Eva Zažímalová · Jan Petrášek
Eva Benková    Editors 
Auxin and Its 
Role in Plant 
Development

Auxin and Its Role in Plant Development

ThiS is a FM Blank Page

Eva Zazˇı´malova´ • Jan Petra´sˇek • Eva Benkova´
Editors
Auxin and Its Role in Plant
Development

Editors
Eva Zazˇı´malova´
Jan Petra´sˇek
Laboratory of Hormonal Regulations
in Plants
Institute of Experimental Botany AS CR
Prague 6
Czech Republic
Eva Benkova´
Hormonal Cross-talk Group
Institute of Science and Technology (IST),
Austria
Klosterneuburg
Austria
ISBN 978-3-7091-1525-1
ISBN 978-3-7091-1526-8 (eBook)
DOI 10.1007/978-3-7091-1526-8
Springer Wien Heidelberg New York Dordrecht London
Library of Congress Control Number: 2014943106
© Springer-Verlag Wien 2014
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part
of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations,
recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission or
information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar
methodology now known or hereafter developed. Exempted from this legal reservation are brief excerpts
in connection with reviews or scholarly analysis or material supplied speciﬁcally for the purpose of being
entered and executed on a computer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of the work. Duplication
of this publication or parts thereof is permitted only under the provisions of the Copyright Law of the
Publisher’s location, in its current version, and permission for use must always be obtained from
Springer. Permissions for use may be obtained through RightsLink at the Copyright Clearance Center.
Violations are liable to prosecution under the respective Copyright Law.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt
from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of
publication, neither the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can accept any legal responsibility for
any errors or omissions that may be made. The publisher makes no warranty, express or implied, with
respect to the material contained herein.
Printed on acid-free paper
Springer is part of Springer Science+Business Media (www.springer.com)

What Is Auxin? How It Operates?
Many articles dealing with plant growth and development start with the “auxin
mantra”, such as: Auxin is involved in control of many developmental processes in
plants.
When in 1881 Charles Darwin and his son Francis examined coleoptiles exposed
to unidirectional light, and proposed the existence of a signalling molecule
directing their bending, they might have not been fully aware of enormous signif-
icance of their discovery for understanding the key principles governing plant
growth and development. Since then the mysterious signalling molecule was
identiﬁed, named auxin, and an immense number of observations conﬁrmed a
crucial importance of this tiny compound throughout life of any plant. Besides its
for a long time known function in regulation of organ bending in response to light
and gravity, auxin was revealed to mediate growth reactions of plants to current
environmental conditions in general, and on top of that to control also genetically
pre-programmed physiological processes such as embryogenesis, and initiation and
formation of diverse organs including ﬂowers, leaves, shoots, roots, and ovules.
However, in spite of tremendous progress in the auxin research in last decades, it is
still not fully understood how auxin operates and how it can regulate so many and
so different processes. So, in spite of years of intensive research bringing much
essential information, auxin still remains rather enigmatic.
In this book, respected scientists—experts in different ﬁelds of “auxinology”—
summarize recent progress in understanding of how auxin operates to control and
coordinate plant development. In 18 chapters various aspects of auxin biology
focusing on auxin metabolism, transport, signalling, and principles of auxin-regulated
plant organogenesis, tropic responses, as well as other interactions with environment
are reviewed and future perspectives are outlined.
We hope this compact contemporary overview on the enigma called auxin will
inspire new fresh research ideas to address remaining auxin challenges.
Prague and Klosterneuburg
Eva Zazˇı´malova´
May 2014
Jan Petra´sˇek
Eva Benkova´
v

ThiS is a FM Blank Page

Contents
Part I
Auxin: Deﬁnition; Metabolism, Transport and Signalling
1
The Auxin Question: A Philosophical Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
Tom Bennett and Ottoline Leyser
2
Auxin Biosynthesis and Catabolism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
Yangbin Gao and Yunde Zhao
3
Identiﬁcation and Proﬁling of Auxin and Auxin Metabolites . . . . .
39
Ondrˇej Nova´k, Alesˇ Peˇncˇı´k, and Karin Ljung
4
Intracellular Auxin Transport . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
David Scheuring and Ju¨rgen Kleine-Vehn
5
Intercellular Transport of Auxin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
Jesica Reemmer and Angus Murphy
6
Auxin Receptors and Perception . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
101
Richard M. Napier
Part II
Auxin and Plant Development
7
The Interplay Between Auxin and the Cell Cycle During Plant
Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
119
Marlies J.F. Demeulenaere and Tom Beeckman
8
Auxin on the Road Navigated by Cellular PIN Polarity . . . . . . . . .
143
Pawel Baster and Jirˇı´ Friml
9
Auxin Regulation of Embryo Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
171
Alejandra Freire Rios, Saiko Yoshida, and Dolf Weijers
10
Auxin, Chief Architect of the Shoot Apex . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
191
Benoıˆt Landrein and Teva Vernoux
vii

11
The Role of Auxin for Reproductive Organ Patterning
and Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
213
Thomas Dresselhaus and Kay Schneitz
12
Auxin and Its Henchmen: Hormonal Cross Talk in Root Growth
and Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
245
Antia Rodriguez-Villalon and Christian S. Hardtke
13
Evolutionary Aspects of Auxin Signalling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
265
Priya Ramakrishna and Ive De Smet
14
Auxin and Self-Organisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
291
Peter Nick
15
Computational Models of Auxin-Driven Development . . . . . . . . . .
315
Adam Runions, Richard S. Smith, and Przemyslaw Prusinkiewicz
Part III
Auxin versus Environment
16
Auxin and Tropisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
361
Katarzyna Retzer, Barbara Korbei, and Christian Luschnig
17
Auxin Coordinates Shoot and Root Development During Shade
Avoidance Response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
389
Valentino Ruzza, Giovanna Sessa, Massimiliano Sassi,
Giorgio Morelli, and Ida Ruberti
18
Auxin and the Interaction Between Plants and Microorganisms . . .
413
Jutta Ludwig-Mu¨ller
Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
435
viii
Contents

Part I
Auxin: Deﬁnition; Metabolism, Transport
and Signalling

Chapter 1
The Auxin Question: A Philosophical
Overview
Tom Bennett and Ottoline Leyser
Abstract In this opening chapter, we ruminate upon “the auxin question”: what is
auxin? It is a seemingly simple question with no simple answer. We ﬁrstly try to
provide a philosophical framework for understanding the question itself. We then
discuss some possible answers to the question, and examine how these answers
might help to drive the future direction of auxin research. We also offer some
speculations on the evolution of auxin, and how such a simple molecule may have
accrued such diverse functions.
1
Introduction: The Auxin Question
At a recent conference, the following conversation between two imaginary auxin
researchers was overheard:
A: “Auxin does everything.”
B: “Yes, but what is auxin?”
A: “I have to go now.”
As an author, the simultaneous excitement and terror caused by an apparently
open-ended brief is difﬁcult to match. For this opening chapter, we were asked
simply to reﬂect upon the question “what is auxin?” It seems innocuous as it lies
there on the page, just three words, twelve characters—and yet, like a coiled
serpent, it is very much longer than it appears and should be approached very
carefully. The longer the question is contemplated, the harder it becomes to give a
straight answer; it is the sort of metaphysical question that might drive one to
T. Bennett • O. Leyser (*)
Sainsbury Laboratory, University of Cambridge, Bateman Street, Cambridge CB2 1LR, UK
e-mail: OL235@cam.ac.uk
E. Zazˇı´malova´ et al. (eds.), Auxin and Its Role in Plant Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-7091-1526-8_1, © Springer-Verlag Wien 2014
3

madness. It would be pleasing if there was a simple answer at least to begin at, but
even taken at its most literal, the question does not have a deﬁnitive answer. Perhaps
it is not possible to give a perfectly clear, unifying answer, only dim reﬂections on
individual facets of the question; then again, perhaps the answer is simple, but we
do not really understand the question we are asking.
What follows is our attempt to provide some kind of answer to this question, and
to the deeper question that is wrapped wolf-like within the clothing of the ﬁrst; how
does such a simple molecule have such incredibly various effects? We also offer
some speculation as to why auxin is so complicated; how and why has the system
evolved in this way? Forced for once to confront these questions, rather than skirt
round them, our own perspectives on auxin have shifted, and as much as anything
else, we are critiquing our own previous (and perhaps current) misconceptions. This
is inevitably a personal reﬂection on auxin, and we claim no great authority to
answer “the auxin question”, but if it is enough to stimulate debate as to the nature
of “the auxin answer”, then it will have served its purpose.
2
A Conceptual Framework
Conceptual frameworks can be very useful in driving science forward, but equally,
they can hinder progress if the framework does not correctly formulate the question
being addressed. Although it is not quite the sense in which Kuhn (1962) used the
term, we might reasonably describe the current “regulator of development” model
of auxin action as a paradigm. Over the last 80 years, there has been a repeated shift
in the paradigm of auxin, as new discoveries (in many ﬁelds) have challenged
existing theories (reviewed in Abel and Theologis 2010; see also Estelle 2009). We
might persuade ourselves that the recent explosion in our knowledge of auxin
means that our paradigm is more robust than in past generations—that we are
now nearer “the answer”—but such optimistic thinking pervades any paradigm
(Kuhn 1962). Certainly, we know more, but the shallowness of our understanding is
amply demonstrated by the fact that we can still legitimately ask “what is auxin?”
and not give a clear answer. It is inevitable that the next generation of auxin
scientists will look back on many of our theories and smile at aspects of our
misguided logic, just as we view many of the ideas of previous generations.
A conceptual framework is at its most useful when it allows us to synthesise
previously unconnected ideas, or to reconcile previously problematic observations.
They are also undoubtedly useful in the communication of science, particularly to
researchers in other ﬁelds. However, they begin to be counter-productive when they
become a “truth” in their own right, to be proved and defended. Then, effort is
diverted into experiments that seek to conﬁrm rather than test a model (“conﬁrma-
tion bias”), or seek to smooth over its inconsistencies, instead of striving for greater
understanding of the actual biological problem. To pick an example from plant
science, the ABC model of ﬂower development was, and still is, an excellent
framework for understanding mutant phenotypes of Arabidopsis and Antirrhinum
4
T. Bennett and O. Leyser

ﬂowers; however, arguably for some it had a constraining effect, with too much
effort spent in “perfecting” it, despite its inconsistencies and shortcomings, rather
than using it as a starting point for a deeper understanding of ﬂower development
(e.g. Gutierrez-Cortines and Davies 2000).
It is inconceivable that we can answer “the auxin question” without some kind of
conceptual framework, but what form should this framework take? It seems fairly
clear that our current theories are insufﬁcient to explain the bewildering mass of
data that we have generated. Partly this is a function of the current funding-
dissemination structure of science; we conceptualise our research as easy-to-digest,
easy-to-sell, “provable” theories, which are by necessity self-limiting. Can we
instead, as a community, establish a robust concept of auxin which brings together
all our knowledge, which drives our research forwards, and leads to a genuinely
deeper understanding of auxin and its role in plant biology? Such a framework must
be only that; a ﬂexible set of ideas, constantly modiﬁed as our knowledge increases;
we must not cling on to ideas simply because they are convenient or pleasingly tidy.
So, what is auxin? Where do we begin?
3
Auxin Is Indole-3-Acetic Acid
Our philosophical struggle to understand auxin begins even with its chemical
identity. At least we can reassure ourselves that it was ever thus; the original
attempts at purifying auxin identiﬁed two auxins (auxin-A and auxin-B) that were
in all probability non-existent (Wildman 1997); only somewhat later was an actual
auxin identiﬁed, namely indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) (Kogl et al. 1934). Neverthe-
less, the idea of multiple “auxins” became ﬁrmly entrenched, no doubt helped by
the fact that the second plant hormone to be identiﬁed, cytokinin, really does have
multiple active forms. Furthermore, the deﬁnition of auxin was for a long time
based on bioassays rather than an explicit chemical description (Abel and Theologis
2010; Simon and Petra´sˇek 2011). This means that a large number of chemicals
showing auxinic activity are described as auxins (or anti-auxins), even though most
are not naturally occurring. This has led to the terms auxin and IAA being used
non-synonymously. To an extent, this might not matter too much, and the continued
use of vague terminology does pleasingly hark back to a golden age in plant
research. However, after nearly a century, we really ought ﬁnally to deﬁne what
we mean by auxin. It is remarkable that despite the revolutionary advances in our
understanding, we persist with such a hazy deﬁnition of a molecule that is so
important it warrants a whole book.
The ﬁrst step in a strict deﬁnition must be to reject as an “auxin” any molecule
that does not occur naturally in plants or green algae. Standard biological termi-
nology would be to describe these molecules, such as naphthalene-1-acetic acid
(NAA) and 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D) as auxin analogues (or auxin
mimics, maybe even auxin agonists). Based on our current knowledge, this leaves
us with four endogenous molecules that have been shown to exhibit auxinic activity
1
The Auxin Question: A Philosophical Overview
5

to some degree: IAA itself, indole-3-butyric acid (IBA), 4-chloro-indole-3-acetic
acid (4-Cl-IAA) and phenyl acetic acid (PAA). In the case of IBA, there is relatively
little evidence that it has inherent activity, but it is readily converted to IAA and
may therefore represent a storage form of IAA (reviewed in Simon and Petra´sˇek
2011). Other storage/degradation forms of IAA (e.g. IAA-lysine and IAA-leucine)
are not referred to as “auxins”, so there is no pressing reason to describe IBA as an
auxin either.
The case for 4-Cl-IAA and PAA is more complex; in both cases auxinic activity
has been observed, although PAA does not have as strong effects as 4-Cl-IAA
(Simon and Petra´sˇek 2011). There is evidence of PAA binding to both ABP1 and
canonical auxin signalling proteins, but it inhibits carrier-mediated auxin transport
(Simon and Petra´sˇek 2011; Strader and Nemhauser 2013). On the other hand,
4-Cl-IAA has strong auxinic effects, but has also been found to modulate processes
that IAA does not (reviewed in Simon and Petra´sˇek 2011). This suggests that PAA
and 4-Cl-IAA are related but fundamentally different signals to auxin, which could
perhaps be described as “auxin-like” signals. One possibility is that PAA and
4-Cl-IAA might have evolved in certain plant groups by neofunctionalisation
from the core auxin synthesis and signalling pathways; certainly 4-Cl-IAA has
only been identiﬁed in a few taxonomic groups. However, the genetic basis for PAA
and 4-Cl-IAA synthesis and signalling is not clear at the moment, and further work
will be needed to establish their exact relationship to the primary IAA signal.
Following these arguments to their logical conclusion, one option is to deﬁne
auxin as IAA and only IAA. Our rapidly developing understanding of auxin
perception raises the possibility that more speciﬁc assays could help provide a
stricter deﬁnition of auxin. Excellent work has elucidated the structure of the auxin
binding pocket in the TIR1/AFB family of auxin receptors (Tan et al. 2007).
Binding of auxin in this pocket promotes association with members of the Aux/IAA
transcriptional repressor family, with the auxin acting as a molecular glue between
the two proteins. Different Aux/IAA-TIR1/AFB combinations have different afﬁn-
ities for IAA and auxin analogues, leading to the idea that these two protein families
act as co-receptors (Caldero´n Villalobos et al. 2012; see also Chap. 6). Assessment
of binding afﬁnities of IBA, 4-Cl-IAA or PAA could allow them to be ruled in or
ruled out as auxins. Similar evidence could be derived from studies of ABP1-type
receptors, for which the crystal structure predicts different binding afﬁnities for
auxin and auxin analogues (Woo et al. 2002).
4
Auxin Is Not a Hormone
Auxin is produced in many tissues and is detected in both the same and other
tissues. It is a mobile molecule that can be actively transported over long distances.
These properties should be enough to convince anyone that auxin is a signal, but
what kind of signal? A word very commonly used in conjunction with auxin is
“hormone”. In its infancy auxin was often called a “plant growth substance”—the
6
T. Bennett and O. Leyser

growth substance, even (from the German “Wuchsstof”)—but there are also early
references to it as a hormone (e.g. Snow 1935), and this latter terminology has been
widely used, though by no means universally accepted, for a considerable time
now. A general deﬁnition of a hormone is a substance secreted by specialised cells
in one tissue that affects the behaviour of cells in another tissue in a speciﬁc
manner. Given what we now know about auxin—it has no specialised site of
synthesis or action, nor does it have speciﬁc effects on cells—it is clear that,
whatever else it might be, it does not meet this deﬁnition of a hormone.
It could be argued instead that auxin is a “phytohormone”: something quite
different to the classical concept of a hormone from animal biology deﬁned above.
However, given the disparate substances that are usually classed as phytohormones,
and the disparate ways in which they work, how exactly can “phytohormone” as a
concept be deﬁned? Any deﬁnition that included auxin would have to be so vague
as to render the concept meaningless. None of this is to say that the hormone
concept cannot be applied to plants. The FLOWERING TIME (FT) protein is a
much better ﬁt to the classical hormone concept, but is referred to as hormone only
infrequently. Similarly, the CLAVATA3 peptide acts in quasi-hormonal manner,
albeit over very small distances. We may also eventually come up with a set of
properties that deﬁnes a separate “phytohormone” concept that includes the lower
molecular weight signals from plants, including for example cytokinins and
brassinosteroids. Auxin, however, is really something unique, and even the prop-
erties of auxin itself are difﬁcult to unify into a single concept.
In some ways, this is a rather semantic argument and a rose by any other name
would smell as sweet. However, as described above, it is likely that the tacit
acceptance of the hormone concept for auxin creates artiﬁcial expectations and
limitations in our research. We call auxin a hormone, so we expect, sub-consciously
perhaps, that auxin will act like a hormone. It is reﬂected in our experimental
designs, in our interpretations of data, and in the way that we write about auxin. To
give an example; when TIR1 was identiﬁed as a proto-typical auxin receptor, there
was widespread surprise that the signal transduction pathway was so short
(Kepinski and Leyser 2005; Dharmasiri et al. 2005; Callis 2005; Abel and
Theologis 2010). We previously knew little about auxin perception, so why should
we have been surprised by this particular answer? We were surprised primarily
because we conceptualised auxin as a hormone, and most hormones do have long
and complicated transduction pathways, full of exotic sounding kinases and
GTP-binding proteins. Yet, we knew at the time that auxin was capable of gener-
ating incredibly fast transcriptional responses, indicative of a short signal transduc-
tion pathway.
However, the real problem with the hormone paradigm runs much deeper. It is
absolutely implicit in the concept that hormones are an instruction to the target cells
to do something in particular (e.g. store glucose! moult! ﬂower!). Similarly, it is
implicit in our view of auxin that it is an instructive factor, i.e. that it makes cells do
things. This leads to the “complexity problem”; if auxin is indeed an instruction,
how can it be taken to mean so many different things in so many places? An
instruction that can be so liberally interpreted is not instruction at all, and this alone
1
The Auxin Question: A Philosophical Overview
7

should convince us that we are looking at the problem from the wrong angle.
Whichever way it is approached, the complexity problem certainly needs an
explanation, but perhaps if we stop viewing auxin as an instruction, we can make
life easier for ourselves and gain a deeper understanding of the auxin enigma.
It would clearly be wishful thinking to hope that the use of “hormone” to
describe auxin might be phased out—in the absence of another convenient cate-
gory, auxin will probably have to live with its label. Still, auxin is not a hormone. It
is far more interesting than that.
5
Auxin Is Impetus
This list of things that auxin does grows longer by the month. No one working on
auxin today needs to be convinced that auxin activity is complex, though some of
the pioneers of auxin research might be a little terriﬁed if they had to catch up on the
literature. The “complexity problem”, outlined above, is the absolute crux of auxin
research; how can we understand a signal that has seemingly limitless powers?
One answer to this question is that the canonical auxin signalling system trans-
lates auxin into different responses depending on concentration and context
(e.g. Kieffer et al. 2010). There is increasing evidence that there are different
AFB-Aux/IAA-ARF complexes expressed in each cell type, each with a different
afﬁnity for auxin, and different sets of target genes, with the result that in each
context a different set of ARFs at a different set of promoters will be activated, with
different dynamics (Kieffer et al. 2010; Abel and Theologis 2010). In Arabidopsis,
there are 6 AFBs, 29 Aux/IAAs and 23 ARFs and therefore a very great number of
possible combinations that could operate in different cell types at different times to
provide speciﬁcity in auxin response (e.g. Rademacher et al. 2011). It is certainly
clear that these different complexes have highly quantitative effects on auxin
signalling due to differences in the stability of the Aux/IAAs and differences in
the afﬁnity of the components for each other (Havens et al. 2012). Since they are the
DNA-binding components of the system, the main qualitative effects of auxin
signalling on transcriptional output (i.e. which set of genes is activated) are
probably mediated by the combination of ARFs that are present in each cell.
However, recent work suggests that there are only ﬁve major auxin-activated
ARFs in Arabidopsis (ARFs 5, 6, 7, 8 and 19), meaning that the multiple effects
of auxin cannot be explained simply as a function of which ARFs are activated. The
remaining ARFs (the so-called repressive type) only interact weakly with the core
auxin signalling machinery (Vernoux et al. 2011) and are therefore probably not
activated by auxin in themselves; instead, it seems likely that these proteins are cell-
type speciﬁc inhibitors of auxin response. If these ARFs block speciﬁc promoters,
they could determine the subset of genes available for activation by positive ARFs
in given cell types, thus contributing to the speciﬁcity of auxin response; however,
there is currently little evidence that repressive ARFs do act in this manner. Indeed,
recent work shows that ARFs probably have few intrinsic differences in their
8
T. Bennett and O. Leyser

DNA-binding speciﬁcity, although it was demonstrated that ARFs act as dimers and
that ARF1 and ARF5 dimers have different tolerances for the spacing between pairs
of auxin response elements (Boer et al. 2014), so some speciﬁcity may arise from
the conﬁguration of promoter elements in target genes. The overall impression is
that we cannot answer the complexity problem through canonical signalling alone.
Where does this leave us? There are of course other signalling systems for auxin;
indeed, given the ubiquity of auxin and its very long evolutionary history, it would
be rather surprising if there were not. In addition to ABP1, there are tentative
suggestions in the community about other possible receptors or signalling compo-
nents. We should certainly expect more receptors to emerge in the forthcoming
years.
As presaged above though, the simplest solution to the complexity problem may
be that auxin is not actually an instruction to do anything at all; in which case, the
concern about how auxin causes so many responses could be reframed and perhaps
better understood. However, if auxin is not an instruction, then what kind of signal
is it? A previous review by Stewart and Nemhauser (2010) proposed that auxin may
act as a kind of cellular currency, permitting many different “transactions” to occur,
the nature of the transaction depending on exactly where the auxin is being “spent”;
auxin here is seen as a “permissive” type of signal.
The key element of this approach is the switch in focus from an auxin-centric
viewpoint to a process-dominated one. Perhaps auxin can be best understood if it is
viewed as a signal that provides “impetus” to processes, but does not specify what
those processes are. Thus, auxin might actually do nothing, but rather motivate
everything. In this model, each cell type has a set of processes that are inherent to it
(i.e. are developmentally speciﬁed), any of which might be “boosted” by auxin, but
none of which is directly speciﬁed by auxin. To put this in a molecular framework,
whether an auxin-inﬂuenced gene is “on” or “off” depends on the other, cell-type
speciﬁc transcription factors bound to the promoter of that gene, while the ARFs
binding to the promoter act as a kind of rheostat, specifying how much transcription
occurs—but ultimately do not control speciﬁcity. To give an example, we might
imagine a cell type (A) that can differentiate into a second cell type (B) under the
inﬂuence of a gene (C). C is normally expressed in A, but not at high enough levels
to trigger differentiation; however, when auxin is present, transcription of C is
boosted, leading to differentiation into B. Thus, auxin does not specify the differ-
entiation of B—that is implicit in the developmental context of A—but it would
appear to the observer that auxin is the causative factor for B. Auxin does not cause
differentiation to B in other contexts, because C is only ever expressed in the
context of A; auxin speciﬁes neither C activity nor B formation and can only
drive those processes in the context of A.
While this might not seem very different from current models of auxin action, in
many ways that is the whole point: it is a subtle shift in emphasis, but it shifts the
complexity problem away from auxin. Under this lens, auxin action is not actually
complex; the complexity is in the tissue systems themselves, and the ways in which
they each utilise auxin as an impetus to drive different processes. The recent
theoretical struggle with auxin has been to try and derive 100 qualitatively different
1
The Auxin Question: A Philosophical Overview
9

instructions from one molecule; the resolution to this problem may simply be that
there is only one auxin signal—impetus.
6
Auxin Is Complex
Pleasingly simple though this concept is, auxin will never be that straightforward.
This “impetus” model may particularly useful in developmental responses to auxin
(as contrasted to “simple” growth responses), especially the more subtle patterning
effects such as gynoecium development, embryo patterning, etc. The impetus
model may also explain the long-standing puzzle of the role of auxin in cell
division. Auxin is often seen to regulate cell division (particularly in callus, for
instance), and it has long been suggested that it may be a general regulator of
division, directly integrated with the cell cycle machinery (e.g. den Boer and
Murray 2000). While there is now some evidence for a direct cell cycle effects
(Jurado et al. 2010; see also Chap. 7), it is also clear that auxin does not universally
promote division. However, if the general role of auxin is to potentiate processes
that are already speciﬁed, then its role in cell division would become clearer; auxin
promotes division (by canonical signalling and/or other pathways) only in contexts
where the potential for division is already developmentally speciﬁed; for instance,
the root meristem (Sabatini et al. 1999), or cambial cells (Snow 1935).
The impetus model will not explain all aspects of auxin action. For instance,
there could be some developmental processes in which auxin does act as an
instruction, specifying events rather than just driving them; the speciﬁcation of
vasculature, which can often happen out-of-context (Sachs 1981; Sauer et al. 2006),
might be an example. Moreover, the difference between instruction and impetus
might be blurred in some developmental processes. Auxin has long been considered
a general regulator of cell elongation—indeed, this is its proto-typical function, for
which it is named—and the many “classical” growth responses to auxin are
manifestations of this same phenomenon. The prominence of this response makes
it tempting to conclude that a principal, and perhaps ancestral, role of auxin is as an
instruction to cells to elongate, but it is nevertheless also clear that elongation is
highly context dependent.
Thus, even if we can understand how complexity emerges in responses to auxin
mediated by canonical signalling, it may not be possible to explain all these
transcriptional effects in a single convenient concept. Add to this the poorly
understood role of ABP1-dependent signalling, and the probability of other minor
signalling mechanisms, and it is clear that complexity is not merely an artefact of
“observer effect”, but a real feature of auxin responses—at least in the ﬂowering
plants that are most commonly studied. Complexity does not lie just with signalling
systems however, because when auxin transport is factored into the equation, things
become even more convoluted.
10
T. Bennett and O. Leyser

7
Auxin Is Connectivity
It is not generally remarked upon, but the properties of the auxin transport system
(see also Chap. 5) are not particularly well suited to the actual transport of auxin.
Admittedly, it is better than diffusion, but transport rates in the order of 1 cm/h are
scarcely impressive, and repeatedly transporting auxin into and out of cells is very
inefﬁcient. As an engineering solution, transporting auxin in the phloem or xylem
(as does happen to some degree) would be much more effective for either signal
transmission or bulk movement of auxin as a “commodity”. We might therefore
conclude that auxin transport is not really about transport per se, but rather
connectivity. What the transport system very effectively achieves is to connect
every cell in the plant together, in an intricate web of auxin, ﬂowing slowly but
inexorably from shoot to root. An important implication of the “impetus model” is
that auxin has a simple, quantitative informational content, interpreted by cells to
modulate cellular processes. Viewed in this perspective, the transport system can
therefore be seen a system for distributing this information to cells. However, it is
much more than that; it is not simply a one-dimensional ﬂow of information; the
auxin stream is constantly altered as it moves through cells and tissues, and further
spatial and temporal stimuli can be integrated into the system en route. In this
model, moving auxin through cells (rather than bypassing them) is a key feature of
the system, because it allows all cells both to connect to the system and to modify
it. Other important properties of the system in this respect are that it is hierarchi-
cal—so that, for instance, some cells/tissues have disproportionate input into the
system or disproportionate exposure to the transport stream—and it is directional—
so that the propagation of information is not equal between all cells or in all
directions.
All cells can modify, in reﬂection of their own status, the amount of signal they
pass on to neighbouring cells by adding or subtracting auxin, or by changing the
immediate kinetics of transport. Due to the high connectivity of the system, these
modulations can have both local and global effects, meaning cells can inﬂuence
multiple processes on a global scale, without having to emit multiple signals. Of
course, the effect of a single cell will be minimal, but coordinated action by a group
of cells (a meristem, for instance) would be able to alter signiﬁcantly development
across the whole plant. Overall, the topology of the auxin transport system permits
auxin to have a much greater inﬂuence over development than if it were merely a
long-distance signal, travelling through the vascular tissues. This is not to argue that
this topology is inherently advantageous per se—indeed, for other signals which
mediate speciﬁc effects, direct transmission is much preferable—only that in the
peculiar case of auxin this highly connective method of transport greatly increases
the inﬂuence and complexity of this singular signal.
As an example, we can consider the Arabidopsis root meristem. At the hub of
this system is the tip of the root; the quiescent centre (QC), which acts as the
organising centre of the meristem, and the columella root cap, which is particularly
important in detecting environmental stimuli (including gravity) and directing root
1
The Auxin Question: A Philosophical Overview
11

growth accordingly. Auxin promotes cell division and elongation in the root
meristem and also drives tropic behaviour in the growth of the root (see also
Chap. 16). These effects are mediated by basipetal/shootward streams of auxin
moving from the root tip through cell ﬁles in the lateral root cap and epidermal
layers of the root. The columella controls allocation of auxin into these cell ﬁles,
and by varying the distribution of auxin between two sides of the root can control
asymmetric root growth. Auxin can also be produced in the root tip, allowing the
root to control the amount of growth (as distinct from the direction of growth) in
relation to local stimuli (Stepanova et al. 2008). Here, auxin is being used as an
informational signal to connect the “sensory” cells in the root tip, which control the
amount and distribution of auxin, to the meristematic cells where auxin provides
impetus for cell division. In theory, the meristematic cells could synthesise their
own auxin to drive division, but the lack of connectivity with the tip (and by
extension with other meristematic cells) would prevent whole-organ spatio-tempo-
ral coordination of growth; so in this context, the key feature of auxin transport is
the connectivity it allows, and not the ﬁnal distribution of auxin that it produces.
Furthermore, as is long established, the roots act as a sink for shoot auxin, and there
is certainly bulk transport of auxin from shoot to root (e.g. Bhalerao et al. 2002).
There is thus a rootward stream of auxin, linking active shoot meristems with active
root meristems, that developmentally connects the shoot and root. This auxin
stream is not required to drive root growth, on short timescales at least, since the
roots can both synthesise their own auxin and recycle the existing pool (Stepanova
et al. 2008; Grieneisen et al. 2007), but it allows global root growth to be modulated
with respect to shoot growth. Again, connectivity is the key feature of the system
and not the supply of auxin per se. The auxin from the shoot moves through the
centrak cell ﬁles of the root, to the tip, where this global signal can be integrated
with the local auxin stimuli. The root tip cells can either add auxin to the pool, or
remove it, and spatially distribute the auxin as appropriate, to generate an integrated
impetus signal tailored to the circumstances of that individual root meristem (see
also Bennett and Scheres 2010). The directionality of the system means that roots
cannot back-signal to shoots directly through transport of auxin; instead, roots
produce other signals, such as strigolactones, which are transported in the xylem
(Kohlen et al. 2011) and act to regulate PIN1 protein abundance in the shoot
(Crawford et al. 2010; Shinohara et al. 2013), thus allowing shoot growth to be
regulated with respect to root growth and establishing feedback between the two
tissue systems.
We can thus observe that the connectivity of the auxin transport system allows
many different stimuli, local and global, to be integrated into a single quantitative
signal at the point of effect. The auxin transport system greatly increases the
apparent, and indeed actual, complexity of auxin responses, since to understand
how auxin “does” so many things, it is not merely enough to know how much auxin
is in a given tissue and how that tissue will respond to the auxin; it is also important
to know how the auxin is transported through the tissue, and how the tissue modiﬁes
the signal. However, a further dimension of complexity still is added by the
remarkable emergent properties of the auxin transport system.
12
T. Bennett and O. Leyser

8
Auxin Is Spooky
When it comes to astonishing insights into the very nature of the universe, Albert
Einstein certainly has a good publication record, including many contributions to
the development of quantum mechanical theory. One of the emergent properties of
this theory is “quantum entanglement”, which suggests that particles that physically
interact and are then separated continue to be “entangled”; they instantaneously
detect and respond to changes in each other’s state, violating the speed of light in
the apparent transmission of information between them. This was a step too far for
even Einstein, who dismissed the notion as “spukhafte Fernwirkung” (“spooky
action at a distance”), although entanglement has since found considerable exper-
imental support and is now a well-established part of standard models of quantum
theory. Einstein made rather fewer memorable contributions to the ﬁeld of auxin
research—one cannot help but feel that he ducked the really difﬁcult questions—
but perhaps he was put off by plant science’s own version of the entanglement
problem and the rather spooky effects generated by the auxin transport system.
It is generally accepted that auxin transport streams are self-organising, although
we still have little grasp on how such self-organisation occurs (see also Chap. 14).
Many models have been proposed, and mathematically analysed, to explain the
emergence of various types of auxin transport phenomena (particularly “up-the-
gradient” and “with-the-ﬂux” patterns), but those models do not capture all phe-
nomena and also lack an explicit mechanistic basis for core aspects of their
operation. It is currently a key challenge in auxin biology to unite the experimental
and theoretical aspects of this problem into a cogent explanation of these self-
organising behaviours. From the point of view of the “auxin question”, the most
interesting aspects of self-organisation in the auxin transport system are those
properties that apparently allow auxin to act as a “signal” between cells or tissues
without any actual movement of signal from one to the other. In essence, it seems
that because cells and tissues are “entangled” through the transport system, events
in one location can affect auxin transport in other (non-downstream) locations,
allowing cells to detect those events and respond accordingly to them, without any
actual movement of auxin (or other signals) between the two locations. This is, as
Einstein obviously feared, the botanical equivalent of action at a distance; and as far
as attempting to explain auxin action to a 6-year-old goes, it is probably the ﬁnal
nail in the cofﬁn. It is not enough to know where auxin is, or where it is going; the
connectivity of the whole system must also be understood.
The starkest example of this action-at-a-distance is seen in Sachs’ classic
canalisation experiments (Sachs 1981). For instance, an auxin source (A),
connected to a vascular bundle with high levels of auxin transport (V), will prevent
a second auxin source (B) from establishing a transport connection with V, but if A
is removed then a connection between B and V is established. Both the “ﬁnding” of
V by B and the inhibition of that process by A occur without any apparent signal
transmission between V and B, or A and B, but as somewhat spooky properties of
the system as a whole. Further examples of these emergent properties can be seen in
1
The Auxin Question: A Philosophical Overview
13

the regulation of vein initiation in leaves (Sachs 1969; Rolland-Lagan and
Prusinkiewicz 2005; Scarpella et al. 2006), phyllotaxis in the meristem (Smith
et al. 2006; Jo¨nsson et al. 2006; see also Chaps. 10 and 15) and in the regulation
of axillary buds by auxin exported from active meristems (Prusinkiewicz
et al. 2009).
9
Auxin Is Ancient
In the preceding sections, we have tried to provide a framework in which the
intricate complexity of responses to auxin can at least be contemplated, but there
is no escaping that complexity, and no set of simple rules that can predict what
those responses will be. Ultimately auxin can only be understood as a function of
the whole system, and reductionist approaches seeking to explain auxin responses
in terms of simple molecular events will be limited in their power to do so. To the
parsimonious mind, this naturally poses the question of why the system is so
complicated—how and why did the architecture of the system evolve in this way
and not as a system of many separate signals? It is possible that by studying the
evolution of auxin, we can begin to unravel some of that complexity and ask
whether auxin was ever simple, and if so, what its proto-typical functions were.
To misquote Dobzhansky: “nothing to do with auxin makes sense except in the light
of evolution”.
At least part of the problem in understanding auxin is that there are no real
precedents on which to base an explanation; such a generalist signal does not, to our
knowledge, exist in other systems and even in plants, auxin is a unique molecule.
We must therefore try and understand which particular aspects of plant biology
might have promoted the evolution of a signal with these properties that are not
present in other systems; the quest to understand auxin thus draws us into
questioning the very nature of plants themselves. Since there is convincing evi-
dence for auxin synthesis, response and transport in streptophyte algae, the sister
taxa to land plants—indeed, it seems that all the main elements of auxin biology
were in place before the evolution of land plants (De Smet et al. 2011; see also
Chap. 13)—the answers must at least partially lie underwater and in the past.
Photosynthesis is undoubtedly the quintessence of plants, and at heart a plant is a
machine for optimal extraction of light and other key nutrients from the environ-
ment. We should therefore expect that early in algal/plant evolution the major
factors driving (and constraining) development were environmental cues. A second
deﬁning characteristic of plants is the cellulosic cell wall, which also plays a key
role in determining the way plants develop. While the cell wall absolutely does not
preclude complex cell shapes/differentiation pathways, it does promote the use of
relatively undifferentiated cells with simple morphology in development unless
there is very good reason to use something more complex. Development in plants
therefore tends to be more a consequence of the ways cells are arranged at a tissue
level, rather than due to major morphological changes in the cells themselves
14
T. Bennett and O. Leyser

(though of course there are counter-examples). The plant cell wall also allows two
fundamentally different mechanisms of “growth” to occur: cell division, preceded
by cell growth in an energy-intensive process, and cell expansion, driven primarily
by water-driven expansion of the vacuole, which is in turn made possible by the
rigidity of the cell wall. Together, photosynthesis and the cell wall seem like good
candidates for plant-speciﬁc processes that might have promoted the evolution of
auxin, especially in the algal context.
Although many green algae do have complex morphology and differentiation,
these are clearly derived forms, and most green algae assume simple morphologies
such as ﬁlaments or laminae. We can use Coleochaete as an example; these
freshwater algae have simple development, producing planar discs of tissue or
branching ﬁlamentous structures that expand in size with relatively little further
differentiation. Like all plants, the ultimate selective force underlying development
in Coleochaete must be to optimise resource acquisition to support reproductive
effort, and an important determinant of the development of Coleochaete is therefore
light harvesting capacity. We would expect the main drivers for growth in these
organisms to be the availability of light, together with CO2, nitrogen, phosphorous
and other minerals. The inputs into growth are therefore quite complex, but the low
developmental potential of the system means that the output is very simple; in
discoidal Coleochaete, the disc must expand in a more or less even-fashion, through
a combination of cell expansion/elongation and division. Indeed, the cell divisions
in this system follow as a natural consequence of cell expansion, and their orien-
tation is apparently determined by the dimensions of the cell (Dupuy et al. 2010), so
the primary developmental output is actually coordinated cell expansion. From a
parsimony perspective, it would make some sense to integrate the various inputs
into a single signal that controls this primary developmental output; and of course,
that signal would closely match the properties of auxin. It is currently unknown
whether development in Coleochaete is controlled in this manner, or whether auxin
plays any role, but given the central role of auxin in cell expansion in land plants, it
seems like a reasonable hypothesis.
Regardless of how development is actually regulated in Coleochaete, we can at
least rationalise the evolution of an auxin-like signal in an organism that is
environmentally sensitive and has low developmental potential. This hypothetical
auxin-like signal would also have two further important properties. Firstly, it is a
widely distributed signal containing integrated information regarding the environ-
ment that could be harnessed to regulate any other process that also required
environmental input. Secondly, although it is acting as an “instruction” for growth,
the signal is highly generic in its effect, and is not tied to any particular develop-
mental or differentiation pathway; it affects primarily growth rather than develop-
ment. Thus, utilising this signal for other purposes does not mean that those
processes would only happen in a certain context; the signal is contextually neutral.
We could therefore imagine that for a new developmental process that was coor-
dinated with the environment—the production of rhizoid-like cells for instance—
our hypothetical signal could be used to give “impetus” to the process, but would
not directly specify the differentiation of these cells. This would not interfere with
1
The Auxin Question: A Philosophical Overview
15

the expansion-promoting role of the signal, nor would the expansion role interfere
with the production of rhizoids. Any number of processes can subsequently “pig-
gyback” onto the signal in the same way, because the signal is still not tied to any
particular developmental context. If the hypothetical signal had a simple transcrip-
tional output (like auxin), then piggybacking onto the signal could simply be a case
of introducing appropriate binding sites into the promoters of relevant differentia-
tion genes—a very simple process that can evolve quickly by single base-pair
modiﬁcations.
We can thus see how an auxin-like system might suit simple algal developmental
systems. We can also see that, if such a simple generic signal evolved, it would
subsequently provide a very cost-effective way of providing the same information
to other processes—because it encodes powerful informational content, and yet has
little instructional value. Attuning many processes to the same signal would also
allow the efﬁcient co-regulation of many processes in line with the general status of
the plant. It is clear that in Arabidopsis, a huge proportion of the genome is
regulated by auxin, which makes little sense as a response to a speciﬁc hormonal
signal, but much sense in the context of a universal co-regulator. The power of such
a system lies in the initial integration a range of environmental (and perhaps other)
inputs into a single signal that controls growth in a generic way; once such a signal
existed, it would perhaps be inevitable that this rich vein of information would be
tapped over and over again. Of course, there is currently little evidence to suggest
that auxin did initially evolve in such a manner, but it is at least a plausible and
testable hypothesis. Ultimately, it is clear that auxin exists in and may well regulate
growth in green algae; and therefore that as far as understanding the origins of
complexity goes, a key future direction for auxin research lies in the past.
In higher plants the homeostasis, transport and signalling of auxin, coupled with
the extensive feedback regulation of all these processes by auxin itself, adds up to a
staggeringly complex network, usually characterised in terms of loops and more
loops (Benjamins and Scheres 2008; Leyser 2010). However, auxin must have
started as a simple algal signal, and even alongside its complexity, auxin in modern
plants still possesses the kind of simple, generic and universal characteristics that
we have discussed in this section. Although it has existed for a very long time, auxin
has not undergone the type of sub- or neofunctionalisation that typically occurs in
peptide signals (for instance, insulin-like growth factors from animals, or CLE
peptides from plants) that would have allowed repeated separation of accumulated
functions into new signals, and the subsequent streamlining of each new signal. We
must therefore assume that the value of auxin as a universal signal has been
sufﬁciently high throughout plant evolution to retain it as a single signal and to
warrant the evolution of this tangled network of regulatory proteins, which allow
the information encoded in the signal to be deciphered and utilised in an ever-
increasing number of ways. Thus, the ultimate paradox of auxin might be that its
complexity is simply an emergent property of its elegant simplicity.
16
T. Bennett and O. Leyser

10
Conclusion
What is auxin? It is a question that operates on several philosophical levels, from
the categorical—of what type is it?—through the metaphysical—what is its
essence?—to the logical—how does it work? The urge to categorise is one of
philosophy’s oldest motivations, but auxin is difﬁcult to classify in a meaningful
biological way. As far as we can tell, it is a unique kind of signal, both in its myriad
functions and in the complexity of responses to it; to try and put a label on auxin is
to obscure its singular nature. Thus, at the simplest level, the somewhat unsatisfac-
tory answer to the auxin question is that auxin is auxin, no more and no less.
However, another major motivation of philosophy is to explain the enigmatic—
auxin certainly qualiﬁes in that respect—and it is possible to give rather more
satisfactory answers to the deeper aspects of the auxin question. In this chapter, we
have attempted both to explore the meaning of the question and to formulate some
answers to it: not deﬁnitive ones, and indeed mostly speculative ones, but hopefully
at least inspiring and testable ones. Ultimately, the auxin question is answerable—
although deﬁnitely serpentine, it is not venomous—but the answer is still very long.
It is already as long as this book, and it is likely to continue growing for some time;
after all, auxin has been growing plants for perhaps a billion years, and we have
only barely just noticed.
References
Abel S, Theologis A (2010) Odyssey of auxin. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2:a004572
Benjamins R, Scheres B (2008) Auxin: the looping star in plant development. Annu Rev Plant Biol
59:443–465
Bennett T, Scheres B (2010) Root development-two meristems for the price of one? Curr Top Dev
Biol 91:67–102
Bhalerao RP, Eklo¨f J, Ljung K, Marchant A, Bennett M, Sandberg G (2002) Shoot-derived auxin is
essential for early lateral root emergence in Arabidopsis seedlings. Plant J 29:325–332
Boer DR, Freire-Rios A, van den Berg WA, Saaki T, Manﬁeld IW, Kepinski S, Lo´pez-Vidrieo I,
Franco-Zorrilla JM, de Vries SC, Solano R, Weijers D, Coll M (2014) Structural basis for DNA
binding speciﬁcity by the auxin-dependent ARF transcription factors. Cell 156:577–589
Caldero´n Villalobos LI, Lee S, De Oliveira C, Ivetac A, Brandt W, Armitage L, Sheard LB, Tan X,
Parry G, Mao H, Zheng N, Napier R, Kepinski S, Estelle M (2012) A combinatorial TIR1/
AFB-Aux/IAA co-receptor system for differential sensing of auxin. Nat Chem Biol 8:477–485
Callis J (2005) Plant biology: auxin action. Nature 435:436–437
Crawford S, Shinohara N, Sieberer T, Williamson L, George G, Hepworth J, Mu¨ller D,
Domagalska MA, Leyser O (2010) Strigolactones enhance competition between shoot
branches by dampening auxin transport. Development 137:2905–2913
de Smet I, Voss U, Lau S, Wilson M, Shao N, Timme RE, Swarup R, Kerr I, Hodgman C, Bock R,
Bennett M, Ju¨rgens G, Beeckman T (2011) Unraveling the evolution of auxin signaling. Plant
Physiol 155:209–221
den Boer BG, Murray JA (2000) Control of plant growth and development through manipulation
of cell-cycle genes. Curr Opin Biotechnol 11:138–145
1
The Auxin Question: A Philosophical Overview
17

Dharmasiri N, Dharmasiri S, Estelle M (2005) The F-box protein TIR1 is an auxin receptor. Nature
435:441–445
Dupuy L, Mackenzie J, Haseloff J (2010) Coordination of plant cell division and expansion in a
simple morphogenetic system. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107:2711–2716
Estelle M (2009) Journal club: growth versus development. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 10:813
Grieneisen VA, Xu J, Mare´e AF, Hogeweg P, Scheres B (2007) Auxin transport is sufﬁcient to
generate a maximum and gradient guiding root growth. Nature 449:1008–1013
Gutierrez-Cortines ME, Davies B (2000) Beyond the ABCs: ternary complex formation in the
control of ﬂoral organ identity. Trends Plant Sci 5:471–476
Havens KA, Guseman JM, Jang SS, Pierre-Jerome E, Bolten N, Klavins E, Nemhauser JL (2012)
A synthetic approach reveals extensive tunability of auxin signalling. Plant Physiol
160:135–142
Jo¨nsson H, Heisler MG, Shapiro BE, Meyerowitz EM, Mjolsness E (2006) An auxin-driven
polarized transport model for phyllotaxis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103:1633–1638
Jurado S, Abraham Z, Manzano C, Lo´pez-Torrejo´n G, Pacios LF, Del Pozo JC (2010) The
Arabidopsis cell cycle F-box protein SKP2A binds to auxin. Plant Cell 22:3891–3904
Kepinski S, Leyser O (2005) The Arabidopsis F-box protein TIR1 is an auxin receptor. Nature
435:446–451
Kieffer M, Neve J, Kepinski S (2010) Deﬁning auxin response contexts in plant development. Curr
Opin Plant Biol 13:12–20
Kogl F, Haagen-Smit AJ, Erxleben H (1934) Uber die neues auxin (heteroauxin) aus hain, XI
Mitteilung. Zeitschr Physiol Chem 228:90sses
Kohlen W, Charnikhova T, Liu Q, Bours R, Domagalska MA, Beguerie S, Verstappen F,
Leyser O, Bouwmeester H, Ruyter-Spira C (2011) Strigolactones are transported through the
xylem and play a key role in shoot architectural response to phosphate deﬁciency in
nonarbuscular mycorrhizal host Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 155:974–987
Kuhn TS (1962) The structure of scientiﬁc revolutions. University of Chicago Press, Chicago,
IL. ISBN 9780226458113
Leyser O (2010) The power of auxin in plants. Plant Physiol 154:501–505
Prusinkiewicz P, Crawford S, Smith RS, Ljung K, Bennett T, Ongaro V, Leyser O (2009) Control
of bud activation by an auxin transport switch. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106:17431–17436
Rademacher EH, Mo¨ller B, Lokerse AS, Llavata-Peris CI, van den Berg W, Weijers D (2011) A
cellular expression map of the Arabidopsis AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR gene family. Plant J
68:597–606
Rolland-Lagan AG, Prusinkiewicz P (2005) Reviewing models of auxin canalization in the context
of leaf vein pattern formation in Arabidopsis. Plant J 44:854–865
Sabatini S, Beis D, Wolkenfelt H, Murfett J, Guilfoyle T, Malamy J, Benfey P, Leyser O,
Bechtold N, Weisbeek P, Scheres B (1999) An auxin-dependent distal organizer of pattern
and polarity in the Arabidopsis root. Cell 99:463–472
Sachs T (1969) Polarity and the induction of organized vascular issues. Ann Bot 33:263–275
Sachs T (1981) The control of the patterned differentiation of vascular tissues. Adv Bot Res
9:151–162
Sauer M, Balla J, Luschnig C, Wisniewska J, Reino¨hl V, Friml J, Benkova´ E (2006) Canalization
of auxin ﬂow by Aux/IAA-ARF-dependent feedback regulation of PIN polarity. Genes Dev
20:2902–2911
Scarpella E, Marcos D, Friml J, Berleth T (2006) Control of leaf vascular patterning by polar auxin
transport. Genes Dev 20:1015–1027
Shinohara N, Taylor C, Leyser O (2013) Strigolactone can promote or inhibit shoot branching by
triggering rapid depletion of the auxin efﬂux protein PIN1 from the plasma membrane. PLoS
Biol 11:e1001474
Simon S, Petra´sˇek J (2011) Why plants need more than one type of auxin. Plant Sci 180:454–460
Smith RS, Guyomarc’h S, Mandel T, Reinhardt D, Kuhlemeier C, Prusinkiewicz P (2006) A
plausible model of phyllotaxis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103:1301–1306
18
T. Bennett and O. Leyser

Snow R (1935) Activation of cambial growth by pure hormones. New Phytol 34:347–360
Stepanova AN, Robertson-Hoyt J, Yun J, Benavente LM, Xie DY, Dolezal K, Schlereth A,
Ju¨rgens G, Alonso JM (2008) TAA1-mediated auxin biosynthesis is essential for hormone
crosstalk and plant development. Cell 133:177–191
Stewart JL, Nemhauser JL (2010) Do trees grow on money? Auxin as the currency of the cellular
economy. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2(2):a001420
Strader LC, Nemhauser JL (2013) Auxin 2012: a rich mea ho’oulu. Development 140(6):1153–
1157
Tan X, Calderon-Villalobos LI, Sharon M, Zheng C, Robinson CV, Estelle M, Zheng N (2007)
Mechanism of auxin perception by the TIR1 ubiquitin ligase. Nature 446(7136):640–645
Vernoux T, Brunoud G, Farcot E, Morin V, Van den Daele H, Legrand J, Oliva M, Das P,
Larrieu A, Wells D, Gue´don Y, Armitage L, Picard F, Guyomarc’h S, Cellier C, Parry G,
Koumproglou R, Doonan JH, Estelle M, Godin C, Kepinski S, Bennett M, De Veylder L, Traas
J (2011) The auxin signalling network translates dynamic input into robust patterning at the
shoot apex. Mol Syst Biol 7:508
Wildman SG (1997) The auxin-A, B enigma: scientiﬁc fraud or scientiﬁc ineptitude? Plant Growth
Regul 22:37–68
Woo EJ, Marshall J, Bauly J, Chen JG, Venis M, Napier RM, Pickersgill RW (2002) Crystal
structure of auxin-binding protein 1 in complex with auxin. EMBO J 21(12):2877–2885
1
The Auxin Question: A Philosophical Overview
19

Chapter 2
Auxin Biosynthesis and Catabolism
Yangbin Gao and Yunde Zhao
Abstract Auxin concentrations in plants are tightly regulated through both bio-
synthesis and degradation. In the past few years, much progress was made in the
area of auxin metabolism. Genetic and biochemical studies in Arabidopsis unequiv-
ocally established a complete tryptophan (Trp)-dependent two-step auxin biosyn-
thesis pathway in which Trp is ﬁrst converted into indole-3-pyruvate (IPA) by the
TAA family of aminotransferases and subsequently indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) is
produced from IPA by the YUC family of ﬂavin monooxygenases. The TAA/YUC
pathway is highly conserved in the plant kingdom and is probably the main auxin
biosynthesis pathway in plants. Recent work also demonstrated that oxidative
degradation of auxin plays an essential role in maintaining auxin homeostasis and
in regulating plant development. In this chapter, we discuss the recent advance-
ments in auxin biosynthesis and catabolism.
1
Introduction
Auxin is an essential hormone for many aspects of plant growth and development
(Zhao 2010). Plants have evolved a sophisticated network to control auxin levels
with spatial and temporal precision in response to environmental cues and devel-
opmental signals. Indole-3-acetic acid (IAA), the main natural auxin in plants, can
be produced from de novo biosynthesis. Free IAA, which is the presumed active
form of auxin, can also be released from IAA conjugates including IAA esters,
IAA-saccharides, and IAA-amino acids. A third probable route for producing IAA
is to convert indole-3-butyric acid (IBA) to IAA using enzymes similar to those
Y. Gao • Y. Zhao (*)
Section of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of California San Diego, 9500 Gilman
Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0116, USA
e-mail: y3zhao@ucsd.edu
E. Zazˇı´malova´ et al. (eds.), Auxin and Its Role in Plant Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-7091-1526-8_2, © Springer-Verlag Wien 2014
21

used in β-oxidation of fatty acids. When auxin levels need to be lowered, plants
employ several mechanisms to deactivate IAA. IAA can be quickly converted into
the presumed inactive forms by reaction of the carboxyl group of IAA with amino
acids, sugars, and other small molecules. The IAA conjugates may serve as a ﬁrst
step for the eventual complete degradation of IAA. IAA is also inactivated by
oxidation of the indole ring of IAA. For example, IAA can be converted to
2-oxindole-3-acetic acid (OxIAA). In this chapter, we discuss the progress made
in the area of auxin biosynthesis and metabolism in the past few years.
2
De Novo Auxin Biosynthesis
De novo auxin biosynthesis is broadly divided into two categories: Tryptophan
(Trp) dependent and Trp independent. Trp-independent auxin biosynthesis pathway
was proposed two decades ago based on results from feeding plants with labeled
Trp and Trp biosynthetic intermediates and from studies on Trp-deﬁcient mutants
(Wright et al. 1991; Normanly et al. 1993). However, the molecular mechanisms
and genes for the Trp-independent pathway are not known. Therefore, the
Trp-independent pathway will not be discussed further in this chapter.
Trp has long been known as a precursor for the production of IAA in plants.
Feeding plants with labeled Trp yields labeled IAA, indicating that plants have the
enzymes to convert Trp to IAA (Wright et al. 1991; Normanly et al. 1993). Many
biosynthetic pathways have been elucidated using analytic biochemistry techniques
in combination with labeled precursors and intermediates. For example, the bio-
synthetic routes for brassinolide and ethylene have been established long before the
biosynthetic genes have been identiﬁed (Yang and Hoffmann 1984; Sakurai and
Fujioka 1993). However, the classic feeding and analytic biochemical approaches
failed to identify the key components for Trp-dependent plant auxin biosynthesis
pathways. There are several reasons for this apparent failure. First, Trp is a
precursor for many metabolites (Fig. 2.1). Trp is a precursor for indole-3-pyruvate
(IPA), tryptamine (TAM), indole-3-acetaldoxime (IAOx), indole-3-acetamide
(IAM), indole-3-acetonitrile (IAN), and indole-3-acetaldehyde (IAAld) (Fig. 2.1).
Arabidopsis and many other plants have the capacity to produce all of the above-
mentioned intermediates (Fig. 2.1) at a given developmental stage (Ouyang
et al. 1999; Sugawara et al. 2009). Some of the intermediates such as IAN exist
in very high concentrations (Fig. 2.1) (Sugawara et al. 2009). Such a complex
proﬁle of Trp metabolism makes it difﬁcult to identify Trp-dependent IAA synthe-
sis intermediates. Second, some of the intermediates are intrinsically unstable
in vitro and can be nonenzymatically converted to other compounds during the
experimental process, therefore complicating the analysis of metabolic proﬁling.
For example, IPA is readily converted nonenzymatically into IAA in vitro (Bentley
et al. 1956). Third, most of the Trp metabolic intermediates display auxin activities
during in vitro bioassays (Fig. 2.2). In the presence of IAM in growth media, light-
grown Arabidopsis seedlings have long hypocotyls and epinastic cotyledons
22
Y. Gao and Y. Zhao

N
H
NH2
OH
O
Trp
(4000)
N
H
OH
N
N
H
N
IAOx (1.7)
IAN(850)
OH
O
N
H
N
H
OH
O
O
N
H
NH2
N
H
NH2
O
IAM (9.9)
H
O
NH
TAM(0.21)
IPA (60)
IAA (10)
IAAld (15)
Fig. 2.1 Selected tryptophan metabolic intermediates. Arabidopsis plants produce all of the
intermediates shown in the ﬁgure. The numbers in parenthesis refer to the actual concentrations
in ng/g fresh weight. IAA indole-3-acetic acid, IAAld indole-3-acetaldehyde, IAOx indole-3-
acetaldoxime, IAM indole-3-acetamide, IAN indole-3-acetonitrile, IPA indole-3-pyruvate, TAM
tryptamine, and Trp tryptophan
MS media
20 µM IAM
40 µM IAN
80 µM IAN
100 µM IAN
Fig. 2.2 Some tryptophan metabolites display auxin activities. Indole-3-acetamide (IAM) stim-
ulates hypocotyl elongation and causes epinastic cotyledons. Indole-3-acetonitrile (IAN) inhibits
primary root elongation and stimulates adventitious root initiation
2
Auxin Biosynthesis and Catabolism
23

(Fig. 2.2). The IAM-induced phenotypes are identical to those observed in auxin
overproduction mutants (Boerjan et al. 1995; Romano et al. 1995; Zhao et al. 2001).
Therefore, the phenotypes of plants grown on IAM media are likely caused by
overaccumulation
of
IAA
in
plants.
Arabidopsis
seedlings
grown
on
IAN-containing media produce more adventitious roots and have short primary
roots (Normanly et al. 1997) (Fig. 2.2). The IAN-induced phenotypes are very
similar to those observed in plants grown on IAA-containing media, suggesting that
IAN is probably converted to IAA in plants (Fig. 2.2). Indeed, a genetic screen for
mutants insensitive to IAN identiﬁed Arabidopsis nitrilase genes that encode
enzymes for the hydrolysis IAN to IAA (Bartel and Fink 1994; Normanly
et al. 1997). Interestingly, treatments with IAN or IAM cause auxin overaccu-
mulation in plants and high-auxin phenotypes. However, the IAM-induced pheno-
types are dramatically different from those caused by IAN (Fig. 2.2). It is
speculated that both IAM and IAN need to be metabolized into IAA to show
auxin activities as the observed phenotypic differences may be simply caused by
different tissue speciﬁcities of the hydrolytic enzymes for IAM and IAN. Although
it is very clear that Trp metabolic intermediates can be converted to IAA in plants, it
is difﬁcult to determine how important their contribution to the total IAA pool
under natural conditions is. The fact that plants produce a large number of Trp
metabolic intermediates (Fig. 2.1) and that some of the Trp metabolites have auxin
activities when added to growth media (Fig. 2.2) made it very difﬁcult to dissect
Trp-dependent auxin biosynthesis pathways using classic analytic biochemistry
techniques alone.
The main criterion for determining whether a Trp metabolite is important for de
novo auxin biosynthesis is to use the “deletion test.” If the intermediate is important
for auxin biosynthesis, we expect that plants show dramatic developmental defects
similar to those observed in mutants defective in auxin transport or signaling if the
plants lose the ability to make the intermediate. Recent results from a combination
of analytic biochemical studies and Arabidopsis genetics research have established
that the main auxin biosynthesis pathway in Arabidopsis is a simple two-step
pathway that converts Trp to IAA (Fig. 2.3). The pathway is highly conserved
throughout the plant kingdom.
N
H
NH2
O
OH
Trp
IPA
NH2
O
OH
R
O
O
OH
R
TAA aminotransferases
YUC flavin
monooxygenases
N
H
O
O
OH
N
H
O
OH
IAA
NADPH
O2
CO2
H2O
Fig. 2.3 A tryptophan-dependent auxin biosynthesis pathway in plants. The TAA family of
aminotransferases produces indole-3-pyruvate (IPA) from tryptophan (Trp) and the YUC ﬂavin-
containing monooxygenases catalyze the conversion of IPA into indole-3-acetic acid (IAA)
24
Y. Gao and Y. Zhao

2.1
The TAA/YUC Pathway as the Main Auxin Biosynthesis
Pathway
The YUCCA ﬂavin-containing monooxygenases catalyze the rate-limiting step.
The YUCCA (YUC) ﬂavin-containing monooxygenase (FMO) gene was identiﬁed
as a key auxin biosynthesis gene a decade ago from an activation-tagging screen for
long hypocotyl mutants in Arabidopsis (Zhao et al. 2001). The dominant yucca
(later renamed as yuc1D) mutant was caused by the insertion of four copies of the
CaMV 35S transcriptional enhancer downstream of the YUC gene (Zhao
et al. 2001). The enhancers greatly increase the YUC expression levels, resulting
in dramatic developmental defects. Physiological and molecular studies demon-
strated that yuc1D is an auxin overproduction mutant (Zhao et al. 2001). Direct
auxin measurements show that yuc1D contains 50 % more free IAA than wild-type
Arabidopsis plants. Moreover, the auxin reporter DR5-GUS is greatly upregulated
in yuc1D further supporting that yuc1D is an auxin overproduction mutant. It was
suggested that YUC ﬂavin-containing monooxygenases catalyze a rate-limiting
step in auxin biosynthesis (Zhao et al. 2001).
YUC was later found to be a member of a gene family with 11 genes in the
Arabidopsis
genome.
The
founding
member
was
renamed
as
YUC1.
Overexpression of any of the YUC family members leads to auxin overproduction
phenotypes in Arabidopsis, suggesting that all of the YUC genes participate in auxin
biosynthesis (Cheng et al. 2006, 2007). The YUC genes have overlapping functions
and inactivation of a single YUC gene does not cause any obvious developmental
defects (Cheng et al. 2006, 2007). The observed genetic redundancy among YUC
genes may provide an explanation for why YUC genes had not been discovered
previously by forward loss-of-function genetic screens. Detailed analyses of vari-
ous yuc mutant combinations have demonstrated that YUC genes are essential for
almost all of the major developmental processes including embryogenesis, seedling
growth, vascular initiation and patterning, ﬂower development, and plant architec-
ture (Cheng et al. 2006, 2007). For example, the yuc1 yuc4 double mutants do not
make tertiary veins in rosette leaves and fail to make continuous vascular boundless
in ﬂowers. Overall yuc1 yuc4 ﬂowers contain fewer ﬂoral organs and are
completely sterile. A key piece of evidence that demonstrates the roles of YUC
genes in auxin biosynthesis is the genetic rescue of yuc1 yuc4 mutants with the
bacterial auxin biosynthesis gene iaaM under the control of the YUC1 promoter
(Cheng et al. 2006, 2007).
The biochemical mechanisms of YUC-mediated auxin biosynthesis have been
solved recently (Mashiguchi et al. 2011; Dai et al. 2013). YUC enzymes use
NADPH and molecular oxygen to catalyze the oxidative decarboxylation of IPA
to generate IAA (Fig. 2.3). On the basis of sequence homology to the mammalian
microsome FMOs, it is expected that YUCs use a ﬂavin (FAD or FMN) as a
cofactor. Expressed in and puriﬁed from E. coli, the Arabidopsis YUC6 displayed
a bright yellowish colour, suggesting that YUC6 contains a ﬂavin cofactor. HPLC
and other experiments demonstrate that the cofactor in YUC6 is FAD, not FMN
2
Auxin Biosynthesis and Catabolism
25

(Dai et al. 2013). The YUC6-catalyzed conversion of IPA to IAA can be divided
into three consecutive chemical steps: (1) reduction of FAD to FADH2 using
electrons from NADPH; (2) binding of molecular oxygen to FADH2 to form the
C4a-(hydro)peroxyl ﬂavin intermediate; (3) the reaction of the C4a intermediate
with IPA to produce IAA from decarboxylation of IPA (Fig. 2.3) (Dai et al. 2013).
Interestingly, the reduction of YUC6 by NADPH takes place regardless of the
presence of IPA. IPA also does not affect the rate of YUC6 reduction. The kinetic
pattern and rate of the formation of the C4a intermediate is also not affected by IPA
(Dai et al. 2013). However, the decomposition of C4a intermediate is greatly
accelerated by IPA (Dai et al. 2013). The oxidized YUC6, reduced YUC6, and
the C4a intermediate display distinct spectroscopic properties and can be monitored
spectroscopically. The oxidized YUC6 shows two peaks at 376 and 448 nm in the
UV-visible spectrum, while reduction of YUC6 causes the disappearance of the
448 nm peak. The YUC6 C4a-(hydro)peroxyl ﬂavin intermediate has a maximum
absorbance at 381 nm in a UV-visible spectrum (Dai et al. 2013). The FAD cofactor
in YUC6 provides a convenient handle to follow the progression of the
YUC-catalyzed reactions.
Besides IPA as a substrate, YUC6 can also catalyze the decarboxylation of
phenyl-pyruvate (PPA) to produce phenyl-acetic acid (PAA), suggesting that
YUC enzymes do not have strict substrate speciﬁcities (Dai et al. 2013). It is not
known whether the YUC6-catalyzed conversion of PPA to PAA has any physio-
logical signiﬁcance. However, it is known that PAA displays auxin activities when
added into growth media. Both YUC enzymes and mammalian FMOs share
sequence homologies and form the C4a-(hydro)peroxyl ﬂavin intermediate. Mam-
malian FMOs are mainly known for their ability to oxygenate soft nucleophiles
such as nitrogen- or sulfur-containing molecules, whereas YUCs such as YUC6
oxygenate electrophilic substrates such as IPA and PPA (Ziegler 1988, 2002; Dai
et al. 2013). However, mammalian FMOs recently have been shown to use elec-
trophilic substrates as well and YUCs were previously shown to oxygenate soft
nucleophiles in vitro (Zhao et al. 2001; Kim et al. 2007; Lai et al. 2010). The
stability of the C4a intermediate is also quite different for YUCs and mammalian
FMOs. The YUC6 intermediate has a half-life of about 20 s, whereas that of some
FMOs from mammalian cells is more than 30 min (Ziegler 1988, 2002; Dai
et al. 2013). It is important to use both in vitro enzymatic assays and in vivo genetic
evidence
to
determine
the
physiological
functions
of
ﬂavin-containing
monooxygenases.
In the presence of excess PPA or IPA, some uncoupled YUC6 reactions still take
place and produce hydrogen peroxide. The uncouple ratio is about 4 % (Dai
et al. 2013). It is not clear whether the uncoupled reaction plays any physiological
role. It is conceivable that H2O2 produced from the uncoupled reaction may
participate in deactivating YUC enzymes, providing an intrinsic mechanism for
turning off auxin biosynthesis.
Genetic, physiological, and biochemical studies have unambiguously demon-
strated that the YUC family of ﬂavin-containing monooxygenases plays a key role
26
Y. Gao and Y. Zhao

in auxin biosynthesis. Genetic evidence suggests that the conversion of IPA to IAA
is the rate-limiting and the committed step for IAA biosynthesis.
Tryptophan Aminotransferase of Arabidopsis (TAA) family of aminotransferases
plays a key role in auxin biosynthesis. Three groups independently discovered that
TAA1, the founding member of a large family of aminotransferases, is an important
auxin biosynthesis enzyme (Stepanova et al. 2008; Tao et al. 2008; Yamada
et al. 2009). Mutations in TAA1, which is also called SAV3, WEI8, and TIR2, alter
shade-avoidance responses, cause resistance to ethylene and to the auxin transport
inhibitor NPA (Stepanova et al. 2008; Tao et al. 2008; Yamada et al. 2009).
Although inactivation of TAA1 along does not cause dramatic developmental
phenotypes, simultaneously disruption of TAA1 and its close homolog TAR2 leads
to defects in vascular pattern formation and in ﬂower development in Arabidopsis.
The taa mutants produce less free IAA compared to wild-type plants (Stepanova
et al. 2008; Tao et al. 2008; Yamada et al. 2009).
TAA1 and its related proteins catalyze the transfer of the amino group from Trp
to pyruvate or to α-ketoglutarate to produce IPA and Ala or Glu (Fig. 2.3) in vitro.
Therefore, it is important to keep in mind that TAA genes not only produce IPA but
also affect the homeostasis of other α-keto acids and other amino acids. It is not
clear which α-keto acid is the preferred in vivo acceptor of the amino group
from Trp.
TAAs and YUCs were previously placed in two separate pathways (Zhao
et al. 2001; Stepanova et al. 2008; Tao et al. 2008). But several recent genetic
studies have demonstrated that YUCs and TAAs participate in the same pathway
(Mashiguchi et al. 2011; Stepanova et al. 2011; Won et al. 2011). The yuc mutants
and taa mutants share many similarities. For example, yuc1 yuc2 yuc4 yuc6
quadruple mutants have dramatic vascular and ﬂoral defects, which are also
observed in taa1 tar2 double mutants (Cheng et al. 2006; Stepanova et al. 2008).
In fact, all of the characteristics of taa mutants can be phenocopied by inactivating
certain combinations of YUC genes (Won et al. 2011). Overexpression of YUC
genes leads to auxin overproduction phenotypes, which are dependent on the
presence of functional TAA genes (Won et al. 2011). Furthermore, taa mutants
are partially IPA deﬁcient, whereas yuc mutants accumulate IPA, suggesting that
TAA genes participate in IPA production and that YUCs use IPA as a substrate
(Mashiguchi et al. 2011; Won et al. 2011). Finally, recent biochemical studies on
the catalytic mechanisms of YUC ﬂavin monooxygenases provide the ﬁnal proof of
the TAA/YUC two-step pathway as the main auxin biosynthesis pathway
(Mashiguchi et al. 2011; Dai et al. 2013; Zhao 2013).
The TAA/YUC pathway is widely distributed throughout the plant kingdom.
YUC genes from maize (Gallavotti et al. 2008), rice (Woo et al. 2007; Yamamoto
et al. 2007; Fujino et al. 2008; Abu-Zaitoon et al. 2012), tomato (Exposito-
Rodriguez et al. 2011), petunia (Tobena-Santamaria et al. 2002), strawberry (Liu
et al. 2012), and other species (Kim et al. 2012; Cheol Park et al. 2013) have been
functionally characterized and they all participate in auxin biosynthesis. The TAA
genes in maize have also been shown to participate in auxin biosynthesis (Phillips
2
Auxin Biosynthesis and Catabolism
27

et al. 2011). The committed step for auxin biosynthesis is catalyzed by the YUC
ﬂavoproteins. Thus the YUC-catalyzed reaction has to be tightly controlled. It has
been shown that YUC genes are only expressed in discrete groups of cells (Cheng
et al. 2006, 2007). Such tight control of YUC transcription provides a mechanism
for temporal and spatial regulation of auxin production.
2.2
Other Trp-Dependent Auxin Biosynthesis Pathways
Trp is metabolized into several other indolic compounds (Fig. 2.1), some of which
show auxin activities when applied to plants (Fig. 2.2). The physiological roles of
the indolic compounds other than IPA in auxin biosynthesis are still ambiguous.
That a compound can be metabolized into IAA both in vitro and in vivo does not
mean that the compound is actually an important contributor to auxin biosynthesis
in plants. Further genetic analysis of the genes responsible for generating the Trp
metabolic intermediates (Fig. 2.1) is needed to assess the roles of the compounds in
auxin biosynthesis.
IAM pathway. Arabidopsis and maize have detectable amount of IAM (Sugawara
et al. 2009), which is the key intermediate in the bacterial auxin biosynthesis
pathway characterized in Agrobacterium and Pseudomonas two decades ago
(Yamada et al. 1985; Romano et al. 1995). In plant pathogenic bacteria, Trp is
oxidized by the iaaM Trp-2-monooxygenase to IAM that is subsequently hydro-
lyzed by iaaH to produce IAA. Unlike the bacterial IAM pathway, the genes and
enzymes responsible for producing IAM in plants have not been identiﬁed. It
appears that plants do not have genes with high sequence homology to the bacterial
iaaM gene. Therefore, IAM may be synthesized using a different mechanism. It is
possible that IAM may be synthesized from IAA as a way to control free IAA
levels. Conversion of IAA to IAM may be accomplished using mechanisms similar
to glutamine biosynthesis.
Hydrolysis of IAM occurs in plants as feeding plants with IAM leads to elevated
auxin levels and “high-auxin” phenotypes (Fig. 2.2). It is proposed that a group of
hydrolases, which are homologous to the bacterial hydrolase iaaH, plays a role in
converting IAM to IAA (Pollmann et al. 2006; Hoffmann et al. 2010). It is still
inconclusive whether IAM is an important auxin biosynthesis intermediate in plants
because IAM-deﬁcient mutants have not been identiﬁed.
TAM pathway. Tryptamine is presumably produced by Trp decarboxylase, but the
enzymes responsible for the reaction in Arabidopsis have not been characterized.
Sequence homology-based prediction may not lead to the correct identiﬁcation of
the genes. TAM was a proposed substrate for the YUC ﬂavin monooxygenases
(Zhao et al. 2001; Kim et al. 2012), which have now been shown to catalyze the
conversion of IPA to IAA in vitro and in vivo. However, all of the ﬂavin-containing
monooxygenases form the C4a-(hydro)peroxyl ﬂavin intermediates, which are the
catalytically active intermediates. The C4a intermediate can do both nucleophilic
28
Y. Gao and Y. Zhao

and electrophilic reactions, depending on the reaction conditions. For example,
mammalian FMOs have long been recognized for their roles in xenobiotic metab-
olism by reacting with soft nucleophiles such as nitrogen-containing compounds
(Ziegler 2002). It has also been shown that Human FMOs can catalyze a Baeyer–
Villiger type reaction, in which the C4a intermediate reacts with an electrophilic
carbonyl carbon (Lai et al. 2010). To date, it has not been ruled out that TAM is an
important intermediate in auxin biosynthesis; however, biosynthesis and metabo-
lism of TAM are not well understood.
IAN pathway. IAN is very abundant compared to other Trp metabolites (Fig. 2.1).
IAN stimulates adventitious root development and inhibits primary root elongation
(Fig. 2.2). The conversion of IAN to IAA is catalyzed by nitrilases. Inactivation of
nitrilase genes leads to resistance to exogenous IAN, but the nitrilase mutants do not
display obvious developmental defects observed in known auxin signaling and
transport mutants (Bartel and Fink 1994; Normanly et al. 1997). Arabidopsis
genome contains four copies of the nitrilase gene. The developmental consequences
of disrupting all four nitrilase genes have not been investigated, partially due to the
fact that two of the copies are immediately adjacent to each other on the same
chromosome. Therefore, it is still an open question whether IAN plays a signiﬁcant
role in auxin biosynthesis.
The routes for IAN production are not well understood either. It has been
reported that metabolism of indolic glucosinolate yields IAN (de Vos et al. 2008).
However, maize does not produce glucosinolates, but still produces IAN,
suggesting that other routes can produce IAN. It has been suggested that IAN
may also be produced from other indolic compounds such as IAOx (Sugawara
et al. 2009).
IAAld pathway. IAAld was previously proposed as an intermediate in the IPA
pathway for auxin biosynthesis (Zhao 2010). In plants, it is now known that IAAld
is not an intermediate in the IPA pathway (Mashiguchi et al. 2011; Won et al. 2011)
as IPA is converted to IAA by the YUC ﬂavin-containing monooxygenases without
producing IAAld (Dai et al. 2013). In some IAA-producing bacteria, IAAld is
produced from IPA by IPA decarboxylases (Carreno-Lopez et al. 2000). IAAld
can be further oxidized into IAA by aldehyde oxidases. In Arabidopsis, genes
homologous to the bacterial IPA decarboxylases appear not to play a role in
auxin biosynthesis. Inactivation of Arabidopsis aldehyde oxidases does not disturb
auxin homeostasis, suggesting that it is very likely that IAAld does not contribute
signiﬁcantly to de novo auxin biosynthesis (Mashiguchi et al. 2011). However,
IAAld can also be oxidized by aldehyde dehydrogenases, which have not been
characterized in Arabidopsis.
IAOx pathway. IAOx has only been detected in Arabidopsis and related species
(Mashiguchi et al. 2011). Monocots such as rice and maize do not have detectable
levels of IAOx (Mashiguchi et al. 2011). In Arabidopsis, CYP79B2 and CYP79B3
convert Trp directly to IAOx (Hull et al. 2000; Zhao et al. 2002). Overexpression of
CYP79B2 in Arabidopsis leads to long hypocotyl and epinastic cotyledons, a
2
Auxin Biosynthesis and Catabolism
29

phenotype that is also observed in YUC overexpression lines, suggesting that IAOx
can be a precursor for IAA biosynthesis (Zhao et al. 2002). IAOx is also a precursor
for indolic glucosinolate biosynthesis (Boerjan et al. 1995; Bak and Feyereisen
2001). When the genes encoding glucosinolate biosynthesis enzymes are mutated,
more IAOx is ﬂuxed into IAA biosynthesis, causing auxin overproduction pheno-
types (Boerjan et al. 1995; Bak and Feyereisen 2001). For example, the sur1 and
sur2 mutants that are defective in glucosinolate biosynthesis overproduce auxin,
which leads to the development of long hypocotyls and numerous adventitious
roots.
It appears that CYP79B2 and B3 are the only genes responsible for producing
IAOx in Arabidopsis. The cyp79b2 cyp79b3 double mutants appear to completely
abolish the biosynthesis of IAOx and the double mutants have no detectable amount
of IAOx (Sugawara et al. 2009). The double mutants have subtle growth defects
when grown at high temperature, but have no obvious phenotypes under normal
growth conditions (Zhao et al. 2002). Therefore, it is believed that IAOx is not an
essential intermediate for auxin biosynthesis. Nor is IAOx a universal intermediate
for auxin biosynthesis.
In summary, after three decades molecular genetics studies in Arabidopsis, the
picture of de novo auxin biosynthesis has become clearer. The two-step
Trp-dependent pathway catalyzed by TAAs and YUCs is the main auxin biosyn-
thesis pathway that plays essential roles in almost all of the main developmental
processes. In retrospect, Arabidopsis probably is not the best model for auxin
biosynthesis studies for two main reasons. First, the Arabidopsis glucosinolate
biosynthesis pathway really complicated the analyses of IAA biosynthesis because
the glucosinolate biosynthesis intermediate IAOx can be converted into IAA. The
aforementioned glucosinolate mutants such as sur1 and sur2 had dramatic auxin
overproduction phenotypes (Boerjan et al. 1995; Bak and Feyereisen 2001). Sec-
ond, the genetic redundancy within YUCs and TAAs in Arabidopsis made it difﬁcult
for loss-of-function studies. The single Arabidopsis yuc or taa mutants do not show
dramatic auxin phenotypes. Only the multiple mutants of taa or yuc display
dramatic developmental defects (Cheng et al. 2006, 2007; Stepanova et al. 2008).
In contrast, some monocots such as maize offer a relatively simpler system for
analyzing auxin biosynthesis. Maize does not produce indolic glucosinolate
(Sugawara et al. 2009). Furthermore, inactivation of a single YUC gene or TAA
gene in maize leads to dramatic developmental phenotypes, whereas inactivation of
at least two YUC genes or TAA genes in Arabidopsis is needed to cause main
developmental defects (Gallavotti et al. 2008; Phillips et al. 2011).
3
IAA Production from Non-De Novo Pathways
Besides de novo in loco synthesis and transportation from neighboring cells, free
IAA can also be made available by releasing IAA from its conjugated forms or from
indole butyric acid (IBA) (Woodward and Bartel 2005). In fact, the majority of IAA
30
Y. Gao and Y. Zhao

in plants exists in the conjugated forms, which are proposed to serve as a storage
pool. It is known that IAA can be conjugated via ester bonds with simple alcohols
and with sugars such as glucose and myo-inositol or via amide bonds with amino
acids, peptides, or proteins. Free IAA can be produced when the conjugates are
hydrolyzed. Hydrolysis of conjugates provides plants with a potentially faster way
to modulate free IAA levels than de novo biosynthesis. For example, in the
germinating seeds of maize, large amount of IAA is released from the endosperm
from its ester form to support the growth of developing seedlings (Bialek
et al. 1992). Some of the enzymes responsible for hydrolyzing IAA-sugar or
IAA-amino acids have been characterized and they show different substrate spec-
iﬁcities and are developmentally regulated (Bartel and Fink 1995; Davies
et al. 1999; Lasswell et al. 2000; LeClere et al. 2002; Rampey et al. 2004).
3.1
Conversion of IBA to IAA
IBA has long been used in agriculture for promoting root initiation/growth from
plant cuttings. Arabidopsis plants accumulate detectable amount of IBA. However,
it is not understood how IBA is synthesized in plants. IBA is known to inhibit
primary root elongation and stimulate lateral root formation. Genetic screens for
Arabidopsis mutants resistant to exogenous IBA have identiﬁed many loci (ibr,
IBA resistant). The majority of the ibr loci encode enzymes related to β-oxidation
of fatty acids or biogenesis of peroxisome, where β-oxidation takes place. The
genetic data suggest that the observed auxin activities of IBA depend on the
conversion of IBA to IAA (Zolman et al. 2000; Strader et al. 2010). However, it
has not been completely ruled out that IBA itself has some biological activities
(Simon et al. 2013).
The physiological roles of IBA-derived IAA are difﬁcult to determine because
the enzymes responsible for IBA to IAA conversion may also participate in other
pathways such as fatty acid metabolism. Recent characterization of mutations
resistant to IBA leads to the discovery that disruption of ENOYL-COA
HYDRATASE2 (ECH2) gene causes defects in IBA responsiveness, but appears
not to affect sugar and fatty acid metabolism. Further analysis of ech2 and other ibr
mutants demonstrated that IBA-derived IAA plays important roles in root hair
development and cotyledon cell expansion (Strader et al. 2010, 2011).
3.2
Release of Free IAA from IAA Conjugates
IAA conjugates with ester-link to sugars and small alcohols or amide-link to amino
acids and peptides have been identiﬁed in plants. The various conjugates may serve
as a storage form of IAA and can release free IAA when needed. The most studied
case of releasing free IAA from conjugates is the hydrolysis of IAA-amino acid
2
Auxin Biosynthesis and Catabolism
31

conjugates. Among the 20 potential amino acid conjugates, 19 (except IAA-Arg)
were tested for their ability to release free IAA in a bioassay based on root
elongation in Arabidopsis (LeClere et al. 2002). It was shown that IAA-Ala,
-Leu, -Phe, -Asn, -Gln, -Glu, -Gly, -Met, -Ser, -Thr, and -Tyr inhibited root
elongation by more than 50 % at 40 μM, suggesting that these amino acid conju-
gates can be hydrolyzed to release free IAA. In contrast, IAA-Asp, -Cys, -His, -Ile,
-Lys, -Pro, -Trp, and -Val appeared not a source for free IAA (LeClere et al. 2002).
Genetic screens for Arabidopsis mutants resistant to IAA-Leu and IAA-Ala iden-
tiﬁed a family of hydrolases including IAA–Leu Resistant 1 (ILR1), IAA–Ala
resistant (IAR3), and the ILR1-like protein (ILL2) responsible for releasing free
IAA from the IAA-amino acid conjugates (Davies et al. 1999; Lasswell et al. 2000;
LeClere et al. 2002; Rampey et al. 2004). The ilr1 iar3 ill2 triple mutants are
resistant to several IAA-amino acid conjugates and have shorter hypocotyl and
fewer lateral roots than wild-type plants, suggesting that releasing free IAA from
conjugates plays important roles in IAA homeostasis and plant development
(Rampey et al. 2004).
4
Deactivation of IAA
The active form of IAA is believed to be free IAA. The carboxyl group in IAA is
essential for its auxin activities. IAA is inactivated by complete oxidation, a process
that is still not well understood. IAA can also be taken out of action by forming
various conjugates with alcohols, sugars, and amino acids (Woodward and Bartel
2005).
4.1
Synthesis of IAA Conjugates
Great progresses have been made in recent years towards understanding the
enzymes responsible for synthesizing IAA esters and amide conjugates. In maize,
synthesis of IAA-ester with sugar starts with the formation of IAA-glucose that is
preceded by activation of glucose by the formation of glucose-UDP that is then
joined with IAA. IAA-glucose is further converted to other IAA-sugar ester conju-
gates that are mostly believed to be a storage form of IAA (Michalczuk and
Bandurski 1982; Leznicki and Bandurski 1988a, b). The formation of methyl
IAA by the IAMT1 methyl transferase has been implicated in regulating leaf
development in Arabidopsis (Qin et al. 2005).
In Arabidopsis, 20 amidosynthases encoded by the large Gretchen Hagen 3
(GH3) family of genes conjugate IAA as well as some other plant hormones such as
jasmonic acid and salicylic acid with amino acids to form amide conjugates (Hagen
et al. 1991; Liu et al. 1994; Staswick et al. 2005). GH3 genes are among the early-
induced genes by auxin treatments (Hagen et al. 1991). Originally discovered as
32
Y. Gao and Y. Zhao

being able to adenylate IAA in vitro, GH3 amidosynthases are later shown to be
responsible for synthesizing IAA-amino acid conjugates. The adenylyl-IAA serves
as the activated intermediate and readily reacts with some amino acids (Staswick
et al. 2005). Some of the IAA-amino acid conjugates can be hydrolyzed to release
free IAA, while some of the conjugates appear non-hydrolyzable in vivo (LeClere
et al. 2002). The latter group of IAA-conjugates may serve as a way to inactivate
IAA. For example, once IAA-Asp is formed, it would not be hydrolyzed and the
conjugated IAA is consequently permanently deactivated. IAA-Asp is also known
as a target for oxidative degradation. GH3 proteins have also been shown to play
roles in response to environmental stimuli such as light and wounding processes,
possibly through the regulation the formation of IAA, jasmonic acid, and/or
salicylic acid conjugates (Woodward and Bartel 2005). Interestingly, some of the
IAA conjugates possesses antagonist effects against IAA. Externally applied
IAA-Trp effectively antagonizes the inhibitory effects of IAA treatment in
Arabidopsis roots (Staswick 2009a, b). IAA-peptide and IAA-protein conjugates
have also been discovered (Walz et al. 2002), indicating that IAA may serve as a
small molecular tag but their functions are still unclear.
4.2
IAA Degradation via Oxidation
IAA starts the oxidative degradation either with decarboxylation on the side chain
or with oxidation of the indole ring. Very little is known regarding oxidative
degradation of IAA. It has been reported that peroxidase may be involved in
the oxidative decarboxylation of IAA (Normanly 2010). Oxidative intermediates
including OxIAA have been discovered in plants (Reinecke and Bandurski 1983;
Ostin et al. 1998; Kai et al. 2007; Peer et al. 2013). In Arabidopsis, other
IAA metabolites such as N-(6-hydroxyindol-3-ylacetyl)-phenylalanine (6-OH-
IAA-Phe),
N-(6-hydroxyindol-3-ylacetyl)-valine
(6-OH-IAA-Val),
and
1-O-
(2-oxoindol-3-ylacetyl)-beta-d-glucopyranose (OxIAA-Glc) have been observed
with OxIAA-Glc being the main oxidative product. Recently, it was reported that
in Arabidopsis roots, OxIAA is the major catabolic product of IAA (Pencik
et al. 2013). Because OxIAA has little auxinic effects, irreversible oxidation of
IAA into OxIAA effectively removes the IAA from the auxin pool. Another recent
discovery in rice shed light on the genes underlying the conversion of IAA to OxIAA
(Zhao et al. 2013). Rice plants with a mutation in the Dioxygenase for Auxin
Oxidation (DAO) gene have elevated free IAA levels in anthers and ovaries and
are defective in anther dehiscence, pollen fertility, and seed development (Zhao
et al. 2013). The dao mutants also do not have detectable level of oxIAA, and the
puriﬁed DAO protein expressed in E. coli could convert IAA to oxIAA in vitro (Zhao
et al. 2013). The new ﬁndings mark the beginning of understanding the molecular
and genetic mechanisms underlying IAA oxidation and the roles of oxidative degra-
dation of IAA in auxin homeostasis.
2
Auxin Biosynthesis and Catabolism
33

5
Conclusions
Plants employ many ways to control auxin levels thus to ensure proper growth and
development. The major advancement in our understanding of auxin homeostasis in
the past few years is the elucidation of a complete two-step Trp-dependent auxin
biosynthesis pathway where Trp is converted to IPA by the TAA family of amino
transferases and the YUC ﬂavin monooxygenases catalyzes the production of IAA
using IPA as a substrate. However, there are still some gaps in our understanding of
both auxin biosynthesis and degradation. The identiﬁcation of a complete network
of auxin metabolic pathways would allow us to effectively modulate auxin levels in
plants with temporal and spatial control and thus greatly facilitate the dissection of
the molecular mechanisms by which auxin regulates various aspects of plant
growth and development.
Acknowledgment Our research was supported by the NSF Plant Genome grant (DBI-0820729 to
YZ) and the NIH (R01GM68631 to YZ).
References
Abu-Zaitoon YM, Bennett K, Normanly J, Nonhebel HM (2012) A large increase in IAA during
development of rice grains correlates with the expression of tryptophan aminotransferase
OsTAR1 and a grain-speciﬁc YUCCA. Physiol Plant 146:487–499
Bak S, Feyereisen R (2001) The involvement of two p450 enzymes, CYP83B1 and CYP83A1, in
auxin homeostasis and glucosinolate biosynthesis. Plant Physiol 127:108–118
Bartel B, Fink GR (1994) Differential regulation of an auxin-producing nitrilase gene family in
Arabidopsis thaliana. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 91:6649–6653
Bartel B, Fink GR (1995) ILR1, an amidohydrolase that releases active indole-3-acetic acid from
conjugates. Science 268:1745–1748
Bentley JA, Farrar KR, Housley S, Smith GF, Taylor WC (1956) Some chemical and physiological
properties of 3-indolylpyruvic acid. Biochem J 64:44–49
Bialek K, Michalczuk L, Cohen JD (1992) Auxin biosynthesis during seed germination in
Phaseolus vulgaris. Plant Physiol 100:509–517
Boerjan W, Cervera MT, Delarue M, Beeckman T, Dewitte W, Bellini C, Caboche M, Van
Onckelen H, Van Montagu M, Inze D (1995) Superroot, a recessive mutation in Arabidopsis,
confers auxin overproduction. Plant Cell 7:1405–1419
Carreno-Lopez R, Campos-Reales N, Elmerich C, Baca BE (2000) Physiological evidence for
differently regulated tryptophan-dependent pathways for indole-3-acetic acid synthesis in
Azospirillum brasilense. Mol Gen Genet 264:521–530
Cheng Y, Dai X, Zhao Y (2006) Auxin biosynthesis by the YUCCA ﬂavin monooxygenases
controls the formation of ﬂoral organs and vascular tissues in Arabidopsis. Genes Dev
20:1790–1799
Cheng Y, Dai X, Zhao Y (2007) Auxin synthesized by the YUCCA ﬂavin monooxygenases is
essential for embryogenesis and leaf formation in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 19:2430–2439
Cheol Park H, Cha JY, Yun DJ (2013) Roles of YUCCAs in auxin biosynthesis and drought stress
responses in plants. Plant Signal Behav 8(6):e24495
34
Y. Gao and Y. Zhao

Dai X, Mashiguchi K, Chen Q, Kasahara H, Kamiya Y, Ojha S, DuBois J, Ballou D, Zhao Y
(2013) The biochemical mechanism of auxin biosynthesis by an arabidopsis YUCCA ﬂavin-
containing monooxygenase. J Biol Chem 288:1448–1457
Davies RT, Goetz DH, Lasswell J, Anderson MN, Bartel B (1999) IAR3 encodes an auxin
conjugate hydrolase from Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 11:365–376
de Vos M, Kriksunov KL, Jander G (2008) Indole-3-acetonitrile production from indole
glucosinolates deters oviposition by Pieris rapae. Plant Physiol 146:916–926
Exposito-Rodriguez M, Borges AA, Borges-Perez A, Perez JA (2011) Gene structure and spatio-
temporal expression proﬁle of tomato genes encoding YUCCA-like ﬂavin monooxygenases:
the ToFZY gene family. Plant Physiol Biochem 49:782–791
Fujino K, Matsuda Y, Ozawa K, Nishimura T, Koshiba T, Fraaije MW, Sekiguchi H (2008)
NARROW LEAF 7 controls leaf shape mediated by auxin in rice. Mol Genet Genomics
279:499–507
Gallavotti A, Barazesh S, Malcomber S, Hall D, Jackson D, Schmidt RJ, McSteen P (2008) sparse
inﬂorescence1 encodes a monocot-speciﬁc YUCCA-like gene required for vegetative and
reproductive development in maize. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105:15196–15201
Hagen G, Martin G, Li Y, Guilfoyle TJ (1991) Auxin-induced expression of the soybean GH3
promoter in transgenic tobacco plants. Plant Mol Biol 17:567–579
Hoffmann M, Lehmann T, Neu D, Hentrich M, Pollmann S (2010) Expression of AMIDASE1
(AMI1) is suppressed during the ﬁrst two days after germination. Plant Signal Behav
5:1642–1644
Hull AK, Vij R, Celenza JL (2000) Arabidopsis cytochrome P450s that catalyze the ﬁrst step of
tryptophan-dependent indole-3-acetic acid biosynthesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
97:2379–2384
Kai K, Horita J, Wakasa K, Miyagawa H (2007) Three oxidative metabolites of indole-3-acetic
acid from Arabidopsis thaliana. Phytochemistry 68:1651–1663
Kim JI, Sharkhuu A, Jin JB, Li P, Jeong JC, Baek D, Lee SY, Blakeslee JJ, Murphy AS, Bohnert
HJ, Hasegawa PM, Yun DJ, Bressan RA (2007) yucca6, a dominant mutation in Arabidopsis,
affects auxin accumulation and auxin-related phenotypes. Plant Physiol 145:722–735
Kim JI, Baek D, Park HC, Chun HJ, Oh DH, Lee MK, Cha JY, Kim WY, Kim MC, Chung WS,
Bohnert HJ, Lee SY, Bressan RA, Lee SW, Yun DJ (2012) Overexpression of Arabidopsis
YUCCA6 in potato results in high-auxin developmental phenotypes and enhanced resistance to
water deﬁcit. Mol Plant 6:337–349
Lai WG, Farah N, Moniz GA, Wong YN (2010) A Baeyer-Villiger oxidation speciﬁcally catalyzed
by human ﬂavin-containing monooxygenase 5. Drug Metab Dispos 39:61–70
Lasswell J, Rogg LE, Nelson DC, Rongey C, Bartel B (2000) Cloning and characterization of
IAR1, a gene required for auxin conjugate sensitivity in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 12:2395–2408
LeClere S, Tellez R, Rampey RA, Matsuda SP, Bartel B (2002) Characterization of a family of
IAA-amino acid conjugate hydrolases from Arabidopsis. J Biol Chem 277:20446–20452
Leznicki AJ, Bandurski RS (1988a) Enzymic synthesis of indole-3-acetyl-1-O-beta-d-glucose.
II. Metabolic characteristics of the enzyme. Plant Physiol 88:1481–1485
Leznicki AJ, Bandurski RS (1988b) Enzymic synthesis of indole-3-acetyl-1-O-beta-d-glucose.
I. Partial puriﬁcation and characterization of the enzyme from Zea mays. Plant Physiol
88:1474–1480
Liu ZB, Ulmasov T, Shi X, Hagen G, Guilfoyle TJ (1994) Soybean GH3 promoter contains
multiple auxin-inducible elements. Plant Cell 6:645–657
Liu H, Ying YY, Zhang L, Gao QH, Li J, Zhang Z, Fang JG, Duan K (2012) Isolation and
characterization of two YUCCA ﬂavin monooxygenase genes from cultivated strawberry
(Fragaria x ananassa Duch.). Plant Cell Rep 31:1425–1435
Mashiguchi K, Tanaka K, Sakai T, Sugawara S, Kawaide H, Natsume M, Hanada A, Yaeno T,
Shirasu K, Yao H, McSteen P, Zhao Y, Hayashi K, Kamiya Y, Kasahara H (2011) The main
auxin biosynthesis pathway in Arabidopsis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108:18512–18517
2
Auxin Biosynthesis and Catabolism
35

Michalczuk L, Bandurski RS (1982) Enzymic synthesis of 1-O-indol-3-ylacetyl-beta-D-glucose
and indol-3-ylacetyl-myo-inositol. Biochem J 207:273–281
Normanly J (2010) Approaching cellular and molecular resolution of auxin biosynthesis and
metabolism. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2:a001594
Normanly J, Cohen JD, Fink GR (1993) Arabidopsis thaliana auxotrophs reveal a tryptophan-
independent biosynthetic pathway for indole-3-acetic acid. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
90:10355–10359
Normanly J, GrisaﬁP, Fink GR, Bartel B (1997) Arabidopsis mutants resistant to the auxin effects
of indole-3-acetonitrile are defective in the nitrilase encoded by the NIT1 gene. Plant Cell
9:1781–1790
Ostin A, Kowalyczk M, Bhalerao RP, Sandberg G (1998) Metabolism of indole-3-acetic acid in
Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 118:285–296
Ouyang J, Chen M, Li J (1999) Measurement of soluble tryptophan and total indole-3-acetic acid
in Arabidopsis by capillary electrophoresis. Anal Biochem 271:100–102
Peer WA, Cheng Y, Murphy AS (2013) Evidence of oxidative attenuation of auxin signalling. J
Exp Bot 64:2629–2639
Pencik A, Simonovik B, Petersson SV, Henykova E, Simon S, Greenham K, Zhang Y,
Kowalczyk M, Estelle M, Zazimalova E, Novak O, Sandberg G, Ljung K (2013) Regulation
of auxin homeostasis and gradients in Arabidopsis roots through the formation of the indole-3-
acetic acid catabolite 2-oxindole-3-acetic acid. Plant Cell 25:3858–3870
Phillips KA, Skirpan AL, Liu X, Christensen A, Slewinski TL, Hudson C, Barazesh S, Cohen JD,
Malcomber S, McSteen P (2011) vanishing tassel2 encodes a grass-speciﬁc tryptophan ami-
notransferase required for vegetative and reproductive development in maize. Plant Cell
23:550–566
Pollmann S, Neu D, Lehmann T, Berkowitz O, Schafer T, Weiler EW (2006) Subcellular
localization and tissue speciﬁc expression of amidase 1 from Arabidopsis thaliana. Planta
224:1241–1253
Qin G, Gu H, Zhao Y, Ma Z, Shi G, Yang Y, Pichersky E, Chen H, Liu M, Chen Z, Qu LJ (2005)
An indole-3-acetic acid carboxyl methyltransferase regulates Arabidopsis leaf development.
Plant Cell 17:2693–2704
Rampey RA, LeClere S, Kowalczyk M, Ljung K, Sandberg G, Bartel B (2004) A family of auxin-
conjugate hydrolases that contributes to free indole-3-acetic acid levels during Arabidopsis
germination. Plant Physiol 135:978–988
Reinecke DM, Bandurski RS (1983) Oxindole-3-acetic acid, an indole-3-acetic acid catabolite in
Zea mays. Plant Physiol 71:211–213
Romano CP, Robson PR, Smith H, Estelle M, Klee H (1995) Transgene-mediated auxin
overproduction in Arabidopsis: hypocotyl elongation phenotype and interactions with the
hy6-1 hypocotyl elongation and axr1 auxin-resistant mutants. Plant Mol Biol 27:1071–1083
Sakurai A, Fujioka S (1993) The current status of physiology and biochemistry of brassinosteroids.
Plant Growth Regul 13:147–159
Simon S, Kubes M, Baster P, Robert S, Dobrev PI, Friml J, Petrasek J, Zazimalova E (2013)
Deﬁning the selectivity of processes along the auxin response chain: a study using auxin
analogues. New Phytol 200:1034–1048
Staswick P (2009a) Plant hormone conjugation: a signal decision. Plant Signal Behav 4:757–759
Staswick PE (2009b) The tryptophan conjugates of jasmonic and indole-3-acetic acids are
endogenous auxin inhibitors. Plant Physiol 150:1310–1321
Staswick PE, Serban B, Rowe M, Tiryaki I, Maldonado MT, Maldonado MC, Suza W (2005)
Characterization of an Arabidopsis enzyme family that conjugates amino acids to indole-3-
acetic acid. Plant Cell 17:616–627
Stepanova AN, Robertson-Hoyt J, Yun J, Benavente LM, Xie DY, Dolezal K, Schlereth A,
Jurgens G, Alonso JM (2008) TAA1-mediated auxin biosynthesis is essential for hormone
crosstalk and plant development. Cell 133:177–191
36
Y. Gao and Y. Zhao

Stepanova AN, Yun J, Robles LM, Novak O, He W, Guo H, Ljung K, Alonso JM (2011) The
Arabidopsis YUCCA1 ﬂavin monooxygenase functions in the indole-3-pyruvic acid branch of
auxin biosynthesis. Plant Cell 23:3961–3973
Strader LC, Culler AH, Cohen JD, Bartel B (2010) Conversion of endogenous indole-3-butyric
acid to indole-3-acetic acid drives cell expansion in Arabidopsis seedlings. Plant Physiol
153:1577–1586
Strader LC, Wheeler DL, Christensen SE, Berens JC, Cohen JD, Rampey RA, Bartel B (2011)
Multiple facets of Arabidopsis seedling development require indole-3-butyric acid-derived
auxin. Plant Cell 23:984–999
Sugawara S, Hishiyama S, Jikumaru Y, Hanada A, Nishimura T, Koshiba T, Zhao Y, Kamiya Y,
Kasahara H (2009) Biochemical analyses of indole-3-acetaldoxime-dependent auxin biosyn-
thesis in Arabidopsis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106:5430–5435
Tao Y, Ferrer JL, Ljung K, Pojer F, Hong F, Long JA, Li L, Moreno JE, Bowman ME, Ivans LJ,
Cheng Y, Lim J, Zhao Y, Ballare CL, Sandberg G, Noel JP, Chory J (2008) Rapid synthesis of
auxin via a new tryptophan-dependent pathway is required for shade avoidance in plants. Cell
133:164–176
Tobena-Santamaria R, Bliek M, Ljung K, Sandberg G, Mol JN, Souer E, Koes R (2002) FLOOZY
of petunia is a ﬂavin mono-oxygenase-like protein required for the speciﬁcation of leaf and
ﬂower architecture. Genes Dev 16:753–763
Walz A, Park S, Slovin JP, Ludwig-Muller J, Momonoki YS, Cohen JD (2002) A gene encoding a
protein modiﬁed by the phytohormone indoleacetic acid. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
99:1718–1723
Won C, Shen X, Mashiguchi K, Zheng Z, Dai X, Cheng Y, Kasahara H, Kamiya Y, Chory J, Zhao
Y (2011) Conversion of tryptophan to indole-3-acetic acid by TRYPTOPHAN AMINO-
TRANSFERASES OF ARABIDOPSIS and YUCCAs in Arabidopsis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U
S A 108:18518–18523
Woo YM, Park HJ, Su’udi M, Yang JI, Park JJ, Back K, Park YM, An G (2007) Constitutively
wilted 1, a member of the rice YUCCA gene family, is required for maintaining water
homeostasis and an appropriate root to shoot ratio. Plant Mol Biol 65:125–136
Woodward AW, Bartel B (2005) Auxin: regulation, action, and interaction. Ann Bot 95:707–735
Wright AD, Sampson MB, Neuffer MG, Michalczuk L, Slovin JP, Cohen JD (1991) Indole-3-
acetic acid biosynthesis in the mutant maize orange pericarp, a tryptophan auxotroph. Science
254:998–1000
Yamada T, Palm CJ, Brooks B, Kosuge T (1985) Nucleotide sequences of the Pseudomonas
savastanoi indoleacetic acid genes show homology with Agrobacterium tumefaciens T-DNA.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 82:6522–6526
Yamada M, Greenham K, Prigge MJ, Jensen PJ, Estelle M (2009) The TRANSPORT INHIBITOR
RESPONSE2 gene is required for auxin synthesis and diverse aspects of plant development.
Plant Physiol 151:168–179
Yamamoto Y, Kamiya N, Morinaka Y, Matsuoka M, Sazuka T (2007) Auxin biosynthesis by the
YUCCA genes in rice. Plant Physiol 143:1362–1371
Yang SF, Hoffmann NE (1984) Ethylene biosynthesis and its regulation in higher plants. Annu
Rev Plant Biol 35:155–189
Zhao Y (2010) Auxin biosynthesis and its role in plant development. Annu Rev Plant Biol
61:49–64
Zhao Y (2013) Auxin biosynthesis: a simple two-step pathway converts tryptophan to indole-3-
acetic acid in plants. Mol Plant 5:334–338
Zhao Y, Christensen SK, Fankhauser C, Cashman JR, Cohen JD, Weigel D, Chory J (2001) A role
for ﬂavin monooxygenase-like enzymes in auxin biosynthesis. Science 291:306–309
Zhao Y, Hull AK, Gupta NR, Goss KA, Alonso J, Ecker JR, Normanly J, Chory J, Celenza JL
(2002) Trp-dependent auxin biosynthesis in Arabidopsis: involvement of cytochrome P450s
CYP79B2 and CYP79B3. Genes Dev 16:3100–3112
2
Auxin Biosynthesis and Catabolism
37

Zhao Z, Zhang Y, Liu X, Zhang X, Liu S, Yu X, Ren Y, Zheng X, Zhou K, Jiang L, Guo X, Gai Y,
Wu C, Zhai H, Wang H, Wan J (2013) A role for a dioxygenase in auxin metabolism and
reproductive development in rice. Dev Cell 27:113–122
Ziegler DM (1988) Flavin-containing monooxygenases: catalytic mechanism and substrate spec-
iﬁcities. Drug Metab Rev 19:1–32
Ziegler DM (2002) An overview of the mechanism, substrate speciﬁcities, and structure of FMOs.
Drug Metab Rev 34:503–511
Zolman BK, Yoder A, Bartel B (2000) Genetic analysis of indole-3-butyric acid responses in
Arabidopsis thaliana reveals four mutant classes. Genetics 156:1323–1337
38
Y. Gao and Y. Zhao

Chapter 3
Identiﬁcation and Proﬁling of Auxin
and Auxin Metabolites
Ondrˇej Nova´k, Alesˇ Peˇncˇı´k, and Karin Ljung
Abstract During the last 10 years, the analytical techniques used in different areas
of “life science” have improved tremendously. Mass spectrometry (MS) has
become the most versatile and sensitive technique available for identifying and
quantifying organic molecules, and liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry is
the modern analytical tool of choice for analyzing samples of plant, animal and
human origin. Both the sensitivity and the selectivity of the available techniques
have increased immensely; modern instruments are much smaller, more user-
friendly and more versatile than before, and the overall cost of the method has
been greatly reduced. However, the required equipment is not available to most
plant research laboratories, and most researchers in biology have limited experience
with MS techniques. In this chapter, we aim to explain the advantages and limita-
tions of these techniques, and how they can be used in plant research today. More
speciﬁcally, we demonstrate how different MS techniques can be used for auxin
metabolite identiﬁcation, quantiﬁcation and proﬁling. Efﬁcient sample extraction
and puriﬁcation is essential for highly sensitive and selective analyses. We there-
fore describe selected novel approaches that have been developed to increase the
sensitivity of these analyses and make them applicable at the tissue and cellular
levels. We also discuss how these techniques can be combined with isotope
labelling and mutant analyses to get a better understanding of the metabolic
pathways involved in auxin biosynthesis and degradation. Finally, we examine
O. Nova´k
Umea˚ Plant Science Centre, Department of Forest Genetics and Plant Physiology, Swedish
University of Agricultural Sciences, 901 83, Umea˚, Sweden
Laboratory of Growth Regulators, Centre of Region Hana´ for Biotechnological and
Agricultural Research, Institute of Experimental Botany ASCR and Palacky´ University,
Sˇlechtitelu˚ 11, 783 71, Olomouc, Czech Republic
A. Peˇncˇı´k • K. Ljung (*)
Umea˚ Plant Science Centre, Department of Forest Genetics and Plant Physiology, Swedish
University of Agricultural Sciences, 901 83, Umea˚, Sweden
e-mail: Karin.Ljung@slu.se
E. Zazˇı´malova´ et al. (eds.), Auxin and Its Role in Plant Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-7091-1526-8_3, © Springer-Verlag Wien 2014
39

the future prospects for the use of MS and other analytical techniques in auxin
research as well as the potential for combining these techniques to obtain more
information from single samples, and perhaps even from single cells.
1
Extraction of IAA Metabolites from Plant Tissues
In general, the isolation and/or pre-concentration of natural bioactive compounds,
such as phytohormones, involves multiple critical and often time-consuming steps
based on extracting and purifying analytes from a complex plant matrix. Conven-
tional sample preparation methods involve the use of protein precipitation (PP),
liquid/liquid extraction (LLE) or solid phase extraction (SPE) to facilitate the
subsequent chromatographic separation and detection of the targeted analytes
(Nova´kova´ and Vlcˇkova´ 2009). Modern approaches to sample preparation often
involve parallel sample processing and/or the use of new sample preparation
techniques (which may permit the use of smaller sample sizes) designed to mini-
mize analyte losses and reduce the levels of interfering substances such as proteins,
carbohydrates, pigments and lipids (Nu´n˜ez et al. 2012).
High-efﬁciency homogenization is important for accurate IAA and IAA metab-
olite quantiﬁcation. In classical methods, homogenization is achieved by manually
grinding frozen or dry plant tissue in extraction buffer with a mortar and pestle or
using knife homogenizers. Recent advances in mass spectrometry and improve-
ments in analytical sensitivity have made it possible to use vibration mills/ball
grinders for the convenient homogenization of small amounts of plant material with
cold extraction media directly in plastic vials (Barkawi et al. 2008; Nova´k
et al. 2012). Miniaturized homogenization is readily adapted for use with high-
throughput methods because it can be performed on large numbers of samples
simultaneously.
The choice of a speciﬁc extraction method depends on both the compounds to be
analyzed and the type of tissue. During the last decade, many different combina-
tions of organic solvents have been used to extract free IAA: methanol/water
(Kowalczyk and Sandberg 2001; Durgbanshi et al. 2005; Sugawara et al. 2009),
isopropanol/acetic acid (Chiwocha et al. 2003), 1-propanol/water/concentrated HCl
(Schmelz et al. 2003; Pan et al. 2008), methanol/water/formic acid (modiﬁed
Bieleski’s solvent) (Dobrev and Kamı´nek 2002; Kojima et al. 2009), isopropanol/
imidazole buffer (pH 7) (Barkawi et al. 2008; Liu et al. 2012) and methanol/
isopropanol/acetic acid (Mu¨ller and Munne´-Bosch 2011). Similarly, a mixture of
buffers and various concentrations of organic solvents, such as methanol, acetone or
isopropanol, have been used as extraction solvents for IAA metabolites (Kowalczyk
and Sandberg 2001; Barkawi et al. 2008; Sugawara et al. 2009). However, IAA is
also readily soluble in water at neutral pH and therefore sodium phosphate buffer is
an attractive alternative to organic solvents for this purpose because aqueous
extracts tend to be less heavily contaminated with non-polar substances (Sundberg
40
O. Nova´k et al.

1990). A study of IAA metabolite stability in different solvents showed that sodium
phosphate buffer at pH 7.0 was the most efﬁcient and least destructive extraction
solvent for the majority of the tested IAA metabolites (Nova´k et al. 2012).
In order to obtain the greatest possible sensitivity and selectivity in the ﬁnal MS
analysis, it is necessary to combine a very efﬁcient extraction method with a
puriﬁcation protocol that yields very high analyte recovery while simultaneously
producing low background noise levels. Moreover, hydrolysis and/or chemical
degradation during the extraction process must also be considered to avoid under-
or overestimating analyte levels. The addition of antioxidants during the extraction
process protects auxins in the sample against oxidation and degradation. For
example, Ernstsen et al. (1986) reported the beneﬁcial effects of sodium
diethyldithiocarbamate on the breakdown of various IAA precursors to IAA during
the puriﬁcation and analysis of extracts from Pinus sylvestris L. needles.
Butylhydroxytoluene is another useful antioxidant and exhibits good solubility in
organic solvents such as methanol (Huang et al. 1992). On the other hand, mild
alkaline conditions (65 % isopropanol and 35 % 0.2 M imidazole, pH 7.0) have
been shown to allow optimal recovery of IAA without inadvertent hydrolysis of its
conjugated forms (Baldi et al. 1989). Auxins can also be protected against degra-
dation by performing the extraction process in a low-oxygen environment created
by imposing a partial vacuum. This was demonstrated by Hu et al. (2011), who
found that efﬁcient vacuum microwave-assisted extraction (VMAE) of IAA and
related compounds was signiﬁcantly faster than conventional solvent extraction.
The degradation of IAA and its metabolites can also be minimized by reducing the
time spent on the extraction process or by performing the extraction at a low
temperature, e.g. +4 C.
The isotope dilution method (Rittenberg and Foster 1940), which involves
determining the concentration of an unlabelled (endogenous) compound and com-
paring it to that of a labelled internal standard, can be used to correct for losses of
IAA and its metabolites during extraction without knowing the extraction yield.
However, in order to obtain an accurate quantitative estimate of these losses, the
isotopically labelled standard must be equilibrated with the endogenous pool of the
compound at an early stage in the extraction process (Sundberg 1990).
2
Methods for Sample Puriﬁcation
Liquid/liquid extraction (LLE) is the most widely used traditional preparative
technique for isolating analytes from plant tissues. However, in many recent
applications, it has been replaced by solid phase extraction (SPE). Several conven-
tional LLE methods based on the differential solubility of IAA in two liquid phases
have been described. Solvent pairs used in these processes include sodium phos-
phate buffer/ethyl acetate, aqueous 1-propanol/methylene chloride, acidiﬁed 80 %
methanol/diethyl ether and potassium sulphate buffer/chloroform (Liu et al. 2002;
Schmelz et al. 2003; Durgbanshi et al. 2005; Quittenden et al. 2009). More recently,
3
Identiﬁcation and Proﬁling of Auxin and Auxin Metabolites
41

two novel methods, dispersive and hollow ﬁbre liquid–liquid microextraction
(LLME), have been used to pre-concentrate acidic plant hormones (including
IAA) from, for example crude plant extracts (Lu et al. 2010) and natural coconut
juice (Wu and Hu 2009). Ideally, LLME techniques should use negligible volumes
of toxic, volatile and ﬂammable organic solvents and involve as few steps as
possible in order to minimize extraction times.
As mentioned above, the most common method for purifying IAA and its
metabolites is SPE, using either silica or polymer-based SPE columns. SPE is
rapid and reproducible, and protocols can easily be modiﬁed for use with a wide
range of compounds and to accommodate different types and quantities of plant
material. Ideally, a one-step SPE method with good recovery would minimize
losses during puriﬁcation and prevent the degradation of sensitive metabolites.
Various low-speciﬁcity, compound-speciﬁc and class-speciﬁc sorbents are com-
monly used to isolate auxins from crude plant extracts on the basis of diverse
interactions, including adsorption, hydrogen bonding, polar and non-polar interac-
tions (Van der Waals and dipole–dipole forces), ionic interactions (via cation–anion
exchange
mechanisms)
and/or
size
exclusion.
For
many
applications,
low-speciﬁcity silica and polymer-based materials can be used interchangeably,
although the chemical backgrounds of the puriﬁed extracts might be different.
Compound-speciﬁc ion exchange sorbents with ﬁxed ionic sites that are comple-
mentary to the analytes of interest can be used to improve the selectivity of the
analysis by isolating speciﬁc groups of ions from the sample solution. Several SPE
methods rely on silica-based, siloxane-bonded sorbents with long alkyl chains such
as C18 or C8 (Kowalczyk and Sandberg 2001; Peˇncˇı´k et al. 2009; Petersson
et al. 2009). However, modern porous co-polymers of divinylbenzene and N-
vinylpyrrolidone (such as Oasis HLB) have become the preferred sorbents for
one-step SPE in more recently developed methods (Izumi et al. 2009; Sugawara
et al. 2009; Liu et al. 2012; Nova´k et al. 2012). In addition, a two-step SPE method
that uses amino SPE followed by poly(methyl methacrylate) epoxide resin SPE has
been developed for purifying extracts from small amounts of tissue (Barkawi
et al. 2008). Multi-step puriﬁcation methods often involve an ion exchange or
mixed-mode SPE stage in order to more thoroughly purify the targeted plant
hormones. Mixed-mode SPE processes that have both reverse-phase and
ion-exchange characteristics can retain different IAA metabolites (precursors,
catabolites and conjugates) depending on the chemical properties of the sorbents
used. For example, a process involving C18 SPE followed by SPE with a mixed
cation-exchange cartridge (Oasis MCX) was used to separate cytokinins from IAA
and abscisic acid, resulting in high overall extraction and concentration efﬁciencies
(Dobrev and Kamı´nek 2002). While the basic analytes were effectively retained by
the cation-exchange mechanism, acidic and neutral hydrophobic compounds were
only retained by the reversed phase mechanism and eluted when the column was
washed with pure methanol. To address this problem, Dobrev et al. (2005) intro-
duced an additional puriﬁcation step that uses a mixed-mode reversed phase anion-
exchange polymeric sorbent (Oasis MAX). This made it possible to separate the
acidic analytes from the neutral compounds. Mixed-mode sorbents have been used
42
O. Nova´k et al.

to purify IAA and its metabolites from samples originating from diverse plant
species including Arabidopsis, radish, rice, tobacco and wheat (Dobrev and
Kamı´nek 2002; Dobrev et al. 2005; Izumi et al. 2009; Kojima et al. 2009; Sugawara
et al. 2009; Farrow and Emery 2012). However, ion-exchange mechanisms based
on pH gradients would be unsuitable for isolating labile IAA precursors such as
indole-3-acetaldoxime (Nova´k et al. 2012). Ideally, a general puriﬁcation method
should be able to separate a broad range of IAA metabolites and would require
optimized conditions that use mixtures of water and organic solvents as eluents.
Traditional SPE aside, a range of alternative high-afﬁnity and highly selective
sample preparation techniques have been used for the isolation, concentration and
clean-up of IAA and related compounds from complex plant matrices. In 1986, an
immunoafﬁnity sorbent prepared by covalently binding polyclonal rabbit anti-
bodies to activated silica was used to purify IAA in extracts from the cambial
zone and shoots of Pinus sylvestris (Sundberg et al. 1986). Peˇncˇı´k et al. (2009)
subsequently introduced antibodies that were capable of interacting speciﬁcally not
only with IAA but also with other 3-substituted indoles. These antibodies were used
to develop a complex analytical protocol based on an immunosorbent with rela-
tively high cross-reactivity that recognizes a whole class of structurally related
compounds. The new protocol was used to isolate IAA and its conjugates in
samples of the pericarps of immature seeds of the Christmas rose (Helleborus
niger L.). Another class-speciﬁc method is based on molecularly imprinted poly-
mers (MIPs), synthetic analogues of immunosorbents that bind speciﬁcally to a
target molecule even in the presence of closely related compounds. MIPs exhibit
good thermal stability, are physically robust and are easy and inexpensive to
prepare. They have recently been used to isolate phytohormones by SPE
(Du et al. 2012a). Other reports have discussed the use of IAA-imprinted polymers
based
on
N,N-dimethylaminoethyl
methacrylate,
methacrylic
acid
and
9-vinyladenine as functional monomers (Kugimiya and Takeuchi 1999a, b; Chen
et al. 2006). More recently still, magnetic MIP beads that have molecular recogni-
tion elements and can be used in magnetic separation have been synthesized (Zhang
et al. 2010). These particles can be dispersed in the plant extract and then easily
separated from the liquid phase using a magnetic ﬁeld, which is more convenient
than conventional centrifugation or ﬁltration steps. The practical utility of this
technique was investigated by using it to purify IAA in tissue samples from three
different plant species (pea, rice and wheat) that had been extracted using LLE or
VMAE and were then subjected to MIP-based clean-up procedures (Zhang
et al. 2010; Hu et al. 2011).
3
Identiﬁcation of Auxin Metabolites
When studying auxin metabolism, it is essential to combine data gained from
genetic investigations with the identiﬁcation and chemical characterization of
individual metabolites. Due to the very low concentrations of phytohormone
3
Identiﬁcation and Proﬁling of Auxin and Auxin Metabolites
43

metabolites and the large number of potentially interfering compounds present in
the complex matrices of plant tissue samples, the identiﬁcation of these metabolites
is very challenging. In early studies, very large amounts of tissue had to be extracted
and puriﬁed by extensive, multistep procedures in order to isolate these substances
(Reinecke and Bandurski 1983). However, the ongoing development of analytical
instrumentation over the last two decades has greatly simpliﬁed the analysis of
organic compounds in plant material. The most useful and widely used tool for
identifying individual metabolites is mass spectrometry, especially tandem mass
spectrometry (MS/MS). Low-resolution MS/MS can be performed with triple
quadrupole or linear ion trap instruments and is capable of providing sufﬁcient
selectivity and sensitivity for the analysis of complex plant samples. High-
resolution mass spectrometers (HRMS), such as the new time-of-ﬂight (TOF)
instruments or machines based on Orbitrap technology, are also being developed
and improved on an ongoing basis and are powerful tools, particularly for deter-
mining the structures of unknown compounds. Before MS detection, the individual
components of samples are usually separated using either gas chromatography
(GC) or liquid chromatography (LC). While GC-MS offers very good sensitivity,
LC-MS is more versatile and permits the analysis of a wider range of compounds
without requiring prior derivatization.
When a sample is introduced into a mass spectrometer, its components are
initially converted into positively or negatively charged ions in the ion source.
These ions are then detected, producing a mass spectrum that shows the mass-to-
charge ratios (m/z values) of the individual ions. Individual molecules can be
identiﬁed by analyzing the ions’ fragmentation patterns, isotopic distributions and
accurate mass values. If an appropriate standard is available, the proposed identity
of a compound can be veriﬁed by comparing its mass spectrum and chromato-
graphic behaviour to that of the standard. This provides the most straightforward
and reliable conﬁrmation of compound identity and is therefore the most frequently
used method for this purpose (Kai et al. 2007a; Peˇncˇı´k et al. 2009). Identiﬁcations
that are based only on analyses of spectra can be unreliable, as demonstrated by the
case of a putative IAA precursor that was initially identiﬁed as N-hydroxytrypta-
mine (Zhao et al. 2001) based on evidence that was subsequently shown to be
inconsistent (Tivendale et al. 2010).
The occurrence of IAA–Ala and IAA–Leu as endogenous IAA metabolites in
Arabidopsis was demonstrated by performing a screen for IAA conjugates in
Arabidopsis samples (Kowalczyk and Sandberg 2001). In this work, plant extracts
were
fractionated
by
preparative
high-performance
liquid
chromatography
(HPLC), and each individual fraction was derivatized and subjected to GC-MS
analysis. Novel IAA conjugates were then identiﬁed based on the occurrence of
characteristic indole fragments such as the quinolinium ion (m/z 130) in the
resulting mass spectra. A similar strategy based on MS/MS screening for charac-
teristic fragments was subsequently used to identify oxidative metabolites of IAA
conjugates such as 6-OH-IAA-Phe, 6-OH-IAA-Val and oxIAA-Glc in Arabidopsis,
and IAA-N-Glc and its conjugates with Asp and Glu in rice (Kai et al. 2007a, b). In
the latter two studies, the identities of the detected compounds were conﬁrmed
44
O. Nova´k et al.

using synthetic standards. The use of highly selective sample preparation tech-
niques before the ﬁnal analysis can greatly increase the scope for identifying
individual compounds with a given analytical method. For example, the use of
Fig. 3.1 Identiﬁcation of 1-O-(2-oxoindol-3-ylacetyl)-β-D-glucopyranose (oxIAA-Glc) from
Arabidopsis thaliana. To elucidate the structure of oxIAA-Glc, the puriﬁed extract was separated
using a Thermo Accela LC system and analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry using an
LTQ/Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Bremen, Germany). Centroid mass
spectra of negative ions were collected in the Orbitrap mass analyzer, with a target mass resolution
of 30,000 (full width at half maximum peak height, deﬁned at m/z 400), after collision-induced
dissociation (CID) in the LTQ cell, using a normalized collision energy of 20 %. The accurate
masses of the precursor ion (m/z 352) and its fragments were calculated and used to determine the
elementary composition and structure of the analyte, with ﬁdelity within 12.5 ppm. (a) Full MS3
spectrum of oxIAA-Glc. The ions at m/z 352 and m/z 190 were selected for fragmentation, using
CID energies of 45 eV and 35 eV, respectively. (b) Proposed MS fragmentation of oxIAA-Glc
according to Kai et al. (2007a). (c) OxIAA-Glc structure with proposed bond breakages during
fragmentation
3
Identiﬁcation and Proﬁling of Auxin and Auxin Metabolites
45

immunoafﬁnity extraction followed by LC-MS/MS analysis made it possible to
isolate and identify the IAA conjugates IAA-Gly, IAA-Val and IAA-Phe in samples
of the Christmas rose (Peˇncˇı´k et al. 2009). In addition, various IAA conjugates and
metabolites were detected within the hormone metabolite proﬁle of tomato samples
using a high-resolution MS Orbitrap instrument (Van Meulebroek et al. 2012).
Figure 3.1 shows the mass spectrum of a compound found in an Arabidopsis extract
that was identiﬁed as oxIAA-Glc using a Fourier Transform Orbitrap MS
instrument.
Another technique that is widely used for metabolite identiﬁcation is nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR). While NMR is a very powerful tool for determining
the structures of chemical compounds, it is less sensitive than MS and is therefore
not suitable for analyzing small biological samples. However, it can be a very
useful tool for obtaining detailed structural information about a speciﬁc metabolite
(O¨ stin et al. 1995).
4
Quantiﬁcation of Auxin Metabolites
At present, endogenous IAA and IAA metabolites (precursors, catabolites and
conjugates) are generally quantiﬁed by mass spectrometry using the isotope dilu-
tion technique (Rittenberg and Foster 1940). As mentioned above, internal stan-
dards labelled with stable isotopes such as 2H (deuterium), 13C, 15N and/or 18O
atoms are added to the samples at an early stage in the sample preparation process,
prior to homogenization and extraction. Isotope-labelled standards are easily dis-
tinguished during MS analysis due to their unique masses. Stable isotope dilution
assays can be very accurate and precise because they correct for losses or inefﬁ-
ciencies in the sample preparation process as well as ion suppression effects during
the MS analysis.
Complete chromatographic separation is generally required during the analysis
of complex plant samples using ultraviolet and/or ﬂuorescence detection. In con-
trast, baseline separation is not essential if the peaks have independent MS signals.
GC-MS is an important tool for the quantitative analysis of auxins, and a number of
recent reports have also demonstrated that LC-MS can also be very useful for IAA
and IAA metabolite quantiﬁcation.
The rapid development of chromatographic techniques, such as ultra-high-per-
formance liquid chromatography using sub-2-μm particle columns, has greatly
improved the speed, separation, resolution and sensitivity of LC-based analyses
relative to those achieved using conventional HPLC. LC separations of IAA and its
metabolites are typically performed with silica or polymer-based columns. Addi-
tives, such as e.g. formic acid (Peˇncˇı´k et al. 2009), acetic acid (Nova´k et al. 2012) or
ammonium acetate (Prinsen et al. 1998), are often added to the mobile phase to
obtain good chromatographic separation and high ionization efﬁciency.
GC-MS is a very robust technique that is suitable for high-throughput analysis,
providing excellent separation and high sensitivity. However, GC-MS methods also
46
O. Nova´k et al.

have several disadvantages compared to LC-MS, especially LC-MS instruments
equipped with an electrospray interface. Electrospray ionization (ESI) is a soft
ionization technique that produces very intense precursor ions. This improves the
yield of the product ions and thus increases the sensitivity of the subsequent MS/MS
analyses. In contrast, GC-MS instruments typically use electron impact ionization,
which causes extensive fragmentation of the precursor ions. In addition, it is
necessary to derivatize IAA and most IAA metabolites prior to GC-MS analysis
in order to increase their volatility. The carboxyl groups of IAA and its acidic
metabolites are usually methylated using ethereal diazomethane, after which any
free hydroxyl groups are trimethylsilylated (Edlund et al. 1995; Kowalczyk and
Sandberg 2001; Peˇncˇı´k et al. 2009). There are also a few methods that are used
speciﬁcally to derivatize IAA precursors for GC-MS analysis, such as the acylation
of
tryptamines,
the
trimethylsilylation
of
indole-3-ethanol
and
methyl
chloroformate
derivatization
of
tryptophan
(Quittenden
et
al.
2009;
Liu
et al. 2012). Derivatization prior to LC-MS can improve the selectivity and sensi-
tivity of the analysis as well as the chromatographic behaviour and resolution of the
targeted compounds. However, all IAA metabolites except IPyA and IAAld can be
analyzed by LC-MS in positive or negative ESI mode without prior derivatization
(Kai et al. 2007a, b; Sugawara et al. 2009; Nova´k et al. 2012).
The development of improved MS instruments and innovative technologies,
such as tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS), has greatly increased the sensitivity
and selectivity of quantitative MS analyses. The main limiting factors that affect the
utility of MS when studying IAA and its metabolites are the complexity of the plant
matrices and the low limits of detection required for effective analysis (around
1 ppt). In conventional MS analyses, these factors necessitate the use of laborious
and time-consuming sample puriﬁcation protocols. This can be avoided by com-
bining the high selectivity of MS/MS with fast chromatography, enabling rapid
high-throughput MS analysis. Because of its many advantages, LC-MS/MS became
widely accepted as a tool for plant hormone analysis within a few years of its
introduction, and several sensitive methods for quantifying IAA and its metabolites
have been reported (Kai et al. 2007a, b; Peˇncˇı´k et al. 2009; Sugawara et al. 2009;
Mashiguchi et al. 2011; Nova´k et al. 2012). In addition, GC-MS/MS has been used
to quantify most of the putative intermediates in the tryptamine pathway in peas
(Quittenden et al. 2009). Liu et al. (2012) have reported that replacing an older
GC-MS protocol (Barkawi et al. 2008) with a modern GC-MS/MS method and a
high-throughput pipette tip SPE protocol improved the sensitivity and the accuracy
of auxin analyses using very small plant tissue samples.
The use of miniaturized puriﬁcation methods in conjunction with the high
separation efﬁciency and selectivity of LC-MS/MS analysis has proven to be very
useful for quantifying plant hormones in very small samples (<5 mg FW) of plant
material (Svacˇinova´ et al. 2012). As a case in point, a recent publication described
an ultra-sensitive GC-MS/MS method for cell-speciﬁc IAA analysis (Petersson
et al. 2009). Similarly, miniaturized tip-based SPE has been used for tissue-speciﬁc
quantiﬁcation of IAA and its metabolites (Peˇncˇı´k and Nova´k, unpublished). Several
methods that use LC chromatography and capillary electrophoresis in conjunction
3
Identiﬁcation and Proﬁling of Auxin and Auxin Metabolites
47

with MS using quadrupole TOF instruments to quantify auxins have been reported
in the last few years (Sugawara et al. 2009; Chen et al. 2011; Mashiguchi
et al. 2011). Although high-resolution MS (HRMS) is not yet widely used for
quantitative analysis of plant hormones, it is likely that this technology will soon
be employed for routine quantiﬁcation due to the lower price of the next-generation
HRMS instruments. HRMS makes it possible to perform very selective quantitative
analyses due to its very narrow mass windows. Its usefulness in IAA analysis was
demonstrated in 2001 during a study on Arabidopsis seedlings (Ljung et al. 2001b).
At present, the detection speciﬁcity, assay precision, and sensitivity for IAA
achieved using the full scan approach of the Orbitrap mass spectrometer are
comparable to those achieved using conventional SRM methods that rely on triple
quadrupole or linear ion trap instruments (Van Meulebroek et al. 2012).
5
Metabolite Proﬁling
5.1
Auxin Metabolite Proﬁling
In order to understand auxin metabolism, it is important to be able to quantify not
only free IAA but also different IAA precursors, conjugates and catabolites. IAA
metabolites have very different chemical properties and can be acidic, neutral or
basic in nature. They occur at a wide range of concentrations, and some of them are
very unstable in solution. Methods for IAA metabolite proﬁling must therefore be
able to deal with all of these factors in order to produce quantitative data of high
quality. The methods used must also be thoroughly validated so that potential
problems with extraction (poor extraction efﬁciency), puriﬁcation (low recovery
of analytes), matrix effects (ion suppression and high chemical background) and
chromatography (co-elution of structurally related compounds) can be identiﬁed
and avoided where possible (Taylor 2005; Nova´k et al. 2012).
Early methods for IAA metabolite proﬁling were primarily developed to quan-
tify free IAA and some acidic IAA metabolites. These analyses were mainly
performed by GC-MS (Tam et al. 2000; Barkawi et al. 2008), although LC-MS-
based methods for the analysis of these metabolites have also been described
(Kowalczyk and Sandberg 2001). GC-MS has the advantage of being a very robust
analytical technique with a high sample throughput, but it is not suitable for
compounds that are thermolabile, and most IAA metabolites also have to be
derivatized in order to make them volatile enough for GC analysis. This limits
the range of IAA metabolites that can be quantiﬁed using GC-MS, and derivatiza-
tion might have negative effects on the sensitivity of the method towards some IAA
metabolites and their recovery. In contrast, LC-MS has proven to be a very versatile
and sensitive method for IAA metabolite proﬁling and is suitable for the analysis of
a wide range of IAA metabolites (Sugawara et al. 2009; Mashiguchi et al. 2011;
Nova´k et al. 2012).
48
O. Nova´k et al.

Figure 3.2 illustrates the workﬂow of a method for IAA metabolite proﬁling
using small amounts of plant tissue. This method is based on microextraction using
sodium phosphate buffer, puriﬁcation on a polymer-based SPE column and
LC-MS/MS analysis. To facilitate the analysis of labile IAA metabolites such as
IPyA and IAAld, the extract is separated into two sub-samples, one of which is
derivatized with cysteamine to convert these labile compounds into their
thiazolidine (TAZ) derivatives (Nova´k et al. 2012, Fig. 3.3). Other methods for
derivatizing these compounds have also been published (Tam and Normanly 1998;
Quittenden et al. 2009; Mashiguchi et al. 2011; Liu et al. 2012). Derivatization is
not only necessary to prevent the degradation of these metabolites during extraction
and puriﬁcation but can also be used to increase the sensitivity of GC-MS and
Fig. 3.2 Protocol for extracting and purifying IAA metabolites for LC-MS/MS proﬁling of small
amounts of plant material. The plant material (<20 mg) is homogenized and extracted in sodium-
phosphate buffer (1 ml) containing labelled internal standards and then divided into two
sub-samples. One sub-sample is acidiﬁed and applied to a pre-conditioned HLB column
(30 mg), which is then washed and eluted with 80 % methanol. The second sub-sample is
derivatized with cysteamine to produce the thiazolidine derivatives of IPyA and IAAld and then
puriﬁed using the same SPE protocol. Both eluates are evaporated to dryness, reconstituted and
analyzed by LC-MS/MS (for more details see Nova´k et al. 2012)
3
Identiﬁcation and Proﬁling of Auxin and Auxin Metabolites
49

Fig. 3.3 Derivatization of IAAld and IPyA. IAAld and IPyA were derivatized with cysteamine to
produce the corresponding thiazolidines (TAZ). (a) The sensitivity and the peak symmetry of
IAAld was greatly improved after derivatization with cysteamine. 1 pmol IAAld and IAAld-TAZ
were injected onto a reverse-phase LC column and analyzed by MS/MS. (b) MS/MS spectrum of
IPyA-TAZ formed by derivatizing IPyA with cysteamine. The product ion scan was obtained by
low-resolution MS analysis (using a triple quadrupole instrument) under optimized MS conditions,
at a collision energy of 20 eV. Inset: Ultra high-resolution MS analysis (Orbitrap technology) was
used to separate and identify the two main product ions, whose masses differed by only 0.07 Da
50
O. Nova´k et al.

LC-MS analyses and to improve peak shapes (Edlund et al. 1995; Kojima
et al. 2009, Fig. 3.3a).
In order to obtain a better understanding of developmental processes in plants, it
will be necessary to perform IAA and IAA metabolite analyses on more well-deﬁned
parts of the plants, such as speciﬁc tissues and cell types in, for example the root and
shoot apex. This was earlier very difﬁcult, but has become feasible due to the high
sensitivity and selectivity of modern LC-MS and GC-MS instruments, and methods
for tissue- and cell-type speciﬁc analysis of IAA and IAA metabolites have recently
been published (Petersson et al. 2009; Nova´k et al. 2012). Figure 3.4 shows chro-
matograms obtained during IAA metabolite proﬁling of the Arabidopsis root apex.
5.2
Proﬁling of Different Classes of Hormones in the Same
Sample
The idea of analyzing different classes of plant hormones in a single sample is not
new, and several attempts have been made to develop methods for the simultaneous
Fig. 3.4 LC-MS/MS chromatograms of IAA metabolites. IAA metabolites were puriﬁed from the
primary root tip (1 mm) of 6-day-old Arabidopsis wild-type seedlings, and analyzed by LC-MS/
MS. The underivatized and derivatized compounds were injected onto a reversed-phase column,
and the chromatographic analysis was split into four scan segments (for more experimental details
see Nova´k et al. 2012)
3
Identiﬁcation and Proﬁling of Auxin and Auxin Metabolites
51

analysis of plant hormones such as auxins, cytokinins (CKs), abscisic acid (ABA)
and gibberellins (GAs) (Du et al. 2012b). Because many of these compounds are
acidic in nature, several authors have proposed that it should be possible to extract
and analyze them together (Mu¨ller et al. 2002; Schmelz et al. 2003; Durgbanshi
et al. 2005; Chen et al. 2011). However, no single method has yet been developed
that is equally capable of extracting all known classes of plant hormones due to
their diverse chemical structures and physicochemical properties. In addition, there
is little available information that can be used to compare or cross-validate the
extraction methods that have been published and are in widespread use (Pan and
Wang 2009). A wide range of puriﬁcation strategies based on concepts described in
the preceding sections, including LLE and/or low-speciﬁc, compound-speciﬁc and
class-speciﬁc SPE have been developed.
One of the more recently developed methods for the simultaneous analysis of
multiple plant hormones involves using LC-MS/MS to proﬁle CKs, IAA and ABA
in 100–300 mg Arabidopsis tissue samples after puriﬁcation on a combination of
mixed-mode (MCX and MAX) and polymer-based (HLB) sorbents (Farrow and
Emery 2012). Other methods for the simultaneous analysis of CKs and acidic plant
hormones have also been developed (Chiwocha et al. 2003; Izumi et al. 2009).
Notably, Izumi et al. (2009) showed that coupling nanoﬂow-LC to a tandem mass
spectrometer improved the sensitivity of a method for quantifying several hor-
mones in samples extracted from minute amounts of tobacco tissue (1 mg DW).
Kojima et al. (2009) created a fully automated SPE puriﬁcation and LC-MS/MS
method for the simultaneous analysis of six major phytohormone groups (including
23 CKs, 7 auxins, ABA and 12 GAs). This method uses bromocholine to esterify
the free carboxylic acid groups of the plant hormones in order to permit their
detection using positive ionization mode. Underivatized GAs are usually negatively
charged, but positive ionization is generally more sensitive than negative ioniza-
tion. In another recent study, up to 18 different plant hormones were proﬁled
simultaneously by LC-MS/MS after the extraction of 50–100 mg of plant material
without any further puriﬁcation or derivatization (Pan et al. 2008; Mu¨ller and
Munne´-Bosch 2011).
As mentioned previously, HRMS analyses focus on narrower mass windows
than unit-mass-based scan modes and provide accurate mass data, which can be a
lot more useful and informative than simple unit masses. Speciﬁcally, the use of
ultra-high-mass resolutions makes it possible to determine the exact masses of the
detected ions, so it is simple to distinguish between analytes and interfering matrix
compounds (Kaufmann 2012). This property was exploited in a recent study that
used a very simple extraction and puriﬁcation procedure combined with high-
resolution mass spectrometry to identify and quantify a large number of endoge-
nous phytohormones in tomato samples (Van Meulebroek et al. 2012).
52
O. Nova´k et al.

5.3
Metabolic Studies
In order to study the pathways of auxin biosynthesis and degradation, sensitive
methods for analyzing steady state levels of IAA and its metabolites have recently
been developed (Sugawara et al. 2009; Mashiguchi et al. 2011; Nova´k et al. 2012).
The use of heavy isotope labelling of intermediates in conjunction with MS analysis
has proven to be a powerful tool for monitoring ﬂuxes through IAA metabolic
pathways. Notably, such methods for in vivo labelling have been used to identify
IAA biosynthetic intermediates and IAA degradation products. They can also be
combined with mutant analyses to provide additional insights into the relevant
metabolic pathways and to estimate the rates of IAA biosynthesis and the half-lives
of IAA metabolites.
Labelling has been performed using both general precursors such as deuterated
water (deuterium oxide, 2H2O) and various IAA precursors such as heavy isotope
labelled tryptophan. 2H2O has the advantage that it is easily taken up by the plant
root and transported to all tissues and cells. Deuterium atoms are initially incorpo-
rated into intermediates in the shikimate pathway, and later into IAA precursors and
IAA itself (Normanly 2010). Feeding experiments with 2H2O in plant species, such
as Zea mays (Pengelly and Bandurski 1983; Jensen and Bandurski 1995),
Lycopersicon esculentum (Cooney and Nonhebel 1991), Arabidopsis thaliana
(Ljung et al. 2001b, 2005; Sairanen et al. 2012) and Physcomitrella patens (Eklund
et al. 2010), have provided valuable insights into IAA metabolism.
Feeding with heavy labelled IAA precursors, such as [13C11,15N2]-Trp
(Mashiguchi et al. 2011), [13C6]-IAOx, [15N2]-TAM and [2H2]-IAN (Sugawara
et al. 2009) has likewise been very important for our understanding of IAA
biosynthesis in Arabidopsis. Similar studies in Pisum sativum, using [2H5]-Trp,
[2H5]-TAM, [2H5]-IAN and [2H5]-IAOx (Quittenden et al. 2009; Tivendale
et al. 2010) and Lemna gibba, using [15N1]-ANT and [2H5]-Trp (Rapparini
et al. 2002) have also provided important information on IAA biosynthesis in
these species.
Figure 3.5 shows the labelling of IAA metabolites after feeding with stable
isotope-labelled IAA precursors (2H2O and 13C6-ANT). The precursors were taken
up by the seedlings and the heavy atoms were incorporated into newly synthesized
Trp, IPyA and IAA.
Feeding experiments using stable labelled IAA and various IAA metabolites
have been performed in Arabidopsis thaliana (O¨ stin et al. 1998; Kai et al. 2007a),
Oryza sativa (Kai et al. 2007b) and Pinus sylvestris (Ljung et al. 2001a) to
investigate IAA catabolism and conjugation. The results obtained made it possible
to identify major IAA catabolites/conjugates in different plant species and to study
the processes of IAA conjugate formation and hydrolysis.
It is important to be aware of the problems that may be encountered when using
heavy isotope labelling. Different compounds can have very different uptake rates,
and there might also be differences in their sub-cellular compartmentation. This can
affect IAA metabolism and is very difﬁcult to measure. Feeding with high,
3
Identiﬁcation and Proﬁling of Auxin and Auxin Metabolites
53

Fig. 3.5 In vivo labelling of IAA metabolites. 10-day-old Arabidopsis wild-type seedlings were
incubated with liquid medium containing 5 % glucose and 30 % deuterated water or 100 μM
[13C6]-anthranilate (ANT). IAA and its precursors tryptophan (Trp) and indole-3-pyruvic acid
54
O. Nova´k et al.

unphysiological concentrations of IAA and its precursors can cause changes in IAA
metabolism due to factors such as feedback inhibition of speciﬁc enzymatic steps
(O¨ stin et al. 1998). Finally, feeding with high concentrations of deuterated water for
extended periods of time has been shown to retard plant growth in some cases
(Ljung et al. 2005).
6
Future Prospects
The analytical techniques used for plant hormone analysis have improved tremen-
dously over the last decade, and it is likely that this trend will continue in the future
(Nova´kova´ and Vlcˇkova´ 2009; Du et al. 2012b; Nu´n˜ez et al. 2012). The sensitivity
and selectivity of mass spectrometric techniques both continue to improve, making
it possible to perform tissue- and cell-speciﬁc quantiﬁcation of IAA and different
IAA metabolites (Petersson et al. 2009; Nova´k et al. 2012). The sensitivity of these
analyses can be further increased by miniaturizing the preceding extraction and
puriﬁcation steps, since this can minimize analyte losses due to adsorption on
surfaces and increase analyte recovery in the SPE step (Svacˇinova´ et al. 2012;
Liu et al. 2012). The use of new SPE technologies, such as combined silica/
polymeric sorbents (Svacˇinova´ et al. 2012), mixed mode sorbents (Dobrev and
Kamı´nek 2002) and molecularly imprinted polymers (MIPs) (Zhang et al. 2010; Hu
et al. 2011; Du et al. 2012a), can also increase analyte recovery during the SPE step
while minimizing matrix effects during the MS analysis. It is likely that the
introduction of new GC and LC methods, such as two-dimensional chromatography
or separation using nanoﬂow-LC, together with the rapid ongoing development of
MS techniques such as ultra-high-resolution MS and ion mobility mass spectrom-
etry, will greatly increase the scope for applying these technologies in many
different ﬁelds of life science (Holcˇapek et al. 2012). The recent improvements in
MS sensitivity and selectivity have made it possible to analyze the levels of IAA
and other plant hormones within single cells and sub-cellular compartments,
although many technical difﬁculties associated with these techniques remain to
be addressed (Oikawa and Saito 2012).
On the other hand, there is also a need for methods for the high-throughput
analysis of different plant hormones, where ultra-high sensitivity might not be the
⁄

Fig. 3.5 (continued) (IPyA) were puriﬁed from shoot tissue and analysed by LC-ESI-MS/MS. (a)
Mass isotopomer proﬁles for the molecular ion (m/z 176) of IAA after incubation with deuterated
water. Incorporation of one or two deuterium atoms was observed up to 20 h after the beginning of
treatment (for more experimental details see Sairanen et al. 2012). (b) Scheme showing the in vivo
labelling of IAA metabolites after feeding with [ring-13C6]-ANT. (c) The MS ion chromatograms
for tryptophan (Trp), the thiazolidine derivative of indole-3-pyruvic acid (IPyA-TAZ) and IAA in
[13C6]-ANT-fed Arabidopsis seedlings. The chromatograms for the SRM transitions for [13C6]-
labelled and unlabelled IAA metabolites are shown in red and blue, respectively
3
Identiﬁcation and Proﬁling of Auxin and Auxin Metabolites
55

most important issue. A range of methods for the high-throughput analysis of
auxins (Barkawi et al. 2010), different classes of plant hormones (Kojima and
Sakakibara 2012), and IAA and its biosynthetic precursors (Liu et al. 2012) have
been reported. In a similar vein, the QuEChERS (“Quick, Easy, Cheap, Effective,
Rugged, and Safe”) method has been used to extract and purify multiple plant
hormones from vegetable and fruit tissues prior to LC-MS/MS analysis (Flores
et al. 2011; Shi et al. 2012). These high-throughput methods often use robotics to
automate sample handling during extraction and puriﬁcation in conjunction with
fast liquid chromatography during the ﬁnal MS step to facilitate the rapid analysis
of a large number of samples (Nova´kova´ and Vlcˇkova´ 2009; Nu´n˜ez et al. 2012).
LC- and GC-MS/MS analyses have become the methods of choice for quanti-
fying many different classes of plant hormones and their metabolites in diverse
plant species. Further increases in the number of compounds that can be analyzed
will require more efﬁcient and automated data processing, as well as powerful
methods for the statistical analysis of the large data sets that will be produced.
Multivariate data analysis has proven to be a very valuable tool for visualizing and
interpreting MS data (Wiklund et al. 2008; Kirwan et al. 2012) and has recently
been used to evaluate data from IAA metabolite proﬁling experiments (Nova´k
et al. 2012). It would be very appealing to combine targeted analyses of plant
hormones with metabolomics, genomics and proteomics data in future plant sys-
tems biology studies, but such an approach would be very challenging from a data
handling perspective.
It is our belief that plant hormone analysis will continue to be a valuable tool in
plant research for the foreseeable future, and it is to be hoped that the art of
“grinding and ﬁnding” will become increasingly accessible to research groups
around the world. Close collaborations between analytical chemists and experts
in plant biology, genetics and biochemistry will be essential in these attempts to
improve our understanding of the function of these important plant growth
regulators.
References
Baldi BG, Maher BR, Cohen JD (1989) Hydrolysis of indole-3-acetic acid esters exposed to mild
alkaline conditions. Plant Physiol 91:9–12
Barkawi LS, Tam YY, Tillman JA et al (2008) A high-throughput method for the quantitative
analysis of indole-3-acetic acid and other auxins from plant tissue. Anal Biochem 372:177–188
Barkawi LS, Tam YY, Tillman JA et al (2010) A high-throughput method for the quantitative
analysis of auxins. Nat Protoc 5:1609–1618
Chen CB, Chen YJ, Zhou J et al (2006) A 9-vinyladenine-based molecularly imprinted polymeric
membrane for the efﬁcient recognition of plant hormone 1H-indole-3-acetic acid. Anal Chim
Acta 569:58–65
Chen ML, Huang YQ, Liu JQ et al (2011) Highly sensitive proﬁling assay of acidic plant hormones
using a novel mass probe by capillary electrophoresis-time of ﬂight-mass spectrometry. J
Chromatogr B 879:938–944
56
O. Nova´k et al.

Chiwocha SD, Abrams SR, Ambrose SJ et al (2003) A method for proﬁling classes of plant
hormones and their metabolites using liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization tandem
mass spectrometry: an analysis of hormone regulation of thermodormancy of lettuce (Lactuca
sativa L.) seeds. Plant J 35:405–417
Cooney TP, Nonhebel HM (1991) Biosynthesis of indole-3-acetic acid in tomato shoots: mea-
surement, mass spectral identiﬁcation and incorporation of 2H from 2H2O into indole-3-acetic
acid, D- and L-tryptophan, indole-3-pyruvate and tryptamine. Planta 184:368–376
Dobrev PI, Kamı´nek M (2002) Fast and efﬁcient separation of cytokinins from auxin and abscisic
acid and their puriﬁcation using mixed-mode solid-phase extraction. J Chromatogr A 950:21–
29
Dobrev PI, Havlı´cˇek L, Va´gner M et al (2005) Puriﬁcation and determination of plant hormones
auxin and abscisic acid using solid phase extraction and two-dimensional high performance
liquid chromatography. J Chromatogr A 1075:159–166
Du F, Ruan G, Liang S et al (2012a) Monolithic molecularly imprinted solid-phase extraction for
the selective determination of trace cytokinins in plant samples with liquid chromatography-
electrospray tandem mass spectrometry. Anal Bioanal Chem 404:489–501
Du F, Ruan G, Liu H (2012b) Analytical methods for tracing plant hormones. Anal Bioanal Chem
403:55–74
Durgbanshi A, Arbona V, Pozo O et al (2005) Simultaneous determination of multiple phytohor-
mones in plant extracts by liquid chromatography-electrospray tandem mass spectrometry. J
Agric Food Chem 53:8437–8442
Edlund A, Eklo¨f S, Sundberg B et al (1995) A microscale technique for gas chromatography-mass
spectrometry measurements of picogram amounts of indole-3-acetic acid in plant tissues. Plant
Physiol 108:1043–1047
Eklund DM, Thelander M, Landberg K et al (2010) Homologues of the Arabidopsis thaliana
SHI/STY/LRP1 genes control auxin biosynthesis and affect growth and development in the
moss Physcomitrella patens. Development 137:1275–1284
Ernstsen A, Sandberg G, Crozier A (1986) Effects of sodium diethyldithiocarbamate, solvent,
temperature and plant extracts on the stability of indoles. Physiol Plant 68:519–522
Farrow SC, Emery RN (2012) Concurrent proﬁling of indole-3-acetic acid, abscisic acid, and
cytokinins and structurally related purines by high-performance-liquid-chromatography tan-
dem electrospray mass spectrometry. Plant Methods 8:42
Flores MI, Romero-Gonza´lez R, Frenich AG et al (2011) QuEChERS-based extraction procedure
for multifamily analysis of phytohormones in vegetables by UHPLC-MS/MS. J Sep Sci
34:1517–1524
Holcˇapek M, Jira´sko R, Lı´sa M (2012) Recent developments in liquid chromatography-mass
spectrometry and related techniques. J Chromatogr A 1259:3–15
Hu Y, Li Y, Zhang Y et al (2011) Development of sample preparation method for auxin analysis in
plants by vacuum microwave-assisted extraction combined with molecularly imprinted clean-
up procedure. Anal Bioanal Chem 399:3367–3374
Huang MT, Ho CT, Lee CY (eds) (1992) Phenolic compounds in food and their effects on health I
and II. American Chemical Society, Washington, DC
Izumi Y, Okazawa A, Bamba T et al (2009) Development of a method for comprehensive and
quantitative analysis of plant hormones by highly sensitive nanoﬂow liquid chromatography-
electrospray ionization-ion trap mass spectrometry. Anal Chim Acta 648:215–225
Jensen PJ, Bandurski RS (1995) Incorporation of deuterium into indole-3-acetic acid and trypto-
phan in Zea mays seedlings grown on 30 % deuterium oxide. Plant Physiol 147:697–702
Kai K, Horita J, Wakasa K et al (2007a) Three oxidative metabolites of indole-3-acetic acid from
Arabidopsis thaliana. Phytochemistry 68:1651–1663
Kai K, Wakasa K, Miyagawa H (2007b) Metabolism of indole-3-acetic acid in rice: identiﬁcation
and characterization of N-beta-D-glucopyranosyl indole-3-acetic acid and its conjugates.
Phytochemistry 68:2512–2522
3
Identiﬁcation and Proﬁling of Auxin and Auxin Metabolites
57

Kaufmann A (2012) The current role of high-resolution mass spectrometry in food analysis. Anal
Bioanal Chem 403:1233–1249
Kirwan GM, Johansson E, Kleemann R et al (2012) Building multivariate systems biology models.
Anal Chem 84:7064–7071
Kojima M, Sakakibara H (2012) Highly sensitive high-throughput proﬁling of six phytohormones
using MS-probe modiﬁcation and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Methods
Mol Biol 918:151–164
Kojima M, Kamada-Nobusada T, Komatsu H et al (2009) Highly sensitive and high-throughput
analysis of plant hormones using MS-probe modiﬁcation and liquid chromatography-tandem
mass spectrometry: an application for hormone proﬁling in Oryza sativa. Plant Cell Physiol
50:1201–1214
Kowalczyk M, Sandberg G (2001) Quantitative analysis of indole-3-acetic acid metabolites in
Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 127:1845–1853
Kugimiya A, Takeuchi T (1999a) Application of indoleacetic acid-imprinted polymer to solid
phase extraction. Anal Chim Acta 395:251–255
Kugimiya A, Takeuchi T (1999b) Effects of 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate on polymer network and
interaction in hydrophilic molecularly imprinted polymers. Anal Sci 15:29–33
Liu BF, Zhong XH, Lu YT (2002) Analysis of plant hormones in tobacco ﬂowers by micellar
electrokinetic capillary chromatography coupled with on-line large volume sample stacking. J
Chromatogr A 945:257–265
Liu X, Hegeman AD, Gardner G et al (2012) Protocol: high-throughput and quantitative assays of
auxin and auxin precursors from minute tissue samples. Plant Methods 8:31
Ljung K, O¨ stin A, Lioussanne L et al (2001a) Developmental regulation of indole-3-acetic acid
turnover in Scots pine seedlings. Plant Physiol 125:464–475
Ljung K, Bhalerao RP, Sandberg G (2001b) Sites and homeostatic control of auxin biosynthesis in
Arabidopsis during vegetative growth. Plant J 28:465–474
Ljung K, Hull AK, Celenza J et al (2005) Sites and regulation of auxin biosynthesis in Arabidopsis
roots. Plant Cell 17:1090–1094
Lu QM, Chen LH, Lu MH et al (2010) Extraction and analysis of auxins in plants using dispersive
liquid-liquid microextraction followed by high-performance liquid chromatography with ﬂuo-
rescence detection. J Agric Food Chem 58:2763–2770
Mashiguchi K, Tanaka K, Sakai T et al (2011) The main auxin biosynthesis pathway in
Arabidopsis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108:18512–18517
Mu¨ller M, Munne´-Bosch S (2011) Rapid and sensitive hormonal proﬁling of complex plant
samples by liquid chromatography coupled to electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrom-
etry. Plant Methods 7:37
Mu¨ller A, Du¨chting P, Weiler EW (2002) A multiplex GC-MS/MS technique for the sensitive and
quantitative single-run analysis of acidic phytohormones and related compounds, and its
application to Arabidopsis thaliana. Planta 216:44–56
Normanly J (2010) Approaching cellular and molecular resolution of auxin biosynthesis and
metabolism. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2:a001594
Nova´k O, He´nykova´ E, Sairanen I et al (2012) Tissue speciﬁc proﬁling of the Arabidopsis thaliana
auxin metabolome. Plant J 72:523–536
Nova´kova´ L, Vlcˇkova´ H (2009) A review of current trends and advances in modern bio-analytical
methods: chromatography and sample preparation. Anal Chim Acta 656:8–35
Nu´n˜ez O, Gallart-Ayala H, Martins CP et al (2012) New trends in fast liquid chromatography for
food and environmental analysis. J Chromatogr A 1228:298–323
Oikawa A, Saito K (2012) Metabolite analyses of single cells. Plant J 70:30–38
O¨ stin
A,
Catala´
C,
Chamarro
J
et
al
(1995)
Identiﬁcation
of
glucopyranosyl-β-1,4-
glucopyranosyl-β-1-N-oxindole-3-acetyl-N-aspartic acid, a new IAA catabolite, by liquid
chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry. J Mass Spectrom 30:1007–1017
O¨ stin A, Kowalyczk M, Bhalerao RP et al (1998) Metabolism of indole-3-acetic acid in
Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 118:285–296
58
O. Nova´k et al.

Pan X, Wang W (2009) Proﬁling of plant hormones by mass spectrometry. J Chromatogr B
877:2806–2813
Pan X, Welti R, Wang X (2008) Simultaneous quantiﬁcation of major phytohormones and related
compounds in crude plant extracts by liquid chromatography-electrospray tandem mass spec-
trometry. Phytochemistry 69:1773–1781
Peˇncˇı´k A, Rolcˇı´k J, Nova´k O et al (2009) Isolation of novel indole-3-acetic acid conjugates by
immunoafﬁnity extraction. Talanta 80:651–655
Pengelly WL, Bandurski RS (1983) Analysis of indole-3-acetic acid metabolism in Zea mays
using deuterium oxide as a tracer. Plant Physiol 73:445–449
Petersson SV, Johansson AI, Kowalczyk M et al (2009) An auxin gradient and maximum in the
Arabidopsis root apex show by high-resolution cell-speciﬁc analysis of IAA distribution and
synthesis. Plant Cell 21:1659–1668
Prinsen E, Van Dongen W, Esmans EL et al (1998) Micro and capillary liquid chromatography
tandem mass spectrometry: a new dimension in phytohormone research. J Chromatogr A
826:25–37
Quittenden LJ, Davies NW, Smith JA et al (2009) Auxin biosynthesis in pea: characterization of
the tryptamine pathway. Plant Physiol 151:1130–1138
Rapparini F, Tam YY, Cohen JD et al (2002) Indole-3-acetic acid metabolism in Lemna gibba
undergoes dynamic changes in response to growth temperature. Plant Physiol 128:1410–1416
Reinecke DM, Bandurski RS (1983) Oxindole-3-acetic acid, an indole-3-acetic acid catabolite in
Zea mays. Plant Physiol 71:211–213
Rittenberg D, Foster L (1940) A new procedure for quantitative analysis by isotope dilution, with
application to the determination of amino acids and fatty acids. J Biol Chem 133:727–744
Sairanen I, Nova´k O, Peˇncˇı´k A et al (2012) Soluble carbohydrates regulate auxin biosynthesis via
PIF proteins in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 24:4907–4916
Schmelz EA, Engelberth J, Alborn HT et al (2003) Simultaneous analysis of phytohormones,
phytotoxins, and volatile organic compounds in plants. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100:10552–
10557
Shi X, Jin F, Huang Y et al (2012) Simultaneous determination of ﬁve plant growth regulators in
fruits by modiﬁed quick, easy, cheap, effective, rugged, and safe (QuEChERS) extraction and
liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Agric Food Chem 60:60–65
Sugawara S, Hishiyama S, Jikumaru Y et al (2009) Biochemical analyses of indole-3-
acetaldoxime-dependent auxin biosynthesis in Arabidopsis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
106:5430–5435
Sundberg B (1990) Inﬂuence of extraction solvent (buffer, methanol, acetone) and time on the
quantiﬁcation of indole-3-acetic acid in plants. Physiol Plant 78:293–297
Sundberg B, Sandberg G, Crozier A (1986) Puriﬁcation of indole-3-acetic acid in plant extracts by
immunoafﬁnity chromatography. Phytochemistry 25:295–298
Svacˇinova´ J, Nova´k O, Placˇkova´ L et al (2012) A new approach for cytokinin isolation from
Arabidopsis tissues using miniaturized puriﬁcation: pipette tip solid-phase extraction. Plant
Methods 8:17
Tam YY, Normanly J (1998) Determination of indole-3-pyruvic acid levels in Arabidopsis
thaliana by gas chromatography-selected ion monitoring-mass spectrometry. J Chromatogr A
800:101–108
Tam YY, Epstein E, Normanly J (2000) Characterization of auxin conjugates in Arabidopsis. Low
steady-state levels of indole-3-acetyl-aspartate, indole-3-acetyl-glutamate, and indole-3-ace-
tyl-glucose. Plant Physiol 123:589–596
Taylor PJ (2005) Matrix effects: the Achilles heel of quantitative high-performance liquid
chromatography-electrospray-tandem mass spectrometry. Clin Biochem 38:328–334
Tivendale
ND,
Davies
NW,
Molesworth
PP
et
al
(2010)
Reassessing
the
role
of
N-hydroxytryptamine in auxin biosynthesis. Plant Physiol 154:1957–1965
Van Meulebroek L, Vanden Bussche J, Steppe K et al (2012) Ultra-high performance liquid
chromatography coupled to high resolution Orbitrap mass spectrometry for metabolomic
3
Identiﬁcation and Proﬁling of Auxin and Auxin Metabolites
59

proﬁling of the endogenous phytohormonal status of the tomato plant. J Chromatogr A
1260:67–80
Wiklund S, Johansson E, Sjo¨stro¨m L et al (2008) Visualization of GC/TOF-MS-based
metabolomics data for identiﬁcation of biochemically interesting compounds using OPLS
class models. Anal Chem 80:115–122
Wu YL, Hu B (2009) Simultaneous determination of several phytohormones in natural coconut
juice by hollow ﬁber-based liquid-liquid-liquid microextraction-high performance liquid chro-
matography. J Chromatogr A 1216:7657–7663
Zhang Y, Li Y, Hu Y, Li G et al (2010) Preparation of magnetic indole-3-acetic acid imprinted
polymer beads with 4-vinylpyridine and β-cyclodextrin as binary monomer via microwave
heating initiated polymerization and their application to trace analysis of auxins in plant
tissues. J Chromatogr A 1217:7337–7344
Zhao YD, Christensen SK, Fankhauser C et al (2001) A role for ﬂavin monooxygenase-like
enzymes in auxin biosynthesis. Science 291:306–309
60
O. Nova´k et al.

Chapter 4
Intracellular Auxin Transport
David Scheuring and Ju¨rgen Kleine-Vehn
Abstract The phytohormone auxin is of fundamental importance in plant devel-
opment. Since the identiﬁcation of auxin as a plant growth substance, auxin
transport has drawn considerable research attention. Intercellular (polar) auxin
transport contributes to its graded distribution in cell ﬁles or entire organs and
allows for dynamic, environmentally controlled rearrangements in auxin accumu-
lation. Insights into polar auxin transport mechanisms have broadened our under-
standing of the phenotypic ﬂexibility of plants. Besides intercellular auxin
transport, auxin is also transported intracellularly across organelle membranes,
but its importance in plant development remains nascent. The intracellular seques-
tration of auxin into cellular compartments, such as peroxisomes and the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER), plays important roles in auxin metabolism and
could furthermore, in the case of the ER, have a direct impact on auxin signaling
events. In this chapter, we review the most recent insights into intracellular auxin
transport and its role in cellular auxin homeostasis.
1
Introduction
The phytohormone auxin is an important regulator of plant growth and patterning
(reviewed in Leyser 2011). Auxin controls diverse developmental aspects, such as
apical–basal axis formation during embryogenesis, de novo postembryonic organ-
ogenesis, or pathogen interaction (reviewed in De Smet and Jurgens 2007; Pe´ret
et al. 2009; Kazan and Manners 2009). At a cellular level, auxin determines the rate
of cell division, elongation, and differentiation (reviewed in Perrot-Rechenmann
D. Scheuring • J. Kleine-Vehn (*)
Department of Applied Genetics and Cell Biology, University of Natural Resources and Life
Sciences (BOKU), Vienna, Austria
e-mail: juergen.kleine-vehn@boku.ac.at; jkleinevehn@gmail.com
E. Zazˇı´malova´ et al. (eds.), Auxin and Its Role in Plant Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-7091-1526-8_4, © Springer-Verlag Wien 2014
61

2010). Given its manifold functions, it is not too surprising that auxin levels and the
cellular responsiveness to auxin are tightly regulated. It now appears that auxin
metabolism and transport jointly control the spatiotemporal activity of auxin
(reviewed in Rosquete et al. 2012), which is a key component in regulating plant
development.
Four distinct endogenous auxin molecules, namely, indole-3-acetic acid (IAA),
indole-3-butyric
acid
(IBA),
4-chloroindole-3-acetic
acid
(4-CI-IAA),
and
phenylacetic acid (PAA), have been identiﬁed (reviewed in Simon and Petra´sˇek
2011), from which IAA appears to be the most abundant (reviewed in Strader and
Bartel 2011). IAA is mainly synthesized in the young aerial parts of the plant
(Ljung et al. 2001) and is subsequently transported in a root-ward direction
(reviewed in Petra´sˇek and Friml 2009). Moreover, local auxin biosynthesis
throughout the entire plant has been shown to be developmentally important
(Zhao 2012; Ljung 2013). The passage of auxin from cell to cell is carried out by
multiple auxin carriers at the plasma membrane. The most prominent are the inﬂux
carrier AUXIN RESISTANT 1 (AUX1), a subfamily of ATP-BINDING CAS-
SETTE (ABC) transporters, and the PIN-FORMED (PIN) efﬂux carrier family
(reviewed in Grunewald and Friml 2010; Kramer and Bennett 2006; Zazˇı´malova´
et al. 2010) (Fig. 4.1). Carrier-dependent polar auxin transport contributes to the
enormously ﬂexible regulation of auxin distribution within tissues (see Chap. 5).
Intracellular auxin must be perceived and converted into a signal to induce
speciﬁc cellular auxin responses (see Chap. 6). In Arabidopsis, three independent
auxin receptors have been proposed (Fig. 4.1): (1) the F-box protein TRANSPORT
INHIBITOR
RESISTANT1/AUXIN
SIGNALING
F-BOX
(TIR1/AFB)
(Dharmasiri et al. 2005; Kepinski and Leyser 2005), (2) the F-box protein
S-PHASE KINASE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 2A (SKP2A) (Jurado et al. 2010),
and (3) the AUXIN-BINDING PROTEIN (ABP1) (Hertel et al. 1972; Tromas
et al. 2010).
Most auxin responses have been associated with nuclear TIR1/AFB action (Tan
et al. 2007; Dharmasiri et al. 2005). In the absence of auxin, AUXIN/INDOLE
ACETIC ACID (Aux/IAA) proteins bind and inhibit AUXIN RESPONSE FAC-
TOR (ARF) transcription factors. Auxin binding to the co-receptor complex of
TIR1/AFB and Aux/IAA induces ubiquitination and degradation of Aux/IAA and
ultimately the release of ARFs, leading to transcriptional reprogramming (reviewed
in Chapman and Estelle 2009).
Nuclear SKP2A is involved in cell cycle regulation and furthermore has been
shown to directly bind auxin (Jurado et al. 2008; del Pozo et al. 2006). Mutations in
the proposed auxin-binding pocket abolish auxin binding and SKP2A activity
(Jurado et al. 2010). Further insight is needed to link SKP2A action and auxin
involvement in the cell cycle.
ABP1 was the ﬁrst auxin-binding protein described in the literature and has a
long-standing history as a putative auxin receptor (reviewed in Sauer and Kleine-
Vehn 2011; Shi and Yang 2011; Scherer 2011). ABP1 localizes mainly to the ER,
but a small portion is secreted to the cell wall where it is assumed to be active
(Sauer and Kleine-Vehn 2011). ABP1 responds rapidly and non-genomically to
62
D. Scheuring and J. Kleine-Vehn

auxin by regulating endocytosis or organizing the cytoskeleton (Robert et al. 2010;
Xu et al. 2010). These functions occur proximate to the plasma membrane; ABP1
additionally affects the cell cycle and gene expression (David et al. 2007; Braun
et al. 2008; Paque et al. 2014).
Both intracellular and extracellular auxin perception is required for integrative
auxin signaling. Carrier activity at the plasma membrane might therefore play a
decisive role in regulating the balance between extra- and intracellular signaling.
Compared with auxin perception and signaling events, auxin metabolism appears at
least in part compartmentalized. The precise subcellular distribution of auxinic
compounds requires speciﬁc auxin transport across organelle membranes, which
adds further complexity to the mechanisms of auxin perception and metabolism.
However, in contrast with cell-to-cell auxin transport, intracellular auxin transport
is only poorly understood. Here, we review our current knowledge of intracellular
auxin compartmentalization and transport.
Fig. 4.1 Intercellular auxin carriers and auxin receptors in plants. In Arabidopsis, three auxin
receptors and at least three different types of auxin carriers at the plasma membrane have been
suggested. Abbreviations: ABP1 ¼ AUXIN-BINDING PROTEIN1, AUX1 ¼ AUXIN RESIS-
TANT1,
PIN ¼ PIN-FORMED,
ABCB ¼ ATP-BINDING
CASETTE
B,
TIR1/
AFB ¼ TRANSPORT
INHIBITOR
RESISTANT1/AUXIN
SIGNALING
F-BOX,
and
SKP2A ¼ S-PHASE KINASE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 2A
4
Intracellular Auxin Transport
63

2
Intracellular Auxin Transport at Peroxisomes
IBA, long considered as synthetic auxin, has been detected in plants (reviewed in
Ludwig-Mu¨ller et al. 1993; Korasick et al. 2013), although a recent study did not
detect endogenous IBA in Arabidopsis (Nova´k et al. 2012). IBA, which differs from
IAA only in the length of its side chain, is produced by IBA synthase using IAA as
substrate. However, other precursors have also been described (reviewed in Wood-
ward and Bartel 2005). IBA displays only weak signaling activity, if at all, and it
has been suggested that it functions as a storage form of IAA (reviewed in Korasick
et al. 2013). IBA and IAA are both transported from cell to cell, but the underlying
carrier systems are distinct (Rashotte et al. 2003). Members of the ABCG trans-
porter family have been propounded as IBA transporters, speciﬁcally at the root–
soil interface (Ru˚zˇcˇcka et al. 2010; Strader and Bartel 2011); however, the biolog-
ical signiﬁcance of resulting IBA release into the rhizosphere remains so far
unknown. Intercellular IBA carriers still need to be unearthed, but it appears that
IBA transport and local conversion to IAA are important during lateral root
development (De Rybel et al. 2012). Hence, spatiotemporal conversion of IBA to
IAA provides an elegant mechanism to ﬁne-tune auxin biology.
The conversion of IBA to IAA is reminiscent of fatty acid ß-oxidation and most
likely involves the same machinery. Similar to fatty acid ß-oxidation, IBA to IAA
conversion takes place in peroxisomes (Fig. 4.2) and, hence, also requires IBA and
IAA to be imported into and exported from this organelle (reviewed in Hu
et al. 2012; Fawcett et al. 1960).
The ATPase PXA1/ABCD1, initially described as transporting fatty acids at
peroxisomes (reviewed in Linka and Weber 2010), might be involved in pumping
IBA from the cytosol into the peroxisome (Fig. 4.2). Loss-of-function mutants of
PXA1/ABCD1 are IBA resistant (Zolman et al. 2001) and show reduced IBA to
IAA conversion (Strader et al. 2010). Notably, defects of abcd1 mutants, such as a
reduced number of lateral roots (Zolman et al. 2001) and a delayed stamen ﬁlament
elongation (Footitt et al. 2007), could be partially rescued by exogenous auxin
application.
These ﬁndings suggest that IBA transport into peroxisomes and subsequent
conversion to IAA is of importance for plant growth and development. However,
the identity of transporters mediating the export of IBA-derived IAA from perox-
isomes into the cytosol remains unfortunately elusive (Fig. 4.2).
3
Compartmentalization of Auxin in the Endoplasmic
Reticulum
The endoplasmic reticulum has a prominent role in the synthesis and folding of
proteins and is also involved in multiple metabolism pathways. Recent evidence
suggests that the ER is essential for auxin metabolism (reviewed in Barbez and
64
D. Scheuring and J. Kleine-Vehn

Kleine-Vehn 2013). For example, several auxin amid-conjugate hydrolases show
an ER-retention motif (Campanella et al. 2003; Bitto et al. 2009), suggesting that
conjugation-based regulation of auxin activity might be linked to the ER. A splice
variant of the IAA biosynthesis gene YUCCA4 also localizes to the cytosolic face
of the ER (Kriechbaumer et al. 2012). The functional importance of this localiza-
tion is currently unknown, but could supply auxin for ER-directed transport.
Furthermore, the auxin receptor ABP1 is localized within the ER lumen and,
hence, auxin signaling could also take place in the ER (Barbez and Kleine-Vehn
2013).
While all these ﬁndings indicate that the ER might be important for auxin
metabolism and signaling, it is also clear that such compartmentalized mechanisms
would require auxins or auxinic compounds to be transported across the ER
membrane. Therefore, it was not too surprising that putative auxin transporters
were indeed discovered at the ER. However, the actual molecular player was
unexpected, because the transporter family has been already identiﬁed as being
involved in intercellular auxin transport.
3.1
PIN Subfamily of Auxin Carriers Function at the ER
PIN proteins are auxin efﬂux carriers (see Chap. 5), originally said to function in
intercellular auxin transport, modulating an extensive range of developmental
Fig. 4.2 Auxin transport at peroxisomes. Conversion from IAA to IBA is carried out in the
cytosol by the IBA synthetase. The reverse reaction, IBA to IAA takes place in peroxisomes, but
the exact mechanism remains unclear. However, enzymes acting in the ß-oxidation pathway have
been suggested as playing an important role in IBA to IAA conversion. ABCD1 is likely to
transport IBA into peroxisomes. The export carrier for IAA is still unknown. Abbreviations:
IAA ¼ Indole-3-acetic acid, IBA ¼ Indole-3-butyric, and PXA1/ABCD1 ¼ ABC transporter.
ECH2, IBR, and PED1 are candidates for IBA ß-oxidation
4
Intracellular Auxin Transport
65

processes (reviewed in Grunewald and Friml 2010). In Arabidopsis thaliana, all
8 members of the PIN protein family share two regions of multiple transmembrane
domains, symmetrically separated by a hydrophilic loop. PIN1-4 and PIN7 have
long hydrophilic loops and localize to the plasma membrane, where they facilitate
auxin efﬂux. This subgroup of PIN proteins determines the rate and direction of
intercellular (polar) auxin transport (Wisniewska et al. 2006; Petra´sˇek et al. 2006).
On the contrary PIN5, PIN6, and PIN8 display a shorter hydrophilic loop and
localize to the ER (Mravec et al. 2009; Dal Bosco et al. 2012; Ding et al. 2012;
Sawchuk et al. 2013). Thus, the classiﬁcation of PINs according to the length of
their central hydrophilic loop correlates with their distinct intracellular localization
(Mravec et al. 2009). The sequence requirements for an ER exit may lie in the loop
region (Ganguly et al. 2014).
It is intriguing that PIN auxin carriers appear to regulate both intercellular and
intracellular auxin transport and that ER-localized PINs seemingly predate the
evolution of plasma membrane localized PINs (Viaene et al. 2013). ER-localized
PIN5 increases cellular auxin retention, presumably by transporting auxin from the
cytosol into the ER lumen (Mravec et al. 2009). The availability of cytosolic/
nuclear IAA would be reduced as a result of such auxin compartmentalization in
the ER, which in turn might impact on nuclear auxin signaling events (Mravec
et al. 2009).
Apart from the transport of free IAA, PIN activity at the ER has been linked to
auxin conjugation-based metabolism (Mravec et al. 2009; Dal Bosco et al. 2012;
Ding et al. 2012). Only a small fraction of auxin is in its free and active form—the
majority is conjugated to amino acids, peptides, and sugars (see Chaps. 2 and 3).
Conjugation enables cells to reversibly inactivate and store auxin. In Arabidopsis,
IAA is mainly conjugated to amino acids and the most abundant IAA amid
conjugates are IA-alanine (Ala), IA-leucine (Leu), IA-aspartate (Asp), and
IA-glutamate (Glu) (Tam et al. 2000; Kowalczyk and Sandberg 2001). The auxin
conjugation to amino acids is catalyzed by members of the auxin-inducible
GRETCHEN HAGEN3 (GH3) gene family (Staswick et al. 2005; Hagen and
Guilfoyle
1985),
while
hydrolysis
of
amino
acids
is
achieved
by
the
IAA-LEUCINE RESISTANT 1 (ILR1)-like family (Bartel and Fink 1995; Rampey
et al. 2004; Davies et al. 1999; LeClere et al. 2002). PIN5 activity correlates with
higher levels of IAA amino acid and sugar conjugates. Hence, it has been hypoth-
esized that PIN5 leads to auxin accumulation in the ER, where conjugation-based
metabolism might take place (Mravec et al. 2009) (Fig. 4.3). Similar to PIN5, PIN8
localizes to the ER (Dal Bosco et al. 2012; Ding et al. 2012). Ectopic PIN8
expression leads to aberrant hypocotyl and root length as well as changes in
ﬂowering time (Ding et al. 2012; Dal Bosco et al. 2012). Surprisingly, a pin5
loss-of-function mutation can rescue the pin8 defects in pollen, whereas PIN5
overexpression attenuates phenotypes caused by ectopic PIN8 expression (Ding
et al. 2012). These ﬁndings indicate antagonistic roles for PIN5 and PIN8, possibly
by counteracting the sequestration of auxin and auxin conjugates in the ER lumen
(Ding et al. 2012). Similar to the scenario in pollen, pin6 and pin8 show antago-
nistic genetic interaction with pin5 in the control of leaf vein patterning (Sawchuk
66
D. Scheuring and J. Kleine-Vehn

et al. 2013) (Fig. 4.3). This could be explained by a scenario in which PIN5
transports auxin from the cytoplasm into the ER (Mravec et al. 2009), and PIN6/
PIN8 transport auxin from the ER to the cytoplasm (Sawchuk et al. 2013), but may
also depend on PIN protein translocation to the plasma membrane (Ganguly et al.
2014). Notably, intercellular (PIN1) and intracellular (PIN5, PIN6, and PIN8) auxin
transport seem to converge to ﬁne-tune auxin-dependent vein networks (Sawchuk
et al. 2013), suggesting complex interplay between intercellular and ER auxin
transport.
3.2
PILS Proteins: A New Family of Putative Auxin
Transporters
Besides PIN proteins, another family of putative auxin transporters at the ER has
been identiﬁed, possibly highlighting the importance of auxin compartmentaliza-
tion in the ER (Barbez et al. 2012). PIN-LIKES (PILS) proteins display only low
sequence similarity and seem evolutionarily distinct from PINs (Feraru et al. 2012;
Viaene et al. 2013), but show similarities to PINs in the predicted protein topology
(Barbez et al. 2012). PILS proteins are conserved throughout plant evolution
(Barbez et al. 2012; Feraru et al. 2012), whereas PIN proteins are absent in
Fig. 4.3 Simpliﬁed model of auxin transport at the ER. Distinct auxin pools in the cytosol, the
nucleus, and the ER depend on different carriers (as depicted in the cartoon). Abbreviations:
ER ¼ endoplasmic reticulum, IAA ¼ Indole-3-acetic acid, PIN ¼ PIN-FORMED, PILS ¼ PIN-
LIKES,
ABP1 ¼ AUXIN-BINDING
PROTEIN1,
GH3 ¼ GRETCHEN
HAGEN
3,
and
ILR ¼ IAA-LEUCINE RESISTANT1-like
4
Intracellular Auxin Transport
67

unicellular algae (Viaene et al. 2013). PILS2 and PILS5 gain- and loss-of-function
mutants show auxin-related phenotypes and convey resistance and hypersensitivity
to exogenous auxin application, respectively (Barbez et al. 2012). PILS2 and PILS5
increase cellular auxin accumulation at the ER (in plant and heterologous systems),
reduce auxin signaling, and stimulate auxin conjugation (Barbez et al. 2012; Barbez
and Kleine-Vehn 2013). This analogy proposes a PIN5-like function for PILS2 and
PILS5 in auxin transport from the cytosol into the ER lumen (Mravec et al. 2009;
Barbez et al. 2012). However, possible functional PILS/PIN redundancy or distinct
modes of actions remain to be addressed. Recently, a connection between ER-based
auxin homeostasis and the unfolded protein response (UPR) has been proposed.
Upon
ER
stress,
auxin
receptors
and
transporters
are
transcriptionally
downregulated in Arabidopsis seedlings (Chen et al. 2013). Remarkably, pin5 as
well as pils2 pils5 mutants show a reduced UPR activation, suggesting a carrier-
dependent link between auxin compartmentalization in the ER and UPR (Chen
et al. 2013).
4
Auxin and Other Cellular Compartments
Auxin metabolism and/or compartmentalization in peroxisomes and ER lumen is
currently gaining research attention, raising questions about the involvement of
additional organelles contributing to auxin homeostasis. Recently, the vacuole and
mitochondria have been advanced as playing a role in cellular auxin homeostasis.
The Arabidopsis transporter protein WALLS ARE THIN1 (WAT1) is ubiqui-
tously expressed throughout the plant, but it is preferentially associated with
vascular tissues. Within the cell, WAT1-GFP localizes to the tonoplast (Ranocha
et al. 2010). In wat1-1 mutants, the cell wall is defective (Denance et al. 2012), but
local auxin application rescues this mutant phenotype (Ranocha et al. 2013). Auxin
transport assays, using isolated Arabidopsis vacuoles and heterologous systems,
such as yeast and Xenopus oocytes, revealed that WAT1 is transporting auxin,
indicating that WAT1 facilitates auxin export from the vacuole (Ranocha
et al. 2013). In agreement, IAA and related compounds could be isolated from
Arabidopsis vacuoles (Ranocha et al. 2013). This ﬁnding adds another layer of
complexity to auxin homeostasis, but the possible role of auxin in the vacuole
remains to be demonstrated. Another link has been established between auxin
homeostasis and IAA-ALANINE RESISTANT4 (IAR4) that localizes to mitochon-
dria (Quint et al. 2009). iar4 mutants show auxin-related phenotypes that can be
rescued by exogenous auxin application. While free IAA levels are not affected,
iar4 mutants show higher levels of auxin conjugates, suggesting that IAR4 could
affect auxin homeostasis.
It remains to be seen whether vacuoles or mitochondria directly or indirectly
affect auxin metabolism, but it certainly illustrates the complexity of cellular auxin
homeostasis.
68
D. Scheuring and J. Kleine-Vehn

5
Concluding Remarks
Auxin transport has important impacts on plant development. While we currently
have a good insight into intercellular transport and its importance in plant devel-
opment, we are still in the early stages of understanding intracellular auxin trans-
port. Compartmentalization of a signaling molecule allows ﬁne-tuning of its
cellular activity and/or metabolism. IBA, for example, appears to be a largely
inactive auxin molecule that becomes redistributed in plant tissues and spatially
converted to an active signal. It is tempting to speculate that IBA converting cells
might differ from other tissues in their activity of IBA and/or auxin carriers at
peroxisomes. Compartmentalization of IBA metabolism seems to be essential for
lateral rooting (De Rybel et al. 2012) and is a stunning example of how environ-
mental signals control postembryonic organ formation (reviewed in Korasick
et al. 2013).
IBA metabolism and reversible IAA conjugation to different moieties might
appear mechanistically similar, with both leading to IAA inactivation. However,
while IBA is actively transported from cell to cell, it remains to be seen whether
IAA conjugates are readily transported within plant tissues. Therefore, it is con-
ceivable that IAA conversion to IBA or IAA conjugation exert distinct spatial
consequences.
The regulation of auxin conjugation might be linked to the ER (reviewed in
Barbez and Kleine-Vehn 2013), but the localization of the molecular players is
poorly deﬁned. Apart from its probable role in auxin metabolism, the ER might also
be directly involved in auxin signaling. The auxin receptor ABP1 is largely retained
in the ER, based on its KDEL retention motif, and only a tiny part of ABP1,
constituting its extracellular activity, escapes this regulation (reviewed in Sauer
and Kleine-Vehn 2011). It thus seems possible that the ER-localized pool of ABP1
participates in auxin signaling as well (Barbez and Kleine-Vehn 2013). ABP1 in the
ER could either directly affect prominent ER functions or provide a signal toward
the nucleus via the nuclear envelope. In such a scenario, intracellular auxin trans-
port at the ER would not only affect the rate of compartmentalized auxin metab-
olism, but might also be a decisive factor for speciﬁc auxin signaling events in the
ER. Such an intracellular transport mechanism would even allow single cells within
a tissue to acquire individual and distinct auxin responses.
Acknowledgments We are grateful to E. Barbez, M. Sauer, and C. Luschnig for helpful discus-
sion and D. Whittaker for help in preparing the manuscript. This work was supported by the
Vienna Science and Technology Fund (WWTF) (to J.K.-V.), Austrian Science Fund (FWF)
(Projects: P26568-B16 and P26591-B16 to J.K.-V.), and the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(DFG) (personal postdoctoral research grant to D.S.).
4
Intracellular Auxin Transport
69

References
Barbez E, Kleine-Vehn J (2013) Divide Et Impera-cellular auxin compartmentalization. Curr Opin
Plant Biol 16(1):78–84. doi:10.1016/j.pbi.2012.10.005
Barbez E, Kubesˇ M, Rolcˇı´k J, Beziat C, Peˇncˇı´k A, Wang B, Rosquete MR, Zhu J, Dobrev PI,
Lee Y, Zazˇı´malova´ E, Petra´sˇek J, Geisler M, Friml J, Kleine-Vehn J (2012) A novel putative
auxin carrier family regulates intracellular auxin homeostasis in plants. Nature 485
(7396):119–122. doi:10.1038/nature11001
Bartel B, Fink GR (1995) ILR1, an amidohydrolase that releases active indole-3-acetic acid from
conjugates. Science 268(5218):1745–1748
Bitto E, Bingman CA, Bittova L, Houston NL, Boston RS, Fox BG, Phillips GN Jr (2009) X-ray
structure of ILL2, an auxin-conjugate amidohydrolase from Arabidopsis thaliana. Proteins 74
(1):61–71. doi:10.1002/prot.22124
Braun N, Wyrzykowska J, Muller P, David K, Couch D, Perrot-Rechenmann C, Fleming AJ
(2008) Conditional repression of AUXIN BINDING PROTEIN1 reveals that it coordinates cell
division and cell expansion during postembryonic shoot development in Arabidopsis and
tobacco. Plant Cell 20(10):2746–2762. doi:10.1105/tpc.108.059048
Campanella JJ, Larko D, Smalley J (2003) A molecular phylogenomic analysis of the ILR1-like
family of IAA amidohydrolase genes. Comp Funct Genomics 4(6):584–600. doi:10.1002/cfg.
340
Chapman EJ, Estelle M (2009) Mechanism of auxin-regulated gene expression in plants. Annu
Rev Genet 43:265–285. doi:10.1146/annurev-genet-102108-134148
Chen Y, Aung K, Rolcˇı´k J, Walicki K, Friml J, Brandizzi F (2013) Inter-regulation of the unfolded
protein response and auxin signaling. Plant J. doi:10.1111/tpj.12373
Dal Bosco C, Dovzhenko A, Liu X, Woerner N, Rensch T, Eismann M, Eimer S, Hegermann J,
Paponov IA, Ruperti B, Heberle-Bors E, Touraev A, Cohen JD, Palme K (2012) The endo-
plasmic reticulum localized PIN8 is a pollen-speciﬁc auxin carrier involved in intracellular
auxin homeostasis. Plant J 71(5):860–870. doi:10.1111/j.1365-313X.2012.05037.x
David KM, Couch D, Braun N, Brown S, Grosclaude J, Perrot-Rechenmann C (2007) The auxin-
binding protein 1 is essential for the control of cell cycle. Plant J 50(2):197–206. doi:10.1111/j.
1365-313X.2007.03038.x
Davies RT, Goetz DH, Lasswell J, Anderson MN, Bartel B (1999) IAR3 encodes an auxin
conjugate hydrolase from Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 11(3):365–376
De Rybel B, Audenaert D, Xuan W, Overvoorde P, Strader LC, Kepinski S, Hoye R, Brisbois R,
Parizot B, Vanneste S, Liu X, Gilday A, Graham IA, Nguyen L, Jansen L, Njo MF, Inze D,
Bartel B, Beeckman T (2012) A role for the root cap in root branching revealed by the
non-auxin probe naxillin. Nat Chem Biol 8(9):798–805. doi:10.1038/nchembio.1044
De Smet I, Jurgens G (2007) Patterning the axis in plants–auxin in control. Curr Opin Genet Dev
17(4):337–343. doi:10.1016/j.gde.2007.04.012
del Pozo JC, Diaz-Trivino S, Cisneros N, Gutierrez C (2006) The balance between cell division
and endoreplication depends on E2FC-DPB, transcription factors regulated by the ubiquitin-
SCFSKP2A pathway in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 18(9):2224–2235. doi:10.1105/tpc.105.039651
Denance N, Ranocha P, Oria N, Barlet X, Riviere MP, Yadeta KA, Hoffmann L, Perreau F,
Clement G, Maia-Grondard A, van den Berg GC, Savelli B, Fournier S, Aubert Y, Pelletier S,
Thomma BP, Molina A, Jouanin L, Marco Y, Goffner D (2012) Arabidopsis wat1 (walls are
thin1)-mediated resistance to the bacterial vascular pathogen, Ralstonia solanacearum, is
accompanied by cross-regulation of salicylic acid and tryptophan metabolism. Plant
J. doi:10.1111/tpj.12027
Dharmasiri N, Dharmasiri S, Estelle M (2005) The F-box protein TIR1 is an auxin receptor. Nature
435(7041):441–445. doi:10.1038/nature03543
Ding Z, Wang B, Moreno I, Dˇ uplˇa´kova´ N, Simon S, Carraro N, Reemmer J, Peˇncˇı´k A, Chen X,
Tejos R, Sku˚pa P, Pollmann S, Mravec J, Petra´sˇek J, Zazˇı´malova´ E, Honys D, Rolcˇı´k J,
Murphy A, Orellana A, Geisler M, Friml J (2012) ER-localized auxin transporter PIN8
70
D. Scheuring and J. Kleine-Vehn

regulates auxin homeostasis and male gametophyte development in Arabidopsis. Nat Commun
3:941. doi:10.1038/ncomms1941
Fawcett CH, Wain RL, Wightman F (1960) The metabolism of 3-indolylalkanecarboxylic acids,
and their amides, nitriles and methyl esters in plant tissues. Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci
152:231–254
Feraru E, Vosolsobeˇ S, Feraru MI, Petra´sˇek J, Kleine-Vehn J (2012) Evolution and structural
diversiﬁcation of PILS putative auxin carriers in plants. Front Plant Sci 3:227. doi:10.3389/
fpls.2012.00227
Footitt S, Dietrich D, Fait A, Fernie AR, Holdsworth MJ, Baker A, Theodoulou FL (2007) The
COMATOSE ATP-binding cassette transporter is required for full fertility in Arabidopsis.
Plant Physiol 144(3):1467–1480. doi:10.1104/pp. 107.099903
Ganguly A, Park M, Kesewat MS, Cho HT (2014). Functional analysis of the hydrophilic loop in
intracellular trafﬁcking of arabidopsis PIN-FORMED proteins. Plant Cell 2014. doi:10.1105/
tpc.113.118422
Grunewald W, Friml J (2010) The march of the PINs: developmental plasticity by dynamic polar
targeting in plant cells. EMBO J 29(16):2700–2714. doi:10.1038/emboj.2010.181
Hagen G, Guilfoyle TJ (1985) Rapid induction of selective transcription by auxins. Mol Cell Biol 5
(6):1197–1203
Hertel R, Thomson KS, Russo VEA (1972) In-vitro auxin binding to particulate cell fractions from
corn coleoptiles. Planta 107:325–340
Hu J, Baker A, Bartel B, Linka N, Mullen RT, Reumann S, Zolman BK (2012) Plant peroxisomes:
biogenesis and function. Plant Cell 24(6):2279–2303. doi:10.1105/tpc.112.096586
Jurado S, Diaz-Trivino S, Abraham Z, Manzano C, Gutierrez C, del Pozo C (2008) SKP2A, an
F-box protein that regulates cell division, is degraded via the ubiquitin pathway. Plant J 53
(5):828–841. doi:10.1111/j.1365-313X.2007.03378.x
Jurado S, Abraham Z, Manzano C, Lopez-Torrejon G, Pacios LF, Del Pozo JC (2010) The
Arabidopsis cell cycle F-box protein SKP2A binds to auxin. Plant Cell 22(12):3891–3904.
doi:10.1105/tpc.110.078972
Kazan K, Manners JM (2009) Linking development to defense: auxin in plant-pathogen interac-
tions. Trends Plant Sci 14(7):373–382. doi:10.1016/j.tplants.2009.04.005
Kepinski S, Leyser O (2005) The Arabidopsis F-box protein TIR1 is an auxin receptor. Nature 435
(7041):446–451. doi:10.1038/nature03542
Korasick DA, Enders TA, Strader LC (2013) Auxin biosynthesis and storage forms. J Exp Bot 64
(9):2541–2555. doi:10.1093/jxb/ert080
Kowalczyk M, Sandberg G (2001) Quantitative analysis of indole-3-acetic acid metabolites in
Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 127(4):1845–1853
Kramer EM, Bennett MJ (2006) Auxin transport: a ﬁeld in ﬂux. Trends Plant Sci 11(8):382–386.
doi:10.1016/j.tplants.2006.06.002
Kriechbaumer V, Wang P, Hawes C, Abell BM (2012) Alternative splicing of the auxin biosyn-
thesis gene YUCCA4 determines its subcellular compartmentation. Plant J 70(2):292–302.
doi:10.1111/j.1365-313X.2011.04866.x
LeClere S, Tellez R, Rampey RA, Matsuda SP, Bartel B (2002) Characterization of a family of
IAA-amino acid conjugate hydrolases from Arabidopsis. J Biol Chem 277(23):20446–20452.
doi:10.1074/jbc.M111955200
Leyser O (2011) Auxin, self-organisation, and the colonial nature of plants. Curr Biol 21(9):R331–
R337. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2011.02.031
Linka N, Weber AP (2010) Intracellular metabolite transporters in plants. Mol Plant 3(1):21–53.
doi:10.1093/mp/ssp108
Ljung K (2013) Auxin metabolism and homeostasis during plant development. Development 140
(5):943–950. doi:10.1242/dev.086363
Ljung K, Bhalerao RP, Sandberg G (2001) Sites and homeostatic control of auxin biosynthesis in
Arabidopsis during vegetative growth. Plant J 28(4):465–474
4
Intracellular Auxin Transport
71

Ludwig-Mu¨ller J, Sass S, Sutter EG, Wondner M, Epstein E (1993) Indole-3-butyric acid in
Arabidopsis thaliana. I. Identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation. Plant Growth Regul 13:179–187
Mravec J, Sku˚pa P, Bailly A, Hoyerova´ K, Krˇecˇek P, Bielach A, Petra´sˇek J, Zhang J, Gaykova V,
Stierhof YD, Dobrev PI, Schwarzerova´ K, Rolcˇı´k J, Seifertova´ D, Luschnig C, Benkova´ E,
Zazˇı´malova´ E, Geisler M, Friml J (2009) Subcellular homeostasis of phytohormone auxin is
mediated by the ER-localized PIN5 transporter. Nature 459(7250):1136–1140. doi:10.1038/
nature08066
Nova´k O, Henykova E, Sairanen I, Kowalczyk M, Pospı´sˇil T, Ljung K (2012) Tissue-speciﬁc
proﬁling of the Arabidopsis thaliana auxin metabolome. Plant J 72(3):523–536. doi:10.1111/j.
1365-313X.2012.05085.x
Paque S, Mouille G, Grandont L, Alabadi D, Gaertner C, Goyallon A, Muller P, Primard-Brisset C,
Sormani R, Blazquez MA, Perrot-Rechenmann C (2014) AUXIN BINDING PROTEIN1 links
cell wall remodeling, auxin signaling, and cell expansion in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 26
(1):280–295. doi:10.1105/tpc.113.120048
Peret B, De Rybel B, Casimiro I, Benkova´ E, Swarup R, Laplaze L, Beeckman T, Bennett MJ
(2009) Arabidopsis lateral root development: an emerging story. Trends Plant Sci 14
(7):399–408. doi:10.1016/j.tplants.2009.05.002
Perrot-Rechenmann C (2010) Cellular responses to auxin: division versus expansion. Cold Spring
Harb Perspect Biol 2(5):a001446. doi:10.1101/cshperspect.a001446
Petra´sˇek J, Friml J (2009) Auxin transport routes in plant development. Development 136
(16):2675–2688. doi:10.1242/dev.030353
Petra´sˇek J, Mravec J, Bouchard R, Blakeslee JJ, Abas M, Seifertova´ D, Wisniewska J, Tadele Z,
Kubesˇ M, Cˇ ovanova´ M, Dhonukshe P, Sku˚pa P, Benkova´ E, Perry L, Krˇecˇek P, Lee OR, Fink
GR, Geisler M, Murphy AS, Luschnig C, Zazˇı´malova´ E, Friml J (2006) PIN proteins perform a
rate-limiting function in cellular auxin efﬂux. Science 312(5775):914–918. doi:10.1126/sci
ence.1123542
Quint M, Barkawi LS, Fan KT, Cohen JD, Gray WM (2009) Arabidopsis IAR4 modulates auxin
response by regulating auxin homeostasis. Plant Physiol 150(2):748–758. doi:10.1104/pp. 109.
136671
Rampey RA, LeClere S, Kowalczyk M, Ljung K, Sandberg G, Bartel B (2004) A family of auxin-
conjugate hydrolases that contributes to free indole-3-acetic acid levels during Arabidopsis
germination. Plant Physiol 135(2):978–988. doi:10.1104/pp. 104.039677
Ranocha P, Denance N, Vanholme R, Freydier A, Martinez Y, Hoffmann L, Kohler L, Pouzet C,
Renou JP, Sundberg B, Boerjan W, Goffner D (2010) Walls are thin 1 (WAT1), an Arabidopsis
homolog of Medicago truncatula NODULIN21, is a tonoplast-localized protein required for
secondary wall formation in ﬁbers. Plant J. doi:10.1111/j.1365-313X.2010.04256.x
Ranocha P, Dima O, Nagy R, Felten J, Corratge-Faillie C, Nova´k O, Morreel K, Lacombe B,
Martinez Y, Pfrunder S, Jin X, Renou JP, Thibaud JB, Ljung K, Fischer U, Martinoia E,
Boerjan W, Goffner D (2013) Arabidopsis WAT1 is a vacuolar auxin transport facilitator
required for auxin homoeostasis. Nat Commun 4:2625. doi:10.1038/ncomms3625
Rashotte AM, Poupart J, Waddell CS, Muday GK (2003) Transport of the two natural auxins,
indole-3-butyric acid and indole-3-acetic acid, in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 133(2):761–772.
doi:10.1104/pp. 103.022582
Robert S, Kleine-Vehn J, Barbez E, Sauer M, Paciorek T, Baster P, Vanneste S, Zhang J, Simon S,
Cˇ ovanova´ M, Hayashi K, Dhonukshe P, Yang Z, Bednarek SY, Jones AM, Luschnig C,
Aniento F, Zazˇı´malova´ E, Friml J (2010) ABP1 mediates auxin inhibition of clathrin-
dependent endocytosis in Arabidopsis. Cell 143(1):111–121. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2010.09.027
Rosquete MR, Barbez E, Kleine-Vehn J (2012) Cellular auxin homeostasis: gatekeeping is
housekeeping. Mol Plant 5(4):772–786. doi:10.1093/mp/ssr109
Ru˚zˇicˇka K, Strader LC, Bailly A, Yang H, Blakeslee J, Langowski L, Nejedla E, Fujita H, Itoh H,
Syono K, Heja´tko J, Gray WM, Martinoia E, Geisler M, Bartel B, Murphy AS, Friml J (2010)
Arabidopsis PIS1 encodes the ABCG37 transporter of auxinic compounds including the auxin
72
D. Scheuring and J. Kleine-Vehn

precursor indole-3-butyric acid. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107(23):10749–10753. doi:10.1073/
pnas.1005878107
Sauer M, Kleine-Vehn J (2011) AUXIN BINDING PROTEIN1: the outsider. Plant Cell 23
(6):2033–2043. doi:10.1105/tpc.111.087064
Sawchuk MG, Edgar A, Scarpella E (2013) Patterning of leaf vein networks by convergent auxin
transport pathways. PLoS Genet 9(2):e1003294. doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1003294
Scherer GF (2011) AUXIN-BINDING-PROTEIN1, the second auxin receptor: what is the signif-
icance of a two-receptor concept in plant signal transduction? J Exp Bot 62(10):3339–3357.
doi:10.1093/jxb/err033
Shi JH, Yang ZB (2011) Is ABP1 an auxin receptor yet? Mol Plant 4(4):635–640. doi:10.1093/mp/
ssr050
Simon S, Petra´sˇek J (2011) Why plants need more than one type of auxin. Plant Sci 180
(3):454–460. doi:10.1016/j.plantsci.2010.12.007
Staswick PE, Serban B, Rowe M, Tiryaki I, Maldonado MT, Maldonado MC, Suza W (2005)
Characterization of an Arabidopsis enzyme family that conjugates amino acids to indole-3-
acetic acid. Plant Cell 17(2):616–627. doi:10.1105/tpc.104.026690
Strader LC, Bartel B (2011) Transport and metabolism of the endogenous auxin precursor indole-
3-butyric acid. Mol Plant 4(3):477–486. doi:10.1093/mp/ssr006
Strader LC, Culler AH, Cohen JD, Bartel B (2010) Conversion of endogenous indole-3-butyric
acid to indole-3-acetic acid drives cell expansion in Arabidopsis seedlings. Plant Physiol 153
(4):1577–1586. doi:10.1104/pp. 110.157461
Tam YY, Epstein E, Normanly J (2000) Characterization of auxin conjugates in Arabidopsis. Low
steady-state levels of indole-3-acetyl-aspartate, indole-3-acetyl-glutamate, and indole-3-ace-
tyl-glucose. Plant Physiol 123(2):589–596
Tan X, Calderon-Villalobos LI, Sharon M, Zheng C, Robinson CV, Estelle M, Zheng N (2007)
Mechanism of auxin perception by the TIR1 ubiquitin ligase. Nature 446(7136):640–645.
doi:10.1038/nature05731
Tromas A, Paponov I, Perrot-Rechenmann C (2010) AUXIN BINDING PROTEIN 1: functional
and evolutionary aspects. Trends Plant Sci 15(8):436–446. doi:10.1016/j.tplants.2010.05.001
Viaene T, Delwiche CF, Rensing SA, Friml J (2013) Origin and evolution of PIN auxin trans-
porters in the green lineage. Trends Plant Sci 18(1):5–10. doi:10.1016/j.tplants.2012.08.009
Wisniewska J, Xu J, Seifertova´ D, Brewer PB, Ru˚zˇicˇka K, Blilou I, Rouquie D, Benkova´ E,
Scheres B, Friml J (2006) Polar PIN localization directs auxin ﬂow in plants. Science 312
(5775):883. doi:10.1126/science.1121356
Woodward AW, Bartel B (2005) Auxin: regulation, action, and interaction. Ann Bot 95
(5):707–735. doi:10.1093/aob/mci083
Xu T, Wen M, Nagawa S, Fu Y, Chen JG, Wu MJ, Perrot-Rechenmann C, Friml J, Jones AM,
Yang Z (2010) Cell surface- and rho GTPase-based auxin signaling controls cellular interdig-
itation in Arabidopsis. Cell 143(1):99–110. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2010.09.003
Zazˇı´malova´ E, Murphy AS, Yang H, Hoyerova´ K, Hosˇek P (2010) Auxin transporters–why so
many? Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2(3):a001552. doi:10.1101/cshperspect.a001552
Zhao Y (2012) Auxin biosynthesis: a simple two-step pathway converts tryptophan to indole-3-
acetic acid in plants. Mol Plant 5(2):334–338. doi:10.1093/mp/ssr104
Zolman BK, Silva ID, Bartel B (2001) The Arabidopsis pxa1 mutant is defective in an
ATP-binding cassette transporter-like protein required for peroxisomal fatty acid beta-
oxidation. Plant Physiol 127(3):1266–1278
4
Intracellular Auxin Transport
73

Chapter 5
Intercellular Transport of Auxin
Jesica Reemmer and Angus Murphy
Abstract Auxin is an essential hormone that regulates both programmed and
plastic plant development. The mechanisms that regulate auxin metabolism, trans-
port and signal transduction are well characterized, although important unresolved
questions remain. A unique feature of auxin-regulated plant development is that it
involves a combination of cellular perception with polarized auxin gradients across
groups of cells, tissues, and organs. Plants achieve these polarized auxin gradients
via site-speciﬁc synthesis followed by directed and polar patterning of transport
components in individual cells. These streams are primarily mediated by three
functionally distinct plasma membrane transporter families. Apical–basal and
organogenic patterning is largely deﬁned by the polar efﬂux activities of full-
length PIN-FORMED (PIN) facilitators. Dynamic auxin uptake into directed
streams is mediated by the AUXIN RESISTANT 1 (AUX1) and LIKE AUX1
(LAX) symporters. Finally, long-distance transport streams are motivated by the
ATP-BINDING CASSETTE subfamily B (ABCB) active transporters that contin-
ually pump across the plasma membrane and prevent reuptake of exported auxin.
Multiple accessory proteins regulate auxin transporter activity and interactions with
subcellular environments. The current understanding of cellular transport of auxin
will be reviewed in this chapter.
J. Reemmer
Department of Horticulture and Landscape Architecture, Purdue University, West Lafayette,
IN 47907, USA
A. Murphy (*)
Department of Horticulture and Landscape Architecture, Purdue University, West Lafayette,
IN 47907, USA
Department of Plant Science and Landscape Architecture, University of Maryland, College
Park, MD 20742, USA
e-mail: asmurphy@umd.edu
E. Zazˇı´malova´ et al. (eds.), Auxin and Its Role in Plant Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-7091-1526-8_5, © Springer-Verlag Wien 2014
75

1
Introduction
Auxins are indolic plant hormones that function in regulation of cell division and
elongation, polar growth, organogenesis, determination of shoot and root architec-
ture, and tropic responses to gravity and light (reviewed in Teale et al. 2006;
Benjamins and Scheres 2008). The word auxin is derived from the Greek word
“auxein,” meaning “to grow/increase” (Ko¨gl and Haagen-Smith 1931). Naturally
occurring auxins contain an indole and carboxylic acid group. The most abundant
and developmentally important natural auxin is indole-3-acetic acid (IAA),
although 4-chloro-indole acetic acid (4-Cl-IAA) is also found in some species
(Fig. 5.1a). Synthetic auxins mimic IAA in structure and spacing of the carboxylic
acid moiety (Fig. 5.1b).
IAA is produced primarily by multistep conversion of the aminoacyl precursor
tryptophan synthesized from chorismate in the chloroplast (Radwanski and Last
1995). In Arabidopsis, tryptophan is converted to indole-3-pyruvic acid (IPA) by
TRYPTOPHAN AMINOTRANSFERASE of ARABIDOPSIS 1 (TAA1), also
known as TRANSPORT INHIBITOR RESPONSE 2 (TIR2) (Yamada et al. 2009;
Tao et al. 2008; Stepanova et al. 2008; see Chap. 2). The second, and rate limiting,
step of this pathway is the conversion of IPA to IAA by YUCCA, which catalyzes
the oxidative decarboxylation of α-keto acids, including IPA and phenyl pyruvate
(PPA) in Arabidopsis (Dai et al. 2013). In the model plant Arabidopsis, the
biosynthetic pathway that generates indole glucosinolate as defense compounds
also contributes to IAA pools (Sugawara et al. 2009).
Auxins are produced in the shoot apex and other sites of cell division and
differentiation (Ljung et al. 2001, 2005; Bhalerao et al. 2002; Cheng et al. 2006,
2007; Stepanova et al. 2008; Tao et al. 2008; Petersson et al. 2009). Emergent
evidence of localized auxin production stands in contrast to traditional models in
which auxin was thought to be synthesized almost exclusively in the shoot apex and
transported to sites of action (Ljung et al. 2001, 2005; Bhalerao et al. 2002; Petersson
et al. 2009). Simultaneous elucidation of auxin transport mechanisms over the past
15 years has largely supported models of more distributed synthesis at the expense of
Fig. 5.1 Molecular structures of auxin. IAA and 4-Cl-IAA are endogenous auxins (a), whereas
2,4-D (2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid) and naphtalene-1-acetic acid (NAA) are synthetically
produced (b). The synthetic auxins 2,4-D and NAA exhibit chemical traits, such as greater
resistance to metabolism or higher rates of diffusion into cells, that make them useful tools for
auxin transport studies
76
J. Reemmer and A. Murphy

shoot apical source models (reviewed in Peer et al. 2011). In particular, closely
linked localized synthesis and polar auxin gradients involved in organogenesis have
emerged as largely distinct from long-distance auxin transport streams.
When free auxin reaches a cell, two temporally distinct sets of responses may be
observed (see Chap. 6). The earliest cell elongation responses to auxin may involve
non-transcriptional events. AUXIN-BINDING PROTEIN 1 (ABP1) is a putative
auxin receptor localized to the ER and cell periphery and may perceive auxin levels
outside of the cell (Lo¨bler and Kla¨mbt 1985; Peer et al. 2013). However, transcrip-
tional activation of genes containing auxin response promoter elements requires
derepression of trans-acting Auxin Response Factor (ARF) proteins by the TIR1/
AFB-AUX/IAA co-receptor system (Guilfoyle et al. 1986; Theologis et al. 1985).
Auxin binding to the TIR1/AFB F-box ubiquitin ligase subunit and an AUX/IAA
co-receptor promotes AUX/IAA degradation to derepress ARF activation of auxin
responsive genes expression (Dharmasiri et al. 2005; Kepinski and Leyser 2005).
The S-Phase Kinase-Associated Protein 2A (SKP2A) is a similar F-box protein
whose function has been found to be additive to the effects of tir1-1 (del Pozo
et al. 2002; Jurado et al. 2010). SKP2A has a different target, however, and its rapid
degradation of key regulators of cell cycle control suggests SKP2A mediates auxin-
responsive cell cycle control (del Pozo et al. 2006; Jurado et al. 2008).
A unique aspect of auxin-dependent growth regulation is that the polarity and
concentration of the auxin transport stream imparts vital information that the
system can recognize. As early as 1880, Darwin described the unknown transmis-
sion of “some inﬂuence” as the agent of seedling bending in response to light
(Darwin 1880). Though delayed by nearly 50 years, the theory of lateral auxin
relocalization as a mechanism for bending was almost immediately proposed by
both Cholodny and Went once the phytohormone auxin was discovered (Cholodny
1927; Went and Thimann 1937). The asymmetric distribution of auxin in this
relocalization is responsible for differential cell elongation and the reorientation
of growth evidenced in both photo- and gravitropic responses (see Chap. 16).
Another result of lateral relocalization is uneven accumulation of auxin into
local maxima and minima. It is through these concentration differences that auxin
sets the blueprint for plant development. These gradients are found to be essential
for both the embryonic development of apical–basal polarity (see Chap. 9) and the
continued patterning of organogenesis (Reinhardt et al. 2003).
2
Cellular Auxin Transport
2.1
Cellular Auxin Import Is Motivated by Chemiosmotic
Gradients
Cellular uptake and efﬂux of auxin is motivated by a combination of chemiosmotic
forces and ATP hydrolysis. IAA is a weak acid with a pKa of approximately 4.85.
5
Intercellular Transport of Auxin
77

In the acidic (pH 5.5) conditions of the apoplast, only a small fraction (a calculated
17 %) of auxin molecules are proton associated (Rubery and Sheldrake 1974;
Raven 1975). While protonated auxin preferentially diffuses into the cell mem-
brane, 83 % of the auxin pool remains unavailable to lipophilic diffusion in its
dissociated form (IAA). Additionally, cells must be able to selectively take up
auxin in competition with other organic acids and adjust for incorporation of the
already limited pool of auxin into other tissues. Thus, in order to meet develop-
mental demands, there is a distinct need for protein importers to actively recruit the
traveling auxin signal. In Arabidopsis, this transport is carried out by the high-
afﬁnity auxin inﬂux transporter AUX1 and its LAX protein family members (Goto
et al. 1987; Parry et al. 2001). These permease-like proteins function by harnessing
the potential of the proton gradient to drive passive anionic symport of deprotonated
IAA at the plasma membrane (Yang et al. 2006).
The importance of symport-driven uptake in enhancing transport streams is
observed in aux1 mutants or transformants wherein AUX/LAX genes are uniformly
expressed in all cells of a tissue. Increased uptake activity increases the total auxin
found in transport streams, and decreased activity results in decreased concentra-
tion of auxin in provascular and vascular tissues compared to wild-type plants
(Marchant et al. 2002; Kramer 2004). AUX1 activity in lateral root cap cells has
been shown to be essential to uptake of auxin from the root apex into directed
transport streams in the root epidermis that direct gravitropic responses (Swarup
et al. 2001; Kleine-Vehn et al. 2006).
In Arabidopsis, the three closely related LAX proteins also function in auxin
uptake. Comparison of gene structure revealed well-conserved exon/intron bound-
aries indicative of origination from a common ancestor through gene duplication,
but regulation of subcellular trafﬁcking and spatial expression patterns of the LAXs
differ considerably from AUX1 (Parry et al. 2001; Bainbridge et al. 2008; Swarup
et al. 2008; Jones et al. 2009; Pe´ret et al. 2012). For instance, AUX1 intracellular
targeting is regulated by AXR4, which encodes a putative endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) chaperone thought to facilitate the correct folding of AUX1 and its export
from ER to Golgi (Dharmasiri et al. 2006). However, LAX2 and LAX3 fail to target
to the plasma membrane in AUX1-expressing cells, suggesting they may need their
own speciﬁc ER chaperones (Pe´ret et al. 2012). Mutations have member-speciﬁc
effects on auxin-related phenotypes as well. Both mutant aux1 and lax3 plants show
comparable reduced lateral root emergence. However, aux1 shows a reduced level
of lateral root primordia, whereas lax3 actually has a threefold increase in primordia
compared to the wild type (Swarup et al. 2008). This suggests distinct functional
roles for the different family members. However, all three LAX proteins have been
shown to retain an auxin inﬂux carrier function, albeit with varying transport
speciﬁcities, that strongly suggests subfunctionalization (Yang et al. 2006; Swarup
et al. 2008; Pe´ret et al. 2012).
78
J. Reemmer and A. Murphy

2.2
Polar Auxin Transport Deﬁnes Local Concentration
Gradients
Once inside the neutral conditions of the cytosol, auxin is deprotonated to its polar
anionic form (IAA). This precludes auxin from diffusing back through the lipo-
philic cell membrane and, unless aided by exporters, auxin remains trapped in the
cytosol. In a unique system, auxin can be transported cell to cell in a polar fashion.
This short-range directional transport is not only a method of export, but the key to
building the patterned auxin gradients crucial in developing tissues (Rubery and
Sheldrake 1974; Raven 1975; Zazˇı´malova´ et al. 2010).
PIN-FORMED (PIN) efﬂux facilitators derive their name from the striking
phenotype of pin1 mutants in which the inﬂorescences do not form ﬂoral organs
and remain bare pin-like stems (Goto et al. 1987). In addition to PIN1, seven other
PIN genes are present in the genome of the model species Arabidopsis. Studies of
plasma membrane-localized, “long” PINs (PIN1, 2, 3, 4, and 7) have shown distinct
roles for individual members of the family. PIN1, 4, and 7 are vital in maintaining
the polar auxin streams necessary for organogenesis and development along with
AUX1/LAX inﬂux carriers (Reinhardt et al. 2003; Bainbridge et al. 2008). PIN2
activity is crucial to gravitropism and the reﬂux of auxin at the root tip (Chen
et al. 1998; Mu¨ller et al. 1998; Friml et al. 2004; Rahman et al. 2010). PIN3 has a
restrictive effect on auxin streams important for directional growth (Friml
et al. 2002). However, mutational studies reveal that despite their apparent special-
ties, PINs largely have redundant functions; the loss of a single PIN protein can be
compensated for by the ectopic activities of the other PIN family members (Blilou
et al. 2005; Vieten et al. 2005). By mutating multiple PIN gene family members,
greater phenotypic and developmental defects can be induced in systems such as
embryonic development, root patterning, and lateral root initiation (Benkova
et al. 2003; Friml et al. 2003; Blilou et al. 2005). Interestingly, application of the
auxin efﬂux inhibitor naphthylphthalamic acid (NPA) can mimic these effects. The
fact that NPA produces these mutant phenotypes indicates a function in the
proximity of PINs and has long made NPA a useful tool in studying altered
development (Katekar and Geissler 1977).
One of the key purposes of directing local auxin concentrations is the creation of
the auxin maxima necessary for organogenesis (see Chaps. 10–12). The auxin
streams created by joint AUX/LAX uptake and PIN efﬂux form the architectural
patterns of new organs at the shoot apical meristem (Vernoux et al 2010). Interest-
ingly, a plant lacking the function of all four members of the AUX/LAX auxin
inﬂux/transporters is still viable and moderately fertile, although its architecture is
signiﬁcantly altered (Bainbridge et al. 2008). Similarly, while auxin efﬂux transport
proteins ABCB1 and ABCB19 can be visualized in developing embryos, knocking
out their function did not result in observable defect to development (Mravec
et al. 2008). Treating a double mutant of pin1 and aux1 with auxin discovered
one clue as to how fertility is maintained in the face of such mutations. Auxin
treatment resulted in very large, fused organs at the apex rather than single ﬂowers
5
Intercellular Transport of Auxin
79

being produced (Reinhardt et al. 2003). This suggests that AUX1 may be involved
in the positioning of organs and restricting their boundaries, thus ensuring that
sufﬁcient auxin remains in the necessary layers of the SAM (Reinhardt et al. 2003).
Furthermore, these observations imply that the function of concentrating auxin at a
maximum is shared, with input from ABCB efﬂux transporters acting redundantly
(Noh et al. 2001).
2.3
ABCB Efﬂux Transporters Maintain Long-Distance
Streams of Auxin
Long-range transport of IAA is needed to generate auxin pools in sink tissues,
which are important for such developmental processes as stimulating lateral roots
and shoot branching. This transport can be accomplished via the phloem vascula-
ture, as is the common route for metabolites.
The best-known member of the B subfamily of ATP-Binding Cassette (ABC)
transporters is human ABCB1 (MULTIDRUG RESISTANT 1/PHOSPHO-
GLYCOPROTEIN 1), which has been extensively studied for its role in increased
resistance to chemotherapeutic agents in breast, brain, and colon cancer cells
(Luckie et al. 2003). However, it was apparent that plant homologues of human
ABCB1 are not promiscuous drug transporters, and, while applicable in mamma-
lian systems, the use of the multidrug resistance (MDR) nomenclature for this
subgroup of proteins has been discontinued (Sidler et al. 1998). The Arabidopsis
thaliana ABC subfamily B comprises 21 members; four proteins to date clearly
mediate high-speciﬁcity auxin transport, and a number of highly homologous pro-
teins are thought to mediate auxin transport to some degree (Kamimoto et al. 2012).
While both the PIN and AUX/LAX families have been extensively studied in terms
of gene expression and protein localization, ABCB proteins are not as well char-
acterized. Phylogenetic and structural analyses indicate that the subclass of ABCB
transporters function in auxin transport across plant species, and many studies have
focused on the representative ABCB1 and 19 proteins of Arabidopsis (reviewed in
Blakeslee et al. 2005; Verrier et al. 2008).
ABCB1 was discovered in the attempt to identify proteins conferring broad-
spectrum herbicide resistance. Mammalian cells with increased expression of
ATP-driven efﬂux pumps can gain resistance to a wide variety of cytotoxic
drugs, and it had been proposed that a similar system might exist in plants (Dudler
and Hertig 1992). Instead, it was found that overexpression of AtABCB1 resulted in
elongation of seedling hypocotyls when grown under dim light, whereas antisense
lines exhibited reduced elongation of the hypocotyls (Sidler et al. 1998). These
phenotypes are similar to those witnessed after treating wild-type plants with low
concentrations of auxin or an auxin transport inhibitor, for the overexpressor and
antisense line, respectively. Further studies revealed that AtABCB1 is localized at
the plasma membrane in nonpolar distributions at the shoot and root apices and is
80
J. Reemmer and A. Murphy

predominantly found with polar localization above the root apex. Its expression in
both yeast and mammalian systems displays increased efﬂux of IAA and active
synthetic 1-NAA, and in planta oxidative breakdown products of IAA are efﬂuxed
as well (Geisler et al. 2005). ABCB1 genes also have auxin transport function in
other plant species. In maize, the P-glycoprotein brachytic2 (br2) mutation shares
67 % identity with AtABCB1 and results in dwarfed plants with shortened lower
stalk internodes (Leng and Vineyard 1951; Stein 1955; Noh et al. 2001). The
mutant gene dwarf3 similarly results in dwarfed sorghum, a close relation to
maize in both genomic organization and plant form (Mullet et al. 2002). While
speciﬁc phenotypes vary between species, it has been conﬁrmed that both
brachytic2 and dwarf3 mutant phenotypes result from loss-of-function mutations
to ABCB1 genes and display reductions in long-distance transport of auxin
(Multani et al. 2003; Bailly et al. 2012). The collective evidence suggests that
ABCB1 functions primarily in regions of high auxin concentration to accelerate
vectorial transport and maintain long-distance auxin transport streams in combina-
tion with PIN and other ABCB family members (Bandyopadhyay et al. 2007).
Arabidopsis ABCB19 was quickly linked to its closest homologue Arabidopsis
ABCB1 (Noh et al. 2001). Both AtABCB1 and AtABCB19 exhibit remarkable
structural similarity to the mammalian ABCB1 multidrug resistance transporter
known for very broad substrate speciﬁcity. However, both AtABCB1 and
AtABCB19 exhibit relatively high speciﬁcity for auxin as a transport substrate
(Titapiwatanakun et al. 2009; Yang and Murphy 2009). Phenotypic analyses of
abcb19 showed epinastic cotyledons, abnormally wrinkled leaves, reduced apical
dominance, partial dwarﬁsm, and reduced basipetal polar auxin transport in hypo-
cotyls and inﬂorescences, all of which are phenotypes consistent with altered auxin
response and/or transport. These defects were synergistically enhanced in the
double mutant abcb1abcb19, suggesting some functional redundancy between
these efﬂux transporters (Noh et al. 2001; Geisler et al. 2003, 2005). Comparison
of expression domains revealed that ABCB19 maintains whole-plant auxin ﬂow
from the shoot to root apices, whereas ABCB1 function is more restricted to the
shoot apex (Geisler et al. 2005). In addition, ABCB19 appears to function in the
regulation of differential growth in response to light and gravity stimulation, and it
is the substrate target for photoreceptor kinase PHOTOTROPIN1 (PHOT1)
(Liscum and Briggs 1995; Noh et al. 2001, 2003; Lin and Wang 2005; Lewis
et al. 2007; Wu et al. 2007; Nagashima et al. 2008). Phosphorylation of ABCB19
halts auxin efﬂux activity, which increases auxin levels at and above the site of
inhibition. This action is an early step in the eventual unilateral growth that causes
the bend seen in phototropism (Christie et al. 2011).
2.4
Canalization and the Ampliﬁcation of Streams by PIN
Proteins
The notion that auxin and polarity are linked dates back to classic histological
studies on developing vascular cells (Sachs 1969). The canalization hypothesis was
5
Intercellular Transport of Auxin
81

put forward by Sachs, and later mathematically formulated by Mitchison, as a
proposal that a positive feedback exists between the ﬂow of the signal molecule
and the capacity for its ﬂow (Sachs 1969; Mitchison 1980). Further experimentation
employing an antibody against export protein PIN1 revealed the occurrence of
upregulation and relocalization away from the site of exogenous auxin application
(Sauer et al. 2006). Studies of such experimental responses strongly suggest that
auxin, or a secondary signal produced in response to auxin, is transported into the
cell and directs canalization by regulating the polarity of PIN positioning in some
cell types. This idea was expanded to include the hypothesis that cells could
effectively monitor the auxin concentration in their surrounding environment and
respond by pumping auxin toward neighboring cells against a concentration gradi-
ent (Fig. 5.2). To test this hypothesis, computer simulation was employed to handle
the hundreds of complex interactions that would occur in such a scenario (Jo¨nsson
et al. 2006; Smith et al. 2006). Using theoretical parameters, the canalization
hypothesis was shown to amplify small auxin ﬂuxes and generate physiologically
plausible results in phyllotactic patterning and vein formation in some tissues
(Scarpella et al. 2006; Sauer et al. 2006).
Interesting observations arise from computational modeling. In the attempt to
describe PIN allocation and function, two radically different, but conditionally
functional, models have been deﬁned that yield discrepant functional conclusions
in different locations. In meristematic tissues, PINs act to sense local auxin con-
centrations, yet in inner tissues a mechanism of ﬂux sensing is called for (Jo¨nsson
et al. 2006; Smith et al. 2006; Scarpella et al. 2006; Sauer et al. 2006). Therefore,
simplistic models of transport are not sufﬁcient to fully describe the complexities
that arise in the actual in planta scenario. Boundaries such as cell walls can pose
issues that have signiﬁcant effects on the expected design of a system (Stoma
Fig. 5.2 Micropolar auxin gradients. In addition to the auxin gradient at the tissue level, auxin
gradients can be thought of to exist within individual cells. This gradient (higher auxin concen-
tration in darker blue) may interact with vesicular trafﬁcking as a way for individual cells to
perceive this auxin gradient. Red cylinders denote PIN exporters, green cylinders AUX/LAX
importers. Solid black arrows denote auxin transport, broken arrow possible vesicular movement
82
J. Reemmer and A. Murphy

et al. 2008; Bayer et al. 2009). The topologic effect of networks of intracellular
compartments can have an appreciable effect on cytoplasmic auxin concentration
through sequestration; merely averaging over a cell volume would result in an
inappropriate rate constant for describing auxin ﬂux (Merks et al. 2007; Hosˇek
et al. 2012). While computational models provide powerful insights and direction
for further research, it is necessary to consider that some of their conclusions may
diverge from in planta auxin patterns.
2.5
PIN Polarity Is Regulated by Phosphorylation
PIN function is inﬂuenced by the phosphorylation of kinases in the AGC family
(named for homology to mammalian cAMP-dependent protein kinase A, cGMP-
dependent protein kinase G, and phospholipid-dependent protein kinase C). This
family includes members such as PINOID (PID) kinase, D6 PROTEIN KINASE
(D6PK), WAVY ROOT GROWTH 1 (WAG1), WAG2, and PHOTOTROPIN
1 (PHOT1) and PHOT2 (Sakai et al. 2001; Dhonukshe et al. 2010; Huang
et al. 2010). Although the mechanisms for the PHOT blue light receptors and the
WAG root growth regulators have not been fully elucidated, their corresponding
tropisms may be the result of changes in auxin response or transport (Harper
et al. 2000; Esmon et al. 2006; Santner and Watson 2006).
PID was previously proposed to be responsible for the phosphorylation of PIN
proteins, as it was observed that pid mutants phenocopy the pin1 mutant phenotype.
From overexpression studies, it was further seen that phosphorylation by PID leads
to a basal to apical localization shift of at least PIN1, PIN2, and PIN4 in root cortex
and lateral root cap cells (Friml et al. 2003). Shifts triggered by this PID kinase can
be reverted by increasing the expression of PP2A, a gene whose product is a subunit
of a compound phosphatase. This suggests that PIN polarity is at least in part
controlled by PID-dependent phosphorylation (Michniewicz et al. 2007). Another
group of kinases, D6PK and its three D6PK-LIKE homologues, have more recently
been shown to phosphorylate and directly activate PIN proteins (Zourelidou
et al. 2009; Willige et al. 2013). D6PKs colocalize at the basal ends of cells with
PINs that mediate rootward auxin transport. However, D6PK does not colocalize
with PIN2 in epidermal root cells and, thus, does not appear to regulate PIN2
activity. This is consistent with auxin efﬂux activity exhibited by PIN2, but not
PIN1, 3, or 7 when heterologously expressed in Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Yang
and Murphy 2009), where a D6PK ortholog has not been identiﬁed.
Expression, abundance, localization, and biochemical activity of D6PK are
insensitive to auxin and NPA, although the genes are expressed strongly at the
sites of lateral root initiation (Zourelidou et al. 2009). Consistent with direct
regulation of PIN transport activity, neither loss of function nor overexpression of
D6PK causes alteration in PIN polarity. Seedlings of overexpression studies show
other differences: D6PK seedlings having defects in lateral root formation, while
5
Intercellular Transport of Auxin
83

PID seedlings exhibit agravitropic growth and meristem collapse (Benjamins
et al. 2001; Friml et al. 2004).
2.6
PIN Proteins Interact with ABP1
Of the long PINs, all are trafﬁcked by dynamic cellular mechanisms (reviewed in
Grunewald and Friml 2010). The clathrin-mediated endocytosis of PIN proteins is
positively regulated by ABP1. ABP1 normally functions in the recruitment of
clathrin to the plasma membrane. However, when ABP1 is bound by auxin, its
signaling is blocked. This leads to a reduced internalization of PINs by clathrin-
mediated endocytosis. The effect of auxin binding is thus the enhancement of auxin
efﬂux transport (Robert et al. 2010). ABP1 also activates the Rho GTPase ROP6
and its effector RIC1. RIC1 promotes cytoskeletal organization by physically
interacting
with
the
microtubules-severing
protein
KATANIN1
(KTN1)
(Fu et al. 2005, 2009; Lin et al. 2013). In this way, the auxin signaling pathway is
linked to the regulation of microtubule organization and physically promotes cell
elongation.
2.7
In Silico Modeling of ABCB Proteins Suggests Exclusion
The aforementioned auxin transport mechanisms mainly address the shuttling of
auxin discretely to and from the apoplast and cytoplasm of the cell. As efﬂux
transporters, ABCB proteins have two well-studied binding sites in the central
pocket through which cytoplasmic auxin can be exported from the cell. Early
models of plant ABCBs were designed by threading their sequences on the crystal
structure of the Sav1866 bacterial ABC transporter in the closed conformation
(Dawson and Locher 2006; Yang and Murphy 2009). Further insight came from
the publication and validation of the crystal structure of murine ABCB1
(MmABCB1) in the open conformation (Aller et al. 2009). New structural models
identiﬁed kingdom-speciﬁc candidate substrate-binding regions and suggested an
early evolutionary divergence of plant and mammalian ABCBs. While the two
experimentally validated IAA substrate-binding sites identiﬁed in models based on
the closed Sav1866 structure are present in open conﬁguration models, an addi-
tional binding site within the outer leaﬂet was also uncovered (Bailly et al. 2012)
(Fig. 5.3a).
This ﬁnding led to an elegant development in the conceptualization of auxin
transport. Auxin is an amphipathic molecule, and a signiﬁcant amount of anionic
auxin is found partially inserted in the lipid bilayer. A mechanism for the removal
of this auxin is thus necessary, particularly in cells such as those adjoining vascular
tissues where the apoplastic concentration of auxin is high, and reuptake must be
prevented to maintain transport ﬂow (Mravec et al. 2008; Titapiwatanakun
84
J. Reemmer and A. Murphy

et al. 2009; Matsuda et al. 2011). AtABCB1 and AtABCB19 have been shown to
function primarily in such exclusion of IAA from cellular membranes (Blakeslee
et al. 2007; Wu et al. 2007; Mravec et al. 2008; Bailly et al. 2012). With the rise of
vascular plants, PINs appear to have emerged to provide an additional vectorial
factor for the control of organogenesis and tropic responses while ABCBs
maintained long-distance transport in increasingly longer and complex shoots and
roots (Blakeslee et al. 2007; Titapiwatanakun et al. 2009).
Fig. 5.3 ABCB transporter in silico models. (a) Red mesh indicates IAA docking poses for
AtABCB1 threaded on MmABCB1 in the open conformation. Site 3 reveals a new region of
auxin binding potential that may account for exporter membrane exclusion ability (Bailly
et al. 2012). (b) Electrostatic potentials between Arabidopsis ABCB proteins in cut view. The
predominantly positive surface of the transport chamber of AtABCB4 suggests an evolution of
transport specialization (Yang and Murphy 2009). (c) AtABCB4 has additional unique domains as
compared to AtABCB exporters. N-terminal coiled-coil domain and linker domain between NBD1
and TMD2 are highlighted in red. TMH4 highlighted in green is shifted down off the membrane
plane. These adjustments could be sufﬁcient to alter the regulation and direction of auxin transport
(Bailly et al. 2012)
5
Intercellular Transport of Auxin
85

2.8
ABCB Trafﬁcking and Maturation
Similar to what is seen with AXR4 and AUX1, folding, trafﬁcking, and activation
of
ABCB1,
ABCB4,
and
ABCB19
is
dependent
on
the
co-chaperone
immunophilin-like
FK506-BINDING
PROTEIN
42/TWISTED
DWARF
1 (FKBP42/TWD1) (Bouchard et al. 2006; Bailly et al. 2008; Wu et al. 2010).
TWD1 was originally biochemically identiﬁed in plasma membrane (PM) fractions
and has been shown to be distributed to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and
tonoplast as well (Murphy et al. 2002; Kamphausen et al. 2002; Geisler
et al. 2003). TWD1 acts at the ER surface to fold and activate ABCBs, but appears
to function at the PM to maintain ABCB activity as well (Bailly et al. 2008; Wu
et al. 2010; Henrichs et al. 2012; Wang et al. 2013). Although ABCB1, ABCB4,
and ABCB19 are largely trapped at the ER in the absence of TWD1, a percentage of
all three transporters still reside at the PM (Titapiwatanakun et al. 2009; Wu
et al. 2010; Wang et al. 2013). However, TWD1 also colocalizes widely with the
lateral marker PEN3/ABCG36 and partially with nonpolar PM proteins and BRI1-
GFP (Langowski et al. 2010; Ru˚zˇicˇka et al. 2010; Wang et al. 2013) suggesting
other potential interactions.
In attempting to determine the mechanism of activation of ABCB activity by
TWD1, TWD1 was found to interact with the PINOID AGC kinase that alters
ABCB1 activity by protein phosphorylation (Henrichs et al. 2012). In addition, the
plasma membrane localization of TWD1 provides a mechanism to minimize
apoplastic reﬂux in tissues where high auxin contents exist, thus addressing the
need to separate shoot- and rootward auxin streams in opposing root tissues and leaf
epidermal cells (Geisler et al. 2005; Matsuda et al. 2011). This idea is further in
agreement with the acid growth theory prediction of auxin-stimulated lateral proton
extrusion for axial cell expansion (Hager 2003). Finally, the severity of the twd1
phenotype in comparison to the abcb1abcb19 double mutant argues that additional
transporters might also be regulated by TWD1 activity.
2.9
Membrane Lipids Deﬁne Functional Environments
Regardless of the site of TWD1 activation, ABCB transporters must be trafﬁcked to
the plasma membrane to function properly. Sphingolipids are essential to
establishing a rigid membrane environment to maintain native structure necessary
for protein validation and vesicular packaging. Fluorescently labeled ABCB19, for
instance, is impaired in its ability to reach the plasma membrane in tsc10a mutant
plants (Yang et al. 2013). The tsc10a mutants are deﬁcient in a key enzyme in
sphingolipid biosynthesis, and a loss of this function results in epinastic cotyledon
development, altered ﬂowering patterns, and reduced hypocotyl elongation pheno-
types reminiscent of abcb19 mutants (Chao et al. 2011). In particular, very long
86
J. Reemmer and A. Murphy

chain fatty acid sphingolipids (VLCFA-SL) are essential for proper development
(Markham et al. 2011).
Co-localization
experiments
showed
that
inhibiting
the
synthesis
of
sphingolipids, either because of the tsc10a mutation or treatment with fumonisin
B1 (FB1), results in ABCB19 retention in the ER and the Golgi apparatus and
failure to reach the PM. Additionally, ﬂuorescently labeled ABCB19 already
present on the membrane accumulates intracellularly after treatment with 1-phe-
nyl-2- hexadecanoylamino-3-morpholino-1-propanol (PPMP) or fumonisin B1
(FB1), both inhibitors of the synthesis of the sphingolipid ceramide (Yang
et al. 2013). These observations suggest sphingolipids are of particular importance
at multiple points of ABCB trafﬁcking and maintenance at the plasma membrane.
Once positioned at the plasma membrane, sterols are required to create the
correct lipid composition of the plasma membrane environment to allow for the
conformational changes associated with transport action. Cell membranes are
necessary not only as the boundaries of living units, but also as the critical sites
for interactions. The removal of sterols by methyl-beta-cyclodextrin (MβCD)
induces the removal of ABCB19 from the plasma membrane. The removal is
only partial, although it seems to have a distinct effect on ABCB19, as marker
protein PLASMA MEMBRANE INTRINSIC PROTEIN 2A (PIP2-GFP) has no
loss of signal at the plasma membrane under the same treatment conditions (Yang
et al. 2013). Addition of cholesterol to ABCB19, however, enhances transport
activity (Titapiwatanakun et al. 2009). This suggests that ABCB19 recruits sterols
to its environment to increase its stability and functioning. It has already been
shown that ABC family members are capable of transferring these sterols as well
(Tarling and Edwards 2011). With the knowledge that Type 4 P-type ATPases
catalyze the translocation of phospholipids between the cytosolic and apoplastic
sides of the plasma membrane, it is conceivable that ABCB19 may catalyze a
similar ﬂipping action (Tanaka et al. 2011). In keeping with the idea that the third
modeled auxin-binding site of ABCB transporters is less speciﬁc, this site has been
suggested to ﬂip substrates wrapped by lipids to the outer leaﬂet during the change
to the outward-facing conformation (Aller et al. 2009; Bailly et al. 2012).
In Arabidopsis, sphingolipids and sterols have been shown to contribute to
trafﬁcking of PIN1 and AUX1 in their respective membrane domains as well
(Carland et al. 2002; Willemsen et al. 2003; Men et al. 2008; Pan et al. 2009;
Roudier et al. 2010; Markham et al. 2011). It is well documented that ABCB19 has
a profound effect on the stabilization of PIN1 at the PM; PIN and ABCB proteins
function together, and ABCB19 is actually required for PIN1 retention in those
membranes (Blakeslee et al. 2007; Mravec et al. 2008; Titapiwatanakun et al. 2009;
Yang et al. 2013). Observations of this web of interactions point to the existence of
an interactive and dynamic environment that allows multiple facets of regulation to
exert control over particular stimuli.
5
Intercellular Transport of Auxin
87

3
Homeostasis
As further components of ﬁne-tuning auxin transport, homeostatic transport and
subcellular compartmentalization have developed. Among the ABCB and PIN
efﬂux transporters, there are proteins that diverged in function from their family
members to play more conditional reﬁning roles. Reversible transporters can be
employed to keep auxin levels constant or augment its uptake in cell types where
importers are not present (Swarup et al. 2001; Jones et al. 2009; Yang and Murphy
2009). Intracellular partitioning can both inﬂuence the effective cytoplasmic con-
centration and expose auxin molecules to various enzymatic environments for
conjugation or degradation.
3.1
Conditional ABCB Transport Responds to Auxin
Concentration
ABCB4 was originally identiﬁed as the most similar Arabidopsis homologue to the
Coptis japonica ATP-dependent berberine inﬂux transporter CjMDR1 (71 % amino
acid identity) (Shitan et al. 2003). Despite the fact that Arabidopsis does not
produce any isoquinoline alkaloids, this homology is greater than the 60 % amino
acid sequence identity ABCB4 shares with ABCB1 (Terasaka et al. 2005). The
sequence of ABCB4 was also predicted to diverge substantially from other ABCB
efﬂux proteins in the loop region adjoining the ﬁrst conserved nucleotide-binding
domain as well as in a unique coiled-coil interactive domain at its N-terminus
(Terasaka et al. 2005). Compilation of characterization data revealed that ABCB4 is
a root-speciﬁc transporter that functions in shootward epidermal transport of auxin
from the root apex, primary and lateral root elongation, and regulation of auxin
movement into root hair cells. However, early studies often led to incongruent
results that were tissue speciﬁc and highly dependent on growth and treatment
conditions (Santelia et al. 2005; Terasaka et al. 2005; Cho et al. 2007; Lewis
et al. 2007). Despite the fact that ABCB4 belongs to a family of active transporters
primarily known for their efﬂux action, ABCB4 auxin efﬂux is conditional, medi-
ating import at very low IAA concentrations but reversing rapidly to stronger export
activity with increased internal IAA levels (Yang and Murphy 2009; Kim
et al. 2010; Kubesˇ et al. 2012). This homeostatic role is consistent with the need
to balance auxin streams in root epidermal cells and would be expected as a plasma
membrane complement to short PIN function at the ER (Mravec et al. 2009; Ding
et al. 2012; see below and Chap. 4).
88
J. Reemmer and A. Murphy

3.2
In Silico Modeling Supports ABCB Homeostatic
Function
ABC transporters, regardless of the direction in which they transport substrates,
have a basic conserved structure of two transmembrane domains (TMDs) and two
nucleotide-binding domains (NBDs) (Dawson and Locher 2006). Using these
NBDs, ATP is expended in a “power stroke” that drives the rearrangement of the
TMDs between open and closed conformations (Hopfner et al. 2000). But conﬁned
to this general structure, from where does the capacity for import arise? Indeed,
AtABCB4 has a closer alignment with efﬂux transporters MmABCB1 and Sav1866
than with other ABC importers (Bailly et al. 2012). The explanation lies in the
differences between the charge potentials of the binding pocket. When AtABCB1
faces the cytosol, it presents an environment that is predominantly negative at the
opening of the cavity and weakens in charge nearer the interior binding regions.
AtABCB19 also displays a similar distribution of negative to neutral electrostatic
potentials. Strikingly, AtABCB4 presents the opposite charge, having a neutral to
positive electrostatic surface spanning the entire binding pocket (Bailly et al. 2012)
(Fig. 5.3b). This strongly suggests that these proteins have signiﬁcantly diverged
and adopted specialized functions. A model could be proposed in which ABCB4,
due to its altered binding potential, does not engage auxin when cytoplasmic
concentrations are low but rather switches conformation to export either other
cargo or remains independent of substrate entirely (Procko et al. 2009). This
would result in empty auxin-binding sites being exposed to the apoplast, and a
net uptake activity could result upon restoration to the open, cytosolic-facing
conformation (Aller et al. 2009). This scenario would account for auxin efﬂux
activity when challenged with greater concentration of cytosolic auxin, as well as
the observed lack of saturable inﬂux kinetics (Dawson and Locher 2006; Yang and
Murphy 2009). In addition to electrostatic potential differences, ABCB4 displays
three other notable structural traits that are not present in ABCB1 or ABCB19.
A shift in the hydrophobic region of transmembrane helix 4 would change its
positioning in respect to the plasma membrane and thus signiﬁcantly alter the
distances and interactions between the second intercellular loop and its NBD,
resulting in altered binding and transport properties (Yang and Murphy 2009).
Docking simulations also identiﬁed two additional coiled coil domains for
ABCB4, one of which is shared with ABCB14 guard cell malate importer and
CjMDR1 putative berberine importer (Shitan et al. 2003; Lee et al. 2008; Yang and
Murphy 2009) (Figs. 5.3c). These N-terminal domains may be interaction sites in
which other proteins could further shift the positioning of the transmembrane
helices.
In addition to the activities of ABCB4, it was expected that another protein
would share this conditional function. Most plant ABCB members exist with a
paralog, and ABCB21 indeed shares 68 % nucleotide identity and 79 % amino acid
identity with ABCB4. These proteins are grouped in clade II of the phylogenic tree
of P-glycoproteins, which is distinct from clade I where ABCB1 and ABCB19 are
5
Intercellular Transport of Auxin
89

classiﬁed (Knoller et al. 2010). Characterization of ABCB21 revealed an
NPA-sensitive, plasma membrane-localized auxin transporter with strong expres-
sion in the abaxial side of cotyledons, junctions of aerial lateral organs, and root
pericycle cells adjacent to the protoxylem poles. However, likeness of ABCB21
auxin transport to that of ABCB4 was not as strong as anticipated, as time course
experiments with low concentration (300 nM) of IAA showed a different pattern of
seedling response to exogenously added IAA. This suggests a different physiolog-
ical role for ABCB21 from that of ABCB4. When cytoplasmic IAA concentration
was increased by preloading IAA into yeast cells however, IAA uptake activity by
ABCB21 was abolished. This same effect is seen in the activity of ABCB4 and
suggests that ABCB21 also functions as a facultative auxin transporter in plant cells
(Kamimoto et al. 2012).
3.3
“Short” PIN and PIN-Like Proteins Act in ER
Compartmentalization of Auxin
In contrast to “long” PIN plasma membrane efﬂux facilitators, PIN5, 6, and
8 encode “short” proteins with a reduced or absent central hydrophilic loop (see
Chap. 4). Unlike their longer, plasma membrane-localized family members, short
PINs reside in endomembrane structures where they are hypothesized to function in
the homeostatic compartmentalization of auxin (Mravec et al. 2009). This seques-
tration within the ER would both reduce the pool of auxin available for cell-to-cell
IAA-Glucose
Amide-linkage
OH
OH
OH
O
OH
OH
O
O
O
OH
O
O
O
O
HO
HO
O
NH
NH
NH
NH
HN
Ester linkage
Oxidation Product
IAA-Aspartate
2-oxindole-3-acid acid (oxIAA)
Indole acetic acid (IAA)
Fig. 5.4 Inactivation of auxin. To attenuate the signal, auxin can undergo reversible or irrevers-
ible modiﬁcation. Conjugates of auxin are found mainly in one of three forms: ester-linked to
sugars, amide-linked to amino acids, or amide-linked to peptides or proteins. Many conjugation
products can be hydrolyzed to reactivate auxin. Other modiﬁcations, such as oxidation, are
terminal
90
J. Reemmer and A. Murphy

transport and alter intracellular perception and nuclear signaling. Although the
motive force for auxin efﬂux via short PINs is not known, recent studies have
unveiled the important implications of their activity. Overexpression of PIN5, for
example, leads to a dramatic shift in the proﬁle of auxin metabolites. Upon
induction of overexpressed PIN5, levels of free IAA and IAA-glucosyl ester nearly
vanish, while there is increased accumulation of amino acid–auxin conjugates
(Mravec et al. 2009). This implicates an unexpected role for PIN5 in controlling
the metabolic fate of intracellular auxin.
On the other hand, PIN6 and PIN8 have been shown to act antagonistically to
PIN5 in directional auxin efﬂux (Ding et al. 2012; Sawchuk et al. 2013). In contrast
to PIN5 overexpression studies, when PIN8 is overexpressed, elevated levels of free
IAA and ester-conjugated IAA are observed (Dal Bosco et al. 2012). It is yet
unknown how these complementary activities are regulated, although varying
hypotheses have been proposed. One suggestion is that PIN6 and PIN8 may serve
to move auxin from the lumen of the ER to the nucleus for signaling and thus
regulate auxin-dependent transcriptional activity (Dal Bosco et al. 2012). Alterna-
tively, these PINs could have different afﬁnities for alternate auxins or auxin
conjugates and form a more complex regulatory network for control of intracellular
auxin levels (Sawchuk et al. 2013). Characterization of these PINs points to the
possibility of highly specialized and conditional functions. PIN8 has been shown to
speciﬁcally accumulate in pollen and functions in the development of the pollen
tube and auxin homeostasis of the male gametophyte (Ganguly et al. 2010; Ding
et al. 2012; Dal Bosco et al. 2012). PIN6 has been shown to act in ﬂoral develop-
ment in Arabidopsis and maintains the auxin homeostasis required for proper
nectary function (Bender et al. 2013). Studies of vein patterning and defects have
led to the conclusions that PIN6 can act redundantly with PIN8 (Sawchuk
et al. 2013).
A complicating factor is that in silico analyses indicate that some members of the
PIN-LIKES (PILS) family exhibit a topology that would include a central hydro-
philic loop similar to that of the PIN family (see Chap. 4). Characterization of these
seven family members revealed that PILS localize to the ER and stimulate intra-
cellular auxin accumulation, potentially contributing to the regulation of auxin
metabolism via compartmentalization. The decreased levels of free IAA in PILS2
and PILS5 overexpressors and increase of auxin conjugates in double mutant
pils2pils5 are reminiscent of similarly altered PIN5 activity (Barbez et al. 2012).
4
Rectiﬁcation: The Oxidation of Auxin Irreversibly
Terminates Auxin Transport and Signaling
Ultimately, auxin that has been transported from cell to cell must be redirected or
catabolized to terminate response processes in destination cells. Auxin can be
reversibly conjugated for temporary inactivation or can be eliminated from the
system via irreversible catabolism (5.4). The metabolites oxIAA and oxIAA-hexose
5
Intercellular Transport of Auxin
91

(oxIAA-Hex) are the major degradation products of IAA and are not transported in
polar streams (O¨ stin et al. 1998; Kai et al. 2007; Nova´k et al. 2012; Kubesˇ
et al. 2012). These oxidation products are terminally inactivated and no longer
induce the expression of auxin-responsive genes, as tested with auxin-inducible
reporters DR5rev:GFP and 2XD0:GUS (Peer et al. 2013). However, addition of
oxIAA does activate IAA transport mediated by ABCB1 and 4 (Geisler et al. 2005;
Kubesˇ et al. 2012; Peer et al. 2013).
5
Conclusions
In conclusion, the phytohormone auxin is found to function in a tremendously
complex system that requires a profusion of interacting proteins and speciﬁcally
deﬁned lipid environments to be synthesized, perceived, and (particularly)
transported. The level of reﬁnement required to transport auxin distinctly for
diverse plans such as polar gradients, organogenic concentrations, long-distance
sinks, and intracellular sequestration is staggering. While we have a conceptual
blueprint of auxin cellular transport to guide our research, the complexity of the
cellular transport systems makes direct measurements difﬁcult. Compartmentaliza-
tion of auxin has an unaccounted inﬂuence on effective concentrations that will
greatly impact the results of intercellular transport models.
Compared to the well-deﬁned ATP-driven export activity of ABCB proteins and
the H+ symport activity of AUX1/LAX proteins, PIN function remains ill deﬁned at
the molecular level. Currently, there exist no crystal structures for PIN proteins or
their close homologues, and the best conceptual models available are inspired by
distantly related microbial transporters (Galvan-Ampudia and Offringa 2007; Peer
and Murphy 2007). Determining the true structure of PIN proteins may shed some
light on putative substrates capable of maintaining a sufﬁcient gradient for this
purpose.
References
Aller SG, Yu J, Ward A, Weng Y, Chittaboina S, Zhuo R, Harrell PM, Trinh YT, Zhang Q,
Urbatsch IL, Chang G (2009) Structure of P-glycoprotein reveals a molecular basis for poly-
speciﬁc drug binding. Science 323:1718–1722
Bailly A, Sovero V, Vincenzetti V, Santelia D, Bartnik D, Koenig BW, Mancuso S, Martinoia E,
Geisler M (2008) Modulation of P-glycoproteins by auxin transport inhibitors is mediated by
interaction with immunophilins. J Biol Chem 283:21817–21826
Bailly A, Yang H, Martinoia E, Geisler M, Murphy AS (2012) Plant lessons: exploring ABCB
functionality through structural modeling. Front Plant Sci 2:108
Bainbridge K, Guyomarch S, Bayer E, Swarup R, Bennett M, Mandel T, Kuhlemeier C (2008)
Auxin inﬂux carriers stabilize phyllotactic patterning. Genes Dev 22:810–823
92
J. Reemmer and A. Murphy

Bandyopadhyay A, Blakeslee JJ, Lee OR, Mravec J, Sauer M, Titapiwatanakun B, Makam SN,
Bouchard R, Geisler M, Martinoia E, Friml J, Peer WA, Murphy AS (2007) Interactions of PIN
and PGP auxin transport mechanisms. Biochem Soc Trans 35:137–141
Barbez E, Kubesˇ M, Rolcˇı´k J, Be´ziat C, Peˇncˇı´k A, Wang B, Rosquete MR, Zhu J, Dobrev PI,
Lee Y, Zazˇı´malova´ E, Petra´sˇek J, Geisler M, Friml J, Kleine-Vehn J (2012) A novel putative
auxin carrier family regulates intracellular auxin homeostasis in plants. Nature 485:119–122
Bayer EM, Smith RS, Mandel T, Nakayama N, Sauer M, Prusinkiewicz P, Kuhlemeier C (2009)
Integration of transport-based models for phyllotaxis and midvein formation. Genes Dev
23:373–384
Bender RL, Fekete ML, Klinkenberg PM, Hampton M, Bauer B, Malecha M, Lindgren K, Maki
JA, Perera MA, Nikolau BJ, Carter CJ (2013) PIN6 is required for nectary auxin response and
short stamen development. Plant J 74:893–904
Benjamins R, Scheres B (2008) Auxin: the looping star in plant development. Annu Rev Plant Biol
59:443–465
Benjamins R, Quint A, Weijers D, Hooykaas P, Offringa R (2001) The PINOID protein kinase
regulates organ development in Arabidopsis by enhancing polar auxin transport. Development
128:4057–4067
Benkova E, Michniewicz M, Sauer M, Teichmann T, Seifertova D, Jurgens G, Friml J (2003)
Local, efﬂux-dependent auxin gradients as a common module for plant organ formation. Cell
115:591–602
Bhalerao RP, Eklof J, Ljung K, Marchant A, Bennett M, Sandberg G (2002) Shoot-derived auxin is
essential for early lateral root emergence in Arabidopsis seedlings. Plant J 29:325–332
Blakeslee JJ, Peer WA, Murphy AS (2005) Auxin transport. Curr Opin Plant Biol 8:494–500
Blakeslee JJ, Bandyopadhyay A, Lee OR, Mravec J, Titapiwatanakun B, Sauer M, Makam SN,
Cheng Y, Bouchard R, Adamec J, Geisler M, Nagashima A, Sakai T, Martinoia E, Friml J, Peer
WA, Murphy AS (2007) Interactions among PIN-FORMED and P-glycoprotein auxin trans-
porters in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 19:131–147
Blilou I, Xu J, Wildwater M, Willemsen V, Paponov I, Friml J, Heidstra R, Aida M, Palme K,
Scheres B (2005) The PIN auxin efﬂux facilitator network controls growth and patterning in
Arabidopsis roots. Nature 433:39–44
Bouchard R, Bailly A, Blakeslee JJ, Oehring SC, Vincenzetti V, Lee OR, Paponov I, Palme K,
Mancuso S, Murphy AS, Schulz B, Geisler M (2006) Immunophilin-like TWISTED DWARF1
modulates auxin efﬂux activities of Arabidopsis P-glycoproteins. J Biol Chem 281:30603–
30612
Carland FM, Fujioka S, Takatsuto S, Yoshida S, Nelson T (2002) The identiﬁcation of CVP1
reveals a role for sterols in vascular patterning. Plant Cell 14:2045–2058
Chao DY, Gable K, Chen M, Baxter I, Dietrich CR, Cahoon EB, Guerinot ML, Lahner B, Lu S,
Markham JE, Morrissey J, Han G, Gupta SD, Harmon JM, Jaworski JG, Dunn TM, Salt DE
(2011) Sphingolipids in the root play an important role in regulating the leaf ionome in
Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell 23:1061–1081
Chen R, Hilson P, Sedbrook J, Rosen E, Caspar T, Masson PH (1998) The Arabidopsis thaliana
AGRAVITROPIC 1 gene encodes a component of the polar-auxin-transport efﬂux carrier.
Proc Natl Acad Sci 95:15112–15117
Cheng Y, Dai X, Zhao Y (2006) Auxin biosynthesis by the YUCCA ﬂavin monooxygenases
controls the formation of ﬂoral organs and vascular tissues in Arabidopsis. Genes Dev
20:1790–1799
Cheng Y, Dai X, Zhao Y (2007) Auxin synthesized by the YUCCA ﬂavin monooxygenases is
essential for embryogenesis and leaf formation in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 19:2430–2439
Cho M, Lee SH, Cho HT (2007) P-Glycoprotein4 displays auxin efﬂux transporter like action in
Arabidopsis root hair cells and tobacco cells. Plant Cell 19:3930–3943
Cholodny N (1927) Wuchshormone und Tropismen bei den Pﬂanzen. Biol Zent Bl 47:604–626
Christie JM, Yang H, Richter GL, Sullivan S, Thomson CE, Lin J, Titapiwatanakun B, Ennis M,
Kaiserli E, Lee OR, Adamec J, Peer WA, Murphy AS (2011) phot1 inhibition of ABCB19
primes lateral auxin ﬂuxes in the shoot apex required for phototropism. PLoS Biol 9:e1001076
5
Intercellular Transport of Auxin
93

Dai X, Mashiguchi K, Chen Q, Kasahara H, Kamiya Y, Ojha S, DuBois J, Ballou D, Zhao Y
(2013) The biochemical mechanism of auxin biosynthesis by an Arabidopsis YUCCA ﬂavin-
containing monooxygenase. J Biol Chem 288:1448–1457
Dal Bosco C, Dovzhenko A, Liu X, Woerner N, Rensch T, Eismann M, Eimer S, Hegermann J,
Paponov IA, Ruperti B, Heberle-Bors E, Touraev A, Cohen JD, Palme K (2012) The endo-
plasmic reticulum localized PIN8 is a pollen-speciﬁc auxin carrier involved in intracellular
auxin homeostasis. Plant J 71:860–870
Darwin C (1880) The power of movement in plants. John Murray, London, p 474
Dawson RJ, Locher KP (2006) Structure of a bacterial multidrug ABC transporter. Nature
443:180–185
Del Pozo JC, Boniotti MB, Gutierrez C (2002) Arabidopsis E2Fc functions in cell division and is
degraded by the ubiquitin-SCF(AtSKP2) pathway in response to light. Plant Cell 14:3057–
3071
Del Pozo JC, Diaz-Trivino S, Cisneros N, Gutierrez C (2006) The balance between cell division
and endoreplication depends on E2FC- DPB, transcription factors regulated by the ubiquitin–
SCFSKP2A pathway in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 18:2224–2235
Dharmasiri N, Dharmasiri S, Estelle M (2005) The F-box protein TIR1 is an auxin receptor. Nature
435:441–445
Dharmasiri S, Swarup R, Mockaitis K, Dharmasiri N, Singh SK, Kowalchyk M, Marchant A,
Mills S, Sandberg G, Bennett MJ, Estelle M (2006) AXR4 is required for localization of the
auxin inﬂux facilitator AUX1. Science 312:1218–1220
Dhonukshe P, Huang F, Galvan-Ampudia CS, Mahonen AP, Kleine-Vehn J, Xu J, Quint A,
Prasad K, Friml J, Scheres B, Offringa R (2010) Plasma membrane-bound AGC3 kinases
phosphorylate PIN auxin carriers at TPRXS(N/S) motifs to direct apical PIN recycling.
Development 137:3245–3255
Ding Z, Wang B, Moreno I, Duplakova N, Simon S, Carraro N, Reemmer J, Pencik A, Chen X,
Tejos R, Skupa P, Pollmann S, Mravec J, Petrasek J, Zazimalova E, Honys D, Rolcik J,
Murphy A, Orellana A, Geisler M, Friml J (2012) ER-localized auxin transporter PIN8
regulates auxin homeostasis and male gametophyte development in Arabidopsis. Nat Commun
3:941
Dudler R, Hertig C (1992) Structure of an mdr-like gene from Arabidopsis thaliana: evolutionary
implications. J Biol Chem 267:5882–5888
Esmon CA, Tinsley AG, Ljung K, Sandberg G, Hearne LB, Liscum E (2006) A gradient of auxin
and auxin-dependent transcription precedes tropic growth responses. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
103:236–241
Friml J, Wisniewska J, Benkova E, Mendgen K, Palme K (2002) Lateral relocation of auxin efﬂux
regulator PIN3 mediates tropism in Arabidopsis. Nature 415:806–809
Friml J, Vieten A, Sauer M, Weijers D, Schwarz H, Hamann T, Offringa R, Ju¨rgens G (2003)
Efﬂux-dependent auxin gradients establish the apical-basal axis of Arabidopsis. Nature
426:147–153
Friml J, Yang X, Michniewicz M, Weijers D, Quint A, Tietz O, Benjamins R, Ouwerkerk PB,
Ljung K, Sandberg G, Hooykaas PJ, Palme K, Offringa R (2004) A PINOID-dependent binary
switch in apical-basal PIN polar targeting directs auxin efﬂux. Science 306:862–865
Fu Y, Gu Y, Zheng Z, Wasteneys G, Yang Z (2005) Arabidopsis interdigitating cell growth
requires two antagonistic pathways with opposing action on cell morphogenesis. Cell 120:687–
700
Fu Y, Xu T, Zhu L, Wen M, Yang Z (2009) A ROP GTPase signaling pathway controls cortical
microtubule ordering and cell expansion in Arabidopsis. Curr Biol 19:1827–1832
Galvan-Ampudia CS, Offringa R (2007) Plant evolution: AGC kinases tell the auxin tale. Trends
Plant Sci 12:541–547
Ganguly A, Lee SH, Cho M, Lee OR, Yoo H, Cho HT (2010) Differential auxin-transporting
activities of PIN-FORMED proteins in Arabidopsis root hair cells. Plant Physiol 153:1046–
1061
94
J. Reemmer and A. Murphy

Geisler M, Kolukisaoglu HU, Bouchard R, Billion K, Berger J, Saal B, Frangne N, Koncz-
Kalman Z, Koncz C, Dudler R, Blakeslee JJ, Murphy AS, Martinoia E, Schulz B (2003)
TWISTED DWARF1, a unique plasma membrane-anchored immunophilin-like protein, inter-
acts with Arabidopsis multidrug resistance-like transporters AtPGP1 and AtPGP19. Mol Biol
Cell 14:4238–4249
Geisler
M,
Blakeslee
JJ,
Bouchard
R,
Lee
OR,
Vincenzetti
V,
Bandyopadhyay
A,
Titapiwatanakun B, Peer WA, Bailly A, Richards EL, Ejendal KF, Smith AP, Baroux C,
Grossniklaus U, Muller A, Hrycyna CA, Dudler R, Murphy AS, Martinoia E (2005) Cellular
efﬂux of auxin catalyzed by the Arabidopsis MDR/PGP transporter AtPGP1. Plant J 44:179–
194
Goto N, Starke M, Kranz AR (1987) Effect of gibberellins on ﬂower development of the
pin-formed mutant of Arabidopsis thaliana. Arabidopsis Inf Serv 23:66–71
Grunewald W, Friml J (2010) The march of the PINs: developmental plasticity by dynamic polar
targeting in plant cells. EMBO J 29:2700–2714
Guilfoyle TJ, Suzich JA, Lindberg M (1986) Synthesis of 5S rRNA and putative tRNAs in nuclei
isolated from wheat embryos. Plant Mol Biol 7:95–104
Hager A (2003) Role of the plasma membrane H+-ATPase in auxin-induced elongation growth:
historical and new aspects. J Plant Res 116:483–505
Harper RM, Stowe-Evans EL, Luesse DR, Muto H, Tatematsu K, Watahiki MK, Yamamoto K,
Liscum E (2000) The NPH4 locus encodes the auxin response factor ARF7, a conditional
regulator of differential growth in aerial Arabidopsis tissue. Plant Cell 12:757–770
Henrichs S, Wang B, Fukao Y, Zhu J, Charrier L, Bailly A, Oehring SC, Linnert M, Weiwad M,
Endler A, Nanni P, Pollmann S, Mancuso S, Schulz A, Geisler M (2012) Regulation of
ABCB1/PGP1-catalysed auxin transport by linker phosphorylation. EMBO J 31:2965–2980
Hopfner KP, Karcher A, Shin DS, Craig L, Arthur LM, Carney JP, Tainer JA (2000) Structural
biology of Rad50 ATPase: ATP-driven conformational control in DNA double-strand break
repair and the ABC-ATPase superfamily. Cell 101:789–800
Hosek P, Kubes M, Lankova M, Dobrev PI, Klima P, Kohoutova M, Petrasek J, Hoyerova K,
Jirina M, Zazimalova E (2012) Auxin transport at cellular level: new insights supported by
mathematical modelling. J Exp Bot 63:3815–3827
Huang F, Zago MK, Abas L, van Marion A, Galvan-Ampudia CS, Offringa R (2010) Phosphor-
ylation of conserved PIN motifs directs Arabidopsis PIN1 polarity and auxin transport. Plant
Cell 22:1129–1142
Jones AR, Kramer EM, Knox K, Swarup R, Bennett MJ, Lazarus CM, Leyser HM, Grierson CS
(2009) Auxin transport through non-hair cells sustains root-hair development. Nat Cell Biol
11:78–84
Jonsson H, Heisler MG, Shapiro BE, Meyerowitz EM, Mjolsness E (2006) An auxin-driven
polarized transport model for phyllotaxis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103:1633–1638
Jurado S, Diaz-Trivino S, Abraham Z, Manzano C, Gutierrez C, del Pozo C (2008) SKP2A, an
F-box protein that regulates cell division, is degraded via the ubiquitin pathway. Plant J
53:828–841
Jurado S, Abraham Z, Manzano C, Lopez-Torrejon G, Pacios LF, Del Pozo JC (2010) The
Arabidopsis cell cycle F-box protein SKP2A binds to auxin. Plant Cell 22:3891–3904
Kai K, Horita J, Wakasa K, Miyagawa H (2007) Three oxidative metabolites of indole-3-acetic
acid from Arabidopsis thaliana. Phytochemistry 68:1651–1663
Kamimoto Y, Terasaka K, Hamamoto M, Takanashi K, Fukuda S, Shitan N, Sugiyama A,
Suzuki H, Shibata D, Wang B, Pollmann S, Geisler M, Yazaki K (2012) Arabidopsis
ABCB21 is a facultative auxin importer/exporter regulated by cytoplasmic auxin concentra-
tion. Plant Cell Physiol 53:2090–2100
Kamphausen T, Fangha¨nel J, Neumann D, Schulz B, Rahfeld JU (2002) Characterization of
Arabidopsis thaliana AtFKBP42 that is membrane-bound and interacts with Hsp90. Plant J
32:263–276
5
Intercellular Transport of Auxin
95

Katekar GK, Geissler AE (1977) Auxin transport inhibitors. III. Chemical requirements of a class
of auxin transport inhibitors. Plant Physiol 60:826–829
Kepinski S, Leyser O (2005) The Arabidopsis F-box protein TIR1 is an auxin receptor. Nature
435:446–451
Kim JY, Henrichs S, Bailly A, Vincenzetti V, Sovero V, Mancuso S, Pollmann S, Kim D,
Geisler M, Nam HG (2010) Identiﬁcation of an ABCB/P-glycoprotein-speciﬁc inhibitor of
auxin transport by chemical genomics. J Biol Chem 285:23309–23317
Kleine-Vehn J, Dhonukshe P, Swarup R, Bennett M, Friml J (2006) Subcellular trafﬁcking of the
Arabidopsis auxin inﬂux carrier AUX1 uses a novel pathway distinct from PIN1. Plant Cell
18:3171–3181
Kno¨ller AS, Blakeslee JJ, Richards EL, Peer WA, Murphy AS (2010) Brachytic2/ZmABCB1
functions in IAA export from intercalary meristems. J Exp Bot 61:3689–3696
Ko¨gl F, Haagen-Smith AJ (1931) U¨ ber die Chemie des Wuchsstoffs K. Akad. Wetenschap.
Amsterdam. Proc Sect Sci 34:1411–1416
Kramer EM (2004) PIN and AUX/LAX proteins: their role in auxin accumulation. Trends Plant
Sci 9:578–582
Kubesˇ M, Yang H, Richter GL, Cheng Y, Mlodzinska E, Wang X, Blakeslee JJ, Carraro N,
Petrasek J, Zazimalova E, Hoyerova K, Peer WA, Murphy AS (2012) The Arabidopsis
concentration- dependent inﬂux/efﬂux transporter ABCB4 regulates cellular auxin levels in
the root epidermis. Plant J 69:640–654
Langowski L, Ruzicka K, Naramoto S, Kleine-Vehn J, Friml J (2010) Trafﬁcking to the outer polar
domain deﬁnes the root-soil interface. Curr Biol 20:904–908
Lee M, Choi Y, Burla B, Kim YY, Jeon B, Maeshima M, Yoo JY, Martinoia E, Lee Y (2008) The
ABC transporter AtABCB14 is a malate importer and modulates stomatal response to CO2.
Nat Cell Biol 10:1217–1223
Leng ER, Vineyard ML (1951) Dwarf and short plants. Maize Genet Coop Newsl 25:31–32
Lewis DR, Miller ND, Splitt BL, Wu G, Spalding EP (2007) Separating the roles of acropetal and
basipetal auxin transport on gravitropism with mutations in two Arabidopsis multidrug
resistance-like ABC transporter genes. Plant Cell 19:1838–1850
Lin R, Wang H (2005) Two homologous ATP-binding cassette transporter proteins, AtMDR1 and
AtPGP1, regulate Arabidopsis photomorphogenesis and root development by mediating polar
auxin transport. Plant Physiol 138:949–964
Lin D, Cao L, Zhou Z, Zhu L, Ehrhardt D, Yang Z, Fu Y (2013) Rho GTPase signaling activates
microtubule severing to promote microtubule ordering in Arabidopsis. Curr Biol 23:290–297
Liscum E, Briggs WR (1995) Mutations in the NPH1 locus of Arabidopsis disrupt the perception
of phototropic stimuli. Plant Cell 7:473–485
Ljung K, O¨ stin A, Lioussanne L, Sandberg G (2001) Developmental regulation of indole-3-acetic
acid turnover in Scots pine seedlings. Plant Physiol 125:464–475
Ljung K, Hull AK, Celenza J, Yamada M, Estelle M, Normanly J, Sandberg G (2005) Sites and
regulation of auxin biosynthesis in Arabidopsis roots. Plant Cell 17:1090–1104
Lo¨bler M, Kla¨mbt D (1985) Auxin-binding protein from coleoptile membranes of corn (Zea mays
L.). I. Puriﬁcation by immunological methods and characterization. J Biol Chem 260:9848–
9853
Luckie DB, Wilterding JH, Krha M, Krouse ME (2003) CFTR and MDR: ABC transporters with
homologous structure but divergent function. Curr Genomics 4:225–235
Marchant A, Bhalerao R, Casimiro I, Eklo¨f J, Casero PJ, Bennett M, Sandberg G (2002) AUX1
promotes lateral root formation by facilitating indole-3-acetic acid distribution between sink
and source tissues in the Arabidopsis seedling. Plant Cell 14:589–597
Markham JE, Molino D, Gissot L, Bellec Y, Hematy K, Marion J, Belcram K, Palauqui JC, Satiat-
Jeunemaitre B, Faure JD (2011) Sphingolipids containing very-long-chain fatty acids deﬁne a
secretory pathway for speciﬁc polar plasma membrane protein targeting in Arabidopsis. Plant
Cell 23:2362–2378
96
J. Reemmer and A. Murphy

Matsuda S, Kajizuka T, Kadota A, Nishimura T, Koshiba T (2011) NPH3- and PGP-like genes are
exclusively expressed in the apical tip region essential for blue-light perception and lateral
auxin transport in maize coleoptiles. J Exp Bot 62:3459–3466
Men S, Boutte Y, Ikeda Y, Li X, Palme K, Stierhof YD, Hartmann MA, Moritz T, Grebe M (2008)
Sterol-dependent endocytosis mediates post-cytokinetic acquisition of PIN2 auxin efﬂux
carrier polarity. Nat Cell Biol 10:237–244
Merks RMH, Van de Peer Y, Inze´ D, Beemster GTS (2007) Canalization without ﬂux sensors: a
traveling-wave hypothesis. Trends Plant Sci 12:384–390
Michniewicz M, Zago MK, Abas L, Weijers D, Schweighofer A, Meskiene I, Heisler MG,
Ohno C, Zhang J, Huang F, Schwab R, Weigel D, Meyerowitz EM, Luschnig C, Offringa R,
Friml J (2007) Antagonistic regulation of PIN phosphorylation by PP2A and PINOID directs
auxin ﬂux. Cell 130:1044–1056
Mitchison GJ (1980) A model for vein formation in higher plants. Proc R Soc Lond B Boil Sci
207:79–109
Mravec J, Kubes M, Bielach A, Gaykova V, Petrasek J, Skupa P, Chand S, Benkova E,
Zazımalova E, Friml J (2008) Interaction of PIN and PGP transport mechanisms in auxin
distribution-dependent development. Development 135:3345–3354
Mravec J, Sku˚pa P, Bailly A, Hoyerova´ K, Krˇecˇek P, Bielach A, Petra´sˇek J, Zhang J, Gaykova V,
Stierhof YD, Dobrev PI, Schwarzerova´ K, Rolcˇı´k J, Seifertova´ D, Luschnig C, Benkova E,
Zazˇı´malova´ E, Geisler M, Friml J (2009) Subcellular homeostasis of phytohormone auxin is
mediated by the ER-localized PIN5 transporter. Nature 459:1136–1140
Mu¨ller A, Guan C, Galweiler L, Tanzler P, Huijser P, Marchant A, Parry G, Bennett M, Wisman E,
Palme K (1998) AtPIN2 deﬁnes a locus of Arabidopsis for root gravitropism control. EMBO J
17:6903–6911
Mullet JE, Klein RR, Klein PE (2002) Sorghum bicolor—an important species for comparative
grass genomics and a source of beneﬁcial genes for agriculture. Curr Opin Plant Biol 5:118–
121
Multani DS, Briggs SP, Chamberlin MA, Blakeslee JJ, Murphy AS, Johal GS (2003) Loss of an
MDR transporter in compact stalks of maize br2 and sorghum dw3 mutants. Science 302:81–
84
Murphy AS, Hoogner KR, Peer WA, Taiz L (2002) Identiﬁcation, puriﬁcation, and molecular
cloning of N-1-naphthylphthalmic acid-binding plasma membrane-associated aminopepti-
dases from Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 128:935–950
Nagashima A, Suzuki G, Uehara Y, Saji K, Furukawa T, Koshiba T, Sekimoto M, Fujioka S,
Kuroha T, Kojima M, Sakakibara H, Fujisawa N, Okada K, Sakai T (2008) Phytochromes and
cryptochromes regulate the differential growth of Arabidopsis hypocotyls in both a PGP19-
dependent and a PGP19-independent manner. Plant J 53:516–529
Noh B, Murphy AS, Spalding EP (2001) Multidrug resistance-like genes of Arabidopsis required
for auxin transport and auxin-mediated development. Plant Cell 13:2441–2454
Noh B, Bandyopadhyay A, Peer WA, Spalding EP, Murphy AS (2003) Enhanced gravi- and
phototropism in plant mdr mutants mislocalizing the auxin efﬂux protein PIN1. Nature
423:999–1002
Nova´k O, He´nykova´ E, Sairanen I, Kowalczyk M, Pospı´sˇil T, Ljung K (2012) Tissue-speciﬁc
proﬁling of the Arabidopsis thaliana auxin metabolome. Plant J 72:523–536
O¨ stin A, Kowalyczk M, Bhalerao RP, Sandberg G (1998) Metabolism of indole-3-acetic acid in
Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 118:285–296
Pan J, Fujioka S, Peng J, Chen J, Li G, Chen R (2009) The E3 ubiquitin ligase SCFTIR1/AFB and
membrane sterols play key roles in auxin regulation of endocytosis, recycling, and plasma
membrane accumulation of the auxin efﬂux transporter PIN2 in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant
Cell 21:568–580
Parry G, Delbarre A, Marchant A, Swarup R, Napier R, Perrot-Rechenmann C, Bennett MJ (2001)
Novel auxin transport inhibitors phenocopy the auxin inﬂux carrier mutation aux1. Plant J
25:399–406
5
Intercellular Transport of Auxin
97

Peer WA, Murphy AS (2007) Flavonoids and auxin transport: modulators or regulators? Trends
Plant Sci 12:556–563
Peer WA, Blakeslee JJ, Yang H, Murphy AS (2011) Seven things we think we know about auxin
transport. Mol Plant 4:487–504
Peer WA, Cheng Y, Murphy AS (2013) Evidence of oxidative attenuation of auxin signalling. J
Exp Bot 64:2629–2639
Peret B, Swarup K, Ferguson A, Seth M, Yang Y, Dhondt S, James N, Casimiro I, Perry P, Syed A,
Yang H, Reemmer J, Venison E, Howells C, Perez-Amador MA, Yun J, Alonso J, Beemster
GT, Laplaze L, Murphy A, Bennett MJ, Nielsen E, Swarup R (2012) AUX/LAX genes encode
a family of auxin inﬂux transporters that perform distinct functions during Arabidopsis
development. Plant Cell 24:2874–2885
Petersson SV, Johansson AI, Kowalczyk M, Makoveychuk A, Wang JY, Moritz T, Grebe M,
Benfey PN, Sandberg G, Ljung K (2009) An auxin gradient and maximum in the Arabidopsis
root apex shown by high-resolution cell-speciﬁc analysis of IAA distribution and synthesis.
Plant Cell 21:1659–1668
Procko E, O’Mara ML, Bennett WFD, Tieleman DP, Gaudet R (2009) The mechanism of ABC
transporters: general lessons from structural and functional studies of an antigenic peptide
transporter. FASEB J 23:1287–1302
Radwanski ER, Last RL (1995) Tryptophan biosynthesis and metabolism: biochemical and
molecular genetics. Plant Cell 7:921–934
Rahman A, Takahashi M, Shibasaki K, Wu S, Inaba T, Tsurumi S, Baskin TI (2010) Gravitropism
of Arabidopsis thaliana roots requires the polarization of PIN2 toward the root tip in meriste-
matic cortical cells. Plant Cell 22:1762–1776
Raven JA (1975) Transport of indoleacetic acid in plant cells in relation to pH and electrical
potential gradients, and its signiﬁcance for polar IAA transport. New Phytol 74:163–172
Reinhardt D, Pesce ER, Stieger P, Mandel T, Baltensperger K, Bennett M, Traas J, Friml J,
Kuhlemeier C (2003) Regulation of phyllotaxis by polar auxin transport. Nature 426:255–260
Robert S, Kleine-Vehn J, Barbez E, Sauer M, Paciorek T, Baster P, Vanneste S, Zhang J, Simon S,
Cˇ ovanova´ M, Hayashi K, Dhonukshe P, Yang Z, Bednarek SY, Jones AM, Luschnig C,
Aniento F, Zazˇimalova´ E, Friml J (2010) ABP1 mediates auxin inhibition of clathrin-
dependent endocytosis in Arabidopsis. Cell 143:111–121
Roudier F, Gissot L, Beaudoin F, Haslam R, Michaelson L, Marion J, Molino D, Lima A, Bach L,
Morin H, Tellier F, Palauqui JC, Bellec Y, Renne C, Miquel M, Dacosta M, Vignard J,
Rochat C, Markham JE, Moreau P, Napier J, Faure JD (2010) Very-long-chain fatty acids
are involved in polar auxin transport and developmental patterning in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell
22:364–375
Rubery PH, Sheldrake AR (1974) Carrier-mediated auxin transport. Planta 118:101–121
Ruzicka K, Strader LC, Bailly A, Yang H, Blakeslee J, Langowski L, Nejedla E, Fujita H, Itoh H,
Syono K, Hejatko J, Gray WM, Martinoia E, Geisler M, Bartel B, Murphy AS, Friml J (2010)
Arabidopsis PIS1 encodes the ABCG37 transporter of the auxinic compounds including the
auxin precursor indole-3-butyric acid. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107:10749–10753
Sachs T (1969) Polarity and the induction of organized vascular tissues. Ann Bot Lond 33:263
Sakai T, Kagawa T, Kasahara M, Swartz TE, Christie JM, Briggs WR, Wada M, Okada K (2001)
Arabidopsis nph1 and npl1: Blue light receptors that mediate both phototropism and chloro-
plast relocation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98:6969–6974
Santelia D, Vincenzetti V, Azzarello E, Bovet L, Fukao Y, Duchtig P, Mancuso S, Martinoia E,
Geisler M (2005) MDR-like ABC transporter AtPGP4 is involved in auxin-mediated lateral
root and root hair development. FEBS Lett 579:5399–5406
Santner AA, Watson JC (2006) The WAG1 and WAG2 protein kinases negatively regulate root
waving in Arabidopsis. Plant J 45:752–764
Sauer M, Balla J, Luschnig C, Wisniewska J, Reinohl V, Friml J, Benkova E (2006) Canalization
of auxin ﬂow by Aux/IAA-ARF-dependent feedback regulation of PIN polarity. Genes Dev
20:2902–2911
98
J. Reemmer and A. Murphy

Sawchuk MG, Edgar A, Scarpella E (2013) Patterning of leaf vein networks by convergent auxin
transport pathways. PLoS Genet 9:e1003294
Scarpella E, Marcos D, Friml J, Berleth T (2006) Control of leaf vascular patterning by polar auxin
transport. Genes Dev 20:1015–1027
Shitan N, Bazin I, Dan K, Obata K, Kigawa K, Ueda K, Sato F, Forestier C, Yazaki K (2003)
Involvement of CjMDR1, a plant multidrug-resistance-type ATP-binding cassette protein, in
alkaloid transport in Coptis japonica. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100:751–756
Sidler M, Hassa P, Hasan S, Ringli C, Dudler R (1998) Involvement of an ABC transporter in a
developmental pathway regulating hypocotyl cell elongation in the light. Plant Cell 10:1623–
1636
Smith RS, Guyomarch S, Mendel T, Reinhardt D, Kuhlemeier C (2006) A plausible model of
phyllotaxis. Proc Natl Acad Sci 103:1301–1306
Stein OL (1955) Rates of leaf initiation in two mutants of Zea mays, dwarf1 and brachytic2. Am J
Bot 42:885–892
Stepanova AN, Robertson-Hoyt J, Yun J, Benavente LM, Xie DY, Dolezal K, Schlereth A,
Jurgens G, Alonso JM (2008) TAA1-mediated auxin biosynthesis is essential for hormone
crosstalk and plant development. Cell 133:177–191
Stoma S, Lucas M, Chopard J, Schaedel M, Traas J, Godin C (2008) Flux-based transport
enhancement as a plausible unifying mechanism for auxin transport in meristem development.
PLoS Comput Biol 4:e1000207
Sugawara S, Hishiyama S, Jikumaru Y, Hanada A, Nishimura T, Koshiba T, Zhao Y, Kamiya Y,
Kasahara H (2009) Biochemical analyses of indole-3-acetaldoxime-dependent auxin biosyn-
thesis in Arabidopsis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106:5430–5435
Swarup R, Friml J, Marchant A, Ljung K, Sandberg G, Palme K, Bennett M (2001) Localization of
the auxin permease AUX1 suggests two functionally distinct hormone trans- port pathways
operate in the Arabidopsis root apex. Genes Dev 15:2648–2653
Swarup K, Benkova E, Swarup R, Casimiro I, Peret B, Yang Y, Parry G, Nielsen E, De Smet I,
Vanneste S, Levesque MP, Carrier D, James N, Calvo V, Ljung K, Kramer E, Roberts R,
Graham N, Marillonnet S, Patel K, Jones JD, Taylor CG, Schachtman DP, May S, Sandberg G,
Benfey P, Friml J, Kerr I, Beeckman T, Laplaze L, Bennett MJ (2008) The auxin inﬂux carrier
LAX3 promotes lateral root emergence. Nat Cell Biol 10:946–954
Tanaka K, Fujimura-Kamada K, Yamamoto T (2011) Functions of phospholipid ﬂippases. J
Biochem 149:131–143
Tao Y, Ferrer JL, Ljung K, Pojer F, Hong F, Long JA, Li L, Moreno JE, Bowman ME, Ivans LJ,
Cheng Y, Lim J, Zhao Y, Ballare CL, Sandberg G, Noel JP, Chory J (2008) Rapid synthesis of
auxin via a new tryptophan-dependent pathway is required for shade avoidance in plants. Cell
133:164–176
Tarling EJ, Edwards PA (2011) ATP binding cassette transporter G1 (ABCG1) is an intracellular
sterol transporter. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108:19719–19724
Teale WD, Paponov IA, Palme K (2006) Auxin in action: signalling, transport and the control of
plant growth and development. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 7:847–859
Terasaka K, Blakeslee JJ, Titapiwatanakun B, Peer WA, Bandyopadhyay A, Makam SN, Lee OR,
Richards EL, Murphy AS, Sato F, Yazaki K (2005) PGP4, an ATP binding cassette
P-glycoprotein, catalyzes auxin transport in Arabidopsis thaliana roots. Plant Cell 17:2922–
2939
Theologis A, Huynh TV, Davis RW (1985) Rapid induction of speciﬁc mRNAs by auxin in pea
epicotyl tissue. J Mol Biol 183:53–68
Titapiwatanakun B, Blakeslee JJ, Bandyopadhyay A, Yang H, Mravec J, Sauer M, Cheng Y,
Adamec J, Nagashima A, Geisler M, Sakai T, Friml J, Peer WA, Murphy AS (2009) ABCB19/
PGP19 stabilises PIN1 in membrane microdomains in Arabidopsis. Plant J 57:27–44
Vernoux T, Besnard F, Traas J (2010) Auxin at the shoot apical meristem. Cold Spring Harb
Perspect Biol 2:a001487
5
Intercellular Transport of Auxin
99

Verrier PJ, Bird D, Burla B, Dassa E, Forestier C, Geisler M, Klein M, Kolukisaoglu U, Lee Y,
Martinoia E, Murphy A, Rea PA, Samuels L, Schulz B, Spalding EJ, Yazaki K, Theodoulou FL
(2008) Plant ABC proteins-uniﬁed nomenclature and updated inventory. Trends Plant Sci
13:151–159
Vieten A, Vanneste S, Wisniewska J, Benkova´ E, Benjamins R, Beeckman T, Luschnig C, Friml J
(2005) Functional redundancy of PIN proteins is accompanied by auxin-dependent cross-
regulation of PIN expression. Development 132:4521–4531
Wang B, Bailly A, Zwiewka M, Henrichs S, Azzarello E, Mancuso S, Maeshima M, Friml J,
Schulz A, Geisler M (2013) Arabidopsis TWISTED DWARF1 functionally interacts with
auxin exporter ABCB1 on the root plasma membrane. Plant Cell 25:202–214
Went FW, Thimann KV (1937) Phytohormones. MacMillan, New York
Willemsen V, Friml J, Grebe M, van den Toorn A, Palme K, Scheres B (2003) Cell polarity and
PIN protein positioning in Arabidopsis require STEROL METHYLTRANSFERASE1 func-
tion. Plant Cell 15:612–625
Willige BC, Ahlers S, Zourelidou M, Barbosa ICR, Demarsy E, Trevisan M, Davis PA, Roelfsema
MRG, Hangarter R, Fankhauser C, Schwechheimer C (2013) D6PK AGCVIII kinases are
required for auxin transport and phototropic hypocotyl bending in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell
25:1674–1688
Wu G, Lewis DR, Spalding EP (2007) Mutations in Arabidopsis multidrug resistance-like ABC
transporters separate the roles of acropetal and basipetal auxin transport in lateral root
development. Plant Cell 19:1826–1837
Wu G, Otegui MS, Spalding EP (2010) The ER-localized TWD1 immunophilin is necessary for
localization of multidrug resistance-like proteins required for polar auxin transport in
Arabidopsis roots. Plant Cell 22:3295–3304
Yamada M, Greenham K, Prigge MJ, Jensen PJ, Estelle M (2009) The TRANSPORT INHIBITOR
RESPONSE2 gene is required for auxin synthesis and diverse aspects of plant development.
Plant Physiol 151:168–179
Yang H, Murphy AS (2009) Functional expression and characterization of Arabidopsis ABCB,
AUX 1 and PIN auxin transporters in Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Plant J 59:179–191
Yang Y, Hammes UZ, Taylor CG, Schachtman DP, Nielsen E (2006) High-afﬁnity auxin transport
by the AUX1 inﬂux carrier protein. Curr Biol 16:1123–1127
Yang H, Richter GL, Wang X, Młodzin´ska E, Carraro N, Ma G, Jenness M, Chao D, Peer WA,
Murphy AS (2013) Sterols and sphingolipids differentially function in trafﬁcking of the
Arabidopsis ABCB19 auxin transporter. Plant J 74:37–47
Zazˇı´malova´ E, Murphy AS, Yang H, Hoyerova´ K, Hosˇek P (2010) Auxin transporters-why so
many? Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2:a001552
Zourelidou M, Mu¨ller I, Willige BC, Nill C, Jikumaru Y, Li H, Schwechheimer C (2009) The
polarly localised D6 PROTEIN KINASE is required for efﬁcient auxin transport in
Arabidopsis thaliana. Development 136:627–636
100
J. Reemmer and A. Murphy

Chapter 6
Auxin Receptors and Perception
Richard M. Napier
Abstract Auxin perception initiates auxin action and is the key step for controlled
plant growth and development. The term perception implies two linked processes:
auxin binding and the biological reaction to that binding event. In human terms we
might describe these steps as recognition and interpretation. Auxin signalling has
become a collective description for all the various mechanisms driving interpreta-
tion and often may be only indirectly and distantly connected to perception. Other
chapters will describe how plants interpret auxin perception and the multitude of
auxin-driven responses we recognise during development. In this chapter, we will
examine what has been learnt about auxin-binding sites and link these observations
to early signalling events, the immediate consequences of binding. Signal ampliﬁ-
cation progresses through, for example, genetic cascades will not be considered
here because they are covered in other chapters, particularly under Auxin and Plant
Development (see Chaps. 7–14). Signals linked to perception by biochemical
events are considered brieﬂy because these open up the discussion about the
probability of additional classes of receptor, including ABP1.
1
Introduction
It is tempting to consider auxin to be only indole-3-acetic acid (IAA). Certainly, all
known auxin responses can be initiated by IAA and it is ubiquitous in green plants.
Auxin is also produced by algae and some bacteria, but responses to IAA in these
organisms are either absent or ill-deﬁned and this chapter will not deal further with
how auxin might be perceived in these systems. Some other naturally occurring
R.M. Napier (*)
School of Life Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK
e-mail: Richard.Napier@warwick.ac.uk
E. Zazˇı´malova´ et al. (eds.), Auxin and Its Role in Plant Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-7091-1526-8_6, © Springer-Verlag Wien 2014
101

molecules, such as indole-3-butyric acid (IBA), may be functional auxins in some
higher plant genera. Nevertheless, despite the huge diversity of known responses to
auxin it appears that IAA is ‘The Endogenous Auxin’. Future analytical science
may prove this title to be unsustainable, but for the purposes of this review, the
starting point will be that IAA is the auxin ligand. It is astonishing how one small
molecule can initiate such a rich diversity of responses.
The Endogenous Auxin has been supplemented by many synthetic auxin ago-
nists and a number of them are highly valued as agrochemicals. The pursuit of these
compounds has provided a useful chemical biology arsenal and much structure–
activity data to inform us about the site or sites into which IAA binds. This
information will be considered in the context of a number of binding site models.
Auxin-binding proteins were sought for many years and associated with varying
levels of speculation about their functionality before protein crystallography pro-
duced convincing evidence of auxin binding. Many putative auxin-binding proteins
have been reported and then passed over (Napier et al. 2002). Few remain to claim
the title of auxin receptor. Principal amongst these are Transport Inhibitor Resistant
1 (TIR1) and its paralogues, the Auxin F Box proteins (AFBs). Convincing proof of
TIR1’s activity as a receptor was presented in 2005 (Dharmasiri et al. 2005a, b;
Kepinski and Leyser 2005) and 2 years later the crystal structure of TIR1
was solved with IAA in the binding pocket (Tan et al. 2007). Prior to this, the
structure of Auxin-Binding Protein 1 (ABP1) had been solved with the auxin
1–naphthylacetic acid (1-NAA) bound in its binding pocket (Woo et al. 2002).
More recently, a further F-Box protein (SKP2), distinct from TIR1, has been
associated with auxin binding (Jurado et al. 2010), although no structural evidence
is available yet.
With a diversity of potential auxin receptors there is clearly a platform from
which the diversity of auxin responses may be explained. The different binding sites
also offer one explanation for the wide dynamic range of different auxin responses.
For example, typical responses in aerial tissues require micromolar concentrations of
auxin, yet inhibition of primary root growth in seedlings (for example) peaks in the
nanomolar range. Nevertheless, as noted above, much response diversity arises from
the multitude of interactors for TIR1 and the AFBs. Is the AFB family of receptors
sufﬁcient to account for all responses to auxin? This chapter will focus on auxin
binding and the resulting immediate early events and consider how the various
auxin-binding proteins may contribute to responsiveness towards auxin.
2
TIR1 Is an Auxin Receptor: Discovery
With the development of Arabidopsis as a tool for molecular genetics came the
description of a number of auxin-resistant mutants. As these were mapped and
cloned it became clear that some of the genes were linked to ubiquitin-mediated
protein breakdown (e.g. AXR1, an ubiquitin E2 conjugating enzyme; Leyser
et al. 1993) and others were transcriptional regulators which were known to have
102
R.M. Napier

rapid turnover times (the Aux/IAA proteins: Abel et al. 1994). It also became clear
that many auxin responses were mediated by derepression of transcription and that
an SCF-type ubiquitin E3 ligase complex was intimately involved in regulating
these auxin responses (Ruegger et al. 1998). Auxin was shown to promote a
reversible interaction between the E3 protein TIR1 and the degron domain of
Aux/IAA proteins, but only in 2005 was it demonstrated that TIR1 was also the
site to which auxin binds (Dharmasiri et al. 2005a; Kepinski and Leyser 2005). In
these key papers afﬁnity-tagged versions of either TIR1 or an Aux/IAA protein
were shown to precipitate each other in the presence of IAA. More convincing still,
puriﬁed TIR1 bound IAA reversibly in a radiolabel binding assay, and for the
radiolabel assay to work, both TIR1 and Aux/IAA protein were needed. The
competition dissociation curves suggested afﬁnities for IAA of between 20–80
nM (Kepinski and Leyser 2005) and 84 nM (Dharmasiri et al. 2005a). These values
were consistent with expectations from physiological assays. Differential afﬁnities
for a series of familiar auxins were also demonstrated. Coupled with the accumu-
lating knowledge about components of the SCFTIR1 complex and its regulation, a
picture of the mechanism of action for TIR1 has been developed (Fig. 6.1).
2.1
The Structure of TIR1 and Auxin Binding
Auxin binding is a precondition of Aux/IAA binding. By implication this is a
two-step process, but binding activity has only been recorded in the presence of
all three partners. Several studies now consider TIR1 and Aux/IAA protein to be
auxin co-receptors given this mutual dependence (e.g. Caldero´n Villalobos
et al. 2012). Therefore, although we might consider Aux/IAA binding as the start
of signalling, its association with TIR1 and auxin needs to be considered part of
perception. Turnover of the Aux/IAA pool then becomes the ﬁrst step of signalling
in this pathway.
The structure of TIR1 was solved soon after its description as a receptor (Tan
et al. 2007). In order to obtain active protein, TIR1 was co-expressed with ASK1 in
a eukaryotic system (baculovirus-induced expression in insect cells in tissue cul-
ture). Also present in the crystal were IAA, and Aux/IAA as a degron peptide. The
F-box domain of TIR1 associates with ASK1 and the leucine-rich repeat (LRR)
domain of TIR1 forms a locked horseshoe-like structure made up of LRR units
(Fig. 6.2), also described as like the head of a mushroom with the F-box domain as
the stem (Tan et al. 2007). The loops extending from LRRs 2, 12 and 14 are integral
to the auxin and degron-binding sites along with residues lining the concave surface
inside the solenoid. The binding site for auxin is a tight, mostly hydrophobic pocket
within and on the inner face of the horseshoe (Fig. 6.2c).
In addition to the binding site for auxin, the structure revealed inositol-6-
phosphate (IP6) bound centrally (Fig. 6.2). It interacts with key residues involved
in forming the auxin pocket, but not with auxin itself. Mutagenesis of the
IP6-coordinating
residues
disrupts
auxin-dependent
co-receptor
assembly
6
Auxin Receptors and Perception
103

(Caldero´n Villalobos et al. 2012), but no role for IP6 as a mediator of auxin action
has been identiﬁed. It is likely that IP6 acts structurally, anchoring the LRR
horseshoe and the base of the auxin-binding site.
Classiﬁcation of auxins is discussed below, but two key features of active auxins
are a hydrophobic ring system and a carboxylic acid group. The most visually
attractive and inﬂuential model of the auxin-binding site before the availability of
crystal structures was the hydrophobic platform model (Katekar 1979). Katekar’s
hydrophobic platform accommodated the indolic rings of IAA and placed the
carboxylate oxygens perpendicular to the plane of the platform and spaced from
it by a distance approximately equal to the space occupied by the methyl carbon of
the acetate side chain. In considering the structure determined for TIR1, it was seen
that the hydrophobic platform is contributed by a series of hydrophobic residues
Fig. 6.1 Overview of the mechanism of activation of transcription in the presence of auxin. In the
absence of auxin (left side) Aux/IAA proteins saturate dimer associations with Auxin Response
Factor (ARF) proteins, repressing transcription of auxin-regulated genes. The protein Topless
(TPL) may also associate with the repressor complex. On addition of auxin (right side), TIR1 binds
both auxin and Aux/IAA proteins, leading to poly-ubiquitination of the Aux/IAAs and their
subsequent degradation in the 26S proteasome. The reduced pool of Aux/IAAs allows transcrip-
tion to proceed.
The SCFTIR1 complex includes ASK1 (Arabidopsis SKP1) to which the F-box domain of TIR1
binds, and CUL1 (Cullin 1) which is known as the scaffold of the complex and links ASK1 to the
E2 ubiquitin transferase. CUL1 is regulated by reversible addition of RUB (Related to Ubiquitin)
and this is mediated by a RUBylation complex (of which AXR1 is the E1 activating enzyme and
RCE the likely E3; Dharmasiri et al. 2003). The catalytic activity of the SCFTIR1 E2 requires the
Ring ﬁnger domain protein RBX. Once activated, the E2 transfers ubiquitins to adjacent substrate
Aux/IAAs. Once polyubiquitinated, Aux/IAAs are targeted for the proteasome (dos Santos
et al. 2009)
104
R.M. Napier

lining the pocket. The hydrophobic space deﬁnes a volume and some steric barriers,
but does not fully restrict how ring systems align, allowing some promiscuity for
auxin structures. Conversely, binding for the carboxylate is speciﬁed precisely by
two polar residues: an arginine (R403) and a serine (S438) from adjacent LRR
strands lining the inner face of the solenoid (Fig. 6.3b). Importantly, R403 is
positioned by cofactor IP6. The acetate side chain of IAA is twisted at the
α-methyl, turning the bound carboxylate away from the plane of the indole ring
and so the oxygens do not sit as if astride the plane of the ring (Katekar 1979), but to
the side (Figs. 6.2c and 6.3b, c). This conformation corresponds well with an earlier
prediction of ligand orientation based on structure–activity analysis (Kaethner
1977).
The binding of auxin to TIR1 was shown to create a second binding site, a site
for the degron motif carried by Aux/IAA proteins. At its core, the degron motif is
hydrophobic (I/V, VGWPPV) and the bound auxin contributes its own large
hydrophobic platform lining the base of a pocket (Fig. 6.2c). The tryptophan at
the heart of the degron (W86 of Aux/IAA7) aligns end to face with the bound IAA
and with the adjacent proline (P88; Fig. 6.3a) completely covers and traps the
ligand. To allow this tight twist the degron adopts a cis-bond in the peptide
backbone, rather than the more common trans peptide bond conformation, giving
-WcisPtransP- (Fig. 6.3a). Much effort has been put into seeking a prolyl isomerase
activity associated with auxin and SCFTIR1 action (e.g. Kepinski and Leyser 2004),
but no convincing evidence of any such activity has been reported so far. It is
possible that TIR1 itself catalyses the isomerization on degron binding, a hypoth-
esis again reminiscent of the conformational change binding model of Kaethner
Fig. 6.2 TIR1 topology and its interaction with ASK1 and IAA. Ribbon images of TIR1 (blue)
and ASK1 (brown) in proﬁle (a), and TIR1 from above as a space-ﬁlling model (b). The
hydrophobic binding pocket for IAA (c). The ligand IAA (green), the substrate degron peptide
(orange) and IP6 (yellow) molecules are shown as skeleton structures in each view. It is seen that
the pocket into which IAA binds appears quite deep (b and c) against the inner side of the LRR
solenoid. The Aux/IAA peptide covers IAA effectively, as well as a considerable area around the
auxin-binding site (b). Many of the residues lining the biding pocket (c) are hydrophobic (purple).
In (b), the residues D170 (pale green surface) and M473 (red circle because the residue itself is
buried) have been found to affect Aux/IAA protein binding (Yu et al. 2013). Rendered in PyMOL
from PDB 2P1Q
6
Auxin Receptors and Perception
105

(1977). Molecular dynamic simulations of the TIR1 binding pocket residues have
also suggested that two phenylalanines (F82 and F351) act as ‘conformational
inducers’, with their phenyl rings pivoting in response to IAA binding, both
trapping IAA and contributing hydrophobic surfaces to complete the binding site
Fig. 6.3 Details of the IAA and degron-binding pocket. (a) The degron is folded intimately
against the hydrophobic surfaces of its binding site on TIR1, trapping IAA (green). The -WcisP-
twist is seen between W86 and P87 (labelled). Phenylalanine F351 is also indicated (Hao and Yang
2010). (b) The two residues which are hydrogen bonded to the carboxylate oxygens of IAA, S438
and R403, are provided by adjacent β-sheets from the LRRs at the side of the solenoid. IP6 is not
directly associated with IAA binding. (c) Bound IAA seen from a side view of the pocket with the
degron peptide above. (d) The same view as in (c), but with the anti-auxin α-tert-butoxycarbony-
laminohexyl-indole-3-acetic acid in the binding site. The bulky side chain extends from the methyl
carbon into the volume that would otherwise be occupied by the degron peptide (Hayashi
et al. 2008). Rendered in PyMOL from PDB 2P1Q and 3C6N
106
R.M. Napier

for Aux/IAA degrons (Fig. 6.3a). All these observations indicate the prescience of
Kaethner’s hypotheses.
2.2
Auxin Antagonists
The role auxin plays in creating a new surface for degron binding has been
described as molecular glue (Tan et al. 2007). Clearly both TIR1 and Aux/IAA
contribute to trapping auxin, justifying the description of them as co-receptors.
Nevertheless, the key ligand-selective residues lie inside the TIR1 binding site.
Given that records of auxin binding in the absence of Aux/IAA have proved elusive,
it is likely that the afﬁnity of the binding pocket in TIR1 is much lower than the
nanomolar ﬁgures reported for the complex. This has implications for the develop-
ment of anti-auxins. Historically, a few compounds have been found to behave
antagonistically to IAA. Principal amongst these has been p-chlorophenoxyi-
sobutyric acid (PCIB). The structure of the TIR1 complex gave the possibility of
rational design of anti-auxins. It was recognised that a compound binding into the
TIR1 pocket, but then preventing association of the degron, would act as a com-
petitive antagonist. A series of indoles and naphthalenes with bulky side groups
substituted onto the α methyl was synthesised (Fig. 6.3) and physiological tests
conﬁrmed their activity as anti-auxins (Hayashi et al. 2008, 2012).
2.3
Aux/IAAs as Co-receptors
The section above suggests that auxin speciﬁcity resides with TIR1. However, some
selectivity in the auxin response is contributed by the Aux/IAA co-receptor
(Lokerse and Weijers 2009; Caldero´n Villalobos et al. 2012). The Aux/IAA family
numbers 29 members in Arabidopsis and most undergo rapid turnover in the
presence of auxin (Abel et al. 1994). The core degron motif is highly conserved,
and variants display considerable changes in half-life (Ramos et al. 2001; Dreher
et al. 2006). Indeed, many of the early auxin-resistant mutant genes were found to
encode altered degron sequences and this helped reveal the vital role ubiquitin-
mediated proteolysis plays in auxin action (reviewed in Chapman and Estelle
2009). Particularly instructive were the axr3 lines (the protein is also known as
IAA17), with the core -VGWPPV- mutated to e.g. -VGWPLV- in axr3.1 and with
its half-life extended sevenfold from 80 min to 550 min (Ouellet et al. 2001). The
longer half-life is consistent with the phenotype of this gain-of-function mutant
which shows auxin-like phenotypes in the absence of applied auxin, a
hypermorphic response (Rouse et al. 1998). It is worth noting that such phenotypes
may also be expected from plants treated with anti-auxins because anti-auxins
should extend Aux/IAA half-lives by preventing ubiquitination and proteolysis
(Oono et al. 2003). This indicates a potential application for them as herbicides,
6
Auxin Receptors and Perception
107

although no chemical biology screen has yet knowingly yielded a commercially
useful anti-auxin.
Viewing Fig. 6.3 it is clear that there is more to Aux/IAA degron binding than
the contribution of trapping IAA by -WPP-. As noted above, adjacent degron
residues are generally hydrophobic and interact with hydrophobic residues around
the neck of the pocket, but the contributions of further residues should not be
overlooked. Arginine R93 and tyrosine Y92 appear to cover a large surface area on
the solenoid face (Fig. 6.2b), whilst arginine R90 penetrates deep into its centre. It
seems likely that these residues contribute considerably to the free energy of
binding. However, the structure and most of the binding experimentation have
been done with degron peptides and although biochemical results agree with
genetic and physiological ﬁndings, a note of caution should be added. The full-
length Aux/IAA protein may not present the same loop to TIR1 and so the roles of
most degron residues must remain hypothetical until we know the structure of full-
length Aux/IAA proteins and understand the kinetics of these interactions.
Two mutations found from screening TIR1 with full-length Aux/IAA protein in
a yeast 2-hybrid experiment have been reported (Fig. 6.2b; Yu et al. 2013). These
mutations enhance the Aux/IAA–TIR1 interaction leading to enhanced Aux/IAA
degradation. The two mutation sites sit at opposite sides on the outer face of the
TIR1 solenoid, distant from the auxin-binding pocket. Their distance from auxin-
and degron-binding sites reinforces the point that the core degron may not mediate
Aux/IAA binding alone. Indeed, measured binding afﬁnities for Aux/IAA7 and its
domain II degron peptide were found to vary by 20-fold (Caldero´n Villalobos
et al. 2012).
Given that many residues across the degron as well as interaction sites from full-
length Aux/IAAs contribute to co-receptor interaction, it is remarkable that a small
molecule (IAA) binding at the base of the small, deep binding pocket changes the
character of TIR1 so much that it then drives forward so much of plant biology.
2.4
Dimerization of Aux/IAAs and ARFs; The Start
of Signalling
The Aux/IAA proteins are modular and in addition to the degron, domains III and
IV are conserved within the family and shared with similarly conserved C-terminal
domains in the Auxin Response Factor proteins (ARFs; Tiwari et al. 2003). Dimer-
ization is promiscuous within and between these two families, particularly between
activator ARFs and Aux/IAAs (Fig. 6.1). It is clear that the multiplicity of possible
interactors (29 Aux/IAAs with 23 ARFs—of which ﬁve are activators, the rest
repressors of transcription) could contribute to the diversity of auxin responses, and
speciﬁc pairings might deliver certain selective responses. However, generally
there do not appear to be more- or less-favoured Aux/IAA-ARF partnerships
when options are presented ex vivo, such as in yeast two-hybrid experiments.
108
R.M. Napier

Much more convincing are the models based on selectivity delivered by zones of
restricted expression (Rademacher et al. 2011; Vernoux et al. 2011) and for
expression to be determined by position and time as well as by auxin concentration
(Vernoux et al. 2011).
In terms of auxin perception, it appears that in the absence of auxin, Aux/IAAs
are present in abundance. The appearance of auxin leads to co-receptor assembly
and the rapid degradation of Aux/IAAs. As the free concentration of Aux/IAAs
falls, ARF–Aux/IAA dimers dissociate, freeing transcription (Fig. 6.1). Some of the
earliest changes in expression induced by auxin are new Aux/IAA transcripts, giving
an active and sensitive feedback loop. The signalling outcomes of concerted
expression (and repression), partner interactions and localised auxin gradients in
the shoot apical meristem are described beautifully in Vernoux’s paper (Vernoux
et al. 2011; see also Chap. 10).
2.5
The TIR1 Family
The TIR1 family in Arabidopsis thaliana includes Auxin F-Box proteins (AFBs) 1–
5. All bind IAA to promote co-receptor assembly with Aux/IAA degrons (Caldero´n
Villalobos et al. 2012). The two most distinct clades are represented by TIR1 and
AFB5 and yet these two bind a range of degron sequences with similar preferences
(Caldero´n Villalobos et al. 2012). However, TIR1 and AFBs are not all equivalent.
In Arabidopsis roots TIR1 and AFB2 are dominant and neither AFB1 nor AFB2 can
replace TIR1 in tir1 plants (Parry et al. 2009). Further, a striking feature of AFB5 is
its enhanced afﬁnity over TIR1 for synthetic picolinate auxins such as Picloram
(Walsh et al. 2006; Lee et al. 2014) and a structural model for the AFB5 auxin-
binding pocket has been developed (Caldero´n Villalobos et al. 2012). A second
dramatic difference between TIR1 and AFB5 is the co-receptor dissociation rates,
with AFB5 complexes falling apart far more rapidly than TIR1 complexes (Lee
et al. 2014). Whether this makes AFB5 more efﬁcient at turning over Aux/IAAs or
more likely to yield mono-ubiquitinated products (which will not be recognised by
the proteasome) is not known. Expression in yeast reporter systems has suggested
that TIR1 and AFB2 do support more rapid degradation of Aux/IAAs than AFB1
and AFB3 (Havens et al. 2012), but unfortunately the biophysics and genetic
reporter assays have not yet crossed over sufﬁciently to cover all TIR1/AFBs.
Two interesting observations arise from the distinctiveness of AFB5 from TIR1.
Whilst IAA acts as a good ligand in both, the very different binding site speciﬁcity
may suggest that additional endogenous ligands await discovery. Secondly, ‘spray
and pray’ chemical biology screens have discovered the picolinates, but
knowledge-led design can now start to contribute molecule leads for novel site-
selective auxins and site-selective anti-auxins.
6
Auxin Receptors and Perception
109

3
The Cell Cycle Protein SKP2
An F-box protein known as S-phase Kinase-associated Protein 2A (SKP2A) has
been reported to bind auxin (Jurado et al. 2010). The protein was shown to bind
radiolabelled IAA in a saturable and speciﬁc manner (estimated KdIAA ¼ 0.2 μM),
although expression was from E. coli which raises some concerns over whether it
was folded authentically. Other plant F-box proteins require expression in eukary-
otic cells to acquire functionality (such as TIR1; Dharmasiri et al. 2005a; Kepinski
and Leyser 2005; Tan et al. 2007). There is little homology with TIR1 except in the
common domains of F-box and LRRs, but the LRR motif allowed modelling of this
part of SKP2A onto the TIR1 structure and a putative binding site was identiﬁed.
Auxin was shown to induce ubiquitin-mediated degradation of SKP2A and a model
was presented for how this linked auxin signalling to the cell cycle and division.
SKP2 seems to be involved in auxin signalling, but its role in auxin perception is far
less certain.
4
ABP1 as an Auxin Receptor
Auxin-binding protein1 (ABP1) has a long history as a candidate receptor. Like
TIR1, it needs to be expressed and puriﬁed from eukaryotic cells (baculovirus
system) to hold activity and the structure has been solved with auxin bound (Woo
et al. 2002). What has proved more elusive for ABP1 has been its mechanism of
action and with no known mechanism the claim that it is a receptor has been inﬁrm.
With TIR1/AFBs apparently in control of auxin-mediated gene expression, were
additional receptors necessary? However, others argued that because auxin action
via TIR1 requires degradation of Aux/IAAs, transcription, and translation (and
estimates for this series are in excess of 10 min), then more rapid responses and
responses which persist in tir1/afb multiple mutants may indicate additional,
non-TIR1 pathways (Badescu and Napier 2006). Recent reports suggest a func-
tional requirement for ABP1 and its signalling pathway.
4.1
The Structure of ABP1 and Auxin Binding
The auxin-binding site in ABP1 shares some general features with that in TIR1, but
some speciﬁc details are quite different. The protein is in the cupin superfamily
which is deﬁned by the way the polypeptide folds into a β-jellyroll barrel (Fig. 6.4;
Woo et al. 2002). At the heart of the barrel is a zinc ion. This zinc coordinates the
carboxylate group of bound auxins, which may be compared with the arginine and
serine hydrogen bonds of TIR1 (Fig. 6.3). In common with TIR1, the hydrophobic
auxin ring system (1-NAA in the ABP1 crystal) sits in a hydrophobic pocket and
110
R.M. Napier

packs end to face with a tryptophan, W151, in the maize sequence, contributed by
the protein’s C-terminal α-helix. This tryptophan–auxin electronic interaction may
be mechanistically signiﬁcant because molecular dynamic simulations have
suggested that the C-terminal helix moves as a consequence of auxin binding
(Bertosa et al. 2008). The crystallography data show little or no molecular move-
ment between ligand-free and ligand-bound ABP1 (Woo et al. 2002), but the
calculations allow a piston-like movement of the whole terminal helix driven
primarily by repositioning W151 against the bound auxin. Such a movement is
consistent with earlier immunological evidence using puriﬁed ABP1 which
suggested that the C-terminus undergoes a ligand-induced conformational change
(Napier and Venis 1990).
4.2
Signalling from ABP1
Early work linked ABP1 with rapid plasma membrane ion ﬂuxes and cell elonga-
tion (reviewed in Napier et al. 2002); more recent work has linked it with a range of
developmental responses (Shi and Yang 2011; Scherer 2011; Xu et al. 2014). It is
understood that all the known physiological responses linked to ABP1 are initiated
on the outside of the plasma membrane, yet many of these responses require that the
signal is passed across the membrane into the cell. A membrane-spanning docking
protein has been proposed (Barbier-Brygoo et al. 1989; Tromas et al. 2010) and
Fig. 6.4 The auxin-binding site in ABP1. (a) Auxin binds inside the cupin barrel. (b) The
carboxylic acid group of 1-NAA coordinates a zinc ion which is held in place by a group of
histidines and a glutamic acid residue. There is an end-to-face interaction with W151 and this is
one of several hydrophobic interactions around the auxinic ring system. The rainbow colouring
system is used to code the structure from N- (Blue) to C-terminus (red). W151 sits at the start of the
C-terminal helix and auxin binding may induce repositioning of this residue which would reorient
the helix (Bertosa et al. 2008). Rendered in PyMOL from 1LRH
6
Auxin Receptors and Perception
111

changes in exposure of the C-terminal residues in ABP1 could clearly modulate the
activity of a signalling partner. Early efforts to identify the docking protein iden-
tiﬁed a membrane-anchored protein known as C-terminal peptide-binding protein
1 (CBP1; Shimomura 2006). Unfortunately CBP1 also lacked the capacity to signal
across the plasma membrane, although it may help. The ﬁrst integral membrane
proteins shown to associate directly with ABP1 are plasma membrane-localised
transmembrane kinase (TMK) receptor-like kinases (Xu et al. 2014).
Unlike the gene family associated with TIR1, ABP1 is alone in the A. thaliana
genome. A T-DNA insertion mutant was isolated and shown to be embryo lethal
(Chen et al. 2001) and this complicated genetic analysis for some time. Latterly,
several genetic tools were developed to circumvent the experimental challenge
(Tromas et al. 2010; Xu et al. 2010; Robert et al. 2010; Effendi et al. 2011). As a
result, a range of responses has been linked to ABP1 action, but featuring consis-
tently has been the regulation of PIN protein internalisation via clathrin-mediated
endocytosis at the plasma membrane to change polar auxin transport. Importantly,
PINs become internalised within 5 min and the response is sustained in tir1/afb
mutants showing that these responses are not downstream of TIR1/AFB signalling.
Further, the abundance of ABP1 was found to correlate with the loss or gain of
response giving conﬁdence to the proposal that ABP1 promotes clathrin-dependent
endocytosis of PIN1. Auxin binding to ABP1 inhibits this activity, at least in roots
(Robert et al. 2010).
In leaf tissue auxin promotes interdigitation of pavement cells and this is
dependent on activation of ROP/Rac GTPases (Xu et al. 2010). In the same weak
abp1-5 mutant line used by others (Robert et al. 2010), rapid ROP activation was
absent. This and other observations led to the conclusion that ABP1 activates ROP2
and this leads to inhibition of PIN1 internalisation, somewhat different to the
situation in roots. Importantly, the leaf pavement cell interdigitation response led
to the link with plasma membrane TMKs, because loss of these trans-membrane
kinases led to a similar lack of interdigitation (and other responses) as loss of ABP1
(Xu et al. 2014). A direct and auxin-dependent association between TMKs and
ABP1 was demonstrated by co-immunoprecipitation, and the association was
shown to be with the extracellular domain of the TMK (Xu et al. 2014). Exactly
how ABP1 interacts to modulate transmembrane kinase activity remains to be
determined, but a signalling pathway now links extracellular ABP1 with auxin-
dependent activation of ROP GTPase signalling.
Additional rapid responses to auxin have been reported, some associated with
ABP1. These include calcium ﬂuxes, phospholipase A2 activation and kinase
activation (Scherer 2011). A metaphor for a two-receptor system has been given,
painting TIR1/AFBs as cell-selective inducers of auxin activity, ABP1 as a more
generic throttle (Scherer 2011). The outstanding challenge is to explain how ABP1
works. There are suggestions of binding site speciﬁc inducers or inhibitors based on
structural understanding of the distinct sites discussed above (Hayashi et al. 2012).
Such pharmacological tools are anticipated eagerly.
112
R.M. Napier

5
Models of Auxin Binding and Structure–Activity
Relationships
Pharmacological models of auxins and of auxin-binding sites have been developed
with the wealth of structure–activity data collected over many years. These need
some reinterpretation now that we know the bioassay responses measured are
mediated by a family, if not a collection of receptors on top of the effects contrib-
uted by auxin transport, metabolism and compartmentation. Indeed, some models
have recognised the multifactorial nature of the system inputs (Tomic´ et al 1998;
Ferro et al 2006, 2010) and have developed auxin classiﬁcations accordingly.
Nevertheless, the advent of receptor-speciﬁc assays (Hayashi et al. 2012; Lee
et al. 2014) will permit far more accurate classiﬁcation systems and far better
design-led pharmacological chemistry. It remains necessary to be alert to the
demands of, for example, Lipinski’s rule of ﬁve, systemic delivery and uptake,
etc. (Lamberth et al. 2013), but there is every chance that in the future useful
auxinic agrochemicals will be designed, not found.
6
Auxin Perception, Signalling Diversity and Signalling
Sensitivity
It has been noted that there is a large physiologically active dose–response range for
auxin, with responses in primary roots sensitive to low nanomolar auxin concen-
trations, whereas other responses (typically in aerial tissues) have half maximal
doses in the mid micromolar range. Classical ligand binding theory describes 80 %
of the binding within a concentration range one log unit above and below the
afﬁnity of the site, a far more restricted dose dependence than that seen for auxins.
Two distinct receptors offer an explanation for a wider dynamic range, yet it is clear
that TIR1/AFBs are the initiators of many auxin-induced responses in both root and
aerial tissues. The observation that different pairings of TIR1 and Aux/IAA had
different afﬁnities (Caldero´n Villalobos et al. 2012) and that these varied over
several log concentration units has helped explain how a diversity of responses can
be driven through one class of receptor and support a wide dynamic sensitivity
range.
A range of TIR1 co-receptor kinetics does not exclude the possibility that ABP1
might also contribute to modulate the signal outputs (Scherer 2011). It is becoming
apparent that ABP1’s role may be linked to rapid changes in the capacity for polar
auxin transport, hence moderating the input signal to the TIR1/AFB system. It is
clear that active auxin transport mediates plant development by controlling tempo-
ral, environmental and spatial auxin gradients (see Chaps. 4, 5, 8, 10, 14, 15).
Associated changes in membrane area and protein complement might account for
several of the rapid membrane-linked responses on record. Plant morphogenesis
appears to be driven by a two-receptor system.
6
Auxin Receptors and Perception
113

7
Concluding Remarks
The mechanisms of auxin perception still hold some secrets. The role bound auxin
plays in the folding of co-receptor degrons is a key issue and a much more detailed
understanding of binding site selectivities for the TIR1/AFBs should allow us to
deﬁne what it takes to be an auxin. Some of the same understanding may allow us to
design novel agonists and antagonists, as well as tools to help distinguish between
signalling from different receptor systems.
Acknowledegments I am grateful to BBSRC for funding (grant reference BB/F014651/1) and to
Alexander J. Fullwood for creating all the images of protein structures.
References
Abel S, Oeller PW, Theologis A (1994) Early auxin-induced genes encode short-lived nuclear
proteins. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 91:326–330
Badescu G, Napier RM (2006) Receptors for auxin: will it all end in TIRs? Trends Plant Sci
11:217–223
Barbier-Brygoo H, Ephritikhine G, Klambt D, Ghislain M, Guern J (1989) Functional evidence for
an auxin receptor at the plasmalemma of tobacco mesophyll protoplasts. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 86:891–895
Bertosˇa B, Kojic´-Prodic´ B, Wade RC, Tomic´ S (2008) Mechanism of auxin interaction with auxin
binding protein (ABP1): a molecular dynamics simulation study. Biophys J 94:27–37. doi:10.
1529/biophysj.107.109025, PMCID: PMC2134879
Caldero´n Villalobos LI, Lee S, De Oliveira C, Ivetac A, Brandt W, Armitage L, Sheard LB, Tan X,
Parry G, Mao H, Zheng N, Napier R, Kepinski S, Estelle M (2012) A combinatorial TIR1/
AFB-Aux/IAA co-receptor system for differential sensing of auxin. Nat Chem Biol 8:477–485.
doi:10.1038/nchembio.926
Chapman EJ, Estelle M (2009) Mechanism of auxin-regulated gene expression in plants. Annu
Rev Genet 43:265–285. doi:10.1146/annurev-genet-102108-134148
Chen JG, Ullah H, Young JC, Sussman MR, Jones AM (2001) ABP1 is required for organized cell
elongation and division in Arabidopsis embryogenesis. Genes Dev 15:902–911
Dharmasiri S, Dharmasiri N, Hellmann H, Estelle M (2003) The RUB/Nedd8 conjugation pathway
is required for early development in Arabidopsis. EMBO J 22:1762–1770
Dharmasiri N, Dharmasiri S, Estelle M (2005a) The F-box protein TIR1 is an auxin receptor.
Nature 435:441–445
Dharmasiri N, Dharmasiri S, Weijers D, Lechner E, Yamada M, Hobbie L, Ehrismann JS,
Jurgens G, Estelle M (2005b) Plant development is regulated by a family of auxin receptor F
box proteins. Dev Cell 9:109–119
dos Santos MF, Memelink J, Offringa R (2009) Auxin-induced, SCFTIR1-mediated poly-
ubiquitination marks AUX/IAA proteins for degradation. Plant J 59:100–109
Dreher KA, Brown J, Saw RE, Callis J (2006) The Arabidopsis Aux/IAA protein family has
diversiﬁed in degradation and auxin responsiveness. Plant Cell 18:699–714
Effendi Y, Rietz S, Fischer U, Scherer GF (2011) The heterozygous abp1/ABP1 insertional mutant
has defects in functions requiring polar auxin transport and in regulation of early auxin-induced
genes. Plant J 65:282–294
114
R.M. Napier

Ferro N, Gallegos A, Bultinck P, Jacobsen HJ, Carbo´-Dorca R, Reinard T (2006) Coulomb and
overlap self-similarities: a comparative selectivity analysis of structure-function relationships
for auxin-like molecules. J Chem Inf Model 46:1751–1762
Ferro N, Bredow T, Jacobsen H-J, Reinard T (2010) Route to novel auxin: auxin chemical space
toward biological correlation carriers. Chem Rev 110:4690–4708
Hao G-F, Yang G-F (2010) The role of Phe82 and Phe351 in auxin-induced substrate perception
by TIR1 ubiquitin ligase: a novel insight from molecular dynamics simulations. PLoS One 5
(5):e10742
Havens KA, Guseman JM, Jang SS, Pierre-Jerome E, Bolten N, Klavins E, Nemhauser JL (2012)
A synthetic approach reveals extensive tunability of auxin signaling. Plant Physiol
160:135–142
Hayashi K-I, Tan X, Zheng N, Hatate T, Kimura Y, Kepinski S, Nozaki H (2008) Small-molecule
agonists and antagonists of F-box protein-substrate interactions in auxin perception and
signaling. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105:5632–5637
Hayashi K-I, Neve J, Hirose M, Kuboki A, Shimada Y, Kepinski S, Nozaki H (2012) Rational
design of an auxin antagonist of the SCF TIR1 auxin receptor complex. ACS Chem Biol
7:590–598
Jurado S, Abraham Z, Manzano C, Lo´pez-Torrejo´n G, Pacios LF, Del Pozo JC (2010) The
Arabidopsis cell cycle F-box protein SKP2A binds to auxin. Plant Cell 22:3891–3904
Kaethner TM (1977) Conformational change theory for auxin structure-activity relationships.
Nature 267:19–23
Katekar GF (1979) Auxins: on the nature of the receptor site and molecular requirements for auxin
activity. Phytochemistry 18:223–233
Kepinski S, Leyser O (2004) Auxin-induced SCFTIR1-Aux/IAA interaction involves stable mod-
iﬁcation of the SCFTIR1 complex. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101:12381–12386
Kepinski S, Leyser O (2005) The Arabidopsis F-box protein TIR1 is an auxin receptor. Nature
435:446–451
Lamberth C, Jeanmart S, Luksch T, Plant A (2013) Current challenges and trends in the discovery
of agrochemicals. Science 341:742–746
Lee S, Sundaram S, Armitage L, Evans JP, Hawkes T, Kepinski S, Ferro N, Napier RM (2014)
Deﬁning binding efﬁciency and speciﬁcity of auxins for SCFTIR1/AFB-Aux/IAA co-receptor
complex formation. ACS Chem Biol 9(3):673–682
Leyser HM, Lincoln CA, Timpte C, Lammer D, Turner J, Estelle M (1993) Arabidopsis auxin-
resistance gene AXR1 encodes a protein related to ubiquitin-activating enzyme E1. Nature
364:161–164
Lokerse AS, Weijers D (2009) Auxin enters the matrix—assembly of response machineries for
speciﬁc outputs. Curr Opin Plant Biol 12:520–526
Napier RM, Venis MA (1990) Monoclonal antibodies detect an auxin-induced conformational
change in the auxin-binding protein. Planta 182:313–318
Napier RM, David KM, Perrot-Rechenmann C (2002) A short history of auxin-binding proteins.
Plant Mol Biol 49:339–348
Oono Y, Ooura C, Rahman A, Aspuria ET, Hayashi K, Tanaka A, Uchimiya H (2003) p-
Chlorophenoxyisobutyric acid impairs auxin response in Arabidopsis root. Plant Physiol
113:1135–1147
Ouellet F, Overvoorde PJ, Theologis A (2001) IAA17/AXR3: biochemical insight into an auxin
mutant phenotype. Plant Cell 13:829–841
Parry G, Caldero´n Villalobos LI, Prigge M, Peret B, Dharmasiri S, Itoh H, Lechner E, Gray WM,
Bennett M, Estelle M (2009) Complex regulation of the TIR1/AFB family of auxin receptors.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106:22540–22545
Rademacher EH, Mo¨ller B, Lokerse AS, Llavata-Peris CI, van den Berg W, Weijers D (2011) A
cellular expression map of the Arabidopsis AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR gene family. Plant J
68:597–606
6
Auxin Receptors and Perception
115

Ramos J, Zenser N, Leyser O, Callis J (2001) Rapid degradation of auxin/indoleacetic acid
proteins requires conserved amino acids of domain II and is proteasome dependent. Plant
Cell 13:2349–2360
Robert S, Kleine_Vehn J et al (2010) ABP1 mediates auxin inhibition of clathrin-dependent
endocytosis in Arabidopsis. Cell 143:111–121
Rouse D, Mackay P, Stirnberg P, Estelle M, Leyser O (1998) Changes in auxin response from
mutations in an AUX/IAA gene. Science 279:1371–1373. doi:10.1126/science.279.5355.1371
Ruegger M, Dewey E, Gray WM, Hobbie L, Turner J, Estelle M (1998) The TIR1 protein of
Arabidopsis functions in auxin response and is related to human SKP2 and yeastGrr1p. Genes
Dev 12:198–207, PMCID: PMC316440
Scherer GFE (2011) AUXIN-BINDING-PROTEIN1, the second auxin receptor: what is the
signiﬁcance
of
a
two-receptor
concept
in
plant
signal
transduction?
J
Exp
Bot
62:3339–3357. doi:10.1093/jxb/err033
Shi J-H, Yang Z-B (2011) Is ABP1 a receptor yet? Mol Plant 4:635–640
Shimomura S (2006) Identiﬁcation of a glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored plasma membrane
protein interacting with the C-terminus of auxin-binding protein1. Plant Mol Biol 60:663–677
Tan X, Calderon-Villalobos LIA, Sharon M, Zheng C, Robinson CV, Estelle M, Zheng N (2007)
Mechanism of auxin perception by the TIR1 ubiquitin ligase. Nature 446:640–645
Tiwari SB, Hagen G, Guilfoyle T (2003) The roles of auxin response factor domains in auxin-
responsive transcription. Plant Cell 15:533–543
Tomic´ S, Gabdoulline RR, Kojic´-Prodic´ B, Wade RC (1998) Classiﬁcation of auxin plant
hormones by interaction property similarity indices. J Comput Aided Mol Des 12:63–79
Tromas A, Popanov I, Perrot-Rechenmann C (2010) AUXIN-BINDING PROTEIN1 is required
for differential responses mediating root growth. PLoS One 4:436–446
Vernoux T, Brunoud G et al (2011) The auxin signalling network translates dynamic input into
robust patterning at the shoot apex. Mol Syst Biol 7:508. doi:10.1038/msb.2011.39
Walsh TA, Neal R, Merlo AO, Honma M, Hicks GR, Wolff K, Matsumura W, Davies JP (2006)
Mutations in an auxin receptor homolog AFB5 and in SGT1b confer resistance to synthetic
picolinate auxins and not to 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid or indole-3-acetic acid in
Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 142:542–552
Woo EJ, Marshall J, Bauly J, Chen JG, Venis M, Napier RM, Pickersgill RW (2002) Crystal
structure of auxin-binding protein 1 in complex with auxin. EMBO J 21:2877–2885
Xu T, Wen M, Nagawa S, Fu Y, Chen JG, Wu MJ, Perrot-Rechenmann C, Friml J, Jones AM,
Yang Z (2010) Cell surface- and rho GTPase-based auxin signaling controls cellular interdig-
itation in Arabidopsis. Cell 143:99–110. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2010.09.003
Xu T, Dai N, Chen J, Nagawa S, Cao M, Li H, Zhou Z, Chen X, De Rycke R, Rakusova´ H,
Wang W, Jones AM, Friml J, Patterson SE, Bleecker AB, Yang Z (2014) Cell surface ABP1-
TMK auxin-sensing complex activates ROP GTPase signalling. Science 343:1025–1028
Yu H, Moss BL, Jang SS, Prigge M, Klavins E, Nemhauser JL, Estelle M (2013) Mutations in the
TIR1 auxin receptor that increase afﬁnity for auxin/indole-3-acetic acid proteins result in auxin
hypersensitivity. Plant Physiol 162:295–303. doi:10.1104/pp. 113.215582
116
R.M. Napier

Part II
Auxin and Plant Development

Chapter 7
The Interplay Between Auxin and the Cell
Cycle During Plant Development
Marlies J.F. Demeulenaere and Tom Beeckman
Abstract The essential role of auxin for cell proliferation in plants is well known.
Both auxin signaling and cell cycle regulation have been studied elaborately, but
less is known about the connection between these processes. Recent studies report
on the ﬁrst molecular pathways that have been found to directly link auxin levels to
the regulation of cell cycle activity. Here, we discuss the general effect of auxin on
cell cycle progression and then zoom in on the interplay between auxin and the cell
cycle during root development in Arabidopsis thaliana. At the root tip, an auxin
gradient maintains the correct organization of the ground tissue layers and controls
the size of the root apical meristem. During auxin-induced lateral root initiation
LATERAL ORGAN BOUNDARIES-DOMAIN transcription factors are upregulated
and control reactivation of the cell cycle and cell speciﬁcation, both of which are
needed for proper lateral root initiation. Auxin-induced lateral root initiation-like
pathways are also involved in cell cycle reactivation during the formation of
nematode feeding sites, nitrogen-ﬁxing nodules and callus tissue, pointing to the
existence of one common auxin–cell cycle module to initiate new organs in plants.
1
Introduction
Auxin has been known for a long time as an important regulator of cell proliferation
and raised auxin levels are generally considered as a prerequisite for cell division
competence. Although recently much knowledge has been gained about both auxin
M.J.F. Demeulenaere • T. Beeckman (*)
Department of Plant Systems Biology, VIB, Technologiepark 927, 9052 Gent, Belgium
Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, Technologiepark
927, 9052 Gent, Belgium
e-mail: tom.beeckman@psb.vib-ugent.be
E. Zazˇı´malova´ et al. (eds.), Auxin and Its Role in Plant Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-7091-1526-8_7, © Springer-Verlag Wien 2014
119

signaling and the regulation of the plant cell cycle, many questions remain unan-
swered concerning the connection between both processes. During the last years,
several studies, mainly on root development, have elucidated molecular pathways
that link cellular auxin levels to regulation of the cell cycle machinery. Here, we
ﬁrst give an overview of the general effects of auxin on the plant cell cycle and then
discuss the interaction between auxin and cell cycle activity during plant develop-
mental processes. We focus on post-embryonic root development in Arabidopsis
thaliana (Arabidopsis) and particularly on the reactivation of the cell cycle during
auxin-induced lateral root initiation.
2
The Cell Cycle Machinery
A regular mitotic cell cycle consists of four different phases. From the G1 gap
phase, cells progress toward the S phase, during which DNA is replicated. After a
second gap phase, G2, cells divide into two daughter cells at the M phase. The three
phases from G1 to G2 are collectively called the interphase. During the gap phases
the cells get ready for the upcoming DNA synthesis or mitosis and repair mecha-
nisms are activated when needed. This makes the G1/S and G2/M boundaries
important cell cycle checkpoints, which is also shown by the arrest of cells in either
G1 or G2 during stressful conditions (Tardieu and Granier 2000; Van’t Hof 1985).
The switches between the different phases are controlled by the presence of
different CDK–CYCLIN complexes. Despite the conservation of the core cell
cycle mechanisms in all eukaryotic organisms, there are major differences in the
total number of cell cycle regulators. In plants, many more regulators are involved
compared to animal and yeast, with over 80 cell cycle proteins known to date in
Arabidopsis (Menges et al. 2005; Vandepoele et al. 2002; Van Leene et al. 2010).
Before we zoom in on how auxin interferes with cell cycle regulation, we ﬁrst give a
summary of the molecular players of the plant cell cycle (Fig. 7.1). For a more
profound overview, however, we refer the readers to the review by Inze´ and De
Veylder (2006).
CYCLIN-DEPENDENT KINASES (CDKs) are the main players in the regula-
tion of the cell cycle. As stated by their name, these serine/threonine kinases are
functionally dependent on CYCLINS with which they form protein complexes. The
transcription and degradation of CYCLINS is the main mechanism driving cells
from one phase of the cell cycle to the next. Most plant D-type CYCLINS (CYCD)
are constitutively expressed during the cell cycle, but mainly function during the
transition from G1 to S. A-type CYCLINS (CYCA) are most abundant from S to M
phase and the majority of B-type CYCLINS (CYCB) are speciﬁc to G2 and M
phase (Ito 2000; Menges et al. 2005).
Further regulation of the core cell cycle machinery is established by binding of
CDK inhibitory proteins to the CDK–CYCLIN complexes. In plants, these inhib-
itors are known as ICKs (INTERACTOR/INHIBITOR OF CDK) and until now two
classes have been identiﬁed, being the KIP-RELATED PROTEINS (KRPs) and the
120
M.J.F. Demeulenaere and T. Beeckman

SIAMESE (RELATED) (SIM and SMR) proteins (Churchman et al. 2006; Peres
et al. 2007). More levels of control arise from protein turnover, which is mainly
executed
by
the
SKP1/CULLIN/F-BOX
(SCF)-related
complex
and
the
ANAPHASE-PROMOTING COMPLEX/CYCLOSOME (APC/C), with the latter
speciﬁcally functioning during the progression through and exit from mitosis
S
G2
M
G1
KRP/SMR
CAK
CDKA - CYCD
mitogens
E2F/DP
CDKA - CYCA
WEE1
CAK
APC/C
CDKB - CYCB
CAK
SMR
APC/C
RBR
Fig. 7.1 Progression of the plant cell cycle is regulated by the activity of CDK–CYC complexes.
The transition from the G1 to S phase is mainly controlled by CDKA–CYCD complexes, which
become more abundant in the presence of mitogens due to upregulation of CYCD expression.
CDKA–CYCD activity inhibits RBR through phosphorylation. Subsequently, E2F/DP activity is
released from the inhibition by RBR, and S-phase speciﬁc genes are induced. During the S phase,
CDKA–CYCA complexes are most important. At the G2/M transition, CDKAs are replaced by
CDKBs, which mainly function in collaboration with B-type CYCLINS. For CDKs to be active,
they need to be phosphorylated by CAKs, while binding by KRPs or SMRs inactivates them.
During S and G2 the activity of CDKAs can also be inhibited by the WEE1 kinase. The APC/C
complex is involved in the phase-speciﬁc degradation of CYCA and CYCB
7
The Interplay Between Auxin and the Cell Cycle During Plant Development
121

(Heyman and De Veylder 2012; Vodermaier 2004). CDK activity can also be
switched on and off by changes in the phosphorylation status of the CDK itself.
CDK-ACTIVATING KINASES (CAKs) mediate the phosphorylation of a con-
served threonine residue in the T-loop of the CDKs, which is crucial for CDK
activity (Umeda et al. 2005). The WEE1 kinase is responsible for inactivating
phosphorylation of the CDKs during S and G2 (Cools et al. 2011; De Schutter
et al. 2007; Sorrell et al. 2002; Sun et al. 1999). In most eukaryotes, the activity of
WEE1 can be counteracted by the CDC25 phosphatase (Landrieu et al. 2004), but
no functional CDC25 gene has been found in plants.
CDKs are responsible for the phosphorylation of downstream targets, which
leads to the breakdown of phase-speciﬁc proteins from the previous cell cycle phase
and the activation of players in the upcoming phase. At the G1/S transition much of
this downstream regulation happens through E2F/DP heterodimer transcription
factor activity (Inze´ and De Veylder 2006). RETINOBLASTOMA-RELATED
(RBR) associates with the E2F/DPs and is a direct target of CDKs. In its
unphosphorylated form RBR represses the transcription of E2F/DP target genes.
During the G1/S transition, CYCLIN D-dependent CDKs are responsible for RBR
phosphorylation, and thus inactivation, thereby enabling the activation of E2F/DP
targets.
3
The Interplay Between Auxin and the Cell Cycle
3.1
Auxin Is Needed for Progression Through the Cell Cycle
From studies with tissue cultures, it has been known for many decades that both
auxin and cytokinin are important to maintain cell divisions. Furthermore, the ratio
between these two plant hormones is a decisive factor to discriminate between root
and shoot development from callus tissue and to decide between cell growth and
differentiation on the one hand and cell division on the other hand (Murashige and
Skoog 1962; Tao and Verbelen 1996). Much of the early work on the effect of auxin
and cytokinin on cell cycle progression has been carried out on a diverse set of
samples from several plant species such as tobacco, pea and Arabidopsis. As a
consequence, the apparent discrepancies between the obtained results might have
been caused by different characteristics of the used tissues (Bayliss 1985). Also
later studies with hormonal treatments in planta did not always generate a uniform
picture, most likely because of differences in the endogenous hormone levels and
transcriptional networks that are active in the samples that were studied (John
2007). As a conclusion from the early experiments on auxin and cytokinin as
plant growth regulators, it can be said that both of them are needed to maintain
cells in a proliferation competent state. Pinpointing speciﬁc cell cycle stages during
which these hormones are acting is difﬁcult, since they seem to have a rather
general effect on the progression of the cell cycle (see Chap. 12).
122
M.J.F. Demeulenaere and T. Beeckman

3.2
Auxin and Regulation of the Core Cell Cycle Machinery
Many reports demonstrate the inﬂuence of auxin treatments on the expression of
core cell cycle genes such as CDKA;1 (Hemerly et al. 1993; John et al. 1993),
CYCB1;1 (Ferreira et al. 1994b), CYCA2;1 (Burssens et al. 2000), CYCD3 (Murray
et al. 1998; Soni et al. 1995), and E2Fb (Magyar et al. 2005). Although auxin
treatment increases the expression levels of CDKs (Zhang et al. 1996), it is not able
to induce CDK activity. Cotreatment with cytokinin is needed to dephosphorylate
and thereby activate the mitotic CDKs (John et al. 1993; Orchard et al. 2005; Zhang
et al. 1996, 2005). The effect of auxin on gene regulation is often established
through the activity of AUXIN RESPONSE FACTORS (ARFs). These transcrip-
tion factors bind their target sequences through recognition of auxin response
elements (AuxREs, Ulmasov et al. 1995, 1997). For most of the cell cycle genes
that have been shown to be transcriptionally regulated by auxin, the involvement of
direct binding by ARFs has not been investigated. Many cell cycle genes do
however contain AuxREs in their upstream sequence (Table 7.1). The functionality
of these elements would need to be tested before a direct link between auxin
signaling and the regulation of these genes can be made.
Next to the transcriptional regulation of their gene expression, auxin also targets
protein levels of core cell cycle genes. In the case of E2Fb, auxin both increases the
expression levels and stabilizes the protein (Magyar et al. 2005). Auxin also binds
directly to SKP2A (Jurado et al. 2010), which is an F-box protein that functions in
an SCF complex to regulate the ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis of E2Fc and DPb
(del Pozo et al. 2002, 2006). The interaction between SKP2A and auxin stimulates
both the degradation of SKP2A itself and of its targets (Jurado et al. 2010). The
latter is very reminiscent of the TRANSPORT INHIBITOR RESPONSE 1 (TIR1)-
AUXIN/INDOLE-3-ACETIC ACID INDUCIBLE (Aux/IAA) auxin signaling
pathway (del Pozo and Manzano 2013), in which binding of auxin to the F-box
protein TIR1 leads to the degradation of the Aux/IAA proteins and as such activates
downstream auxin signaling via ARFs. For more details on the auxin signaling
mechanism, we refer readers to the dedicated chapter in this book (see Chap. 6).
SKP2B, the closest homolog of SKP2A, is also regulated by auxin. Auxin has
been shown to promote histone H3 acetylation in the promoter region of SKP2B,
which increases its transcription levels (Manzano et al. 2012). KRP1 was reported
to be targeted for degradation by SKP2B (Ren et al. 2008), but probably SKP2B
also targets positive cell cycle regulators, because it negatively regulates cell
proliferation in both apical and lateral root meristems (Manzano et al. 2012).
Modulation of calcium levels is another strategy used by auxin to inﬂuence the
progression through the cell cycle. Auxin induces a rapid increase of cytosolic Ca2+
concentration (Monshausen 2012; Monshausen et al. 2011; Shishova and Lindberg
2010). Through the activity of calcium-dependent protein kinases and phosphatases,
these increased Ca2+ levels can impact on cell cycle progression. A KRP protein from
Medicago was shown to have higher activity after calcium-dependent phosphoryla-
tion (Pettko´-Szandtner et al. 2006) and regulation of RBR activity by PP2A
phosphatases might also depend on Ca2+ binding to the PP2As (Dudits et al. 2011).
7
The Interplay Between Auxin and the Cell Cycle During Plant Development
123

Table 7.1 Potential binding sites for AUXIN RESPONSE FACTORS in cell cycle genes
Gene name
AGI ID
AuxRE TGTCTC/
GAGACA
AuxRE core
TGTC/GACA
CDKA;1
AT3g48750
–
497, 340, 324, 303, 56
CDKB1;1
AT3g54180
–
95
CDKB1;2
AT2g38620
–
–
CDKB2;1
AT1g76540
–
84, 76
CDKB2;2
AT1g20930
–
334, 239, 194, 159, 142, 34
CDKC;1
AT5g10270
–
935, 696, 518, 378, 225, 198
CDKC;2
AT5g64960
–
120
CDKD;1/CAK3
AT1g73690
–
781, 740, 417
CDKD;2/CAK4
AT1g66750
–
873, 353
CDKD;3/CAK2
AT1g18040
–
–
CDKE;1
AT5g63610
–
35
CDKF;1/CAK1
AT4g28980
–
441, 112
CDKG;1
AT5g63370
–
–
CDKG;2
AT1g67580
–
832, 646, 345, 222, 209, 193, 5
CKS1
AT2g27960
161
–
CKS2
AT2g27970
–
75, 19
CYCA1;1
AT1g44110
648, 140
851, 771
CYCA1;2
AT1g77390
–
481, 332, 263, 63, 23, 8
CYCA2;1
AT5g25380
–
782, 767, 728, 550, 377, 340, 292
CYCA2;2
AT5g11300
–
774, 744, 668, 642, 539, 351, 91
CYCA2;3
AT1g15570
–
686, 640, 340, 213, 97, 36
CYCA2;4
AT1g80370
35
794, 560, 516, 362
CYCA3;1
AT5g43080
96
426, 334, 305
CYCA3;2
AT1g47210
–
988, 881, 731, 717, 332, 325, 288,
276, 268, 261
CYCA3;3
AT1g47220
127
743, 681, 573, 471
CYCA3;4
AT1g47230
–
985, 823, 810, 804, 781, 733, 718,
648, 510, 488, 478, 444, 372, 106
CYCB1;1
AT4g37490
859
526, 289, 136
CYCB1;2
AT5g06150
–
355, 237
CYCB1;3
AT3g11520
–
921, 877, 832, 321, 250
CYCB1;4
AT2g26760
981, 759
928, 237
CYCB1;5
AT1g34460
365, 65
819, 733, 441, 347, 315, 305, 179
CYCB2;1
AT2g17620
440
905, 817, 787, 686, 553, 444, 280, 181
CYCB2;2
AT4g35620
–
854, 739, 295, 185
CYCB2;3
AT1g20610
666
856, 763, 471, 228, 78
CYCB2;4
AT1g76310
–
832, 644, 388
CYCB2;5
AT1g20590
–
797, 713, 458, 411, 326, 305, 296
CYCB3;1
AT1g16330
–
182
CYCC1;1
AT5g48640
–
970, 325, 256, 51
CYCC1;2
AT5g48630
–
–
CYCD1;1
AT1g70210
–
–
CYCD2;1
AT2g22490
–
872, 857, 831, 717, 420, 229, 124
CYCD3;1
AT4g34160
–
251, 219, 54
CYCD3;2
AT5g67260
609, 156
362, 263, 166
(continued)
124
M.J.F. Demeulenaere and T. Beeckman

Table 7.1 (continued)
Gene name
AGI ID
AuxRE TGTCTC/
GAGACA
AuxRE core
TGTC/GACA
CYCD3;3
AT3g50070
–
997, 958, 870, 509, 366, 208, 154
CYCD4;1
AT5g65420
–
641, 434, 264, 71
CYCD4;2
AT5g10440
–
939, 319, 151
CYCD5;1
AT4g37630
–
659, 610, 514, 260
CYCD6;1
AT4g03270
920
926, 899, 19
CYCD7;1
AT5g02110
–
691, 538, 173, 92
CYCH;1
AT5g27620
–
771, 755, 743, 654, 467, 308, 221, 89, 57
CYCL1
AT2g26430
835, 727, 496
717, 417, 14
DEL1
AT3g48160
–
518, 428, 341
DEL2
AT5g14960
425, 50, 7
563, 488, 334, 169
DEL3
AT3g01330
–
491
DPa
AT5g02470
768
921, 840, 749, 597
DPb
AT5g03415
–
–
E2Fa
AT2g36010
–
692, 604, 584
E2Fb
AT5g22220
478
574, 559, 544, 400
E2Fc
AT1g47870
–
869, 690, 296, 35
KRP1
AT2g23430
330
842, 836, 694, 515, 466, 458, 445,
355, 281, 183
KRP2
AT3g50630
–
970, 909, 876, 666, 620, 589, 539, 184, 67
KRP3
AT5g48820
–
889, 749, 340
KRP4
AT2g32710
–
503, 466, 323, 229
KRP5
AT3g24810
–
988, 925, 847, 519, 99, 76, 61, 16
KRP6
AT3g19150
–
507, 457, 267, 73, 63
KRP7
AT1g49620
407
625, 548, 362, 310, 50
RBR
AT3g12280
–
284, 141, 22
SIM
AT5g04470
–
704, 605, 563
SMR1
AT3g10525
–
393, 354
SMR2
AT1g08180
632
828, 788, 623, 600, 523, 446, 264, 198, 26
SMR3
AT5g02420
10
854, 390, 208, 141, 107
SMR4
AT5g02220
–
687, 375, 318, 12
SMR5
AT1g07500
–
343
SMR6
AT5g40460
–
872, 705, 469
SMR8
AT1g10690
–
846, 787, 691, 365, 242, 167
SMR11
AT2g28330
–
839, 817, 752, 508, 32
WEE1
AT1g02970
–
–
This table gives an overview of the presence of auxin response elements (AuxREs) in the upstream
region of core cell cycle regulators. The gene list is based on the work of Menges et al. (2005),
Vandepoele et al. (2002), and Van Leene et al. (2010). Since variations of the canonical AuxRE
sequence have also been shown to be targeted by ARFs, we present the position of both AuxREs
(TGTCTC) and their core sequence (TGTC, Ulmasov et al. 1999; Walcher and Nemhauser 2012;
Donner et al. 2009). This overview is limited to 1 kb upstream regions and does not exclude the
presence of functional AuxREs in other parts of the promoters. One kb sequences upstream of the
transcriptional start site were obtained from PLAZA 2.5 (Van Bel et al. 2012). Shorter sequences
were extracted if the upstream gene was situated within less than 1 kb. The position of the elements
is indicated as the number of nucleotides upstream of the transcriptional start site. CKS
CDK-SUBUNIT, DEL DP-E2F-LIKE
7
The Interplay Between Auxin and the Cell Cycle During Plant Development
125

3.3
Auxin and Endoreduplication
When plant cells start to differentiate, they often switch from the mitotic cell cycle
to the endocycle. During the endocycle, or endoreduplication, the cell proceeds
from the S phase directly to G1, without passing through G2 and M (Fig. 7.1). This
results in a doubling of the DNA content of the nucleus. This process can occur
several times, yielding cells with 4C, 8C, 16C, and even higher ploidy levels instead
of the usual 2C in Arabidopsis. The biological relevance of endoreduplication has
long remained elusive, but recent progress indicates that the cell cycle switch to
endoreduplication is essential for proper plant development and for responses to the
changing environment (De Veylder et al. 2011).
Different effects of auxin on the endocycle have been reported. In tobacco cell
cultures depleted of cytokinin, auxin was shown to induce cell elongation that was
accompanied by endoreduplication (Valente et al. 1998). High auxin levels have
also been correlated with the induction of endoreduplication in differentiating
tissues, for example during endosperm development (Sabelli et al. 2007), in apricot
and tomato fruits (Bradley and Crane 1955; Chevalier 2007) and in cultured
Petunia tissue (Liscum and Hangarter 1991). The work of Ishida et al. (2010) on
Arabidopsis root tips showed however an opposite effect of auxin on cell ploidy
levels and on the transition from meristematic cells to differentiating cells in the
root apical meristem. Their data indicate that high auxin levels drive cells through
the mitotic cell cycle, while the switch to endocycle is only made when less auxin is
present. This switch was correlated with a decreased transcription of M phase-
speciﬁc genes such as CYCA2;3 and CYCB1;1 (Ishida et al. 2010). Earlier work
from Magyar et al. (2005) showed that auxin stabilizes E2Fb and induces its
expression, which in turn stimulates both the G1/S and G2/M transition. As such
auxin promotes cell proliferation instead of cell cycle exit and endoreduplication.
This dual effect of high auxin concentrations on endoreduplication clearly shows
the importance of the plant developmental context. Depending on the presence of
mitosis promoting factors such as cytokinin, auxin stimulates either cell prolifera-
tion or endoreduplication. Either way, auxin accumulation enhances the G1/S
transition. When concentrations of mitosis-speciﬁc factors are high enough, cells
will divide. If this is not the case, they will switch to endoreduplication. Since auxin
is involved in the regulation of both S and M phase-speciﬁc genes, the auxin level
itself might be involved in making the difference. This is in accordance with a
proposed mechanism for cell cycle progression that depends on an increasing CDK
activity from G1/S to G2/M (De Veylder et al. 2011). As such, cells in which auxin
is not able to induce high enough CDK activity to cross the G2/M border would start
the endocycle. Nevertheless, it is clear that not only the absolute levels of auxin and
cytokinin matter for a balance between mitosis and the endocycle, but the ratio
between these two plant hormones is as important.
126
M.J.F. Demeulenaere and T. Beeckman

4
An Auxin Gradient at the Root Tip Maintains Pattern
and Size of the Apical Meristem
The transcription factors SHORT ROOT (SHR) and SCARECROW (SCR) func-
tion as a heterodimer at the root apical stem cell niche to establish the cortex and
endodermis ground tissue layers. The continuous production of these layers
depends on two successive asymmetric divisions in the cortex-endodermis initial
cells and their daughter cells. These divisions are controlled by SHR and SCR and
their interaction with RBR. RBR binds to SCR, thereby restricting the functionality
of the SHR–SCR heterodimer to induce the formative divisions (Cruz-Ramı´rez
et al. 2012). One of the direct targets of SHR and SCR, amongst other cell cycle
genes, is CYCD6;1 (Sozzani et al. 2010). The CDKB;1–CYCD6;1 complex was
shown to phosphorylate RBR, which leads to its inactivation (Cruz-Ramı´rez
et al. 2012). In this way a feedforward loop is established that maintains a bistable
circuit in which SHR–SCR activity is either high or low, with high activity inducing
asymmetric cell division (Cruz-Ramı´rez et al. 2012). Auxin can impact on this
circuit by its ability to induce CYCD6;1 expression, although in an SHR–SCR
dependent way (Cruz-Ramı´rez et al. 2012). As such the radial information provided
by the cell type-speciﬁc expression of SHR and SCR and the longitudinal gradient
of auxin at the root tip (Grieneisen et al. 2007, see Chap. 5) together restrict
formative divisions to the cortex-endodermis initial cells and their daughter cells.
Thereby the correct patterning of the ground tissue is guaranteed. Moreover,
Weimer et al. (2012) showed that RBR not only inhibits the transcription of cell
cycle genes, but also of genes that are needed for asymmetric divisions and cell fate
acquisition. Depending on the activity level of CDKA;1, the RBR-controlled
inhibition of only the cell cycle genes or of both cell cycle and speciﬁcation
genes is abrogated. In this way, the asymmetric divisions of the cortex-endodermis
daughter cells only occur when CDKA;1 activity is high enough (Weimer et al.
2012).
As described earlier, the auxin gradient at the root tip also controls the size of the
root apical meristem. High auxin levels inhibit the transition from the mitotic cell
cycle to the endocycle and the coupled transition from meristematic to differentiating
cells by affecting the transcription of cell cycle genes (Ishida et al. 2010). The
PLETHORA (PLT) transcription factors are involved in maintaining the root meri-
stem size (Aida et al. 2004; Galinha et al. 2007), and their activity can be linked to the
auxin gradient. PLT1 and PLT2 are also responsible for correct patterning of the root
stem cell niche, in parallel with SCR and SHR. Both PLT genes are inducible by
auxin via an ARF-dependent pathway (Aida et al. 2004). Their expression follows the
auxin gradient at the root tip and determines the size of the meristem: high PLT
activity close to the quiescent center maintains stem cell identity, medium levels are
linked to mitotic activity of the stem cell daughters, and low levels are correlated with
cellular differentiation (Aida et al. 2004; Galinha et al. 2007).
7
The Interplay Between Auxin and the Cell Cycle During Plant Development
127

5
Auxin Regulates Cell Cycle Reactivation During Lateral
Root Initiation
Two important features of lateral root initiation (LRI) have made it a favorable
model system to study the interaction between auxin and the cell cycle. First, the
inductive effect of auxin treatment on the formation of lateral roots has been known
for a long time (Torrey 1950). An increase of endogenous auxin levels results in an
overproliferation of lateral roots as well (Boerjan et al. 1995; Celenza et al. 1995;
Delarue et al. 1998; King et al. 1995). Second, lateral roots originate from differ-
entiated pericycle cells. The mitotic cell cycle thus needs to be reactivated in these
cells to allow the development of new meristematic regions for the production of
lateral root primordia. During the last decades many studies have been performed to
unravel the tight link between auxin signaling and cell proliferation during the
initiation of lateral roots in Arabidopsis. After a general introduction to lateral root
development, we will give an overview of the interplay between auxin and the cell
cycle during LRI.
5.1
Lateral Root Development in Arabidopsis
In Arabidopsis, lateral roots originate from those pericycle cells that are located
opposite the two xylem strands of the vascular tissue. These cells undergo a series
of divisions which lead to the formation of a dome-shaped primordium that emerges
through the overlaying tissues (Malamy and Benfey 1997). The ﬁrst division is
asymmetric and is thought to follow respeciﬁcation of the cells. The primordium
becomes an independent lateral root when a new meristem has been established at
its tip (Laskowski et al. 1995). When treated with auxin, all xylem pole pericycle
cells can be stimulated into LRI, but under normal conditions only a subset of these
cells will actually start to proliferate (Himanen et al. 2002). This speciﬁcation
process is preceded by the occurrence of auxin response oscillations in the basal
meristem of the main root tip (De Rybel et al. 2010; De Smet et al. 2007; Moreno-
Risueno et al. 2010). The basal meristem is the region immediately shootward of
the root apical meristem where both cell division and cell elongation occur. The
auxin response oscillations take place in the protoxylem strands and induce priming
of the neighboring pericycle cells. Hereafter, auxin response maxima are
maintained as static spots of expression of the pDR5::luciferase auxin response
marker (Moreno-Risueno et al. 2010). These spots are referred to as prebranch sites
and predict the location where later a lateral root might, but not necessarily will be
initiated (Moreno-Risueno et al. 2010; Van Norman et al. 2013). In the prebranch
sites, some primed pericycle cells will get speciﬁed as lateral root founder cells
higher up in the root. Only these speciﬁed founder cells will eventually give rise to
new lateral root primordia. The moment when the founder cells start to divide is
what we refer to as lateral root initiation. It is preceded by increased auxin levels
128
M.J.F. Demeulenaere and T. Beeckman

and the occurrence of an auxin signaling maximum in the lateral root founder cells
(Benkova´ et al. 2003; Dubrovsky et al. 2008).
From the above, it is clear that auxin is involved in almost every single step of
lateral root development, during the formation of prebranch sites, founder cell
speciﬁcation, and primordium initiation, but also later during development and
shaping of the primordium. In what follows we only discuss LRI, which coincides
with the reactivation of the cell cycle in the founder cells.
5.2
Pericycle Cells Must Maintain the Capacity to Divide
As mentioned before, in Arabidopsis lateral roots originate speciﬁcally from peri-
cycle cells that are located next to the two xylem poles that are present in the diarch
vasculature. These cells thus have to remain capable of proceeding through mitotic
cell division cycles, in contrast to most other root cells. The active transcription of
CDKA;1 in all pericycle cells indicates that they still have the competence to divide,
also in mature tissues (Hemerly et al. 1993; Martinez et al. 1992).
One of the main morphological differences that were noted in different species is
the shorter length of the root cell type that produces lateral roots compared to other
root cells. Lloret et al. (1989) measured the length of both xylem and phloem pole-
associated pericycle cells in onion, pea, and carrot and found that the cell ﬁles from
which lateral roots originate always contained the shortest cells. Similar results
were obtained in radish and Arabidopsis (Beeckman et al. 2001; Dubrovsky
et al. 2000; Laskowski et al. 1995). The data from Lloret et al. (1989) indicate
that also non-lateral root founder cells still divide after having left the meristematic
region of the root tip. As such LRI would rather be regulated by a switch from
symmetric to asymmetric divisions than by the reactivation of the mitotic cell cycle
(Lloret et al. 1989). This hypothesis is in accordance with the data from Dubrovsky
et al. (2000) who have shown the occurrence of symmetric, proliferative divisions
in cells in between initiating primordia in Arabidopsis. However, when LRI is
induced, for example by auxin treatment, in mature parts of the root that are located
further away from the root meristem, a reactivation of the cell cycle is needed
(Laskowski et al. 1995).
5.3
A Lateral Root Induction System Synchronizes
Auxin-Induced Cell Cycle Reactivation
A great part of the studies on cell cycle regulation during LRI has been done in
lateral root inducing conditions. Since lateral root formation occurs in an acropetal
manner, different developmental stages of primordia can be found along the length
of the primary root. As such it is hard to pinpoint the cells wherein a speciﬁc
7
The Interplay Between Auxin and the Cell Cycle During Plant Development
129

developmental stage of LRI is occurring. The small number of cells involved in
early lateral root development makes these studies even harder. By inducing the
initiation of lateral roots with auxin treatment, it is possible to synchronize the
development of lateral root primordia over the entire length of the root. This greatly
facilitates the study of speciﬁc steps during lateral root formation.
A commonly used method to obtain such synchronization of lateral root devel-
opment and the associated cell cycle reactivation is the lateral root induction system
(LRIS) developed by Himanen et al. (2002). Plants are germinated on the auxin
transport inhibitor N-1-naphthylphthalamic acid (NPA) to block the formation of
lateral roots. Subsequent treatment with the synthetic auxin 1-naphthalene acetic
acid (NAA) triggers the simultaneous development of lateral roots at both strands of
xylem pole pericycle cells along the entire main root. This system has been used
frequently to study the cell cycle reactivation during auxin-induced LRI (for
example by de Almeida Engler et al. 2009; Himanen et al. 2002, 2004; Vanneste
et al. 2005) and the main ﬁndings will be summarized below.
As discussed before, the initiation of lateral roots in the LRIS differs from
non-induced initiation, because the latter does not occur in fully matured pericycle
cells. A second difference can be found in the cell cycle phase in which the cells are
residing before being recruited for LRI. Blakely and Evans (1979) have shown that
in radish seedling roots all pericycle cells arrest in G2 and can be stimulated by
auxin to reactivate the cell cycle. An arrest in G2 can also clarify the very fast
response to auxin treatment, with divisions already occurring 2 h after the start of
the treatment (Blakely and Evans 1979). The experiments of Beeckman
et al. (2001) also showed evidence for the occurrence of LRI in cells that are
residing in the G2 phase. In the LRIS in Arabidopsis, however, LRI starts from G1
cells (Himanen et al. 2002, 2004), while recently Jansen et al. (2013a) demonstrated
a G2 start using an adapted LRIS in maize.
5.4
Auxin-Induced Cell Cycle Activity During Lateral Root
Initiation
During naturally occurring and auxin-induced LRI, many cell cycle genes can be
found that show changes in their transcriptional regulation. Most of these changes,
such as upregulation of A, B, and D-type CYCLINS, E2Fa, DPa, and CDKB as well
as downregulation of KRP1 and KRP2 (Beeckman et al. 2001; de Almeida Engler
et al. 2009; De Veylder et al. 1999; Doerner et al. 1996; Ferreira et al. 1994a;
Himanen et al. 2002, 2004; Vanneste et al. 2005), are linked to progression of the
cell cycle.
Auxin not only represses the transcription of KRP2 but also lowers its protein
levels (Himanen et al. 2002; Richard et al. 2002; Sanz et al. 2011). KRP2 prevents
formative divisions in the pericycle and overexpression reduces the number of
lateral roots (Himanen et al. 2002). Correspondingly, its expression can be seen
130
M.J.F. Demeulenaere and T. Beeckman

at sites where no lateral roots are to be formed, such as phloem pole pericycle cells
and xylem associated pericycle cells opposite developing primordia (Himanen
et al. 2002), suggesting a role in the strict bilateral origin of lateral roots in
Arabidopsis. Sanz et al. (2011) reported that KRP2 binds CYCD2;1, thereby
probably keeping the CDKA;1–CYCD2;1 complexes inactive. KRP1 is likely to
act in a similar way to KRP2 during LRI. It also inhibits auxin-induced LRI, is
downregulated by auxin, and interacts with CDKA;1–CYCD2;1 complexes
(Himanen et al. 2002; Ren et al. 2008). Repression of KRP activity and induction
of positive cell cycle regulators by auxin can thus account for a reactivation of the
cell cycle.
It has however become clear that an induction of cell proliferation is not enough
to stimulate lateral root development. Overexpression of the G1/S regulators
CYCD3;1 or E2Fa/DPa or of the mitotic CYCB1;1 induces divisions in the peri-
cycle, but these are symmetric and do not lead to lateral root primordium estab-
lishment (De Smet et al. 2010; Doerner et al. 1996; Vanneste et al. 2005). Auxin
signaling is thus responsible for cell speciﬁcation next to reactivation of the cell
cycle. Both processes were shown to act through the SOLITARY ROOT (SLR)/
IAA14-ARF7-ARF19 auxin signaling module (Fukaki et al. 2002, 2005, 2006;
Okushima et al. 2005; Vanneste et al. 2005; Wilmoth et al. 2005).
5.5
Auxin-Induced Cell Speciﬁcation During Lateral Root
Initiation
Speciﬁcation of cells is often correlated with asymmetric cell divisions (De Smet
and Beeckman 2011). This is also the case during LRI, in which the ﬁrst division of
the founder cells is preceded by a nuclear migration that leads to the asymmetric
nature of the division. Evidence has been found that auxin-dependent expression of
the LATERAL ORGAN BOUNDARIES-DOMAIN/ASYMMETRIC LEAVES2-LIKE
(LBD/ASL) gene family is involved in establishing the polarity of these divisions.
Five members of the LBD/ASL family have been shown to be transcriptionally
regulated by ARF7/19 and to be expressed during lateral root development, being
LBD16/ASL18, LBD17/ASL15, LBD18/ASL20, LBD29/ASL16, and LBD33/ASL24
(hereafter referred to as LBD16, LBD17, LBD18, LBD29, and LBD33, Goh
et al. 2012; Okushima et al. 2005). Okushima et al. (2007) showed that ARF7
and ARF19 induce the expression of LBD16 and LBD29 through direct binding to
AuxREs in their promoter regions. LBD16 activity in the founder cells was later
found to be required for nuclear migration and to establish the asymmetric nature of
the ﬁrst divisions during LRI (Goh et al. 2012). Overexpression of LBD16, LBD18,
or LBD29, but not LBD33, can induce the formation of lateral roots in the arf7arf19
lateral rootless mutant background (Goh et al. 2012; Lee et al. 2009; Okushima
et al. 2007). Moreover, LBD18 and LBD33 were shown to function as a
heterodimer to induce the expression of E2Fa in lateral root founder cells by
7
The Interplay Between Auxin and the Cell Cycle During Plant Development
131

binding directly to its promoter (Berckmans et al. 2011). LBD29 levels have also
been linked to changes in the expression of several cell cycle genes (Feng
et al. 2012). Altogether, these data indicate that the LBD genes play an important
role during LRI by linking auxin signaling downstream of ARF7 and ARF19 to cell
cycle activity and cell speciﬁcation (Fig. 7.2).
6
Cell Cycle Reactivation During the Formation of Feeding
Sites, Nodules and Callus Has Similarities with Lateral
Root Initiation
There are two processes known in plants that depend on the reactivation of the cell
cycle in a similar way as is the case for LRI, namely the production of feeding cells
by plant-parasitic nematodes and nitrogen-ﬁxing nodule formation in leguminous
plants. During both processes the cell cycle is activated in differentiated root cells
and in most cases this occurs in the proximity of the xylem poles (Gheysen and
Mitchum 2011; Goverse et al. 2000; Grunewald et al. 2009b). Moreover, the
development of these organs is linked to an increased auxin response during the
X P En C Ep
X P En C Ep
auxin
lateral root initiation
SLR/IAA14
ARF7/19
LBDs
asymmetric cell division
E2Fa
cell fate
specification
cell cycle
genes
Fig. 7.2 LBD transcription factors regulate cell cycle activity and cell speciﬁcation during lateral
root initiation. During auxin-induced lateral root initiation the cell cycle must be reactivated and
the founder cells need to be respeciﬁed. Both processes depend on auxin signaling via SLR/IAA14
and ARF7/19. LBD transcription factors are directly targeted by ARF7/19 and subsequently also
directly induce E2Fa expression. Both ARFs and LBDs probably also target other genes that are
involved in cell cycle activity and cell fate speciﬁcation. As such an asymmetric cell division is
established that ensures proper lateral root initiation. Gray-colored cells have elevated auxin
response levels. X xylem, P pericycle, En endodermis, C cortex, Ep epidermis
132
M.J.F. Demeulenaere and T. Beeckman

early events (Grunewald et al. 2009a, b; Takanashi et al. 2011; van Noorden
et al. 2007), similar to the accumulation of auxin in founder cells before LRI
(Benkova´ et al. 2003; Dubrovsky et al. 2008). Concordantly, a large number of
proteins were shown to be coregulated during auxin treatment and nodule-inducing
Rhizobium infection (van Noorden et al. 2007).
Both nematodes and Rhizobium bacteria affect auxin distribution, as such
generating high auxin concentrations at the sites of infection (Gheysen and
Mitchum 2011; Grunewald et al. 2009a, b; Hewezi and Baum 2013; see
Chap. 18). This leads, amongst others, to the upregulation of genes involved in
cell proliferation. CDKA;1, CDKB1;1, CYCA2;1, and CYCB1;1 are upregulated
during nematode infection, at the site where a feeding cell will be established
(de Almeida Engler et al. 1999; Niebel et al. 1996). In the legume Medicago,
CYCA2;2 was shown to be upregulated in the proliferating cells involved in nodule
formation (Roudier et al. 2003). KRP1 and KRP2, inhibitors of LRI (see higher,
Himanen et al. 2002), also have an inhibitory effect on the formation of feeding
sites and nodules (Ren et al. 2008; Vieira et al. 2013). All this points to an important
role for auxin during the formation of nodules and nematode feeding sites in plant
roots. Since the same cell types are involved as for LRI, it can be assumed that
similar pathways are activated to translate the auxin signal into stimulation of the
cell cycle machinery. This idea is enforced by the fact that nematode infection is
correlated with the production of lateral roots at feeding sites (Goverse et al. 2000).
Another process with high similarity to LRI is the in vitro regeneration of plants
through callus formation, which also requires elevated auxin levels (Gordon
et al. 2007). Callus induction from both root and shoot explants was shown to
follow a lateral-root-development pathway (Sugimoto et al. 2010) and callus from
root and hypocotyl explants is initiated from xylem-pole-associated pericycle cells
(Atta et al. 2009), which are also responsible for LRI. Moreover, xylem-pole-
pericycle-like cells were found to be involved in callus formation from cotyledons
and petals (Sugimoto et al. 2010).
Four of the LBD transcription factors functioning during LRI are also required
for callus induction (Fan et al. 2012; Xu et al. 2012). In line with the data on LRI,
upregulation of LBD16, 17, 18, and 29 during callus formation was shown to be
dependent on auxin signaling via ARF7 and ARF19 (Fan et al. 2012). ABERRANT
LATERAL ROOT FORMATION 4 (ALF4) is another protein that has been shown
to be essential during LRI as well as callus induction (Celenza et al. 1995;
DiDonato et al. 2004; Sugimoto et al. 2010). ALF4 functions independently of
auxin signaling and seems to have a general effect on cell proliferation competence
in different tissues and plant organs (Celenza et al. 1995; Chupeau et al. 2013;
DiDonato et al. 2004; Vanneste et al. 2005).
Clearly, a common auxin-dependent pathway is used for the initiation of lateral
roots, the induction of feeding sites and nodules and the formation of callus. The
distinction between these processes most probably depends on the combination of
elevated auxin levels with other growth regulators. An example of this is the switch
from callus proliferation to root regeneration when the auxin-to-cytokinin ratio in
the growth medium is increased.
7
The Interplay Between Auxin and the Cell Cycle During Plant Development
133

7
Perspectives
From all the studies that have been done to clarify the interplay between auxin and
the cell cycle, it is clear that a tight link exists between cellular auxin levels and the
ability of cells to maintain a proliferative status. For some of the developmental
processes that we have described here, factors bridging these auxin levels with cell
cycle regulatory genes have been elucidated. There are of course many more
processes in which both auxin signaling and cell cycle activity play prominent
roles, for example during embryogenesis, the initiation of shoot-derived organs,
leaf development, vasculature and cambium development, and lateral root forma-
tion beyond the initiation stage. In the future, we expect more links between auxin
and cell cycle regulation to be revealed. It will be interesting to ﬁnd out if identical
pathways are employed in distinct plant organs. This seems possible, since, similar
to their function in the root tip, SHR, SCR, RBR, and CYCD6;1 activity have been
correlated and linked to progression of the cell cycle during leaf development in
Arabidopsis (Dhondt et al. 2010). Due to the extensiveness of some of the gene
families involved in linking auxin to the cell cycle during root development (for
example the Aux/IAA, ARF, CDK, CYCLIN and LBD families), it is also plausible
that other members of these families will be found to perform similar functions in
other tissues. It is however very well possible that other genes will also emerge as
signal transducers between auxin and cell proliferation.
Most of the results described here were generated from research on Arabidopsis.
Comparisons with other species will tell us more about the evolutionary conserva-
tion of these pathways. Studies with a recently developed lateral root induction
system for maize (Jansen et al. 2013b) will certainly shed more light on this aspect.
The ﬁrst results point toward conserved mechanisms between mono- and dicotyle-
donous plants concerning auxin-induced lateral root initiation (Jansen et al. 2013a).
Acknowledgments M.J.F.D. is indebted to the Agency for Innovation by Science and Technol-
ogy in Flanders (IWT) for a predoctoral grant. Work in the lab of T.B. is supported by the
Interuniversity Attraction Poles Programme IAP7/29 from the Belgian Federal Science Policy
Ofﬁce.
References
Aida M, Beis D, Heidstra R, Willemsen V, Blilou I, Galinha C, Nussaume L, Noh Y-S,
Amasino R, Scheres B (2004) The PLETHORA genes mediate patterning of the Arabidopsis
root stem cell niche. Cell 119(1):109–120. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2004.09.018
Atta R, Laurens L, Boucheron-Dubuisson E, Guivarc’h A, Carnero E, Giraudat-Pautot V, Rech P,
Chriqui D (2009) Pluripotency of Arabidopsis xylem pericycle underlies shoot regeneration
from root and hypocotyl explants grown in vitro. Plant J 57(4):626–644. doi:10.1111/j.1365-
313X.2008.03715.x
134
M.J.F. Demeulenaere and T. Beeckman

Bayliss MW (1985) Regulation of the cell division cycle in cultured plant cells. In: Bryant JA,
Francis D (eds) The cell division cycle in plants. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp
157–177
Beeckman T, Burssens S, Inze´ D (2001) The peri-cell-cycle in Arabidopsis. J Exp Bot 52(Spec
Issue):403–411
Benkova´ E, Michniewicz M, Sauer M, Teichmann T, Seifertova´ D, Ju¨rgens G, Friml J (2003)
Local, efﬂux-dependent auxin gradients as a common module for plant organ formation. Cell
115(5):591–602
Berckmans B, Vassileva V, Schmid SPC, Maes S, Parizot B, Naramoto S, Magyar Z, Alvim Kamei
CL, Koncz C, Bo¨gre L, Persiau G, De Jaeger G, Friml J, Simon R, Beeckman T, De Veylder L
(2011) Auxin-dependent cell cycle reactivation through transcriptional regulation of
Arabidopsis E2Fa by lateral organ boundary proteins. Plant Cell 23(10):3671–3683. doi:10.
1105/tpc.111.088377
Blakely LM, Evans TA (1979) Cell dynamics studies on the pericycle of radish seedling roots.
Plant Sci Lett 14(1):79–83
Boerjan W, Cervera M-T, Delarue M, Beeckman T, Dewitte W, Bellini C, Caboche M, Van
Onckelen H, Van Montagu M, Inze´ D (1995) superroot, a recessive mutation in Arabidopsis,
confers auxin overproduction. Plant Cell 7(9):1405–1419
Bradley MV, Crane JC (1955) The effect of 2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic acid on cell and nuclear
size and endopolyploidy in parenchyma of apricot fruits. Am J Bot 42(3):273–281
Burssens S, de Almeida Engler J, Beeckman T, Richard C, Shaul O, Ferreira P, Van Montagu M,
Inze´ D (2000) Developmental expression of the Arabidopsis thaliana CycA2;1 gene. Planta
211(5):623–631
Celenza JL Jr, GrisaﬁPL, Fink GR (1995) A pathway for lateral root formation in Arabidopsis
thaliana. Genes Dev 9(17):2131–2142
Chevalier C (2007) Cell cycle control and fruit development. In: Inze´ D (ed) Cell cycle control and
plant development, vol 32, Annual plant reviews. Blackwell, Oxford, UK
Chupeau M-C, Granier F, Pichon O, Renou J-P, Gaudin V, Chupeau Y (2013) Characterization of
the early events leading to totipotency in an Arabidopsis protoplast liquid culture by temporal
transcript proﬁling. Plant Cell. doi:10.1105/tpc.113.109538
Churchman ML, Brown ML, Kato N, Kirik V, Hu¨lskamp M, Inze´ D, De Veylder L, Walker JD,
Zheng Z, Oppenheimer DG, Gwin T, Churchman J, Larkin JC (2006) SIAMESE, a plant-
speciﬁc cell cycle regulator, controls endoreplication onset in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell
18(11):3145–3157. doi:10.1105/tpc.106.044834
Cools T, Iantcheva A, Weimer AK, Boens S, Takahashi N, Maes S, Van den Daele H, Van
Isterdael G, Schnittger A, De Veylder L (2011) The Arabidopsis thaliana checkpoint kinase
WEE1 protects against premature vascular differentiation during replication stress. Plant Cell
23(4):1435–1448. doi:10.1105/tpc.110.082768
Cruz-Ramı´rez A, Dı´az-Trivin˜o S, Blilou I, Grieneisen VA, Sozzani R, Zamioudis C, Miskolczi P,
Nieuwland J, Benjamins R, Dhonukshe P, Caballero-Pe´rez J, Horvath B, Long Y, Ma¨ho¨nen
AP, Zhang H, Xu J, Murray JAH, Benfey PN, Bako L, Mare´e AFM, Scheres B (2012) A
bistable circuit involving SCARECROW-RETINOBLASTOMA integrates cues to inform
asymmetric stem cell division. Cell 150(5):1002–1015. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2012.07.017
de Almeida Engler J, De Vleesschauwer V, Burssens S, Celenza JL Jr, Inze´ D, Van Montagu M,
Engler G, Gheysen G (1999) Molecular markers and cell cycle inhibitors show the importance
of cell cycle progression in nematode-induced galls and syncytia. Plant Cell 11(5):793–808
de Almeida Engler J, De Veylder L, De Groodt R, Rombauts S, Boudolf V, De Meyer B,
Hemerly A, Ferreira P, Beeckman T, Karimi M, Hilson P, Inze´ D, Engler G (2009) Systematic
analysis of cell-cycle gene expression during Arabidopsis development. Plant J 59(4):645–660.
doi:10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.03893.x
De Rybel B, Vassileva V, Parizot B, Demeulenaere M, Grunewald W, Audenaert D, Van
Campenhout J, Overvoorde P, Jansen L, Vanneste S, Mo¨ller B, Wilson M, Holman T, Van
Isterdael G, Brunoud G, Vuylsteke M, Vernoux T, De Veylder L, Inze´ D, Weijers D, Bennett
7
The Interplay Between Auxin and the Cell Cycle During Plant Development
135

MJ, Beeckman T (2010) A novel Aux/IAA28 signaling cascade activates GATA23-dependent
speciﬁcation of lateral root founder cell identity. Curr Biol 20(19):1697–1706. doi:10.1016/j.
cub.2010.09.007, S0960-9822(10)01088-2 [pii]
De Schutter K, Joube`s J, Cools T, Verkest A, Corellou F, Babiychuk E, Van Der Schueren E,
Beeckman T, Kushnir S, Inze´ D, De Veylder L (2007) Arabidopsis WEE1 kinase controls cell
cycle arrest in response to activation of the DNA integrity checkpoint. Plant Cell 19(1):211–
225. doi:10.1105/tpc.106.045047
De Smet I, Beeckman T (2011) Asymmetric cell division in land plants and algae: the driving force
for differentiation. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 12(3):177–188. doi:10.1038/nrm3064
De Smet I, Tetsumura T, De Rybel B, Frei dit Frey N, Laplaze L, Casimiro I, Swarup R, Naudts M,
Vanneste S, Audenaert D, Inze´ D, Bennett MJ, Beeckman T (2007) Auxin-dependent regula-
tion of lateral root positioning in the basal meristem of Arabidopsis. Development 134(4):681–
690
De Smet I, Lau S, Voß U, Vanneste S, Benjamins R, Rademacher EH, Schlereth A, De Rybel B,
Vassileva V, Grunewald W, Naudts M, Levesque MP, Ehrismann JS, Inze´ D, Luschnig C,
Benfey PN, Weijers D, Van Montagu MCE, Bennett MJ, Ju¨rgens G, Beeckman T (2010)
Bimodular auxin response controls organogenesis in Arabidopsis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
107(6):2705–2710. doi:10.1073/pnas.0915001107
De Veylder L, de Almeida Engler J, Burssens S, Manevski A, Lescure B, Van Montagu M,
Engler G, Inze´ D (1999) A new D-type cyclin of Arabidopsis thaliana expressed during lateral
root primordia formation. Planta 208(4):453–462
De Veylder L, Larkin JC, Schnittger A (2011) Molecular control and function of endoreplication
in development and physiology. Trends Plant Sci 16(11):624–634. doi:10.1016/j.tplants.2011.
07.001
del Pozo JC, Manzano C (2013) Auxin and the ubiquitin pathway. Two players-one target: the cell
cycle in action. J Exp Bot. doi:10.1093/jxb/ert363
del Pozo JC, Boniotti MB, Gutierrez C (2002) Arabidopsis E2Fc functions in cell division and is
degraded by the ubiquitin-SCFAtSKP2 pathway in response to light. Plant Cell 14(12):3057–
3071
del Pozo JC, Diaz-Trivino S, Cisneros N, Gutierrez C (2006) The balance between cell division
and endoreplication depends on E2FC-DPB, transcription factors regulated by the ubiquitin-
SCFSKP2A pathway in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 18(9):2224–2235. doi:10.1105/tpc.105.039651
Delarue M, Prinsen E, Van Onckelen H, Caboche M, Bellini C (1998) Sur2 mutations of
Arabidopsis thaliana deﬁne a new locus involved in the control of auxin homeostasis. Plant
J 14(5):603–611
Dhondt S, Coppens F, De Winter F, Swarup K, Merks RMH, Inze´ D, Bennett MJ, Beemster GTS
(2010) SHORT-ROOT and SCARECROW regulate leaf growth in Arabidopsis by stimulating
S-phase progression of the cell cycle. Plant Physiol 154(3):1183–1195. doi:10.1104/pp.110.
158857
DiDonato RJ, Arbuckle E, Buker S, Sheets J, Tobar J, Totong R, GrisaﬁP, Fink GR, Celenza JL
(2004) Arabidopsis ALF4 encodes a nuclear-localized protein required for lateral root forma-
tion. Plant J 37(3):340–353. doi:10.1046/j.1365-313X.2003.01964.x
Doerner P, Jørgensen J-E, You R, Steppuhn J, Lamb C (1996) Control of root growth and
development by cyclin expression. Nature 380(6574):520–523. doi:10.1038/380520a0
Donner TJ, Sherr I, Scarpella E (2009) Regulation of preprocambial cell state acquisition by auxin
signaling in Arabidopsis leaves. Development 136(19):3235–3246. doi:10.1242/dev.037028
Dubrovsky JG, Doerner PW, Colo´n-Carmona A, Rost TL (2000) Pericycle cell proliferation and
lateral root initiation in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 124(4):1648–1657
Dubrovsky JG, Sauer M, Napsucialy-Mendivil S, Ivanchenko MG, Friml J, Shishkova S,
Celenza J, Benkova´ E (2008) Auxin acts as a local morphogenetic trigger to specify lateral
root founder cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105(25):8790–8794. doi:10.1073/pnas.
0712307105
136
M.J.F. Demeulenaere and T. Beeckman

Dudits D, A´ braha´m E, Miskolczi P, Ayaydin F, Bilgin M, Horva´th GV (2011) Cell-cycle control as
a target for calcium, hormonal and developmental signals: the role of phosphorylation in the
retinoblastoma-centred pathway. Ann Bot 107(7):1193–1202. doi:10.1093/aob/mcr038
Fan M, Xu C, Xu K, Hu Y (2012) LATERAL ORGAN BOUNDARIES DOMAIN transcription
factors direct callus formation in Arabidopsis regeneration. Cell Res 22(7):1169–1180. doi:10.
1038/cr.2012.63
Feng Z, Sun X, Wang G, Liu H, Zhu J (2012) LBD29 regulates the cell cycle progression in
response to auxin during lateral root formation in Arabidopsis thaliana. Ann Bot 110(1):1–10.
doi:10.1093/aob/mcs019
Ferreira P, Hemerly A, de Almeida Engler J, Bergounioux C, Burssens S, Van Montagu M,
Engler G, Inze´ D (1994a) Three discrete classes of Arabidopsis cyclins are expressed during
different intervals of the cell cycle. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 91(24):11313–11317
Ferreira PCG, Hemerly AS, de Almeida Engler J, Van Montagu M, Engler G, Inze´ D (1994b)
Developmental expression of the Arabidopsis cyclin gene cyc1At. Plant Cell 6(12):1763–1774
Fukaki H, Tameda S, Masuda H, Tasaka M (2002) Lateral root formation is blocked by a gain-of-
function mutation in the SOLITARY-ROOT/IAA14 gene of Arabidopsis. Plant J 29(2):153–168
Fukaki H, Nakao Y, Okushima Y, Theologis A, Tasaka M (2005) Tissue-speciﬁc expression of
stabilized SOLITARY-ROOT/IAA14 alters lateral root development in Arabidopsis. Plant J 44
(3):382–395. doi:10.1111/j.1365-313X.2005.02537.x
Fukaki H, Taniguchi N, Tasaka M (2006) PICKLE is required for SOLITARY-ROOT/IAA14-
mediated repression of ARF7 and ARF19 activity during Arabidopsis lateral root initiation.
Plant J 48(3):380–389. doi:10.1111/j.1365-313X.2006.02882.x
Galinha C, Hofhuis H, Luijten M, Willemsen V, Blilou I, Heidstra R, Scheres B (2007) PLETH-
ORA proteins as dose-dependent master regulators of Arabidopsis root development. Nature
449(7165):1053–1057. doi:10.1038/nature06206
Gheysen G, Mitchum MG (2011) How nematodes manipulate plant development pathways for
infection. Curr Opin Plant Biol 14(4):415–421. doi:10.1016/j.pbi.2011.03.012
Goh T, Joi S, Mimura T, Fukaki H (2012) The establishment of asymmetry in Arabidopsis lateral
root founder cells is regulated by LBD16/ASL18 and related LBD/ASL proteins. Development
139(5):883–893. doi:10.1242/dev.071928
Gordon SP, Heisler MG, Reddy GV, Ohno C, Das P, Meyerowitz EM (2007) Pattern formation
during de novo assembly of the Arabidopsis shoot meristem. Development 134(19):3539–
3548. doi:10.1242/dev.010298
Goverse A, de Almeida Engler J, Verhees J, van der Krol S, Helder J, Gheysen G (2000) Cell cycle
activation by plant parasitic nematodes. Plant Mol Biol 43(5–6):747–761
Grieneisen VA, Xu J, Mare´e AFM, Hogeweg P, Scheres B (2007) Auxin transport is sufﬁcient to
generate a maximum and gradient guiding root growth. Nature 449(7165):1008–1013. doi:10.
1038/nature06215
Grunewald W, Cannoot B, Friml J, Gheysen G (2009a) Parasitic nematodes modulate
PIN-mediated auxin transport to facilitate infection. PLoS Pathog 5(1):e1000266. doi:10.
1371/journal.ppat.1000266
Grunewald W, van Noorden G, Van Isterdael G, Beeckman T, Gheysen G, Mathesius U (2009b)
Manipulation of auxin transport in plant roots during Rhizobium symbiosis and nematode
parasitism. Plant Cell 21(9):2553–2562. doi:10.1105/tpc.109.069617
Hemerly AS, Ferreira P, de Almeida Engler J, Van Montagu M, Engler G, Inze´ D (1993) cdc2a
expression in Arabidopsis is linked with competence for cell division. Plant Cell 5(12):1711–
1723. doi:10.1105/tpc.5.12.1711
Hewezi T, Baum TJ (2013) Manipulation of plant cells by cyst and root-knot nematode effectors.
Mol Plant Microbe Interact 26(1):9–16. doi:10.1094/MPMI-05-12-0106-FI
Heyman J, De Veylder L (2012) The anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome in control of plant
development. Mol Plant 5(6):1182–1194. doi:10.1093/mp/sss094
7
The Interplay Between Auxin and the Cell Cycle During Plant Development
137

Himanen K, Boucheron E, Vanneste S, de Almeida Engler J, Inze´ D, Beeckman T (2002) Auxin-
mediated cell cycle activation during early lateral root initiation. Plant Cell 14(10):2339–2351.
doi:10.1105/tpc.004960
Himanen K, Vuylsteke M, Vanneste S, Vercruysse S, Boucheron E, Alard P, Chriqui D, Van
Montagu M, Inze´ D, Beeckman T (2004) Transcript proﬁling of early lateral root initiation.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101(14):5146–5151. doi:10.1073/pnas.0308702101
Inze´ D, De Veylder L (2006) Cell cycle regulation in plant development. Annu Rev Genet 40:77–
105. doi:10.1146/annurev.genet.40.110405.090431
Ishida T, Adachi S, Yoshimura M, Shimizu K, Umeda M, Sugimoto K (2010) Auxin modulates the
transition from the mitotic cycle to the endocycle in Arabidopsis. Development 137(1):63–71.
doi:10.1242/dev.035840
Ito M (2000) Factors controlling cyclin B expression. Plant Mol Biol 43(5–6):677–690
Jansen L, Hollunder J, Roberts I, Forestan C, Fonteyne P, Van Quickenborne C, Zhen R-G,
McKersie B, Parizot B, Beeckman T (2013a) Comparative transcriptomics as a tool for the
identiﬁcation of root branching genes in maize. Plant Biotechnol J. doi:10.1111/pbi.12104
Jansen L, Parizot B, Beeckman T (2013b) Inducible system for lateral roots in Arabidopsis
thaliana and maize. Methods Mol Biol 959:149–158. doi:10.1007/978-1-62703-221-6_9
John PCL (2007) Hormonal regulation of cell cycle progression and its role in development. In:
Inze´ D (ed) Cell cycle control and plant development. Blackwell, Oxford, pp 311–334
John PCL, Zhang K, Dong C, Diederich L, Wightman F (1993) p34cdc2 related proteins in control
of cell cycle progression, the switch between division and differentiation in tissue develop-
ment, and stimulation of division by auxin and cytokinin. Aust J Plant Physiol 20(5):503–526
Jurado S, Abraham Z, Manzano C, Lo´pez-Torrejo´n G, Pacios LF, Del Pozo JC (2010) The
Arabidopsis cell cycle F-box protein SKP2A binds to auxin. Plant Cell 22(12):3891–3904.
doi:10.1105/tpc.110.078972
King JJ, Stimart DP, Fisher RH, Bleecker AB (1995) A mutation altering auxin homeostasis and
plant morphology in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 7(12):2023–2037. doi:10.1105/tpc.7.12.2023
Landrieu I, da Costa M, De Veylder L, Dewitte F, Vandepoele K, Hassan S, Wieruszeski J-M,
Corellou F, Faure J-D, Van Montagu M, Inze´ D, Lippens G (2004) A small CDC25 dual-
speciﬁcity tyrosine-phosphatase isoform in Arabidopsis thaliana. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
101(36):13380–13385. doi:10.1073/pnas.0405248101
Laskowski MJ, Williams ME, Nusbaum HC, Sussex IM (1995) Formation of lateral root meri-
stems is a two-stage process. Development 121(10):3303–3310
Lee HW, Kim NY, Lee DJ, Kim J (2009) LBD18/ASL20 regulates lateral root formation in
combination with LBD16/ASL18 downstream of ARF7 and ARF19 in Arabidopsis. Plant
Physiol 151(3):1377–1389. doi:10.1104/pp.109.143685
Liscum E, Hangarter RP (1991) Manipulation of ploidy level in cultured haploid Petunia tissue by
phytohormone treatments. J Plant Physiol 138(1):33–38
Lloret PG, Casero PJ, Pulgarı´n A, Navascue´s J (1989) The behaviour of two cell populations in the
pericycle of Allium cepa, Pisum sativum, and Daucus carota during early lateral root devel-
opment. Ann Bot 63:465–475
Magyar Z, De Veylder L, Atanassova A, Bako´ L, Inze´ D, Bo¨gre L (2005) The role of the
Arabidopsis E2FB transcription factor in regulating auxin-dependent cell division. Plant Cell
17(9):2527–2541. doi:10.1105/tpc.105.033761
Malamy JE, Benfey PN (1997) Organization and cell differentiation in lateral roots of Arabidopsis
thaliana. Development 124(1):33–44
Manzano C, Ramirez-Parra E, Casimiro I, Otero S, Desvoyes B, De Rybel B, Beeckman T,
Casero P, Gutierrez C, del Pozo JC (2012) Auxin and epigenetic regulation of SKP2B, an
F-box that represses lateral root formation. Plant Physiol 160(2):749–762. doi:10.1104/pp.112.
198341
Martinez MC, Jørgensen J-E, Lawton MA, Lamb CJ, Doerner PW (1992) Spatial pattern of cdc2
expression in relation to meristem activity and cell proliferation during plant development.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 89(16):7360–7364
138
M.J.F. Demeulenaere and T. Beeckman

Menges M, de Jager SM, Gruissem W, Murray JAH (2005) Global analysis of the core cell cycle
regulators of Arabidopsis identiﬁes novel genes, reveals multiple and highly speciﬁc proﬁles of
expression and provides a coherent model for plant cell cycle control. Plant J 41(4):546–566.
doi:10.1111/j.1365-313X.2004.02319.x
Monshausen GB (2012) Visualizing Ca2+ signatures in plants. Curr Opin Plant Biol 15(6):677–
682. doi:10.1016/j.pbi.2012.09.014
Monshausen GB, Miller ND, Murphy AS, Gilroy S (2011) Dynamics of auxin-dependent Ca2+ and
pH signaling in root growth revealed by integrating high-resolution imaging with automated
computer vision-based analysis. Plant J 65(2):309–318. doi:10.1111/j.1365-313X.2010.04423.x
Moreno-Risueno MA, Van Norman JM, Moreno A, Zhang J, Ahnert SE, Benfey PN (2010)
Oscillating gene expression determines competence for periodic Arabidopsis root branching.
Science 329(5997):1306–1311. doi:10.1126/science.1191937
Murashige T, Skoog F (1962) A revised medium for rapid growth and bio assays with Tobacco
tissue cultures. Physiol Plant 15:473–497
Murray JAH, Freeman D, Greenwood J, Huntley R, Makkerh J, Riou-Khamlichi C, Sorrell DA,
Cockcroft C, Carmichael JP, Soni R, Shah ZH (1998) Plant D cyclins and retinoblastoma
protein homologues. In: Francis D, Dudits D, Inze´ D (eds) Plant cell division. Portland Press,
London, pp 99–127
Niebel A, de Almeida Engler J, Hemerly A, Ferreira P, Inze´ D, Van Montagu M, Gheysen G
(1996) Induction of cdc2a and cyc1At expression in Arabidopsis thaliana during early phases
of nematode-induced feeding cell formation. Plant J 10(6):1037–1043
Okushima Y, Overvoorde PJ, Arima K, Alonso JM, Chan A, Chang C, Ecker JR, Hughes B, Lui A,
Nguyen D, Onodera C, Quach H, Smith A, Yu G, Theologis A (2005) Functional genomic
analysis of the AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR gene family members in Arabidopsis thaliana:
unique and overlapping functions of ARF7 and ARF19. Plant Cell 17(2):444–463. doi:10.1105/
tpc.104.028316
Okushima Y, Fukaki H, Onoda M, Theologis A, Tasaka M (2007) ARF7 and ARF19 regulate
lateral root formation via direct activation of LBD/ASL genes in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 19
(1):118–130. doi:10.1105/tpc.106.047761
Orchard CB, Siciliano I, Sorrell DA, Marchbank A, Rogers HJ, Francis D, Herbert RJ,
Suchomelova P, Lipavska H, Azmi A, Van Onckelen H (2005) Tobacco BY-2 cells expressing
ﬁssion yeast cdc25 bypass a G2/M block on the cell cycle. Plant J 44(2):290–299. doi:10.1111/
j.1365-313X.2005.02524.x
Peres A, Churchman ML, Hariharan S, Himanen K, Verkest A, Vandepoele K, Magyar Z,
Hatzfeld Y, Van Der Schueren E, Beemster GTS, Frankard V, Larkin JC, Inze´ D, De Veylder
L (2007) Novel plant-speciﬁc cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors induced by biotic and abiotic
stresses. J Biol Chem 282(35):25588–25596. doi:10.1074/jbc.M703326200
Pettko´-Szandtner A, Me´sza´ros T, Horva´th GV, Bako´ L, Csorda´s-To´th E´, Blastya´k A,
Zhiponova M, Miskolczi P, Dudits D (2006) Activation of an alfalfa cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor by calmodulin-like domain protein kinase. Plant J 46(1):111–123. doi:10.1111/j.
1365-313X.2006.02677.x
Ren H, Santner A, del Pozo JC, Murray JAH, Estelle M (2008) Degradation of the cyclin-
dependent kinase inhibitor KRP1 is regulated by two different ubiquitin E3 ligases. Plant J
53(5):705–716. doi:10.1111/j.1365-313X.2007.03370.x
Richard C, Lescot M, Inze´ D, De Veylder L (2002) Effect of auxin, cytokinin, and sucrose on cell
cycle gene expression in Arabidopsis thaliana cell suspension cultures. Plant Cell Tissue
Organ Cult 69(2):167–176. doi:10.1023/A:1015241709145
Roudier F, Fedorova E, Lebris M, Lecomte P, Gyo¨rgyey J, Vaubert D, Horvath G, Abad P,
Kondorosi A, Kondorosi E (2003) The Medicago species A2-type cyclin is auxin regulated and
involved in meristem formation but dispensable for endoreduplication-associated developmen-
tal programs. Plant Physiol 131(3):1091–1103. doi:10.1104/pp.102.011122
7
The Interplay Between Auxin and the Cell Cycle During Plant Development
139

Sabelli PA, Nguyen H, Larkins BA (2007) Cell cycle and endosperm development. In: Inze´ D
(ed) Cell cycle control and plant development, vol 32, Annual plant reviews. Blackwell,
Oxford, UK
Sanz L, Dewitte W, Forzani C, Patell F, Nieuwland J, Wen B, Quelhas P, De Jager S, Titmus C,
Campilho A, Ren H, Estelle M, Wang H, Murray JAH (2011) The Arabidopsis D-type cyclin
CYCD2;1 and the inhibitor ICK2/KRP2 modulate auxin-induced lateral root formation. Plant
Cell 23(2):641–660. doi:10.1105/tpc.110.080002
Shishova M, Lindberg S (2010) A new perspective on auxin perception. J Plant Physiol 167
(6):417–422. doi:10.1016/j.jplph.2009.12.014
Soni R, Carmichael JP, Shah ZH, Murray JAH (1995) A family of cyclin D homologs from plants
differentially controlled by growth regulators and containing the conserved retinoblastoma
protein interaction motif. Plant Cell 7(1):85–103
Sorrell DA, Marchbank A, McMahon K, Dickinson JR, Rogers HJ, Francis D (2002) A WEE1
homologue from Arabidopsis thaliana. Planta 215(3):518–522. doi:10.1007/s00425-002-
0815-4
Sozzani R, Cui H, Moreno-Risueno MA, Busch W, Van Norman JM, Vernoux T, Brady SM,
Dewitte W, Murray JAH, Benfey PN (2010) Spatiotemporal regulation of cell-cycle genes by
SHORTROOT links patterning and growth. Nature 466(7302):128–132. doi:10.1038/
nature09143
Sugimoto K, Jiao Y, Meyerowitz EM (2010) Arabidopsis regeneration from multiple tissues
occurs via a root development pathway. Dev Cell 18(3):463–471. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2010.
02.004
Sun Y, Dilkes BP, Zhang C, Dante RA, Carneiro NP, Lowe KS, Jung R, Gordon-Kamm WJ,
Larkins BA (1999) Characterization of maize (Zea mays L.) Wee1 and its activity in develop-
ing endosperm. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 96(7):4180–4185
Takanashi K, Sugiyama A, Yazaki K (2011) Involvement of auxin distribution in root nodule
development of Lotus japonicus. Planta 234(1):73–81. doi:10.1007/s00425-011-1385-0
Tao W, Verbelen J-P (1996) Switching on and off cell division and cell expansion in cultured
mesophyll protoplasts of tobacco. Plant Sci 116:107–115
Tardieu F, Granier C (2000) Quantitative analysis of cell division in leaves: methods, develop-
mental patterns and effects of environmental conditions. Plant Mol Biol 43(5–6):555–567
Torrey JG (1950) The induction of lateral roots by indoleacetic acid and root decapitation. Am J
Bot 37:257–264
Ulmasov T, Liu Z-B, Hagen G, Guilfoyle TJ (1995) Composite structure of auxin response
elements. Plant Cell 7(10):1611–1623. doi:10.1105/tpc.7.10.1611
Ulmasov T, Murfett J, Hagen G, Guilfoyle TJ (1997) Aux/IAA proteins repress expression of
reporter genes containing natural and highly active synthetic auxin response elements. Plant
Cell 9(11):1963–1971. doi:10.1105/tpc.9.11.1963
Ulmasov T, Hagen G, Guilfoyle TJ (1999) Dimerization and DNA binding of auxin response
factors. Plant J 19(3):309–319
Umeda M, Shimotohno A, Yamaguchi M (2005) Control of cell division and transcription by
cyclin-dependent kinase-activating kinases in plants. Plant Cell Physiol 46(9):1437–1442.
doi:10.1093/pcp/pci170
Valente P, Tao W, Verbelen J-P (1998) Auxins and cytokinins control DNA endoreduplication and
deduplication in single cells of tobacco. Plant Sci 134:207–215
Van Bel M, Proost S, Wischnitzki E, Movahedi S, Scheerlinck C, Van de Peer Y, Vandepoele K
(2012) Dissecting plant genomes with the PLAZA comparative genomics platform. Plant
Physiol 158(2):590–600. doi:10.1104/pp.111.189514
Van Leene J, Hollunder J, Eeckhout D, Persiau G, Van De Slijke E, Stals H, Van Isterdael G,
Verkest A, Neirynck S, Buffel Y, De Bodt S, Maere S, Laukens K, Pharazyn A, Ferreira PCG,
Eloy N, Renne C, Meyer C, Faure J-D, Steinbrenner J, Beynon J, Larkin JC, Van de Peer Y,
Hilson P, Kuiper M, De Veylder L, Van Onckelen H, Inze´ D, Witters E, De Jaeger G (2010)
140
M.J.F. Demeulenaere and T. Beeckman

Targeted interactomics reveals a complex core cell cycle machinery in Arabidopsis thaliana.
Mol Syst Biol 6:397. doi:10.1038/msb.2010.53
van Noorden GE, Kerim T, Goffard N, Wiblin R, Pellerone FI, Rolfe BG, Mathesius U (2007)
Overlap of proteome changes in Medicago truncatula in response to auxin and Sinorhizobium
meliloti. Plant Physiol 144(2):1115–1131. doi:10.1104/pp.107.099978
Van Norman JM, Xuan W, Beeckman T, Benfey PN (2013) To branch or not to branch: the role of
pre-patterning in lateral root formation. Development 140(21):4301–4310. doi:10.1242/dev.
090548
Van’t Hof J (1985) Control points within the cell cycle. In: Bryant JA, Francis D (eds) The cell
division cycle in plants. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 1–13
Vandepoele K, Raes J, De Veylder L, Rouze´ P, Rombauts S, Inze´ D (2002) Genome-wide analysis
of core cell cycle genes in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 14(4):903–916
Vanneste S, De Rybel B, Beemster GTS, Ljung K, De Smet I, Van Isterdael G, Naudts M, Iida R,
Gruissem W, Tasaka M, Inze´ D, Fukaki H, Beeckman T (2005) Cell cycle progression in the
pericycle is not sufﬁcient for SOLITARY ROOT/IAA14-mediated lateral root initiation in
Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell 17(11):3035–3050. doi:10.1105/tpc.105.035493
Vieira P, Escudero C, Rodiuc N, Boruc J, Russinova E, Glab N, Mota M, De Veylder L, Abad P,
Engler G, de Almeida Engler J (2013) Ectopic expression of Kip-related proteins restrains root-
knot nematode-feeding site expansion. New Phytol 199(2):505–519. doi:10.1111/nph.12255
Vodermaier HC (2004) APC/C and SCF: controlling each other and the cell cycle. Curr Biol 14
(18):R787–R796. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2004.09.020
Walcher CL, Nemhauser JL (2012) Bipartite promoter element required for auxin response. Plant
Physiol 158(1):273–282. doi:10.1104/pp.111.187559
Weimer AK, Nowack MK, Bouyer D, Zhao X, Harashima H, Naseer S, De Winter F, Dissmeyer
N, Geldner N, Schnittger A (2012) Retinoblastoma related1 regulates asymmetric cell divi-
sions in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 24(10):4083–4095. doi:10.1105/tpc.112.104620
Wilmoth JC, Wang S, Tiwari SB, Joshi AD, Hagen G, Guilfoyle TJ, Alonso JM, Ecker JR, Reed
JW (2005) NPH4/ARF7 and ARF19 promote leaf expansion and auxin-induced lateral root
formation. Plant J 43(1):118–130. doi:10.1111/j.1365-313X.2005.02432.x
Xu K, Liu J, Fan M, Xin W, Hu Y, Xu C (2012) A genome-wide transcriptome proﬁling reveals the
early molecular events during callus initiation in Arabidopsis multiple organs. Genomics 100
(2):116–124. doi:10.1016/j.ygeno.2012.05.013
Zhang K, Letham DS, John PCL (1996) Cytokinin controls the cell cycle at mitosis by stimulating
the tyrosine dephosphorylation and activation of p34cdc2-like H1 histone kinase. Planta 200
(1):2–12
Zhang K, Diederich L, John PCL (2005) The cytokinin requirement for cell division in cultured
Nicotiana plumbaginifolia cells can be satisﬁed by yeast Cdc25 protein tyrosine phosphatase.
Implications for mechanisms of cytokinin response and plant development. Plant Physiol 137
(1):308–316. doi:10.1104/pp.104.051938
7
The Interplay Between Auxin and the Cell Cycle During Plant Development
141

Chapter 8
Auxin on the Road Navigated by Cellular PIN
Polarity
Pawel Baster and Jirˇı´ Friml
Abstract The generation of asymmetry, at both cellular and tissue level, is one of
the most essential capabilities of all eukaryotic organisms. It mediates basically all
multicellular development ranging from embryogenesis and de novo organ forma-
tion till responses to various environmental stimuli. In plants, the awe-inspiring
number of such processes is regulated by phytohormone auxin and its directional,
cell-to-cell transport. The mediators of this transport, PIN auxin transporters, are
asymmetrically localized at the plasma membrane, and this polar localization
determines the directionality of intercellular auxin ﬂow. Thus, auxin transport
contributes crucially to the generation of local auxin gradients or maxima, which
instruct given cell to change its developmental program. Here, we introduce and
discuss the molecular components and cellular mechanisms regulating the genera-
tion and maintenance of cellular PIN polarity, as the general hallmarks of cell
polarity in plants.
1
Introduction
The emergence of multicellularity during the evolution of species had its inevitable
repercussions. Efﬁcient intercellular communication was one of such. In other
words, to achieve a mutual goal, neighboring cells (single elements of the system)
needed to perceive and transduce externally or internally generated signals. As a
result, the multicellular organism, as a whole, should be able to translate these
P. Baster • J. Friml (*)
Department of Plant Systems Biology, VIB, 9052 Gent, Belgium
Department of Plant Biotechnology and Genetics, Ghent University, 9052 Gent, Belgium
Institute of Science and Technology Austria (IST Austria), 3400 Klosterneuburg, Austria
e-mail: Jiri.FRIML@ist.ac.at
E. Zazˇı´malova´ et al. (eds.), Auxin and Its Role in Plant Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-7091-1526-8_8, © Springer-Verlag Wien 2014
143

signals into a developmental response. This basic necessity for efﬁcient internal
communication underlies the origin of the small signaling molecules, termed
hormones, present in both plants and animals (Alberts et al. 2007). While the
essential role of hormones in cell-to-cell communication is evident in both cases,
the response of the organism into which the hormonal signal is translated, diverge
between two kingdoms. In animal species, solutions based on a modulation of
behavior were primarily promoted (Davies 2004). In contrast, plants, due to the
sessile nature of their lifestyle, developed a remarkable repertoire of mechanisms
which allow them, through ﬁne-tuning of metabolism or body shaping, to adjust and
survive in ever changing and often adverse environments (Tanaka et al. 2006).
These mechanisms are facilitated not only by intercellular communication but also
by tightly regulated cell division, morphogenesis, and differentiation. Importantly,
most, if not all of them, are based on cell polarization and repolarization which
guide tissue and organ patterning and thus underpin basic shape and functionality of
an organism. The phenomenon of cell polarity can be reﬂected in various aspects
like disproportional growth or asymmetrical distribution of the cellular compo-
nents. The term itself, however, is much broader and in largest sense applies to the
generation of any asymmetry in relation to an axis (Sauer and Friml 2004; Geldner
2009).
Despite its complexity, plant development, with its remarkable polarization-
based ﬂexibility, is coordinated most prominently by a single phytohormone—
auxin—which serves itself as a polarizing cue (Chap. 14; Berleth and Sachs 2001;
Sauer et al. 2006; Leyser 2011). Moreover, generation of local auxin accumulations
(gradients) plays an essential role in plethora of crucial events during plant devel-
opment, like embryogenesis (Chap. 9; Friml et al. 2003; Schlereth et al. 2010),
organogenesis (Chaps. 10 and 11; Benkova´ et al. 2003), phyllotaxis (Reinhardt
et al. 2003), root meristem organization (Sabatini et al. 1999; Friml et al. 2002a),
root stem cell differentiation (Ding and Friml 2010), or vascular tissue patterning
(Scarpella et al. 2006). Although essentially all plant tissues possess the capacity for
auxin biosynthesis (Mano and Nemoto 2012; Ljung 2013) and metabolism
(Ludwig-Mu¨ller 2011; Ruiz Rosquete et al. 2012), it is the directional auxin
transport that most signiﬁcantly contributes for establishing of auxin gradients
across plant tissues (Tanaka et al. 2006). The existence of such a cell-to-cell
transport of auxin (see Chap. 5), which is the unique feature among other phyto-
hormones, was predicted in the mid-1970s by so-called chemiosmotic model
(Rubery and Sheldrake 1974; Raven 1975). This model postulated an auxin efﬂux
from the cell, facilitated by polarly localized exporters, as a critical step during
intercellular auxin translocation. These predictions were spectacularly conﬁrmed
by characterization of the broad spectrum of developmental phenotypes caused by
mutations in the PIN-FORMED (PIN) genes (Ga¨lweiler et al. 1998; Luschnig
et al. 1998; Okada et al. 1991). Basically all different phenotypes found in various
pin mutants could be mimicked by treatments with auxin transport inhibitors
(Vieten et al. 2007). Transport assays from both plant and heterologous systems,
provided later, shown that PIN proteins indeed mediate auxin export from the cells
(Petra´sˇek et al. 2006). The intercellular auxin transport, beside of PINs, rely on the
144
P. Baster and J. Friml

coordinated activity of two other transporter families. These are AUXIN RESIS-
TANT1/LIKE
AUX1
(AUX1/LAX)
and
MULTIDRUG
RESISTANCE/
PHOSPHOGLYCOPROTEIN/ATP-BINDING
CASSETTE
OF
B-TYPE
(MDR/PGP/ABCB) proteins, facilitating inﬂux and efﬂux of auxin from the cell,
respectively (Bennett et al. 1996; Noh et al. 2001; Kramer 2004; Yang et al. 2006;
Mravec et al. 2008; Swarup et al. 2008; Verrier et al. 2008). Despite the fact that
multiple components are involved, a critical control of the directionality of auxin
ﬂux is attributed to the efﬂux activity of the PIN transporters at their highly deﬁned,
polar, subcellular domains (Wis´niewska et al. 2006; Blakeslee et al. 2007;
Titapiwatanakun et al. 2009). PIN family consist of eight members, most of
which (PIN1, 2, 3, 4, 6, and 7) dependent on the tissue or developmental context
exhibit plasma membrane (PM) localization restricted mainly to the apical
(shootward; shoot-apex-facing) or basal (rootward; root-apex-facing) side of the
cell (Zazˇı´malova´ et al. 2007). Notably, also AUX/LAXs and ABCBs, which serve
as an additional source of auxin for PIN-mediated transport (Geisler et al. 2005;
Mravec et al. 2008; Christie et al. 2011; Kubesˇ et al. 2012), in some cases display
asymmetric distribution (Swarup et al. 2001; Panikashvili et al. 2007; McFarlane
et al. 2010).
Although some similarities can be found (Geldner 2009), in general, the mech-
anisms underlying cell polarity in plants differ from those characterized in animals
(Tepass et al. 2001; Humbert et al. 2006; Wells et al. 2006; Chen et al. 2010). It
seems that in both animal and plant systems the delivery of protein to the place of
action by subcellular trafﬁcking is equally important (Dudu et al. 2004; Altschuler
et al. 2008; Geldner 2009; Shivas et al. 2010). On the other hand, the most
prominent trafﬁcking-based determinants of polarity found in animals, like
CRUMBS, SCRIBBLE, and PAR complexes, are missing in plant genomes
(Geldner 2009). Additionally, counterparts of so-called tight junctions which in
animals serve as diffusion barriers, dividing PM of epithelial cells into apical and
baso-lateral, polar domains (Giepmans and van Ijzendoorn 2009), are missing in
majority of plant cell types. A similar structure is present in plants in form of
‘Casparian Strip’, belts of specialized cell wall material generating an extracellular
diffusion barrier, found exclusively in endodermis (Roppolo et al. 2011). Polar
trafﬁcking pathways described in plants cells appear to be more complex than those
found in animals. Besides apical and basal PM domains, characteristic for animal
epidermal cells, also outer- and inner-lateral domains, with corresponding polar
cargos, can be found in similar cell types in plants (Miwa et al. 2007; Langowski
et al. 2010; Takano et al. 2010). What is more, the differences are reﬂected not only
on the cellular but also on the tissue level. Plants in contrast to animals cannot use
the mechanism of invasive, cell-migration-based tissue patterning due to the pres-
ence of the rigid extracellular matrix, cell wall, encapsulating plant cells and
making them immobile (Dettmer and Friml 2011).
Considering the aforementioned differences it is not surprising that alternative,
to animal, solutions were promoted by evolution in plant kingdom. In this chapter,
these plant-speciﬁc mechanisms for cellular polarization are discussed. The polarity
of cellular components is mainly considered in context of PIN proteins, due to their
8
Auxin on the Road Navigated by Cellular PIN Polarity
145

essential role in auxin-mediated plant development. Moreover, in case of PIN
family enough molecular components and polarity generating/maintaining signals
are described for drawing a comprehensive and interesting overview. First, subcel-
lular trafﬁcking machinery relevant for PIN polarity is characterized. Next, cell
structure and cargo-related determinants for PIN targeting and maintenance at the
polar domain are presented. Finally, the feedback mechanisms for PIN polarization
are discussed. It should be taken into account that such a categorization, due to
frequently redundant nature of the biological processes, is largely subjective and
serves mainly for presentation purposes.
2
Long Journey with Unsure Destination: Trafﬁcking
for PIN Polarization
Polar localization of PIN auxin transporters, restricted to the speciﬁc side of the cell
relies, among other mechanisms, on the function of complicated network,
encompassing multiple bypassing and interconnected pathways collectively
referred to as ‘intracellular trafﬁcking’ (Paul and Frigerio 2007; Bassham
et al. 2008; Robinson et al. 2008; Irani and Russinova 2009; Zˇa´rsky´ et al. 2009).
Auxin transporters, subjected to intracellular trafﬁcking, originate from de novo
synthesis and are delivered to the PM through so-called anterograde route. This
mode of intracellular transport generally involves sequential steps including protein
folding in endoplasmic reticulum (ER), translocation through the cis- and trans-
cisternae of the Golgi Apparatus (GA) with ﬁnal arrival to the cell surface (Vitale
and Denecke 1999; Matheson et al. 2006).
2.1
Constitutive PIN Cycling for Rapid Repolarizations
Contrary to the usually presented rather static snapshot pictures, the polar locali-
zation of PIN proteins is in reality very dynamic. Once delivered to the cell surface,
PINs undergo continuous shuttling between PM and intracellular compartments by
rounds of internalization (endocytosis) and polar recycling (exocytosis). These
processes are jointly referred to as ‘constitutive endocytic cycling’ (Geldner
et al. 2001; Dhonukshe et al. 2007; Kleine-Vehn et al. 2011). It is not entirely
clear to which extent the initial secretion of de novo synthesized PINs to the PM
occurs in polar fashion (Langowski and Friml, unpublished) or whether the
endocytic cycling is generating the polar distribution following apolar secretion
(Dhonukshe et al. 2008a).
Nevertheless, the ﬁrst station reached by internalized PINs on their endocytic
trafﬁcking route from the PM is early endosome (EE). This subcellular compart-
ment is critical as it is the intersection between secretory and endocytic routes and,
146
P. Baster and J. Friml

in plants, originates from and associates with trans-Golgi network (TGN) (Dettmer
et al. 2006; Lam et al. 2007; Viotti et al. 2010). Thus, sorting of vesicular cargo for
various subcellular destinations occurs at EE/TGN (Liu et al. 2002; Dettmer
et al. 2006). Once destined for recycling, PINs are translocated from EE/TGN to
the hypothetical compartment called recycling endosome (RE), where they fall
under the control of ADP-Ribosylation Factor GTPase (ARF-GTPase) machinery.
ARF-GTPases, by recruitment of vesicle coat proteins and organizing cytoskeleton
at membrane surfaces, control vesicle trafﬁcking. Their spatiotemporal activity is
determined by the antagonistic activity of ARF guanine nucleotide exchange
factors (ARF-GEFs) and ARF-GTPase activating proteins (ARF-GAPs), which
are activating and deactivating ARF-GTPase complex, respectively (D’Souza-
Schorey and Chavrier 2006). GNOM, a protein belonging to the golgi-associated,
brefeldin-A resistant guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GBF) class of
ARF-GEFs, most prominently controls the polar recycling of PINs to the PM
(Fig. 8.1; Geldner et al. 2003). This protein, and more speciﬁcally its Sec7 domain,
is a target of fungal toxin brefeldin A (BFA), which by inhibiting GNOM-mediated
exocytosis,
causes
reversible
intracellular
accumulation
of
constitutively
endocytosed proteins and aggregation of TGN into so-called BFA compartments
or BFA bodies. This effect serves as a tool to visualize the constitutive cycling of
PM proteins (Geldner et al. 2001). Interestingly, GNOM controls preferentially PIN
recycling to the basal side of the cell, whereas pathway by which PINs are targeted
to the apical domain is, most likely, additionally controlled by uncharacterized,
BFA-insensitive ARF-GEF (Kleine-Vehn et al. 2008a, b).
Besides ARF-GTPases, also RabA1B, a member of small Rab-GTPase family
and INTERACTOR OF CONSTITUTIVE ACTIVE ROP1 (ICR1), an effector of
RHO OF PLANTS1 (ROP1) RAC-GTPase, were recently associated with defective
PIN recycling (Fig. 8.1; Hazak et al. 2010; Feraru et al. 2012). Importantly, genetic
interference with ICR1 results with severely disturbed polarity of PIN1 and PIN2,
as well as various developmental defects (Hazak et al. 2010). Moreover, ICR1 was
shown to interact with Sec3A (Lavy et al. 2007), one of the exocyst complex
(EC) components. EC is known to participate in the extensive fusion of exocytic
vesicles at speciﬁc sites of PM during so-called polarized exocytosis. Polarized
exocytosis is controlled, among others, by Rho GTPases (Zˇa´rsky´ et al. 2009).
Interestingly, another subunit of the EC, Exo70, inﬂuences polar auxin transport
through the regulation PIN1 and PIN2 recycling (Drdova´ et al. 2013).
The fundamental role of the cellular scaffolding and cytoskeleton for intracel-
lular PIN trafﬁcking should be also underlined here. PIN constitutive cycling seems
to depend mainly on actin ﬁlaments since pharmacological interference with the
integrity of this component abolishes internalization and recycling of PINs. On the
other hand, microtubules are essential for both PIN trafﬁcking in dividing cells as
well as for maintenance of the general polarity of the cell (Geldner et al. 2001;
Friml et al. 2002b; Petra´sˇek and Schwarzerova´ 2009; Dhonukshe et al. 2008b;
Boutte´ et al. 2006; Kleine-Vehn et al. 2006, 2008b, c; Kleine-Vehn and Friml
2008). The components of cytoskeleton not only serve as an orientation cues,
8
Auxin on the Road Navigated by Cellular PIN Polarity
147

according to which PINs polarize (Heisler et al. 2010), but also provide guidance
for vesicle trafﬁcking (Voigt et al. 2005) (Fig. 8.1).
The functional signiﬁcance of an energy-demanding process such as constitutive
cycling still remains unclear. Evidently, this process provides the means for fast and
de novo synthesis-independent repositioning of PIN auxin transporters, in response
to internal and external cues. It, thus, allows developmental ﬂexibility conditioned
by rapid redirection of auxin ﬂuxes within tissues (Michniewicz et al. 2007a;
Vanneste and Friml 2009). Another, attractive scenario highlights a possible anal-
ogy between auxin efﬂux and neurotransmitter release. In this scenario, PIN trans-
porters localized at the surface of constitutively cycling intracellular vesicles would
mediate uptake of auxin from the cytosol into these vesicles and after their arrival
and fusion with the PM, auxin would be released from the cell, similarly to the
synaptic release of neurotransmitters (Friml and Palme 2002; Balusˇka et al. 2003).
Such a hypothesis was to some extent supported by experiments based on auxin
immunolocalization and manipulation of secretory pathway using phospholipase
LYTIC 
VACUOLE
CYTOPLASM
CELL WALL
CLATHRIN
PVC/MVB
GOLGI
TGN/EE
VSR recycling
BFA
RE ??
BEN1
VPS45/BEN2
GNL1
GNOM
VAN3
GNOM
SA
GA
GLV
CYTOKININ
DRP1
VPS29
SNX1
CHMP1A
CHMP1B
+/- AUXIN
ABP1
AUXIN
ROP2/ROP6
AP-3 
RabA1b
Fig. 8.1 Intracellular trafﬁcking for polarization of PINs. Auxin, when extracellularly bound to
ABP1, rapidly inhibits clathrin-mediated PIN endocytosis through mutually exclusive ROP2/
ROP6 signaling. Formation of the PIN-containing, clathrin-coated vesicles, in case of cell plate
formation, requires the function of DRP1. Internalization of cargo vesicles from the plasma
membrane is mediated by Rab5 GTPase ARA7, ARF-GEFs GNOM, GNL1, and ARF-GAP
VAN3, inhibited by SA and proceeds along cytoskeletal cell scaffold. Early endocytic trafﬁcking
of PINs requires function of VPS45 BEN2 and ARF-GEF BEN1. PIN recycling depends on
RabA1b GTPase and GNOM, a target of BFA-mediated inhibition of exocytosis. PIN vacuolar
targeting route passing through PVC/MVB includes the regulation by retromer complex compo-
nents VPS29 and SNX1, as well as ESCRT components CHMP1A and CHMP1B. PVC/MVB-
bypassing route for regulating vacuolar function is mediated by AP-3 complex. Cytokinin and
long-term, above- or below-optimal auxin levels reduce the membrane abundance of PINs by
promoting their turnover. In contrast, vacuolar targeting of PINs is inhibited by GA and GLV
peptides
148
P. Baster and J. Friml

Dζ2 mutant (Schlicht et al. 2006; Mancuso et al. 2007). The validation of the
‘neurotransmitter’ hypothesis would provide a connection between the effect of
established inhibitors of auxin transport on both vesicle trafﬁcking and on
PIN-dependent auxin transport (Geldner et al. 2001; Dhonukshe et al. 2008b).
Finally, auxin transporters were proposed to have an additional function, similar
to known, dual function receptor/transporters (Hertel 1983; Foti et al. 2004; Holler
and Dikic 2004). In this scenario, endocytic cycling, analogously to the situation in
animals, would serve as a way to transduce the signal and to regenerate receptors
during ligand-dependent endocytosis. It is important to note that all the interpreta-
tions for functionality of constitutive cycling in the process of auxin transport are
not mutually exclusive, but the latter two (‘neurotransmitter’ and transporter/recep-
tor) remain rather speculative.
On the other hand, changes in PIN polarity have been observed in courses of
many developmental processed including embryogenesis (Friml et al. 2003), organ-
ogenesis (Benkova´ et al. 2003; Reinhardt et al. 2003), fruit development (Sorefan
et al. 2009), vascular tissue formation and regeneration (Scarpella et al. 2006; Balla
et al. 2011), as well as in response to light (Ding et al. 2011) or gravity (Kleine-
Vehn et al. 2010; Rakusova et al. 2011). Such a dynamic translocation of polar
cargos from one cell side to another via recycling endosomes is called transcytosis
(Tuma and Hubbard 2003; Kleine-Vehn et al. 2008a, b) and it appears that plants
evolved to utilize this mechanism to adjust their development in response to
different cues via redirecting of PIN-dependent auxin ﬂuxes.
2.2
Early Endocytic Processes for PIN Polarization
The ﬁrst step of endocytic recycling is the internalization from the PM. The most
prominent route of PIN internalization occurs through the creation of the membrane
curvature from which upon scission the intracellular vesicle is formed, during
clathrin-mediated endocytosis (CME) (Fig. 8.1). Clathrin is a self-assembling
protein, recruited to the membranes where it contributes to membrane deformation
and serves as a vesicular coat constituent (Chen et al. 2011). The fundamental role
of CME in PIN trafﬁcking and thus its essential contribution to generation of
intrinsic polar localization of PINs is well characterized. It was demonstrated by
pharmacological and genetic interference with the clathrin function (Dhonukshe
et al. 2007; Kitakura et al. 2011). The notion that auxin efﬂux carriers from the PIN
family are cargos of CME was further supported by identiﬁcation of DYNAMIN-
RELATED PROTEIN 1 (DRP1) as associated with PIN1 and important for its
endocytosis (Fig. 8.1; Mravec et al. 2011). In plants, the precise function of the
dynamin superfamily, represented among others by DRP1, is not well character-
ized. It is speculated that these proteins might regulate membrane dynamics by
modulation of its scission and tubulation (Praefcke and McMahon 2004; Heymann
and Hinshaw 2009). Importantly, proteins belonging to this family were previously
implicated in plant CME (Konopka et al. 2008; Fujimoto et al. 2010) and
8
Auxin on the Road Navigated by Cellular PIN Polarity
149

interference with DRP1 function results in altered distribution of PIN1 in dividing
cells which eventually leads to a range of developmental phenotypes related to
defective auxin transport (Mravec et al. 2011).
Interestingly, ARF-GEF GNOM, function of which is typically associated with
recycling to the PM, was also implicated in the regulation of endocytosis, based on
its partial localization at the PM and PIN endocytosis defects observed in gnom
knock-down mutants (Fig. 8.1; Naramoto et al. 2010). In addition, another GBF
subfamily member GNOM LIKE1 (GNL1) and ARF-GAP—VASCULAR NET-
WORK DEFECTIVE 3 (VAN3)—have been functionally associated with PM and
endocytic processes, corroborating the notion that ARF GTPase machinery is
involved in endocytosis (Fig. 8.1; Teh and Moore 2007; Naramoto et al. 2010).
Following internalization from the PM, the early endocytic trafﬁcking of PINs
has been shown to rely on the BFA-VISUALIZED ENDOCYTIC TRAFFICKING
DEFECTIVE1/HOPM INTERACTOR7 (BEN1/MIN7/BIG5) ARF-GEF, belong-
ing to BFA-inhibited guanine nucleotide exchange protein (BIG) subfamily
(Fig. 8.1; Tanaka et al. 2009). PIN internalization is regulated also by Rab5/
ARA7, a member of Rab GTPase family (Fig. 8.1; Dhonukshe et al. 2008a) and
an universal component of membrane fusion in eukaryotes—VACUOLAR PRO-
TEIN SORTING45 (VPS45/BEN2) (Fig. 8.1; Tanaka et al. 2013). Genetic inter-
ference with all aforementioned components regulating endocytosis or early
endocytic trafﬁcking leads, besides perturbations in PIN trafﬁcking and polarity,
to signiﬁcant developmental aberrations like embryogenesis and organogenesis
defects, reduced growth and apical dominance, leaf venation pattern discontinuity,
and root meristem disorganization. These observation links early endocytic pro-
cesses to PIN polarity and auxin-mediated development.
2.3
Late Endocytic Trafﬁcking for PIN Abundance
at the Cell Surface
Certain proportion of internalized PINs, based on signals which are not fully
understood, is targeted for the late endocytic pathway. This mode of transport
originates generally at EE/TGN, where proteins are sorted, proceeds through late
endosomes (LE), prevacuolar compartments/multivesicular bodies (PVC/MVB)
and terminates at the ﬁnal destination of membrane proteins—the lytic vacuole.
This subcellular route eventually results with protein degradation. Vacuolar
targeting deﬁnes additional mechanism, by which polar localization of PINs and
speciﬁcally the aspect of their membrane abundance can be controlled (Mu¨ller
et al. 2007; Scheuring et al. 2011). As mentioned above, plant trafﬁcking machinery
encompasses multiple bypassing, often unidirectional transport routes. Accord-
ingly, PINs can be retrieved from late endocytic pathway and thus avoid degrada-
tion. This is accomplished by the Retromer Complex (RC) capacity for retrieval of
certain trafﬁcking components like VACUOLAR SORTING RECEPTORS (VSR)
150
P. Baster and J. Friml

from PVC to EE/TGN (Arighi et al. 2004; Seaman 2005). Both the core component
of this complex—VACUOLAR PROTEIN SORTING29 (VPS29) and its promi-
nent interactor—SORTIN NEXIN1 (SNX1) were shown to control the rate of PINs
progression toward the vacuole (Fig. 8.1; Kleine-Vehn et al. 2008c; Nodzyn´ski
et al. 2013). Such a mechanism is in agreement with widely accepted and evolu-
tionary conserved function of RC (Arighi et al. 2004; Seaman 2005; Shimada
et al. 2006). Notably, a more unorthodox function, related more directly to PIN
polarity, has been also proposed for RC at the level of early endocytic recycling
(Jaillais et al. 2006, 2007).
The signiﬁcance of the ﬁnal steps during late endocytic trafﬁcking of PIN
proteins for their polar localization and abundance is not to be underestimated.
The endosomal-sorting complexes required for transport (ESCRT) machinery,
controlling the formation of internal vesicles within PVC/MVB, which upon fusion
are released into vacuolar lumen, appears to play important role for PIN polariza-
tion (Winter and Hauser 2006; Wollert et al. 2009; Scheuring et al. 2011). Inter-
fering with the function of CHARGED MULTIVESICULAR BODY PROTEIN/
CHROMATIN MODIFYING PROTEIN 1A and 1B (CHMP1A/CHMP1B), com-
ponents of ESCRT machinery, leads to severe developmental defects including
seedling lethality. These phenotypes were associated with inaccurately generated
auxin distribution correlated with the ectopic (PVC/MVB and vacuolar mem-
branes) PIN localization (Fig. 8.1; Spitzer et al. 2009). Also an alternative,
PVC-bypassing, late endocytic pathway, dependent on the ADAPTOR PROTEIN
(AP) Complex 3 subunits β and δ, generally regulates vacuolar function and thus
PIN degradation rate, although it does not affect PIN polarity or abundance at the
PM (Fig. 8.1; Feraru et al. 2010; Zwiewka et al. 2011).
3
Where to Go and Why to Stay? Cues and Cellular
Requirements for Pin Polarity
3.1
Cargo-Based Determinants for Polar PIN Localization
One of the most important initial ﬁndings concerning the determination of PIN
polarity was derived from the ectopic PIN expression in particular cell types. The
PIN2 promoter-driven expression of PIN1 targeted this protein predominantly to
the basal side of root epidermal cells contrasting to the native apical PIN2 locali-
zation in the same cells. Consecutive introduction of the ﬂuorescent tag into certain
place within central hydrophilic loop of PIN1 was sufﬁcient to cause basal-to-apical
switch in PIN1 localization. This was a clear indication that some determinants of
polar PIN localization are encoded intrinsically in PIN amino acid sequence
(Wis´niewska et al. 2006). This sequence-based instruction turned out to be the
phosphorylation status of speciﬁc serine residues located within PIN central hydro-
philic loop (Huang et al. 2010; Zhang et al. 2010). Current model postulates that
8
Auxin on the Road Navigated by Cellular PIN Polarity
151

dephosphorylated PINs are preferentially recruited to the basal, GNOM-dependent
and BFA-sensitive pathway, whereas phosphorylation targets PINs into the apical
cell side, independently of GNOM function (Fig. 8.2; Friml et al. 2004;
Michniewicz et al. 2007b; Kleine-Vehn et al. 2009).
Readjustments of PIN phosphorylation status rely on the antagonistic activity of
protein kinases and phosphatases. AGC3 protein kinases PINOID (PID) and its
homologs WAVY ROOT GROWTH1/2 (WAG1/WAG2) (Benjamins et al. 2001;
Friml et al. 2004; Santner and Watson 2006; Dhonukshe et al. 2010) phosphorylate,
while PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE2A (PP2A) (Muday and DeLong 2001;
Michniewicz et al. 2007b; Ballesteros et al. 2013) dephosphorylate PINs
(Fig. 8.2). Along with PID and WAG proteins, also other kinases such as D6 protein
kinase (Zourelidou et al. 2009) or CDPK-RELATED KINASE5 (Rigo´ et al. 2013)
can phosphorylate PIN proteins and regulate their function, but their exact role is
less clear. On the other hand, phosphatase subunit PP2AA interacts with another
Ser/Thr protein phosphatase, FyPP1, to form functional holoenzyme. FyPP1 and its
GNOM
P
P
PID
WAG2
WAG1
PP2A
FyPP1
FyPP3
LYTIC 
VACUOLE
PAS1
CYTOPLASM
CELL WALL
CESA3
Ca2+
InsP3
IND
APICAL
BASAL
U
U
P
P
MAB4
MEL1
MEL2
MEL3
MEL4
SUPO1
SMT1
CPI1
InsP6 ??
Fig. 8.2 Posttranslational modiﬁcations and cellular requirements for polarization of PINs. PINs
dephosphorylated by PP2A, FyPP1, or FyPP3 phosphatases are preferentially recruited to the
basal, GNOM-dependent, BFA-sensitive pathway, whereas phosphorylation by PID, WAG1, or
WAG2 kinases targets PINs into apical cell site independently of GNOM function. The transcrip-
tion of PID kinase is controlled by IND transcription factor. The activity of the kinases is
inﬂuenced also by MAB4, its homologs MELs and by InsP3 (or alternatively InsP6) that regulate
cellular Ca2+ levels with the assistance of SUPO1. The polar localization of PINs depends on the
sterol and VLCFA composition of the membrane controlled by SMT1, CPI1, and PAS1, respec-
tively. Membrane abundance of PINs, regulated by their vacuolar targeting, depends on the
ubiquitination status of the protein. Cellulose content of the cell wall regulated by CESA3
contributes to the maintenance of PIN polarity
152
P. Baster and J. Friml

close homolog FyPP3 were reported to interact with and directly dephosphorylate
PINs (Fig. 8.2; Dai et al. 2012). Importantly, ﬂuctuations of PIN phosphorylation
status both above and below certain native threshold lead eventually to severe
developmental aberrations like defective embryogenesis and patterning of shoot
apical meristem and root (Christensen et al. 2000; Benjamins et al. 2001; Friml
et al. 2004; Michniewicz et al. 2007b; Dhonukshe et al. 2010; Li et al. 2011; Dai
et al. 2012).
Given the crucial role of PID-mediated PIN phosphorylation in PIN polarity, it is
important to highlight that the regulation of PID activity, on various levels, has also
impact on polar PIN localization and thus on auxin ﬂuxes. Calcium (Ca2+), which is
one of the most ubiquitous secondary messengers in eukaryotes, appears to be the
prominent part of such a system for the regulation of PID kinase activity (Fig. 8.2).
Early experiments in animal and yeast systems have associated the appearance of
cytosolic Ca2+ with the phospholipase C (PLC)-generated inositol trisphosphate
(InsP3). PLC signaling is known to be important for various biological processes
including cell division and differentiation (Michell 2008). The plant ﬁeld has
followed this paradigm upon an observation that InsP3 is able to trigger the release
of Ca2+ from the cellular storage compartments (Blatt et al. 1990; Gilroy et al. 1990;
Krinke et al. 2007; Tang et al. 2007). Controversially, up to date no unambiguous
InsP3-activated Ca2+ channel could be identiﬁed in plants (Testerink and Munnik
2011). Interestingly, there are indications that InsP6 can function as a signaling
molecule, triggering Ca2+ release with a much higher potency than InsP3 (Lemtiri-
Chlieh et al. 2003). Moreover, InsP3 when microinjected into plant can be rapidly
converted into InsP6 (Munnik and Testerink 2009), explaining the earlier observa-
tions of InsP3 being able to release Ca2+. PID kinase was shown to be regulated by
both phospholipid and Ca2+ signaling. Some PID interactors bind Ca2+ (Benjamins
et al. 2003; Zegzouti et al. 2006). Moreover, suppressor of PIN1 overexpression-1
(supo-1) mutant encoding ALTERED EXPRESSION OF APX2 8/FIERY1/HIGH
EXPRESSION
OF
OSMOTICALLY
RESPONSIVE
GENES2/ROTUNDA1
(ALX8/FRY1/HOS2/RON1/SAL1) inositol polyphosphate 1-phosphatase also
with 30(20),50-bisphosphate nucleotidase activity exhibits aberrant PIN polarization
presumably as a result of changed PID activity. It was proposed that this effect is a
result of altered content of cytosolic Ca2+ in a mutant due to disturbed InsP3
metabolism (Fig. 8.2; Zhang et al. 2011a). Although in light of recent ﬁndings, an
alternative explanation, in which InsP6 would be the signal activating Ca2+ cascade,
seems more plausible (Munnik and Nielsen 2011).
Another mode of PID activity regulation applies to its transcription. INDEHIS-
CENT (IND), a basic helix–loop–helix transcription factor through negative regu-
lation of PID and WAG2 expression inﬂuences polar localization of PIN1 and PIN3
proteins (Fig. 8.2). Interestingly, in this case local auxin minimum, which is
required for valve margin formation in Arabidopsis fruit, is not properly
established. Consequently, abnormal fruits which fail to open and thus do not
disperse seeds are observed in ind mutant (Sorefan et al. 2009). Another regulator
of PID activity is ENHANCER OF PINOID/MACCHI-BOU4 (ENP/MAB4)
(Treml et al. 2005; Furutani et al. 2007) and its close homologs MAB4/ENP/
8
Auxin on the Road Navigated by Cellular PIN Polarity
153

NPY1-LIKEs (MEL1, MEL2, MEL3, and MEL4) that are known to inﬂuence polar
PIN
localization
(Fig.
8.2;
Furutani
et
al.
2011).
MAB4
encodes
NON-PHOTOTROPIC HYPOCOTYL3-like (NPH3)-like protein, which associ-
ates with light activated kinase PHOTOTROPIN1 (PHOT1), a blue-light receptor
(Motchoulski and Liscum 1999). NPH3 has been shown to modulate PIN2 trafﬁck-
ing in root phototropism (Wan et al. 2012).
Regulation of PID activity provides also an entry point for various external
signals, such as light or gravity, to which plants are able to dynamically respond by
modulation of their growth. For example, during hypocotyl gravitropic response,
PIN3 and PIN7 polarize to the bottom side of gravity-sensing endodermal cells and
mediate the differential auxin accumulation at the lower side of hypocotyl for
asymmetric bending and growth (Rakusova et al. 2011). Accordingly, blue-light-
dependent signaling cascade causes polarization of PIN3 away from the light
during phototropic response in hypocotyl endodermal cells. This coincides with
an establishment of auxin maximum at the shaded side of an organ (Ding
et al. 2011). Importantly, in both cases PIN repolarization is initiated by differential
recruitment into GNOM-mediated trafﬁcking pathway and depends on the
PID-mediated phosphorylation status of the PIN protein (Ding et al. 2011;
Rakusova et al. 2011).
Beside PIN phosphorylation, another posttranslational protein modiﬁcation
appears to be instructive for PIN localization. The destabilization of PINs from
the PM and their sorting for vacuolar delivery was associated with the linking of the
polyubiquitin chains to speciﬁc lysine residues within PIN2 central hydrophilic
loop (Fig. 8.2; Leitner et al. 2012). Moreover, PIN2 degradation was shown to be
dependent on the 26S proteasome, the universal proteolysis complex of eukaryotic
organisms, which targets ubiquitinated, typically soluble proteins (Sieberer
et al. 2000; Abas et al. 2006). Although recent data clearly show that ubiquitination
is a crucial part of PIN abundance control (Abas et al. 2006; Leitner et al. 2012), it
remains unclear how proteasome activity can contribute to the degradation of PM
proteins such as PINs, which were shown to be targeted to the lytic vacuoles
(Kleine-Vehn et al. 2008c; Laxmi et al. 2008; Shirakawa et al. 2009; Marhavy´
et al. 2011; Baster et al. 2013).
3.2
Cell Structural Determinants of PIN Polarity
Maintenance
The cues and mechanisms described in the previous paragraph dealt mainly with
targeting of PINs to their respective polar domains but not with their maintenance
there. As mentioned before, crucial polarity trafﬁcking components as well as ‘tight
junctions’, which in animals limit migration of the surface proteins between polar
domains of epithelial cells, are absent in the plant kingdom. On the other hand, plant
cells are surrounded by cell wall, a structure absent in animal cells. It appears that in
154
P. Baster and J. Friml

order to preserve abundance and asymmetry of proteins within ﬂuid PM, in
comparison to animals, plants developed both overlapping and alternative mecha-
nisms. The migration of transmembrane proteins within the lipid bilayer can serve
as an example of polarity regulation mechanism which is common for plants and
animals. Interestingly, certain fraction of membrane localized PINs, as reported
previously, appears to be surprisingly stagnant (Dhonukshe et al. 2008a; Men
et al. 2008; Kleine-Vehn et al. 2011). This phenomenon was proposed to be linked
with processes that actually immobilize this fraction of PINs within speciﬁc
structures at the PM, called clusters, which have been detected by super-resolution
microscopy approaches (Kleine-Vehn et al. 2011). The nature of these highly
immobile structures is not entirely clear; however, their appearance might be
related to speciﬁc sterol and lipid composition of the PM (Kleine-Vehn
et al. 2011; Men et al. 2008; Roudier et al. 2010; Carland et al. 2010; Martinie`re
et al. 2012). In fact, the sterol methyl transferase 1 (smt1) mutant, function of which
is required for appropriate synthesis and composition of major membrane sterols
(Diener et al. 2000), is characterized by defective polar auxin transport correlating
with mislocalization of PIN1 and PIN3 proteins (Fig. 8.2; Willemsen et al. 2003).
Similarly, the improper reestablishment of PIN2 polarity following cytokinesis as a
consequence of defective PIN2 endocytosis was reported for sterol biosynthesis,
cyclopropylsterol isomerase1-1 (cpi1-1) mutant (Fig. 8.2; Men et al. 2008). The
involvement of sterols in polar distribution of PIN proteins is additionally supported
by the fact that the internalized PIN2 co-localizes with the sterol marker ﬁlipin and
a prolonged disruption of membrane sterols by ﬁlipin treatments reduces the
heterogeneity and polar localization of PIN2 in the PM (Grebe et al. 2003;
Kleine-Vehn et al. 2006, 2011).
Apart from sterols, some other molecular components that physically scaffold
structure of the membrane appear very important for maintaining PIN polarity.
Sphingolipids,
membrane
constituents
and
signaling
molecules
(Dickson
et al. 2006), were shown to inﬂuence cell polarity (Hoekstra et al. 2003; Nyasae
et al. 2003). The immunophilin-like protein PASSTICINO1 (PAS1) (Bach
et al. 2008; Roudier et al. 2010) is involved in the biosynthesis and metabolism
of very-long-chain fatty acids (VLCFAs), one of the composites of sphingolipids.
In case of pas1 mutant, patterning defects at the cellular level were attributed to
altered auxin distribution during key events in plant life. Disturbed formation of
auxin gradients was associated with abnormal PM distribution of PIN1 protein due
to defective VLCFA synthesis (Fig. 8.2; Roudier et al. 2010). Additionally, PIN1
abundance in its polar domain was shown to be stabilized by interaction with PGP1/
PGP19 ABCB transporters (Titapiwatanakun et al. 2009). Notably, the efﬂux
activity of these ABCB transporters at the PM is positively regulated by PID,
most likely through direct phosphorylation. In this case, another immunophilin—
TWISTED DWARF (TWD) by interaction with PID appears to decrease ABCB
activity at the cell surface (Bouchard et al. 2006; Henrichs et al. 2012; Wang
et al. 2012, 2013).
Finally, recent reports suggest that not only structure of the PM but also the
integrity of the cell wall is required for maintenance of PIN polarity. Such a notion
8
Auxin on the Road Navigated by Cellular PIN Polarity
155

was suggested upon characterization of regulator of PIN polarity3 (repp3) mutant
(Feraru et al. 2011), exhibiting defects in localization of ectopically expressed
PIN1. The mutation responsible for repp mutant phenotype was found in the gene
coding for CELLULOSE SYNTHASE CATALYTIC SUBUNIT3/CONSTITU-
TIVE EXPRESSION OF VSP1/ISOXABEN RESISTANT1/ECTOPIC LIGNIN1
(CESA3/CEV1/IXR1/ELI1). CESA3 is a part of the enzymatic complex required
for synthesis of 1,4 glucans, molecules which are able to associate to form cellulose
microﬁbrils and thus scaffold cell wall (Fig. 8.2; Richmond and Somerville 2000;
Ellis and Turner 2001; Scheible et al. 2001; Can˜o-Delgado et al. 2003; Desprez
et al. 2007). Additionally, pharmacologically induced cell wall degradation or
inhibition of the cell wall biosynthesis resulted in similar phenotypes as in case
of repp3 mutant. Interestingly, plasmolysis-based experiments forcing detachment
of the polar domain from the cell wall suggested that the mechanisms immobilizing
PIN-containing PM clusters might relate to cellulose-based connections between
the polar domain and the cell wall (Feraru et al. 2011; Martinie`re et al. 2012).
4
Transport in Loops: Hormonal Feedback Regulations
of PIN Polarity
4.1
Auxin Feedback on PIN-Dependent Auxin Transport
Polar distribution of PIN auxin transporters can be regulated through plethora of
controlling mechanisms with various molecular players involved. Intriguingly,
another layer of complexity for auxin-driven plant development emerges from the
self-organizing abilities of auxin transport. Already early experiments implied that
auxin-induced changes could instruct capacity and directionality of auxin ﬂow and
thus auxin would have the ability to shape its own transport (Sachs 1981, 1991).
Indeed, the effect of auxin on PIN amounts and PIN localization and thus existence
of multiple feedback mechanisms at various levels has been validated experimen-
tally. One of such mechanisms is a well-characterized nucleus-based SCFTIR1/AFB-
dependent auxin signaling (Dharmasiri and Estelle 2004; Dharmasiri et al. 2005a,
b; Kepinski and Leyser 2005; Chapman and Estelle 2009), involved in the regula-
tion of PIN transcription (Peer et al. 2004; Vieten et al. 2005; Heisler et al. 2005;
Scarpella et al. 2006). SCFTIR1/AFB-dependent auxin signaling appears to have a
double role in transport feedback, controlling both PIN transcription and abundance
at the PM by promoting, upon prolonged auxin exposure, PIN vacuolar targeting for
degradation (Baster et al. 2013). The gravitropic response of the roots serve as an
example of the process facilitated by such a dual mechanism in which ﬂuctuations
of auxin above or below certain physiological threshold through (SCFTIR1/AFB)-
dependent signaling mediate PIN degradation (Fig. 8.1; Abas et al. 2006; Kleine-
Vehn et al. 2008c; Baster et al. 2013). In addition, this transcriptional signaling is
156
P. Baster and J. Friml

also required to feedback on PIN polarity and thus directionality of auxin transport
in both root- and shoot-based model systems (Sauer et al. 2006; Balla et al. 2011).
The auxin feedback loop which has recently drawn considerable amount of
attention, due to its proposed contribution to the polarization of auxin transporters,
is the non-transcriptional auxin effect on PIN endocytosis. Indeed auxin, rapidly
upon application, inhibits PIN internalization and promotes the retention of PINs at
the PM correlating with increased auxin efﬂux capacity (Paciorek et al. 2005).
Although the mechanism is still largely elusive, it was proposed that auxin, when
extracellulary bound to AUXIN-BINDING PROTEIN1 (ABP1), executes this
inhibitory function through dynamic activation of mutually exclusive RHO OF
PLANTS2 and 6 (ROP2/ROP6) pathways downstream of ABP1 (Fig. 8.1). This
mechanism is functionally important in developmental processes like patterning of
the leaf epidermis or root gravitropism (Robert et al. 2010; Xu et al. 2010; Nagawa
et al. 2012; Chen et al. 2012; Lin et al. 2012).
Additional complexity of the system, which depends on auxin-mediated feed-
back and regulates plant development, emerges from the fact that some of its
elements are interconnected. For example CME, activity of which was shown to
be nonuniform throughout the root meristem, directly inﬂuences auxin-responsive
gene expression. Such a mechanism is based on the positive autoregulatory feed-
back mediated by BREVIS RADIX (BRX). This plant-speciﬁc transcription factor,
through auxin-regulated PM-to-nucleus transfer and subsequent transcriptional
activation of certain auxin response factor targets, controls the cell elongation and
proliferation in the root tip. Therefore, the differential pattern of endocytosis splits
the transcriptional auxin signaling within the root meristem and might thus provide
additional positional information to interpret auxin gradients (Mouchel et al. 2004;
Santuari et al. 2011).
Notably, the experimental approaches aiming to explain the principles of auxin
feedback-mediated plant development are more and more prominently supported
by computational models. For example, recently proposed ‘extracellular receptor-
based polarization’ (ERP) model integrates transcription-based intracellular feed-
back mechanisms with a competitive utilization of auxin receptors in the cell
exterior for the spatial regulation of PIN internalization (Wabnik et al. 2010,
2011). Given the fact that during various developmental processes, PINs can
behave differentially, polarizing either toward or away from the auxin source
(Grieneisen et al. 2007; Blilou et al. 2005; Benjamins and Scheres 2008; Kleine-
Vehn et al. 2008b), it is worth mentioning that ERP model proposes mechanistic
principles explaining these contrasting self-organizing properties of auxin transport
(Wabnik et al. 2010, 2011). However, it remains to be seen whether this largely
theoretical model corresponds to the biological reality. This question will be solved
only after the molecular mechanism underlying the polarization of PINs and auxin
transport will be elucidated.
8
Auxin on the Road Navigated by Cellular PIN Polarity
157

4.2
Other Hormonal Regulations of PIN-Dependent Auxin
Transport
It seems that not only auxin can shape the capacity and directionality of its
transport. Other hormones, by inﬂuencing the PM stability of PIN auxin trans-
porters, can be also integrated into the PIN-dependent auxin distribution network.
Most of the plant hormones have been shown to regulate transcription of numerous
genes downstream of their corresponding signaling pathways, thus many of them
directly or indirectly inﬂuence also the transcription of PIN genes. Such an effect is
well characterized in case of cytokinin and ethylene, both of which have also
multiple developmental functions (Swarup et al. 2007; Ru˚zˇicˇka et al. 2007, 2009;
Dello Ioio et al. 2008; Zhang et al. 2011b; Bishopp et al. 2011; Liu et al. 2013).
Other hormones prominently modulate PIN activity by posttranscriptional reg-
ulation. For example, a stabilization of PINs at the PM by interference with their
endocytosis was observed when plants were subjected to pharmacologically or
genetically induced accumulation of the plant hormone salicylic acid (SA) (Fig. 8.1;
Du et al. 2013). In contrast, gibberellic acid (GA) deﬁciency, observed in GA
biosynthesis mutants, promotes degradation of PIN proteins, whereas treatment
with GA increases PIN protein stability by inhibiting PIN vacuolar trafﬁcking. This
mechanism appears to be important for correct gravitropic response of the root
(Fig. 8.1; Willige et al. 2011; Lo¨fke et al. 2013). The stabilization of PIN2 at the
membrane resulting in the perturbations in root gravitropism could be also observed
in both Arabidopsis plants overexpressing GOLVEN (GLV) genes encoding for
small secretory peptides of ROOT GROWTH FACTOR (RGF) family as well as
upon exogenous applications of such compounds (Fig. 8.1; Matsuzaki et al. 2010;
Whitford et al. 2012). In contrast to these stabilizing effects, cytokinin promotes
vacuolar trafﬁcking of PINs thus destabilizing them from the PM. Functionality of
this mechanism was demonstrated during lateral root organogenesis (Fig. 8.1;
Marhavy´ et al. 2011). These frequent observations on the effects of various signal-
ing pathways converging at the regulation of PIN-dependent auxin distribution
network are in line with the model that PIN-mediated asymmetric auxin distribution
functions as a versatile mechanism integrating multiple internal and external
signals (Vanneste and Friml 2009).
5
Conclusions and Perspectives
In recent years, there has been a signiﬁcant advance achieved in our understanding
of the basic rules governing generation, maintenance, and reﬁning of the cellular
polarity in plants. It becomes clear how polar protein localization at the subcellular
scale can underpin basic functionality of an organism and instruct its development.
In particular, the studying of asymmetric distribution displayed by PIN auxin
transporters allowed us to deepen the knowledge about polarity. At the same
158
P. Baster and J. Friml

time, it provided excellent means to comprehend auxin transport machinery and its
contribution, by establishment of asymmetric auxin distribution, to the regulation of
various developmental processes. An important open question remains: to which
extent cellular mechanisms and molecular components of the PIN polar targeting
machinery can be translated into proteins localized at different polar domains in
plants. Another important aspect is the evolution of auxin transport machinery and
thus mechanisms governing polarity generation in more ancient plant species. For
this, the examination of evolutionary older than Angiosperms plant species like
moss or algae, which is rapidly gaining popularity in the plant ﬁeld, will hopefully
signiﬁcantly contribute to our understanding of the polarity phenomenon in the
close future.
References
Abas L, Benjamins R, Malenica N, Paciorek T, Wis´niewska J, Moulinier-Anzola JC, Sieberer T,
Friml J, Luschnig C (2006) Intracellular trafﬁcking and proteolysis of the Arabidopsis auxin-
efﬂux facilitator PIN2 are involved in root gravitropism. Nat Cell Biol 8:249–256
Alberts B, Johnson A, Lewis J, Raff M, Roberts K, Walter P (2007) Molecular biology of the cell,
5th edn. Garland, New York
Altschuler SJ, Angenent SB, Wang Y, Wu LF (2008) On the spontaneous emergence of cell
polarity. Nature 454:886–889
Arighi CN, Hartnell LM, Aguilar RC, Haft CR, Bonifacino JS (2004) Role of the mammalian
retromer in sorting of the cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate receptor. J Cell Biol
165:123–133
Bach L, Michaelson LV, Haslam R, Bellec Y, Gissot L, Marion J, Da Costa M, Boutin JP,
Miquel M, Tellier F, Domergue F, Markham JE, Beaudoin F, Napier JA, Faure JD (2008)
The plant very long chain hydroxy fatty Acyl-CoA dehydratase PASTICCINO2 is essential
and limiting for plant development. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105:14727–14731
Balla J, Kalousek P, Reino¨hl V, Friml J, Procha´zka S (2011) Competitive canalization of
PIN-dependent auxin ﬂow from axillary buds controls pea bud outgrowth. Plant J 65:571–577
Ballesteros I, Domı´nguez T, Sauer M, Paredes P, Duprat A, Rojo E, Sanmartı´n M, Sa´nchez-
Serrano JJ (2013) Specialized functions of the PP2A subfamily II catalytic subunits PP2A-C3
and PP2A-C4 in the distribution of auxin ﬂuxes and development in Arabidopsis. Plant J
73:862–872
Balusˇka F, Samaj J, Menzel D (2003) Polar transport of auxin: carrier-mediated ﬂux across the
plasma membrane or neurotransmitter-like secretion? Trends Cell Biol 13:282–285
Bassham DC, Brandizzi F, Otegui MS, Sanderfoot AA (2008) The secretory system of
Arabidopsis. Arabidopsis Book 6:e0116
Baster P, Robert S, Kleine-Vehn J, Vanneste S, Kania U, Grunewald W, De Rybel B, Beeckman T,
Friml J (2013) SCF(TIR1/AFB)-auxin signaling regulates PIN vacuolar trafﬁcking and auxin
ﬂuxes during root gravitropism. EMBO J 32:260–274
Benjamins R, Scheres B (2008) Auxin: the looping star in plant development. Annu Rev Plant Biol
59:443–465
Benjamins R, Quint A, Weijers D, Hooykaas P, Offringa R (2001) The PINOID protein kinase
regulates organ development in Arabidopsis by enhancing polar auxin transport. Development
128:4057–4067
Benjamins R, Ampudia CSG, Hooykaas PJJ, Offringa R (2003) PINOID-mediated signaling
involves calcium-binding proteins. Plant Physiol 132:1623–1630
8
Auxin on the Road Navigated by Cellular PIN Polarity
159

Benkova´ E, Michniewicz M, Sauer M, Teichmann T, Seifertova´ D, Ju¨rgens G, Friml J (2003)
Local, efﬂux-dependent auxin gradients as a common module for plant organ formation. Cell
115:591–602
Bennett MJ, Marchant A, Green HG, May ST, Ward SP, Millner PA, Walker AR, Schulz B,
Feldmann KA (1996) Arabidopsis AUX1 gene: a permease-like regulator of root gravitropism.
Science 273:948–950
Berleth T, Sachs T (2001) Plant morphogenesis: long-distance coordination and local patterning.
Curr Opin Plant Biol 4:57–62
Bishopp A, Help H, El-Showk S, Weijers D, Scheres B, Friml J, Benkova´ E, Ma¨ho¨nen AP,
Helariutta Y (2011) A mutually inhibitory interaction between auxin and cytokinin speciﬁes
vascular pattern in roots. Curr Biol 21:917–926
Blakeslee JJ, Bandyopadhyay A, Lee OR, Mravec J, Titapiwatanakun B, Sauer M, Makam SN,
Cheng Y, Bouchard R, Adamec J, Geisler M, Nagashima A, Sakai T, Martinoia E, Friml J, Peer
WA, Murphy AS (2007) Interactions among PIN-FORMED and P-glycoprotein auxin trans-
porters in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 19:131–147
Blatt MR, Thiel G, Trentham DR (1990) Reversible inactivation of K+ channels of Vicia stomatal
guard cells following the photolysis of caged inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate. Nature 346:766–769
Blilou I, Xu J, Wildwater M, Willemsen V, Paponov I, Friml J, Heidstra R, Aida M, Palme K,
Scheres B (2005) The PIN auxin efﬂux facilitator network controls growth and patterning in
Arabidopsis roots. Nature 433:39–44
Bouchard R, Bailly A, Blakeslee JJ, Oehring SC, Vincenzetti V, Lee OR, Paponov I, Palme K,
Mancuso S, Murphy AS, Schulz B, Geisler M (2006) Immunophilin-like TWISTED DWARF1
modulates
auxin
efﬂux
activities
of
Arabidopsis
P-glycoproteins.
J
Biol
Chem
281:30603–30612
Boutte´ Y, Crosnier MT, Carraro N, Traas J, Satiat-Jeunemaitre B (2006) The plasma membrane
recycling pathway and cell polarity in plants: studies on PIN proteins. J Cell Sci
119:1255–1265
Can˜o-Delgado A, Penﬁeld S, Smith C, Catley M, Bevan M (2003) Reduced cellulose synthesis
invokes ligniﬁcation and defense responses in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant J 34:351–362
Carland F, Fujioka S, Nelson T (2010) The sterol methyltransferases SMT1, SMT2, and SMT3
inﬂuence Arabidopsis development through nonbrassinosteroid products. Plant Physiol
153:741–756
Chapman EJ, Estelle M (2009) Mechanism of auxin-regulated gene expression in plants. Annu
Rev Genet 43:265–285
Chen CL, Gajewski KM, Hamaratoglu F, Bossuyt W, Sansores-Garcia L, Tao C, Halder G (2010)
The apical-basal cell polarity determinant Crumbs regulates Hippo signaling in Drosophila.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107:15810–15815
Chen X, Irani NG, Friml J (2011) Clathrin-mediated endocytosis: the gateway into plant cells. Curr
Opin Plant Biol 14:674–682
Chen X, Naramoto S, Robert S, Tejos R, Lo¨fke C, Lin D, Yang Z, Friml J (2012) ABP1 and ROP6
GTPase signaling regulate clathrin-mediated endocytosis in Arabidopsis roots. Curr Biol
22:1326–1332
Christensen SK, Dagenais N, Chory J, Weigel D (2000) Regulation of auxin response by the
protein kinase PINOID. Cell 100:469–478
Christie JM, Yang H, Richter GL, Sullivan S, Thomson CE, Lin J, Titapiwatanakun B, Ennis M,
Kaiserli E, Lee OR, Adamec J, Peer WA, Murphy AS (2011) phot1 inhibition of ABCB19
primes lateral auxin ﬂuxes in the shoot apex required for phototropism. PLoS Biol 9(6):
e1001076
D’Souza-Schorey C, Chavrier P (2006) ARF proteins: roles in membrane trafﬁc and beyond. Nat
Rev Mol Cell Biol 7:347–358
Dai M, Zhang C, Kania U, Chen F, Xue Q, McCray T, Li G, Qin G, Wakeley M, Terzaghi W,
Wan J, Zhao Y, Xu J, Friml J, Deng XW, Wang H (2012) A PP6-type phosphatase holoenzyme
160
P. Baster and J. Friml

directly regulates PIN phosphorylation and auxin efﬂux in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell
24:2497–2514
Davies PJ (2004) Plant hormones: biosynthesis, signal transduction, action! Kluwer Academic,
London
Dello Ioio R, Nakamura K, Moubayidin L, Perilli S, Taniguchi M, Morita MT, Aoyama T,
Costantino P, Sabatini S (2008) A genetic framework for the control of cell division and
differentiation in the root meristem. Science 322:1380–1384
Desprez T, Juraniec M, Crowell EF, Jouy H, Pochylova Z, Parcy F, Ho¨fte H, Gonneau M,
Vernhettes S (2007) Organization of cellulose synthase complexes involved in primary cell
wall synthesis in Arabidopsis thaliana. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104:15572–15577
Dettmer J, Friml J (2011) Cell polarity in plants: when two do the same, it is not the same. Curr
Opin Cell Biol 23:686–696
Dettmer J, Hong-Hermesdorf A, Stierhof Y-D, Schumacher K (2006) Vacuolar H+-ATPase
activity is required for endocytic and secretory trafﬁcking in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell
18:715–730
Dharmasiri N, Estelle M (2004) Auxin signaling and regulated protein degradation. Trends Plant
Sci 9:302–308
Dharmasiri N, Dharmasiri S, Estelle M (2005a) The F-box protein TIR1 is an auxin receptor.
Nature 435:441–445
Dharmasiri N, Dharmasiri S, Weijers D, Lechner E, Yamada M, Hobbie L, Ehrismann JS,
Jurgens G, Estelle M (2005b) Plant development is regulated by a family of auxin receptor F
box proteins. Dev Cell 9:109–119
Dhonukshe P, Aniento F, Hwang I, Robinson DG, Mravec J, Stierhof YD, Friml J (2007) Clathrin-
mediated constitutive endocytosis of PIN auxin efﬂux carriers in Arabidopsis. Curr Biol
17:520–527
Dhonukshe P, Tanaka H, Goh T, Ebine K, Ma¨ho¨nen AP, Prasad K, Blilou I, Geldner N, Xu J,
Uemura T, Chory J, Ueda T, Nakano A, Scheres B, Friml J (2008a) Generation of cell polarity
in plants links endocytosis, auxin distribution and cell fate decisions. Nature 456:962–966
Dhonukshe P, Grigoriev I, Fischer R, Tominaga M, Robinson DG, Hasek J, Paciorek T, Petra´sek J,
Seifertova´ D, Tejos R, Meisel LA, Zazı´malova´ E, Gadella TW Jr, Stierhof YD, Ueda T,
Oiwa K, Akhmanova A, Brock R, Spang A, Friml J (2008b) Auxin transport inhibitors impair
vesicle motility and actin cytoskeleton dynamics in diverse eukaryotes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S
A 105:4489–4494
Dhonukshe P, Huang F, Galvan-Ampudia CS, Ma¨ho¨nen AP, Kleine-Vehn J, Xu J, Quint A,
Prasad K, Friml J, Scheres B, Offringa R (2010) Plasma membrane-bound AGC3 kinases
phosphorylate PIN auxin carriers at TPRXS(N/S) motifs to direct apical PIN recycling.
Development 137:3245–3255
Dickson RC, Sumanasekera C, Lester RL (2006) Functions and metabolism of sphingolipids in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Prog Lipid Res 45:447–465
Diener AC, Li H, Zhou W, Whoriskey WJ, Nes WD, Fink GR (2000) Sterol methyltransferase
1 controls the level of cholesterol in plants. Plant Cell 12:853–870
Ding Z, Friml J (2010) Auxin regulates distal stem cell differentiation in Arabidopsis roots. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 107:12046–12051
Ding Z, Galva´n-Ampudia CS, Demarsy E, Łangowski Ł, Kleine-Vehn J, Fan Y, Morita MT,
Tasaka M, Fankhauser C, Offringa R, Friml J (2011) Light-mediated polarization of the PIN3
auxin transporter for the phototropic response in Arabidopsis. Nat Cell Biol 13:447–452
Drdova´ EJ, Synek L, Pecˇenkova´ T, Ha´la M, Kulich I, Fowler JE, Murphy AS, Za´rsky´ V (2013) The
exocyst complex contributes to PIN auxin efﬂux carrier recycling and polar auxin transport in
Arabidopsis. Plant J 73:709–719
Du Y, Tejos R, Beck M, Himschoot E, Li H, Robatzek S, Vanneste S, Friml J (2013) Salicylic acid
interferes with clathrin-mediated endocytic protein trafﬁcking. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110
(19):7946–7951
8
Auxin on the Road Navigated by Cellular PIN Polarity
161

Dudu V, Pantazis P, Gonzalez-Gaitan M (2004) Membrane trafﬁc during embryonic development:
epithelial formation, cell fate decisions and differentiation. Curr Opin Cell Biol 16:407–414
Ellis C, Turner JG (2001) The Arabidopsis mutant cev1 has constitutively active jasmonate and
ethylene signal pathways and enhanced resistance to pathogens. Plant Cell 13:1025–1033
Feraru E, Paciorek T, Feraru MI, Zwiewka M, De Groodt R, De Rycke R, Kleine-Vehn J, Friml J
(2010) The AP-3 B adaptin mediates the biogenesis and function of lytic vacuoles in
Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 22:2812–2824
Feraru E, Feraru MI, Kleine-Vehn J, Martinie`re A, Mouille G, Vanneste S, Vernhettes S,
Runions J, Friml J (2011) PIN polarity maintenance by the cell wall in Arabidopsis. Curr
Biol 21:338–343
Feraru E, Feraru MI, Asaoka R, Paciorek T, De Rycke R, Tanaka H, Nakano A, Friml J (2012)
BEX5/RabA1b regulates trans-Golgi network-to-plasma membrane protein trafﬁcking in
Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 24:3074–3086
Foti M, Moukil MA, Dudognon P, Carpentier JL (2004) Insulin and IGF-1 receptor trafﬁcking and
signaling. Novartis Found Symp 262:125–141
Friml J, Palme K (2002) Polar auxin transport – old questions and new concepts? Plant Mol Biol
49:273–284
Friml J, Benkova´ E, Blilou I, Wisniewska J, Hamann T, Ljung K, Woody S, Sandberg G,
Scheres B, Ju¨rgens G, Palme K (2002a) AtPIN4 mediates sink-driven auxin gradients and
root patterning in Arabidopsis. Cell 108:661–673
Friml J, Wis´niewska J, Benkova´ E, Mendgen K, Palme K (2002b) Lateral relocation of auxin
efﬂux regulator PIN3 mediates tropism in Arabidopsis. Nature 415:806–809
Friml J, Vieten A, Sauer M, Weijers D, Schwarz H, Hamann T, Offringa R, Ju¨rgens G (2003)
Efﬂux-dependent auxin gradients establish the apical-basal axis of Arabidopsis. Nature
426:147–153
Friml J, Yang X, Michniewicz M, Weijers D, Quint A, Tietz O, Benjamins R, Ouwerkerk PB,
Ljung K, Sandberg G, Hooykaas PJ, Palme K, Offringa R (2004) APINOID-dependent binary
switch in apical-basal PIN polar targeting directs auxin efﬂux. Science 306:862–865
Fujimoto M, Arimura S, Ueda T, Takanashi H, Hayashi Y, Nakano A, Tsutsumi N (2010)
Arabidopsis dynamin-related proteins DRP2B and DRP1A participate together in clathrin-
coated vesicle formation during endocytosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107:6094–6099
Furutani M, Kajiwara T, Kato T, Treml BS, Stockum C, Torres-Ruiz RA, Tasaka M (2007) The
gene MACCHI-BOU 4/ENHANCER OF PINOID encodes a NPH3-like protein and reveals
similarities between organogenesis and phototropism at the molecular level. Development
134:3849–3859
Furutani M, Sakamoto N, Yoshida S, Kajiwara T, Robert HS, Friml J, Tasaka M (2011)
Polarlocalized NPH3-like proteins regulate polarity and endocytosis of PIN-FORMED auxin
efﬂux carriers. Development 138:2069–2078
Ga¨lweiler L, Guan C, Mu¨ller A, Wisman E, Mendgen K, Yephremov A, Palme K (1998)
Regulation of polar auxin transport by AtPIN1 in Arabidopsis vascular tissue. Science
282:2226–2230
Geisler
M,
Blakeslee
JJ,
Bouchard
R,
Lee
OR,
Vincenzetti
V,
Bandyopadhyay
A,
Titapiwatanakun B, Peer WA, Bailly A, Richards EL, Ejendal KF, Smith AP, Baroux C,
Grossniklaus U, Mu¨ller A, Hrycyna CA, Dudler R, Murphy AS, Martinoia E (2005) Cellular
efﬂux of auxin catalyzed by the Arabidopsis MDR/PGP transporter AtPGP1. Plant J
44:179–194
Geldner N (2009) Cell polarity in plants: a PARspective on PINs. Curr Opin Plant Biol 12:42–48
Geldner N, Friml J, Stierhof YD, Ju¨rgens G, Palme K (2001) Auxin transport inhibitors block PIN1
cycling and vesicle trafﬁcking. Nature 413:425–428
Geldner N, Anders N, Wolters H, Keicher J, Kornberger W, Muller P, Delbarre A, Ueda T,
Nakano A, Ju¨rgens G (2003) The Arabidopsis GNOM ARF-GEF mediates endosomal
recycling, auxin transport, and auxin-dependent plant growth. Cell 112:219–230
162
P. Baster and J. Friml

Giepmans BN, van Ijzendoorn SC (2009) Epithelial cell-cell junctions and plasma membrane
domains. Biochim Biophys Acta 1788:820–831
Gilroy S, Read ND, Trewavas AJ (1990) Elevation of cytoplasmic calcium by caged calcium or
caged inositol triphosphate initiates stomatal closure. Nature 346:769–771
Grebe M, Xu J, Mobius W, Ueda T, Nakano A, Geuze HJ, Rook MB, Scheres B (2003)
Arabidopsis sterol endocytosis involves actin-mediated trafﬁcking via ARA6-positive early
endosomes. Curr Biol 13:1378–1387
Grieneisen VA, Xu J, Mare´e AF, Hogeweg P, Scheres B (2007) Auxin transport is sufﬁcient to
generate a maximum and gradient guiding root growth. Nature 449:1008–1013
Hazak O, Bloch D, Poraty L, Sternberg H, Zhang J, Friml J, Yalovsky S (2010) A rho scaffold
integrates the secretory system with feedback mechanisms in regulation of auxin distribution.
PLoS Biol 8(1):e1000282
Heisler MG, Ohno C, Das P, Sieber P, Reddy GV, Long JA, Meyerowitz EM (2005) Patterns of
auxin transport and gene expression during primordium development revealed by live imaging
of the Arabidopsis inﬂorescence meristem. Curr Biol 15:1899–1911
Heisler MG, Hamant O, Krupinski P, Uyttewaal M, Ohno C, Jo¨nsson H, Traas J, Meyerowitz EM
(2010) Alignment between PIN1 polarity and microtubule orientation in the shoot apical
meristem reveals a tight coupling between morphogenesis and auxin transport. PLoS Biol 8
(10):e1000516
Henrichs S, Wang B, Fukao Y, Zhu J, Charrier L, Bailly A, Oehring SC, Linnert M, Weiwad M,
Endler A, Nanni P, Pollmann S, Mancuso S, Schulz A, Geisler M (2012) Regulation of
ABCB1/PGP1-catalysed auxin transport by linker phosphorylation. EMBO J 31:2965–2980
Hertel R (1983) The mechanism of auxin transport as a model for auxin action. Z Pﬂanzenphysiol
112:53–67
Heymann JAW, Hinshaw JE (2009) Dynamins at a glance. J Cell Sci 122:3427–3431
Hoekstra D, Maier O, van der Wouden JM, Slimane TA, van IJzendoorn SC (2003) Membrane
dynamics and cell polarity: the role of sphingolipids. J Lipid Res 44:869–877
Holler D, Dikic I (2004) Receptor endocytosis via ubiquitin-dependent and -independent path-
ways. Biochem Pharmacol 67:1013–1017
Huang F, Zago MK, Abas L, van Marion A, Galva´n-Ampudia CS, Offringa R (2010) Phosphor-
ylation of conserved PIN motifs directs Arabidopsis PIN1 polarity and auxin transport. Plant
Cell 22:1129–1142
Humbert PO, Dow LE, Russell SM (2006) The Scribble and Par complexes in polarity and
migration: friends or foes? Trends Cell Biol 16:622–630
Irani NG, Russinova E (2009) Receptor endocytosis and signaling in plants. Curr Opin Plant Biol
12:653–659
Jaillais Y, Fobis-Loisy I, Mie`ge C, Rollin C, Gaude T (2006) AtSNX1 deﬁnes an endosome for
auxin-carrier trafﬁcking in Arabidopsis. Nature 443:106–109
Jaillais Y, Santambrogio M, Rozier F, Fobis-Loisy I, Mie`ge C, Gaude T (2007) The retromer
protein VPS29 links cell polarity and organ initiation in plants. Cell 130:1057–1070
Kepinski S, Leyser O (2005) The Arabidopsis F-box protein TIR1 is an auxin receptor. Nature
435:446–451
Kitakura S, Vanneste S, Robert S, Lo¨fke C, Teichmann T, Tanaka H, Friml J (2011) Clathrin
mediates endocytosis and polar distribution of PIN auxin transporters in Arabidopsis. Plant
Cell 23:1920–1931
Kleine-Vehn J, Friml J (2008) Polar targeting and endocytic recycling in auxin-dependent plant
development. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 24:447–473
Kleine-Vehn J, Dhonukshe P, Swarup R, Bennett M, Friml J (2006) Subcellular trafﬁcking of the
Arabidopsis auxin inﬂux carrier AUX1 uses a novel pathway distinct from PIN1. Plant Cell
18:3171–3181
Kleine-Vehn J, Dhonukshe P, Sauer M, Brewer PB, Wis´niewska J, Paciorek T, Benkova´ E, Friml J
(2008a) ARF GEF-dependent transcytosis and polar delivery of PIN auxin carriers in
Arabidopsis. Curr Biol 18:526–531
8
Auxin on the Road Navigated by Cellular PIN Polarity
163

Kleine-Vehn J, Łangowski Ł, Wisniewska J, Dhonukshe P, Brewer PB, Friml J (2008b) Cellular
and molecular requirements for polar PIN targeting and transcytosis in plants. Mol Plant
1:1056–1066
Kleine-Vehn J, Leitner J, Zwiewka M, Sauer M, Abas L, Luschnig C, Friml J (2008c) Differential
degradation of PIN2 auxin efﬂux carrier by retromer-dependent vacuolar targeting. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 105:17812–17817
Kleine-Vehn J, Huang F, Naramoto S, Zhang J, Michniewicz M, Offringa R, Friml J (2009) PIN
auxin efﬂux carrier polarity is regulated by PINOID kinase-mediated recruitment into GNOM-
independent trafﬁcking in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 21:3839–3849
Kleine-Vehn J, Ding Z, Jones AR, Tasaka M, Morita MT, Friml J (2010) Gravity-induced PIN
transcytosis for polarization of auxin ﬂuxes in gravity-sensing root cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U
S A 107:22344–22349
Kleine-Vehn J, Wabnik K, Martinie`re A, Łangowski Ł, Willig K, Naramoto S, Leitner J,
Tanaka H, Jakobs S, Robert S, Luschnig C, Govaerts W, Hell SW, Runions J, Friml J (2011)
Recycling, clustering, and endocytosis jointly maintain PIN auxin carrier polarity at the plasma
membrane. Mol Syst Biol 25:540
Konopka CA, Backues SK, Bednarek SY (2008) Dynamics of Arabidopsis dynamin-related
protein 1C and a clathrin light chain at the plasma membrane. Plant Cell 20:1363–1380
Kramer EM (2004) PIN and AUX/LAX proteins: their role in auxin accumulation. Trends Plant
Sci 9:578–582
Krinke O, Novotna´ Z, Valentova´ O, Martinec J (2007) Inositol trisphosphate receptor in higher
plants: is it real? J Exp Bot 58:361–376
Kubesˇ M, Yang H, Richter GL, Cheng Y, Młodzin´ska E, Wang X, Blakeslee JJ, Carraro N,
Petra´sˇek J, Zazˇı´malova´ E, Hoyerova´ K, Peer WA, Murphy AS (2012) The Arabidopsis
concentration-dependent inﬂux/efﬂux transporter ABCB4 regulates cellular auxin levels in
the root epidermis. Plant J 69:640–654
Lam SK, Siu CL, Hillmer S, Jang S, An G, Robinson DG, Jiang L (2007) Rice SCAMP1 deﬁnes
clathrin-coated, trans-golgi-located tubular-vesicular structures as an early endosome in
tobacco BY-2 cells. Plant Cell 19:296–319
Langowski L, Ru˚zicka K, Naramoto S, Kleine-Vehn J, Friml J (2010) Trafﬁcking to the outer polar
domain deﬁnes the root-soil interface. Curr Biol 20:904–908
Lavy M, Bloch D, Hazak O, Gutman I, Poraty L, Sorek N, Sternberg H, Yalovsky S (2007) A
Novel ROP/RAC effector links cell polarity, root-meristem maintenance, and vesicle trafﬁck-
ing. Curr Biol 17:947–952
Laxmi A, Pan J, Morsy M, Chen R (2008) Light plays an essential role in intracellular distribution
of auxin efﬂux carrier PIN2 in Arabidopsis thaliana. PLoS One 3(1):e1510
Leitner J, Petra´sˇek J, Tomanov K, Retzer K, Parˇezova´ M, Korbei B, Bachmair A, Zazˇı´malova´ E,
Luschnig C (2012) Lysine63-linked ubiquitylation of PIN2 auxin carrier protein governs
hormonally controlled adaptation of Arabidopsis root growth. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
109:8322–8327
Lemtiri-Chlieh F, MacRobbie EA, Webb AA, Manison NF, Brownlee C, Skepper JN, Chen J,
Prestwich GD, Brearley CA (2003) Inositol hexakisphosphate mobilizes an endomembrane
store of calcium in guard cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100:10091–10095
Leyser O (2011) Auxin, self-organisation, and the colonial nature of plants. Curr Biol 21:R331–
R337
Li H, Lin D, Dhonukshe P, Nagawa S, Chen D, Friml J, Scheres B, Guo H, Yang Z (2011)
Phosphorylation switch modulates the interdigitated pattern of PIN1 localization and cell
expansion in Arabidopsis leaf epidermis. Cell Res 21:970–978
Lin D, Shingo N, Chen J, Chen X, Cao L, Xu T, Li H, Dhonukshe P, Friml J, Scheres B, Fu Y,
Yang Z (2012) A ROP GTPase-dependent auxin signaling pathway inhibits PIN2 endocytosis
in Arabidopsis roots. Curr Biol 22:1319–1325
164
P. Baster and J. Friml

Liu T, Mirschberger C, Chooback L, Arana Q, Dal Sacco Z, MacWilliams H, Clarke M (2002)
Altered expression of the 100 kDa subunit of the Dictyostelium vacuolar proton pump impairs
enzyme assembly, endocytic function and cytosolic pH regulation. J Cell Sci 115:1907–1918
Liu J, Mehdi S, Topping J, Friml J, Lindsey K (2013) Interaction of PLS and PIN and hormonal
crosstalk in Arabidopsis root development. Front Plant Sci 4:75
Ljung K (2013) Auxin metabolism and homeostasis during plant development. Development
140:943–950
Lo¨fke C, Zwiewka M, Heilmann I, Van Montagu MC, Teichmann T, Friml J (2013) Asymmetric
gibberellin signaling regulates vacuolar trafﬁcking of PIN auxin transporters during root
gravitropism. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110:3627–3632
Ludwig-Mu¨ller J (2011) Auxin conjugates: their role for plant development and in the evolution of
land plants. J Exp Bot 62:1757–1773
Luschnig C, Gaxiola RA, GrisaﬁP, Fink GR (1998) EIR1, a root-speciﬁc protein involved in auxin
transport, is required for gravitropism in Arabidopsis thaliana. Genes Dev 12:2175–2218
Mancuso S, Marras AM, Mugnai S, Schlicht M, Za´rsky V, Li G, Song L, Xue HW, Baluska F
(2007) Phospholipase Dζ2 drives vesicular secretion of auxin for its polar cell-cell transport in
the transition zone of the root apex. Plant Signal Behav 2:240–244
Mano Y, Nemoto K (2012) The pathway of auxin biosynthesis in plants. J Exp Bot 63:2853–2872
Marhavy´ P, Bielach A, Abas L, Abuzeineh A, Duclercq J, Tanaka H, Parezova´ M, Petra´sek J,
917 Friml J, Kleine-Vehn J, Benkova´ E (2011) Cytokinin modulates endocytic trafﬁcking of
PIN1 918 auxin efﬂux carrier to control plant organogenesis. Dev Cell 21:796–804
Martinie`re A, Lavagi I, Nageswaran G, Rolfe DJ, Maneta-Peyret L, Luu DT, Botchway SW, Webb
SEW, Mongrand S, Maurel C, Martin-Fernandez ML, Kleine-Vehn J, Friml J, Moreau P,
Runions J (2012) The cell wall constrains lateral diffusion of plant plasma-membrane proteins.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109:12805–12810
Matheson LA, Hanton SL, Brandizzi F (2006) Trafﬁc between the plant endoplasmic reticulum
and Golgi apparatus: to the Golgi and beyond. Curr Opin Plant Biol 9:601–609
Matsuzaki Y, Ogawa-Ohnishi M, Mori A, Matsubayashi Y (2010) Secreted peptide signals
required for maintenance of root stem cell niche in Arabidopsis. Science 329:1065–1067
McFarlane HE, Shin JJ, Bird DA, Samuels AL (2010) Arabidopsis ABCG transporters, which are
required for export of diverse cuticular lipids, dimerize in different combinations. Plant Cell
22:3066–3075
Men S, Boutte´ Y, Ikeda Y, Li X, Palme K, Stierhof Y-D, Hartmann M-A, Moritz T, Grebe M
(2008) Sterol-dependent endocytosis mediates post-cytokinetic acquisition of PIN2 auxin
efﬂux carrier polarity. Nat Cell Biol 10:237–244
Michell RH (2008) Inositol derivatives: evolution and functions. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol
9:151–161
Michniewicz M, Brewer PB, Friml J (2007a) Polar auxin transport and asymmetric auxin distri-
bution. Arabidopsis Book 5:e0108
Michniewicz M, Zago MK, Abas L, Weijers D, Schweighofer A, Meskiene I, Heisler MG,
Ohno C, Zhang J, Huang F, Schwab R, Weigel D, Meyerowitz EM, Luschnig C, Offringa R,
Friml J (2007b) Antagonistic regulation of PIN phosphorylation by PP2A and PINOID directs
auxin ﬂux. Cell 130:1044–1056
Miwa K, Takano J, Omori H, Seki M, Shinozaki K, Fujiwara T (2007) Plants tolerant of high boron
levels. Science 318:1417
Motchoulski A, Liscum E (1999) Arabidopsis NPH3: a NPH1 photoreceptor-interacting protein
essential for phototropism. Science 286:961–964
Mouchel CF, Briggs GC, Hardtke CS (2004) Natural genetic variation in Arabidopsis identiﬁes
BREVIS RADIX, a novel regulator of cell proliferation and elongation in the root. Genes Dev
18:700–714
Mravec J, Kubes M, Bielach A, Gaykova V, Petra´sek J, Sku˚pa P, Chand S, Benkova´ E,
Zazı´malova´ E, Friml J (2008) Interaction of PIN and PGP transport mechanisms in auxin
distribution-dependent development. Development 135:3345–3354
8
Auxin on the Road Navigated by Cellular PIN Polarity
165

Mravec J, Petra´sˇek J, Li N, Boeren S, Karlova R, Kitakura S, Parˇezova´ M, Naramoto S,
Nodzyn´ski T, Dhonukshe P, Bednarek SY, Zazˇı´malova´ E, de Vries S, Friml J (2011) Cell
plate restricted association of DRP1A and PIN proteins is required for cell polarity establish-
ment in Arabidopsis. Curr Biol 21:1055–1060
Muday GK, DeLong A (2001) Polar auxin transport: controlling where and how much. Trends
Plant Sci 6:535–542
Mu¨ller J, Mettbach U, Menzel D, Sˇamaj J (2007) Molecular dissection of endosomal compart-
ments in plants. Plant Physiol 145:293–304
Munnik T, Nielsen E (2011) Green light for polyphosphoinositide signals in plants. Curr Opin
Plant Biol 14:489–497
Munnik T, Testerink C (2009) Plant phospholipid signaling: ‘in a nutshell’. J Lipid Res
50:260–265
Nagawa S, Xu T, Lin D, Dhonukshe P, Zhang X, Friml J, Scheres B, Fu Y, Yang Z (2012) ROP
GTPase-dependent actin microﬁlaments promote PIN1 polarization by localized inhibition of
clathrin-dependent endocytosis. PLoS Biol 10(4):e1001299
Naramoto S, Kleine-Vehn J, Robert S, Fujimoto M, Dainobu T, Paciorek T, Ueda T, Nakano A,
Van Montagu MCE, Fukuda H, Friml J (2010) ADP-ribosylation factor machinery mediates
endocytosis in plant cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107:21890–21895
Nodzyn´ski T, Feraru MI, Hirscha S, De Rycke R, Niculaesa C, Boerjana W, Van Leene J, De
Jaeger G, Vanneste S, Friml J (2013) Retromer subunits VPS35A and VPS29 mediate
prevacuolar compartment (PVC) function in Arabidopsis. Mol Plant 6:1849–1862
Noh B, Murphy AS, Spalding EP (2001) Multidrug resistance-like genes of Arabidopsis required
for auxin transport and auxin-mediated development. Plant Cell 13:2441–2454
Nyasae LK, Hubbard AL, Tuma PL (2003) Transcytotic efﬂux from early endosomes is dependent
on cholesterol and glycosphingolipids in polarized hepatic cells. Mol Biol Cell 14:2689–2705
Okada K, Ueda J, Komaki MK, Bell CJ, Shimura Y (1991) Requirement of the auxin polar
transport system in early stages of Arabidopsis ﬂoral bud formation. Plant Cell 3:677–684
Paciorek T, Zazˇı´malova´ E, Ruthardt N, Petra´sˇek J, Stierhof YD, Kleine-Vehn J, Morris DA,
Emans N, Ju¨rgens G, Geldner N, Friml J (2005) Auxin inhibits endocytosis and promotes its
own efﬂux from cells. Nature 435:1251–1256
Panikashvili D, Savaldi-Goldstein S, Mandel T, Yifhar T, Franke RB, Ho¨fer R, Schreiber L,
Chory J, Aharoni A (2007) The Arabidopsis DESPERADO/AtWBC11 transporter is required
for cutin and wax secretion. Plant Physiol 145:1345–1360
Paul MJ, Frigerio L (2007) Coated vesicles in plant cells. Semin Cell Dev Biol 18:471–478
Peer WA, Bandyopadhyay A, Blakeslee JJ, Makam SN, Chen RJ, Masson PH, Murphy AS (2004)
Variation in expression and protein localization of the PIN family of auxin efﬂux facilitator
proteins in ﬂavonoid mutants with altered auxin transport in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell
16:1898–1911
Petra´sˇek J, Schwarzerova´ K (2009) Actin and microtubule cytoskeleton interactions. Curr Opin
Plant Biol 12:728–734
Petra´sˇek J, Mravec J, Bouchard R, Blakeslee JJ, Abas M, Seifertova´ D, Wis´niewska J, Tadele Z,
Kubesˇ M, Cˇ ovanova´ M, Dhonukshe P, Sku˚pa P, Benkova´ E, Perry L, Krˇecˇek P, Lee OR, Fink
GR, Geisler M, Murphy AS, Luschnig C, Zazˇı´malova´ E, Friml J (2006) PIN proteins perform a
rate-limiting function in cellular auxin efﬂux. Science 312:914–918
Praefcke GJK, McMahon HT (2004) The dynamin superfamily: universal membrane tubulation
and ﬁssion molecules? Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 5:133–147
Rakusova H, Gallego-Bartolome´ J, Vanstraelen M, Robert HS, Alabadı´ D, Bla´zquez MA,
Benkova´ E, Friml J (2011) Polarization of PIN3-dependent auxin transport for hypocotyl
gravitropic response in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant J 67:817–826
Raven JA (1975) Transport of indoleacetic acid in plant cells in relation to pH and electrical
potential gradients, and its signiﬁcance for polar IAA transport. New Phytol 74:163–172
Reinhardt D, Pesce ER, Stieger P, Mandel T, Baltensperger K, Bennett M, Traas J, Friml J,
Kuhlemeier C (2003) Regulation of phyllotaxis by polar auxin transport. Nature 426:255–260
166
P. Baster and J. Friml

Richmond TA, Somerville CR (2000) The cellulose synthase superfamily. Plant Physiol
124:495–498
Rigo´ G, Ayaydin F, Tietz O, Zsigmond L, Kova´cs H, Pa´y A, Salchert K, Darula Z, Medzihradszky
KF, Szabados L, Palme K, Koncz C, Cse´plo A (2013) Inactivation of plasma membrane-
localized CDPK-RELATED KINASE5 decelerates PIN2 exocytosis and root gravitropic
response in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 25(5):1592–1608
Robert S, Kleine-Vehn J, Barbez E, Sauer M, Paciorek T, Baster P, Vanneste S, Zhang J, Simon S,
Cˇ ovanova´ M, Hayashi K, Dhonukshe P, Yang Z, Bednarek SY, Jones AM, Luschnig C,
Aniento F, Zazˇı´molova´ E, Friml J (2010) ABP1 mediates auxin inhibition of clathrin-
dependent endocytosis in Arabidopsis. Cell 143:111–121
Robinson DG, Jiang L, Schumacher K (2008) The endosomal system of plants: charting new and
familiar territories. Plant Physiol 147:1482–1492
Roppolo D, De Rybel B, Tendon VD, Pﬁster A, Alassimone J, Vermeer JE, Yamazaki M, Stierhof
YD, Beeckman T, Geldner N (2011) A novel protein family mediates Casparian strip formation
in the endodermis. Nature 473:380–383
Roudier F, Gissot L, Beaudoin F, Haslam R, Michaelson L, Marion J, Molino D, Lima A, Bach L,
Morin H, Tellier F, Palauqui JC, Bellec Y, Renne C, Miquel M, Dacosta M, Vignard J,
Rochat C, Markham JE, Moreau P, Napier J, Faure JD (2010) Very-long-chain fatty acids
are involved in polar auxin transport and developmental patterning in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell
22:364–375
Rubery PH, Sheldrake AR (1974) Carrier-mediated auxin transport. Planta 118:101–121
Ruiz Rosquete M, Barbez E, Kleine-Vehn J (2012) Cellular auxin homeostasis: gatekeeping is
housekeeping. Mol Plant 5:772–786
Ru˚zˇicˇka K, Ljung K, Vanneste S, Podhorska´ R, Beeckman T, Friml J, Benkova´ E (2007) Ethylene
regulates root growth through effects on auxin biosynthesis and transport-dependent auxin
distribution. Plant Cell 19:2197–2212
Ru˚zˇicˇka K, Sˇima´sˇkova´ M, Duclercq J, Petra´sˇek J, Zazˇı´malova´ E, Simon S, Friml J, Van Montagu
MC, Benkova´ E (2009) Cytokinin regulates root meristem activity via modulation of the polar
auxin transport. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106:4284–4289
Sabatini S, Beis D, Wolkenfelt H, Murfett J, Guilfoyle T, Malamy J, Benfey P, Leyser O,
Bechtold N, Weisbeek P, Scheres B (1999) An auxin-dependent distal organizer of pattern
and polarity in the Arabidopsis root. Cell 99:463–472
Sachs T (1981) The control of the patterned differentiation of vascular tissues. Adv Bot Res
9:151–262
Sachs T (1991) Cell polarity and tissue patterning in plants. Development 113:83–93
Santner AA, Watson JC (2006) The WAG1 and WAG2 protein kinases negatively regulate root
waving in Arabidopsis. Plant J 45:752–764
Santuari L, Scacchi E, Rodriguez-Villalon A, Salinas P, Dohmann EM, Brunoud G, Vernoux T,
Smith RS, Hardtke CS (2011) Positional information by differential endocytosis splits auxin
response to drive Arabidopsis root meristem growth. Curr Biol 21:1918–1923
Sauer M, Friml J (2004) The matryoshka dolls of plant polarity. Development 131:5774–5775
Sauer M, Balla J, Luschnig C, Wisniewska J, Reino¨hl V, Friml J, Benkova´ E (2006) Canalization
of auxin ﬂow by Aux/IAA-ARF-dependent feedback regulation of PIN polarity. Genes Dev
20:2902–2911
Scarpella E, Marcos D, Friml J, Berleth T (2006) Control of leaf vascular patterning by polar auxin
transport. Genes Dev 20:1015–1027
Scheible WR, Eshed R, Richmond T, Delmer D, Somerville C (2001) Modiﬁcations of cellulose
synthase confer resistance to isoxaben and thiazolidinone herbicides in Arabidopsis Ixr1
mutants. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 98:10079–10084
Scheuring D, Viotti C, Kru¨ger F, Ku¨nzl F, Sturm S, Bubeck J, Hillmer S, Frigerio L, Robinson DG,
Pimpl P, Schumacher K (2011) Multivesicular bodies mature from the trans-Golgi network/
early endosome in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 23:3463–3481
8
Auxin on the Road Navigated by Cellular PIN Polarity
167

Schlereth A, Mo¨ller B, Liu W, Kientz M, Flipse J, Rademacher EH, Schmid M, Ju¨rgens G, Weijers
D (2010) MONOPTEROS controls embryonic root initiation by regulating a mobile transcrip-
tion factor. Nature 464:913–916
Schlicht M, Strnad M, Scanlon MJ, Mancuso S, Hochholdinger F, Palme K, Volkmann D,
Menzel
D,
Baluska
F
(2006)
Auxin
immunolocalization
implicates
vesicular
neurotransmitter-like mode of polar auxin transport in root apices. Plant Signal Behav
1:122–133
Seaman MNJ (2005) Recycle your receptors with retromer. Trends Cell Biol 15:68–75
Shimada T, Koumoto Y, Li L, Yamazaki M, Kondo M, Nishimura M, Hara-Nishimura I (2006)
AtVPS29, a putative component of a retromer complex, is required for the efﬁcient sorting of
seed storage proteins. Plant Cell Physiol 47:1187–1194
Shirakawa M, Ueda H, Shimada T, Nishiyama C, Hara-Nishimura I (2009) Vacuolar SNAREs
function in the formation of the leaf vascular network by regulating auxin distribution. Plant
Cell Physiol 50:1319–1328
Shivas JM, Morrison HA, Bilder D, Skop AR (2010) Polarity and endocytosis: reciprocal
regulation. Trends Cell Biol 20:445–452
Sieberer T, Seifert GJ, Hauser MT, GrisaﬁP, Fink GR, Luschnig C (2000) Post-transcriptional
control of the Arabidopsis auxin efﬂux carrier EIR1 requires AXR1. Curr Biol 10:1595–1598
Sorefan K, Girin T, Liljegren SJ, Ljung K, Robles P, Galva´n-Ampudia CS, Offringa R, Friml J,
Yanofsky MF, Østergaard L (2009) A regulated auxin minimum is required for seed dispersal
in Arabidopsis. Nature 459:583–586
Spitzer C, Reyes FC, Buono R, Sliwinski MK, Haas TJ, Otegui MS (2009) The ESCRT-related
CHMP1A and B proteins mediate multivesicular body sorting of auxin carriers in Arabidopsis
and are required for plant development. Plant Cell 21:749–766
Swarup R, Friml J, Marchant A, Ljung K, Sandberg G, Palme K, Bennett M (2001) Localization of
the auxin permease AUX1 suggests two functionally distinct hormone transport pathways
operate in the Arabidopsis root apex. Genes Dev 15:2648–2653
Swarup R, Perry P, Hagenbeek D, Van Der Straeten D, Beemster GT, Sandberg G, Bhalerao R,
Ljung K, Bennett MJ (2007) Ethylene upregulates auxin biosynthesis in Arabidopsis seedlings
to enhance inhibition of root cell elongation. Plant Cell 19:2186–2196
Swarup K, Benkova E, Swarup R, Casimiro I, Peret B, Yang Y, Parry G, Nielsen E, De Smet I,
Vanneste S, Levesque MP, Carrier D, James N, Calvo V, Ljung K, Kramer E, Roberts R,
Graham N, Marillonnet S, Patel K (2008) The auxin inﬂux carrier LAX3 promotes lateral root
emergence. Nat Cell Biol 10:946–954
Takano J, Tanaka M, Toyoda A, Miwa K, Kasai K, Fuji K, Onouchi H, Naito S, Fujiwara T (2010)
Polar localization and degradation of Arabidopsis boron transporters through distinct trafﬁck-
ing pathways. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107:5220–5225
Tanaka H, Dhonukshe P, Brewer PB, Friml J (2006) Spatiotemporal asymmetric auxin distribu-
tion: a means to coordinate plant development. Cell Mol Life Sci 63:2738–2754
Tanaka H, Kitakura S, De Rycke R, De Groodt R, Friml J (2009) Fluorescence imaging-based
screen identiﬁes ARF GEF component of early endosomal trafﬁcking. Curr Biol 19:391–397
Tanaka H, Kitakura S, Rakusova´ R, Uemura T, Feraru MI, De Rycke R, Robert S, Kakimoto T,
Friml J (2013) Cell polarity and patterning by PIN trafﬁcking through early endosomal
compartments in Arabidopsis. PLoS Genet 9(5):e1003540
Tang RH, Han S, Zheng H, Cook CW, Choi CS, Woerner TE, Jackson RB, Pei ZM (2007)
Coupling diurnal cytosolic Ca2+ oscillations to the CAS-IP3 pathway in Arabidopsis. Science
315:1423–1426
Teh OK, Moore I (2007) An ARF-GEF acting at the golgi and in selective endocytosis in polarized
plant cells. Nature 448:493–496
Tepass U, Tanentzapf G, Ward R, Fehon R (2001) Epithelial cell polarity and cell junctions in
Drosophila. Annu Rev Genet 35:747–784
Testerink C, Munnik T (2011) Molecular, cellular and physiological responses to phosphatidic
acid formation in plants. J Exp Bot 62:2349–2361
168
P. Baster and J. Friml

Titapiwatanakun B, Blakeslee JJ, Bandyopadhyay A, Yang H, Mravec J, Sauer M, Cheng Y,
Adamec J, Nagashima A, Geisler M, Sakai T, Friml J, Peer WA, Murphy AS (2009) ABCB19/
PGP19 stabilizes PIN1 in membrane microdomains in Arabidopsis. Plant J 57:27–44
Treml BS, Winderl S, Radykewicz R, Herz M, Schweizer G, Hutzler P, Glawischnig E, Ruiz RA
(2005) The gene ENHANCER OF PINOID controls cotyledon development in the Arabidopsis
embryo. Development 132:4063–4074
Tuma PL, Hubbard AL (2003) Transcytosis: crossing cellular barriers. Physiol Rev 83:871–932
Vanneste S, Friml J (2009) Auxin: a trigger for change in plant development. Cell 136:1005–1016
Verrier PJ, Bird D, Burla B, Dassa E, Forestier C, Geisler M, Klein M, Kolukisaoglu U¨ , Lee Y,
Martinoia E, Murphy A, Rea PA, Samuels L, Schulz B, Spalding EP, Yazaki K, Theodoulou
FL (2008) Plant ABC proteins—a uniﬁed nomenclature and updated inventory. Trends Plant
Sci 13:151–159
Vieten A, Vanneste S, Wis´niewska J, Benkova´ E, Benjamins R, Beeckman T, Luschnig C, Friml J
(2005) Functional redundancy of PIN proteins is accompanied by auxin-dependent cross-
regulation of PIN expression. Development 132:4521–4531
Vieten A, Sauer M, Brewer PB, Friml J (2007) Molecular and cellular aspects of auxin transport-
mediated development. Trends Plant Sci 12:160–168
Viotti C, Bubeck J, Stierhof YD, Krebs M, Langhans M, van den Berg W, van Dongen W,
Richter S, Geldner N, Takano J, Ju¨rgens G, de Vries SC, Robinson DG, Schumacher K (2010)
Endocytic and secretory trafﬁc in Arabidopsis merge in the trans-Golgi network/early endo-
some, an independent and highly dynamic organelle. Plant Cell 22:1344–1357
Vitale A, Denecke J (1999) The endoplasmic reticulum – gateway of the secretory pathway. Plant
Cell 11:615–628
Voigt B, Timmers AC, Sˇamaj J, Mu¨ller J, Balusˇka F, Menzel D (2005) GFP-FABD2 fusion
construct allows in vivo visualization of the dynamic actin cytoskeleton in all cells of
Arabidopsis seedlings. Eur J Cell Biol 84:595–608
Wabnik K, Kleine-Vehn J, Balla J, Sauer M, Naramoto S, Reino¨hl V, Merks RMH, Govaerts W,
Friml J (2010) Emergence of tissue polarization from synergy of intracellular and extracellular
auxin signaling. Mol Syst Biol 6:447
Wabnik K, Govaerts W, Friml J, Kleine-Vehn J (2011) Feedback models for polarized auxin
transport: an emerging trend. Mol Biosyst 7:2352
Wan Y, Jasik J, Wang L, Hao H, Volkmann D, Menzel D, Mancuso S, Balusˇka F, Lin J (2012) The
signal transducer NPH3 integrates the phototropin1 photosensor with PIN2-based polar auxin
transport in Arabidopsis root phototropism. Plant Cell 24:551–565
Wang B, Henrichs S, Geisler M (2012) The AGC kinase, PINOID, blocks interactive ABCB/PIN
auxin transport. Plant Signal Behav 7(12):1515–1517 (Epub ahead of print)
Wang B, Bailly A, Zwiewka M, Henrichs S, Azzarello E, Mancuso S, Maeshima M, Friml J,
Schulz A, Geisler M (2013) Arabidopsis TWISTED DWARF1 functionally interacts with
auxin exporter ABCB1 on the root plasma membrane. Plant Cell 25:202–214
Wells CD, Fawcett JP, Traweger A, Yamanaka Y, Goudreault M, Elder K, Kulkarni S, Gish G,
Virag C, Lim C, Colwill K, Starostine A, Metalnikov P, Pawson T (2006) A Rich1/Amot
complex regulates the Cdc42 GTPase and apical-polarity proteins in epithelial cells. Cell
125:535–548
Whitford R, Fernandez A, Tejos R, Pe´rez AC, Kleine-Vehn J, Vanneste S, Drozdzecki A,
Leitner J, Abas L, Aerts M, Hoogewijs K, Baster P, De Groodt R, Lin Y-C, Storme V, Van
de Peer Y, Beeckman T, Madder A, Devreese B, Luschnig C, Friml J, Hilson P (2012)
GOLVEN secretory peptides regulate auxin carrier turnover during plant gravitropic
responses. Dev Cell 22:678–685
Willemsen V, Friml J, Grebe M, van den Toorn A, Palme K, Scheres B (2003) Cell polarity and
PIN protein positioning in Arabidopsis require STEROL METHYLTRANSFERASE1 func-
tion. Plant Cell 15:612–625
8
Auxin on the Road Navigated by Cellular PIN Polarity
169

Willige BC, Isono E, Richter R, Zourelidou M, Schwechheimer C (2011) Gibberellin regulates
PIN-FORMED abundance and is required for auxin transport-dependent growth and develop-
ment in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell 23:2184–2195
Winter V, Hauser MT (2006) Exploring the ESCRTing machinery in eukaryotes. Trends Plant Sci
11:115–123
Wis´niewska J, Xu J, Seifertova´ D, Brewer PB, Ru˚zˇicˇka K, Blilou I, Rouquie´ D, Benkova´ E,
Scheres B, Friml J (2006) Polar PIN localization directs auxin ﬂow in plants. Science 312:883
Wollert T, Wunder C, Lippincott-Schwartz J, Hurley JH (2009) Membrane scission by the
ESCRT-III complex. Nature 458:172–177
Xu T, Wen M, Nagawa S, Fu Y, Chen JG, Wu MJ, Perrot-Rechenmann C, Friml J, Jones AM,
Yang Z (2010) Cell surface- and rho GTPase-based auxin signaling controls cellular interdigi-
tationin Arabidopsis. Cell 143:99–110
Yang Y, Hammes UZ, Taylor CG, Schachtman DP, Nielsen E (2006) High-afﬁnity auxin transport
by the AUX1 inﬂux carrier protein. Curr Biol 16:1123–1127
Zˇa´rsky´ V, Cvrcˇkova´ F, Potocky´ M, Ha´la M (2009) Exocytosis and cell polarity in plants – exocyst
and recycling domains. New Phytol 183:255–272
Zazˇı´malova´ E, Krecek P, Sku˚pa P, Hoyerova´ K, Petra´sek J (2007) Polar transport of the plant
hormone auxin—the role of PIN-FORMED (PIN) proteins. Cell Mol Life Sci 64:1621–1637
Zegzouti H, Anthony RG, Jahchan N, Bo¨gre L, Christensen SK (2006) Phosphorylation and
activation of PINOID by the phospholipid signaling kinase 3-phosphoinositide-dependent
protein kinase 1 (PDK1) in Arabidopsis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103:6404–6409
Zhang J, Nodzynski T, Pencı´k A, Rolcı´k J, Friml J (2010) PIN phosphorylation is sufﬁcient to
mediate PIN polarity and direct auxin transport. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107:918–922
Zhang J, Vanneste S, Brewer PB, Michniewicz M, Grones P, Kleine-Vehn J, Lo¨fke C,
Teichmann T, Bielach A, Cannoot B, Hoyerova´ K, Chen X, Xue HW, Benkova´ E,
Zazˇı´malova´ E, Friml J (2011a) Inositol trisphosphate-induced Ca2+ signaling modulates
auxin transport and PIN polarity. Dev Cell 20:855–866
Zhang W, To JP, Cheng CY, Eric Schaller G, Kieber JJ (2011b) Type-A response regulators are
required for proper root apical meristem function through post-transcriptional regulation of
PIN auxin efﬂux carriers. Plant J 68:1–10
Zourelidou M, Mu¨ller I, Willige BC, Nill C, Jikumaru Y, Li H, Schwechheimer C (2009) The
polarly localized D6 PROTEIN KINASE is required for efﬁcient auxin transport in
Arabidopsis thaliana. Development 136:627–636
Zwiewka M, Feraru E, Mu¨ller B, Hwang I, Feraru MI, Kleine-Vehn J, Weijers D, Friml J (2011)
The AP-3 adaptor complex is required for vacuolar function in Arabidopsis. Cell Res
21:1711–1722
170
P. Baster and J. Friml

Chapter 9
Auxin Regulation of Embryo Development
Alejandra Freire Rios, Saiko Yoshida, and Dolf Weijers
Abstract Important steps in plant development are made shortly after fertilization.
In a brief succession of cell divisions, the zygote is transformed into an embryo, a
multicellular structure carrying all fundamental tissue types and the meristems.
Hence, embryogenesis offers excellent opportunities to dissect the molecular con-
trol and cellular mechanisms underlying plant development. In the past decades,
forward and reverse genetics studies have revealed that the plant hormone auxin
plays a central role in the establishment of pattern and polarity in the Arabidopsis
embryo. Here, we review the roles that localized auxin biosynthesis, directional
transport and cell type-speciﬁc response play in embryo development. We focus on
the molecular mechanisms, as well as the feedbacks that connect these disparate
levels of regulation. Finally, we discuss the potential for hormonal cross-talk in
auxin-dependent control of the key events during the earliest, formative phase of
plant life.
1
Introduction: Early Plant Embryogenesis
Multicellular organisms begin life as a single zygote cell. While the animal embryo
is a miniature form of the adult body and thus has a relatively complex structure, the
plant mature embryo has a rather simple structure: an embryonic root, hypocotyl
and one or two embryonic leaves. This miniature encompasses meristems in the
shoot and root tips. The meristems will create all the other parts of the mature plant
body after germination (Weigel and Jurgens 2002). In Arabidopsis embryos, these
meristem primordia consist only of a few stem cells. These stem cells will divide
Alejandra Freire Rios and Saiko Yoshida contributed equally.
A. Freire Rios • S. Yoshida • D. Weijers (*)
Laboratory of Biochemistry, Wageningen University, Dreijenlaan 3, 6703HA Wageningen,
The Netherlands
e-mail: dolf.weijers@wur.nl
E. Zazˇı´malova´ et al. (eds.), Auxin and Its Role in Plant Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-7091-1526-8_9, © Springer-Verlag Wien 2014
171

and spatially coordinate the acquisition of different cell identities during the post-
embryonic generation of a functional body. Stem cell niches are an excellent
example for the importance of spatial coordination in cell speciﬁcation where, in
order to keep a functional niche, stem and organizer cells need to be in direct
vicinity (Scheres 2007). Additionally, as early embryos consist of few cells, yet
different layers, tissues and organs are established, there is a general need for tightly
coordinated development. In this chapter, we discuss how the plant hormone
mediates the coordinated acquisition of cell types during this formative phase of
Arabidopsis life.
Unlike in animal embryos, plant cells do not migrate during embryogenesis
because they are surrounded by a rigid cell wall. Therefore, oriented cell division
and directional expansion plays an important role in morphogenesis. Division
patterns during embryogenesis have been studied and described based on the
observations of sections (Scheres et al. 1994; Ju¨rgens and Mayer 1994). After
fertilization, the apical–basal polarity is forecast when the zygote divides asym-
metrically to create an apical embryonic cell and a basal extra embryonic cell
(Fig. 9.1). The embryonic cell further divides to generate eight embryonic cell
organizer in two tiers. While the cells in the upper tier will generate the shoot (shoot
apical meristem and cotyledons), the cells in the lower tier will make the hypocotyl,
root and root apical meristem. Subsequently, all embryonic cells divide periclinally
and generate inner and outer cells corresponding to the ﬁrst establishment of a
radial axis. Next, lower tier inner cells divide periclinally to generate the initials for
ground tissue and vascular cells at early globular stage. On the other hand, the extra-
embryonic cell divides to create the suspensor. Its uppermost cell is speciﬁed into
hypophysis and then divides asymmetrically to create the upper lens-shaped cell
and lower cell which will respectively become the initials for quiescent centre
(QC) and columella cells in the root. From transition to heart stage, primordia of the
two cotyledons are formed and the structure of embryo obtains bilateral symmetry.
Thus, during this morphogenesis phase the basic body pattern is established and the
meristem of shoot/root and embryonic organs are generated. Arguably, this mor-
phogenetic phase is of great importance for the establishment of a new plant from a
single fertilized egg cell. Hence, understanding of the molecular and cellular
mechanisms underlying these events is a key goal for plant developmental biology.
In the past decades, much progress has been made, and interestingly, the plant
hormone auxin has surfaced repeatedly as a central regulator. Here, we will discuss
the various aspects of auxin regulation that contribute to regulating its activity in
embryo development.
2
Auxin Biosynthesis Pathways in Embryogenesis
The major natural auxin, indole-3-acetic acid (IAA), is biosynthesized from tryp-
tophan via a two-step pathway (Fig. 9.2). Several key enzymes are known to be
involved in this pathway (see Chap. 2). TRYPTOPHAN AMINOTRANSFERASE
172
A. Freire Rios et al.

OF ARABIDOPSIS 1 (TAA1) and its closest homologues TRYPTOPHAN AMI-
NOTRANSFERASE RELATED 1,2 (TAR1, 2) are transaminases that convert
tryptophan to indole-3-pyruvate (IPA) (Tao et al. 2008). YUCCA is a ﬂavin
monooxygenase that catalyses oxidative decarboxylation of IPA to produce IAA
(Mashiguchi et al. 2011). Eleven YUC homologues are known in the Arabidopsis
genome (Cheng et al. 2007). TAA1 and some of the YUC genes are expressed during
embryogenesis. YUC3, YUC4 and YUC9 are expressed in the suspensor from eight-
cell stage on. At the globular stage, YUC1 and YUC4 are expressed in the cells
around the future shoot apical meristem, while YUC8 is expressed around the
hypophysis. From late globular to heart stage, YUC4 is not only expressed in apical
cells around the shoot meristem but is also expressed in the basal hypophysis. TAA1
is expressed in the apical epidermal cells from 16-cell stage (Robert et al. 2013).
From transition to heart stage on, it is expressed in the L1 layer of shoot apical
meristem (Cheng et al. 2007). Consistent with the TAA/TAR and YUC proteins
acting in a linear biosynthetic pathway, higher-order mutants in each family lead to
nearly indistinguishable phenotypes. Embryos of yuc1 yuc4 yuc10 yuc11 quadruple
mutant and the taa1 tar1 tar2 triple mutant display abnormal cell division in
embryonic cells. Seedlings of these mutants lack root/hypocotyl and often have
aberrant number of cotyledons, which strongly suggests that auxin activity is
required for the normal establishment of these embryonic structures (Stepanova
et al. 2008; Cheng et al. 2007). Interestingly, these severe phenotypes cannot be
rescued by ectopic production of auxin, which indicates the importance of spatial
and temporal regulation of auxin local biosynthesis (Robert et al. 2013).
If local, rather than ubiquitous auxin biosynthesis is important for auxin-
dependent embryo development, a key question is what activates the expression
of the biosynthesis genes. Transcriptional regulators of the SHORT INTER-
NODES/STYLISH (SHI/STY) family have been identiﬁed as activators of YUC4
Late Globular
Zygote
establishment 
of apical-basal 
axis
establishment 
of radial axis
8-cell
ut
lt
1-cell
ac
bc
Early Globular
hy
v
g
16-cell
oc
ic
susp
establishment 
of bilateral 
symmetry
Heart stage
SAM
Cot
Hyp
RAM
QC
col
Fig. 9.1 Embryo development in Arabidopsis. Sequential cell division events as observed in 2D
sections of embryos starting in the zygote until the heart stage. Points in the process where
symmetries are established are indicated. Cells in different colours will differentiate in different
tissues/organs. ac apical cell, bc basal cell, ut upper tier, lt lower tier, oc outer cell, ic inner cell,
susp suspensor, v vascular initial, g ground tissue initial, hy hypophysis, Cot cotyledon, SAM shoot
apical meristem, Hyp hypocotyl, RAM root apical meristem, QC quiescent centre, col columella
cells
9
Auxin Regulation of Embryo Development
173

and YUC8 (Sohlberg et al. 2006; Eklund et al. 2010a, b; Staldal et al. 2008). The
expression pattern of STY1 and YUC genes overlap (Kuusk et al. 2002) and STY1 is
expressed in the future cotyledon primordia of early globular embryos (Kuusk
et al. 2002). Overexpression of STY1 increases auxin biosynthesis, while in the
sty1 sty2 mutant the level of free IAA is low. This mutant displays severe defects in
the development of leaf and ﬂoral organs, especially in the style. The style pheno-
type of sty1 sty2 can be restored by exogenous application of auxin (Staldal
et al. 2008). A dominant negative transgenic line of STY1 does not make a shoot
apical meristem, indicating that STY1-dependent auxin biosynthesis has a role in
the formation of the shoot apical meristem during embryogenesis or its post-
embryonic maintenance. STY1 is in turn activated by DORNRO¨ SCHEN-LIKE
(DRNL), an AP2/ERF family transcription factor (Eklund et al. 2011). DRNL and
its homologue DORNRO¨ SCHEN (DRN) interact with class III HD-ZIP family
transcription factors PHAVOLUTA, PHABULOSA, REVOLUTA, CORONA
and ATHB8 to regulate patterning of apical embryo (Chandler et al. 2007). As a
quintuple mutant among these HD-ZIP transcription factor genes does not develop
an embryonic shoot meristem (Emery et al. 2003), this suggests the outlines of a
genetic network that directs morphogenesis of shoot apical meristem during
embryogenesis and involves several interacting transcription factors to control
local auxin biosynthesis. Interestingly, DRN as well as the HD-ZIP gene ATHB8
are direct transcriptional target genes of the auxin response factor MONOPTEROS
(see below; Cole et al. 2009; Donner et al. 2009), which suggests that this control
network is not linear, but likely involves feedback regulation by auxin.
Trp
TAA
IPA
YUC
IAA
NH
O
OH
TIR/AFB
Aux/IAA
ARF
PIN
EC
IC
N
Target Genes
PID
GNOM (polarization and recycling)
PP2A
(polarization)
Fig. 9.2 Core auxin pathways. After being synthesized by the TAA/YUC pathway, intracellular
(IC) auxin can either be transported to the extracellular space (EC) or initiate the signalling
cascade inside the nucleus (N). Auxin in the nucleus will allow the recognition of Aux/IAAs by
the TIR/AFB complex. This will lead to Aux/IAA degradation, and hence de-repression of ARF
activity. Transport of auxin is carried out by PIN proteins. The polarized position of PINs within
the cells is controlled by proteins like PID, PP2A and GNOM
174
A. Freire Rios et al.

3
Auxin Redistribution Through Directional Transport
The expression pattern of auxin biosynthesis genes does not always match the
locations that are marked by auxin response reporter genes such as DR5-GFP
(Friml et al. 2003). This suggests that locally produced auxin should be transported
to where auxin is needed. Indeed, expression analysis and protein localization, as
well as genetic analysis supports an important role for the PIN auxin efﬂux
facilitators in embryo development. The PIN proteins are well known to be
involved in the efﬁcient transport system of auxin (Vanneste and Friml 2009; see
Chap. 5). Of the eight Arabidopsis PIN genes, four are expressed during embryo-
genesis (Friml et al. 2003). From the one-cell stage onward, the PIN7 gene is
expressed and its protein becomes polarly localized in the apical side of extra-
embryonic cells. PIN1 is also expressed from one-cell stage and subsequent stages,
although it does not show clear subcellular polarity until mid-globular stage. Auxin
response activity (DR5-GFP reporter) is also detected in the embryonic cells, but
not the extra-embryonic cells at these stages. In pin7 and pin1 pin2 pin4 pin7
quadruple mutants, ectopic DR5-GFP expression is observed in the suspensor
(Friml et al. 2003). Considering that few YUC genes are expressed in the suspensor,
it suggests that PIN7 transports the biosynthesized auxin from suspensor to embry-
onic cells (Robert and Friml 2009). At globular stage, the polarity of PIN7 is
changed from apical to basal in the suspensor cells, while PIN1 becomes basally
polarized in the vascular initials. This likely promotes accumulation of auxin in the
hypophysis. Consistently, strong DR5-GFP signal is observed in the hypophysis
(Friml et al. 2003). At the transition stage, PIN1 polarity localizes towards the
ﬂanks of the apical embryonic cells. This promotes accumulation of auxin in the
cotyledons primordial (Benkova et al. 2003). On the other hand, PIN4 is expressed
in the hypophysis at the globular stage embryo. After the division of the hypoph-
ysis, it is expressed in the upper lens-shaped cell. PIN3 is expressed in the columella
precursors in the heart stage embryo. The pin7 mutant displays abnormal cell
division as well as the quadruple mutants of pin1 pin3 pin4 pin7 and pin2 pin3
pin4 pin7 indicating that coordinated polar localization of PINs regulates embryo
patterning (Blilou et al. 2005; Friml et al. 2003).
Recent work has suggested the existence of a connection between local auxin
biosynthesis and polarization of PIN proteins (see Chap. 8). In auxin biosynthesis
mutants, localization of PIN1 is apolar and its expression level is reduced in the
later stage (Robert et al. 2013). The mechanisms underlying this link are unclear,
but will likely involve control of the cellular mechanisms that target the polar
localization of PIN proteins. The polar membrane localization of PIN proteins is the
result of a continuous exocytosis/endocytosis cycle, where regulation can act on
either step (Vanneste and Friml 2009). Several proteins are known as regulators of
PIN trafﬁcking and polarity (Fig. 9.2). A serine–threonine kinase, PINOID (PID)
and PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE 2A (PP2A) antagonistically regulate polarity of
PIN proteins by regulating their phosphorylation status (Bennett et al. 1995; Ben-
jamins et al. 2001; Friml et al. 2004; Michniewicz et al. 2007). While PIN proteins
9
Auxin Regulation of Embryo Development
175

are targeted to the apical plasma membrane by phosphorylation, PINs are targeted
to the basal plasma membrane by dephosphorylation. PID, three PID homologues
(PID2, WAG1 and WAG2) and PP2A are expressed during embryogenesis (Cheng
et al. 2008; Michniewicz et al. 2007). As expected, mutations in any of these
polarity regulators cause defects similar to loss of PIN proteins or auxin biosyn-
thesis (Michniewicz et al. 2007; Benjamins et al. 2001).
The recycling of PIN proteins from endocytic vesicles (endosomes) to the
plasma membrane requires GNOM, an ADP ribosylation factor-guanine exchange
factor (Geldner et al. 2003; Steinmann et al. 1999). GNOM regulates the recycling
of PIN1 protein by controlling its polar localization on the membrane (Geldner
et al. 2003). GNOM is ubiquitously expressed (Geldner et al. 2004) and the mutant
seedling is rootless and makes fused cotyledons (Mayer et al. 1993), which
phenocopies the pin1 mutant and the pin1,3,4,7 quadruple mutant (Friml
et al. 2003). The gnom mutant embryo defects appear from the zygote onward
and the mutant embryo fails to establish an apical–basal axis (Mayer et al. 1993). At
the globular stage, orientation of cell division plate and cell division pattern of the
entire embryo become abnormal (Wolters et al. 2011). Establishment of the bilat-
eral symmetric structure at heart stage is also disturbed and results in a ball-shaped
embryo (Mayer et al. 1993). In gnom embryos, PIN1 is no longer polarized and
auxin transport is reduced causing accumulation in the apical region of globular
embryos (Wolters et al. 2011). When GNOM expression is driven by the promoter
of a provascular gene, polar localization of PIN1 is restored, auxin accumulation in
the apical embryo is reduced and formation of primary root is rescued. When
GNOM is expressed in the hypophysis, primary root formation is also restored.
This suggests that GNOM acts non-autonomously to regulate root apical meristem
formation, which is consistent with its function in intercellular auxin transport.
Furthermore, GNOM expression in apical epidermis restores the formation of two
cotyledons. Thus GNOM-dependent polar auxin transport is important for the
establishment of meristems (Wolters et al. 2011).
Studies on the HANABA TARANU (HAN) GATA transcription factor have
revealed a critical role for PIN gene regulation in embryo patterning (Nawy
et al. 2010). HAN is ﬁrst expressed in the zygote, and expression is retained in all
embryonic cells until the 16-cell stage. From globular to heart stage, HAN expres-
sion becomes restricted to the provasculature cells (Nawy et al. 2010; Zhao
et al. 2004). HAN regulates the transcription of the genes regulating the develop-
ment of the basal embryonic cells. Therefore, in the han mutant embryo, establish-
ment of the apical–basal axis fails. The basal cells of han embryos from 16-cell
stage resemble suspensor cells with large vacuoles and lower cell divisions. In these
cells, marker genes of suspensor and hypophysis (SUC3 and WOX5) are expressed,
whereas SHR, which is normally expressed in provasculature of basal cells, disap-
pears. The expression patterns of apical marker genes (WUS and ML1) are not
affected in the han mutant. Distribution of auxin is also changed in the han mutant.
While DR5-GFP is expressed in hypophysis and neighbouring suspensor cells in
the wild-type embryo, the expression domain is expanded to basal embryonic cells
in han mutant. The expression domain of PIN7 is also expanded to the basal
176
A. Freire Rios et al.

embryonic cells, while the expression of PIN1 is restricted to the apical embryonic
cells. Thus, the lack of root meristem in the han mutant is strongly correlated with
the disruption of the establishment of an auxin maxima in hypophysis likely due to
PIN gene misexpression (Nawy et al. 2010). Whether the regulation is direct
remains to be determined, but this ﬁnding opens new avenues for understanding
the regulation of PIN gene activity during embryo development.
In addition to the PIN proteins, other regulators of auxin transport have been
identiﬁed. Notably, the PGP/ABCB transporters facilitate non-polar auxin transport
(Geisler et al. 2005; see Chap. 5), but their activity has not yet been proven essential
for normal embryo development (Mravec et al. 2008). Recently, a new family of
auxin transporters, the PIN-LIKES (PILS) proteins, was shown to mediate intra-
cellular auxin transport between cytosol and the endoplasmic reticulum (Barbez
et al. 2012). PILS are auxin efﬂux carriers with a similar topology to PINs. The
PILS family consists of seven proteins containing an auxin carrier domain and six
(PILS 1, 2, 3, 5, 6 and 7) are localized to the endoplasmic reticulum (Barbez
et al. 2012, see Chap. 4). Among the seven PILS, PILS2 and PILS5 are the most
abundantly expressed in seedlings. Unlike PIN proteins, the family is conserved
throughout the plant kingdom and even exists in algae, suggesting that PILS can be
evolutionally older than PINs. PILS are uniformly expressed in various tissues and
some of them are auxin inducible. Overexpression and loss of function of PILS2
and/or PILS5 affect hypocotyl and root growth, lateral root organogenesis and root
hair length. It will be interesting to see if this novel mode of auxin partitioning is
also important for embryo development.
4
Transcriptional Response to Auxin
After auxin biosynthesis and transport, hormone accumulation triggers transcrip-
tional changes to affect cell division and identity. The auxin-mediated transcrip-
tional responses are mainly controlled by the interaction of two families of plant
transcriptional regulators: the auxin response factors (ARFs) and the Aux/IAA
proteins. In a general mechanism of action, the Aux/IAA proteins, together with
transcriptional co-repressors like TOPLESS (TPL), form a complex with the ARFs
in auxin low levels. When auxin levels rise in the cell, the Aux/IAA proteins are
targeted to the 26S-proteosome by an SCF E3 ubiquitin ligase complex. Upon
degradation of Aux/IAAs, ARFs are released and can act activating or repressing
their target genes (Fig. 9.2; reviewed in Chapman and Estelle 2009; see Chap. 6).
The Arabidopsis genome encodes 29 Aux/IAA proteins that share conserved
domains. Domain I is necessary for transcriptional repression and it has been shown
to recruit the TPL co-repressor in most of the Aux/IAAs (Causier et al. 2012;
Szemenyei et al. 2008). Domain II contains the degron motif, a 13 amino acids
sequence responsible for the Aux/IAAs’ instability by mediating their interaction
with the TIR1/AFB receptor (Dharmasiri et al. 2005; Kepinski and Leyser 2005).
There might be other sequences outside Domain II contributing to this interaction;
9
Auxin Regulation of Embryo Development
177

for example, the afﬁnity between the Aux/IAAs and the TIR1/AFB can drop
dramatically when a KR conserved motif between Domain I and Domain II is
mutated (Calderon Villalobos et al. 2012). Finally, domains III/IV in the C-terminal
region, considered as the interaction domain, is thought to mediate homo- and
heterodimerization between the Aux/IAAs and with the ARFs (Tiwari et al. 2003).
There are also Aux/IAAs that lack one of the domains. They are considered
non-canonical Aux/IAAs and their function remain unknown. Overexpression of
a subclade of Aux/IAAs, which lack domain II (IAA20, IAA30 and IAA31), results
in auxin-related phenotypes suggesting that they may interfere with endogenous
ARF-Aux/IAA interactions (Sato and Yamamoto 2008).
The degradation of Aux/IAAs is mediated by the family of E3 ligases called
SCFTIR1/AFB1–5 which targets them for ubiquitination. The F-box protein TRANS-
PORT INHIBITOR RESPONSE 1 (TIR1) and related proteins AUXIN SIGNAL-
LING F-BOX PROTEIN 1,2,3,4,5 (AFB 1–5) are the substrate receptor of the SCF
(Dharmasiri et al. 2005; Kepinski and Leyser 2005). All the six members of the
TIR1/AFB family are auxin receptors although they show individual distinct
biochemical properties and biological functions (Parry et al. 2009). For the SCF
to recognize the Aux/IAAs, the F-box protein needs to be directly bound to auxin.
The structure of TIR1 has been determined in the presence of auxin and the degron
peptide of IAA7, and it shows that its C-terminal 18 leucine-rich repeats (LRRs) is
essential for Aux/IAA and auxin binding (Tan et al. 2007). There are no confor-
mational changes of TIR1 upon auxin binding, which sits in a binding pocket
underneath the Aux/IAA binding site (Calderon-Villalobos et al. 2010; Tan
et al. 2007). Recent experiments using TIR1-ASK1 and IAA7 showed that both
proteins act as co-receptors and are necessary and sufﬁcient for auxin binding. With
29 Aux/IAAs and 6 TIR/AFBs, many qualitatively different co-receptor pairs may
exist. Recent data suggests that this is the case. In a qualitative yeast two-hybrid
assay, different receptor pairs showed different auxin dose–response and, further-
more, an inverse correlation between the Aux/IAAs’ stability and the strength of the
interactions. Also, quantitative biochemical assays (saturation and/or homologue
competitive IAA-binding assays) showed that afﬁnity of different co-receptor pairs
for auxin ranges from 10 nM to >1 μM (Calderon Villalobos et al. 2012). Given
that the complex TIR1/AFB–auxin–AUX/IAA is the ﬁrst step towards Aux/IAA
degradation, hence de-repression of ARFs; this complex formation may be a part of
a control mechanism of differential auxin responses. While mutations in the degron
of many Aux/IAA proteins have been reported to cause distinct auxin-related
defects (Reed 2001), only few were shown to affect embryo development. The
iaa12/bdl and iaa13 mutations cause defects in root initiation (Hamann et al. 2002;
Weijers et al. 2005), while iaa18 mutants have defects in cotyledon formation
(Ploense et al. 2009). In contrast, iaa10 and iaa11 mutations affect suspensor and
hypophysis development (Rademacher et al. 2012). Rather than distinct protein
capacities, these unique phenotypes likely reﬂect the highly speciﬁc gene expres-
sion patterns of Aux/IAA genes. Misexpression of the unrelated Aux/IAA protein
iaa3/shy2 in the IAA12/BDL expression domain causes bdl-like root defects
(Weijers et al. 2005).
178
A. Freire Rios et al.

As Aux/IAAs are degraded, ARFs are free to elicit gene expression response to
auxin. There are 23 ARFs in Arabidopsis (Okushima et al. 2005), which adds to the
possible combinatorial logic of auxin signalling considering that the members of
this family also have different biochemical properties and biological functions. All
auxin-dependent processes in the embryo seem to be mediated by ARF activity, as
mutations in individual or multiple ARFs, or misexpression of the Aux/IAA pro-
teins disrupt all these processes (Hardtke and Berleth 1998; Rademacher
et al. 2012). ARFs have three protein domains. At the N-terminus there is the
conserved DNA-binding domain, which binds to the auxin response elements in the
promoter regions of the direct targets. The second domain, named middle region, is
the non-conserved part and is proposed to determine the activity of the ARFs. ARFs
have been classiﬁed as gene activators or repressors based on the amino acid
composition of their middle region. Experiments in protoplasts showed that some
ARFs with a relatively glutamine-rich MR (ARF5–8 and 19) can activate synthetic
auxin promoters, and that ARFs with less glutamines (ARF1–4 and 9) can repress
the same promoters. The rest of the ARFs have been arbitrarily classiﬁed based on
these results (Tiwari et al. 2003). Since there is experimental data for some ARFs
suggesting that they can act as both activators and repressors of different genes
(Schlereth et al. 2010; Zhao et al. 2010), this classiﬁcation might not be entirely
accurate and the regulation of transcription by ARFs might be more complex.
Indeed, triple mutants between ARF1, ARF2 and ARF6 show a phenotype that
none of the single or double mutants shows (Rademacher et al. 2012). This suggests
that redundancy among ARFs is not limited to close related members with similar
domains III/IV.
Interestingly, recognition motifs for co-repressor proteins have been found in
several ARFs (Ikeda and Ohme-Takagi 2009), and yeast two-hybrid assays have
shown strong interactions between the transcriptional co-repressor TPL and ARF2,
9, 17 and 18; and putative weak interactions with ARF1, 3, 4 and 19 (Causier
et al. 2012). Finally at the C-terminus, we ﬁnd the Domains III/IV which mediates
the ARFs interaction with the Aux/IAAs and with other ARFs (Tiwari et al. 2003).
5
Generating Cell Type-Speciﬁc Responses
Various developmental processes during embryogenesis are dependent on proper
auxin response (Rademacher et al. 2012), and each of these is marked by activity of
the DR5-GFP auxin response reporter (Friml et al. 2003). Therefore, whether or not
there is an auxin response does not seem to deﬁne what developmental output is
triggered. A key question is what deﬁnes the nature of the auxin output. A plausible
explanation lies in the biochemically distinct properties of the transcriptional
regulators. Importantly, these proteins are differentially expressed in embryos:
different sets of Aux/IAAs and ARFs are expressed in different cell types. Tissue
types are established in the embryo soon after fertilization and the differential
expression of ARFs can already be observed at this level in Arabidopsis. An
9
Auxin Regulation of Embryo Development
179

expression map of all ARFs at different embryonic developmental stages was
recently described (Rademacher et al. 2011). All the embryonic cells express at
least one ARF gene and most cell types express a unique combination. These
expression patterns are dynamic, changing between developmental stages,
suggesting that as the embryo gets more complex, and as the different cell types
gain identities, different subsets of ARFs need to be active. In the octant stage two
subsets of ARFs can be observed; ARFs expressed in all cells of pro-embryo and
suspensor (ARF1, 6 and 18) and ARFs expressed only in the suspensor (ARF2,
9 and 13). During the globular stage, seven ARFs are expressed in the embryo in
partially overlapping patterns; ARF1 and 18 are expressed in every cell, ARF6 is
expressed in the basal tier and suspensor, ARF5/MP is strongly expressed in the
lower tier of the pro-embryo, ARF13 is expressed in the suspensor and surrounding
endosperm and ﬁnally ARF2 and 9 are expressed in the suspensor and in the
protoderm of the lower tier of the pro-embryo. In heart stage, when cotyledons
and meristems are established, more ARFs are expressed. Nine ARFs (1, 2, 4, 5,
6, 7, 10, 11 and 18) are expressed in the vascular cylinder. ARF3 is restricted to the
abaxial side of the cotyledons. ARF9 and 10 are expressed in the protoderm. ARF1,
2, 6 and 18 are expressed in the quiescent centre (QC) and columella cells. ARF5
and 7 are expressed in the QC and ARF9 is expressed in the columella cells.
Co-expression of ARFs in speciﬁc tissues may imply that they act in the same
biological processes, but this still needs to be determined (Rademacher et al. 2011)
(Fig. 9.3).
In any event, the cell type-speciﬁc ARF complements have the potential to
generate unique cellular auxin output if the ARF proteins are not biochemically
equivalent. In promoter-swap and misexpression experiments, it was shown that
ARF16 cannot fully replace the embryonic function of ARF5/MP (Weijers
et al. 2005). Furthermore, driving ARF9 from the ARF5/MP promoter enhances
weak mp phenotypes (Rademacher et al. 2012), and while an arf6 mutation
enhances
the
mp
phenotype,
arf1
mutation
suppressed
it
(Rademacher
et al. 2012). Finally, expression of MP in the suspensor from the ARF13 promoter
interfered with suspensor development, while an extra ARF13 dose did not. These
data together suggest that some ARFs are interchangeable (ARF6 and ARF5/MP),
while others act differently (ARF16 and ARF5/MP) or even antagonistically (ARF1
or ARF9 and ARF5/MP). This supports a role for an ARF prepattern in establishing
cell-speciﬁc auxin output.
5.1
Downstream Effectors of Auxin Signalling
The key to understanding the cellular mechanisms for auxin-dependent develop-
ment lies in the identiﬁcation of the genes that are controlled in each cell type. The
only ARF targets identiﬁed in the context of the embryo are regulated by ARF5/
MP. Three direct target genes of MP expressed in cells relevant for root initiation
have been identiﬁed through a micro-array approach and were named TARGET OF
180
A. Freire Rios et al.

MONOPTEROS (TMO) (Schlereth et al. 2010). MP acts in inner, lower tier
embryonic cells to promote root initiation, and does this in part non-cell-autono-
mously in the case of hypophysis speciﬁcation (Weijers et al. 2006). All three TMO
genes (TMO3,5,7) are expressed in the cells adjacent to the hypophysis where MP
acts. TMO3 encodes an AP2 transcription factor that becomes broadly expressed in
later stages. TMO5 and TMO7 encode basic helix–loop–helix (bHLH) transcription
factors. At later stages, TMO5 is expressed speciﬁcally in vascular tissues and
TMO7 becomes restricted to the future root stem cells. These three TMOs are all
individually able to partially rescue root initiation in a weak mp mutant when
misexpressed, but the largest effect was seen with TMO5 and TMO7. Since these
TMOs are transcription factors, we can assume that root initiation is a process of
successive transcriptional steps. It is to be noted that the TMO7 protein moves
directionally to the hypophysis where it is presumed to act as a cofactor for other
bHLH transcription factors and control hypophysis speciﬁcation or division. The
mobilization of this may be taken as the signal of intercellular communication used
by MP to regulate hypophysis divisions (Schlereth et al. 2010).
In contrast to the mobile TMO7, TMO5 acts cell-autonomously in vascular cells.
MP is required for oriented divisions in these cells that allow the development of a
vascular bundle with more than 30 cell ﬁles from 4 precursor cells. TMO5 was
recently shown to mediate these local, oriented divisions (De Rybel et al. 2013).
TMO5 acts in a complex with its bHLH partner LONESOME HIGHWAY. The
activity of the TMO5/LHW complex in promoting oriented division is normally
restricted to a small domain by transcriptional control through MP (on TMO5) and
other pathways that restrict LHW expression. When ectopically expressed, the
TMO5/LHW dimer is able to trigger the same oriented division in a variety of
cell types in the root. Hence, the diverse functions of MP in activating root
formation bifurcate at the level of its TMO target genes.
ARF 1, 6,18
ARF 1, 2, 6, 9,13,18
ARF 1,18
ARF 1, 6, 18
ARF 1, 6, 5,18
ARF 1, 2, 9,18
ARF 1, 2, 6, 9,13,18
8-cell
Early Globular
Heart stage
ARF 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7,10,11
ARF 1, 5 
ARF 1, 2, 6 
ARF 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 18
ARF 1, 2, 6, 9,18 
ARF 1, 2, 5
ARF 1, 2, 9, 10, 18  
ARF 1, 2, 3, 4
ARF 1, 2, 3, 4, 9, 10, 18 
ARF 1, 2, 4, 6, 9, 10, 18 
Fig. 9.3 Expression of auxin response transcription factors during embryogenesis. Schematic
depiction of gene expression patterns of ARF genes as determined by promoter-GFP reporters.
Expression can be observed already early at embryogenesis. The number of ARFs expressed
increases in time. Unique combinations of ARFs correlate with the identities obtained by each
group of cells which are depicted in different colours
9
Auxin Regulation of Embryo Development
181

Another identiﬁed direct target of MONOPTEROS is DRN. DRN encodes an
AP2 transcription factor that acts redundantly with its paralogue DRNL upstream
auxin polar transport and synthesis (see above). The expression of DRN can be
observed from the two-to-four-cell stage in the embryo proper, then it focuses in the
emerging cotyledons and then it gets restricted to the SAM at torpedo stage. Loss-
of-function drn mutant phenotype affects the apical and the basal embryo domains.
In drn mutants, localization of the PIN1 protein is altered, being randomly distrib-
uted instead of being located basally as in the wild type. This can already be
observed at 32-cell stage, where it is found to be localized laterally. In this mutant,
the expression of the auxin distribution and response reporter DR5-GFP at different
embryonic stages is also abnormal. In the drn mutant, abnormal cell division can be
observed from the globular stage onwards. This abnormal division affects specially
cotyledon organogenesis. Also, phenotypes resembling the one of mp and bdl can
be observed (Chandler et al. 2007; Cole et al. 2009), which suggests that MP acts in
part by controlling PIN1 protein localization through the DRN/DRNL genes.
Auxin plays a fundamental role not only in determining the location of the distal
stem niche but also in the speciﬁcation of the QC and entire embryonic root.
Downstream MP and other ARFs, other genes are activated. The AP2 putative
transcription factors PLETHORA (PLT) are transcribed in response to auxin. In the
embryo, ARF5-MP and ARF7-NHP4 are necessary for the transcription of PLETH-
ORA1 (PLT1) and PLETHORA2 (PLT2), genes that act in the speciﬁcation and
maintenance of the QC and the stem cell niche (Aida et al. 2004). The expression of
both PLT genes can be detected already at octant stage and it is restricted to the
basal half of the embryo (Aida et al. 2004; Galinha et al. 2007). At globular stage, it
is expressed in the provascular cells and the QC progenitor and later on it is
expressed only in the QC and surrounding stem cells. It has been observed that
misexpression of PLT1 and PLT2 leads to the development of ectopic roots, and
that PLT activity is critical for embryonic root formation (Galinha et al. 2007). The
regulation by MP and ARF7 may not be direct given the slow activation after auxin
treatment (Aida et al. 2004). Recently, an intriguing aspect of PLT activity was
revealed. The expression of the HD-ZIP III genes (see above), master regulators of
the embryonic apical fate, is expanded to the root domain in plt mutants (Smith and
Long 2010). PLT misexpression suppresses HD-Zip gene expression, and con-
versely, HD-Zip misexpression suppressed PLT expression. In these cases,
misexpression induced the formation of a second shoot in the root domain
(HD-Zip
misexpression),
or
a
second
root
in
the
shoot
position
(PLT
misexpression). This suggests that part of the network downstream of auxin acts
through PLT genes to suppress shoot development in the root pole (Smith and Long
2010).
182
A. Freire Rios et al.

5.2
Interactions of Auxin with Other Hormonal Pathways
Recent studies have shown that auxin interacts with other hormones to regulate
developmental patterning and growth in various tissues (Marhavy´ et al. 2011; Dello
Ioio et al. 2008; Mouchel et al. 2006; Shani et al. 2006; Zhao et al. 2010, see
Chap. 12). Therefore, understanding how auxin controls development will have to
include a description of its cross-talk with other hormones. We brieﬂy review recent
insights in cross-talks relevant to auxin-dependent embryo development.
While auxin promotes cytokinin signalling in the shoot apical meristem (Zhao
et al. 2010), cytokinin acts antagonistically to auxin signalling in the root. It was
shown that auxin promotes meristematic activity, whereas cytokinin promotes
differentiation of stem cells in root. Furthermore, cytokinin regulates redistribution
of auxin in the root apical meristem. A primary cytokinin-response transcription
factor, ARR1, activates the gene SHY2/IAA3 (SHY2), a repressor of auxin signal-
ling that negatively regulates the PIN genes (Dello Ioio et al. 2008). First evidence
for auxin control of cytokinin signalling in embryo development has come from the
analysis of the cytokinin signalling reporter pTCS-GFP (Muller and Sheen 2008).
Its activity is ﬁrst detected in the hypophysis and suspensor at the 16-cell stage
embryo (Muller and Sheen 2008). After the division of the hypophysis, TCS
expression is only maintained in the apical cell that is speciﬁed to become the
quiescent centre, whereas it is repressed in the basal cell that becomes the distal root
cap. Consistently, the negative regulators of cytokinin signalling, type-A ARR7 and
15, are upregulated in the basal hypophysis cell. Importantly, expression of these
ARR genes is promoted by auxin. Furthermore, expression of DR5-GFP is
maintained in the basal hypophysis cell while it is suppressed in apical hypophysis
cell. These data suggest that auxin antagonizes cytokinin signalling via activating
the type A ARRs. This appears to be biologically meaningful as altering cytokinin
signalling in embryos through manipulating ARR gene expression causes defects in
embryonic root formation similar to those found in several auxin-related mutants.
In the root vasculature, cytokinin signalling markers TCS-GFP and ARR5 are
expressed in procambial cells adjacent to the xylem, whereas auxin signalling
markers such as DR5-GFP and IAA2 promoters are expressed in the xylem. This
indicates that cytokinin activity is correlated with procambium division while auxin
promotes xylem differentiation (Bishopp et al. 2011). Indeed, cytokinin treatment
inhibits protoxylem formation, and in the cytokinin receptor mutant wol, all the
vascular cells differentiate into protoxylem (Ma¨ho¨nen et al. 2006). Mutation in the
ARABIDOPSIS HISTIDINE PHOSPHOTRANSFER PROTEIN 6 (AHP6) gene
was able to restore phloem and procambium in wol mutant. AHP6 belongs to a
family of histidine phosphotransfer proteins that transduce cytokinin signal. How-
ever, AHP6 has a mutation in a conserved histidine residue, which is a target of
phosphorylation of AHPs. Therefore, AHP6 cannot participate in phosphotransfer
and is considered as pseudo-AHP. In the ahp6 mutant, differentiation of protoxylem
is disrupted. However, the phenotype is restored by expressing cytokinin oxidase
CKX2 from the AHP6 promoter, which is expressed in protoxylem and pericycle
9
Auxin Regulation of Embryo Development
183

cells (Ma¨ho¨nen et al. 2006). The expression domain of auxin signalling markers
overlaps with that of AHP6 expression and auxin promotes transcription of AHP6,
likely mediated by MP (Bishopp et al. 2011). Thus, AHP6 is an auxin inducible,
negative regulator of cytokinin signalling that promotes protoxylem differentiation
(Ma¨ho¨nen et al. 2006).
In procambium cells adjacent to the xylem, PIN1 was localized on both basal
and lateral side of the plasma membrane. This lateral localization of PIN1 promotes
auxin transport from procambium to protoxylem. Accumulated auxin in the proto-
xylem likely creates a bisymmetric AHP6 expression domain. During embryogen-
esis, AHP6 is expressed in the cotyledon tips of the heart stage embryo and the
expression domain migrates from cotyledon to vasculature cells. At the same time,
expression pattern of the auxin signalling marker, IAA2 changes from symmetric to
bisymmetric in vasculature cells. This suggests that AHP6 is required to the
establishment of bisymmetric pattern of protoxylem during embryogenesis
(Bishopp et al. 2011). Likely, these examples are the ﬁrst of many more that
show intimate connections between auxin and cytokinin, as well as perhaps other
hormones, that dynamically control cell fate and division during embryo
development.
6
Concluding Remarks
The morphogenetic potential of the plant hormone auxin has been discovered many
decades ago (Skoog and Miller), but the mechanisms by which it controls embryo
development have only been revealed in the last decade. In this chapter, we
discussed the developmental progression of early embryogenesis and reviewed
which steps are under auxin control. We show that a network involving the
regulation of auxin biosynthesis, transport and cell type-speciﬁc response allows
this generic hormone to control a variety of processes during embryogenesis. While
the outlines of this network have been drafted, important questions remain. These
include how local biosynthesis is activated, how PIN protein polarity regulation
leads to precise auxin accumulation patterns and, ﬁnally, how these accumulation
patterns in turn trigger the activation of speciﬁc sets of developmental effector
genes. With the current pace of progress, we anticipate that the next years will have
much in store for our understanding of how this hormone directs multicellular plant
development.
Acknowledgements We thank all members of our group for inspiring discussions. Work by the
authors is funded by grants from the Netherlands Organization for Scientiﬁc research (NWO;
ECHO grant 711.011.002 and ALW grant 820.02.019).
184
A. Freire Rios et al.

References
Aida M, Beis D, Heidstra R, Willemsen V, Blilou I, Galinha C, Nussaume L, Noh YS, Amasino R,
Scheres B (2004) The PLETHORA genes mediate patterning of the Arabidopsis root stem cell
niche. Cell 119(1):109–120. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2004.09.018
Barbez E, Kubes M, Rolcik J, Beziat C, Pencik A, Wang B, Rosquete MR, Zhu J, Dobrev PI,
Lee Y, Zazimalova E, Petrasek J, Geisler M, Friml J, Kleine-Vehn J (2012) A novel putative
auxin carrier family regulates intracellular auxin homeostasis in plants. Nature 485(7396):119–
122. doi:10.1038/nature11001
Benjamins R, Quint A, Weijers D, Hooykaas P, Offringa R (2001) The PINOID protein kinase
regulates organ development in Arabidopsis by enhancing polar auxin transport. Development
128(20):4057–4067
Benkova E, Michniewicz M, Sauer M, Teichmann T, Seifertova D, Jurgens G, Friml J (2003)
Local, efﬂux-dependent auxin gradients as a common module for plant organ formation. Cell
115(5):591–602
Bennett SRM, Alvarez J, Bossinger G, Smyth DR (1995) Morphogenesis in pinoid mutants of
Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant J 8(4):505–520. doi:10.1046/J.1365-313x.1995.8040505.X
Bishopp A, Help H, El-Showk S, Weijers D, Scheres B, Friml J, Benkova E, Mahonen AP,
Helariutta Y (2011) A mutually inhibitory interaction between auxin and cytokinin speciﬁes
vascular pattern in roots. Curr Biol 21(11):917–926. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2011.04.017
Blilou I, Xu J, Wildwater M, Willemsen V, Paponov I, Friml J, Heidstra R, Aida M, Palme K,
Scheres B (2005) The PIN auxin efﬂux facilitator network controls growth and patterning in
Arabidopsis roots. Nature 433(7021):39–44. doi:10.1038/nature03184
Calderon-Villalobos LI, Tan X, Zheng N, Estelle M (2010) Auxin perception – structural insights.
Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2(7):a005546. doi:10.1101/cshperspect.a005546
Calderon Villalobos LI, Lee S, De Oliveira C, Ivetac A, Brandt W, Armitage L, Sheard LB, Tan X,
Parry G, Mao H, Zheng N, Napier R, Kepinski S, Estelle M (2012) A combinatorial TIR1/
AFB-Aux/IAA co-receptor system for differential sensing of auxin. Nat Chem Biol 8(5):477–
485. doi:10.1038/nchembio.926
Causier B, Ashworth M, Guo W, Davies B (2012) The TOPLESS interactome: a framework for
gene repression in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 158(1):423–438. doi:10.1104/pp. 111.186999
Chandler JW, Cole M, Flier A, Grewe B, Werr W (2007) The AP2 transcription factors
DORNROSCHEN and DORNROSCHEN-LIKE redundantly control Arabidopsis embryo
patterning via interaction with PHAVOLUTA. Development 134(9):1653–1662. doi:10.
1242/dev.001016
Chapman EJ, Estelle M (2009) Mechanism of auxin-regulated gene expression in plants. Annu
Rev Genet 43:265–285. doi:10.1146/annurev-genet-102108-134148
Cheng Y, Dai X, Zhao Y (2007) Auxin synthesized by the YUCCA ﬂavin monooxygenases is
essential for embryogenesis and leaf formation in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 19(8):2430–2439.
doi:10.1105/tpc.107.053009
Cheng Y, Qin G, Dai X, Zhao Y (2008) NPY genes and AGC kinases deﬁne two key steps in
auxin-mediated organogenesis in Arabidopsis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105(52):21017–
21022. doi:10.1073/pnas.0809761106
Cole M, Chandler J, Weijers D, Jacobs B, Comelli P, Werr W (2009) DORNROSCHEN is a direct
target of the auxin response factor MONOPTEROS in the Arabidopsis embryo. Development
136(10):1643–1651. doi:10.1242/dev.032177
De Rybel B, Moller B, Yoshida S, Grabowicz I, Barbier de Reuille P, Boeren S, Smith RS, Borst
JW, Weijers D (2013) A bHLH complex controls embryonic vascular tissue establishment and
indeterminate growth in Arabidopsis. Dev Cell 24(4):426–437. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2012.12.
013
Dello Ioio R, Nakamura K, Moubayidin L, Perilli S, Taniguchi M, Morita MT, Aoyama T,
Costantino P, Sabatini S (2008) A genetic framework for the control of cell division and
differentiation in the root meristem. Science 322:1380–1384
9
Auxin Regulation of Embryo Development
185

Dharmasiri N, Dharmasiri S, Estelle M (2005) The F-box protein TIR1 is an auxin receptor. Nature
435(7041):441–445. doi:10.1038/nature03543
Donner TJ, Sherr I, Scarpella E (2009) Regulation of preprocambial cell state acquisition by auxin
signaling in Arabidopsis leaves. Development 136(19):3235–3246. doi:10.1242/dev.037028
Eklund DM, Staldal V, Valsecchi I, Cierlik I, Eriksson C, Hiratsu K, Ohme-Takagi M, Sundstrom
JF, Thelander M, Ezcurra I, Sundberg E (2010a) The Arabidopsis thaliana STYLISH1 protein
acts as a transcriptional activator regulating auxin biosynthesis. Plant Cell 22(2):349–363.
doi:10.1105/tpc.108.064816
Eklund DM, Thelander M, Landberg K, Staldal V, Nilsson A, Johansson M, Valsecchi I, Pederson
ER, Kowalczyk M, Ljung K, Ronne H, Sundberg E (2010b) Homologues of the Arabidopsis
thaliana SHI/STY/LRP1 genes control auxin biosynthesis and affect growth and development
in the moss Physcomitrella patens. Development 137(8):1275–1284. doi:10.1242/dev.039594
Eklund DM, Cierlik I, Staldal V, Claes AR, Vestman D, Chandler J, Sundberg E (2011) Expression
of Arabidopsis SHORT INTERNODES/STYLISH family genes in auxin biosynthesis zones of
aerial organs is dependent on a GCC box-like regulatory element. Plant Physiol 157(4):2069–
2080. doi:10.1104/pp. 111.182253
Emery JF, Floyd SK, Alvarez J, Eshed Y, Hawker NP, Izhaki A, Baum SF, Bowman JL (2003)
Radial patterning of Arabidopsis shoots by class III HD-ZIP and KANADI genes. Curr Biol 13
(20):1768–1774
Friml J, Vieten A, Sauer M, Weijers D, Schwarz H, Hamann T, Offringa R, Jurgens G (2003)
Efﬂux-dependent auxin gradients establish the apical-basal axis of Arabidopsis. Nature 426
(6963):147–153. doi:10.1038/nature02085
Friml J, Yang X, Michniewicz M, Weijers D, Quint A, Tietz O, Benjamins R, Ouwerkerk PBF,
Ljung K, Sandberg G, Hooykaas PJJ, Palme K, Offringa R (2004) A PINOID-dependent binary
switch in apical-basal PIN polar targeting directs auxin efﬂux. Science 306(5697):862–865.
doi:10.1126/Science.1100618
Galinha C, Hofhuis H, Luijten M, Willemsen V, Blilou I, Heidstra R, Scheres B (2007) PLETH-
ORA proteins as dose-dependent master regulators of Arabidopsis root development. Nature
449(7165):1053–1057. doi:10.1038/nature06206
Geisler
M,
Blakeslee
JJ,
Bouchard
R,
Lee
OR,
Vincenzetti
V,
Bandyopadhyay
A,
Titapiwatanakun B, Peer WA, Bailly A, Richards EL, Ejendal KF, Smith AP, Baroux C,
Grossniklaus U, Muller A, Hrycyna CA, Dudler R, Murphy AS, Martinoia E (2005) Cellular
efﬂux of auxin catalyzed by the Arabidopsis MDR/PGP transporter AtPGP1. Plant J 44
(2):179–194. doi:10.1111/j.1365-313X.2005.02519.x
Geldner N, Anders N, Wolters H, Keicher J, Kornberger W, Muller P, Delbarre A, Ueda T,
Nakano A, Jurgens G (2003) The Arabidopsis GNOM ARF-GEF mediates endosomal
recycling, auxin transport, and auxin-dependent plant growth. Cell 112(2):219–230. doi:10.
1016/S0092-8674(03)00003-5
Geldner N, Richter S, Vieten A, Marquardt S, Torres-Ruiz RA, Mayer U, Jurgens G (2004) Partial
loss-of-function alleles reveal a role for GNOM in auxin transport-related, post-embryonic
development of Arabidopsis. Development 131(2):389–400. doi:10.1242/dev.00926
Hamann T, Benkova E, Baurle I, Kientz M, Jurgens G (2002) The Arabidopsis BODENLOS gene
encodes an auxin response protein inhibiting MONOPTEROS-mediated embryo patterning.
Genes Dev 16(13):1610–1615. doi:10.1101/gad.229402
Hardtke CS, Berleth T (1998) The Arabidopsis gene MONOPTEROS encodes a transcription
factor mediating embryo axis formation and vascular development. EMBO J 17(5):1405–1411.
doi:10.1093/emboj/17.5.1405
Ikeda M, Ohme-Takagi M (2009) A novel group of transcriptional repressors in Arabidopsis. Plant
Cell Physiol 50(5):970–975. doi:10.1093/pcp/pcp048
Ju¨rgens G, Mayer U (1994) Arabidopsis. In: Bard J (ed) A colour atlas of developing embryos.
Wolfe, London, pp 7–21
186
A. Freire Rios et al.

Kepinski S, Leyser O (2005) The Arabidopsis F-box protein TIR1 is an auxin receptor. Nature 435
(7041):446–451. doi:10.1038/nature03542
Kuusk S, Sohlberg JJ, Long JA, Fridborg I, Sundberg E (2002) STY1 and STY2 promote the
formation of apical tissues during Arabidopsis gynoecium development. Development 129
(20):4707–4717
Mashiguchi K, Tanaka K, Sakai T, Sugawara S, Kawaide H, Natsume M, Hanada A, Yaeno T,
Shirasu K, Yao H, McSteen P, Zhao Y, Hayashi K, Kamiya Y, Kasahara H (2011) The main
auxin biosynthesis pathway in Arabidopsis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108(45):18512–18517.
doi:10.1073/pnas.1108434108
Marhavy P, Bielach A, Abas L, Abuzeineh A, Duclercq J, Tanaka H, Parˇezova´ M, Petra´sek J,
Friml J, Kleine-Vehn J, Benkova´ E (2011) Cytokinin modulates endocytic trafﬁcking of PIN1
auxin efﬂux carrier to control plant organogenesis. Dev Cell 21:796–804
Ma¨ho¨nen AP, Bishopp A, Higuchi M, Nieminen KM, Kinoshita K, To¨rma¨kangas K, Ikeda Y, Oka
A, Kakimoto T, Helariutta Y (2006) Cytokinin signaling and its inhibitor AHP6 regulate cell
fate during vascular development. Science 311:94–98
Mayer U, Buttner G, Jurgens G (1993) Apical-basal pattern-formation in the Arabidopsis embryo
– studies on the role of the gnom gene. Development 117(1):149–162
Michniewicz M, Zago MK, Abas L, Weijers D, Schweighofer A, Meskiene I, Heisler MG,
Ohno C, Zhang J, Huang F, Schwab R, Weigel D, Meyerowitz EM, Luschnig C, Offringa R,
Friml J (2007) Antagonistic regulation of PIN phosphorylation by PP2A and PINOID directs
auxin ﬂux. Cell 130(6):1044–1056. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2007.07.033
Mouchel CF, Osmont KS, Hardtke CS (2006) BRX mediates feedback between brassinosteroid
levels and auxin signalling in root growth. Nature 443:458–461
Mravec J, Kubes M, Bielach A, Gaykova V, Petrasek J, Skupa P, Chand S, Benkova E,
Zazimalova E, Friml J (2008) Interaction of PIN and PGP transport mechanisms in auxin
distribution-dependent development. Development 135(20):3345–3354. doi:10.1242/dev.
021071
Muller B, Sheen J (2008) Cytokinin and auxin interaction in root stem-cell speciﬁcation during
early embryogenesis. Nature 453(7198):1094–1097. doi:10.1038/nature06943
Nawy T, Bayer M, Mravec J, Friml J, Birnbaum KD, Lukowitz W (2010) The GATA factor
HANABA TARANU is required to position the proembryo boundary in the early Arabidopsis
embryo. Dev Cell 19(1):103–113. doi:10.1016/J.Devcel.2010.06.004
Okushima Y, Overvoorde PJ, Arima K, Alonso JM, Chan A, Chang C, Ecker JR, Hughes B, Lui A,
Nguyen D, Onodera C, Quach H, Smith A, Yu G, Theologis A (2005) Functional genomic
analysis of the AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR gene family members in Arabidopsis thaliana:
unique and overlapping functions of ARF7 and ARF19. Plant Cell 17(2):444–463. doi:10.
1105/tpc.104.028316
Parry G, Calderon-Villalobos LI, Prigge M, Peret B, Dharmasiri S, Itoh H, Lechner E, Gray WM,
Bennett M, Estelle M (2009) Complex regulation of the TIR1/AFB family of auxin receptors.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106(52):22540–22545. doi:10.1073/pnas.0911967106
Ploense SE, Wu MF, Nagpal P, Reed JW (2009) A gain-of-function mutation in IAA18 alters
Arabidopsis embryonic apical patterning. Development 136(9):1509–1517. doi:10.1242/dev.
025932
Rademacher EH, Moller B, Lokerse AS, Llavata-Peris CI, van den Berg W, Weijers D (2011) A
cellular expression map of the Arabidopsis AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR gene family. Plant J
68(4):597–606. doi:10.1111/j.1365-313X.2011.04710.x
Rademacher EH, Lokerse AS, Schlereth A, Llavata-Peris CI, Bayer M, Kientz M, Freire Rios A,
Borst JW, Lukowitz W, Jurgens G, Weijers D (2012) Different auxin response machineries
control distinct cell fates in the early plant embryo. Dev Cell 22(1):211–222. doi:10.1016/j.
devcel.2011.10.026
Reed JW (2001) Roles and activities of Aux/IAA proteins in Arabidopsis. Trends Plant Sci 6
(9):420–425
9
Auxin Regulation of Embryo Development
187

Robert HS, Friml J (2009) Auxin and other signals on the move in plants. Nat Chem Biol 5(5):325–
332. doi:10.1038/nchembio.170
Robert HS, Grones P, Stepanova AN, Robles LM, Lokerse AS, Alonso JM, Weijers D, Friml J
(2013) Local auxin sources orient the apical-basal axis in Arabidopsis embryos. Curr Biol 23
(24):2506–2512
Sato A, Yamamoto KT (2008) Overexpression of the non-canonical Aux/IAA genes causes auxin-
related aberrant phenotypes in Arabidopsis. Physiol Plant 133(2):397–405. doi:10.1111/j.
1399-3054.2008.01055.x
Scheres B (2007) Stem-cell niches: nursery rhymes across kingdoms. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 8
(5):345–354. doi:10.1038/nrm2164
Scheres B, Wolkenfelt H, Willemsen V, Terlouw M, Lawson E, Dean C, Weisbeek P (1994)
Embryonic origin of the Arabidopsis primary root and root meristem initials. Development
120:2475–2487
Schlereth A, Moller B, Liu W, Kientz M, Flipse J, Rademacher EH, Schmid M, Jurgens G,
Weijers D (2010) MONOPTEROS controls embryonic root initiation by regulating a mobile
transcription factor. Nature 464(7290):913–916. doi:10.1038/nature08836
Shani E, Yanai O, Ori N (2006) The role of hormones in shoot apical meristem function. Curr Opin
Plant Biol 9:484–489
Smith ZR, Long JA (2010) Control of Arabidopsis apical-basal embryo polarity by antagonistic
transcription factors. Nature 464(7287):423–426. doi:10.1038/nature08843
Sohlberg JJ, Myrenas M, Kuusk S, Lagercrantz U, Kowalczyk M, Sandberg G, Sundberg E (2006)
STY1 regulates auxin homeostasis and affects apical-basal patterning of the Arabidopsis
gynoecium. Plant J 47(1):112–123. doi:10.1111/j.1365-313X.2006.02775.x
Staldal V, Sohlberg JJ, Eklund DM, Ljung K, Sundberg E (2008) Auxin can act independently of
CRC, LUG, SEU, SPT and STY1 in style development but not apical-basal patterning of the
Arabidopsis gynoecium. New Phytol 180(4):798–808. doi:10.1111/j.1469-8137.2008.02625.x
Steinmann T, Geldner N, Grebe M, Mangold S, Jackson CL, Paris S, Galweiler L, Palme K,
Jurgens G (1999) Coordinated polar localization of auxin efﬂux carrier PIN1 by GNOM ARF
GEF. Science 286(5438):316–318
Stepanova AN, Robertson-Hoyt J, Yun J, Benavente LM, Xie DY, Dolezal K, Schlereth A,
Jurgens G, Alonso JM (2008) TAA1-mediated auxin biosynthesis is essential for hormone
crosstalk and plant development. Cell 133(1):177–191. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2008.01.047
Szemenyei H, Hannon M, Long JA (2008) TOPLESS mediates auxin-dependent transcriptional
repression during Arabidopsis embryogenesis. Science 319(5868):1384–1386. doi:10.1126/
science.1151461
Tan X, Calderon-Villalobos LIA, Sharon M, Zheng C, Robinson CV, Estelle M, Zheng N (2007)
Mechanism of auxin perception by the TIR1 ubiquitin ligase. Nature 446(7136):6
Tao Y, Ferrer JL, Ljung K, Pojer F, Hong F, Long JA, Li L, Moreno JE, Bowman ME, Ivans LJ,
Cheng Y, Lim J, Zhao Y, Ballare CL, Sandberg G, Noel JP, Chory J (2008) Rapid synthesis of
auxin via a new tryptophan-dependent pathway is required for shade avoidance in plants. Cell
133(1):164–176. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2008.01.049
Tiwari SB, Hagen G, Guilfoyle T (2003) The roles of auxin response factor domains in auxin-
responsive transcription. Plant Cell 15(2):533–543
Vanneste S, Friml J (2009) Auxin: a trigger for change in plant development. Cell 136(6):1005–
1016. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2009.03.001
Weigel D, Jurgens G (2002) Stem cells that make stems. Nature 415(6873):751–754. doi:10.1038/
415751a
Weijers D, Benkova E, Jager KE, Schlereth A, Hamann T, Kientz M, Wilmoth JC, Reed JW,
Jurgens G (2005) Developmental speciﬁcity of auxin response by pairs of ARF and Aux/IAA
transcriptional regulators. EMBO J 24(10):1874–1885. doi:10.1038/sj.emboj.7600659
Weijers D, Schlereth A, Ehrismann JS, Schwank G, Kientz M, Jurgens G (2006) Auxin triggers
transient local signaling for cell speciﬁcation in Arabidopsis embryogenesis. Dev Cell 10
(2):265–270. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2005.12.001
188
A. Freire Rios et al.

Wolters H, Anders N, Geldner N, Gavidia R, Jurgens G (2011) Coordination of apical and basal
embryo development revealed by tissue-speciﬁc GNOM functions. Development 138(1):117–
126. doi:10.1242/Dev.059147
Zhao YX, Medrano L, Ohashi K, Fletcher JC, Yu H, Sakai H, Meyerowitz EM (2004) HANABA
TARANU is a GATA transcription factor that regulates shoot apical meristem and ﬂower
development in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 16(10):2586–2600. doi:10.1105/Tpc.104.024869
Zhao Z, Andersen SU, Ljung K, Dolezal K, Miotk A, Schultheiss SJ, Lohmann JU (2010)
Hormonal control of the shoot stem-cell niche. Nature 465(7301):1089–1092. doi:10.1038/
nature09126
9
Auxin Regulation of Embryo Development
189

Chapter 10
Auxin, Chief Architect of the Shoot Apex
Benoıˆt Landrein and Teva Vernoux
Abstract Plants have a unique capacity for continuous postembryonic develop-
ment linked to the existence of permanent stem cell niches, located in specialized
tissues called meristems. The activity of the shoot apical meristem (SAM), which is
located at the tip of stems and branches, allows for the continuous production of all
aerial organs that will develop as lateral shoots, leaves, or ﬂowers. As it deﬁnes the
number, type, and position of lateral primordia, the SAM is at the basis of plant
architecture and its activity can be modulated by both internal and environmental
cues. Successive initiations of new organ primordia occur in the meristem follow-
ing very precise spatiotemporal patterns, called phyllotaxis. The maintenance of the
meristem over time is thus expected to require precise spatiotemporal control of cell
fate to allow for the continuous emergence of new primordia at precise positions
and the maintenance of the stem cell niche. Signaling initiated by the plant hormone
auxin plays a central role in the control of cell identities during organogenesis and
in the dynamics of phyllotaxis. We ﬁrst describe the structure and function of the
SAM, focusing on the model species Arabidopsis thaliana. We then discuss the
central role played by auxin in the coordination of cellular behaviors and cell
identities in the SAM, and thus in providing the primary instructions for phyllotaxis
and for elaborating the shoot architecture. Finally, we illustrate how the gene
network downstream of auxin and mechanical properties of tissues participate in
controlling morphogenesis and phyllotaxis dynamics.
B. Landrein
Laboratoire de Reproduction et De´veloppement des Plantes, CNRS, INRA, ENS Lyon, UCBL,
Universite´ de Lyon, 46 Alle´e d’Italie, 69364 Lyon Cedex 07, France
Laboratoire Joliot-Curie, CNRS, ENS Lyon, Universite´ de Lyon, 46 Alle´e d’Italie, 69364 Lyon
Cedex 07, France
T. Vernoux (*)
Laboratoire de Reproduction et De´veloppement des Plantes, CNRS, INRA, ENS Lyon, UCBL,
Universite´ de Lyon, 46 Alle´e d’Italie, 69364 Lyon Cedex 07, France
e-mail: teva.vernoux@ens-lyon.fr
E. Zazˇı´malova´ et al. (eds.), Auxin and Its Role in Plant Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-7091-1526-8_10, © Springer-Verlag Wien 2014
191

1
From the Stem Cell Niche to Organogenesis at the Shoot
Apical Meristem
The SAM presents a very organized tissular structure; it can be subdivided into
different zones and layers which are maintained throughout the life of the plant
(Fig. 10.1a, b; Bowman and Eshed 2000). First, the stem cells can be found at the
top of the SAM in the central zone and are primarily involved in meristem
maintenance. In the surrounding peripheral zone, new lateral organs (leaves, lateral
shoots, or ﬂowers) are generated following speciﬁc spatiotemporal patterns called
phyllotaxis. Higher growth and division of cells that are recruited in the organs
result in the formation of a bump that will develop as the new lateral organ. The area
between the growing bump and the meristem will rapidly form a creased-shape
boundary that allows for the physical separation between the organ and the meri-
stem. The meristem can also be divided into layers whose integrity largely depends
on the orientation of division planes within the structure (Fig. 10.1b): the epidermal
layer or L1, the L2 that together with L1 forms the tunica, and the L3 that forms the
corpus of the meristem. The organization of the SAM into zones and layers is
maintained during the life of the plant, suggesting a strict control of the integrity of
the tissue alongside the continuous generation of new organs.
During the last two decades, a large amount of master genes involved in the
control of meristem activity have been isolated and have allowed the ﬁne dissection
of the mechanisms underlying both the maintenance of the meristem structure and
the emergence of the organs. Most of this work was carried in the model
Arabidopsis thaliana and we only present brieﬂy some of the most important master
regulators of the SAM functions in this species (Fig. 10.1c and for more extensive
reviews, see Barton 2010; Chandler 2012). Both the formation of the SAM during
embryogenesis and its maintenance during the post-embryonic life of the plant rely
on the activity of the homeodomain transcription factor SHOOTMERISTEMLESS
(STM). STM belongs to the KNOX gene family and is expressed throughout the
meristem except in the early developing primordia where it is downregulated (Long
et al. 1996). WUSCHEL (WUS), another homeodomain transcription factor, is more
speciﬁcally involved in controlling the maintenance of the stem cell niche in the
meristem. WUS is expressed in a small area called organizing center and located
below the central zone, and prevent the differentiation of the stem cells above
non-cell autonomously (Mayer et al. 1998; Yadav et al. 2011). WUS acts in a
different pathway than STM (Endrizzi et al. 1996; Lenhard et al. 2002), but
overexpression of the two genes together is sufﬁcient to induce SAM identity,
even in root tissues (Brand et al. 2002; Gallois et al. 2002). The control of the size of
the central zone involves a feedback loop between WUSCHEL and CLAVATA
(CLV) genes (Brand et al. 2000; Schoof et al. 2000). CLV3 encodes a precursor
for a small peptide and its expression is induced in the upper part of the central zone
by WUSCHEL (Kondo et al. 2006). This peptide diffuse broadly in the meristem
and act non-autonomously to restrict WUSCHEL expression to the organizing
192
B. Landrein and T. Vernoux

center through binding to the CLAVATA1-2 receptor complex (Nimchuk et al. 2011;
Fletcher et al. 1999; Ogawa et al. 2008 and for a recent review, see Aichinger
et al. 2012).
A large set of genes is also known to control the initiation, the development and
the identity (leaf, lateral meristem, or ﬂower) of the lateral primordia. As pointed
out above, cells incorporated in the primordium lose their meristematic identity
through the repression of STM expression (Long et al. 1996). This allows induction
of the expression of the MYB transcription factor ASYMMETRIC LEAVES 1 (AS1)
that is normally repressed by STM. AS1 acts in a feedback loop to inhibit the
expression of several other KNOX genes, a process that is thought to be important
for the correct distinction between organ and meristem identity (Byrne et al. 2000;
Phelps-Durr et al. 2005). As the primordium starts to emerge, a complex network is
set to control the size, the identity, and the polarity of the growing organs. Among
these players, the transcription factor LEAFY (LFY) is necessary for inducing ﬂoral
identity (Parcy et al. 1998; Weigel et al. 1992). Another transcription factor,
AINTEGUMENTA (ANT) controls proliferation in the organs and therefore deter-
mines their ﬁnal size (Mizukami and Fischer 2000). During ﬂower development
ANT acts redundantly with another member of the AINTEGUMENTA-LIKE/
PLETHORA family, AIL6/PLT3, the double mutant showing severe defects in ﬂoral
development (Krizek 2009; Yamaguchi et al. 2013). Genetic evidence further
indicates that ANT and AIL6/PLT3 are also required for ﬂower initiation together
with LFY in inﬂorescence meristems (Yamaguchi et al. 2013). Indeed, the ant lfy
ail6 triple mutant shows a drastic reduction in the production of organs, the organs
Fig. 10.1 Structural and functional organization of the SAM of Arabidopsis. On the top, orthog-
onal views, at the bottom, top view of the SAM. (a) Structural zonation of the SAM. (CZ) Central
zone; (PZ) peripheral zone; (P) primordia; and (B) boundaries. (b) Organization into layers of the
SAM. (c) Spatiotemporal pattern of meristematic genes. Note that the timing of AS1 activation in
the developing primordia is speculative. (d) Illustration of a model of organogenesis based on the
inhibitory ﬁeld theory. Each primordium is locally inhibiting the development of new organs at its
vicinity. A new initium (green dot) is appearing on the blue circle at the position where the effect
on inhibitory ﬁelds is the lowest
10
Auxin, Chief Architect of the Shoot Apex
193

produced being only ﬁlamentous structures. The establishment of abaxial–adaxial
polarity requires notably the antagonist activity of adaxial class III HD-ZIP tran-
scription factors [PHABULOSA, PHAVOLUTA, and REVOLUTA (REV)] and of the
different members of the abaxial YABBY family of transcription factor including
FILAMENTOUS FLOWERS (FIL) (for reviews on organ polarity, see Bowman and
Floyd 2008). Finally, a speciﬁc set of genes is expressed in the boundary to allow
for the correct separation between the developing organ and the meristem. Amongst
these, the three members of the CUP-SHAPED COTYLEDON (CUC) family play
an important role in boundary formation, certainly by repressing growth in this area
but also by activating STM expression (Aida et al. 1997; Takada et al. 2001;
Vroemen et al. 2003). Other actors from the LATERAL ORGAN BOUNDARIES
DOMAIN (LBD) family have also more recently been shown to play important roles
in the formation of the boundary (Husbands et al. 2007; Rast and Simon 2012;
Shuai et al. 2002).
2
Phyllotaxis: The Dynamics of Organogenesis
Although the ﬁne dissection of the gene regulatory networks underlying meristem
functions has pushed forward our understanding of the mechanisms involved in
meristem maintenance and organ emergence, this knowledge mostly provides a
linear picture of how cell identity changes from the stem niche to the emergence of
a new lateral organ and do not explain the spatial positioning of the organs in the
meristem. A striking characteristic of the SAM is that organ initiations follow very
robust and stereotypical phyllotactic patterns. One the most common pattern of
phyllotaxis is the Fibonacci spiral where successive organs appear one by one (the
time between two organ initiation being called the plastochrone) at a relative angle
(the divergence angle) close to the 137.5 golden angle and either in a clockwise or
counter-clockwise direction (Fig. 10.1d). This phyllotaxis is observed in many
plants such as the sunﬂower or Arabidopsis, but other patterns can also be found
in nature such as the characteristic whorled pattern of the angiosperm ﬂower.
One of the most important early hypotheses to explain phyllotaxis was postu-
lated by Hofmeister (1868) who proposed that new organs appear periodically at the
periphery of the meristem in the largest available space between the preexisting
organs. This hypothesis was tested experimentally using microsurgery in the middle
of the twentieth century by Snow and Snow in Lupinus albus (Snow and Snow
1932) and Wardlaw in the fern Dryopteris (Wardlaw 1949). The results suggested
that the emergence of an organ is inﬂuenced by the preexisting organs close to the
site of initiation. This led Wardlaw to propose that chemical inhibitory ﬁelds
prevent the initiation of organs in their vicinity, following the proposition by
Schoute that the position of organ initiation is controlled by a chemical inhibitor
produced by the existing organs (Schoute 1913). The idea of a key role of a
chemical inhibitor was also supported by the work of Richards that proposed the
concept of inhibitory ﬁelds (Richards 1948; Fig. 10.1c).
194
B. Landrein and T. Vernoux

In their seminal work, Douady and Couder (1992) used ﬁrst a physical model
(see Chap. 14) and then modeling to demonstrate that both the periodicity of organ
initiation and the relative position of the organs can emerge solely from a system
where organ produces inhibitory ﬁelds on a growing apex (Douady and Couder
1996a, b, c). This theoretical work suggests that a mechanism inhibiting organ
initiation in the vicinity of existing organs could be sufﬁcient to drive the spatio-
temporal dynamics of phyllotaxis. This prediction holds indeed whatever the nature
of the inhibitory mechanism and biophysical theories of phyllotaxis were also
developed (Green 1999; Hernandez and Green 1993; Dumais and Steele 2000).
However, as we discuss in the following sections, biological data strongly support
the existence of auxin-based chemical inhibitory ﬁelds, but we will see also that
mechanical stress may have a contributing role in stabilizing the patterns of auxin
distribution that control phyllotaxis.
3
A Central Role for Dynamic Auxin Distribution
in Meristem Patterning and Phyllotaxis
3.1
Polar Auxin Transport Regulates Organogenesis
Indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) is auxin main chemical form in most higher plants,
including Arabidopsis. IAA is a weak acid that can be either in a protonated or
deprotonated state depending on the local pH. This chemical property of auxin is at
the basis of an active polar transport of auxin (Raven 1975; see Chap. 5) that is able
to generate complex distribution of auxin in the SAM. When present in the
extracellular space with a pH close to 5.5, auxin is present in its acidic uncharged
form. In this neutral form, auxin is in theory able to freely diffuse through the
plasma membrane and enter inside the cell. However, inﬂux of auxin has been
shown to also be facilitated by the AUX1/LAX family of auxin inﬂux carriers
(Bennett et al. 1996; Peret et al. 2012; Yang et al. 2006). When present in the
cytoplasm whose pH is close to 7, auxin loses its proton and become charged. In its
basic form, auxin cannot diffuse anymore through the plasma membrane. The
efﬂux of auxin from the cell therefore requires the activity of members of the
PIN-FORMED (PIN) family of auxin efﬂux carriers. The polar localization of the
PIN pump in cells then establishes and controls the direction of polar auxin
transport within tissues (Petrasek et al. 2006; Benkova et al. 2003; Wisniewska
et al. 2006; see Chap. 8). In the meristem, PIN1 is one of the founding members of
this family (Galweiler et al. 1998) and is essential for organogenesis at the SAM.
Indeed, while pin1 mutants are able to generate leaves (Guenot et al. 2012), the
inﬂorescence meristems of pin1 mostly fail to generate lateral organs (Okada
et al. 1991). Organ initiation can however be triggered on pin1 meristems by
applying locally high concentration of auxin (Reinhardt et al. 2000, 2003). These
evidence were the ﬁrst to show that auxin efﬂux is a limiting step for organogenesis
10
Auxin, Chief Architect of the Shoot Apex
195

in the inﬂorescence meristem (while the situation is less clear for the vegetative
SAM) and that a local maximum of auxin concentration might be necessary and
sufﬁcient for organ initiation in the meristem. PIN1 is more speciﬁcally expressed
in the L1 of the SAM and the PIN1 pumps show complex polarity patterns with
local convergence foci marking the sites of organ initiation and early primordia
(Fig. 10.2a; de Reuille et al. 2006; Heisler et al. 2005; Reinhardt et al. 2003). This
leads to propose that the PIN1 pump network generates local accumulation of auxin
in organs from the initium to later stages, with these organs acting as auxin sinks
(Reinhardt et al. 2003; Wisniewska et al. 2006). The inﬂux carriers are also
involved in the regulation of phyllotaxis by auxin. Loss of AUX1/LAX function
leads to important alterations of the phyllotactic pattern showing that auxin inﬂux in
the cell is required for the emergence of patterns in the meristem (Bainbridge
et al. 2008). AUX1 is expressed speciﬁcally in the L1 and was proposed to help
concentrating auxin in this layer, and facilitating redistribution by PIN1. The other
auxin inﬂux pumps are expressed more broadly in the SAM and the way their
activity might inﬂuence PIN1-mediated auxin distribution remains largely to be
explained (Bainbridge et al. 2008).
In our current view, polar auxin transport not only is responsible for triggering
organ initiation but also establishes inhibitory ﬁelds through depletion of auxin
around organs. Indeed, computer simulation of auxin distribution when considering
the entire meristematic PIN1 transport network supports this idea (de Reuille
et al. 2006). In addition, the synthetic auxin-inducible DR5 reporter is speciﬁcally
activated in the lateral organs, from organ initiation onwards, demonstrating an
activation of auxin transcriptional responses during organogenesis and supporting a
local accumulation of auxin in organs (Fig. 10.2c; Heisler et al. 2005). The recent
development of the DII-VENUS auxin biosensor allowed to obtain more direct
information on auxin distribution in the SAM (Fig. 10.2b; Brunoud et al. 2012;
Vernoux et al. 2011). Auxin perception triggers directly the degradation of a class
of highly unstable transcriptional repressors, the Aux/IAAs that act as auxin
co-receptors (Chapman and Estelle 2009). DII-VENUS was built by fusing the
auxin-binding domain of an Aux/IAA to a fast-maturating YFP, VENUS, and
expressing it under the constitutive 35S promoter. Analysis of the distribution of
DII-VENUS ﬂuorescence in the SAM conﬁrmed accumulation of auxin during
organogenesis but also allowed visualizing auxin-depleted regions in the immediate
vicinity of organs (Brunoud et al. 2012; Vernoux et al. 2011). These results provide
strong support to the role of polar auxin transport in generating inhibitory ﬁelds.
Considering the theoretical work on inhibitory ﬁelds, our knowledge on auxin
distribution in the SAM thus suggests that polar auxin transport could be the
necessary and sufﬁcient driving force behind phyllotaxis.
The key role of auxin in the dynamics of organogenesis is further highlighted by
experiments that have explored the molecular basis of auxin action on the expres-
sion of master genes involved in the control of cell identity (see also Sect. 5). The
ﬁrst evidence that auxin might regulate directly cell identities during organogenesis
in the SAM came from the analysis of the expression of various meristematic
markers in the inﬂorescence meristem of the pin1 mutant (Vernoux et al. 2000).
196
B. Landrein and T. Vernoux

Although WUS and STM are expressed normally, organ markers such as LFY and
ANT and also the boundary marker CUC2 were found to be expressed in a ring-like
domain at the periphery of the SAM. These results indicate that cells in the
peripheral zone of pin1 SAMs have an organ/boundary hybrid identity and that
auxin is involved in separating these two identities. Vernoux et al. (2000) also
observed that LFY was expressed at lower levels in pin1 meristems further indicat-
ing that auxin might regulate positively LFY transcription. A role for auxin in
repressing CUC2 expression and the boundary identity was also proposed to
explain the expression of CUC2 throughout the peripheral zone. Live-imaging
experiments further allowed to follow concomitantly PIN1 polarities and auxin
signaling activities (using a DR5::VENUS marker) and the activation of key
morphogenetic regulators during lateral organ initiation (Heisler et al. 2005). This
analysis indicates that LFY, FIL and REV are transcriptionally activated after the
convergence of PIN1 pumps deﬁning the site of a new initium and leading to
activation of the DR5 marker. In addition, the authors observed that both STM
and CUC2 expression are repressed in the same time window in the organ and
restricted to the boundary. These results support a causal relationship between
auxin distribution and cell identities and are in agreement with the idea that auxin
can both activate organ identity markers and repress organ boundary identity. While
this remains to be shown for organ boundary genes, a recent study demonstrated
using chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by quantitative PCR that both LFY,
ANT and AIL6/PLT3 are indeed direct targets of the auxin signaling effector
MONOPTEROS(MP)/Auxin Response factor 5 (ARF5) during lateral organ initi-
ation (see Sect. 4.1; Yamaguchi et al. 2013). These data clearly show that auxin can
directly control cell identities during organogenesis through direct transcriptional
regulation of master regulators of organ development and provide a mechanism by
which auxin spatiotemporal distribution controls phyllotaxis.
Fig. 10.2 Polar auxin transport controls auxin distribution. (a) PIN1 whole mount immunoloca-
lization in the meristem. (b) Meristem expressing the DII-VENUS sensor (in green) and stained
with FM4-64 (in red) to label the membranes. (c) Meristem expressing the DR5-VENUS sensor
(in green) and stained with FM4-64 (in red). Scale bars: 20 μm
10
Auxin, Chief Architect of the Shoot Apex
197

3.2
Self-organizing Properties of Polar Auxin Transport:
Insights from Conceptual Models
While the data discussed above show that a dynamic reorganization of the pump
network controlling polar auxin transport might be driving phyllotaxis, they do not
provide an understanding of how polar auxin transport is coordinated in space and
time in the SAM. A key question is notably how are PIN1 polarities controlled in
order to lead to the emergence of auxin accumulation patterns driving phyllotaxis.
The polarity of the different PIN transporters was shown to rely on a complex and
rapid mechanism of transcytosis (for a review, see Friml 2010; Chap. 8). Indeed,
PIN proteins are constantly undergoing clathrin-dependent endocytosis from the
plasma membrane and are incorporated into intracellular vesicles that can be either
degraded or retargeted to speciﬁc locations on the plasma membrane, which
therefore leads to their polar localization. It was shown that auxin itself acts both
on the expression level and the polarity of PIN1 through inhibition of its endocy-
tosis (Heisler et al. 2005; Paciorek et al. 2005; Vieten et al. 2005). Therefore, the
generation of pattern of phyllotaxis in the meristem could be a self-organizing
process relying on local interactions between auxin and its transporter PIN1.
A number of cell-based theoretical models have explored simple but plausible
conceptual scenarios that could explain a self-organization of the auxin transport
system in the L1 of the SAM (see van Berkel et al. 2013 for an extensive
comparison of these different models). A ﬁrst family of computational models,
the concentration-based models, was developed based on a hypothetical mechanism
allowing PIN1 polarity in a given cell to be directed toward the neighboring cell
with the highest auxin concentration. This hypothetical mechanism could indeed
result in part from the inhibitory effect of auxin on PIN1 endocytosis (Jonsson
et al. 2006; Paciorek et al. 2005; Smith et al. 2006). Another hypothesis that might
explain PIN1 polarization dynamics was proposed by Tsvi Sachs and is used in
another family of models, the ﬂux-based or canalization models (Sachs 1969).
Working on vascular development, Sachs and others proposed that auxin enhances
its own ﬂux across membranes, thus leading to a stabilization of existing ﬂuxes of
auxin. This hypothetical feedback mechanism, referred to as the canalization
hypothesis, has the ability to generate realistic venation patterns and PIN pattern
distribution
in
vasculature
(Mitchison
1980,
1981;
Rolland-Lagan
and
Prusinkiewicz 2005; Scarpella et al. 2006). Models built using either the
concentration-based or the canalization hypothesis can explain both the dynamics
of PIN1 polarities in the SAM and the patterns of auxin accumulation (Stoma
et al. 2008). In addition, a third hybrid model, using both the concentration-based
hypothesis in the L1 and ﬂux-based hypothesis in the provasculature, was also
shown to reproduce realistic PIN1 polarities patterns during organ initiation in the
SAM (Bayer et al. 2009; see also Chap. 15). While these studies leave the question
of what is the actual molecular mechanism involved largely unanswered (see
below), they however demonstrate that the phyllotactic pattern could emerge
198
B. Landrein and T. Vernoux

from a rather simple PIN1 polarization mechanism controlled by a feedback
between auxin and its own transport.
3.3
Possible Molecular Mechanisms Controlling Polar
Auxin Transport Dynamics and Auxin Distribution
in the SAM
The conceptual models we have discussed above suggest that a PIN1 polarization
mechanism relying either on concentration-sensing of auxin in neighboring cells or
on ﬂux-sensing of auxin in a given membrane could explain how auxin distribution
is controlled and drive phyllotaxis in the SAM. However, so far, modeling
approaches speciﬁcally designed to understand how auxin drives phyllotaxis do
not allow to pinpoint the cellular mechanisms involved. Does our experimental
knowledge of PIN1 polarization, auxin perception, and signaling allow us to go
further? ABP1, an auxin receptor putatively acting in the extracellular space, has
recently been shown to mediate auxin positive feedback on PIN1 membrane
localization by inhibiting the clathrin-dependent endocytosis of PIN1 (Nagawa
et al. 2012; Xu et al. 2010; Robert et al. 2010; Chen et al. 2012; see Chaps. 6 and
8). If active in the SAM, such a mechanism could provide a concentration-sensing
mechanism compatible with the concentration-based model. However, a recent
computational study suggests that the existence of an extracellular concentration-
sensing mechanism such as the one mediated by ABP1 is actually compatible with
the canalization hypothesis and could indeed participate in ﬂux-sensing. Wabnik
et al. (2010) built a mechanistic PIN-polarization model considering (1) auxin
transport through both inﬂux and efﬂux carriers; (2) an extracellular auxin receptor
which inhibits PIN trafﬁcking upon auxin binding (similarly to ABP1); and (3) the
regulation of PIN transcription by auxin through nuclear signaling (see below for
details on nuclear signaling), since several other PINs in addition to PIN1 are
known to be induced by auxin (Vieten et al. 2005; Peer et al. 2004). The authors
demonstrate that vein-like patterns of PIN1 polarities can be obtained with the
model in the presence of discrete sources and sink of auxin, as seen in models using
the canalization hypothesis (Wabnik et al. 2010). In this model, the patterns of PIN
polarities emerge from auxin perception by both extracellular and intracellular
concentration sensors and not ﬂux sensors, and still the model appears to have the
capacity to simulate canalization of auxin. While it remains to explore whether such
a model could simulate phyllotactic patterns, this work by Wabnik et al. (2010)
suggests that the molecular components that allow cells to sense auxin ﬂuxes might
have been identiﬁed.
In this context, it is important to stress that the different PIN1-based models of
phyllotaxis are prone to instabilities, independently of the postulated mechanism
for PIN1 polarization (Jonsson et al. 2006; Smith et al. 2006; Stoma et al. 2008).
This could indicate that other mechanisms essential for auxin homeostasis need to
10
Auxin, Chief Architect of the Shoot Apex
199

be considered. Auxin biosynthesis is an evident candidate for a mechanism that
could be crucial for controlling auxin distribution in the SAM and a positive
feedback between auxin transport and biosynthesis is indeed supported by exper-
imental evidence (Ljung et al. 2001; Cheng et al. 2007; see Chap. 2). Auxin
biosynthesis is regulated mainly through a two-step pathway implicating enzymes
of the TRYPTOPHAN AMINOTRANSFERASE OF ARABIDOPSIS (TAA) fam-
ily followed by YUCCA (YUC) ﬂavin monooxygenase-like proteins (Won
et al. 2011; Mashiguchi et al. 2011). A role for the TAA/YUC pathway is strongly
supported by genetic evidence. Several yuc mutant combinations display severe
defects in the development of leaves and ﬂowers and pin-like structures occur in the
yuc1,2,4,6 quadruple mutant (Cheng et al. 2006). In addition, combining pin1 with
the yuc1 and yuc4 mutations enhances pin1 organogenesis defects (Cheng
et al. 2007). Since the YUC genes are expressed in the SAM, a spatial and temporal
control of auxin biosynthesis could play a key role in phyllotaxis. Supporting this
idea, the expression of YUC1 and YUC4 in the SAM is positively regulated by the
transcription factors of the AIL/PLT family (Pinon et al. 2013). Phyllotactic defects
are observed in the plt3plt5plt7 mutants (Prasad et al. 2011) and were proposed to
result from a lower auxin biosynthesis activity in the SAM which would alter auxin
distribution in the SAM (Pinon et al. 2013). A coordinate action between auxin
transport and biosynthesis in the SAM, controlled by feedbacks from one to
another, could indeed provide robustness to auxin distribution dynamics. Exploring
this idea by incorporating auxin biosynthesis in the computational models of
phyllotaxis will likely be important to help reﬁning our understanding of auxin-
dependent patterning in the SAM.
4
The Role of the Gene Network Downstream of the Auxin
Signal in Patterning the Shoot Apical Meristem
4.1
The Role of the Spatiotemporal Control
of Transcriptional Responses to Auxin in Patterning
While auxin provides undoubtedly the primary signal driving phyllotaxis, the
distribution of this signal needs then to be interpreted by the meristematic cells.
29 Aux/IAAs and 23 ARFs regulate gene transcription in response to auxin. The
properties of this transduction pathway are largely governed by protein–protein
interactions involving these two families, downstream of auxin perception by F-box
(TIR1 or one the 5 Auxin-related F-Box or AFBs) together with Aux/IAAs that act
also as auxin co-receptors (Chapman and Estelle 2009; see Chap. 6). Most Aux/
IAAs are themselves induced by auxin, thus acting in a negative feedback loop and
providing a nonlinear regulation of transcription in response to auxin. The ﬁrst
indication that a spatial control of auxin signaling capacities might be essential to
mediate auxin action in the SAM came from the observation that exogenous
200
B. Landrein and T. Vernoux

treatments of pin1 meristems with auxin could trigger organ initiation and auxin
responses throughout the peripheral zone but not in the central zone (Reinhardt
et al. 2000). In addition, mutants in the mp/arf5 develop pin-like inﬂorescence stem
and Reinhardt et al. (2003) demonstrated that mp meristems are insensitive to
exogenous auxin application. This indicates that expression of at least ARF5 in
the SAM regulates the capacity of cells in the peripheral zone to respond to the
auxin signal. Vernoux et al. (2011) systematically analyzed the expression patterns
of TIR1/AFBs, Aux/IAAs, and ARFs and identiﬁed TIR1, AFB1, AFB5, 25
Aux/IAAs, and ARFs (12 and 13, respectively) as the effectors of auxin perception
and signaling in the SAM. Moreover, they could show that, similarly to MP/ARF5,
most Aux/IAAs and ARFs detected are differentially expressed in the SAM, with a
low expression in the central zone and a high expression in the peripheral zone. To
understand the functional meaning of this differential distribution of auxin signal-
ing effectors, a mathematical model of the control of gene transcription by auxin
was developed using information on the topology of the auxin signaling network
obtained through a high-throughput yeast two-hybrid analysis of the Aux/IAA-ARF
interactome. The authors could predict that spatial distribution of ARFs establishes
a differential sensitivity to auxin between the central zone (low) and the peripheral
zone (high) and that the auxin signaling pathway provides buffering capacities to
the signaling pathway upon ﬂuctuations of the auxin signal. Conﬁrming the ﬁrst
prediction, analysis of DII-VENUS ﬂuorescence spatial distribution showed high
concentration of auxin (high degradation) both at the center of the SAM and in
lateral organs. On the contrary, the auxin-inducible DR5 reporter is expressed only
in the lateral organs in the peripheral zone, thus demonstrating the differential
sensitivity. Also, the dynamics of DII-VENUS in live imaging experiments dem-
onstrate important changes in ﬂuorescence intensity that are not translated into
changes in transcriptional responses, thus supporting buffering capacities for the
auxin signaling pathway. These data demonstrate that the expression pattern of the
ARFs, which is for most of these genes independent of auxin, provides a supple-
mentary layer of regulation of the SAM patterning downstream of the auxin signal
distribution. The expression of ARFs allows restricting auxin-induced genes
(including Aux/IAAs) in the peripheral zone and thus participates to the functional
zonation of the SAM. The buffering properties of the Aux/IAA-ARF signaling
pathway are also likely essential to give robustness to the patterning of the SAM.
This regulatory system is therefore a striking example where the integration of both
the spatial distribution of a signal and the local signaling capacities controls the
dynamics of morphogenesis.
10
Auxin, Chief Architect of the Shoot Apex
201

4.2
Feedbacks from Cell Identity Genes or How Patterning
Might Inﬂuence Auxin Distribution
While the ﬁrst evidence for a direct regulation of the expression of masters genes
involved in organogenesis by the auxin signaling pathway is emerging (see Sect. 3),
auxin signaling effectors as well as polar auxin transport and auxin biosynthesis
regulators have been identiﬁed as putative or conﬁrmed direct targets of regulators
of organ development (Brandt et al. 2012; Winter et al. 2011; Yamaguchi
et al. 2013; Moyroud et al. 2011). PINOID (PID), a kinase regulating PIN polarities
(Benjamins et al. 2001; Christensen et al. 2000; Friml et al. 2004), was identiﬁed as
one of LFY putative target. It was demonstrated recently that PID is activated
transcriptionally downstream of LFY (Yamaguchi et al. 2013). In addition, not
only PID but also PIN1 and DR5 expression levels are reduced in the SAM of lfy
mutants. Moreover, LFY overexpression increases DR5 expression in the peripheral
zone of the SAM and also in the root meristem (Li et al. 2013). These data strongly
support a direct positive feedback regulation of the master regulator of ﬂowering
LFY on auxin transport and signaling that might help in ensuring an irreversible
commitment to a ﬂoral identity (Yamaguchi et al. 2013). Another positive feedback
loop involving ANT and several other members of the AIL/PLT family has also been
identiﬁed. Both ANT and AIL6/PLT3 are directly activated by MP during organo-
genesis and the expression of an AGH3-2 auxin-inducible reporter is reduced in the
ant plt3 double mutant (Krizek 2009). A reduced expression of PIN1, YUC1, and
YUC4 is also observed in the plt3,5,7 triple mutant and, inversely, inducible
expression of PLT5 induces the transcription of these three genes. The plt3,5,7
triple mutants tend to show an unstable spiral phyllotaxis with frequent shifts to a
distichous phyllotaxis, suggesting that the feedback from the AIL/PLT genes (this
remains to be demonstrated for ANT) on auxin transport and biosynthesis is
required to stabilize the phyllotactic pattern. Feedback on auxin distribution from
cell identity regulators is probably not restricted to the organ per se, and JAGGED
LATERAL ORGANS (JLO), one member of the LBD family expressed in organ
boundaries in the SAM, was shown to regulate PIN1 expression (Borghi et al. 2007;
Rast and Simon 2012). The establishment of the depletion of auxin in the boundary
region, that correspond at least in part to the inhibitory ﬁeld surrounding the organ,
has been proposed to result from an inversion of the polarity of the PIN1 pumps,
triggering a redirection of the ﬂux both toward the organ in the boundary cells
closest to the organ and toward the meristem in the boundary cells closest to the
meristem (Heisler et al. 2005; Jonsson et al. 2006). Feedback from boundary
identity genes on auxin transport could thus also participate in establishing and
stabilizing the boundary. Further research will be necessary to fully appreciate how
feedbacks from cell identity genes on auxin distribution and signaling contribute to
the emergence of the spatiotemporal patterns of cell identities in the SAM and thus
of phyllotaxis.
202
B. Landrein and T. Vernoux

5
Monitoring the Shape: The Role of Mechanical Signals
in Auxin-Induced Morphogenesis
5.1
Mechanics of the Shoot Apical Meristem
Like any other biological system, the SAM is a complex physical structure with
speciﬁc mechanical properties and which is submitted to mechanical stress both at
the cellular level and at the tissue level. At the cellular level, plant cells diverge
from animal cells by their high turgor pressure, which results from the differential
in osmotic potential between the symplastic and the apoplastic compartments and
that is compensated by the stiffness of the cell wall (Cosgrove 1986). Growth of an
isolated cell can then be achieved by two means: either by increasing turgor
pressure through modulation of the osmotic potential of the cell or by decreasing
the yielding properties of the cell wall, that is, the pressure that needs to be applied
to induce an irreversible deformation of the wall (Proseus et al. 1999; Schopfer
2006; see Chap. 14). During growth but also at a steady state, each cell is submitted
to mechanical stress as turgor pressure is constantly putting the cell walls under
tension. At the organ level, both the geometry and the heterogeneity in the mechan-
ical properties between the different tissues impact on cell growth and are believed
to generate speciﬁc patterns of mechanical stress. In the stem, it was proposed based
notably on peeling experiments and on measure of the thickness of cell walls, that
the epidermis is under tension and mechanically restricts the growth of the inner
tissues under compression (Kutschera and Niklas 2007). This model of growth
controlled by the epidermis is thought to be applicable to the shoot apex where the
outer cell wall of the epidermis is much thicker than other cell walls as seen in the
stem (Kierzkowski et al. 2012). It has thus been proposed that the inner tissues of
the meristem are under compression and that the epidermis, which is limiting for
growth, is submitted to high tensile stresses, whose intensity and directions would
largely depend on the geometry of the organ (Hamant et al. 2008). Supporting the
key role proposed for the epidermis in controlling growth, it has also been demon-
strated that modulation of BR signaling in the epidermis (including the L1 of the
SAM) is sufﬁcient to control shoot growth (Savaldi-Goldstein et al. 2007).
5.2
Mechanics Is Involved in the Control of PIN1 Polarity
The idea that mechanical loads would inﬂuence biological processes such as growth
and patterning has long been postulated and was notably theorized by d’Arcy
Thompson at the beginning of the twentieth century (D’Arcy Thompson 1917).
Although some of his assumptions were proven to be wrong, recent observations in
animals and plants are strongly supporting the idea that cells are indeed able to
perceive their mechanical environment and adapt their behavior to this physical cue
10
Auxin, Chief Architect of the Shoot Apex
203

(Chehab et al. 2009; Engler et al. 2006; Farge 2003). In the SAM, it has been shown
that mechanical stress can impact on the anisotropy and coordination of growth
between cells in the epidermis by inﬂuencing the orientation of the cellular micro-
tubules (Hamant et al. 2008; Uyttewaal et al. 2012). Interestingly, several experi-
ments also point out a possible role of mechanical forces in developmental
patterning in several plant tissues in addition to their inﬂuence on growth. It was
shown that the emergence of a lateral root can be induced mechanically, either by
gravi-stimulation or by direct bending of the root (Ditengou et al. 2008; Richter
et al. 2009). Upon mechanical stimulation, emergence of the root is correlated with
a relocation of PIN1 in speciﬁc cells of the cortex at the site of induction, suggesting
that auxin distribution can be inﬂuenced by mechanics. In the SAM, the develop-
ment of ectopic leaves or ﬂowers can be induced either by changing the mechanical
properties of the cells at speciﬁc places using enzymes that modify the cell wall
properties or directly by compressing the meristem (Green 1999; Peaucelle
et al. 2011; Pien et al. 2001). This suggests that mechanical stress can also inﬂuence
patterning in the SAM. Although the molecular mechanisms by which mechanical
stress can inﬂuence organ initiation in the SAM or any other tissues are still poorly
understood, recent studies have demonstrated an inﬂuence of mechanical cue on the
polarity of the PIN1 transporter (Heisler et al. 2010; Nakayama et al. 2012).
Through various chemical and mechanical treatments modifying the patterns of
mechanical stress (Heisler et al. 2010; Nakayama et al. 2012), these two studies
were able to show that both the polar localization and the degree of polarity of
PIN1 at the membrane in the SAM can be inﬂuenced by the directions and the
intensity of mechanical stress that the cells are submitted to.
The idea that PIN1 can be inﬂuenced by mechanics lead Heisler et al. (2010) to
develop a computer model of PIN1 polarization in the SAM based on local
mechanical stress. To do so they postulated that higher concentration of auxin in
a cell wall leads to higher cell wall relaxation, thus inducing a local increase in the
mechanical stress that localizes PIN1 preferentially to this cell wall. This model is
very similar to the concentration-based model we discussed earlier (see Sect. 4.2),
in the way that it provides an hypothetical mechanisms by which a cell can sense a
higher concentration of auxin in neighboring cell and polarize PIN1 toward this
cell. However, as we have seen just above, the mechanical stress in a cell wall is
also dependent on tissue geometry and on tissue growth. Such a mechanism thus
also allows the cell to integrate tissue-level mechanical information and was shown
to allow simulating realistic phyllotactic patterns. While this modeling work sup-
ports a vision where mechanics could be driving phyllotaxis, the biological data
available so far rather indicates that mechanical stress does not play a major role in
the generation of these phyllotactic patterns. Notably, applications of mechanical
stress have been shown to have only a minor effect on auxin accumulation in
primordia (Nakayama et al. 2012) and a modiﬁcation of the mechanical properties
of the meristem using long-term treatments with oryzalin (which depolymerizes
microtubules) does not impact phyllotaxis (Hamant et al. 2008). Taken together,
this rather suggests a model where an additional level of control of PIN1 polarity by
mechanical stress could improve the robustness of the patterning. Through its
204
B. Landrein and T. Vernoux

inﬂuence on PIN1 polarity but also on microtubule dynamics, mechanical stress
could be used by cells as an integrator of auxin-mediated growth. First, at the
cellular level, differential growth between neighboring cells (which could be
caused by local variations in auxin concentration between these cells) could locally
impact on the distribution of mechanical stress as cells tend to resist to the changes
in growth of their neighbors (Uyttewaal et al. 2012). These variations of the
mechanical loads could then affect the polarity of PIN1, thus providing a feedback
on auxin concentrations and ﬂuxes between neighboring cells (Nakayama
et al. 2012). Such a mechanism has not yet been clearly described for PIN1;
however, it was recently shown that the mechanical control of microtubule orien-
tation increases local heterogeneities of growth in the meristem (Uyttewaal
et al. 2012). Second, at the tissue scale, the emergence of organs in auxin maxima
is modifying the overall structure of the meristem and is thus likely inﬂuencing at
larger scale the patterns of tensions applied on the L1. This information could be
used by the cells to assess their position within the SAM and could provide an extra
level of control of PIN1 polarity. Such a mechanism could notably be important
during the establishment of the boundary between the organs and the meristem
where the speciﬁc mechanical properties of this crease-like structure (Hamant
et al. 2008) are correlated with speciﬁc pattern of expression and polarity of PIN1
transporters (Heisler et al. 2005), as we have discussed earlier.
6
Conclusions
The SAM is central to the indeterminate growth of the plant and the patterns of
organ initiation at the SAM are also the primary determinant of plant architecture,
allowing to establish their relative position on the stem. As it is controlling not only
the positioning but is also involved in establishing the identity of the organs, the
plant hormone auxin is thus a master regulator of plant architecture and therefore
likely of the diversity of shape amongst Angiosperms. During the two last decades,
the dissection of the mechanisms of auxin-mediated morphogenesis has signiﬁ-
cantly pushed forward our understanding of how auxin achieves this regulatory
function. But important questions still remain to be answered primarily on the
molecular mechanisms controlling auxin polar transport but also on the interactions
between the auxin pathway and mechanical cues that may be essential for the
robustness of the patterning. The study of these interactions together with an
exploration of the mechanisms controlling integration of information provided by
other hormonal pathways is certainly a major challenge for the future.
Acknowledgments We thank Olivier Hamant for critical reading of the manuscript and
Geraldine Brunoud for providing pictures. The work in the authors’ laboratory is supported by
ANR and HFSP grants.
10
Auxin, Chief Architect of the Shoot Apex
205

References
Aichinger E, Kornet N, Friedrich T, Laux T (2012) Plant stem cell niches. Annu Rev Plant Biol 63
(63):615–636
Aida M, Ishida T, Fukaki H, Fujisawa H, Tasaka M (1997) Genes involved in organ separation in
Arabidopsis: an analysis of the cup-shaped cotyledon mutant. Plant Cell 9(6):841–857. doi:10.
1105/tpc.9.6.841
Bainbridge K, Guyomarc’h S, Bayer E, Swarup R, Bennett M, Mandel T, Kuhlemeier C (2008)
Auxin inﬂux carriers stabilize phyllotactic patterning. Genes Dev 22(6):810–823. doi:10.1101/
gad.462608
Barton MK (2010) Twenty years on: the inner workings of the shoot apical meristem, a develop-
mental dynamo. Dev Biol 341(1):95–113. doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.11.029
Bayer EM, Smith RS, Mandel T, Nakayama N, Sauer M, Prusinkiewicz P, Kuhlemeier C (2009)
Integration of transport-based models for phyllotaxis and midvein formation. Genes Dev 23
(3):373–384. doi:10.1101/gad.497009, 23/3/373 [pii]
Benjamins R, Quint A, Weijers D, Hooykaas P, Offringa R (2001) The PINOID protein kinase
regulates organ development in Arabidopsis by enhancing polar auxin transport. Development
128(20):4057–4067
Benkova E, Michniewicz M, Sauer M, Teichmann T, Seifertova D, Jurgens G, Friml J (2003)
Local, efﬂux-dependent auxin gradients as a common module for plant organ formation. Cell
115(5):591–602
Bennett MJ, Marchant A, Green HG, May ST, Ward SP, Millner PA, Walker AR, Schulz B,
Feldmann KA (1996) Arabidopsis AUX1 gene: a permease-like regulator of root gravitropism.
Science 273(5277):948–950
Borghi L, Bureau M, Simon R (2007) Arabidopsis JAGGED LATERAL ORGANS is expressed in
boundaries and coordinates KNOX and PIN activity. Plant Cell 19(6):1795–1808. doi:10.1105/
tpc.106.047159
Bowman JL, Eshed Y (2000) Formation and maintenance of the shoot apical meristem. Trends
Plant Sci 5(3):110–115
Bowman JL, Floyd SK (2008) Patterning and polarity in seed plant shoots. Annu Rev Plant Biol
59:67–88. doi:10.1146/annurev.arplant.57.032905.105356
Brand U, Fletcher JC, Hobe M, Meyerowitz EM, Simon R (2000) Dependence of stem cell fate in
Arabidopsis on a feedback loop regulated by CLV3 activity. Science 289(5479):617–619
Brand U, Grunewald M, Hobe M, Simon R (2002) Regulation of CLV3 expression by two
homeobox genes in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 129(2):565–575. doi:10.1104/pp. 001867
Brandt R, Salla-Martret M, Bou-Torrent J, Musielak T, Stahl M, Lanz C, Ott F, Schmid M, Greb T,
Schwarz M, Choi SB, Barton MK, Reinhart BJ, Liu T, Quint M, Palauqui JC, Martinez-Garcia
JF, Wenkel S (2012) Genome-wide binding-site analysis of REVOLUTA reveals a link
between leaf patterning and light-mediated growth responses. Plant J 72(1):31–42. doi:10.
1111/j.1365-313X.2012.05049.x
Brunoud G, Wells DM, Oliva M, Larrieu A, Mirabet V, Burrow AH, Beeckman T, Kepinski S,
Traas J, Bennett MJ, Vernoux T (2012) A novel sensor to map auxin response and distribution
at high spatio-temporal resolution. Nature 482(7383):103–106. doi:10.1038/nature10791
Byrne ME, Barley R, Curtis M, Arroyo JM, Dunham M, Hudson A, Martienssen RA (2000)
Asymmetric leaves1 mediates leaf patterning and stem cell function in Arabidopsis. Nature
408(6815):967–971. doi:10.1038/35050091
Chandler JW (2012) Floral meristem initiation and emergence in plants. Cell Mol Life Sci 69
(22):3807–3818. doi:10.1007/s00018-012-0999-0
Chapman EJ, Estelle M (2009) Mechanism of auxin-regulated gene expression in plants. Annu
Rev Genet 43:265–285. doi:10.1146/annurev-genet-102108-134148
Chehab EW, Eich E, Braam J (2009) Thigmomorphogenesis: a complex plant response to
mechano-stimulation. J Exp Bot 60(1):43–56. doi:10.1093/jxb/ern315
206
B. Landrein and T. Vernoux

Chen X, Naramoto S, Robert S, Tejos R, Lofke C, Lin D, Yang Z, Friml J (2012) ABP1 and ROP6
GTPase signaling regulate clathrin-mediated endocytosis in Arabidopsis roots. Curr Biol 22
(14):1326–1332. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2012.05.020
Cheng YF, Dai XH, Zhao YD (2006) Auxin biosynthesis by the YUCCA ﬂavin monooxygenases
controls the formation of ﬂoral organs and vascular tissues in Arabidopsis. Genes Dev 20
(13):1790–1799. doi:10.1101/Gad.1415106
Cheng Y, Dai X, Zhao Y (2007) Auxin synthesized by the YUCCA ﬂavin monooxygenases is
essential for embryogenesis and leaf formation in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 19(8):2430–2439.
doi:10.1105/tpc.107.053009
Christensen SK, Dagenais N, Chory J, Weigel D (2000) Regulation of auxin response by the
protein kinase PINOID. Cell 100(4):469–478
Cosgrove D (1986) Biophysical control of plant cell growth. Annu Rev Plant Physiol 37:377–405.
doi:10.1146/annurev.pp. 37.060186.002113
D’Arcy Thompson W (1917) On growth and form. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
de Reuille PB, Bohn-Courseau I, Ljung K, Morin H, Carraro N, Godin C, Traas J (2006) Computer
simulations reveal properties of the cell-cell signaling network at the shoot apex in
Arabidopsis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103(5):1627–1632. doi:10.1073/pnas.0510130103,
0510130103 [pii]
Ditengou FA, Teale WD, Kochersperger P, Flittner KA, Kneuper I, van der Graaff E, Nziengui H,
Pinosa F, Li X, Nitschke R, Laux T, Palme K (2008) Mechanical induction of lateral root
initiation in Arabidopsis thaliana. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105(48):18818–18823. doi:10.
1073/pnas.0807814105
Douady S, Couder Y (1992) Phyllotaxis as a physical self-organized growth-process. Phys Rev
Lett 68(13):2098–2101. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.68.2098
Douady S, Couder Y (1996a) Phyllotaxis as a dynamical self organizing process.1. The spiral
modes resulting from time-periodic iterations. J Theor Biol 178(3):255–274. doi:10.1006/jtbi.
1996.0024
Douady S, Couder Y (1996b) Phyllotaxis as a dynamical self organizing process. 2. The sponta-
neous formation of a periodicity and the coexistence of spiral and whorled patterns. J Theor
Biol 178(3):275–294. doi:10.1006/jtbi.1996.0025
Douady S, Couder Y (1996c) Phyllotaxis as a dynamical self organizing process. 3. The simulation
of the transient regimes of ontogeny. J Theor Biol 178(3):295–312. doi:10.1006/jtbi.1996.0026
Dumais J, Steele CR (2000) New evidence for the role of mechanical forces in the shoot apical
meristem. J Plant Growth Regul 19(1):7–18
Endrizzi K, Moussian B, Haecker A, Levin JZ, Laux T (1996) The SHOOT MERISTEMLESS
gene is required for maintenance of undifferentiated cells in Arabidopsis shoot and ﬂoral
meristems and acts at a different regulatory level than the meristem genes WUSCHEL and
ZWILLE. Plant J 10(6):967–979
Engler AJ, Sen S, Sweeney HL, Discher DE (2006) Matrix elasticity directs stem cell lineage
speciﬁcation. Cell 126(4):677–689. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2006.06.044
Farge E (2003) Mechanical induction of Twist in the Drosophila foregut/stomodeal primordium.
Curr Biol 13(16):1365–1377
Fletcher JC, Brand U, Running MP, Simon R, Meyerowitz EM (1999) Signaling of cell fate
decisions by CLAVATA3 in Arabidopsis shoot meristems. Science 283(5409):1911–1914
Friml J (2010) Subcellular trafﬁcking of PIN auxin efﬂux carriers in auxin transport. Eur J Cell
Biol 89(2–3):231–235. doi:10.1016/j.ejcb.2009.11.003
Friml J, Yang X, Michniewicz M, Weijers D, Quint A, Tietz O, Benjamins R, Ouwerkerk PB,
Ljung K, Sandberg G, Hooykaas PJ, Palme K, Offringa R (2004) A PINOID-dependent binary
switch in apical-basal PIN polar targeting directs auxin efﬂux. Science 306(5697):862–865.
doi:10.1126/science.1100618
Gallois JL, Woodward C, Reddy GV, Sablowski R (2002) Combined SHOOT MERISTEMLESS
and WUSCHEL trigger ectopic organogenesis in Arabidopsis. Development 129(13):3207–
3217
10
Auxin, Chief Architect of the Shoot Apex
207

Galweiler L, Guan C, Muller A, Wisman E, Mendgen K, Yephremov A, Palme K (1998)
Regulation of polar auxin transport by AtPIN1 in Arabidopsis vascular tissue. Science 282
(5397):2226–2230
Green PB (1999) Expression of pattern in plants: combining molecular and calculus-based
biophysical paradigms. Am J Bot 86(8):1059–1076
Guenot B, Bayer E, Kierzkowski D, Smith RS, Mandel T, Zadnikova P, Benkova E, Kuhlemeier C
(2012) Pin1-independent leaf initiation in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 159(4):1501–1510.
doi:10.1104/pp. 112.200402
Hamant O, Heisler MG, Jonsson H, Krupinski P, Uyttewaal M, Bokov P, Corson F, Sahlin P,
Boudaoud A, Meyerowitz EM, Couder Y, Traas J (2008) Developmental patterning by
mechanical signals in Arabidopsis. Science 322(5908):1650–1655. doi:10.1126/science.
1165594, 322/5908/1650 [pii]
Heisler MG, Ohno C, Das P, Sieber P, Reddy GV, Long JA, Meyerowitz EM (2005) Patterns of
auxin transport and gene expression during primordium development revealed by live imaging
of the Arabidopsis inﬂorescence meristem. Curr Biol 15(21):1899–1911. doi:10.1016/j.cub.
2005.09.052, S0960-9822(05)01213-3 [pii]
Heisler MG, Hamant O, Krupinski P, Uyttewaal M, Ohno C, Jonsson H, Traas J, Meyerowitz EM
(2010) Alignment between PIN1 polarity and microtubule orientation in the shoot apical
meristem reveals a tight coupling between morphogenesis and auxin transport. PLoS Biol 8
(10):e1000516. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1000516
Hernandez LF, Green PB (1993) Transductions for the expression of structural pattern: analysis in
sunﬂower. Plant Cell 5(12):1725–1738. doi:10.1105/tpc.5.12.1725
Hofmeister W (1868) Allgemeine Morphologie des Gewa¨chse. Handbuch des physiologischeb
Botanik, vol 1. Engelmann, Leipzig
Husbands A, Bell EM, Shuai B, Smith HM, Springer PS (2007) LATERAL ORGAN BOUND-
ARIES deﬁnes a new family of DNA-binding transcription factors and can interact with
speciﬁc bHLH proteins. Nucleic Acids Res 35(19):6663–6671. doi:10.1093/nar/gkm775
Jonsson H, Heisler MG, Shapiro BE, Meyerowitz EM, Mjolsness E (2006) An auxin-driven
polarized transport model for phyllotaxis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103(5):1633–1638.
doi:10.1073/pnas.0509839103, 0509839103 [pii]
Kierzkowski D, Nakayama N, Routier-Kierzkowska AL, Weber A, Bayer E, Schorderet M,
Reinhardt D, Kuhlemeier C, Smith RS (2012) Elastic domains regulate growth and organo-
genesis in the plant shoot apical meristem. Science 335(6072):1096–1099. doi:10.1126/sci
ence.1213100
Kondo T, Sawa S, Kinoshita A, Mizuno S, Kakimoto T, Fukuda H, Sakagami Y (2006) A plant
peptide encoded by CLV3 identiﬁed by in situ MALDI-TOF MS analysis. Science 313
(5788):845–848. doi:10.1126/science.1128439
Krizek B (2009) AINTEGUMENTA and AINTEGUMENTA-LIKE6 act redundantly to regulate
Arabidopsis ﬂoral growth and patterning. Plant Physiol 150(4):1916–1929. doi:10.1104/pp.
109.141119
Kutschera U, Niklas KJ (2007) The epidermal-growth-control theory of stem elongation: an old
and a new perspective. J Plant Physiol 164(11):1395–1409. doi:10.1016/j.jplph.2007.08.002
Lenhard M, Jurgens G, Laux T (2002) The WUSCHEL and SHOOTMERISTEMLESS genes fulﬁl
complementary roles in Arabidopsis shoot meristem regulation. Development 129(13):3195–
3206
Li W, Zhou Y, Liu X, Yu P, Cohen JD, Meyerowitz EM (2013) LEAFY Controls Auxin Response
Pathways in Floral Primordium Formation. Sci Signal 6(270):ra23. doi:10.1126/scisignal.
2003937
Ljung K, Bhalerao RP, Sandberg G (2001) Sites and homeostatic control of auxin biosynthesis in
Arabidopsis during vegetative growth. Plant J 28(4):465–474
Long JA, Moan EI, Medford JI, Barton MK (1996) A member of the KNOTTED class of
homeodomain proteins encoded by the STM gene of Arabidopsis. Nature 379(6560):66–69.
doi:10.1038/379066a0
208
B. Landrein and T. Vernoux

Mashiguchi K, Tanaka K, Sakai T, Sugawara S, Kawaide H, Natsume M, Hanada A, Yaeno T,
Shirasu K, Yao H, McSteen P, Zhao YD, Hayashi K, Kamiya Y, Kasahara H (2011) The main
auxin biosynthesis pathway in Arabidopsis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108(45):18512–18517.
doi:10.1073/pnas.1108434108
Mayer KF, Schoof H, Haecker A, Lenhard M, Jurgens G, Laux T (1998) Role of WUSCHEL in
regulating stem cell fate in the Arabidopsis shoot meristem. Cell 95(6):805–815
Mitchison GJ (1980) A model for vein formation in higher plants. Proc R Soc Lond Biol Sci
207:79–109
Mitchison GJ (1981) The polar transport of auxin and vein patterns in plants. Philos Trans R Soc B
295
Mizukami Y, Fischer RL (2000) Plant organ size control: AINTEGUMENTA regulates growth
and cell numbers during organogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97(2):942–947
Moyroud E, Minguet EG, Ott F, Yant L, Pose D, Monniaux M, Blanchet S, Bastien O,
Thevenon E, Weigel D, Schmid M, Parcy F (2011) Prediction of regulatory interactions
from genome sequences using a biophysical model for the Arabidopsis LEAFY transcription
factor. Plant Cell 23(4):1293–1306. doi:10.1105/tpc.111.083329
Nagawa S, Xu T, Lin D, Dhonukshe P, Zhang X, Friml J, Scheres B, Fu Y, Yang Z (2012) ROP
GTPase-dependent actin microﬁlaments promote PIN1 polarization by localized inhibition of
clathrin-dependent
endocytosis.
PLoS
Biol
10(4):e1001299.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.
1001299
Nakayama N, Smith RS, Mandel T, Robinson S, Kimura S, Boudaoud A, Kuhlemeier C (2012)
Mechanical regulation of auxin-mediated growth. Curr Biol 22(16):1468–1476. doi:10.1016/j.
cub.2012.06.050
Nimchuk ZL, Tarr PT, Ohno C, Qu X, Meyerowitz EM (2011) Plant stem cell signaling involves
ligand-dependent trafﬁcking of the CLAVATA1 receptor kinase. Curr Biol 21(5):345–352.
doi:10.1016/j.cub.2011.01.039
Ogawa M, Shinohara H, Sakagami Y, Matsubayashi Y (2008) Arabidopsis CLV3 peptide directly
binds CLV1 ectodomain. Science 319(5861):294. doi:10.1126/science.1150083
Okada K, Ueda J, Komaki MK, Bell CJ, Shimura Y (1991) Requirement of the auxin polar
transport system in early stages of Arabidopsis ﬂoral bud formation. Plant Cell 3(7):677–684.
doi:10.1105/tpc.3.7.677
Paciorek T, Zazimalova E, Ruthardt N, Petrasek J, Stierhof YD, Kleine-Vehn J, Morris DA,
Emans N, Jurgens G, Geldner N, Friml J (2005) Auxin inhibits endocytosis and promotes its
own efﬂux from cells. Nature 435(7046):1251–1256. doi:10.1038/nature03633
Parcy F, Nilsson O, Busch MA, Lee I, Weigel D (1998) A genetic framework for ﬂoral patterning.
Nature 395(6702):561–566. doi:10.1038/26903
Peaucelle A, Braybrook SA, Le Guillou L, Bron E, Kuhlemeier C, Hofte H (2011) Pectin-induced
changes in cell wall mechanics underlie organ initiation in Arabidopsis. Curr Biol 21
(20):1720–1726. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2011.08.057
Peer WA, Bandyopadhyay A, Blakeslee JJ, Makam SN, Chen RJ, Masson PH, Murphy AS (2004)
Variation in expression and protein localization of the PIN family of auxin efﬂux facilitator
proteins in ﬂavonoid mutants with altered auxin transport in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell 16
(7):1898–1911. doi:10.1105/tpc.021501
Peret B, Swarup K, Ferguson A, Seth M, Yang Y, Dhondt S, James N, Casimiro I, Perry P, Syed A,
Yang H, Reemmer J, Venison E, Howells C, Perez-Amador MA, Yun J, Alonso J, Beemster
GT, Laplaze L, Murphy A, Bennett MJ, Nielsen E, Swarup R (2012) AUX/LAX genes encode
a family of auxin inﬂux transporters that perform distinct functions during Arabidopsis
development. Plant Cell 24(7):2874–2885. doi:10.1105/tpc.112.097766
Petrasek J, Mravec J, Bouchard R, Blakeslee JJ, Abas M, Seifertova D, Wisniewska J, Tadele Z,
Kubes M, Covanova M, Dhonukshe P, Skupa P, Benkova E, Perry L, Krecek P, Lee OR, Fink
GR, Geisler M, Murphy AS, Luschnig C, Zazimalova E, Friml J (2006) PIN proteins perform a
rate-limiting function in cellular auxin efﬂux. Science 312(5775):914–918. doi:10.1126/sci
ence.1123542
10
Auxin, Chief Architect of the Shoot Apex
209

Phelps-Durr TL, Thomas J, Vahab P, Timmermans MC (2005) Maize rough sheath2 and its
Arabidopsis orthologue ASYMMETRIC LEAVES1 interact with HIRA, a predicted histone
chaperone, to maintain knox gene silencing and determinacy during organogenesis. Plant Cell
17(11):2886–2898. doi:10.1105/tpc.105.035477
Pien S, Wyrzykowska J, McQueen-Mason S, Smart C, Fleming A (2001) Local expression of
expansin induces the entire process of leaf development and modiﬁes leaf shape. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 98(20):11812–11817. doi:10.1073/pnas.191380498
Pinon V, Prasad K, Grigg SP, Sanchez-Perez GF, Scheres B (2013) Local auxin biosynthesis
regulation by PLETHORA transcription factors controls phyllotaxis in Arabidopsis. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 110(3):1107–1112. doi:10.1073/pnas.1213497110
Prasad K, Grigg SP, Barkoulas M, Yadav RK, Sanchez-Perez GF, Pinon V, Blilou I, Hofhuis H,
Dhonukshe P, Galinha C, Mahonen AP, Muller WH, Raman S, Verkleij AJ, Snel B, Reddy GV,
Tsiantis M, Scheres B (2011) Arabidopsis PLETHORA transcription factors control phyllo-
taxis. Curr Biol 21(13):1123–1128. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2011.05.009
Proseus TE, Ortega JK, Boyer JS (1999) Separating growth from elastic deformation during cell
enlargement. Plant Physiol 119(2):775–784
Rast MI, Simon R (2012) Arabidopsis JAGGED LATERAL ORGANS acts with ASYMMETRIC
LEAVES2 to coordinate KNOX and PIN expression in shoot and root meristems. Plant Cell 24
(7):2917–2933. doi:10.1105/tpc.112.099978
Raven JA (1975) Transport of indoleacetic-acid in plant-cells in relation to pH and electrical
potential gradients, and its signiﬁcance for polar IAA transport. New Phytol 74(2):163–172.
doi:10.1111/j.1469-8137.1975.tb02602.x
Reinhardt D, Mandel T, Kuhlemeier C (2000) Auxin regulates the initiation and radial position of
plant lateral organs. Plant Cell 12(4):507–518
Reinhardt D, Pesce ER, Stieger P, Mandel T, Baltensperger K, Bennett M, Traas J, Friml J,
Kuhlemeier C (2003) Regulation of phyllotaxis by polar auxin transport. Nature 426
(6964):255–260. doi:10.1038/nature02081, nature02081 [pii]
Richards FJ (1948) The geometry of phyllotaxis and its origin. Symp Soc Exp Biol 2:217–245
Richter GL, Monshausen GB, Krol A, Gilroy S (2009) Mechanical stimuli modulate lateral root
organogenesis. Plant Physiol 151(4):1855–1866. doi:10.1104/pp. 109.142448
Robert S, Kleine-Vehn J, Barbez E, Sauer M, Paciorek T, Baster P, Vanneste S, Zhang J, Simon S,
Covanova M, Hayashi K, Dhonukshe P, Yang Z, Bednarek SY, Jones AM, Luschnig C,
Aniento F, Zazimalova E, Friml J (2010) ABP1 mediates auxin inhibition of clathrin-
dependent endocytosis in Arabidopsis. Cell 143(1):111–121. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2010.09.027
Rolland-Lagan AG, Prusinkiewicz P (2005) Reviewing models of auxin canalization in the context
of leaf vein pattern formation in Arabidopsis. Plant J 44(5):854–865. doi:10.1111/j.1365-
313X.2005.02581.x
Sachs T (1969) Polarity and induction of organized vascular tissues. Ann Bot Lond 33(130):263
Savaldi-Goldstein S, Peto C, Chory J (2007) The epidermis both drives and restricts plant shoot
growth. Nature 446(7132):199–202. doi:10.1038/Nature05618
Scarpella E, Marcos D, Friml J, Berleth T (2006) Control of leaf vascular patterning by polar auxin
transport. Genes Dev 20(8):1015–1027. doi:10.1101/gad.1402406
Schoof H, Lenhard M, Haecker A, Mayer KF, Jurgens G, Laux T (2000) The stem cell population
of Arabidopsis shoot meristems in maintained by a regulatory loop between the CLAVATA
and WUSCHEL genes. Cell 100(6):635–644
Schopfer P (2006) Biomechanics of plant growth. Am J Bot 93(10):1415–1425. doi:10.3732/ajb.
93.10.1415
Schoute JC (1913) Beitrage zur Blattstellunglehre. I. Die Theorie. Recueil de Travaux Botaniques
Neerlandais 10:153–339
Shuai B, Reynaga-Pena CG, Springer PS (2002) The lateral organ boundaries gene deﬁnes a novel,
plant-speciﬁc gene family. Plant Physiol 129(2):747–761. doi:10.1104/pp. 010926
210
B. Landrein and T. Vernoux

Smith RS, Guyomarc’h S, Mandel T, Reinhardt D, Kuhlemeier C, Prusinkiewicz P (2006) A
plausible model of phyllotaxis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103(5):1301–1306. doi:10.1073/pnas.
0510457103, 0510457103 [pii]
Snow M, Snow R (1932) Experiments on phyllotaxis I—the effect of isolating a pininordium.
Philos Trans R Soc Lond B 221:1–43. doi:10.1098/rstb.1932.0001
Stoma S, Lucas M, Chopard J, Schaedel M, Traas J, Godin C (2008) Flux-based transport
enhancement as a plausible unifying mechanism for auxin transport in meristem development.
PLoS Comput Biol 4(10):e1000207. doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000207
Takada S, Hibara K, Ishida T, Tasaka M (2001) The CUP-SHAPED COTYLEDON1 gene of
Arabidopsis regulates shoot apical meristem formation. Development 128(7):1127–1135
Uyttewaal M, Burian A, Alim K, Landrein B, Borowska-Wykret D, Dedieu A, Peaucelle A,
Ludynia M, Traas J, Boudaoud A, Kwiatkowska D, Hamant O (2012) Mechanical stress acts
via katanin to amplify differences in growth rate between adjacent cells in Arabidopsis. Cell
149(2):439–451. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2012.02.048
van Berkel K, de Boer RJ, Scheres B, Ten Tusscher K (2013) Polar auxin transport: models and
mechanisms. Development 140(11):2253–2268. doi:10.1242/dev.079111
Vernoux T, Kronenberger J, Grandjean O, Laufs P, Traas J (2000) PIN-FORMED 1 regulates cell
fate at the periphery of the shoot apical meristem. Development 127(23):5157–5165
Vernoux T, Brunoud G, Farcot E, Morin V, Van den Daele H, Legrand J, Oliva M, Das P,
Larrieu A, Wells D, Guedon Y, Armitage L, Picard F, Guyomarc’h S, Cellier C, Parry G,
Koumproglou R, Doonan JH, Estelle M, Godin C, Kepinski S, Bennett M, De Veylder L, Traas
J (2011) The auxin signalling network translates dynamic input into robust patterning at the
shoot apex. Mol Syst Biol 7:508. doi:10.1038/msb.2011.39
Vieten A, Vanneste S, Wisniewska J, Benkova E, Benjamins R, Beeckman T, Luschnig C, Friml J
(2005) Functional redundancy of PIN proteins is accompanied by auxin-dependent cross-
regulation of PIN expression. Development 132(20):4521–4531. doi:10.1242/dev.02027
Vroemen CW, Mordhorst AP, Albrecht C, Kwaaitaal MA, de Vries SC (2003) The CUP-SHAPED
COTYLEDON3 gene is required for boundary and shoot meristem formation in Arabidopsis.
Plant Cell 15(7):1563–1577
Wabnik K, Kleine-Vehn J, Balla J, Sauer M, Naramoto S, Reinohl V, Merks RMH, Govaerts W,
Friml J (2010) Emergence of tissue polarization from synergy of intracellular and extracellular
auxin signaling. Mol Syst Biol 6:447. doi:10.1038/Msb.2010.103
Wardlaw CW (1949) Phyllotaxis and organogenesis in ferns. Nature 164(4161):167–169. doi:10.
1038/164167a0
Weigel D, Alvarez J, Smyth DR, Yanofsky MF, Meyerowitz EM (1992) LEAFY controls ﬂoral
meristem identity in Arabidopsis. Cell 69(5):843–859
Winter CM, Austin RS, Blanvillain-Baufume S, Reback MA, Monniaux M, Wu MF, Sang Y,
Yamaguchi A, Yamaguchi N, Parker JE, Parcy F, Jensen ST, Li H, Wagner D (2011) LEAFY
target genes reveal ﬂoral regulatory logic, cis motifs, and a link to biotic stimulus response.
Dev Cell 20(4):430–443. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2011.03.019
Wisniewska J, Xu J, Seifertova D, Brewer PB, Ruzicka K, Blilou I, Rouquie D, Benkova E,
Scheres B, Friml J (2006) Polar PIN localization directs auxin ﬂow in plants. Science 312
(5775):883. doi:10.1126/science.1121356
Won C, Shen XL, Mashiguchi K, Zheng ZY, Dai XH, Cheng YF, Kasahara H, Kamiya Y, Chory J,
Zhao YD (2011) Conversion of tryptophan to indole-3-acetic acid by TRYPTOPHAN AMI-
NOTRANSFERASES OF ARABIDOPSIS and YUCCAs in Arabidopsis. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 108(45):18518–18523. doi:10.1073/pnas.1108436108
Xu T, Wen M, Nagawa S, Fu Y, Chen JG, Wu MJ, Perrot-Rechenmann C, Friml J, Jones AM,
Yang Z (2010) Cell surface- and rho GTPase-based auxin signaling controls cellular interdig-
itation in Arabidopsis. Cell 143(1):99–110. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2010.09.003
Yadav RK, Perales M, Gruel J, Girke T, Jonsson H, Reddy GV (2011) WUSCHEL protein
movement mediates stem cell homeostasis in the Arabidopsis shoot apex. Genes Dev 25
(19):2025–2030. doi:10.1101/gad.17258511
10
Auxin, Chief Architect of the Shoot Apex
211

Yamaguchi N, Wu MF, Winter CM, Berns MC, Nole-Wilson S, Yamaguchi A, Coupland G,
Krizek BA, Wagner D (2013) A molecular framework for auxin-mediated initiation of ﬂower
primordia. Dev Cell 24(3):271–282. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2012.12.017
Yang Y, Hammes UZ, Taylor CG, Schachtman DP, Nielsen E (2006) High-afﬁnity auxin transport
by the AUX1 inﬂux carrier protein. Curr Biol 16(11):1123–1127. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2006.04.029
212
B. Landrein and T. Vernoux

Chapter 11
The Role of Auxin for Reproductive Organ
Patterning and Development
Thomas Dresselhaus and Kay Schneitz
Abstract The reproductive structures of ﬂowering plants consist of the gynoecium
harboring the female gametophyte (embryo sac) inside one or many ovules as well
as stamen and anthers containing the male gametophytes (pollen). The coordinative
development and patterning of these structures from undifferentiated ﬂower mer-
istems into gametophyte-containing reproductive organs constitutes the most com-
plex developmental process in plants. Auxin represents a master player as it acts not
only as a local morphogenetic trigger in ﬂower organ primordia formation, but also
in concert with other hormones during further development, patterning, and func-
tion of both reproductive organs. Most of our knowledge about the role of auxin for
plant reproduction was obtained from the study of mutants in the Brassicaceae
model plant Arabidopsis thaliana. Especially mutants defective in biosynthesis and
perception of the hormone as well as in auxin-regulated transcriptional response
have been analyzed. Although very little is known about the role of auxin during
reproduction in crop plants, we will brieﬂy report on reproductive structures in the
economically important grass family and highlight auxin signaling data in other
species when available.
T. Dresselhaus (*)
Cell Biology and Plant Biochemistry, Biochemie-Zentrum Regensburg, University of
Regensburg, Universita¨tsstrasse 31, 93053, Regensburg, Germany
e-mail: thomas.dresselhaus@ur.de
K. Schneitz
Entwicklungsbiologie der Pﬂanzen, Wissenschaftszentrum Weihenstephan, Technische
Universita¨t Mu¨nchen, Emil-Ramann-Strasse 4, 85354 Freising, Germany
E. Zazˇı´malova´ et al. (eds.), Auxin and Its Role in Plant Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-7091-1526-8_11, © Springer-Verlag Wien 2014
213

1
Introduction
Flowering plants (angiosperms) comprise an extraordinary diversity of species
dominating today’s terrestrial life. Their mode of reproduction involving the devel-
opment of highly specialized male and female reproductive organs protecting the
gametophytes, the evolution of species-speciﬁc fertilization mechanisms, as well as
the generation of seeds protecting and nourishing the embryo largely contributes to
their success. Angiosperms are characterized by the double fertilization process
involving fusion of two sperm cells (male gametes) with the egg and central cell,
respectively, representing the female gametes. Sperm cells of angiosperms are
immobile and are transported via the pollen tube toward the female gametes to
execute fertilization. During their path pollen tubes use the reproductive tract, a
unique structure consisting of the stigma, style, transmitting tract, and the sporo-
phytic tissues of the ovule. Initially pollen grains land on the surface of elongated
stigma papillae cells (e.g., in the Brassicaceae) or multicellular stigmatic hairs (e.g.,
in the Poaceae) germinate and invade the stigma during compatible interactions to
reach the intercellular space between transmitting tract cells. During stigma inva-
sion and growth through the transmitting tract the pollen tube extensively commu-
nicates along its path with the sporophytic tissues of the reproductive tract of the
gynoecium in order to reach the ovule and embryo sac, respectively (for review, see
Dresselhaus and Franklin-Tong 2013; Palanivelu and Tsukamoto 2012).
The gynoecium represents the female reproductive structure of ﬂowering plants.
Depending on the plant family it is composed of one to multiple carpels harboring
one (Gramineae) up to hundreds of ovules (e.g., in Solanaceous species). The model
plant Arabidopsis thaliana develops about 50 ovules in each ovary arising from two
fused carpels (for review, see Larsson et al. 2013). In addition to its protective role
the gynoecium controls pollen tube germination, invasion at the apical stigma, and
growth toward and through the transmitting tract until the ﬁnal destination of the
tube, the female gametophyte containing two female gametes (egg and central cell)
(for review, see Palanivelu and Tsukamoto 2012; Dresselhaus and Franklin-Tong
2013). The male reproductive structures (stamen) consist of the ﬁlament and the
anther. At maturity anthers contain the male gametes (sperm cells) enclosed by the
vegetative pollen tube cell inside the pollen grain. This male gametophyte develops
during a process called microgametogenesis from microspores that undergo two
mitotic divisions forming tricellular pollen grains in many angiosperm genera
including the Brassicaceae and Poaceae. After completion of pollen maturation
ﬁlaments elongate rapidly and anthers dehisce to release pollen grains. Disruption
of reproductive organ development, pollen maturation, anther dehiscence, or ﬁla-
ment elongation results in male sterility and loss of reproductive success.
Effective reproduction thus depends not only on a timely and coordinated
development of reproductive structures and their successful interplay, but is also
strongly inﬂuenced by environmental stimuli such as heat and drought (Sakata
et al. 2010).
214
T. Dresselhaus and K. Schneitz

The last decade has shown that auxin plays a central role during the development
and patterning of both male and female reproductive structures. However, com-
pared to our knowledge about the role of auxin for vegetative development and
post-fertilization processes including embryogenesis (see Chaps. 9 and 10), rela-
tively little is known about the role of auxin to provide positional information
during reproduction. Moreover, almost all knowledge generated was obtained from
studies using the model plant Arabidopsis. It was shown that already the initiation
of male and female reproductive structure from the peripheral regions of the ﬂoral
meristems is associated with auxin signaling. In this chapter we will detail our
current knowledge about the role of auxin for gynoecium, stamen, ovule, and
gametophyte development and brieﬂy discuss how auxin acts in concert with
other hormones during reproduction in angiosperms.
2
The Role of Auxin for Gynoecium Patterning
and Development
The angiosperm gynoecium represents the female reproductive structure. Its major
components are the stigma, style, transmitting tract, and ovary harboring and
protecting the ovules (Figs. 11.1 and 11.2). It also regulates and aids pollen tube
growth to reach the female gametophyte and controls successful fertilization to
maximize reproductive success (Hamamura et al. 2012; Dresselhaus and Sprunck
2012; Larsson et al. 2013). After fertilization the gynoecium of most eudicoty-
ledonous angiosperms develops into a fruit containing numerous seeds or into a
single fruit named as caryopsis in the Poaceae (Sundberg and Ostergaard 2009;
Kennedy 1899). In the model plant Arabidopsis the gynoecium originates from two
fused carpels, which are thought to have evolved from ancestral leaﬂike structures
(e.g., Honma and Goto 2001), while they are formed from a single carpel in the
grasses (Kennedy 1899). There is no doubt that auxin plays a major role in
gynoecium development and patterning.
Direct measurement of auxin distribution in reproductive organs is technically
extremely challenging. However, auxin levels can be indirectly approximated by
monitoring reporter signal in a transgenic plant that harbors a construct where the
promoter of a gene encoding a key step in auxin biosynthesis, such as members of
the TRYPTOPHAN AMINOTRANSFERASE OF ARABIDOPSIS (TAA) and YUCCA
(YUC) gene families (Cheng et al. 2006; Mashiguchi et al. 2011; Zhao et al. 2001),
drives expression of a reporter gene encoding, for example, glucuronidase (GUS)
or green ﬂuorescent protein (GFP). In addition, the response to auxin is often
assessed by using reporter constructs that carry the artiﬁcial auxin-sensitive pro-
moters DR5 (Ulmasov et al. 1997; Friml et al. 2003) or DR5rev (Friml et al. 2002).
While these reporters are tremendously useful it should be kept in mind that they
may not always reﬂect endogenous auxin levels. Expression of the auxin response
reporter DR5 (Ulmasov et al. 1997) in Arabidopsis was detectable already in
11
The Role of Auxin for Reproductive Organ Patterning and Development
215

gynoecium primordia cells with strongest signals towards the primordia tip
(Benkova et al. 2003). During further gynoecium development DR5 activity was
detectable apically in two lateral foci of young gynoecia (stage 7), and expression
extends to the developing vasculature at stages 8 to 9 and is almost restricted to
stigmatic papillae cells at maturity (stage 12) (Larsson et al. 2013). Various auxin
efﬂux facilitator mutants have indicated that the hormone is required during
gynoecium development. Of the eight PIN (PIN-FORMED) genes in Arabidopsis
(Grunewald and Friml 2010) pin1 (Okada et al. 1991) and pin3 pin7 double mutants
(Benkova et al. 2003) display reduced ovary length with enlarged stigma and
gynophore (Fig. 11.1). It is likely that these phenotypes are caused by defects of
polar auxin transport (PAT) as the auxin-inducible protein kinase PINOID regulat-
ing PIN1 localization shows a similar phenotype (Christensen et al. 2000; Friml
et al. 2004). Moreover, it has been shown recently that the basic helix-loop-helix
(bHLH) proteins SPATULA (SPT) and INDEHISCENT (IND) regulate the main-
tenance of high auxin levels at the apical pole of maturating gynoecia likely by
inhibiting PAT via repressing PINOID activity (Girin et al. 2011).
As mentioned above auxin biosynthesis requires enzymes of the TAA1/TAR and
YUC families (for review, Mashiguchi et al. 2011; see also Chap. 2). Expression of
Pollen 
Stigma 
Style 
Ovary
Gynophore
Valve
Replum
Ovule
Transmitting
tract
Replum
Septum 
Embryo 
sac
Anther
Filament 
Stomium
Pollen  
grains
Epidermis  
+ Endothecium
Middle
layers
Locule
Vascular strand
Fig. 11.1 Scheme of reproductive organ morphology of the Brassicaceae. A mature gynoecium is
shown at the left. A cross section displays two ovules each containing a female gametophyte
(embryo sac). The transmitting tract is indicated in the center of the gynoecium. At maturity auxin
responses occur in the stigmatic papillae cells and the vasculature associated with the transmitting
tract. A stamen consisting of the anther and elongated ﬁlament at maturity is shown at the right.
The cross section displays the butterﬂy structure of a typical angiosperm anther. The tapetum cells
are already degenerated and the locules contain mature pollen grains. Auxin responses during late
stages of stamen development have been detected in tapetum cells, pollen grains, and the
vasculature stand as well as during ﬁlament elongation
216
T. Dresselhaus and K. Schneitz

Fig. 11.2 Wild-type ovule development in Arabidopsis. (a) Scanning electron micrograph (SEM)
of an early stage 2-II ovule. (b) SEM of a stage 2-IV ovule. (c) Confocal micrograph of an early
stage 3-III ovule. The two-nuclear embryo sac is visible. (d) SEM of a near-mature ovule (adapted
11
The Role of Auxin for Reproductive Organ Patterning and Development
217

members of both families was detected throughout gynoecium development. The
whole complexity of gene expression pattern involving several members (TAA1,
TAR2, YUC1, YUC2, and YUC4) and their regulation during gynoecium develop-
ment is described by Larsson et al. (2013) and will not be further detailed here.
Brieﬂy, as shown by in situ hybridization und promoter::GUS marker studies YUC2
and YUC4 are expressed in the apical region of the developing gynoecium (Cheng
et al. 2006). Regulators of auxin biosynthesis such as the STYLISH (STY)/SHORT
INTERNODES (SHI) family proteins targeting YUC4 or NGATHA (NGA) genes
are predominately expressed in the apical region of the developing gynoecia and
seem to regulate style development by directing auxin biosynthesis in the apex of
the gynoecium (Kuusk et al. 2002, 2006; Sohlberg et al. 2006; Alvarez et al. 2009;
Eklund et al. 2010). These ﬁndings may explain the observation that strongest auxin
response(s) are detectable in this region (Larsson et al. 2013).
Combinations of various taa/tar yuc or sty1 mutants, affecting biosynthesis or
the regulation of biosynthesis, respectively, lead to the development of defective
gynoecia in Arabidopsis that may be devoid of any ovary tissues (Cheng et al. 2006;
Staldal et al. 2008; Eklund et al. 2010). In summary the expression pattern and
analyses of corresponding biosynthesis mutants indicate that auxin is generated and
required at different regions during gynoecia development, but is largely
transported toward the apical region, displaying simultaneously auxin biosynthesis
maxima in this region.
The auxin-regulated transcriptional response is mediated by the AUXIN
RESPONSE FACTOR (ARF) family (see also Chap. 6). ARF3/ETTIN (ETT) and
ARF5/MONOPTEROS (MP) represent the major auxin response regulators during
gynoecium development as shown by arf3/ett and arf5/mp mutants displaying
smaller gynoecia with a reduction of the stigmatic, stylar, and ovary tissues (see,
for example, Sessions and Zambryski 1995; Hardtke and Berleth 1998). The
phenotypes are even more dramatic in arf3/ett and arf5/mp double mutants (Pekker
et al. 2005) with a near complete loss of ovary tissues. A very similar phenotype
was described for KANADI (KAN) kan1 kan2 double mutants (Eshed et al. 2001). A
recent report conﬁrmed physical interaction of ARF3/ETT with KAN1 and KAN4
transcriptional regulators (Kelley et al. 2012). Moreover, KAN gene activity, which
reduces expression levels of PIN genes and thus auxin ﬂux during embryogenesis
and vasculature development (Izhaki and Bowman 2007; Ilegems et al. 2010), may
also affect PAT during gynoecium development in a similar manner. In summary
Fig. 11.2 (continued) from Enugutti et al. 2012). (e, f) Confocal micrographs of plants carrying
the pDR5rev::GFP reporter [adapted from Enugutti and Schneitz (2013)]. Overlays of GFP and
bright-ﬁeld channels. (e) Stage 2-III ovule. Note the GFP signal at the tip of the nucellus. (f) Stage
3-III ovule. GFP signal can be seen at the tip of the nucellus and the vascular strand. (g) Confocal
micrograph depicting the PIN1:GFP signal in a stage 2-III ovule. (h) Bright-ﬁeld channel of the
ovule shown in (g). ch chalaza, es embryo sac, fu funiculus, ii inner integument, mp micropyle, nu
nucellus, oi outer integument, vs vascular strand. Scale bars: 20 μm
218
T. Dresselhaus and K. Schneitz

these ﬁndings suggest that auxin ﬂux, accumulation, and further signaling is
required for stigma, style, and ovary development and function.
2.1
Auxin and the Transmitting Tract in the Center
of the Gynoecium
An important component of the gynoecium is the transmitting tract. Its major
function is to connect the apex of the gynoecium (stigma) representing the pollen
germination region with the ovules containing the female gametes. It also assists,
guides, and nourishes the growing pollen tube during its journey. In the
Brassicaceae, the transmitting tract develops between two fused carpels and ini-
tially contains two meristematic ridges, which give rise to placenta and ovules,
respectively (for review, see Crawford and Yanofsky 2008). Moreover, the trans-
mitting tract cells produce an extracellular matrix (ECM) in many plant species and
may undergo programmed cell death before, during, or after pollen tube passage.
Development and function of the transmitting tract largely depends on genes related
to auxin biosynthesis and response. The above-mentioned transcriptional regulators
SPT and STY1, for example, not only regulate stigma and style development at the
apical pole of maturating gynoecia, but moreover play a key role during transmit-
ting tract formation (Gremski et al. 2007; Heisler et al. 2001). This structure is
strongly reduced in sty1 mutants (Eklund et al. 2010).
A similar phenotype was recently described by the analysis of the SPL8 and
miR156-targeted SPL genes during gynoecium patterning: spl8 single mutants
containing additionally miR156-targeted SPL genes showed a reduced style lacking
a transmitting tract. The ovary was swollen and the gynophore elongated (Xing
et al. 2013). Enhanced sensitivity to PAT inhibition and altered expression of YUC4
let the authors suggest that SPL genes regulate transmitting tract and gynoecium
patterning through interference with auxin signaling pathway(s).
2.2
Auxin–BR–Cytokinin Cross Talk During Gynoecium
Development
The ﬁrst model for the role of auxin in patterning the Arabidopsis gynoecium along
its apical–basal axis was suggested by Nemhauser et al. (2000). According to the
model high auxin levels would determine style and stigma formation, intermediate
auxin levels are required for ovary and ovule formation, and low levels lead to
gynophore formation. The ﬁnding that PAT inhibition leads to reduced or almost
complete loss of ovules (for review, see Sundberg and Ostergaard 2009) seemed to
conﬁrm the model. However, this model was questioned in recent years (Ostergaard
2009; Larsson et al. 2013) due to various observations including the ﬁnding that
11
The Role of Auxin for Reproductive Organ Patterning and Development
219

auxin biosynthesis and response are mainly visualized in the stigma and apex of the
style (see above), that gynophore elongation was observed in a number of auxin
pathway mutants, and that cytokinin signaling takes place in the gynophore (for
review, see Sundberg and Ostergaard 2009). It was therefore proposed that high auxin
levels are required for stigma and style development, low auxin and cytokinin induce
ovary and ovule development, and high cytokinin levels regulate gynophore forma-
tion. Especially the role of cytokinin and auxin–cytokinin cross talk has to be veriﬁed
by further experimentation involving also more sensitive methods (see also 5.
Conclusions).
Recently, auxin signaling during gynoecium development was also connected
with brassinosteroid (BR) signaling. The major auxin response regulators of gynoe-
cium development ARF6 and ARF8 have been shown to positively regulate HALF
FILLED (HAF) expression in the transmitting tract (Crawford and Yanofsky 2011).
HAF encoding a bHLH transcription factor acts together with its related sister
proteins BRASSINOSTEROID ENHANCED EXPRESSION1/3 (BEE1 and
BEE3). The three genes display a similar expression pattern and act together to
generate the ECM and cell death during gynoecium maturation in Arabidopsis
(Crawford and Yanofsky 2011). Moreover, their corresponding triple mutant sig-
niﬁcantly reduces pollen tube growth. Whether this effect results, for example, from
a malformed transmitting tract or reduced ECM formation remains to be shown.
However, a genetic network was elucidated showing that the auxin pathway genes
(STY1, ARF6, and ARF8) control the expression of HAF, BEE1, and BEE3, which
altogether encode key regulators of stigma, style, and transmitting tract develop-
ment (Crawford and Yanofsky 2011). Thus although multilevel interactions have
been reported about the interaction of auxin with BRs (for review, see Chap. 12),
the cross talk among these hormones during reproductive development is still
largely unclear.
2.3
The Role of Auxin During Gynoecium Development
in Other Plants
Auxin pathway genes have been identiﬁed in many other plant species, but com-
pared with Arabidopsis almost nothing is known about its role during reproductive
development (see also Chap. 13). Most data are available from transcript proﬁling
or promoter::marker experiments that identiﬁed, for example, expression of mem-
bers of the ARF, Aux/IAA, GH3, and SAUR gene families during various stages of
reproductive development in rice (for example, Jain and Khurana 2009). In maize
14 PIN/PIN-like genes have been identiﬁed of which some display overlapping
expression pattern during both male and female inﬂorescence development
(Forestan et al. 2012). Moreover, PIN1a fused to YFP and studies involving the
synthetic auxin-responsive marker DR5rev:mRFPer showed that auxin response
maxima are created at the ﬂanks of apical inﬂorescence meristems and thus seem to
220
T. Dresselhaus and K. Schneitz

promote branching during primordia formation (Gallavotti et al. 2008b). Auxin
transporters including PIN3, PIN9, AUX/LAX, and PGPs were also shown to be
expressed in ﬂowers of sorghum (Sorghum bicolor) (Shen et al. 2010). A total of
31 and 36 ARF genes, respectively, were identiﬁed in the genome of maize (Xing
et al. 2011; Wang et al. 2012). Thus the gene family is slightly expanded in this
species compared to Arabidopsis (23 genes) and rice (25 genes). Expression studies
revealed that members of this gene family display a dynamic post-fertilization
expression pattern during embryogenesis and germination. Expression pattern
during reproductive organ development has not yet been reported.
Almost nothing is known to date about gynoecia development in other eudicoty-
ledonous plant species. In Medicago truncatula, for example, two carpels develop
in some pin10 mutant ﬂowers suggesting that PAT and auxin accumulation might
be required to determine carpel number (Peng and Chen 2011). DR5 promoter
activity during gynoecium development in the related Fabaceae pea is similar to the
pattern observed in Arabidopsis (DeMason and Polowick 2009), indicating that the
role of auxin for gynoecium development may be conserved among eudicots.
3
The Role of Auxin for Male Reproductive Organ
and Pollen Development
In most hermaphroditic ﬂowers stamen primordia emerge before gynoecium
primordia and differentiate into the anther and ﬁlament (Fig. 11.1). The ﬁlament
mainly contains the vascular system and provides water and nutrients for the
anthers that contain the male gametophytes at maturity. During morphogenesis of
the butterﬂy-shaped anther archesporial cells of the L2 layer are differentiated in
the four anther corners to form the microsporangia containing microsporophytes
(for review, see Feng and Dickinson 2007). Microsporocytes undergo meiosis
generating microspore tetrads, which are released in the four anther locules (two
pairs of neighboring theca) after callose degradation. During progression of game-
togenesis pollen grains are formed after two mitotic divisions consisting of the
vegetative tube cell enclosing two sperm cells in species generating tricellular
pollen (most Brassicaceae and Poaceae species). The second mitosis occurs inside
the growing pollen tube of species generating bicellular pollen grains (e.g., many
Solanaceous species). During anther maturation, two of the four sporophytic cell
layers surrounding the developing pollen grains undergo programmed cell death.
From the epidermis, endothecium, middle layers, and tapetum, the middle cell
layers start to degenerate while meiosis takes place inside microsporangia. The
tapetum degenerates during progression of microgametogenesis and forms the
exine of mature pollen grains. Finally, the enthothecium enlarges and ligniﬁes,
while the stomium differentiates and ruptures as the ﬁnal event of anther dehiscence
(Feng and Dickinson 2007). The processes of ﬁlament elongation, development of
11
The Role of Auxin for Reproductive Organ Patterning and Development
221

sporophytic and gametophytic anther tissues, as well as programmed cell death
occurring during anther dehiscence and preanthesis ﬁlament elongation require
precisely coordinated developmental events, where auxin acts as a masterplayer.
3.1
Auxin Is Required Throughout All Stages of Stamen
Formation
Although our knowledge about the role of auxin for stamen development is still
limited, ﬁrst mutant approaches have clearly shown that the hormone is required
together with jasmonic acid (JA) and giberellic acid (GA) to coordinate and
regulate stamen primordia formation, development of ﬁlament and anthers,
preanthesis ﬁlament elongation, pollen maturation, and anther dehiscence (for
review, see Song et al. 2013). In Arabidopsis high auxin responses were detected
in emerging stamen primordia and mutant approaches indeed conﬁrmed that the
hormone is required to regulate stamen number and outgrowth (Heisler et al. 2005).
Auxin levels remain high during early stamen development (Cecchetti et al. 2008)
and require the formation of auxin gradients during early stamen development as
the auxin transport mutant pin1 and its regulator pinoid contain fewer stamen and
less than four microsporangia (Reinhardt et al. 2000). Stamen development is even
completely arrested in some pin1 and pin3 pin7 ﬂowers (Benkova et al. 2003; for
review, see Paponov et al. 2005) as well as in the auxin biosynthesis double mutant
yuc1 yuc4 (Cheng et al. 2006). Auxin biosynthesis is also required during anther
morphogenesis when YUC2 and YUC6 are expressed in microsporangia, surround-
ing tapetum layer, endothecium, and procambium (Cecchetti et al. 2008; Feng
et al. 2006). The yuc2 yuc6 double mutants but also mutants of genes required for
auxin transportation, such as the MultiDrug Resistance protein 1/P-GlycoProtein 1
(MDR1/PGP1) as well as PIN1, PIN3, and PIN7, are defective in ﬁlament elonga-
tion, anther dehiscence, and pollen maturation generate anthers that rarely contain
mature pollen (Geisler et al. 2005; Cheng et al. 2006; Cecchetti et al. 2008; Nagpal
et al. 2005).
Mutant approaches have also shown that auxin plays a major role for ﬁlament
elongation: biosynthesis mutants yuc2 yuc6, receptor mutants tir afb, as well as
auxin response mutants arf6 arf8 fail to elongate ﬁlaments at anthesis (preanthesis
ﬁlament elongation) and either lack functional pollen grains or release defective
pollen grains before completion of ﬁlament elongation (Cheng et al. 2006;
Cecchetti et al. 2008; Nagpal et al. 2005). The microRNA miR167 restricts ARF6
and ARF8 accumulation, thereby showing a similar phenotype than arf 6 arf8
double mutants (Wu et al. 2006; Ru et al. 2006). This ﬁnding further supports the
hypothesis that auxin signaling is required for ﬁlament elongation.
Feng et al. (2006) suggested that PAT from the ﬁlament to the anther may also be
required for pollen development. Reduction of auxin levels in the ﬁlament not only
resulted in short ﬁlaments, but also in degeneration of pollen after mitosis arrest.
222
T. Dresselhaus and K. Schneitz

Moreover, the presence of auxin receptors (TIR1, AFB1-3) at the end of meiosis
and DR5 activation at this stage further indicate a role of auxin for anther morpho-
genesis and gametophyte development (Cecchetti et al. 2008). Finally, auxin affects
anther dehiscence, which takes place precociously in the tir afb mutants (Cecchetti
et al. 2008). Dehiscence is initiated in parallel to meiosis and results in the
degeneration of the tapetum cell layer, degeneration of middle cell layers, thereby
forming two locules from each two neighboring thecas, and degeneration of the
connective tissue and culminates in the rupture of the stomium, thus releasing
mature pollen grains. DR5-driven auxin responses are detected in the tapetum
layer, the theca, vasculature, and stomium (for review, see Sundberg and
Ostergaard 2009). More detailed mutant analyses showed that initiation of meiosis,
endothecium ligniﬁcation, and anther dehiscence occurs earlier in auxin perception
mutants afb1-3 as well as tir1 afb2 afb3 (Cecchetti et al. 2013). Recently another
report demonstrated that auxin acts through MYB26 regulating endothecium ligni-
ﬁcation, while it regulates stomium opening via the control of JA biosynthesis (see
below).
Little is known about the role of auxin during stamen development in other
plants. During stamen primordia formation in maize expression of the YUCCA
family gene SPI1 becomes visible in proximity to stamen primordia formation
(Gallavotti et al. 2008a, b). The corresponding spi1 mutant displays signiﬁcantly
reduced stamen, indicating that the role of auxin for stamen development is
conserved in angiosperms.
In summary auxin accumulation is required for stamen primordia formation and
outgrowth and proper auxin transport is essential for ﬁlament elongation. However,
its major role seems to be the coordination of the timing and progression of anther
maturation and dehiscence as well as the generation of functional male
gametophytes.
3.2
Auxin–JA–GA–BR Cross Talk During Stamen
Development
Similar to late auxin mutants, mutations in JA-biosynthesis or -signaling genes fail
to elongate ﬁlaments, display delayed anther dehiscence, and rarely generate viable
pollen (Ishiguro et al. 2001; Nagpal et al. 2005; for review, Song et al. 2013).
Exogenous JA can restore anther development, but not ﬁlament elongation (Nagpal
et al. 2005). ARF6 and ARF8 have been discussed above to represent key auxin
response regulators mediating the promotion of stamen ﬁlament elongation, anther
dehiscence, gynoecium development, and patterning. During stamen development
it was further shown that arf6 arf8 double mutants contain strongly reduced JA
levels (Nagpal et al. 2005; Tabata et al. 2010; Reeves et al. 2012). Consequently,
the indehiscent phenotype of the arf6 arf8 double mutant can be rescued by JA
treatment, suggesting that auxin signaling acts upstream of JA signaling (Cecchetti
11
The Role of Auxin for Reproductive Organ Patterning and Development
223

et al. 2008). JA triggers expression of the R2R3 MYB transcription factors MYB21
and MYB24 that promote stamen as well as gynoecium growth (Reeves et al. 2012).
Furthermore MYB21 feeds back negatively on the expression of JA-biosynthesis
genes, thus reducing its levels in ﬂower organs.
Stamen development is also regulated by gibberellic acids (GAs) in Arabidopsis.
The ga1-3, ga3, ga3ox, and ga20ox mutants defective in GA biosynthesis display
late stamen development defects similar to auxin and JA mutants (see above) as
well as arrested anther development and short ﬁlaments (Cheng et al. 2004; Hu
et al. 2008; Rieu et al. 2008; Plackett et al. 2012). These ﬁndings suggest that de
novo synthesis of GAs is necessary for stamen development. It will be interesting to
elucidate whether exogenously applied auxin and/or JA can rescue GA phenotypes.
Mutations in the GIBBERELLIN INSENSITIVE DWARF 1a/b/c receptors
(GID1a/b/c) show early stamen developmental defects (Grifﬁths et al. 2006) and
likely act by labeling stamen expressed DELLA proteins RGA and RGL2 for
degradation (Cheng et al. 2004; Peng 2009). Similar to auxin it is thought that
GA may act through JA signaling during late stamen development (Peng 2009), but
not during early processes. The molecular mechanisms underlying GA–auxin cross
talk during stamen development are quite unclear at the moment.
Brassinosteroids (BRs) represent another hormone group that controls male
fertility. Besides cell expansion defects, BR-biosynthetic and -signaling mutants
showed reduced pollen number, viability, and release. These phenotypes are cor-
related with abnormal tapetum and microspore development (Ye et al. 2010). Many
key genes required for anther and pollen development are suppressed in BR
mutants. Moreover, BES1, a regulator of BR signaling, was shown to directly
bind to the promoter regions of genes encoding transcription factors essential for
anther and pollen development. Auxin pathway genes have not yet been shown to
be regulated by BES1 or BR signaling during stamen development, but the auxin-
induced bHLH transcription factor HAF or CESTA is also regulated by the
BR-signaling BIN2 kinase (Poppenberger et al. 2011) indicating cross talk among
the two hormones.
In summary auxin is required for stamen initiation, auxin and GA are required
for early stamen development and preanthesis ﬁlament elongation, and auxin and
GA seem to act through JA signaling and may involve also BR signaling during late
stages regulating anther dehiscence and pollen maturation.
3.3
Stress Affects Auxin Signaling During Stamen
Development
Stress experiments conﬁrmed the important role of auxin signaling for anther and
pollen development. These processes are highly susceptible to various stresses
including high temperatures. Initial experiments showed that auxin accumulates
upon stress treatment in cotton anthers (Gossypium hirsutum) and thus resulted in
224
T. Dresselhaus and K. Schneitz

delayed anther dehiscence and male sterility (Yasuor et al. 2006). Sakata
et al. (2010) showed the opposite using Arabidopsis and barley as model plants.
Endogenous auxin levels signiﬁcantly decreased in developing anthers at high
temperature conditions. Moreover expression of YUC auxin biosynthesis genes
was repressed and exogenous application of auxin completely reversed male
sterility in both plant species. This important ﬁnding indicates that induction or
repression (likely depending on the plant species) of auxin biosynthesis at high
temperatures represents a major cause of male sterility and emphasizes the impor-
tance of balanced and well-coordinated auxin signaling for male reproductive organ
and gametophyte development.
3.4
Role of Auxin During Pollen Tube Growth
As discussed above high auxin levels exist in papillae cells of mature stigmata and
the apical region of the style in Arabidopsis (Larsson et al. 2013). After pollination
auxin responses are repressed. The auxin response factor ARF3/ETT was now
identiﬁed as a mediator of self-incompatibility (SI) and gynoecium maturation in
this species. ARF3/ETT, which is expressed in the vasculature of the style,
downregulates auxin responses in stigma papillae cells likely by regulating a
mobile ligand generated in the style (Tantikanjana and Nasrallah 2012). It was
suggested that repression of auxin signaling in the stigma epidermis cells promotes
inhibition of “self-pollen” in self-incompatible reactions. Auxin dynamics during
pollen germination and growth was also investigated in tobacco (Nicotiana
tabacum). Similar to Arabidopsis high auxin levels were detected in the stigma
and style. It was further shown that auxin levels and response (determined by
immunolocalization and DR5 activity, respectively) were highest in the transmit-
ting tract before pollen tube entrance and declined in the regions penetrated by
pollen tubes (Chen and Zhao 2008).
High auxin levels were also reported in pollen grains, germinating tubes, and
during further growth in Arabidopsis (Chen and Zhao 2008; Aloni et al. 2006), but
its role is quite unclear. We show here that also the maize growing pollen tube
comprises the whole machinery to perceive, transport, and respond to auxin. Auxin
response in Arabidopsis involves at least one of six auxin receptors TIR1/AFB, one
of 23 ARF transcriptional regulators, likely a co-repressor (one of 29 Aux/IAA
genes) and usually results in the activation of auxin response genes such as
members of the Small Auxin Up RNA (SAUR) family and/or the Gretchen
Hagen3 (GH3) family (for review, see Chap. 6). The GH3 family maintains auxin
and JA homeostasis by conjugating excess hormones to amino acids, while the
function of small SAUR is largely unknown.
As shown in Table 11.1 auxin transporters are expressed at very low levels in
growing pollen tubes of maize. However, the auxin receptor gene AFB5 displays a
strong expression level and it is very likely that it acts via ARF27, which is the only
auxin response factor showing a signiﬁcant expression pattern. Aux/IAA genes are
11
The Role of Auxin for Reproductive Organ Patterning and Development
225

Table 11.1 Auxin response of in vitro grown pollen tubes of maize
Chr no.
Gene_transcript identity
Pollen tube
Leaf
Root
Encoded protein
(description according
to Zm5b.60)
Auxin transport
3
GRMZM2G127949_T08
1.84a
0
0
Auxin transporter-like
protein 1
7
GRMZM2G461586_T01
1.32
32.49
54.58
Auxin transport protein
3
GRMZM2G050089_T02
0.5
2.33
9.45
Auxin efﬂux carrier
family protein-like
(ZmPINY)
2
GRMZM2G070563_T01
0.1a
0
0
Auxin efﬂux carrier
family protein
Auxin receptors
1
GRMZM2G079112_T01
13.77
14.27
25.63
Auxin F-box protein 5
2
GRMZM2G155849_T01
2.71
25.13
31.39
Auxin signaling F-box 2
10
GRMZM2G078508_T01
1.73
25.07
29.38
Auxin-binding protein 4
ARFs
9
GRMZM2G160005_T01
3.08
1.02
4.81
Auxin response factor
27
1
GRMZM2G179121_T01
0.15
0
0.02
Auxin response factor
31a
10
GRMZM2G023813_T01
0.12
0
0.04
Auxin response factor
31b
3
GRMZM2G475263_T01
0.12
4.55
13.92
Auxin response factor 7
IAAs
1
GRMZM2G386209_T01
0.15
2.18
16.14
Auxin induced-like
protein
4
GRMZM2G065244_T01
0.09
28.82
6.65
Auxin induced-like
protein
1
GRMZM2G137367_T01
0.06
0.04
0.08
Auxin-responsive
protein IAA27
SAURs
1
GRMZM2G123896_T04
18.9
588.56
1,260.99
Dormancy/auxin associ-
ated protein
1
GRMZM2G073755_T01
7.06
38.28
45.86
Dormancy/auxin associ-
ated protein
9
GRMZM2G043338_T01
4.72
33.7
40.74
Dormancy/auxin associ-
ated protein
1
GRMZM2G366373_T02
3.22
0.11
84.27
Auxin responsive
protein
6
GRMZM2G466229_T01
1.73
3.28
9.68
SAUR-like auxin-
responsive protein
3
GRMZM2G102047_T01
0.92
0.19
13.83
SAUR-like auxin-
responsive protein
2
GRMZM2G365166_T01
0.72
0
4.54
SAUR-like auxin-
responsive protein
4
GRMZM2G118717_T01
0.69
0
0
SAUR-like auxin-
responsive protein
(continued)
226
T. Dresselhaus and K. Schneitz

expressed at extremely low levels, but a number of downstream genes of the
dormancy/auxin associated proteins of the SAUR superfamily are expressed, indi-
cating that auxin signaling takes place. A very strong expression was found for a
gene encoding a GH3 family member showing that auxin signaling likely takes
place during pollen tube growth in maize.
An interesting observation that differs between Arabidopsis and maize is the
ﬁnding that one of eight Arabidopsis PIN auxin efﬂux carriers (Grunewald and
Friml 2010) is speciﬁcally expressed in the male gametophyte. PIN8 is expressed
throughout male gametogenesis and the encoded transporter localizes to the
endomembrane system (Dal Bosco et al. 2012; Ding et al. 2012). The transporter
remains internally localized during pollen germination and growth and was
detected primarily at the endoplasmic reticulum. Its precise role during gameto-
genesis and pollen tube growth is unclear, but it seems to be required to ﬁne-tune
cellular free auxin levels (Ding et al. 2012). Dal Bosco et al. (2012) suggest that
PIN8 might control intracellular thresholds and access of auxin to the nucleus and
thereby regulating auxin-dependent transcriptional responses (see also Chap. 4).
4
Auxin and Ovule Development
The ovule is the central component of the female reproductive system and located
within the ovary (Esau 1977). It carries the egg and central cells, respectively, and
upon successful fertilization will eventually develop into the seed harboring the
Table 11.1 (continued)
Chr no.
Gene_transcript identity
Pollen tube
Leaf
Root
Encoded protein
(description according
to Zm5b.60)
GH3
3
GRMZM2G033359_T01
177.89
0.06
9
GH3 family protein
8
GRMZM2G001421_T04
1.6
0
0
GH3 family protein
Control: Actin
2
GRMZM2G006765_T02
547.32
9.15
226.25
Actin-7
5
GRMZM2G017847_T01
57.18
1.28
3.49
Actin
7
GRMZM2G342386_T02
1.45
10.72
17.27
Actin
8
GRMZM2G067985_T01
1.4a
0
0
Actin
1
GRMZM2G082484_T01
0.74
23.24
146.28
Actin-2
RNAseq data was generated by Dr. Mayada Woriedh (University of Regensburg) and ﬁltered gene
sets annotated according to release 5b.60 of the maize inbred line B73. Numbers represent log of
FPKM values (expected fragments per kilobase of transcript per million fragments sequenced).
Note that genes encoding transporters, receptors, SAURs, GH3 and actin with a value <0.5 are not
listed (exception: pollen tube-speciﬁc transporters). ARFs with a value <0.1 and IAAs with a
value <0.05 are not listed. Expression pattern of corresponding genes in leafs and roots as well as
actin genes is included for comparison
aPollen tube-speciﬁc transcript
11
The Role of Auxin for Reproductive Organ Patterning and Development
227

embryo and endosperm. The systematics, morphology, and evolution of ovules are
well studied in many species (Bouman 1984; Willemse and van Went 1984;
Endress 2011), but the genetic and molecular basis of ovule development is best
understood in Arabidopsis thaliana (Kelley and Gasser 2009; Shi and Yang 2011).
However, despite rapidly growing molecular insight into ovule development
knowledge regarding the role of auxin in this process is still very limited.
4.1
Ovule Development in Arabidopsis thaliana
The morphology of Arabidopsis ovule development has been described in great
detail (Christensen et al. 1997; Robinson-Beers et al. 1992; Schneitz et al. 1995;
Webb and Gunning 1990) (Fig. 11.2). During stage 1 (staging according to Schneitz
et al. 1995) ovule primordia initiate and outgrow from the placenta, a tissue formed
by the adaxial portions of the medial domains of the ovary (Larsson et al. 2013).
Eventually, an individual ovule contains three distinct pattern elements along the
proximal–distal axis: the distal nucellus that eventually carries the embryo sac or
female gametophyte, the central chalaza that initiates the integuments, and the
proximal funiculus that harbors the vascular strand and connects the ovule to the
placenta (Esau 1977; Schneitz et al. 1995). During stage 2 these elements become
morphologically recognizable in a sequential fashion. The nucellus develops ﬁrst.
A large megaspore mother cell (MMC) is singled out from cells of the ﬁrst
subepidermal cell layer, undergoes meiosis, and develops into four haploid mega-
spores three of which will abort. The surviving chalazal megaspore will develop
further into the embryo sac during stage 3. Following the appearance of the nucellus
an inner and an outer integument develop from epidermal cells of the chalaza.
During stages 2 and 3 cells within a growing integument expand and divide in a
regular fashion along the plane of the integument (planar growth). Each integument
is characterized by individual adaxial (upper) or abaxial (lower) cell layers and thus
exhibits distinct tissue polarity. The outer integument grows asymmetrically and
develops into a hoodlike structure eventually enveloping the nucellus and the inner
integument. A small cleft or micropyle remains through which the pollen tube
enters the ovule and effects fertilization.
4.2
Auxin Distribution During Ovule Development
Spatial distribution of auxin biosynthesis was assayed by analyzing TAA1 expres-
sion patterns using in situ hybridization and by monitoring signals of TAA1::GFP
and several YUC::GUS reporters in wild-type ovules. In the ovule primordium
TAA1 is initially broadly expressed and subsequently becomes restricted to the
boundary between nucellus and chalaza (Ceccato et al. 2013; Nole-Wilson
et al. 2010). Slightly later, reporter signal could be monitored in the inner
228
T. Dresselhaus and K. Schneitz

integument and the developing funiculus. YUC1-3::GUS signal was detected
around the distal nucellus starting at early stage 3 (Ceccato et al. 2013; Pagnussat
et al. 2009).
In wild-type plants carrying pDR5rev::GFP or pDR5::GFP reporter signals
could be detected in a few epidermal cells at the tip of a late stage 1 ovule
primordium (Benkova et al. 2003). During the early phase of integument develop-
ment a similar but weak signal was seen at the tips of both integuments (Benkova
et al. 2003). The nucellar signal continues to be detectable until mid-stage 3 (see
also below) (Bencivenga et al. 2012; Ceccato et al. 2013; Enugutti and Schneitz
2013; Pagnussat et al. 2009). In addition, DR5-based signal is also detected in the
vascular strand during stage 3 (Ceccato et al. 2013; Enugutti and Schneitz 2013;
Pagnussat et al. 2009) (Fig. 11.2e, f). These results indicate that higher levels of
localized responses to auxin exist at the tips of the nucellus and young integuments,
respectively. In addition, a response to auxin appears to occur along the vascular
strand.
The localized signal distribution of reporters for auxin synthesis and auxin
response indicates that auxin is not present broadly throughout the developing
ovule. It further suggests that auxin is synthesized at one position and may be
transported toward another location, possibly by members of the PIN family of
auxin efﬂux carriers (Ga¨lweiler et al. 1998; Krecek et al. 2009; see also Chap. 5).
Interestingly, analysis of ovules from wild-type plants carrying a pPIN1::PIN1:
GFP (PIN1:GFP) reporter suggested that PIN1 is localized in the nucellar epider-
mis toward the end of stage 1 (Benkova et al. 2003). At later stages, PIN1:GFP was
also observed at the tip of the young inner integument and in the developing
vascular strand (Benkova et al. 2003; Ceccato et al. 2013; Pagnussat et al. 2009)
(Fig. 11.2g). The subcellular polarity of PIN1:GFP localization suggested a trans-
port of auxin from more proximal parts of the ovule epidermis to the distal tip of the
nucellus. Rapidly thereafter PIN1:GFP becomes undetectable in ovules and other
PIN family auxin exporters, except PIN3, seem to be absent during prefertilization
ovule development altogether (Ceccato et al. 2013; Pagnussat et al. 2009). How-
ever, PIN3 does not seem to play a major role during ovule development (Ceccato
et al. 2013).
4.3
The Control of Ovule Primordium Outgrowth
Taken together, the results outlined above suggest that auxin plays an important
role during early ovule development. Localized auxin maxima regulate the initia-
tion and speciﬁcation of lateral organs at the shoot apical meristem (Reinhardt
et al. 2000, 2003; Yamaguchi et al. 2013). Given the early local DR5-based signal at
the distal tip of the nucellus one could speculate that auxin plays a role in the
outgrowth, speciﬁcation, and proximal–distal patterning of the ovule primordium as
well. Several lines of evidence are compatible with the view that auxin affects the
initiation and outgrowth of the primordium. For example, mutations in PIN1 or the
11
The Role of Auxin for Reproductive Organ Patterning and Development
229

ARF5 gene MP result in malformed gynoecia with either absent or fewer ovules
(Okada et al. 1991; Bencivenga et al. 2012; Benkova et al. 2003; Przemeck
et al. 1996). In addition, young gynoecia treated with polar auxin transport inhib-
itors also develop into ovule-less structures (Nemhauser et al. 2000; Nole-Wilson
et al. 2010) as do for example gynoecia of plants carrying defects in auxin
biosynthesis genes (Cheng et al. 2006; Stepanova et al. 2008). However, these
results need to be interpreted with caution as it is often difﬁcult to discriminate
between primary effects on ovule outgrowth or secondary effects due to altered
gynoecium development.
Additional evidence supporting a role for auxin in ovule primordium outgrowth
is derived from studies involving AINTEGUMENTA (ANT). ANT encoding an
AP2-type transcription factor (Elliott et al. 1996; Klucher et al. 1996) is thought
to act downstream of auxin in the regulation of meristematic competence during
organogenesis (Hu et al. 2003; Mizukami and Fischer 2000) and appears to affect
auxin homeostasis in developing pistils (Nole-Wilson et al. 2010). Gynoecia of ant
mutants form fewer but more widely spaced ovules indicating a role of ANT in
ovule initiation (Elliott et al. 1996). In addition, SEUSS (SEU), encoding a LIM
domain binding putative transcriptional co-regulator (Franks et al. 2002), affects
ovule initiation in conjunction with ANT. Pistils of ant seu double mutant plants
exhibit
relatively
minor
defects
except
for
a
complete
lack
of
ovules
(Azhakanandam et al. 2008). Furthermore, plants defective in ANT and
HUELLENLOS (HLL), a gene encoding a mitochondrial ribosomal protein (Skinner
et al. 2001), speciﬁcally fail to form the proximal-most part of the ovule also
supporting a role for ANT in the outgrowth of the ovule primordium (Schneitz
et al. 1998). Taken together, the available evidence supports the notion that auxin
plays an important role in the initiation and outgrowth of the ovule primordium.
How auxin controls this process via ANT remains to be investigated.
4.4
Pattern Formation in the Ovule Primordium
Outgrowth and proximal–distal pattern formation are coordinated during early
ovule development (Schneitz et al. 1995, 1998). It is unclear how this coordination
is controlled, but auxin could conceivably be part of such a mechanism. Loss-of-
function mutations in NOZZLE (NZZ) (Schiefthaler et al. 1999), also known as
SPOROCYTELESS (SPL) (Yang et al. 1999), result in a reduced nucellus and the
absence of the MMC (Schneitz et al. 1997; Schiefthaler et al. 1999; Yang
et al. 1999; Balasubramanian and Schneitz 2000). NZZ encodes a putative tran-
scription factor but how it regulates nucellus formation is only partially understood
(Balasubramanian and Schneitz 2002; Balasubramanian and Schneitz 2000; Sieber
et al. 2004). It was suggested that NZZ plays a role in auxin homeostasis
(Li et al. 2008) and recent work provided evidence that NZZ is a positive regulator
of auxin responses and PIN1-mediated PAT in the ovule. The nucellar DR5-based
GFP signal as well as PIN1:GFP expression was reduced in nzz ovules (Bencivenga
et al. 2012). However, pin1-5 mutant ﬂowers carry ovules with a nucellus and an
230
T. Dresselhaus and K. Schneitz

MMC arguing against a role for NZZ in early nucellus development through a
primary effect on PIN1 (Bencivenga et al. 2012; Ceccato et al. 2013). Further work
is required to determine whether NZZ mediates its effects on ovule development
through the regulation of an auxin-related process.
Recent evidence suggests that control of PAT contributes to the development of
the chalaza. Chalaza formation requires BELL1 (BEL1) and NZZ function. BEL1
encodes a homeodomain transcription factor (Reiser et al. 1995) and the central
region of bel1 ovules develops outgrowths of unclear identity in place of integu-
ments (Robinson-Beers et al. 1992; Modrusan et al. 1994; Reiser et al. 1995;
Schneitz et al. 1997; Brambilla et al. 2007; Bencivenga et al. 2012). In nzz bel1
double mutants the chalaza is replaced by funiculus-like tissue (Balasubramanian
and Schneitz 2000), indicating that NZZ and BEL1 synergistically interact during
the control of chalaza identity.
The bel1 phenotype can be phenocopied by exogenous application of cytokinin
to wild-type ovules which is also accompanied by ectopic expression of pDR5rev::
GFP and PIN1:GFP (Bencivenga et al. 2012). Moreover, the outgrowths of bel1
ovules show similar ectopic expression of these two reporters and the bel1 pheno-
type is suppressed upon exogenous addition of the PAT inhibitor N-1-
naphthylphthalamic acid (NPA) (Bencivenga et al. 2012). These results indicate
that bel1 outgrowth formation is the result of ectopic auxin accumulation in the
developing chalaza. In addition, it was suggested that BEL1 contributes to the
control of PAT in the ovule by repressing PIN1 in the proximal parts of the chalaza.
4.5
Integument Development
Auxin synthesis appears to be present in the inner integument as TAA1::GFP signal
is present in this tissue during initiation and outgrowth (Ceccato et al. 2013). In
addition, pDR5rev::GFP signal can be observed at the tips of both young integu-
ments in Arabidopsis (Benkova et al. 2003) and mature integuments in maize
(Lituiev et al. 2013), although in Arabidopsis the signal is very weak and frequently
undetectable (Ceccato et al. 2013; Enugutti and Schneitz 2013) (Fig. 11.2e).
Finally, PIN1:GFP reporter signal can be detected in the adaxial half of the tip of
the initiating inner integument (Benkova et al. 2003; Ceccato et al. 2013)
(Fig. 11.2g). These ﬁndings indicate that local accumulation of auxin and auxin
responses may inﬂuence integument initiation and/or outgrowth.
Whether or not PIN1 contributes to integument development is unclear. In nzz
mutants initiation of the inner integument is delayed (Schiefthaler et al. 1999) and
PIN1:GFP expression is strongly reduced (Bencivenga et al. 2012) raising the
possibility that PIN1-mediated PAT inﬂuences the timing of inner integument
initiation. Other data do not favor a central role for PIN1 in integument develop-
ment. For example, the cytokinin receptor genes CRE1, AHK2, and AHK3 (Higuchi
et al. 2004) affect the outgrowth of the primordium and development of the female
gametophyte (Kinoshita-Tsujimura and Kakimoto 2011; Bencivenga et al. 2012)
11
The Role of Auxin for Reproductive Organ Patterning and Development
231

(see also below). Interestingly, PIN1:GFP expression was undetectable in fully
developed young ovules of the strong cre1 ahk2 ahk3 triple mutant (Bencivenga
et al. 2012). However, integument development was either described as unaffected
(Kinoshita-Tsujimura and Kakimoto 2011) or it was found that about 10 % of
ovules failed to form integuments while the other ovules exhibited normal devel-
opment (Bencivenga et al. 2012). Regarding integuments a similar result was found
for pin1-5 (Bencivenga et al. 2012) and in plants where PIN1 was silenced in an
ovule-speciﬁc manner (Ceccato et al. 2013). Several interpretations of these results
are conceivable. For example, PIN1 could play a minor role in integument devel-
opment. Alternatively, PIN1 does not play a role in this process and the 10 % ovules
lacking integuments are an indirect result of aberrant ovule primordium outgrowth
that can occur in cre1 ahk2 ahk3 and in pin1-5 mutants (Bencivenga et al. 2012). In
this context it is notable that none of the other PIN-family members seem to be
expressed in integuments of prefertilization ovules (Ceccato et al. 2013; Pagnussat
et al. 2009; B. Enugutti and K. Schneitz, unpublished observations), indicating that
integument initiation and/or outgrowth may not depend on PIN-mediated PAT.
Auxin appears to affect integument development in a complex fashion. For
example ANT promotes integument initiation and outgrowth (Elliott et al. 1996;
Klucher et al. 1996; Krizek 1999; Mizukami and Fischer 2000; Schneitz et al. 1997)
while ARF2 restricts cell division in integuments (Schruff et al. 2006). Ectopic
expression of other ARF genes, including ARF6 and ARF8, in integuments, how-
ever, results in reduced integument outgrowth (Wu et al. 2006). Yet other auxin-
related genes, such as ARF3/ETT (Sessions et al. 1997) or the Aux/IAA family
member IAA17/AXR3 (Rouse et al. 1998), are expressed in integuments as well
(Kelley et al. 2012; Skinner and Gasser 2009). In this context there is an interesting
link between ARF3/ETT and ARF4 and the function of the KANADI (KAN) genes.
As discussed already above, members of the KAN family of transcription factor
genes are required for the establishment of adaxial–abaxial polarity during leaf
development (Eshed et al. 2001; Kerstetter et al. 2001). During this process they
genetically cooperate with the ARF genes ARF3/ETT and ARF4 and it was proposed
that ARF3/ETT and ARF4 proteins might function as cofactors of KAN (Pekker
et al. 2005). Physical interactions of ARF3/ETT with KAN1 and KAN4 were
reported recently (Kelley et al. 2012). ARF3/ETT and ARF4 also affect integument
development as for example ovules of arf3/ett arf4 double mutants exhibit variably
reduced integuments (Enugutti and Schneitz 2013; Pekker et al. 2005). Moreover,
integument formation is also severely affected in several kan mutants (Eshed
et al. 2001; McAbee et al. 2006).
Further insight into the close association between ARF and KAN genes has come
from studies on the KAN family member ABERRANT TESTA SHAPE (ATS) and its
role in integument development. ATS is required for the formation of integument
boundary,
inner
integument
outgrowth,
and
adaxial–abaxial
polarity
(Balasubramanian and Schneitz 2002; Le´on-Kloosterziel et al. 1994; Kelley
et al. 2009; McAbee et al. 2006). In ovules of ats mutants spacing between the
two integuments is reduced resulting in the appearance of “fused” integuments.
Interestingly, ovules of single arf3/ett mutants exhibit a similar phenotype and
232
T. Dresselhaus and K. Schneitz

recent evidence suggests that ARF3/ETT and ATS proteins form a complex that is
part of an auxin-controlled module regulating the spacing between the two initiat-
ing integuments (Kelley et al. 2012). This postulated ARF3/ETT-ATS complex
appears to be required only transiently during early integument development
(Enugutti and Schneitz 2013).
A role for auxin could principally be imagined in the control of planar growth
during the outgrowth of the integuments. In this process cells expand and divide
along the plane of the integument layer (Schneitz et al. 1995; Truernit and Haseloff
2008). Thus, an interesting question relates to how this planar growth is orches-
trated (Enugutti et al. 2013). We are presently only beginning to understand the
control of these processes. Planar integument growth involves UNICORN (UCN)
encoding an AGC type kinase (Enugutti et al. 2012). Integuments of loss-of-
function ucn mutants exhibit localized multicellular outgrowths. The current
model states that ucn protrusions are the result of hyperactive ATS and that UCN
normally suppresses this ectopic growth by repressing ATS in the nucleus, likely
through a direct physical interaction of the two proteins (Enugutti et al. 2012;
Enugutti and Schneitz 2013). If hyperactive ATS interferes with auxin-related
processes remains to be determined. Apical–basal positioning of root hairs, another
example of planar polarity, is coordinated relative to an auxin concentration
gradient with the maximum concentration of auxin located at the root tip (Grebe
et al. 2002; Grebe 2004; Fischer et al. 2006; Ikeda et al. 2009; Masucci and
Schiefelbein 1994; Sabatini et al. 1999). It will be interesting to investigate whether
a similar mechanism acts during planar integument growth as well and whether
auxin plays a fundamental role in both processes.
4.6
Does Auxin Pattern the Female Gametophyte?
The haploid female gametophyte (embryo sac) develops during stage 3 in
Arabidopsis. After MMC formation and meiosis the surviving megaspore turns
into the mononuclear embryo sac which continues syncytial development with
three rounds of nuclear divisions and the formation of a large central vacuole.
Eventually cellularization takes place resulting in a typical Polygonum-type
embryo sac containing seven cells and eight nuclei. The maturating embryo sac
exhibits a prominent micropylar–chalazal polarity. Two accessory synergid cells
and the egg cell form the egg apparatus and locate to the distal or micropylar pole of
the embryo sac. A large di-haploid central cell containing two nuclei that eventually
fuse and a large vacuole occupies the central part of the embryo sac. At the
proximal or chalazal pole three accessory antipodal cells form that eventually
will degenerate shortly before or around the time of fertilization (Sprunck and
Gross-Hardt 2011). Upon double fertilization the egg cell develops into the diploid
zygote and embryo while the central cell will originate the triploid endosperm.
On the basis of auxin synthesis and auxin response reporter studies a dynamic
model of auxin ﬂux was proposed in which auxin generated in more proximal
11
The Role of Auxin for Reproductive Organ Patterning and Development
233

regions is transported through the nucellar epidermis to the tip of the nucellus where
it could affect MMC and embryo sac development (Ceccato et al. 2013; Pagnussat
et al. 2009). Thus, it is believed that auxin contributes to the sporophyte–gameto-
phyte cross talk. However, at present there appears to exist some uncertainties as to
the speciﬁc part auxin plays in gametophyte development. One set of experiments
suggests that PAT is essential for the control of the ﬁrst nuclear divisions of early
embryo sac development. A second set of data indicates that auxin does not play
such an early essential role but is a central regulator of pattern formation along the
micropylar–chalazal axis of the embryo sac.
For example, plants homozygous for the pin1-5 mutants develop ovule-bearing
pistils (Sohlberg et al. 2006; Bencivenga et al. 2012). While pin1-5 ovules usually
carry normal integuments they exhibit an early arrest of embryo sac development
(Bencivenga et al. 2012) as do plants in which PIN1 was silenced in an ovule-
speciﬁc manner (Ceccato et al. 2013). This implies that PIN1-mediated PAT is
involved in early steps of female gametophyte development. Thus, a sporophytic
source of auxin would directly or indirectly regulate early development of the
female gametophyte. In line with this notion are results from the study of the role
of the cytokinin receptor genes CRE1, AHK2, and AHK3 as ovules of a strong cre1
ahk2 ahk3 triple mutant resemble pin1-5 ovules with usually normal integuments
but an early block in embryo sac development (Bencivenga et al. 2012; Kinoshita-
Tsujimura and Kakimoto 2011). Moreover, the absence of detectable PIN1:GFP
expression in ovules of the cre1 ahk2 ahk3 triple mutant (Bencivenga et al. 2012)
suggests that the early block in embryo sac development is due to the absence of
PIN1 expression and aberrant PAT. Thus, these experiments are compatible with
the view that PIN1-mediated local accumulation of auxin at the distal tip of the
nucellus is essential for the control of the initial steps of female gametophyte
development.
There is also evidence that auxin plays a central role in patterning the
Arabidopsis embryo sac (Pagnussat et al. 2009). The authors found that signals
from DR5-based reporters eventually accumulated at the micropylar pole inside the
early and still syncytial embryo sac. As PIN1:GFP signal was already absent at
these stages it was assumed that the DR5-based signal was related to local auxin
biosynthesis. Indeed pYUC1-2::GUS reporters yielded signal at the micropylar pole
of the embryo sac. However, recent microscopic evidence does not support the
notion of auxin synthesis or auxin response taking place in the developing
Arabidopsis embryo sac but suggests dynamic control of these activities in nucellar
cells neighboring the developing gametophyte (Ceccato et al. 2013; Lituiev
et al. 2013). It is unclear whether signiﬁcant auxin biosynthesis or response takes
place inside the developing female gametophyte as DR5 reporter signal is absent
from embryo sacs of Hieracium pilosella (Tucker et al. 2012) or Arabidopsis
(Ceccato et al. 2013; Lituiev et al. 2013) and occurs only at maturity in proliferating
antipodal cells of maize embryo sacs, but not in Arabidopsis (Lituiev et al. 2013).
Nevertheless, embryo sac-speciﬁc downregulation of ARF genes or upregulation of
YUC genes did not lead to early gametophyte abortion but resulted in cell identity
defects that could be observed in late Arabidopsis embryo sacs (Pagnussat
234
T. Dresselhaus and K. Schneitz

et al. 2009). Morphology and marker gene expression studies indicated that spec-
iﬁcation defects were particularly evident for egg apparatus cells that are normally
located at the micropylar pole of the embryo sac. In one attractive model the authors
proposed that PIN1-mediated PAT leads to a ﬁrst auxin maximum at the distal pole
of the nucellus up to the beginning of embryo sac development. Such a sporophytic
auxin source could subsequently trigger gametophyte-speciﬁc auxin biosynthesis at
the micropylar pole of the female gametophyte. This localized auxin biosynthesis
would be fundamental for the establishment of an auxin gradient along the
micropylar–chalazal (distal–proximal) axis within the syncytium of the developing
embryo sac. Auxin might then act as a morphogen in the uncellularized embryo sac
with highest auxin concentrations specifying synergids, followed by egg cell and
central cell, while low levels of auxin result in the development of antipodal cells
(Pagnussat et al. 2009; Sundaresan and Alandete-Saez 2010).
The recent data described above regarding the absence of auxin synthesis and
response in the embryo sac and the role of PIN1 in ovule development pose some
challenges to this original model. For example, it is difﬁcult to rationalize the early
embryo sac abortion in ovules lacking PIN1:GFP signal, such as in ovules of the
cre1 ahk2 ahk3 triple mutants, or in ovules of pin1-5 plants if PIN1-mediated PAT
would result in the initial trigger leading to the auxin gradient involved in patterning
the female gametophyte. Rather, one would expect patterning defects in late
embryo sacs as observed in ovules with embryo sac-speciﬁc up- or downregulation
of YUC and ARF activities, respectively. In addition, results from mathematical
modeling, making use of published auxin degradation rates and diffusion coefﬁ-
cients, are incompatible with a gametophytic auxin gradient patterning the embryo
sac (Lituiev et al. 2013). Since there is a dynamic auxin response in sporophytic
cells neighboring the embryo sac it was postulated that a sporophytic, auxin-
responsive, diffusible signal patterns the embryo sac in a non-cell-autonomous
fashion. Obviously, additional work is necessary and it will be of great interest to
investigate further the molecular mechanism underlying the control of auxin-
dependent pattern formation in the developing embryo sac.
5
Conclusions
The past 10 years have seen a tremendous increase in knowledge about the central
role of auxin for the timely and coordinated regulation of reproductive organ
development in angiosperms. Some ﬁndings were perhaps not unexpected while
other results, for example, the apparent absence of PIN-mediated PAT during later
steps of integument development, are surprising. Moreover, early models such as
the auxin gradient theory (Nemhauser et al. 2000) explaining gynoecium patterning
turned out to represent oversimpliﬁcations as auxin signaling is strongly
interconnected with other hormonal pathways (see also Chap. 6). Most of our
current knowledge was generated by the analysis of auxin pathway mutants as
well as fusion protein and DR5 reporter studies in the Brassicaceae model
11
The Role of Auxin for Reproductive Organ Patterning and Development
235

Arabidopsis thaliana. Thus, it is not only urgently required to study auxin processes
during reproductive development using more advanced tools, for example, more
precise Aux/IAA-based DII-VENUS sensors (Brunoud et al. 2012), but to include
other plant species, for example, the economically important grasses, in functional
studies as well. Considering the existing opportunities and the accelerated pace of
research the next 10 years will certainly witness exciting and new insights into the
role of auxin during reproductive development.
Acknowledgments We thank Mayada Woriedh for the generation of RNAseq data from maize
pollen tubes and acknowledge Sapna Sharma for annotation and clustering of the data. Work on
reproductive development in the Dresselhaus and Schneitz labs is funded by SFB 924 grants
(TP A2/TP A3) as well as by grant SCHN 723/6-1 from the German Research Council (DFG) and
supported by the Free State of Bavaria.
References
Aloni R, Aloni E, Langhans M, Ullrich CI (2006) Role of auxin in regulating Arabidopsis ﬂower
development. Planta 223:315–328
Alvarez JP, Goldshmidt A, Efroni I, Bowman JL, Eshed Y (2009) The NGATHA distal organ
development genes are essential for style speciﬁcation in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 21:1373–
1393
Azhakanandam S, Nole-Wilson S, Bao F, Franks RG (2008) SEUSS and AINTEGUMENTA
mediate patterning and ovule initiation during gynoecium medial domain development. Plant
Physiol 146:1165–1181
Balasubramanian S, Schneitz K (2000) NOZZLE regulates proximal-distal pattern formation, cell
proliferation and early sporogenesis in Arabidopsis thaliana. Development 127:4227–4238
Balasubramanian S, Schneitz K (2002) NOZZLE links proximal-distal and adaxial-abaxial pattern
formation during ovule development in Arabidopsis thaliana. Development 129:4291–4300
Bencivenga S, Simonini S, Benkova E, Colombo L (2012) The transcription factors BEL1 and
SPL are required for cytokinin and auxin signaling during ovule development in Arabidopsis.
Plant Cell 24:2886–2897
Benkova E, Michniewicz M, Sauer M, Teichmann T, Seifertova D, Ju¨rgens G, Friml J (2003)
Local, efﬂux-dependent auxin gradients as a common module for plant organ formation. Cell
115:591–602
Bouman F (1984) The ovule. In: Johri BM (ed) Embryology of angiosperms. Springer, New York,
pp 123–157
Brambilla V, Battaglia R, Colombo M, Masiero S, Bencivenga S, Kater MM, Colombo L (2007)
Genetic and molecular interactions between BELL1 and MADS box factors support ovule
development in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 19:2544–2556
Brunoud G, Wells DM, Oliva M, Larrieu A, Mirabet V, Burrow AH, Beeckman T, Kepinski S,
Traas J, Bennett MJ, Vernoux T (2012) A novel sensor to map auxin response and distribution
at high spatio-temporal resolution. Nature 482:103–106
Ceccato L, Masiero S, Sinha RD, Bencivenga S, Roig-Villanova I, Ditengou FA, Palme K,
Simon R, Colombo L (2013) Maternal control of PIN1 is required for female gametophyte
development in Arabidopsis. PLoS One 8:e66148
Cecchetti V, Altamura MM, Falasca G, Costantino P, Cardarelli M (2008) Auxin regulates
Arabidopsis anther dehiscence, pollen maturation, and ﬁlament elongation. Plant Cell
20:1760–1774
236
T. Dresselhaus and K. Schneitz

Cecchetti V, Altamura MM, Brunetti P, Petrocelli V, Falasca G, Ljung K, Costantino P, Cardarelli
M (2013) Auxin controls Arabidopsis anther dehiscence by regulating endothecium ligniﬁca-
tion and jasmonic acid biosynthesis. Plant J 74:411–422
Chen D, Zhao J (2008) Free IAA in stigmas and styles during pollen germination and pollen tube
growth of Nicotiana tabacum. Physiol Plant 134:202–215
Cheng H, Qin L, Lee S, Fu X, Richards DE, Cao D, Luo D, Harberd NP, Peng J (2004) Gibberellin
regulates Arabidopsis ﬂoral development via suppression of DELLA protein function. Devel-
opment 131:1055–1064
Cheng Y, Dai X, Zhao Y (2006) Auxin biosynthesis by the YUCCA ﬂavin monooxygenases
controls the formation of ﬂoral organs and vascular tissues in Arabidopsis. Genes Dev
20:1790–1799
Christensen CA, King EJ, Jordan JR, Drews GN (1997) Megagametogenesis in Arabidopsis wild
type and the Gf mutant. Sex Plant Reprod 10:49–64
Christensen SK, Dagenais N, Chory J, Weigel D (2000) Regulation of auxin response by the
protein kinase PINOID. Cell 100:469–478
Crawford BC, Yanofsky MF (2008) The formation and function of the female reproductive tract in
ﬂowering plants. Curr Biol 18:R972–R978
Crawford BC, Yanofsky MF (2011) HALF FILLED promotes reproductive tract development and
fertilization efﬁciency in Arabidopsis thaliana. Development 138:2999–3009
Dal Bosco C, Dovzhenko A, Liu X, Woerner N, Rensch T, Eismann M, Eimer S, Hegermann J,
Paponov IA, Ruperti B, Heberle-Bors E, Touraev A, Cohen JD, Palme K (2012) The endo-
plasmic reticulum localized PIN8 is a pollen-speciﬁc auxin carrier involved in intracellular
auxin homeostasis. Plant J 71:860–870
DeMason DA, Polowick PL (2009) Patterns of DR5:GUS expression in organs of pea (Pisum
sativum). Int J Plant Sci 170:1–11
Ding Z, Wang B, Moreno I, Duplakova N, Simon S, Carraro N, Reemmer J, Pencik A, Chen X,
Tejos R, Skupa P, Pollmann S, Mravec J, Petrasek J, Zazimalova E, Honys D, Rolcik J,
Murphy A, Orellana A, Geisler M, Friml J (2012) ER-localized auxin transporter PIN8
regulates auxin homeostasis and male gametophyte development in Arabidopsis. Nat Commun
3:941
Dresselhaus T, Franklin-Tong N (2013) Male-female cross-talk during pollen germination, tube
growth and guidance, and double fertilization. Mol Plant 6:1018–1036. doi:10.1093/mp/sst061
Dresselhaus T, Sprunck S (2012) Plant fertilization: maximizing reproductive success. Curr Biol
22:R487–R489
Eklund DM, Staldal V, Valsecchi I, Cierlik I, Eriksson C, Hiratsu K, Ohme-Takagi M, Sundstrom
JF, Thelander M, Ezcurra I, Sundberg E (2010) The Arabidopsis thaliana STYLISH1 protein
acts as a transcriptional activator regulating auxin biosynthesis. Plant Cell 22:349–363
Elliott RC, Betzner AS, Huttner E, Oakes MP, Tucker WQ, Gerentes D, Perez P, Smyth DR (1996)
AINTEGUMENTA, an APETALA2-like gene of Arabidopsis with pleiotropic roles in ovule
development and ﬂoral organ growth. Plant Cell 8:155–168
Endress PK (2011) Angiosperm ovules: diversity, development, evolution. Ann Bot 107:1465–
1489
Enugutti B, Schneitz K (2013) Genetic analysis of ectopic growth suppression during planar
growth of integuments mediated by the Arabidopsis AGC protein kinase UNICORN. BMC
Plant Biol 13:2
Enugutti B, Kirchhelle C, Oelschner M, Torres Ruiz RA, Schliebner I, Leister D, Schneitz K
(2012) Regulation of planar growth by the Arabidopsis AGC protein kinase UNICORN. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 109:15060–15065
Enugutti B, Kirchhelle C, Schneitz K (2013) On the genetic control of planar growth during tissue
morphogenesis in plants. Protoplasma 250:651–661
Esau K (1977) Anatomy of seed plants, 2nd edn. Wiley, New York
Eshed Y, Baum SF, Perea JV, Bowman JL (2001) Establishment of polarity in lateral organs of
plants. Curr Biol 11:1251–1260
11
The Role of Auxin for Reproductive Organ Patterning and Development
237

Feng X, Dickinson HG (2007) Packaging the male germline in plants. Trends Genet 23:503–510
Feng XL, Ni WM, Elge S, Mueller-Roeber B, Xu ZH, Xue HW (2006) Auxin ﬂow in anther
ﬁlaments is critical for pollen grain development through regulating pollen mitosis. Plant Mol
Biol 61:215–226
Fischer U, Ikeda Y, Ljung K, Serralbo O, Singh M, Heidstra R, Palme K, Scheres B, Grebe M
(2006) Vectorial information for Arabidopsis planar polarity is mediated by combined AUX1,
EIN2, and GNOM activity. Curr Biol 16:2143–2149
Forestan C, Farinati S, Varotto S (2012) The maize PIN gene family of auxin transporters. Front
Plant Sci 3:16
Franks RG, Wang C, Levin JZ, Liu Z (2002) SEUSS, a member of a novel family of plant
regulatory proteins, represses ﬂoral homeotic gene expression with LEUNIG. Development
129:253–263
Friml J, Benkova E, Blilou I, Wisniewska J, Hamann T, Ljung K, Woody S, Sandberg G,
Scheres B, Jurgens G, Palme K (2002) AtPIN4 mediates sink-driven auxin gradients and
root patterning in Arabidopsis. Cell 108:661–673
Friml J, Vieten A, Sauer M, Weijers D, Schwarz H, Hamann T, Offringa R, Ju¨rgens G (2003)
Efﬂux-dependent auxin gradients establish the apical-basal axis of Arabidopsis. Nature
426:147–153
Friml J, Yang X, Michniewicz M, Weijers D, Quint A, Tietz O, Benjamins R, Ouwerkerk PB,
Ljung K, Sandberg G, Hooykaas PJ, Palme K, Offringa R (2004) A PINOID-dependent binary
switch in apical-basal PIN polar targeting directs auxin efﬂux. Science 306:862–865
Gallavotti A, Barazesh S, Malcomber S, Hall D, Jackson D, Schmidt RJ, McSteen P (2008a)
Sparse inﬂorescence1 encodes a monocot-speciﬁc YUCCA-like gene required for vegetative
and reproductive development in maize. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105:15196–15201
Gallavotti A, Yang Y, Schmidt RJ, Jackson D (2008b) The relationship between auxin transport
and maize branching. Plant Physiol 147:1913–1923
Ga¨lweiler L, Guan C, Mu¨ller A, Wisman E, Mendgen K, Yephremov A, Palme K (1998)
Regulation of polar auxin transport by AtPIN1 in Arabidopsis vascular tissue. Science
282:2226–2230
Geisler
M,
Blakeslee
JJ,
Bouchard
R,
Lee
OR,
Vincenzetti
V,
Bandyopadhyay
A,
Titapiwatanakun B, Peer WA, Bailly A, Richards EL, Ejendal KF, Smith AP, Baroux C,
Grossniklaus U, Muller A, Hrycyna CA, Dudler R, Murphy AS, Martinoia E (2005) Cellular
efﬂux of auxin catalyzed by the Arabidopsis MDR/PGP transporter AtPGP1. Plant J 44:179–
194
Girin T, Paicu T, Stephenson P, Fuentes S, Korner E, O’Brien M, Sorefan K, Wood TA,
Balanza V, Ferrandiz C, Smyth DR, Ostergaard L (2011) INDEHISCENT and SPATULA
interact to specify carpel and valve margin tissue and thus promote seed dispersal in
Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 23:3641–3653
Grebe M (2004) Ups and downs of tissue and planar polarity in plants. Bioessays 26:719–729
Grebe M, Friml J, Swarup R, Ljung K, Sandberg G, Terlou M, Palme K, Bennett MJ, Scheres B
(2002) Cell polarity signaling in Arabidopsis involves a BFA-sensitive auxin inﬂux pathway.
Curr Biol 12:329–334
Gremski K, Ditta G, Yanofsky MF (2007) The HECATE genes regulate female reproductive tract
development in Arabidopsis thaliana. Development 134:3593–3601
Grifﬁths J, Murase K, Rieu I, Zentella R, Zhang ZL, Powers SJ, Gong F, Phillips AL, Hedden P,
Sun TP, Thomas SG (2006) Genetic characterization and functional analysis of the GID1
gibberellin receptors in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 18:3399–3414
Grunewald W, Friml J (2010) The march of the PINs: developmental plasticity by dynamic polar
targeting in plant cells. EMBO J 29:2700–2714
Hamamura Y, Nagahara S, Higashiyama T (2012) Double fertilization on the move. Curr Opin
Plant Biol 15:70–77
Hardtke CS, Berleth T (1998) The Arabidopsis gene MONOPTEROS encodes a transcription
factor mediating embryo axis formation and vascular development. EMBO J 17:1405–1411
238
T. Dresselhaus and K. Schneitz

Heisler MG, Atkinson A, Bylstra YH, Walsh R, Smyth DR (2001) SPATULA, a gene that controls
development of carpel margin tissues in Arabidopsis, encodes a bHLH protein. Development
128:1089–1098
Heisler MG, Ohno C, Das P, Sieber P, Reddy GV, Long JA, Meyerowitz EM (2005) Patterns of
auxin transport and gene expression during primordium development revealed by live imaging
of the Arabidopsis inﬂorescence meristem. Curr Biol 15:1899–1911
Higuchi M, Pischke MS, Mahonen AP, Miyawaki K, Hashimoto Y, Seki M, Kobayashi M,
Shinozaki K, Kato T, Tabata S, Helariutta Y, Sussman MR, Kakimoto T (2004) In planta
functions of the Arabidopsis cytokinin receptor family. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101:8821–
8826
Honma T, Goto K (2001) Complexes of MADS-box proteins are sufﬁcient to convert leaves into
ﬂoral organs. Nature 409:525–529
Hu Y, Xie Q, Chua NH (2003) The Arabidopsis auxin-inducible gene ARGOS controls lateral
organ size. Plant Cell 15:1951–1961
Hu J, Mitchum MG, Barnaby N, Ayele BT, Ogawa M, Nam E, Lai WC, Hanada A, Alonso JM,
Ecker JR, Swain SM, Yamaguchi S, Kamiya Y, Sun TP (2008) Potential sites of bioactive
gibberellin production during reproductive growth in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 20:320–336
Ikeda Y, Men S, Fischer U, Stepanova AN, Alonso JM, Ljung K, Grebe M (2009) Local auxin
biosynthesis modulates gradient-directed planar polarity in Arabidopsis. Nat Cell Biol 11:731–
738
Ilegems M, Douet V, Meylan-Bettex M, Uyttewaal M, Brand L, Bowman JL, Stieger PA (2010)
Interplay of auxin, KANADI and class III HD-ZIP transcription factors in vascular tissue
formation. Development 137:975–984
Ishiguro S, Kawai-Oda A, Ueda J, Nishida I, Okada K (2001) The DEFECTIVE IN ANTHER
DEHISCIENCE gene encodes a novel phospholipase A1 catalyzing the initial step of jasmonic
acid biosynthesis, which synchronizes pollen maturation, anther dehiscence, and ﬂower open-
ing in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 13:2191–2209
Izhaki A, Bowman JL (2007) KANADI and class III HD-Zip gene families regulate embryo
patterning and modulate auxin ﬂow during embryogenesis in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 19:495–
508
Jain M, Khurana JP (2009) Transcript proﬁling reveals diverse roles of auxin-responsive genes
during reproductive development and abiotic stress in rice. FEBS J 276:3148–3162
Kelley DR, Gasser CS (2009) Ovule development: genetic trends and evolutionary considerations.
Sex Plant Reprod 22:229–234
Kelley DR, Skinner DJ, Gasser CS (2009) Roles of polarity determinants in ovule development.
Plant J 57:1054–1064
Kelley DR, Arreola A, Gallagher TL, Gasser CS (2012) ETTIN (ARF3) physically interacts with
KANADI proteins to form a functional complex essential for integument development and
polarity determination in Arabidopsis. Development 139:1105–1109
Kennedy PB (1899) The structure of the caryopsis of grasses with reference to their morphology
and classiﬁcation. USDA Div Agrostol Bull 19:1–44
Kerstetter RA, Bollman K, Taylor RA, Bomblies K, Poethig RS (2001) KANADI regulates organ
polarity in Arabidopsis. Nature 411:706–709
Kinoshita-Tsujimura K, Kakimoto T (2011) Cytokinin receptors in sporophytes are essential for
male and female functions in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Signal Behav 6:66–71
Klucher KM, Chow H, Reiser L, Fischer RL (1996) The AINTEGUMENTA gene of Arabidopsis
required for ovule and female gametophyte development is related to the ﬂoral homeotic gene
APETALA2. Plant Cell 8:137–153
Krecek P, Skupa P, Libus J, Naramoto S, Tejos R, Friml J, Zazimalova E (2009) The
PIN-FORMED (PIN) protein family of auxin transporters. Genome Biol 10:249
Krizek BA (1999) Ectopic expression of AINTEGUMENTA in Arabidopsis plants results in
increased growth of ﬂoral organs. Dev Genet 25:224–236
11
The Role of Auxin for Reproductive Organ Patterning and Development
239

Kuusk S, Sohlberg JJ, Long JA, Fridborg I, Sundberg E (2002) STY1 and STY2 promote the
formation of apical tissues during Arabidopsis gynoecium development. Development
129:4707–4717
Kuusk S, Sohlberg JJ, Magnus Eklund D, Sundberg E (2006) Functionally redundant SHI family
genes regulate Arabidopsis gynoecium development in a dose-dependent manner. Plant J
47:99–111
Larsson E, Franks RG, Sundberg E (2013) Auxin and the Arabidopsis thaliana gynoecium. J Exp
Bot 64:2619–2627
Le´on-Kloosterziel KM, Keijzer CJ, Koornneef M (1994) A seed shape mutant of Arabidopsis that
is affected in integument development. Plant Cell 6:385–392
Li LC, Qin GJ, Tsuge T, Hou XH, Ding MY, Aoyama T, Oka A, Chen Z, Gu H, Zhao Y, Qu LJ
(2008) SPOROCYTELESS modulates YUCCA expression to regulate the development of
lateral organs in Arabidopsis. New Phytol 179:751–764
Lituiev D, Krohn NG, Mu¨ller B, Jackson D, Hellriegel B, Dresselhaus T, Grossniklaus U (2013)
Theoretical and experimental evidence indicates that there is no auxin gradient patterning the
angiosperm female gametophyte. Development 14022:4544–4553
Mashiguchi K, Tanaka K, Sakai T, Sugawara S, Kawaide H, Natsume M, Hanada A, Yaeno T,
Shirasu K, Yao H, McSteen P, Zhao Y, Hayashi K, Kamiya Y, Kasahara H (2011) The main
auxin biosynthesis pathway in Arabidopsis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108:18512–18517
Masucci JD, Schiefelbein JW (1994) The rhd6 mutation of Arabidopsis thaliana alters root-hair
initiation through an auxin- and ethylene-associated process. Plant Physiol 106:1335–1346
McAbee JM, Hill TA, Skinner DJ, Izhaki A, Hauser BA, Meister RJ, Venugopala Reddy G,
Meyerowitz EM, Bowman JL, Gasser CS (2006) ABERRANT TESTA SHAPE encodes a
KANADI family member, linking polarity determination to separation and growth of
Arabidopsis ovule integuments. Plant J 46:522–531
Mizukami Y, Fischer RL (2000) Plant organ size control: AINTEGUMENTA regulates growth and
cell numbers during organogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97:942–947
Modrusan Z, Reiser L, Feldmann KA, Fischer RL, Haughn GW (1994) Homeotic transformation
of ovules into carpel-like structures in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 6:333–349
Nagpal P, Ellis CM, Weber H, Ploense SE, Barkawi LS, Guilfoyle TJ, Hagen G, Alonso JM,
Cohen JD, Farmer EE, Ecker JR, Reed JW (2005) Auxin response factors ARF6 and ARF8
promote jasmonic acid production and ﬂower maturation. Development 132:4107–4118
Nemhauser JL, Feldman LJ, Zambryski PC (2000) Auxin and ETTIN in Arabidopsis gynoecium
morphogenesis. Development 127:3877–3888
Nole-Wilson S, Azhakanandam S, Franks RG (2010) Polar auxin transport together with
aintegumenta and revoluta coordinate early Arabidopsis gynoecium development. Dev Biol
346:181–195
Okada K, Ueda J, Komaki MK, Bell CJ, Shimura Y (1991) Requirement of the auxin polar
transport system in early stages of Arabidopsis ﬂoral bud formation. Plant Cell 3:677–684
Ostergaard L (2009) Don’t leaf now. The making of a fruit. Curr Opin Plant Biol 12:36–41
Pagnussat GC, Alandete-Saez M, Bowman JL, Sundaresan V (2009) Auxin-dependent patterning
and gamete speciﬁcation in the Arabidopsis female gametophyte. Science 324:1684–1689
Palanivelu R, Tsukamoto T (2012) Pathﬁnding in angiosperm reproduction: pollen tube guidance
by pistils ensures successful double fertilization. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Dev Biol 1:96–113
Paponov IA, Teale WD, Trebar M, Blilou I, Palme K (2005) The PIN auxin efﬂux facilitators:
evolutionary and functional perspectives. Trends Plant Sci 10:170–177
Pekker I, Alvarez JP, Eshed Y (2005) Auxin response factors mediate Arabidopsis organ asym-
metry via modulation of KANADI activity. Plant Cell 17:2899–2910
Peng J (2009) Gibberellin and jasmonate crosstalk during stamen development. J Integr Plant Biol
51:1064–1070
Peng J, Chen R (2011) Auxin efﬂux transporter MtPIN10 regulates compound leaf and ﬂower
development in Medicago truncatula. Plant Signal Behav 6:1537–1544
240
T. Dresselhaus and K. Schneitz

Plackett AR, Powers SJ, Fernandez-Garcia N, Urbanova T, Takebayashi Y, Seo M, Jikumaru Y,
Benlloch R, Nilsson O, Ruiz-Rivero O, Phillips AL, Wilson ZA, Thomas SG, Hedden P (2012)
Analysis of the developmental roles of the Arabidopsis gibberellin 20-oxidases demonstrates
that GA20ox1, -2, and -3 are the dominant paralogs. Plant Cell 24:941–960
Poppenberger B, Rozhon W, Khan M, Husar S, Adam G, Luschnig C, Fujioka S, Sieberer T (2011)
CESTA, a positive regulator of brassinosteroid biosynthesis. EMBO J 30:1149–1161
Przemeck GKH, Mattson J, Hardtke CS, Sung ZR, Berleth T (1996) Studies on the role of the
Arabidopsis gene MONOPTEROS in vascular development and plant cell axialization. Planta
200:229–237
Reeves PH, Ellis CM, Ploense SE, Wu MF, Yadav V, Tholl D, Chetelat A, Haupt I, Kennerley BJ,
Hodgens C, Farmer EE, Nagpal P, Reed JW (2012) A regulatory network for coordinated
ﬂower maturation. PLoS Genet 8:e1002506
Reinhardt D, Mandel T, Kuhlemeier C (2000) Auxin regulates the initiation and radial position of
plant lateral organs. Plant Cell 12:507–518
Reinhardt D, Pesce ER, Stieger P, Mandel T, Baltensperger K, Bennett M, Traas J, Friml J,
Kuhlemeier C (2003) Regulation of phyllotaxis by polar auxin transport. Nature 426:255–260
Reiser L, Modrusan Z, Margossian L, Samach A, Ohad N, Haughn GW, Fischer RL (1995) The
BELL1 gene encodes a homeodomain protein involved in pattern formation in the Arabidopsis
ovule primordium. Cell 83:735–742
Rieu I, Ruiz-Rivero O, Fernandez-Garcia N, Grifﬁths J, Powers SJ, Gong F, Linhartova T,
Eriksson S, Nilsson O, Thomas SG, Phillips AL, Hedden P (2008) The gibberellin biosynthetic
genes AtGA20ox1 and AtGA20ox2 act, partially redundantly, to promote growth and devel-
opment throughout the Arabidopsis life cycle. Plant J 53:488–504
Robinson-Beers K, Pruitt RE, Gasser CS (1992) Ovule development in wild-type Arabidopsis and
two female-sterile mutants. Plant Cell 4:1237–1249
Rouse D, Mackay P, Stirnberg P, Estelle M, Leyser O (1998) Changes in auxin response from
mutations in an AUX/IAA gene. Science 279:1371–1373
Ru P, Xu L, Ma H, Huang H (2006) Plant fertility defects induced by the enhanced expression of
microRNA167. Cell Res 16:457–465
Sabatini S, Beis D, Wolkenfeldt H, Murfett J, Guilfoyle T, Malamy J, Benfey P, Leyser O,
Bechtold N, Weisbeek P, Scheres B (1999) An auxin-dependent distal organizer of pattern
and polarity in the Arabidopsis root. Cell 99:463–472
Sakata T, Oshino T, Miura S, Tomabechi M, Tsunaga Y, Higashitani N, Miyazawa Y,
Takahashi H, Watanabe M, Higashitani A (2010) Auxins reverse plant male sterility caused
by high temperatures. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107:8569–8574
Schiefthaler U, Balasubramanian S, Sieber P, Chevalier D, Wisman E, Schneitz K (1999)
Molecular analysis of NOZZLE, a gene involved in pattern formation and early sporogenesis
during sex organ development in Arabidopsis thaliana. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96:11664–
11669
Schneitz K, Hu¨lskamp M, Pruitt RE (1995) Wild-type ovule development in Arabidopsis thaliana:
a light microscope study of cleared whole-mount tissue. Plant J 7:731–749
Schneitz K, Hu¨lskamp M, Kopczak SD, Pruitt RE (1997) Dissection of sexual organ ontogenesis: a
genetic analysis of ovule development in Arabidopsis thaliana. Development 124:1367–1376
Schneitz K, Baker SC, Gasser CS, Redweik A (1998) Pattern formation and growth during ﬂoral
organogenesis: HUELLENLOS and AINTEGUMENTA are required for the formation of the
proximal region of the ovule primordium in Arabidopsis thaliana. Development 125:2555–
2563
Schruff MC, Spielman M, Tiwari S, Adams S, Fenby N, Scott RJ (2006) The AUXIN RESPONSE
FACTOR 2 gene of Arabidopsis links auxin signalling, cell division, and the size of seeds and
other organs. Development 133:251–261
Sessions RA, Zambryski PC (1995) Arabidopsis gynoecium structure in the wild and in ettin
mutants. Development 121:1519–1532
11
The Role of Auxin for Reproductive Organ Patterning and Development
241

Sessions A, Nemhauser JL, McColl A, Roe JL, Feldmann KA, Zambryski PC (1997) ETTIN
patterns the Arabidopsis ﬂoral meristem and reproductive organs. Development 124:4481–
4491
Shen C, Bai Y, Wang S, Zhang S, Wu Y, Chen M, Jiang D, Qi Y (2010) Expression proﬁle of PIN,
AUX/LAX and PGP auxin transporter gene families in Sorghum bicolor under phytohormone
and abiotic stress. FEBS J 277:2954–2969
Shi DQ, Yang WC (2011) Ovule development in Arabidopsis: progress and challenge. Curr Opin
Plant Biol 14:74–80
Sieber P, Petrascheck M, Barberis A, Schneitz K (2004) Organ polarity in Arabidopsis. NOZZLE
physically interacts with members of the YABBY protein family. Plant Physiol 135:2172–
2185
Skinner DJ, Gasser CS (2009) Expression-based discovery of candidate ovule development
regulators through transcriptional proﬁling of ovule mutants. BMC Plant Biol 9:29
Skinner DJ, Baker SC, Meister RJ, Broadhvest J, Schneitz K, Gasser CS (2001) The Arabidopsis
HUELLENLOS gene, which is essential for normal ovule development, encodes a mitochon-
drial ribosomal protein. Plant Cell 13:2719–2730
Sohlberg JJ, Myrenas M, Kuusk S, Lagercrantz U, Kowalczyk M, Sandberg G, Sundberg E (2006)
STY1 regulates auxin homeostasis and affects apical-basal patterning of the Arabidopsis
gynoecium. Plant J 47:112–123
Song S, Qi T, Huang H, Xie D (2013) Regulation of stamen development by coordinated actions of
jasmonate, auxin and gibberellin in Arabidopsis. Mol Plant 6(4):1065–1073
Sprunck S, Gross-Hardt R (2011) Nuclear behavior, cell polarity, and cell speciﬁcation in the
female gametophyte. Sex Plant Reprod 24:123–136
Staldal V, Sohlberg JJ, Eklund DM, Ljung K, Sundberg E (2008) Auxin can act independently of
CRC, LUG, SEU, SPT and STY1 in style development but not apical-basal patterning of the
Arabidopsis gynoecium. New Phytol 180:798–808
Stepanova AN, Robertson-Hoyt J, Yun J, Benavente LM, Xie DY, Dolezal K, Schlereth A,
Ju¨rgens G, Alonso JM (2008) TAA1-mediated auxin biosynthesis is essential for hormone
crosstalk and plant development. Cell 133:177–191
Sundaresan V, Alandete-Saez M (2010) Pattern formation in miniature: the female gametophyte of
ﬂowering plants. Development 137:179–189
Sundberg E, Ostergaard L (2009) Distinct and dynamic auxin activities during reproductive
development. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 1:a001628
Tabata R, Ikezaki M, Fujibe T, Aida M, Tian CE, Ueno Y, Yamamoto KT, Machida Y,
Nakamura K, Ishiguro S (2010) Arabidopsis auxin response factor6 and 8 regulate jasmonic
acid biosynthesis and ﬂoral organ development via repression of class 1 KNOX genes. Plant
Cell Physiol 51:164–175
Tantikanjana T, Nasrallah JB (2012) Non-cell-autonomous regulation of crucifer self-
incompatibility by auxin response factor ARF3. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109:19468–19473
Truernit E, Haseloff J (2008) Arabidopsis thaliana outer ovule integument morphogenesis: ectopic
expression of KNAT1 reveals a compensation mechanism. BMC Plant Biol 8:35
Tucker MR, Okada T, Johnson SD, Takaiwa F, Koltunow AM (2012) Sporophytic ovule tissues
modulate the initiation and progression of apomixis in Hieracium. J Exp Bot 63:3229–3241
Ulmasov T, Murfett J, Hagen G, Guilfoyle TJ (1997) Aux/IAA proteins repress expression of
reporter genes containing natural and highly active synthetic auxin response elements. Plant
Cell 9:1963–1971
Wang Y, Deng D, Shi Y, Miao N, Bian Y, Yin Z (2012) Diversiﬁcation, phylogeny and evolution
of auxin response factor (ARF) family: insights gained from analyzing maize ARF genes. Mol
Biol Rep 39:2401–2415
Webb
MC,
Gunning
BES
(1990)
Embryo
sac
development
in
Arabidopsis
thaliana.
I. Megasporogenesis, including the microtubular cytoskeleton. Sex Plant Reprod 3:244–256
Willemse MTM, van Went JL (1984) The female gametophyte. In: Johri BM (ed) Embryology of
angiosperms. Springer, New York, pp 159–196
242
T. Dresselhaus and K. Schneitz

Wu MF, Tian Q, Reed JW (2006) Arabidopsis microRNA167 controls patterns of ARF6 and ARF8
expression, and regulates both female and male reproduction. Development 133:4211–4218
Xing H, Pudake RN, Guo G, Xing G, Hu Z, Zhang Y, Sun Q, Ni Z (2011) Genome-wide
identiﬁcation and expression proﬁling of auxin response factor (ARF) gene family in maize.
BMC Genomics 12:178
Xing S, Salinas M, Garcia-Molina A, Hohmann S, Berndtgen R, Huijser P (2013) SPL8 and
miR156-targeted SPL genes redundantly regulate Arabidopsis gynoecium differential pattern-
ing. Plant J 75(4):566–577
Yamaguchi N, Wu MF, Winter CM, Berns MC, Nole-Wilson S, Yamaguchi A, Coupland G,
Krizek BA, Wagner D (2013) A molecular framework for auxin-mediated initiation of ﬂower
primordia. Dev Cell 24:271–282
Yang W-C, Ye D, Xu J, Sundaresan V (1999) The SPOROCYTELESS gene of Arabidopsis is
required for initiation of sporogenesis and encodes a novel nuclear protein. Genes Dev
13:2108–2117
Yasuor H, Abu-Abied M, Belausov E, Madmony A, Sadot E, Riov J, Rubin B (2006) Glyphosate-
induced anther indehiscence in cotton is partially temperature dependent and involves cyto-
skeleton and secondary wall modiﬁcations and auxin accumulation. Plant Physiol 141:1306–
1315
Ye Q, Zhu W, Li L, Zhang S, Yin Y, Ma H, Wang X (2010) Brassinosteroids control male fertility
by regulating the expression of key genes involved in Arabidopsis anther and pollen develop-
ment. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107:6100–6105
Zhao Y, Christensen SK, Fankhauser C, Cashman JR, Cohen JD, Weigel D, Chory J (2001) A role
for ﬂavin monooxygenase-like enzymes in auxin biosynthesis. Science 291:306–309
11
The Role of Auxin for Reproductive Organ Patterning and Development
243

Chapter 12
Auxin and Its Henchmen: Hormonal Cross
Talk in Root Growth and Development
Antia Rodriguez-Villalon and Christian S. Hardtke
Abstract Among the intrinsic growth regulators, auxin occupies a central role in
plant growth and development. Auxin has been implicated in the regulation of
many developmental processes at different scales, including cell division, cell
differentiation, organogenesis, and morphogenesis. This is for instance evident in
the sometimes similar and sometimes divergent phenotypes of auxin pathway
mutants with regard to root system architecture, root meristem maintenance and
lateral root organogenesis. Interestingly, other hormone pathways often similarly
affect root system development, which has given rise to the notion of hormone
pathway cross talk and/or synergy. Indeed, in recent years a few examples of
mechanistically deﬁned hormone pathway interactions have been identiﬁed. Most
of these inputs appear to ultimately converge on the modulation of auxin levels,
transport, or signaling and can explain aspects of context-speciﬁc auxin action. In
this chapter, we will discuss examples of interaction between the pathways of auxin
and other hormones, notably brassinosteroid, cytokinin, ethylene, and gibberellin,
with a focus on root growth and development.
1
Introduction
A broad range of growth processes in root system development, ranging from
initiation and organization of root apical meristems to initiation of lateral roots,
have been shown to be highly dependent on auxin signaling and homeostasis
(Benkova and Hejatko 2009; Bennett and Scheres 2010). This pivotal role of
auxin is conserved across the root systems of monocotyledons and dicotyledons,
A. Rodriguez-Villalon • C.S. Hardtke (*)
Department of Plant Molecular Biology, University of Lausanne, Biophore Building, 1015
Lausanne, Switzerland
e-mail: christian.hardtke@unil.ch
E. Zazˇı´malova´ et al. (eds.), Auxin and Its Role in Plant Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-7091-1526-8_12, © Springer-Verlag Wien 2014
245

despite their variable architectures (Pacheco-Villalobos and Hardtke 2012; de
Dorlodot et al. 2007; Hochholdinger and Zimmermann 2008; see Chap. 13). In
both mono- and dicotyledons, post-embryonic root growth is driven by cell pro-
duction of self-renewing apical meristems. This process has been best characterized
in Arabidopsis, where the stem cells localized at the apex of the root meristem
generate daughter cells that undergo several additional divisions in the so-called
meristematic zone before rapid elongation and differentiation into their destined
cell type in the so-called transition/elongation zone. For meristem maintenance, and
therefore continuous root growth, the rate of cell differentiation must equal the rate
of generation of new cells (Dello Ioio et al. 2007; Moubayidin et al. 2009; Scacchi
et al. 2010). Moreover, stem cell differentiation must be suppressed, which requires
the rarely dividing quiescent center cells at the heart of the stem cell niche. In
addition to the embryogenic primary root, the Arabidopsis root system also com-
prises lateral roots, which are formed throughout the plant life cycle. Lateral roots
are essentially similar to primary roots in overall morphology and are initiated from
pericycle founder cells located adjacent to the protoxylem (Casimiro et al. 2001;
Dubrovsky et al. 2008), which undergo several division and differentiation steps to
form lateral root primordia (Malamy and Benfey 1997). The Arabidopsis root
system displays all the essential features observed in other species, although the
roots of the latter generally tend to be larger and more complex. For example,
instead of the single cortex cell layer found in Arabidopsis, frequently 10–15 layers
are formed, whereas the Arabidopsis quiescent center of four cells can comprise in
the hundreds in other species. Variation is also observed at the level of the root
systems, notably in monocotyledons, where it frequently comprises additional root
types, such as shoot-borne adventitious roots (Smith and De Smet 2012; Pacheco-
Villalobos and Hardtke 2012; Osmont et al. 2007). Finally, the variation extends to
the arrangement and number of xylem and phloem tissue poles and their paren-
chyma within the root vasculature, which is surrounded by the pericycle.
The classic notion of auxin as a key hormonal regulator of root organogenesis
has been conﬁrmed through the identiﬁcation of auxin signaling, transport, and
biosynthesis mutants, which display impaired root growth and meristem organiza-
tion. For instance, impaired polar auxin transport through loss of function in
multiple redundant PIN-FORMED (PIN) genes, which encode auxin efﬂux carriers,
severely affects root development (Blilou et al. 2005; see Chap. 5), eventually
leading to total loss of embryonic root formation, thereby resembling corresponding
mutants with severely reduced local auxin biosynthesis or signaling (Stepanova
et al. 2008; Hardtke and Berleth 1998; see Chap. 2). Beyond the essential function
of auxin, tissue-speciﬁc regulation of its biosynthesis, transport, and response in
interaction with other hormone pathways is emerging as a key element in the
speciﬁc roles of auxin during development. Here, we will discuss examples of
such signal integration processes in the context of root system growth, with a focus
on the Arabidopsis primary root, where these interactions have been characterized
best. It is noteworthy however that conceptually similar interactions are frequently
observed in other contexts, notably lateral root formation and vascular differenti-
ation (Fig. 12.1). We will focus on those hormones for which clear evidence of
246
A. Rodriguez-Villalon and C.S. Hardtke

TZ
EZ
DZ
CK
SHY2
ARR1
MP
PIN3
BRX
IAA
cell 
diferentiation
IAA
AHP6
CK signaling
PIN7
CK
Procambial cells
Protoxylem cells
PIN7
AHP6
CK signaling
CK
Lateral root
b
c
a
PIN1
PIN6
Auxin maximum
Primordium 
cell diferentiation
Fig. 12.1 Molecular mechanisms of auxin and cytokinin interaction in the regulation of the
Arabidopsis primary root meristem (a), vascular (b), and lateral root (c) development. (a) In the
root meristem, a complex network of regulatory interactions balances cell division and differen-
tiation/elongation. Auxin promotes cell division through both degradation of SHY2 and induction
of BRX expression, which converge on the antagonistica regulation of PIN3 expression. (b) Within
the root meristem vasculature, procambial cells display high levels of cytokinin, which promotes
the expression of PIN7, thereby forcing auxin transport out of the cells and its accumulation in
protoxylem cells. High auxin signaling at this position in turn promotes expression of the negative
cytokinin regulator AHP6, thereby promoting protoxylem speciﬁcation. (c) Early in lateral root
development, creation of a local auxin concentration maximum is essential for lateral root
primordium formation, whereas cytokinin negatively regulates lateral root initiation by inhibiting
the expression of PIN proteins
12
Auxin and Its Henchmen: Hormonal Cross Talk in Root Growth and Development
247

interaction with the auxin pathway exists, i.e., cytokinin, brassinosteroids, gibber-
ellins, and ethylene.
2
Auxin–Cytokinin Cross talk
The maybe most important interaction of the auxin pathway in root development
occurs with the cytokinin pathway. Cytokinins are adenine derivatives whose levels
are maintained by a complex equilibrium between their synthesis and catabolism
(Sakakibara 2006). In Arabidopsis, cytokinins are perceived by three transmem-
brane histidine kinase receptors, ARABIDOPSIS HISTIDINE KINASE (AHK)
2, AHK3, and WOODEN LEG (WOL; a.k.a. AHK4 or CYTOKININ RECEPTOR
1) (Rieﬂer et al. 2006; Higuchi et al. 2004; Nishimura et al. 2004; Yamada
et al. 2001; Inoue et al. 2001). Sensing of cytokinin by their extracellular domain
initiates receptor autophosphorylation in the cytosolic kinase domain, followed by
transfer of the phosphate to cytosolic Arabidopsis histidine phosphotransfer pro-
teins (AHPs), which can cycle between the cytosol and the nucleus. In the nucleus,
AHPs transfer their phosphates to type-B ARABIDOPSIS RESPONSE REGULA-
TORs (B-ARRs), which thus initiate transcription of primary cytokinin-responsive
genes (Sakai et al. 2001; Hwang et al. 2001). Among them, the type-A ARRs
(A-ARRs), which are stabilized by AHP-mediated phosphorylation (To et al. 2007),
mediate negative feedback to ﬁne-tune cytokinin signaling amplitude by repressing
the activity of B-ARRs (Hwang and Sheen 2001) (Fig. 12.2).
2.1
Cytokinin Controls Different Aspects of Root System
Development
A role of cytokinin in antagonizing auxin action has initially been realized in classic
callus regeneration experiments, in which a high auxin to cytokinin ratio induces
root organogenesis. This is also reﬂected in the ﬁnding that contrary to auxin,
cytokinin is a negative regulator of lateral root formation; i.e., reduced cytokinin
levels result in higher density of lateral roots (Werner et al. 2003; Rieﬂer et al. 2006;
Mason et al. 2005; Hutchison et al. 2006), whilst exogenous cytokinin treatment
inhibits lateral root formation (Kuderova et al. 2008; Laplaze et al. 2007; Li
et al. 2006). A ﬁne-tuned balance in the activity of both hormones is also required
to sustain root meristem growth, where simply spoken auxin keeps cells dividing
whereas cytokinin promotes cell differentiation (Moubayidin et al. 2009; Bishopp
et al. 2011). This antagonism between the two hormones plays out by complex
interactions on different levels, which can trigger different downstream responses
based on tissue speciﬁcity and developmental context.
248
A. Rodriguez-Villalon and C.S. Hardtke

cytoplasm
CKs
A
H
K
P
P
AHP
P
AHP
P
B-ARR
P
A-ARR
Aux/IAA
ARF
A-ARR
PIN
TIR1
SCF
A
U
X
IAA
IAA
26S
proteasome
PIN
IAA
IAA
apoplast
nucleus
Fig. 12.2 Schematic representation of the auxin (IAA) and cytokinin (CK) signaling pathways
with an emphasis on the nodes where cross talk occurs. CKs are perceived by the AHK receptors,
thus initiating receptor autophosphorylation, followed by transfer of the phosphate group to a
cytosolic AHP. Translocation of AHP to the nucleus triggers phosphorylation of B-ARRs,
promoting the transcription of primary CK-responsive genes, including the negative feedback
regulators, the A-ARRs genes. Phosphorylated A-ARRs activate negative regulation of CK
signaling through a yet unknown mechanism. Auxin is taken up from the apoplast by passive
diffusion as well as the action of inﬂux transporters [(AUXIN-RESISTANT MUTATION 1/LIKE
(AUX1 AUX/LAX)] and actively transported out of the cell by the efﬂux carriers, the PIN
proteins. In the nucleus, high auxin concentration promotes interaction of AUX/IAA proteins,
which inhibit ARF transcription factors, with SCF-type E3 ubiquitin ligase complexes that contain
auxin receptor F-box proteins, such as TRANSPORT INHIBITOR RESPONSE 1 (TIR1). This
interaction leads to AUX/IAA degradation and thus releases ARF transcription activation to
induce expression of auxin-responsive genes. B-ARRs can activate transcription of certain AUX/
IAA genes and thereby affect ARF-controlled PIN expression, whereas auxin signaling suppresses
CK response by the activation of A-ARRs
12
Auxin and Its Henchmen: Hormonal Cross Talk in Root Growth and Development
249

2.2
Cytokinin and Auxin Can Impinge on Each Other’s
Signaling Pathway
In the post-embryonic root, high primary cytokinin response is observed in the root
tip (Bielach et al. 2012; Aloni et al. 2004). For instance, recent studies that
employed the synthetic cytokinin-responsive promoter, TCS, to drive expression
of a GFP reporter gene have shown high cytokinin response in the root cap, but not
in the meristematic or transition/elongation zones (Bielach et al. 2012; Muller and
Sheen 2008). Nevertheless, due to the differential expression patterns of individual
A-ARRs it remains unclear in which cells cytokinin response is most active, and
genetic analyses suggest indeed a role for cytokinin signaling in the transition/
elongation zone. This has been revealed by analysis of the AUX/IAA gene SHORT
HYPOCOTYL 2 (SHY2), a mediator of cross talk between auxin and cytokinin,
whose expression in the vascular tissue of the transition/elongation zone is con-
trolled by two cytokinin-inducible A-ARRs, ARR1 and ARR12 (Dello Ioio
et al. 2007, 2008; Moubayidin et al. 2009). Chromatin immunoprecipitation exper-
iments have demonstrated that ARR1 binds directly to the SHY2 promoter (Dello
Ioio et al. 2008). Interestingly, expression of stabilized SHY2 protein in gain-of-
function shy2 alleles or overexpression of a constitutively active (phosphomimic)
form of ARR1 in transgenic lines both phenocopy cytokinin treatment; i.e., they
result in strongly reduced meristem size and consequently reduced root growth.
Complementing these observations, loss-of-function shy2 mutants (Dello Ioio
et al. 2007) as well as cytokinin biosynthetic and signaling mutants display larger
root meristem sizes (Dello Ioio et al. 2007).
Through its inﬂuence on SHY2 expression, the cytokinin pathway indirectly
controls polar auxin transport in the root meristem, because SHY2 activity inhibits
the expression of PIN genes that are under control of auxin response factors (ARFs)
(Dello Ioio et al. 2008) (Fig. 12.2). Importantly, this cross talk occurs in a distinct
spatiotemporal setting to control root meristem growth and thereby mature meri-
stem size in the early seedling (Fig. 12.1). The BREVIS RADIX (BRX) gene, a
positive regulator of auxin signaling and an antagonist of SHY2, is essential for the
meristem growth process (Mouchel et al. 2006; Scacchi et al. 2009). BRX is
thought to potentiate the activity of the ARF MONOPTEROS (MP), thereby
transiently boosting meristematic PIN expression and thus polar auxin transport
(Scacchi et al. 2010). High polar auxin transport promotes cell proliferation over
differentiation and thereby meristem growth. Meristematic SHY2 expression
depends on transcriptional feedback through combined BRX-ARF activity and
therefore also on the differential plasma membrane to nucleus transfer of BRX
(Scacchi et al. 2009), which is a function of increasing endocytosis in the develop-
ing protophloem toward the transition/elongation zone (Santuari et al. 2011). Thus,
cell proliferation only ceases once nuclear BRX activity increases in the transition/
elongation zone. Eventually, meristem growth is brought to a halt as cytokinin
activity in the transition/elongation zone boosts SHY2 expression independent of
BRX-ARF activity, thereby enabling SHY2 to take over the autoregulatory network
250
A. Rodriguez-Villalon and C.S. Hardtke

and locally dampen polar auxin transport to promote cell differentiation. Subse-
quently, these interactions between the different components result in a dynamic
equilibrium that spatially separates and synchronizes cell proliferation and
differentiation.
2.3
Homeostasis Feedback Loops Regulate Auxin
and Cytokinin Levels
Interestingly, auxin and cytokinin do not only interact at the level of signaling
components and gene expression, but also impinge on each other’s biosynthesis.
For instance, direct hormone measurements have shown that auxin rapidly
downregulates cytokinin biosynthesis (Nordstrom et al. 2004). This result is some-
what counterintuitive given that auxin appears to promote cytokinin biosynthesis
via speciﬁc activation of genes encoding the rate-limiting step in cytokinin biosyn-
thesis, ISOPENTENYL TRANSFERASE (IPT) 5 and IPT7 (Miyawaki et al. 2004;
Nordstrom et al. 2004). However, it could reﬂect the spatiotemporal ﬂuctuation in
the interactions of the two hormones, because it has been shown that cytokinin can
reciprocally regulate auxin biosynthesis, suggesting the existence of an active
homeostatic feedback loop. For example, in experiments combining inducible
cytokinin overproduction with stable isotope labeling, an elevation in cytokinin
levels led to a rapid increase in auxin biosynthesis rates (Jones et al. 2010).
Conversely, cytokinin reduction by induction of catabolic enzymes resulted in
lower levels of auxin biosynthesis. The feedbacks between both hormone pathways
require their intact signaling pathways. Thus, the speciﬁcity of this cross-regulation
is likely highly complex and plays out to different levels depending on the root
tissue (Jones et al. 2010). This complexity is underlined by interactions with
additional pathways. For instance, in early root meristem growth, promotion of
SHY2 expression by cytokinin is indirectly repressed through the gibberellin path-
way (see below). This is because high levels of gibberellin signaling in very young
meristems repress expression of ARR1, which is needed in combination with
ARR12 to fully induce SHY2 expression in response to cytokinin once gibberellin
activity goes down (Moubayidin et al. 2009). Finally, the interactions also involve
posttranslational regulation, since cytokinin can for instance promote the degrada-
tion of PIN proteins (Marhavy et al. 2011).
In summary, tight control and balance of the antagonistic activities of auxin and
cytokinin are particularly important during early phases of primary root growth as
well as lateral root organogenesis. A general theme emerging in all contexts is that
auxin signaling inhibits the activity of negative regulators of cytokinin signaling,
whereas cytokinin signaling in turn promotes the expression of inhibitors of auxin
signaling. The two hormones also reciprocally regulate each other’s biosynthesis
and cytokinin also directs auxin transport, with the generic effect that cytokinin
activity can establish zones of high auxin signaling.
12
Auxin and Its Henchmen: Hormonal Cross Talk in Root Growth and Development
251

3
Auxin and Brassinosteroid Cross talk
Another important hormone pathway in root development is the brassinosteroid
pathway, which has been shown to modulate auxin activity in various processes,
cooperatively in some cases and antagonistically in others (Hardtke et al. 2007).
The close relationship between auxin and brassinosteroid effects likely reﬂects
several levels of cross-regulation, which could occur through the regulation of
common target genes by auxin- and brassinosteroid-controlled transcription factors.
Moreover, brassinosteroid and auxin effects also converge at the level of hormone
transport and biosynthesis (Li et al. 2005; Mouchel et al. 2006). Compared with
auxin, the brassinosteroid signaling pathway is complex and represents a more
classical signaling paradigm. Active brassinosteroids, i.e., in Arabidopsis mainly
brassinolide and castasterone, are perceived at the cell surface by direct binding to
the extracellular domain of their leucine-rich repeat serine/threonine kinase recep-
tors, which triggers a signal transduction cascade that via several intermediates
ultimately results in dephosphorylation of the BRASSINAZOLE RESISTANT
1 (BZR1) and bri1-EMS-SUPPRESSOR 1 (BES1) transcription factors. This
event promotes their accumulation in the nucleus and their DNA-binding activity,
resulting in gene activation (Vert and Chory 2006). Although BES1 and BZR1 are
considered to be redundant transcriptional regulators, their respective mutant phe-
notypes suggest some level of sub-functionalization (Sun et al. 2010; Yu
et al. 2011).
3.1
The Role of Brassinosteroids in Root Development
Pharmacological, genetic, and transcriptomic evidence, for instance, the short-root
phenotype of brassinosteroid pathway mutants (Mouchel et al. 2004; Szekeres
et al. 1996; Gonzalez-Garcia et al. 2011), suggests an important role of
brassinosteroid activity in root growth. Growth stimulation by brassinosteroids
has been mainly related to cell elongation, in line with transcriptional and ChIP-
chip data for BZR1 and BES1, which suggest that their target genes are mainly
involved in cell growth and cell wall organization (Sun et al. 2010; Yu et al. 2011).
However, brassinosteroids are also essential to sustain root meristem activity
(Mouchel et al. 2006; Gonzalez-Garcia et al. 2011; Gujas et al. 2012), because
the brassinosteroid receptor mutants and the gain-of-function bes1-D mutant dis-
play reduced meristematic cell number and thus reduced root meristem size. Thus,
brassinosteroids are needed for cell proliferation in the root meristem, possibly
through controlling the cell cycle (Gonzalez-Garcia et al. 2011; Hacham et al. 2011;
Hu et al. 2000). Interestingly, cell cycle genes were identiﬁed as target genes of
BZR1/BES1, although their expression was neither affected in brassinosteroid
mutants nor by brassinosteroid treatment (Sun et al. 2010; Yu et al. 2011). It
appears possible however that in experiments monitoring expression at the organ
252
A. Rodriguez-Villalon and C.S. Hardtke

level this effect could be masked because it is very localized, and indeed recent data
suggest that in the root meristem, brassinosteroids do not generically drive cell
proliferation, but rather speciﬁcally promote the division of stem cell daughter cells
(Gujas et al. 2012).
3.2
Auxin–Brassinosteroid Interactions in Modulating Gene
Expression
Several transcriptomic studies suggest that auxin and brassinosteroids converge on
shared target genes, many of which are synergistically induced when auxin and
brassinosteroid are applied simultaneously (Goda et al. 2004; Nemhauser
et al. 2006; Mouchel et al. 2006; Vert et al. 2008; Chung et al. 2011). Moreover,
expression changes in response to one hormone require an intact biosynthetic and
signaling pathway of the other (Chung et al. 2011; Hardtke et al. 2007; Nakamura
et al. 2006; Nemhauser et al. 2006). The target genes typically react strongly to
auxin and weakly to brassinosteroid, which could reﬂect differences in the signal
transduction kinetics or indirect effects, such as a rate-limiting role of
brassinosteroids in auxin action (Mouchel et al. 2006). However, although no direct
interactions between ARFs and BES1/BZR1 have been demonstrated to date, a
recent study suggests that auxin and brassinosteroid response are mediated by a
combination of respective cis-regulatory elements (Walcher and Nemhauser 2012).
For example, a Hormone Up at Dawn (HUD)-type E-box in combination with a
nearby auxin-responsive element variant has been identiﬁed as a target for BES1
and MP, respectively. Moreover, their binding can be enhanced by treatment with
either auxin or brassinosteroids (Walcher and Nemhauser 2012; Chandler
et al. 2009).
It has also been suggested that brassinosteroids could promote polar auxin
transport (Bao et al. 2004; Li et al. 2005), although it remains unclear whether
this effect is direct and/or at the transcriptional or posttranslational level. The slow
kinetics suggests that at least in part it could be indirect, because brassinosteroid
can enhance physiological responses in auxin-saturated background (Nemhauser
et al. 2004) and because polar auxin transport is under feedback control through
auxin signaling. Consistent with the idea that brassinosteroid limits auxin action at
the signaling rather than the biosynthesis level (Mouchel et al. 2006; Nemhauser
et al. 2004), auxin biosynthesis does not change dramatically in response to
brassinosteroid treatment (Kim et al. 2007; Nakaya et al. 2002; Bao et al. 2004)
and genes coding for rate-limiting enzymes in the major developmentally regulated
auxin biosynthesis pathway are not among the BZR1/BES1 targets (Sun
et al. 2010). However, feedback of the auxin pathway on brassinosteroid homeo-
stasis has been reported. For instance, BRX as well as ARFs are likely involved in
promoting the expression of rate-limiting enzymes in the brassinosteroid biosyn-
thesis pathway (Yoshimitsu et al. 2011; Mouchel et al. 2006; Chung et al. 2011).
12
Auxin and Its Henchmen: Hormonal Cross Talk in Root Growth and Development
253

Thus, auxin could promote brassinosteroid biosynthesis to maintain brassinosteroid
levels that enable a saturated auxin response. Consistent with this idea, genes
encoding rate-limiting enzymes in brassinosteroid biosynthesis are auxin-inducible
in suboptimal auxin conditions (Yamamoto et al. 2007). In summary, the data
suggest that brassinosteroids limit auxin response and that feedback control by
the auxin pathway contributes to the homeostasis of brassinosteroid levels, which
might be the primary cause of reduced root growth of brassinosteroid pathway
mutants.
4
Auxin and Gibberellin Cross talk
Gibberellins are a family of diterpenoid plant hormones that regulate various
developmental processes throughout the plant life cycle, from seed germination
through leaf expansion, stem elongation, ﬂower induction, and transition from
skotomorphogenesis
to
photomorphogenesis
(Weiss
and
Ori
2007;
Teale
et al. 2008). Both auxin and gibberellins regulate cell elongation and differentiation
through mechanisms that, for a long time, were thought to be independent. How-
ever, evidence accumulated over the last years has revealed interaction of at least
two types: (1) auxin affects gibberellin biosynthesis and (2) auxin controls the
stability of downstream gibberellin signaling components, the DELLA factors,
thereby modulating gibberellin response (Fu and Harberd 2003; Ubeda-Tomas
et al. 2008; Desgagne-Penix and Sponsel 2008).
4.1
The Gibberellin Signaling Pathway
The DELLA proteins are the most extensively characterized downstream compo-
nents in the gibberellin signaling pathway. Five largely redundant but also context-
speciﬁc DELLA genes have been identiﬁed in Arabidopsis, including the prototyp-
ical REPRESSOR OF ga1-3 (RGA) (Peng et al. 1997, 1999; Silverstone et al. 1998).
Perception of gibberellin by its predominantly nuclear localized receptors (Grifﬁths
et al. 2007; Willige et al. 2007) triggers their conformational change and promotes
their interaction with the DELLA transcriptional co-repressors (Peng et al. 1997;
Grifﬁths et al. 2007). This in turn stabilizes interaction of DELLAs with a speciﬁc
SCF E3 ubiquitin ligase (Dill et al. 2004; McGinnis et al. 2003), thus resulting in
their poly-ubiquitination and degradation by the 26S proteasome (Dill et al. 2004;
Grifﬁths et al. 2007). Beyond this relatively simple gibberellin signaling cascade,
other studies have identiﬁed additional factors that affect gibberellin response
(Feng et al. 2008; de Lucas et al. 2008; Bai et al. 2012). For example, BZR1 can
interact
with
DELLA
proteins
as
well
as
with
the
PHYTOCHROME-
INTERACTING FACTOR 4 (PIF4) (Bai et al. 2012; Oh et al. 2012) to impinge
on a common transcriptome.
254
A. Rodriguez-Villalon and C.S. Hardtke

4.2
Role of Gibberellin in Root Development
Gibberellins have long been recognized for their pivotal role in shoot elongation;
however they also control root growth in conjunction with auxin. Various
gibberellin-deﬁcient mutants display a short root phenotype (Fu and Harberd
2003; Ubeda-Tomas et al. 2009), at least in part because of suspended root
meristem growth. A set of elegant experiments (in which expression of a dominant
negative, because stabilized and gibberellin-insensitive form of a DELLA protein
was targeted to select root tissues) has demonstrated that gibberellin is required in
the endodermis to reach and maintain full root meristem size after germination
(Ubeda-Tomas et al. 2008, 2009). However, since DELLA proteins are expressed
throughout the meristem, the biological signiﬁcance of this observation remains
unclear. In fact, local, cell layer-speciﬁc inhibition of other hormone signaling
pathways similarly affects cell proliferation in the root meristem in a non-cell-
autonomous manner, which could mean that asynchronous cellular growth pro-
cesses in one layer generically limit those processes in neighboring layers, for
instance, through mechanically triggered signals.
As pointed out above, in the early meristem gibberellin represses ARR1 expres-
sion, which is likely conferred by destabilization of the activator of ARR1 expres-
sion, RGA. Thus, the root meristem phenotype of gibberellin mutants could simply
reﬂect premature SHY2 hyperactivity. Consistently, gibberellin promotes root elon-
gation, through increasing meristematic cell proliferation as well as cell elongation,
but only in older seedlings, i.e., by prolonging meristem growth (Moubayidin
et al. 2010). This requires shoot-derived auxin, because gibberellin-induced root
elongation is inhibited when the shoot apex (the main auxin source at the seedling
stage) is removed and this effect can be reversed by exogenous auxin treatment
(Fu and Harberd 2003). Complicating this scenario, an intact auxin signaling
pathway is needed for gibberellin-induced RGA degradation (Fu and Harberd
2003). Thus, RGA seems to be a key point in the cross talk between auxin and
gibberellins. Moreover, a recent study established that gibberellins are required for
proper polar auxin transport in Arabidopsis, because gibberellin-deﬁcient mutants
display reduced PIN protein levels, implying that gibberellin feeds back on auxin
response by regulating PIN turnover (Willige et al. 2011). The solution to the ﬁrst
part of this interdependency is the observation that auxin might positively regulate
gibberellin biosynthesis (Ross et al. 2000; Wolbang and Ross 2001; Frigerio
et al. 2006). However, auxin treatment also induces the expression of genes that
encode gibberellin catabolic enzymes (Frigerio et al. 2006). Therefore, it remains
difﬁcult to ultimately decide the ﬁnal effect of auxin on gibberellin metabolism,
although the most parsimonious explanation would be that auxin is needed for RGA
destabilization in the meristem because it promotes local gibberellin biosynthesis.
12
Auxin and Its Henchmen: Hormonal Cross Talk in Root Growth and Development
255

5
Auxin and Ethylene Cross talk
The ﬁnal important hormone interactor for auxin is ethylene, a small volatile
compound that regulates many aspects of plant development in response to envi-
ronmental stimuli and has been identiﬁed as a general modulator of root develop-
ment (Ruzicka et al. 2007; Stepanova et al. 2005; Swarup et al. 2002). Indeed,
various effects of ethylene can be explained by cross talk with the auxin pathway at
different levels. Physiological and genetic characterization of ethylene mutants has
revealed a linear signaling pathway, which starts by ethylene binding to its recep-
tors, thereby suppressing their activity. In Arabidopsis, ﬁve ethylene receptors have
been described (Hua and Meyerowitz 1998) that may act cooperatively rather than
independently (Wang et al. 2003; Klee 2004; O’malley et al. 2005; Liu et al. 2010).
Their signaling affects the activity of a protein kinase (Huang et al. 2003; Clark
et al. 1998), which negatively regulates the pathway. Thus, in the absence of
ethylene, the receptors, such as ETHYLENE RESPONSE 1 (ETR1), keep the
downstream signaling components ETHYLENE-INSENSITIVE 2 (EIN2) and
EIN3 inactive (Chao et al. 1997; Alonso et al. 1999). Ethylene binding causes
inactivation of the receptor-kinase complex and accumulation of EIN3 and EIN3-
like (EIL) transcription factors in the nucleus (Guo and Ecker 2003). Their activity
in turn depends on simultaneous nucleus translocation of the EIN2 C-terminus,
after ethylene-triggered dephosphorylation and proteolytic cleavage of EIN2 in the
endoplasmic reticulum (Qiao et al. 2012; Ju et al. 2012; Wen et al. 2012). Together,
the EIN2 C-terminus, EIN3, and EIL1 are needed to activate the expression of
target genes such as ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR 1 (ERF1) (Solano
et al. 1998), thereby initiating a transcriptional cascade that results in the activation
or repression of hundreds of genes (Alonso et al. 1999; Olmedo et al. 2006).
5.1
The Role of Ethylene in Root Development
The best studied effect of the application of ethylene, or the rate-limiting ethylene
precursor 1-aminocyclopropane carboxylic acid (ACC), on primary root develop-
ment is the inhibition of root elongation (Markakis et al. 2012; Rahman et al. 2001;
Swarup et al. 2002). This mainly reﬂects the fact that ethylene reduces the expan-
sion rate of cells in the central elongation zone of the primary root (Swarup
et al. 2007; Rahman et al. 2007), which likely reﬂects an increase in auxin levels
to a degree that is eventually inhibitory for cell elongation (see below). A detailed
examination of auxin-inducible reporter genes has shown that ethylene treatment
increases auxin response throughout the tissues of the transition/elongation zone
(Ruzicka et al. 2007; Stepanova et al. 2007; Negi et al. 2008). While a functional
auxin signaling network is required for this response (Stepanova et al. 2007;
Swarup et al. 2007), it is not clear whether conversely a functional ethylene
response is needed for root growth inhibition by auxin application (Ruzicka
256
A. Rodriguez-Villalon and C.S. Hardtke

et al. 2007). Transcriptomic analyses of ACC-treated roots have shown that ethyl-
ene inhibition of cell elongation is concomitant with the induction of several auxin-
dependent genes (Markakis et al. 2012). However, studies employing mutants in the
auxin and ethylene receptors suggest that the primary transcriptional response of
the two hormones might be regulated through independent signaling pathways, and
secondary cross talk could occur through the expression of genes that are either
auxin- or ethylene-responsive (Lewis et al. 2011a, b).
5.2
Ethylene Enhances Auxin Biosynthesis and Vice Versa
to Modify Root System Architecture
The isolation of mutants in polar auxin transport components in screens for reduced
ethylene-mediated growth inhibition was a ﬁrst evidence that ethylene could
modulate auxin transport (Pickett et al. 1990; Luschnig et al. 1998). However,
whether ethylene effects on polar auxin transport are direct or indirect remains
unclear. Again, they could be obscured by the observed reciprocal interaction in the
regulation of auxin and ethylene biosynthesis. For instance, ACC synthase cata-
lyzes the rate-limiting step in the ethylene biosynthetic pathway (Wang et al. 2002),
and auxin stimulates the transcription of genes encoding this enzyme, thereby
enhancing ethylene production (Abel et al. 1995; Stepanova et al. 2007). Eight
out of the nine Arabidopsis ACC SYNTHASE genes are thus upregulated by auxin,
and consistently several of them contain canonical auxin response elements in their
promoter, suggesting that the effect is direct (Tsuchisaka and Theologis 2004).
Relatively more important however, ethylene was found to promote auxin biosyn-
thesis in Arabidopsis roots (Ruzicka et al. 2007; Swarup et al. 2007). Evidence for
ethylene-regulated auxin biosynthesis initially emerged from a screen for weak
ethylene-insensitive mutants, surprisingly leading to the identiﬁcation of several
enzymes involved in a developmentally regulated, rather short auxin biosynthesis
pathway (Stepanova et al. 2005, 2008). These include the alpha and beta subunits of
anthranilate synthase, which catalyzes the ﬁrst steps of tryptophan biosynthesis, and
tryptophan aminotransferases, which catalyze the intermediate step between tryp-
tophan and auxin (Stepanova et al. 2005, 2008). The latter, such as TRYPTOPHAN
AMINOTRANSFERASE OF ARRABIDOPSIS 1 (TAA1), maintain proper auxin
levels in the root. Loss-of-function mutations in TAA1 result in root-speciﬁc
ethylene insensitivity, which can be restored when roots are treated with low levels
of exogenous auxin. The ethylene defects of taa1 mutants are dramatically
enhanced in the taa1 taa1-related 2 (tar2) double mutants, which display a com-
plete lack of response to ACC in roots and low auxin levels, uncovering functional
redundancy
between
TAA1
and
TAR2
(Stepanova
et
al.
2008).
Since
ACC-dependent upregulation of auxin response is also strongly impaired in taa1
tar2 roots, ethylene appears to act mainly through regulating auxin biosynthesis in
Arabidopsis roots. Indeed, expression of TAA1 and TAR genes, as well as of the
12
Auxin and Its Henchmen: Hormonal Cross Talk in Root Growth and Development
257

YUCCA genes, which encode the second, rate-limiting step in this auxin biosyn-
thesis pathway, is ethylene-responsive (Stepanova et al. 2008; Liang et al. 2012; see
Chap. 2), suggesting that upregulation of auxin biosynthesis is the key point in
auxin–ethylene cross talk.
6
Concluding Remarks
In summary, multiple hormones impinge on the activity of auxin, as best charac-
terized and illustrated in root growth and development. While some of these
interactions might be rather indirect and difﬁcult to dissect, for instance, altered
polar auxin transport in response to another hormone, examples for direct interac-
tions exist. The latter include evidence for cross-regulation of hormone biosynthesis
pathways, but also for a few interactions at the signaling level, mostly converging at
the level of transcriptional response. What is lacking for most of these interactions
is their detailed characterization with respect to the spatiotemporal dimension and
posttranslational regulation. Many of the experiments that have uncovered cross
talk between auxin and other hormones one way or another are somewhat artiﬁcial,
e.g., they report marker responses after ﬂooding plants of various stages with
hormones. They do not necessarily tell us if and when the observed regulations
are biologically relevant during development. The example of root meristem
growth and the sequential interactions between the auxin, cytokinin, and gibberellin
pathways highlights this problematic. Thus, in the next step, future studies should
aim to verify and quantify the identiﬁed, possible regulatory interactions by live
imaging of markers at high spatiotemporal resolution.
References
Abel S, Nguyen MD, Chow W, Theologis A (1995) ACS4, a primary indoleacetic acid-responsive
gene encoding 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate synthase in Arabidopsis thaliana. Struc-
tural characterization, expression in Escherichia coli, and expression characteristics in
response to auxin [corrected]. J Biol Chem 270:19093–19099
Aloni R, Langhans M, Aloni E, Ullrich CI (2004) Role of cytokinin in the regulation of root
gravitropism. Planta 220:177–182
Alonso JM, Hirayama T, Roman G, Nourizadeh S, Ecker JR (1999) EIN2, a bifunctional
transducer of ethylene and stress responses in Arabidopsis. Science 284:2148–2152
Bai MY, Shang JX, Oh E, Fan M, Bai Y, Zentella R, Sun TP, Wang ZY (2012) Brassinosteroid,
gibberellin and phytochrome impinge on a common transcription module in Arabidopsis. Nat
Cell Biol 14:810–817
Bao F, Shen J, Brady SR, Muday GK, Asami T, Yang Z (2004) Brassinosteroids interact with
auxin to promote lateral root development in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 134:1624–1631
Benkova E, Hejatko J (2009) Hormone interactions at the root apical meristem. Plant Mol Biol
69:383–396
258
A. Rodriguez-Villalon and C.S. Hardtke

Bennett T, Scheres B (2010) Root development-two meristems for the price of one? Curr Top Dev
Biol 91:67–102
Bielach A, Podlesakova K, Marhavy P, Duclercq J, Cuesta C, Muller B, Grunewald W,
Tarkowski P, Benkova E (2012) Spatiotemporal regulation of lateral root organogenesis in
Arabidopsis by cytokinin. Plant Cell 24:3967–3981
Bishopp A, Benkova E, Helariutta Y (2011) Sending mixed messages: auxin-cytokinin crosstalk in
roots. Curr Opin Plant Biol 14:10–16
Blilou I, Xu J, Wildwater M, Willemsen V, Paponov I, Friml J, Heidstra R, Aida M, Palme K,
Scheres B (2005) The PIN auxin efﬂux facilitator network controls growth and patterning in
Arabidopsis roots. Nature 433:39–44
Casimiro I, Marchant A, Bhalerao RP, Beeckman T, Dhooge S, Swarup R, Graham N, Inze D,
Sandberg G, Casero PJ, Bennett M (2001) Auxin transport promotes Arabidopsis lateral root
initiation. Plant Cell 13:843–852
Chandler JW, Cole M, Flier A, Werr W (2009) BIM1, a bHLH protein involved in brassinosteroid
signalling, controls Arabidopsis embryonic patterning via interaction with DORNROSCHEN
and DORNROSCHEN-LIKE. Plant Mol Biol 69:57–68
Chao Q, Rothenberg M, Solano R, Roman G, Terzaghi W, Ecker JR (1997) Activation of the
ethylene gas response pathway in Arabidopsis by the nuclear protein ETHYLENE-
INSENSITIVE3 and related proteins. Cell 89:1133–1144
Chung Y, Maharjan PM, Lee O, Fujioka S, Jang S, Kim B, Takatsuto S, Tsujimoto M, Kim H,
Cho S, Park T, Cho H, Hwang I, Choe S (2011) Auxin stimulates DWARF4 expression and
brassinosteroid biosynthesis in Arabidopsis. Plant J 66:564–578
Clark KL, Larsen PB, Wang X, Chang C (1998) Association of the Arabidopsis CTR1 Raf-like
kinase with the ETR1 and ERS ethylene receptors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 95:5401–5406
De Dorlodot S, Forster B, Pages L, Price A, Tuberosa R, Draye X (2007) Root system architecture:
opportunities and constraints for genetic improvement of crops. Trends Plant Sci 12:474–481
De Lucas M, Daviere JM, Rodriguez-Falcon M, Pontin M, Iglesias-Pedraz JM, Lorrain S,
Fankhauser C, Blazquez MA, Titarenko E, Prat S (2008) A molecular framework for light
and gibberellin control of cell elongation. Nature 451:480–484
Dello Ioio R, Linhares FS, Scacchi E, Casamitjana-Martinez E, Heidstra R, Costantino P, Sabatini
S (2007) Cytokinins determine Arabidopsis root-meristem size by controlling cell differenti-
ation. Curr Biol 17:678–682
Dello Ioio R, Nakamura K, Moubayidin L, Perilli S, Taniguchi M, Morita MT, Aoyama T,
Costantino P, Sabatini S (2008) A genetic framework for the control of cell division and
differentiation in the root meristem. Science 322:1380–1384
Desgagne-Penix I, Sponsel VM (2008) Expression of gibberellin 20-oxidase1 (AtGA20ox1) in
Arabidopsis seedlings with altered auxin status is regulated at multiple levels. J Exp Bot
59:2057–2070
Dill A, Thomas SG, Hu J, Steber CM, Sun TP (2004) The Arabidopsis F-box protein SLEEPY1
targets gibberellin signaling repressors for gibberellin-induced degradation. Plant Cell
16:1392–1405
Dubrovsky JG, Sauer M, Napsucialy-Mendivil S, Ivanchenko MG, Friml J, Shishkova S,
Celenza J, Benkova E (2008) Auxin acts as a local morphogenetic trigger to specify lateral
root founder cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105:8790–8794
Feng S, Martinez C, Gusmaroli G, Wang Y, Zhou J, Wang F, Chen L, Yu L, Iglesias-Pedraz JM,
Kircher S, Schafer E, Fu X, Fan LM, Deng XW (2008) Coordinated regulation of Arabidopsis
thaliana development by light and gibberellins. Nature 451:475–479
Frigerio M, Alabadi D, Perez-Gomez J, Garcia-Carcel L, Phillips AL, Hedden P, Blazquez MA
(2006) Transcriptional regulation of gibberellin metabolism genes by auxin signaling in
Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 142:553–563
Fu X, Harberd NP (2003) Auxin promotes Arabidopsis root growth by modulating gibberellin
response. Nature 421:740–743
12
Auxin and Its Henchmen: Hormonal Cross Talk in Root Growth and Development
259

Goda H, Sawa S, Asami T, Fujioka S, Shimada Y, Yoshida S (2004) Comprehensive comparison
of auxin-regulated and brassinosteroid-regulated genes in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol
134:1555–1573
Gonzalez-Garcia MP, Vilarrasa-Blasi J, Zhiponova M, Divol F, Mora-Garcia S, Russinova E,
Cano-Delgado AI (2011) Brassinosteroids control meristem size by promoting cell cycle
progression in Arabidopsis roots. Development 138:849–859
Grifﬁths J, Murase K, Rieu I, Zentella R, Zhang ZL, Powers SJ, Gong F, Phillips AL, Hedden P,
Sun TP, Thomas SG (2007) Genetic characterization and functional analysis of the GID1
gibberellin receptors in Arabidopsis (vol. 18, pg 3399, 2006). Plant Cell 19:726
Gujas B, Alonso-Blanco C, Hardtke CS (2012) Natural Arabidopsis brx loss-of-function alleles
confer root adaptation to acidic soil. Curr Biol 22:1962–1968
Guo H, Ecker JR (2003) Plant responses to ethylene gas are mediated by SCF(EBF1/EBF2)-
dependent proteolysis of EIN3 transcription factor. Cell 115:667–677
Hacham Y, Holland N, Butterﬁeld C, Ubeda-Tomas S, Bennett MJ, Chory J, Savaldi-Goldstein S
(2011) Brassinosteroid perception in the epidermis controls root meristem size. Development
138:839–848
Hardtke CS, Berleth T (1998) The Arabidopsis gene MONOPTEROS encodes a transcription
factor mediating embryo axis formation and vascular development. EMBO J 17:1405–1411
Hardtke CS, Dorcey E, Osmont KS, Sibout R (2007) Phytohormone collaboration: zooming in on
auxin-brassinosteroid interactions. Trends Cell Biol 17:485–492
Higuchi M, Pischke MS, Mahonen AP, Miyawaki K, Hashimoto Y, Seki M, Kobayashi M,
Shinozaki K, Kato T, Tabata S, Helariutta Y, Sussman MR, Kakimoto T (2004) In planta
functions of the Arabidopsis cytokinin receptor family. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101:8821–
8826
Hochholdinger F, Zimmermann R (2008) Conserved and diverse mechanisms in root develop-
ment. Curr Opin Plant Biol 11:70–74
Hu Y, Bao F, Li J (2000) Promotive effect of brassinosteroids on cell division involves a distinct
CycD3-induction pathway in Arabidopsis. Plant J 24:693–701
Hua J, Meyerowitz EM (1998) Ethylene responses are negatively regulated by a receptor gene
family in Arabidopsis thaliana. Cell 94:261–271
Huang Y, Li H, Hutchison CE, Laskey J, Kieber JJ (2003) Biochemical and functional analysis of
CTR1, a protein kinase that negatively regulates ethylene signaling in Arabidopsis. Plant J
33:221–233
Hutchison CE, Li J, Argueso C, Gonzalez M, Lee E, Lewis MW, Maxwell BB, Perdue TD,
Schaller
GE,
Alonso
JM, Ecker
JR,
Kieber
JJ
(2006)
The
Arabidopsis
histidine
phosphotransfer proteins are redundant positive regulators of cytokinin signaling. Plant Cell
18:3073–3087
Hwang I, Sheen J (2001) Two-component circuitry in Arabidopsis cytokinin signal transduction.
Nature 413:383–389
Hwang UW, Friedrich M, Tautz D, Park CJ, Kim W (2001) Mitochondrial protein phylogeny joins
myriapods with chelicerates. Nature 413:154–157
Inoue T, Higuchi M, Hashimoto Y, Seki M, Kobayashi M, Kato T, Tabata S, Shinozaki K,
Kakimoto T (2001) Identiﬁcation of CRE1 as a cytokinin receptor from Arabidopsis. Nature
409:1060–1063
Jones B, Gunneras SA, Petersson SV, Tarkowski P, Graham N, May S, Dolezal K, Sandberg G,
Ljung K (2010) Cytokinin regulation of auxin synthesis in Arabidopsis involves a homeostatic
feedback loop regulated via auxin and cytokinin signal transduction. Plant Cell 22:2956–2969
Ju C, Yoon GM, Shemansky JM, Lin DY, Ying ZI, Chang J, Garrett WM, Kessenbrock M,
Groth G, Tucker ML, Cooper B, Kieber JJ, Chang C (2012) CTR1 phosphorylates the central
regulator EIN2 to control ethylene hormone signaling from the ER membrane to the nucleus in
Arabidopsis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109:19486–19491
260
A. Rodriguez-Villalon and C.S. Hardtke

Kim TW, Lee SM, Joo SH, Yun HS, Lee Y, Kaufman PB, Kirakosyan A, Kim SH, Nam KH, Lee
JS, Chang SC, Kim SK (2007) Elongation and gravitropic responses of Arabidopsis roots are
regulated by brassinolide and IAA. Plant Cell Environ 30:679–689
Klee HJ (2004) Ethylene signal transduction. Moving beyond Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 135:660–
667
Kuderova A, Urbankova I, Valkova M, Malbeck J, Brzobohaty B, Nemethova D, Hejatko J (2008)
Effects of conditional IPT-dependent cytokinin overproduction on root architecture of
Arabidopsis seedlings. Plant Cell Physiol 49:570–582
Laplaze L, Benkova E, Casimiro I, Maes L, Vanneste S, Swarup R, Weijers D, Calvo V, Parizot B,
Herrera-Rodriguez MB, Offringa R, Graham N, Doumas P, Friml J, Bogusz D, Beeckman T,
Bennett M (2007) Cytokinins act directly on lateral root founder cells to inhibit root initiation.
Plant Cell 19:3889–3900
Lewis DR, Negi S, Sukumar P, Muday GK (2011a) Ethylene inhibits lateral root development,
increases IAA transport and expression of PIN3 and PIN7 auxin efﬂux carriers. Development
138:3485–3495
Lewis DR, Ramirez MV, Miller ND, Vallabhaneni P, Ray WK, Helm RF, Winkel BS, Muday GK
(2011b) Auxin and ethylene induce ﬂavonol accumulation through distinct transcriptional
networks. Plant Physiol 156:144–164
Li L, Xu J, Xu ZH, Xue HW (2005) Brassinosteroids stimulate plant tropisms through modulation
of polar auxin transport in Brassica and Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 17:2738–2753
Li X, Mo X, Shou H, Wu P (2006) Cytokinin-mediated cell cycling arrest of pericycle founder
cells in lateral root initiation of Arabidopsis. Plant Cell Physiol 47:1112–1123
Liang X, Wang H, Mao L, Hu Y, Dong T, Zhang Y, Wang X, Bi Y (2012) Involvement of COP1 in
ethylene- and light-regulated hypocotyl elongation. Planta 236:1791–1802
Liu Q, Xu C, Wen CK (2010) Genetic and transformation studies reveal negative regulation of
ERS1 ethylene receptor signaling in Arabidopsis. BMC Plant Biol 10:60
Luschnig C, Gaxiola RA, GrisaﬁP, Fink GR (1998) EIR1, a root-speciﬁc protein involved in auxin
transport, is required for gravitropism in Arabidopsis thaliana. Genes Dev 12:2175–2187
Malamy JE, Benfey PN (1997) Organization and cell differentiation in lateral roots of Arabidopsis
thaliana. Development 124:33–44
Marhavy P, Bielach A, Abas L, Abuzeineh A, Duclercq J, Tanaka H, Parezova M, Petrasek J,
Friml J, Kleine-Vehn J, Benkova E (2011) Cytokinin modulates endocytic trafﬁcking of PIN1
auxin efﬂux carrier to control plant organogenesis. Dev Cell 21:796–804
Markakis MN, De Cnodder T, Lewandowski M, Simon D, Boron A, Balcerowicz D, Doubbo T,
Taconnat L, Renou JP, Hofte H, Verbelen JP, Vissenberg K (2012) Identiﬁcation of genes
involved in the ACC-mediated control of root cell elongation in Arabidopsis thaliana. BMC
Plant Biol 12:208
Mason MG, Mathews DE, Argyros DA, Maxwell BB, Kieber JJ, Alonso JM, Ecker JR, Schaller
GE (2005) Multiple type-B response regulators mediate cytokinin signal transduction in
Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 17:3007–3018
Mcginnis KM, Thomas SG, Soule JD, Strader LC, Zale JM, Sun TP, Steber CM (2003) The
Arabidopsis SLEEPY1 gene encodes a putative F-box subunit of an SCF E3 ubiquitin ligase.
Plant Cell 15:1120–1130
Miyawaki K, Matsumoto-Kitano M, Kakimoto T (2004) Expression of cytokinin biosynthetic
isopentenyltransferase genes in Arabidopsis: tissue speciﬁcity and regulation by auxin, cyto-
kinin, and nitrate. Plant J 37:128–138
Moubayidin L, Di Mambro R, Sabatini S (2009) Cytokinin-auxin crosstalk. Trends Plant Sci
14:557–562
Moubayidin L, Perilli S, Dello Ioio R, Di Mambro R, Costantino P, Sabatini S (2010) The rate of
cell differentiation controls the Arabidopsis root meristem growth phase. Curr Biol 20:1138–
1143
12
Auxin and Its Henchmen: Hormonal Cross Talk in Root Growth and Development
261

Mouchel CF, Briggs GC, Hardtke CS (2004) Natural genetic variation in Arabidopsis identiﬁes
BREVIS RADIX, a novel regulator of cell proliferation and elongation in the root. Genes Dev
18:700–714
Mouchel CF, Osmont KS, Hardtke CS (2006) BRX mediates feedback between brassinosteroid
levels and auxin signalling in root growth. Nature 443:458–461
Muller B, Sheen J (2008) Cytokinin and auxin interaction in root stem-cell speciﬁcation during
early embryogenesis. Nature 453:1094–1097
Nakamura A, Nakajima N, Goda H, Shimada Y, Hayashi K, Nozaki H, Asami T, Yoshida S,
Fujioka S (2006) Arabidopsis Aux/IAA genes are involved in brassinosteroid-mediated growth
responses in a manner dependent on organ type. Plant J 45:193–205
Nakaya M, Tsukaya H, Murakami N, Kato M (2002) Brassinosteroids control the proliferation of
leaf cells of Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell Physiol 43:239–244
Negi S, Ivanchenko MG, Muday GK (2008) Ethylene regulates lateral root formation and auxin
transport in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant J 55:175–187
Nemhauser JL, Mockler TC, Chory J (2004) Interdependency of brassinosteroid and auxin
signaling in Arabidopsis. PLoS Biol 2:E258
Nemhauser JL, Hong F, Chory J (2006) Different plant hormones regulate similar processes
through largely nonoverlapping transcriptional responses. Cell 126:467–475
Nishimura C, Ohashi Y, Sato S, Kato T, Tabata S, Ueguchi C (2004) Histidine kinase homologs
that act as cytokinin receptors possess overlapping functions in the regulation of shoot and root
growth in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 16:1365–1377
Nordstrom A, Tarkowski P, Tarkowska D, Norbaek R, Astot C, Dolezal K, Sandberg G (2004)
Auxin regulation of cytokinin biosynthesis in Arabidopsis thaliana: a factor of potential
importance for auxin-cytokinin-regulated development. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
101:8039–8044
O’malley RC, Rodriguez FI, Esch JJ, Binder BM, O’donnell P, Klee HJ, Bleecker AB (2005)
Ethylene-binding activity, gene expression levels, and receptor system output for ethylene
receptor family members from Arabidopsis and tomato. Plant J 41:651–659
Oh E, Zhu JY, Wang ZY (2012) Interaction between BZR1 and PIF4 integrates brassinosteroid
and environmental responses. Nat Cell Biol 14:802–809
Olmedo G, Guo H, Gregory BD, Nourizadeh SD, Aguilar-Henonin L, Li H, An F, Guzman P,
Ecker JR (2006) ETHYLENE-INSENSITIVE5 encodes a 50–>30 exoribonuclease required for
regulation of the EIN3-targeting F-box proteins EBF1/2. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103:13286–
13293
Osmont KS, Sibout R, Hardtke CS (2007) Hidden branches: developments in root system
architecture. Annu Rev Plant Biol 58:93–113
Pacheco-Villalobos D, Hardtke CS (2012) Natural genetic variation of root system architecture
from Arabidopsis to Brachypodium: towards adaptive value. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol
Sci 367:1552–1558
Peng J, Carol P, Richards DE, King KE, Cowling RJ, Murphy GP, Harberd NP (1997) The
Arabidopsis GAI gene deﬁnes a signaling pathway that negatively regulates gibberellin
responses. Genes Dev 11:3194–3205
Peng J, Richards DE, Hartley NM, Murphy GP, Devos KM, Flintham JE, Beales J, Fish LJ,
Worland AJ, Pelica F, Sudhakar D, Christou P, Snape JW, Gale MD, Harberd NP (1999)
‘Green revolution’ genes encode mutant gibberellin response modulators. Nature 400:256–261
Pickett FB, Wilson AK, Estelle M (1990) The aux1 mutation of Arabidopsis confers both auxin
and ethylene resistance. Plant Physiol 94:1462–1466
Qiao H, Shen Z, Huang SS, Schmitz RJ, Urich MA, Briggs SP, Ecker JR (2012) Processing and
subcellular trafﬁcking of ER-tethered EIN2 control response to ethylene gas. Science 338:390–
393
Rahman A, Amakawa T, Goto N, Tsurumi S (2001) Auxin is a positive regulator for ethylene-
mediated response in the growth of Arabidopsis roots. Plant Cell Physiol 42:301–307
262
A. Rodriguez-Villalon and C.S. Hardtke

Rahman A, Bannigan A, Sulaman W, Pechter P, Blancaﬂor EB, Baskin TI (2007) Auxin, actin and
growth of the Arabidopsis thaliana primary root. Plant J 50:514–528
Rieﬂer M, Novak O, Strnad M, Schmulling T (2006) Arabidopsis cytokinin receptor mutants
reveal functions in shoot growth, leaf senescence, seed size, germination, root development,
and cytokinin metabolism. Plant Cell 18:40–54
Ross JJ, O’neill DP, Smith JJ, Kerckhoffs LH, Elliott RC (2000) Evidence that auxin promotes
gibberellin A1 biosynthesis in pea. Plant J 21:547–552
Ruzicka K, Ljung K, Vanneste S, Podhorska R, Beeckman T, Friml J, Benkova E (2007) Ethylene
regulates root growth through effects on auxin biosynthesis and transport-dependent auxin
distribution. Plant Cell 19:2197–2212
Sakai H, Honma T, Aoyama T, Sato S, Kato T, Tabata S, Oka A (2001) ARR1, a transcription
factor for genes immediately responsive to cytokinins. Science 294:1519–1521
Sakakibara H (2006) Cytokinins: activity, biosynthesis, and translocation. Annu Rev Plant Biol
57:431–449
Santuari L, Scacchi E, Rodriguez-Villalon A, Salinas P, Dohmann EM, Brunoud G, Vernoux T,
Smith RS, Hardtke CS (2011) Positional information by differential endocytosis splits auxin
response to drive Arabidopsis root meristem growth. Curr Biol 21:1918–1923
Scacchi E, Osmont KS, Beuchat J, Salinas P, Navarrete-Gomez M, Trigueros M, Ferrandiz C,
Hardtke CS (2009) Dynamic, auxin-responsive plasma membrane-to-nucleus movement of
Arabidopsis BRX. Development 136:2059–2067
Scacchi E, Salinas P, Gujas B, Santuari L, Krogan N, Ragni L, Berleth T, Hardtke CS (2010)
Spatio-temporal sequence of cross-regulatory events in root meristem growth. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 107:22734–22739
Silverstone AL, Ciampaglio CN, Sun T (1998) The Arabidopsis RGA gene encodes a transcrip-
tional regulator repressing the gibberellin signal transduction pathway. Plant Cell 10:155–169
Smith S, De Smet I (2012) Root system architecture: insights from Arabidopsis and cereal crops.
Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 367:1441–1452
Solano R, Stepanova A, Chao Q, Ecker JR (1998) Nuclear events in ethylene signaling: a
transcriptional
cascade
mediated
by
ETHYLENE-INSENSITIVE3
and
ETHYLENE-
RESPONSE-FACTOR1. Genes Dev 12:3703–3714
Stepanova AN, Hoyt JM, Hamilton AA, Alonso JM (2005) A Link between ethylene and auxin
uncovered by the characterization of two root-speciﬁc ethylene-insensitive mutants in
Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 17:2230–2242
Stepanova AN, Yun J, Likhacheva AV, Alonso JM (2007) Multilevel interactions between
ethylene and auxin in Arabidopsis roots. Plant Cell 19:2169–2185
Stepanova AN, Robertson-Hoyt J, Yun J, Benavente LM, Xie DY, Dolezal K, Schlereth A,
Jurgens G, Alonso JM (2008) TAA1-mediated auxin biosynthesis is essential for hormone
crosstalk and plant development. Cell 133:177–191
Sun Y, Fan XY, Cao DM, Tang W, He K, Zhu JY, He JX, Bai MY, Zhu S, Oh E, Patil S, Kim TW,
Ji H, Wong WH, Rhee SY, Wang ZY (2010) Integration of brassinosteroid signal transduction
with the transcription network for plant growth regulation in Arabidopsis. Dev Cell 19:765–
777
Swarup R, Parry G, Graham N, Allen T, Bennett M (2002) Auxin cross-talk: integration of
signalling pathways to control plant development. Plant Mol Biol 49:411–426
Swarup R, Perry P, Hagenbeek D, Van Der Straeten D, Beemster GT, Sandberg G, Bhalerao R,
Ljung K, Bennett MJ (2007) Ethylene upregulates auxin biosynthesis in Arabidopsis seedlings
to enhance inhibition of root cell elongation. Plant Cell 19:2186–2196
Szekeres M, Nemeth K, Koncz-Kalman Z, Mathur J, Kauschmann A, Altmann T, Redei GP,
Nagy F, Schell J, Koncz C (1996) Brassinosteroids rescue the deﬁciency of CYP90, a cyto-
chrome P450, controlling cell elongation and de-etiolation in Arabidopsis. Cell 85:171–182
Teale WD, Ditengou FA, Dovzhenko AD, Li X, Molendijk AM, Ruperti B, Paponov I, Palme K
(2008) Auxin as a model for the integration of hormonal signal processing and transduction.
Mol Plant 1:229–237
12
Auxin and Its Henchmen: Hormonal Cross Talk in Root Growth and Development
263

To JP, Deruere J, Maxwell BB, Morris VF, Hutchison CE, Ferreira FJ, Schaller GE, Kieber JJ
(2007) Cytokinin regulates type-A Arabidopsis Response Regulator activity and protein
stability via two-component phosphorelay. Plant Cell 19:3901–3914
Tsuchisaka A, Theologis A (2004) Unique and overlapping expression patterns among the
Arabidopsis 1-amino-cyclopropane-1-carboxylate synthase gene family members. Plant
Physiol 136:2982–3000
Ubeda-Tomas S, Swarup R, Coates J, Swarup K, Laplaze L, Beemster GT, Hedden P, Bhalerao R,
Bennett MJ (2008) Root growth in Arabidopsis requires gibberellin/DELLA signalling in the
endodermis. Nat Cell Biol 10:625–628
Ubeda-Tomas S, Federici F, Casimiro I, Beemster GT, Bhalerao R, Swarup R, Doerner P,
Haseloff J, Bennett MJ (2009) Gibberellin signaling in the endodermis controls Arabidopsis
root meristem size. Curr Biol 19:1194–1199
Vert G, Chory J (2006) Downstream nuclear events in brassinosteroid signalling. Nature 441:96–
100
Vert G, Walcher CL, Chory J, Nemhauser JL (2008) Integration of auxin and brassinosteroid
pathways by Auxin Response Factor 2. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105:9829–9834
Walcher CL, Nemhauser JL (2012) Bipartite promoter element required for auxin response. Plant
Physiol 158:273–282
Wang KL, Li H, Ecker JR (2002) Ethylene biosynthesis and signaling networks. Plant Cell 14
(Suppl):S131–S151
Wang W, Hall AE, O’malley R, Bleecker AB (2003) Canonical histidine kinase activity of the
transmitter domain of the ETR1 ethylene receptor from Arabidopsis is not required for signal
transmission. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100:352–357
Weiss D, Ori N (2007) Mechanisms of cross talk between gibberellin and other hormones. Plant
Physiol 144:1240–1246
Wen X, Zhang C, Ji Y, Zhao Q, He W, An F, Jiang L, Guo H (2012) Activation of ethylene
signaling is mediated by nuclear translocation of the cleaved EIN2 carboxyl terminus. Cell Res
22:1613–1616
Werner T, Motyka V, Laucou V, Smets R, Van Onckelen H, Schmulling T (2003) Cytokinin-
deﬁcient transgenic Arabidopsis plants show multiple developmental alterations indicating
opposite functions of cytokinins in the regulation of shoot and root meristem activity. Plant
Cell 15:2532–2550
Willige BC, Ghosh S, Nill C, Zourelidou M, Dohmann EM, Maier A, Schwechheimer C (2007)
The DELLA domain of GA INSENSITIVE mediates the interaction with the GA INSENSI-
TIVE DWARF1A gibberellin receptor of Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 19:1209–1220
Willige BC, Isono E, Richter R, Zourelidou M, Schwechheimer C (2011) Gibberellin regulates
PIN-FORMED abundance and is required for auxin transport-dependent growth and develop-
ment in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell 23:2184–2195
Wolbang CM, Ross JJ (2001) Auxin promotes gibberellin biosynthesis in decapitated tobacco
plants. Planta 214:153–157
Yamada H, Suzuki T, Terada K, Takei K, Ishikawa K, Miwa K, Yamashino T, Mizuno T (2001)
The Arabidopsis AHK4 histidine kinase is a cytokinin-binding receptor that transduces cyto-
kinin signals across the membrane. Plant Cell Physiol 42:1017–1023
Yamamoto R, Fujioka S, Iwamoto K, Demura T, Takatsuto S, Yoshida S, Fukuda H (2007)
Co-regulation of brassinosteroid biosynthesis-related genes during xylem cell differentiation.
Plant Cell Physiol 48:74–83
Yoshimitsu Y, Tanaka K, Fukuda W, Asami T, Yoshida S, Hayashi K, Kamiya Y, Jikumaru Y,
Shigeta T, Nakamura Y, Matsuo T, Okamoto S (2011) Transcription of DWARF4 plays a
crucial role in auxin-regulated root elongation in addition to brassinosteroid homeostasis in
Arabidopsis thaliana. PLoS One 6:e23851
Yu X, Li L, Zola J, Aluru M, Ye H, Foudree A, Guo H, Anderson S, Aluru S, Liu P, Rodermel S,
Yin Y (2011) A brassinosteroid transcriptional network revealed by genome-wide identiﬁca-
tion of BESI target genes in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant J 65:634–646
264
A. Rodriguez-Villalon and C.S. Hardtke

Chapter 13
Evolutionary Aspects of Auxin Signalling
Priya Ramakrishna and Ive De Smet
Abstract Auxin is one of the ﬁrst phytohormones to be discovered in plants. It
plays a key role in plant growth and development and in the evolution of land
plants. The presence of auxin has been reported from microalgae to higher seed
plants. However, tracing the origin of auxin response and of the associated proteins
has proven to be more difﬁcult. This chapter will summarize recent molecular
developments on the origin of auxin metabolism, transport and signalling in green,
red and brown algae, mosses and spikemosses.
1
Introduction
Auxin, the ﬁrst phytohormone to be discovered in plants, is a key player in the
regulation of plant growth and development and in response to environmental
changes. The term “auxin” is derived from the Greek word “auxein”, which
means “to grow” or “to increase”. Auxin is important for various developmental
processes, including gamete speciﬁcation in the female gametophyte, local pattern-
ing during embryogenesis and, post-embryonically, for the iterative production of
tissues and organs and in the development of vascular strands (Reinhardt
et al. 2003; Benkova et al. 2003; Heisler et al. 2005; Swarup et al. 2008; Dubrovsky
P. Ramakrishna
Division of Plant and Crop Sciences, School of Biosciences, University of Nottingham, Sutton
Bonington Campus, Loughborough LE12 5RD, UK
I. De Smet (*)
Division of Plant and Crop Sciences, School of Biosciences, University of Nottingham, Sutton
Bonington Campus, Loughborough LE12 5RD, UK
Centre for Plant Integrative Biology, University of Nottingham, Nottingham LE12 5RD, UK
e-mail: Ive.De_Smet@nottingham.ac.uk
E. Zazˇı´malova´ et al. (eds.), Auxin and Its Role in Plant Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-7091-1526-8_13, © Springer-Verlag Wien 2014
265

et al. 2008; Pagnussat et al. 2009; Pe´ret et al. 2009; De Smet et al. 2010; Bennett and
Scheres 2010; Peris et al. 2010; Ha et al. 2010; Scarpella and Helariutta 2010).
Auxin acts by moving over long distances (Petra´sˇek and Friml 2009), from shoot to
root, inﬂuencing growth and development along its transport path (Thimann and
Skoog 1933; Marchant et al. 2002; Fu and Harberd 2003). However, the speciﬁc
expression patterns of some auxin biosynthesis genes suggest that localized auxin
biosynthesis may also have a role in plant development (Tao et al. 2008; Cheng
et al. 2006; Stepanova et al. 2005; Stepanova 2008; Ikeda et al. 2009; Pinon
et al. 2013).
Indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) is the most common auxin involved in many of the
physiological processes in plants and is broadly found from bacteria to seed plants,
including, algae, fungi and even animals (Arteca 1995; De Smet et al. 2011; Cooke
et al. 2002; Gruen 1959; Spaepen et al. 2007; Ichimura and Yamaki 1975). IAA was
discovered in the ﬁrst half of the twentieth century (Went and Thimann 1937; Abel
and Theologis 2010), though the concept of plant hormones and their role in plant
development had been around since the late 1880s (Went and Thimann 1937). IAA
is a very dynamic molecule, which can move from the place of synthesis to the
regions where it will exert its function. This regulated polar auxin transport (PAT)
within plant tissues appears to be unique to IAA, as it has not been detected for any
other signalling molecule (Zazˇı´malova´ et al. 2007; Benjamins and Scheres 2008;
Petra´sˇek and Friml 2009; Boot et al. 2012; Went and Thimann 1937). In addition to
IAA, plants synthesize other compounds referred to as “endogenous auxins”,
including indole-3-butyric acid (IBA) (Zimmerman and
Wilcoxon 1935),
phenylacetic acid (PAA) (Koepﬂi et al. 1938) and 4-chloroindole-3-acetic acid
(4-Cl-IAA) (Porter and Thimann 1965). However, their roles and mechanisms of
action have not been entirely determined (Simon and Petra´sˇek 2011).
The plant hormone auxin is possibly one of the most extensively studied
molecules in plants as it impacts on nearly every aspect of a plant’s life cycle.
However, very little is known about the evolutionary origin of its signalling
activity. This chapter will summarize recent developments on the origin of auxin
metabolism, transport and signalling in green, red and brown algae, mosses and
spikemosses.
2
A Brief History of Auxin Biology
Auxin was one of the ﬁrst plant hormones to be discovered. Charles Darwin, one of
the ﬁrst scientists to perform plant hormone research, described the effects of light
on movement of canary grass (Phalaris canariensis) coleoptiles (Darwin 1880).
Darwin’s experiments expanded upon Theophil Ciesielski’s research examining
roots bending towards gravity (Ciesielski 1871). In one of his experiments, Darwin
covered the tip of the coleoptile with aluminium foil and observed that no bending
would occur towards the unidirectional light. However, when the tip of the cole-
optile was left uncovered, but the portion just below the tip was covered, exposure
to unidirectional light resulted in curvature towards the light. Darwin’s experiment
266
P. Ramakrishna and I. De Smet

suggested that the tip of the coleoptile was the tissue responsible for perceiving the
light and producing some signal which was transported to the lower part of the
coleoptile where the physiological response of bending occurred. He then cut off
the tip of the coleoptile and exposed the rest to unidirectional light to observe if
curvature occurred. Curvature did not occur, conﬁrming the results of his ﬁrst
experiment (Darwin 1880). Building on Darwin’s observations, Peter Boysen-
Jensen showed that the phototropic stimulus is transmitted from an excised tip
across a gelatin barrier into the lower part of an Avena coleoptile where it still elicits
the curvature response (Boysen Jensen and Nielsen 1925). Arpad Paa´l further
developed this line of experimentation and concluded that the tip must produce
and release a chemical substance that travels toward the coleoptile base to promote
growth and that unilateral light causes an asymmetric transmission of this sub-
stance. This later became a cornerstone of the Cholodny–Went hypothesis (Went
and Thimann 1937). For a direct demonstration of the postulated growth-promoting
substance, Frits Went adapted Stark’s agar block method (Stark 1921) in which he
placed excised Avena coleoptile tips on agar blocks that received the growth-
promoting substance by diffusion and could then serve as an artiﬁcial source for
inducing curvature of decapitated coleoptiles (Went 1927). Between 1926 and
1928, Went made the deﬁnitive discovery of the “hormone”, which was later in
1934–1935 called “auxin”. Around a decade later, IAA was discovered in Zea mays
(Haagen-Smit et al. 1946), and it soon became clear that IAA is the principal auxin
in all plant species (Woodward and Bartel 2005; Davies 2010). Soon after the
chemical identiﬁcation of IAA, a number of structurally related compounds with
auxin activity were reported which led to systematic study of structural activity
relationships. The large body of experimental data led to predictions of structural
requirements for auxin activity and spatial features of a hypothetical receptor site
(Thimann 1969).
Recent evidence has provided further support for the Cholodny–Went hypoth-
esis and its applicability to plant tropisms and development (see Chap. 16; Orbovik
1993; Litwack 2005). Several experiments that establish the plant signalling mol-
ecule auxin as a key player in organogenesis and vascular tissue formation (Rein-
hardt 2005), and the unique property of auxin being polarly transported from cell to
cell through whole tissues, led to the formulation of the “canalization hypothesis”.
It proposes a feedback effect of the phytohormone auxin on tissues based on a
feedback effect that auxin exerts on the polarity of its transport at the single cell
level (Sauer et al. 2006). However, the critical requirement for these models of an
auxin ﬂux sensor was not addressed (Sauer et al. 2006) and aspects like the
signalling mechanisms responsible for accumulation of auxin on, for example, the
shaded side of the stem remain poorly deﬁned (Christie and Murphy 2013).
New biologically plausible mathematical models of auxin transport during shoot
development have been proposed (see Chap. 15; de Reuille et al. 2006; Heisler and
Jo¨nsson 2006; Jonsson et al. 2006; Smith et al. 2006), each of them being able to
reproduce some aspects of phyllotaxis in simulations. Other auxin-related mathe-
matical models were also proposed for plant mechanics (Mjolsness 2006) and for
the interaction between mechanics and biochemistry (Shipman and Newell 2005;
13
Evolutionary Aspects of Auxin Signalling
267

Newell et al. 2008). The idea of canalization without ﬂux sensors was derived from
the model of phyllotaxis (Jonsson et al. 2006) and a travelling-wave hypothesis for
the formation of polar auxin transport channels was formulated (Merks et al. 2007).
It was assumed that auxin is transported actively using auxin transporter proteins,
and possibly passively, at a very low rate, by leaking away from auxin maxima. The
model neglects apoplastic (intercellular) compartments, so auxin moves directly
from one cell into the next, and the effect of this has not fully been studied (Merks
et al. 2007). A model proposed by Wabnik et al. (2011) integrates feedback circuits
utilizing the conserved nuclear auxin signalling for the regulation of PIN transcrip-
tion and a hypothetical endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-based signalling for the regu-
lation of PIN-dependent transport activity at the ER. Hosˇek et al. (2012) used a
single-cell-based systems and their proposed mathematical model of 2,4-D trans-
port at a single-cell level successfully predicts the course of 2,4-D accumulation
and conﬁrms the consistency of the current concept of cellular auxin transport.
Feller et al. (2013) studied equilibrium conﬁgurations of auxin and have come up
with a model to explain the pattern formation in auxin ﬂux. Recently, multiscale
modelling of auxin transport has been carried out for the plant-root elongation zone
(Band and King 2012) and with respect to protoxylem and protophloem of
Arabidopsis thaliana root tips (Novoselova et al. 2013).
Over the years, various components of auxin biosynthesis (see Chaps. 2 and 3),
transport (see Chaps. 4 and 5) and signalling (see Chap. 6) have been identiﬁed
(Dharmasiri et al. 2005; Kepinski and Leyser 2005; Zazˇı´malova´ et al. 2007; Zhao
2010; Normanly 2010; Leyser 2011). One of the most ground-breaking discoveries
was the role of TRANSPORT INHIBITOR RESPONSE 1 (TIR1)-AUXIN SIG-
NALING F-BOX PROTEINs (AFBs) and their mode of action (Dharmasiri
et al. 2005; Kepinski and Leyser 2005; Tan et al. 2007). In Arabidopsis, TIR1
and its closest paralogues AFB1 to AFB5 belong to the C3 subfamily of leucine-
rich-repeat-containing F-box proteins (Gagne et al. 2002; Napier 2005). Auxin is
sensed by a co-receptor complex consisting of a TIR1/AFB protein and an AUXIN/
INDOLE-3-ACETIC ACID (AUX/IAA) protein, collectively mediating auxin-
regulated responses throughout plant growth and development (Dharmasiri
et al. 2005; Calderon Villalobos et al. 2012). Auxin promotes SKP1/CULLIN/F-
BOX PROTEINTIR1–substrate binding by acting as a “molecular glue” rather than
an allosteric switch (Tan et al. 2007).
3
Basics of Auxin Biology
3.1
Auxin Metabolism
Auxin metabolism involves the processes of biosynthesis, conjugation and degra-
dation (see Chap. 2). Auxin biosynthesis in plants is extremely complex and
multiple pathways contribute to de novo auxin production (Zhao 2010). Five
268
P. Ramakrishna and I. De Smet

pathways of auxin (IAA) biosynthesis have been proposed so far (Ljung 2013): one
tryptophan (Trp) independent and four Trp dependent. Due to the unknown iden-
tities of some key enzymes and extensive functional redundancy, the importance of
each of these pathways in auxin biosynthesis has been difﬁcult to assess. In the
indole-3-pyruvic acid (IPyA) pathway, the TRYPTOPHAN AMINOTRANSFER-
ASE OF ARABIDOPSIS 1 (TAA1) and its close homologues TRYPTOPHAN
AMINOTRANSFERASE-RELATED 1 (TAR1) and TAR2 convert L-Trp to
IPyA, and the YUCCA (YUC) enzymes subsequently synthesize IAA from IPyA
(Zhao 2012). The GH3 enzyme is responsible for the homeostatic feedback regu-
latory loop that controls the intracellular IAA level (Park et al. 2007). The indole-3-
acetamide (IAM) pathway is well studied in bacteria and is present in many plant
species, including Arabidopsis, maize, rice and tobacco (Sugawara et al. 2009;
Nova´k et al. 2012). The tryptamine (TRA) pathway was originally thought to be an
intermediate in the YUCCA pathway, but this has recently been questioned
(Tivendale et al. 2010; Mano and Nemoto 2012). It is possible that TRA could
function both as a precursor for IAA and in indole alkaloid and serotonin biosyn-
thesis in different plant species (Mano and Nemoto 2012). More details on other
pathways can be found in recent reviews on this topic (Lehmann et al. 2010; Zhao
2012; Mano and Nemoto 2012; Ljung 2013).
De novo synthesis of IAA is one important homeostatic mechanism operating in
plant cells, but IAA levels can also be attenuated by conjugation (mainly to amino
acids and sugars) and by degradation (Ruiz Rosquete et al. 2012). Proteins involved
in IAA conjugation and IAA conjugate hydrolysis have been identiﬁed (Woodward
and Bartel 2005; Ludwig-Mueller 2011). The metabolites 2-oxoindole-3-acetic
acid (oxIAA) and oxIAA-glucose (oxIAA-Glc) are the major degradation products
of IAA (O¨ stin et al. 1998; Kai et al. 2007; Nova´k et al. 2012), but the genes involved
in IAA catabolism have not been identiﬁed so far (Ljung 2013).
3.2
Auxin Transport
Auxin is a weak organic acid that does not move from cell to cell just by plain
diffusion alone and requires speciﬁc transporters (Zazˇı´malova´ et al. 2010; Ruiz
Rosquete et al. 2012). Passive auxin uptake is aided by the amino acid permease-
like proteins (inﬂux carriers) of the AUXIN RESISTANT 1 (AUX1)-LIKE AUX1
(LAX) family (Bennett et al. 1996; Yang et al. 2006; Swarup et al. 2008; Jones
et al. 2009; Ugartechea-Chirino et al. 2009; Pe´ret et al. 2012). The Arabidopsis
thaliana genome encodes four types of these proteins in total (AUX1 and LAX1-3).
They have been shown to be involved in almost any auxin-dependent process for
example, lateral root formation, gravitropism, embryonic development or phyllo-
taxis (Bennett et al. 1996; Swarup et al. 2008; Bainbridge et al. 2008; Ugartechea-
Chirino et al. 2009). AUX1, being asymmetrically localized to the plasma mem-
brane of root protophloem cells, promotes the acropetal, post-phloem movement of
auxin to the root apex (Bennett et al. 1996; Swarup et al. 2001).
13
Evolutionary Aspects of Auxin Signalling
269

The PIN-FORMED (PIN) proteins are secondary transporters acting in the efﬂux
of auxin from cells. The PIN family proteins can be classiﬁed into two groups:
(1) the PIN1-type proteins (PIN1, 2, 3, 4, and 7) that are plasma membrane
(PM) localized and function as auxin transporters at the PM for intercellular
transport (long PINs), and (2) the PIN5-type proteins (PIN5, 6, and 8) that localize
to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and carry out intracellular regulation of auxin
homeostasis (short PINs) (Petrasek et al. 2006; Mravec et al. 2009). Arabidopsis has
eight annotated PIN genes, which have been functionally characterized: PIN1
(Ga¨lweiler et al. 1998), PIN2 (Ludwig-Mueller 2011; Muller et al. 1998; Luschnig
et al. 1998; Chen et al. 1998; Utsuno et al. 1998), PIN3 (Friml et al. 2002b), PIN4
(Friml et al. 2002a), PIN5 (Mravec et al. 2009), PIN6 (Krecek et al. 2009; Sawchuk
et al. 2013), PIN7 (Friml et al. 2003) and PIN8 (Ding et al. 2012; Bosco et al. 2012).
PINs play an important role in regulating asymmetric auxin distribution in multiple
developmental processes, including embryogenesis, organogenesis, tissue differen-
tiation and tropic responses (Vieten et al. 2007; Petra´sˇek and Friml 2009;
Grunewald and Friml 2010).
The ATP-BINDING CASSETTE PROTEIN SUB-FAMILY B (ABCB)–
MULTI-DRUG RESISTANCE (MDR)–P-GLYCOPROTEIN (PGP) transporters
also facilitate the transport of IAA to and from the cell (Terasaka et al. 2005;
Blakeslee et al. 2007; Mravec et al. 2008; Cho and Cho 2012; Kubesˇ et al. 2012).
They are a sub-family of the ancient ABC family which is shown to have the most
conserved sequences coding for their nucleotide-binding domains in living organ-
isms (Isenbarger et al. 2008). At least ﬁve members of this sub-family have been
reported to mediate cellular transport of auxin or auxin derivatives (Cho and Cho
2012). For example, ABCB19 was shown to work in coordination with PIN1 in
speciﬁc PM domains, thereby at least taking part in directional auxin transport
(Titapiwatanakun et al. 2009) and ABCB21 was found to function as a facultative
importer/exporter controlling auxin concentrations in plant cells (Kamimoto
et al. 2012).
PIN-LIKES (PILS) are a putative auxin carrier family of seven members in
Arabidopsis (Barbez et al. 2012). These proteins are named PIN-LIKES since their
predicted protein topology is highly similar to the topology of the PIN proteins. In
addition, PILS contain the so-called Interpro auxin carrier domain, an in silico-
deﬁned domain to predict auxin transport function. These putative auxin carriers
localize to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and contribute to cellular auxin homeo-
stasis. PILS proteins regulate intracellular auxin accumulation, the rate of auxin
conjugation and, subsequently, affect nuclear auxin signalling. Consequently, these
proteins are important for auxin-regulated developmental such as de novo organ
formation and growth regulation (Barbez et al. 2012).
270
P. Ramakrishna and I. De Smet

3.3
Auxin Signalling
Auxin signalling (see Chap. 6) is central to the growth and development of higher
plants (Mockaitis and Estelle 2008). Intracellular auxin is perceived by the
TIR1AFB1–3 receptors (Dharmasiri et al. 2005; Kepinski and Leyser 2005), or
more correctly co-receptors, because for high afﬁnity binding, a complex with
proteins of the AUX/IAA family is needed (Calderon-Villalobos et al. 2010).
TIR1 is an integral component of the SKP1/CULLIN/F-BOX PROTEINTIR1 com-
plex that mediates the auxin-dependent ubiquitination of AUXIN/INDOLE-3-
ACETIC ACID (AUX/IAA) repressor proteins and thereby destines them for 26S
proteasome-dependent degradation (Maraschin et al. 2009). The AUX/IAA family
of proteins plays a central role in the auxin signal transduction that regulates auxin-
responsive gene expression. AUX/IAAs at low auxin concentrations together with
co-repressor proteins, such as TOPLESS (Long et al. 2006; Szemenyei et al. 2008),
form dimers with AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR (ARF) transcription factors,
thereby blocking the activity of at least the activating ARFs. When freed from the
AUX/IAAs, these ARFs regulate the expression of auxin-responsive genes and
control many aspects of plant growth and development (Lau et al. 2008; Mockaitis
and Estelle 2008).
Regulation of gene expression by the SCFTIR1/AFB pathway does not account for
early auxin responses, which do not necessarily require primary modiﬁcations of
gene expression (Tromas et al. 2010). The potential receptor AUXIN-BINDING
PROTEIN 1 (ABP1) is involved in early responses at the plasma membrane with
the regulation of rapid cytosol-based signalling mechanisms. ABP1 contains a
KDEL-type endoplasmic reticulum (ER) retention sequence at the C-terminus,
which suggests that the ABP1 protein would be predominantly localized in the
ER (Jones and Herman 1993). ABP1 can sense the transported auxin concentration
in the apoplast and regulate PIN activity and is also involved in other wide variety
of auxin-dependent responses, including regulation of gene expression, cell divi-
sion and cell expansion (Braun et al. 2008; Robert et al. 2010; Chen et al. 2012).
Finally, INDOLE-3-BUTYRIC ACID RESPONSE5 (IBR5) is a phosphatase
protein that acts as a positive regulator of auxin responses, including auxin-
inducible transcription, without
affecting
TIR1-mediated
destabilisation of
AUX/IAAs. IBR5 acts downstream of auxin recognition by the SCFTIR1/AFB-
AUX/IAA complexes (Monroe-Augustus et al. 2003; Strader et al. 2008).
4
Auxin Biology Throughout Evolution
4.1
A Few Basics of Algae and Land Plant Evolution
Land plants (Embryophytes) are believed to have evolved from freshwater
multicellular algae and are possibly related to the existing Charophyte groups
13
Evolutionary Aspects of Auxin Signalling
271

Charales or Coleochaetales. Embryophytes and Charophytes collectively form a
monophyletic group, the Streptophytes, which is sister to the other green algae,
i.e. the Chlorophytes (Karol et al. 2001; Lewis and McCourt 2004; Becker and
Marin 2009; Pires and Dolan 2012; Kenrick et al. 2012). The Streptophytes
themselves likely split from Chlorophyta (all other green algae) in between
725 and 1,200 Mya (Becker and Marin 2009). Brown algae are a group of (photo-
synthetic) organisms or “plant systems” belonging to the Heterokonts (Van den
Hoek et al. 1996), an extremely diverse kingdom. Brown algae are among the
eukaryotes that acquired complex multicellularity (Bogaert et al. 2013). They share
a common ancestry with land plants well over 1,500 Mya (Yoon et al. 2004).
The two monophyletic lineages, the Chlorophyta and the Streptophyta comprise
a clade Viridiplantae (Latin for “green plants”) (Fig. 13.1) (Simon et al. 2006).
Many important cellular structures (phragmoplast, plasmodesmata, hexameric cel-
lulose synthase, sporopollenin) and physiological characteristics (photorespiration,
phytochrome system) originated within the Streptophyta (Becker and Marin 2009).
Zygnematales, the conjugating algae, have been identiﬁed as the closest relatives of
land plants (Turmel 2006; Finet et al. 2010). The transition of Streptophytes to
terrestrial environments was allied with the evolution of the key features that deﬁne
land plants, for instance a multicellular sporophyte, retention of the zygote and
embryo within the female gametophyte, and apical cells with three cutting faces
that allow the generation of three-dimensional parenchymatous tissues (Graham
et al. 2000; Niklas and Kutschera 2009; Pires and Dolan 2012).
The ﬁrst proto-land plants, represented by the sporophytes of Cooksonia and
similar forms, appear on older Mid-Late Silurian strata, around 425 Mya. Since
then, Bryophyta, Pteridophyta and Spermatophyta have emerged (Wodniok
et al. 2011). The Bryophytes (mosses, hornworts and liverworts) represent the
most basal lineage of land plants. They supposedly separated about 400 Mya,
only 50 Mya after the actual separation of land plants themselves (Sanderson
et al. 2004; Becker and Marin 2009). They differ a great deal from the rest of the
group, as seen from the domination of the gametophyte in their life cycle and the
absence of vascular tissues, genuine roots, stalks and leaves. Since the available
fossils suggest that the ﬁrst land plants were moss-like organisms (Rensing
et al. 2008), they are an excellent model to uncover the aspects of the transition
to land. This more “recent” evolution of land plants appears to mainly utilize
expansion of genes and their differential expression rather than sequence variations.
Horizontal gene transfer is extremely rare, except for mitochondrial genes (Becker
and Marin 2009). Plants have been challenged to coordinate the patterning of their
multicellular body plans during embryogenesis and for postembryonic develop-
ment. Genes involved in cell-to-cell communication, cell adhesion and cell differ-
entiation
had
to
evolve
predating
or
accompanying
the
emergence
of
multicellularity (Ruiz-Trillo et al. 2007).
Selaginellaceae (belonging to the Lycopsida class) have their origins dating to
the late Silurian/early Devonian (Banks 2009) and are heterosporous (producing
megaspores and microspores). Homospory is a character known to be shared by the
earliest vascular plants and hence heterospory is thought to have evolved multiple
272
P. Ramakrishna and I. De Smet

times in different vascular plant lineages (including the lycophytes) and this is
considered a key innovation in land plant evolution (Bateman and DiMichele
1994). The spikemoss Selaginella moellendorfﬁi is an extant member of the
lycopsid lineage, which diverged from the Euphyllophyta (ferns and seed plants)
ca. 400 Mya (Banks 2009).
4.2
Where Can We Find Auxin?
Auxin is ubiquitous in heterotrophic and photoautotrophic organisms (Evans and
Trewavas 1991). Auxin has been shown to be present in several kingdoms and in a
wide range of organisms (Fig. 13.1), ranging from bacteria, some plant parasitic
nematodes to several single-celled and multicellular green, red and brown algae,
bryophytes and ﬂowering plants (Overbeek 1940; Jacobs 1950; Abe et al. 1972;
Jacobs et al. 1985; Cooke et al. 2002; De Meutter et al. 2005; Decker et al. 2006;
Tsavkelova et al. 2007; Spaepen et al. 2007; Lau et al. 2008, 2009; Hayashi
et al. 2008; Banks 2009; Ross and Reid 2010; Yokoya et al. 2010; Bradley 1991;
Evans and Trewavas 1991; Basu 2002; Rensing et al. 2008; De Smet et al. 2011).
Fig. 13.1 Schematic evolutionary tree highlighting some key aspects of auxin biology. The
symbols are explained as follows: **, Chlorophyte species studied are Ostreococcus tauri,
Ostreococcus
lucimarinus,
Micromonas
pusilla
strain
CCMP1545
and
strain
RCC299,
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Volvox carteri, Chlorella vulgaris and Chlorella variabilis
NC64A; 1, presence of auxin conﬁrmed via experimental evidence; , indicative of presence; *,
presence only in sporophyte; n.i., not investigated in detail; +, no response to auxin induction in the
Chlorophyte Chlamydomonas reinhardtii based on DR5 promoter activity. Figure mainly based on
Finet and Jaillais (2012), De Smet et al. (2011) and Lau et al. (2009)
13
Evolutionary Aspects of Auxin Signalling
273

4.3
The Role of Auxin in Algae
Auxin and its action have been studied for a long time in algae (Bradley 1991).
There is evidence that auxin may play a role in various aspects of algal develop-
ment, such as the establishment of polarity, embryo development and rhizoid
elongation.
In green algae, auxin formation and distribution have been shown to control
rhizoid formation in Bryopsis (Jacobs 1950), and in Ulothrix auxin was shown to
have a striking effect with a dramatic increase in stalk elongation (Conrad
et al. 1959). Polar auxin transport was shown to be present in Charophyta and
probably auxin may play a role in directing growth and development (Boot
et al. 2012). With respect to brown algae, Fucus distichus embryos accumulate
IAA in early stages and this acts on the formation of apical basal patterns in Fucus
embryo development (Basu 2002). There are also suggested interactions between
the actin cytoskeleton and auxin transport in Fucus (Sun et al. 2004). IAA was also
detected in mature Ectocarpus siliculosus and was found to be present mainly at the
apices of the ﬁlaments in the early stages of development (Hayashi et al. 2008). It
has been suggested that IAA is used by Ectocarpus to relay cell–cell positional
information and induces a signalling pathway different from that known in land
plants (Le Bail et al. 2010). In red algae (Rhodophyta), there has been very little
research performed with respect to the role of auxin so far. There are a few reports
on IAA having a positive effect on growth of Gracilaria tissue cultures (Yokoya
et al. 2004) and playing a role in regulating physiological processes (Yokoya
et al. 2010).
4.4
The Role of Auxin in Bryophytes
Bryophytes are the earliest diverging group of land plants where polar auxin
transport has been unequivocally detected and where auxin-signalling response
was found to be functional (Hayashi et al. 2008; Poli et al. 2003; Fujita
et al. 2008; Fujita and Hasebe 2009; Viaene et al. 2013; Prigge et al. 2010; Rensing
et al. 2008). Auxin-driven mechanisms are important for Bryophyte growth, repro-
duction and development. In Physcomitrella. patens, the development of rhizoids
(muticellular ﬁlaments of epidermal origin) was found to be auxin dependent
(Ashton et al. 1979; Sakakibara 2003; Bierfreund et al. 2003). Auxin treatment
was also found to stimulate stem elongation (Fujita et al. 2008), and elongation of
gametophore phyllids (leaves) (Decker et al. 2006) and triggers physiological
responses such as the chloronema-to-caulonema transition by the auxin-dependent
positive regulation of ROOT HAIR DEFECTIVE SIX-LIKE1 (PpRSL1) and
PpRSL2 transcription factors (Johri and Desai 1973; Jang and Dolan 2011).
274
P. Ramakrishna and I. De Smet

5
Molecular Components for Auxin Biology Throughout
Evolution
The conquest of terrestrial habitats was associated with an expansion of gene
families in several signalling pathways including that of signalling mediated by
the growth hormone auxin (De Smet et al. 2011; Rensing et al. 2008). Surveys of
green algae and plants with special emphasis on available genomes of chlorophyte
algae, such as Ostreococcus tauri, Ostreococcus lucimarinus, Micromonas pusilla,
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Volvox carteri, Chlorella vulgaris and Chlorella
variabilis (De Smet et al. 2011), brown algae Ectocarpus siliculosus (Hayashi
et al. 2008), the mosses Physcomitrella patens (Nishiyama et al. 2003; Fujita
et al. 2008) and Funaria hygrometrica (Panigrahi et al. 2009; Rensing
et al. 2008) and the spikemoss Sellaginella (Sztein et al. 2000; Paponov
et al. 2009; Banks 2009), revealed a potential early origin for proteins related to
auxin (see Fig. 13.2 and below for more details). The completion of the genome
sequence for the moss Physcomitrella patens and Sellaginella moellendorfﬁi has
established them as a useful experimental tool to study the ancestral role of auxin
(Banks et al. 2011; Rensing et al. 2008).
5.1
Auxin Metabolism Components
The Trp-independent pathway is poorly characterized in plants, which limits
evolutionary genomic approaches. Chlorophyta generally seem to possess many
orthologues of auxin metabolism genes (Finet and Jaillais 2012; De Smet
et al. 2011). The key enzymes that convert the important precursor chorismate
into indole and Trp in land plants had clear orthologues in Chlorophyta. Although
not all genetic pathways known from land plants for auxin biosynthesis are
represented in the Chlorophytes, based on the genome evidence, they very likely
may produce auxin by the IAM pathway (Patten and Glick 1996; De Smet
et al. 2011). Finally, in silico surveys showed that IAA biosynthesis genes from
land plants also have orthologues in the brown alga Ectocarpus siliculosus (Cock
et al. 2010; Hayashi et al. 2008).
In P. patens GH3 proteins were shown to be involved in auxin homeostasis by
conjugating excess of physiologically active free auxin to inactive IAA-amide
conjugates (Ludwig-Muller et al. 2009). With regard to the Trp-dependent pathway
of auxin biosynthesis, the YUCCA gene family is ancient in land plants (Finet and
Jaillais 2012). The green algal species Chlorella vulgaris encodes a putative
functional YUC since the putative FAD-binding and NADPH-binding motifs of
the protein are largely conserved (De Smet et al. 2011). Homologues have also been
identiﬁed in the moss P. patens (Pires and Dolan 2012; Rensing et al. 2008) and in
Selaginella (Banks 2009). Finally, orthologues of Arabidopsis SHI/STY family
13
Evolutionary Aspects of Auxin Signalling
275

proteins, which are positive regulators of auxin biosynthesis, are also present in
P. patens (Eklund et al. 2010).
5.2
Auxin Transport Components
Auxin transport mechanisms appear to have already been present, at least in part
(Fig. 13.2), before plants invaded the land (De Smet et al. 2011).
The ABCB/PGP/MDR family of ABC transporters have been shown to be
involved in auxin transport (Geisler and Murphy 2006; Verrier et al. 2008; Yang
and Murphy 2009), and putative homologues of the ABCB efﬂux IAA transporter
family have been identiﬁed in brown algae Ectocarpus siliculosus (Hayashi
et al. 2008) and in Chlorophyta and Streptophyta species (De Smet et al. 2011).
Fig. 13.2 Summary of molecular components throughout plant evolution. The upper panel
displays the evolutionary clades. The symbols are explained as follows: , indicative of presence;
–, absence; n.i., not investigated; +, unclear putative orthologue for most Chlorophytes except
Chlorella vulgaris; *, no orthologues identiﬁed except in Chlorella sp. Figure mainly based on
Finet and Jaillais (2012) and De Smet et al. (2011)
276
P. Ramakrishna and I. De Smet

AUX1LAX homologues have been reported to be present throughout the plant
kingdom (Hochholdinger et al. 2000; de Billy et al. 2001; Pe´ret et al. 2007; Pattison
and Catala 2012) and are present in mosses (Rensing et al. 2008). However,
AUX1LAX inﬂux carriers were not identiﬁed in all Chlorophyta, except for
one orthologue in Chlorella (De Smet et al. 2011).
There is no evidence of presence of PINs in Chlorophyta and neither the precise
origin of PIN proteins in the evolutionary history of plants is known (Krecek
et al. 2009; Viaene et al. 2013). All green algae with genomes sequenced so far
(Chlamydomonas, Volvox, Ostreococcus and Micromonas) belong to the clade
Chlorophyta and none of these organisms contains a PIN gene (Viaene
et al. 2013; De Smet et al. 2011). However, a putative PIN gene orthologue was
found in the genome of Spirogyra pratensis (De Smet et al. 2011). Sequence data
from P. patens and S. moellendorfﬁhave revealed the presence of both group 1 and
group 2 PIN genes (Krecek et al. 2009; Fujita et al. 2008). The most ancient PIN
proteins currently known from mosses are localized to the ER, which suggests that
intracellular
function
is
evolutionarily
ancestral
(Paponov
et
al.
2005).
Physcomitrella PIN proteins are functionally related to the PIN5-type proteins
that regulate subcellular homeostasis of auxin and not to the PIN1-type proteins
that are responsible for auxin efﬂux from cell to cell in angiosperms (Mravec
et al. 2009). Within the group of multicellular plants the PINs have undergone
changes during evolution, both in structure and in number.
Finally, the PILS family was shown to be present already in algae and to have
diversiﬁed in the different plant lineages. Ancient species, such as algae, mosses
and spike mosses, have 1–8 PILS genes, while seed plants, such as Oryza, Zea,
Medicago or Populus have 6–18 PILS genes. PILS proteins based on their evolution
diversiﬁed into three clades. Clade I consists of PILS algae orthologues clustered
together. In Chlorophyta, relatively low number of only one or two PILS genes per
species were identiﬁed (Feraru et al. 2012). The evolutionary Clade II and III
already emerged early during non-vascular plant evolution and both contain PILS
sequences from land plants. Clade II includes the well-conserved PILS2- and
PILS6-like subclades and includes the orthologues of PILS2 and PILS6 from
Physcomitrella, Selaginella, Brachypodium and/or Oryza. Clade III encompasses
the PILS1/PILS3/PILS4- and PILS5/PILS7-like subclades and displays particular
expansion in higher seed plants (Feraru et al. 2012).
In conclusion, while sequence data suggests the presence of auxin transporters in
green algae, further detailed functional characterisation will be required to demon-
strate auxin transport. For example, in Physcomitrella the reduced sporophyte
seemingly exhibits polarized auxin ﬂow and sensitivity to its inhibitor (NPA),
while the dominant gametophyte shows apolar auxin distribution (Fujita
et al. 2008).
13
Evolutionary Aspects of Auxin Signalling
277

5.3
Auxin Signalling
The auxin signalling pathway has undergone substantial functional diversiﬁcation
and specialization within vascular plants since they diverged from bryophytes
(Fig. 13.2). Although the auxin signalling pathways in land plants are nowadays
relatively well understood and the respective signalling mechanisms are also
present in basal lineages such as bryophytes (Paponov et al. 2005; Rensing
et al. 2008), the evolution of the associated molecular components is much less
clear. According to Cooke et al. (2002), auxin signalling mechanisms in both brown
algae and green plants originated independently by convergent evolution. It has
been suggested that auxin signalling emerged to coordinate multicellular growth, at
least in land plants (Rensing et al. 2008), but particular aspects of auxin signalling
could of course have an earlier origin. With respect to the readout of auxin
signalling, DR5-visualised auxin response occurs in Physcomitrella (Bierfreund
et al. 2003), but seemingly not in Chlamydomonas (De Smet et al. 2011).
In silico analyses of available algal genomes (green, brown and red) for “clas-
sical” auxin signalling mechanisms in plants involving TIR1-AFB, ARFs and
AUX/IAA proteins revealed no complete AUX/IAAs and ARFs-dependent signal-
ling machinery to be present in the investigated Chlorophyta (Lau et al. 2009; De
Smet et al. 2011) though potential orthologues of single domains can be found.
Orthologues for the transcriptional corepressor TOPLESS (TPL) and related pro-
teins were not present in the investigated Chlorophyta, but seemed to be present in
P. patens and S. moellendorfﬁi (De Smet et al. 2011). Comparative analysis of the
P. patens, S. moellendorfﬁi and A. thaliana genomes suggested that the well-
established rapid transcriptional response to auxin of ﬂowering plants, evolved in
vascular plants after their divergence from the last common ancestor shared with
mosses (Paponov et al. 2009). However, a phylogenomic analysis of auxin signal-
ing genes indicates that the lower land plants P. patens and S. moellendorfﬁi contain
fewer AUX/IAA and ARF family members (3 and 3 AUX/IAAs and 12 and 7 ARFs
in P. patens and S. moellendorfﬁi, respectively) (Paponov et al. 2009; Hayashi
2012). The Physcomitrella genome encodes four closely related TIR1 homologues
PpAFB 1–4 and two slightly more distantly related homologues from a lineage not
present in angiosperms (Paponov et al. 2009; Rensing et al. 2008).
Orthologues of ABP1 and IBR5 were detected in the green algae (Tromas
et al. 2010; Lau et al. 2009; De Smet et al. 2011), suggesting that they evolved in
the streptophyte lineage. The presence of ABP1 was also shown in all species from
bryophytes to ﬂowering plants by comparative analysis of the Arabidopsis ABP1
sequence against available genome sequence databases of land plants (Tromas
et al. 2010).
278
P. Ramakrishna and I. De Smet

6
Conclusion
Auxin appears to play a role already in green algae and even in brown algae.
However, these organisms only appear to have some components of the machinery
related to auxin biology. In future, more sequence information on algae, and
especially multicellular green algae, will provide further insight in how auxin
biology components evolved. However, it will be important to subsequently func-
tionally characterise relevant proteins in algae.
References
Abe H, Uchiyama M, Sato R (1972) Isolation and identiﬁcation of native auxins in marine algae.
Agric Biol Chem 36(12):2259–2260
Abel S, Theologis A (2010) Odyssey of auxin. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2:a004572. doi:10.
1101/cshperspect.a004572
Arteca RN (1995) Plant growth substances: principles and applications. Chapman & Hall, USA
Ashton NW, Grimsley NH, Cove DJ (1979) Analysis of gametophytic development in the moss,
Physcomitrella patens, using auxin and cytokinin resistant mutants. Planta 144(5):427–435.
doi:10.1007/bf00380118
Bainbridge K, Guyomarc’h S, Bayer E, Swarup R, Bennett M, Mandel T, Kuhlemeier C (2008)
Auxin inﬂux carriers stabilize phyllotactic patterning. Genes Dev 22(6):810–823. doi:10.1101/
gad.462608
Band LR, King JR (2012) Multiscale modelling of auxin transport in the plant-root elongation
zone. J Math Biol 65(4):743–785. doi:10.1007/s00285-011-0472-y
Banks JA (2009) Selaginella and 400 million years of separation. Annu Rev Plant Biol 60:223–
238. doi:10.1146/annurev.arplant.59.032607.092851
Banks JA, Nishiyama T, Hasebe M, Bowman JL, Gribskov M, de Pamphilis C, Albert VA,
Aono N, Aoyama T, Ambrose BA, Ashton NW, Axtell MJ, Barker E, Barker MS, Bennetzen
JL, Bonawitz ND, Chapple C, Cheng C, Correa LGG, Dacre M, DeBarry J, Dreyer I, Elias M,
Engstrom EM, Estelle M, Feng L, Finet C, Floyd SK, Frommer WB, Fujita T, Gramzow L,
Gutensohn M, Harholt J, Hattori M, Heyl A, Hirai T, Hiwatashi Y, Ishikawa M, Iwata M, Karol
KG, Koehler B, Kolukisaoglu U, Kubo M, Kurata T, Lalonde S, Li K, Li Y, Litt A, Lyons E,
Manning G, Maruyama T, Michael TP, Mikami K, Miyazaki S, Morinaga SI, Murata T,
Mueller-Roeber B, Nelson DR, Obara M, Oguri Y, Olmstead RG, Onodera N, Petersen BL,
Pils B, Prigge M, Rensing SA, Rian˜o-Pacho´n DM, Roberts AW, Sato Y, Scheller HV,
Schulz B, Schulz C, Shakirov EV, Shibagaki N, Shinohara N, Shippen DE, Sørensen I,
Sotooka R, Sugimoto N, Sugita M, Sumikawa N, Tanurdzic M, Theißen G, Ulvskov P,
Wakazuki S, Weng JK, Willats WWGT, Wipf D, Wolf PG, Yang L, Zimmer AD, Zhu Q,
Mitros T, Hellsten U, Loque´ D, Otillar R, Salamov A, Schmutz J, Shapiro H, Lindquist E,
Lucas S, Rokhsar D, Grigoriev IV (2011) The selaginella genome identiﬁes genetic changes
associated with the evolution of vascular plants. Science 332(6032):960–963. doi:10.1126/
science.1203810
Barbez E, Kubesˇ M, Rolcˇı´k J, Beziat C, Peˇncˇı´k A, Wang B, Rosquete MR, Zhu J, Dobrev PI,
Lee Y, Zazˇı´malova´ E, Petra´sˇek J, Geisler M, Friml J, Kleine-Vehn J (2012) A novel putative
auxin carrier family regulates intracellular auxin homeostasis in plants. Nature 485(7396):119–
122. doi:10.1038/nature11001
Basu S (2002) Early embryo development in fucus distichus is auxin sensitive. Plant Physiol 130
(1):292–302. doi:10.1104/pp. 004747
13
Evolutionary Aspects of Auxin Signalling
279

Bateman RM, DiMichele WA (1994) Heterospory: the most iterative key innovation in the
evolutionary history of the plant kingdom. Biol Rev 69(3):345–417. doi:10.1111/j.1469-
185X.1994.tb01276.x
Becker B, Marin B (2009) Streptophyte algae and the origin of embryophytes. Ann Bot 103
(7):999–1004. doi:10.1093/aob/mcp044
Benjamins R, Scheres B (2008) Auxin: the looping star in plant development. Annu Rev Plant Biol
59:443–465. doi:10.1146/annurev.arplant.58.032806.103805
Benkova E, Michniewicz M, Sauer M, Teichmann T, Seifertova D, Jurgens G, Friml J (2003)
Local, efﬂux-dependent auxin gradients as a common module for plant organ formation. Cell
115(5):591–602. doi:10.1016/S0092-8674(03)00924-3
Bennett T, Scheres B (2010) Chapter Three – Root development—two meristems for the price of
one? In: Marja CPT (ed) Current topics in developmental biology, vol 91. Academic Press,
USA, pp 67–102. doi:10.1016/S0070-2153(10)91003-X
Bennett MJ, Marchant A, Green HG, May ST, Ward SP, Millner PA, Walker AR, Schulz B,
Feldmann KA (1996) Arabidopsis AUX1 gene: a permease-like regulator of root gravitropism.
Science (New York, NY) 273(5277):948–950. doi:10.1126/science.273.5277.948
Bierfreund NM, Reski R, Decker EL (2003) Use of an inducible reporter gene system for the
analysis of auxin distribution in the moss Physcomitrella patens. Plant Cell Rep 21(12):1143–
1152. doi:10.1007/s00299-003-0646-1
Blakeslee JJ, Bandyopadhyay A, Lee OR, Mravec J, Titapiwatanakun B, Sauer M, Makam SN,
Cheng Y, Bouchard R, Adamec J, Geisler M, Nagashima A, Sakai T, Martinoia E, Friml J, Peer
WA, Murphy AS (2007) Interactions among PIN-FORMED and P-glycoprotein auxin trans-
porters in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 19:131–147. doi:10.1105/tpc.106.040782
Bogaert KA, Arun A, Coelho SM, Clerck O (2013) Brown algae as a model for plant organogen-
esis. Methods Mol Biol 959:97–125. doi:10.1007/978-1-62703-221-6_6
Boot KJ, Libbenga KR, Hille SC, Offringa R, van Duijn B (2012) Polar auxin transport: an early
invention. J Exp Bot 63(11):4213–4218. doi:10.1093/jxb/ers106
Bosco CD, Dovzhenko A, Liu X, Woerner N, Rensch T, Eismann M, Eimer S, Hegermann J,
Paponov IA, Ruperti B, Heberle-Bors E, Touraev A, Cohen JD, Palme K (2012) The endo-
plasmic reticulum localized PIN8 is a pollen-speciﬁc auxin carrier involved in intracellular
auxin homeostasis. Plant J 71(5):860–870. doi:10.1111/j.1365-313X.2012.05037.x
Boysen Jensen P, Nielsen N (1925) Studien u¨ber die hormonalen Beziehungen zwischen Spitze
und Basis der Avenacoleoptile. Planta 1(3):321–331. doi:10.1007/bf02039223
Bradley PM (1991) Plant hormones do have a role in controlling growth and development of algae.
J Phycol 27(3):317–321. doi:10.1111/j.0022-3646.1991.00317.x
Braun N, Wyrzykowska J, Muller P, David K, Couch D, Perrot-Rechenmann C, Fleming AJ
(2008) Conditional repression of AUXIN BINDING PROTEIN1 reveals that it coordinates cell
division and cell expansion during postembryonic shoot development in Arabidopsis and
tobacco. Plant Cell 20(10):2746–2762. doi:10.1105/tpc.108.059048
Calderon Villalobos LI, Lee S, De Oliveira C, Ivetac A, Brandt W, Armitage L, Sheard LB, Tan X,
Parry G, Mao H, Zheng N, Napier R, Kepinski S, Estelle M (2012) A combinatorial TIR1/
AFB-Aux/IAA co-receptor system for differential sensing of auxin. Nat Chem Biol 8(5):477–
485. doi:10.1038/nchembio.926
Calderon-Villalobos LI, Tan X, Zheng N, Estelle M (2010) Auxin perception—structural insights.
Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2(7):a005546. doi:10.1101/cshperspect.a005546
Chen R, Hilson P, Sedbrook J, Rosen E, Caspar T, Masson PH (1998) The Arabidopsis thaliana
AGRAVITROPIC 1 gene encodes a component of the polar-auxin-transport efﬂux carrier.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 95(25):15112–15117
Chen X, Naramoto S, Robert S, Tejos R, Lofke C, Lin D, Yang Z, Friml J (2012) ABP1 and ROP6
GTPase signaling regulate clathrin-mediated endocytosis in Arabidopsis roots. Curr Biol 22
(14):1326–1332. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2012.05.020
280
P. Ramakrishna and I. De Smet

Cheng Y, Dai X, Zhao Y (2006) Auxin biosynthesis by the YUCCA ﬂavin monooxygenases
controls the formation of ﬂoral organs and vascular tissues in Arabidopsis. Genes Dev
20:1790–1799. doi:10.1101/gad.1415106
Cho M, Cho HT (2012) The function of ABCB transporters in auxin transport. Plant Signal Behav
8(2):e22990. doi:10.4161/psb.22990
Christie JM, Murphy AS (2013) Shoot phototropism in higher plants: new light through old
concepts. Am J Bot 100(1):35–46. doi:10.3732/ajb.1200340
Ciesielski T (1871) Untersuchungen u¨ber die Abwa¨rtskru¨mmung der Wurzel. [s.n.], Breslau
Cock JM, SterckL RP, Scornet D, Allen AE, Amoutzias G, Anthouard V, Artiguenave F, Aury J,
Badger JH, Beszteri B, Billiau K, Bonnet E, Bothwell JH, Bowler C, Boyen C, Brownlee C,
Carrano CJ, Charrier B, Cho GY, Coelho SM, Colle´n J, Corre E, Silva CD, Delage L,
Delaroque N, Dittami SM, Doulbeau S, Elias M, Farnham G, Gachon CMM, Gschloessl B,
Heesch S, Jabbari K, Jubin C, Kawai H, Kimura K, Kloareg B, Ku¨pper FC, Lang D, Bail AL,
Leblanc C, Lerouge P, Lohr M, Lopez PJ, Martens C, Maumus F, Michel G, Miranda-Saavedra
D, Morales J, Moreau H, Motomura T, Nagasato C, Napoli CA, Nelson DR, Nyvall-Colle´n P,
Peters AF, Pommier C, Potin P, Poulain J, Quesneville H, Read B, Rensing SA, Ritter A,
Rousvoal S, Samanta M, Samson G, Schroeder DC, Se´gurens B, Strittmatter M, Tonon T,
Tregear JW, Valentin K, Dassow PV, Yamagishi T, de Peer YV, Wincker P (2010) The
Ectocarpus genome and the independent evolution of multicellularity in brown algae. Nature
465(7298):617–621
Conrad H, Saltman P, Eppley R (1959) Effects of auxin and gibberellic acid on growth of ulothrix.
Nature 184(4685):556–557. doi:10.1038/184556a0
Cooke TJ, Poli D, Sztein AE, Cohen JD (2002) Evolutionary patterns in auxin action. Plant Mol
Biol 49(3–4):319–338. doi:10.1023/A:1015242627321
Darwin C (1880) The power of movement in plants. John Murray, London
Davies P (2010) The plant hormones: their nature, occurrence, and functions. In: Davies P
(ed) Plant hormones. Springer, Netherlands, pp 1–15. doi:10.1007/978-1-4020-2686-7_1
de Billy F, Grosjean C, May S, Bennett M, Cullimore JV (2001) Expression studies on AUX1-like
genes in Medicago truncatula suggest that auxin is required at two steps in early nodule
development. Mol Plant Microbe Interact 14(3):267–277. doi:10.1094/MPMI.2001.14.3.267
De Meutter J, Tytgat T, Prinsen E, Gheysen G, Van Onckelen H (2005) Production of auxin and
related compounds by the plant parasitic nematodes Heterodera schachtii and Meloidogyne
incognita. Commun Agric Appl Biol Sci 70(1):51–60
de Reuille PB, Bohn-Courseau I, Ljung K, Morin H, Carraro N, Godin C, Traas J (2006) Computer
simulations reveal properties of the cell-cell signaling network at the shoot apex in
Arabidopsis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103(5):1627–1632. doi:10.1073/pnas.0510130103
De Smet I, Lau S, Mayer U, Ju¨rgens G (2010) Embryogenesis – the humble beginnings of plant
life. Plant J 61(6):959–970. doi:10.1111/j.1365-313X.2010.04143.x
De Smet I, Voβ U, Lau S, Wilson M, Shao N, Timme RE, Swarup R, Kerr I, Hodgman C, Bock R,
Bennett M, Ju¨rgens G, Beeckman T (2011) Unraveling the evolution of auxin signaling. Plant
Physiol 155(1):209–221, doi:pp.110.168161 [pii]
Decker EL, Frank W, Sarnighausen E, Reski R (2006) Moss systems biology en route: phytohor-
mones in Physcomitrella development. Plant Biol (Stuttg) 8(3):397–405. doi:10.1055/s-2006-
923952
Dharmasiri N, Dharmasiri S, Estelle M (2005) The F-box protein TIR1 is an auxin receptor. Nature
435(7041):441–445. doi:10.1038/nature03543
Ding Z, Wang B, Moreno I, Dupla´kova´ N, Simon S, Carraro N, Reemmer J, Peˇncˇı´k A, Chen X,
Tejos R, Sku˚pa P, Pollmann S, Mravec J, Petra´sˇek J, Zazˇı´malova´ E, Honys D, Rolcˇı´k J,
Murphy A, Orellana A, Geisler M, Friml J (2012) ER-localized auxin transporter PIN8
regulates auxin homeostasis and male gametophyte development in Arabidopsis. Nat Commun
3:941. doi:10.1038/ncomms1941
13
Evolutionary Aspects of Auxin Signalling
281

Dubrovsky JG, Sauer M, Napsucialy-Mendivil S, Ivanchenko MG, Friml J, Shishkova S,
Celenza J, Benkova E (2008) Auxin acts as a local morphogenetic trigger to specify lateral
root founder cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105:8790–8794. doi:10.1073/pnas.0712307105
Eklund DM, Thelander M, Landberg K, Sta˚ldal V, Nilsson A, Johansson M, Valsecchi I, Pederson
ERA, Kowalczyk M, Ljung K, Ronne H, Sundberg E (2010) Homologues of the Arabidopsis
thaliana SHI/STY/LRP1 genes control auxin biosynthesis and affect growth and development
in the moss Physcomitrella patens. Development 137(8):1275–1284. doi:10.1242/dev.039594
Evans LV, Trewavas AJ (1991) Is algal development controlled by plant growth substances? J
Phycol 27(3):322–326. doi:10.1111/j.0022-3646.1991.00322.x
Feller C, Gabriel JP, Mazza C, Yerly F (2013) Pattern formation in auxin ﬂux. J Math Biol 23:23.
doi:10.1007/s00285-013-0655-9
Feraru E, Vosolsobeˇ S, Feraru MI, Petra´sˇek J, Kleine-Vehn J (2012) Evolution and structural
diversiﬁcation of PILS putative auxin carriers in plants. Front Plant Sci 3:227. doi:10.3389/
fpls.2012.00227
Finet C, Jaillais Y (2012) Auxology: when auxin meets plant evo-devo. Dev Biol 369(1):19–31.
doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.05.039S0012-1606(12)00309-0
Finet C, Timme RE, Delwiche CF, Marle´taz F (2010) Multigene phylogeny of the green lineage
reveals the origin and diversiﬁcation of land plants. Curr Biol 20(24):2217–2222. doi:10.1016/
j.cub.2010.11.035
Friml J, Benkova´ E, Blilou I, Wisniewska J, Hamann T, Ljung K, Woody S, Sandberg G,
Scheres B, Ju¨rgens G, Palme K (2002a) AtPIN4 mediates sink-driven auxin gradients and
root patterning in arabidopsis. Cell 108(5):661–673. doi:10.1016/S0092-8674(02)00656-6
Friml J, Wisniewska J, Benkova E, Mendgen K, Palme K (2002b) Lateral relocation of auxin
efﬂux regulator PIN3 mediates tropism in Arabidopsis. Nature 415(6873):806–809. doi:10.
1038/415806a
Friml J, Vieten A, Sauer M, Weijers D, Schwarz H, Hamann T, Offringa R, Jurgens G (2003)
Efﬂux-dependent auxin gradients establish the apical-basal axis of Arabidopsis. Nature 426
(6963):147–153. doi:10.1038/nature02085
Fu X, Harberd NP (2003) Auxin promotes Arabidopsis root growth by modulating gibberellin
response. Nature 421(6924):740–743. doi:10.1038/nature01387
Fujita T, Hasebe M (2009) Convergences and divergences in polar auxin transport and shoot
development in land plant evolution. Plant Signal Behav 4(4):313–315. doi:10.4161/psb.4.4.
8090
Fujita T, Sakaguchi H, Hiwatashi Y, Wagstaff SJ, Ito M, Deguchi H, Sato T, Hasebe M (2008)
Convergent evolution of shoots in land plants: lack of auxin polar transport in moss shoots.
Evol Dev 10(2):176–186. doi:10.1111/j.1525-142X.2008.00225.x
Gagne JM, Downes BP, Shiu S-H, Durski AM, Vierstra RD (2002) The F-box subunit of the SCF
E3 complex is encoded by a diverse superfamily of genes in Arabidopsis. Proc Natl Acad Sci
99(17):11519–11524. doi:10.1073/pnas.162339999
Ga¨lweiler L, Guan C, Mu¨ller A, Wisman E, Mendgen K, Yephremov A, Palme K (1998)
Regulation of polar auxin transport by AtPIN1 in Arabidopsis vascular tissue. Science 282
(5397):2226–2230. doi:10.1126/science.282.5397.2226
Geisler M, Murphy AS (2006) The ABC of auxin transport: the role of p-glycoproteins in plant
development. FEBS Lett 580(4):1094–1102. doi:10.1016/j.febslet.2005.11.054
Graham LE, Cook ME, Busse JS (2000) The origin of plants: body plan changes contributing to a
major evolutionary radiation. Proc Natl Acad Sci 97(9):4535–4540. doi:10.1073/pnas.97.9.
4535
Gruen HE (1959) Auxins and fungi. Annu Rev Plant Physiol Plant Mol Biol 10:405–440. doi:10.
1146/annurev.pp. 10.060159.002201
Grunewald W, Friml J (2010) The march of the PINs: developmental plasticity by dynamic polar
targeting in plant cells. EMBO J 29(16):2700–2714. doi:10.1038/emboj.2010.181
282
P. Ramakrishna and I. De Smet

Ha CM, Jun JH, Fletcher JC (2010) Chapter Four – Shoot apical meristem form and function. In:
Marja CPT (ed) Current topics in developmental biology, vol 91. Academic Press, USA, pp
103–140. doi:10.1016/S0070-2153(10)91004-1
Haagen-Smit A, Dandliker W, Wittwer S, Murneek A (1946) Isolation of 3-indoleacetic acid from
immature corn kernels. Am J Bot 33:118–120. doi:10.2307/2437327
Hayashi K (2012) The interaction and integration of auxin signaling components. Plant Cell
Physiol 53(6):965–975. doi:10.1093/pcp/pcs035
Hayashi K-I, Tan X, Zheng N, Hatate T, Kimura Y, Kepinski S, Nozaki H (2008) Small-molecule
agonists and antagonists of F-box protein–substrate interactions in auxin perception and
signaling. Proc Natl Acad Sci 105(14):5632–5637. doi:10.1073/pnas.0711146105
Heisler MG, Jo¨nsson H (2006) Modeling auxin transport and plant development. J Plant Growth
Regul 25(4):302–312. doi:10.1007/s00344-006-0066-x
Heisler MG, Ohno C, Das P, Sieber P, Reddy GV, Long JA, Meyerowitz EM (2005) Patterns of
auxin transport and gene expression during primordium development revealed by live imaging
of the Arabidopsis inﬂorescence meristem. Curr Biol 15(21):1899–1911. doi:10.1016/j.cub.
2005.09.052
Hochholdinger F, Wulff D, Reuter K, Park WJ, Feix G (2000) Tissue-speciﬁc expression of AUX1
in maize roots. J Plant Physiol 157(3):315–319. doi:10.1016/S0176-1617(00)80053-X
Hosˇek P, Kubesˇ M, Lanˇkova´ M, Dobrev PI, Klima P, Kohoutova´ M, Petra´sˇek J, Hoyerova´ K,
Jirˇina M, Zazˇı´malova´ E (2012) Auxin transport at cellular level: new insights supported by
mathematical modelling. J Exp Bot 63(10):3815–3827. doi:10.1093/jxb/ers074
Ichimura H, Yamaki T (1975) Indole-3-acetic acid in chick embryos. Dev Growth Differ 17
(3):275–279. doi:10.1111/j.1440-169X.1975.00275.x
Ikeda Y, Men S, Fischer U, Stepanova AN, Alonso JM, Ljung K, Grebe M (2009) Local auxin
biosynthesis modulates gradient-directed planar polarity in Arabidopsis. Nat Cell Biol 11:731–
738. doi:10.1038/ncb1879
Isenbarger TA, Carr CE, Johnson SS, Finney M, Church GM, Gilbert W, Zuber MT, Ruvkun G
(2008) The most conserved genome segments for life detection on earth and other planets. Orig
Life Evol Biosph 38(6):517–533. doi:10.1007/s11084-008-9148-z
Jacobs WP (1950) Auxin effects in bryopsis. Biol Bull 99(2):369–370
Jacobs WP, Falkenstein K, Hamilton RH (1985) Nature and amount of auxin in algae: IAA from
extracts of Caulerpa paspaloides (Siphonales). Plant Physiol 78(4):844–848. doi:10.1104/pp.
78.4.844
Jang G, Dolan L (2011) Auxin promotes the transition from chloronema to caulonema in moss
protonema by positively regulating PpRSL1and PpRSL2 in Physcomitrella patens. New Phytol
192(2):319–327. doi:10.1111/j.1469-8137.2011.03805.x
Johri MM, Desai S (1973) Auxin regulation of caulonema formation in moss protonema. Nat New
Biol 245:1. doi:10.1038/newbio245223a0
Jones AM, Herman EM (1993) KDEL-containing auxin-binding protein is secreted to the plasma
membrane and cell wall. Plant Physiol 101(2):595–606. doi:10.1104/pp. 101.2.595
Jones AR, Kramer EM, Knox K, Swarup R, Bennett MJ, Lazarus CM, Leyser HM, Grierson CS
(2009) Auxin transport through non-hair cells sustains root-hair development. Nat Cell Biol
11:78–84. doi:10.1038/ncb1815
Jonsson H, Heisler MG, Shapiro BE, Meyerowitz EM, Mjolsness E (2006) An auxin-driven
polarized transport model for phyllotaxis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103:1633–1638. doi:10.
1073/pnas.0509839103
Kai K, Horita J, Wakasa K, Miyagawa H (2007) Three oxidative metabolites of indole-3-acetic
acid from Arabidopsis thaliana. Phytochemistry 68(12):1651–1663. doi:10.1016/j.phytochem.
2007.04.030
Kamimoto Y, Terasaka K, Hamamoto M, Takanashi K, Fukuda S, Shitan N, Sugiyama A,
Suzuki H, Shibata D, Wang B, Pollmann S, Geisler M, Yazaki K (2012) Arabidopsis
ABCB21 is a facultative auxin importer/exporter regulated by cytoplasmic auxin concentra-
tion. Plant Cell Physiol 53(12):2090–2100. doi:10.1093/pcp/pcs149
13
Evolutionary Aspects of Auxin Signalling
283

Karol KG, McCourt RM, Cimino MT, Delwiche CF (2001) The closest living relatives of land
plants. Science 294(5550):2351–2353. doi:10.1126/science.1065156
Kenrick P, Wellman CH, Schneider H, Edgecombe GD (2012) A timeline for terrestrialization:
consequences for the carbon cycle in the Palaeozoic. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 367
(1588):519–536. doi:10.1098/rstb.2011.0271
Kepinski S, Leyser O (2005) The Arabidopsis F-box protein TIR1 is an auxin receptor. Nature 435
(7041):446–451. doi:10.1038/nature03542
Koepﬂi JB, Thimann KV, Went FW (1938) Phytohormones: structure and physiological activity.
I. J Biol Chem 122(3):763–780
Krecek P, Skupa P, Libus J, Naramoto S, Tejos R, Friml J, Zazimalova E (2009) The
PIN-FORMED (PIN) protein family of auxin transporters. Genome Biol 10(12):249, doi:gb-
2009-10-12-249 [pii]10.1186/gb-2009-10-12-249
Kubesˇ M, Yang H, Richter GL, Cheng Y, Mlodzinska E, Wang X, Blakeslee JJ, Carraro N,
Petra´sˇek J, Zazˇı´malova´ E, Hoyerova´ K, Peer WA, Murphy AS (2012) The Arabidopsis
concentration-dependent inﬂux/efﬂux transporter ABCB4 regulates cellular auxin levels in
the root epidermis. Plant J 69(4):640–654. doi:10.1111/j.1365-313X.2011.04818.x
Lau S, Jurgens G, De Smet I (2008) The evolving complexity of the auxin pathway. Plant Cell 20
(7):1738–1746. doi:10.1105/tpc.108.060418
Lau S, Shao N, Bock R, Jurgens G, De Smet I (2009) Auxin signaling in algal lineages: fact or
myth? Trends Plant Sci 14(4):182–188. doi:10.1016/j.tplants.2009.01.004
Le Bail A, Billoud B, Kowalczyk N, Kowalczyk M, Gicquel M, Le Panse S, Stewart S, Scornet D,
Cock JM, Ljung K, Charrier B (2010) Auxin metabolism and function in the multicellular
brown alga Ectocarpus siliculosus. Plant Physiol 153(1):128–144. doi:10.1104/pp. 109.149708
Lehmann T, Hoffmann M, Hentrich M, Pollmann S (2010) Indole-3-acetamide-dependent auxin
biosynthesis: a widely distributed way of indole-3-acetic acid production? Eur J Cell Biol 89
(12):895–905, doi:S0171-9335(10)00135-4 [pii]
Lewis LA, McCourt RM (2004) Green algae and the origin of land plants. Am J Bot 91(10):1535–
1556. doi:10.3732/ajb.91.10.1535
Leyser O (2011) Auxin, self-organisation, and the colonial nature of plants. Curr Biol 21(9):R331–
R337, doi:S0960-9822(11)00222-3 [pii]
Litwack G (2005) Plant hormones. Elsevier Academic Press Inc, USA
Ljung K (2013) Auxin metabolism and homeostasis during plant development. Development 140
(5):943–950. doi:10.1242/dev.086363
Long JA, Ohno C, Smith ZR, Meyerowitz EM (2006) TOPLESS regulates apical embryonic fate
in Arabidopsis. Science 312(5779):1520–1523. doi:10.1126/science.1123841
Ludwig-Mueller J (2011) Auxin conjugates: their role for plant development and in the evolution
of land plants. J Exp Bot 62(6):1757–1773. doi:10.1093/jxb/erq412
Ludwig-Muller J, Julke S, Bierfreund NM, Decker EL, Reski R (2009) Moss (Physcomitrella
patens) GH3 proteins act in auxin homeostasis. New Phytol 181(2):323–338. doi:10.1111/j.
1469-8137.2008.02677.x
Luschnig C, Gaxiola RA, GrisaﬁP, Fink GR (1998) EIR1, a root-speciﬁc protein involved in auxin
transport, is required for gravitropism in Arabidopsis thaliana. Genes Dev 12(14):2175–2187.
doi:10.1101/gad.12.14.2175
Mano Y, Nemoto K (2012) The pathway of auxin biosynthesis in plants. J Exp Bot 63(8):2853–
2872. doi:10.1093/jxb/ers091
Maraschin Fdos S, Memelink J, Offringa R (2009) Auxin-induced, SCF(TIR1)-mediated poly-
ubiquitination marks AUX/IAA proteins for degradation. Plant J 59(1):100–109. doi:10.1111/
j.1365-313X.2009.03854.x
Marchant A, Bhalerao R, Casimiro I, Eklo¨f J, Casero PJ, Bennett M, Sandberg G (2002) AUX1
promotes lateral root formation by facilitating indole-3-acetic acid distribution between sink
and source tissues in the Arabidopsis seedling. Plant Cell 14(3):589–597. doi:10.1105/tpc.
010354
284
P. Ramakrishna and I. De Smet

Merks RM, Van de Peer Y, Inze D, Beemster GT (2007) Canalization without ﬂux sensors: a
traveling-wave hypothesis. Trends Plant Sci 12:384–390. doi:10.1016/j.tplants.2007.08.004
Mjolsness E (2006) The growth and development of some recent plant models: a viewpoint. J Plant
Growth Regul 25(4):270–277. doi:10.1007/s00344-006-0069-7
Mockaitis K, Estelle M (2008) Auxin receptors and plant development: a new signaling paradigm.
Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 24:55–80. doi:10.1146/annurev.cellbio.23.090506.123214
Monroe-Augustus M, Zolman BK, Bartel B (2003) IBR5, a dual-speciﬁcity phosphatase-like
protein modulating auxin and abscisic acid responsiveness in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 15
(12):2979–2991. doi:10.1105/tpc.017046
Mravec J, Kubes M, Bielach A, Gaykova V, Petrasek J, Skupa P, Chand S, Benkova E,
Zazimalova E, Friml J (2008) Interaction of PIN and PGP transport mechanisms in auxin
distribution-dependent development. Development 135:3345–3354. doi:10.1242/dev.021071
Mravec J, Skupa P, Bailly A, Hoyerova K, Krecek P, Bielach A, Petrasek J, Zhang J, Gaykova V,
Stierhof YD, Dobrev PI, Schwarzerova K, Rolcik J, Seifertova D, Luschnig C, Benkova E,
Zazimalova E, Geisler M, Friml J (2009) Subcellular homeostasis of phytohormone auxin is
mediated by the ER-localized PIN5 transporter. Nature 459(7250):1136–1140. doi:10.1038/
nature08066
Muller A, Guan C, Galweiler L, Tanzler P, Huijser P, Marchant A, Parry G, Bennett M, Wisman E,
Palme K (1998) AtPIN2 deﬁnes a locus of Arabidopsis for root gravitropism control. EMBO J
17(23):6903–6911. doi:10.1093/emboj/17.23.6903
Napier RM (2005) TIRs of joy: new receptors for auxin. Bioessays 27(12):1213–1217. doi:10.
1002/bies.20329
Newell AC, Shipman PD, Sun Z (2008) Phyllotaxis: cooperation and competition between
mechanical and biochemical processes. J Theor Biol 251(3):421–439. doi:10.1016/j.jtbi.
2007.11.036
Niklas KJ, Kutschera U (2009) The evolutionary development of plant body plans. Funct Plant
Biol 36(8):682–695. doi:10.1071/fp09107
Nishiyama T, Fujita T, Shin IT, Seki M, Nishide H, Uchiyama I, Kamiya A, Carninci P,
Hayashizaki Y, Shinozaki K, Kohara Y, Hasebe M (2003) Comparative genomics of
Physcomitrella patens gametophytic transcriptome and Arabidopsis thaliana: implication for
land plant evolution. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100(13):8007–8012. doi:10.1073/pnas.
0932694100
Normanly J (2010) Approaching cellular and molecular resolution of auxin biosynthesis and
metabolism. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2(1):a001594. doi:10.1101/cshperspect.a001594
Nova´k O, He´nykova´ E, Sairanen I, Kowalczyk M, Pospı´sˇil T, Ljung K (2012) Tissue-speciﬁc
proﬁling of the Arabidopsis thaliana auxin metabolome. Plant J 72(3):523–536. doi:10.1111/j.
1365-313X.2012.05085.x
Novoselova ES, Mironova VV, Omelyanchuk NA, Kazantsev FV, Likhoshvai VA (2013) Math-
ematical modeling of auxin transport in protoxylem and protophloem of Arabidopsis thaliana
root tips. J Bioinform Comput Biol 11(1):6. doi:10.1142/S0219720013400106
Orbovik V, Poff KL (1993) Growth distribution during Phototropism of Arabidopsis thaliana
seedlings. Plant Physiology 103(1):157–163. doi:10.1104/pp. 103.1.157
O¨ stin A, Kowalyczk M, Bhalerao RP, Sandberg G (1998) Metabolism of indole-3-acetic acid in
Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 118(1):285–296. doi:10.1104/pp. 118.1.285
Overbeek JV (1940) Auxin in marine algae. Plant Physiol 15(2):291–299. doi:10.1104/pp. 15.2.
291
Pagnussat GC, Alandete-Saez M, Bowman JL, Sundaresan V (2009) Auxin-dependent patterning
and gamete speciﬁcation in the Arabidopsis female gametophyte. Science 324(5935):1684–
1689, doi:1167324 [pii] 10.1126/science.1167324
Panigrahi KC, Panigrahy M, Vervliet-Scheebaum M, Lang D, Reski R, Johri MM (2009) Auxin-
binding proteins without KDEL sequence in the moss Funaria hygrometrica. Plant Cell Rep 28
(11):1747–1758. doi:10.1007/s00299-009-0775-2
13
Evolutionary Aspects of Auxin Signalling
285

Paponov IA, Teale WD, Trebar M, Blilou K, Palme K (2005) The PIN auxin efﬂux facilitators:
evolutionary and functional perspectives. Trends Plant Sci 10(4):170–177. doi:10.1016/j.
tplants.2005.02.009
Paponov IA, Teale W, Lang D, Paponov M, Reski R, Rensing SA, Palme K (2009) The evolution
of nuclear auxin signalling. BMC Evol Biol 9:126, doi:1471-2148-9-126 [pii] 10.1186/1471-
2148-9-126
Park JE, Park JY, Kim YS, Staswick PE, Jeon J, Yun J, Kim SY, Kim J, Lee YH, Park CM (2007)
GH3-mediated auxin homeostasis links growth regulation with stress adaptation response in
Arabidopsis. J Biol Chem 282(13):10036–10046. doi:10.1074/jbc.M610524200
Patten CL, Glick BR (1996) Bacterial biosynthesis of indole-3-acetic acid. Can J Microbiol 42
(3):207–220. doi:10.1139/m96-032
Pattison RJ, Catala C (2012) Evaluating auxin distribution in tomato (Solanum lycopersicum)
through an analysis of the PIN and AUX/LAX gene families. Plant J 70(4):585–598. doi:10.
1111/j.1365-313X.2011.04895.x
Pe´ret B, Swarup R, Jansen L, Devos G, Auguy F, Collin M, Santi C, Hocher V, Franche C,
Bogusz D, Bennett M, Laplaze L (2007) Auxin inﬂux activity is associated with frankia
infection during actinorhizal nodule formation in Casuarina glauca. Plant Physiol 144
(4):1852–1862. doi:10.1104/pp. 107.101337
Pe´ret B, De Rybel B, Casimiro I, Benkova E, Swarup R, Laplaze L, Beeckman T, Bennett MJ
(2009) Arabidopsis lateral root development: an emerging story. Trends Plant Sci 14:399–408.
doi:10.1016/j.tplants.2009.05.002
Pe´ret B, Swarup K, Ferguson A, Seth M, Yang Y, Dhondt S, James N, Casimiro I, Perry P, Syed A,
Yang H, Reemmer J, Venison E, Howells C, Perez-Amador MA, Yun J, Alonso J, Beemster
GT, Laplaze L, Murphy A, Bennett MJ, Nielsen E, Swarup R (2012) AUX/LAX genes encode
a family of auxin inﬂux transporters that perform distinct functions during Arabidopsis
development. Plant Cell 24(7):2874–2885. doi:10.1105/tpc.112.097766
Peris CIL, Rademacher EH, Weijers D (2010) Green beginnings – pattern formation in the early
plant embryo. In: Timmermans MCP (ed) Plant development, vol 91, Current topics in
developmental biology. Elsevier Academic, San Diego, pp 1–27. doi:10.1016/s0070-2153
(10)91001-6
Petra´sˇek J, Friml J (2009) Auxin transport routes in plant development. Development 136
(16):2675–2688. doi:10.1242/dev.030353
Petrasek J, Mravec J, Bouchard R, Blakeslee JJ, Abas M, Seifertova D, Wisniewska J, Tadele Z,
Kubes M, Covanova M, Dhonukshe P, Skupa P, Benkova E, Perry L, Krecek P, Lee OR, Fink
GR, Geisler M, Murphy AS, Luschnig C (2006) PIN proteins perform a rate-limiting function
in cellular auxin efﬂux. Science 312:914–918. doi:10.1126/science.1123542
Pinon V, Prasad K, Grigg SP, Sanchez-Perez GF, Scheres B (2013) Local auxin biosynthesis
regulation by PLETHORA transcription factors controls phyllotaxis in Arabidopsis. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 110(3):1107–1112. doi:10.1073/pnas.1213497110
Pires ND, Dolan L (2012) Morphological evolution in land plants: new designs with old genes.
Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 367(1588):508–518. doi:10.1098/rstb.2011.0252
Poli DB, Jacobs M, Cooke TJ (2003) Auxin regulation of axial growth in bryophyte sporophytes:
its potential signiﬁcance for the evolution of early land plants. Am J Bot 90(10):1405–1415.
doi:10.3732/ajb.90.10.1405
Porter WL, Thimann KV (1965) Molecular requirements for auxin action-I. Halogenated indoles
and indoleacetic acid. Phytochemistry 4(2):229–243. doi:10.1016/S0031-9422(00)86169-5
Prigge MJ, Lavy M, Ashton NW, Estelle M (2010) Physcomitrella patens auxin-resistant mutants
affect conserved elements of an auxin-signaling pathway. Curr Biol 20(21):1907–1912. doi:10.
1016/j.cub.2010.08.050
Reinhardt D (2005) Regulation of phyllotaxis. Int J Dev Biol 49(5–6):539–546, doi:041922dr [pii]
10.1387/ijdb.041922dr
286
P. Ramakrishna and I. De Smet

Reinhardt D, Pesce ER, Stieger P, Mandel T, Baltensperger K, Bennett M, Traas J, Friml J,
Kuhlemeier C (2003) Regulation of phyllotaxis by polar auxin transport. Nature 426:255–260.
doi:10.1038/nature02081
Rensing SA, Lang D, Zimmer AD, Terry A, Salamov A, Shapiro H, Nishiyama T, Perroud PF,
Lindquist EA, Kamisugi Y, Tanahashi T, Sakakibara K, Fujita T, Oishi K, Shin IT, Kuroki Y,
Toyoda A, Suzuki Y, Hashimoto S, Yamaguchi K, Sugano S, Kohara Y, Fujiyama A,
Anterola A, Aoki S, Ashton N, Barbazuk WB, Barker E, Bennetzen JL, Blankenship R, Cho
SH, Dutcher SK, Estelle M, Fawcett JA, Gundlach H, Hanada K, Heyl A, Hicks KA, Hughes J,
Lohr M, Mayer K, Melkozernov A, Murata T, Nelson DR, Pils B, Prigge M, Reiss B, Renner T,
Rombauts S, Rushton PJ, Sanderfoot A, Schween G, Shiu SH, Stueber K, Theodoulou FL,
Tu H, Van de Peer Y, Verrier PJ, Waters E, Wood A, Yang L, Cove D, Cuming AC, Hasebe M,
Lucas S, Mishler BD, Reski R, Grigoriev IV, Quatrano RS, Boore JL (2008) The
physcomitrella genome reveals evolutionary insights into the conquest of land by plants.
Science 319(5859):64–69, doi:1150646 [pii] 10.1126/science.1150646
Robert S, Kleine-Vehn J, Barbez E, Sauer M, Paciorek T, Baster P, Vanneste S, Zhang J, Simon S,
Covanova M, Hayashi K, Dhonukshe P, Yang Z, Bednarek SY, Jones AM, Luschnig C,
Aniento F, Zazimalova E, Friml J (2010) ABP1 mediates auxin inhibition of clathrin-
dependent endocytosis in Arabidopsis. Cell 143(1):111–121. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2010.09.027
Ross J, Reid J (2010) Evolution of growth-promoting plant hormones. Funct Plant Biol 37:10.
doi:10.1071/FP10063
Ruiz Rosquete M, Barbez E, Kleine-Vehn J (2012) Cellular auxin homeostasis: gatekeeping is
housekeeping. Mol Plant 5(4):772–786. doi:10.1093/mp/ssr109
Ruiz-Trillo I, Burger G, Holland PWH, King N, Lang BF, Roger AJ, Gray MW (2007) The origins
of multicellularity: a multi-taxon genome initiative. Trends Genet 23(3):113–118. doi:10.1016/
j.tig.2007.01.005
Sakakibara K (2003) Involvement of auxin and a homeodomain-leucine zipper I gene in rhizoid
development of the moss Physcomitrella patens. Development 130(20):4835–4846. doi:10.
1242/dev.00644
Sanderson M, Thorne J, Wikstrom N, Bremer K (2004) Molecular evidence on plant divergence
times. Am J Bot 91(10):1656–1665. doi:10.3732/ajb.91.10.1656
Sauer M, Balla J, Luschnig C, Wisniewska J, Reinohl V, Friml J, Benkova E (2006) Canalization
of auxin ﬂow by Aux/IAA-ARF-dependent feedback regulation of PIN polarity. Genes Dev 20
(20):2902–2911. doi:10.1101/gad.390806
Sawchuk MG, Edgar A, Scarpella E (2013) Patterning of leaf vein networks by convergent auxin
transport pathways. PLoS Genet 9(2):e1003294. doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1003294
Scarpella E, Helariutta Y (2010) Chapter Eight – Vascular pattern formation in plants. In: Marja
CPT (ed) Current topics in developmental biology, vol 91. Academic Press, USA, pp 221–265.
doi:10.1016/S0070-2153(10)91008-9
Shipman PD, Newell AC (2005) Polygonal planforms and phyllotaxis on plants. J Theor Biol 236
(2):154–197. doi:10.1016/j.jtbi.2005.03.007
Simon S, Petra´sˇek J (2011) Why plants need more than one type of auxin. Plant Sci 180(3):454–
460. doi:10.1016/j.plantsci.2010.12.007
Simon A, Glockner G, Felder M, Melkonian M, Becker B (2006) EST analysis of the scaly green
ﬂagellate Mesostigma viride (Streptophyta): implications for the evolution of green plants
(Viridiplantae). BMC Plant Biol 6(1):2. doi:10.1186/1471-2229-6-2
Smith RS, Guyomarc’h S, Mandel T, Reinhardt D, Kuhlemeier C, Prusinkiewicz P (2006) A
plausible model of phyllotaxis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103:1301–1306. doi:10.1073/pnas.
0510457103
Spaepen S, Vanderleyden J, Remans R (2007) Indole-3-acetic acid in microbial and
microorganism-plant signaling. FEMS Microbiol Rev 31(4):425–448. doi:10.1111/j.1574-
6976.2007.00072.x
13
Evolutionary Aspects of Auxin Signalling
287

Stark P (1921) Studien iiber traumatotrope und haptotrope Reizleitungsvorgange mit besonderer
Beru¨cksichtigung der Reizu¨bertragung auf fremde Arten und Gattungen. Jahr biicher ﬁir
wissenschaftliche Botanik 60:67
Stepanova AN (2008) TAA1-mediated auxin biosynthesis is essential for hormone crosstalk and
plant development. Cell 133:177–191. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2008.01.047
Stepanova AN, Hoyt JM, Hamilton AA, Alonso JM (2005) A link between ethylene and auxin
uncovered by the characterization of two root-speciﬁc ethylene-insensitive mutants in
Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 17:2230–2242. doi:10.1105/tpc.105.033365
Strader LC, Monroe-Augustus M, Bartel B (2008) The IBR5 phosphatase promotes Arabidopsis
auxin responses through a novel mechanism distinct from TIR1-mediated repressor degrada-
tion. BMC Plant Biol 8:41. doi:10.1186/1471-2229-8-41
Sugawara S, Hishiyama S, Jikumaru Y, Hanada A, Nishimura T, Koshiba T, Zhao Y, Kamiya Y,
Kasahara H (2009) Biochemical analyses of indole-3-acetaldoxime-dependent auxin biosyn-
thesis in Arabidopsis. Proc Natl Acad Sci 106(13):5430–5435. doi:10.1073/pnas.0811226106
Sun H, Basu S, Brady SR, Luciano RL, Muday GK (2004) Interactions between auxin transport
and the actin cytoskeleton in developmental polarity of Fucus distichus embryos in response to
light and gravity. Plant Physiol 135(1):266–278. doi:10.1104/pp. 103.034900
Swarup R, Friml J, Marchant A, Ljung K, Sandberg G, Palme K, Bennett M (2001) Localization of
the auxin permease AUX1 suggests two functionally distinct hormone transport pathways
operate in the Arabidopsis root apex. Genes Dev 15:2648–2653. doi:10.1101/gad.210501
Swarup K, Benkova E, Swarup R, Casimiro I, Peret B, Yang Y, Parry G, Nielsen E, De Smet I,
Vanneste S, Levesque MP, Carrier D, James N, Calvo V, Ljung K, Kramer E, Roberts R,
Graham N, Marillonnet S, Patel K (2008) The auxin inﬂux carrier LAX3 promotes lateral root
emergence. Nat Cell Biol 10:946–954. doi:10.1038/ncb1754
Szemenyei H, Hannon M, Long JA (2008) TOPLESS mediates auxin-dependent transcriptional
repression during Arabidopsis embryogenesis. Science 319(5868):1384–1386. doi:10.1126/
science.1151461
Sztein AE, Cohen JD, Cooke TJ (2000) Evolutionary patterns in the auxin metabolism of green
plants. Int J Plant Sci 161(6):849–859. doi:10.1086/317566
Tan X, Calderon-Villalobos LIA, Sharon M, Zheng C, Robinson CV, Estelle M, Zheng N (2007)
Mechanism of auxin perception by the TIR1 ubiquitin ligase. Nature 446(7136):640–645.
doi:10.1038/nature05731
Tao Y, Ferrer JL, Ljung K, Pojer F, Hong F, Long JA, Li L, Moreno JE, Bowman ME, Ivans LJ,
Cheng Y, Lim J, Zhao Y, Ballare CL, Sandberg G, Noel JP, Chory J (2008) Rapid synthesis of
auxin via a new tryptophan-dependent pathway is required for shade avoidance in plants. Cell
133:164–176. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2008.01.049
Terasaka K, Blakeslee JJ, Titapiwatanakun B, Peer WA, Bandyopadhyay A, Makam SN, Lee OR,
Richards EL, Murphy AS, Sato F, Yazaki K (2005) PGP4, an ATP binding cassette
P-glycoprotein, catalyzes auxin transport in Arabidopsis thaliana roots. Plant Cell 17
(11):2922–2939. doi:10.1105/tpc.105.035816
Thimann KV (1969) The auxins. In: Wilkins MB (ed) The physiology of plant growth and
development. McGraw-Hill, New York, p 345
Thimann KV, Skoog F (1933) Studies on the growth hormone of plants: III. The inhibiting action
of the growth substance on bud development. Proc Natl Acad Sci 19(7):714–716
Titapiwatanakun B, Blakeslee JJ, Bandyopadhyay A, Yang H, Mravec J, Sauer M, Cheng Y,
Adamec J, Nagashima A, Geisler M, Sakai T, Friml J, Peer WA, Murphy AS (2009) ABCB19/
PGP19 stabilises PIN1 in membrane microdomains in Arabidopsis. Plant J 57(1):27–44.
doi:10.1111/j.1365-313X.2008.03668.x
Tivendale ND, Davies NW, Molesworth PP, Davidson SE, Smith JA, Lowe EK, Reid JB, Ross JJ
(2010) Reassessing the role of N-hydroxytryptamine in auxin biosynthesis. Plant Physiol 154
(4):1957–1965. doi:10.1104/pp. 110.165803
Tromas A, Paponov I, Perrot-Rechenmann C (2010) AUXIN BINDING PROTEIN 1: functional
and evolutionary aspects. Trends Plant Sci 15(8):436–446. doi:10.1016/j.tplants.2010.05.001
288
P. Ramakrishna and I. De Smet

Tsavkelova E, Cherdyntseva T, Klimova S, Shestakov A, Botina S, Netrusov A (2007) Orchid-
associated bacteria produce indole-3-acetic acid, promote seed germination, and increase their
microbial yield in response to exogenous auxin. Arch Microbiol 188(6):655–664. doi:10.1007/
s00203-007-0286-x
Turmel M (2006) The chloroplast genome sequence of Chara vulgaris sheds new light into the
closest green algal relatives of land plants. Mol Biol Evol 23(6):1324–1338. doi:10.1093/
molbev/msk018
Ugartechea-Chirino Y, Swarup R, Swarup K, Peret B, Whitworth M, Bennett M, Bougourd S
(2009) The AUX1 LAX family of auxin inﬂux carriers is required for the establishment of
embryonic root cell organization in Arabidopsis thaliana. Ann Bot 105(2):277–289. doi:10.
1093/aob/mcp287
Utsuno K, Shikanai T, Yamada Y, Hashimoto T (1998) AGR, an agravitropic locus of Arabidopsis
thaliana, encodes a novel membrane-protein family member. Plant Cell Physiol 39(10):1111–
1118
Van den Hoek C, Mann D, Jahns HM (1996) Algae: an introduction to phycology. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge
Verrier PJ, Bird D, Burla B, Dassa E, Forestier C, Geisler M, Klein M, Kolukisaoglu U¨ , Lee Y,
Martinoia E, Murphy A, Rea PA, Samuels L, Schulz B, Spalding EP, Yazaki K, Theodoulou
FL (2008) Plant ABC proteins – a uniﬁed nomenclature and updated inventory. Trends Plant
Sci 13(4):151–159. doi:10.1016/j.tplants.2008.02.001
Viaene T, Delwiche CF, Rensing SA, Friml J (2013) Origin and evolution of PIN auxin trans-
porters in the green lineage. Trends Plant Sci 18(1):5–10, doi:S1360-1385(12)00194-X [pii]
10.1016/j.tplants.2012.08.009
Vieten A, Sauer M, Brewer PB, Friml J (2007) Molecular and cellular aspects of auxin-transport-
mediated development. Trends Plant Sci 12(4):160–168. doi:10.1016/j.tplants.2007.03.006
Wabnik K, Kleine-Vehn J, Govaerts W, Friml J (2011) Prototype cell-to-cell auxin transport
mechanism by intracellular auxin compartmentalization. Trends Plant Sci 16(9):468–475.
doi:10.1016/j.tplants.2011.05.002S1360-1385(11)00100-2
Went FW (1927) Wuchsstoff und wachstum. J.H. de Bussy, Amsterdam
Went F, Thimann K (1937) Phytohormones. Macmillan, New York, NY
Wodniok S, Brinkmann H, Glo¨ckner G, Heidel AJ, Philippe H, Melkonian M, Becker B (2011)
Origin of land plants: do conjugating green algae hold the key? BMC Evol Biol 11(1):104.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-104
Woodward AW, Bartel B (2005) Auxin: regulation, action, and interaction. Ann Bot 95(5):707–
735. doi:10.1093/aob/mci083
Yang H, Murphy AS (2009) Functional expression and characterization of Arabidopsis ABCB,
AUX1 and PIN auxin transporters in Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Plant J 59(1):179–191.
doi:10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.03856.x
Yang Y, Hammes UZ, Taylor CG, Schachtman DP, Nielsen E (2006) High-afﬁnity auxin transport
by the AUX1 inﬂux carrier protein. Curr Biol 16(11):1123–1127. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2006.04.
029
Yokoya NS, West JA, Luchi AE (2004) Effects of plant growth regulators on callus formation,
growth and regeneration in axenic tissue cultures of Gracilaria tenuistipitata and Gracilaria
perplexa (Gracilariales, Rhodophyta). Phycol Res 52(3):244–254. doi:10.1111/j.1440-183.
2004.00349.x
Yokoya NS, Stirk WA, van Staden J, Nova´k O, Turecˇkova´ V, Peˇncˇı´k A, Strnad M (2010)
Endogenous cytokinins, auxins, and abscisic acid in red algae from Brazil. J Phycol 46
(6):1198–1205. doi:10.1111/j.1529-8817.2010.00898.x
Yoon HS, Hackett JD, Ciniglia C, Pinto G, Bhattacharya D (2004) A molecular timeline for the
origin of photosynthetic eukaryotes. Mol Biol Evol 21(5):809–818. doi:10.1093/molbev/
msh075
13
Evolutionary Aspects of Auxin Signalling
289

Zazˇı´malova´ E, Krˇecˇek P, Sku˚pa P, Hoyerova´ K, Petra´sˇek J (2007) Polar transport of the plant
hormone auxin – the role of PIN-FORMED (PIN) proteins. Cell Mol Life Sci 64(13):1621–
1637. doi:10.1007/s00018-007-6566-4
Zazˇı´malova´ E, Murphy AS, Yang H, Hoyerova´ K, Hosˇek P (2010) Auxin transporters—why so
many? Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2(3):a001552. doi:10.1101/cshperspect.a001552
Zhao Y (2010) Auxin biosynthesis and its role in plant development. Annu Rev Plant Biol 61:49–
64. doi:10.1146/annurev-arplant-042809-112308
Zhao Y (2012) Auxin biosynthesis: a simple two-step pathway converts tryptophan to indole-3-
acetic acid in plants. Mol Plant 5(2):334–338. doi:10.1093/mp/ssr104
Zimmerman PW, Wilcoxon F (1935) Several chemical growth substances which cause initiation
of root and other responses in plants. Contrib Boyce Thompson Inst 7:209–229
290
P. Ramakrishna and I. De Smet

Chapter 14
Auxin and Self-Organisation
Peter Nick
Abstract This essay develops a conceptual framework to understand the role of
auxin for the genesis of plant organisms. This framework has to consider the
speciﬁcities of the plant lifestyle and underscores the fact that plant organisation
is highly modular. The assembly of these modules is controlled through robust self-
organisation driven by autocatalytic loops linked to lateral inhibition which can be
formally described as reaction–diffusion system in sensu Turing. Instead of actual
inhibitory molecules as in the original Turing model, they achieve lateral inhibition
by mutual competition for an activator (auxin). This can be demonstrated for
phyllotaxis, but also for vascular differentiation. We study self-organisation in
cell strains from tobacco and ﬁnd that individual cell divisions within a ﬁle are
synchronised through weak coupling based on a directional ﬂow of auxin. We use
this system as a simple minimal organism we have identiﬁed an oscillatory circuit
as central element of self-organisation. This self-referring circuit connects auxin-
dependent remodelling of the actin cytoskeleton with actin-dependent remodelling
of auxin ﬂux. The essay concludes with the working hypothesis that the contiguity
of plant organisms is manifest in time (“rhythm”) rather than in space (“body”) and
describes an experimental model where the induction of cell axis and polarity as
base for self-organisation can be studied de novo in regenerating protoplasts.
P. Nick (*)
Molecular Cell Biology, Botanical Institute, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Kaiserstr. 2,
Karlsruhe 76128, Germany
e-mail: peter.nick@bio.uni-karlsruhe.de
E. Zazˇı´malova´ et al. (eds.), Auxin and Its Role in Plant Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-7091-1526-8_14, © Springer-Verlag Wien 2014
291

1
Why Plant Organisms Are Really Different
1.1
It All Starts with Biophysics
All life has to balance supply with consumption. Supply has to occur through the
surface, whereas consumption is a function of volume. A growing cell will increase
surface by the second power of the radius, but volume by the third power. As a
consequence, supply (surface, r2) and consumption (volume, r3) will diverge
progressively. To bridge this gap, metabolic efﬁciency has to be elevated—how-
ever, this is possible only due to the innate constraints set for instance by protein
structure. When this tunable component of metabolic efﬁciency is enriched, the
surface has to be increased by invaginations or protrusions, a phenomenon already
observed already in unicellular organisms. Such surface increases confer a selective
advantage, because a larger organism acquires buffering against environmental
ﬂuctuations and, most important, is less readily devoured by competitors.
As a consequence of their photosynthetic lifestyle, plants have to augment their
surface by centrifugal extension, generating a considerable degree of mechanical
load (Fig. 14.1a). As long as plants remained aquatic, this load was at least partially
relieved by buoyancy, allowing considerable sizes even for fairly simple architec-
tures. However, when plants began to conquer terrestrial habitats, they had to
develop ﬂexible, yet robust, mechanical supports. The invention of vasculature-
based modules, so-called telomes (Zimmermann 1965), became a decisive factor
for the evolutionary success of land plants (Fig. 14.1b). Mechanical load shaped
plant architecture down to the cellular level: Plant cells are endowed with a rigid
cell wall with speciﬁc and fundamental consequences for cell division and cell
expansion. These cellular speciﬁcities are of tremendous agronomical impact. For
instance, the reduction of lodging in cereals is considered as pivotal factor for the
success of the so-called Green Revolution (for the cellular details, refer to Nick
2012).
The central point of these considerations is that plants were channelled towards a
sessile lifestyle due to biophysical constraints.
1.2
A Consequence: Cells Versus Organisms—Why the Plant
Approach Is Different
In addition to plant architecture, the sessile lifestyle has shaped the mode of
morphogenesis. In animals, the Bauplan is laid down early in development. In
some cases, even maternal factors have been found to complement the DNA of the
embryo providing a kind of “morphogenetic inheritance”. For instance, the
anterior–posterior polarity in the Drosophila embryo is determined by a gradient
of maternal, untranslated mRNA encoding transcription factors such as BICOID or
292
P. Nick

NANOS (Nu¨sslein-Volhard 1995). Even in classical models for epigenetic mor-
phogenesis, such as the amphibian embryo (Spemann 1936), the dorsiventral
polarity of frog eggs is established by autocatalytic feedback of polarising signals
(gravity, sperm entrance) upon inherited patterns. These inherent patterns include
not only preformed morphogenetic movements, but also transport and translation of
maternal mRNA coding for cytoskeletal proteins and polar determinants (Elinson
and Rowning 1988). In these models, the Bauplan is laid down during early
development, often prior to cellularisation. Differentiation proceeds from the
level of the entire organism down to the level of individual cells.
Again, plants are different: The genetic determination of plant shape is not as
stringent as for animal development, but depends strongly on the environment. As
central feature of this open morphogenesis, growth is not conﬁned to early devel-
opment, but continues throughout the entire life cycle. The ability to adjust growth
in response to environmental stimuli is central for the adaptation of the individual
plant to the challenges of its habitat. As a consequence of the rigid cell walls,
cellular movements, a central mechanism in animal development, are not relevant
for plant morphogenesis. The basic morphogenetic unit in plant development is the
individual cell. Differentiation initiates from the level of individual cells and
subsequently proceeds up to the level of the entire organism. This fact is highlighted
by the ability to regenerate entire plants from almost any plant cell. In animals, such
totipotency is conﬁned to the fertilised egg cell and, sometimes, to its immediate
descendants (Spemann 1936).
Thus, the principal difference (although there are deﬁnitely transitions that are
now ignored for the sake of being clear) between plant and animal morphogenesis
can be condensed into the following statement: In animals, the organism produces
cells, whereas in plants, cells produce an organism. This means that the potency to
form an organism must be enshrined in the individual plant cell.
Fig. 14.1 Plant architecture is shaped by mechanical load. (a) The lever force produced when a
branch doubles its length (from d1 ¼ 1 to d2 ¼ 2) grows fourfold. (b) The development of telomes
as load-bearing architectural module in the early Devonian was decisive for the evolutionary
success of land plants
14
Auxin and Self-Organisation
293

2
Why Plants Need Coordinative Signalling?
2.1
Open Patterning
Plant cells are ﬂexible in their developmental potency. Cell expansion is under
control of phytohormones and environmental factors such as light (Lockhard 1960).
The rapid expansion of cells is complemented by a slower addition of morphoge-
netic elements (cells or organ primordia), which does not occur randomly, but is
ordered in space and time. This pattern formation (in sensu Bu¨nning 1965) depends,
on the one hand, on intrinsic signals that are obviously deﬁned by genetic factors
(otherwise there would be no base for classical plant taxonomy!). On the other
hand, plant patterning can integrate signals from the environment. Environmental
integration is evident, when a shoot meristem is committed for ﬂowering controlled
by day length and subsequently will form ﬂoral instead of vegetative organs. In
animal patterning, the elements that are organised during pattern formation are
generated prior to being differentiated. In a fruit ﬂy embryo, for example, numerous
nuclei are produced before they are patterned depending on gradients derived from
maternal factors. Plants follow different developmental rules—here, the pattern is
perpetuated in an iterative manner when new elements are continuously added
during the patterning process.
This pattern iteration could be achieved, in principle, by assigning different
developmental fates to the daughter cells during cell division. The pattern would
then result from an ordered sequence of such formative divisions. Such a mecha-
nism had been proposed for the root meristem of the model plant Arabidopsis
thaliana, which is characterised by a highly stereotypic cell lineage (Scheres
et al. 1994). However, elegant laser ablation experiments (Van den Berg
et al. 1995) and functional analysis of mutants with aberrant tissue layers (Nakajima
et al. 2001) revealed that even in this stereotypic system, cell fate was deﬁned by
signals (transcription factors) from adjacent cells and not by cellular genealogy.
Generally, the principal totipotency of plant cells is difﬁcult to reconcile with a
strong impact of cell lineage. Patterning in plants must result from coordinative
signals between the already deﬁned (older) regions of the pattern and the newly
formed elements of the ﬁeld that still have to acquire a speciﬁc identity.
2.2
Coordinative Signalling During Patterning
Is Evolutionary Ancient
Plants
acquired photosynthesis
by sustainable
symbiosis with
autotrophic
cyanobacteria. Functional multicellularity is already present in this class of pro-
karyotes. Filamentous cyanobacteria are capable of a simple cell differentiation
yielding so-called heterocysts that can convert atmospheric nitrogen into
294
P. Nick

ammonium and thus overcome the limitations of nitrogen bioavailability. Since
ﬁlamentous cyanobacteria combine open patterning with developmental ﬂexibility,
coordinative signalling would be expected already in these prokaryotic precursors
of the plant lifestyle. The nitrogenase required for the ﬁxation of nitrogen dates
back to the earliest anoxic phases of life on this planet and is therefore highly
sensitive to oxygen. To safeguard the functionality of nitrogenase, any photosyn-
thetic activity (releasing oxygen) has to be excluded from heterocysts. Thus, the
heterocysts must be supplied with assimilates from their photosynthetic neighbours.
Nitrogen export and assimilate import have to be balanced even though the total
number of cells grows continuously, which represents a classical problem of open
patterning. This balance is regulated by iterative algorithms, whereby preexisting
heterocysts suppress the differentiation of new heterocysts over a range of around
ten cells. When, as a consequence of cell division, the distance between the
heterocysts exceeds this threshold, a new heterocyst will differentiate between
them. Using patterning mutants in Anabaena, the factor responsible for this lateral
inhibition could be identiﬁed as the diffusible peptide patS (Yoon and Golden
1998). Differentiation (including the synthesis of patS) will begin in clusters of
neighbouring cells. However, one of these cells will excel the others and then
immediately start to suppress further differentiation in its neighbourhood (Yoon
and Golden 2001).
Thus, already the photosynthetic pluricellular prokaryotes do not use a
predetermined cell fate but “negotiate” differentiation by signalling between
neighbouring cells.
3
The LEGO Principle of Plant Morphogenesis
Plants use a modular version of “organism” and “identity”. Due to their centrifugal
architecture, plant organisms lack contiguous borders, a hierarchy of the “body”
over its parts (which is linked with a strong cell autonomy). Moreover, there is not
any impact of cellular genealogy on the set-up of the Bauplan, nor a predeﬁned
developmental programme. Nevertheless, they are able to defend their identity
against the ﬂuctuations of their environment. Their buffering capacity even excels
that of animals by orders of magnitude. Despite strong variations in the details of
individual development (which is tuned with the respective environmental condi-
tions), the characteristics of each plant species emerge as a speciﬁc way to develop,
respond and propagate. Without this speciﬁcity, no classical plant taxonomy would
be possible.
We encounter here a seemingly paradox combination of ﬂexible and species
characteristic development. This paradox can be resolved considering the pro-
nounced modularity of plant development. To use a metaphor: plant development
resembles a play of LEGO bricks. Each brick is simple in shape and robust enough
to survive most if not all challenges posed by a young architect. The assembly of
these bricks is extremely ﬂexible, though, and allows for almost any conceivable
14
Auxin and Self-Organisation
295

variation of architecture. Where would be genetic information be placed in this
metaphor? Probably less in the inspiration of the young architect, but rather in the
way the bricks are produced in the factory.
What are these “LEGO bricks” of plant development? There are principally
three types of bricks: architectural, cellular, and genetic (Fig. 14.2).
3.1
Architectural Modules
The architectural “LEGO bricks” are the telomic modules arranged in a ﬂexible
way integrating mechanical load with a panel of environmental signals (with light
as central component). The arrangement of telomic modules is under control of
auxin ﬂux from the aerial organs towards the roots driving the differentiation of
ground tissue into vasculature (as core element of the developing telome). This
architectural principle is simple, robust, and ﬂexible. Cellular details of recently
discovered fossil ﬁnds of the progymnosperm Archaeopteris (Rothwell and
Lev-Yadun 2005) suggest that already in the Upper Devonian, 375 million years
before our time, the arrangement of telomes was controlled by auxin ﬂow. The
secret of the land plant success story seems to reside in this modular morphology.
Fig. 14.2 Modular
organisation of plant
development. Plant
architecture is based on
morphological modules
(telomes) that are combined
in a ﬂexible manner
depending on
environmental conditions.
Individual plant cells are
endowed with innate
directionality (cell polarity)
that is dynamically aligned
by signal ﬂow through the
morphological modules.
Self-referring robust genetic
circuits guide the
differentiation of the
cellular and the
morphological modules and
are recombined in temporal
patterns
296
P. Nick

3.2
Cellular Modules
The polarity of vascular cells is aligned with the shoot–root axis and represents the
cellular correlate of the “LEGO bricks” forming the base for the telomic principle.
The directional transport of auxin (see Chap. 4) is brought about by the combination
of multidirectional, “exploratory” inﬂux and directional efﬂux (due to the polar
localisation of auxin efﬂux carriers). The polar localisation of auxin efﬂux carriers
is a continuous process rather than a ﬁxed structure: These carriers cycle continu-
ously and rapidly (the lifetime of the carriers at the membrane are in the range of a
few minutes!) between an endocytic compartment and the site of their activity at the
plasma membrane. The intensity of cycling depends on the presence of auxin
(Paciorek et al. 2005) and differs between the different poles of the cell establishing
such a polar distribution (Dhonukshe et al. 2008) providing the positive ampliﬁca-
tion loop required for the auxin canalisation mechanism driving vascular pattern-
ing. Sensory input on the auxin distribution of surrounding cells continuously
“questions” this loop either reinforcing the existing directionality of the cell or
leading to a new polarity. Since morphology and cellular architecture are brought
about by modular, self-organised processes, the genetic control might be relatively
simple.
3.3
Genetic Modules
The genetic “LEGO bricks” underlying the Bauplan of land plants might be robust
regulatory circuits that are launched under control of fairly permissive temporal
patterns. By shifting these programmes in time (so called heterochrony), new
architectures can be generated that at ﬁrst sight are very spectacular. The power
of heterochrony is illustrated by the case of the “Skye” ecotype of the model plant
Arabidopsis thaliana (thale cress). Normal thale cress plants produce a leaf rosette
but, upon bolting, switch to the formation of small, single leaves protruding from
the elongating inﬂorescence. This switch is impaired in the “Skye” ecotype
resulting in a fundamentally altered architecture with aerial rosettes formed from
the axillary meristems of the bolting inﬂorescence (Grbic´ and Bleecker 1996). It
could be shown that this spectacular change of the Bauplan was caused by muta-
tions in two relatively inconspicuous genes that modulate, among numerous other
factors, the timing of developmental processes. The mutations simply delay the
inactivation of the vegetative programming during bolting. The ongoing vegetative
development at simultaneous launch of a ﬂoral programme accounted for a funda-
mentally different morphology that at ﬁrst sight seemed to result from “macroevo-
lution”. A comparative approach on plant development rapidly reveals that
evolutionary adaptations of plant architecture can often be deduced from
heterochronic shifts between fairly simply morphogenetic processes (for review,
see Li and Johnston 2000).
14
Auxin and Self-Organisation
297

3.4
The Secret of Plant Morphogenesis: Robust Modules,
Flexible Assembly
In summary, plant organisms assemble morphological, cellular, and genetic mod-
ules to accommodate challenges from the environment with the innate necessities
of physiology. These modules stem from fairly robust self-organisation providing a
mechanism to maintain the speciﬁc quality of the respective plant. The assembly of
these modules is rather ﬂexible and can be tuned with the exogenous necessity of
environment. Since the modules are relatively robust and autonomous, the signals
that regulate modular assembly may be very simple. Complexity is provided by the
receiving modular process, not by signal triggering this process. Indole-acetic acid,
the natural auxin, is astonishingly small and simple. However, it combines three
molecular properties (none of which is spectacular): Auxin is a small organic acid
and therefore easily moves through the acidic environment of the apoplast. Auxin
carries a lipophilic indole ring and therefore can permeate the cell membrane from
any direction, which allows a cell to “explore” the auxin levels in its
neighbourhood. Auxin is a weak acid and thus readily trapped in the neutral
cytoplasm and has to be actively exported by carriers, which allows to create a
directionality of auxin efﬂux. When the localisation of the efﬂux transporter is
shifted under the control of auxin itself, this will generate a self-regulatory circuit
that perfectly meets the criteria of a reaction–diffusion system in sensu
Turing (1952).
4
Auxin and Coordinative Signalling
4.1
Plant Patterning and Coordinative Signalling:
Phyllotaxis
Phyllotaxis allows to optimise the position of leaves to maximise photosynthetic
efﬁciency. A prospective leaf primordium will form at maximal distance from the
older primordia indicating inhibitory ﬁelds (Schoute 1913). In fact, when the
youngest primordium is isolated from its environment by tangential incisions, this
will be the subsequently formed primordia will shift their position (Snow and Snow
1931). This shift was originally interpreted in terms of the additional space created
by the incision that would allow the incipient primordia to move to a position where
they otherwise were excluded (ﬁrst available space model). Later, inhibitory ﬁelds
emanating from the older primordia have been proposed, but the nature of these
inhibitory signals has been under debate for a long time. Basically, there were two
standpoints in this debate: biophysics versus biochemistry.
298
P. Nick

4.2
Biophysical Model of Phyllotaxis
Buckling from the older primordial would, under conditions of the tissue tension
present in a growing meristem, inhibit by mechanical stresses the formation of new
primordial in the neighbourhood. In fact, the position of prospective primordial
could be perfectly predicted by models of stress–strain patterns (for review, see
Green 1980). As expected from a biophysical model, local release of tissue tension
by beads coated with the cell wall loosening protein extensin could invert the
phyllotactic pattern (Fleming et al. 1997). As early event of incipient primordial
commitment, membrane-associated microtubules reorient sharply and subsequently
align with the stress–strain pattern (Hardham et al. 1980). By means of
GFP-labelled microtubules, this phenomenon could be followed in a non-invasive
manner in living shoot apices of Arabidopsis thaliana (Hamant et al. 2008). A
combination of live cell imaging with mathematical modelling of stress–strain
pattern revealed that cortical microtubules align in the direction of maximal
mechanical stress in a transcellular pattern. When the outer meristem layer was
removed by laser ablation, microtubules reoriented in orientations predicted by the
mathematical model, followed by a compensatory bulging of the apex. The impact
of cortical microtubules is further corroborated by recent evidence for a role of the
microtubule-severing
protein
katanin
for
meristem
patterning
(Uyttewaal
et al. 2012).
4.3
Biochemical Model of Phyllotaxis
As alternative to the biophysical inhibition, chemical signals from the older
primordia were proposed to inhibit the initiation of a new primordium in their
proximity. This model was supported by studies in apices that had been freed from
primordia by application of auxin transport inhibitors (Reinhardt et al. 2000), an
experimental system that allows study of the de novo generation of a pattern in the
absence of any prepattern. These studies showed that the coordinative signal
depends on auxin. Unexpectedly, the preexisting primordia did not act as sources,
but as sinks for auxin. This leads to mutual competition for free auxin within the
apical belt that is competent for the initiation of leaf primordia. Since pre-existing
primordia attract auxin ﬂuxes from the meristem, they drain their neighbourhood
from diffusible auxin, such that the initiation of new primordia is inhibited (Rein-
hardt et al. 2003). When the auxin efﬂux regulator PIN1 is mutated, this will, as a
consequence, strongly perturb phyllotaxis, supporting the importance of directional
auxin efﬂux for the pattern. However, a recent detailed analysis of the pin1 mutant
revealed that the phyllotactic pattern is disturbed but not eliminated, indicating that
PIN1 is not the only factor capable of guiding the pattern (Guenot et al. 2012).
14
Auxin and Self-Organisation
299

4.4
Synthesis: The Auxin–Microtubule–Tension Loop
As for most dichotomous debates in biology, reality seems to be a synthesis of the
two seemingly exclusive standpoints: By measuring tissue rigidity with Atomic
Force Microscopy in the vegetative apex of Arabidopsis thaliana, an auxin-
dependent local softening of the cell wall could be demonstrated. It was further
shown that this relaxation of wall tension was mediated by a speciﬁc modiﬁcation
of wall pectins homogalacturonan de-methyl-esteriﬁcation (Braybrook and
Peaucelle 2013). Interestingly, when this modiﬁcation was administered in the
absence of auxin transport, it was not effective. Thus, both functional auxin
transport and local reduction of mechanical stress were necessary and sufﬁcient
for phyllotactic patterning. The resulting model is based on a regulatory feedback
loop between auxin transport and tissue tension and requires that the direction of
mechanic stress can be transduced into altered localisation of auxin efﬂux trans-
porters. Microtubules that can guide the localisation of PIN1 (Heisler et al. 2010)
and simultaneously perceive mechanic stress might be the mechanistic link. This
auxin–microtubule–tension loop might thus provide the synthetic bridge reconcil-
ing the traditional antagonistic viewpoints on phyllotaxis.
4.5
Plant Patterning and Coordinative Signalling:
Vasculature
All land plants (except the archaic mosses) are made of load-bearing modular
elements, the telomes. These telomic modules consist of conductive woody vascu-
lature embedded in a cylinder of parenchymatic tissue with the potency for vascular
development, enclosed by an epidermal layer. The ﬂexible arrangement of telomes
represents the core process of plant architecture. The vasculature can be adjusted by
differentiation of parenchymatic cells to tune mechanic load and transport with the
perturbations, for instance, from wounds (Sachs 2000) or from growth as in the
venation of developing leaves (Mattsson et al. 1999). All cells of the parenchymatic
tissue are competent to differentiate into vasculature. This differentiation depends
on the ﬂow of auxin through these cells.
Although auxin can enter the cells of higher plants through speciﬁc import
channels, for the pattern of vasculature, the non-directional inﬂux through the
membrane is important (discussed in more detail in Sect. 6). The major natural
auxin, indolyl-3-acetic acid, is a weak acid and relatively small. In the acidic
environment at the outer face of a plant cells, it will be uncharged and therefore
can permeate through the membrane even without the help of inﬂux carriers. In the
more or less neutral cytoplasm, auxin is deprotonated and thus acquires a negative
charge that will prevent its spontaneous exit. Due to this ion-trap mechanism, auxin
will accumulate in the cell. However, it can exit by means of speciﬁc export pumps
that are localised asymmetrically, guided by cell polarity. The combination of
300
P. Nick

non-directional inﬂux and directional inﬂux produces a mutual competition of
individual cells for free auxin and a directional ﬂow in the direction of cell polarity.
A cell with more active or more localised auxin exporters will transport more auxin
than its neighbours and therefore cause a drainage of auxin. This mechanism for
lateral inhibition of individual elements is now combined by autocatalytic feed-
back: The differentiation from the ground state into a vascular cell fate is induced
by the ﬂux of auxin passing through the respective cell. Conversely, this differen-
tiation promotes cell polarity resulting in a stronger gradient of auxin exporters
what, in turn, will further stimulate auxin drainage of the neighbourhood.
This positive feedback, in combination with a lateral inhibition (caused by
mutual competition for auxin), drives the pattern of conductive tissue and thus
the arrangement of telomes. This “auxin canalisation” model has been extensively
studied and modelled mathematically and is capable, for instance, to predict
venation patterns in leaves (for review, see Berleth and Sachs 2001).
4.6
Plant Patterning: Order Without a “Great Chairman”
Biological patterns are shapes that become manifest on the level of a population of
cells or organs. They are holistic in quality and represent classical system properties
that emerge when the system is considered as an entity. At ﬁrst glance, this would
call for a strong hierarchy controlling the behaviour of the individual elements. To
use a metaphor from human societies: collectivism is usually bound to strong (and
often autocratic) leader personalities. This approach will not work for plant devel-
opment, though. As pointed out above, plant cells maintain a high level of auton-
omy and are not easily subdued to the rule of a “Great Chairman”. In addition, plant
cells behave in a highly stochastic manner, a property that ultimately can be
attributed to the diffuse organisation of environmental sensing (details are given
in Nick 2006): Plants lack specialised sensory organs. In shorthand, each individual
cell is able to sense most environmental signals in a monadic way and therefore has
to employ extreme ampliﬁcation of the sensory input resulting in all-or-none type
outputs on the level of individual cells. If all cells of a tissue would respond in a
homogenous manner, plant responses would be saturated already at very low input.
In case of light, the input from the new moon would produce the same output as full
sunlight at noon time. Due to the strong variation of sensory thresholds, plants can
differentiate between weak and strong stimuli by the frequency of individual cells
where sensing is activated. By integrating over the population of activated cells via
cell–cell communication, plants can extend their dynamic range of sensing com-
bining high sensitivity with differential responses to different signal input.
What can we generalise from phyllotaxis and vascular patterning? Both patterns
resist stochastic ﬂuctuations of the initial situation, they are based on lateral
inhibition between the elements of the pattern, and they contain qualitative deci-
sions generated via autocatalytic feedback loops. Both patterns can be described by
the mathematics of reaction–diffusion systems that were adapted to biology by
14
Auxin and Self-Organisation
301

Turing (1952) and have been quite successfully used to model various biological
patterns such as foot-head patterning in Hydra (Gierer et al. 1972) and segmenta-
tion in Drosophila (Meinhard 1986), but also leaf venation (Meinhard 1976). In
reaction–diffusion systems, a locally constrained, self-amplifying feedback loop of
an activator is linked to a far-ranging mutual inhibition (Gierer and Meinhard
1972). Auxin-dependent patterning differs in one aspect from the original model,
where the inhibitor is usually described as a positive entity (such as the patS peptide
acting in cyanobacterial patterning). In auxin-dependent patterning, lateral inhibi-
tion is brought about by mutual competition for the activator.
Self-activation combined to mutual competition also provides proportional
harmony, a system property of many organisms meaning that a new holistic
organisation can emerge independently of size, when the original system is either
divided or fused. In plants, this astounding ability becomes manifest as the lack of
physical body individuality: the plant body can be subdivided and the parts will
readily organise a new independent plantlet that in shape and architecture resembles
its progenitor organism.
5
Organismic Modules Are Built by “Auxin Resonance”
5.1
“Leaves in the Test Tube”: Experimental Reduction
of Plant Self-Organisation
Plants add, during their entire lifetime, new cells to the tip of roots and shoots. As
shown for the root meristem by elegant laser ablation experiments (van den Berg
et al. 1995), cell differentiation in the mitotically active meristems is controlled by
signals from the neighbouring, already differentiated, cells. However, when the
meristem becomes accessible to cell biological inspection, differentiation is already
channelled. At this stage, it is very difﬁcult, if not impossible, to manipulate the
pattern in a fundamental manner. Thus, meristems are beautiful systems to study
how patterns are perpetuated, but for the analysis of pattern induction, simpler
systems are needed, where determination has not progressed that far. Several years
ago, we have introduced cell lines derived from the ground tissue of tobacco shoots
as experimental system to study the primordial stages of division patterning
(Campanoni et al. 2003). These cell lines can be readily cultivated in suspensions
maintained under continuous rotation. Plant suspension cell lines are generally
considered as dedifferentiated and have even been termed “HeLa cells of plant
biology” (Nagata et al. 1992). However, they often preserve certain features from
their source tissue, such as the ability to generate the structured cell wall thicken-
ings characteristic for vascular cells (Nick et al. 2000), the ability to generate,
through a series of axial cell divisions, cell ﬁles with a clear axis and polarity, and
302
P. Nick

they have preserved responsiveness to the controlling signal, auxin. Since these ﬁles
derive from singular cells, they cannot rely on positional information inherited from
the mother tissue. Patterns of competence within a cell ﬁle must originate de novo
during the culture cycle.
Fig. 14.3 Models for the synchrony of division patterns in cell lines derived from tobacco
parenchyma. There are two concurrent possibilities—either individual cells act autonomously
(no coupling of their cell cycles, left) or they show temporary, unidirectional coupling of their cell
cycles (right). The schematic clocks represent the position of the cell cycle for the respective cell.
A position at “high noon” stands for the onset of mitosis. The predicted frequency distributions of
cell number per ﬁle are shown in the lower panel. Three principle cases are shown: (1) In the
absence of coupling, but under tight control of cell cycle duration would result in a sequence,
where frequency peaks are predicted for 2, 4, 8,. . ., 2n cells per ﬁle (left-hand column). (2) In the
absence of coupling and for a noisy cell cycle, there should be no clear frequency peaks, but odd-
and even-numbered cell ﬁles should occur at the same frequency (central column). (3) In case of
unidirectional coupling, a cell entering mitosis generates a signal that is conveyed to its down-
stream neighbour. This signal causes a phase shift by accelerating the cell cycle of the receiver
cell. For this unidirectional coupling, even for noisy cell cycles, a partial synchrony is predicted
with frequency peaks at 2, 4, 6,. . ., 2n cells per ﬁle (right-hand column). This model is the only that
predicts a frequency peak for six cells per ﬁle. This frequency peak (arrow) is diagnostic for
unidirectional coupling (bidirectional coupling would lead to a pattern as observed for uncoupled
cells under tight control of the cell cycle; see left-hand panel)
14
Auxin and Self-Organisation
303

5.2
Weak Coupling of Autonomous Oscillators
During the work with these tobacco cell ﬁles, we observed that ﬁles consisting of
even numbers of cells were dominating over ﬁles with uneven cell numbers
(Campanoni et al. 2003; Maisch and Nick 2007). At ﬁrst sight, frequency peaks
of even-numbered ﬁles might occur, when the cell cycle proceeds with a precise
timing (Fig. 14.3). This should generate ﬁles in a sequence of
f n
ð Þ ¼ 1, 2, 4, 8, . . . 2n
individual cells (with n representing the number of cell cycles). However, the length
of individual cell cycles varies over a broad range, and there is, in addition to the
expected peaks at 2n, a curious frequency peak for ﬁles composed of six cells
(in some cases accompanied by a smaller peak of ten cells). This observed feature
could be simulated using a mathematical model derived from non-linear dynamics,
where elementary oscillators (cycling cells) with a high level of noise (variation in
the length of individual cell cycles) were weakly coupled, and where the number of
these oscillators was not constant, but grows with time (Campanoni et al. 2003). In
contrast to concurrent models, this weak coupling algorithm was able to predict the
observed frequency peak of hexacellular ﬁles. Moreover, this model predicted
several non-intuitive properties of the experimental system. A striking feature of
the model was the prediction that coupling must be unidirectional, i.e. that the
coordinating signal is transported in a polar fashion. The coupling is seen as a phase
shift in the cell cycle, i.e. a dividing cell will cause its downstream neighbour to
accelerate its cell cycle such that it will also initiate mitosis. Unidirectional signal-
ling is a diagnostic feature of auxin transport. In fact, the predominance of even-
numbered cell ﬁles could be eliminated by low concentrations of 1-N-
naphthylphthalamic acid, a speciﬁc inhibitor of auxin exporters (and thus of
directional auxin transport). Although the noise in this system was considerable,
with high variation in the cycling period over the cell population, the division of
adjacent cells was synchronised to such a degree that ﬁles with uneven cell numbers
were rare compared to ﬁles with even numbers. Frequency distributions over the
cell number per ﬁle thus exhibited oscillatory behaviour with characteristic peaks at
even cell numbers (Fig. 14.3).
5.3
Sensitive Muscles: The Actin–Auxin Oscillator
Auxin efﬂux carriers are not static, but undergo dynamic cycling between intracel-
lular compartments and the plasma membrane. Treatment with the fungal toxin
Brefeldin A (BFA) traps the carriers in the intracellular compartments (Geldner
et al. 2001). This trapping is suppressed by cytochalasin D, an inhibitor of actin
assembly suggesting that actin is involved in the cycling of auxin efﬂux carriers. On
304
P. Nick

the other hand, the cargo of these carriers, auxin, controls the conformation of actin,
whereby the massive bundles prevalent in the absence of auxin are rapidly detached
into ﬁner ﬁlaments after addition of auxin (for review, see Nick 2010). Auxin can
stimulate its own transport by improving the polar localisation of the auxin efﬂux
carriers at the cell poles (Paciorek et al. 2005), suggesting that these transporters are
more efﬁciently moved along the ﬁner actin ﬁlaments in response to auxin. This
model was tested in rice seedlings expressing different levels of the actin-binding
domain of mouse talin in fusion with the yellow ﬂuorescent protein (Fig. 14.4). By
feeding radioactively labelled auxin to the tip of the seedling, the amount of
radioactivity recovered in an agar block at the seedling base (quantiﬁed by a
scintillation counter) could be used as measure for the efﬁciency of auxin transport.
Based on this experimental system, the debundling of actin ﬁlaments by exogenous
auxin could be shown to precede the concomitant stimulation of transport efﬁciency
(Nick et al. 2009). Upon overexpression of the talin marker, actin ﬁlaments were
constitutively bundled accompanied by a reduced capacity to transport auxin.
However, when exogenous auxin was added, these bundles relaxed into numerous
ﬁne strands of actin ﬁlaments followed by a promotion of auxin transport. These
ﬁndings demonstrate that
1. Actin reorganisation into ﬁne strands precedes the stimulation of auxin transport.
2. Fine strands of actin are necessary for efﬁcient auxin transport.
3. Actin reorganisation into ﬁne strands is sufﬁcient to promote auxin transport.
Thus, manipulation of actin can be used as tool to manipulate auxin transport—
at least in experimental systems, where polar auxin ﬂux is elevated to an extent that
the steady-state level of active transporters at the membrane becomes limiting. We
therefore transferred this strategy to further dissect the role of auxin transport for
division synchrony in the tobacco cell model. If actin is part of an auxin-driven
feedback loop, it should be possible to manipulate auxin-dependent patterning
through manipulation of actin. To test this prediction, we had to create a situation,
where actin is excessively bundled. For this purpose we employed a transgenic
approach, where we expressed the actin-binding domain of mouse talin in fusion
with the yellow ﬂuorescent protein. Mouse talin competes with endogenous actin
depolymerisation factors for binding sites on actin such that the actin ﬁlaments are
progressively trapped in a bundled conﬁguration (Ketelaar et al. 2004). In fact,
overexpression of the construct in tobacco cells produced constitutively bundled
ﬂuorescent actin ﬁlaments. As predicted, the synchrony of cell division was
impaired in this line, but could be restored by addition of auxins along with a
normal organisation of actin. A screen for actin-binding proteins mediating the
effect of auxin upon actin organisation identiﬁed tobacco actin depolymerisation
factor 2 (NtADF2) as central player. A cell line overexpressing this factor is
impaired in division synchrony in a highly speciﬁc way—in this line, the frequency
peak at n ¼ 6 diagnostic of unidirectional weak coupling is absent, but can be
rescued by addition of PIP2, a phospholipid speciﬁcally sequestering ADFs
(Durst et al. 2013).
14
Auxin and Self-Organisation
305

We therefore arrive at a model of a self-referring regulatory circuit between
polar auxin transport and actin organisation, where auxin promotes its own trans-
port by shaping actin ﬁlaments. This circuit seems to contribute to the self-
ampliﬁcation of auxin transport, a central element in current models of auxin-
dependent patterning. The implications of this model are to be explored, but already
at this stage it can be used to derive characteristic properties of basipetal auxin
transport. For instance, the model predicts that the transport of IAA should oscil-
late. Auxin will induce ﬁne actin strands that will partition auxin efﬂux carriers
more efﬁciently to the plasma membrane, such that the intracellular auxin concen-
tration will decrease. This decrease will cause bundling of actin ﬁlaments and, as a
consequence, efﬂux carriers will be sequestered in intracellular compartments,
culminating in a reduced efﬂux such that auxin received from the adjacent cells
will accumulate and trigger a new cycle. The frequency of these oscillations should
depend on the dynamics of actin reorganisation (around 20 min) and the speed of
carrier cycling which is in the range of 5–10 min (as inferred from the comparison
of auxin uptake in control versus BFA-treated cells; Paciorek et al. 2005). From
these parameters, auxin transport is predicted to oscillate with a period of about 25–
30 min. In fact, such oscillations with a period of 25 min had been observed during
classical experiments on basipetal auxin transport in maize coleoptiles (Hertel and
Flory 1968).
Fig. 14.4 Two-phase model for the exploration of space by auxin in plant self-organisation. A
self-amplifying feedback between non-directional auxin inﬂux through ion-trapping and gradient-
dependent cycling of auxin efﬂux and inﬂux carriers allows to integrate auxin concentration over
the environment of a given cell and to generate a polar ﬂux driving self-organisation
306
P. Nick

5.4
New Approaches to Morphogenesis: Chemical
Engineering
The polarity of ground tissue cells provides the cellular base for the alignment of
telomes as architectural modules. A self-referring, oscillatory circuit involving
actin remodelling, rapid cycling of auxin efﬂux carriers, non-directional auxin
inﬂux, and directional auxin efﬂux has been identiﬁed as core element of this cell
polarity. To dissect this circuit, it is not sufﬁcient to identify molecular players such
as ADF2 (Durst et al. 2013), but it is necessary to generate and manipulate the
spatial patterns of molecules at subcellular resolution. Although genetic engineer-
ing allows to target transgenes to speciﬁc compartments using localisation motives,
the spatial resolution of this strategy is too coarse-grained. New strategies are
warranted to increase spatial resolution. To achieve this goal we used chemical
engineering based on caged auxin that can be released by localised irradiation in
single cells or even parts of a cell (Kusaka et al. 2009). Caged compounds
conventionally use 2-nitrobenzyl-esters as caging group. However, the ester bond
was found to be enzymatically hydrolysed in plant cells such that auxin was
released prior to photolysis producing high unspeciﬁc background activities. By
molecular modelling of the active centres of these enzymes, an esterase-resistant
caging group, (2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)(2-nitrobenzyl) ester, could be designed and
employed successfully. We administered this tool to the actin–auxin oscillator to
demonstrate in a proof-of-principle experiment that a biological response can be
controlled by light at cellular resolution. By using an auxin-inducible promoter
(DR5) driving a GFP reporter, we were able to conﬁrm that auxin was released only
in the irradiated cell. Subsequently, we used the cell line overexpressing talin in
fusion with the yellow ﬂuorescent protein. In this cell line, actin is constitutively
bundled, but can be rescued by addition of exogenous auxin (Maisch and Nick
2007). By feeding caged auxin to this cell line and irradiating individual cells of a
ﬁle, we could trigger a speciﬁc reorganisation of actin ﬁlaments that was conﬁned to
the irradiated cell (Kusaka et al. 2009). Thus, chemical engineering using light-
switchable triggers can now be exploited to steer auxin gradients during self-
organisation of the tobacco cell model. At present, we are completing a study,
where auxin is released in different cells of a ﬁle during speciﬁc stages of the
culture cycle accompanied by speciﬁc changes in division patterns. Recent exper-
iments using protoplasts from ﬂuorescently tagged actin marker lines could dem-
onstrate that even intracellular auxin gradients can be produced that will then be
transduced into intracellular gradients of actin organisation (Liu et al. 2013).
14
Auxin and Self-Organisation
307

6
The Inﬂux Issue: Auxin as Exploratory Molecule
The generation of spatial patterns by coordinative signals requires that space can be
explored in different directions. This seems to contrast with the pronounced polarity
of auxin transport. This directionality has been classically explained by polar efﬂux
of auxin (Rubery and Sheldrake 1974). The exploratory part of coordination would
be the non-directional inﬂux of indolyl-acetic acid through the plasma membrane
maintained by a chemical gradient, where IAA is stripped from its proton in the
more or less neutral cytoplasm. The molecular identiﬁcation of auxin inﬂux carriers
(Bennett et al. 1996) that are localised in a polar fashion opposite to the PIN efﬂux
carriers (Swarup et al. 2001) has shifted focus a bit. These ﬁndings led to a model,
where not only efﬂux but also directional inﬂux contributes to the polarity of
auxin ﬂow.
A molecule that is easily transported through the acidic environment of the
apoplast, but that is readily trapped in the cytoplasm and then has to be actively
exported is ideally suited to convey lateral inhibition between neighbouring cells.
When the localisation of the efﬂux transporter is placed under the control of auxin
itself (Paciorek et al. 2005), this will establish a perfect reaction–diffusion system in
sensu Turing (1952). This system is able to establish a clear cell polarity from even
minute and noisy directional cues. However, when auxin inﬂux were exclusively
directional, due to the polar localisation of the inﬂux carrier AUX1, exploration of
space as prerequisite of coordinative signalling for pattern formation, would
not work.
This apparent dilemma might be less dramatic as it seems at ﬁrst sight. The
impact of carrier-based auxin inﬂux depends strongly on apoplastic pH: since the
pKs value for indole-acetic acid is 4.75, the proportion of the anionic form that
deﬁnitely requires a carrier to enter the cell is relatively high for pH 5 (74 % IAA);
for a pH of 5.5 even 95 % of auxin are present in the anionic form (Swarup and
Pe´ret 2012). However, is this the relevant pH of the cell wall? To determine the pH
of plant cell walls is far from trivial, due to ion exchange at the carbon hydrate
matrix. Most measurements of cell wall pH systematically underestimate the
acidity of the chemical environment for the apoplastic auxin. Reliable measure-
ments can only be achieved by using a pH-stat approach, because here the metric
component is buffered. Using this strategy, the physiological pH of the cell wall has
been found to range between 4.0 and 4.5 (Lu¨then et al. 1990), i.e. in a range, where
the uncharged form of auxin predominates. Thus, “exploratory” ion trapping is a
substantial component of auxin inﬂux.
Alternatively, exploration of space might be achieved by the cycling of the
efﬂux carrier as well (see Chap. 8). When the auxin effect on the cycling of PIN
proteins (Paciorek et al. 2005) is not homogenous over the auxin-stimulated cell,
but depends on the local auxin concentration at the respective ﬂank of the cell, this
would provide a mechanism, by which a cell can “explore” gradients of auxin
across a tissue. This mechanism has been proposed for phyllotaxis (Jo¨nsson
et al. 2006) and has been integrated into models for auxin channelling that are
308
P. Nick

congruent with predictions from the classical auxin canalisation model (Roeland
et al. 2007).
A polar transport of auxin can be detected already in several lines of
multicellular algae (see Chap. 13; Dibb-Fuller and Morris 1992; Cooke
et al. 2002) including Chara as close relative of the land plant ancestor (Boot
et al. 2012; for review see Raven 2013). In phaeophycean algae, polar auxin
transport has been recruited for the establishment of polarity (Basu et al. 2002).
Transcellular auxin gradients are necessary for polarity, because when these gra-
dients are overrun by exogenous IAA symmetry break is suppressed in Fucus
(Whitaker 1942). This indicates that the central role of auxin in cell communication
developed from evolutionarily quite ancient preadaptations already present prior to
the transition to a terrestrial lifestyle. However, in order to integrate plant architec-
ture, the directional output must be integrated with input that is non-directional. The
cell must explore its neighbourhood in different directions, which is possible
through the ion-trap mechanism of auxin inﬂux. This does not exclude that the
resulting cellular polarity will subsequently reinforce the main route of inﬂux by
partitioning auxin inﬂux carriers of the AUX1/LAX family to the sites, where ion
trapping was most active. In fact, both mechanisms of auxin inﬂux might act in
concert (Fig. 14.4): the ion-trap mechanism would be used in a phase of polarity
exploration, whereas repartitioning of inﬂux carriers (along with repartitioning of
efﬂux carriers) would provide a ﬁxation of the initial, still ﬂexible, polarity.
Patterning of a tissue is a complex phenomenon, and at the time that tissues
become amenable to experimental manipulation, cell polarity is already laid down.
This means that in tissues it is possible to investigate pattern perpetuation. How a
pattern is laid down requires experimental systems, where cell polarity is still on
the move.
7
It Is All Geometry: The Tabula Rasa Approach
Polarity induction de novo has been classically studied in the brown alga Fucus
(Goodner and Quatrano 1993; Hable and Hart 2010). The spherical zygote
undergoes asymmetric division yielding progenitor cells for thallus and rhizoid.
The orientation of this division can be aligned by unilateral blue light inducing a
calcium inﬂux at the shaded ﬂank, where later the rhizoid will emerge (Jaffe 1966).
A cap of dynamic actin ﬁlaments is formed at this site and attracts vesicles
transporting cell wall material driving the outgrowth of a rhizoid. The polarity
seen in response to blue light is produced by reorientation of a preformed polarity,
but truly generated de novo, demonstrated by induction with strong plane-polarised
blue light producing a high fraction of birhizoidal twins. This beautiful system has
enabled a wealth of phenomenological, physiological, and cell biological insights
into polarity induction, but it suffers from limited molecular accessibility.
Comparable systems, where spherical cells undergo formative divisions, are rare
in higher plants. The closest version, developing microspores, are quite different, in
14
Auxin and Self-Organisation
309

that they harbour a distinct preformed polarity that becomes manifest as nuclear
movements as well as asymmetric cell fate of the daughter cells: the generative
daughter will inherit immortality, whereas the vegetative cell is doomed to death at
fertilisation, giving a neat illustration of Weismann’s germ line/soma concept. By
colchicine or other antimicrotubular drugs, this developmental asymmetry can be
eliminated (Twell et al. 1998).
To obtain symmetric, apolar cells in higher plants is possible, however, when the
cell is stripped off its wall by cellulase. These protoplasts correspond to a tabula
rasa situation and lack any axis and polarity, but retain the ability to regenerate
complete plants as shown in spectacular experiments on tobacco (Nagata and
Takebe 1970). Thus, protoplasts resemble the zygotes of Fucus with respect to de
novo generation of polarity. The observation that regenerating protoplasts of the
moss Physcomitrella patens show a redistribution of calcium channels (visualised
by a ﬂuorescent channel antagonist (Bhatla et al. 2002) indicates that the underlying
mechanisms might be similar.
We therefore used protoplasts of tobacco BY-2 cells to study how polarity and
axis are induced de novo (Zaban et al. 2013). The presence of ﬂuorescently tagged
transgenic marker lines allowed us to follow the behaviour and role of the cyto-
skeleton during this phenomenon. The system could be standardised to such a
degree that the temporal pattern of regenerative stages could be investigated on
the quantitative level such that functional analysis became possible. Using anti-
cytoskeletal compounds and inducible expression of actin-bundling proteins it
could be shown that a dynamic population of actin was necessary for polarity.
When actin dynamics were suppressed, curious tripolar cells ensued in analogy to
the twinned embryos observed in Fucus for induction by strong polarised light.
In the meantime, we succeeded to integrate this tabula rasa system into a
microﬂuidics platform, which allows us to provide gradients of auxin through
controlling the ﬂux through the system and preformed geometries through rectan-
gular microvessels (Sun et al. 2009). Using this system we currently investigate
how the regenerating protoplast induces polarity after having explored the geom-
etry of its environment.
References
Basu S, Sun H, Brian L, Quatrano RL, Muday GK (2002) Early embryo development in Fucus
distichus is auxin sensitive. Plant Physiol 130:292–302
Bhatla SC, Kießling J, Reski R (2002) Observation of polarity induction by cytochemical
localization of phenylalkylamine-binding receptors in regenerating protoplasts of the moss
Physcomitrella patens. Protoplasma 219:99–105
Bennett MJ, Marchant A, Green HG, May ST, Ward SP, Millner PA, Walker AR, Schulz B,
Feldmann KA (1996) Arabidopsis AUX1 gene: a permease-like regulator of root gravitropism.
Science 273:948–950
Berleth T, Sachs T (2001) Plant morphogenesis: long-distance coordination and local patterning.
Curr Opin Plant Biol 4:57–62
310
P. Nick

Boot KJ, Libbenga KR, Hille SC, Offringa R, van Duijn B (2012) Polar auxin transport: an early
invention. J Exp Bot 63:4213–4218
Braybrook SA, Peaucelle A (2013) Mechano-chemical aspects of organ formation in Arabidopsis
thaliana: the relationship between auxin and pectin. PLoS One 8:e57813
Bu¨nning E (1965) Die Entstehung von Mustern in der Entwicklung von Pﬂanzen. In: Ruhland W
(ed) Handbuch der Pﬂanzenphysiologie, vol 15/1. Springer, Berlin, pp 383–408
Campanoni P, Blasius B, Nick P (2003) Auxin transport synchronizes the pattern of cell division in
a tobacco cell line. Plant Physiol 133:1251–1260
Cooke TJ, Poli DB, Sztein AE, Cohen JD (2002) Evolutionary patterns in auxin action. Plant Mol
Biol 49:319–338
Dhonukshe P, Tanaka H, Goh T, Ebine K, Ma¨honen AP, Kalika Prasad K, Blilou I, Geldner N,
Xu J, Uemura T, Chory J, Ueda T, Nakano A, Scheres B, Friml J (2008) Generation of cell
polarity in plants links endocytosis, auxin distribution and cell fate decisions. Nature 456:962–
967
Dibb-Fuller JB, Morris DA (1992) Studies on the evolution of auxin carriers and phytotropin
receptors: transmembrane auxin transport in unicellular and multicellular Chlorophyta. Planta
186:219–226
Durst S, Nick P, Maisch J (2013) Actin-depolymerizing factor 2 is involved in auxin dependent
patterning. J Plant Physiol 170(12):1057–1066. doi:10.1016/j.jplph.2013.03.002
Elinson RP, Rowning B (1988) Transient array of parallel microtubules in frog eggs: potential
tracks for a cytoplasmic rotation that speciﬁes the dorso-ventral axis. Dev Biol 128:185–197
Fleming AJ, McQueen-Mason S, Mandel T, Kuhlemeier C (1997) Induction of leaf primordia by
the cell wall protein expansion. Science 276:1415–1418
Geldner N, Friml J, Stierhof YD, Ju¨rgens G, Palme K (2001) Auxin transport inhibitors block PIN1
cycling and vesicle trafﬁcking. Nature 413:425–428
Gierer A, Meinhard H (1972) A theory of biological pattern formation. Kybernetik 12:30–39
Gierer A, Berking S, Bode H, David CN, Flick K, Hansmann G, Schaller H, Trenkner E (1972)
Regeneration of Hydra from reaggregated cells. Nature 239:98–101
Goodner B, Quatrano RS (1993) Fucus embryogenesis: a model to study the establishment of
polarity. Plant Cell 5:1471–1481
Grbic´ V, Bleecker AB (1996) An altered body plan is conferred on Arabidopsis plants carrying
dominant alleles of two genes. Development 122:2395–2403
Green PB (1980) Organogenesis – a biophysical view. Annu Rev Plant Physiol 31:51–82
Guenot B, Bayer E, Kierzkowski D, Smith RS, Mandel T, Za´dnı´kova´ P, Benkova´ E, Kuhlemeier C
(2012) PIN1-independent leaf initiation in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 159:1501–1510
Hable WE, Hart PE (2010) Signaling mechanisms in the establishment of plant and fucoid algal
polarity. Mol Reprod Dev 77:751–758
Hamant O, Heisler MG, Jo¨nsson H, Krupinski P, Uyttewaal M, Bokov P, Corson F, Sahlin P,
Boudaoud A, Meyerowitz EM, Couder Y, Traas J (2008) Developmental patterning by
mechanical signals in Arabidopsis. Science 322:1650–1655
Hardham AR, Green PB, Lang JM (1980) Reorganizatioonf cortical microtubules and cellulose
deposition during leaf formation of Graptopetala paraguyense. Planta 149:181–195
Heisler MG, Hamant O, Krupinski P, Uyttewaal M, Ohno C et al (2010) Alignment between PIN1
polarity and microtubule orientation in the shoot apical meristem reveals a tight coupling
between morphogenesis and auxin transport. PLoS Biol 8:e1000516
Hertel R, Flory R (1968) Auxin movement in corn coleoptiles. Planta 82:123–144
Jaffe LF (1966) Electrical currents through the developing Fucus egg. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
56:1102–1109
Jo¨nsson H, Heisler MG, Shapiro BE, Meyerowitz EM, Mjolsness E (2006) An auxin-driven
polarized transport model for phyllotaxis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103:1633–1638
Ketelaar T, Anthony RG, Hussey PJ (2004) Green ﬂuorescent protein-mTalin causes defects in
actin organization and cell expansion in Arabidopsis and inhibits actin depolymerizing factor’s
actin depolymerizing activity in vitro. Plant Physiol 136:3990–3998
14
Auxin and Self-Organisation
311

Kusaka N, Maisch J, Nick P, Hayashi KI, Nozaki H (2009) Manipulation of intercellular auxin in a
single cell by light with esterase-resistant caged auxins. ChemBioChem 10:2195–2202
Li P, Johnston MO (2000) Heterochrony in plant evolutionary studies through the twentieth
century. Bot Rev 66:57–88
Liu Q, Qiao F, Ismail A, Chang X, Nick P (2013) The plant cytoskeleton controls regulatory
volume increase. Biochim Biophys Acta 1828(2111):2120
Lockhard J (1960) Intracellular mechanism of growth inhibition by radiant energy. Plant Physiol
35:129–135
Lu¨then H, Bigdon M, Bo¨ttger M (1990) Reexamination of the acid growth theory of auxin action.
Plant Physiol 93:931–939
Maisch J, Nick P (2007) Actin is involved in auxin-dependent patterning. Plant Physiol 143:1695–
1704
Mattsson J, Sung ZR, Berleth T (1999) Responses of plant vascular systems to auxin transport
inhibition. Development 126:2979–2991
Meinhard H (1976) Morphogenesis of lines and nets. Differentiation 6:117–123
Meinhard H (1986) The threefold subdivision of segments and the initiation of legs and wings in
insects. Trends Genet 3:36–41
Nagata T, Takebe I (1970) Cell wall regeneration and cell division in isolated tobacco mesophyll
protoplasts. Planta 92:301–308
Nagata T, Nemoto Y, Hasezawa S (1992) Tobacco BY-2 cell line as the “Hela” cell in the cell
biology of higher plants. Int Rev Cytol 132:1–30
Nakajima K, Sena G, Nawy T, Benfey PN (2001) Intercellular movement of the putative
transcription factor SHR in root patterning. Nature 413:307–311
Nick P (2006) Noise yields order – auxin, actin, and polar patterning. Plant Biol 8:360–370
Nick P (2010) Probing the actin-auxin oscillator. Plant Signal Behav 5:4–9
Nick P (2012) Microtubules and the tax payer. Protoplasma 249(Suppl 2):S81–S94
Nick P, Heuing A, Ehmann B (2000) Plant chaperonins: a role in microtubule-dependent wall-
formation? Protoplasma 211:234–244
Nick P, Han M, An G (2009) Auxin stimulates its own transport by actin reorganization. Plant
Physiol 151:155–167
Nu¨sslein-Volhard C (1995) The identiﬁcation of genes controlling development of ﬂies and ﬁshes.
In: Noble Lecture, held on 8 Dec 1995
Paciorek T, Zazˇimalova´ E, Ruthardt N, Petra´sˇek J, Stierhof YD, Kleine-Vehn J, Morris DA,
Emans N, Ju¨rgens G, Geldner N, Friml J (2005) Auxin inhibits endocytosis and promotes its
own efﬂux from cells. Nature 435:1251–1256
Raven JA (2013) Polar auxin transport in relation to long-distance transport of nutrients in the
Charales. J Exp Bot 64:1–9
Reinhardt D, Mandel T, Kuhlemeier C (2000) Auxin regulates the initiation and radial position of
plant lateral organs. Plant Cell 12:507–518
Reinhardt D, Pesce ER, Stieger P, Mandel T, Baltensperger K, Bennett M, Traas J, Friml J,
Kuhlemeier C (2003) Regulation of phyllotaxis by polar auxin transport. Nature 426:255–260
Roeland MH, Merks RMH, Van de Peer Y, Inze´ D, Beemster GTS (2007) Canalization without
ﬂux sensors: a traveling-wave hypothesis. Trends Plant Sci 12:384–390
Rothwell GW, Lev-Yadun S (2005) Evidence of polar auxin ﬂow in 375 million-year-old fossil
wood. Am J Bot 92:903–906
Rubery PH, Sheldrake AR (1974) Carrier-mediated auxin transport. Planta 118:101–121
Sachs T (2000) Integrating cellular and organismic aspects of vascular differentiation. Plant Cell
Physiol 41:649–656
Scheres B, Wolkenfelt H, Willemsen V, Terlouw M, Lawson E, Dean C, Weisbeek P (1994)
Embryonic origin of the Arabidopsis root and root meristem initials. Development 120:2475–
2487
Schoute JC (1913) Beitra¨ge zur Blattstellungslehre. I. Die Theorie. Rec Trav Bot Neerl 10:153–
325
312
P. Nick

Snow M, Snow R (1931) Experiments on phyllotaxis. I. The effect of isolating a primordium. Phil
Trans Roy Soc Lond B 221:1–43
Spemann H (1936) Experimentelle Beitra¨ge zu einer Theorie der Entwicklung. Springer, Berlin
Sun Y, Liu Y, Qu W, Jiang X (2009) Combining nanosurface chemistry and microﬂuidics for
molecular analysis and cell biology. Anal Chim Acta 650:98–105
Swarup R, Pe´ret B (2012) AUX/LAX family of auxin inﬂux carriers—an overview. Front Plant Sci
3:e225
Swarup R, Friml J, Marchant A, Ljung K, Sandberg G, Palme K, Bennett M (2001) Localization of
the auxin permease AUX1 suggests two functionally distinct hormone transport pathways
operate in the Arabidopsis root apex. Genes Dev 15:2648–2653
Turing AM (1952) The chemical basis of morphogenesis. Phil Trans Roy Soc Lond B 237:37–72
Twell D, Park SK, Lalanne E (1998) Asymmetric division and cell-fate determination in devel-
oping pollen. Trends Plant Sci 3:305–310
Uyttewaal M, Burian A, Alim K, Landrein B, Borowska-Wykre˛t D, Dedieu A, Peaucelle A,
Ludynia M, Traas J, Boudaoud A, Kwiatkowska D, Hamant O (2012) Mechanical stress acts
via katanin to amplify differences in growth rate between adjacent cells in Arabidopsis. Cell
149:439–451
Van den Berg C, Willensen V, Hage W, Weisbeek P, Scheres B (1995) Cell fate in the Arabidopsis
root meristem is determined by directional signalling. Nature 378:62–65
Whitaker DM (1942) Ultraviolet light and the development of Fucus eggs as affected by auxin and
pH. Biol Bull 82:127–137
Yoon HS, Golden JW (1998) Heterocyst pattern formation controlled by a diffusible peptide.
Science 282:935–938
Yoon HS, Golden JW (2001) PatS and products of nitrogen ﬁxation control heterocyst pattern. J
Bacteriol 183:2605–2613
Zaban B, Maisch J, Nick P (2013) Dynamic actin controls polarity induction de novo in pro-
toplasts. J Int Plant Biol 55:142–159
Zimmermann W (1965) Die Telomtheorie. Gustav Fischer, Stuttgart
14
Auxin and Self-Organisation
313

Chapter 15
Computational Models of Auxin-Driven
Development
Adam Runions, Richard S. Smith, and Przemyslaw Prusinkiewicz
Abstract Auxin plays a key regulatory role in plant development. According to
our current understanding, the morphogenetic action of auxin relies on its polar
transport and the feedback between this transport and the localization of auxin
transporters. Computational models complement experimental data in studies of
auxin-driven development: they help understand the self-organizing aspects of
auxin patterning, reveal whether hypothetical mechanisms inferred from experi-
ments are plausible, and highlight differences between competing hypotheses that
can be used to direct further experimental studies. In this chapter we present the
state of the art in the computational modeling of auxin patterning and auxin-driven
development in plants. We ﬁrst discuss the methodological foundations of model
construction: computational representations of tissues, cells, and molecular com-
ponents of the studied systems. On this basis, we present mathematical models of
auxin transport and the essential properties of pattern formation mechanisms
involving auxin. We then review some of the key areas that have been investigated
with the use of models: phyllotactic patterning of lateral organs in the shoot apical
meristem, determination of leaf shape and vasculature, long-distance signaling and
apical control of development, and auxin patterning in the root. The chapter is
concluded with a brief review of current open problems.
A. Runions • P. Prusinkiewicz (*)
Department of Computer Science, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada
e-mail: pwp@cpsc.ucalgary.ca
R.S. Smith
Department of Comparative Development and Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Plant
Breeding Research, Cologne, Germany
E. Zazˇı´malova´ et al. (eds.), Auxin and Its Role in Plant Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-7091-1526-8_15, © Springer-Verlag Wien 2014
315

1
Introduction
A key objective of developmental biology is to understand how molecular pro-
cesses drive the development of tissues, organs, and entire organisms. In plants, the
growth regulator auxin plays a commanding role on which many developmental
processes depend. The morphogenetic role of auxin begins in the embryo, where its
dynamic, differential distribution establishes the shoot–root polarity (Weijers and
Ju¨rgens 2005 ). In post-embryonic development, diverse patterning, signaling, and
regulatory functions of auxin are summarized by the reverse/inverse fountain model
(Benkova´ et al. 2003) (Fig. 15.1). According to this model, auxin is produced in the
vicinity of the shoot apical meristem and is transported in the epidermis towards the
peripheral zone of the apex. There it accumulates in emergent convergence points,
which determine the phyllotactic pattern of the incipient plant organs: leaves,
ﬂowers, and new branches (Reinhardt et al. 2003; Jo¨nsson et al. 2006; Smith
et al. 2006a). As a leaf grows and becomes ﬂat, further convergence points appear
at the leaf margin (Scarpella et al. 2006; Hay et al. 2006). These points may be
correlated with the growth pattern localized near the margin, leading to the forma-
tion of serrated (Hay et al. 2006; Bilsborough et al. 2011), lobed, or compound
(Barkoulas et al. 2008; Koenig et al. 2009; Ben-Gera et al. 2012; Townsley and
Sinha 2012) leaves. From the primordia auxin ﬂows into the subepidermal layers of
the apex and, subsequently, into the plant stem. In this process, it is “canalized” into
narrow paths (Sachs 1969, 1991; Mitchison 1980, 1981; Rolland-Lagan and
Prusinkiewicz 2005; Feugier et al. 2005; Bayer et al. 2009; O’Connor et al. 2014),
which, in the case of a leaf, mark the location of the primary vein and its extension
into stem vasculature. Within the stem, auxin is involved in the patterning of the
vascular system and the activation of lateral buds (Bennett et al. 2006; Prusinkiewicz
et al. 2009; Crawford et al. 2010), thus coordinating the development of the
branching plant structure (Leyser 2011). From the stem, auxin continues on to the
root system, ﬂowing through the root–shoot transition zone towards the apical
meristems of the main and lateral roots, and reversing its direction in the root
epidermis. In this process, it is involved in the maintenance and growth of sharply
bounded meristematic and elongation zones (Grieneisen et al. 2007), initiation of
lateral rootlets (Benkova´ et al. 2003; Laskowski et al. 2008; Lucas et al. 2008a, b;
Moreno-Risueno et al. 2010), and tropic responses to gravity (Swarup et al. 2005;
Zazˇı´malova´ et al. 2010).
The ability of auxin to perform these diverse functions is related to the pattern of
its transport and the feedback between transport and the intercellular distribution of
transporters. This includes, in particular, the highly mobile efﬂux carriers from the
PIN protein family. In recent years, the interplay between auxin and further
morphogenetic factors, such as other hormones, nutrients, light, and mechanical
forces acting on cells, has also been considered (Leyser 2009). Computational
models play a signiﬁcant role in the studies of auxin-related patterning. The
importance of these models stems from the self-organization of the patterning
processes. Causal links underlying the emergence of patterns through self-
316
A. Runions et al.

organization are generally nonintuitive, and computational models are a valuable
tool facilitating their understanding (Camazine et al. 2001; Prusinkiewicz and
Runions 2012). Models of auxin-driven patterning range from those directly rooted
in biochemistry (Renton et al. 2012; Steinacher et al. 2012; Hosˇek et al. 2012) to
more abstract constructs that aim at deducing morphogenetic characteristics of
molecular-level process from the observed patterns and forms. In some cases,
several hypotheses have been proposed to explain the same phenomenon, for
example, the formation of phyllotactic and vascular patterns (Merks et al. 2007;
Stoma et al. 2008; Bayer et al. 2009). While there is no consensus which of these
hypotheses, if any, is the right one, the alternative models highlight their logical
consequences and help formulate experiments that may support or falsify each
hypothesis. Eventually, the models that survive the test of experiments will estab-
lish a causal chain linking molecular processes to macroscopic patterns and forms
(Fig. 15.2).
The survey presented in this chapter begins with an outline of computational
representations of tissues, cells, and cell states used in models of auxin-driven
development. This is a fundamental aspect of model construction, as different
Phyllotaxis
Leaf form
Bud activation
Stem vasculature
Root tip maintenance 
Leaf venation
Lateral root
initiation
Fig. 15.1 Processes and
patterns regulated by auxin
in post-embryonic
development according to
the reverse (shoot) and
inverse (root) fountain
model (Benkova´
et al. 2003). Blue arrows
indicate the paths and
directions of auxin ﬂow.
Blue circles mark points of
auxin accumulation. From
(Prusinkiewicz and Runions
2012)
15
Computational Models of Auxin-Driven Development
317

representations reﬂect different assumptions concerning the modeled processes.
Models of auxin transport and polarization of transporters in cells are presented
next, followed by a discussion of fundamental patterning properties of the postu-
lated feedback loops (e.g., capability of forming a pattern of peaks or canals of
auxin transport). Finally, the reverse/inverse fountain model is used to organize a
review of speciﬁc models of auxin-driven patterning and plant development. Parts
of this survey are an updated version of an earlier work by Prusinkiewicz and
Runions (2012).
2
Computational Representations of Cells and Tissues
The choice of computational representations (data structures) of the modeled
phenomena affects the range of processes that can be captured by the model, the
level of abstraction at which they will be considered, the ease of creating, modify-
ing, and exploring the model, and the computational efﬁciency of simulations. In
the case of auxin-driven patterning, the central question is the relation between
processes taking place in individual cells and the patterns emerging at the level of
tissues. Consequently, the data structures typically consist of an explicit represen-
tation of cells connected into a tissue. Within this general framework, a number of
choices exist and have been incorporated into different models.
Microscopic 
processes
Macroscopic
forms
Molecular models 
of carrier transport
PIN polarization models
Geometric models
bottom-up reasoning
top-down reasoning
Individual 
molecules
With the flux
Up the gradient
Geometric and field-based 
phyllotaxis models
Geometric and fracture-based 
venation models
Intracellular 
auxin gradients
Extracellular
auxin gradients
Fig. 15.2 Models formulated at different scales and levels of abstraction represent a partial view
of the causal chain that links molecular-level patterning and macroscopic forms
318
A. Runions et al.

2.1
Dimensionality of the Model
Selected basic aspects of patterning, for example, the emergence of auxin concen-
tration peaks (Smith et al. 2006a; Jo¨nsson et al. 2006) or uniformly polarized cell
ﬁles (Abley et al. 2013), can be explored in one-dimensional models: a sequence,
ring (Fig. 15.3a), or branching arrangement of cells. One-dimensional models can
be speciﬁed, implemented, and analyzed more easily than two- or three-
dimensional models, but the scope of phenomena that they can capture is limited.
In particular, canalization, i.e., the consolidation of auxin transport into narrow
channels that pattern vascular tissues, can only be considered in two or three
dimensions.
Two-dimensional models that abstract cells as polygons and cell walls as
polygon edges are widely used as a compromise between the limited expressive
power of one-dimensional models and the complexity of creating and visualizing
fully three-dimensional models. The use of two-dimensional models is often further
justiﬁed by the nature of the studied processes. For example, phyllotactic patterning
in the apical shoot meristem of Arabidopsis is assumed to take place in the single
layer of epidermal cells (Reinhardt et al. 2003; Barbier de Reuille et al. 2006;
Jo¨nsson et al. 2006; Smith et al. 2006a; Stoma et al. 2008; Kierzkowski et al. 2013),
although subepidermal tissues may also play a role ( Larson 1975; Banasiak 2011).
Patterning of leaf veins is essentially a two-dimensional process. The radial sym-
metry of roots suggests that modeling a longitudinal root section may sufﬁce to
capture the essential features of root morphogenesis (Grieneisen et al. 2007). Even
Fig. 15.3 Some tissue representations used in cellular-level models of auxin-driven development.
(a) One-dimensional ring representing the peripheral zone of a shoot apical meristem patterning
the position of three primordia. The model assumes up-the-gradient polarization as described in
Sect. 4.1 (Jo¨nsson et al. 2006; Smith et al. 2006a). Auxin concentration in each cell is indicated by
the size of the green square, PIN localization by the width of red bars, and auxin ﬂuxes by the
white arrows between cells. (b) Hexagonal tissue representing a longitudinal section through the
shoot of Brachypodium distachyon. The model captures phyllotaxis and vascular development as
described in Sect. 5.3 (O’Connor et al. 2014). Auxin concentration is shown in red and the
localization of different PIN types in yellow, blue, and white. (c) A polygonal mesh representing
the surface of a shoot apical meristem during a simulation of spiral phyllotaxis described in
Sect. 5.1 (Smith et al. 2006a). Auxin concentration is shown in green and PIN in cell membranes in
red
15
Computational Models of Auxin-Driven Development
319

processes that break this radial symmetry can be modeled in two dimensions if an
appropriate section plane is chosen. For instance, the impact of root bending on the
distribution of auxin and initiation of lateral roots was successfully modeled in two
dimensions (Laskowski et al. 2008). Fully three-dimensional models still present a
technical challenge.
2.2
Representation of Cells and Tissues
The simplest two-dimensional models are constructed assuming identical, square
(Mitchison 1981; Rolland-Lagan and Prusinkiewicz 2005), or hexagonal (Feugier
et al. 2005; Stoma et al. 2008; O’Connor et al. 2014) cells (Fig. 15.3b) . These cells
are arranged in a regular tiling pattern, allowing for a straightforward and compu-
tationally efﬁcient representation of the tissue as an array of cells. Artifacts of the
regular tilings include directional bias (for example, a tissue made of square cells
has different properties in the horizontal and vertical directions than in the diagonal
directions) and a limited capacity for simulating growth: divisions of internal cells
would break the regularity of the tiling, and thus new cells can only be added at the
tissue boundary.
In more realistic models, tissues are represented by two-dimensional assemblies
of polygons resembling the shape of cells, which form polygon meshes. For
example, positions of cell walls and vertices at which they meet may be speciﬁed
explicitly (Fig. 15.3c), inferred from the position of cell centroids through the
construction of a Voronoi diagram, or result from a physically based simulation
(see Prusinkiewicz and Runions (2012) for a review and Shapiro et al. (2013) for the
most recent result). Diverse computational representations of polygon meshes are
possible and have been widely studied due to their importance to geometric
modeling and computer graphics. In particular, the vertex–vertex data structure
(Smith et al. 2004; Smith 2006), rooted in the mathematical formalism of graph
rotation systems (Edmonds 1960; White 1973), has been used in several models of
auxin-driven patterning (Smith et al. 2006a; Bayer et al. 2009; Chitwood
et al. 2012; Abley et al. 2013; O’Connor et al. 2014). This is due, in part, to the
relatively simple speciﬁcation of tissue growth and cell divisions in this formalism.
The model of cell division by Besson and Dumais (2011) highlights the need for
representing cells with curved walls, which likely will be incorporated into future
models of auxin-driven morphogenesis. Models of jigsaw-shaped pavement cells in
leaf epidermis will require even more ﬂexibility in representing cell geometry.
In the above representations, cells typically partition the tissue without gaps or
overlaps (except for the shared walls). Accumulation and diffusion of auxin in the
intercellular space is neglected, and auxin leaving a cell is bound to enter the
neighboring cell. This implies, in particular, that the relative roles of auxin efﬂux
and inﬂux carriers (e.g., PIN vs. AUX/LAX proteins) are difﬁcult to distinguish.
Recognizing these limitations, Kramer (2004) pioneered the incorporation of
intercellular space into auxin transport models. He estimated the range of diffusion
320
A. Runions et al.

in the intercellular space to be of the same order as the cell size, which could be
interpreted as an argument for both including extracellular auxin in more detailed
models and excluding it from less detailed models. More recently, intercellular
space was postulated to play a fundamental role in the molecular-level models of
auxin-based cell polarization proposed by Wabnik et al. (2010), Roussel and
Slingerland (2012) and Abley et al. (2013). In addition to auxin itself, candidate
molecules involved in auxin-driven patterning involve ABP1 (Napier et al. 2002)
and ROP (Xu et al. 2010).
Increasing the spatial resolution of cell models, Kramer (2004) incorporated
vacuoles as a factor affecting the diffusion of auxin in the cells, and Hamant
et al. (2008) subdivided the cell wall in order to analyze cell wall mechanics with
the ﬁnite element method. In addition, Hamant et al. (2008) showed a correlation
between the orientation of cortical microtubules, which are thought to be sensitive
to stresses, and PIN polarity. The likely signiﬁcant role of mechanosensing creates
the need of representing the cytoskeleton in detailed models of auxin patterning
as well.
The above representations of cells and tissues are of the Lagrangian type: they
describe where in space the cells and their components are located. In contrast,
Eulerian representations characterize what is located in different points in space.
An example of the Eulerian viewpoint is the Cellular Potts model (Merks and
Glazier 2005), which was employed to simulate auxin distribution and ﬂow in the
root of Arabidopsis by Grieneisen et al. (2007). Changes of shape due to deforma-
tions or growth are more easily represented from the Lagrangian viewpoint (Fan
et al. 2013), which suggests why it has been used more frequently in tissue
modeling.
2.3
Static vs. Dynamic Tissue Models
Some models of auxin-based patterning operate on tissues with a ﬁxed geometry:
cell arrangements generated programmatically (e.g., Mitchison 1981; Rolland-
Lagan and Prusinkiewicz 2005; Feugier et al. 2005) or templates obtained by
digitizing a microphotograph (e.g., Barbier de Reuille et al. 2006; Stoma
et al. 2008; Bayer et al. 2009; Santuari et al. 2011). The underlying assumption is
that the modeled patterning processes are fast compared to tissue growth, and thus
growth can be neglected (c.f. Bayer et al. 2009). However, patterning may also be
driven by growth or coupled with growth in a feedback loop of interactions. Sample
models exploring such connections include phyllotactic patterning in a growing
shoot apical meristem (Jo¨nsson et al. 2006; Smith et al. 2006a; O’Connor
et al. 2014), the sequential production of serrations in a growing leaf (Bilsborough
et al. 2011), and the maintenance of the pattern of auxin ﬂow (“reﬂux”) in a growing
Arabidopsis root (Grieneisen et al. 2007; Mironova et al. 2012). Tissue growth can
be modeled geometrically, as a consequence of the expansion of the surface in
which the cells are embedded (e.g., Smith et al. 2006a), or using a physically based
15
Computational Models of Auxin-Driven Development
321

model (e.g., Jo¨nsson et al. 2006; Merks et al. 2011). In the latter case, cell expansion
is attributed to an imbalance between the internal pressure in the cell and cell wall
tension (Lockhart 1965; Prusinkiewicz and Lindenmayer 1990). Compared to the
geometric models with prescribed growth, physically based models facilitate the
inclusion of the impact of patterning on growth. In addition, they inherently
incorporate physical forces, which may be morphogenetically relevant due to
mechanosensing (Hamant et al. 2008; Heisler et al. 2010).
Models of tissue growth involve cell divisions, which are frequently simulated
using the Errera (1886) rule. In the context of auxin-driven patterning, cell divisions
pose a problem, because the impact of divisions on auxin transport and the
distribution of the transporters is not sufﬁciently understood. The assumptions
that the daughter cells preserve the polarization of the parent cell (Bilsborough
et al. 2011) or that the polarization of the daughter cells is immediately established
by the neighboring cells (Smith et al. 2006a) have been used in practice.
2.4
The State of the Cell
In most models of auxin-based patterning, each cell is characterized by the con-
centrations of the relevant substances, e.g., auxin, PIN, AUX/LAX, and CUC.
Additional parameters are used to nuance this representation, for example, by
indicating the polar allocation of PIN proteins to different sections of the membrane
(Sect. 3.4) or by specifying the gradient of auxin concentration within the cell
(Mitchison 1981). This level of abstraction is closely related to microscopic obser-
vations and is often used in models and their visualizations. Further details can be
given by subdividing the cell into compartments and specifying relevant parameters
individually for each compartment (Kramer 2004).
It is also possible to account for individual molecules of auxin and other sub-
stances (Garnett et al. 2008; Renton et al. 2012), instead of characterizing them
summarily as concentrations. Potential advantages of this approach include a more
intuitive model of interaction and transport of molecules, and the sustained validity
of the model when the numbers of molecules are small and the continuous notion of
concentration no longer applies (Gillespie 1976, 1977). At present, the numbers of
molecules involved in auxin-driven patterning are not known, and thus it is not clear
whether the increased computational cost of simulating individual molecules,
compared to solving systems of differential equations used in the continuous
case, is justiﬁed.
322
A. Runions et al.

3
Auxin Transport
Auxin-induced patterning in plants is intimately related to auxin distribution and
transport, in which auxin efﬂux carriers from the PIN family (Zazˇı´malova´
et al. 2010) and auxin inﬂux carriers from the AUX/LAX family (Swarup and
Pe´ret 2012) have received the closest attention. The currently recognized key
processes involved in auxin transport are shown in Fig. 15.4a. The concentration
of PIN on each membrane is determined by allocation (exocytosis, 1) and
deallocation (endocytosis, 2) from a pool of free PIN in the cell. PINs located at
the membrane export auxin from the cell to the extracellular space (3). From there,
auxin is transported back into cells with the help of AUX/LAX proteins (4), which
are assumed to be uniformly distributed along the cell membranes. Auxin also
moves between the cells and the extracellular space by diffusion and background
transport due to the residual presence of auxin exporters along the cell membranes
(5). Finally, auxin diffuses between neighboring extracellular compartments (6). If
the extracellular space is neglected, there is no extracellular diffusion, and any
auxin leaving a cell directly enters the adjacent cell, as shown in Fig. 15.4b.
Below we present the typical equations used to model these processes. We ﬁrst
discuss the case when extracellular space is included and then introduce the
simpliﬁed equations employed when this space is omitted. For simplicity, we
assume that each cell has unit volume and each cell wall has unit area. Extensions
to nonuniform volumes and lengths are described, for example, by Smith
et al. (2006a), Jo¨nsson et al. (2006), Stoma et al. (2008) and Bayer et al. (2009).
3.1
Auxin Mass Conservation
In cell i, auxin concentration [IAAi] changes according to the equation:
d IAAi
½

dt
¼ Production  Removal  Flux:
ð15:1Þ
The Production term accounts for auxin biosynthesis, the level of which has a
qualitative impact on some patterning processes (Pinon et al. 2013). The Removal
term captures auxin turnover or conversion of auxin to a conjugated form. Both
these terms may depend on the auxin concentration [IAAi]. For example, auxin
production may have the form of a polynomial or rational polynomial function
(e.g., Smith et al. 2006a, Eq. 5), which are easily derived from the chemically
plausible laws of mass action (Shapiro et al. 2013). The Production term may also
incorporate the effect of exogenous application of auxin in simulated experiments
(e.g., Smith et al. 2006a), and both the Production and Removal terms may include
sources or sinks representing tissues not explicitly included in the simulation (e.g.,
Mitchison 1980).
15
Computational Models of Auxin-Driven Development
323

The last term, Flux, represents the net ﬂow (difference between outﬂux and
inﬂux) of auxin from cell i. It is the sum of ﬂuxes Φij through the membranes of cell
i facing cells j in the neighborhood N(i) of cell i:
Flux ¼
X
j ∈N ið Þ
Φij:
ð15:2Þ
Cells do not exchange ﬂuxes directly, but via the extracellular space. Auxin
concentration [IAAij] in the extracellular compartment between cells i and
j changes according to the ﬂuxes from cells i and j and diffusion to neighboring
extracellular regions:
d IAAij


dt
¼ Φij þ Φji  DE
X
k;l
ð
Þ ∈N i;j
ð
Þ
IAAij


 IAAkl
½



,
ð15:3Þ
where the sum is taken over all extracellular neighbors (k, l) of the extracellular
compartment (i, j). The coefﬁcient DE represents the rate of diffusion between
adjacent compartments. Fluxes Φij through the walls are captured by the chemios-
motic model of auxin transport, described next.
3.2
The Chemiosmotic Model
Inside a cell and within the intercellular space, auxin is assumed to move by
diffusion. However, the transport of auxin into and out of cells is more complicated.
The chemiosmotic model (Rubery and Sheldrake 1974; Raven 1975; Goldsmith
1977; Mitchison 1980) was proposed to provide a physicochemical basis for the
description of this transport.
Auxin is a weak acid, and in the neutral pH inside cells it is largely dissociated.
In this ionic form, auxin is hydrophilic and unable to diffuse across the plasma
1
2
3
4
PIN exocytosis
PIN endocytosis
5
PINij
1
2
3
5
4
PINi
PINji
IAAi
IAAj
T
D
α
δ
6
Extracellular
Cell i
Cell j
PINij
1
2
3
PINi
AUXj
IAAi
To
4
IAAij
6
6
Ti
DE
5
5
DCE
DEC
α
δ
Cell i
Cell j
Extracellular
space
Background transport
b
a
Fig. 15.4 Processes underlying cellular-level models of polar auxin transport with (a) and without
(b) intercellular space. Variables and parameters denoted by letters are explained in Sect. 3
324
A. Runions et al.

membrane. In order to leave a cell, auxin requires the activity of carriers located at
the plasma membrane (Zazˇı´malova´ et al. 2010), among which PIN proteins appear
to play the most prominent morphogenetic role. Outside the cell, a signiﬁcant
portion of auxin becomes protonated in the lower pH of the extracellular space.
This auxin is lipophilic, which makes it able to cross the plasma membrane and
diffuse back into cells. Additionally, auxin is transported into cells by the
AUX/LAX family of auxin import carriers, located in the plasma membrane.
Equations often used to implement the chemiosmotic model of auxin transport
have been presented by Kramer (2009) (see also Kramer 2004; Swarup et al. 2005;
Jo¨nsson et al. 2006; Heisler and Jo¨nsson 2006; Sahlin et al. 2009). The ﬂux of auxin
from the extracellular space ij into cell i is described as a combination of ﬂuxes due
to diffusion—Φdiff, export—Φexport, and import—Φimport:
Φij ¼ Φdiff þ Φexport þ Φimport:
ð15:4Þ
The ﬂux due to diffusion, Φdiff, is proportional to the difference in concentration
of protonated auxin between the cell i and the extracellular space ij. Given pK, the
negative log of dissociation constant for auxin, and pHc, the pH of a compartment c,
the protonated proportion of auxin in this compartment is (Weiss 1996):
K IAAH
c
¼
1
1 þ 10pHcpK :
ð15:5Þ
Flux due to diffusion can thus be calculated as
Φdiff ¼ Pdiff K IAAH
i
IAAi
½
  K IAAH
ij
IAAij




,
ð15:6Þ
where Pdiff is the membrane permeability for auxin diffusion.
The ﬂuxes due to active transport, Φexport and Φimport, are typically modeled
using the Goldman–Hodgkin–Katz equation (Weiss 1996), assuming that the mem-
brane is a homogeneous material and that the permeability to auxin depends on
membrane potential. If we let
f zð Þ ¼
ϕz
eϕz  1
with
ϕ ¼ VF
RT ,
ð15:7Þ
where V is the membrane potential, F is the Faraday constant, R is the gas constant,
T is the absolute temperature, and z is the net valence of the ions being transported,
the equations for import and export can be written as
Φexport ¼ Pexport f zð ÞKIAA
i
IAAi
½
  f z
ð
ÞKIAA
ij
IAAij




,
ð15:8Þ
15
Computational Models of Auxin-Driven Development
325

Φimport ¼ Pimport f z
ð
ÞKIAA
i
IAAi
½
  f zð ÞKIAA
ij
IAAij




:
ð15:9Þ
In the above equations, we use the notation
KIAA
c
¼ 1  K IAAH
c
¼
1
1 þ 10pKpHc :
ð15:10Þ
Pimport is the membrane permeability for import of auxin by AUX/LAX, and
Pexport is the membrane permeability for the export of auxin by PIN and other
exporters, such as the ABCB proteins (Zazˇı´malova´ et al. 2010). These equations
represent diffusion down the electrochemical gradient. Equations (15.8) and (15.9)
are similar to Eq. (15.6) except for the factor f () required to account for the
dependence of ﬂuxes on membrane potential. Pimport depends on the membrane
concentration of importers [AUXi], whereas Pexport depends on the membrane
concentration [PINij] of PIN proteins, as well as on ABCB proteins, which are
assumed to be present at a background level (Grieneisen et al. 2007; Kramer 2009).
With a few exceptions (Steinacher et al. 2012; Hosˇek et al. 2012), the terms in
Eqs. (15.5), (15.7), and (15.10) have been assumed constant in simulation models.
Kramer (2009) calculated the three ﬂuxes given by Eqs. (15.6), (15.8), and (15.9) by
setting z ¼ 1, using a membrane voltage of 120 mV, pK ¼ 4.8, pHij ¼ 5.3, and
pHi ¼ 7.2. This yielded:
Φdiff
¼

0:004 IAAi
½
  0:24

IAAij

Pdiff,
Φexport
¼

4:68 IAAi
½
  0:034

IAAij

Pexport,
Φimport
¼

0:045 IAAi
½
  3:57

IAAij

Pimport:
ð15:11Þ
A comparison of coefﬁcients in the expression for Φdiff shows that diffusion into
the cell is favored over diffusion out of the cell by almost two orders of magnitude.
However, the coefﬁcient 3.57 is much larger than the other inﬂux terms (preceded
by the minus sign in the equations), which suggests that carrier-mediated inﬂux
dominates in cells where importers are expressed (provided that permeabilities Pdiff ,
Pexport, and Pimport have comparable values). Likewise, of the three terms control-
ling auxin efﬂux, coefﬁcient 4.68 of the export term is signiﬁcantly larger than the
other two terms, which is consistent with the biological importance of PIN proteins.
Note that the model implies a small inﬂux involving exporters of auxin, and efﬂux
involving its importers.
3.3
Auxin Fluxes
To obtain the typical equations used to model ﬂux through a membrane, Φij , we
eliminate negligible terms in Eqs. (15.6), (15.8), and (15.9) according to the
analysis of Eq. (15.11). Assuming that Pexport is proportional to [PINij] + β, where
326
A. Runions et al.

β is the background concentration of efﬂux carriers, and Pimport is proportional to
[AUXi], we then obtain:
Φdiff
¼ 0:24Pdiff IAAij


,
Φexport
¼ 4:68Pexport IAAi
½

¼ 4:68KPIN

PINij


þ β

IAAi

,
Φimport
¼ 3:57Pimport IAAij


¼ 3:57KAUX AUXi
½


IAAij

,
ð15:12Þ
where KPIN and KAUX are coefﬁcients of proportionality. By combining constant
terms and parameters Pdiff , β, KPIN , and KAUX , we can rewrite the ﬂuxes as
Φdiff
¼ DEC IAAij


,
Φexport
¼

TO PINij


þ DCE

IAAi

,
Φimport
¼ TI AUXi
½


IAAij

,
ð15:13Þ
which, when summed, yield the net ﬂux through the membrane equal to
Φij ¼ TO PINij


IAAi
½
 þ DCE IAAi
½
  DEC IAAij


 TI AUXi
½
 IAAij


: ð15:14Þ
All the elements of this equation are illustrated in Fig. 15.4. The ﬁrst term
accounts for the transport of auxin from cell i to the extracellular space between
cells i and j by PIN, with efﬁciency TO . It is sometimes assumed that this transport
is nonlinear and the efﬁciency of PIN decreases as the concentration of auxin in cell
i increases (Jo¨nsson et al. 2006) or as the concentration of auxin in the adjacent
compartment increases (Smith et al. 2006a; Bayer et al. 2009; Roussel and
Slingerland 2012; Chitwood et al. 2012). The second and third terms account for
background auxin transport into the extracellular space with rate DCE and diffusion
from the extracellular space into the cell with rate DEC, respectively. The last term
captures active import of auxin from the extracellular space by AUX/LAX proteins,
with rate TI . For AUX/LAX the same concentration [AUXi] is used for all segments
of the cell membrane, as these proteins are typically uniformly localized throughout
the membrane.
When extracellular compartments are included, all communication between
cells is mediated by the extracellular space. Explicit representation of extracellular
space is particularly useful in models including the action of AUX/LAX proteins
(Kramer 2004; Wabnik et al. 2010) and those interrogating the fundamental mech-
anisms that underlie PIN polarization (Kramer 2009; Wabnik et al. 2010; Roussel
and Slingerland 2012; Abley et al. 2013). However, in patterning models the
extracellular space is often assumed to play a secondary role and is omitted
(Fig. 15.4b). In this case, auxin is transported directly between neighboring cells,
i.e., every efﬂux implies a corresponding inﬂux. Equation (15.14) then takes the
form:
15
Computational Models of Auxin-Driven Development
327

Φij ¼ T PINij


IAAi
½
  PINji


IAAj


þ D IAAi
½
  IAAj


:
ð15:15Þ
Equation (15.15) has been used in numerous models, e.g., Mitchison (1981);
Smith et al. (2006a); Jo¨nsson et al. (2006); Rolland-Lagan and Prusinkiewicz
(2005); Stoma et al. (2008); Feugier et al. (2005); Prusinkiewicz et al. (2009);
Bilsborough et al. (2011); O’Connor et al. (2014). The ﬁrst term accounts for polar
transport of auxin from cell i to cell j by PIN located in the membrane of cells
i facing j, with efﬁciency given by T . The second term accounts for polar transport
from cell j to cell i in an analogous way. The last two terms account for nonpolar
transport between the cells, with rate given by D. They represent the combined
effect of phenomena such as diffusion through the extracellular space, background
transport of auxin by PIN and other efﬂux carriers (e.g., ABCB proteins), and
diffusion through the plasmodesmata (Rutschow et al. 2011). Note that Φij ¼ Φji,
which is not the case when extracellular space is present. Equation (15.15) can be
contrasted with that appearing in facilitated diffusion models (Mitchison 1981;
Rolland-Lagan and Prusinkiewicz 2005; van Berkel et al. 2013), which postulate
regulated permeability of the cell membranes instead of polar auxin transport
controlled by the membrane concentration of inﬂux and efﬂux carriers. In terms
of Eq. (15.15), T is then equal to 0, and the values of D change locally as a function
of the absolute value of Φij . Unlike polar transport, facilitated diffusion cannot
move auxin up a concentration gradient.
3.4
PIN Cycling
The concentration of PIN in the membrane of cell i abutting cell j changes due to
allocation from (exocytosis) and deallocation to (endocytosis) a pool of unallocated
PIN in the cell i:
d PINij


dt
¼ α PINi
½
  δ PINij


:
ð15:16Þ
Here [PINi] denotes PIN concentration within the cell, α is the rate of exocytosis,
and δ is the rate of endocytosis. These rates may depend on several factors. For α,
typical examples include auxin concentration in the neighboring cell j (Smith
et al. 2006a; Jo¨nsson et al. 2006; Bayer et al. 2009; Bilsborough et al. 2011;
Draelants et al. 2012; O’Connor et al. 2014) and auxin ﬂux through the membrane
(Feugier et al. 2005; Stoma et al. 2008; Bayer et al. 2009; Farcot and Yuan 2013;
O’Connor et al. 2014). In contrast, δ may be a function of cellular auxin concen-
tration (Paciorek et al. 2005) and also likely depends on cytokinin (Marhavy´
et al. 2011). Bilsborough et al. (2011) postulated that CUC2 may be required in
some instances to modify cellular PIN polarizations, which could be accomplished
by acting on α and δ. A broad survey of the various PIN allocation schemes
328
A. Runions et al.

proposed in the literature is provided by van Berkel et al. (2013), who examined
properties of these schemes at the level of cell membranes, cells, and
one-dimensional ﬁles of cells.
Balancing the allocation of PIN proteins to the cell membranes, the change in
concentration of PIN in the cytosol is
d PINi
½

dt
¼ 
X
j ∈N ið Þ
d PINij


dt
:
ð15:17Þ
Initial models of polar auxin transport did not employ Eqs. (15.16) and (15.17),
and instead assumed independent production of PIN-like efﬂux carriers at different
segments of the cell membrane (Mitchison 1981; Rolland-Lagan and Prusinkiewicz
2005). However, competitive allocation of PIN proteins from a common pool
appears to be more justiﬁed in view of biological data (Geldner et al. 2001), and
readily leads to high auxin concentrations in developing veins (Feugier et al. 2005),
consistent with observations (Sect. 4.2). Recent mathematical analysis (van Berkel
et al. 2013; Farcot and Yuan 2013) shows that competitive allocation increases the
range of parameters for which stable pattern formation may occur.
4
Elements of Auxin-Based Patterning
Molecular-level observations suggest that auxin regulates its own transport through
a feedback with PIN proteins (Reinhardt et al. 2003; Scarpella et al. 2006; Hay
et al. 2006; Bayer et al. 2009) (Fig. 15.5). This feedback likely provides the basis for
the self-organized patterning of many elements of plant anatomy (Reinhardt
et al. 2003; Scarpella et al. 2006; Hay et al. 2006; Barkoulas et al. 2008; Bayer
et al. 2009; Bilsborough et al. 2011; O’Connor et al. 2014). Two different types of
feedback between auxin and the cellular localization of PIN have been proposed,
not precluding a possibility that they are different manifestations of a common
mechanism. On the one hand, leaf primordia, as well as serrations, lobes, and
leaﬂets, are initiated at auxin maxima (as inferred through auxin reporters such as
DR5), with PIN1 in surrounding tissues polarized towards these maxima (Reinhardt
et al. 2003; Hay et al. 2006; Koenig et al. 2009; Barkoulas et al. 2008; Bayer
et al. 2009; Bilsborough et al. 2011; O’Connor et al. 2014). This has led to the
hypothesis that PIN polarizes up the gradient of auxin concentration to generate
convergence points (Jo¨nsson et al. 2006; Smith et al. 2006a). On the other hand,
during vascular initiation, PIN1 expression is reﬁned into highly polarized strands
(Scarpella et al. 2006; Bayer et al. 2009; O’Connor et al. 2014). The patterning of
these strands is generally consistent with the canalization hypothesis proposed
by Sachs (1969, 1981), according to which auxin ﬂux through cells increases
their capacity to transport auxin. The corresponding computational models thus
assume that PIN polarizes with the ﬂux of auxin transport (Mitchison 1980, 1981;
15
Computational Models of Auxin-Driven Development
329

Rolland-Lagan and Prusinkiewicz 2005; Feugier et al. 2005; Fujita and Mochizuki
2006; Stoma et al. 2008; Bayer et al. 2009; O’Connor et al. 2014). Computational
models employing these two types of feedback reproduce a broad range of the
observed spatiotemporal patterns of auxin signaling and PIN polarization.
4.1
Up-the-Gradient Models
In up-the-gradient models, PIN is allocated to each cell membrane according to the
auxin concentration in the neighboring cell (Fig. 15.5). This causes small differ-
ences in cellular auxin concentration to be ampliﬁed, leading to the emergence of a
stable pattern of periodic auxin maxima (Jo¨nsson et al. 2006; Smith et al. 2006a;
Sahlin et al. 2009; Draelants et al. 2012; van Berkel et al. 2013). Formally, up-the-
gradient polarization can be enacted by making the rate of exocytosis, α in
Eq. (15.16), an increasing function of auxin concentration in the neighboring cell
j, while keeping the rate of endocytosis δ constant. As noted by Sahlin et al. (2009,
p. 66), the opposite case, where the rate of exocytosis is constant and the rate of
endocytosis is regulated, is mathematically equivalent; what matters is the ratio
between both processes.
In up-the-gradient models constructed to date, PIN polarization has been
assumed to be fast compared to the production and turnover of PINs, as well as
changes in cellular auxin concentration. Consequently, the concentrations of PIN at
each cell membrane and inside each cell were set to their steady-state values at each
simulation step:
IAAj
PINi
IAAi
Φij
up the gradient
Fig. 15.5 Hypothetical feedbacks controlling the localization of PIN proteins. With-the-ﬂux
models assume that (positive) auxin ﬂux Φij (c.f. Eq. 15.15) through a cell membrane increases
exocytosis, whereas up-the-gradient models assume that high auxin concentration [IAAj] in the
adjoining cell increases exocytosis. Some models also assume that cellular auxin concentration
[IAAi] inhibits endocytosis
330
A. Runions et al.

PINij


¼
α
IAAj




X
k ∈N ið Þα IAAk
½

ð
Þ þ δ
,
ð15:18Þ
PINi
½
 ¼
δ
X
k ∈N ið Þα IAAk
½

ð
Þ þ δ
:
ð15:19Þ
These equations can be derived by assuming that the total amount of PIN
proteins in the cell, PINi
½
 þ
X
j ∈N ið Þ PINij


, is constant, and setting Eqs. (15.16)
and (15.17) to 0 (see Jo¨nsson et al. (2006) for details). A key difference in initial
models was the choice of the function α([IAAj]) relating the rate of PIN allocation
to a membrane to the auxin concentration in the abutting cell. Jo¨nsson et al. (2006)
employed a Hill function and Smith et al. (2006a) an exponential function.
Simulations and mathematical analysis showed that, with either function, up-the-
gradient polarization can generate one- and two-dimensional periodic patterns of
approximately equidistant auxin maxima (Jo¨nsson et al. 2006; Smith et al. 2006a;
Sahlin et al. 2009; Draelants et al. 2012; van Berkel et al. 2013) (Fig. 15.6a, b).
Different spacings can be achieved by adjusting model parameters, with the number
of cells between peaks depending on the efﬁciency of polar auxin transport
T compared to diffusion rate D (Eq. 15.15) (Fig. 15.6c). Further analysis in two
dimensions showed that up-the-gradient models are also capable of creating striped
patterns (Sahlin et al. 2009), similar to those emerging in reaction–diffusion models
(Meinhardt 1982; Chap. 12). Differentiating between variants of up-the-gradient
polarization models, recent mathematical analysis by Draelants et al. (2012) dem-
onstrated that the model of Smith et al. (2006a) can produce oscillating steady states
and conﬁrmed the observation by Jo¨nsson et al. (2006) that their model cannot.
Vieten et al. (2005) reported strong upregulation of PIN1 expression at the sites
of primordia initiation, suggesting the dependence of PIN1 production on auxin.
Model studies by Smith et al. (2006a) and Heisler and Jo¨nsson (2006) showed that
such an upregulation can destabilize auxin peaks. Speciﬁcally, if PIN levels
increase with auxin concentration, a cell with a high concentration of auxin will
also have a high concentration of PIN, resulting in a large outﬂux of auxin. This
may cause the maximum to shift to neighboring cells, which Smith et al. (2006a)
and Heisler and Jo¨nsson (2006) found undesirable in the context of phyllotactic
patterning. In contrast, Merks et al. (2007) exploited the instability of auxin peaks,
motivated by the appeal of a uniﬁed model potentially explaining both the forma-
tion of convergence points and vascular strands. In their model, the auxin maximum
that initiates a leaf primordium subsequently moves into subepidermal tissues. PIN
polarity follows this moving peak, leaving behind a strand of polarized PINs
patterning a future vein. Unfortunately, predictions of this model are not consistent
with the observed spatiotemporal patterns of auxin maxima and PIN polarization in
developing leaves. For example, the predicted progression of the auxin maximum
from the leaf tip towards the base during midvein formation is not observed in
Arabidopsis leaves, where the maximum indicated by the DR5 reporter remains at
15
Computational Models of Auxin-Driven Development
331

the tip as the midvein develops. Consequently, most models of vein patterning
assume a different mode of PIN polarization, discussed next.
4.2
With-the-Flux Models
In with-the-ﬂux models, PIN allocation to a cell membrane is promoted by auxin
ﬂux through this membrane. With-the-ﬂux polarization is the cornerstone of the
canalization hypothesis formulated by Sachs (1969, 1981, 1991, 2003). Histori-
cally, it was the ﬁrst conceptual model of patterning that involved auxin and
postulated the feedback of auxin on its own transport.
Sachs postulated that the export of auxin across a cell membrane promotes
further auxin transport in the same direction and hypothesized that this feedback
creates canals of auxin ﬂow in a manner analogous to the carving of riverbeds by
ﬂowing water (Sachs 2003). Using a computational model operating on a square
array of cells, Mitchison (1980, 1981) showed that the with-the-ﬂux polarization
model proposed by Sachs can indeed generate canals of high auxin ﬂux. A
reimplementation of Mitchison’s model by Rolland-Lagan and Prusinkiewicz
(2005) (Fig. 15.7a) and its reinterpretation in terms of a feedback between auxin
IAA
b
a
c
Fig. 15.6 Up-the-gradient patterning. (a) One-dimensional pattern of equidistant auxin peaks that
emerge when PINs orient up the gradient of auxin concentration. PIN polarization in each cell is
shown in red and auxin concentration in green. Polar transport up the auxin gradient (red arrows)
balances diffusion down the gradient (blue arrows) in the steady state shown. (b) A
two-dimensional counterpart of the simulation from (a) also produces a pattern of auxin peaks.
(c) The steady-state auxin concentration in a row of 50 cells plotted as a function of the efﬁciency
of PIN transport T (Eq. 15.15). Red and black dashes indicate the approximate size and position of
each cell. As the efﬁciency of transport increases, the number of maxima increases as well
332
A. Runions et al.

ﬂow and polarization of PIN1 proteins conﬁrmed that the canalization hypothesis is
generally consistent with observations of vein formation in developing leaves.
Mitchison (1980) proposed two main variants of his model: facilitated diffusion
and polar transport. Each variant suggested a different molecular mechanism. In the
case of facilitated diffusion, transport was affected by passive channels. The
diffusion rate between cells was assumed to increase with net auxin ﬂux,
irrespective of the ﬂux direction. Mitchison (1980) suggested plasmodesmata as
potential candidates for the channels. Although it is likely that auxin can move
through plasmodesmata to some extent (Rutschow et al. 2011), experimental
support for a feedback based on auxin ﬂux is currently lacking.
Polar transport is more compatible with the chemiosmotic model of auxin
transport and molecular data on the localization and polarity of the PIN proteins
(Rolland-Lagan and Prusinkiewicz 2005). At the cellular level, the impact of auxin
Fig. 15.7 Patterns generated by with-the-ﬂux (a–c) and dual-polarization (d–f) models. (a) A
reimplementation (Rolland-Lagan and Prusinkiewicz 2005) of the model proposed by Mitchison
(1980). PINs (red) are allocated assuming a quadratic dependence on auxin ﬂux (black arrows). A
canal of polarized cells is formed, connecting the auxin source at the top of the grid (outlined in
green) to the sink at the bottom (middle cell, bottom row). The canal is characterized by high ﬂux
and low concentration of auxin (blue). (b) A linear PIN allocation function results in a broad
coordination of PIN polarity across the tissue. (c) An implementation of the canalization model of
Feugier et al. (2005). In contrast to panel (a), PINs are drawn from a limited pool, causing transport
to saturate and auxin to build up in the strand. (d–f) Three frames of a simulation using the dual-
polarization model by Bayer et al. (2009). (d) Epidermal cells (top row) initially polarize up the
gradient, causing a convergence point to form in the center of the top row. (e) As auxin levels
increase, the peak extends into the inner tissue. (f) The resulting strand elongates until it reaches
the sink
15
Computational Models of Auxin-Driven Development
333

on carrier allocation is captured by making parameter α in Eq. (15.16) a function of
the net ﬂux through the cell membrane:
α Φij


¼
h Φij


Φij  0
0
otherwise

,
ð15:20Þ
where h(Φij) is an increasing function of net ﬂux. According to this equation, the
export of auxin across a cell membrane promotes further auxin transport in the same
direction. Mitchison (1980) used a quadratic allocation function h(Φij) (Fig. 15.7a)
and reported that it must be supralinear for canalization to occur. This feature was
later investigated by Feugier et al. (2005) who found that a variety of supralinear
functions for carrier allocation produced strands, including a step function. Feugier
et al. (2005) also showed that if allocation is linear or sublinear then broad patterns
of coordinated polarity over many cells arise (Fig. 15.7b). Stoma et al. (2008)
exploited this regime in a model which, similar to the model of Merks et al. (2007),
attempted to encompass phyllotaxis and vein formation using a common mecha-
nism. In this model, linear polarization was assumed in the epidermis of the shoot
apical meristem, producing broad patterns of PIN polarization towards primordia,
and quadratic polarization was used to model the subepidermal patterning of veins.
The produced patterns of PIN polarization closely matched those observed in the
shoot apical meristem, but the model predicted a decrease of auxin concentration at
the tips of leaf primordia that did not match auxin patterns reported by DR5.
Mitchison’s model produces canals with high ﬂux and low concentration of
auxin (Fig. 15.7a), whereas experiments suggest that auxin concentration in canals
is high (Scarpella et al. 2006). Exploring this discrepancy, Feugier et al. (2005)
proposed and analyzed variants of Mitchison’s models that operated according to
two scenarios: with PINs allocated to different membrane sectors independently,
and with PINs allocated to membranes from a ﬁxed pool within each cell
(c.f. Sect. 3.4). In the ﬁrst case, simulations conﬁrmed that the concentration of
auxin in canals was lower than in the surrounding tissue, as originally predicted by
Mitchison’s model. In contrast, when cell membranes competed for the PINs within
each cell, the models produced canals with auxin concentration higher than in the
surrounding tissue (Fig. 15.7c). This result removed a key inconsistency between
the canalization hypothesis and experimental data.
Competitive allocation of PIN qualitatively modiﬁes the results of simulation
compared to the noncompetitive allocation for the following reason. Given the ﬁxed
pool of PIN proteins in a cell, competitive allocation of PIN to one segment of the
membrane (bottom segment of the provascular cells in Fig. 15.7c) reduces PIN
allocation to the remaining segments of the membrane in the same cell. Conse-
quently, auxin outﬂux from the provascular strand is reduced. From the viewpoint
of the cells adjacent to this strand, this situation is indistinguishable from the
reduction of outﬂux due to low concentration of auxin in Mitchison’s model
(Fig. 15.7a). This can be seen by rewriting Eq. (15.15) into the form:
334
A. Runions et al.

Φij ¼ T PINij


þ D


IAAi
½
  T PINji


þ D


IAAj


:
ð15:21Þ
Reduction in the concentration of [PINji] postulated by Feugier’s model, but not
by Mitchison’s model, has the same effect on the ﬂux Φij as a reduction of auxin
concentration [IAAj].
4.3
The Dual-Polarization Model
The proposed modes of PIN polarization by auxin, up the gradient and with the ﬂux,
involve the same molecular players. This raises the question of how a plant decides
where and when to deploy each mode. Addressing this question, Bayer et al. (2009)
investigated the development of the midvein in tomato leaf primordia. There the
auxin peak that causes leaf initiation in the meristem remains in place while the
strand that prepatterns the midvein is formed. To explain these dynamics, Bayer
et al. (2009) proposed a dual-polarization model, according to which up-the-
gradient and with-the-ﬂux modes operate concurrently, with the weights dependent
on the tissue type and auxin concentration. Figure 15.7d–f shows a simulation of
this model. At ﬁrst, auxin levels are low, allowing PINs to polarize up the gradient
in the L1 and form a new convergence point (Fig. 15.7d). As the auxin levels
increase, cells at the convergence point begin to favor with-the-ﬂux polarization,
which directs auxin ﬂow towards inner tissues. This causes the peak to extend into a
canal that eventually connects the source to the sink (Fig. 15.7e, f). The model
reliably produces canals with high auxin concentration, as any drop in concentra-
tion would restore the up-the-gradient polarization mode, replenishing auxin in the
canal.
The existence of an auxin-dependent transition between these two modes of
PIN1 polarization has recently been supported by Furutani et al. (2014), who
showed that genes from the MAB4 family mediate the transition from up-the-
gradient PIN1 polarization at lower auxin concentrations to with-the-ﬂux polariza-
tion at higher concentrations. An interesting hypothesis is that PINOID is also
involved in the deployment of each mode (van Berkel et al. 2013), as it is known to
regulate apical vs. basal polarization of members of the PIN family in the root
(Friml et al. 2004) in a manner dependent on auxin (Fozard et al. 2013).
The work of Bayer et al. (2009) suggests that the combined action of the up-the-
gradient and with-the-ﬂux polarization modes sufﬁces to explain patterning induced
by polar auxin transport in the shoot. Further support for the coordinated operation
of up-the-gradient and with-the-ﬂux polarization modes is presented by (O’Connor
et al. 2014), who showed that in grasses these modes of polarization may be
associated with distinct proteins related to AtPIN1 (c.f. Sect. 5.3).
15
Computational Models of Auxin-Driven Development
335

4.4
The Role of Import Carriers
In addition to export carriers, the ﬂow of auxin is affected by the AUX/LAX family
of import carriers (Bennett et al. 1996; Parry et al. 2001) (Eqs. 15.11, 15.12, 15.13
and 15.14). These proteins are typically, although not always (Swarup et al. 2001),
located uniformly on the cell membranes. Experimental results and models have
focused on the role of AUX/LAX in enhancing and maintaining patterns of high
auxin concentration in selected cells, vascular strands, and tissues. In contrast,
studies of PINs have been focused on their primary role in the self-organization
of patterns.
The ﬁrst computational model by Kramer (2004) showed that AUX/LAX pro-
teins can contribute to the maintenance of high auxin concentrations in vascular
strands. A subsequent model by Swarup et al. (2005) pointed to the importance of
AUX/LAX proteins in maintaining gradients of auxin concentration that are
responsible for gravitropic responses in the root. Heisler and Jo¨nsson (2006) used
computational models to support the hypothesis that AUX/LAX proteins play a role
concentrating auxin in the epidermis of shoot apical meristems (Reinhardt
et al. 2003), although the retention or concentration of auxin in the epidermis also
involves PIN1 (Bainbridge et al. 2008; Bayer et al. 2009; Kierzkowski et al. 2013).
Heisler and Jo¨nsson (2006) and Sahlin et al. (2009) also showed that auxin-induced
AUX/LAX proteins may help to ﬁx auxin maxima at the locations at which they
emerged (i.e., the convergence points), and thus stabilize phyllotactic patterns. This
role of AUX/LAX is consistent with the observations of irregular phyllotaxis
patterns in plants with multiple mutations of these importers (Bainbridge
et al. 2008).
Auxin application has been shown to upregulate AUX1 in roots (Laskowski
et al. 2006, 2008; Paponov et al. 2008). On this basis, Laskowski et al. (2008)
proposed that a positive feedback between auxin and its importers in the pericycle
reinforces auxin peaks during lateral root initiation. Smith and Bayer (2009)
explored this idea further using a model of a line of cells. They showed that a
positive feedback between auxin-dependent importer production and the retention
of auxin by importers not only can reinforce preexisting patterns, but can also
generate patterns of equidistant peaks de novo (Fig. 15.8). These patterns resemble
those generated by up-the-gradient polar transport of auxin by PIN (Fig. 15.6a). In
contrast to peak formation by PIN proteins, peak formation by auxin importers does
not require polarized transporters.
4.5
Molecular Basis of Cell Polarization
Although formulated in molecular terms, neither the up-the-gradient nor with-the-
ﬂux model explains the molecular mechanism of PIN polarization. As experimental
data remain limited, several computational models have recently been proposed to
336
A. Runions et al.

explore hypothetical mechanisms. Generally, these models can be divided into two
classes: those postulating a purely biochemical polarization mechanism (Kramer
2009; Wabnik et al. 2010; Roussel and Slingerland 2012; Abley et al. 2013) and
those incorporating biomechanical factors (Heisler et al. 2010).
Fig. 15.8 One-dimensional simulation of a hypothetical pattern formation process driven by
AUX/LAX. Panels (a–e) represent subsequent stages of the simulation. Auxin concentration in
each cell is shown in green and AUX/LAX concentration on cell membranes in yellow. Auxin is
produced at the same rate in each cell. The ﬁrst and last cells, shown in purple, are auxin sinks. The
concentration of AUX/LAX is a quadratic function of auxin concentration. As cellular auxin levels
increase, inﬂux due to AUX/LAX (yellow arrows) begins to exceed efﬂux due to diffusion or
transport by background efﬂux carriers (blue arrows), leading to auxin accumulation in some cells
(progression from a to b). A competition between cells results, where the cells achieving a high
auxin concentration deplete auxin from nearby cells. A pattern of approximately equidistant auxin
maxima gradually emerges (c, d, e)
15
Computational Models of Auxin-Driven Development
337

The biochemical models explore the emergence of a coherent polarization in a
set of cells under different assumptions regarding auxin gradients. These assump-
tions include emergent coordination of auxin gradients in individual cells
(Fig. 15.9a), alignment of polarizations governed by a tissue-level gradient in the
intercellular space (Fig. 15.9b), and transmission of polarizing information via
auxin gradients in the extracellular spaces between adjoining cells (Fig. 15.9c).
Kramer (2009) explored Mitchison’s (1981) idea that ﬂux sensing could result
from a readout of intracellular auxin gradients (Fig. 15.9a). He suggested a role for
the auxin-binding protein ABP1 in sensing these gradients, and showed that the
resulting auxin ﬂuxes can become canalized. In the reported simulations, vascular
strands were always initiated at auxin sinks. In contrast, experimental observations
suggest that the midvein in the leaf is initiated at an auxin source (Scarpella
et al. 2006; Bayer et al. 2009; O’Connor et al. 2014). Kramer (2009) did not
comment whether his model could reproduce these dynamics as well.
Roussel and Slingerland (2012) investigated another model of PIN polarization.
They postulated that auxin in the extracellular space inhibits PIN exocytosis and,
consequently, PIN proteins polarize towards regions of low auxin concentration in
the extracellular space (Fig. 15.9b). This model produced a tissue-scale gradient of
extracellular auxin spanning its source and sink, with PINs in the cells polarized
consistently towards the sink. The source and the sink were connected by a path of
high auxin ﬂux in a manner resembling a vein, but auxin concentration in this path
was not consistently elevated, in contrast to experimental data (c.f. Sect. 4.2).
Abley et al. (2013) systematically explored several hypothetical mechanisms
that potentially could underlie cell polarization in both animals and plants. The
mechanism they proposed to describe polarization in plants employed a PIN-like
transporter molecule and an auxin-like substance that was exported from cells into
the extracellular space by the transporter molecule. The extracellular auxin pro-
moted PIN endocytosis, thus decreasing PIN concentration on both membranes
abutting the same extracellular compartment. An inherent part of the model is the
assumption of two antagonistic membrane-bound substances (possibly the proteins
ROP2 and ROP6), one of which correlates positively and another one negatively
with the localization of PIN. These substances enforce inherent cell polarization
Intracellular
Tissue level
 extracellular
Across extracellular 
compartments
a
b
c
Fig. 15.9 Auxin concentration gradients assumed in postulated molecular-level models of PIN
polarization. High auxin concentrations are shown in green and low in white. (a) Gradients are
present in individual cells (Kramer 2009). (b) Tissue-level gradient are present in the extracellular
space (Roussel and Slingerland 2012; Abley et al. 2013). (c) Gradients are present in compart-
ments of the extracellular space (Wabnik et al. 2010)
338
A. Runions et al.

even in the absence of external stimuli. Abley et al. showed that a coordinated
polarization of cells in a tissue results, and the steady-state auxin concentration in
consecutive cells may either decrease or increase towards the sink, depending on
model parameters. They did not apply their model to speciﬁc patterning processes,
such as the formation of convergence points or veins.
In both the models of Roussel and Slingerland (2012) and Abley et al. (2013),
auxin in the extracellular space acted symmetrically on the adjacent cells. In
contrast, Wabnik et al. (2010) proposed that auxin in the extracellular compart-
ments forms gradients, and these gradients provide asymmetric cues guiding PIN
polarization in the adjacent cells (Fig. 15.9c). Similar to Kramer (2009), Wabnik
et al. (2010) postulated that the auxin-binding protein ABP1 plays a role in this
process, but they assumed that ABP1 interacts with auxin in the apoplast rather than
within cells. PIN polarization would thus emerge from the intercellular competition
for the ABP1 proteins that prevent PIN endocytosis. This hypothesis is consistent
with experimental data showing that ABP1 is secreted from the cell where it is
physiologically active (Napier et al. 2002) and is involved in the inhibition of
endocytosis by auxin (Robert et al. 2010). The resulting model reproduced numer-
ous details of vascular patterning and regeneration. Furthermore, bifurcation anal-
ysis indicated that it was capable of transitioning between up-the-gradient and with-
the-ﬂux transport regimes. Potentially, it could thus also account for phyllotaxis and
other up-the-gradient phenomena. Nevertheless, the question remains whether
signiﬁcant auxin gradients are possible in the very narrow spaces between cells in
the tissues where patterning occurs.
A model assuming that PINs are polarized by mechanical forces was proposed
by Heisler et al. (2010), who built on their earlier model (Hamant et al. 2008) to
explain peak formation in the shoot apex. Heisler et al. showed that PIN polarity is
correlated with microtubule patterns, which can be modiﬁed by mechanical
stresses. They proposed that high auxin concentration in a cell causes its wall to
loosen, transferring load onto the wall of the adjacent cell (the loads acting on
adjacent cell walls, abutting the same extracellular compartment, may thus be
different). These stresses were sensed by the cells and used as a cue to polarize
PIN proteins. Using a computational model operating on a ﬁxed template of
hexagonal cells, Heisler et al. (2010) showed that the feedback between the
polarization of PIN proteins and stresses can generate a whorled pattern of auxin
maxima.
Mechanical forces have also been involved in models of vascular patterning in
leaves (Couder et al. 2002; Laguna et al. 2008; Corson et al. 2009), but links
between these models and polar auxin transport are tenuous.
15
Computational Models of Auxin-Driven Development
339

5
Review of Speciﬁc Models
A tight synergy between laboratory experiments and computational models under-
lies recent studies of growth regulation and patterning focused on the role of auxin.
The fountain model (Fig. 15.1) suggests an exciting possibility of reducing funda-
mental features of plant development to a small number of general mechanisms. At
a more immediate level, it presents a structured set of hypotheses regarding some of
the key elements of plant development. Below we discuss these elements in more
detail.
5.1
Phyllotaxis
The ﬁrst morphogenetic process involving auxin, in the order implied by the reverse
fountain model, is the generation of a phyllotactic pattern of leaf and ﬂower
primordia on the shoot apical meristem (SAM). Microscopic observations of
meristems in Arabidopsis by Reinhardt et al. (2003) showed that PIN1 proteins
are oriented towards spatially separated convergence points, creating auxin maxima
that predict the location of new primordia. Following these observations, they
proposed that phyllotactic patterns emerge from a competition for auxin, where
existing primordia drain auxin from their neighborhoods. This creates zones of low
auxin concentration surrounding each primordium, where new primordia cannot be
formed. The conceptual model of Reinhardt et al. can thus be viewed as a molecular
implementation of the inhibitory mechanism of phyllotaxis proposed by Hofmeister
(1868): the absence of auxin plays the role of an inhibitor. It leaves open, however,
the question of what information is used to polarize PINs towards a convergence
point, and what biochemical or biomechanical mechanisms effect this polarization.
Addressing the ﬁrst question, Jo¨nsson et al. (2006) and Smith et al. (2006a) postu-
lated a feedback between auxin distribution and PIN localization. According to
these models, active auxin transport by PIN proteins creates auxin maxima that
localize the incipient primordia. PINs orient themselves preferentially towards
these maxima, promoting further auxin ﬂux that reinforces them (up-the-gradient
model, c.f. Sect. 4.1). Operating on a growing surface approximating the shoot
apical meristem, this basic mechanism creates a relatively irregular pattern of auxin
maxima. However, with additional assumptions—the restriction of the initiation of
new primordia to the peripheral zone, the immobilization of auxin maxima, and the
strengthening of PIN1 polarization towards the incipient primordia after their
initiation (Smith et al. 2006a)—the model generates typical, highly regular spiral
phyllotactic patterns (Fig. 15.10). Van Mourik et al. (2012) have recently proposed
a related model to explain the patterning of ﬂoral organ primordia in Arabidopsis.
Motivated by the auxin-driven models of phyllotaxis, Smith et al. (2006b) and
Mirabet et al. (2012) analyzed the robustness of phyllotactic patterning using
models that abstract inhibitory properties of auxin in geometric terms. Both studies
340
A. Runions et al.

postulated a secondary inhibitory ﬁeld as a means through which the robustness of
phyllotactic pattern formation can be increased. The more detailed analysis by
Mirabet et al. (2012) has also considered a form of instability manifested by
incorrect order of the initiation of primordia. Besnard et al. (2014) have subse-
quently shown that cytokinin establishes a secondary ﬁeld which reduces the
frequency of such instabilities in Arabidopsis. In addition to the inherent value of
these results, they point to the need and usefulness of extending auxin-driven
models with other regulatory processes and substances.
5.2
Leaf Development
Once positioned, a leaf primordium begins to grow, bulging out of the shoot apical
meristem and gradually ﬂattening along the abaxial–adaxial axis. During this
growth, new convergence points emerge along the leaf margin, while the conver-
gence point that initiated the leaf remains at the leaf tip (Scarpella et al. 2006; Hay
et al. 2006). The formation of convergence points along the leaf margin appears to
be governed by a mechanism similar to phyllotactic patterning in the SAM (Berleth
et al. 2007; Smith and Bayer 2009; Bilsborough et al. 2011). As in phyllotaxis,
existing convergence points locally inhibit the formation of new convergence
points by draining auxin. New points thus only emerge when sufﬁcient space is
created for them by leaf growth. Similar to their counterparts at the shoot apical
meristem, the convergence points at the leaf margin mark locations of increased
Fig. 15.10 Simulation model of organ formation in the shoot apical meristem (Smith
et al. 2006a). Transport of auxin (green) by PIN proteins (red) creates a self-organizing pattern
of auxin maxima. PINs are polarized up the gradient, resulting in a spacing mechanism that
positions auxin peaks as far as possible from previously existing ones. These peaks trigger the
formation of new organs that bulge out from the apex surface. Growth of the shoot apex creates
space at the tip, giving room for new organs to appear. Depending on model parameters and initial
conditions, this can lead to a pattern of spiral (a) or decussate (b) phyllotaxis
15
Computational Models of Auxin-Driven Development
341

outgrowth, yielding serrations in the case of Arabidopsis leaves (Bilsborough
et al. 2011) and, possibly, lobes in leaves of other species (Barkoulas et al. 2008;
Koenig et al. 2009). This similarity is consistent with the “partial shoot theory”
(Arber 1950), which emphasizes parallels between the growth of shoots and leaves
(Champagne and Sinha 2004). Following this train of thought, the strikingly
different appearance of spiral phyllotactic patterns and leaves does not result
from fundamentally different morphogenetic processes, but from the different
geometries on which they operate: an approximately paraboloid shoot apical
meristem that dynamically maintains its form vs. a ﬂattening leaf that changes its
shape and size as it grows.
Bilsborough et al. (2011) constructed a computational model of Arabidopsis leaf
serration to further explore leaf development (Fig. 15.11). The general features of
the observed serration patterns could be explained in terms of a feedback between
auxin and PIN proteins, but the model showed that an additional factor was required
to stabilize auxin maxima and thus robustly position serrations (Fig. 15.11b, c).
This stabilizing role was fulﬁlled by the CUC2 protein, known to play a major role
in leaf serration development (Nikovics et al. 2006; Kawamura et al. 2010). Fol-
lowing experimental data (PIN1 convergence points do not form in cuc2 mutants),
Bilsborough et al. (2011) hypothesized that PIN1 repolarization may only occur in
the presence of CUC2. Auxin, however, downregulates CUC2 expression, thus
ﬁxing PIN1 localization at the convergence points. It is an interesting question
whether a related mechanism also stabilizes auxin maxima during phyllotactic
pattern generation at the SAM [as suggested by Nikovics et al. (2006) and Berger
et al. (2009)].
Chitwood et al. (2012) observed that auxin maxima in the model of phyllotaxis
by Smith et al. (2006a) have an asymmetric shape and hypothesized that this
asymmetry may disrupt the bilateral symmetry of leaf forms. They validated this
hypothesis experimentally in tomato. Speciﬁcally, they observed the predicted
asymmetric DR5 expression due to differences in distances between a given
maximum and adjacent primordia in the clockwise and counterclockwise directions
around the shoot and conﬁrmed a relation between the direction of phyllotaxis
(clockwise or counterclockwise) and the resulting asymmetry of leaves using a
statistical analysis of leaf form.
5.3
Vascular Patterning
The models of phyllotaxis and leaf formation discussed above operate at the
boundary of the organs considered: in the epidermis of the shoot apical meristem
and at the margin of the leaf. The localization of PIN1 proteins and the activation of
the DR5 auxin reporter in emerging leaves indicate that auxin reaching conver-
gence points is redirected there towards the leaf interior. Its ﬂow is then organized
into canals: narrow paths that deﬁne the position of future veins. Modeling of vein
formation is intimately linked with auxin canalization discussed in Sect. 4.2.
342
A. Runions et al.

Initial models of the initiation of leaf midveins used pure up-the-gradient (Merks
et al. 2007) or with-the-ﬂux (Stoma et al. 2008) polarization modes. These models
did not fully reproduce the spatiotemporal dynamics of DR5 and PIN1 expression
(Sects. 4.1 and 4.2). Bayer et al. (2009) reproduced detailed observations of leaf
midvein initiation with the dual-polarization model (Sect. 4.3), which blends
between both polarization modes based on auxin concentration and tissue type
(Fig. 15.12). In this model, up-the-gradient polarization is dominant in the epider-
mis and at low auxin concentrations, whereas with-the-ﬂux polarization is dominant
in the subepidermal tissues and at high auxin concentrations. The dual-polarization
model reproduces the experimentally observed spatiotemporal sequence of PIN
polarizations and auxin distribution in a leaf primordium. It shows that up-the-
gradient and with-the-ﬂux polarization modes can plausibly coexist in the conver-
gence point. It also captures the basal position of PIN proteins in the vein precursor
cells, the gradual narrowing of vein-deﬁning canals, and the towards-the-vein
orientation of PINs in the cells adjacent to these canals. The model predicted a
transient polarization of PIN1 proteins in the subepidermis towards the epidermis at
the onset of the primordium formation. This phenomenon was subsequently
observed microscopically.
While formulating their model, Bayer et al. (2009) observed that canalizing
strands cannot easily ﬁnd sinks representing previously formed veins. To overcome
this problem, they introduced a hypothetical diffusing substance that was produced
IAAi
CUCi
CUC2 enables PIN1 
reallocation
 Auxin represses 
CUC2 expression
b
c
a
Fig. 15.11 The model of leaf margin development proposed by Bilsborough et al. (2011).
Polarized PIN1 proteins are shown in red, cellular auxin concentrations in green, and CUC2
expression is indicated by the presence of pink circles in the center of the cells. The model assumes
that PIN1 polarizes up the gradient of auxin concentration and incorporates CUC2 as the enabling
factor (inset a). As the leaf grows, the feedback between PIN1, auxin, and CUC2 generates an
interspersed pattern of auxin maxima and CUC2 expression. Increased growth at auxin maxima
and growth repression at sites of CUC2 expression modulate leaf growth, producing serrations.
Inset (b)–(c): a variant of the model, where PIN1 can (re)polarize in the absence of CUC2. The
convergence point marked by an arrow in (b) is unstable and splits into two in (c). The resulting
convergence points travel away from each other until a stable spacing is achieved. Figure based on
Bilsborough et al. (2011)
15
Computational Models of Auxin-Driven Development
343

in the vasculature and polarized cells towards existing veins. The problem of
ﬁnding the sink was revisited in the recent work by O’Connor et al. (2014), in the
context of phyllotactic and vascular patterning in the shoot apical meristem of the
grass Brachypodium distachyon. Confocal microscopy observations indicated that
three different proteins (termed PIN1a, PIN1b, and SoPIN1—sister of PIN1) were
involved in Brachypodium, in contrast to the single PIN1 in Arabidopsis. These
PINs have distinct expression and cellular localization patterns, which points to
differences in the mechanisms determining their polarization. Assuming that
SoPIN1 proteins polarize up the gradient and the remaining two PINs polarize
with the ﬂux at different rates (linear and quadratic, respectively), O’Connor
et al. modeled the observed patterns of DR5 expression and PIN localization. The
model suggests that each PIN plays a distinct role. SoPIN1 generates convergence
points in the epidermis. PIN1b broadly polarizes cells towards nearby vasculature,
which provides a sink-ﬁnding mechanism similar to that described by Feugier
et al. (2005) and Stoma et al. (2008). Finally, PIN1a canalizes broad auxin ﬂow
towards the sink into a narrow high-ﬂux path. These results show that phyllotaxis
and vascular patterning in Brachypodium can be explained by concurrent up-the-
gradient and with-the-ﬂux polarization. Their coordinated action is consistent with
Fig. 15.12 Comparison of experimental observations with the dual model for PIN1 polarization.
(a–c) Three stages of midvein initiation in a tomato shoot apex. Scale bars: 20 μm. White stars in
the insets indicate the PIN1 convergence point in the L1. PIN1 immunolocalization (green)
suggests that PINs are oriented up the gradient of auxin concentration both in the L1 and in the
subepidermal tissues that surround the initiating vein (red arrows). In contrast, PINs at the center
of the convergence point and along the midvein appear to be oriented with the auxin ﬂux (white
arrows). Intermediate polarities are observed at the boundary between both regions (yellow
arrows). (d–f) Successive stages of a simulation of PIN polarization using the dual-polarization
model. The simulation employs a cellular template approximating microscopic image (a). Auxin
concentration is shown in green and PIN localization in red. (d) PINs in the inner tissue are
polarized towards the convergence point forming in the epidermis. (e) PINs near the convergence
point switch polarity as the auxin ﬂow extends into the subepidermis. (f) Auxin ﬂux reaches the
sink that represents preexisting vasculature (dark cells at the bottom) and becomes reﬁned into a
narrow strand. Figure adapted from Bayer et al. (2009)
344
A. Runions et al.

the dual-polarization model. The progression from broad to canalizing auxin-driven
PIN polarization suggests a mechanism for directing the emerging vein to the sink,
alternative to the hypothetical factor introduced by Bayer et al. (2009).
Another model integrating up-the-gradient polarization (which leads to the
emergence of convergence points) and with-the-ﬂux polarization (which leads to
the production of canals) captures the formation of the midvein and ﬁrst-order
laterals veins in open venation patterns, i.e., patterns without loops (Smith and
Bayer 2009; Smith 2011). The model is driven by growth of the leaf blade,
approximated as a single cellular layer. Questions related to the coupling of
canalization and growth in the context of vein pattern formation have been
highlighted and analyzed in a preliminary model study by Lee et al. (2014).
Observations by Scarpella et al. (2006) indicate that loops are formed by
anastomosis, i.e., connection of canals. PIN proteins in these canals have opposite
orientations, pointing away from a bipolar cell at which both canals meet.
Mitchison’s 1980 model and its recreation by Rolland-Lagan and Prusinkiewicz
(2005) show that such a scenario of loop creation is possible if the bipolar cell is a
source of auxin, turned on at a precisely deﬁned time. A separate model of vein
patterning in areoles (Dimitrov and Zucker 2006) also relies on elevated auxin
concentration to localize the meeting point. However, the data of Scarpella
et al. (2006) do not show an elevated auxin concentration at the meeting points. It
is possible that bipolar cells are located at weak maxima of auxin concentration, not
detected using experimental techniques of Scarpella et al. (2006). Another possi-
bility, investigated using a computational model by Feugier and Iwasa (2006), is
that proposed anastomosing canals are guided towards each other by a hypothetical
diffusing substance. The existence of such a substance has not been experimentally
conﬁrmed. Vein pattern formation beyond the formation of the midvein and ﬁrst-
order lateral branches thus remains unclear.
5.4
Apical Dominance and Bud Activation
From leaves, auxin ﬂows to the stem. There, auxin not only patterns the stem
vascular system in a manner similar to the patterning of leaf veins, but also
coordinates the activation of lateral buds, and thus the development of the
branching structure as a whole. This coordination includes the phenomenon of
apical dominance: a strong inhibitory inﬂuence of the shoot apical meristem in the
vegetative state on the lateral buds below. Apical dominance is lifted upon the
transition of the apex to the ﬂowering state, resulting in the activation of one or
more lateral buds in a basipetal sequence. Thimann and Skoog (1933) suggested
that the inhibitory signal is auxin, produced by the shoot apex and actively
transported down the plant. The use of computational models in the study of apical
dominance has a particularly long history, rivaled only by Mitchison’s (1980)
models of auxin canalization.
15
Computational Models of Auxin-Driven Development
345

The ﬁrst family of models of apical dominance was created by Lindenmayer and
his
collaborators
(Lindenmayer
1984;
Janssen
and
Lindenmayer
1987;
Prusinkiewicz et al. 1988; Prusinkiewicz and Lindenmayer 1990). The models
aimed at elucidating the dynamics of branch initiation and ﬂowering in compound
inﬂorescences, using the herbaceous plant Mycelis muralis as a case study. To
switch apical meristems in the main and lateral branches from the vegetative to
ﬂowering state, the models incorporated an additional long-distance signal,
representing a then hypothetical ﬂower-inducing substance, “ﬂorigen.” The nature
of ﬂorigen has since then been established (Lifschitz et al. 2006; Lifschitz and
Eshed 2006; Shalit et al. 2009; Zeevaart 2008), opening the door for future models
that may lead to a deeper understanding of inﬂorescence development.
Lindenmayer and his collaborators hypothesized that the timing of activation of
successive buds reﬂects the speed with which the wave of auxin depletion propa-
gates down the stem after the transition of the apical meristem to ﬂowering. This
hypothesis put in focus several questions. First, it is not clear how the resulting
models could account for the activation sequences of buds within rosettes. There,
extremely short internodes should lead to almost simultaneous activation of lateral
buds, yet in Arabidopsis, for example, a basipetal sequence is observed in the
rosette in spite of the short internodes (Stirnberg et al. 1999). Second, the
depletion-wave models do not take into consideration contributions of the lateral
branches to the auxin ﬂow in the stem, contrary to experimental data (Morris 1977).
Third, experiments with radiolabeled auxin show that auxin transported from the
main apex through the stem does not pass in the vicinity of the dormant buds and
does not enter them (Morris 1977). It is thus not clear how the auxin signal is
conveyed to the bud. One possibility is that auxin acts on the lateral bud indirectly,
through the intermediacy of one or more other hormones that move freely between
the stem and the bud and act as secondary messengers. Candidate hormones are
cytokinin (Muu¨ller and Leyser 2011; Shimizu-Sato et al. 2008) and strigolactone
(Gomez-Roldan et al. 2008; Dun et al. 2009; Brewer et al. 2009; Agusti et al. 2011),
possibly acting jointly (Dun et al. 2012). Modeling shows, however, that this
intermediacy is not necessary, and all three shortcomings of the auxin-depletion
model can be addressed with a “relay” model using only auxin (Prusinkiewicz
et al. 2009; Leyser 2009; Shinohara et al. 2013).
The relay model is based on the assumption, most recently supported by Furutani
et al. (2014), that a lateral bud remains dormant until it can effectively export the
auxin it produces through a polar transport mechanism. Bifurcation analysis of the
with-the-ﬂux model of auxin transport (Prusinkiewicz et al. 2009) shows that such
export can be triggered by a temporary decrease of auxin concentration in the stem
segment (metamer) supporting the bud, which the bud senses through an increase in
the background auxin ﬂow from the bud. Once triggered, the polar auxin transport is
maintained even after the high level of auxin concentration in the metamer is
restored by the auxin efﬂux from the activated bud.
In the context of a branched shoot, the temporary decrease of auxin concentra-
tion in a metamer results from a decrease in auxin supply from the shoot apical
meristem and/or lateral meristems positioned further up the stem. A more basipetal
346
A. Runions et al.

bud is thus activated when the bud higher up switches from the vegetative to the
ﬂowering state. By the same mechanism, the subsequent switch to ﬂowering of the
most recently activated bud triggers activation of the next one, and the relay
progresses (Fig. 15.13). In contrast to the depletion model, the timing of this
progression is determined by the delay between the activation of a lateral bud and
its switch to ﬂowering. Auxin propagation times thus play a secondary role.
The relay model extrapolates the with-the-ﬂux auxin polarization model from
the level of individual cells to the level of architectural modules of a plant: apices,
buds, and metamers. An important aspect of with-the-ﬂux polarization is its ability
to canalize auxin ﬂow into narrow streams, precursors of vascular strands
(Fig. 15.7c). In the case of lateral buds, vascular connections may be formed
concurrently with, and indeed as an integral part of, increased auxin outﬂow from
the buds (Grbic and Bleecker 2000). A cellular-level version of the relay model
(Fig. 15.14) shows that it is compatible with such a behavior.
The secondary messenger model and the model explaining apical dominance
and bud activation in terms of the properties of with-the-ﬂux polarization are not
mutually exclusive. As the mechanisms of apical control continue to be actively
studied, the use of models elucidating logical consequences of different assump-
tions fulﬁlls one of key roles of modeling: to sharpen the questions.
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
flowering
auxin
PIN
vegetative
auxin
PIN
auxin
PIN
flux
out
out
out
in
auxin flow
auxin flow
auxin flow
auxin flow
concentration
concentration
concentration
concentration
concentration
concentration
state
state
Fig. 15.13 The relay model of bud activation at the metamer level. (a, b) Schematic representa-
tions of an apex in the ﬂowering and vegetative state. (c) Representation of a metamer. (d–g)
Selected stages of the simulation. At the beginning of the simulation, the main apex creates a
sequence of metamers with the associated lateral buds. Due to the high supply of auxin from the
apex, the concentration of auxin in the metamers is high (d). Upon transition to ﬂowering,
production of auxin in the main apex decreases, causing a decrease in auxin concentration in the
stem. This decrease is the strongest in the topmost metamer, triggering polar auxin efﬂux from the
associated lateral bud that activates it. Auxin produced by this bud re-saturates the stem (e). After
transition of the topmost bud to the ﬂowering state, next lateral bud becomes activated (f). The
resulting relay process continues (g) until all buds have become activated. Figure based on
Prusinkiewicz et al. (2009)
15
Computational Models of Auxin-Driven Development
347

5.5
Root Development
As described by the reverse/inverse fountain model (Fig. 15.1), auxin from the stem
ﬂows into the root. There, PINs are localized towards the root apex in the vascu-
lature and away from it in the epidermis and cortex. Consistent with these locali-
zations, auxin ﬂows towards the root apex in the subepidermal layers and away
from it in the epidermis. In the outer layers PIN proteins are also partially polarized
towards the central axis of the root. As a result, auxin from the outer layers reenters
the inner layers and is recycled towards the root tip. This recycling underlies the
maintenance of an auxin maximum at the root apex. Grieneisen et al. (2007) capture
this phenomenon using a model operating on a static grid and a model incorporating
growth and division of approximately rectangular cells. In both cases PIN polarities
were predeﬁned. Similar spatial patterns of auxin concentration were subsequently
obtained by Santuari et al. (2011), who used static cellular templates based on
digitized microscopy images (Fig. 15.15). Cellular templates were also used by
Stoma et al. (2008), who assumed that PINs are polarized according to the with-the-
ﬂux model. They showed that auxin maxima are maintained in this case as well.
In contrast to the above models, which were focused on the maintenance of the
auxin maximum at the root tip, Mironova et al. (2010) addressed the problem of the
emergence of this maximum and its regeneration after the removal of the root tip.
They modeled these phenomena by assuming that PINs in different root layers have
predeﬁned polarizations, but their concentrations depend on the concentration of
auxin. Mironova et al. (2012) extended that model by incorporating three different
PIN proteins, PIN1, PIN2, and PIN3, and assuming that their expression and
turnover rates respond differently to auxin concentration levels.
a
b
c
d
e
f
auxin
PIN
auxin flux
concentration
concentration
Fig. 15.14 The relay model of bud activation at the cellular level. The cellular grid represents a
longitudinal section of a stem with two buds. (a) Iconic representation of a cell. (b–f) Selected
stages of the simulation. Following the placement of an auxin source at the top of the main
segment, a vascular strand running through the segment emerges (c). Subsequent placement of
auxin sources in the two buds (d) does not trigger formation of lateral vasculature until the auxin
source at the top of the main stem is deactivated. The resulting decrease of auxin concentration in
the main vasculature then triggers the formation of a vein connecting the higher bud to the central
vasculature (e). When the source of auxin associated with this bud is deactivated, a similar process
occurs in the lower bud (f). Figure adapted from Prusinkiewicz et al. (2009)
348
A. Runions et al.

Grieneisen et al. (2007) used their model to propose that the recycling (“reﬂux”)
of auxin at the root tip produces an “auxin capacitor,” where auxin is gradually
accumulated. An extension of this idea underlies the mechanistic models of lateral
root initiation proposed by Lucas et al. (2008a, b). In these models, the auxin
capacitor at the root tip is charged by the basipetal ﬂux of auxin. The capacitor is
periodically discharged when the auxin level exceeds a threshold. The discharge
triggers the formation of a lateral root. The models explain the timing of the
initiation of lateral roots. Although they do not have a spatial character, they
yield a spatial distribution of lateral roots when a rate of main root growth is
assumed.
Fortin et al. (1989) observed that the sites of lateral root initiation are primed by
root geometry, as lateral roots tend to form on the convex side of a curved main
root. Investigating this phenomenon with computational models, Laskowski
et al. (2008) found that longer cells on the convex side accumulate more auxin
than shorter cells on the concave side. These differences are ampliﬁed by the auxin-
dependent upregulation of auxin transport to cells by the AUX1 proteins. The
higher auxin concentration on the convex side prompts preferential establishment
of auxin maxima on the same side. These maxima induce lateral roots (Benkova´
et al. 2003).
The model by Laskowski et al. (2008) showed that a feedback between auxin
and its importers may play a role in auxin-driven patterning. As shown in Sect. 4.4,
such a feedback can theoretically create a pattern of approximately equidistant
auxin maxima even in the absence of the more widely considered feedback between
auxin and its exporters.
Fig. 15.15 A model of auxin ﬂuxes in the root. PINs (red) polarize towards the root tip in the
central vascular system and away from the tip in the epidermis and cortex. Note the presence of
PINs directing auxin back into the vasculature in the outer cell layers. This causes a reﬂux of auxin
(green) back to the tip, allowing the system to store auxin even after the shoot is removed
(Grieneisen et al. 2007). Simulation adapted from Santuari et al. (2011)
15
Computational Models of Auxin-Driven Development
349

6
Conclusions
Computational modeling of auxin-driven patterning got off to an early start with
Mitchison’s (1980) exploration of Sachs’s canalization theory (Sachs 1969), but for
the next 25 years the area remained dormant. The situation changed in the early
2000s with the explosion of new experimental techniques. Immunological detection
(Sauer and Friml 2010) and ﬂuorescent tagging (Millar et al. 2009) have made it
possible to display the localization patterns of proteins in different tissues at
subcellular resolution. In vivo techniques (Heisler et al. 2005) enabled the obser-
vation of these localizations over time. Genetic manipulations led to remarkable
advancements in the study of protein functions. The experimental results prompted
by these techniques have led to new hypotheses regarding mechanisms of pattern
formation in plants. Computational models turned out to be useful in testing
whether these hypotheses are plausible. They also put into focus many crucial
questions, in particular regarding the biological mechanisms of PIN polarization
(Bennett et al. 2013), which are subject of current research.
In contrast to the experimental systems, where causal relations are not directly
observed, in computational models such relations are explicitly assumed. This
makes models indispensable, as they provide the only rigorous means to examine
whether proposed mechanisms can indeed yield the observed patterns and forms.
The use of computational models for this purpose began with the examination
(Jo¨nsson et al. 2006; Smith et al. 2006a; Barbier de Reuille et al. 2006) of the
conceptual model of phyllotaxis introduced by Reinhardt et al. (2003). Models
examining further auxin-driven processes in plants, including apical control and the
development of leaves and roots, quickly followed (Sect. 5). Extensions to other
processes and systems (e.g., regulation of embryonic development and mediation of
tropic responses in plants) are forthcoming.
In addition to explaining phenomena based on experimental data, computational
models highlight areas where experimental data are insufﬁcient. At present, one
such area encompasses molecular mechanisms of PIN polarization. Models exam-
ining different hypothetical mechanisms have been proposed (Sect. 4.5), but data
that would put them on a solid experimental foundation are still not available. Their
theoretical implications and relations to the higher-level up-the-gradient, with-the-
ﬂux, and dual-polarization models also require a better understanding. This is
needed to connect models operating at different scales and levels of abstraction
(Fig. 15.2). An intriguing element of the puzzle is the extent to which the interplay
between mechanical stresses and the distribution of auxin transporters (Hamant
et al. 2008; Hamant and Traas 2010; Boudaoud 2010; Heisler et al. 2010), as well as
growth, may play a role in PIN polarization and the resulting regulation of devel-
opment. Furthermore, production of leaves and vascular systems in pin mutants
(Barkoulas et al. 2008; Bilsborough et al. 2011) indicate that the feedback between
PIN proteins and polar auxin transport represents only one facet of the relevant
patterning processes (Guenot et al. 2012; Kierzkowski et al. 2013). Problems of
current interest also concern the interplay between auxin and other substances (e.g.,
350
A. Runions et al.

cytokinin, strigolactone) and the role of auxin synthesis in patterning. Furthermore,
mechanistic links between auxin-related patterns and the resulting macroscopic
forms, for example, the diverse forms of leaves, remain an area of active study.
From the methodological perspective, most models of auxin-driven patterning
and growth devised to date operate on surfaces. In some cases, however, the use of
three-dimensional models appears to be essential. One example is the modeling of
vascular pattern development in stems. The methodology for creating and visual-
izing three-dimensional models, especially those operating on growing tissues as
opposed to static templates, is yet to be fully developed.
Acknowledgment The authors’ research is supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation
(RSS), the Max Planck Society (RSS), the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of
Canada (PP), and the Human Frontier Science Program (PP).
References
Abley K, Barbier de Reuille P, Strutt D, Bangham A, Prusinkiewicz P, Mare´e A, Grieneisen V,
Coen E (2013) An intracellular partitioning-based framework for tissue cell polarity in plants
and animals. Development 140(10):2061–2074
Agusti J, Herold S, Schwarz M, Sanchez P, Ljung K, Dun E, Brewer P, Beveridge C, Sieberer T,
Sehr E, Greb T (2011) Strigolactone signaling is required for auxin-dependent stimulation of
secondary growth in plants. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108(50):20242–20247
Arber A (1950) The natural philosophy of plant form. University Press, Cambridge
Bainbridge K, Guyomarc’h S, Bayer E, Swarup R, Bennett M, Mandel T, Kuhlemeier C (2008)
Auxin inﬂux carriers stabilize phyllotactic patterning. Genes Dev 22(6):810–823
Banasiak A (2011) Putative dual pathway of auxin transport in organogenesis of Arabidopsis.
Planta 233(1):49–61
Barbier de Reuille P, Bohn-Courseau I, Ljung K, Morin H, Carraro N, Godin C, Traas J (2006)
Computer simulations reveal properties of the cell-cell signaling network at the shoot apex in
Arabidopsis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103(5):1627–1632
Barkoulas M, Hay A, Kougioumoutzi E, Tsiantis M (2008) A developmental framework for
dissected leaf formation in the Arabidopsis relative Cardamine hirsuta. Nat Genet 40
(9):1136–1141
Bayer E, Smith R, Mandel T, Nakayama N, Sauer M, Prusinkiewicz P, Kuhlemeier C (2009)
Integration of transport-based models for phyllotaxis and midvein formation. Genes Dev 23
(3):373–384
Ben-Gera H, Shwartz I, Shao M, Shani E, Estelle M, Ori N (2012) ENTIRE and GOBLET promote
leaﬂet development in tomato by modulating auxin response. Plant J 70(6):903–915
Benkova´ E, Michniewicz M, Sauer M, Teichmann T, Seifertova D, Ju¨rgens G, Friml J (2003)
Local, efﬂux-dependent auxin gradients as a common module for plant organ formation. Cell
115(5):591–602
Bennett M, Marchant A, Green H, May S, Ward S, Millner P, Walker A, Schulz B, Feldmann K
(1996) Arabidopsis AUX1 gene: a permease-like regulator of root gravitropism. Science 273
(5277):948–950
Bennett T, Sieberer T, Willett B, Booker J, Luschnig C, Leyser O (2006) The Arabidopsis MAX
pathway controls shoot branching by regulating auxin transport. Curr Biol 16(6):553–563
Bennett T, Hines G, Leyser O (2013) Canalization: what the ﬂux? Trends Genet 30(2):41–48
15
Computational Models of Auxin-Driven Development
351

Berger Y, Harpaz-Saad S, Brand A, Melnik H, Sirding N, Alvarez J, Zinder M, Samach A,
Eshed Y, Ori N (2009) The NAC-domain transcription factor GOBLET speciﬁes leaﬂet
boundaries in compound tomato leaves. Development 136(5):823–832
Berleth T, Scarpella E, Prusinkiewicz P (2007) Towards the systems biology of auxin-transport-
mediated patterning. Trends Plant Sci 12(14):151–159
Besnard F, Refahi Y, Morin V, Marteaux B, Brunoud G, Chambrier P, Rozier F, Mirabet V,
Legrand J, Laine´ S, The´venon E, Farcot E, Cellier C, Das P, Bishopp A, Dumas R, Parcy F,
Helariutta Y, Boudaoud A, Godin C, Traas J, Gue´don Y, Vernoux T (2014) Cytokinin
signalling inhibitory ﬁelds provide robustness to phyllotaxis. Nature 505:417–421
Besson S, Dumais J (2011) Universal rule for the symmetric division of plant cells. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 108(15):6294–6299
Bilsborough G, Runions A, Barkoulas M, Jenkins H, Hasson A, Galinha C, Laufs P, Hay A,
Prusinkiewicz P, Tsiantis M (2011) Model for the regulation of Arabidopsis thaliana leaf
margin development. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108(8):3424–3429
Boudaoud A (2010) An introduction to the mechanics of morphogenesis for plant biologists.
Trends Plant Sci 15(6):353–360
Brewer P, Dun E, Ferguson B, Rameau C, Beveridge C (2009) Strigolactone acts downstream of
auxin to regulate bud outgrowth in pea and Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 150(1):482–493
Camazine S, Deneubourg J, Franks N, Sneyd J, Theraulaz G, Bonabeau E (2001) Self-organization
in biological systems. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ
Champagne C, Sinha N (2004) Compound leaves: equal to the sum of their parts? Development
131(18):4401–4412
Chitwood D, Headland L, Ranjan A, Martinez C, Braybrook S, Koenig D, Kuhlemeier C, Smith R,
Sinha N (2012) Leaf asymmetry as a developmental constraint imposed by auxin-dependent
phyllotactic patterning. Plant Cell 24(16):2318–2327
Corson F, Adda-Bedia M, Boudaoud A (2009) In silico leaf venation networks: growth and
reorganization driven by mechanical forces. J Theor Biol 259(3):440–448
Couder Y, Pauchard L, Allain C, Adda-Bedia M, Douady S (2002) The leaf venation as formed in
a tensorial ﬁeld. Eur Phys J B Condens Matter Complex Syst 28(2):135–138
Crawford S, Shinohara N, Sieberer T, Williamson L, George G, Hepworth J, Muller D,
Domagalska M, Leyser O (2010) Strigolactones enhance competition between shoot branches
by dampening auxin transport. Development 137(17):2905–2913
Dimitrov P, Zucker S (2006) A constant production hypothesis guides leaf venation patterning.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103(24):9363–9368
Draelants D, Broeckhove J, Beemster G, Vanroose W (2012) Numerical bifurcation analysis of the
pattern formation in a cell based auxin transport model. J Math Biol 67(5):1279–1305
Dun E, Brewer P, Beveridge C (2009) Strigolactones: discovery of the elusive shoot branching
hormone. Trends Plant Sci 14(7):364–372
Dun E, de Saint Germain A, Rameau C, Beveridge C (2012) Antagonistic action of strigolactone
and cytokinin in bud outgrowth control. Plant Physiol 158(1):487–498
Edmonds J (1960) A combinatorial representation for polyhedral surfaces. Notices Amer Math
Soc 7:646
Errera L (1886) Sur une condition fondamentale d’e´quilibre des cellules vivantes. Comptes
Rendus Hebdomadaires des Seances de l’Academie des Sciences 103:822–824
Fan Y, Litven J, Levin D, Pai D (2013) Eulerian-on-Lagrangian simulation. ACM Trans Graph 32
(3):22:1–22:9
Farcot E, Yuan Y (2013) Homogenous auxin steady states and spontaneous oscillations in ﬂux-
based auxin transport models. SIAM J Appl Dyn Syst 12(3):1330–1353
Feugier F, Iwasa Y (2006) How canalization can make loops: a new model of reticulated leaf
vascular pattern formation. J Theor Biol 243(2):235–244
Feugier F, Mochizuki A, Iwasa Y (2005) Self-organization of the vascular system in plant leaves:
inter-dependent dynamics of auxin ﬂux and carrier proteins. J Theor Biol 236(4):366–375
352
A. Runions et al.

Fortin M, Pierce F, Poff K (1989) The pattern of secondary root formation in curving roots of
Arabidopsis thaliana (L.) Heynh. Plant Cell Environ 12(3):337–339
Fozard J, King J, Bennett M (2013) Modelling auxin efﬂux carrier phosphorylation and localiza-
tion. J Theor Biol 319:34–49
Friml J, Yang X, Michniewicz M, Weijers D, Quint A, Tietz O, Benjamins R, Ouwerkerk P,
Ljung K, Sandberg G, Hooykaas P, Palme K, Offringa R (2004) A PINOID-dependent binary
switch in apical-basal PIN polar targeting directs auxin efﬂux. Science 306(5697):862–865
Fujita H, Mochizuki A (2006) Pattern formation of leaf veins by the positive feedback regulation
between auxin ﬂow and auxin efﬂux carrier. J Theor Biol 241(3):541–551
Furutani M, Nakano Y, Tasaka M (2014) MAB4-induced auxin sink generates local auxin
gradients in Arabidopsis organ formation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111(3):1198–1203
Garnett P, Stepney S, Leyser O (2008) Towards an executable model of auxin transport
canalisation. In: Stepney S, Polack F, Welch P (eds) Proceedings of the 2008 workshop on
complex systems modelling and simulation. Luniver Press, Frome, pp 63–91
Geldner N, Friml J, Stierhof Y, Ju¨rgens G, Palme K (2001) Auxin transport inhibitors block PIN1
cycling and vesicle trafﬁcking. Nature 413(6854):425–428
Gillespie D (1976) A general method for numerically simulating the stochastic time evolution of
coupled chemical reactions. J Comput Phys 22(4):403–434
Gillespie D (1977) Exact stochastic simulation of coupled chemical reactions. J Phys Chem 81
(25):2340–2361
Goldsmith M (1977) The polar transport of auxin. Annu Rev Plant Physiol 28:439–478
Gomez-Roldan V, Fermas S, Brewer P, Puech-Pages V, Dun E, Pillot J, Letisse F, Matusova R,
Danoun S, Portais J, Bouwmeester H, Be´card G, Beveridge C, Rameau C, Rochange S (2008)
Strigolactone inhibition of shoot branching. Nature 455(7210):189–194
Grbic V, Bleecker AB (2000) Axillary meristem development in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant J 21
(2):215–223
Grieneisen V, Xu J, Mare´e A, Hogeweg P, Scheres B (2007) Auxin transport is sufﬁcient to
generate a maximum and gradient guiding root growth. Nature 449(7165):1008–1013
Guenot B, Bayer E, Kierzkowski D, Smith R, Mandel T, Zadnikova P, Benkova´ E, Kuhlemeier C
(2012) PIN1-independent leaf initiation in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 159(4):1501–1510
Hamant O, Traas J (2010) The mechanics behind plant development. New Phytol 185(2):369–385
Hamant O, Heisler M, Jo¨nsson H, Krupinski P, Uyttewaal M, Bokov P, Corson F, Sahlin P,
Boudaoud A, Meyerowitz E, Couder Y, Traas J (2008) Developmental patterning by mechan-
ical signals in Arabidopsis. Science 322(5908):1650–1655
Hay A, Barkoulas M, Tsiantis M (2006) ASYMMETRIC LEAVES1 and auxin activities converge
to repress BREVIPEDICELLUS expression and promote leaf development in Arabidopsis.
Development 133(20):3955–3961
Heisler M, Jo¨nsson H (2006) Modeling auxin transport and plant development. J Plant Growth
Regul 25(4):302–312
Heisler M, Ohno C, Das P, Sieber P, Reddy G, Long J, Meyerowitz E (2005) Patterns of auxin
transport and gene expression during primordium development revealed by live imaging of the
Arabidopsis inﬂorescence meristem. Curr Biol 15(21):1899–1911
Heisler M, Hamant O, Krupinski P, Uyttewaal M, Ohno C, Jo¨nsson H, Traas J, Meyerowitz E
(2010) Alignment between PIN1 polarity and microtubule orientation in the shoot apical
meristem reveals a tight coupling between morphogenesis and auxin transport. PLoS Biol 8
(10):e1000516
Hofmeister W (1868) Allgemeine Morphologie der Gewachse. Engelmann, Leipzig, pp 405–664
Hosˇek P, Kubes M, Lankova M, Dobrev P, Klima P, Kohoutova M, Petrasek J, Hoyerova K,
Jirina M, Zazˇı´malova´ E (2012) Auxin transport at cellular level: new insights supported by
mathematical modelling. J Exp Bot 63(10):3815–3827
Janssen J, Lindenmayer A (1987) Models for the control of branch positions and ﬂowering
sequences of capitula in Mycelis muralis (L.) Dumont (Compositae). New Phytol 105
(2):191–220
15
Computational Models of Auxin-Driven Development
353

Jo¨nsson H, Heisler M, Shapiro B, Meyerowitz E, Mjolsness E (2006) An auxin-driven polarized
transport model for phyllotaxis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103(5):1633–1638
Kawamura E, Horiguchi G, Tsukaya H (2010) Mechanisms of leaf tooth formation in Arabidopsis.
Plant J 62(3):429–441
Kierzkowski D, Lenhard M, Smith R, Kuhlemeier C (2013) Interaction between meristem tissue
layers controls phyllotaxis. Dev Cell 26(6):616–628
Koenig D, Bayer E, Kang J, Kuhlemeier C, Sinha N (2009) Auxin patterns Solanum
lycopersicuam leaf morphogenesis. Development 136(17):2997–3006
Kramer E (2004) PIN and AUX/LAX proteins: their role in auxin accumulation. Trends Plant Sci 9
(12):578–582
Kramer E (2009) Auxin-regulated cell polarity: an inside job? Trends Plant Sci 14(5):242–247
Laguna M, Bohn S, Jagla E (2008) The role of elastic stresses on leaf venation morphogenesis.
PLoS Comput Biol 4(4):e1000055
Larson P (1975) Development and organization of the primary vascular system in Populus
deltoides according to phyllotaxy. Am J Bot 62(10):1084–1099
Laskowski M, Biller S, Stanley K, Kajstura T, Prusty R (2006) Expression proﬁling of auxin-
treated Arabidopsis roots: toward a molecular analysis of lateral root emergence. Plant Cell
Physiol 47(6):788–792
Laskowski M, Grieneisen V, Hofhuis H, ten Hove C, Hogeweg P, Mare´e A, Scheres B (2008) Root
system architecture from coupling cell shape to auxin transport. PLoS Biol 6(12):e307
Lee S-W, Feugier F, Morishita Y (2014) Canalization-based vein formation in a growing leaf. J
Theor Biol 353C:104–120
Leyser O (2009) The control of shoot branching: an example of plant information processing. Plant
Cell Environ 32(6):694–703
Leyser O (2011) Auxin, self-organization, and the colonial nature of plants. Curr Biol 21(9):R331–
R337
Lifschitz E, Eshed Y (2006) Universal ﬂorigenic signals triggered by FT homologues regulate
growth and ﬂowering cycles in perennial day-neutral tomato. J Exp Bot 57(13):3405–3414
Lifschitz E, Eviatar T, Rozman A, Shalit A, Goldshmidt A, Amsellem Z, Alvarez J, Eshed Y
(2006) The tomato FT ortholog triggers systemic signals that regulate growth and ﬂowering
and substitute for diverse environmental stimuli. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103(16):6398–6403
Lindenmayer A (1984) Positional and temporal control mechanisms in inﬂorescence development.
In: Barlow PW, Carr DJ (eds) Positional controls in plant development. University Press,
Cambridge, pp 461–486
Lockhart J (1965) An analysis of irreversible plant cell elongation. J Theor Biol 8(2):264–275
Lucas M, Godin C, Jay-Allemand C, Laplaze L (2008a) Auxin ﬂuxes in the root apex coregulate
gravitropism and lateral root initiation. J Exp Bot 59(1):55–66
Lucas M, Gue´don Y, Jay-Allemand C, Godin C, Laplaze L (2008b) An auxin transport-based
model of root branching in Arabidopsis thaliana. PLoS One 3(11):e3673
Marhavy´ P, Bielach A, Abas L, Abuzeineh A, Duclercq J, Tanaka H, Parezˇova´ M, Petra´sˇek J,
Friml J, Kleine-Vehn J, Benkova´ E (2011) Cytokinin modulates endocytic trafﬁcking of PIN1
auxin efﬂux carrier to control plant organogenesis. Dev Cell 21(4):796–804
Meinhardt H (1982) Models of biological pattern formation. Academic, London
Merks R, Glazier J (2005) A cell-centered approach to developmental biology. Phys A 352:113–
130
Merks R, Van de Peer Y, Inze´ D, Beemster G (2007) Canalization without ﬂux sensors: a
traveling-wave hypothesis. Trends Plant Sci 12(9):384–390
Merks R, Guravage M, Inze´ D, Beemster G (2011) VirtualLeaf: an open-source framework for
cell-based modeling of plant tissue growth and development. Plant Physiol 155(2):656–666
Millar A, Carrie C, Pogson B, Whelan J (2009) Exploring the function-location nexus: using
multiple lines of evidence in deﬁning the subcellular location of plant proteins. Plant Cell 21
(6):1625–1631
354
A. Runions et al.

Mirabet V, Besnard F, Vernoux T, Boudaoud A (2012) Noise and robustness in phyllotaxis. PLoS
Comput Biol 8(2):e1002389
Mironova V, Omelyanchuk N, Yosiphon G, Fadeev S, Kolchanov N, Mjolsness E, Likhoshvai V
(2010) A plausible mechanism for auxin patterning along the developing root. BMC Syst Biol
4(98):1–19
Mironova V, Omelyanchuk N, Novoselova E, Doroshkov A, Kazantsev F, Kochetov A,
Kolchanov N, Mjolsness E, Likhoshvai V (2012) Combined in silico/in vivo analysis of
mechanisms providing for root apical meristem self-organization and maintenance. Ann Bot
110(2):349–360
Mitchison G (1980) A model for vein formation in higher plants. Proc R Soc B 207:79–109
Mitchison G (1981) The polar transport of auxin and vein patterns in plants. Philos Trans Roy Soc
Lond B 295:461–470
Moreno-Risueno M, Van Norman J, Moreno A, Zhang J, Ahnert S, Benfey P (2010) Oscillating
gene expression determines competence for periodic Arabidopsis root branching. Science 329
(5997):1306–1311
Morris D (1977) Transport of exogenous auxin in two-branched dwarf pea seedlings (Pisum
sativum L.). Planta 136(1):91–96
Muller D, Leyser O (2011) Auxin, cytokinin and the control of shoot branching. Ann Bot 107
(7):1203–1212
Napier R, David K, Perrot-Rechenmann C (2002) A short history of auxin-binding proteins. Plant
Mol Biol 49(3–4):339–348
Nikovics K, Blein T, Peaucelle A, Ishida T, Morin H, Aida M, Laufs P (2006) The balance
between the MIR164A and CUC2 genes controls leaf margin serration in Arabidopsis. Plant
Cell 18(11):2929–2945
O’Connor D, Runions A, Sluis A, Bragg J, Vogel J, Prusinkiewicz P, Hake S (2014) A division in
PIN-mediated patterning during lateral organ initiation in the grasses. PLoS Comput Biol 10
(1):e1003447
Paciorek T, Zazˇı´malova´ E, Ruthardt N, Petrasek J, Stierhof Y, Kleine-Vehn J, Morris D, Emans N,
Ju¨rgens G, Geldner N, Friml J (2005) Auxin inhibits endocytosis and promotes its own efﬂux
from cells. Nature 435(7046):1251–1256
Paponov I, Paponov M, Teale W, Menges M, Chakrabortee S, Murray J, Palme K (2008)
Comprehensive transcriptome analysis of auxin responses in Arabidopsis. Mol Plant 1
(2):321–337
Parry G, Marchant A, May S, Swarup R, Swarup K, James N, Graham N, Allen T, Martucci T,
Yemm A, Napier R, Manning K, King G, Bennett M (2001) Quick on the uptake: character-
ization of a family of plant auxin inﬂux carriers. J Plant Growth Regul 20(30):217–225
Pinon V, Prasad K, Grigg S, Sanchez-Perez G, Scheres B (2013) Local auxin biosynthesis
regulation by PLETHORA transcription factors controls phyllotaxis in Arabidopsis. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 110(3):1107–1112
Prusinkiewicz P, Lindenmayer A (1990) The algorithmic beauty of plants. Springer, New York,
NY. With JS Hanan, FD Fracchia, DR Fowler, MJM de Boer, and L Mercer
Prusinkiewicz P, Runions A (2012) Computational models of plant form and development. New
Phytol 193(3):549–569
Prusinkiewicz P, Lindenmayer A, Hanan J (1988) Developmental models of herbaceous plants for
computer imagery purposes. Comput Graph 22:141–150
Prusinkiewicz P, Crawford S, Smith R, Ljung K, Bennett T, Ongaro V, Leyser O (2009) Control of
bud activation by an auxin transport switch. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106(41):17431–17436
Raven J (1975) Transport of indoleacetic acid in plant cells in relation to pH and electrical
potential gradients, and its signiﬁcance for polar IAA transport. New Phytol 74(2):163–172
Reinhardt D, Pesce E, Stieger P, Mandel T, Baltensperger K, Bennett M, Traas J, Friml J,
Kuhlemeier C (2003) Regulation of phyllotaxis by polar auxin transport. Nature 426
(6964):255–260
15
Computational Models of Auxin-Driven Development
355

Renton M, Hanan J, Ferguson B, Beveridge C (2012) Models of long-distance transport: how is
carrier-dependent auxin transport regulated in the stem? New Phytol 194(3):704–715
Robert S, Kleine-Vehn J, Barbez E, Sauer M, Paciorek T, Baster P, Vanneste S, Zhang J, Simon S,
Covanova M, Hayashi K, Dhonukshe P, Yang Z, Bednarek S, Jones A, Luschnig C, Aniento F,
Zazˇı´malova´ E, Friml J (2010) ABP1 mediates auxin inhibition of clathrin-dependent endocy-
tosis in Arabidopsis. Cell 143(1):111–121
Rolland-Lagan A, Prusinkiewicz P (2005) Reviewing models of auxin canalization in the context
of leaf vein pattern formation in Arabidopsis. Plant J 44(5):854–865
Roussel M, Slingerland M (2012) A biochemically semi-detailed model of auxin-mediated vein
formation in plant leaves. BioSyst 109(3):475–487
Rubery P, Sheldrake R (1974) Carrier-mediated auxin transport. Planta 118:101–121
Rutschow H, Baskin T, Kramer E (2011) Regulation of solute ﬂux through plasmodesmata in the
root meristem. Plant Physiol 155(4):1817–1826
Sachs T (1969) Polarity and the induction of organized vascular tissues. Ann Bot 33(2):263–275
Sachs T (1981) The control of patterned differentiation of vascular tissues. Adv Bot Res 9:151–
262
Sachs T (1991) Pattern formation in plant tissues. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Sachs T (2003) Collective speciﬁcation of cellular development. Bioessays 25(9):897–903
Sahlin P, So¨derberg B, Jo¨nsson H (2009) Regulated transport as a mechanism for pattern
generation: capabilities for phyllotaxis and beyond. J Theor Biol 258(1):60–70
Santuari L, Scacchi E, Rodriguez-Villalon A, Salinas P, Dohmann E, Brunoud G, Vernoux T,
Smith R, Hardtke C (2011) Positional information by differential endocytosis splits auxin
response to drive Arabidopsis root meristem growth. Curr Biol 21(22):1918–1923
Sauer M, Friml J (2010) Immunolocalization of proteins in plants. In: Hennig L, Ko¨hler C (eds)
Plant developmental biology: methods ad protocols. Humana, New York, NY, pp 253–263
Scarpella E, Marcos D, Friml J, Berleth T (2006) Control of leaf vascular patterning by polar auxin
transport. Genes Dev 20(8):1015–1027
Shalit A, Rozman A, Goldshmidt A, Alvarez J, Bowman J, Eshed Y, Lifschitz E (2009) The
ﬂowering hormone ﬂorigen functions as a general systemic regulator of growth and termina-
tion. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106(20):8392–8397
Shapiro B, Meyerowitz E, Mjolsness E (2013) Using Cellzilla for plant growth simulations at the
cellular level. Front Plant Sci 4(408):1–9
Shimizu-Sato S, Tanaka M, Mori H (2008) Auxin–cytokinin interactions in the control of shoot
branching. Plant Mol Biol 69(4):429–435
Shinohara N, Taylor C, Leyser O (2013) Strigolactone can promote or inhibit shoot branching by
triggering rapid depletion of the auxin efﬂux protein PIN1 from the plasma membrane. PLoS
Biol 11(1):e1001474
Smith C (2006) On vertex-vertex systems and their use in geometric and biological modelling.
PhD Thesis, University of Calgary, Calgary
Smith R (2011) Modeling plant morphogenesis and growth. In: Amar M, Goriely A, Mueller M,
Cugliandolo L (eds) New trends in the physics and mechanics of biological systems, vol
92, Lecture notes of the Les Houches summer school, July 2009. Oxford University Press,
Oxford, pp 301–336
Smith R, Bayer E (2009) Auxin transport-feedback models of patterning in plants. Plant Cell
Environ 32(5):1258–1271
Smith C, Prusinkiewicz P, Samavati F (2004) Local speciﬁcation of subdivision algorithms. In:
Pfaltz J (ed) Applications of graph transformations with industrial relevance, vol 3062, Lecture
notes in computer science. Springer, Berlin, pp 313–327
Smith R, Guyomarc’h S, Mandel T, Reinhardt D, Kuhlemeier C, Prusinkiewicz P (2006a) A
plausible model of phyllotaxis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103:1301–1306
Smith R, Kuhlemeier C, Prusinkiewicz P (2006b) Inhibition ﬁelds for phyllotactic pattern forma-
tion: a simulation study. Can J Bot 84:1635–1649
356
A. Runions et al.

Steinacher A, Leyser O, Clayton R (2012) A computational model of auxin and pH dynamics in a
single plant cell. J Theor Biol 296:84–94
Stirnberg P, Chatﬁeld S, Leyser O (1999) AXR1 acts after lateral bud formation to inhibit lateral
bud growth in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 121(3):839–847
Stoma S, Lucas M, Chopard J, Schaedel M, Traas J, Godin C (2008) Flux-based transport
enhancement as a plausible unifying mechanism for auxin transport in meristem development.
PLoS Comput Biol 4(10):e1000207
Swarup R, Pe´ret B (2012) AUX/LAX family of auxin inﬂux carriers — an overview. Front Plant
Sci 3(225):1–11
Swarup R, Friml J, Marchant A, Ljung K, Sandberg G, Palme K, Bennett M (2001) Localization of
the auxin permease AUX1 suggests two functionally distinct hormone transport pathways
operate in the Arabidopsis root apex. Genes Dev 15(20):2648–2653
Swarup R, Kramer E, Perry P, Knox K, Leyser O, Haseloff J, Beemster G, Bhalerao R, Bennett M
(2005) Root gravitropism requires lateral root cap and epidermal cells for transport and
response to a mobile auxin signal. Nat Cell Biol 7(11):1057–1065
Thimann K, Skoog F (1933) Studies on the growth hormone of plants III. The inhibitory action of
the growth substance on bud development. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 19:714–716
Townsley B, Sinha N (2012) A new development: evolving concepts in leaf ontogeny. Annu Rev
Plant Biol 63(1):535–562
van Berkel K, de Boer R, Scheres B, ten Tusscher K (2013) Polar auxin transport: models and
mechanisms. Development 140(11):2253–2268
van Mourik S, Kaufmann K, van Dijk A, Angenent G, Merks R, Molenaar J (2012) Simulation of
organ patterning on the ﬂoral meristem using a polar auxin transport model. PLoS One 7(1):
e28762
Vieten A, Vanneste S, Wisniewska J, Benkova´ E, Benjamins R, Beeckman T, Luschnig C, Friml J
(2005) Functional redundancy of PIN proteins is accompanied by auxin-dependent cross-
regulation of PIN expression. Development 132(20):4521–4531
Wabnik K, Kleine-Vehn J, Balla J, Sauer M, Naramoto S, Reino¨hl V, Merks R, Govaerts W, Friml
J (2010) Emergence of tissue polarization from synergy of intracellular and extracellular auxin
signaling. Mol Syst Biol 6:447
Weijers D, Ju¨rgens G (2005) Auxin and embryo axis formation: the ends in sight? Curr Opin Plant
Biol 8(1):32–37
Weiss T (1996) Cellular biophysics: transport, vol 1. Bradford Books, Cambridge, MA
White A (1973) Graphs, groups and surfaces. North-Holland, Amsterdam
Xu T, Wen M, Nagawa S, Fu Y, Chen J, Wu M, Perrot-Rechenmann C, Friml J, Jones A, Yang Z
(2010) Cell surface- and Rho GTPase-based auxin signaling controls cellular interdigitation in
Arabidopsis. Cell 143(1):99–110
Zazˇı´malova´ E, Murphy A, Yang H, Hoyerova´ K, Hosˇek P (2010) Auxin transporters–why so
many? Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2(3):a001552
Zeevaart J (2008) Leaf-produced ﬂoral signals. Curr Opin Plant Biol 11(5):541–547
15
Computational Models of Auxin-Driven Development
357

Part III
Auxin versus Environment

Chapter 16
Auxin and Tropisms
Katarzyna Retzer, Barbara Korbei, and Christian Luschnig
Abstract From the very beginnings, attempts to identify mechanisms underlying
polar auxin transport in higher plants have been intimately linked to studies on the
regulation of plant tropisms. Already in the nineteenth century Charles Darwin
came up with a concept, suggesting that a transmissible signal might be involved in
controlling directional plant growth in response to an environmental stimulus.
Much later, plant physiologists identiﬁed auxin as a candidate molecule that
could mediate tropic growth responses. However, it was not until establishment
of Arabidopsis genetics and novel molecular techniques at the end of the twentieth
century that enabled the characterization of auxin-signaling pathways and resulted
in mechanistic insights into control of polar auxin transport and its signiﬁcance for
plant tropisms. In this chapter, essential aspects of the current framework of
molecular events are presented, highlighting the role of auxin in directional plant
growth.
1
A Moving Story
When taking basic courses in plant physiology at the—then brand new—ﬁrst
Biozentrum building in Vienna, Professor Karl Burian entertained us with a con-
versation he had with one of the construction site engineers. They walked through
one of the greenhouses, and by accident the engineer touched one of the mimosas
that were cultivated for student courses. The plant responded to this stimulus, and
after a few seconds of silence, the stunned engineer exclaimed: “For a moment I
thought that it’s alive!”
K. Retzer • B. Korbei • C. Luschnig (*)
Department of Applied Genetics and Cell Biology, University of Natural Resources and Life
Sciences, BOKU, Wien, Austria
e-mail: christian.luschnig@boku.ac.at
E. Zazˇı´malova´ et al. (eds.), Auxin and Its Role in Plant Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-7091-1526-8_16, © Springer-Verlag Wien 2014
361

The experienced professor used this anecdote as a starter for his lecture on plant
movements, one of the most fascinating aspects of plant physiology. When going
through the old notes on this lecture, it seems that not much has changed in
conceptual terms: Plants sense an environmental stimulus that triggers transmission
of endogenous signals, ultimately resulting in, sometimes quite fast responses like
the nastic movements of mimosa leaves, or, comparably slow growth responses like
organ movement in accordance with the gravity vector or gravitropism. Some of
these concepts are ancient, dating back long before Darwin’s inﬂuential book on the
movement of plants (Darwin and Darwin 1881). However, what has changed in
recent years is the availability of powerful molecular techniques, producing amaz-
ing insights into principles of signal perception and transduction that guide plant
movements.
2
Plant Movements: Overlapping and Distinct Concepts
Plants are continuously exposed to variations in their respective environment,
which are perceived by a sophisticated sensorium of receptors and signaling
pathways in order to adjust growth parameters accordingly. Given that higher plants
are sessile, they have evolved mechanisms that allow them to modify their organ
growth in response to environmental stimuli. These activities differ from
preprogrammed autonomous plant movements, as they depend on perception of
an external stimulus. Two major types of such responses, tropism and nastic
movements have been described, where tropic responses depends on the direction
of the stimulus, like a chemical gradient or local variations in illumination, whereas
nastic movements summarize nondirectional responses. A large variety of different
stimuli cause tropic responses in plants, and a range of different tropisms have been
described. Moreover, they come in different ﬂavors. Depending on the direction of
movements, either toward or away from the external stimulus, resulting movements
are referred to as positive or negative tropisms. In special cases, even transversal
tropisms have been observed, like, for instance, strawberry runners, deﬁned by a
growth direction on the soil’s surface, i.e., perpendicular to the main growth axis.
Empirical records describing phototropism (or heliotropism), i.e., directional
movement of plant organs in response to a light stimulus, date back to Greek
philosophers. For the longest time though, Aristotelian views, that discriminated
plants from animals based on their supposed “insensitivity,” hampered proper
interpretation of this growth response (for an excellent summary on the history of
phototropism research, see Whippo and Hangarter 2006). It was not until the
seventeenth century, that researchers began to hypothesize that tropic curvature
involves an actual growth response and it took until the late nineteenth century, to
show that phototropism is an inductive response, triggered by a directional light
stimulus (Sharrock 1672; Darwin and Darwin 1881; Sachs 1882). Darwin’s inter-
pretation of growth experiments suggesting that organ circumnutation functions as
a uniform mechanism that drives directional plant growth responses could not be
362
K. Retzer et al.

veriﬁed in subsequent experiments (Darwin and Darwin 1881). However, he was
the ﬁrst to come up with a concept, predicting that a transmissible signal would
control events, leading from perception of a stimulus to the actual growth response.
This concept still holds true and represents one of the cornerstones of contemporary
models for plant tropisms.
The term geotropism (nowadays most often replaced by the term gravitropism)
was introduced by Albert B. Frank (1868) and by Julius von Sachs (1868) and
deﬁnes directional growth movements of plants in response to gravity. Early
experiments by Andrew Knight and Henry Johnson (1829) proposed that downward
growth of roots might be controlled by gravity. But it was the work especially by
Sachs, who introduced the clinostat and initiated a systematic analysis of plant
organ bending in response to external stimuli, that led to our current views on
mechanisms of plant tropisms (Sachs 1879, 1892).
Thigmotropism involves perception of and response to mechanical stimulation
(Migliaccio et al. 2009), whereas chemotropism describes directional movement of
plant organs in response to chemical gradients. A prominent example is pollen tube
chemotropism that describes directed pollen tube growth from the stigma to ovules
in a process that seemingly involves pollen tube attraction by chemotropic factors
(Chae and Lord 2011). Hydrotropism ﬁnally could be considered a special case of
chemotropism, in which directional growth of roots is inﬂuenced by the availability
of water, a vital growth response that has been described already by early plant
physiologists like Sachs (1872).
3
Plant Movements and the Inﬂuence of Auxin:
A Historical Perspective
Plant tropisms depend on spatiotemporal control of asymmetric organ growth. This
typically involves differential cell expansion in distinct portions of an organ, like in
the apical region of hypocotyls bending toward light. In some instances, differential
cell elongation appears to be intimately linked to the control of cell proliferation, as
in graviresponding root tips. Regardless of mechanisms involved, it appears that
activity of the phytohormone auxin is crucial for all tropisms, and there is now
convincing evidence that this growth regulator represents Darwin’s transmissible
signal.
A number of plant researchers deserve credit for initial characterization of the
hormone and for putting forward working models that explain the contribution of
auxin to the control of organ bending, thereby generating a solid foundation for our
current understanding of polar auxin transport (PAT). Based on Darwin’s experi-
ments, which show that removal of the very tip of canary grass coleoptiles will
block organ bending toward a light source (Darwin and Darwin 1881), researchers
tested the concept of a transmissible signal causing this growth response. It was
Peter Boysen Jensen (1910), who demonstrated the existence of such a
16
Auxin and Tropisms
363

transmissible signal that will penetrate through a layer of gelatine, introduced
subapically into oat coleoptiles. Furthermore, by inserting impermeable mica sheets
into cuts made into coleoptiles before phototropic stimulation, Boysen Jensen was
able to conclude that signal transmission at the shaded side of illuminated coleop-
tiles is essential for their bending, an elegant, ﬁrst demonstration of signal gradient
formation taking place in plants (Boysen Jensen 1913). Discovery and initial
characterization of auxin, as a mediator of tropic growth responses, came from
work by Frits Went (1926) and Nikolai Cholodny (1927), whereas the chemical
characterization of the compound was achieved by Ko¨gl and Haagen-Smits (1931).
Went and Cholodny, independently, suggested quite similar mechanisms by which
auxin could inﬂuence organ bending, now known as the Cholodny–Went theory
(Went and Thimann 1937). In simple terms, this theory proposes that lateral,
unequal auxin distribution within organs, induces differential growth, ultimately
causing organ curvature (Cholodny 1928; Went 1928; Fig. 16.1a).
Whereas the Cholodny–Went theory offers a simple explanation for organ
bending, it is not fully resolved, if lateral auxin transport to the shaded side of
organs is the only cause for phototropic curvature. Additional mechanisms, such as
light-induced growth inhibition at the illuminated side of the organ (Overbeek
1932; Baskin 1986), or variable photo-inactivation of auxin (Ko¨gl and Schuringa
1944), could contribute to the growth response as well (Fig. 16.1a). In addition,
spatiotemporal variations in cellular auxin sensitivity could lead to differential
auxin responsiveness and resulting growth adjustments (Kang and Burg 1974;
Fig. 16.1a). Experimental evidence in support of the Cholodny–Went theory was
provided by Winslow Briggs and coworkers, demonstrating light-controlled lateral
auxin redistribution in phototropically responding corn coleoptiles (Briggs
et al. 1957). Some years later, Briggs showed a direct correlation between photo-
tropic coleoptile curvature and auxin found on the shaded side of the organ,
suggesting that it is the steepness of lateral auxin concentration gradients that
deﬁnes phototropic organ bending (Briggs 1963). Related studies demonstrated
that unilateral illumination by blue light is sufﬁcient for establishment of a lateral
auxin gradient in coleoptiles, thus predicting the involvement of blue-light respon-
sive photoreceptors in gradient establishment (Pickard and Thimann 1964; Gardner
et al. 1974).
Alternatives to upregulation of lateral auxin transport in response to unilateral
illumination have been proposed. For example, work by Shen-Miller and col-
leagues (1969) suggested light-controlled asymmetric inhibition of PAT in photo-
tropically stimulated oat coleoptiles. Recent, molecular characterization of auxin
transport activities in Arabidopsis hypocotyls undergoing phototropic curvature
provided evidence for both scenarios; induction and downregulation of PAT
(Christie et al. 2011; Ding et al. 2011), pointing toward a more complex array of
events involved in light-mediated control of auxin distribution.
Similar to the situation in above-ground organs, control of root tropisms appears
to involve establishment of a lateral auxin gradient. That is, an environmental
stimulus like gravity would promote auxin accumulation at the “lower” side of a
horizontally positioned root, where it would cause growth inhibition, resulting in a
364
K. Retzer et al.

downward bending of the root tip (Kaufman et al. 1988). Differences in cell
expansion rates in gravistimulated roots have been described, speciﬁcally in the
Distal Elongation Zone (DEZ) a region proximal to the mitotically active zone in
root meristems (Ishikawa et al. 1991). In numerous studies, a complex interplay of
spatiotemporal variations in cell elongation has been described, and variations have
been observed when comparing responses under different conditions or in different
Fig. 16.1 Suggested modes of auxin action upon tropic organ growth. (a) Differential auxin
responses upon phototropic stimulation by unilateral illumination with blue light (BL) were
suggested to result from local variations in auxin biosynthesis, sensitivity, or degradation (I). In
alternative models, asymmetric auxin ﬂow from the apical portion of the stimulated organ (red
arrows) was suggested to induce differential organ growth (II). This might result from local
inhibition or induction of PAT. Another model suggested establishment of a lateral auxin con-
centration gradient, via differential lateral auxin transport (red arrowheads), with more auxin
transferred into the shaded, elongating portion of the organ (III). (b) Fountain model describing
auxin transport routes in root meristems. Rootward auxin transport in the stele mediates auxin
accumulation in the root tip (red arrowheads). From there it is redistributed for further shootward
transport via outer cell layers into the root meristem elongation zone (I). Upon gravistimulation
(black arrow indicates direction of gravity vector), more auxin is transported to the lower side of
the root tip, resulting in asymmetric, shootward auxin ﬂow into the elongation zone (red arrow-
heads), ultimately causing organ bending (II). Shaded areas indicate zones accumulating auxin
and/or exhibiting increased auxin responsiveness
16
Auxin and Tropisms
365

species (Pilet and Ney 1981; Nelson and Evans 1986; Firn and Myers 1989;
Ishikawa et al. 1991; Ishikawa and Evans 1997). In Arabidopsis for example,
gravistimulation was shown to induce transient, differential elongation in the
DEZ, reﬂected in growth inhibition at the lower side, whereas growth at the
upper side appears stimulated, contributing to the control of root bending (Mullen
et al. 1998). This likely reﬂects distinct and overlapping growth responses, ensuring
proper interpretation of gravity signals during the continuous growth of roots.
Linking differential root elongation in bending roots to auxin has been difﬁcult,
mainly due to technical limitations in the determination of variations in auxin
concentrations in tissue as fragile as root tips. Moreover, in those cases in which
researchers managed to determine auxin distribution in graviresponding roots,
differences in auxin concentration were rather small, which made it difﬁcult to
link root gravity responses to lateral auxin concentration gradients in the DEZ
(Mertens and Weiler 1983; Young et al. 1990). Perception and transduction of the
gravity signal requires the root cap, veriﬁed by numerous experiments demonstrat-
ing that root decapitation blocks any further tropic growth responses (Darwin and
Darwin 1881; Juniper et al. 1966). This indicates involvement of a signal that, after
gravity perception in the root cap, would get transmitted into the root bending zone.
In a modiﬁed version of the Cholodny–Went hypothesis it was proposed that auxin
itself would function as that signal, ﬁrst being translocated via the stele into the
columella root cap, from where it would get redistributed into the root elongation
zone, with asymmetries in auxin ﬂow, resulting in directional root growth (Konings
1968; Hasenstein and Evans 1986; Boonsirichai et al. 2002). This fountain model
for PAT in root meristems accounts for variations in auxin ﬂow rates and conse-
quences for directional root growth and is meanwhile supported by several studies,
describing molecular determinants of PAT (Fig. 16.1b).
4
Molecular Determinants of Auxin Transport
and Signaling in the Regulation of Tropisms
It was not until the advent of Arabidopsis thaliana as a model system for plant
molecular genetics that led to identiﬁcation of molecular determinants of signaling
cascades involved in plant tropisms. In this section, selected aspects of stimulus
perception as well as transmission and translation of auxin signals into tropic
growth responses are summarized.
366
K. Retzer et al.

4.1
Phototropism
Stimulus Perception
In the nineteenth century Julius von Sachs demonstrated that blue light is most
efﬁcient for induction of phototropic responses (Sachs 1882), but it took another
century and mutant screens performed in Arabidopsis to characterize the genes
involved. In such screens, hypocotyl phototropism mutants that no longer bend
toward a light source were identiﬁed (Khurana and Poff 1989; Liscum and Briggs
1995), which eventually led to characterization of NON PHOTOTROPIC
RESPONSE1 (NPH1) an AGC-type kinase protein (Huala et al. 1997; Galvan-
Ampudia and Offringa 2007). This protein, together with its close relative NPH1-
LIKE 1 (NPL1; Jarillo et al. 2001), represents key regulators of blue light-mediated
tropic responses and hence were renamed phototropin1 (phot1) and phototropin2
(phot2; Briggs et al. 2001). Both proteins are characterized by two Flavin Mono-
nucleotide (FMN)-binding sites, so-called LOV (light-, oxygen- or voltage-sensing)
domains that bind FMN chromophores noncovalently in the dark. Blue light causes
covalent binding of FMN to the LOV domains, which results in conformational
changes that expose the C-terminal phototropin kinase domain (Salomon
et al. 2000; Christie et al. 2002). Blue light-induced kinase activation then appears
to cause phototropin autophosphorylation at conserved Serine residues, a modiﬁ-
cation indispensable for phototropic responses (Christie et al. 1998, 2002; Sakai
et al. 2001; Inoue et al. 2008). Although phototropins seem to represent the only
class of receptors capable of sensing directionality of a blue light stimulus (Sakai
et al. 2001), additional light receptors have been implicated in the regulation of
tropic growth responses, acting via, e.g., modulation of transcriptional control and
intracellular protein distribution (Lariguet and Fankhauser 2004; Han et al. 2008;
Wu et al. 2010; Kami et al. 2012). This apparent involvement of additional light
receptors might reﬂect parts of a complex network of interactions among distinct
classes of light receptors, essential for ﬁne-tuning of tropic growth responses
(Hohm et al. 2013).
Identiﬁcation of phototropin-interacting proteins elucidated potential links to
auxin transport. Cloning of NPH3, which was originally identiﬁed as another
hypocotyl phototropism mutant, revealed a protein featuring conserved domains
that function in protein–protein interaction (Motchoulski and Liscum 1999): A
coiled-coil domain, in the C-terminal portion of NPH3 is required for its interaction
with phot1 (Motchoulski and Liscum 1999), whereas a BTB/POZ (broad-complex,
tramtrack, bric a` brac/Pox virus and zinc ﬁnger) domain mediates interaction with
ROOT PHOTOTROPISM2 (RPT2), a protein similar to NPH3 and belonging to the
NRL (NPH3/RPT2-Like) protein family (Inada et al. 2004; Sakai 2005). NPH3 has
been found to localize to speciﬁc domains at the plasma membrane, similar to its
interaction partner phot1 (Motchoulski and Liscum 1999). In addition its rice
ortholog has been implicated in auxin redistribution in phototropically responding
16
Auxin and Tropisms
367

coleoptiles (Haga et al. 2005); however, functions of NPH3 and related proteins in
mechanistic terms remained elusive.
Work by Roberts and others (2011) might provide answers to questions regard-
ing the function of NRL proteins. The authors found that NPH3 acts as adaptor
protein that binds to CUL3, an SCF-type E3 ubiquitin ligase complex subunit,
apparently facilitating phot1 ubiquitylation in a light-dependent manner (Roberts
et al. 2011). Under conditions of low blue light intensity, phot1 is mono(multi)
ubiquitylated, whereas higher irradiation intensities correlated with phot1
polyubiquitylation. Such different ubiquitylation modes could have a strong impact
on the fate of phot1, with monoubiquitylation affecting intracellular sorting, and
polyubiquitylation triggering proteasome-dependent phot1 degradation (Roberts
et al. 2011). Resulting variations in phot1 distribution and/or abundance were
suggested to feed back on PAT in Arabidopsis hypocotyls (Roberts et al. 2011).
Additional members of the NRL family have been linked to the regulation of
directional growth responses. Next to RPT2, required for root phototropism and
demonstrated to interact with phot1 (Sakai et al. 2000), NAKED PINS IN YUCCA/
ENHANCER OF PINOID/MACHI-BOU (NPY/ENP/MAB) genes were recently
shown to function in auxin-controlled processes involving root gravitropism
(Treml et al. 2005; Cheng et al. 2007, 2008; Furutani et al. 2007, 2011; Li
et al. 2011). By analogy to interaction of NPH3 and phot1, there is evidence for
similar crosstalk between NPYs and additional AGC-kinases involving PINOID
(PID) and some of its close homologs (Cheng et al. 2007, 2008). Given the function
of PID in adjusting directionality of PAT by controlling phosphorylation status and
localization of PIN-FORMED (PIN) auxin transport proteins (Friml et al. 2004;
Michniewicz et al. 2007), it is tempting to speculate about a function for NPY
proteins, similar to the one shown for NPH3. In such a scenario, NPYs might
function as adaptors, recruiting E3 ubiquitin ligases for ubiquitylation of PID or
related AGC kinases, in order to modulate phosphorylation and intracellular sorting
of auxin transport proteins (Michniewicz et al. 2007). Indirect evidence supporting
such a scenario comes from a recent study, demonstrating mislocalization of PINs
auxin transport proteins in npy mutant background, presumably causing pro-
nounced aberrations in PAT (Furutani et al. 2011). Moreover, a function in the
regulation of PIN sorting was recently suggested for NPH3, which together with
phot1 appears to modulate PIN2 localization in root meristem cells (Wan
et al. 2012). We still need to await further experimental proof for such a concept,
but a regulatory module consisting of SCF-ubiquitin E3 ligases, NRL adaptor
proteins, and AGC-type protein kinases could represent a highly versatile regula-
tory hub, integrating environmental and intrinsic cues and their various impacts
on PAT.
Transmission of the Light Stimulus
After perception of a tropic stimulus, it is necessary to adjust auxin signaling and
responses in respective tissues, in order to orchestrate growth events. Transmission
368
K. Retzer et al.

of the initial light signal to the auxin transport/signaling machinery has remained a
black box for quite some years, until recently, two reports provided mechanistic
insights (Christie et al. 2011; Ding et al. 2011). Christie and others demonstrate
interaction between phot1 and auxin efﬂux carrier ABCB19 (ATP-BINDING
CASSETTE B19), which appears to result in ABCB19 phosphorylation and inhi-
bition of its transport activities (Christie et al. 2011). The authors suggested that
such inhibition of auxin transport, preferentially in the illuminated portions of
hypocotyls, could establish an ABCB19 activity gradient, with more hormone
being transported at the shaded side from the hypocotyl apex into the bending
zone (Christie et al. 2011). In this model, an auxin concentration gradient would be
established already in the hypocotyl apex (Fig. 16.2a, b). In another model
suggested by Ding and coworkers establishment of lateral auxin gradients takes
place directly in the bending zone of hypocotyls (Ding et al. 2011). Together with
additional plasma membrane-localized PIN-type auxin transport proteins, PIN3 has
been proposed to act in hypocotyl phototropism (Friml et al. 2002; Haga
et al. 2005), which is expressed at the plasma membrane of hypocotyl stele and
endodermis cells. The authors found that unilateral blue-light treatment resulted in
a relocation of endodermal PIN3 reporter signals, giving rise to polar distribution at
the plasma membrane that would favor lateral auxin transport from the illuminated
towards the shaded side of hypocotyls (Ding et al. 2011; Fig. 16.2c and 16.3a). Such
control of PIN3 distribution apparently depends on intracellular protein sorting via
ADP ribosylation factor guanine nucleotide exchange factor (ARF-GEF) GNOM-
pathways and is controlled by PID. According to this model, blue-light-mediated
gradual downregulation of PID transcription enforces PIN3 polarization due to
resulting variations in PID kinase activities (Ding et al. 2011; Fig. 16.2d).
Both mechanisms offer plausible scenarios, connecting blue-light signaling and
auxin gradient establishment in the control of hypocotyl phototropism. It remains to
be resolved, however, how these distinct mechanisms converge to control lateral
auxin gradient establishment (Haga and Sakai 2012; Sakai and Haga 2012; Hohm
et al. 2013).
Regardless of mechanisms ultimately causing auxin gradient establishment in
illuminated hypocotyls, variations in auxin concentration need to be perceived by
hormone receptors and translated further into local adjustments of gene expression
programs that drive differential growth. Some lines of evidence suggest involve-
ment of SCFTIR1/AFB-type E3 ubiquitin ligases that function as auxin receptors and
are essential for transcriptional responses induced by the growth regulator (see
Chap. 6 and Dharmasiri et al. 2005). Mo¨ller and others (2010) demonstrated
phototropism defects in tir1 afb1 afb2 afb3, deﬁcient in four F-box proteins, each
of which constituting a subunit of SCF auxin receptor complexes. Additional
evidence for involvement of the SCF-auxin receptor pathway comes from analysis
of MASSUGU2(MSG2)/IAA19 one of the likely substrates for SCFTIR1/AFB
complex-mediated polyubiquitylation (Tatematsu et al. 2004). MSG2 represents
one out of 29 Aux/IAA proteins in Arabidopsis (Liscum and Reed 2002), several of
which have been demonstrated to be short lived and degraded in response to auxin
by means of SCFTIR1/AFB E3 ubiquitin ligase activity (Gray et al. 2001). Analysis of
16
Auxin and Tropisms
369

dominant, presumably stabilized, msg2 alleles revealed severe defects in hypocotyl
tropisms and alterations in auxin-controlled gene expression, suggesting involve-
ment of MSG2 in the control of differential hypocotyl growth responses (Tatematsu
et al. 2004). Aux/IAA proteins form heterodimers with AUXIN RESPONSE
FACTOR (ARF) transcriptional regulators, and these dimers are suggested to
attenuate ARF function in transcriptional control (Guilfoyle and Hagen 2007).
Intriguingly, Yeast-2-Hybrid assays demonstrated interaction between MSG2 and
NPH4/ARF7 (Tatematsu et al. 2004), representing an ARF gene with a
nonredundant function in hypocotyl phototropism (Harper et al. 2000). This led
to models in which variations in SCFTIR1/AFB-mediated MSG2 turnover cause
adjustments in NPH4/ARF7-controlled transcriptional programs, essential for pho-
totropic organ bending (Tatematsu et al. 2004).
Fig. 16.2 Current models describing establishment of lateral auxin gradients upon phototropic
stimulation of Arabidopsis hypocotyls. (a) According to Christie and colleagues (Christie
et al. 2011), differential auxin ﬂow is established in the most apical portion of unilaterally
illuminated hypocotyls (blue arrows), with more auxin transported at the shaded side to induce
asymmetric growth in the hypocotyl bending zone. (b) This response is proposed to involve phot1-
mediated phosphorylation of ABCB19 resulting in local inhibition of ABCB19-mediated rootward
auxin transport (red arrow). (c) Ding and colleagues (2011) proposed PIN3-mediated lateral auxin
transport in the hypocotyl bending zone toward the shaded side (small red arrowheads). (d)
Mechanistically, this response is suggested to involve phot1-controlled inhibition of PID tran-
scription, resulting in local adjustments in PIN3 distribution at the plasma membrane controlled by
PID- and GNOM-dependent sorting pathways
370
K. Retzer et al.

Only little is known about downstream targets of the MSG2/NPH4 regulatory
module that could bring about physiological adjustments essential for differential
cell elongation. A function in differential growth has been attributed to expansins, a
group of proteins implicated in controlled cell wall loosening, particularly under
conditions of acidic pH, thereby allowing for turgor-driven cell expansion (Rayle
and Cleland 1970; Hager et al. 1971; Cosgrove 2005). Whilst it is not fully
resolved, how expansins function in mechanistic terms, expression of some mem-
bers of this gene family has been associated with hypocotyl elongation (Caderas
et al. 2000). Furthermore, by analyzing unilaterally illuminated B. oleracea seed-
lings, Esmon and colleagues demonstrated differential expression of presumptive
NPH4/ARF7 target genes, including expansins EXPA1 and EXPA8 in hypocotyls,
Fig. 16.3 Relocation of PIN auxin carriers as potential determinants of directionality of auxin
transport in Arabidopsis thaliana. (a) Distribution of PIN3:YFP signals (green) in unilaterally
illuminated PIN3::PIN3:YFP hypocotyl cells (yellow arrow). White arrowheads indicate enrich-
ment of ﬂuorescent signals at the lateral, outer plasma membrane domain of endodermis cells at
the shaded side. This might result in increased, lateral auxin ﬂow. (b, c) Accumulation of PIN3:
YFP signals (green) at the bottom side of columella root cap cells gravistimulated for 10 min
(yellow arrow indicates direction of gravity vector). White arrowheads in (c) indicate signal
accumulation at the lower side of these cells. Red signals: Propidium iodide cell wall staining.
Scale bars: a ¼ 50 μm; b, c ¼ 10 μm
16
Auxin and Tropisms
371

with more transcripts accumulating at the elongating, shaded side (Esmon
et al. 2006).
Apart from a role of SCFTIR1/AFB in phototropism, auxin signaling via AUXIN
BINDING PROTEIN1 (ABP1) could be involved as well. Evidence for auxin
binding by ABP1 was ﬁrst provided in maize coleoptile membrane preparations
(Hertel et al. 1972; Batt and Venis 1976). Subsequently, molecular cloning and
functional characterization suggested auxin perception by ABP1 at the periphery of
the plasma membrane (Barbier-Brygoo et al. 1989; Inohara et al. 1989; Tillmann
et al. 1989). Clearcut molecular evidence for ABP1-controlled signaling at the
plasma membrane was provided recently, demonstrating that ABP1 functions as
positive regulator of clathrin-mediated endocytosis (Robert et al. 2010). Upon
auxin binding, ABP1 effects on endocytic sorting of plasma membrane proteins
are attenuated (Paciorek et al. 2005; Robert et al. 2010). This might affect the
equilibrium between intracellular and plasma membrane localized pools of auxin
carrier proteins, which in turn might impact on PAT activities essential for photo-
tropic bending. Consistent with this model, defects in phototropism have been
described for abp1/ABP1 heterozygote seedlings (Effendi et al. 2011).
In addition to a function in modulating auxin ﬂow, ABP1 appears relevant for
apoplastic acidiﬁcation and control of cell expansion (Cosgrove 2005). Auxin
binding by ABP1 correlates with plasma membrane hyperpolarization, resulting
from elevated plasma membrane-(PM)-H+ATPase activity that is detectable
already within minutes (Barbier-Brygoo et al. 1989; Ru¨ck et al. 1993). This has
been attributed to auxin-induced PM-H+ATPase phosphorylation as well as to
increased abundance at the plasma membrane (Hager et al. 1991; Takahashi
et al. 2012). Together with comparably slow SCFTIR1/AFB-mediated transcriptional
responses, such rapid ABP1-induced proton extrusion might constitute a regulatory
module for transmission of auxin signals, controlling phototropic growth.
Root Phototropism
Compared to the wealth of information, addressing regulation of phototropism in
above-ground organs, substantially less is known about the situation in roots. The
more so, as root phototropism appears to be a less uniform response than light-
regulated growth of aerial organs (Kutschera and Briggs 2012) and as the ecological
signiﬁcance of soil-borne organs responding to light remains unclear (Kiss
et al. 2003; Galen et al. 2007). Roots of several plant species, including those of
Arabidopsis exhibit negative phototropism (Wiesner 1884; Kutschera and Briggs
2012), which allowed the characterization of mutants with deﬁciencies in light-
controlled directional root growth (Okada and Shimura 1992; Liscum and Briggs
1995). Some of these mutant alleles turned out to be allelic to phot1, suggesting
participation of the blue light receptor in modulating light-responsive root growth.
Notably, phot1 appears to be expressed in the root meristem (Sakamoto and Briggs
2002), and analysis of PHOT1-GFP reporter expression in roots demonstrated a
positive correlation between root growth efﬁciency and phot1 abundance in cells
372
K. Retzer et al.

close to the soil surface, suggesting that light perception by root-expressed phot1 is
involved in directional root growth (Galen et al. 2007).
In a study by Wan and colleagues (2012), the authors provide indirect evidence
for asymmetric distribution of auxin in unilaterally illuminated roots, with more
auxin accumulating at the shaded side. Control of such asymmetric auxin distribu-
tion might involve PIN2 activity, indicated by reduced responsiveness of a pin2 null
allele, exposed to blue light. Notably, blue light appears to modulate intracellular
distribution of a PIN2 reporter protein by mechanisms that seemingly require NPH3
(Wan et al. 2012). It remains to be determined, as to how such regulation of PIN2
localization might affect PAT in phototropically responding roots.
4.2
Gravitropism
Gravity Perception and Signaling
Quite similar to analysis of phototropism, early experiments addressing root
gravitropism identiﬁed sites of gravity perception as well as zones that respond
with differential growth to the stimulus (reviewed in, e.g., Boonsirichai et al. 2002;
Arnaud et al. 2010). However, unlike phototropism, a gravity receptor, acting
analogous to light receptors has not been identiﬁed.
Physical ablation experiments in which the root cap, the very tip of the root, was
removed demonstrated its signiﬁcance for gravity responsiveness (Darwin and
Darwin 1881; Juniper et al. 1966). In more recent years, manipulation of
Arabidopsis root meristems by genetic or laser-mediated removal of the root cap
conﬁrmed earlier ﬁndings and characterized starch-accumulating columella root
cap cells as potential gravity sensors (Blancaﬂor et al. 1998; Tsugeki and Fedoroff
1999). These and numerous further studies are in agreement with the starch-
statolith hypothesis, originally coined by Gottlieb Haberlandt, suggesting that
sedimentation of starch-ﬁlled amyloplasts (statoliths) within specialized statocytes
is essential for perception of variations in the direction of the gravity vector
(Haberlandt 1900). Analogous to statolith sedimentation in roots, relocation of
plastids in endodermal cells was suggested to function in gravity perception in
above-ground organs (Kiss et al. 1997; Morita 2010).
A role for starch-accumulating plastids in gravity perception is supported by
analysis of starch metabolism mutants, like pgm1 alleles, deﬁcient in PHOSPHO-
GLUCOMUTASE1, which exhibit a reduced, but still signiﬁcant gravity respon-
siveness (Caspar and Pickard 1989; Sack 1991). This led to modiﬁed concepts,
suggesting that starch is important but not absolutely required for initial gravity
perception by plastids in gravity responsive cells (Morita 2010). However, to this
day, mechanisms that would translate gravity-induced plastid relocation into a
cellular response remain elusive, both, in roots and stems. Mutual interactions
between the actin cytoskeleton and plastids have been implicated in early events
of gravity signal perception (Hou et al. 2003; Nakamura et al. 2011), which might
16
Auxin and Tropisms
373

affect activity of mechano-sensitive ion channels (Sievers et al. 1989; Perbal and
Driss-Ecole 2003). This in turn might cause variations in secondary messenger
signaling and/or in a shift in cytoplasmic pH, but the physiological signiﬁcance of
these responses is not fully resolved (Daye et al. 1984; Sievers et al. 1984; Gehring
et al. 1990; Fasano et al. 2001; Plieth and Trewavas 2002; Boonsirichai et al. 2003;
Perera et al. 2006). Intriguingly, some of these responses, like Ca2+ and inositol
trisphosphate signaling have been linked to control of auxin transport, which might
reﬂect a function in controlling auxin distribution in gravistimulated organs (Lee
et al. 1984; Ettlinger and Lehle 1988; Hasenstein and Evans 1988; Zhang
et al. 2011; Cho et al. 2012).
The Role of Auxin Transport
A combination of genetics, cell biology, and biochemistry identiﬁed the molecular
machinery orchestrating PAT in higher plants (see Chaps. 5 and 8) and established
its function in control of tropisms. Identiﬁcation of auxin response mutants pro-
vided genetic evidence, as these mutants exhibit often quite pronounced defects in
directional growth responses (Lincoln et al. 1990; Pickett et al. 1990; Timpte
et al. 1995). Mutations in the AUXIN TRANSPORTER PROTEIN1 (AUX1)
permease-like protein result in pronounced resistance to externally applied IAA
and cause strong defects in tropisms, which led to the suggestion that AUX1
functions in cellular uptake of auxin thereby modulating directional growth (Pickett
et al. 1990; Bennett et al. 1996; Stone et al. 2008). Indeed, functional analysis in
heterologous
systems
demonstrated
auxin
transport
activity,
capable
of
translocating IAA across membrane boundaries (Yang et al. 2006). Characteriza-
tion of additional mutants deﬁcient in root gravitropism led to identiﬁcation of
proteins required for cellular auxin efﬂux. Mutants deﬁcient in AGRAVITROPIC
ROOT/ETHYLENE INSENSITIVE ROOT1/PIN-FORMED2/WAVY GROWTH6
(AGR/EIR1/PIN2/WAV6) turned out to be defective in a plasma membrane protein
expressed in the outer cell layers of root meristems and became the founding
member of the plant-speciﬁc family of PIN-type auxin efﬂux carrier proteins
(Chen et al. 1998; Luschnig et al. 1998; Mu¨ller et al. 1998; Utsuno et al. 1998).
Furthermore, mutations affecting members of the p-glycoprotein PGP/ABCB fam-
ily exhibit alterations in auxin distribution and in control of tropisms, arguing for an
involvement of plant ABC-transporters in directional growth responses (Noh
et al. 2001; Terasaka et al. 2005; Nagashima et al. 2008). For both, plasma
membrane-localized PINs and ABCBs, there is now experimental evidence for
their activity as auxin carrier proteins (Petra´sˇek et al. 2006; Yang and Murphy
2009), but it took extensive analysis of auxin carrier expression, subcellular local-
ization, and its dynamics to obtain a comprehensive picture of events, orchestrating
auxin distribution in graviresponding organs.
According to the fountain model, acropetal/rootward PAT in the stele would
deliver auxin from the shoot into the root tip. PIN1 auxin efﬂux carrier expressed in
the stele appears to be involved in this process, indicated by defects in rootward
374
K. Retzer et al.

PAT in pin1 loss-of-function alleles, and by PIN1 localization at the lower, basal
end of stele cells, which would favor transport toward the root tip (Okada
et al. 1991; Ga¨lweiler et al. 1998; Geldner et al. 2001). Redistribution of auxin
for further basipetal/shootward transport toward the elongation zone is suggested to
take place in the root cap (Hasenstein and Evans 1988), and might involve activity
of PIN3 and PIN7 efﬂux carriers that localize to the plasma membrane of root cap
columella cells (Friml et al. 2002; Kleine-Vehn et al. 2010). Upon gravistimulation,
both PINs rapidly accumulate at the plasma membrane domain at the lower side of
columella cells (Friml et al. 2002; Kleine-Vehn et al. 2010; Fig. 16.3b, c). As a
result, auxin would be relocated predominantly to the lower side of the root tip
ready for its passage to the DEZ, where it would induce differential cell elongation
and root bending (Ottenschlager et al. 2003; Band et al. 2012). Such a
PIN-dependent redistribution mechanism is also utilized in lateral roots, allowing
deﬁned auxin ﬂux and lateral root gravitropic set point regulation (Rosquete
et al. 2013). PIN relocation in columella cells is detectable within a few minutes
after gravistimulation and presumably occurs via ARF-GEF GNOM-dependent
protein transcytosis (Friml et al. 2002; Kleine-Vehn et al. 2010; Fig. 16.4a, b). In
addition, mutants affected in ALTERED RESPONSE TO GRAVITY1/ROOT AND
HYPOCOTYL GRAVITROPISM (ARG1/RHG) or ARG1-LIKE2 (ARL2) were
shown to exhibit defects in gravistimulated relocation of PIN3 (Harrison and
Masson 2008). ARG1 and ARL2 represent DnaJ-domain containing peripheral
membrane proteins, implicated in regulation of vesicular transport that might link
early events in gravity perception to the control of directional auxin transport
(Boonsirichai et al. 2003; Harrison and Masson 2008; Fig. 16.4a, b).
Somewhat surprisingly, pin3 or pin7 single mutants and its combinations exhibit
only subtle defects in root gravitropism, suggesting redundant activities of addi-
tional auxin transport proteins (Kleine-Vehn et al. 2010). This differs from mutants
deﬁcient in AUX1 and PIN2, which exhibit pronounced agravitropic root growth
and defects in PAT, indicating rate-limiting activities in the control of root
gravitropism (Bennett et al. 1996; Chen et al. 1998; Luschnig et al. 1998; Utsuno
et al. 1998; Rashotte et al. 2000). Indepth analysis of AUX1 function revealed a
signiﬁcant role for AUX1 expression in lateral root cap cells proximal to the central
root cap, as conditional aux1 mutants lacking AUX1 expression in these cells fail to
exhibit gravitropic root growth (Swarup et al. 2005). Further auxin transport via
lateral root cap and epidermis cells into the DEZ requires PIN2 (Mu¨ller et al. 1998;
Blilou et al. 2005; Vieten et al. 2005), with a tight regulation of its localization and
turnover. PIN2 protein stability regulation is seemingly essential for establishment
of a lateral auxin gradient in graviresponding roots (Paciorek et al. 2005; Abas
et al. 2006; Fig. 16.4c, d). Speciﬁcally, analysis of PIN2 signals in gravity-
responding roots revealed establishment of a transient expression gradient, with
more PIN2 accumulating at the lower side vs. the upper side of horizontally
positioned roots (Paciorek et al. 2005; Abas et al. 2006). This involves antagonistic
processes, with PIN2 retention at the plasma membrane of epidermis cells at the
lower side, and enhanced PIN2 endocytosis and vacuolar targeting at the upper side,
altogether resulting in differential auxin ﬂow toward the DEZ, and -ultimately-
16
Auxin and Tropisms
375

downward bending of the root tip (Paciorek et al. 2005; Abas et al. 2006; Kleine-
Vehn et al. 2008; Robert et al. 2010; Leitner et al. 2012). It is not fully resolved,
how such differential protein sorting might be regulated, but apparently PIN2
ubiquitylation signals variations in its sorting and proteolytic turnover in an
auxin-dependent
feedback
regulatory
loop
(Sieberer
et
al.
2000;
Leitner
et al. 2012; Baster et al. 2013). This regulatory switch allows for continuous
adjustments in auxin ﬂow rates in the coordination of directional root growth
(Band et al. 2012), but molecular determinants, sensing, and controlling the
Fig. 16.4 Mechanisms potentially involved in auxin relocation to the lower portion of
gravistimulated Arabidopsis root meristems. (a) Auxin relocation to the lower side of the root
tip is suggested to initiate within minutes after gravistimulation (yellow arrow indicates direction
of the gravity vector; red arrowheads highlight directionality of auxin ﬂow). (b) Rapid relocation
of PIN3 auxin carrier to the plasma membrane domain at the lower side of gravistimulated root cap
cells involves GNOM ARF-GEF regulated sorting and transcytosis. In addition, a function for
peripheral membrane protein ARG1 in PIN3 relocation has been shown but remains to be
characterized in mechanistic terms. (c) At later stages, auxin ﬂow is increased at the lower side
of root meristems, when compared to the upper side (red arrowheads), eventually causing
downward bending of the root tip. (d) Control of differential PIN2 expression has been implicated
as an essential determinant for this process. At the upper side vacuolar PIN2 targeting is suggested
to cause a reduction in plasma membrane-localized PIN2 levels. Vacuolar PIN2 targeting has been
suggested to require its (poly)-ubiquitylation, however, E3 ubiquitin ligase controlling this step is
still unknown. At the lower side, PIN2 appears to be stabilized at the plasma membrane promoting
auxin transport into the root elongation zone. This response is suggested to involve inhibition of
ABP1-mediated clathrin-dependent PIN2 endocytosis into Early Endosome/Trans Golgi Network
(EE/TGN) compartments. Inhibition of ABP1 activity might arise as a consequence of its binding
to auxin. Whether such ABP1–auxin interaction occurs at the cell’s periphery, or intracellularly, is
not known
376
K. Retzer et al.

interplay between auxin levels and PIN2 sorting remain to be determined in more
detail (Fig. 16.4d).
PIN expression gradient formation could as well be involved in control of
hypocotyl gravitropism. Rakusova and others observed asymmetric abundance of
PIN3-GFP reporter signals in endodermis cells of gravistimulated hypocotyls that
would favor auxin ﬂow to the organ’s lower, elongating side (Rakusova et al. 2011).
Such gravity-induced PIN3 relocation in hypocotyls was found to require GNOM
ARF-GEF and PID activity, which appears comparable to PIN3 relocation upon
phototropic stimulation and further highlights the critical role of intracellular
protein sorting in the control of tropic growth responses (Ding et al. 2011;
Rakusova et al. 2011).
Variations in auxin distribution, resulting from differential auxin transport
activities in graviresponding organs, appear to cause induction of distinct transcrip-
tional programs that would induce differential cell expansion. By analogy to the
transcriptional
output
resulting
from
phototropic
signaling,
transcriptional
responses to gravistimulation could involve activity of Aux/IAA and ARF proteins,
as indicated by agravitropic growth phenotypes associated with corresponding
mutant and misexpression lines (Okushima et al. 2005; Wang et al. 2005; Weijers
et al. 2005; Yan et al. 2013). However, detailed insights into phenotypic conse-
quences of variable transcriptional control of downstream target loci are still
limited. Perhaps, transcriptome analyses based on cell-sorting approaches will
help to elucidate differences in gene expression at a sufﬁciently high resolution,
both, over time, and in different portions of graviresponding organs (Birnbaum
et al. 2005).
4.3
Hydrotropism
Molecular analysis of physiological events controlling directional plant growth in
response to humidity gradients has been problematic for the longest time, due to
difﬁculties in separating gravitropic and hydrotropic responses (Sachs 1872). Nota-
bly, decapitation and ablation experiments revealed a role for the columella root
cap in moisture gradient perception (Jaffe et al. 1985; Miyazawa et al. 2008), thus,
overlapping with sites of gravity perception and raising questions as to how root tip
cells perceive and transmit these different environmental stimuli (Takahashi
et al. 2009). However, in the 1980s, an agravitropic pea mutant was found to exhibit
positive hydrotropism, suggesting that control of these tropic responses requires
distinct regulatory switches (Jaffe et al. 1985). There is only limited information
available on early events of hydrotropic signaling, which was suggested to involve
Ca2+ signaling and was found to coincide with degradation of starch granules in
columella root cap cells, the signiﬁcance of which remains elusive (Takano
et al. 1997; Takahashi et al. 2003).
Conﬂicting evidence suggests involvement of auxin in regulation of hydrotro-
pism. Auxin transport inhibitors, like 2,3,5-triiodobenzoic acid (TIBA) were found
16
Auxin and Tropisms
377

to block hydrotropism in some plant species, whereas in Arabidopsis no compara-
ble effect was observed (Mizuno et al. 2002; Kaneyasu et al. 2007). Likewise, while
some reports suggest local differences in auxin signaling and/or concentration in
roots exposed to moisture gradients, other reports failed to verify such variations
(Mizuno et al. 2002; Takahashi et al. 2009). Moreover, Arabidopsis loss-of-func-
tion mutants deﬁcient in PIN2 and AUX1 exhibit normal root hydrotropism, which
uncouples Arabidopsis hydrotropic responses from these key mediators of PAT in
root meristems (Takahashi et al. 2002).
Mutant screens performed in Arabidopsis allowed for characterization of deter-
minants involved in root hydrotropism (Eapen et al. 2003; Kobayashi et al. 2007).
Cloning of MIZU-KUSSEI1 (MIZ1) revealed a gene of unknown function that is
strongly expressed in root columella cells; however, its function in root hydrotro-
pism remains unanswered (Kobayashi et al. 2007). Notably, when analyzing lateral
root formation in MIZ1 loss-of-function and overexpression lines, it turned out that
MIZ1 acts as a negative regulator of lateral root formation in an auxin-dependent
manner (Moriwaki et al. 2011). This could be linked to variations in free IAA
content, with miz1 roots accumulating more auxin than wild-type controls and
might suggest that MIZ1 function in root hydrotropism relates to modulation of
auxin levels (Moriwaki et al. 2011).
Cloning of MIZ2 provided additional indirect evidence for an involvement of
auxin in regulation of hydrotropism. This mutant turned out to represent a novel
allele of ARF-GEF GNOM; however unlike gnom alleles described earlier,
gnommiz2 does not exhibit comparable defects in overall plant morphology and in
gravitropic growth responses (Geldner et al. 2004; Miyazawa et al. 2009). These
ﬁndings indicated a role for GNOM-dependent vesicle sorting in the regulation of
hydrotropism, and, given the function of GNOM in controlling localization of auxin
transport components (Geldner et al. 2003), it is tempting to speculate about
similar, potentially subtler defects in gnommiz2. Limited or delayed GNOM-
dependent rerouting of auxin carrier proteins might account for moderate variations
in auxin distribution or signaling, causing growth defects restricted to hydrotro-
pism. However, no variations in auxin carrier protein localization or abundance
have so far been described for miz2 (Moriwaki et al. 2013). Notably, MIZ1 dosage
effects on lateral root formation are blocked by gnommiz2, suggesting indirect
effects of GNOM on MIZ1-mediated variations in auxin homeostasis (Moriwaki,
et al. 2011). Mechanisms controlling such crosstalk remain to be determined.
5
Concluding Remarks
More than a century after pioneering experimental work by early plant physiolo-
gists, a decent framework of molecular events controlling directional plant growth
responses, is ﬁnally available. Even though current models still suffer from major
shortcomings, like the vaguely understood mechanism of gravity-perception, we
experienced the evolution of a once uncertain idea of transmissible signals being
378
K. Retzer et al.

involved in tropism to sophisticated molecular models, underpinning various func-
tions of auxin in these growth processes. With all these concepts available,
attracting students probably would have been easier for our professor.
References
Abas L, Benjamins R, Malenica N, Paciorek T, Wisniewska J, Moulinier-Anzola JC, Sieberer T,
Friml J, Luschnig C (2006) Intracellular trafﬁcking and proteolysis of the Arabidopsis auxin-
efﬂux facilitator PIN2 are involved in root gravitropism. Nat Cell Biol 8(3):249–256
Arnaud C, Bonnot C, Desnos T, Nussaume L (2010) The root cap at the forefront. C R Biol 333
(4):335–343
Band LR, Wells DM, Larrieu A, Sun JY, Middleton AM, French AP, Brunoud G, Sato EM, Wilson
MH, Peret B, Oliva M, Swarup R, Sairanen I, Parry G, Ljung K, Beeckman T, Garibaldi JM,
Estelle M, Owen MR, Vissenberg K, Hodgman TC, Pridmore TP, King JR, Vernoux T,
Bennett MJ (2012) Root gravitropism is regulated by a transient lateral auxin gradient
controlled by a tipping-point mechanism. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109(12):4668–4673
Barbier-Brygoo H, Ephritikhine G, Klambt D, Ghislain M, Guern J (1989) Functional evidence for
an auxin receptor at the plasmalemma of tobacco mesophyll protoplasts. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 86(3):891–895
Baskin T (1986) Redistribution of growth during phototropism and nutation in the pea epicotyl.
Planta 169:406–414
Baster P, Robert S, Kleine-Vehn J, Vanneste S, Kania U, Grunewald W, De Rybel B, Beeckman T,
Friml J (2013) SCF(TIR1/AFB)-auxin signalling regulates PIN vacuolar trafﬁcking and auxin
ﬂuxes during root gravitropism. EMBO J 32(2):260–274
Batt S, Venis MA (1976) Separation and localization of two classes of auxin binding sites in corn
coleoptile membranes. Planta 130:15–21
Bennett MJ, Marchant A, Green HG, May ST, Ward SP, Millner PA, Walker AR, Schulz B,
Feldmann KA (1996) Arabidopsis AUX1 gene: a permease-like regulator of root gravitropism.
Science 273(5277):948–950
Birnbaum K, Jung JW, Wang JY, Lambert GM, Hirst JA, Galbraith DW, Benfey PN (2005) Cell
type-speciﬁc expression proﬁling in plants via cell sorting of protoplasts from ﬂuorescent
reporter lines. Nat Methods 2(8):615–619
Blancaﬂor EB, Fasano JM, Gilroy S (1998) Mapping the functional roles of cap cells in the
response of Arabidopsis primary roots to gravity. Plant Physiol 116(1):213–222
Blilou I, Xu J, Wildwater M, Willemsen V, Paponov I, Friml J, Heidstra R, Aida M, Palme K,
Scheres B (2005) The PIN auxin efﬂux facilitator network controls growth and patterning in
Arabidopsis roots. Nature 433(7021):39–44
Boonsirichai K, Guan C, Chen R, Masson PH (2002) Root gravitropism: an experimental tool to
investigate basic cellular and molecular processes underlying mechanosensing and signal
transmission in plants. Annu Rev Plant Biol 53:421–447
Boonsirichai K, Sedbrook JC, Chen R, Gilroy S, Masson PH (2003) ALTERED RESPONSE TO
GRAVITY is a peripheral membrane protein that modulates gravity-induced cytoplasmic
alkalinization and lateral auxin transport in plant statocytes. Plant Cell 15(11):2612–2625
Boysen Jensen P (1910) U¨ ber die Leitung des phototropischen Reizes in Avenakeimpﬂanzen. Ber
Deutsch Bot Ges 28:118–120
Boysen Jensen P (1913) U¨ ber die Leitung des phototropischen Reizes in der Avenakoleoptile. Ber
Deutsch Bot Ges 31:559–566
Briggs WR (1963) Mediation of phototropic responses of corn coleoptiles by lateral transport of
auxin. Plant Physiol 38:237–247
16
Auxin and Tropisms
379

Briggs WR, Tochter RD, Wilson JF (1957) Phototropic auxin redistribution in corn coleoptiles.
Science 126:210–212
Briggs WR, Beck CF, Cashmore AR, Christie JM, Hughes J, Jarillo JA, Kagawa T, Kanegae H,
Liscum E, Nagatani A, Okada K, Salomon M, Rudiger W, Sakai T, Takano M, Wada M,
Watson JC (2001) The phototropin family of photoreceptors. Plant Cell 13(5):993–997
Caderas D, Muster M, Vogler H, Mandel T, Rose JK, McQueen-Mason S, Kuhlemeier C (2000)
Limited correlation between expansin gene expression and elongation growth rate. Plant
Physiol 123(4):1399–1414
Caspar T, Pickard BG (1989) Gravitropism in a starchless mutant of Arabidopsis: implications for
the starch-statolith theory of gravity sensing. Planta 177:185–197
Chae K, Lord EM (2011) Pollen tube growth and guidance: roles of small, secreted proteins. Ann
Bot 108(4):627–636
Chen R, Hilson P, Sedbrook J, Rosen E, Caspar T, Masson PH (1998) The arabidopsis thaliana
AGRAVITROPIC 1 gene encodes a component of the polar-auxin-transport efﬂux carrier.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95(25):15112–15117
Cheng Y, Qin G, Dai X, Zhao Y (2007) NPY1, a BTB-NPH3-like protein, plays a critical role in
auxin-regulated organogenesis in Arabidopsis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104(47):18825–18829
Cheng Y, Qin G, Dai X, Zhao Y (2008) NPY genes and AGC kinases deﬁne two key steps in
auxin-mediated organogenesis in Arabidopsis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105(52):21017–21022
Cho D, Villiers F, Kroniewicz L, Lee S, Seo YJ, Hirschi KD, Leonhardt N, Kwak JM (2012)
Vacuolar CAX1 and CAX3 inﬂuence auxin transport in guard cells via regulation of apoplastic
pH. Plant Physiol 160(3):1293–1302
Cholodny N (1927) Wuchshormone und Tropismem bei den Pﬂanzen. Biol Zent Bl 47:604–626
Cholodny N (1928) Beitra¨ge zur hormonalen Theorie von Tropismen. Planta 6:118–134
Christie JM, Reymond P, Powell GK, Bernasconi P, Raibekas AA, Liscum E, Briggs WR (1998)
Arabidopsis NPH1: a ﬂavoprotein with the properties of a photoreceptor for phototropism.
Science 282(5394):1698–1701
Christie JM, Swartz TE, Bogomolni RA, Briggs WR (2002) Phototropin LOV domains exhibit
distinct roles in regulating photoreceptor function. Plant J 32(2):205–219
Christie JM, Yang H, Richter GL, Sullivan S, Thomson CE, Lin J, Titapiwatanakun B, Ennis M,
Kaiserli E, Lee OR, Adamec J, Peer WA, Murphy AS (2011) Phot1 inhibition of ABCB19
primes lateral auxin ﬂuxes in the shoot apex required for phototropism. PLoS Biol 9(6):
e1001076
Cosgrove DJ (2005) Growth of the plant cell wall. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 6(11):850–861
Darwin C, Darwin FE (1881) The power of movement in plants. Appleton, New York
Daye S, Biro RL, Roux SJ (1984) Inhibition of gravitropism in oat coleoptiles by the calcium
chelator, ethyleneglycol-bis-(beta-aminoethyl ether)-N, N’-tetraacetic acid. Physiol Plant 61
(3):449–454
Dharmasiri N, Dharmasiri S, Weijers D, Lechner E, Yamada M, Hobbie L, Ehrismann JS,
Jurgens G, Estelle M (2005) Plant development is regulated by a family of auxin receptor F
box proteins. Dev Cell 9(1):109–119
Ding Z, Galvan-Ampudia CS, Demarsy E, Langowski L, Kleine-Vehn J, Fan Y, Morita MT,
Tasaka M, Fankhauser C, Offringa R, Friml J (2011) Light-mediated polarization of the PIN3
auxin transporter for the phototropic response in Arabidopsis. Nat Cell Biol 13(4):447–452
Eapen D, Barroso ML, Campos ME, Ponce G, Corkidi G, Dubrovsky JG, Cassab GI (2003) A no
hydrotropic response root mutant that responds positively to gravitropism in Arabidopsis. Plant
Physiol 131(2):536–546
Effendi Y, Rietz S, Fischer U, Scherer GF (2011) The heterozygous abp1/ABP1 insertional mutant
has defects in functions requiring polar auxin transport and in regulation of early auxin-
regulated genes. Plant J 65(2):282–294
Esmon CA, Tinsley AG, Ljung K, Sandberg G, Hearne LB, Liscum E (2006) A gradient of auxin
and auxin-dependent transcription precedes tropic growth responses. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
103(1):236–241
380
K. Retzer et al.

Ettlinger C, Lehle L (1988) Auxin induces rapid changes in phosphatidylinositol metabolites.
Nature 331(6152):176–178
Fasano JM, Swanson SJ, Blancaﬂor EB, Dowd PE, Kao TH, Gilroy S (2001) Changes in root cap
pH are required for the gravity response of the Arabidopsis root. Plant Cell 13(4):907–921
Firn RD, Myers AB (1989) Plant movements caused by differential growth–unity or diversity of
mechanisms? Environ Exp Bot 29(1):47–55
Frank AB (1868) U¨ ber die durch Schwerkraft verursachten Bewegungen von Pﬂanzenteilen.
Beitrage zur Pﬂanzenphysiologie 8:1–99
Friml J, Wisniewska J, Benkova E, Mendgen K, Palme K (2002) Lateral relocation of auxin efﬂux
regulator PIN3 mediates tropism in Arabidopsis. Nature 415(6873):806–809
Friml J, Yang X, Michniewicz M, Weijers D, Quint A, Tietz O, Benjamins R, Ouwerkerk PB,
Ljung K, Sandberg G, Hooykaas PJ, Palme K, Offringa R (2004) A PINOID-dependent binary
switch in apical-basal PIN polar targeting directs auxin efﬂux. Science 306(5697):862–865
Furutani M, Kajiwara T, Kato T, Treml BS, Stockum C, Torres-Ruiz RA, Tasaka M (2007) The
gene MACCHI-BOU 4/ENHANCER OF PINOID encodes a NPH3-like protein and reveals
similarities between organogenesis and phototropism at the molecular level. Development 134
(21):3849–3859
Furutani M, Sakamoto N, Yoshida S, Kajiwara T, Robert HS, Friml J, Tasaka M (2011) Polar-
localized NPH3-like proteins regulate polarity and endocytosis of PIN-FORMED auxin efﬂux
carriers. Development 138(10):2069–2078
Galen C, Rabenold JJ, Liscum E (2007) Functional ecology of a blue light photoreceptor: effects of
phototropin-1 on root growth enhance drought tolerance in Arabidopsis thaliana. New Phytol
173(1):91–99
Galvan-Ampudia CS, Offringa R (2007) Plant evolution: AGC kinases tell the auxin tale. Trends
Plant Sci 12(12):541–547
Ga¨lweiler L, Guan C, Mu¨ller A, Wisman E, Mendgen K, Yephremov A, Palme K (1998)
Regulation of polar auxin transport by AtPIN1 in Arabidopsis vascular tissue. Science 282
(5397):2226–2230
Gardner G, Shaw S, Wilkins MB (1974) IAA transport during the phototropic responses of intact
Zea and Avena coleoptiles. Planta 28:439–478
Gehring CA, Williams DA, Cody SH, Parish RW (1990) Phototropism and geotropism in maize
coleoptiles are spatially correlated with increases in cytosolic free calcium. Nature 345:528–
530
Geldner N, Friml J, Stierhof YD, Jurgens G, Palme K (2001) Auxin transport inhibitors block PIN1
cycling and vesicle trafﬁcking. Nature 413(6854):425–428
Geldner N, Anders N, Wolters H, Keicher J, Kornberger W, Muller P, Delbarre A, Ueda T,
Nakano A, Jurgens G (2003) The Arabidopsis GNOM ARF-GEF mediates endosomal
recycling, auxin transport, and auxin-dependent plant growth. Cell 112(2):219–230
Geldner N, Richter S, Vieten A, Marquardt S, Torres-Ruiz RA, Mayer U, Jurgens G (2004) Partial
loss-of-function alleles reveal a role for GNOM in auxin transport-related, post-embryonic
development of Arabidopsis. Development 131(2):389–400
Gray WM, Kepinski S, Rouse D, Leyser O, Estelle M (2001) Auxin regulates SCF(TIR1)-
dependent degradation of AUX/IAA proteins. Nature 414(6861):271–276
Guilfoyle TJ, Hagen G (2007) Auxin response factors. Curr Opin Plant Biol 10(5):453–460
Haberlandt G (1900) U¨ ber die Perzeption des geotropischen Reizes. Ber Deutsch Bot Ges 18:261–
272
Haga K, Sakai T (2012) PIN auxin efﬂux carriers are necessary for pulse-induced but not
continuous light-induced phototropism in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 160(2):763–776
Haga K, Takano M, Neumann R, Iino M (2005) The Rice COLEOPTILE PHOTOTROPISM1
gene encoding an ortholog of Arabidopsis NPH3 is required for phototropism of coleoptiles
and lateral translocation of auxin. Plant Cell 17(1):103–115
Hager A, Menzel H, Krauss A (1971) Versuche und Hypothese zur Prima¨rwirkung des Auxins
beim Streckungswachstum. Planta 100:47–75
16
Auxin and Tropisms
381

Hager A, Debus G, Edel H-G, Stransky H, Serrano R (1991) Auxin induces exocytosis and the
rapid synthesis of a high-turnover pool of plasma-membrane H+-ATPase. Planta 185:527–537
Han IS, Tseng TS, Eisinger W, Briggs WR (2008) Phytochrome A regulates the intracellular
distribution of phototropin 1-green ﬂuorescent protein in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell 20
(10):2835–2847
Harper RM, Stowe-Evans EL, Luesse DR, Muto H, Tatematsu K, Watahiki MK, Yamamoto K,
Liscum E (2000) The NPH4 locus encodes the auxin response factor ARF7, a conditional
regulator of differential growth in aerial Arabidopsis tissue. Plant Cell 12(5):757–770
Harrison BR, Masson PH (2008) ARL2, ARG1 and PIN3 deﬁne a gravity signal transduction
pathway in root statocytes. Plant J 53(2):380–392
Hasenstein KH, Evans ML (1986) Calcium dependence of rapid auxin action in maize roots. Plant
Physiol 81:439–443
Hasenstein KH, Evans ML (1988) Effects of cations on hormone transport in primary roots of Zea
mays. Plant Physiol 86:890–894
Hertel R, Thomson K-S, Russo VEA (1972) In-vitro auxin binding to particulate cell fractions
from corn coleoptiles. Planta 107:325–340
Hohm T, Preuten T, Fankhauser C (2013) Phototropism: translating light into directional growth.
Am J Bot 100(1):47–59
Hou G, Mohamalawari DR, Blancaﬂor EB (2003) Enhanced gravitropism of roots with a disrupted
cap actin cytoskeleton. Plant Physiol 131(3):1360–1373
Huala E, Oeller PW, Liscum E, Han IS, Larsen E, Briggs WR (1997) Arabidopsis NPH1: a protein
kinase with a putative redox-sensing domain. Science 278(5346):2120–2123
Inada S, Ohgishi M, Mayama T, Okada K, Sakai T (2004) RPT2 is a signal transducer involved in
phototropic response and stomatal opening by association with phototropin 1 in Arabidopsis
thaliana. Plant Cell 16(4):887–896
Inohara N, Shimomura S, Fukui T, Futai M (1989) Auxin-binding protein located in the endo-
plasmic reticulum of maize shoots: molecular cloning and complete primary structure. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 86(10):3564–3568
Inoue S, Kinoshita T, Matsumoto M, Nakayama KI, Doi M, Shimazaki K (2008) Blue light-
induced autophosphorylation of phototropin is a primary step for signaling. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 105(14):5626–5631
Ishikawa H, Evans ML (1997) Novel software for analysis of root gravitropism: comparative
response patterns of Arabidopsis wild-type and axr1 seedlings. Plant Cell Environ 20(7):919–
928
Ishikawa H, Hasenstein KH, Evans ML (1991) Computer-based video digitizer analysis of surface
extension in maize roots: kinetics of growth rate changes during gravitropism. Planta 183
(3):381–390
Jaffe MJ, Takahashi H, Biro RL (1985) A pea mutant for the study of hydrotropism in roots.
Science 230:445–447
Jarillo JA, Gabrys H, Capel J, Alonso JM, Ecker JR, Cashmore AR (2001) Phototropin-related
NPL1 controls chloroplast relocation induced by blue light. Nature 410(6831):952–954
Johnson H (1829) The unsatisfactory nature of the theories proposed to account for the descent of
the radicles in the germination of seeds, shown by experiments. Edinburgh New Pil J 312–317
Juniper B, Groves S, Landau-Schchar B, Audus L (1966) Root cap and the perception of gravity.
Nature 209:93–94
Kami C, Hersch M, Trevisan M, Genoud T, Hiltbrunner A, Bergmann S, Fankhauser C (2012)
Nuclear phytochrome A signaling promotes phototropism in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 24
(2):566–576
Kaneyasu T, Kobayashi A, Nakayama M, Fujii N, Takahashi H, Miyazawa Y (2007) Auxin
response, but not its polar transport, plays a role in hydrotropism of Arabidopsis roots. J Exp
Bot 58:1143–1150
Kang BG, Burg SP (1974) Red Light enhancement of the phototropic response in pea stems. Plant
Physiol 53:445–448
382
K. Retzer et al.

Kaufman PB, Wu L-L, Brock TG, Kim D (1988) Hormones and the orientation of growth. In:
Davies PJ (ed) Plant hormones physiology, biochemistry and molecular biology. Kluwer
Academic, Dordrecht
Khurana JP, Poff KL (1989) Mutants of Arabidopsis thaliana with altered phototropism. Planta
178:400–406
Kiss JZ, Guisinger MM, Miller AJ, Stackhouse KS (1997) Reduced gravitropism in hypocotyls of
starch-deﬁcient mutants of Arabidopsis. Plant Cell Physiol 38(5):518–525
Kiss JZ, Mullen JL, Correll MJ, Hangarter RP (2003) Phytochromes A and B mediate red-light-
induced positive phototropism in roots. Plant Physiol 131(3):1411–1417
Kleine-Vehn J, Leitner J, Zwiewka M, Sauer M, Abas L, Luschnig C, Friml J (2008) Differential
degradation of PIN2 auxin efﬂux carrier by retromer-dependent vacuolar targeting. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 105(46):17812–17817
Kleine-Vehn J, Ding Z, Jones AR, Tasaka M, Morita MT, Friml J (2010) Gravity-induced PIN
transcytosis for polarization of auxin ﬂuxes in gravity-sensing root cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 107(51):22344–22349
Kobayashi A, Takahashi A, Kakimoto Y, Miyazawa Y, Fujii N, Higashitani A, Takahashi H
(2007) A gene essential for hydrotropism in roots. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104(11):4724–
4729
Ko¨gl F, Haagen-Smits AJ (1931) U¨ ber die Chemie des Wuchsstoffs. Proc Koninklijke
Nederlandse Akademie Wetenschappen 34:1411–1416
Ko¨gl F, Schuringa GJ (1944) U¨ ber die Inaktivierung von Auxin-a-lacton bei verschiedenen
Wellenla¨ngen und den Einﬂuß von Carotinoiden auf die Lichtreaktion. Hoppe Seylers Z
Physiol Chem 280:148–161
Konings H (1968) The signiﬁcance of the root cap for geotropism. Acta Bot Neerl 17:203–211
Kutschera U, Briggs WR (2012) Root phototropism: from dogma to the mechanism of blue light
perception. Planta 235(3):443–452
Lariguet P, Fankhauser C (2004) Hypocotyl growth orientation in blue light is determined by
phytochrome A inhibition of gravitropism and phototropin promotion of phototropism. Plant J
40(5):826–834
Lee JS, Mulkey TJ, Evans ML (1984) Inhibition of polar calcium movement and gravitropism in
roots treated with auxin-transport inhibitors. Planta 160:536–543
Leitner J, Petrasek J, Tomanov K, Retzer K, Parezova M, Korbei B, Bachmair A, Zazimalova E,
Luschnig C (2012) Lysine63-linked ubiquitylation of PIN2 auxin carrier protein governs
hormonally controlled adaptation of Arabidopsis root growth. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109
(21):8322–8327
Li Y, Dai X, Cheng Y, Zhao Y (2011) NPY genes play an essential role in root gravitropic
responses in Arabidopsis. Mol Plant 4(1):171–179
Lincoln C, Britton JH, Estelle M (1990) Growth and development of the axr1 mutants of
Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 2(11):1071–1080
Liscum E, Briggs WR (1995) Mutations in the NPH1 locus of Arabidopsis disrupt the perception
of phototropic stimuli. Plant Cell 7(4):473–485
Liscum E, Reed JW (2002) Genetics of Aux/IAA and ARF action in plant growth and develop-
ment. Plant Mol Biol 49(3–4):387–400
Luschnig C, Gaxiola RA, GrisaﬁP, Fink GR (1998) EIR1, a root-speciﬁc protein involved in auxin
transport, is required for gravitropism in Arabidopsis thaliana. Genes Dev 12(14):2175–2187
Mertens R, Weiler EW (1983) Kinetic studies on the redistribution of endogenous growth
regulators in gravireacting plant organs. Planta 158:339–348
Michniewicz M, Zago MK, Abas L, Weijers D, Schweighofer A, Meskiene I, Heisler MG,
Ohno C, Zhang J, Huang F, Schwab R, Weigel D, Meyerowitz EM, Luschnig C, Offringa R,
Friml J (2007) Antagonistic regulation of PIN phosphorylation by PP2A and PINOID directs
auxin ﬂux. Cell 130(6):1044–1056
Migliaccio F, Fortunati A, Tassone P (2009) Arabidopsis root growth movements and their
symmetry: progress and problems arising from recent work. Plant Signal Behav 4(3):183–190
16
Auxin and Tropisms
383

Miyazawa Y, Sakashita T, Funayama T, Hamada N, Negishi H, Kobayashi A, Kaneyasu T,
Ooba A, Morohashi K, Kakizaki T, Wada S, Kobayashi Y, Fujii N, Takahashi H (2008)
Effects of locally targeted heavy-ion and laser microbeam on root hydrotropism in Arabidopsis
thaliana. J Radiat Res 49(4):373–379
Miyazawa Y, Takahashi A, Kobayashi A, Kaneyasu T, Fujii N, Takahashi H (2009) GNOM-
mediated vesicular trafﬁcking plays an essential role in hydrotropism of Arabidopsis roots.
Plant Physiol 149(2):835–840
Mizuno H, Kobayashi A, Fujii N, Yamashita M, Takahashi H (2002) Hydrotropic response and
expression pattern of auxin-inducible gene, CS-IAA1, in the primary roots of clinorotated
cucumber seedlings. Plant Cell Physiol 43(7):793–801
Mo¨ller B, Schenck D, Luthen H (2010) Exploring the link between auxin receptors, rapid cell
elongation and organ tropisms. Plant Signal Behav 5(5)
Morita MT (2010) Directional gravity sensing in gravitropism. Annu Rev Plant Biol 61:705–720
Moriwaki T, Miyazawa Y, Kobayashi A, Uchida M, Watanabe C, Fujii N, Takahashi H (2011)
Hormonal regulation of lateral root development in Arabidopsis modulated by MIZ1 and
requirement of GNOM activity for MIZ1 function. Plant Physiol 157(3):1209–1220
Moriwaki T, Miyazawa Y, Kobayashi A, Takahashi H (2013) Molecular mechanisms of hydrot-
ropism in seedling roots of Arabidopsis thaliana (Brassicaceae). Am J Bot 100(1):25–34
Motchoulski A, Liscum E (1999) Arabidopsis NPH3: a NPH1 photoreceptor-interacting protein
essential for phototropism. Science 286(5441):961–964
Mullen JL, Ishikawa H, Evans ML (1998) Analysis of changes in relative elemental growth rate
patterns in the elongation zone of Arabidopsis roots upon gravistimulation. Planta 206(4):598–
603
Mu¨ller A, Guan C, Ga¨lweiler L, Tanzler P, Huijser P, Marchant A, Parry G, Bennett M, Wisman E,
Palme K (1998) AtPIN2 deﬁnes a locus of Arabidopsis for root gravitropism control. EMBO J
17(23):6903–6911
Nagashima A, Uehara Y, Sakai T (2008) The ABC subfamily B auxin transporter AtABCB19 is
involved in the inhibitory effects of N-1-naphthyphthalamic acid on the phototropic and
gravitropic responses of Arabidopsis hypocotyls. Plant Cell Physiol 49(8):1250–1255
Nakamura M, Toyota M, Tasaka M, Morita MT (2011) An Arabidopsis E3 ligase, SHOOT
GRAVITROPISM9, modulates the interaction between statoliths and F-actin in gravity sens-
ing. Plant Cell 23(5):1830–1848
Nelson AJ, Evans ML (1986) Analysis of growth patterns during gravitropic curvature in roots of
Zea mays by use of a computer-based video digitizer. J Plant Growth Regul 5:73–83
Noh B, Murphy AS, Spalding EP (2001) Multidrug resistance-like genes of Arabidopsis required
for auxin transport and auxin-mediated development. Plant Cell 13(11):2441–2454
Okada K, Shimura Y (1992) Mutational analysis of root gravitropism and phototropism of
Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings. Aust J Plant Physiol 19:439–448
Okada K, Ueda J, Komaki MK, Bell CJ, Shimura Y (1991) Requirement of the Auxin Polar
Transport System in Early Stages of Arabidopsis Floral Bud Formation. Plant cell 3(7):677–
684
Okushima Y, Overvoorde PJ, Arima K, Alonso JM, Chan A, Chang C, Ecker JR, Hughes B, Lui A,
Nguyen D, Onodera C, Quach H, Smith A, Yu G, Theologis A (2005) Functional genomic
analysis of the AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR gene family members in Arabidopsis thaliana:
unique and overlapping functions of ARF7 and ARF19. Plant Cell 17(2):444–463
Ottenschlager I, Wolff P, Wolverton C, Bhalerao RP, Sandberg G, Ishikawa H, Evans M, Palme K
(2003) Gravity-regulated differential auxin transport from columella to lateral root cap cells.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100(5):2987–2991
Overbeek JV (1932) An analysis of phototropism in dicotyledons. Proc Koninklijke Nederlandse
Akademie Wetenschappen 35:1325–1335
Paciorek T, Zazˇı´malova´ E, Ruthardt N, Petra´sˇek J, Stierhof YD, Kleine-Vehn J, Morris DA,
Emans N, Jurgens G, Geldner N, Friml J (2005) Auxin inhibits endocytosis and promotes its
own efﬂux from cells. Nature 435(7046):1251–1256
384
K. Retzer et al.

Perbal G, Driss-Ecole D (2003) Mechanotransduction in gravisensing cells. Trends Plant Sci 8
(10):498–504
Perera IY, Hung CY, Brady S, Muday GK, Boss WF (2006) A universal role for inositol 1,4,5-
trisphosphate-mediated signaling in plant gravitropism. Plant Physiol 140(2):746–760
Petra´sˇek J, Mravec J, Bouchard R, Blakeslee JJ, Abas M, Seifertova´ D, Wisniewska J, Tadele Z,
Kubesˇ M, Cˇ ovanova´ M, Dhonukshe P, Sku˚pa P, Benkova´ E, Perry L, Krˇecˇek P, Lee OR, Fink
GR, Geisler M, Murphy AS, Luschnig C, Zazˇı´malova´ E, Friml J (2006) PIN proteins perform a
rate-limiting function in cellular auxin efﬂux. Science 312(5775):914–918
Pickard BG, Thimann KV (1964) Transport and distribution of auxin during tropistic response.
II. The lateral migration of auxin in phototropism of coleoptiles. Plant Physiol 39:341–350
Pickett FB, Wilson AK, Estelle M (1990) The aux1 Mutation of Arabidopsis Confers Both Auxin
and Ethylene Resistance. Plant Physiol 94(3):1462–1466
Pilet P-E, Ney D (1981) Differential growth of georeacting maize roots. Planta 151:146–150
Plieth C, Trewavas AJ (2002) Reorientation of seedlings in the earth’s gravitational ﬁeld induces
cytosolic calcium transients. Plant Physiol 129(2):786–796
Rakusova H, Gallego-Bartolome J, Vanstraelen M, Robert HS, Alabadi D, Blazquez MA,
Benkova E, Friml J (2011) Polarization of PIN3-dependent auxin transport for hypocotyl
gravitropic response in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant J 67(5):817–826
Rashotte AM, Brady SR, Reed RC, Ante SJ, Muday GK (2000) Basipetal auxin transport is
required for gravitropism in roots of arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 122(2):481–490
Rayle DL, Cleland RE (1970) Enhancement of wall loosening and elongation by acid solutions.
Plant Physiol 46:250–253
Robert S, Kleine-Vehn J, Barbez E, Sauer M, Paciorek T, Baster P, Vanneste S, Zhang J, Simon S,
Covanova M, Hayashi K, Dhonukshe P, Yang Z, Bednarek SY, Jones AM, Luschnig C,
Aniento F, Zazimalova E, Friml J (2010) ABP1 mediates auxin inhibition of clathrin-
dependent endocytosis in Arabidopsis. Cell 143(1):111–121
Roberts D, Pedmale UV, Morrow J, Sachdev S, Lechner E, Tang X, Zheng N, Hannink M,
Genschik P, Liscum E (2011) Modulation of phototropic responsiveness in Arabidopsis
through ubiquitination of phototropin 1 by the CUL3-Ring E3 ubiquitin ligase CRL3
(NPH3). Plant Cell 23(10):3627–3640
Rosquete MR, von Wangenheim D, Marhavy P, Barbez E, Stelzer EH, Benkova E, Maizel A,
Kleine-Vehn J (2013) An auxin transport mechanism restricts positive orthogravitropism in
lateral roots. Curr Biol 23(9):817–822
Ru¨ck A, Palme K, Venis MA, Napier RM, Felle HH (1993) Patch-clamp analysis establishes a role
for an auxin binding protein in the auxin stimulation of plasma membrane current in Zea mays
protoplasts. Plant J 4:41–46
Sachs J (1868) Lehrbuch der Botanik. Engelmann, Leipzig
Sachs J (1872) Ablenkung der Wurzel von ihrer normalen Wachstumsrichtung durch feuchte
Ko¨per. Arb D Bot Inst Wu¨rzburg 1:209–222
Sachs J (1879) U¨ ber Ausschließung der geotropischen und heliotropischen Kru¨mmungen wa¨hrend
des Wachsthums. Wu¨rzburger Arbeiten 2:209–225
Sachs J (1882) Vorlesungen u¨ber Pﬂanzen-Physiologie. Engelmann, Leipzig
Sachs J (1892) Gesammelte Abhandlungen u¨ber Pﬂanzen-Physiologie, vol Erster Band. Wilhem
Engelmann, Leipzig
Sack FD (1991) Plant gravity sensing. Int Rev Cytol 127:193–252
Sakai T (2005) NPH3 and RPT2: signal transducers in phototropin signaling pathways. In:
Wada M, Shimazaki K, Iino M (eds) Light sensing in plants. Springer, Tokyo
Sakai T, Haga K (2012) Molecular genetic analysis of phototropism in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell
Physiol 53(9):1517–1534
Sakai T, Wada T, Ishiguro S, Okada K (2000) RPT2. A signal transducer of the phototropic
response in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 12(2):225–236
16
Auxin and Tropisms
385

Sakai T, Kagawa T, Kasahara M, Swartz TE, Christie JM, Briggs WR, Wada M, Okada K (2001)
Arabidopsis nph1 and npl1: blue light receptors that mediate both phototropism and chloroplast
relocation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98(12):6969–6974
Sakamoto K, Briggs WR (2002) Cellular and subcellular localization of phototropin 1. Plant Cell
14(8):1723–1735
Salomon M, Christie JM, Knieb E, Lempert U, Briggs WR (2000) Photochemical and mutational
analysis of the FMN-binding domains of the plant blue light receptor, phototropin. Biochem-
istry 39(31):9401–9410
Sharrock R (1672) The history of the propagation and improvement of vegetables. W. Hall, Oxford
Shen-Miller J, Cooper P, Gordon SA (1969) Phototropism and photoinhibiiton of basipolar
transport of auxin in oat coleoptiles. Plant Physiol 44:491–496
Sieberer T, Seifert GJ, Hauser MT, GrisaﬁP, Fink GR, Luschnig C (2000) Post-transcriptional
control of the Arabidopsis auxin efﬂux carrier EIR1 requires AXR1. Curr Biol 10(24):1595–
1598
Sievers A, Behrens HM, Buckhout TJ, Gradmann D (1984) Can a Ca2+ pump in the endoplasmic
reticulum of the Lepidium root be the trigger for rapid changes in membrane potential after
gravistimulation? J Plant Physiol 114(3):195–200
Sievers A, Kruse S, Kuo-Huang LL, Wendt M (1989) Statoliths and microﬁlaments in plant cells.
Planta 179(2):275–278
Stone BB, Stowe-Evans EL, Harper RM, Celaya RB, Ljung K, Sandberg G, Liscum E (2008)
Disruptions in AUX1-dependent auxin inﬂux alter hypocotyl phototropism in Arabidopsis.
Mol Plant 1(1):129–144
Swarup R, Kramer EM, Perry P, Knox K, Leyser HM, Haseloff J, Beemster GT, Bhalerao R,
Bennett MJ (2005) Root gravitropism requires lateral root cap and epidermal cells for transport
and response to a mobile auxin signal. Nat Cell Biol 7(11):1057–1065
Takahashi N, Goto N, Okada K, Takahashi H (2002) Hydrotropism in abscisic acid, wavy, and
gravitropic mutants of Arabidopsis thaliana. Planta 216(2):203–211
Takahashi N, Yamazaki Y, Kobayashi A, Higashitani A, Takahashi H (2003) Hydrotropism
interacts with gravitropism by degrading amyloplasts in seedling roots of Arabidopsis and
radish. Plant Physiol 132(2):805–810
Takahashi H, Miyazawa Y, Fujii N (2009) Hormonal interactions during root tropic growth:
hydrotropism versus gravitropism. Plant Mol Biol 69(4):489–502
Takahashi K, Hayashi K, Kinoshita T (2012) Auxin activates the plasma membrane H+-ATPase
by phosphorylation during hypocotyl elongation in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 159(2):632–641
Takano M, Takahashi H, Suge H (1997) Calcium requirement for the induction of hydrotropism
and enhancement of calcium-induced curvature by water stress in primary roots of pea, Pisum
sativum L. Plant Cell Physiol 38:385–391
Tatematsu K, Kumagai S, Muto H, Sato A, Watahiki MK, Harper RM, Liscum E, Yamamoto KT
(2004) MASSUGU2 encodes Aux/IAA19, an auxin-regulated protein that functions together
with the transcriptional activator NPH4/ARF7 to regulate differential growth responses of
hypocotyl and formation of lateral roots in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell 16(2):379–393
Terasaka K, Blakeslee JJ, Titapiwatanakun B, Peer WA, Bandyopadhyay A, Makam SN, Lee OR,
Richards EL, Murphy AS, Sato F, Yazaki K (2005) PGP4, an ATP binding cassette
P-glycoprotein, catalyzes auxin transport in Arabidopsis thaliana roots. Plant Cell 17
(11):2922–2939
Tillmann U, Viola G, Kayser B, Siemeister G, Hesse T, Palme K, Lobler M, Klambt D (1989)
cDNA clones of the auxin-binding protein from corn coleoptiles (Zea mays L.): isolation and
characterization by immunological methods. EMBO J 8(9):2463–2467
Timpte C, Lincoln C, Pickett FB, Turner J, Estelle M (1995) The AXR1 and AUX1 genes of
Arabidopsis function in separate auxin-response pathways. Plant J 8(4):561–569
Treml BS, Winderl S, Radykewicz R, Herz M, Schweizer G, Hutzler P, Glawischnig E, Ruiz RA
(2005) The gene ENHANCER OF PINOID controls cotyledon development in the Arabidopsis
embryo. Development 132(18):4063–4074
386
K. Retzer et al.

Tsugeki R, Fedoroff NV (1999) Genetic ablation of root cap cells in Arabidopsis. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 96(22):12941–12946
Utsuno K, Shikanai T, Yamada Y, Hashimoto T (1998) Agr, an Agravitropic locus of Arabidopsis
thaliana, encodes a novel membrane-protein family member. Plant Cell Physiol 39(10):1111–
1118
Vieten A, Vanneste S, Wisniewska J, Benkova E, Benjamins R, Beeckman T, Luschnig C, Friml J
(2005) Functional redundancy of PIN proteins is accompanied by auxin-dependent cross-
regulation of PIN expression. Development 132(20):4521–4531
Wan Y, Jasik J, Wang L, Hao H, Volkmann D, Menzel D, Mancuso S, Baluska F, Lin J (2012) The
signal transducer NPH3 integrates the phototropin1 photosensor with PIN2-based polar auxin
transport in Arabidopsis root phototropism. Plant Cell 24(2):551–565
Wang JW, Wang LJ, Mao YB, Cai WJ, Xue HW, Chen XY (2005) Control of root cap formation
by MicroRNA-targeted auxin response factors in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 17(8):2204–2216
Weijers D, Benkova E, Jager KE, Schlereth A, Hamann T, Kientz M, Wilmoth JC, Reed JW,
Jurgens G (2005) Developmental speciﬁcity of auxin response by pairs of ARF and Aux/IAA
transcriptional regulators. EMBO J 24(10):1874–1885
Went FW (1926) On growth accelerating substances in the coleoptile of Avena sativa. Proc
Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie Wetenschappen 30:10–19
Went FW (1928) Wuchsstoff und Wachstum. Receuil des Travaux Botaniques Neerlandais 25:1–
116
Went FW, Thimann KV (1937) Phytohormones. Macmillan, New York
Whippo CW, Hangarter RP (2006) Phototropism: bending towards enlightenment. Plant Cell 18
(5):1110–1119
Wiesner J (1884) Untersuchungen u¨ber die Wachstumsbewegungen der Wurzeln. Sitzungsber
Akad Wiss Wien Math-Naturwiss Kl I 89:223–302
Wu G, Cameron JN, Ljung K, Spalding EP (2010) A role for ABCB19-mediated polar auxin
transport in seedling photomorphogenesis mediated by cryptochrome 1 and phytochrome
B. Plant J 62(2):179–191
Yan DW, Wang J, Yuan TT, Hong LW, Gao X, Lu YT (2013) Perturbation of auxin homeostasis
by overexpression of wild-type IAA15 results in impaired stem cell differentiation and
gravitropism in roots. PLoS One 8(3):e58103
Yang H, Murphy AS (2009) Functional expression and characterization of Arabidopsis ABCB,
AUX 1 and PIN auxin transporters in Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Plant J 59(1):179–191
Yang Y, Hammes UZ, Taylor CG, Schachtman DP, Nielsen E (2006) High-afﬁnity auxin transport
by the AUX1 inﬂux carrier protein. Curr Biol 16(11):1123–1127
Young LM, Evans ML, Hertel R (1990) Correlations between gravitropic curvature and auxin
movement across gravistimulated roots of Zea mays. Plant Physiol 92:792–796
Zhang J, Vanneste S, Brewer PB, Michniewicz M, Grones P, Kleine-Vehn J, Lofke C,
Teichmann T, Bielach A, Cannoot B, Hoyerova K, Chen X, Xue HW, Benkova E,
Zazimalova E, Friml J (2011) Inositol trisphosphate-induced Ca2+ signaling modulates auxin
transport and PIN polarity. Dev Cell 20(6):855–866
16
Auxin and Tropisms
387

Chapter 17
Auxin Coordinates Shoot and Root
Development During Shade Avoidance
Response
Valentino Ruzza, Giovanna Sessa, Massimiliano Sassi, Giorgio Morelli,
and Ida Ruberti
Abstract Plants have evolved sophisticated mechanisms to sense the presence of
other plants growing nearby and adjust their growth rate accordingly. The early
perception of neighbor proximity depends on the detection of light quality changes.
Within a vegetation community, the ratio of red (R) to far-red (FR) light is lowered
by the absorption of R light by photosynthetic pigments. This light quality change is
perceived through phytochrome (phyB, phyD, and phyE in Arabidopsis) as a signal
of the proximity of neighbors and induces a suite of developmental responses
(termed the shade avoidance response). In Arabidopsis shade avoidance is regulated
by a balance of positive (PIF) and negative (HFR1/SICS1) regulators of gene
expression which ensures a fast reshaping of the plant body toward an environment
optimal for growth while at the same time avoiding an exaggerated reaction to low
R/FR. Persistency of a low R/FR signal enhances the activity of phyA and, in turn,
of HY5, a master regulator of seedling de-etiolation. Several hormones, such as
gibberellins and brassinosteroids, have been implicated in shade-induced elonga-
tion. However, a compelling amount of evidence indicates that low R/FR-induced
changes in auxin homeostasis and auxin transport are central in the shade avoidance
response. This chapter describes the recent advances in understanding how auxin
coordinates plant growth in a low R/FR light environment.
V. Ruzza • G. Sessa • I. Ruberti (*)
Institute of Biology, Molecular Medicine and NanoBiotechnology, National Research Council,
P.le A. Moro 5, 00185, Rome, Italy
e-mail: ida.ruberti@uniroma1.it
M. Sassi
Institute of Biology, Molecular Medicine and NanoBiotechnology, National Research Council,
P.le A. Moro 5, 00185, Rome, Italy
Laboratoire de Reproduction et De´veloppement des Plantes, E´cole Normale Supe´rieure de
Lyon 46, Alle´e d’Italie, 69364, Lyon, CEDEX 07, France
G. Morelli
Food and Nutrition Research Centre, Agricultural Research Council, Via Ardeatina 546,
00178, Rome, Italy
E. Zazˇı´malova´ et al. (eds.), Auxin and Its Role in Plant Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-7091-1526-8_17, © Springer-Verlag Wien 2014
389

1
Plant Responses to Light
To grow and develop properly, all organisms need to perceive and process infor-
mation from their environment. As sessile organisms, plants have evolved sophis-
ticated mechanisms to sense, respond, and adapt to ﬂuctuating environmental cues.
Light is likely the most important environmental factor inﬂuencing plant growth
and development. It provides energy for photosynthesis, but also circadian, sea-
sonal, and positional information critical for plant survival and reproduction.
Developmental responses to light, although especially evident at the seedling
stage, occur throughout the life of the plant. Depending on whether germination
occurs in darkness or in light, angiosperms choose between two distinct develop-
mental pathways: skotomorphogenesis, also known as etiolation, and photomor-
phogenesis (Arsovski et al. 2012). When germination occurs underground, in the
absence of light, seedling development is characterized by rapid hypocotyl elonga-
tion, slow root growth, and unexpanded cotyledons which enclose an inactive shoot
apical meristem (SAM). The seedling utilizes its energy resources to rapidly
emerge from below the soil surface and reach the light. Under sunlight, the
photomorphogenic pattern is followed rapidly establishing the seedling as a pho-
toautotrophic organism. The plant’s energy is essentially used for leaf and root
development, while longitudinal extension growth is minimized. However, in
shade-avoiding plants the photoautotrophic seedling rapidly gains the capacity to
perceive the presence of neighboring vegetation and compete for the light resource
by stimulation of elongation growth (Casal 2013; Franklin 2008; Ruberti
et al. 2012).
1.1
Shade Avoidance Response
Plants have evolved two opposing strategies in response to competition for light:
shade tolerance and shade avoidance. Angiosperms have an impressive capacity to
avoid shade. Daylight contains roughly equal proportions of red (R) and far-red
(FR), but within vegetation that ratio is lowered as a result of R absorption by
photosynthetic pigments. The reduction in the R/FR ratio is perceived through the
phytochrome photoreceptors as an early signal of neighbor proximity resulting in a
suite of developmental responses known as shade avoidance. The most dramatic
response to low R/FR light is the stimulation of elongation growth. This response is
remarkably rapid, with a lag phase of a few minutes, and its magnitude inversely
relates to the R/FR ratio. In dicotyledonous plants, elongation growth induced by
low R/FR is often associated with a reduction of leaf development. Root growth is
also often impaired in low R/FR light environments. In the long term, low R/FR
exposure leads to early ﬂowering with a reduced seed set, which is considered an
escape mechanism because it shortens generation time. All of these responses occur
both in natural dense communities and in shade simulations (low R/FR).
390
V. Ruzza et al.

Furthermore, similar responses are induced by exposing plants to horizontal FR
radiation with white light from above. This is because shade-avoiding plants are
able to perceive light reﬂected by neighboring plants as partially depleted of the R
wavelengths, and they can activate responses to avoid shade even before canopy
closure and actual shading occurs (Casal 2013; Franklin 2008; Ruberti et al. 2012).
However, at high canopy density multiple light signals control shade avoidance
response (Ballare´ 1999). There is evidence that both low R/FR and reduced blue
(B) light are required for full expression of shade avoidance in plant canopies.
Interestingly, the B light responses seem to be mediated through pathways that
showed only limited overlap with those activated by low R/FR (Keller et al. 2011;
Keuskamp et al. 2011).
2
Perception of Shade Light Signals by Photoreceptors
An ever-increasing body of evidence highlights the signiﬁcance of the reduction in
the R/FR ratio as a signal that triggers shade avoidance response. However, the
reduced irradiance and the blue/green ratio of shade also provide signals which are
important for plant responses to canopy light, and phoreceptors other than phyto-
chromes—cryptochromes, phototropins, UV RESISTANCE LOCUS 8—are
increasingly being implicated to play a role in perceiving differences between
light and shade (Casal 2013).
2.1
Phytochromes
Phytochromes are photochromic biliproteins that exist in two photo-convertible
isoforms: a R-light-absorbing form (Pr) and a FR-light-absorbing form (Pfr). They
exist as dimers with each monomer consisting of an apoprotein covalently attached
to a tetrapyrrole chromophore, phytochromobilin. Phytochromes are synthesized in
the dark in their inactive Pr form. Upon absorption of red light, Pr is converted into
the biological active Pfr form which can absorb FR light and switch back to Pr,
resulting in a dynamic photoequilibrium between the two forms of phytochrome.
Following conversion to the Pfr form, phytochromes translocate to the nucleus (Bae
and Choi 2008; Casal 2013).
The phytochrome apoproteins are encoded by a small gene family in most plant
species. Three phytochrome encoding genes, PHYA, PHYB, and PHYC, are con-
served in angiosperms (Mathews 2006). Additional PHY genes are found in dicots,
perhaps the products of more recent duplications within the PHYB lineage
(Mathews and Sharrock 1997). In Arabidopsis, the phytochrome apoproteins are
encoded by ﬁve genes, PHYA-PHYE. PHYE is thought to have originated from a
duplication within the PHYB lineage early on in the evolution of dicots. PHYD,
which encodes a protein that shares approximately 80 % amino acid sequence
17
Auxin Coordinates Shoot and Root Development During Shade Avoidance Response
391

identity with PHYB, apparently arose from a relatively recent gene duplication
within the Brassicaceae (Mathews and Sharrock 1997). PHYC is thought to have
originated from a duplication within the PHYA lineage (Mathews and Sharrock
1997). However, phyA is the only phytochrome that is rapidly degraded in its Pfr
form and can signal during rapid photoconversion between Pr and Pfr form. It is the
predominant phytochrome in etiolated seedlings, and it plays a major role in the
rapid promotion of de-etiolation upon emergence from the soil. All the other
phytochromes are relatively stable in the Pfr form, and they control several aspects
of plant growth and development (Bae and Choi 2008; Casal 2013; Franklin and
Quail 2010).
A major function of phytochromes in photoautotrophic seedlings and in adult
plants involves the perception of changes in the R/FR ratio of the light environment.
Among the light-stable phytochromes, phyB plays a central role in shade avoid-
ance. Arabidopsis phyB loss-of-function mutants constitutively display shade
avoidance traits such as elongated hypocotyl, stem, petioles, and leaves, accelera-
tion of ﬂowering, and higher apical dominance under high R/FR light (Reed
et al. 1993). However, phyB mutants also show typical shade avoidance responses
under low R/FR light, indicating that other phytochromes contribute to these
responses (Franklin and Quail 2010; Smith and Whitelam 1997). phyD and phyE
single loss-of-function mutants are essentially indistinguishable from wild-type
plants. However, phyB phyE, and, to a lesser extent, phyB phyD double mutants
had longer petioles and ﬂower earlier than phyB mutants in high R/FR light. This
led to the proposal that in conjunction with phyB, phyD and phyE function in the
regulation of shade avoidance responses (Aukerman et al. 1997; Devlin et al. 1998,
1999). In agreement, phyB phyD phyE triple mutants show no response to low R/FR
light (Franklin et al. 2003). On the other hand, phyA seems to attenuate the
elongation response induced by low R/FR light (Devlin et al. 2003; Johnson
et al. 1994; Wang et al. 2011; Ciolﬁet al. 2013).
3
PIF Proteins in the Control of the Shade Avoidance
Response
In the nucleus, phytochromes physically interact with a subfamily of basic helix-
loop-helix (bHLH) proteins, the PHYTOCHROME INTERACTING FACTORS
(PIFs), controlling several aspects of photomorphogenesis (Castillon et al. 2007;
Jiao et al. 2007; Leivar and Quail 2011). This interaction in turn leads to PIF’s
phosphorylation, ubiquitination, and degradation via the 26S proteasome, providing
an elegant mechanism for rapid regulation of gene expression in response to
changes in the light environment (Al-Sady et al. 2006; Bauer et al. 2004; Nozue
et al. 2007; Park et al. 2004; Shen et al. 2005, 2007).
392
V. Ruzza et al.

3.1
PIF Proteins Promote the Shade Avoidance Response
Signaling downstream of the photoreceptors involves two main pathways: CON-
STITUTIVE PHOTOMORPHOGENIC 1 (COP1)-ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL
5 (HY5) and PIFs. COP/DE-ETIOLATED(DET)/FUSCA(FUS) are central repres-
sors of photomorphogenesis, which, in the dark, function in concert to target
positive regulators of photomorphogenesis (i.e., HY5) for degradation through the
26S proteasome, thus preventing de-etiolation. In daylight, the activity of
COP/DET/FUS proteins is reduced resulting in the accumulation of transcription
factors required for photomorphogenesis. COP1, one of the COP/DET/FUS pro-
teins, is an E3 ligase that interacts with several transcription factors and promotes
their ubiquitination together with the SUPPRESSOR OF PHYA-105 (SPA) pro-
teins (Lau and Deng 2010). On the other hand, a pif1 pif3 pif4 pif5 quadruple (pifq)
mutant displays a cop-like phenotype in darkness, demonstrating that these PIF
transcription factors function in the dark to promote skotomorphogenesis (Leivar
et al. 2008a; Shin et al. 2009). Upon light exposure, photoactivated phytochromes
interact with PIF proteins and promote their degradation via the ubiquitin-
proteasome pathway (Leivar and Quail 2011). Interestingly, the stability of PIF3
is dependent on COP1 and SPA proteins, suggesting that these molecules, besides
targeting photomorphogenesis-promoting transcription factors for degradation,
may positively affect PIF protein levels in the dark (Bauer et al. 2004; Leivar
et al. 2008a). The rapid, light-induced degradation of PIF transcription factors does
not lead to their disappearance, but rather it results in a lower steady-state level of
these proteins in daylight (Leivar and Quail 2011).
PIF1, PIF3, PIF4, PIF5, and PIF7 have been demonstrated to directly contribute
to shade avoidance (Hornitschek et al. 2012; Leivar et al. 2012a; Li et al. 2012;
Lorrain et al. 2008). They all interact physically with phyB through the conserved
N-terminal sequence, called the active phyB-binding motif; PIF1 and PIF3 also
interact with phyA through a distinct motif (Leivar and Quail 2011). As a result,
PIF1, PIF3, PIF4, and PIF5 become phosphorylated and degraded via the ubiquitin-
proteasome system, with degradation half-times in the range of 5–20 min (Leivar
and Quail 2011). PIF3, PIF4, and PIF5 protein levels increase rapidly in photoauto-
throphic seedlings upon exposure to low R/FR light (Leivar et al. 2012a; Lorrain
et al. 2008). Unlike its close relatives, PIF7 is not rapidly degraded in high R/FR
light (Leivar et al. 2008b). However, this PIF protein accumulates in its
dephosphorylated form in shade, suggesting the existence of a protein phosphatase
and a protein kinase whose activities or availability is regulated by light quality
changes (Li et al. 2012). Shade-induced elongation response is signiﬁcantly atten-
uated in pif4 pif5 and, to an even greater extent, in pifq and pif7 mutants (Leivar
et al. 2012a; Li et al. 2012; Lorrain et al. 2008). Conversely, PIF4 and PIF5
overexpressing seedlings have constitutively long hypocotyls and petioles (Lorrain
et al. 2008).
In high R/FR light, PIF proteins negatively regulate phyB levels promoting the
polyubiquitination of active phyB by COP1, which in turn leads to degradation of
17
Auxin Coordinates Shoot and Root Development During Shade Avoidance Response
393

phyB through the proteasome (Jang et al. 2010; Leivar et al. 2008b). In agreement,
pifq mutants contain signiﬁcantly higher levels of PHYB than wild-type seedlings
in high R/FR light (Leivar et al. 2012b). However, when seedlings grown under
high R/FR are exposed to simulated shade, the PHYB levels increase and become
largely independent of PIFs (within 12 h), thus suggesting that PIFs contribute
directly to trigger shade avoidance through their transcriptional regulatory activity
rather than via feedback regulation of phyB abundance (Leivar et al. 2012b).
3.2
PIF Proteins Directly Regulate Transcription Factor
Genes Promoting Shade Avoidance
Consistent with the rapidity of the elongation growth response to low R/FR and its
reversibility upon perception of high R/FR, changes in gene expression are very
rapid and reversible (Carabelli et al. 1996; Salter et al. 2003). The transcript levels
of the Homeodomain-Leucine Zipper (HD-Zip) ARABIDOPSIS THALIANA
HOMEOBOX2 (ATHB2) and bHLH PIF3-LIKE1 (PIL1) transcription factor
genes, functionally implicated in the elongation response provoked by light quality
changes (Salter et al. 2003; Steindler et al. 1999), increase within a few minutes of
low R/FR exposure (Carabelli et al. 1996; Salter et al. 2003). Signiﬁcantly, ATHB2
and PIL1 transcript levels fall very rapidly after transfer from low R/FR to high
R/FR (Carabelli et al. 1996; Salter et al. 2003). phyB, phyD, and phyE are all
involved in the regulation of both ATHB2 and PIL1 by light quality changes, further
indicating the redundant action of these photoreceptors in regulation of shade
avoidance (Franklin et al. 2003; Salter et al. 2003).
ATHB2 and PIL1 induction by low R/FR does not require de novo protein
synthesis (Roig-Villanova et al. 2006) and is signiﬁcantly reduced in loss-of-
function pif mutants (pif1 pif3; pif4 pif5; pif7; Hornitschek et al. 2009; Leivar
et al. 2012a; Li et al. 2012; Lorrain et al. 2008). There is evidence that PIL1 and
ATHB2 are recognized in vivo by PIF4 and PIF5 (de Lucas et al. 2008; Hornitschek
et al. 2009, 2012), and physical interaction between PIL1 promoter and PIF7 has
also been reported (Li et al. 2012).
ATHB2 is a member of the HD-Zip II family consisting of 10 genes. Phylogeny
reconstruction revealed that almost all of the HD-Zip II genes can be subdivided
into 4 clades (α–δ), each clade comprising 2–3 paralogs (Ciarbelli et al. 2008). All
the γ [ATHB2, HOMEOBOX ARABIDOPSIS THALIANA 1 (HAT1), HAT2] and δ
genes (ATHB4, HAT3) are regulated by light quality changes that induce shade
avoidance, and kinetics of induction and low R/FR/high R/FR reversibility strongly
suggest that HAT1, HAT3, and ATHB4, as ATHB2, are under the control of the
phytochrome system (Ciarbelli et al. 2008).
Transgenic plants bearing constructs that alter ATHB2 expression display a
series of interesting developmental phenotypes (Schena et al. 1993; Steindler
et al. 1999). For example, seedlings overproducing ATHB2 have longer hypocotyls
394
V. Ruzza et al.

and petioles and smaller and fewer leaves. Moreover, these seedlings also have a
thinner root mass; that is, they produce less lateral roots than wild-type controls.
The phenotypes of adult transgenic plants are similar to those of seedlings but more
exaggerated. Altogether the phenotypes of plants overexpressing ATHB2 are
reminiscent of those displayed by wild-type plants grown in low R/FR light, further
suggesting a role for this HD-Zip protein in the regulation of shade avoidance
response (Morelli and Ruberti 2000, 2002; Steindler et al. 1999). Overexpression of
HAT1, HAT2, initially isolated as an auxin-inducible gene by DNA microarray
(Sawa et al. 2002), HAT3, and ATHB4 results in phenotypes similar to those caused
by elevated levels of ATHB2 (Ciarbelli et al. 2008; Ruberti et al. 2012; Sawa
et al. 2002; Sorin et al. 2009), further suggesting a redundant function of these
transcription factors in shade avoidance.
Interestingly, members of the HD-Zip II γ and δ subfamilies also seem to play a
central role in several aspects of plant development in a high R/FR environment.
ATHB2, ATHB4, HAT1 (also known as JAIBA; Zu´n˜iga-Mayo et al. 2012), and
HAT3 were indeed recently identiﬁed as genes positively regulated by SPATULA,
a bHLH protein related to PIFs but lacking an active phytochrome binding domain
involved in their negative regulation by the phytochrome in high R/FR, and
proposed to be involved in carpel margin development (Reymond et al. 2012). In
addition, there is evidence that ATHB2, ATHB4, and HAT3 control embryonic
apical patterning and SAM function at least in part through interaction with HD-Zip
III proteins (Turchi et al. 2013). Importantly, they seem to play a critical role in
promoting auxin transport and auxin responses during embryogenesis (Turchi
et al. 2013). Finally, simultaneous lack of ATHB4 and HAT3 is associated with
the loss of adaxial identity of lateral organs (Bou-Torrent et al. 2012; Turchi
et al. 2013).
The dual role of HD-Zip II proteins in development and in shade avoidance
suggests that the spatial expression pattern of these transcription factors may
change when plants perceive a low R/FR light signal. In agreement, ATHB2 is
indeed induced by low R/FR in cell types that do not normally express this protein.
Under a high R/FR light environment, ATHB2 expression is mainly localized in
provascular cells in either the embryo or leaf primordia (Turchi et al. 2013). Low
R/FR light rapidly induces ATHB2:GUS expression in all cell layers of the elon-
gating portion of the hypocotyl and cotyledon petioles (Fig. 17.1a), thus suggesting
that ATHB2 acts, at least in part, in these organs to control shade avoidance.
Consistent with the transient induction of ATHB2 by light quality changes (Sessa
et al. 2005), both ATHB2:GUS and ATHB2:GFP protein levels decrease upon
prolonged exposure to low R/FR (Fig. 17.1a, b), implying that ATHB2 may also be
regulated at the level of protein stability.
17
Auxin Coordinates Shoot and Root Development During Shade Avoidance Response
395

3.3
PIF Proteins Directly Regulate Atypical bHLH Factor
Genes Attenuating Shade Avoidance
By exploiting mutant analysis in combination with genome-wide expression pro-
ﬁling, Sessa et al. (2005) uncovered a negative regulatory mechanism active in low
R/FR that involves HYPOCOTYL FAR RED1/SLENDER IN CANOPY SHADE1
(HFR1/SICS1). HFR1/SICS1 acting as a negative controller of the shade avoidance
response ensures that in the presence of a persistent low R/FR light signal an
exaggerated plant response does not occur (Hornitschek et al. 2009; Sessa
et al. 2005). HFR1/SICS1 was originally described as a downstream component
of phyA and cryptochrome 1 in the de-etiolation process (Duek and Fankhauser
2003; Fairchild et al. 2000; Fankhauser and Chory 2000; Soh et al. 2000). However,
Fig. 17.1 ATHB2 is rapidly and transiently induced by low R/FR. (a) Time-course analysis of the
histochemical localization of GUS activity in ATHB2::ATHB2:GUS seedlings grown for 4 days in
a light (L)/dark (D)cycle (16/8 h) in high R/FR and then exposed to low R/FR under the same L/D
regimen for the indicated times. Bar, 0.1 mm. (b) Time-course analysis of ATHB2:GFP protein
levels in response to low R/FR. ATHB2::ATHB2:GFP seedlings were grown for 4 days in a light
(L)/dark (D)cycle (16/8 h) in high R/FR and then exposed to low R/FR for the indicated times
before immunoblot analysis with GFP antibody (sc-9996 HRP, Santa Cruz Biotech). Tubulin was
used as a loading control. (c) Histochemical localization of GUS activity in ATHB2::ATHB2:GUS
and ATHB2::ATHB2:GUS hfr1-4/sics1-1 seedlings grown for 5 days in a L/D cycle (16/8 h) in
high R/FR and then exposed to low R/FR under the same L/D regimen for 1 day. Bar, 0.1 mm.
Growth conditions, light settings, and GUS staining procedure were as previously reported
(Carabelli et al. 2007; Sessa et al. 2005). Immunoblot analysis was performed as described by
Jang et al. (2005)
396
V. Ruzza et al.

there is evidence that in photoautotrophic seedlings HFR1/SICS1 is largely regu-
lated through phyB and that its promoter is directly recognized by PIF5
(Hornitschek et al. 2009; Ciolﬁet al. 2013). The HFR1/SICS1 transcript increases
signiﬁcantly upon exposure to low R/FR (15–30 fold; Sessa et al. 2005). HFR1/
SICS1 is a short-lived protein in darkness and is degraded through a 26S
proteasome-dependent pathway and this process requires COP1. Light, however,
irrespective of its quality, enhances HFR1/SICS1 protein stability (Duek
et al. 2004; Jang et al. 2005; Yang et al. 2005).
HFR1/SICS1 encodes an atypical bHLH protein and acts as a HLH inhibitor.
Upon prolonged exposure to low R/FR, HFR1/SICS1 accumulates and interacts
with PIF4 and PIF5 forming non-DNA-binding heterodimers, thus limiting
PIF-mediated gene expression (Hornitschek et al. 2009). Consistent with this,
several genes rapidly and transiently induced by low R/FR are signiﬁcantly
upregulated in hfr1/sics1 loss-of-function mutants upon prolonged exposure to
simulated shade (Sessa et al. 2005; Fig. 17.1c).
Another atypical bHLH protein gene, HELIX LOOP HELIX1/PHYTOCHROME
RAPIDLY REGULATED1 (HLH1/PAR1; Roig-Villanova et al. 2006; Sessa
et al. 2005), is also rapidly regulated by low R/FR, and its induction does not
require de novo protein synthesis. HLH1/PAR1 has also been involved in negative
regulation of shade-induced elongation and proposed to act as a dominant-negative
antagonist of conventional bHLH transcription factors (Galstyan et al. 2011; Hao
et al. 2012; Roig-Villanova et al. 2007).
4
COP1 in the Control of the Shade Avoidance Response
cop1 mutants lack the low R/FR-induced elongation response in young seedlings,
thus implying a central role for COP1 in shade avoidance (McNellis et al. 1994). In
agreement, the low R/FR induction of several transcription factor genes (i.e.,
ATHB2, PIL1) rapidly regulated by light quality changes is reduced in weak cop1
alleles (Roig-Villanova et al. 2006).
More recently, Rolauffs et al. (2012) provided evidence that both COP1 and the
four SPA genes (SPA1-SPA4) are essential for hypocotyl and leaf petiole elongation
in response to low R/FR, in a fashion that seems to involve the COP1/SPA
ubiquitination target HFR1/SICS1 but not HY5. This led to the proposal that
COP1/SPA activity may be important in modulating HFR1/SICS1 protein levels
in low R/FR and thus in turn PIF activity (Rolauffs et al. 2012).
The cop1 mutant does respond to shade in the b-box domain protein 21 (bbx21)
bbx22 double mutant background (Crocco et al. 2010). The BBX21 (also known as
SALT TOLERANCE HOMOLOG 2) gene, encoding a B-box-containing zinc-ﬁnger
transcription factor, plays a central role during seedling de-etiolation and functions
as a negative regulator of the shade avoidance response (Crocco et al. 2010; Datta
et al. 2007; Khanna et al. 2009). BBX22, a homolog of BBX21, operates additively
with BBX21 in early seedling development, inducing hypocotyl inhibition,
17
Auxin Coordinates Shoot and Root Development During Shade Avoidance Response
397

anthocyanin accumulation, and chloroplast biogenesis (Chang et al. 2008; Datta
et al. 2008). BBX22 is degraded through the proteasome; this reaction is faster in
darkness than in light and requires COP1 (Chang et al. 2011). This further suggests
that COP1 may be required in low R/FR to control protein levels of negative
regulators of shade avoidance.
5
Hormones in the Control of the Shade Avoidance
Response
An ever-increasing body of evidence shows that plant responses to low R/FR
involve changes in hormone signaling. Several hormones, such as auxin, gibberel-
lins (GA), and brassinosteroids (BR), have been functionally involved in the
promotion of elongation growth by low R/FR (Casal 2013; Ruberti et al. 2012;
Stamm and Kumar 2010), and links between these hormones and PIF proteins have
been established (Casal 2013). There is also evidence of a high degree of interaction
between the different hormonal pathways (Depuydt and Hardtke 2011). The inter-
actions may involve the regulation of the homeostasis of another hormone and/or
the shared participation of signaling factors in more than one pathway (Depuydt and
Hardtke 2011; Jaillais and Chory 2010; Kuppusamy et al. 2009; see Chap. 12). For
example, auxin regulates GA biosynthesis (Frigerio et al. 2006), and DELLA
proteins negatively regulate both GA and BR signaling. GA promotes plant growth
by
removing
DELLA
proteins.
Binding
of
GA
to
its
nuclear
receptor
GA-INSENSITIVE DWARF 1 (GID1) enhances GID1–DELLA interaction and
association with the E3 ubiquitin ligase SCFSLY1/GID2, leading to polyubiquitylation
and degradation of DELLAs (Murase et al. 2008; Sun 2011). When GA levels are
low, DELLAs accumulate and directly inactivate several transcription factors,
including PIF3 and PIF4 (de Lucas et al. 2008; Feng et al. 2008; Harberd
et al. 2009; Sun 2011). Low R/FR reduces the stability of DELLA proteins, likely
as a consequence of increased GA levels (Djakovic-Petrovic et al. 2007). Further-
more, there is evidence that enhanced DELLA stability [i.e., gibberellic acid-
insensitive dominant mutant] inhibits shade-induced elongation, suggesting
that DELLAs constrain shade avoidance (Djakovic-Petrovic et al. 2007). BR is
perceived by the receptor kinase Brassinosteroid-Insensitive 1 (BRI1), and
downstream signal transduction leads to activation of the BRASSINAZOLE-
RESISTANT 1 (BZR1) family transcription factors, which control BR-responsive
gene expression (Kim and Wang 2010). BZR1 and PIF4 physically interact and
synergistically regulate common target genes, including the PACLOBUTRAZOL
RESISTANCE family HLH factors required for promoting cell elongation
(Oh et al. 2012). DELLAs negatively regulate BR signaling by interacting
with BZR1 and inhibiting its ability to bind to target genes (Bai et al. 2012;
Gallego-Bartolome´ et al. 2012). These ﬁndings lead to the suggestion that
DELLAs, BZR1/2, and PIFs form the central command system in the control of
398
V. Ruzza et al.

the elongation growth processes (Bai et al. 2012), potentially including those
occurring during shade avoidance (Casal 2013).
Auxin however is unique among plant hormones for exhibiting polar transport,
and a key role of auxin in triggering shade avoidance is clearly emerging. Auxin-
related genes are overrepresented among those rapidly and transiently induced by
low R/FR (Devlin et al. 2003; Hornitschek et al. 2012; Sessa et al. 2005; Tao
et al. 2008; Ciolﬁet al. 2013). The expression of the synthetic auxin-inducible
marker DR5::GUS (Ulmasov et al. 1997) is promoted in the cotyledons and
hypocotyl by low R/FR (Carabelli et al. 2007; Morelli and Ruberti 2002; Salisbury
et al. 2007; Tao et al. 2008). However, the expression of auxin-responsive genes
seems to be enhanced by low R/FR in a tissue-speciﬁc manner. For example,
AUXIN/INDOLE-3-ACETIC ACID (AUX/IAA) 19, a gene implicated in phototro-
pic growth (Tatematsu et al. 2004), is strongly induced in the vasculature of
cotyledon petioles and hypocotyl upon low R/FR exposure (Pierik et al. 2009;
Ruberti et al. 2012). Signiﬁcantly, auxin-related genes are upregulated in hfr1/sics1
loss-of-function mutants upon prolonged exposure to low R/FR (Sessa et al. 2005;
Ciolﬁet al. 2013; Fig. 17.2). Importantly, besides promoting cell elongation, auxin
controls other aspects of shade avoidance, such as reduced leaf and root growth,
thus coordinating plant growth in low R/FR (Carabelli et al. 2007, 2008; Morelli
and Ruberti 2000, 2002; Sassi et al. 2012, 2013).
6
Auxin Has a Central Role in Many Aspects of the Shade
Avoidance Response
Several features of plants grown in low R/FR light, such as increased elongation of
stem-like organs (including hypocotyl and petioles), reduced leaf growth, leaf
hyponasty, and apical dominance, are characteristic of high auxin levels. Con-
versely, other aspects of the shade avoidance response, such as reduced root growth
and development, are typical of plants with low auxin content.
6.1
Auxin and Hypocotyl Growth
Low R/FR light produces distinct but coordinated effects on different cell types
within an organ. The increase in extension growth of a seedling in low R/FR is
indeed the consequence of two events: a change in the orientation of cell expansion
toward elongation in cells that do not divide, as the epidermal and cortical cells in
the hypocotyl, and the inhibition of cambial cell proliferation that contributes to
radial growth. Auxin has a central role in cell division and elongation, and therefore
it was suggested to act as a coordinator of organ growth in low R/FR. Consistent
with this suggestion, auxin resistant 1 mutant seedlings do not elongate
17
Auxin Coordinates Shoot and Root Development During Shade Avoidance Response
399

signiﬁcantly in low R/FR, and the hypocotyl response to simulated shade is blocked
by the addition of the auxin transport inhibitor 1-N-naphthylphthalamic acid
(NPA). These results lead to a model for Arabidopsis shade-induced responses.
The model postulated that low R/FR light may produce a reorientation of the auxin
transport stream through a spatial redistribution of a speciﬁc auxin efﬂux carrier
protein or the activation of regulatory protein(s) controlling speciﬁc auxin efﬂux
carrier protein(s) or both (see Chaps. 5 and 8). A higher lateral transport of auxin in
the hypocotyl may promote the elongation of epidermal and cortical cells; on the
other hand, a reduction of polar auxin transport through the central cylinder is likely
to cause a let up in vascular differentiation and a decrement in auxin concentration
reaching the root. This, in turn, may result in a reduction of lateral root formation
and, eventually, primary root growth. In support of this hypothesis is the root
phenotype of seedlings overexpressing ATHB2 in high R/FR. Primary root growth
and lateral root formation are both inhibited by elevated levels of ATHB2, and at
least the lateral root phenotype of ATHB2 seedlings is rescued by exogenous IAA
(Morelli and Ruberti 2000, 2002; Steindler et al. 1999).
Fig. 17.2 Dynamic regulation of auxin genes during shade avoidance. Histograms show percent-
age and statistical overrepresentation of auxin metabolism (“IAA metabolism”) and auxin signal-
ing (“Aux/IAA protein family”) functional classes among the genes upregulated after 1 h
(ArrayExpress, E-MEXP-443), 4 h (ArrayExpress, E-MEXP-3266), and 24 h (ArrayExpress,
E-MEXP-3266) in Low R/FR in Col-0 and after 24 h in the same light environment in hfr1-4/
sics1-1 (ArrayExpress, E-MEXP-444) and phyA-211 (ArrayExpress, E-MEXP-3267) mutants. All
Affymetrix GeneChips were normalized together in a single normalization step by mean of
GeneSpring implementation of RMA algorithm. Statistically signiﬁcantly regulated genes were
deﬁned by fold change >2 on expression level and FDR < 0.05 (one-way ANOVA, Student’s t-
test with Benjamini and Hochberg correction). For each group, statistical overrepresentation
analyses of functional classes were carried out using the ORA of MapMan/PageMan webtool.
The percentage of each class is compared with that obtained considering all genes present on the
ATH1 Chip (indicated as genome) in terms of Fisher’s Exact Test. P-values are shown above
the bars
400
V. Ruzza et al.

6.2
Auxin and Leaf Growth
In dicotyledonous plants, elongation growth induced by low R/FR is often associ-
ated with a reduction of leaf development. In Arabidopsis, there is evidence that cell
number contributes to the reduced leaf size of plants grown under simulated shade
(Carabelli et al. 2007). Low R/FR rapidly and transiently reduces the frequency of
cell division in young leaf primordia through a non-cell-autonomous mechanism
that requires the action of the auxin receptor TRANSPORT INHIBITOR RESIS-
TANT 1 (TIR1). The auxin increase perceived through TIR1 induces CYTOKININ
OXIDASE/DEHYDROGENASE 6 (CKX6), a gene encoding an enzyme involved in
cytokinin degradation (Redman et al. 2004; Werner et al. 2003), which in turn
promoting cytokinin breakdown diminishes cell proliferation in developing leaf
primordia. Interestingly, the upregulation of DR5::GUS as well as that of CKX6::
GUS by low R/FR occurs in pre-provascular cells of young leaf primordia,
suggesting that induction of cytokinin degradation in the developing vasculature
may be sufﬁcient to arrest leaf primordium growth in low R/FR (Carabelli
et al. 2007, 2008). However, the mechanism through which the incipient vein
cells might signal to all the other cells of the young primordium to arrest their
division upon perception of neighbors remains to be elucidated.
6.3
Auxin and Root Growth
Low R/FR severely reduces cell proliferation in the root apical meristem (RAM) of
young seedlings as evidenced by diminished RAM size and reduced number of
RAM cells expressing the CYCB1;1:GUS cell proliferation marker (Colo´n-Car-
mona et al. 1999). This inhibition is fully reversible as RAM cell proliferation is
recovered upon subsequent exposure of the young seedlings to high R/FR light
(Sassi and Ruberti, unpublished data). The model proposed for shade-induced
responses described in Sect. 6.1 postulated that a reduction of polar auxin transport
through the central cylinder is likely to cause a decrement in auxin concentration
reaching the root. The RAM phenotype of seedlings exposed to low R/FR indeed
resembles that of seedlings in which shoot-to-root polar auxin transport is impaired
(Sassi et al. 2012). In agreement, the expression of DR5::GUS, which is strongly
enhanced in the aerial tissues of seedlings exposed to low R/FR, is markedly
reduced in the RAM under simulated shade. DR5::GUS expression is restored by
reexposure to high R/FR light (Sassi et al. 2013).
17
Auxin Coordinates Shoot and Root Development During Shade Avoidance Response
401

7
Auxin Homeostasis and Auxin Transport in the Control
of the Shade Avoidance Response
A growing body of evidence indicates that auxin homeostasis and auxin transport
are central to many aspects of shade avoidance response.
7.1
Auxin Homeostasis
During the ﬁrst 1–2 h of low R/FR, the levels of auxin in the Arabidopsis shoot
increase (Hornitschek et al. 2012; Li et al. 2012; Tao et al. 2008). New auxin is
synthesized from tryptophan (Trp) through TRYPTOPHAN AMINOTRANSFER-
ASE OF ARABIDOPSIS 1 (TAA1), an enzyme encoded by the SHADE AVOID-
ANCE 3 (SAV3) gene. Loss-of-function sav3 mutants have reduced auxin in high
R/FR light and are impaired in de novo auxin synthesis under simulated shade (Tao
et al. 2008, see Chap. 2). In agreement with the central role of auxin in shade
avoidance, sav3 mutants are defective in several plant responses to low R/FR,
including reduced hypocotyl elongation and leaf hyponasty (Tao et al. 2008).
SAV3 is highly expressed in cotyledons and leaves and not in the hypocotyl, further
conﬁrming that shade-induced elongation requires auxin transport (Steindler
et al. 1999; Tao et al. 2008). Low R/FR however has no effect on TAA1 transcript
levels at the early stages of shade avoidance response (Tao et al. 2008).
A revised pathway for IAA biosynthesis has recently been proposed
(Mashiguchi et al. 2011; Stepanova et al. 2011; Won et al. 2011, see Chap. 2) in
which Trp is converted to indole-3-pyruvic acid (IPA) through TAA1, and IPA is
converted to IAA through the action of a family of ﬂavin monooxygenases encoded
by the YUCCA (YUC) gene family (Zhao et al. 2001). YUC2, YUC5, YUC8, and
YUC9 are induced by low R/FR (Li et al. 2012; Tao et al. 2008). YUCs appear to
encode a rate-limiting step in auxin biosynthesis (Mashiguchi et al. 2011; Won
et al. 2011; Zhao et al. 2001), and thus the increase of YUC2, YUC5, YUC8, and
YUC9 RNA in low R/FR is likely to contribute to increased auxin synthesis during
early stages of shade avoidance (Li et al. 2012). yuc1-163 yuc4 double mutant, and
to a lesser extent yuc3 yuc5 yuc7 yuc8 yuc9 quintuple mutant, displays reduced
hypocotyl elongation in response to low R/FR (Li et al. 2012; Won et al. 2011). It is
possible that the weak phenotype of yuc quintuple mutant in low R/FR is due to
redundancy among YUC family members (Li et al. 2012).
The identiﬁcation of genome-wide PIF5-binding sites during shade avoidance
revealed that this bHLH transcription factor physically interacts not only with the
promoters of transcritption factor genes early induced by low R/FR (i.e., ATHB2,
HFR1/SICS1) but also with those of auxin biosynthesis (YUC8) and auxin signaling
(AUX/IAA29) genes. However, whereas ATHB2 and HFR1/SICS1 show reduced
induction by low R/FR in pif4 pif5 double mutant, the expression of both YUC8 and
IAA29 is only slightly diminished in seedlings lacking PIF4 and PIF5 exposed to
402
V. Ruzza et al.

simulated shade (Hornitschek et al. 2012). More signiﬁcantly, PIF7 in its
dephosphorylated form binds G-boxes of the auxin biosynthetic genes YUC5,
YUC8, and YUC9 and increases their expression, thus directly linking the percep-
tion of a low R/FR signal to changes in free IAA required for shade-induced growth
(Li et al. 2012). In agreement, pif7 loss-of-function mutants show impaired auxin
level increase in response to low R/FR (Li et al. 2012).
Consistent with the proposal that the COP1/SPA complex may inﬂuence HFR1/
SICS1 protein levels in low R/FR, and in turn PIF protein activity, spa1 spa2 spa3
spa4 quadruple (spaq) mutant seedlings fail to exhibit an increase in the transcript
levels of the auxin biosynthesis genes YUC2, YUC8, and YUC9 in response to
simulated shade. This suggests that the increase in auxin biosynthesis promoted by
low R/FR requires the activity of the SPA proteins. In agreement, the expression of
the auxin-inducible marker DR5::GUS does not increase in spaq mutant seedlings
upon exposure to simulated shade (Rolauffs et al. 2012).
It is worth to point out that low R/FR might further control auxin levels by
regulating auxin inactivation as well. Several auxin-inducible genes of the GH3
family have been shown to be early upregulated by low R/FR (Devlin et al. 2003;
Carabelli et al. 2007). GH3 proteins are known to promote the conjugation of free
IAA to different amino acids, likely reducing the pool of free IAA (Staswick
et al. 2005, see Chap. 2). Relevantly, plants with altered levels of GH3 proteins
display defects in light-mediated hypocotyl elongation responses (Nakazawa
et al. 2001; Takase et al. 2004). Thus the concurrent induction of auxin biosynthesis
and inactivation by low R/FR might be required to ﬁne-tune auxin levels during the
shade avoidance response.
7.2
Auxin Transport
Cells with the highest expression levels of SAV3 are distinct from the ones that
elongate in response to low R/FR (Tao et al. 2008). It was thus proposed that the
low R/FR signal is perceived by phytochrome in cotyledons or leaves where SAV3
is highly expressed. SAV3 then mediates an increase in free IAA, which is
transported to hypocotyls, leading to promotion of cell elongation. In agreement,
it was found that NPA blocks the shade-induced increase of DR5::GUS in hypo-
cotyls but not in other aerial organs indicating that shade-induced increase in auxin
synthesis occurs in the upper part of the shoot, and auxin is transported to the
hypocotyls (Tao et al. 2008).
An increasing amount of evidence indicates that polar auxin transport is actively
regulated during the shade avoidance response. Low R/FR has been shown to
regulate the expression of PIN-FORMED (PIN) auxin efﬂux carriers PIN1, PIN3
and PIN7 (Devlin et al. 2003; Carabelli et al. 2007; Keuskamp et al. 2010; Sassi
et al. 2013). Relevantly, among all the members of the PIN family, only PIN1,
PIN3, and PIN7 are expressed in the vasculature of the hypocotyl (Blakeslee
17
Auxin Coordinates Shoot and Root Development During Shade Avoidance Response
403

et al. 2007; Sassi et al. 2012), suggesting that low R/FR speciﬁcally regulates auxin
transport in this tissue.
In the hypocotyls low R/FR light also regulates the localization of the auxin
efﬂux carrier PIN-FORMED (PIN) 3 (Keuskamp et al. 2010), known to play a
central role in tropic responses (Friml et al. 2002, see Chap. 16). Recent work
revealed how light perception initiates auxin redistribution that leads to directional
growth during phototropic responses (Ding et al. 2011). In the dark, high activity of
the PINOID (PID) kinase correlates with apolar localization of PIN3 in the endo-
dermal cells of the hypocotyls. Light represses PID transcription and PIN3 is
polarized speciﬁcally to the inner cell sides by GNOM ARF GTPase GEF (guanine
nucleotide exchange factor)-dependent trafﬁcking. Upon exposure to unilateral
blue light, the differential recruitment of PIN3 into different trafﬁcking pathways
at the two sides of the hypocotyl is followed by a redirection of auxin ﬂow toward
the shaded part where auxin promotes cell elongation and thus bending (Ding
et al. 2011). By analogy to tropic responses, it was proposed more than a decade
ago that elongation growth induced by neighbor detection and shade is the result of
a laterally symmetric redistribution of auxin (see Sect. 6.1; Steindler et al. 1999;
Morelli and Ruberti 2000, 2002). In agreement, it was recently found that low R/FR
promotes PIN3 lateral localization in the endodermal cells toward the outer cells of
the hypocotyl (Keuskamp et al. 2010). This shade-induced relocalization of PIN3
redirects auxin efﬂux toward the cortical and epidermal cells of the hypocotyl,
promoting the cell elongation response (Keuskamp et al. 2010). Notably, the ﬁtness
of seedlings lacking PIN3 (pin3-3 mutants), which are impaired in hypocotyl
elongation in low R/FR, is suppressed by 40 % when competing with wild-type
neighbors (Keuskamp et al. 2010).
Recent work also demonstrates that the regulation of auxin ﬂuxes plays a central
role in coordinating shoot and root growth in response to changes in the light
environment (Sassi et al. 2012, 2013). PIN1 is expressed at relatively low levels
in etiolated hypocotyls, and it is induced upon exposure to light. This suggested that
light may control shoot-to-root polar auxin transport in the hypocotyl primarily by
regulating PIN1 transcription. In accordance, pin1 loss-of-function mutants display
reduced root length and RAM defects identical to those of plants with inhibited
shoot-to-root polar auxin transport. Relevantly, the light-mediated regulation of
PIN1 expression in the hypocotyl depends on the action of COP1, which can
therefore ﬁne-tune shoot-derived auxin levels in the root. This in turn inﬂuences
auxin transport and cell proliferation in the RAM by modulating PIN1 and PIN2
intracellular distribution in the root in a COP1-dependent fashion (Sassi
et al. 2012). Notably, shade induces a strong downregulation of PIN1 in the
hypocotyls, along with a concurrent decrease in auxin levels in the RAM,
suggesting that low R/FR may activate a PIN1-dependent mechanism, analogous
to that observed in etiolated seedlings, to partition auxin levels between shoot and
root (Sassi et al. 2012, 2013). Similarly to what occurs during etiolation, this
regulatory mechanism might inhibit root growth, allowing to tune the development
of the whole plant to the light environment (Sassi et al. 2012, 2013).
404
V. Ruzza et al.

8
Plant Adaptation to Low R/FR Environment
Plant responses to light quality changes are regulated by a balance of positive (PIFs)
and negative (HFR1/SICS1) regulators of gene expression which ensures a fast
reshaping of the plant body toward an environment optimal for growth while at the
same time avoiding an exaggerated reaction to low R/FR (Hornitschek et al. 2009;
Lorrain et al. 2008; Sessa et al. 2005; Fig. 17.3). Recent work demonstrated that
downregulation of genes early induced by light quality changes upon prolonged
exposure to low R/FR depends not only on HFR1/SICS1 (Sessa et al. 2005;
Fig. 17.2), which interacts with PIF transcription factors forming non-DNA-binding
heterodimers,
thus
limiting
PIF-mediated
gene
expression
(Hornitschek
et al. 2009), but also on phyA (Ciolﬁet al. 2013; Fig. 17.2). Furthermore, phyA
and not HFR1/SICS1 is required for upregulation of several genes late induced by
low R/FR. Remarkably, among them is the HY5 transcription factor gene (Ciolﬁ
et al. 2013; Fig. 17.3). Expression studies in young seedlings exposed to simulated
shade for different times have shown that HY5-HOMOLOG (HYH), a gene func-
tionally involved in inhibition of hypocotyl elongation (Holm et al. 2002) and
known to be a direct target of HY5 (Lee et al. 2007), is late induced by low
R/FR, and its upregulation depends on the action of HY5 since it does not occur
in hy5 mutant (Ciolﬁet al. 2013).
The role of HY5 has been mostly studied at the early stages of seedling
development. Initially identiﬁed as a negative regulator of cell elongation function-
ing downstream of multiple families of the photoreceptors (Oyama et al. 1997;
Osterlund et al. 2000), it has been then shown to act as a key controller of the
transcriptional cascades promoting seedling de-etiolation (Lau and Deng 2010).
More recently, HY5 has also been implicated in inhibition of hypocotyl elongation
induced in shaded plants by brief exposure to direct sunlight perceived primarily by
phyB (Sellaro et al. 2011). In agreement with its prominent role in de-etiolation,
HY5 protein reaches its highest level 2–3 days after germination and then dramat-
ically decreases at later times of seedling development (Hardtke et al. 2000).
Notably, HY5 abundance directly correlates with the degree of photomorphogenic
development (Osterlund et al. 2000). Thus, it seems likely that increased HY5
expression upon prolonged exposure to low R/FR may be a mechanism through
which phyA exerts its regulatory role in shade avoidance response (Ciolﬁ
et al. 2013).
Relevantly, several links between auxin and HY5/HYH have been established.
On the basis of the misexpression of key components of the auxin signaling
observed in the hy5 and hy5 hyh mutants, it has been proposed that HY5 and
HYH act as negative regulators of auxin response (Cluis et al. 2004; Sibout
et al. 2006). Moreover, HY5 and HYH may also play a role in the regulation of
polar auxin transport. Indeed, hy5 hyh double mutants displayed altered auxin
ﬂuxes in roots, as well as shoot phenotypes reminiscent of defective auxin transport
(Sibout et al. 2006). In agreement with this, HY5-binding sites in PIN1 and PIN3
loci have also been found (Lee et al. 2007), further suggesting a direct regulation on
17
Auxin Coordinates Shoot and Root Development During Shade Avoidance Response
405

the expression of auxin efﬂux carriers. More recently, Sassi et al. (2012) have also
suggested that HY5 might be involved in the COP1-mediated regulation of PIN1
transcription in the hypocotyl in response to light. However, although this is an
attractive possibility, whether HY5 regulates the expression of PIN genes in
response to changes in the light environment remains to be determined.
Fig. 17.3 Transcriptional networks in shade avoidance response. Changes in the R/FR ratio of the
light environment are perceived by multiple phytochromes (phyB, phyD, and phyE) and result in a
shift of the photoequilibrium between the Pr and Pfr forms toward Pr which, in turn, leads to an
increase in the level or activity of several PIF proteins (PIF1, 3, 4, 5, 7). These phy-regulated
changes in PIFs rapidly induce the transcription of genes encoding positive (HD-Zips II and
YUCs) and negative (HFR1/SICS1) regulators of shade avoidance response. By forming non-
DNA-binding heterodimers, HFR1/SICS1 inhibits PIF activity ensuring that an exaggerated
response to low R/FR light does not occur when the plant is unsuccessful in escaping canopy
shade. Shade avoidance is further attenuated by phyA which positively regulates HY5, a master
regulator of seedling de-etiolation
406
V. Ruzza et al.

9
Conclusions
The shade avoidance signaling network involves the reduction of active phyB,
phyD, and phyE by low R/FR, the subsequent increase in PIF activity, and the
induction of transcription factor genes that function as positive and negative
regulators of plant responses to light quality changes. Among the positive regula-
tors of shade avoidance are members of the HD-Zip II protein family (Ciarbelli
et al. 2008; Sawa et al. 2002; Sorin et al. 2009; Steindler et al. 1999). Several links
between these transcription factors and auxin have been established (Sorin
et al. 2009; Steindler et al. 1999; Turchi et al. 2013); however the mechanisms
through which ATHB2, ATHB4, and HAT3 inﬂuence auxin transport and response
in low R/FR remain to be investigated. Among the genes directly regulated by PIF
proteins there are also several auxin biosynthetic genes, thus directly linking the
perception of a low R/FR signal to changes in free IAA required for shade-induced
growth (Li et al. 2012). Shade-induced increase in auxin synthesis occurs in the
upper part of the shoot, and auxin is transported to the hypocotyls (Tao et al. 2008).
Polar auxin transport is actively regulated during the shade avoidance response. In
the hypocotyl, low R/FR promotes PIN3 lateral localization in the endodermal cells
toward the outer cell layers (Keuskamp et al. 2010) and strongly downregulates
PIN1 in the vasculature (Sassi et al. 2012, 2013). In agreement with the model for
Arabidopsis shade-induced responses (Steindler et al. 1999; Morelli and Ruberti
2000, 2002), these changes in PIN expression and localization, on the one hand,
enhance lateral transport of auxin in the hypocotyl promoting elongation and, on the
other hand, reduce polar auxin transport through the central cylinder and, in turn,
shoot-derived auxin levels in the root (Keuskamp et al. 2010; Sassi et al. 2012,
2013). This in turn is likely to inﬂuence auxin transport and cell proliferation in the
RAM by modulating PIN1 and PIN2 intracellular distribution in the root in a COP1-
dependent fashion (Sassi et al. 2012, 2013).
Acknowledgments We thank all our collaborators who made the work on shade avoidance a
rewarding experience. Our apologies to the many researchers whose work or original publications
could not be cited here because of space constraints. Authors work was funded by grants from the
Italian Ministry of Education, University and Research, FIRB-ERA-PG Program, and from the
Italian Ministry of Agricultural, Food and Forestry Policies, AGRONANOTECH and NUTRIGEA
Programs. This work was also supported by a grant from the Italian Ministry of Economy and
Finance to the CNR for the Project FaReBio di Qualita`.
References
Al-Sady B, Ni W, Kircher S et al (2006) Photoactivated phytochrome induces rapid PIF3
phosphorylation prior to proteasome-mediated degradation. Mol Cell 23:439–446
Arsovski AA, Galstyan A, Guseman JM et al (2012) Photomorphogenesis. Arabidopsis Book 10:
e0147
17
Auxin Coordinates Shoot and Root Development During Shade Avoidance Response
407

Aukerman MJ, Hirschfeld M, Wester L et al (1997) A deletion in the PHYD gene of the
Arabidopsis Wassilewskija ecotype deﬁnes a role for phytochrome D in red/far-red light
sensing. Plant Cell 9:1317–1326
Bae G, Choi G (2008) Decoding of light signals by plant phytochromes and their interacting
proteins. Annu Rev Plant Biol 59:281–311
Bai MY, Shang JX, Oh E et al (2012) Brassinosteroid, gibberellin and phytochrome impinge on a
common transcription module in Arabidopsis. Nat Cell Biol 14:810–817
Ballare´ CL (1999) Keeping up with the neighbours: phytochrome sensing and other signaling
mechanisms. Trends Plant Sci 4:97–102
Bauer D, Viczia´n A, Kircher S et al (2004) Constitutive photomorphogenesis 1 and multiple
photoreceptors control degradation of phytochrome interacting factor 3, a transcription factor
required for light signaling in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 16:1433–1445
Blakeslee JJ, Bandyopadhyay A, Lee OR et al (2007) Interactions among PIN-FORMED and
P-glycoprotein auxin transporters in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 19:131–147
Bou-Torrent J, Salla-Martret M, Brandt R et al (2012) ATHB4 and HAT3, two class II HD-ZIP
transcription factors, control leaf development in Arabidopsis. Plant Signal Behav 7:1382–
1387
Carabelli M, Morelli G, Whitelam G et al (1996) Twilight-zone and canopy shade induction of the
ATHB-2 homeobox gene in green plants. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93:3530–3535
Carabelli M, Possenti M, Sessa G et al (2007) Canopy shade causes a rapid and transient arrest in
leaf development through auxin-induced cytokinin oxidase activity. Genes Dev 21:1863–1868
Carabelli M, Possenti M, Sessa G et al (2008) A novel regulatory circuit underlying plant response
to canopy shade. Plant Signal Behav 3:137–139
Casal JJ (2013) Photoreceptor signaling networks in plant responses to shade. Annu Rev Plant Biol
64:403–427
Castillon A, Shen H, Huq E (2007) Phytochrome interacting factors: central players in
phytochrome-mediated light signaling networks. Trends Plant Sci 12:514–521
Chang CS, Li YH, Chen LT et al (2008) LZF1, a HY5-regulated transcriptional factor, functions in
Arabidopsis de-etiolation. Plant J 54:205–219
Chang CSJ, Maloof JN, Wu SH (2011) COP1 mediated degradation of BBX22/LZF1 optimizes
seedling development in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 156:228–239
Ciarbelli AR, CiolﬁA, Salvucci S et al (2008) The Arabidopsis homeodomain-leucine zipper II
gene family: diversity and redundancy. Plant Mol Biol 68:465–478
CiolﬁA, Sessa G, Sassi M et al (2013) Dynamics of the shade-avoidance response in Arabidopsis.
Plant Physiol 163:331–353
Cluis CP, Mouchel CF, Hardtke CS (2004) The Arabidopsis transcription factor HY5 integrates
light and hormone signaling pathways. Plant J 38:332–347
Colo´n-Carmona A, You R, Haimovitch-Gal T et al (1999) Spatio-temporal analysis of mitotic
activity with a labile cyclin-GUS fusion protein. Plant J 20:503–508
Crocco CD, Holm M, Yanovsky MJ et al (2010) AtBBX21 and COP1 genetically interact in the
regulation of shade avoidance. Plant J 64:551–562
Datta S, Hettiarachchi C, Johansson H et al (2007) SALT TOLERANCE HOMOLOG2, a B-box
protein in Arabidopsis that activates transcription and positively regulates light-mediated
development. Plant Cell 19:3242–3255
Datta S, Johansson H, Hettiarachchi C et al (2008) LZF1/SALT TOLERANCE HOMOLOG3, an
Arabidopsis B-box protein involved in light-dependent development and gene expression,
undergoes COP1-mediated ubiquitination. Plant Cell 20:2324–2338
de Lucas M, Daviere J-M, Rodriguez-Falcon M et al (2008) A molecular framework for light and
gibberellin control of cell elongation. Nature 451:480–484
Depuydt S, Hardtke CS (2011) Hormone signalling crosstalk in plant growth regulation. Curr Biol
21:R365–R373
Devlin PF, Patel SR, Whitelam GC (1998) Phytochrome E inﬂuences internode elongation and
ﬂowering time in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 10:1479–1487
408
V. Ruzza et al.

Devlin PF, Robson PRH, Patel SR et al (1999) Phytochrome D acts in the shade-avoidance
syndrome in Arabidopsis by controlling elongation and ﬂowering time. Plant Physiol
119:909–915
Devlin PF, Yanovsky MJ, Kay SA (2003) A genomic analysis of the shade avoidance response in
Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 133:1617–1629
Ding Z, Galva´n-Ampudia CS, Demarsy E et al (2011) Light-mediated polarization of the PIN3
auxin transporter for the phototropic response in Arabidopsis. Nat Cell Biol 13:447–452
Djakovic-Petrovic T, de Wit M, Voesenek LACJ et al (2007) DELLA protein function in growth
responses to canopy signals. Plant J 51:117–126
Duek PD, Fankhauser C (2003) HFR1, a putative bHLH transcription factor, mediates both
phytochrome A and cryptochrome signaling. Plant J 34:827–836
Duek PD, Elmer MV, van Oosten VR et al (2004) The degradation of HFR1, a putative bHLH
class transcription factor involved in light signaling, is regulated by phosphorylation and
requires COP1. Curr Biol 14:2296–2301
Fairchild CD, Schumaker MA, Quail PH (2000) HFR1 encodes an atypical bHLH protein that acts
in phytochrome A signal transduction. Genes Dev 14:2377–2391
Fankhauser C, Chory J (2000) RSF1, an Arabidopsis locus implicated in phytochrome A signaling.
Plant Physiol 124:39–45
Feng S, Martinez C, Gusmaroli G et al (2008) Coordinated regulation of Arabidopsis thaliana
development by light and gibberellins. Nature 451:475–479
Franklin KA (2008) Shade avoidance. New Phytol 179:930–944
Franklin KA, Quail PH (2010) Phytochrome functions in Arabidopsis development. J Exp Bot
61:11–24
Franklin KA, Praekelt U, Stoddart WM et al (2003) Phytochromes B, D, and E act redundantly to
control multiple physiological responses in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 131:1340–1346
Frigerio M, Alabadi D, Perez-Gomez J et al (2006) Transcriptional regulation of gibberellin
metabolism genes by auxin signaling in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 142:553–563
Friml J, Wis´niewska J, Benkova´ E et al (2002) Lateral relocation of auxin efﬂux regulator PIN3
mediates tropism in Arabidopsis. Nature 415:806–809
Gallego-Bartolome´ J, Minguet EG, Grau-Enguix F et al (2012) Molecular mechanism for the
interaction between gibberellin and brassinosteroid signaling pathways in Arabidopsis. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 109:13446–13451
Galstyan A, Cifuentes-Esquivel N, Bou-Torrent J et al (2011) The shade avoidance syndrome in
Arabidopsis: a fundamental role for atypical basic helix-loop-helix proteins as transcriptional
cofactors. Plant J 66:258–267
Hao Y, Oh E, Choi G, Liang Z et al (2012) Interactions between HLH and bHLH factors modulate
light-regulated plant development. Mol Plant 5:688–697
Harberd NP, Belﬁeld E, Yasumura Y (2009) The angiosperm gibberellin-GID1–DELLA growth
regulatory mechanism: how an ‘inhibitor of an inhibitor’ enables ﬂexible response to ﬂuctu-
ating environments. Plant Cell 21:1328–1339
Hardtke CS, Gohda K, Osterlund MT et al (2000) HY5 stability and activity in Arabidopsis is
regulated by phosphorylation in its COP1 binding domain. EMBO J 19:4997–5006
Holm M, Ma L-G, Qu L-J et al (2002) Two interacting bZIP proteins are direct targets of COP1-
mediated control of light-dependent gene expression in Arabidopsis. Genes Dev 16:1247–1259
Hornitschek P, Lorrain S, Zoete V et al (2009) Inhibition of the shade avoidance response by
formation of non-DNA binding bHLH heterodimers. EMBO J 28:3893–3902
Hornitschek P, Kohnen MV, Lorrain S et al (2012) Phytochrome interactin factors 4 and 5 control
seedling growth in changing light conditions by directly controlling auxin signaling. Plant J
71:699–711
Jaillais Y, Chory J (2010) Unraveling the paradoxes of plant hormone signaling in- tegration. Nat
Struct Mol Biol 17:642–645
Jang I-C, Yang J-Y, Soo Seo H et al (2005) HFR1 is targeted by COP1 E3 ligase for post-
translational proteolysis during phytochrome A signaling. Genes Dev 19:593–602
17
Auxin Coordinates Shoot and Root Development During Shade Avoidance Response
409

Jang IC, Henriques R, Seo HS et al (2010) Arabidopsis PHYTOCHROME INTERACTING
FACTOR proteins promote phytochrome B polyubiquitination by COP1 E3 ligase in the
nucleus. Plant Cell 22:2370–2383
Jiao Y, Lau OS, Deng XW (2007) Light-regulated transcriptional networks in higher plants. Nat
Rev Genet 8:217–230
Johnson E, Bradley JM, Harberd NP et al (1994) Photoresponses of light-grown phyA mutants of
Arabidopsis: phytochrome A is required for the perception of daylength extensions. Plant
Physiol 105:141–149
Keller MM, Jaillais Y, Pedmale UV et al (2011) Cryptochrome 1 and phytochrome B control
shade-avoidance responses in Arabidopsis via partially independent hormonal cascades. Plant J
67:195–207
Keuskamp DH, Pollmann S, Voesenek LACJ et al (2010) Auxin transport through PIN-FORMED
3 (PIN3) controls shade avoidance and ﬁtness during competition. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
107:22740–22744
Keuskamp DH, Sasidharan R, Vos I et al (2011) Blue-light-mediated shade avoidance requires
combined auxin and brassinosteroid action in Arabidopsis seedlings. Plant J 67:208–217
Khanna R, Kronmiller B, Maszle DR et al (2009) The Arabidopsis B-box zinc ﬁnger family. Plant
Cell 21:3416–3420
Kim TW, Wang ZY (2010) Brassinosteroid signal transduction from receptor kinases to transcrip-
tion factors. Annu Rev Plant Biol 61:681–704
Kuppusamy KT, Walcher CL, Nemhauser JL (2009) Cross-regulatory mechanisms in hormone
signaling. Plant Mol Biol 69:375–381
Lau OS, Deng XW (2010) Plant hormone signaling lightens up: integrators of light and hormones.
Curr Opin Plant Biol 13:571–577
Lee J, He K, Stolc V et al (2007) Analysis of transcription factor HY5 genomic binding sites
revealed its hierarchical role in light regulation of development. Plant Cell 19:731–749
Leivar P, Quail PH (2011) PIFs: pivotal components in a cellular signaling hub. Trends Plant Sci
16:19–28
Leivar P, Monte E, Oka Y et al (2008a) Multiple phytochrome-interacting bHLH transcription
factors repress premature seedling photomorphogenesis in darkness. Curr Biol 18:1815–1823
Leivar P, Monte E, Al-Sady B et al (2008b) The Arabidopsis phytochrome-interacting factor PIF7,
together with PIF3 and PIF4, regulates responses to prolonged red light by modulating phyB
levels. Plant Cell 20:337–352
Leivar P, Tepperman JM, Cohn MM et al (2012a) Dynamic antagonism between phytochromes
and PIF family basic helix-loop-helix factors induces selective reciprocal responses to light and
shade in a rapidly responsive transcriptional network in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 24:1398–1419
Leivar P, Monte E, Cohn MM et al (2012b) Phytochrome signaling in green Arabidopsis seedlings:
impact assessment of a mutually negative phyB–PIF feedback loop. Mol Plant 5:734–749
Li L, Ljung K, Breton G et al (2012) Linking photoreceptor excitation to changes in plant
architecture. Genes Dev 26:785–790
Lorrain S, Allen T, Duek PD et al (2008) Phytochrome-mediated inhibition of shade avoidance
involves degradation of growth-promoting bHLH transcription factors. Plant J 53:312–323
Mashiguchi K, Tanaka K, Sakai T et al (2011) The main auxin biosynthesis pathway in
Arabidopsis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108:18512–18517
Mathews S (2006) Phytochrome-mediated development in land plants: red light sensing evolves to
meet the challenges of changing light environments. Mol Ecol 15:3483–3503
Mathews S, Sharrock RA (1997) Phytochrome gene diversity. Plant Cell Environ 20:666–671
McNellis TW, von Arnim AG, Araki T et al (1994) Genetic and molecular analysis of an allelic
series of cop1 mutants suggests functional roles for the multiple protein domains. Plant Cell
6:487–500
Morelli G, Ruberti I (2000) Shade avoidance responses. Driving auxin along lateral routes. Plant
Physiol 122:621–626
Morelli G, Ruberti I (2002) Light and shade in the photocontrol of Arabidopsis growth. Trends
Plant Sci 7:399–404
410
V. Ruzza et al.

Murase K, Hirano Y, Sun TP et al (2008) Gibberellin-induced DELLA recognition by the
gibberellin receptor GID1. Nature 456:459–463
Nakazawa M, Yabe N, Ichikawa T et al (2001) DFL1, an auxin-responsive GH3 gene homologue,
negatively regulates shoot cell elongation and lateral root formation, and positively regulates
the light response of hypocotyl length. Plant J 25:213–221
Nozue K, Covington MF, Duek PD et al (2007) Rhythmic growth explained by coincidence
between internal and external cues. Nature 448:358–361
Oh E, Zhu JY, Wang ZY (2012) Interaction between BZR1 and PIF4 integrates brassinosteroid
and environmental responses. Nat Cell Biol 14:802–809
Osterlund MT, Hardtke CS, Wei N et al (2000) Targeted destabilization of HY5 during light-
regulated development of Arabidopsis. Nature 405:462–466
Oyama T, Shimura Y, Okada K (1997) The Arabidopsis HY5 gene encodes a bZIP protein that
regulates stimulus-induced development of root and hypocotyl. Genes Dev 11:2983–2995
Park E, Kim J, Lee Y et al (2004) Degradation of phytochrome interacting factor 3 in
phytochrome-mediated light signaling. Plant Cell Physiol 45:968–975
Pierik R, Djakovic-Petrovic T, Keuskamp DH et al (2009) Auxin and ethylene regulate elongation
responses to neighbor proximity signals independent of gibberellin and DELLA proteins in
Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 149:1701–1712
Redman JC, Haas BJ, Tanimoto G et al (2004) Development and evaluation of an Arabidopsis
whole genome Affymetrix probe array. Plant J 38:545–561
Reed JW, Nagpal P, Poole DS et al (1993) Mutations in the gene for the red/far-red light receptor
phytochrome B alter cell elongation and physiological responses throughout Arabidopsis
development. Plant Cell 5:147–157
Reymond MC, Brunoud G, Chauvet A et al (2012) A light-regulated genetic module was recruited
to carpel development in Arabidopsis following a structural change to SPATULA. Plant Cell
24:2812–2825
Roig-Villanova I, Bou J, Sorin C et al (2006) Identiﬁcation of primary target genes of phytochrome
signaling. Early transcriptional control during shade avoidance responses in Arabidopsis. Plant
Physiol 141:85–96
Roig-Villanova I, Bou-Torrent J, Galstyan A et al (2007) Interaction of shade avoidance and auxin
responses: a role for two novel atypical bHLH proteins. EMBO J 26:4756–4767
Rolauffs S, Fackendah P, Sahm J (2012) Arabidopsis COP1 and SPA genes are essential for plant
elongation but not for acceleration of ﬂowering time in response to a low red light to far-red
light ratio. Plant Physiol 160:2015–2027
Ruberti I, Sessa G, CiolﬁA et al (2012) Plant adaptation to dynamically changing environment:
the shade avoidance response. Biotechnol Adv 30:1047–1058
Salisbury FJ, Hall A, Grierson CS et al (2007) Phytochrome coordinates Arabidopsis shoot and
root development. Plant J 50:429–438
Salter MG, Franklin KA, Whitelam GC (2003) Gating of the rapid shade avoidance response by
the circadian clock in plants. Nature 426:680–683
Sassi M, Lu Y, Zhang Y et al (2012) COP1 mediates the coordination of root and shoot growth by
light through modulation of PIN1- and PIN2-dependent auxin transport in Arabidopsis.
Development 139:3402–3412
Sassi M, Wang J, Ruberti I et al (2013) Shedding light on auxin movement: light-regulation of
polar auxin transport in the photocontrol of plant development. Plant Signal Behav 8:e23355
Sawa S, Ohgishi M, Goda H et al (2002) The HAT2 gene, a member of the HD-Zip gene family,
isolated as an auxin inducible gene by DNA microarray screening, affects auxin response in
Arabidopsis. Plant J 32:1011–1022
Schena M, Lloyd AM, Davis RW (1993) The HAT4 gene of Arabidopsis encodes a developmental
regulator. Genes Dev 7:367–379
Sellaro R, Yanovsky MJ, Casal JJ (2011) Repression of shade-avoidance reactions by sunﬂeck-
induction of HY5 expression in Arabidopsis. Plant J 68:919–928
Sessa G, Carabelli M, Sassi M et al (2005) A dynamic balance between gene activation and
repression regulates the shade avoidance response in Arabidopsis. Genes Dev 19:2811–2815
17
Auxin Coordinates Shoot and Root Development During Shade Avoidance Response
411

Shen H, Moon J, Huq E (2005) PIF1 is regulated by light-mediated degradation through the
ubiquitin-26S proteasome pathway to optimize photomorphogenesis of seedlings in
Arabidopsis. Plant J 44:1023–1035
Shen Y, Khanna R, Carle CM et al (2007) Phytochrome induces rapid PIF5 phosphorylation and
degradation in response to red-light activation. Plant Physiol 145:1043–1051
Shin J, Kim K, Kang H et al (2009) Phytochromes promote seedling light responses by inhibiting four
negatively-acting phytochrome-interacting factors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106:7660–7665
Sibout R, Sukumar P, Hettiarachchi C et al (2006) Opposite root growth phenotypes of hy5 versus
hy5 hyh mutants correlate with increased constitutive auxin signaling. PLoS Genet 11:e202
Smith H, Whitelam GC (1997) The shade avoidance syndrome: multiple responses mediated by
multiple phytochromes. Plant Cell Environ 20:840–844
Soh M-S, Kim Y-M, Han S-J et al (2000) REP1, a basic helix-loop-helix protein, is required for a
branch pathway of phytochrome A signaling in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 12:2061–2073
Sorin C, Salla-Martret M, Bou-Torrent J et al (2009) ATHB4, a regulator of shade avoidance,
modulates hormone response in Arabidopsis seedlings. Plant J 59:266–277
Stamm P, Kumar PP (2010) The phytohormone signal network regulating elongation growth
during shade avoidance. J Exp Bot 61:2889–2903
Staswick PE, Serban B, Rowe M et al (2005) Characterization of an Arabidopsis enzyme family
that conjugates amino acids to indole-3-acetic acid. Plant Cell 17:616–627
Steindler C, Matteucci A, Sessa G et al (1999) Shade avoidance responses are mediated by the
ATHB-2 HD-Zip protein, a negative regulator of gene expression. Development 125:4235–4245
Stepanova AN, Yun J, Robles LM et al (2011) The Arabidopsis YUCCA1 ﬂavin monooxygenase
functions in the indole-3-pyruvic acid branch of auxin biosynthesis. Plant Cell 23:3961–3973
Sun T-P (2011) The molecular mechanism and evolution of the GA-GID1-DELLA signaling
module in plants. Curr Biol 21:R338–R345
Takase T, Nakazawa M, Ishikawa A et al (2004) ydk1-D, an auxin-responsive GH3 mutant that is
involved in hypocotyl and root elongation. Plant J 37:471–483
Tao Y, Ferrer JL, Ljung K et al (2008) Rapid synthesis of auxin via a new tryptophan-dependent
pathway is required for shade avoidance in plants. Cell 133:164–176
Tatematsu K, Kumagai S, Muto H et al (2004) MASSUGU2 encodes Aux/IAA19, an auxin-
regulated protein that functions together with the transcriptional activator NPH4/ARF7 to
regulate differential growth responses of hypocotyl and formation of lateral roots in
Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell 16:379–393
Turchi L, Carabelli M, Ruzza V et al (2013) Arabidopsis HD-Zip II transcription factors control
embryo development and meristem function. Development 140:2118–2129
Ulmasov T, Murfett J, Hagen G et al (1997) Aux/IAA proteins repress expression of reporter genes
containing natural and highly active synthetic auxin response elements. Plant Cell 9:1963–1971
Wang X, Roig-Villanova I, Khan S et al (2011) A novel high-throughput in vivo molecular screen
for shade avoidance mutants identiﬁes a novel phyA mutation. J Exp Bot 62:2973–2987
Werner T, Motyka V, Laucou V et al (2003) Cytokinin-deﬁcient transgenic Arabidopsis plants
show multiple developmental alterations indicating opposite functions of cytokinins in the
regulation of shoot and root meristem activity. Plant Cell 11:2532–2550
Won C, Shen X, Mashiguchi K et al (2011) Conversion of tryptophan to indole- 3-acetic acid by
TRYPTOPHAN
AMINOTRANSFERASES
OF
ARABIDOPSIS
and
YUCCAs
in
Arabidopsis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108:18518–18523
Yang J, Lin R, Sullivan J et al (2005) Light regulates COP1-mediated degradation of HFR1, a
transcription factor essential for light signaling in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 17:804–821
Zhao Y, Christensen SK, Fankhauser C et al (2001) A role for ﬂavin monooxygenase-like enzymes
in auxin biosynthesis. Science 291:306–309
Zu´n˜iga-Mayo VM, Marsch-Martı´nez N, de Folter S (2012) JAIBA, a class-II HD-ZIP transcription
factor involved in the regulation of meristematic activity, and important for correct gynoecium
and fruit development in Arabidopsis. Plant J 71:314–326
412
V. Ruzza et al.

Chapter 18
Auxin and the Interaction Between Plants
and Microorganisms
Jutta Ludwig-Mu¨ller
Abstract While auxin is involved in virtually every process in plant development
and orientation in the environment, plant pathogens have exploited the auxin
machinery of the plant to alter plant growth and development in their favor. On
the opposite, the plant is able to turn this against invaders and uses the same
pathways for defense reactions. Also, plant beneﬁcial microbes can interfere with
the auxin metabolism of the host plant to induce growth of the plant for mutual
beneﬁts. Here, the role of auxin in disease symptom development will be reviewed,
where either the plant or the pathogen contributes to alterations in host auxin
synthesis and metabolism. Due to the many interactions known, the focus here
will be on bacteria, protists, and fungi. On the one hand, auxin can be rated as
pathogenicity factor, but also on the other hand alterations in auxin levels can result
in changes of target genes, which then lead to changes in plant defense. In addition,
the auxin-signaling pathway is directly utilized in the defense reaction against some
pathogens.
1
Introduction
Plant diseases are economical factors inﬂuencing agricultural and horticultural
applications. Plant diseases cause huge losses by changing the quality and quantity
of harvested crops. Other costs are created by the chemical defense using pesticides
in general, which is ecologically not desirable. To understand how disease symp-
toms develop and how the plant’s defense machinery can be employed for breeding
resistant varieties is of importance. Many disease symptoms caused by bacteria or
J. Ludwig-Mu¨ller (*)
Technische Universita¨t Dresden, 01062 Dresden, Germany
e-mail: jutta.ludwig-mueller@tu-dresden.de
E. Zazˇı´malova´ et al. (eds.), Auxin and Its Role in Plant Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-7091-1526-8_18, © Springer-Verlag Wien 2014
413

fungi rely on the involvement of plant hormones, while other plant hormones act as
defense signals in the plant. The latter encompass ethylene, jasmonic acid, and
salicylic acid. In some cases these defense compounds show also cross talk with
auxin. The growth promoting plant hormones causing disease symptoms are gib-
berellins, factors for the “foolish seedling” (bakanae) disease in rice (Mitchell and
Angel 1951); cytokinins, which stimulate cell division and thereby resulting in
tumorous growth of infected tissues (Zupan and Zambryski 1995) or growth
anomalies such as fasciation (Crespi et al. 1992); and auxins, which also stimulate
cell division, but also cell elongation, resulting in hypertrophied cells (Ludwig-
Mu¨ller et al. 2009). In many cases auxins and cytokinins are inseparable in causing
disease symptoms, such as tumor formation. Finally, brassinosteroids have dual
roles, ﬁrst in some cases they are involved in defense (Krishna 2003), but they could
also act together with auxins on cell elongation and thus tissue growth. During an
infection cycle auxin can play a role at different points in the plant being involved
in either pathogenicity or defense responses (Fig. 18.1). Auxin is involved in
symptom development after colonization and thus important for pathogenesis. It
can also direct plant defense signaling or act directly as defense molecule with
antimicrobial activity. Alterations in auxin levels result in changes of target genes
of the auxin response. For example, a reduction of auxin could alter cell wall
functionality by decreasing cell wall loosening enzymes. In this case the auxin
reduction would increase plant defense. However, auxin can also be a factor used
by beneﬁcial microbes to alter plant growth and development.
2
Auxin in Symbiotic Interactions
Soil microbes are known to alter plant growth for example by alteration of hormone
levels, either by themselves or by induction of auxin synthesis in the host plant.
Beneﬁcial soil bacteria produce indole-3-acetic acid (IAA), which induces the
plant’s root growth (Patten and Glick 1996, 2002). Whether there is a beneﬁcial
effect for the bacteria through an enlarged root system of the host plants has not
directly been shown, but possibly, the larger root system secretes more nutrients,
which is of advantage for the bacteria. In agreement with this hypothesis, maize
roots inoculated with bacteria from the genus Azospirillum had higher levels of
indole-3-butyric acid (IBA) (Fallik et al. 1989). Also, there are soil bacteria, which
hydrolyze with high speciﬁcity different IAA conjugates with amino acids, thus
transforming inactive auxins into active IAA (Chou et al. 1998; Chou and Huang
2005).
Rhizobia are able to induce root nodules on their hosts from the family of
Leguminoseae (reviewed in Long 2001). They were shown to synthesize IAA by
either the indole-3-acetamide or the indole-3-pyruvic acid pathways (reviewed in
Spaepen et al. 2007; see also Chap. 2), but also the host IAA homeostasis plays a
role. For the recognition, the symbiotic bacteria use host plant compounds, the
ﬂavonoids. These compounds are secreted into the rhizosphere to attract the
rhizobia. They are recognized by speciﬁc bacterial receptors, which lead to
414
J. Ludwig-Mu¨ller

ﬂavonoid-dependent gene expression in the free-living bacteria. Later, in the plant
the ﬁrst response is a curvature of the root hairs, which is prerequisite for the
colonization process. The symbiosis is fully established upon symbiosome forma-
tion, which terminates into the macroscopically visible nodules. However, ﬂavo-
noids are not only recognition signals, but also discussed to be involved in the
formation of the root nodule structure itself. Flavonoids accumulate at the entrance
site for the rhizobia. Since they inhibit auxin efﬂux from cells (Peer et al. 2004; see
also Chap. 5), it is hypothesized that high levels of ﬂavonoids would lead to a local
increase in IAA which might trigger the formation of the nodules, in turn leading to
increased cell division rates. Root nodules are discussed to be organs, such as lateral
roots, so their initiation needs a plant-derived signal, which could be auxin (Hirsch
1992; Mathesius 2008). While auxin is not essential for the initial stages in
colonization, it might be important for nodule development. Auxin-responsive
promoter::reporter constructs were used as tool to get an indication for increased
auxin levels in root nodules (e.g., Huo et al. 2006). Consequently, mutants with
altered ﬂavonoid synthesis did not form nodules, even though normal root hair
curling occurred after inoculation with rhizobia (Wasson et al. 2006). The inhibi-
tion of chalcone synthase, a protein essential for ﬂavonoid biosynthesis, in
attachment
penetration
recognition of 
pathogen by host 
recognition of 
host by pathogen
inoculation
inoculum production
dissemination
of pathogen
growth/reproduction
of pathogen
symptom development
colonization
defense
signaling
overseasoning stage
auxin
auxin
antimicrobial
compound
auxin
auxin
alteration of wall 
characteristics
organ formation
on roots 
fitness of 
pathogen
auxin
Fig. 18.1 A model of a disease cycle and the possible auxin functions in pathogenicity or defense
reactions. In black a basic infection cycle is shown and in red defense responses. The green arrows
show where auxin has a positive effect and the blue where auxin is negatively inﬂuencing plant
defense. In addition, the entry points for auxin in beneﬁcial interactions are shown in magenta,
such as organ formation as an example
18
Auxin and the Interaction Between Plants and Microorganisms
415

Medicago truncatula results in reduced ﬂavonoid accumulation and reduced auxin
transport, which in turn reduces nodulation (Wasson et al. 2006). More directly, the
reduction of a PIN transporter gene expression involved in IAA transport in
M. truncatula also results in reduced nodulation (Huo et al. 2006). Rhizobia have
been shown to synthesize auxin, probably from tryptophan exuded by the host plant
(Kefford et al. 1960). A role for the hydrolysis of auxin conjugates in nodule
formation was also suggested (Campanella et al. 2008). Since the transcript levels
of several auxin amido hydrolases from Medicago truncatula were dramatically
increased during early stages of nodule formation, the authors hypothesized that the
conjugate hydrolysis could play a role to increase free auxin levels.
Auxins can be produced by several fungi, which form ectomycorrhizal associ-
ations and thus inﬂuence the host plant to increase the root system to form more
interaction sites (Splivallo et al. 2009). Also, arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungi
colonize preferentially young host roots. They form appressoria, which develop
into intraradical hyphae and then arbuscules. The latter are the exchange places for
nutrients from plant to fungus and vice versa. Several publications have shown that
auxins are increased in roots colonized by AM fungi (e.g., Meixner et al. 2005).
Besides IAA other auxin compounds such as IBA occur naturally in plants (Epstein
and Ludwig-Mu¨ller 1993; Ludwig-Mu¨ller 2000). In maize roots the accumulation
of IBA but not IAA might trigger the enlargement of the root system, where
especially lateral roots are newly induced (Kaldorf and Ludwig-Mu¨ller 2000).
These are thought to be the preferential entry points for the fungi. In Tropaeolum
majus also an increase in several molecules with auxin activity (Ludwig-Mu¨ller and
Cohen 2002) was found after mycorrhization (Jentschel et al. 2007). In addition,
Fitze et al. (2005) reported an increase in IAA amino acid conjugates in
AM-inoculated roots, but not ester conjugates. Also, a systemic increase of IBA
and IBA conjugates was noted. In Medicago truncatula roots the increase in auxin
was accompanied by differential upregulation of several transcripts belonging to a
family of auxin amino acid conjugate hydrolases (Campanella et al. 2008). This
could be an indication for the involvement of auxin conjugate hydrolysis to
contribute to high auxin levels.
The endophytic basidiomycete Piriformospora indica (Sebacinaceae) has vari-
ous beneﬁcial effects on plants (Oelmu¨ller et al. 2009). It was shown that the major
growth promoting effect derives from cytokinins synthesized by the fungus and
perceived by the plant (Vadassery et al. 2008). However, the fungus is also able to
synthesize auxins (Sirrenberg et al. 2007; Vadassery et al. 2008), which might,
similarly to arbuscular mycorrhiza, result in alterations of the root system of host
plants. Using auxin and cytokinin mutants, the role of each hormone for the
observed growth promotion was investigated, indicating that only cytokinin, but
not auxin, was responsible for induction of shoot growth (Vadassery et al. 2008),
despite the auxin production of the fungus.
416
J. Ludwig-Mu¨ller

3
Auxin as Pathogenicity Factor
3.1
Symptoms Likely Dependent on Auxin
Many symptoms of plant diseases displaying changes of organs or turning the plant
tissue into tumorous swellings are dependent on alterations in auxin metabolism.
Such tumors are dependent on the activation of the cell cycle, in which auxin is also
involved (see also Chap. 7). The focus of plant–microbe interactions will lie on
bacteria, protists, and fungi, even though for other pests such as nematodes and
some insects an involvement of auxins has also been hypothesized and in some
cases experimentally veriﬁed. Among the disease symptoms caused by bacteria,
protists, and fungi are changes in organ structure, for example, leaf and stem
fasciation, other leaf anomalies, i.e., leaf curling or the witches’ broom symptoms,
and the hairy root symptom, but also tumor formation. The latter can be divided into
two groups, the ﬁrst being the tumors of Agrobacterium tumefaciens, which result
from stable transformation of the tissue (Zupan and Zambryski 1995), and the
second comprises undirected growth of host tissues caused by infection, but not
transformation. Among
the latter are the clubroot
symptoms caused
by
Plasmodiophora brassicae (Ludwig-Mu¨ller et al. 2009). Not in all cases it is
clear that the cause of the anomaly is dependent on auxin, but due to the type of
alterations observed, an involvement can be postulated. Typical symptoms thought
to be associated with auxin are connected with changes in phenotypes, such as
tumors, galls, and root or shoot like structures (Fig. 18.2).
Among the disease symptoms changes in organ structure, for example, leaf and
stem fasciation, caused by the bacterium Rhodococcus fascians, sometimes also
called “leafy galls” (Goethals et al. 2001), can be found. Fasciation is an unnatural
status of growth originating from the meristem producing ﬂattened, ribbon-like,
crested, or contorted tissue. This might be due to hormonal imbalances in the
meristematic cells of plants or induced by phytopathogens. Also, the witches’
broom disease caused by phytoplasma results in alterations of host tissue. The latter
appear as brushlike clusters of dwarfed and weak shoots emerging at the same site
of the original stem. They may be also due to changes in auxin levels (Hoshi
et al. 2009).
Alternatively, the tissue is transformed into indeterminate growing cell clumps
(tumor) or organs (hairy roots), which grow in theory without additional plant
hormones (Georgiev et al. 2010). The hairy root disease caused by Agrobacterium
rhizogenes (Altamura 2004) is also brought into the context of changes in auxin
levels. Infection triggers organogenesis and transforms (in theory) any plant tissue
to the “hairy root” phenotype, consisting of strongly branching roots with many
lateral emergences. Here, in contrast to the other bacterial pathogens mentioned, the
plant is stably transformed by the rol genes (Altamura 2004), but auxin synthesis is
caused by two additional loci of the bacteria, namely, the aux1 and aux2 genes
(Nemoto et al. 2009). Plant tumors are caused by stable transformation with
Agrobacterium tumefaciens causing an imbalance in the hormone homeostasis of
18
Auxin and the Interaction Between Plants and Microorganisms
417

auxin and cytokinin, resulting in tumorous tissues (Zupan et al. 2000). However,
free-living bacteria can also synthesize IAA (Lee et al. 2009a). While Pseudomonas
syringae infection is associated with leaf necroses or partial tissue death (Canﬁeld
et al. 1986), another species Pseudomonas savastanoi is the causal agent of olive
(Olea europaea) knot disease and an unorthodox member of the P. syringae
complex, causing tumorous structures (Ramos et al. 2012). Symptoms of infected
trees include hypertrophy formation on the stems and branches and occasionally on
the leaves and fruits. Here, in addition to a pathway for IAA biosynthesis, the
bacteria also possess an enzyme for the conjugation of IAA with the amino acid
lysine (Matas et al. 2009). Since IAA lysine seems to be a conjugate which cannot
be hydrolyzed by the plant, the formation of this protein could lead to alterations in
the hormone homeostasis, thus inducing the disease phenotype. The tumors formed
by the phytopathogenic bacterium Pantoea agglomerans (formerly Enterobacter
agglomerans) are different from those induced by A. tumefaciens, because the
presence of Pantoea agglomerans is essential for tumor development via synthesis
Fig. 18.2 Some typical disease symptoms associated with auxin. (a) Bacterial tumor (unknown
cause), (b) Agrobacterium rhizogenes hairy root culture (picture courtesy of Annemarie Lippert,
Technische Universita¨t Dresden), (c) Plasmodiophora brassicae root gall on oilseed rape seed-
lings, (d) Witches’ broom, unknown cause, (e) Ustilago maydis tumor (left corn cob; right male
ﬂower)
418
J. Ludwig-Mu¨ller

of IAA by different pathways as the tissue is not stably transformed (Clark
et al. 1989).
Growth anomalies are also induced by a group of phytopathogenic protists of the
Plasmodiophoromycota. Among these are Plasmodiophora brassicae (Ludwig-
Mu¨ller et al. 2009), the causal agent of clubroot disease, Polymyxa betae transmit-
ting a virus and thereby causing the rhizomania disease on host roots (Ciafardini
1991), and Spongospora subterranea, the causal agent of potato powdery scab,
inducer of the disease itself, but also virus transmitter (Merz and Falloon 2009).
P. brassicae infection is characterized by changing the complete root tissue into
large undifferentiated galls or tumors. Contrary to the tumors induced by
A. tumefaciens, the P. brassicae-induced tumorous tissue is not stably transformed,
but relies on continuous synthesis of auxins and cytokinins, the former only by the
plant and the latter by the plant and the protist (Ludwig-Mu¨ller et al. 2009). Not
much is known about the involvement of hormones in disease development caused
by the other two protists.
Many other growth anomalies are known to be induced by fungi. The causal
agent of black wart on potatos, Synchytrium endobioticum, induces host cells to
proliferate into a warty gall containing sporangia (Laidlaw 1985). Very often whole
plant organs are transformed into the tumorous structure, such as in the case of the
conversion of plum fruit into the pocket plum galls after Taphrina pruni infection
(Ogawa et al. 1995). Some pathogens induce formation of tissue alterations only on
small parts of an organ, for example, the leaf curling (“peach leaf curl”) induced by
Taphrina deformans (Bassi et al. 1984). The transformation can also occur at small
sites, as is the case in the formation of witches’ brooms by phytoplasma or various
Taphrina species among them T. betulina or T. wiesneri (Spanos and Woodward
1994; Komatsu et al. 2010). In several of these Taphrina species the IAA synthesis
could be demonstrated in vitro, so it was assumed that they alter plant growth by
their own hormone synthesis (Yamada et al. 1990). However, without direct genetic
proof it cannot be veriﬁed that IAA is indeed a pathogenicity factor. Investigations
on auxin synthesis in the smut fungus Ustilago maydis, infecting maize kernels and
turning these into large gall structures, have shown that the fungus is indeed able to
produce IAA and that this IAA is responsible for the increase of auxin in infected
kernels, but the tumor formation was not affected in IAA biosynthesis mutants
(Basse et al. 1996; Reineke et al. 2008).
3.2
Auxin Biosynthesis
There are different possibilities how pathogens can alter the level of plant hor-
mones, here auxins (Fig. 18.3). First, they can synthesize the hormones by them-
selves; these are secreted into the host plant and change the growth responses.
Second, the plant is taking part in this process. Here, two main possibilities exist:
one involves transformation of the plant by genes of the pathogen, but the plant cell
itself is making the hormone. The other involves partial synthesis of the hormone by
18
Auxin and the Interaction Between Plants and Microorganisms
419

the pathogen, so that the plant is delivering precursors for the biosynthesis or the
pathogen is delivering intermediates in auxin synthesis to the plant. Also, the
hydrolysis of inactive auxin conjugates by bacteria, albeit not phytopathogenic
ones, has been described (Chou et al. 1998; Chou and Huang 2005), which would
lead to an increase in the levels of active plant hormones. Third, the plant is alone
responsible for the synthesis of auxin, but the pathogen is somehow stimulating the
plant to do so. In addition, the hydrolysis from inactive auxin conjugates can
increase the levels of free auxins, which is used by some soil bacteria or symbiotic
fungi to stimulate plant root growth for their own beneﬁt. Vice versa, the synthesis
of auxin conjugates decreases free active auxin, which results in altered auxin
responses, i.e., lower levels of cell wall loosening proteins, which reduces possi-
bilities to penetrate (Ding et al. 2008). Of course, not for all plant–pathogen
interactions where auxin might play a role the precise mechanisms have yet been
understood.
anthranilic acid
indole-3-glycerol-P
indole
tryptophan
indole-3-aceticacid 
amide conjugates
degradation
indole-3-pyruvate
ester conjugates
indole-3-butyric acid 
trp-independent pathway
transport
transport
indole-3-acetaldehyde
indole-3-acetaldoxime
indole-3-acetonitrile
tryptamine
myrosinase
C-S-lyase
Cyp79B2/B3
nitrilase
IAAld-
oxidase
IPyA-
decarboxylase
Trp-amino-
transferase
indole-3-methyl-
glucosinolate
camalexin
indole-3-acetamide
IAAM 
hydrolase
Trp-
monooxygenase
YUCCA?
Cyp783B1
YUCCA
Trp-
decarboxylase
Fig. 18.3 Pathways of auxin synthesis and metabolism, including those routes that might be
utilized by pathogens shaded in gray
420
J. Ludwig-Mu¨ller

Auxin Synthesized by Phytopathogens
Even though the metabolism of auxin is described in Chap. 2, a short overview on
biosynthesis and metabolism will be given, including the routes that might be used
by the pathogens (Fig. 18.3). There are several possible pathways for auxin
biosynthesis, which exist parallel to each other in plants. Some are speciﬁc for
the family Brassicaceae, including the indole glucosinolates as possible intermedi-
ates. The indole phytoalexins, in Arabidopsis thaliana it is camalexin (Glawischnig
2007), are also deriving from the indole pathway, but will not be discussed further.
Anthranilic acid is converted to indole-3-glycerol-phosphate (IGP) and then to
indole, which is then turned into the aromatic amino acid tryptophan (Trp). From
either IGP or indole the Trp-independent pathway is leading directly to IAA. Other
routes all depend on Trp as precursor. Several of these pathways are used by
microbes. First, the one via indole-3-acetamide (IAM) is used by phytopathogenic
bacteria, which are able to transform the plant with the two genes for IAM and IAA
synthesis, Trp-monooxygenase and IAM-hydrolase (amidase) (Patten and Glick
1996). The second major pathway is that leading via indole-3-pyruvic acid (IPyA)
to indole-3-acetaldehyde (IAAld) and IAA. However, microbes also possess
nitrilases capable of transforming indole-3-acetonitrile (IAN) to IAA (Yamada
et al. 1990). In addition, IAA can be stored as inactive ester or amide conjugates,
which can release by hydrolysis the active auxin moiety (reviewed in Ludwig-
Mu¨ller 2011). These reactions also play a role for the levels of IAA and thus the
auxin status of the plant (Fig. 18.3).
Many phytopathogenic and beneﬁcial bacteria can synthesize auxin (for review,
see Spaepen et al. 2007). Maybe the most prominent example is the induction of
tumors by the soil bacterium Agrobacterium tumefaciens. Here, the host is directly
genetically transformed with genes involved in auxin and cytokinin synthesis
(Zupan et al. 2000). The two genes involved in auxin synthesis encoded on the
T-DNA of the Ti-plasmid are known and convert tryptophan to IAM, which in turn
yields IAA. Several other phytopathogenic and also beneﬁcial bacteria use this
pathway via IAM for IAA synthesis, so it was concluded that these routes might
have a common evolutionary origin (Morris 1995). Among the phytopathogens
possessing the genes iaaM and iaaH are Agrobacterium rhizogenes, Pseudomonas
savastanoi, and Pantoea agglomerans. The latter also possesses a second pathway
via IPyA, encoded on the bacterial chromosome. Only those isolates with the
plasmid-encoded IAM pathway were virulent, whereas deletion of the IPyA path-
way did not result in the reduction of gall size (Clark et al. 1993). In some bacteria
also nitrilases were detected, which converted IAN to IAA (see Spaepen et al. 2007)
(Fig. 18.3). However, nitrilases might also be involved in the detoxiﬁcation of
nitriles other than IAN. For Rhodococcus fascians it was shown that it can synthe-
size and secrete IAA (Vandeputte et al. 2005). Interestingly, the synthesis of IAA
was only induced when a compound from infected plants was added. In addition, it
was shown that the plant symptoms are a result of cytokinins from the bacteria and
18
Auxin and the Interaction Between Plants and Microorganisms
421

induction of the auxin biosynthetic pathway via IPyA in the plant resulting in
enhanced auxin signaling in infected tissues (Stes et al. 2012).
If a pathogen secretes IAA in vitro, it can be concluded that the complete
pathway has to be present in the organism. For some Taphrina species it was
shown that they possess nitrilase activity (Yamada et al. 1990). In addition, they
were able to synthesize IAA from Trp via the IPyA and IAAld pathway in cultures.
Interestingly, nitrilase activity was inducible by the substrate, while the other
enzymatic reactions were not, implying that maybe the nitrilase pathway might
only be used in the plant and the fungus would thus contribute only part of the
biosynthetic route (Fig. 18.3). Hence, if the organism is contributing to the plant’s
IAA synthesis, it cannot be excluded that only part of the biosynthetic route is
derived from the pathogen.
The smut fungus Ustilago maydis has stimulated many investigations on its
possible production of IAA, likely due to the galls formed on the host tissues.
Selection of U. maydis strains for different IAA levels indicated a correlation
between high pathogenicity of the different strains and high IAA content and vice
versa, so the authors assumed that IAA is necessary for tumor formation (Guevara-
Lara et al. 2000). Genetic evidence showed that U. maydis possesses genes for the
biosynthesis of IAA via the IPyA pathway, aromatic amino acid aminotransferase,
and IAAld dehydrogenase genes and the respective enzymatic activities were
conﬁrmed as well as IAA production (Basse et al. 1996; Reineke et al. 2008).
Mutants were generated in different combinations, up to quadruple mutant strains,
showing that indeed IPyA is a precursor for increased IAA formation in U. maydis-
induced tumors. However, tumor induction itself was not compromised in these
strains (Reineke et al. 2008). Another gall-inducing Ustilago species also showed
IAA production. Ustilago esculenta is the cause of galls in the aquatic perennial
grass, Zizania latifolia (Chung and Tzeng 2004). The galls had higher IAA levels
than control tissues and Ustilago esculenta was shown to produce IAA from Trp via
IPyA and IAAld similar to U. maydis, but the fungus did not convert IAM. In
contrast, the sugarcane smut fungus U. scitaminea produced less amount of IAA in
comparison to the other two species (Chung and Tzeng 2004).
IAA is also produced by phytopathogenic fungi not altering plant growth or
development. The biosynthesis of IAA has been detected in the rice blast fungus
Magnaporthe oryzae during the biotrophic growth phase (Tanaka et al. 2011).
Immunolocalization of IAA in infected tissue has localized IAA to infection hyphae
of the fungus. Host plants expressing the auxin-responsive DR5::reporter construct
showed activation of the GUS gene locally restricted to those cells in contact with
the apex of the infection hyphae (Tanaka et al. 2011), indicating that the host can
respond to the auxin secreted by the fungus. In two other hemibiotrophic fungal
species Colletotrichum gloeosporioides and Colletotrichum acutatum, also IAA
synthesis was observed (Chung et al. 2003; Maor et al. 2004). There are more
examples of auxin producing phytopathogenic fungi, which cannot all be men-
tioned here, but they all highlight the importance of auxin for various diseases.
422
J. Ludwig-Mu¨ller

Auxin Involved in Pathogenesis and Synthesized by Plants
It cannot be excluded that in the examples described above the plant is also
contributing to the biosynthesis of auxin. Sometimes the involvement of the
pathogen can be ruled out and thus the increased levels of IAA are solely the result
of altered auxin biosynthesis of the host plant. This is the case for the clubroot
disease, caused by Plasmodiophora brassicae, a plant pathogenic obligate
biotrophic protist on host plants of the Brassicales. Auxin and cytokinin play
major roles in this root gall (¼club) formation, where auxins are only formed by
the host (Ludwig-Mu¨ller et al. 2009). For the interaction of P. brassicae with its
host plants from the family Brassicaceae, indole glucosinolates (Fig. 18.2) have
been proposed to play a role in symptom development and the nitrilase pathway of
IAA biosynthesis is thought to be the major source of free IAA (reviewed in
Ludwig-Mu¨ller 2009a). In Arabidopsis nitrilase transcript levels and also IAN as
well as indole glucosinolates are increased during pathogenesis (Ludwig-Mu¨ller
et al. 1999). The nitrilase protein was found to be elevated in cells harboring
plasmodia of the pathogen (Grsic-Rausch et al. 2000) and nitrilase mutants
displayed smaller gall phenotypes (Neuhaus et al. 2000). In addition, nitrilase
transcription was also increased in pathogen-containing cells (Pa¨sold et al. 2010).
However, blocking the initial pathway for indole glucosinolate biosynthesis
completely did not result in the expected reduction of club size and IAA levels,
suggesting that alternative routes also contribute to IAA (Siemens et al. 2008). For
different Brassica species the role for nitrilase in clubroot formation was conﬁrmed.
Ishikawa et al. (2007a) reported an increase in nitrilase transcripts in clubroots
compared to controls and Ando et al. (2008) observed an alterative splicing for
nitrilase transcripts only in infected roots. In addition, evidence for the involvement
of the IAM pathway in Brassica root galls was provided (Ishikawa et al. 2007b). As
a third pathway in Brassica an increase in aldehyde oxidase transcript level
accompanied with increased enzymatic activities suggests the activation of the
IPyA pathway (Ando et al. 2006). Additionally, the hydrolysis of auxin conjugates
was differentially regulated in B. rapa clubroots (Schuller and Ludwig-Mu¨ller
2006).
3.3
Modulation of Auxin Signaling and Transport
of the Plant in Pathogenesis
Another strategy would be to interfere with the auxin transport or signaling
pathway. In some examples it is not easy to distinguish between the involvement
of auxin in symptom development or defense. Alterations of the auxin pathway
could also lead to the reduction of disease symptoms and could thus be considered
as mechanism involved in resistance. By interference with auxin signaling, the
plant pathogenic bacterium phytoplasma was able to induce witches’ broom
18
Auxin and the Interaction Between Plants and Microorganisms
423

symptoms (Hoshi et al. 2009). This was demonstrated by overexpressing a single
virulence factor called TENGU, a small secreted protein of this bacterium, in
Nicotiana benthamiana and Arabidopsis plants. These transgenic plants showed
symptoms of witches’ broom and dwarﬁsm, the typical symptoms of phytoplasma
infection, without being infected. Furthermore, microarray analyses showed that
auxin-responsive genes were signiﬁcantly downregulated in the transgenic plants
expressing TENGU compared with control plants. The results presented in this
work suggest that TENGU inhibits auxin-related signaling and subsequent gene
expression pathways, thereby affecting plant development.
IAA can also act as signaling molecule to induce speciﬁc genes of the pathogen,
which are in turn able to increase the ﬁtness of the colonizing organism (see review
by Spaepen et al. 2007). Ideally, this leads then to better colonization. This strategy
is obviously of advantage, if the pathogen is the cause of increased IAA production
but can also be exploited, if the plant can be triggered to synthesize more auxin
(Fig. 18.1).
The auxin transport rate also inﬂuences the levels of auxin at speciﬁc tissue sites
(see also Chap. 5). This is exploited by rhizobia and also plant pathogens. For
example, an increase in local auxin levels can be achieved by inhibition of auxin
efﬂux. In the case of phytoplasma infection a reduced auxin efﬂux has been
observed in samples showing strong witches’ broom symptoms on apple trees
(Aldaghi et al. 2009). In the case of the clubroot disease several lines of evidence
point to an altered auxin transport through club development. Some evidence has
accumulated that ﬂavonoids might act as auxin efﬂux modulators in clubroots,
thereby contributing to increased auxin levels in galls (Pa¨sold et al. 2010). Indeed,
blocking IAA transport during early stages of infection disturbs clubroot develop-
ment (Devos and Prinsen 2006). In addition, an Arabidopsis mutant alh1 was more
tolerant to clubroot (Devos et al. 2006). This mutant has a defect in the cross talk
between
ethylene
and
auxins,
probably
at
the
level
of
auxin
transport
(Vandenbussche et al. 2003). Consequently, it was proposed that the mutant was
resistant because host IAA transport was hampered.
3.4
Auxin as Indirect Factor to Inﬂuence Pathogenicity
Since auxins are key regulators of many developmental processes, alterations of
auxin levels could result in phenotypical changes associated with colonization
events by pathogens. The cell wall is one example for this observation. It is well
known that auxins can induce loosening of plant cell walls (Cosgrove 1993).
Consequently, the stimulation of the expression of genes encoding proteins
involved in cell wall loosening are upregulated by auxin, for example, Xyloglucan
endoTransglycosylase/Hydrolase (XTH) (Yokoyama and Nishitani 2001) and
expansins (Cosgrove et al. 2002). For the hypertrophied root galls induced by
P. brassicae a loosening of cell wall by expansins has been postulated based on
microarray experiments (Siemens et al. 2006; Ludwig-Mu¨ller 2009b). Also, the
424
J. Ludwig-Mu¨ller

higher activity of a XTH was shown early in club development (Devos et al. 2005).
The advantage for the protist is that more resting spores can be formed in larger
cells of the host. Reduction of these protein activities should therefore result in
reduced disease symptoms.
Contrary, strengthening the cell wall could be beneﬁcial in the case of penetra-
tion by hemibiotrophic fungi. Since expansins are controlled partially by auxin, the
reduction of active IAA from the total auxin pool should reduce expansin levels and
thus render the cell wall more rigid. Overexpression of a gene encoding an IAA
amino acid conjugate synthetase GH3.8 in rice resulted in smaller cells and lesser
disease symptoms after infection with bacteria presumably based on reduced
expansin production (Ding et al. 2008), because it was shown that overexpression
of expansin genes renders the plant more susceptible. Similarly, two additional rice
GH3
genes
GH3.1
and
GH3.2
confer
broad-spectrum
resistance
against
Xanthomonas species and Magnaporthe grisea to rice plants by suppressing
pathogen-induced accumulation of IAA (Domingo et al. 2009; Fu et al. 2011).
The conjugate of IAA with the amino acid aspartate also plays a role in disease
development (Gonza´lez-Lamothe et al. 2012). Contrary to the results obtained from
rice, the conjugation to the amino acid renders the Arabidopsis plant more suscep-
tible to infection with Botrytis cinerea and Pseudomonas syringae. This work has
shown that infection leads to transcriptional activation of the Arabidopsis GH3.2
gene and consequently to accumulation of IAA-Asp. It is interesting to note that
IAA-Asp was categorized as auxin conjugate, which is rather degraded than
hydrolyzed (Fig. 18.3) (reviewed in Ludwig-Mu¨ller 2011). IAA-Asp was able to
promote disease development as a compound in several plant species, indicating
that the conjugate itself and not low levels of IAA might be responsible for disease
severity (Gonza´lez-Lamothe et al. 2012). For the induction of GH3.5 in
Arabidopsis a cross talk between auxin and salicylic acid (SA) is discussed for
this protein, because it can convert both IAA and SA to amino acid conjugates
(Zhang et al. 2007). The authors hypothesized that GH3.5 might play dual roles in
disease resistance and susceptibility against avirulent or virulent Pseudomonas
races, respectively. The dual enzymatic function could be the consequence of the
evolution of an auxin-conjugating enzyme, which promotes susceptibility to the
bacteria, but also capable of regulating the SA pathway to trigger plant defense
responses (Fig. 18.4).
4
Auxin in Plant Defense Reactions
4.1
Auxin as a Signal Triggering Plant Defense
Since auxins have been recognized to be important for plant defense (Kazan and
Manners 2009), many investigations have been conducted to elucidate the pathways
involved (Fu and Wang 2011). Some studies have demonstrated that exogenous
18
Auxin and the Interaction Between Plants and Microorganisms
425

IAA induces a resistance response (for example Ueno et al. 2004; Terrile
et al. 2006). Over the recent years it was shown that auxin inﬂuences resistance
against pathogens, probably because many plant pathogenic microorganisms pro-
duce auxins during their interactions with plants. An infection with Pseudomonas
syringae pv. tomato (Pst) DC3000, but also the expression of P. syringae type III
effector AvrRpt2 in plants increased the level of IAA, leading to enhanced disease
development (Chen et al. 2007). Here, a fast inactivation of excess IAA would help
the plant in the resistance response, suggesting that auxin homeostasis plays an
important role in direct or indirect defense responses. Downregulation of auxin
signaling by bacterial PAMPs (pathogen-associated molecular patterns), speciﬁ-
cally by the ﬂagellin ﬂg22-dependent recognition in Arabidopsis, which play an
important role in the ﬁrst basal defense reaction of a plant, enhances bacterial
disease resistance in Arabidopsis (Navarro et al. 2006; Wang et al. 2007). The
repression results from stabilization of Aux/IAA proteins via either microRNA-
(Navarro et al. 2006) or SA-mediated (Wang et al. 2007) negative regulation of
F-box auxin receptors. Downregulation of TIR and stabilization of Aux/IAA pro-
teins occur simultaneously (see also Chap. 6). Thus, repression of auxin signaling
by the SA pathway contributes to antibacterial resistance. By showing that a
knockout mutant in a GDSL lipase has a more susceptible phenotype concerning
some pathogens, it could be established that auxin signaling is also involved in this
defense response. In comparison to wild-type plants the mutants exhibited
repressor
ARF
gene expression
ARF
Aux/IAA
inhibion of gene 
expression
receptor
IAA
degradaon in 
proteasome
SCF-complex
polyubiquin
Aux/IAA
SA
defense
e.g. GH3 family
IAAbact
defense
suscepbility
SA
resistance
IAA
AA
suscepbility
TIR
ARF
Fig. 18.4 Regulation of auxin signaling with respect to defense mechanisms and also salicylic
acid. Auxin is perceived by the TIR family of receptors, leading to the degradation of transcrip-
tional inhibitors, the Aux/IAA proteins. That in turn allows auxin-dependent gene expression to
occur. Among the auxin-inducible genes are the genes of the GH3 family involved in the
conjugation of IAA, jasmonic acid, and salicylic acid (SA). Also there is a cross talk between
auxin and SA at different levels. ARFs negatively regulate SA, but SA induces Aux/IAA function
and inhibits TIR1 signaling
426
J. Ludwig-Mu¨ller

enhanced
auxin
responses
and
elevated
Aux/IAA
gene
expression
(Lee
et al. 2009b). When the plants were inoculated with the necrotropic bacteria
Erwinia carotovora, glip2 mutants were more susceptible than wild-type plants.
Thus, GLIP2 is an additional factor, which plays a role in plant defense by
negatively regulating the auxin-signaling pathway.
Another plant defense strategy, occurring after the PAMP-induced immunity, is
the hypersensitive response (HR), characterized by necrosis of plant cells in the
inoculated area. By this mechanism mainly biotrophic pathogens are excluded from
living tissue and limited to the inoculation site. It was shown that auxin produced by
the bacterium Pseudomonas savastanoi is required to block the HR in tobacco
leaves induced by a second phytopathogenic bacterium Pseudomonas syringae
pv. phaseolicola (Robinette and Matthysse 1990). The results were extended by
using a bacterial elicitor, harpin, from the phytopathogen Erwinia amylovora
(Gopalan 2008). Like the bacterium itself, the elicitor can induce cell death on
plant leaves. Auxin was able to inhibit this HR over a wide period of time during the
programmed cell death response, but gene expression for local and systemic
resistance responses were not affected by the treatment. Interestingly, plants
overproducing auxin did not show this reversal of HR (Gopalan 2008), indicating
that exogenous auxin is perceived differently than the endogenously produced
hormone.
In the case of necrotrophic fungi the functional auxin-signaling pathway is
needed for the resistance response. The strategy of these organisms is therefore to
suppress auxin signaling. For the resistance against the fungi Plectosphaerella
cucumerina and Botrytis cinerea it was shown that the components of the auxin
signaling pathway need to be intact (Llorente et al. 2008), while repression of the
auxin-response pathway, either in mutants or by a pharmacological approach
blocking proteasome function, increases the pathogenicity in Arabidopsis. It has
to be assumed that the fungi might possess mechanisms to suppress this signaling
pathway. Similarly, the fungus Macrophomina phaseolina, causing the charcoal rot
disease on many plant species suppresses the auxin signaling response of host
plants, here Medicago truncatula (Mah et al. 2012). Transcriptome analysis
revealed the downregulation of genes involved in auxin homeostasis, transport,
and signal transduction during the disease progression, suggesting that plant sus-
ceptibility is closely connected to this downregulation. Hence, treatment with auxin
reduced disease symptoms. On the contrary, resistance to the obligate biotrophic
oomycete Hyaloperonospora arabidopsidis (formerly H. parasitica) was not
dependent on the TIR-pathway of auxin signal transduction (Llorente et al. 2008),
suggesting that an adaptation has occurred for different pathogens to the existing
auxin pathways.
18
Auxin and the Interaction Between Plants and Microorganisms
427

4.2
Auxin as Direct Defense Molecule
There are some indications that the different auxins naturally occurring in plant
species might be directly toxic to pathogenic microbes. However, other organisms
might have developed a tolerance for auxin, because they themselves synthesize
IAA like Agrobacterium tumefaciens. Despite this assumption, one investigation
has shown that eight out of ten plant-associated bacteria, including one
A. tumefaciens strain, were inhibited in their growth by IAA, while this was not
the case using the same IAA concentration on bacteria not in nature associated with
plants (Liu and Nester 2006). The authors concluded that, even if the number of
organisms tested was small, a bias was found toward growth inhibition by IAA of
plant-associated bacteria. A decrease of phytoplasma cells in infected Catharanthus
roseus treated with high concentrations of auxins were reported (Pertot et al. 1998).
This result supports the idea that auxins may interfere with the phytoplasma growth
in the plant host. Certain phytoplasma strains were completely reduced in C. roseus
after treatment with IBA (Curkovic-Perica et al. 2007).
It was reported by Walker et al. (2003) that indole-3-propionic acid (IPA) was
one of the metabolites found in the root exudate of Arabidopsis upon treatment with
SA, which is usually produced by plants as a response to microbial attack. In
Brassica rapa an auxin conjugate hydrolase was identiﬁed with high preference
for conjugates of IPA and the amino acid alanine (Savic´ et al. 2009). A function for
this hydrolase could not be determined, but it was suggested that maybe IPA could
act as antimicrobial compound, because it was shown that IPA and some deriva-
tives
are
partially
toxic
for
phytopathogenic
bacteria,
i.e.,
Pseudomonas
solanacearum and Ralstonia solanacearum (Matsuda et al. 1993, 1998). This
observation makes those indoles possibly interesting as antimicrobial agents. Cor-
roborating the possibility of antimicrobial compounds is the developed of resistance
to IPA through conjugation with amino acids and sugars by some bacteria like
Bacillus megatherium (Tabone and Tabone 1953; Tabone 1958).
The common scab disease of potato is caused by Streptomyces spp. It was shown
that
the
foliar
application
of
auxin-like
compounds
such
as
2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D) and others somehow systemically reduced
severity and occurrence of common scab in subsequently produced tubers (Tegg
et al. 2008). Virulence was dependent on the production of a toxin by the pathogen
and the treatment with 2,4-D led to increased tolerance to the pathogen-derived
toxin in tubers. Conﬁrmatory evidence came from studies with Arabidopsis
thaliana seedlings demonstrating that 2,4-D and IAA reduced toxicity of the
virulence factor secreted by the pathogen (Tegg et al. 2008).
The amount of IAA synthesized by the pathogen might also inﬂuence the
balance of the interaction toward susceptibility or tolerance in the case of the host
plant. While low auxin synthesis levels of the oomycete Pythium ultimum were
increasing disease symptoms on tomato, higher levels induced plant defense reac-
tions (Gravel et al. 2007). This shows that the pathogen itself can trigger the
outcome of the interaction with its host. The small amounts of IAA might mimic
428
J. Ludwig-Mu¨ller

the host levels and are thus not detected by the plant, while larger amounts of IAA
trigger the defense responses, because they have been sensed as unusual. This is an
attractive hypothesis that of course needs experimental support.
In experiments controlling head blight of barley by Fusarium culmorum it could
be shown that IAA treatment effectively reduced the disease, while treatment with
abscisic acid did not (Petti et al. 2012). The study was conducted to ﬁnd out whether
IAA is involved in biocontrol of the disease by a biocontrol agent Pseudomonas
ﬂuorescence. The bacterium is contributing to the higher IAA levels in
co-inoculated plants; thus IAA synthesis by beneﬁcial bacteria could be one of
the puzzle stones to achieve control of plant diseases.
5
Concluding Remarks
As much as auxin regulates a plethora of plant developmental processes, its role in
the interaction with other organisms is likewise of plentiful nature. Some examples
were given how auxin is involved in the interaction between plants and beneﬁcial
organisms as well as pathogens. The auxin response of the plant can be used to
transform the host tissue into a paradise for the parasites by either synthesizing
auxin themselves or inducing the plant’s auxin metabolism. On the other hand, the
plant is using this molecule as signal in its defense responses against the pathogens.
These are co-evolutionary processes, which result in complicated networks, still
needed to be completely unraveled in the future.
References
Aldaghi M, Massart S, Bertaccini A, Jijakli MH, Lepoivre P (2009) Identiﬁcation of host genes
potentially implicated in the Malus pumila and ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma mali’ interactions.
In: Proceedings of the 21st ICVF conference, Berichte aus dem Julius Ku¨hn-Institut, Neustadt,
Germany, pp 43–44
Altamura MM (2004) Agrobacterium rhizogenes rolB and rolD genes: regulation and involvement
in plant development. Plant Cell Tissue Organ Cult 77:89–101
Ando S, Tsushima S, Tagiri A, Kamachi S, Konagaya K-I, Hagio T, Tabei Y (2006) Increase in
BrAO1 gene expression and aldehyde oxidase activity during clubroot development in Chinese
cabbage (Brassica rapa L.). Mol. Plant Pathol 7:223–234
Ando S, Tsushima S, Kamachi S, Konagaya K, Tabei Y (2008) Alternative transcription initiation
of the nitrilase gene (BrNIT2) caused by infection with Plasmodiophora brassicae Woron. in
Chinese cabbage (Brassica rapa L.). Plant Mol Biol 68:557–569
Basse CW, Lottspeich F, Steglich W, Kahmann R (1996) Two potential indole-3-acetaldehyde
dehydrogenases in the phytopathogenic fungus Ustilago maydis. Eur J Biochem 242:648–656
Bassi M, Conti GG, Barbieri N (1984) Cell wall degradation by Taphrina deformans in host leaf
cells. Mycopathologia 88:115–125
Campanella JJ, Smith SM, Leibu D, Wexler S, Ludwig-Mu¨ller J (2008) The auxin conjugate
hydrolase family of Medicago truncatula and their expression during the interaction with two
symbionts. J Plant Growth Regul 27:26–38
18
Auxin and the Interaction Between Plants and Microorganisms
429

Canﬁeld ML, Baca S, Moore LW (1986) Isolation of Pseudomonas syringae from 40 cultivars of
diseased woody plants with tip dieback in Paciﬁc Northwest nurseries. Plant Dis 70:647–650
Chen Z, Agnew JL, Cohen JD, He P, Shan L, Sheen J, Kunkel BN (2007) Pseudomonas syringae
type III effector AvrRpt2 alters Arabidopsis thaliana auxin physiology. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 104:20131–20136
Chou J-C, Huang Y-B (2005) Induction and characterization of an indole-3-acetyl-L-alanine
hydrolase from Arthrobacter ilicis. J Plant Growth Regul 24:11–18
Chou J-C, Mulbry WW, Cohen JD (1998) The gene for indole-3-acetyl-L-aspartic acid hydrolase
from Enterobacter agglomerans: molecular cloning, nucleotide sequence, and expression in
Escherichia coli. Mol Gen Genet 259:172–178
Chung KR, Tzeng DD (2004) Biosynthesis of indole-3-acetic acid by the gall-inducing fungus
Ustilago esculenta. J Biol Sci 4:744–750
Chung K-R, Shilts T, Ertu¨rk U¨ , Timmer LW, Ueng PP (2003) Indole derivatives produced by the
fungus Colletotrichum acutatum causing lime anthracnose and postbloom fruit drop of citrus.
FEMS Microbiol Lett 226:23–30
Ciafardini G (1991) Evaluation of Polymyxa betae Keskin contaminated by Beet Necrotic Yellow
Vein Virus in soil. Appl Environ Microbiol 57:1817–1821
Clark E, Vigodskyhaas H, Gafni Y (1989) Characteristics in tissue-culture of hyperplasias induced
by Erwinia herbicola pathovar gypsophilae. Physiol Mol Plant Pathol 35:383–390
Clark E, Manulis S, Ophir Y, Barash I, Gafni Y (1993) Cloning and characterization of iaaM and
iaaH from Erwinia herbicola pathovar gypsophilae. Phytopathology 83:234–240
Cosgrove D (1993) How do plant cell walls extend? Plant Physiol 102:1–6
Cosgrove D, Li L, Cho H, Hoffmann-Benning S, Moore R, Blecker D (2002) The growing world
of expansins. Plant Cell Physiol 43:1436–1444
Crespi M, Messens E, Caplan AB, van Montagu M, Desomer J (1992) Fasciation induction by the
phytopathogen Rhodococcus fascians depends upon a linear plasmid encoding a cytokinin
synthase gene. EMBO J 11:795–804
Curkovic-Perica M, Lepedus H, Music MS (2007) Effect of indole-3-butyric acid on phytoplasmas
in infected Catharanthus roseus shoots grown in vitro. FEMS Microbiol Lett 268:171–177
Devos S, Prinsen E (2006) Plant hormones: a key in clubroot development. Commun Agric Appl
Biol Sci 71((3 Pt B)):869–872
Devos S, Vissenberg K, Verbelen J-P, Prinsen E (2005) Infection of Chinese cabbage by
Plasmodiophora brassicae leads to a stimulation of plant growth: inpacts on cell wall metab-
olism and hormone balance. New Phytol 166:241–250
Devos S, Laukens K, Deckers P, Van Der Straeten D, Beeckman T, Inze D, van Onckelen H,
Witters E, Prinsen E (2006) A hormone and proteome approach to picturing the initial
metabolic events during Plasmodiophora brassicae infection on Arabidopsis. Mol Plant
Microbe Interact 19:1431–1433
Ding X, Cao Y, Huang L, Zhao J, Xu C, Li X, Wang S (2008) Activation of the indole-3-acetic
acid–amido synthetase GH3-8 suppresses expansin expression and promotes salicylate- and
jasmonate-independent basal immunity in rice. Plant Cell 20:228–240
Domingo C, Andres F, Tharreau D, Iglesias DJ, Talon M (2009) Constitutive expression of
OsGH3.1 reduces auxin content and enhances defense response and resistance to a fungal
pathogen in rice. Mol Plant-Microbe Interact 22:201–210
Epstein E, Ludwig-Mu¨ller J (1993) Indole-3-butyric acid in plants: occurrence, synthesis, metab-
olism and transport. Physiol Plant 88:382–389
Fallik E, Okon Y, Epstein E, Goldman A, Fischer M (1989) Identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation of
IAA and IBA in Azospirillum brasilense-inoculated maize roots. Soil Biol Biochem
21:147–153
Fitze D, Wiepning A, Kaldorf M, Ludwig-Mu¨ller J (2005) Auxins in the development of an
arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis in maize. J Plant Physiol 162:1210–1219
Fu J, Wang S (2011) Insights into auxin signaling in plant-pathogen interactions. Front Plant Sci
2:74. doi:10.3389/fpls.2011.00074
430
J. Ludwig-Mu¨ller

Fu J, Liu H, Li Y, Yu H, Li X, Xiao J, Wang S (2011) Manipulating broad-spectrum disease
resistance by suppressing pathogen-induced auxin accumulation in rice. Plant Physiol
155:589–602
Georgiev MI, Ludwig-Mu¨ller J, Bley T (2010) Hairy root culture: copying nature in new
bioprocesses. In: Arora R (ed) Medicinal plant biotechnology. CAB International, Oxon, pp
156–175
Glawischnig E (2007) Camalexin. Phytochemistry 68:401–406
Goethals K, Vereecke D, Jaziri M, Van Montagu M, Holsters M (2001) Leafy gall formation by
Rhodococcus fascians. Annu Rev Phytopathol 39:27–52
Gonza´lez-Lamothe R, El Oirdi M, Brisson N, Bouarab K (2012) The conjugated auxin indole-3-
acetic acid–aspartic acid promotes plant disease development. Plant Cell 24:762–777
Gopalan S (2008) Reversal of an immunity associated plant cell death program by the growth
regulator auxin. BMC Res Notes 1:126
Gravel V, Antoun H, Tweddell R (2007) Effect of indole-acetic acid (IAA) on the development of
symptoms caused by Pythium ultimum on tomato plants. Eur J Plant Pathol 119:457–462
Grsic-Rausch S, Kobelt P, Siemens J, Bischoff M, Ludwig-Mu¨ller J (2000) Expression and
localization of nitrilase during symptom development of the clubroot disease in Arabidopsis
thaliana. Plant Physiol 122:369–378
Guevara-Lara F, Valverde ME, Paredes-Lopez O (2000) Is pathogenicity of Ustilago maydis
(huitlacoche) strains on maize related to in vitro production of indole-3-acetic acid? World J
Microbiol Biotechnol 16:481–490
Hirsch A (1992) Developmental biology of legume nodulation. New Phytol 122:211–237
Hoshi A, Oshima K, Kakizawa S, Ishii Y, Ozeki J, Hashimoto M, Komatsu K, Kagiwada S,
Yamaji Y, Namba S (2009) A unique virulence factor for proliferation and dwarﬁsm in plants
identiﬁed from a phytopathogenic bacterium. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106:6416–6421
Huo X, Schnabel E, Hughes K, Frugoli J (2006) RNAi phenotypes and the localization of a
protein:GUS fusion imply a role for Medicago truncatula PIN genes in nodulation. J Plant
Growth Regul 25:156–165
Ishikawa T, Okazaki K, Kuroda H, Itoh K, Mitsui T, Hori H (2007a) Molecular cloning of Brassica
rapa nitrilases and their expression during clubroot development. Mol Plant Pathol 8:623–637
Ishikawa T, Kuroda H, Okazaki K, Itoh K, Mitsui T, Hori H (2007b) Evaluation of roles of
amidase which converts indole-3-acetamide to indole-3-acetic acid, in formation of clubroot in
turnip. Bull Facul Agric Niigata Univ 60:53–60
Jentschel K, Thiel D, Rehn F, Ludwig-Mu¨ller J (2007) Arbuscular mycorrhiza enhances auxin
levels and alters auxin biosynthesis in Tropaeolum majus during early stages of colonization.
Physiol Plant 129:320–333
Kaldorf M, Ludwig-Mu¨ller J (2000) AM fungi might affect the root morphology of maize by
increasing indole-3-butyric acid biosynthesis. Physiol Plant 109:58–67
Kazan K, Manners J (2009) Linking development to defense: auxin in plant-pathogen interactions.
Trends Plant Sci 14:373–382
Kefford NP, Brockwell J, Zwar JA (1960) The symbiotic synthesis of auxin by legumes and nodule
bacteria and its role in nodule development. Aust J Biol Sci 13:456–467
Komatsu M, Taniguchi M, Matsushita N, Takahashi Y, Hogetsu T (2010) Overwintering of
Taphrina wiesneri within cherry shoots monitored with species-speciﬁc PCR. J Gen Plant
Pathol 76:363–369
Krishna P (2003) Brassinosteroid-mediated stress responses. J Plant Growth Regul 22:289–297
Laidlaw WMR (1985) A method for the detection of resting sporangia of the potato wart disease
(Synchytrium endobioticum) in the soil of old outbreak sites. Potato Res 28:223–232
Lee C-W, Efetova M, Engelmann JC, Kramell R, Wasternack C, Ludwig-Mu¨ller J, Hedrich R,
Deeken R (2009a) Agrobacterium tumefaciens promotes tumor induction by modulating
pathogen defense in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell 21:2948–2962
18
Auxin and the Interaction Between Plants and Microorganisms
431

Lee DS, Kim BK, Kwon SJ, Jin HC, Park OK (2009b) Arabidopsis GDSL lipase 2 plays a role in
pathogen defense via negative regulation of auxin signaling. Biochem Biophys Res Commun
379:1038–1042
Liu P, Nester EW (2006) Indoleacetic acid, a product of transferred DNA, inhibits vir gene
expression and growth of Agrobacterium tumefaciens C58. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
103:4658–4662
Llorente F, Muskett P, Sanchez-Vallet A, Lopez G, Ramos B, Sanchez-Rodriguez C, Jorda L,
Parker J, Molina A (2008) Repression of the auxin response pathway increases Arabidopsis
susceptibility to necrotrophic fungi. Mol Plant 1:496–509
Long SR (2001) Genes and signals in the Rhizobium-legume symbiosis. Plant Physiol 125:69–72
Ludwig-Mu¨ller J (2000) Indole-3-butyric acid in plant growth and development. Plant Growth
Regul 32:219–230
Ludwig-Mu¨ller J (2009a) Glucosinolates and the clubroot disease: defense compounds or auxin
precursors? Phytochem Rev 8:135–148
Ludwig-Mu¨ller J (2009b) Plant defense – what can we learn from clubroots? Aust Plant Pathol
38:318–324
Ludwig-Mu¨ller J (2011) Auxin conjugates: their role for plant development and in the evolution of
land plants. J Exp Bot 62:1757–1773
Ludwig-Mu¨ller J, Cohen JD (2002) Identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation of three active auxins in
different tissues of Tropaeolum majus. Physiol Plant 115:320–329
Ludwig-Mu¨ller J, Pieper K, Ruppel M, Cohen JD, Epstein E, Kiddle G, Bennett R (1999) Indole
glucosinolate and auxin biosynthesis in Arabidopsis thaliana L. glucosinolate mutants and the
development of the clubroot disease. Planta 208:409–419
Ludwig-Mu¨ller J, Prinsen E, Rolfe S, Scholes J (2009) Metabolism and plant hormone action
during the clubroot disease. J Plant Growth Regul 28:229–244
Mah KM, Uppalapati SR, Tang Y, Allen S, Shuai B (2012) Gene expression proﬁling of
Macrophomina phaseolina infected Medicago truncatula roots reveals a role for auxin in
plant tolerance against the charcoal rot pathogen. Physiol Mol Plant Pathol 79:21–30
Maor R, Haskin S, Levi-Kedmi H, Sharon A (2004) In planta production of indole-3-acetic acid by
Colletotrichum gloeosporioides f. sp. aeschynomene. Appl Environ Microbiol 70:1852–1854
Matas IM, Perez-Martinez I, Quesada JM, Rodriguez-Herva JJ, Penyalver R, Ramos C (2009)
Pseudomonas savastanoi pv. savastanoi contains two iaaL paralogs, one of which exhibits a
variable number of a trinucleotide (TAC) tandem repeat. Appl Environ Microbiol
75:1030–1035
Mathesius U (2008) Auxin: at the root of nodule development? Funct Plant Biol 35:651–668
Matsuda K, Toyoda H, Yokoyama K, Wakita K, Nishio H, Nishida T et al (1993) Growth
inhibition of Pseudomonas solanacearum by substituted 3-indolepropionic acids and related
compounds. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem 57:1766–1767
Matsuda K, Toyoda H, Nishio H, Nishida T, Bingo M, Matsuda Y et al (1998) Control of the
bacterial wilt of tomato plants by a derivative of 3-indolepropionic acid based on selective
actions on Ralstonia solanacearum. J Agric Food Chem 46:4416–4419
Meixner C, Ludwig-Mu¨ller J, Miersch O, Gresshoff P, Staehelin C, Vierheilig H (2005) Lack of
mycorrhizal autoregulation and phytohormonal changes in the supernodulating soybean
mutant nts1007. Planta 222:709–715
Merz U, Falloon RE (2009) Review: powdery scab of potato - increased knowledge of pathogen
biology and disease epidemiology for effective disease management. Potato Res 52:17–37
Mitchell JE, Angel CR (1951) The growth-stimulating properties of a metabolic product of
Fusarium moniliforme. Phytopathology 41:26–27
Morris RO (1995) Genes specifying auxin and cytokinin biosynthesis in prokaryotes. In: Davies PJ
(ed) Plant hormones. Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht, pp 318–339
Navarro L, Dunoyer P, Jay F, Arnold B, Dharmasiri N, Estelle M, Voinnet O, Jones JDG (2006) A
plant miRNA contributes to antibacterial resistance by repressing auxin signaling. Science
312:436–439
432
J. Ludwig-Mu¨ller

Nemoto K, Hara M, Goto S, Kasai K, Seki H, Suzuki M, Oka A, Muranaka T, Mano Y (2009) The
aux1 gene of the Ri plasmid is sufﬁcient to confer auxin autotrophy in tobacco BY-2 cells. J
Plant Physiol 166:729–738
Neuhaus K, Grsic-Rausch S, Sauerteig S, Ludwig-Mu¨ller J (2000) Arabidopsis plants transformed
with nitrilase 1 or 2 in antisense direction are delayed in clubroot development. J Plant Physiol
156:756–761
Oelmu¨ller R, Sherameti I, Tripathi S, Varma A (2009) Piriformospora indica, a cultivable root
endophyte with multiple biotechnological applications. Symbiosis 49:1–17
Ogawa JM, Zehr EI, Bird GW, Ritchie DF, Uriu K, Uyemoto JK (1995) Compendium of stone
fruit diseases. APS Press, St. Paul, MN
Pa¨sold S, Siegel I, Seidel C, Ludwig-Mu¨ller J (2010) Flavonoid accumulation in Arabidopsis
thaliana root galls caused by the obligate biotrophic pathogen Plasmodiophora brassicae. Mol
Plant Pathol 11:545–562
Patten CL, Glick BR (1996) Bacterial biosynthesis of indole-3-acetic acid. Can J Microbiol
42:207–220
Patten CL, Glick BR (2002) Role of Pseudomonas putida indole-acetic acid in development of the
host plant root system. Appl Environ Microbiol 68:3795–3801
Peer WA, Bandyopadhyay A, Blakeslee JJ, Makam SN, Chen RJ, Masson PH, Murphy AS (2004)
Variation in expression and protein localization of the PIN family of auxin efﬂux facilitator
proteins in ﬂavonoid mutants with altered auxin transport in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell
16:1898–1911
Pertot I, Musetti R, Pressacco L, Osler R (1998) Changes in Indole-3-acetic acid level in
micropropagated tissues of Catharanthus roseus L. infected by the agent of the clover phyllody
and effect of exogenous auxins on phytoplasma morphology. Cytobios 95:13–23
Petti C, Reiber K, Ali SS, Berney M, Doohan FM (2012) Auxin as a player in the biocontrol of
Fusarium head blight disease of barley and its potential as a disease control agent. BMC Plant
Biol 12:224
Ramos C, Matas IM, Bardaji L, Aragon IM, Murillo J (2012) Pseudomonas savastanoi
pv. savastanoi: some like it knot. Mol. Plant Pathol 13:998–1009
Reineke G, Heinze B, Schirawaski J, Buettner H, Kahmann R, Basse CW (2008) Indole-3-acetic
acid (IAA) biosynthesis in the smut fungus Ustilago maydis and its relevance for increased
IAA levels in infected tissue and host tumour formation. Mol Plant Pathol 9:339–355
Robinette D, Matthysse AG (1990) Inhibition by Agrobacterium tumefaciens and Pseudomonas
savastanoi of development of the hypersensitive response elicited by Pseudomonas syringae
pv phaseolicola. J Bacteriol 172:5742–5749
Savic´ B, Tomic´ S, Magnus V, Gruden K, Barle K, Grenkovic´ R, Ludwig-Mu¨ller J, Salopek-Sondi
B (2009) Auxin amidohydrolases from Brassica rapa cleave the alanine conjugate of
indolepropionic acid as a preferable substrate: a biochemical and modeling approach. Plant
Cell Physiol 50:1587–1599
Schuller A, Ludwig-Mu¨ller J (2006) A family of auxin conjugate hydrolases from Brassica rapa:
characterization and expression during clubroot disease. New Phytol 171:145–158
Siemens J, Keller I, Sarx J, Kunz S, Schuller A, Nagel W, Schmu¨lling T, Parniske M, Ludwig-
Mu¨ller J (2006) Transcriptome analysis of Arabidopsis clubroots indicate a key role for
cytokinins in disease development. Mol Plant-Microbe Interact 19:480–494
Siemens J, Glawischnig E, Ludwig-Mu¨ller J (2008) Indole glucosinolates and camalexin do not
inﬂuence the development of the clubroot disease in Arabidopsis thaliana. J Phytopathol
156:332–337
Sirrenberg A, Go¨bel C, Grond S, Czempinski N, Ratzinger A, Karlovsky P, Santos P, Feussner I,
Pawlowski K (2007) Piriformospora indica affects plant growth by auxin production. Physiol
Plant 13:581–589
Spaepen S, Vanderleyden J, Remans R (2007) Indole-3-acetic acid in microbial and
microorganism-plant signaling. FEMS Microbiol Rev 31:425–448
18
Auxin and the Interaction Between Plants and Microorganisms
433

Spanos YA, Woodward S (1994) The effects of Taphrina betulina infection on growth of Betula
pubescens. Eur J Forest Pathol 24:277–286
Splivallo R, Fischer U, Go¨bel C, Feussner I, Karlovsky P (2009) Trufﬂes regulate plant root
morphogenesis via the production of auxin and ethylene. Plant Physiol 150:2018–2029
Stes E, Prinsen E, Holsters M, Vereecke D (2012) Plant-derived auxin plays an accessory role in
symptom development upon Rhodococcus fascians infection. Plant J 70:513–527
Tabone D (1958) Biosynthe`se par B. megatherium de combinaisons de l’acide indol propionique
avec certains acides amine´s. Bull Soc Chim Biol 40:5–6
Tabone J, Tabone D (1953) Bio-esteriﬁcation du glucose. V. Bio-synthe`se par Bacillus
megatherium de l’ester β glucosidique de l’acide indolpropionique. C R Hebd Seances Acad
Sci 237:943–944
Tanaka E, Koga H, Mori M, Mori M (2011) Auxin production by the rice blast fungus and its
localization in host tissue. J Phytopathol 159:522–530
Tegg RS, Gill WM, Thompson HK, Davies NW, Ross JJ, WIlson CR (2008) Auxin-induced
resistance to common scab disease of potato linked to inhibition of thaxtomin A toxicity. Plant
Dis 92:1321–1328
Terrile M, Olivieri F, Bottini R, Casalongue C (2006) Indole-3-acetic acid attenuates the fungal
lesions in infected potato tubers. Physiol Plant 127:205–211
Ueno M, Kihara J, Honda Y, Arase S (2004) Indole-related compounds induce the resistance to
rice blast fungus, Magnaporthe grisea in barley. J Phytopathol 152:606–612
Vadassery J, Ritter C, Venus Y, Camehl I, Varma A, Shahollari B, Nova´k O, Strnad M, Ludwig-
Mu¨ller J, Oelmu¨ller R (2008) The role of auxins and cytokinins in the mutualistic interaction
between Arabidopsis and Piriformospora indica. Mol Plant-Microbe Interact 21:1371–1383
Vandenbussche F, Smalle J, Le J, Saibo NJM, De Paepe A, Chaerle L, Tietz O, Smets R,
Laarhoven LJJ, Harren FJM, Van Onckelen H, Palme K, Verbelen J-P, Van Der Straeten D
(2003) The Arabidopsis mutant alh1 illustrates a cross talk between ethylene and auxin. Plant
Physiol 131:1228–1238
Vandeputte O, O¨ den S, Mol A, Vereecke D, Goethals K, El Jaziri M, Prinsen E (2005) Biosyn-
thesis of auxin by the gram-positive phytopathogen Rhodococcus fascians is controlled by
compounds speciﬁc to infected plant tissues. Appl Environ Microbiol 71:1169–1177
Walker TS, Bais HP, Halligan KM, Stermitz FR, Vivanco JM (2003) Metabolic proﬁling of root
exudates of Arabidopsis thaliana. J Agric Food Chem 51:2548–2554
Wang D, Pajerowska-Mukhtar K, Culler A, Dong X (2007) Salicylic acid inhibits pathogen growth
in plants through repression of the auxin signaling pathway. Curr Biol 17:1784–1790
Wasson AP, Pellerone FI, Mathesius U (2006) Silencing the ﬂavonoid pathway in Medicago
truncatula inhibits root nodule formation and prevents auxin transport regulation by rhizobia.
Plant Cell 18:1617–1629
Yamada T, Tsukamoto H, Shirashi T, Nomura T, Oku H (1990) Detection of indoleacetic acid
biosynthesis in some species of Taphrina causing hyperplastic diseases in plants. Ann
Phytopath Soc Jpn 56:532–540
Yokoyama R, Nishitani K (2001) A comprehensive expression analysis of all members of a gene
family encoding cell-wall enzymes allowed us to predict cis-regulatory regions involved in
cell-wall construction in speciﬁc organs of Arabidopsis. Plant Cell Physiol 42:1025–1033
Zhang Z, Li Q, Li Z, Staswick PE, Wang M, Zhu Y, He Z (2007) Dual regulation role of GH3.5 in
salicylic acid and auxin signaling during Arabidopsis-Pseudomonas syringae interaction. Plant
Physiol 145:450–464
Zupan JR, Zambryski P (1995) Transfer of T-DNA from Agrobacterium to the plant cell. Plant
Physiol 107:1041–1047
Zupan J, Muth TR, Draper O, Zambryski P (2000) The transfer of DNA from Agrobacterium
tumefaciens into plants: a feast of fundamental insights. Plant J 23:11–28
434
J. Ludwig-Mu¨ller

Index
A
Aberrant testa shape (ATS), 232–233
ABP1. See Auxin-binding protein1 (ABP1)
Actin–auxin oscillator
BFA, 304
ﬂuorescent protein, 305
IAA, 306
polar auxin ﬂux, 305
ADP-ribosylation factor GTPase
(ARF-GTPase), 147
Aerial tissues, 102, 113, 401
AFBs. See Auxin F-box proteins (AFBs)
Agrobacterium rhizogenes, 417, 418, 421
Agrobacterium tumefaciens, 417–418, 421, 428
AHP6. See Arabidopsis histidine
phosphotransfer protein 6 (AHP6)
Aintegumenta (ANT), 53, 193, 197, 202,
230, 232
Algae and land plant evolution
Chlorophyta and Streptophyta, 272
embryophytes and charophytes, 271–272
proto-land plants, 272
Selaginellaceae, 272–273
Selaginella moellendorfﬁi, 273
Algal developmental system, 16
Angiosperms, 159, 194, 205, 214–216, 223,
235, 277, 278, 390, 391
Animal embryos, 172
Anthranilate (ANT), 53, 54, 193, 202, 230, 232
Antipodal cells, 233–235
Apical–basal axis formation, 61, 176, 219
Apical dominance and bud activation
candidate hormones, 346
cellular level, 348
ﬂorigen, 346
metamer level, 347
secondary messenger model, 347
shoot apical meristem, 345
Arabidopsis histidine kinase (AHK),
248, 249
Arabidopsis histidine phosphotransfer protein
6 (AHP6), 183–184, 247
Arabidopsis thaliana, 214, 236
ABCB, 80
AFBs, 109
and Antirrhinum, 4–5
ATHB2, 394
oryza sativa, 53
ovule development, 228
oxIAA-Glc, 45
and Physcomitrella patens, 53
phytoalexins, 421
PIN protein family, 66
protoxylem and protophloem, 268
root meristem, 294
vegetative apex, 300
ARF. See Auxin response factor (ARF)
ARF-GTPase. See ADP-ribosylation factor
GTPase (ARF-GTPase)
Arginine, 105, 108, 110
Asymmetric leaves 1 (AS1), 193
ATP-binding cassette subfamily B (ABCB)
A. thaliana, 81
auxin transport function, 81
characterization, 90
efﬂux transporters, 80–81
ER and golgi apparatus, 87
homeostatic function, 89
phosphorylation, 81
plasma membrane, 87
proteins, 84–85
sterols, 87
trafﬁcking and maturation, 86
transport, auxin, 88
E. Zazˇı´malova´ et al. (eds.), Auxin and Its Role in Plant Development,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-7091-1526-8, © Springer-Verlag Wien 2014
435

Aux/IAA proteins. See Auxin/indole acetic
acid (Aux/IAA) proteins
Auxin
antagonists, 107
gynoecium, 215–221
male reproductive organ, 221–227
and ovule development, 227–235
pollen development, 221–227
and self-organisation
cell expansion, 294
functional multicellularity, 294–295
plant morphogenesis, 295–298
plant organisms, 292–293
Auxin-based patterning
cell polarization, 336–339
dual-polarization model, 335
ﬂux models, 332–335
gradient models, 330–332
import carriers, 336
Auxin-binding protein 1 (ABP1), 6, 62–63, 77,
102, 157, 199, 271, 278
and auxin receptor, 110–112
canonical auxin signalling proteins, 6
C-terminal helix, 111
endoplasmic reticulum, 271
in ER, 69
hydrophobic pocket, 110, 111
hypothesis, 339
phototropism, 372
PIN proteins, 84, 110
plasma membrane, 271
signalling, 111–112
and TIR1, 110
TIR1/AFB system, 113
Auxin biology
“canalization hypothesis”, 267
coleoptile, 266–267
ER, 268
TIR1/AFB protein, 268
Auxin biosynthesis, 215, 216, 218–220, 222,
225, 228, 230, 234, 235
IAM, 421
and metabolism, 419–420
plant-pathogen interactions, 420
Auxin–brassinosteroid (BR)–cytokinin cross
talk, 219–220
Auxin–cytokinin cross talk
AHK, 248
B-ARRs, 248
IAA, 248–249
IPT, 251
SHY2 expression, 250
Auxin distribution, 199–200
Auxin-driven development, 318–319
Auxin F-box proteins (AFBs)
metaphor, 112
picloram, 109
and TIR1, 102
Auxin ﬂuxes
AUX/LAX proteins, 327
extracellular compartments, 327
patterning models, 327
polar transport, 328
Auxin homeostasis, 199–200
Auxin/indole acetic acid (Aux/IAA) proteins
A. thaliana, 177
bacterial disease, 426
transcriptional regulators, 102–103
Auxin–JA–GA–BR cross talk, 223–224
Auxin mass conservation
extracellular compartment, 324
production and removal terms, 323
Auxin metabolism, 268–269
ANT, 53, 54
biosynthesis and degradation, 53
de novo auxin biosynthesis (see De novo
auxin biosynthesis)
deuterium atoms, 53–55
ER, 65
fatty acids, 21–22
IAA metabolites (see Indole-3-acetic
acid (IAA))
peroxisomes, 68
plant growth, 21
plant hormone analysis, 55
proﬁling, 48–51
puriﬁcation, 41–44
quantiﬁcation, 46–48
spatiotemporal activity, 62
Auxin–microtubule–tension loop, 300
Auxin redistribution, 175–177
Auxin-related patterning, 316
Auxin resistant 1 (AUX1), 62, 78–80, 87,
196, 269, 308, 336, 349, 374, 375,
378, 417
Auxin response factor (ARF), 8, 232, 370
Aux/IAA proteins, 123
root development, 134
Auxin signalling, 180–182
ABP1, 266
description, 265–266
IAA, 266
IBR5, 271
PAA, 266
436
Index

Auxin transport, 113, 269–270
auxin mass conservation, 323–324
chemiosmotic model, 324–326
ﬂuxes, 326–328
PIN, 323
and polarization, 318
B
B arabidopsis response regulators (B-ARRs)
cytokinin signaling, 248
phosphorylation, 249
B-ARRs. See B arabidopsis response regulators
(B-ARRs)
Basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
HFR1/SICS1, 396, 397
HLH inhibitor, 397
PIF5-binding sites, 402
PIF proteins, 396–397
BFA. See Brefeldin A (BFA)
Brassinazole resistant 1 (BZR1)
and BES1, 252
DELLA proteins, 254
and PIF4, 398
Brassinosteroids (BRs), 224
and auxin, 252–254
BZR1, 252
gene expression, 253–254
in gene expression, 253–254
and gibberellins (GA), 398
in root development, 252–253
signaling, 220
Brefeldin A (BFA), 147, 150, 152, 304, 306
Bryophytes
auxin role, 274
and ﬂowering plants, 273
BZR1. See Brassinazole resistant 1 (BZR1)
C
CAKs. See Cdk-activating kinases (CAKs)
Calcium (Ca2+), eukaryotes, 153
Calcium ﬂuxes, 112
Calcium levels, 123
Canalization hypothesis
auxin and polarity, 81–82
micropolar auxin gradients, 82
PIN allocation and function, 82
Candidate hormones, 346
Carboxylate, 105
Caryopsis, 215
Casparian strip, 145
CBP1. See C-terminal peptide-binding protein
1 (CBP1)
CDK-activating kinases (CAKs), 122
CDKs. See Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs)
Cell cycle and auxin
cell cycle machinery, 120–122
endoreduplication, 126
LRI, 128–133
root tip maintains pattern and meristem, 127
Cell polarization
ABP1, 339
auxin gradients, 338
classiﬁcation, 336–337
polar auxin transport, 339
tissue-level gradient, 339
Cellular auxin transport
A. thaliana, 78
ATP hydrolysis, 77
AUX1 and LAX protein, 78
Chalaza formation, 231
Chalazal megaspore, 228
Chemiosmotic model, 144
auxin transport, 325
Goldman–Hodgkin–Katz equation,
325–326
PIN proteins, 326
4-Chloro-indole-3-acetetic acid (4-CI-IAA)
carboxylic acid moiety, 76
and IAA, 76
and PAA, 6
4-Chloroindole-3-acetic acid (4-CI-IAA), 62
p-Chlorophenoxyi-sobutyric acid (PCIB), 107
Cholodny-Went theory, 364
Chromatography, 46
CID. See Collision-induced dissociation (CID)
Clathrin-dependent endocytosis, 199
Clathrin-mediated endocytosis (CME),
149–150, 157
CLAVATA3 peptide, 7
CME. See Clathrin-mediated endocytosis
(CME)
Coleochaete, 15
Coleoptile, 266–267
Colletotrichum acutatum, 422
Colletotrichum gloeosporioides, 422
Collision-induced dissociation (CID), 45, 46
‘Constitutive endocytic cycling’, 146, 148
Con-stitutive photomorphogenic 1 (COP1)
shade avoidance response, 397–398
and SPA proteins, 393
Core cell cycle machinery, 122–125
Crystallography, 111
C-terminal peptide-binding protein
1 (CBP1), 112
Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs)
cytokinin, 123
Index
437

Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) (cont.)
phosphorylation, 122
serine/threonine kinases, 120
Cysteamine, 49, 50
Cytokinin (CKs), 52
and auxin, 122
and auxin–cytokinin cross talk, 220
biosynthetic and signaling mutants, 250
and ethylene, 158
molecular mechanisms, 247
receptor genes, 231, 234
root system development, 248–249
signalling, embryos, 183
Cytoskeleton, 63, 147–148
D
De novo auxin biosynthesis
Arabidopsis, 22–24
brassinolide and ethylene, 22
feeding plants, 22
hydrolytic enzymes, 24
IAM, 22–24
IAN, 22–24
IPA, 24
TAA/YUC (see Tryptophan aminotransferase
of Arabidopsis (TAA))
2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D), 428
Distal Elongation Zone (DEZ), 365–366, 375
Double fertilization, 214, 233
DRP1. See Dynamin-related protein 1 (DRP1)
Dryopteris, 194
Dual-polarization model, 335, 343–345, 350
Dynamin-related protein 1 (DRP1), 149–150
E
Early endosome (EE), 146
Ectocarpus siliculosus, 274–276
EE. See Early endosome (EE)
Egg apparatus cells, 233, 235
Electrospray ionization (ESI), 47
Embryo sac, 233–235
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER), 77, 78, 86–88,
146, 177, 227, 256, 268, 270,
271, 277
ABP1, 69
auxin amid-conjugate hydrolases, 65
description, 64–65
PILS proteins, 67–68
PIN5, 66
PIN proteins, 65–67
and TWD1, 85
and UPR, 68
Endoreduplication, 126
Endosomal-sorting complexes required for
transport (ESCRT), 148, 151
Epidermis, 203, 204
ERF1. See Ethylene response factor 1 (ERF1)
ESCRT. See Endosomal-sorting complexes
required for transport (ESCRT)
ESI. See Electrospray ionization (ESI)
Ethylene
ACC synthase genes, 257
brassinolide, 22
characterization, 256
and cytokinin, 158
ERF1, 256
in root development, 256–257
TAA1 and TAR2 genes, 257–258
Ethylene response factor 1 (ERF1), 256
Eukaryotic cells, 110
Extracellular matrix (ECM), 219, 220
Extracellular receptor-based polarization
(ERP) model, 157
F
Female gametophyte, 233–235, 265, 272
Flavin-containing monooxygenase (FMO)
auxin biosynthesis, 25
IPA, 24
mammalian microsome, 25
oxygenate soft nucleophiles, 26
YUC, 25
Flavin mono nucleotide (FMN), 25–26, 367
Florigen, 346
Flowering plants, 214
FMO. See Flavin-containing monooxygenase
(FMO)
G
Gametogenesis pollen grains, 221
Gas chromatography (GC)
auxins, 46
disadvantages, 46–47
IAA analysis, 47
plant hormones, 56
tryptamine pathway, 47
Geotropism, 363
GH3. See Gretchen Hagen 3 (GH3)
Gibberellic acids (GAs), 158
in Arabidopsis, 224
and JA, 222
438
Index

Gibberellin
and auxin, 254
DELLA proteins, 254
in root development, 255
Gibberellin insensitive dwarf 1a/b/c receptors
(GID1a/b/c), 224
Glucuronidase (GUS), 215, 218, 228, 234, 395,
396, 401, 403
Gossypium hirsutum, 224
Gracilaria tissue cultures, 274
Gravitropism, 156
AUX1, 374
auxin relocation, 376
columella cells, 375
PIN expression gradient, 377
pin3/pin7 single mutants, 375
starch-accumulating plastids, 373–374
Green ﬂuorescent protein (GFP), 215
Gretchen Hagen3 (GH3), 32, 33, 66, 220, 225,
227, 269, 275, 403, 425, 426
amidosynthases, 32–33
Arabidopsis, 425
auxin signaling, 227
Ground tissue cells, 307
Gynoecia, 216, 218, 219, 221, 230
Gynoecium, 10, 214
Arabidopsis, 215, 217
ARF3/ETT and ARF5/MP, 218
auxin biosynthesis, 215–216, 218
auxin–brassinosteroid (BR)–cytokinin
cross talk, 219–220
Brassicaceae, 215, 216
DR5, 215–216
KAN gene activity, 218
maize 14 PIN/PIN-like genes, 220
transcript proﬁling/promoter, 220
transmitting tract, 219
Gynophore, 216, 219, 220
H
Hanaba taranu (HAN), 176
HD-Zip. See Homeodomain-Leucine Zipper
(HD-Zip)
Herbicides, 107–108
Hieracium pilosella, 234
High-resolution mass spectrometers (HRMS)
Orbitrap technology, 50
phytohormones, 52
plant hormones, 48
Homeodomain-Leucine Zipper (HD-Zip), 174,
182, 194, 394, 395
ATHB2, 394
role, 395
SAM function, 395
shade avoidance response, 395
Homeostasis
ABCB transport, 88
in silico modeling supports, 89
Hormonal cross talk
auxin–cytokinin (see Auxin–cytokinin
cross talk)
brassinosteroid, 252–254
ethylene, 256–258
gibberellin, 254–255
molecular mechanisms, auxin and
cytokinin interaction, 246–247
mono-and dicotyledons, 245–246
root organogenesis, 246
root system development, 245
Hormones, auxin metabolites
antagonism, 248
auxin biosynthesis, 419
brassinosteroid pathway, 252
bromocholine, 52
cytokinin biosynthesis, 251
ethylene, 256
gibberellins, 254
HRMS, 52
phytohormone groups, 52
plant hormones, 51–52
puriﬁcation strategies, 52
soil microbes, 414
Hyaloperonospora arabidopsidis, 427
Hydrotropism
GNOM, 378
TIBA, 377–378
Hypersensitive response (HR), 427
I
IAA. See Indole-3-acetic acid (IAA)
IAA metabolites. See Indole-3-acetic acid
(IAA)
IAM. See Indole-3-acetamide (IAM)
IAN. See Indole-3-acetonitrile (IAN)
IAOx. See Indole-3-acetaldoxime (IAOx)
IBA. See Indole-3-butyric acid (IBA)
ICR1. See Interactor of constitutive active rop1
(ICR1)
Immunoafﬁnity sorbents, 43
Indole-3-acetaldoxime (IAOx), 29–30
Indole-3-acetamide (IAM), 421
Agrobacterium, 28
auxin biosynthesis, 28
auxin overaccumulation, 24
hydrolytic enzymes, 24
phytopathogenic bacteria, 421
Pseudomonas, 28
Index
439

Indole-3-acetamide (IAM) (cont.)
tryptophan metabolites, 23
Indole-3-acetic acid (IAA), 5–6, 21, 62, 64–69,
266, 414
amino acids and peptides, 31
Arabidopsis, 32, 44, 48, 51
bioactive compounds, 40
carboxyl group, 32
chromatograms, 51
cytoplasm, 308
degradation vs. oxidation, 33
description, 5
endogenous auxin, 102
extraction and puriﬁcation, 48
Fucus distichus, 274
GC-MS, 48
GH3 genes, 32
glutamine biosynthesis, 28
homeostasis and plant development, 32
homogenization, 40
hydrolysis, 31
hypocotyls, 403
IBA, 30, 31
in vivo labelling, 53, 54
immunoaffonity extraction, 45–46
isotope dilution method, 41
MS analysis, 41
N-hydroxytryptamine, 44
Orbitrap mass spectrometer, 48
organic solvents, 40
phytohormones, 40
Pinus sylvestris, 43
plant hormone, 47
plasma membrane, 308
sorbents, 42–43
SPE, 42
storage/degradation forms, 6
Taphrina, 419
TAZ, 49
trimethylsilylation, 47
VMAE, 41
YUC enzymes, 25
Indole-3-acetonitrile (IAN)
Arabidopsis, 24
auxin biosynthesis, 29
microbes, 421
nitrilases, 421
Indole-3-butyric acid (IBA), 6, 21, 30, 31, 62,
64, 65, 69, 102, 266, 414, 416, 428
Azospirillum, 414
endogenous auxins, 266
fatty acid β-oxidation, 64
metabolism, 69
peroxisomes, 64
Indole-3-pyruvate (IPA)
antimicrobial compound, 428
decarboxylases, 29
oxidative decarboxylation, 25
TAA, 24
Trp, 22
Inositol-6-phosphate (IP6), 103–105
Integument development, 235
ANT, 232
ARF4 and KAN, 232
ARF3/ETT, 232
ATS, 232–233
pDR5rev::GFP signal, 231
PIN1:GFP reporter signal, 231–232
TAA1::GFP signal, 231
UCN, 233
Interactor of constitutive active rop1
(ICR1), 147
Intercellular transport
cellular auxin transport (see Cellular auxin
transport)
SKP2A, 77
Intracellular auxin transport
endoplasmic reticulum (ER), 64–68
peroxisomes, 64, 65
Intracellular trafﬁcking, 146, 148
IP6. See Inositol-6-phosphate (IP6)
IPA. See Indole-3-pyruvate (IPA)
Isomerization, 105–106
Isopentenyl transferase (IPT), 251
J
Jasmonic acid (JA), 32, 33, 222–225, 414, 426
β-Jellyroll barrel, 110
Jigsaw-shaped pavement cells, 320
K
Kip-related proteins (KRPs), 120, 121, 123,
130, 131, 133
KRPs. See Kip-related proteins (KRPs)
L
Lateral root induction system (LRIS), 130
Lateral root initiation (LRI)
ALF4, 133
Arabidopsis, 128–129
auxin-dependent pathway, 133
callus formation, 133
cell cycle reactivation, 129–130
440
Index

cell proliferation, 131
downregulation, KRP1 and KRP2, 130–131
LBD/ASL, 131–132
leguminous plants, 132
Medicago, 133
pericycle cells, 129
Rhizobium, 133
Leaf development
Arabidopsis, 341–342
CUC2 protein, 342–343
margin, 342, 343
Leaf primordium, 298
Leguminous plants, 132
Leucine-rich repeat (LRR), 103–106, 110
Liquid chromatography (LC)
IAA metabolites, 51
immunoafﬁnity extraction, 45–46
plant hormones, 52
Liquid/liquid extraction (LLE)
IAA, 41
MIP, 43
puriﬁcation, 52
LLE. See Liquid/liquid extraction (LLE)
LRI. See Lateral root initiation (LRI)
LRIS. See Lateral root induction system
(LRIS)
LRR. See Leucine-rich repeat (LRR)
Lupinus albus, 194
M
Macrophomina phaseolina, 427
Male reproductive organ
anther and ﬁlament, 221–222
stamen development, 222–225
Mass spectrometry (MS)
GC (see Gas chromatography (GC))
isotope dilution, 46
LC (see Liquid chromatography (LC))
plant hormones, 47
tryptamine pathway, 47
Medicago truncatula, 123, 133, 221, 416, 427
Megaspore mother cell (MMC), 228, 230, 231,
233, 234
Meristematic cells, 12, 126, 200, 417
Methyl-beta-cyclodextrin (MβCD), 86
Microgametogenesis, 214, 221
Microsporocytes, 221
MIPs. See Molecularly imprinted polymers
(MIPs)
Mitotic cell cycle, 120
Molecular components, auxin biology
auxin metabolism components, 275–276
auxin signalling pathway, 278
auxin transport mechanisms, 276–277
Molecularly imprinted polymers (MIPs), 43, 55
MS. See Mass spectrometry (MS)
N
Naphthalene-1-acetic acid (NAA)
and 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid, 5
and IAA, 81
Naphthylphthalamic acid (NPA), 27, 79, 83,
90, 130, 231, 277, 400, 403
Nematode feeding sites, 133
Neurotransmitter hypothesis, 148–149
N-hydroxytryptamine, 44
Nicotiana benthamiana, 424
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), 46
Nuclear SKP2A, 62
O
Oryzalin, 204
Ovule development
A. thaliana, 228
auxin distribution, 228–229
description, 227–228
female gametophyte, 233–235
integument development, 231–233
and ovary, 220
PIN1, 235
primordium outgrowth, 229–231
Ovule primordium
ANT, 230
gynoecia, 230
initiation and outgrowth, 229
pattern formation, 230–231
P
PAA. See Phenyl-acetic acid (PAA)
Pantoea agglomerans, 418–419
PCIB. See p-Chlorophenoxyi-sobutyric acid
(PCIB)
Peroxisomes, 31, 64, 65
Petunia tissue culture, 126
Pharmacological models, 113
Phenyl-acetic acid (PAA), 6, 26, 62, 266
auxinic activity, 6
decarboxylation, 26
endogenous auxins, 266
Index
441

Phenylalanines, 106–107
Phospholipase A2 activation, 112
Photomorphogenesis, 392, 393
Photosynthesis, 14, 15, 294, 390
Phototropism
ABP1, 372
AGC-type kinase protein, 367
ARF, 370–371
auxin gradients, 369–370
FMN, 367
light stimulus transmission, 368–369
NPH3, 367–368
root, 372–373
Phyllotaxis, 13–14, 194–195
auxin-driven models, 340–341
auxin–microtubule–tension loop, 300
biochemical model, 299
biophysical model, 299
leaf primordium, 298
PIN1 proteins, 340
plant patterning, 301–302
SAM, 340
vasculature, 300–301
Phytochrome interacting factors (PIF) proteins
ATHB2 and PIL1, 394–395
bHLH factor, 396–397
COP1, 393
GUS, 395–396
HD-Zip protein, 395
photomorphogenesis, 392
R/FR ligh, 393–394
SPA, 393
Phytochromes, 391–392, 406
Phytohormone, 7, 40, 43, 52, 77
Phytohormone auxin, 61, 77, 92, 144, 267, 363
PILS proteins. See Pin-likes (PILS) proteins
PIN-formed (PIN)
auxin transport, 156–157
cycling, 328–329
function, 83–84
phosphorylation, 153
plasma membrane, 90
polarization model, 199
proteins, 175
Pin-likes (PILS) proteins, 67–68, 91, 177,
270, 277
PIN2 promoter-driven expression, 151
Plant cell cycle, 119–121
Plant-microbe interactions, 417
Plant morphogenesis
architectural modules, 296
cellular modules, 297
genetic modules, 297
LEGO bricks, 295–296
modular organisation, 296
Plant movements
auxin action, 364, 365
Cholodny-Went theory, 364
DEZ, 365–366
geotropism, 363
gravity signal, 366
hydrotropism, 363
PAT, 363
phototropism, 362
thigmotropism, 363
Plant organisms
biophysics, 292
mechanical load, 292–293
plant and animal morphogenesis, 293
plant shape, 293
telomes, 292
Plant responses, light
SAM, 390
shade avoidance response, 390–391
Plants and microorganisms
arbuscular mycorrhizal, 416
diseases, 413–414
IAA, 414
Medicago truncatula, 416
Piriformospora indica, 416
rhizobia, 414
root nodules, 415
soil microbes, 414
Plant self-organisation, 302, 303
Plasmodiophora brassicae, 417–418, 423
Plastochrone, 194
Poaceae, 214, 215, 221
Polar auxin ﬂux, 305
Polar auxin transport (PAT), 216, 218, 219,
221, 222, 230–232, 234, 235, 274,
363, 407
ATP-binding cassette (ABC), 80
NPA, 79
Pollen tube growth, 215, 220, 363
ARF3/ETT, 225
maize, 225–227
PIN8, 227
SAUR and GH3 family, 225, 227
Post-embryonic development, auxin, 316–317
Prevacuolar compartments/multivesicular
bodies (PVC/MVB), 150–151
Pseudomonas savastanoi, 417–418
Q
Quiescent centre (QC)
and ARF9, 180
and columella cells, 172
and embryonic root, 182
stem cell niche, 182
442
Index

R
Rhizobium, 133
Rhodococcus fascians, 417
Root
auxin ﬂuxes, 348, 349
capacitor, 349
cellular templates, 348
growth and development (see Hormonal
cross talk)
meristem, 177
phototropism, 372–373
shoot and root development (see Shoot
and root development)
tip cells, 12
tip maintains pattern and apical meristem,
126, 127
S
Salicylic acid (SA)
and auxin, 425
and IAA, 425
and jasmonic acid, 32
Scanning electron micrograph (SEM), 217
Secondary messenger model, 347
Serine hydrogen, 110
Serine-threonine kinase, 175–176
Shade avoidance response. See Shoot and root
development
Shade light signals, photoreceptors
blue/green ratio, 391
phytochromes, 391–392
Shoot and root development
auxin homeostasis, 402–403
auxin transport, 403–404
COP1, 397–398
hormones, shade avoidance response,
398–399
hypocotyl growth and auxin, 399–400
leaf growth and auxin, 401
PIF proteins, 392–397
plant adaptation, 405–406
plant responses, light, 390–391
root growth and auxin, 401
shade light signals, photoreceptors,
391–392
Shoot apical meristem (SAM)
and ANT (see Aintegumenta (ANT))
and AS1 (see Asymmetric leaves 1 (AS1))
A. thaliana, 192
and CLV, 192, 193
cup-shaped cotyledon (CUC), 194
meristem, 192, 193
spatiotemporal control, 200–201
stem cells, 192
and STM (see Shootmeristemless (STM))
structural and functional organization, 193
Shootmeristemless (STM), 192–194, 197
Short hypocotyl 2 (SHY2), 178, 183,
250–251, 255
Solid phase extraction (SPE)
divinylbenzene, 42
IAA, 42
N-vinylpyrrolidone, 42
phytohormones, 43
poly(methyl methacrylate), 42
polymer-based, 42, 49
Sorghum bicolor, 221
Spatiotemporal control, 200–201
SPE. See Solid phase extraction (SPE)
S-Phase Kinase-Associated Protein 2A
(SKP2A), 62, 63, 77, 110, 123
Spongospora subterranea, 419
Sporophyte–gametophyte cross talk, 234
Stamen development
auxin–JA–GA–BR cross talk, 223–224
auxin receptors, 223
dehiscence, 223
JA and GA, 222
MDR1/PGP1, 222
mutant approaches, 222
PAT, 222
primordia formation, 223
stress, auxin signaling, 224–225
YUC2 and YUC6, 222
Static vs. dynamic tissue models
arabidopsis root, 321
parent cell polarization, 322
Stem cells
embryogenesis, 144
SAM, 192
TMO, 181
Sterol methyl transferase 1 (SMT1) mutant, 155
STM. See Shootmeristemless (STM)
Suppressor of phyA-105 (SPA), 393, 397, 403
Synchytrium endobioticum, 419
T
TAA. See Tryptophan aminotransferase
of arabidopsis (TAA)
Tabula rasa approach, 309–310
Target of monopteros (TMO), 180, 181
Telomes, 292
Tengu, 424
Thiazolidine (TAZ), 49, 50
Index
443

Thigmotropism, 363
TMK. See Transmembrane kinase (TMK)
Tobacco parenchyma, 303, 304
Transcytosis, 198
Transmembrane kinase (TMK), 112
Transmembrane proteins, 155
Transport inhibitor resistant 1 (TIR1)
arabidopsis, 102–103
ARFs, 108–109
Aux/IAA, 103, 104, 107–108
auxin antagonists, 107
auxin binding, 103–107
2,3,5-Triiodobenzoic acid (TIBA), 377–378
Tryptamine (TAM), 28–29
Tryptophan aminotransferase of Arabidopsis
(TAA)
apical epidermal cells, 173
auxin biosynthesis, 216
biochemical studies, 27
electrophilic substrates, 26
FMOs, 25–27
IAA, 26, 29
IAM and IAN pathway, 23, 28, 29
IAOx, 29–30
indolic compounds, 28
IPA, 25
α-keto acid, 27
mutant combinations, 25
PAA, 26
TAM pathway, 28–29
temporal and spatial regulation, 28
Tryptophan aminotransferase of arabidopsis
(TAA), 25–27
Arabidopsis yuc, 30
auxin biosynthesis, 26
Tryptophan-auxin electronic interaction, 111
Tyrosine Y92, 105, 108
U
Ubiquitination, 62, 107, 154, 178, 254, 271,
392, 397
Ulothrix, 274
Unfolded protein response (UPR), 68
Ustilago maydis, 422
V
Vacuolar protein sorting 45 (VPS45), 150
Vacuum microwave-assisted extraction
(VMAE), 41, 43
Vascular patterning
PIN1 proteins, 342
polarization modes, 343, 344
SoPIN1 proteins, 344
vein pattern formation, 345
Very-long-chain fatty acids (VLCFAs), 155
VLCFAs. See Very-long-chain fatty acids
(VLCFAs)
VMAE. See Vacuum microwave-assisted
extraction (VMAE)
W
Walls are thin1 (WAT1), 68
X
Xyloglucan endotransglycosylase/hydrolase
(XTH), 424–425
444
Index

