
Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence
6237
Edited by R. Goebel, J. Siekmann, and W. Wahlster
Subseries of Lecture Notes in Computer Science

Pompeu Casanovas Ugo Pagallo
Giovanni Sartor Gianmaria Ajani (Eds.)
AI Approaches
to the Complexity
of Legal Systems
Complex Systems, the Semantic Web,
Ontologies, Argumentation,
and Dialogue
International Workshops AICOL-I/IVR-XXIV
Beijing, China, September 19, 2009 and
AICOL-II/JURIX 2009, Rotterdam,The Netherlands,
December 16, 2009. Revised Selected Papers
1 3

Volume Editors
Pompeu Casanovas
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Institute of Law and Technology,
08193 Bellaterra, Barcelona, Spain
E-mail: pompeu.casanovas@uab.es
Ugo Pagallo
University of Torino, Torino Law School
via s. Ottavio 20, 10124 Torino, Italy
E-mail: ugo.pagallo@unito.it
Giovanni Sartor
European University Institute and CIRSFID
via Zamboni 33, 40126 Bologna, Italy
E-mail: giovanni.sartor@eui.eu
Gianmaria Ajani
University of Torino, Torino Law School
via s. Ottavio 20, 10124 Torino, Italy
E-mail: gianmaria.ajani@unito.it
Library of Congress Control Number: 2010936471
CR Subject Classiﬁcation (1998): I.2, H.4, H.3, H.5, C.2, J.1, K.4.1-2
LNCS Sublibrary: SL 7 – Artiﬁcial Intelligence
ISSN
0302-9743
ISBN-10
3-642-16523-0 Springer Berlin Heidelberg New York
ISBN-13
978-3-642-16523-8 Springer Berlin Heidelberg New York
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved, whether the whole or part of the material is
concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, re-use of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting,
reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other way, and storage in data banks. Duplication of this publication
or parts thereof is permitted only under the provisions of the German Copyright Law of September 9, 1965,
in its current version, and permission for use must always be obtained from Springer. Violations are liable
to prosecution under the German Copyright Law.
springer.com
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010
Printed in Germany
Typesetting: Camera-ready by author, data conversion by Scientiﬁc Publishing Services, Chennai, India
Printed on acid-free paper
06/3180

Foreword: What AICOL Workshops
Intend to Be
This volume assembles the selected papers stemming from two workshops, or-
ganized at the XXIV World Congress of Philosophy of Law and Social Philoso-
phy (IVR, Beijing, China, September 15–20, 2009), and at JURIX 2009(December
16–19, 2009, Rotterdam) (see: http://idt.uab.es/IVRXXIV-aicol09). AICOL
stands for “Artiﬁcial Intelligence Approaches to the Complexity of Legal
Systems.”
Complexity and complex systems, then, summarize the perspective chosen
to describe recent developments in AI and law, legal theory, argumentation, the
semantic web, and multi-agent systems. In this sense, AICOL Workshops, the
two former as well as the forthcoming ones, are conceived as a meeting point for
diverse researchers (legal theorists, political scientists, linguists, logicians, and
computational and cognitive scientists) eager to discuss and share their ﬁndings
and proposals. We want to contribute to overcome through theoretical and mutu-
ally informed dialogue the multiple gaps and misunderstandings existing between
formal and empirical approaches to the law, and between theoretical inquiries
and the practices of lawyering, rule-making and sentencing. Some years ago, the
distinguished American scholar John Henry Merryman referred elegantly to this
communication problem by choosing as a general title for his selected works
“The Loneliness of the Comparative Lawyer” (1999). We think that, in a way,
researchers in the complexity of legal systems have experienced this isolation
too, partly due to the same expertise which is required to properly carry out
their work.
The inspiring idea of AICOL 2009 was indeed to develop models of legal
knowledge, concerning its organization, structure and content, in order to pro-
mote mutual understanding and communication between diﬀerent legal systems
and cultures. By achieving more precise models of legal concepts—from multi-
lingual dictionaries to taxonomies and legal ontologies, namely, formal models of
legal conceptualization—we enhance our comprehension of legal cultures, of their
commonalities and diﬀerences. Moreover, in this way we can proﬁt increasingly
from computer support in managing legal knowledge, drawing on convergences
and bridging diﬀerences for deeper understanding.
Legal ontologies, in particular, support the creation of multi-agent systems
for the law—where the diﬀerent agents can understand one-another by shar-
ing the same concepts, or through the awareness of their diﬀerent conceptual
structures—which can be useful, for instance, in electronic commerce and the
building of web services. Legal ontologies can proﬁt from social network analy-
sis, which could indicate what terms are fundamental for comparison. The study
of how legal information is produced and distributed in complex social systems
makes it possible to follow the semantic evolution of the network through its own

VI
Foreword
topology, since the set of nodes with highest degree represents the main core of
the taxonomy with the shortest average distance-concepts. The domain of multi-
system and multi-lingual ontologies oﬀers the opportunity to integrate artiﬁcial
intelligence not only with legal theory, but also with further, more empirical and
comparative, legal studies.
The relation of legal ontologies, multi-agent systems, and distributed net-
works, is only one, albeit important, among many other examples of research in
AI and law. The aim of the AICOL workshops is thus to oﬀer eﬀective support
for the exchange of knowledge and methodological approaches between scholars
from diﬀerent scientiﬁc ﬁelds, by highlighting their similarities and diﬀerences.
The comparison of multiple formal approaches to the law—such as logical mod-
els, cognitive theories, argumentation frameworks, graph theory, game theory,
as well as opposite perspectives like the internal and the external viewpoints—
should stress possible convergences, as for instance in the realms of concep-
tual structures, argumentation schemes, emergent behaviors, learning evolution,
adaptation, and simulation.
We would like to thank the AICOL reviewers and the Organizing Committees
of the JURIX 2009 and IVR 2009 conferences. We would also like to thank Alfred
Hofmann for being so sensitive to the main AICOL idea. The following projects
allowed the conception and organization of the research workshops, and the
edition of this ﬁrst volume: CSO-2008-05536-SOCI, TSI-020110-2009-39, TSI-
020110-2009-374, TSI-020501-2008-131, TSI-020100-2008-134, and JLS-28002-
CFP-CJ-08.
May 2010
Pompeu Casanovas
Ugo Pagallo
Giovanni Sartor
Gianmaria Ajani

Organization
Organizing Committee
Pompeu Casanovas
UAB Institute of Law and Technology, Spain
Ugo Pagallo
Law School, University of Turin, Italy
Giovanni Sartor
European University Institute, Italy
Gianmaria Ajani
University of Turin, Italy
Program Committee
Kevin Ashley
University of Pittsburgh, USA
V. Richard Benjamins
Telef´onica, Spain
Xavier Binefa
Cognitive Media Technologies, UPF, Spain
Guido Boella
Universit`a degli Studi di Torino, Italy
Dani`ele Bourcier
CERSA-CNRS, Paris, France
Joost Breuker
Leibniz Center for Law, UvA, The Netherlands
Tom Bruce
Cornell University, USA
N´uria Casellas
UAB Institute of Law and Technology, Spain
Cristiano Castelfranchi ISTC-CNR, Italy
Pilar Dellunde
IIIA-CSIC and Universitat Aut`onoma de
Barcelona, Spain
Enrico Francesconi
ITTIG-CNR Florence, Italy
Michael Genesereth
CodeX, Stanford University, USA
Guido Governatori
NICTA, Australia
Rinke Hoekstra
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam and Lebniz
Center for Law (UvA), The Netherlands
Arno Lodder
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, The Nederlands
Pablo Noriega
IIIA-CSIC, Barcelona, Spain
Monica Palmirani
Universit`a di Bologna, Italy
Marta Poblet
ICREA, UAB Institute of Law and Technology, Spain
Henry Prakken
Utrecht University and University of Groningen,
The Netherlands
Piercarlo Rossi
Facolt`a di Economia, Universit`a del Piemonte
Orientale, Italy
Marco Schorlemmer
IIIA-CSIC, Barcelona, Spain
Carles Sierra
IIIA-CSIC, Barcelona, Spain
Barry Smith
University of Buﬀalo, USA
Daniela Tiscornia
ITTIG-CNR, Florence, Italy
Joan-Josep Vallb´e
UAB Institute of Law and Technology, Spain
Tom van Engers
Leibniz Center for Law, UvA, The Nederlands
Radboud Winkels
Leibniz Center for Law, UvA, The Nederlands
John Zeleznikow
University of Victoria, Australia

Table of Contents
AI Approaches to the Complexity of Legal Systems
Introduction: Complex Systems and Six Challenges for the Development
of Law and the Semantic Web . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
Pompeu Casanovas, Ugo Pagallo, Giovanni Sartor, and
Gianmaria Ajani
I
Language and Complex Systems in Law
As Law Goes By: Topology, Ontology, Evolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
Ugo Pagallo
Sailing the Semantic Seas by Structural Vessels: Problems and
Perspectives for the Identiﬁcation of Implicit Knowledge in the Legal
Domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
Gianmaria Ajani and Piercarlo Rossi
Network Analysis of the French Environmental Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
Romain Boulet, Pierre Mazzega, and Dani`ele Bourcier
Model Regularity of Legal Language in Active Modiﬁcations. . . . . . . . . . .
54
Monica Palmirani and Raﬀaella Brighi
II
Ontologies and the Representation of Legal Knowledge
Traceability and Change in Legal Requirements Engineering . . . . . . . . . . .
74
Alexander Boer, Tom van Engers, and Radboud Winkels
When a FrameNet-Style Knowledge Description Meets an Ontological
Characterization of Fundamental Legal Concepts. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
Tommaso Agnoloni, Meritxell Fern´andez-Barrera,
Maria Teresa Sagri, Daniela Tiscorni, and Giulia Venturi
Application of an Ontology-Based Model to a Selected Fraudulent
Disbursement Economic Crime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
113
Jaroslaw Bak and Czeslaw Jedrzejek
Multi-layer Markup and Ontological Structures in Akoma Ntoso . . . . . . .
133
Gioele Barabucci, Luca Cervone, Monica Palmirani,
Silvio Peroni, and Fabio Vitali

X
Table of Contents
III
Argumentation and Logics
Prescriptive and Descriptive Obligations in Dynamic Epistemic Deontic
Logic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
150
Guillaume Aucher, Guido Boella, and Leendert van der Torre
Lex Minus Dixit Quam Voluit, Lex Magis Dixit Quam Voluit: A Formal
Study on Legal Compliance and Interpretation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
162
Guido Boella, Guido Governatori, Antonino Rotolo, and
Leendert van der Torre
IV
Dialogue and Legal Multimedia
Legal Electronic Institutions and ONTOMEDIA: Dialogue, Inventio,
and Relational Justice Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
184
Pompeu Casanovas
Mediation, ODR, and the Web 2.0: A Case for Relational Justice . . . . . .
205
Marta Poblet, Pompeu Casanovas, Jos´e Manuel L´opez-Cobo,
Alvaro Cabrerizo, and Juan Antonio Prieto
Legal “Neutral Dialogue”, Implementing the Work of Bruce Ackerman
in the Field of Law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
217
Antoni Abad-Ninet
Legal Multimedia Management through JPEG2000 Framework . . . . . . . .
229
Jorge Gonz´alez-Conejero
Author Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
243

 
P. Casanovas et al. (Eds.): AICOL Workshops 2009, LNAI 6237, pp. 1–11, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
Introduction: Complex Systems and Six Challenges for 
the Development of Law and the Semantic Web 
Pompeu Casanovas1, Ugo Pagallo2, Giovanni Sartor3, and Gianmaria Ajani2 
1 UAB Institute of Law and Technology, Autonomous University of Barcelona, 
Bellaterra (Barcelona) 08193, Spain 
pompeu.casanovas@uab.cat 
2 Torino Law School, University of Torino, via s. Ottavio 20, 1024 Torino, Italy 
{ugo.pagallo,gianmaria.ajani}@unito.it 
3 European University Institute & CIRSFID, via Zamboni 33, 40126 Bologna, Italy 
giovanni.Sartor@eui.eu 
Abstract. AICOL workshops aim to bridge the multiple ways of understanding 
legal systems and legal reasoning in the field of AI and Law. Moreover, they 
pay special attention to the complexity of both legal systems and legal studies, 
on one hand, and the expanding power of the internet and engineering applica-
tions, on the other. Along with a fruitful interaction and exchange of method-
ologies and knowledge between some of the most relevant contributions to AI 
work on contemporary legal systems, the goal is to integrate such a discussion 
with legal theory, political philosophy, and empirical legal approaches. More 
particularly, we focus on four subjects, namely, (i) language and complex sys-
tems in law; (ii) ontologies and the representation of legal knowledge; (iii) ar-
gumentation and logics; (iv) dialogue and legal multimedia. 
Keywords: AI & Law, legal theory, complex systems, Semantic Web, legal  
ontologies, legal semantic web services, argumentation. 
1   Introduction 
Work on Artificial Intelligence and Law has been particularly fruitful in the last dec-
ade. Besides providing advanced computer applications for the legal domain such as 
knowledge based systems and intelligent information retrieval, research in AI and 
Law has developed innovative interdisciplinary models for understanding legal sys-
tems and legal reasoning, which are highly significant for philosophy of law and legal 
theory. Among such models, we can mention, for instance, logical frameworks for 
feasible legal reasoning and dialectical argumentation, logics of normative positions, 
theories of case-based reasoning, and computable models of legal concepts. 
Today there is a strong need not only to integrate research in AI and Law within 
legal theory, but also to encompass the different branches of research in this area. 
When different branches are developing quickly, the risk is in fact missing the oppor-
tunities to exchange knowledge and methodologies. This is particularly so in the case 
of the multiagent systems-approach and social network analysis, that share concepts 
and objects of study, but often present merely superficial convergences in practice as 

2 
P. Casanovas et al. 
 
well as in theory. Multilingual ontologies provide an important opportunity for com-
plementing different trends of research in AI and Law as those mentioned above: 
logical models of norms and concepts, multiagent systems, and distributed networks. 
Recently, research on models of legal systems and legal reasoning has merged with 
research on multiagent systems (MAS), in order to animate such models: normative 
structures may provide guidance to, and result from, the interaction of digital agents, 
that is autonomous entities able to act and communicate, in the pursuit of their pur-
poses, possibly accepting the constraints of violable rules. By developing computable 
models including not only legal norms and concepts but also legal agents (with the 
associated roles and procedures) we can go beyond the statics of a legal system, i.e., 
its representation as a set of norms and concepts, and capture the social, interactive 
and dialectical dynamics of the law (using also ideas from game theory). An even 
more recent line of research in AI and Law uses social network analysis to model the 
evolution of the law. This means identifying the patterns of emergent behavior of 
complex social networks and the ways to anticipate and control such dynamics. 
Thus, the AICOL Workshops aim at addressing legal subject matters, by facing the 
methodological, epistemic and ontological problems of knowledge and information 
processing in complex systems. In what follows, we will examine these theoretical and 
practical dimensions of complexity in the law, legal systems and legal web services.   
2   Complexity and Legal Systems 
Complexity is a complex notion on its own: Along with dozens scientific definitions 
of the concept [1], it has been argued that complexity is “too general a subject to have 
much content” so that only “particularly classes of complex systems possessing strong 
properties that provide a fulcrum for theorizing and generalizing can serve as the foci 
of attention” [2]. 
Unsurprisingly, we find several and often contradictory definitions of complexity 
in the realm of law as well. For example, Luhmann claims in Social Systems that 
complexity “means being forced to select; being forced to select means contingency; 
and contingency means risk” [3]. Moreover, in Hayek’s Law, Legislation and Liberty, 
the idea of complexity is introduced to illustrate the very difference between taxis and 
kosmos, that is, between deliberate human arrangements and the emergence of spon-
taneous orders, thereby representing the key word of Hayek’s critique of any kind of 
social constructivism: “One of our main contentions will be that very complex orders, 
comprising more particular facts that any brain could ascertain or manipulate, can be 
brought only through forces inducing the formation of spontaneous orders” [4]. 
Furthermore, the expression ‘complexity of law’ is not rarely used as opposed to 
simplification. Along with scholarly work [5], specially in France [6, 7, 8], public 
organizations and institutions often refer to the effects of globalization in terms of 
anxiety and panic, insofar as “la complexité croissante de notre droit est devenue une 
source majeure de fragilité pour notre sociéte ́et notre économie” [9]. 
This panoply of different meanings and approaches, however, should not worry us. 
Let aside prescriptive or value-laden assumptions on the topic, the key is to prelimi-
narily grasp the mechanisms of complexity by developing analytic tools for describ-
ing it. Following the abovementioned work of Simon [2], the aim is to briefly recall 

Complex Systems and Six Challenges for the Development of Law and the Semantic Web 
3 
 
the ‘three eruptions’ or burst of interest which have characterized scholarly research 
throughout the twentieth Century, so as to cast light on different aspects of the  
phenomenon. 
First, after World War I, the key term was the neologism ‘holism’, together with 
‘Gestalt’ and ‘creative evolution.’ 
Then, after World War II, research on complexity was associated to the notions of 
‘information’, ‘feedback’, ‘cybernetics’ and ‘general systems.’ 
Finally, current work on the topic mainly focuses on the ideas of ‘chaos’, ‘adaptive 
systems’, ‘genetic algorithms’ and ‘cellular automata.’ 
As well-known, Simon proposes a sort of compromise between reductionism and 
holism. By suggesting that hierarchy, i.e., a system made of inter-related subsystems, 
offers the clue for grasping the architecture of complexity, it does not follow that both 
the description of the properties of those subsystems and the laws of their interaction 
would allow us to infer how the whole mechanism actually works: In the same way in 
which determinism does not mean predictability, very simple laws often end up in 
really complex phenomena. 
Besides, Simon’s ideas on hierarchy provide another conciliation between the top-
down approaches and bottom-up perspectives on complexity mentioned above, e.g., 
Luhmann’s theses on the structure and functioning of social systems, on one hand, 
and Hayek’s views on the evolution of spontaneous orders on the other. Simon’s 
notion of “nearly decomposable systems” reconciles such outlooks because “the clus-
ters of dense interaction in the chart” of social interaction “will identify a rather well-
defined hierarchic structure” [2]. Nevertheless, according to the “empty world  
hypothesis,” the term of near decomposability denotes that “most things are only 
weakly connected with most other things; for a tolerable description of reality only a 
tiny fraction of all possible interactions needs to be taken into account” [2]. 
Quite interestingly, this aspect of Simon’s work has been deepened by today’s re-
search on network applications to (complex) legal systems. Their representation in 
terms of nodes, arcs or links, diameter of the network and its clustering coefficients, 
has delivered fruitful modeling for the comprehension of poorly understood systems 
and even modeling as a source of new knowledge [10, 11]. For instance, in the light 
of the differentiation of regular networks, random networks, and small worlds, we 
know that Simon’s “empty world hypothesis” can be grasped with the notion of hubs, 
i.e., a small fraction of nodes in the network with a much higher degree of connec-
tivity than the average. These hubs not only offer the common connections mediating 
the short path lengths between nodes of the network, but also explain the clusters of 
dense interaction in the chart of social exchange. This occurs when small, tightly 
interlinked clusters of nodes are connected into larger, less cohesive groups, through 
the hubs [12, 13]. 
Along with specific work on jurisprudence [14, 15, 16], codes [17], and even legal 
theory [18], there have been attempts to measure the complexity of legal systems in 
order to compare their structure and content in terms of interpretability, density of 
norms, institutionalization, and so forth [19]. This would be possible by determining 
the “structure-based” measure of the network, which involves the organization of the 
legal text and the quotations in a given corpus, as well as the “content-based” meas-
ure, namely, the diversity of legal outputs produced by any legal system [20].  

4 
P. Casanovas et al. 
 
Despite such theoretical efforts, there are still open problems concerning, say, the 
heuristic capability of the models in explaining real world-phenomena [21, 22], and 
the mechanisms according to which the distribution of information arises in social 
systems, that is, via combinations of exponentials, inverses of quantities, random 
walks, the “Yule process,” phase transitions and critical phenomena, self-organized 
criticality, etc. [23]. Whereas it is essential to ascertain on what “level of abstraction” 
network analyses are carried on [24], we can single out some convergences with other 
fields of research, so as to determine what is going on in the realm of legal theory and 
complexity. Let us point out three main areas. 
First, today’s complexity of the law stands for the crisis of legal positivism and the 
dogma of sovereignty: Even when adopting a top-down approach, there are no simple 
vertexes like in the traditional Kelsenian model of the legal pyramid. As it has been 
stressed by seminal work in transnational law [25], we observe the fragmentation of 
such old vertexes [26, 27, 28], which should be properly understood in the wider 
context of Simon’s clusters of dense interaction mediated by institutional hubs [29]. 
Secondly, today’s complexity of the law recalls the bottom-up approach of 
Hayek’s ideas on evolution and constructivism, spontaneous orders and human (po-
litical) planning, for the informational complexity of the kosmos cannot be reduced to 
any taxis and, furthermore, orders spontaneously evolve from such informational 
complexity. It is noteworthy that, in conformity with Simon’s theses, this evolution is 
framed in novel hierarchical forms [30]. Along with research in ‘evolutionary algo-
rithms’ or ‘adaptive social systems’ [31, 32], the topic has also been addressed in 
terms of “normative emergence” from a multi-agent systems-perspective [33]. 
Finally, we have to mention the impact of technology on current legal systems 
[34], and how multiple fields of AI and Law are practically dealing with complexity 
in terms of, say, legal ontologies, Web services, computer engineering, etc. Because 
of their relevance in the exchange of knowledge and methodologies put forward by 
the AICOL workshops over the last year, let this new frontier in contemporary legal 
systems guide us through the detailed analysis in the next paragraph. 
3   Legal Semantic Web Services: Six New Challenges 
It is generally accepted that computational complexity theory deals with the practical 
boundaries on what computers can and cannot do. In his Turing Award Lecture in 
1982, Stephen A. Cook distinguished parallel computation models from probabilistic 
computation, computational information models and upper and lower bounds in the 
measurement of the complexity of a mathematical problem [35]. As we have said, 
these different approaches have been considered in the legal information field only 
recently. Computable models of the law are usually proposed within the regular 
strong Church-Turing paradigm [36]. Alternative approaches —such as quantum 
interaction [37] and interactive models [38]— are being developed first on other non-
legal domains. Besides, engineering in law poses a set of different problems dealing 
with the practical behavior of users within multiple scenarios. This means that, as 
H.A. Simon pointed out, computer and human behavior interface matters [2]. Com-
plexity lies in context, within the inner/outer ambience dynamics which is commonly 
referred as the ‘extension mind hypothesis’ (or ‘active externalism’) rather that in a 

Complex Systems and Six Challenges for the Development of Law and the Semantic Web 
5 
 
closed human mind. In contrast with the conventional view of the computer/brain 
metaphor, body and world can sometimes form part of the machinery by which mind 
and cognition are physically realized [39, 40].  
Let’s consider complexity from this practical side, too. There are three challenges 
to be considered related to the development of the Semantic Web: (i) the relationship 
between the Social Web (Web 2.0) and the Web of Data (Web 3.0); (ii) evolving legal 
ontologies (and their relationship to folksonomies), (iii) and the construction of Se-
mantic Legal Web Services (SLWS). 
Bridging the gap between the Social and the Semantic Web is perhaps one of the 
main concerns [41, 42] The Web is no longer considered only a web of linked websites, 
but a web of linked data: publication of capabilities is as important as vertical applica-
tions. Flickr, YouTube, Delicious, mySpace, eBay… are examples of user generated 
content which can be harnessed by semantics and participative architectures [43]. 
In this way, collected intelligence outputs may become the path for collective intel-
ligence processes as well. Mashups (combining data or functionality from two or 
many more external sources to create a new service) and Web-based crowdsourcing 
(e.g. collaborative tagging) are related to this basic idea. As Tom Gruber [44] put it, 
collective knowledge systems are based in the synergy of the ecosystem of participa-
tion and the ecosystem of aggregated data. In the former, value is created by the ag-
gregation of many individual users; in the SW, value is created by the integration of 
structured data from many sources. ‘We will know we are crossing into the new learn-
ing paradigm when we see a qualitative change in the way people think of interacting 
on the web. Today, that interaction pattern treats the web as an information source: 
we learn by browsing, searching, and monitoring the web. Tomorrow, the web will be 
understood as an active human-computer system, and we will learn by telling it what 
we are interested in, asking it what we collectively know, and using it to apply our 
collective knowledge to address our collective needs’.  
The way of facing ontology conception and construction is changing too. Contex-
tual ontologies constitute a classical problem [45], especially in multimedia [46] and 
ontology visualization [47]. However, in the second SW generation, ontologies are 
conceived in a lighter way, to be combined with data mining, NLP techniques and 
folksonomies [48]. Tagging-systems (i.e. folksonomies) seem especially apt to be 
combined with a more structured semantic approach, even if they present phenomena 
as tag synonymy, tag polysemy, and basic level variation [49, 50].  
Semantic Web Services (SWS) constitute a third challenge. Combination of se-
mantic and social dimensions produce Web 3.0, and by combining semantic technol-
ogy and web services we create the possibility of offering service communities [43, 
51]. Fig. 1 shows the vision of SWS, as recently plotted by SW developers (J. Davies, 
J. Domingue, D. Fensel et al.). This would imply the transformation of service-
oriented architectures (SOA) into an architecture comprised of billion of services, 
grounded into the worldwide sharing of content: (i) properly incorporating principles 
that made the web scale to a worldwide communication infrastructure (contracting, 
reusability, autonomy, discoverability, composability…); (ii) achieving significant 
automation of service lifecycle activities (location, negotiation, adaptation, composi-
tion, invocation and monitoring as well as service interaction requiring data, protocol 
and process mediation); and (iii) reaching a balanced integration of services provided 
by humans and machines [43]. 

6 
P. Casanovas et al. 
 
 
Fig. 1. SWS technological pillars. Source: [43] (reproduced with permission). 
This seems to be a reasonable next step for the development of the web. However, 
what does it happen in the legal field?  
Law in the web constitutes an ever expanding field. Since the nineties, World Le-
gal Information Institutes provide free access to thousands of legal databases [52, 53]. 
Contrary to an extended belief, legal professions (mostly, law firms, judiciaries and 
governmental agencies) have shown a growing interest in taking advantage from the 
web communicative and expressive capabilities, and this is still the case with the 
emergence of blawgs and the provision of legal services in the Web 2.0 [54]. More-
over, partly due to the special risk-aversion of the field, privacy, trust and security 
have been an issue since the beginning.  Protecting sensitive data, and setting up se-
cure content and interfaces for users are the main concerns [55, 56]. 
Therefore, there are at least three more challenges to be faced by law and the 
spreading of Semantic Web services: (iv) bridging the gap between IT law and IT for 
lawyers; (v) grasping the changing and evolving nature of regulations through the 
convergence between Web 2.0 and Web 3.0; (vi) adding reasoning and applying dia-
lectic systems to facilitate users’ exchanges and legal operations (contracting, sen-
tencing or drafting). 
The fourth challenge means overcoming the traditional divide between IT law (in-
tellectual property, patent law, privacy…) and IT for lawyers (legal programming, 
computer and AI tools) [54, 57]. With the web focused on linked content, it does not 
make much sense maintaining the two fields separated: computer scientists and on-
tologists have to model content regulations into programs, and lawyers should be able 
to understand and even actively participate in protocol design.  
The last two challenges are directly connected to the developments of legal theory, 
argumentation, and multi-agent systems (MAS). Regulation is not just rules and norms. 
Besides technical protocols and web languages, there is in the web a consistent grow-
ing trend towards user-centered patterns and collective behavior. Sharing content 
means capturing emergent patterns which lie on the complexity of interactions. People 

Complex Systems and Six Challenges for the Development of Law and the Semantic Web 
7 
 
are only partially aware that sometimes they are following paths that can be described 
and explained by means of complex systems [58]. Self-regulation and personalization 
may wide up this dimension of an emergent collective order through the layers of se-
mantic languages.  
Critical thinking, informal logic, deontic logic, non-monotonic logic, argumenta-
tion theory, multi-agent systems, can be incorporated to set up the legal reasoning 
frame in which LSWS may flourish. In this way, users could add content into an 
automated environment able to facilitate the performance of legal acts through suc-
cessive (interactive) moves. Dialectic systems are crucial to reach this late objective. 
Legal theory is crucial to structure its content.  
4   On the Content of This Volume 
AICOL Workshops are planned to foster discussion on these topics among the differ-
ent perspectives and branches of AI & Law, legal theory, political philosophy, and 
empirical legal approaches. We have organized the papers included in this volume in 
four sections: (i) language and complex systems in law; (ii) ontologies and the repre-
sentation of legal knowledge; (iii) argumentation and logics; (iv) dialogue and legal 
multimedia.  
Complex systems are the subject matter of the first section. Ugo Pagallo illustrates 
the informational nature of complex social systems via a theory of spontaneous orders 
and an evolutionary theory of complex social networks. He reflects on the main dis-
tinction between taxis and cosmos set up by Hayek. Gianmaria Ajani and PierCarlo 
Rossi propose some insights on how the relationship of Law and AI concerns the 
issue of knowledge discovery. They focus on social network analysis and the applica-
tion of ontologies in multicultural contexts. Romain Boulet, Pierre Mazzega and 
Danièle Bourcier search for hidden structures within the network of citations of the 
French Environmental Code. The graph associated to it has a small-world structure. 
Monica Palmirani uses NLP techniques to isolate relevant parts of linguistic speech in 
the content of norms. She presents a methodology to classify a special kind of norms 
called “modificatory provisions”. 
Ontologies and legal knowledge representation constitute loosely the next section. 
Alexander Boer, Tom van Engers, and Radboud Winkels write on traceability and 
change. They introduce the Agile Project, in which a mediating layer of representation 
functions as link bases for traces to sources of law and other resources (business proc-
esses, service specifications, etc.). Tommaso Agnoloni, Meritxell Fernández-Barrera, 
Maria Teresa Sagri, Daniela Tiscornia and Giulia Venturi compare a FrameNet-style 
(NLP-based analysis) and an ontological characterization of the fundamental legal 
concept of ‘obligation’. They contend that lexicons can be mapped into ontological 
characterizations, bridging the traditional gap between linguistic (NLP) and semantic 
approaches. Jeroslaw Bak and Czeslaw Jedrzejek present a crime ontology-based 
model of fraudulent disbursement. They set up a ‘conceptual minimal model’ consist-
ing of eight layers of concepts to use available data on facts and to map crime actions 
and roles.  Gioele Barabucci, Luca Cervone, Monica Palmirani, Silvio Peroni, and 
Fabio Vitali introduce Akoma Ntoso, a project with African Parliaments to organize 
and classify their legal texts as XML documents. Akoma Ntoso maintains separated 

8 
P. Casanovas et al. 
 
many conceptual layers, and provides ontologies on top which allow simple legal rea-
soning as well.  
The third section focuses on argumentation and logics. Guillaume Aucher, Guido 
Boella and Leon van der Torre make the distinction between prescriptive and descrip-
tive obligations within dynamic epistemic deontic logic. In a second paper pointing to 
the same direction, Antonino Rotolo, Guido Boella, Guido Governatori and Leon van 
der Torre reflect on applicability conditions of norms. They outline a logical frame-
work to capture the norm change power and, at the same time, the limitations of the 
judicial system in revising the set of constitutive rules defining the concepts on which 
the applicability of such a rule is based. 
Finally, the fourth section addresses the issue of relational justice and dialogue. Re-
lational justice models are based on cooperative behavior, negotiation, and agreement. 
Pompeu Casanovas reelaborates the content of ancient rhetoric terms such as stasis, 
ekphrasis and inventio to monitor the construction of new relational justice tools, such 
as Legal Electronic Institutions (LEI) and the Ontomedia platform for Online Dispute 
Resolution (ODR). Marta Poblet, Pompeu Casanovas, José Manuel López Cobo, 
Alvaro Cabrerizo and Juan Antonio Prieto describe its design as a semantically-driven 
web service that allows end-users to negotiate and mediate in different domains (fam-
ily, commerce, consumer disputes…). Antoni Abad-Ninet deepens into the notion of 
relational justice and introduces Bruce Ackerman’s theory of ‘neutral legal dialogue’. 
Finally, the volume ends up with a paper on the new field of legal multimedia. Jorge 
González-Conejero introduces legal multimedia management through some parts of 
the JPEG2000 framework to deal with content. This kind of developments on the 
treatment of images, sound and videos are most required to develop multimedia func-
tionalities on LSWS in the web.  
Acknowledgments 
CSO-2008-05536-SOCI, TSI-020110-2009-39, TSI-020110-2009-374, TSI-020501-
2008-131, TSI-020100-2008-134.  
References 
1. Lloyd, S.: Measures of Complexity: A Non-Exhaustive List. IEEE Control Systems Maga-
zine (August 2001) 
2. Simon, H.A.: The Sciences of the Artificial. The MIT Press, Cambridge (1996) 
3. Luhmann, N.: Social Systems. Stanford University Press, Stanford (1995) 
4. Hayek, F.A.: Law, Legislation and Liberty. In: A New Statement of the Liberal Principles 
of Justice and Political Economy. Chicago University Press, Chicago (1982) 
5. Schuck, P.H.: Legal Complexity: Some Causes, Consequences, and Cures. Duke Law 
Journal 42(1), 1–52 (1992) 
6. Carbonnier, J.: Flexible droit. LGDJ, Paris (1983) 
7. Delmas-Marty, M.: Le flou du droit. PUF, Paris (2004) 
8. Doat, M., Le Goff, J., Pédrot, P. (eds.): Droit et complexité. Pour une nouvelle intelligence 
du droit vivant. PUR, Rennes (2007) 

Complex Systems and Six Challenges for the Development of Law and the Semantic Web 
9 
 
9. Conseil d’État, Rapport public 2006. In: Sécurité juridique et Complexité du droit, Etudes 
et doc. n° 57, La documentation française, pp. 227– 406 (2006) 
10. Watts, D., Strogatz, S.: Collective Dynamics of “Small-World” Networks. Nature 393, 
440–442 (1998) 
11. Kleinberg, J.M.: Navigation in a Small World. Nature 406, 845 (2000) 
12. Barabási, A.-L.: Linked: The New Science of Networks. Perseus, New York (2002) 
13. Newman, M.E.J.: The Structure and Function of Complex Networks. SIAM Review 45, 
167–256 (2003) 
14. Chandler, S.: The Network Structure of Supreme Court Jurisprudence. The University of 
Houston Working Paper Series, No. 2005-W-01 (2005) 
15. Fowler, Th., Jeon, S.: The Authority of Supreme Court Precedent: A Network Analysis 
(2005), http://jhfowler.ucdavis.edu 
16. Bommarito, M.J., Katz, D., Zelner, J.: Law as a Seamless Web? Comparison of Various 
Network Representations of the United States Supreme Court Corpus (1791-2005). Social 
Science Research Network Working Paper Series (2009) 
17. Chandler, S.: The Network Structure of the Uniform Commercial Code: It’s a Small World 
After All (2005),  
 http://library.wolfram.com/infocenter/Conferences/5800/ 
 uccanalysis.pdf 
18. Smith, T.A.: The Web of Law. San Diego Legal Studies Research, paper n° 06-11 (2005) 
19. Robilant, E.: di: Il diritto nella società industriale. In: Rivista internazionale di filosofia del 
diritto, LI, pp. 225-262 (1973) 
20. Bourcier, D., Mazzega, P.: Toward measures of complexity in legal systems. In: ICAIL 
2007 Proceedings, pp. 211–215 (2007) 
21. Mitchell, M.: Complexity. A Guided Tour. Oxford University Press, New York (2009) 
22. Schnettler, S.: A Structured Overview of 50 Years of Small-World Research. Social Net-
works 31, 165–178 (2009) 
23. Newman, M.E.J.: Power Laws, Pareto Distributions and Zipf’s Law. Contemporary Phys-
ics 46, 323–351 (2006) 
24. Pagallo, U.: Power Laws and Levels of Abstraction in Understanding Legal Systems. In: 
Andrighetto, G., Boella, G., Pagallo, U., Villata, S. (eds.) Combined Proceedings of the In-
ternational Symposium on Social Network Analysis and Norms for MAS, pp. 41–45. 
AISB Publication, De Montford University, Leicester (2010) 
25. Jessup, P.C.: Transnational Law. Yale University Press, New Haven (1956) 
26. Wallace, M.D., Singer, J.D.: International Networks, 1904-1950: The Small World of 
Trade and Diplomacy. In: Kochen, M. (ed.) The Small World, pp. 128–144. Ablex, Nor-
wood (1989) 
27. Fischer-Lescano, A., Teubner, G.: Regime-Collisions: The Vain Search for Legal Unity in the 
Fragmentation of Global Law. Michigan Journal of International Law 25, 999–1045 (2004) 
28. Zumbansen, P.: Transnational Law. In: Smits, J. (ed.) Encyclopedia of Comparative Law, 
pp. 738–754. Elgar, Cheltenham (2006) 
29. Pagallo, U.: “Small World” Paradigm in Social Sciences: Problems and Perspectives. In: 
Ward Bynum, T., Rogerson, S., Murata, K. (eds.) Glocalisation: Bridging the Global Na-
ture of Information and Communication Technology and the Local Nature of Human Be-
ings, e-SCM Research Center and University of Meiji, Tokyo, pp. 456–465 (2007) 
30. Pagallo, U.: Let Them Be Peers: The Future of P2P Systems and Their Impact on Contempo-
rary Legal Networks. In: M. Fernandez-Barrera, N. Nuno Gomes de Andrade, P. de Filippi, M. 
Viola de Azevedo Cunha, G. Sartor and P. Casanovas (eds.), Law and Technology: Looking 
into the Future, European Press Academic Publishing, Florence, 323-338 (2009)  

10 
P. Casanovas et al. 
 
31. Taylor, M.C.: The Moment of Complexity. In: Emerging Network Culture. The University 
of Chicago Press, Chicago (2001) 
32. Pagallo, U.: Teoria giuridica della complessità, Giappichelli, Torino (2006) 
33. Pew Internet & American Life Project: The Impact of the Internet on Institutions in the Fu-
ture (2010), http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2010/Impact-of-the-
Internet-on-Institutions-in-the-Future/Main-
Findings.aspx?r=1 
34. Andrighetto, G., Campennì, M., Conte, R., Cecconi, F.: The Complex Loop of Norm 
Emergence: a Simulation Model. LNCS (LNAI). Springer, Hiedelberg (in press) 
35. Cook, S.A.: An Overview on Computational Complexity. 1982 Turing Award Lecture, 
Communications of the ACM 26(6), 401–408 (1983) 
36. Casanovas, P., Sartor, G., Casellas, N., Rubino, R.: Computable Models of the Law. LNCS 
(LNAI), vol. 4884. Springer, Heidelberg (2008) 
37. Bruza, P., Sofge, D., Lawless, W., van Rijsbergen, K., Klusch, M. (eds.): QI 2009. LNCS, 
vol. 5494. Springer, Heidelberg (2009) 
38. Wegner, P., Eberbach, E.: New Models of Computation. The Computer Journal 47(1), 4–9 
(2004) 
39. Smart, P.R., Engelbrecht, P.C., Braines, D., Strub, M., Hendler, J.: Cognitive Extension 
and the Web. In: Web Science Conference: Society On-Line, Athens, Greece, March 18-20 
(2009), http://eprints.ecs.soton.ac.uk/17155/ (retrieved 2020) 
40. Smart, P.R., Engelbrecht, P.C., Braines, D., Strub, M., Giammanco, C.: The Network-
Extended Mind. In: Network Science for Military Coalition Operations: Information Ex-
traction and Interaction. IGI Global, Hershey (2010) (in Press) 
41. Hendler, J.: Web 3.0: Chicken Farms on the Semantic Web. IEEE Computer Society 41(1), 
106–108 (2008) 
42. Hendler, J.: Web 3.0: The Dawn of Semantic Search. IEEE Computer Society 43(1), 77–
80 (2010) 
43. Davies, J., Potter, M., Richardson, M., Stincić, S., Domingue, J., González-Cabero, R.: 
Towards 
the 
Open 
Service 
Web. 
BT 
Technology 
Journal 26(2) 
(2009), 
http://www.btplc.com/Innovation/Journal/BTTJ/current/HTMLArt
icles/Volume26/25Towards/Default.aspx (2010) 
44. Gruber, T.: Collective Knowledge Systems: Where the Social Web meets the Semantic 
Web. In: Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web (2007), 
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2007.11.011 
45. Bao, J., Tao, J., McGuinness, D.L., Smart, P.: Context Representation for the Semantic 
Web. In: Web Science Conference, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA, April 26- April 27 
(2010), http://eprints.ecs.soton.ac.uk/20829/ 
46. Dietze, S., Domingue, J.: Towards Context-aware Multimedia Processing through Seman-
tic Web Services. In: European Conference on Interactive Television, Proceedings of the 
Seventh European Conference on European Interactive Television Conference, Leuven, 
Belgium, pp. 129–132 (2009) 
47. Pajntar, O., Mladenić, D., Grobelnik, M.: Contextualized Visualization of Ontologies and 
Ontology Networks, NeOn Project (2009),  
 http://kt.ijs.si/Dunja/SiKDD2009/Papers/BostjanPajntar.pdf  
  (retrieved 2010) 
48. d’Aquin, M., Motta, E., Sabou, M., Angeletou, S., Gridinoc, L., Lopez, V., Guidi, D.: To-
wards a New Generation of Semantic Web Applications. IEEE Intelligent Systems 23(3), 
20–28 (2008) 

Complex Systems and Six Challenges for the Development of Law and the Semantic Web 
11 
 
49. Angeletou, S., Sabou, M., Motta, E.: Improving Search in Folksonomies: A Task Based 
Comparison of WordNet and Ontologies. In: International Conference on Knowledge Cap-
ture Proceedings of the 5th Conference on Knowledge Redondo Beach, California, USA, 
pp. 169–170 (2009) 
50. Angeletou, S., Sabou, M., Motta, E.: Folksonomy Enrichment and Search. In: Arroyo, L., 
et al. (eds.) ESWC 2009. LNCS, vol. 5554, pp. 801–805. Springer, Heidelberg (2009) 
51. Pedrinaci, C., Domingue, J., Krummenacher, R.: Services and the Web of Data: An Unex-
ploited Symbiosis. In: Workshop: Linked AI: AAAI Spring Symposium, Linked Data 
Meets Artificial Intelligence (2010) 
52. Bruce, T.R.: Foundings on the Cathedral Steps. In: Peruginelli, G., Ragona, M. (eds.) Law 
via the Internet: Free Access Quality of Information Effectiveness of Rights, pp. 411–422. 
European Press Academic Publishing, Florence (2009) 
53. Greenleaf, G.: AustLII’s Business Models: Constraints and Opportunities in Funding Free 
Access to Law. In: Peruginelli, G., Ragona, M. (eds.) Law via the Internet: Free Access 
Quality of Information Effectiveness of Rights, pp. 423–446. European Press Academic 
Publishing, Florence (2009) 
54. Casanovas, P., Poblet, M.: Justice via the Internet: Hopes and Challenges of Law and the 
Semantic Web. In: Peruginelli, G., Ragona, M. (eds.) Law via the Internet: Free Access 
Quality of Information Effectiveness of Rights, pp. 337–346. European Press Academic 
Publishing, Florence (2009) 
55. Roig, A. (ed.): Law and Web 2.0, IDT Series 3,  
 http://www.huygens.es/site/service4.html 
56. Fernandez-Barrera, M., Nuno Gomes de Andrade, N., de Filippi, P., Viola de Azevedo 
Cunha, M., Sartor, G., Casanovas, P. (eds.): Law and Technology: Looking into the Fu-
ture. European Press Academic Publishing, Florence (2009) 
57. Casanovas, P.: The Future of Law: Relational Justice and Next Generation of Web Ser-
vices. In: Fernandez-Barrera, M., Nuno Gomes de Andrade, N., de Filippi, P., Viola de 
Azevedo Cunha, M., Sartor, G., Casanovas, P. (eds.) Law and Technology: Looking into 
the Future, pp. 137–156. European Press Academic Publishing, Florence (2009) 
58. Pagallo, U.: “Small world” Paradigm and Empirical Research in Legal Ontologies: a Topo-
logical Approach. In: Ajani, G., Peruginelli, G., Sartor, G., Tiscornia, D. (eds.) The Multi-
language Complexity of European Law: Methodologies in Comparison, pp. 195–210. 
European Press Academic Publishing, Florence (2007) 

 
P. Casanovas et al. (Eds.): AICOL Workshops 2009, LNAI 6237, pp. 12–26, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
As Law Goes By: Topology, Ontology, Evolution 
Ugo Pagallo 
Law School, University of Torino, via s. Ottavio 54, 10124 Torino, Italy 
ugo.pagallo@unito.it 
Abstract. The paper deals with Hayek’s classical distinction between cosmos 
and taxis, i.e., evolution vs. constructivism, spontaneous orders vs. human (po-
litical) planning. Recent empirical evidence confirms that the informational 
complexity of the law is not reducible to taxis alone and, furthermore, orders 
spontaneously emerge from the complexity of the environment through specific 
laws of evolution. Whereas, most of the time, today’s research on AI & Law  
focuses on the taxis-side of the law, my aim is to illustrate the informational na-
ture of complex social systems via a theory of spontaneous orders and an evolu-
tionary theory of complex social networks. By distinguishing  three levels of 
analysis, namely information as reality, for reality, and on reality, a topological 
approach shows how information is produced and distributed in current legal 
systems, how it is possible to harness these properties and obtain useful applica-
tions in the legal domain, while shedding further light on some aspects of cur-
rent AI research. 
Keywords: Complexity, Evolution, Information, Legal Systems, Ontology,  
Topology. 
1   Introduction 
As stressed by the organizers of both the AICOL workshop in Beijing and its follow-
up in Rotterdam (respectively in September and December 2009), “today there is a 
strong need to integrate research in AI & Law within legal theory” as well as “to 
encompass the different branches in AI & Law.” While different fields like legal 
ontologies, network analyses, multi-agent systems, and so forth, are developing 
quickly, there is a risk of “missing the opportunities to exchange knowledge and 
methodologies.” 
Hence, by following up the AICOL proposal, there are two reasons why I think 
Friedrich Hayek’s work on philosophy of law is particularly relevant when promoting 
the integration between AI & Law and legal theory, and between different branches of 
AI & Law. 
On the one hand, it is of course a matter of information: In the preface of the third 
volume of Law, Legislation and Liberty from 1979, i.e., The Political Order of a Free 
People, the Nobel laureate updated his own lexis with the informational perspective 
and network approach suggested by cybernetics and contemporary system theory [1]. 
Although Hayek did not mention Norbert Wiener, but Ilya Prigogine’s work on com-
plexity, Karl Popper and “another friend of mine from Wien,” Ludwig von Bertalanffy, 

 
As Law Goes By: Topology, Ontology, Evolution 
13 
 
the point can be summarised with a quote of Wiener from Control and Communication 
in the Animal and the Machine: “Information is information, not matter or energy. No 
materialism which does not admit this can survive at the present day” [2]. 
On the other hand, there is the distinction between cosmos and taxis, evolution and 
constructivism, spontaneous orders and human (political) planning. The idea is that 
the informational complexity of the cosmos cannot be reduced to any taxis and that 
orders spontaneously evolve from this informational complexity. While scholars often 
discuss the first facet of Hayek’s work, e.g., an informational theory of complex so-
cial systems as a theory of spontaneous orders, my aim has been to develop another 
aspect: The evolutionary theory of complex social networks [3]. More specifically, 
such an approach suggests some interesting modes of interaction with other areas of 
AI & Law. 
In order to illustrate such a double Hayek’s legacy, this paper is presented in four 
sections. 
First, I summarise twelve years of research on the ‘small world’-paradigm and, 
hence, some work on the topology of complex legal systems. An expert of spontane-
ous orders like Friedrich Hayek would have been very pleased to discover the way we 
have deepened these topics over the last years. 
Secondly, I mention some applications of the paradigm to extremely hot issues of 
today’s legal debate like privacy and copyright: A concrete example is given by a new 
kind of recommender system on the internet and how it deals with some constitutional 
rights. 
Thirdly, I focus on possible applications of the paradigm to areas of AI & Law and, 
in particular, to the field of ‘legal ontologies.’ We will look at how we can annotate 
legislation with concepts and evaluate the performance of the informational system 
facing massive amounts of data. 
Finally, I differentiate two meanings of ‘evolution,’ namely, between Hayek’s idea 
of cosmos and his thesis on evolutionary psychology [1]. This allows me to sum up 
the multiple outputs of the new paradigm while singling out three ways of conceiving 
the connection between information and reality, that is, information as reality (section 
2), for reality (section 3), and on reality (sections 3 and 4). This very differentiation 
sets the proper ground to prevent some misunderstandings of today’s debate and the 
risk of missing the opportunities to exchange knowledge and methodologies between 
different branches of AI & Law and legal theory. 
Let us start with Hayek’s ideas on information as reality, that is law, cosmos and 
taxis as matters of information. 
2   Network Thinking 
Some of the most relevant problems in AI & Law concern two major questions en-
twined with the complexity of Hayek’s cosmos, namely, the amount of work we need 
to gloss relevant legal information and the issue of evaluating the performance of a 
given tool with increasing amounts of data [4]. Over the last years, I have been show-
ing how Hayek’s ideas on legal cosmos, spontaneous orders, and the evolution of 
complex social networks may be illustrated topologically, that is, analysing how in-
formation is distributed among the nodes of the network.  

14 
U. Pagallo 
 
The general idea is offered by Gregory Chaitin’s algorithmic theory of information 
[5]: We should start thinking of information in terms of complexity, and vice versa. 
The phenomenon will become all the more complex as the quantity of information 
grows and its theoretical compression decreases. While some scholars as Murray 
Gell-Mann [6] or Mark C. Taylor [7] have been applying these ideas to adaptive com-
plex systems and to social networks, I developed this outlook as an evolutionary the-
ory of social institutions and, more particularly, of complex legal systems [3, 8]. 
In a nutshell, Chaitin has algorithmically updated Gödel’s theorem of incomplete-
ness by proving that truth should be considered as a subset of complexity. In social 
terms, this means that complex networks are constituted by a quantity of information 
irreducible to complete formalization and algorithmic compression. As in the case of 
Gell-Mann’s adaptive systems [6], or Taylor’s complex networks [7], the evolution of 
contemporary social systems goes along with the emergence of spontaneous orders. 
Although we can predict this evolution only in very partial terms due to the intrinsic 
randomness of the system, there is a way to quantify these spontaneous orders as a 
sort of informational network. We can determine, in other words, the complexity of 
the social system. 
To simply grasp the point, consider three key parameters of every network, namely 
(i) its nodes, (ii) the average distance between nodes or diameter of the network, and 
(iii) its clustering coefficients. This allows us to single out three models. 
The first one is represented by a regular network in which all of the nodes have the 
same number of links: This network has high clustering coefficients but a long diame-
ter since the degree of separation between nodes is high. 
The second model is a random network with opposite characteristics: It presents 
low clustering coefficients but a very short diameter. The explanation is that random 
links exponentially reduce the degree of separation between nodes in the network. 
The third model is a small world-network: Its peculiarity depends on the apparent 
deviation from the properties of both random and regular networks. Like random 
networks, small world-networks present a short characteristic path length, but they 
also share with regular networks high clustering coefficients. 
Since the pioneering work of Stanley Milgram [9] and, later, of Mark Granovetter 
[10], the idea of small world-networks became in few years one of the key words of 
contemporary scientific research by fostering a large set of empirical studies on the 
topology of complex systems. Significant effort has been made in order to structure 
analytical models able to capture the nature of small world-networks. Here it suffices 
to mention only two of these. 
The first small world-model was proposed by Duncan Watts and Steven Strogatz 
[11]: They suggested to randomly rewire a small fraction of the edges belonging to a 
low-dimensional regular lattice so as to prove that the degrees of separation in the net-
work would exponentially decrease. Yet, contrarily to random networks, the shortening 
of the diameter proceeded along with high clustering coefficients as in regular networks. 
These small world-features explain the results of Milgram’s and Granovetter’s research 
because short diameters of the network and high clustering coefficients quantify both 
the low degrees of separation between two citizens picked up randomly in such a com-
plex network like the American society studied by Milgram in the mid 1960s [9], and 
the “strength of weak ties” stressed by Granovetter in the early 1970s [10]. 

 
As Law Goes By: Topology, Ontology, Evolution 
15 
 
The second analytical model we need to mention was defined by Albert-Lászlo 
Barabási [12]: He noted that most real world networks grow by continuous addition of 
new nodes whereas the likelihood of connecting to a node would depend upon its 
degree of connectivity. This sort of special attachment in a growing system explains 
what Watts and Strogatz apparently missed, namely, the power-law distribution of the 
network in a topological scale-free perspective: Small world-networks in the real 
world are indeed characterized by few nodes with very high values and by most nodes 
with low connectivity. The presence of hubs or of a small fraction of nodes with a 
much higher degree than the average offers the key to comprehend why small world-
networks can be both highly clustered and scale-free. This occurs when small, tightly 
interlinked clusters of nodes are connected into larger, less cohesive groups. 
More recently, Melanie Mitchell [13] and Sebastian Schnettler [14] have offered a 
comprehensive picture of this work with its many applications to real world-networks 
like the brain, genetic regulatory networks as in the case of metabolic networks, of 
epidemiology, ecologies and food webs. Apart from economics, art, and sociology, 
however, both Mitchell and Schnettler missed some relevant applications of the new 
paradigm to the realm of law. Here it suffices to recall two studies from 2005. 
The first work is by Seth Chandler [15], who built an electronic map of 26000 de-
cisions issued by the U.S. Supreme Court from early 19th Century onwards. He as-
sumed each case as a node of the network and each citation as a link, while links 
between nodes are intended as directional arrows rather than simple lines. The result 
is a network with very low density that, nevertheless, has a main core. In fact, only 
258047 out of 365 million possible citations have been made in actual law. We also 
find decisions among the large group of weakly connected cases that are both well 
cited and interdependent. These decisions are the hubs of the network and, unsurpris-
ingly, Chandler claims that this main core substantially concerns “rights of free 
speech and association under the American constitution” [15]. More particularly, 
there are 122 nodes each with 28 or more links to the other cases of the main core, so 
that the density is more than 500 times greater than the density of the network as a 
whole. By grasping these cases as hubs of a small world-network, it is then easy to 
understand why any First Amendment decision would reverberate more readily 
through the U.S. law than a decision made in any other field. In a nutshell, hubs offer 
the common connections mediating the short path lengths between other nodes in the 
network. 
These results were (partially) confirmed in June 2005 by Thomas Fowler and 
Sangick Jeon [16], who presented the network of 30288 U.S. Supreme Court majority 
opinions from 1754 to 2002 (actually, they also accounted for the decisions of the 
Supreme Court of Pennsylvania contained in the first volume of the U.S. Supreme 
Court Reporter). Again, each case is considered as a vertex or a node of the network 
and each citation as an arc or a link. The total number of links to and from the node 
represents its degree (in and out). The overall result is a list of all of the cases that are 
connected together by 220500 citations according to the power-law distribution of a 
small world-network. From this viewpoint, it is not only possible to highlight the 
“good hubs” (well cited) as well as the “good authorities” (most interdependent nodes) 
of the network. We are also able to follow the rise and fall of a precedent’s importance 
in a continuously evolving legal system such as the U.S. constitutional law. While the 
most authoritative cases before the American civil war involved freedom of contract, 

16 
U. Pagallo 
 
namely the contract clause, after the war and until the end of the 1930s with the New 
Deal the main core became balance of power in order to regulate commercial issues in 
a federal system. Whereas this perspective confirms Chandler’s conclusions – in that 
the contemporary main core of the U.S. Supreme Court jurisprudence is given by rights 
of free speech as Justices shifted their focus towards civil liberties – Fowler and Jeon 
also back up our network perspective: “In particular, the power-law tail in the degree 
distribution of inward and outward citations in the precedent network suggests that 
there is something systematic about the evolution of law that mimics the evolution of 
other network phenomena” [16]. 
The laws of this complex evolution has been found in other legal fields [17, 18], 
and have suggested to ask whether the “web of the law” is really a “seamless web” 
[19], that is, an interconnected network where “the categorization of legal doctrine 
into discrete fields (torts, property, contracts, and so forth) does not accurately capture 
the nature of the law” [20]. 
Whether or not this is the case, our network perspective has achieved three impor-
tant results. 
First, all legal networks we have been considering optimize the distribution of in-
formation in the system by shortening its diameter via hubs. This is how, finally, 
Milgram’s The Small World Problem was resolved after forty years: Even though, 
compared to regular networks, randomness increases in small world-networks, small 
world-networks are more efficient than regular networks by shortening the average 
distance between the nodes of the system. 
Secondly, these legal networks are complex in that optimization of distribution of 
legal information goes along with high (local) clustering coefficients. Although this 
latter property is also a feature of regular networks, randomness explains why you 
need more information in order to understand the features of small world-networks: 
They are actually less compressible in theoretical terms, i.e., harder to understand.  
Finally, randomness reappears when examining the taking over of the hubs in the 
network (both at institutional and semantic levels). In fact, it is impossible to predict 
the evolution of the network due to its own complexity: Whether or not you agree that 
today’s spontaneous orders present some specific properties as short diameters, high 
clustering coefficients, etc., there is no algorithm or computation in order to determine 
the evolution of the hubs.  
Notwithstanding these theoretical limits (information as reality), there are interest-
ing applications of the new paradigm by exploiting the topological properties of small 
world-networks (information for reality). In order to stress this theoretical difference 
and set the framework of the following section, it is useful the example of a new gen-
eration of recommender systems on the internet and their impact on some crucial 
fields of today’s legal systems as copyright and privacy. After all, no cosmos can do 
without taxis in a complex world. 
3   Overloading Information 
A striking example of today’s spontaneous orders is given by peer-to-peer (P2P) net-
works and the way these file sharing applications-systems have been evolving over 

 
As Law Goes By: Topology, Ontology, Evolution 
17 
 
the last years on the internet. In particular, after Barabási’s work [12], several scien-
tific papers have shown the existence of small world-patterns and power  
laws-distribution of information that characterize any P2P system at different levels. 
There is significant evidence of spontaneous clustering of users by content distribu-
tion in, say, both P2P systems like Gnutella and Kazaa as demonstrated by Iamnitchi 
et al. [21], and Ruffo et al. [22]. If different models can be used in order to detect this 
phenomenon, like “data-sharing graphs” or “affinity networks,” what is remarkable is 
the fact that the topology remains the same in such complex networks as the Web 
studied by Barabási and the U.S. Supreme Court jurisprudence which I mentioned in 
the previous section. Regardless of the nature of the system or of its peculiar constitu-
ents, the probability that a vertex in a complex network is connected to other vertices 
decays according to a power law.  
It is thus possible to exploit the topological properties of the network (information 
as reality), so as to obtain some interesting applications in the legal field (information 
for reality). I clarify the point with the difference between recommender systems 
which harness the topological properties of the network (i.e., information as reality), 
and the goals we can achieve through these recommender systems (i.e., information 
for reality, namely sets of rules or instructions for the determination of other informa-
tional objects). Let me start with the first point: What is a recommender system? 
In a nutshell, recommender systems are techniques for coping with the problem of 
overloading information on the internet. Most of the time the semantic of the ap-
proach has been to find a simple match between a query string and the content of 
documents, without considering user’s preferences. Centralized approaches appear to 
be content-based as in the recommender systems of News Weeder and Syskill & We-
bert, or collaborative filtering as Tapestry, or using a demographic strategy. With 
Giancarlo Ruffo and his team at the University of Turin, however, I have been devel-
oping the idea that it is not necessary to get user profiles, and users are not required to 
give feedback to a data collector entity, in order to obtain useful information. First 
presented in [22], then deepened by Ruffo and myself [17, 18], this topological model 
can be illustrated with a P2P file sharing applications-system as the software of 
Gnutella. It is important to grasp its basic structure to explain how this decentralized 
recommendation scheme, based on “spontaneous affinities,” works. 
First of all, Gnutella consists in a two-tier overlay where a set of interconnected ul-
trapeers forms the top-level overlay to which a large group of ‘leaves’ are connected. 
Leaves never forward messages as they send queries to the ultrapeers and simply wait 
for a set of Query-Hits matching the searching criteria. Even if an ultrapeer acts as a 
proxy to the Gnutella network for the leaves connected to it, ultrapeers are nonethe-
less connected to each other and to regular Gnutella hosts, so that Query-Hits mes-
sages return back to the querying user by reverse path forwarding. This ensures that 
only those servents, i.e., both servers and clients that routed the Query message, will 
get the returning Query-Hit message. Hence, an ultrapeer receives all Query-Hit mes-
sages addressed to its leaves. Since Query-Hit messages contain information about 
files which match searching criteria stored in answering peers, they are a precious 
source in order to identify who shares what. Besides, the two-tier architecture allows 
one to collect Query-Hits by means of a passive monitoring of Gnutella traffic that 
transits through an ultrapeer node. In fact, it receives both Query-Hit replies from 

18 
U. Pagallo 
 
leaves peers which it is connected to and (part of) the traffic that the top-level ul-
trapeers forward each other. (Although the information extracted from Query-Hit 
messages is only a small fraction of the overall resources shared by a peer, however, 
this does not seem to change the picture as a whole.) 
Another important technical detail is that instead of implementing a Gnutella 
crawler from scratch, it is possible to modify the open-source client Phex with the 
multi-source download feature in order to realize an effective passive searching and 
snooping for files. This adapted client is forced to enter the network in ultrapeer 
mode by collecting and storing all of the Query-Hit messages it forwards. Since the 
goal is to identify unambiguously both users and files in a Gnutella network, a tech-
nical device such as the SHA1 hash codes permits binding identifiers to the content 
rather than to the name of a resource. Another problem consists in the possibility 
that the same IP address can correspond to different users and, vice versa, the same 
user can obtain different IP addresses in different sessions. Therefore, it is neces-
sary to filter out all IP addresses that belong to the private network class  
specification. 
After running for a week, the data collected by the Gnutella ultrapeer crawler is 
composed by more than 3 million search replies generated by a community of 283000 
different clients that advertise more than 900000 different files. Let me sum up these 
results with the following table: 
Table 1. Data collected by the Gnutella ultrapeer crawler 
 
As in other small world-networks seen above, the result is the phenomenon known 
as ‘rich gets richer.’ Few very popular files along with a very large set of resources 
are shared by only one or two people (see below fig. 1). In other words, the network 
presents a power-law distribution characterized by an exponent γ = 3.17 and an error 
α = ±0.04 (fig. 2). What does this mean? Once again, as in other small world-
networks, this is the proof of the existence of hubs, namely users that share a large 
amount of items playing a significant role in providing connectivity, along with short 
paths between couples of peers and high clustering factor. On the one hand, let us see 
this particular distribution: 
 

 
As Law Goes By: Topology, Ontology, Evolution 
19 
 
 
Fig. 1. Cumulative distribution of the files popularity plotted in a log-log scale following a 
zipf’s law 
On the other hand, let us observe its peculiar power-law: 
 
Fig. 2. Cumulative distribution of the node degree, i.e. the number of distinct files shared by a 
peer, plotted in a log-log scale 
As you can notice, we get the characteristic long tail determined by few nodes with 
very high values and by most nodes with small degree. The existence of hub peers, i.e., 
users who share a large amount of items playing a main role in providing connectivity, 
proceeds with high clustering factor and typical short path length. Therefore, the topol-
ogy is the same of such complex networks as, say, the U.S. Supreme Court jurispru-
dence analyzed by Chandler [15] or by Fowler and Jeon [16], or the Web by Barabási 
[12]: By computing the average shortest path of the network and its clustering coeffi-
cients it is possible to prove that even in the case of P2P file sharing applications as 
Gnutella, hubs link small worlds of strongly interconnected clusters. Besides, what is 
striking about this network is that this property seems to depend neither on the overall 
number of connected cases nor on the thematic sphere analyzed, e.g., video or audio 
files. On the contrary, small world-properties of the network appear to be scale-free as 
well as free from thematic constraint [22]. Hence, by exploiting these topological 

20 
U. Pagallo 
 
properties of the network (information as reality), we obtain some interesting applica-
tions on recommender systems, digital privacy, and even copyright (information for 
reality), because we do not need to structure our digital object in terms of author 
names, genre, movie, song titles, and the like. What is recommended here is based on 
partnership degree and users’ relationships by harnessing small world-properties. 
Leaving aside some further details of the experiment, it is enough to present its final 
outcome:  
Table 2. Average accuracies of the recommendation by exploiting the topological properties of 
the network 
 
As it is easy to see, these good results are also good news for our privacy because 
you do not need to disseminate personal information on the Web in order to obtain 
information which is not personal at all. By harnessing partnership degree and users 
relationships it is not necessary to get user profiles and users are not required to give 
feedbacks to a data collector entity. In other words, we do not need to trade off personal 
data for digital personalization on the Web, for there is a way to update Amitai Etzioni’s 
dichotomy between “liberalizing technologies” and public protective ones [23]. 
Yet, this sort of new ‘invisibility’ has its own risks because this topological ap-
proach could also permit, say, music companies to concentrate their attention upon 
one of the key features I mentioned above, e.g., the hubs of the network. Let aside 
today’s debate on the “three strikes”-doctrine and, in France, on the so called 
HADOPI 2 law (passed by the Parliament on October 22nd, 2009), legal troubles of 
P2P systems with both copyright and privacy interests clearly illustrate how political 
decisions influence or attempt to determine possible developments of technology. 
While, on the Web 1.0, the main target of surveillance were not individuals but web 
sites (Napster case, 2000) and P2P software developers (Grokster case before the 
U.S. Supreme Court in 2005), on the Web 2.0 the target has become P2P users chosen 
by private investigators (as shown by both the Torrent Spy and Peppermint cases 
which I fully examined in [24, 25, 26]). 
This legal trend brings us back to the role of Hayek’s taxis: Although human plan-
ning does not exhaust the complexity of legal information, this does not mean that 
taxis cannot shape the evolution of cosmos. On the contrary, we have to pay attention 
to this interaction between taxis and cosmos, which impacts on the very nature of the 

 
As Law Goes By: Topology, Ontology, Evolution 
21 
 
law and the ways in which we represent legal knowledge. It is all about the difference 
between philosophical inquiries on being qua being, or traditional ontology, and re-
search semantically committed to knowledge and concepts, as in the case of current 
legal ontologies. After looking at information for reality, we shall focus on the differ-
ence between information as reality and on reality [27]. 
4   Ontology of Law 
There are many meanings of the word ‘complexity’ [28], and this polysemy affects 
the idea of ‘information’ as well [27]. Hence, it is not surprising to find that ‘ontol-
ogy’ represents a complex informational topic of its own. 
The word ‘ontology’ was coined by Jacob Lorhard in his Ogdoas Scholastica 
(1606), and perhaps independently by Rudolf Göckel in his Lexicon philosophicum 
(1613). Defined by Nathaniel Bailey’s Universal Etymological Dictionary (1721) as 
“an Account of being in the Abstract,” the word became particularly popular thanks to 
a Leibniz’s pupil, Christian Wolff, and his book Ontology from 1729. As a “general 
metaphysics,” ontology would deal with information as reality, namely, the examina-
tion of being qua being or its essence. This approach is closely related to Hayek’s 
ideas on cosmos and his critique of any form of legal constructivism and positivism 
as, say, in the case of Kelsen [1]. We will come back to this primitive meaning of 
ontology at the end of this section. 
Yet, ontology can be understood as information on reality, namely as a matter of 
knowledge and concepts that frames the representation and function of a shared legal 
terminology, thereby representing “the missing link between legal theory and AI & 
Law” [29]. The aim being to represent knowledge, legal ontologies model concepts 
traditionally employed by lawyers such as norms, rights, or duties, in fields like 
criminal law, administrative law, etc., so that a machine can comprehend and process 
this very information on reality. Whereas, according to the type, role, character, con-
struction and application, there are at least 24 different projects of legal ontologies 
nowadays [30], we should further distinguish different kinds of information on reality, 
i.e., formal semantic accounts, specifications of a conceptualization, representations 
of a conceptual system through logical theory, and so forth [31]. 
All this work, however, incur in a significant problem when reducing the informa-
tional complexity of a legal system which is subject to evolution in its concepts and 
relations. In order to illustrate the point, let us consider the example of formal descrip-
tions of knowledge, e.g., ‘structured dictionaries’ and research efforts on formal  
ontologies. 
An interesting project has been presented by Gianmaria Ajani and his research 
group: Over the last years, they have been developing an ontology designed both to 
recover legal information and to build conceptual dictionaries. Avoiding as much as 
possible the polysemy of legal terms as well as terminological and conceptual faux-
amis, an experiment has been conducted on a taxonomy, where “terms are supported 
by a clearly identified concept inserted in a knowledge structure of a text and related 
to the other concepts that belong to such a structure” [32]. From a technical outlook, it 
is crucial to stress the “bottom up fashion” that starts from legal terms defined by 
scholars. In fact, a traditional “top-down approach works well for the topmost level, 

22 
U. Pagallo 
 
where the basic conceptual primitives are precisely defined (concept, relation, role, 
qualia, processes, etc.), and the representation instruments are put at the disposal of 
those who build the ontology” [33]. 
Still, a lot of issues arise when the core ontology level is taken into account: Sim-
ply put, the amount of information involved in the project of a structured dictionary 
with its headwords is hardly compressible. In particular, “two main problems arise in 
our approach: the first one is theoretical, and it concerns the issue of evaluating the 
performance of the system with more massive data. (…) Secondly, the amount of 
work needed to annotate the EU directives with concepts, terms and their transposi-
tions, is huge” [4]. 
All in all, legal concepts evolve and their relations change both diachronically (re-
member the U.S. Supreme Court network seen above), and synchronically (as it oc-
curs with the different legal systems defined by national sovereign states or by the EU 
legal system with its 23 official languages). What is more, the overwhelming number 
of concepts and relations obliges us to prioritize which ones should be considered 
first. It is enough to mention William Prosser’s efforts to systematize privacy rights in 
the U.S. law torts-field [34]. 
A useful approach to such complex networks is suggested by the cumulative distri-
bution of the information in the Gnutella network seen in the previous section (check 
above fig. 1-2). The power-laws of distribution highlight some properties of language 
(i.e., information as reality), which are useful when computing huge amounts of data 
so as to build conceptual dictionaries (i.e., information on reality). 
Quite interestingly, since the early 1930s, by paying attention to the statistical dis-
tribution of quantities and how information ‘flows’ in any large text, George Zipf 
noted a curious power law in such distributions, in that the frequency of a word would 
be approximately proportional to the inverse of its rank [35]. Some years later, both 
Benoit Mandelbrot [36] and Herbert Simon [37] shed further light on this law. While 
the former considered ‘words’ as messages sent by a source who wants to maximise 
the amount of information and minimise the cost of sending it, the latter thought about 
the probability of using a word in making a text. In both cases, the outcome was the 
same: On one hand, Mandelbrot proved that, if the information content and transmis-
sion costs are optimized at the same time, the outcome is Zipf’s law. On the other 
hand, Simon envisioned a typical feature of small world-networks, i.e., the mecha-
nism of preferential attachment or the probability that the choice of a word is  
proportional to that word’s recurrence in a text. Whereas words not yet appeared have 
nonzero probability of being added, the result of this process is again Zipf’s law.  
Therefore, when computing huge amounts of data so as to produce, say, ‘structured 
dictionaries,’ a network perspective would suggest to single out the possible hubs of 
the system. Dealing with linguistic issues, it is likely to find determinate clustering 
coefficients that go along with a diameter shorter than that of regular networks. The 
set of nodes with highest degree would represent the main core of the taxonomy be-
cause our empirical research would conduct us, with fair probability, to the shortest 
average distance-concepts with their specific grades of ‘betweenness.’ 
Moreover, by further considering the topological features which I mentioned in 
section 2, this outlook offers a good way to face our own ‘trials and errors’ while 
structuring a legal dictionary. Hubs, in fact, will probably indicate the nodes mostly 
tested by scholars in order to check the quality of the taxonomy. While a topological 

 
As Law Goes By: Topology, Ontology, Evolution 
23 
 
approach allows us to understand which concepts and relations of the (specific field of 
a given) legal system are more relevant, such an empirical evidence helps us to define 
the complexity of these systems in two ways. 
First, we can check support knowledge-acquisition for legal domain ontologies as 
well as general language for expressing legal knowledge. Due to the cosmos side of 
the law, legal theory does not always reflect legal experience because law is far more 
complex than its own language. Network theory allows us to shed light on this gap. 
Secondly, this approach focuses on the most interdependent nodes of the network 
and its hubs: It is likely that only a few of many millions of possible connections in 
the network really exist. 
Let aside further considerations on information as reality and massive work in sta-
tistical natural language processing [38], what about the specific contribution of net-
work analysis to the representation of a shared legal terminology via knowledge and 
concepts, that is, information on reality, which is semantically committed? 
As shown by work in the “semantic seismographers” and “conceptual hubs” of the 
US Supreme Court network [15, 16], along with its “semantic subsets” [19], or the 
“hidden communities” of the French environmental code examined in this volume by 
Boulet et al., it is beyond doubt that network analyses deal not only with the statistical 
distribution of quantities that determine how information is distributed in any large 
text such as a ‘structured dictionary.’ Indeed, most recent network-studies on legal 
systems are semantically committed to the analyses of concepts and legal knowledge: 
They involve jurisprudence and case-studies [8, 15, 16], codes [19, 39], general the-
ory [40], and so forth. It is enough to stress two points of this shift in network theory, 
from traditional researching information as reality to today’s researching information 
on reality [41]. 
First, the semantic commitment concerns knowledge acquired and organized by le-
gal experts in both the development and evaluation-phases established by most ontol-
ogy building methodologies nowadays. This implies that we can test the expertise of 
legal scholars, and further grasp their concepts, through a network approach. For 
example, the semantic commitment is clear in the case of network analysis on U.S. 
constitutional law, freedom of speech, and the First Amendment discussed by Chan-
dler [15]; in the difference established between “good hubs” (well cited) and “good 
authorities” (most interdependent nodes) of the network put forward by Fowler and 
Jeon [16]. Moreover, there is also the example of today’s debate on whether the web 
of law is “seamless,” i.e., whether the categorization of legal doctrine into discrete 
fields like torts, contracts, etc., captures the nature of the law [19, 20, 40].  
On the other hand, the representation of a shared legal terminology via a network 
theory involves knowledge that may be tuned to reality in terms of evolution, but 
should not be confounded with the ontological inquiries of philosophers on being qua 
being [42, 43]. Integration between network theory and legal ontologies does not 
hinge only on information as reality as, say, Pinker’s evolutionary psychology sug-
gests [44], so that basic human concepts would be wired in our brains thus grounding 
cultural evolution. Although this very possibility also attracted Hayek [1], it should 
accurately be distinguished from the idea that even cosmos and spontaneous orders 
are necessarily entwined with semantics and matters of knowledge and concepts. In 
the first case, we are still dealing with the traditional area of being qua being; in the 
second case, what is at stake with evolution concerns the representation of a shared 

24 
U. Pagallo 
 
(legal) terminology. When discussing the opportunities to exchange knowledge and 
methodologies between different branches of AI & Law and legal theory, this differ-
ence should always be taken into account. 
5   Conclusions 
This paper focused on legal dynamics, ontology and the topology of complex social 
systems, according to a threefold informational perspective [3, 27]. 
First, we referred to information as reality, which deals with the analysis of being 
qua being, as information opposed to knowledge and concepts. As seen in section 2, 
this outlook characterizes the current network approach to the distribution of informa-
tion in complex systems as a matter of statistical properties of quantities (like nodes, 
edges and diameters of the network). 
Secondly, we have information for reality, e.g., sets of rules or instructions for the 
determination of other informational objects. As stressed in section 3, network analy-
ses are fruitful for tackling the problem of informational overload. 
Finally, there is information on reality as a matter of knowledge and concepts that 
frames the representation and function of a shared legal terminology. As shown in 
section 4, most recent research in network analyses and the law is increasingly focus-
ing on the semantic features of this representation. 
The conclusion is that today’s debate on the opportunities to exchange knowledge 
and methodologies between different branches of AI & Law and legal theory, should 
take this difference into account so as to preliminarily define whether the exchange of 
knowledge and methodologies concerns information as reality, for reality, or on reality. 
After all, this is what emerges through the analysis of the topology, ontology and 
evolution of the law. Leaving aside specific projects on information for reality, which 
are neither true nor false, topology, ontology and evolution are grounding current 
research on legal information as reality. Namely, topology is conceived as the study 
of the statistical properties of quantities (section 2), ontology as the study of being 
qua being (section 4), and evolution as concepts making us adapt to the complexity of 
the environment (as remarked in sections 2 and 4). 
Yet, there is the other side of the coin. Along with sets of rules or instructions for 
determining other informational objects (section 3), I mentioned topological research 
in concepts and legal knowledge that goes hand in hand with the semantic commit-
ment of current efforts in legal ontologies. Even though cosmos cannot be reduced to 
any form of human planning (information as reality), spontaneous orders are neces-
sarily entwined with the evolution of taxis (information on reality). This latter level of 
analysis frames the representation of a shared legal terminology as law goes by. 
References 
1. Hayek, F.A.: Law, Legislation and Liberty. A New Statement of the Liberal Principles of 
Justice and Political Economy. Chicago University Press, Chicago (1982) 
2. Wiener, N.: Cybernetics: Or Control and Communication in the Animal and in the Ma-
chine. Wiley, New York (1948) 
3. Pagallo, U.: Teoria giuridica della complessità. Giappichelli, Torino (2006) 

 
As Law Goes By: Topology, Ontology, Evolution 
25 
 
4. Ajani, G., Boella, G., Lesmo, L., Martin, M., Mazzei, A., Radicioni, D.P., Rossi, P.: Multi-
level Legal Ontologies (forthcoming) 
5. Chaitin, G.: Meta Math! The Quest for Omega. Pantheon, New York (2005) 
6. Gell-Mann, M.: The Quark and the Jaguar. Freeman, New York (1994) 
7. Taylor, M.C.: The Moment of Complexity. Emerging Network Culture. The University of 
Chicago Press, Chicago (2001) 
8. Pagallo, U.: “Small world” Paradigm and Empirical Research in Legal Ontologies: A 
Topological Approach. In: Ajani, G., Peruginelli, G., Sartor, G., Tiscornia, D. (eds.) The 
Multilanguage Complexity of European Law: Methodologies in Comparison, pp. 195–210. 
European Press Academic Publishing, Florence (2007) 
9. Milgram, S.: The Small World Problem. Psychology Today, 60–67 (1967) 
10. Granovetter, M.: The Strength of Weak Ties. American Journal of Sociology 78, 1360–
1380 (1973) 
11. Watts, D., Strogatz, S.: Collective Dynamics of “Small-World” Networks. Nature 393, 
440–442 (1998) 
12. Barabási, A.-L.: Linked: The New Science of Networks. Perseus, New York (2002) 
13. Mitchell, M.: Complexity. A Guided Tour. Oxford University Press, New York (2009) 
14. Schnettler, S.: A Structured Overview of 50 Years of Small-World Research. Social Net-
works 31, 165–178 (2009) 
15. Chandler, S.: The Network Structure of Supreme Court Jurisprudence. The University of 
Houston Working Paper Series, No. 2005-W 01 (2005) 
16. Fowler, T., Jeon, S.: The Authority of Supreme Court Precedent: A Network Analysis 
(2005), http://jhfowler.ucdavis.edu 
17. Pagallo, U., Ruffo, G.: P2P Systems in Legal Networks: Another “Small World” Case. In: 
Eleventh International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law, pp. 287–288. ACM, 
Stanford (2007) 
18. Pagallo, U., Ruffo, G.: On the Growth of Collaborative and Competitive Networks: Oppor-
tunities and New Challenges. In: Rogerson, R., Yang, N. (eds.) Ethicomp Working Con-
ference 2007, pp. 77–92. Yunnan University, Kunming (2007) 
19. Bommarito, M.J., Katz, D., Zelner, J.: Law as a Seamless Web? Comparison of Various 
Network Representations of the United States Supreme Court Corpus (1791-2005). Social 
Science Research Network Working Paper Series (2009) 
20. Solum, L.: Legal Theory Lexicon 059: The Law Is a Seamless Web? (2006),  
http://lsolum/typepad.com/legaltheory/2006/10/ 
legal_theory_1_e.html  
21. Iamnitchi, A., Ripeanu, M., Foster, I.: Small-world File-sharing Communities. In: 23rd Con-
ference of the IEEE Communications Society (InfoCom 2004). IEEE, Hong Kong (2004) 
22. Ruffo, G., Schifanella, R., Ghiringhello, E.: A Decentralized Recommendation System 
Based on Self-Organizing Partnerships. In: Boavida, F., Plagemann, T., Stiller, B., West-
phal, C., Monteiro, E. (eds.) NETWORKING 2006. LNCS, vol. 3976, pp. 618–629. 
Springer, Heidelberg (2006) 
23. Etzioni, A.: How Patriotic Is the Patriot Act? Freedom versus Security in the Age of Ter-
rorism. Routledge, New York (2004) 
24. Pagallo, U.: La tutela della privacy negli Stati Uniti d’America e in Europa: Modelli gi-
uridici a confronto. Giuffrè, Milano (2008) 
25. Pagallo, U.: Let Them Be Peers: The Future of P2P Systems and Their Impact on Contem-
porary Legal Networks. In: Fernandez-Barrera, M., Nuno Gomes de Andrade, N., de 
Filippi, P., Viola de Azevedo Cunha, M., Sartor, G., Casanovas, P. (eds.) Law and Tech-
nology: Looking into the Future, pp. 323–338. European Press Academic Publishing,  
Florence (2009) 

26 
U. Pagallo 
 
26. Pagallo, U.: Ethics Among Peers: From Napster to Peppermint, and Beyond. In: D’Atri, 
A., Saccà, D. (eds.) Information Systems: People, Organizations, Institutions, and Tech-
nologies, pp. 297–304. Springer, Heidelberg (2010) 
27. Floridi, L.: Infosfera. Etica e filosofia dell’informazione. Giappichelli, Torino (2009) 
28. Lloyd, S.: Measures of Complexity: A Non-Exhaustive list. IEEE Control Systems Maga-
zine (August 2001) 
29. Valente, A., Breuker, J.: Ontologies: The Missing Link between Legal Theory and AI & 
Law. In: Soeteman, A. (ed.) JURIX 1994, pp. 138–150. LKoninklije Vermande, Lelystad 
(1994) 
30. Breuker, J., Casanovas, P., Klein, M.C.A., Francesconi, E.: Law, The Flood, the Channels 
and the Dikes: Managing Legal Information in a Globalized and Digital World. In: Breu-
ker, J., et al. (eds.) Law, Ontologies and the Semantic Web. Channelling the Legal Infor-
mation Flood, pp. 3–18. IOS Press, Amsterdam (2009) 
31. Guarino, N., Giaretta, P.: Ontologies and Knowledge Bases: Towards a Terminological 
Classification. In: Mars, N. (ed.) Towards Very Large Knowledge Bases, pp. 25–32. IOS 
Press, Amsterdam (1995) 
32. Ajani, G., Ebers, M. (eds.): Uniform Terminology for European Contract Law. Nomos 
Verlag, Baden-Baden (2005) 
33. Lesmo, L., Boella, G., Mazzei, A., Rossi, P.: Multilingual Conceptual Dictionaries Based 
on Ontologies: Analytical Tools and Case Studies. In: Ajani, G., Peruginelli, G., Sartor, G., 
Tiscornia, D. (eds.) The Multilanguage Complexity of European Law: Methodologies in 
Comparison, pp. 179–194. European Press Academic Publishing, Florence (2007) 
34. Prosser, W.: Privacy. California Law Review 48(3), 383–423 (1960) 
35. Zipf, G.: Selected Studies of the Principle of Relative Frequency in Language. Harvard 
University Press, Cambridge (1932) 
36. Maldelbrot, B.: An Informational Theory of the Statistical Structures of Language. In: 
Jackson, W. (ed.) Communication Theory, pp. 486–502. Butterworth, Woburn, MA (1953) 
37. Simon, H.: The Architecture of Complexity. Proceedings of the American Philosophical 
Society 106(6), 467–482 (1962) 
38. Manning, C., Schütze, H.: Foundations of Statistical Natural Language Processing. MIT 
Press, Cambridge (1999) 
39. Chandler, S.: The Network Structure of the Uniform Commercial Code: It’s a Small World 
After All (2005),  
http://library.wolfram.com/infocenter/Conferences/ 
5800/uccanalysis.pdf 
40. Smith, T. A.: The Web of Law. San Diego Legal Studies Research, paper n° 06-11 (2005) 
41. Newman, M.E.J., Barabási, A.-L., Watts, D.J.: The Structure and Dynamics of Networks. 
Princeton University Press, Princeton (2006) 
42. Boyd, R., Richerson, P.J.: Culture and the Evolutionary Process. University of Chicago 
Press, Chicago (1985) 
43. Coleman, J.S.: Foundations of Social Theory. Harvard University Press, Cambridge (1991) 
44. Pinker, S.: The Stuff of Thought: Language as a Window into Human Nature. Viking, New 
York (2007) 

 
P. Casanovas et al. (Eds.): AICOL Workshops 2009, LNAI 6237, pp. 27–38, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
Sailing the Semantic Seas by Structural Vessels:  
Problems and Perspectives for the Identification of 
Implicit Knowledge in the Legal Domain 
Gianmaria Ajani1 and Piercarlo Rossi2 
1 University of Torino, Italy 
2 University of Eastern Piedmont, Italy 
Abstract. In this paper we propose some preliminary insights on how the rela-
tionship of Law and AI affects the identification of implicit knowledge in the 
legal domain. From a theoretical point of view, the notion of knowledge, as 
conceived in AI, is problematical for law, because it cannot be solved making 
recourse to a dominant theory on truth. As it is known,  the current state of legal 
research is fragmented, not only on the issue of identifying truth, but more gen-
erally on the issue of evaluating the relationships between formalism and  in-
formalism in law. in diverse theories of truth. From an operational point of 
view, new advances in terms of social network analysis could be fruitful to 
knowledge discovery in the legal domain, especially for application of legal on-
tologies in multicultural contexts.  
Keywords: legal ontologies, legal culture, social network analysis, epistemo-
logical completeness. 
1   Legal Ontologies at the Helm: Questions about Theory of 
Knowledge 
Artificial intelligence for law has been in existence for several decades as a multi-
disciplinary field of research. To achieve the purposes of AI and Law, it is essential to 
bring together researchers from different research communities. These include AI and 
computer science, as well as legal philosophy. 
AI and Law is directed toward different research lines, such as the development of 
legal knowledge systems, knowledge management, models of legal argumentation, 
and legal ontologies, where cross-fertilisations are possible. 
Therefore, the demand for information retrieval has determined an increasing atten-
tion towards the development of legal ontologies for knowledge engineering [50]. 
Since legal ontologies are useful for sharing knowledge, they play a significant role in 
areas dealing with vast amounts of distributed and heterogeneous computer based 
information, such as legal information available on internet and specialised database 
for legal purposes.  

28 
G. Ajani and P. Rossi 
 
Legal ontologies may also be implied in modelling the legal reasoning1 in order to 
define the prior knowledge of the legal domains, which is helpful for formalizing case 
abstractions, selecting procedural rules, refining input data, and representing the out-
put in a comprehensible way. Legal ontologies can enhance information extraction 
from semi-structured and non-structured data, adding a new dimension to legal re-
search [20], [25], [43]. One of the most complicated issues is, however, the definition 
of “prior knowledge” either from the process or the domain. Ontology building is a 
time consuming activity that requires a lot of effort for knowledge domain acquisi-
tion2. Several methods have been developed to overcome these problems, including 
tools that automatically or semi-automatically allow to generate ontologies [34], [1], 
[43], [14]. Within the legal domain, semi-automatically ontology building employs 
text-mining, machine-learning, and NLP algorithms [18]. 
The interaction between the prior knowledge as encoded in ontologies and the de-
rived knowledge as the result of a process, such as a knowledge-based system appli-
cation or a data mining analysis [41], has not been fully explored. 
Knowledge3 in AI theory may reproduce the traditional concept of truth as ade-
quacy between object and cognition at different levels of world description [29]. In 
short, research within the field of Artificial Intelligence is directed to perform tasks 
that would otherwise require human intelligence. The simulation of human intelli-
gence may be designed following different frames. A choice has to be made among 
the several options, to acquire and process the knowledge. An architecture based on 
the correspondence theory of truth4 should modify its beliefs, to maximise the accu-
racy of its predictions about the external world, while one founded on the coherence 
theory5 should maximise internal consistency.  
Furthermore, the different theories about the nature of the law may inspire different 
methodologies in the building of a legal ontology: even if we consider law as a social 
phenomenon, the outcomes in ontology building can be assorted. Knowledge, conse-
quently, may be obtained by corpora of statutory texts according to a conventionalist 
and positivist view of law [36], while the perception of law as an institutional reality 
[48] may pay more attention to case-law and regulations. 
As it is known,  the major effort in developing legal ontologies is related to the 
world knowledge.  
                                                           
1 Reasoning systems can be divided into systems of case-based, rule-based, or statistical ap-
proaches. The first aims at drawing analogies to find previous cases that are similar to the 
current one. The second is constituted by a knowledge base in which the domain knowledge 
is represented by rules, an inference mechanism which makes it possible to reason with the 
rules. The third encompasses several machine learning methods, such as neural networks, to 
learn new concepts from sets of input features [47], [2]. 
2 With regard to the several ways of using knowledge, the acquisition process can be guided by 
different principles and methods to increase the efficiency of the acquisition process [39]. 
3 In this paper we refer to knowledge discovery in a broader sense than the notion of partially 
automated process of extracting patterns from databases [1], [49]. Essentially we think about 
the process of showing concepts and connections, locating implicit knowledge within the le-
gal domain [43]. 
4 By assuming that statements or propositions are true because they match with reality, state of 
affairs or facts [51], [12], [16].  
5 By assuming that statements are true because they fit together with other statements, even 
though  there are different conceptions about epistemic or constitutive coherence [32], [52].  

 
Sailing the Semantic Seas by Structural Vessels 
29 
 
Law, in fact, seems to lack its own ontological foundation. When legal philoso-
phers discuss the ontological assumptions in law and legal reasoning, their discourse  
is invariably about normative knowledge. This is different from other knowledge-
based fields of practice like medicine or engineering, which ground their ontological 
foundations in notions established within the realm of physics, mathematics, and so 
forth. Jurisprudence and legal philosophy are primarily concerned with the justifica-
tion of law and legal systems, rather than with the explanation of the role of law and 
its relation to social and natural reality. It is, therefore, clear that ontology in jurispru-
dence and legal philosophy implies different issues than ontology in computing. 
Building knowledge systems involves indeed the creation of models that are necessar-
ily an abstraction of the domain being modelled. However, as noted in [44] “assessing 
the epistemological completeness of an ontology is problematic because in order to 
determine whether an ontology facilitates the modelling of some piece of legal 
knowledge we need to identify this piece of knowledge first”. And this statement calls 
for a “some commonly accepted theory about legal knowledge that tells us what 
pieces of knowledge exist in the legal domain”. But no theory in the current state of 
legal research may answer this question.  
Seen from an instrumental point of view, AI models are a representation of infor-
mation in a specific structure, and claims for the model’s effectiveness point out the 
interface between models and the world, asking for instruments to assess the repre-
sented knowledge.  
Since AI models can only be improved through their use by particular agents in 
specific situations, the question of effectiveness in the representation is often reduced 
to its efficacy to some environments or uses.  
As to law, different ontologies have been developed according to specific domains, 
such as diverse jurisdictions or typologies of documents. Consequently, core ontolo-
gies are required for enabling the re-use of legal knowledge bases written in different 
representation formats and formalisms. These examples, however, are only a few, and 
they encompass a straight division between ontological explanations and epistemo-
logical justifications so that they may be defective in dealing with epistemological 
completeness, as considered in the literature on knowledge engineering [26], [50]. 
2   Ontology Mapping: Knowledge in the Legal Domain 
Interoperability is one of the main issues about semantic knowledge management; its 
role is to prevent the construction of copious contents not properly communicating 
with each other. A knowledge base represented in a specific language or format 
should be interoperable with other knowledge bases. As to legal ontologies, there is, 
here, an additional issue: numerous natural languages express legal contents, and 
different communities at the international, national and regional levels employ such 
languages.  
The ongoing globalisation compels those communities to redefine the role of lan-
guages in the international lawmaking where contents from a language to another 
have to be exchanged, while preserving for each one precise communication and 
linguistic diversity. Moreover, there is a prospective shift to multilingual law in insti-
tutional contexts such as the European Union, where the rules are considered to be 
expressed with the same meaning in the different national languages.  

30 
G. Ajani and P. Rossi 
 
The ontology building in the legal domain cannot resolve the interoperability issue 
by working only on the final step represented by the integration of the diverse knowl-
edge bases6. 
There is another level of knowledge representation that is not always documented 
at the normative surface. As noted, “documents have a physical perspective (the sup-
port), a representational one (the language), and a cognitive one (the intended con-
tent): legal practice refers to those perspectives in each application case” [3]. 
Several legal contents are present in the various jurisdictions and different legal sys-
tems support the production, interpretation and implementation of such contents. Al-
though there are variations in the ontological commitment on what the law is, it may be 
a positivistic illusion to understand the functioning of the legal systems by studying the 
corpus of laws in force in the diverse jurisdictions. Despite the fact that legal rules are 
ultimately based on formal sources, meaningful understanding of a legal system re-
quires also the ascertaining of the socio-cultural contexts in which legal rules operate. 
The tension and the reciprocal adaptation between legal rules and cultural norms is 
considered in different ways depending on the perspectives of the local epistemic 
communities. Culture is usually constituted by a common language, a common history, 
a collective memory and a shared territory, while the enforcement of legal rules may be 
influenced by customs and cultural habits. Classical examples are the open-ended 
principles in which the judicial interpretation recalls these elements, such as good faith 
or the duty of care principle. Moreover, other socio-cultural experiences may affect the 
same territory, such as those of minority groups and immigrant peoples. We find legal 
conceptions within different social, ethnic and religious groups. Those groups, as an 
effect of globalization, do move from one territory to another, and contribute to an 
increased multiculturalism that irritates local (legal) cultures. 
Legal ontologies cannot ignore cultural features relevant for law. In particular, the 
so-called legal culture - that is the attitudes towards the law in a given jurisdiction – 
has to be taken into account [18], [25].  
Legal culture is a more and more cited expression in scholarly literature, giving 
raise to different policy options in the current projects of law harmonisation, like the 
ones developed in the European Union. Given the different attitudes towards the law 
in the national jurisdictions, it may seem that legal systems cannot “understand” each 
other because of irreconcilable differences in “mentalities” [30], [31]. On the other 
hand, since legal cultures are the development of historical outcomes, it may be ob-
served that the singularity of national jurisdictions can be reconciled by the recourse 
to legal (historical) traditions [37], [53], [54]. Under these opposite views, the debate 
is still open to understand how legal cultures constitute legal systems. In fact, legal 
culture is not univocally defined by its advocates; the various definitions can be ar-
ranged on two main lines: a “narrow” identification of it as a set of shared perceptions 
                                                           
6 The integration of ontologies is especially important to enable sharing of data between hetero-
geneous knowledge bases and to allow applications to reuse data from different knowledge 
bases. There are different ways to achieve such a goal: the ontology mapping that is related to  
the representation of correspondences between ontologies in way that ontological axioms and 
intended interpretations may be respected in the diverse knowledge bases; the ontology align-
ment that is related the discovery of these correspondences; and the ontology merging that is 
related to the building of new ontologies, based on the correspondences between the merged 
ontologies. 

 
Sailing the Semantic Seas by Structural Vessels 
31 
 
on what is formally normative, and a “broad” recognition of it as a blend of (formal 
and informal) practices and beliefs on what is normative. 
Legal culture may refer to common concepts and values shared only by the legal 
elites of a given legal system. As already mentioned, then, it is important to recognize 
that, as a result of globalization, a legal culture is no longer necessarily national. The 
globalising process has not only accelerated  increased the communication among 
national elites and consequently the circulation of legal models and legal reasoning 
which can be adopted as patterns for legal adjudication or for statutory reforms.  
Legal culture may refer also to external influences on the legal elites, such as client 
groups representing economic or political forces that lawyers assist or, ultimately, 
such as the community of laymen constituted by the people living in a given territory.  
The relevance of cultural features of law for knowledge discovery is demonstrated 
by the conundrum in which existing multilingual legal applications find themselves. 
There is a high dependency between the language of the people and their culture. 
Thus, within a community of people speaking the same language, we can find differ-
ent usages of terms, even within the same context. Seemingly, the ideal solution for 
such a problem is to provide a set of rules for the usage of each term, considering all 
the cultural issues, both of lawyers and of laymen. Although it may be possible to 
report all such issues, the subsequent large quantity of multicultural contents, when 
imported in a multilingual environment, will not support a scalable approach for the 
information management.  
Cultural features of law are relevant also at a deeper conceptual level. Researches 
on knowledge discovery by data mining have reported the existence of discretionary 
domains where decision-makers, mainly judges, act combining the dictates of their 
judgements with the formal process of adjudication recognised by the rule of law 
[49]. Undoubtedly, the logical or mathematical description of patterns and regularities 
in a set of data could be improved whether legal ontologies would enhance informa-
tion extraction by the resort to cultural features of law. 
Legal ontologies may constitute, indeed, a valid solution, but only after assessing 
the trade off between domain re-usability and epistemological completeness.  
Ontologies are supposed to capture knowledge at the domain level independently 
from task requirements [21], [8]. Reuse is commonly agreed to reduce the cost of the 
ontology building. However, a main concern in ontology mapping is the difficulty of 
isolating the re-usable components. Since the relationship between primitives may 
vary within diverse knowledge structures, aiming at the epistemological completeness 
in the knowledge representation may affect the reusability [7].  
3   Ontology Modelling: Considering Legal Culture  
Core ontologies are intended to capture knowledge by the identification of basic con-
cepts and categories of a domain. The knowledge represented by legal culture, how-
ever, is hardly formalised and therefore it is underestimated in ontology modelling. A 
legal culture is framed by individuals who have their own perception about the law; as 
a collective phenomenon, however, it is also distributed among the members who 
share the same historical path. Local variations of norms are originated in the inter-
sections and gaps between the formal aspect of legal rules and the  expectations that 
become relevant in the various social contexts in which they arise. 

32 
G. Ajani and P. Rossi 
 
Thus, different authors may produce substantially different conceptualisations of 
the legal domain although their purposes are rather similar.  It is, therefore, clear that 
legal ontologies cannot support a new legal dogmatism. Conversely, the final aim of a 
core ontology  should be to ascertain the main primitives of legal knowledge and the 
different kinds of their relations. The wide range of primitives and relations allows 
conceptualizations defined by group of axioms or rules, but there is nothing prevent-
ing that different conceptualizations, linked to the same arrays of primitives and rela-
tions, will sort out. 
A discussed topic in the literature on knowledge engineering is that the large part 
of the intended meaning of the ontological concepts may remain implicit among on-
tology developers [22].  The issue is particularly relevant in the realm of law, where 
some rules remain implicit, because jurists rely on legal culture as an informal back-
ground for justification. Legal systems are normative systems and what jurists typi-
cally do can be described as striving to construct the most normatively attractive  
account of their system that they can offer [14]. However, local legal culture partici-
pates in structuring the law in several ways: through the legal perception, common to 
the citizens, through patterns of legally relevant behaviour transmitted by legal educa-
tion, through the action of institutional setting as the outcome of historical accidents, 
through the classification and arrangement of rules (such as a codification) and 
through legal doctrines, inspiring the process of adjudication [10].  
Several patterns of legal culture may also coexist within a legal system, where le-
gal scholars can confront their different views and receive diverse influences from 
political, economic, and social forces [44]. These dynamics together with historical 
accidents in the course of time, may change legal cultures that cannot be considered 
immutable. 
The ontology modelling can be characterised as either a top-down approach or a 
bottom-up approach, the conceptual and the lexical one. Both approaches require to 
better consider the legal culture claims. The top down approach adopts categoriza-
tions of legal notions developed from legal theory. Analytic frameworks on legal 
categorization, however, vary greatly; the main reason is that lawyers compete in 
producing explanations of the interaction among legal rules and values. These catego-
rizations can stipulate new coherent orders in a legal system, but they may fail to 
describe the real, yet rather inconsistent, conceptualizations implied in the legal prac-
tice. Behind ephemeral products of legal problem-solving there are, in fact, mentally 
structured representations typical of a given legal culture.  In particular, the patterns 
of legally relevant behaviours are to be considered. They comprise the psychology of 
legal elites, the styles of legal reasoning, and the hermeneutical practices. Some pat-
terns referring to what the law is and to the ascertaining of facts can question the 
modalities of incorporation in the upper level ontologies. Other patterns may drive 
different conceptualizations of the same subject-matter, like, for example, property 
law, according to the different legal cultures. 
The lack of communication between the categorizations implied in the top down 
approach and the multiple conceptualisations - mainly context dependent - implied in 
the legal practice may hinder an acceptable degree of epistemological completeness in 
the legal domain. 
Conversely, the bottom up approach adopts an ontology extraction from the lexical 
level performed on the basis of relevance criterions and adapting techniques taken 

 
Sailing the Semantic Seas by Structural Vessels 
33 
 
from, for example, NLP, computational linguistics, machine learning and text mining. 
However, the concept formation, and especially the labelling, is differently intended 
by ontology developers who often treat terms as concepts and directly add them to the 
ontology. 
To properly represent a domain, the real challenge is to match the localised ex-
tracted knowledge with a generalised background knowledge.  Many approaches tried 
to use different kinds of background knowledge in addition to the input text corpus, 
such as using the WordNet dictionary or other resources. Linguistic resources (such as 
lexicons, dictionaries and glossaries) can be used as consensus references to root 
ontology concept. Within the legal domain, this background knowledge cannot be 
constituted only by semantic criterions, because the way in which the “legal texts” 
become “legal norms” does not lie only in the legal provisions of such texts.  
The background knowledge can be constituted by a macro-textual ontology of le-
gal provisions emerging from the corpus of legal texts, collected for their reference to 
a specific domain7. This background knowledge is not complete, because of the role 
played by  case law in the legal system, according to the different authority attributed 
to judicial decisions in the several jurisdictions as well as in the diverse branches of 
law, like for example constitutional law.  
Also a macro-textual ontology of normative texts enriched by legal decisions rele-
vant for a specific domain is, however, limited to its teleological function, thus influ-
encing in a recursive way the relevance criterions and the techniques adopted for 
ontology extraction. 
To improve ontology extraction, background knowledge needs to be integrated 
with conceptualisations from legal culture. A classic instance of this is the case of 
general rules governing the interpretation as well as the enforcement of specific  
domains. The problem is that such rules are not always documented by normative 
references, but are normally applied by scholars and practitioners, in the process of 
adjudication.  
4   Hooking: Semantic Nodes and Social Nodes 
The ascertainment of the conceptualizations grounded on legal culture is hindered by 
the difficulties in knowledge representation of the outcomes (judicial decisions, stat-
utes, doctrinal comments) produced by the different players (judges, legislators, 
scholars). The picture of law as a socio-cultural phenomenon can be sketched out as a 
network of discourses and practices, where the correspondence between meanings 
produced by discourses and outcomes produced by practices may change according to 
the different contexts. 
The challenge is, then, how to evaluate such conceptualizations in terms of their 
diachronical stability and of their effective impact on legal practice.  
As it is known, the metaphor of the network has contributed to import in legal re-
search methodologies aiming at measuring the network effect for different usages.   
                                                           
7 Such as environmental protection, consumer protection or others. 

34 
G. Ajani and P. Rossi 
 
Leaving aside the foundational quest of the network paradigm8, legal scholars have 
already shown the potentialities of social network analysis in detecting regularities in 
precedents, such as the US Supreme Court majority opinions or case citation.  
The question is whether social network analysis may contribute to integrate cur-
rently used legal ontologies. According to the hypothesis proposed by Ugo Pagallo, 
network analysis should be applied to ontology building in terms of what he calls 
“topological ontologies” [42].  
Network analysis may indeed hold up the ontology mapping, and reinforce the  
effectiveness of knowledge discovery in the legal domain. As mentioned, the concep-
tualizations produced within a given legal culture are, usually lacking a normative 
reference. The risk is to devise several conceptualisations within the same domain, 
grounded on the different scholarly discourses focused on the meaning of the rules. 
To avoid subjectivism in ontology building, the conceptualisations proposed by legal 
experts should therefore be evaluated in terms of stability and effective impact on 
legal practice. 
Some difficulties, however, remain when the topological relations are applied to 
legal ontologies, because these kind of relations are made of connections among enti-
ties situated in a physical space and considered in their social interaction9. Whilst 
several ontologies can be used to represent social networks [38], the contrary may not 
be as well true. Capturing the semantics of legal concepts [45] in a controlled termi-
nology requires to represent the collection of semantic nodes and the links that exist 
among them. The nodes represent concepts and the links represent relations between 
nodes. Conversely, social networks are representations of social interactions. The 
nodes represent the social actors (i.e. individuals or organizations) which are tied by 
one or more specific types of interdependency.  
An attempt to bring together concepts and the relations among social actors who 
share such concepts has been made in case of contents distributed on the internet 
where web users may add user-driven metadata, in the form of tags to contents. In this 
way, ontology modelling may consider to represent tagging choices in order to dis-
cover lightweight conceptual structures called folksonomies10. Once they are struc-
tured in an ontology representation, the relations among the tags and between the tags 
and the users allow to analyse contents by the means of social ties and social networks 
through the typology of  data produced by social actors11.  
                                                           
8 Despite its first usage in the mid-1930s in social and behavioural sciences, interest in network 
analysis has increasingly grown in the last years. Thanks to physics and biological studies 
handling with metabolic systems, network analysis has been popularised by the problem  of 
“small world”, even if some authors are absolutely unconscious of the previous works. In 
particular such a problem which comprises one particular feature from the several method-
ologies and tools in network analysis has become a paradigm as an intersectoral regulatory 
framework for studying world wide web as well as electric grid reliability [6], [9]. 
9 The topological properties may change according to several ontological classifications, such 
as for example in the case of physical objects, or internal relations in ontological models  
[4], [15].  
10 Folksonomies  are conceptualizations shared by given communities. Unlike ontologies, they 
are not formalized, but rather implicit [33], [26]. 
11 See for instance [28]. 

 
Sailing the Semantic Seas by Structural Vessels 
35 
 
Even if a large part of legal contents would be distributed on internet, the concep-
tualizations from legal culture might not be elicited in the same way as folksonomies.  
One reason is obvious: lawyers and laymen contribute to conceptualizations from 
legal culture, but legal elites show lower inclination to explain the underpinnings of 
their behaviour to a large public outside the legal process, especially when in form of 
social networking.  
Another reason concerns the proper design of the social network analysis for legal 
ontologies.  
Social networks can not correspond to a representation of the whole social reality 
in which a top level ontology may be grounded. Social network analysis may be 
viewed as a broadening or a generalization of data analytic techniques which usually 
focus on selected observational units. Deciding on the sets of objects that lie within a 
network is a difficult problem for whole-network studies12, since network boundaries 
are often permeable or ambiguous13. As to the network sampling14, the explicit as-
sumptions about how vertex, edge, and arc variable are related devise different re-
search outcomes. Also, the degree of  granularity may vary, depending on the quantity 
of parameters; it is pretty evident that only through recourse to a few parameters, 
discrete models and clustering of dyad distribution may arrive to a conditional inde-
pendence of links15.    
In other words, the research focus of social network analysis is too tailored on  
localised objectives, while conceptualisations from legal culture require a wider re-
search focus according to the multi-layered issues of the legal domains at the interna-
tional, national and regional levels.  
A different approach could combine semantic nodes and social network analysis, 
mainly small world functions[5]. Legal theorists are well aware that legal concepts are 
open textured because different instances may be read against a notion of relevance 
which is dependent from the legal context [24]. Some social network techniques may 
give some insights on the clustering coefficients among legal concepts.  
Instead of considering the nodes as agents in a real environment, small world func-
tions can be applied to legal documents in order to detect the hub centrality of some 
terms or their degree of betweenness. The linkage to the social dimension may derive 
from the ranking in the use of such terms by legal elites and laymen, when these data 
are reported, as in statutes, case law or legal literature.  
Finally, two considerations can be made with respect to this approach. Small world 
applications mainly focus on structural information (e.g. centrality, closeness, be-
tweenness, etc.) of nodes whit a weak meaning. This implies that the analysis mainly 
considers the existence of a relation among subjects, and not the typology of the rela-
tions, which may be inferred by a following step. This argument is strictly related to 
the rigid nature of a node-based network. Nodes are a sort of abstraction in the net-
work and they have finite boundaries that distinguish them from their surroundings. 
                                                           
12 As sets of interrelated objects or actors that are regarded for analytical purposes as bounded 
social collectives [17].  
13 Such as, for example, the selection about some judicial activities or some lines of binding 
authorities. 
14 Designed as a multivariate complete multigraph.  
15 For further reading [11]. 

36 
G. Ajani and P. Rossi 
 
Meaning nuances may fail to be detected when social network analysis is applied 
directly to semantics. 
To come back to the epistemological completeness of legal ontologies, social net-
work analysis may address the question of validating different legal culture  
conceptualisations.   
As noted above, background knowledge needs to be integrated with conceptualisa-
tions from legal culture in order to enlarge ontology extraction in the case of rules 
which are not documented by normative references, but normally applied by jurists. 
Therefore, the solution to present alternative and different types of extensional se-
mantics requires to combine them with a group of common axioms at a core ontology 
level. 
This method is reductionist in the axiom formalisation and static in its implementa-
tion. Nevertheless, empirical analysis by social network could be applied orthogonally 
to defined tasks, linguistic occurrences or instances with the purpose of bridging the 
different extensional semantics relating to a specific period of time and a specific 
social context16. 
References 
1. Agrawal, R., Imielinsky, T., Swami, A.: Mining Associations Rules between Sets of Items 
in Large Database. In: Buneman, P., Jajodia, S. (eds.) Proceedings of ACM SIGMOD 
Conference on Management of Data, pp. 207–216. ACM Press, Washington (1993) 
2. Bench-Capon, T.J.M., Visser, P.R.S.: Open Texture and Ontologies in Legal Information 
Systems. In: Proceedings of the 8th International Workshop on Database and Expert Sys-
tems Applications, pp. 192–197. IEEE Press, New York (1997) 
3. Benjamins, R., Casanovas, P., Breuker, J., Gangemi, A.: Law and the Semantic Web, an 
Introduction. In: Benjamins, V.R., Casanovas, P., Breuker, J., Gangemi, A. (eds.) Law and 
the Semantic Web. LNCS (LNAI), vol. 3369, pp. 1–17. Springer, Heidelberg (2005) 
4. Borgo, S., Guarino, N., Masolo, C.: Stratified Ontologies: The Case of Physical Objects. 
In: Proceedings of the ECAI-96 Workshop on Ontological Engineering. John Wiley, New 
York (1996) 
5. Bourcier, D., Mazzega, P.: Toward Measure of Complexity in Legal Systems. In: Proceed-
ings of the 11th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law, Stanford Law 
School, June 4-8, pp. 211–215. ACM Press, Stanford (2007) 
6. Buchanan, M.: Nexus: Small World and the Groundbreaking Science of Network. W.W. 
Norton & Company, New York (2002) 
7. Bylander, T., Chandrasekaran, B.: Generic tasks in Knowledge Based Reasoning: The 
Right Level of Abstraction for Knowledge Acquisition. In: Gaines, B., Boose, J. (eds.) 
Knowledge Acquisition for Knowledge Based Systems, vol. 1, pp. 65–77. Academic Press, 
London (1988) 
8. Chandrasekaran, B., Johnson, R., Benjamins, R.: Ontologies: what are they? why do we 
need, them? IEEE Intelligent Systems 14, 20–26 (1999) 
9. Chassin, D.P., Posse, C.: Evaluating North American Electric Grid Reliability using the 
Barabási–Albert Network Model. Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 355, 667–677 
(2005) 
                                                           
16 Where design of network and method of sampling may be intentionally considered in their 
variability. 

 
Sailing the Semantic Seas by Structural Vessels 
37 
 
10. Cotterrell, R.: The Concept of Legal Culture. In: Nelken, D. (ed.) Comparing Legal Cul-
tures, pp. 13–31. Aldershot, Dartmouth (1997) 
11. Cox, D.R., Wertmuth, N.: Multivariate Dependencies. Chapman & Hall, London (1996) 
12. David, M.: Correspondence and Disquotation. In: An Essay on the Nature of Truth. Oxford 
University Press, Oxford (1994) 
13. Doan, A., Halevy, A.: Semantic integration research in the database community: A brief 
survey. AI Magazine, Special Issue on Semantic Integration (2005) 
14. Dworkin, R.: Law’s Empire. Harvard University Press, Cambridge (1986) 
15. Fortuna, B., Grobelnik, M., Mladenic, D.: OntoGen: Semi-automatic Ontology Editor. In: 
Smith, M.J., Salvendy, G. (eds.) HCII 2007. LNCS, vol. 4558, pp. 309–318. Springer, Hei-
delberg (2007) 
16. Foulkes, P.: Theories of Truth. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 77, 63–72 (1977) 
17. Freeman, C.L.: Social Networks and the Structure Experiment. In: Freeman, C.L., White, 
D.R., Romney, A.K. (eds.) Research Method in Social Network Analysis, pp. 11–40. 
George Mason University Press, Fairfax (1992) 
18. Friedman, L.: The Place of Legal Culture in the Sociology of Law. In: Freeman, M. (ed.) 
Law and Sociology: Current Legal Issues, vol. 8, pp. 185–199. Oxford University Press, 
Oxford (2006) 
19. Gangemi, A., Sagri, M.T., Tiscornia, D.: A Constructive Framework for Legal Ontologies. 
In: Benjamins, V.R., Casanovas, P., Breuker, J., Gangemi, A. (eds.) Law and the Semantic 
Web. LNCS (LNAI), vol. 3369, pp. 97–124. Springer, Heidelberg (2005) 
20. Gilardoni, L., Biasuzzi, C., Ferraro, M., Fonti, R., Slavazza, P.: LKMS – A Legal Knowl-
edge Management System Exploiting Semantic Web Technologies. In: Gil, Y., Motta, E., 
Benjamins, V.R., Musen, M.A. (eds.) ISWC 2005. LNCS, vol. 3729. Springer, Heidelberg 
(2005) 
21. Gomez-Perez, A., Benjamins, R.: Overview of Knowledge Sharing and Reuse Compo-
nents: Ontologies and Problem-Solving Methods. In: Proceedings of the IJCAI-99, Work-
shop on Ontologies and Problem-Solving Methods (KRR5). Morgan Kaufmann, Los Altos 
(1999) 
22. Guarino, N.: Formal Ontology in Information Systems. In: Proceedings of FOIS 1998, pp. 
3–15. IOS Press, Amsterdam (1998) 
23. Hafner, C.D.: Representation of knowledge in a legal information retrieval system. SIGIR, 
139–153 (1980) 
24. Hart, H.L.A.: The Concept of Law. Clarendon Press, Oxford (1961) 
25. Hoecke, M., van, W.M.: Legal Cultures and Legal Paradigms: Towards a New Model for 
Comparative Law. International and Comparative Law Quarterly 47, 495–536 (1998) 
26. Hoekstra, R., Breuker, J., Di Bello, M., Boer, A.: The LKIF Core Ontology of Basic Legal 
Concepts. In: Casanovas, P., Biasiotti, M.A., Francesconi, E., Sagri, M.T. (eds.) Proceed-
ings of the Workshop on Legal Ontologies and Artificial Intelligence Techniques (LOAIT 
2007). CEUR Workshop Proceedings, pp. 43–63 (2007) 
27. Jäschke, R., Hotho, A., Schmitz, C., Ganter, B., Stumme, G.: Discovering Shared Concep-
tualizations in Folksonomies. In: Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the 
World Wide Web, vol. 6, pp. 38–53 (2008) 
28. Kim, H., Yang, S., Song, S., Breslin, J.G., Kim, H.: Tag Mediated Society with SCOT On-
tology. In: Proceedings of the Semantic Web Challenge. CEUR Workshop Proceedings 
(2007) 
29. Lacey, N.J., Lee, M.H.: The Epistemological Foundations of Artificial Agents. Minds and 
Machines 13, 339–365 (2003) 
30. Legrand, P.: Against A European Civil Code. Modern Law Review 60, 46–63 (1997) 

38 
G. Ajani and P. Rossi 
 
31. Legrand, P.: Antivonbar. Journal of Comparative Law 1, 13–40 (2006) 
32. Lehrer, K.: The Coherence Theory of Knowledge. Philosophical Topics 14, 5–25 (1986) 
33. Limpens, F., Gandon, F., Buffa, M.: Bridging Ontologies and Folksonomies to Leverage 
Knowledge Sharing on the Social Web: a Brief Survey. In: Proceedings of the 1st Interna-
tional Workshop on Social Software Engineering and Applications, SoSEA (2008) 
34. Maedche, A., Staab, S.: Ontology Learning. IEEE Intelligent Systems 16, 72–79 (2001) 
35. Margalit, A.: Open texture. In: Margalit, A. (ed.) Meaning and Use, pp. 141–152. Reidel 
Publishing, Dordrecht (1979) 
36. Marmor, A.: Interpretation and Legal Theory. Hart Publishing, Oxford (2005) 
37. Merryman, J., Clark, D.: Comparative Law: Cases and Materials. Michie Company, Char-
lotsville (1978) 
38. Mika, P.: Ontologies are Us: A Unified Model of Social Networks and Semantics. In: Gil, 
Y., Motta, E., Benjamins, V.R., Musen, M.A. (eds.) ISWC 2005. LNCS, vol. 3729,  
pp. 522–536. Springer, Heidelberg (2005) 
39. Milton, N.: Knowledge Acquisition in Practice. A Step-by-step Guide. In: Decision Engi-
neering. Springer, London (2007) 
40. Moens, M.F.: Innovative techniques for legal text retrieval. Artificial Intelligence and 
Law 9, 29–57 (2001) 
41. Nigro, H.O., Gonzalez Cisaro, S.E., Xodo, D.H. (eds.): Data Mining with Ontologies: Im-
plementations, Findings and Frameworks. Idea Group Reference, Hershey (2007) 
42. Pagallo, U.: Small World Paradigm and Empirical Research in Legal Ontologies: a Topo-
logical Approach. In: Ajani, G., Peruginelli, G., Sartor, G., Tiscornia, D. (eds.) The Multi-
language Complexity of European Law. Methodologies in Comparison, pp. 1957–1210. 
European Press Academic Publishing, Florence (2007) 
43. Papatheodorou, C., Vassilious, A., Simon, B.: Discovery Ontologies for Learning Re-
sources using Word-based Clustering. In: Barker, P., Rebelsky, S. (eds.) Proceedings of 
World Conference on Educational Multimedia, Hypermedia and Telecommunications 
2002, pp. 1523–1528. AACE, Denver (2002) 
44. Pepijn, R.S., Visser, S., Trevor, J., Bench-Capon, M.: A Comparison of Four Ontologies 
for the Design of Legal Knowledge Systems. Artificial Intelligence and Law 6, 27–57 
(1998) 
45. Samuel, G.: Epistemology and Method in Law. Ashgate, Aldershot (2003) 
46. Sartor, G.: Legal concepts as Inferential Nodes and Ontological Categories. Artificial Intel-
ligence and Law 17, 217–251 (2009) 
47. Schild, U., Saban, J.: Knowledge Representation in Legal Systems. Syracuse Law Re-
view 52, 1321–1330 (2002) 
48. Searle, J.: The Construction of Social Reality. Free Press, New York (1995) 
49. Stranieri, A., Zeleznikow, J.: Knowledge Discovery from Legal Databases. Springer,  
Heidelberg (2005) 
50. Valente, A.: A Modelling Approach to Legal Knowledge Engineering. IOS Press, Amster-
dam (1995) 
51. Vision, G.: Modern Anti-Realism and Manufactured Truth. Routledge, London (1988) 
52. Walker, R.: The Coherence Theory of Truth. Routledge, London (1989) 
53. Wieacker, F.: Foundations of European Legal Culture. American Journal of Comparative 
Law 38, 1–29 (1990) 
54. Zimmermann, R.: Savigny’s Legacy: Legal History, Comparative Law, and the Emergence 
of a European Legal Science. Law Quarterly Review 112, 576–605 (1996) 

P. Casanovas et al. (Eds.): AICOL Workshops 2009, LNAI 6237, pp. 39–53, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
Network Analysis of the French Environmental Code 
Romain Boulet1, Pierre Mazzega1, and Danièle Bourcier2 
1 Université de Toulouse, UPS (OMP), 
CNRS IRD, LMTG Toulouse 
14 av. Belin 31400 Toulouse, France 
{boulet,mazzega}@lmtg.obs-mip.fr 
2 CERSA CNRS, 
Université de Paris 2, 
10 rue Thénard, 75005 Paris, France 
daniele.bourcier@cersa.cnrs.fr 
Abstract. We perform a detailed analysis of the network constituted by the ci-
tations in a legal code, we search for hidden structures and properties. The 
graph associated to the Environmental code has a small-world structure and it is 
partitioned in several hidden communities of articles that only partially coincide 
with the organization of the code as given by its table of content. Several arti-
cles are also connected with a low number of articles but are intermediate  
between large communities. The structure of the Environmental Code is con-
trasting with the reference network of all the French Legal Codes that presents a 
rich-club of ten codes very central to the whole French legal system, but no 
small-world property. This comparison shows that the structural properties of 
the reference network associated to a legal system strongly depends on the scale 
and granularity of the analysis, as is the case for many complex systems. 
Keywords: Legal complexity, graph theory, network analysis, Environmental 
Code, citation network. 
1   Introduction 
In recent years, the debates about the legal complexity by spontaneous orders and the 
possibility to control it have recovered strength and interest from many different sci-
entific and politic communities. In particular, when it is seen as a part of liberaliza-
tion, the simplification of law is expected by different governmental bodies in Europe 
to reduce some administrative burdens, to induce net positive economical returns or, 
for example, to increase the trade volumes between State members, or even world-
wide. However, what is the legal complexity, how to control it, and what might be the 
impacts of the simplification of the Law, are questions without any element of an-
swer. This article does not attempt to define or redefine legal complexity (exposed for 
instance by Hayek’s works) but is aimed to better understand an aspect of this legal 
complexity induced by the numerous citation links between articles. In a seminal pa-
per [1], we proposed to open a field of research aiming at building rigorous defini-
tions of legal complexity that could be operational and exploited over large legal data 
bases. 

40 
R. Boulet, P. Mazzega, and D. Bourcier 
Instead of directly confronting ourselves with the semantic complexity of the Law, 
we decided to analyze some structure associated with the legal systems. The positive 
fact in choosing this less ambitious objective is that we start building and using defi-
nitions of some aspects of legal complexity that, exploited with legal corpuses, pro-
vide new insight on the structural properties of some legal systems. These insights in 
turn open new perspectives on the Law. In particular the granularity of the legal texts 
we are considering is fundamental in the analysis because, as we shall see, the proper-
ties of the legal structure differ with the scale of the analysis (as is the case for many 
complex systems). Indeed in a previous study, we considered as the smallest object 
legal codes themselves and proceed to the analysis of the network formed by their 
cross-citations [2]. Using mathematical tools developed for the analysis of social net-
works, we found that several hidden stable structures are underlying the network of 
the French legal codes: a “rich club” is gathering the ten most cited and most citing 
codes that are very strongly connected to each others. Several other code communities 
also exist, in particular one of 12 codes related to “social matters” and “social activi-
ties”, and another one of 11 codes regulating various matters linked to “territories and 
natural resources”. 
Changing the scale and granularity of the analysis, new structural properties are 
likely to appear. Here we choose to consider a single code and to analyze the network 
of citations within it. In a previous study, we have increased our resolution till the 
distinction of subdivisions within the articles. A statistical analysis of the distribution 
of the levels of organization of the Environmental Code and of the corresponding 
number of objects brought interesting clues about a kind of self-organization even 
within a code [3]. In the present study we go beyond the statistical analysis by consid-
ering with scrutiny the associated network structure. 
2   A Network Approach to Legal Complexity 
2.1   Networks Dealing with Legal Complexity 
Studying legal networks brings a new point of view on the issues of the complexity of 
Law. Approaching the complexity of the law through network analysis is a novel area 
of study and few analyses have been made so far.  
Previous work mainly focused on the analysis of the citation network of the Su-
preme Court jurisprudence [4], [5], [6]. In [6], some structural elements are high-
lighted: the network possesses a main core of 122 vertices, the most cited cases and 
the most central cases are enumerated and, despite a low density, the network is lo-
cally dense. James Fowler also used the different notions of centrality to study the 
citation network of the Supreme Court precedents [4]. The United States Code is also 
considered as a network in [7], the vertices of the network are the different sections of 
the US Code and the links are citations links. A common aspect of these papers is the 
examination of the degree1 distribution in order to bring out a scale-free effect. The 
network structure of the Uniform Commercial Code is analyzed in [8]; in this paper 
citations links and hierarchical links are considered and several tools are exposed in 
order to understand the shape of the network. These tools are computing indices of the 
                                                           
1 The degree of a vertex is the number of vertices linked to this vertex. 

 
Network Analysis of the French Environmental Code 
41 
graph (like small world indices or centralities) or performing a good visualization of 
the graph in order to detect communities.    
In the next subsection we shall introduce the legal network we study throughout 
this paper and then in Section 3 we shall not only compute the degree distribution and 
central vertices but also exhibit a small-world structure and cluster the network into 
communities. The analyses we perform, with an emphasis on legal interpretations of 
our results, will give us a better understanding of the shape of this network .  
2.2   Associating a Network to the Environmental Code 
Several networks – sets of vertices (or node) possibly linked by edges - can be associ-
ated to any legal corpus. We consider the cross-citations between various objects. 
Such an object can be, among others, an international Treatise or Convention, a law, a 
whole code, any subdivision of a code (book, title, chapter, etc.), an article, a key 
word, etc. There are numerous citations between these objects. Then it is straightfor-
ward to associate a network of citations (hereafter also called reference network) 
where the objects of the considered corpus are vertices and the citations constitute 
edges (or links) between them. For a network of several tens to thousands of vertices 
and edges, only appropriate mathematical tools allow to recover the main underlying 
properties and hidden structures. 
In this study our corpus is the French Environmental Code (but our approach 
would apply as well to any other code). The nodes are the articles belonging to the 
code and also the various objects of the hierarchy of the code, say books, titles, chap-
ters, sections, etc. Then we define two kinds of edges [1], [3]: influence-type edges 
and selection-type edges. Influence-type links are closely related to the hierarchy 
structure of the Code as they link objects A and B if B is a subdivision or a part of A. 
Being a “part of” surely indicates a non-arbitrary relationship, a dependence based on 
the organization of the legal substance of the corresponding texts or hierarchical lev-
els within the code. This yields the tree structure of the Code (as can be retrieved from 
its table of contents). 
A selection-type edge links two articles C and D if there is an explicit reference to 
D in C. For instance, the following extract of Article L211-3 produces a link between 
articles L211-3 and L211-2 and a link between articles L211-3 and L211-1: “Article 
L211-3 (extract): In addition to the general regulations mentioned in Article L. 211-2, 
national or particular provisions with regard to certain parts of the territory are es-
tablished by a Conseil d'Etat decree in order to ensure the protection of the principles 
set out in Article 211-1.”. This kind of link is also called citation link or reference 
link. Moreover any other object of the hierarchy of the code (not only articles) can be 
cited as for example in the Article L222-4 which explicitly cites the Article L222-1 
and the Chapter III of Title III of Book I, thus creating the corresponding two selec-
tion-type links in the associated network. Note that the links to objects that do not 
belong to our corpus (here the Environmental Code) are discarded in the analysis. 
2.3   The French Environmental Code 
In France, an important step in the intelligibility and the accessibility of the Law was 
made in 1989 when the Government decided to accelerate and reinvigorate the codifi-
cation process with the creation of the Commission Supérieure de Codification.  

42 
R. Boulet, P. Mazzega, and D. Bourcier 
The codification process contributes to the clarification and ordering of the Law for 
citizens by collecting norms and regulations on a specific field in a single book called a 
Code. The present study is realized with the version of the Environmental Code as 
available on the Légifrance site [9] at the reference date of March, 27th 2009. Though 
the code is regularly updated and transformed, we believe that the results presented 
here are robust and representative for a period covering a decade or so (this period will 
depend on the rate of change of the texts in the corpus, this rate being itself most de-
pendent on the regulated matter). 
The French environmental Code is divided into a legislative part and a regulatory 
part. The legislative part has been voted by the parliament in 2003. The regulatory 
part should theoretically mirror the structure of the legislative part, and its content 
develops more specifically the corresponding regulations to be implemented. Here we 
only consider the legislative part and we construct the network of references as de-
scribed in the previous sub-section. The legislative part of the Environmental Code is 
divided into the following seven books [9]: (I) Common provisions (Art. L121-1 to 
L110-2); (II) Physical environments (Art. L211-1 to L220-2); (III) Natural spaces 
(Art. L310-1 to L300-3); (IV) Flora and fauna (Art. L411-1 to L430-1); (V) Preven-
tion of pollution, risks and nuisances (Art. L511-1 to L582-1); (VI) Provisions appli-
cable in New Caledonia, French Polynesia, the Wallis and Futuna Islands, French 
Southern and Antarctic Territories and Mayotte (Art. L611-1 to L656-1); (VII) Pro-
tection of the environment in the Antarctic (Art. L711-1 to L713-9). 
Added to these 7 books, we find 1775 other vertices (the smallest objects that we 
consider being articles) distributed into 31 titles, 122 chapters, 201 sections, 107 sub-
sections, 26 paragraphs and 1288 articles. Among this total of 1782 vertices, 513 ver-
tices do not share any link with another vertex. They are “isolated vertices”. This is 
particularly the case of objects of the hierarchy which are never explicitly cited like 
for example the Chapter IV of Title II of Book II “National technical measures for 
the prevention of atmospheric pollution and the rational use of energy”. There are 93 
such vertices that are not texts but headings of group of articles. It is also the case for 
articles which are never cited and do not cite any other part of the code like for exam-
ple the Article L429-2 (“The right to hunt on lands or water-covered areas is admin-
istered by the municipality for and on behalf of the owners”). 
We hereafter focus on the greatest connected component which contains 980 verti-
ces, that is more than 80% of vertices sharing at least one link. The second greatest 
connected component has 40 vertices, the third one has 26 vertices and the remaining 
components have fewer than 5 vertices. 
3   Analyzing the Network Structure of the Environmental Code 
In the following the graph G denotes the greatest connected component of the refer-
ence network of the French Environmental Code. In order to visualize the hierarchical 
organization of the code on this reference network, we give a color to each vertex 
according to the book they belong to. A first representation of this network is done by 
using a spring-like force algorithm, often used to represent networks in a readable 
way and such as there are as few crossing edges as possible (Figure 1). However,  
owing to the high number of vertices, further analyses are necessary to better under-
stand the network.  
 

 
Network Analysis of the French Environmental Code 
43 
 
Fig. 1. The graph G associated to the main connected component (980 vertices, 2186 edges) of 
the Environmental Code (legislative part only). The colors given to the vertices indicate the 
Book they are belonging to (hereafter only short names are given): (blue) Common provisions; 
(green) Physical environments; (orange) Natural space; (yellow) Flora and fauna; (pink) Pre-
vention of pollutions, Risks nuisances; (dark blue) Provisions applicable in New Caledonia etc.; 
(grey) Environmental protection in Antarctica. 

44 
R. Boulet, P. Mazzega, and D. Bourcier 
3.1   A Small-World Network  
The small-world structure has been found in many social or social-like networks [10], 
[11], [12], [13]. The definition of a small world structure is based on two main  
properties: 
• 
Only few steps are needed to link two any vertices; 
• 
The probability that two vertices are linked by an edge is much higher if 
these vertices already have a common neighbor. 
The first point can be measured by the characteristic path length [13], [12] which 
is the median of the average shortest path starting at a vertex. The second point can be 
measured by a clustering coefficient which is the mean of densities of neighborhood 
of vertices. The global density of the graph is the ratio between the number of edges 
in the graph and the maximal number of edges the graph could have if all the vertices 
were pair wise linked. The clustering coefficient measures the local density that is the 
density around a vertex. In a small-world network this local density is much higher 
than the global density.  
In order to estimate how high or low are these indices (the characteristic path 
length and the clustering coefficient), we compare them to those of other real net-
works sharing the small-world property. We also compare these indices to those cal-
culated on an Erdos-Renyi random graph: the global connectivity (here measured by 
the characteristic path length) must be almost the same and the clustering coefficient 
must be much higher in a small-world type network. 
Table 1. Small-world indices of G (graph of the greatest connected component of the Environ-
mental Code), of the associated random graph, of a medieval social network [14] and of a net-
work between German companies in 1993-1997 [15] (two companies are linked if they have a 
common owner). The number of vertices is denoted by n, the number of edges by m and the 
density by d, (with d=2m/[n(n-1)]). The small-world properties are related to the characteristic 
path length (L) and the first clustering coefficient (C).  
Graph 
n 
m 
d 
L 
C 
G 
980 
2186 
0.0046 
6.78 
0.49 
Random graph 980 
2186 
0.0046 
4.61 
0.0046 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Medieval  
 615 
4193 
0,0222 
3.71 
0.78 
Companies 
 291 
1036 
0.02 
 
0.84 
As we can see in Table 1, the reference network of the French environmental code 
is a small-world. Indeed, the global connectivity measured by the characteristic path 
length is close to the one obtained for a random graph and the clustering coefficient is 
much higher than the global density of the graph. 
3.2   Degree Distribution 
Another strong characteristic of real networks (or social-like networks) are scale-free 
networks or networks having a power-law degree distribution. That means that the 

 
Network Analysis of the French Environmental Code 
45 
empirical probability2 for a node to have a degree k, that is to be linked to k other 
nodes, is proportional to a power of k. As the network considered in this paper is un-
directed we only examine the degree distribution for this graph. This distribution is 
represented on Figure 2a and is clearly a long tail distribution: there are a lot of verti-
ces with a low degree and few vertices with a high degree revealing the presence of 
hubs. Figure 2b represents the same distribution but drawn on a log-log scale in order 
to check if this distribution is a power-law3. We recall that a power-law distribution 
can be obtained by a preferential attachment model [16]: when a new vertex enters the 
network, it links to other vertices with a probability proportional to their degree. In 
other words this new node will preferentially link to a high degree node (this can be 
seen as the winner-takes-all effect or rich get richer). 
Here, we observe that the decreasing of the distribution is stronger for high de-
grees, this is a common phenomena which occurs for instance in the distribution of 
inward and outward citations of the judicial precedent network [4]. This deviation 
from power-law can be explained by the fact that the network elements have a finite 
capacity to add links, which limits their maximum degree [17]. 
 
Fig. 2a. Cumulative degree distribution of the citation network of the French environmental 
code. The y-axis represents the probability to have a vertex of degree greater than or equal to x. 
                                                           
2 For practical reasons we consider the cumulative distribution, that is the probability for a node 
to have a degree greater than or equal to k. This allows a smoothing of the distribution. Note 
that a distribution is power-law if and only if its cumulative distribution is power-law. 
3 A power-law drawn in a log-log scale is represented by a straight line. 

46 
R. Boulet, P. Mazzega, and D. Bourcier 
 
Fig. 2b. Cumulative degree distribution of the citation network of the French environmental 
code plotted on a log-log scale. The y-axis represents the probability to have a vertex of degree 
greater than or equal to x. 
3.3   Central Articles 
We then examine whether G possesses a “rich-club” that is a central and influent 
community consisting of vertices (e.g. articles) with highest degrees and highly inter-
connected. A rich-club provides a network structure mainly organized around this 
influential group. The degrees of the nine articles with highest degrees are listed in 
Table 2. It appears that this distribution is quite heterogeneous with a strong decrease 
and a gap between the largest degree and the second largest degree. In the network of 
citations of the French Environmental Code, it appears that there is no edge between 
the eight vertices with highest degree. Therefore they cannot constitute a highly inter-
connected group. Oppositely to the network of French Legal Codes [2] the network of 
citations in the French Environmental Code does not have a rich-club of articles (or of 
any other objects in the code). From a legal point of view, it means that every code is 
written in an autonomous way following an internal logic but that the global project 
of codification follows an emergent and successive organization. 
Table 2. The nine vertices with highest degrees 
Rank Article 
Degree Rank 
Article 
Degree Rank 
Article 
Degree 
1 
L640-1 
143 4 
L632-1 
72 7 
L216-5 
30 
2 
L612-1 
72 5 
L429-1 
36 8 
L213-11 
27 
3 
L622-1 
72 6 
L216-3 
31 9 
L652-1 
27 
 

 
Network Analysis of the French Environmental Code 
47 
Another important centrality notion is betweenness [18] which measures how im-
portant a vertex is for the network connectivity by counting the number of shortest 
paths going through this vertex. Figure 3a distinguishes some articles with a particu-
larly high betweenness measure and Figure 3b shows some vertices with a low degree 
but a high betweenness centrality. We select the eight vertices with highest between-
ness indices, the corresponding articles are listed in Table 3. 
Among other things, Article L640-1 enumerates the references of a large list of ar-
ticles of the Books I, II, III and IV of the Environmental Code that apply to the French 
Southern and Antarctic Territories. This content explains why it has both the highest 
degree and the highest betweenness (see Table 2 and 3, and Fig.2a). The Title I of 
Book V has a relatively high degree that results from being often cited. All together 
the Articles L511-1 to L517-2 form a whole description of the “Classified facilities 
for the protection of the environment” under this heading that is cited in preference to 
the individual articles. But these facilities for the protection of the environment are of 
concern for many other parts of the Environmental Code that otherwise would not be 
related. This is the reason for the relatively high betweenness centrality of this head-
ing (Title I of Book V). 
Table 3. The eight articles with the highest indices of betweenness centrality 
Rank Article 
Betweenness Degree
Rank Article 
Betweenness Degree 
1 
L640-1
2.57 105 
143 5 
L218-44 
5.80 104 
14 
2 
L141-1
1.28 105 
15 6 
L142-2 
5.49 104 
7 
3 
L424-3
7.31 104 
14 7 
Book V, Title I 4.50 104 
23 
4 
L413-4
7.22 104 
4 8 
L581-32 
4.38 104 
3 
 
Fig. 3a. Betweenness centrality for the 40 vertices with highest betweenness measure 

48 
R. Boulet, P. Mazzega, and D. Bourcier 
Article L142-2 is a good example of a central vertex with a low degree (d=7). In-
deed it cites only three other articles and is cited by four other articles but these arti-
cles belong to four different books. As a result Article L142-2 is linking different 
communities of articles.  As is seen in Fig.2b, many other articles in the Environ-
mental Code have a low degree and a relatively high betweenness. By linking differ-
ent communities they strongly structure the overall architecture of the code. But how 
do we reveal these communities? Do they exactly coincide with books, titles, or chap-
ters of the Environmental Code or are they forming hidden structures within the 
Code?  
 
Fig. 3b. Betweenness centrality of a vertex (y-axis) as a function of its degree (x-axis) 
3.4   Gathering Articles into Communities 
Like social networks, the vertices of many real networks can be gathered into groups 
densely wired internally and with few connections between these groups. By analogy 
with social networks, such groups are called communities. In graph theory, the proc-
ess of graph partitioning aims at dividing the graph into parts such that the number of 
links between the parts is as small as possible, and as large as possible within each 
part. 
A preliminary step in the partitioning process is to remove the eight central vertices 
found in Section 3.3. Excluding these vertices will afford a clearer representation: let 
us assume that a central vertex links two communities A and B. If we do not remove 
the central vertex, there is a risk for A and B to be aggregated together in a single 
community at the end of the partitioning algorithm though they are distinct. Moreover 
this approach will allow us to emphasize the role played by these central vertices (e.g. 
articles). 

 
Network Analysis of the French Environmental Code 
49 
Without entering into technical details (see the mathematical references if re-
quired), we use a spectral partitioning algorithm based on the eigenvectors of the 
normalized graph Laplacian [19], [20]. We obtain a set of communities of articles. 
Some of them are directly linked by edges between articles belonging to these com-
munities. By adding the central vertices we previously deleted we can visualize how 
these different groups of vertices are connected. Figure 4 gives a visualization of this 
structure. 
 
Fig. 4. Communities found in the largest connected part of the French Environmental Code and 
obtained by a spectral partitioning. A disk represents a community of vertices. Its area is propor-
tional to the number of vertices therein. A community is colored if more than 75% of the vertices 
belong to the same Book; otherwise the community is white. The colors are the same than in Fig 1. 
The thickness of a link is related to the number of citations between the communities. 
Three kinds of communities arise: 
z 
Communities consisting of articles from the same section, chapter or book 
(note that for instance belonging to a same chapter is stronger than belonging 
to a same book). For example, the community with number 1 is composed of 
articles from the Chapter I of Title III of Book I “Institutions acting in the 
domain of environmental protection”; 

50 
R. Boulet, P. Mazzega, and D. Bourcier 
z 
Communities mostly composed of articles from a same part of the Code. For 
instance vertices of community number 6 belong to the Chapter III of Title I 
of Book II excepted the articles L652-1and L652-8; 
z 
More heterogeneous communities. Among the 22 vertices of community 15, 
10 of them belong to Chapter II of Title II of Book I and 9 belong to Chapter 
I of Title VII of Book V. 
In Table 4 we give the list of the main communities found in the graph G. The big-
gest one counts 135 articles, almost all belonging to the Book IV (Flora and fauna) of 
the Environmental Code. This group of articles has been gathered together in the 
code, and functions like a closed, “autonomous” community where most of references 
is pointing towards an article of the same group (and book). This community appears 
as the largest yellow disk on the right side of Fig.3.  
Table 3. Size of the communities with the percentage of vertices belonging to the Book the 
most represented in that community (that Book and its associated color in Figure 4 are given in 
brackets). We do not mention the 34 communities of size 1. 
Size 
% of art. 
Book, color 
Size 
% of art. 
Book, color 
Size 
% of art. 
Book, color 
Size 
% of art. 
Book, color 
135 
99.3  
(IV, yellow) 
47 
97.9  
(V, pink) 
22 
50  
(I, white) 
3 
66.7  
(I, white) 
109 
77.1  
(II, green) 
46 
87.0  
(IV) 
18 
100  
(III, orange) 
3 
66.7  
(II, white) 
90 
85.6  
(II, green) 
41 
80.5  
(V, pink) 
13 
92.3  
(V, pink) 
3 
100  
(I, blue) 
84 
91.7  
(V, pink) 
36 
94.4  
(II, green) 
9 
88.9  
(V, pink) 
3 
100  
(V, pink) 
56 
64.3  
(V, white) 
34 
94.1  
(II, green) 
8 
100  
(V, pink) 
2 
100  
(I, blue) 
55 
96.4  
(III, orange) 
33 
63.6  
(IV, white) 
7 
57.1  
(II, white) 
2 
100  
(IV, yellow) 
48 
95.9  
(II, green) 
23 
95.7 
(II, green) 
6 
100  
(I, blue) 
2 
100  
(IV, yellow) 
About 77% of the articles of the second largest community (109 articles) are be-
longing to Book II. The nearly 23% of the remaining articles are from one or several 
other books of the Environmental Code. An interesting exercise would be to analyze 
the content of these articles and see if they could be explicitly gathered under a com-
mon heading. It could be also extended to the other communities that we find and that 
present a non negligible number of articles external to the principal book of member-
ship. We also notice that five important communities mainly issued from Book V 
appear in Fig.3 (green disks; see also Tab.4), though this Book counts only two titles, 
entitled “Water and aquatic environments” and “Air and the atmosphere” respec-
tively. This features shows that the communities retrieved in the reference network 
are not simply reproducing the organization of the content of the code, but constitute 
hidden structures underlying it. 

 
Network Analysis of the French Environmental Code 
51 
We also find several communities of size 1. Indeed, when we remove the central 
vertices, the resulting graph contains some isolated vertices, that is vertices sharing no 
links; these vertices cannot be gathered into a larger community and therefore consti-
tute a community of size one.  
Most of the revealed largest communities are mainly constituted of articles from 
the book treating of the physical environments (green disks in Fig.3), from the book 
on the prevention of pollutions, risks nuisances (pink) and from the book on the flora 
and fauna (yellow). The matters treated in these communities are presented in several 
articles with a relatively important number of cross-citations, like in a local sub-
network. In these quite complex matters (see for example the way the water and 
aquatic environments are regulated in the Environmental Code) there is now easy or 
desirable way to organize the articles in a tree-like hierarchy. The contents of the arti-
cles are intrinsically interdependent. On the opposite we found no community gather-
ing a majority of articles related to the provisions applicable in New Caledonia etc. 
(Book VI; dark blue vertices in Fig.1) or to the environmental protection in Antarctica 
(Book VII; grey vertices in Fig.1). 
In Fig.3 we also see several small communities (sometimes in fact a single article) 
that are the center for a star-like shape (see e.g. the right most part of Fig.3), but the 
articles linked to this central node are not citing each others. Then they do not form a 
community. 
4   Discussion 
We can point out the particular position in the network of Book VI. A quick examina-
tion of figure 1 reveals that this book (the articles of which are colored in deep blue) 
is very disconnected and its articles are scattered and spread out in the network and 
they are linked to articles belonging to the five first books. As mentioned in the previ-
ous section, Figure 4 substantiates this fact as there is no community colored in deep 
blue. This observation confirms a remark made by the Commission Supérieure de 
Codification in paragraph of [21] devoted to French overseas territories “The Com-
mission met in a very classic way, questions relating to the codification of provisions 
relating to overseas territories. The complexity of the law of the overseas presents for 
each code some issues.”  
The low density, the small world structure and the absence of a rich-club in the ci-
tation network of the French Environmental Code clearly contrast with the architec-
ture found in the analysis of the reference network at the scale of codes [2]. Changing 
the granularity of the analysis modifies the nature of network structure and its associ-
ated properties. The density variation is not unexpected because while increasing the 
granularity (that is grouping vertices), the number of vertices decreases and the prob-
ability of existence of a citation between the two any bigger vertex increases.  If this 
structure modification may be evident for the density (and therefore the small world 
effect), the disappearance of the rich-club is remarkable. This observed relationship 
between change of structure and granularity could be further investigated by consider-
ing other codes and other legal systems. 
The mathematical analysis of the graph associated to the Environmental Code al-
lows to identify hidden communities of articles interrelated by cross-citations.  

52 
R. Boulet, P. Mazzega, and D. Bourcier 
An analysis of the content of the articles so grouped should bring new understanding 
on the way the matter is regulated. This question can be approached by lawyers or by 
the members of the Commission Supérieure de Codification (but is not the subject of 
this study), probably giving new insights on the way the legal substance is conceived 
and organized. Such analysis should be performed considering the largest communi-
ties with the higher percentage of “external” articles (articles in the community but 
belonging to different books or titles) as identified in Table 3. 
5   Conclusion 
This study provides a detailed analysis of the network of citations of a legal code. As 
a result we made a step forward in understanding the aspect of law complexity in-
duced by intra-references of the norms in the Environmental Code. We focus our 
analysis on the largest connected graph found in this code that counts 980 vertices and 
2186 edges (citations). This network is characterized by a small-world structure with 
several central vertices connecting communities. The structure into books of the Code 
is globally consistent with the exception of Book VI (Provisions applicable in New 
Caledonia, French Polynesia, the Wallis and Futuna Islands, French Southern and 
Antarctic Territories and Mayotte) which is not well and densely connected and the 
articles of which are linked to very different parts of the Environmental Code.  
The structure of the Environmental Code is contrasting with the network formed by 
the citations between the French legal Codes (each code being a vertex). In this dense 
network we found a central group of ten most cited and most citing codes, strongly 
interlinked, and forming a rich-club, but no small-world structure. This comparison 
reinforces the idea that the underlying structures and properties of legal networks are 
dependent on the scale and granularity of the performed analysis. 
The present study is a necessary stage to future applications. One of them is to 
compare different environmental codes for example the National Environmental Code 
and the two recent Provincial Environmental Codes of New Caledonia (the environ-
mental matter belongs to the territories), or to compare this environmental code with 
other codes related to other legal fields (like the rural Code). These comparisons 
would allow us to state new hypotheses about the specificity of the organization of 
laws related to environmental matters or, if the occasion arises, to make assumptions 
concerning the constant shape of citations networks of legal codes. Another applica-
tion would be to perform such analysis at different dates; this would give a way to 
measure the dynamical evolution of Law by measuring the evolution of small world 
indices, degree distributions and by examining the behavior of communities (which 
communities becomes denser or which communities are created).   
Acknowledgements. R. Boulet benefits from a post doctoral grant of the Institut Na-
tional des Sciences de l’Univers (CNRS, Paris). This study is funded by the RTRA 
Sciences et Techniques de l’Aéronautique et de l’Espace (http://www.fondation-
stae.net/) in Toulouse (MAELIA project - http://www.iaai-maelia.eu/ ). The yEd 
Graph editor has been used for producing the Fig.1 and Fig.3. Statistical properties of 
networks have been computed with R and the library igraph (http://www.r-
project.org/). We thank the anonymous reviewer for bringing to our attention the  
reference [8]. 

 
Network Analysis of the French Environmental Code 
53 
References  
1. Bourcier, D., Mazzega, P.: Toward measure of complexity in legal systems. In: Proc. 11th 
Intern. Conf. on Artificial Intelligence and Law, Stanford Law School, Stanford, California 
USA, June 4-8, pp. 211–215. ACM Press, New York (2007) 
2. Mazzega, P., Bourcier, D., Boulet, R.: The Network of French Legal Codes. In: Proc. 12th 
Intern. Conf. on Artificial Intelligence and Law (ICAIL), Barcelona, Spain, June 8-12, pp. 
236–237. ACM, New York (2009) 
3. Bourcier, D., Mazzega, P.: Codification, law article and graphs. In: Jurix, Lodder, A.R., 
Mommers, L. (eds.) Legal Knowledge and Information Systems, pp. 29–38. IOS Press, 
Amsterdam (2007) 
4. Fowler, J.H., Jeon, S.: The authority of Supreme Court precedent. Social Networks 30,  
16–30 (2008) 
5. Fowler, J.H., Johnson, T.R., Spriggs II, J.F., Jeon, S., Wahlbeck, P.J.: Network Analysis 
and the Law : Measuring the Legal Importance of Precedents at the U.S. Supreme Court. 
Political Analysis 15, 324–346 (2007) 
6. Chandler, S.J.: The Network Structure of Supreme Court Jurisprudence. Public Law and 
Legal Theory Series 2005-W-01 (Technical report), University of Houston Law Center 
(2005) 
7. Bommarito, M.J., Katz, D.M.: Properties of the United States Code Citation Network. 
LSN Experimental and Empirical Studies (2009) 
8. Chandler, S.J.: The Network Structure of the Uniform Commercial Code: It’s a Small 
World After All. Paper presented at the 2005 Wolfram Technology Conference (2005) 
9. Légifrance: 
Service 
Public 
de 
la 
Diffusion 
du 
Droit 
(2009), 
http://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/ 
10. Fell, D.A., Wagner, A.: The small world of metabolism. Nat. Biotech. 11(18), 1121–1122 
(2000) 
11. Newman, M.E.: The structure of scientific collaboration networks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
U.S.A. 98(2), 404–409 (2001) 
12. Watts, D.J., Strogatz, S.H.: Collective dynamics of ’small-world’ networks. Nature 393, 
440–442 (1998) 
13. Watts, D.J.: Small worlds: The dynamics of networks between order and randomness. 
Princeton University Press, Princeton (2003) 
14. Boulet, R., Jouve, B., Rossi, F., Villa, N.: Batch kernel SOM and related Laplacian meth-
ods for social network analysis. Neurocomputing 71, 1257–1273 (2008) 
15. Kogut, B., Walker, G.: The Small World of Germany and the Durability of National Net-
works. American Sociological Review 66(3), 317–335 (2001) 
16. Barabasi, A.L., Albert, R.: Emergence of scaling in random networks. Science 286, 509–
512 (2009) 
17. Pastor-Satorras, R., Vespignani, A.: Internet, Structure et Evolution. Editions Belin (2004) 
18. Freeman, L.C.: Centrality in social networks: Conceptual clarification. Social Net-
works 1(3), 215–239 (1979) 
19. von Luxburg, U.: A tutorial on spectral clustering. Statistics and computing 17(4),  
395–416 (2007) 
20. Shi, J., Malik, J.: Normalized Cuts and Image Segmentation. IEEE Transactions on Pattern 
Analysis and Machine Intelligence 22(8), 888–905 (2000) 
21. Commission Supérieure de Codification : Dix-neuvième rapport annuel (2008), 
http://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/html/codification/rapportannue
l2008.pdf 

 
P. Casanovas et al. (Eds.): AICOL Workshops 2009, LNAI 6237, pp. 54–73, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
Model Regularity of Legal Language  
in Active Modifications∗  
Monica Palmirani and Raffaella Brighi 
C.I.R.S.F.I.D., via Galliera. 3, 
40121 Bologna, Italy 
{monica.palmirani,raffaella.brighi}@unibo.it 
Abstract. One of the main emerging challenges in legal documentation is to cap-
ture the meaning and the semantics of normative content using NLP techniques, 
and to isolate the relevant part of the linguistic speech. The last five years have 
seen an explosion in XML schemas and DTDs whose focus in modelling legal 
resources their focus was on structure. Now that the basic elements of textual de-
scriptiveness are well formalized, we can use this knowledge to proceed with 
content. This paper presents a detailed methodology for classifying modificatory 
provisions in depth and providing all the necessary information for semi-
automatically managing the consolidation process. The methodology is based on 
an empirical legal analysis of about 29,000 Italian acts1, where we bring out 
regularities in the language associated with some modifications, and where we 
define patterns of proprieties for each type of modificatory provision. The list of 
verbs and the frames inferred through this empirical legal analysis have been 
used by the NLP group at the University of Turin to refine a syntactical NLP 
parser for isolating and representing the sentences as syntactic trees, and the pat-
tern will be used by the light semantic interpreter module to indentify the pa-
rameters of modificatory provisions.2 
Keywords: Legal XML, Legal Ontology, NLP. 
1   Semantic Layers in Legal Text 
Certainly, one of the most important challenges now facing legal informatics is to 
achieve an ability to effectively capture the legal knowledge embedded in legal 
documents and to represent such knowledge in an appropriate formal format able to 
                                                           
∗ This paper was carried out with the following authors' contributions: M. Palmirani paragraphs 
1, 2, 6, 7, appendix; R. Brighi paragraphs 3, 4, 5. 
1 Our research was conducted in Italian on Italian act, to be sure, but our methodology is lan-
guage-independent, and we have solid evidence that it works as well on European directives. 
For this reason, and in order to make for a clearer exposition, we will use here several exam-
ples from the Eur-Lex database. 
2 For more detail on the NLP techniques used in this research work see also the paper "NLP-
based Extraction of Modificatory Provisions Semantics", ICAIL2009, [15]. 

 
Model Regularity of Legal Language in Active Modifications 
55 
 
express descriptiveness, meaning, semantic, all the while enabling machine-
computable functions with which to address numerous specific problems. 
In Europe, as well as outside Europe, many national and supranational initiatives 
have established XML standards for describing legal sources and schemas with which 
to represent legal documents3 and uniquely identify the legal resources on the Web 
(URI). These initiatives have since grown into projects for the development of a new, 
Europe-wide representation format making integration and interoperability possible 
across all legal domains.4 
A legal resource is a complex multilayered information architecture that includes 
several angles or layers of analysis: 
TEXT. The part of the document officially approved by an authority with legal power. 
STRUCTURE OF THE TEXT. The part of the document that states a text’s organisation. 
METADATA. Any information that was not issued by an authority in its deliberative 
act. Metadata can involve document description metadata (e.g., keyword), work-
flow (e.g., procedural steps in the bill), document’s lifecycle (e.g., document’s 
history), and document identification metadata (e.g., URL, URI, URN, and an-
nexes). 
ONTOLOGY. Any information about the setting in which the document plays a role, 
for example, information specifying a concept pertaining to the legal system or 
any concept which is invoked in the text and which needs modelling. 
LEGAL KNOWLEDGE MODELLING. The interpretation and modelling of the text’s 
legal meaning, especially as concerns the representation of norms and rules that 
are not already included in the more abstract ontology layer. 
The figure 1 shows how each layer needs a separate description and representation 
mechanism within the document, so as to enable multi-annotation on the same level 
and to manipulate data on any level without affecting the higher level. The layers are 
in this sense strata of information applied on the original document, as happened with 
the ancient palimpsests. 
1.1   Text and Structure Layer 
A feature common to all schemes is that they model the text and the structure of a 
normative text: text containers, by way of meaningful elements (preamble, title,  
 
                                                           
3 Among these initiatives we have, in Europe [14], the Eur-Lex portal based on FORMEX data 
model, the Dutch projects MetaLex and SDU BWB, along with LexDania in Denmark, eLaw 
in Austria, CHLexML in Switzerland, the Crown XML Schema for Legislation in United 
Kingdom and NormeinRete in Italy, forming the main basis for this contribution. Outside 
Europe we have the AKOMA NTOSO project, coordinated by the United Nations Depart-
ment of Economic and Social Affairs (UNDESA) and launched by the Pan-African Parlia-
ments Organization; EnAct, with the governments of Tasmania, Canada, New Zealand; 
LexMLBrazil promoted by the Senate of the Brazil Republic and based on NormeInRete and 
Akoma Ntoso experiences, a number of states in the US as well as the United States House of 
Representatives [12]. Others national government initiatives [7] design legal XML DTD or 
schema that are not available for comparative studies, but are largely used in the on-line pub-
lications in official legislative portal like Legifrance in France, eBundesanzeiger in Germany, 
Finlex in Finland. 
4 See ESTRELLA - European project for Standardised Transparent Representations in order to 
Extend Legal Accessibility (IST-2004-027655) and CEN MetaLex Workshop. 

56 
M. Palmirani and R. Brighi 
 
 
Fig. 1. Layers of representation in Legal Document Modelling 
article/sections/clauses, quoted text, etc.) or by way of general textual elements. The 
structure markup capture the text and how the document was organized by the author 
empowered to endorse the document.  
1.2   Legal Metadata Layer 
A normative text is described not only through its structural elements but also through 
metadata, consisting in additional contributions provided by some agent (editor, pub-
lisher, etc.) to make sure the content more closely represents the legal knowledge 
embedded in the text and that the text is suitable for interpretation and use. 
The metadata can be divided into objective and subjective metadata. The objective 
metadata don’t need any strong subjective interpretation but do need to be detected 
within the text and linked to the proper ontology class: belonging to this category are 
data for identifying and managing the act (publication, location or legislative work-
flow, etc.). 
We have also subjective metadata: belonging to this class are lifecycle attributes 
(helpful in versioning a document as it changes over time or in tracking events linked 
to the document), keywords, functional metadata (for modificatory and functional 
provisions, as well as for permissions, obligations, rights, etc.), and normative refer-
ences made using Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs). 
Metadata should be always clearly distinguished from content, independently of 
the syntactical approach used, because they are an enrichment added to the text, usu-
ally by a different agent other than its author (as by an editor, publisher, etc.), and in 
case the author also provides the metadata, these will still need further annotation: we 
can place metadata on a separate layer sitting on top of the structural content (as in 
CEN Metalex or in Akoma Ntoso) or inline close to the content itself (as in  

 
Model Regularity of Legal Language in Active Modifications 
57 
 
NormeInRete), or instead in an external document (as in Legal RDF, UKMF, LMAS, 
JMAS) [13]. 
1.3   Semantic Layer 
On top of the metadata it is possible to define a domain ontology with which to enrich 
the metadata definition with abstract definitions, properties, axioms, and relationships 
between classes like LKIF-core [4]. 
While the ontology layer defines the abstract legal concepts (Tbox), in each legal 
text there are assertions that constitute the instances of the ontology classes (Abox): 
assertions, resources, and literals have to be associated with the proper legal concept 
(e.g. “Smith is Supreme Court justice” is modeled as Smith is an instance of the class 
Supreme Court justice). In the Semantic Layer, we find also the logic layer that fosters 
the ontology definitions and axioms. The logic layer models the norms’ content, or 
legal knowledge (e.g., “Any person who wilfully infringes a copyright shall be pun-
ished as provided under section 2319 of title 18” is modelled using a logic formalism 
such as ∀ x (infringes (Person(x), copyright)⇒ Punished(x; #title18.section2319); 
another example is Art. 48 of the Italian Constitution, “Any citizen, male or female, 
who has attained majority, is entitled to vote,” formalized in Fig. 1, where the status of 
citizen is linked to the ontology class of citizenship). 
1.4   Fill the Gap 
Important advancements are being made in the effort to model and represent the struc-
ture and content of legal texts and so as to model their meaning, but legal knowledge 
will not really be useful unless tools are available with which to automatically extract 
structural and semantic data from legal texts in order to generate formalized serializa-
tion of assertions [25] (XML, RDF, RDF/A, OWL, LKIF-rules.). 
Still, one of the main problems in the state of the art is to fill the gap between these 
multiple layers, so that the information embedded in each level can be fostered and 
used by the others. Partly owing to a new legal-drafting policy in Italy,5 as well as in 
Europe,6 Africa,7 and in internationally, legal provisions now have a regular structure 
making it possible to use a text editor to mark up in an automated or semi-guided 
fashion a normative text’s structural partition [5] and normative references [6]. We do 
have several tools such as XML-Leges, MetaVox, and Norma-Editor [17] that are 
provided to a parser capable of capturing a legal text’s format and automatically 
marking up the text to give it a structure equal to that of the corresponding legal 
document; so, too, these tools add identificatory data to this text in such a way as to 
build for it a URN8 and to recognize the normative references made in it. 
But there still remains the problem of filling the gap between the text’s structure 
and its concepts. Our problem in particular, where consolidation is concerned, is to 
                                                           
5 Circolare 2 maggio 2001, n. 1/1.1.26/10888/9.92. Guida alla redazione dei testi normativi. 
6 Joint Practical Guide of the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission for per-
sons involved in the drafting of legislation within the Community institutions. http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/en/techleg/index.htm 
7 Legislative Drafting Guidelines for Africa - www.akomantoso.org 
8 See also [6]. 

58 
M. Palmirani and R. Brighi 
 
detect and formalize a provision’s content and functional properties. Specifically, our 
objective is to develop a tool with which to automatically classify a modificatory 
provision (meaning a provision that modifies other provisions) by pointing out its 
attributes and the action it expresses, both of which are elements that serve a useful 
purpose in helping us apply a text so modelled. Several other researches have the 
same goal [9], [10], but their scope is limited mostly to detecting textual modifica-
tions. Our research aims to also discover and model temporal modifications and modi-
fications of content that may be hidden within a textual modification. 
2   Methodology and Semantic Annotation Architecture 
This research was developed as part of the National Italian Research Project PRIN 
2005, and is being developed under the ICT4Law project, Converging Technologies 
Project financed by Piedmont Region. 
The previously stated objective makes it necessary to define a methodology devel-
oped on the basis of seven steps as follows: 
1. Using Norma-Editor for XML markup of a legal text’s structure and  
references. 
2. Legal experts manually annotating modificatory provisions. 
3. Using a taxonomy of modificatory provisions to extract from the text verbs 
frequently used in connection with each modificatory action. 
4. Inferring a pattern of parameters in the language for each type of modifica-
tory provision. 
5. Running a deep syntactical parser using NLP tools and semantic interpreter 
on the basis of the taxonomy and the extracted verbs. 
6. Applying the pattern of the parameters linked to each type of modification, so 
as to isolate the meaning of each text fragment connected to the modification. 
7. Comparison and evaluation. In this paper we present the steps from 1 to 4, 
which form the basis for applying the NLP techniques under steps 5 to 7.9 
We also present the architecture of the application serving to provide the service of 
semantically annotating legal texts via Web services (see Fig. 2). 
The application is based on the SOAP Web-service architecture; therefore, any edi-
tor can use a standard API to communicate with the Web application. The use-case 
scenario is composed of seven steps as follows: 
(a) The application or the end user directly calls the Web application and submits 
an NIR-compliant XML file. 
(b) The file is converted from the original XML NIR version into the v2.2 mark-up. 
(c) Two parsers are used to refine the mark-up in case the file was not completely 
and correctly marked up in those parts (such as structure, references, quoted 
text, and nested quoted text) that are fundamental for semantic detection and 
extraction. (These parsers are developed by CIRSFID and are already present in 
Norma-Editor.) 
                                                           
9 See also [15]. 

 
Model Regularity of Legal Language in Active Modifications 
59 
 
(d) The XML file is processed by the NLP module (developed by Computer Sci-
ence Department in Turin) to detect the modification qualification on the modi-
ficatory provisions. 
(e) Output is converted into XML-compliant NIR v2.2 because the previous step 
does not harmonize all the metadata found in the document header or locally in 
the provision. 
(f) We also produce an intermediate format, CEN Metalex, to preserve over time 
the pattern-oriented knowledge acquired during the process and not well stored 
in the NIR XML. 
(g) The Web services display output for any further purposes.  
Web Application
Annotation in NIR
Web Services
NLP module
Partial
NIR
XML
Converter Metalex/CEN
Annotated
NIR
XML
Metalex
XML
input
output
Client Side
Import NIR & Metalex
Refinement
Convertion and Validation XML
Norma-Editor
application
XML RIF parser
XML quoted text parser
Web Application
Annotation in NIR
Web Services
NLP module
Partial
NIR
XML
Partial
NIR
XML
Converter Metalex/CEN
Annotated
NIR
XML
Annotated
NIR
XML
Metalex
XML
Metalex
XML
input
output
Client Side
Import NIR & Metalex
Refinement
Convertion and Validation XML
Norma-Editor
Client Side
Import NIR & Metalex
Refinement
Convertion and Validation XML
Client Side
Import NIR & Metalex
Refinement
Convertion and Validation XML
Norma-Editor
application
XML RIF parser
XML quoted text parser
 
Fig. 2. Architecture of the semantic-annotation service on legal texts 
Finally, we have designed and developed two important tools for testing and refin-
ing the methodology: 
(a) A repository base on an XML-native database (eXist) storing the 29,000 XML 
Italian acts marked up using the NIR standard; 
(b) A query module with which to flexibly extract the fragments of the modifica-
tory provisions and their corresponding statistical data. 
3   Modificatory Provision Definition 
A normative system, for its part, will be understood as a body of provisions that change 
over time, in a process where existing provisions are amended or ejected as new ones 

60 
M. Palmirani and R. Brighi 
 
are introduced, or where a provision simply changes its normative content.10 The pro-
visions making up a normative system are therefore interconnected not only by their 
structure (textual part of the provision) but also through the meaning of a text amended 
within an entire norm. Thus, it will often happen that one provision should change 
other provision’s text, purview, or term of enforceability through an amending clause 
embedded in the provision itself (e.g. “in Article 125(1) and (2), the words ‘until 31 
December 2007’ shall be replaced by ‘until 31 December 2010’”).11 For this reason we 
strongly believe that the modificatory provisions should no longer be limited to textual 
amendments but should ontologically also extend to the modifications of a norm’s time 
parameters (time of entry into force or of efficacy), to its role (as when a national legal 
corpus comes to include an international treaty or implements a EU directive), to a 
legislative document’s hierarchy within the normative system (delegation or delegifica-
tion act), and surely to the scope of the application of the norms. 
Therefore, modificatory provisions also require special attention because they af-
fect the entire normative system at different times: they can act instantaneously, 
retroactively, or in the future (e.g. “in Article 28, paragraph 2, ‘Directive 
79/1072/EEC shall be repealed effecting 1 January 2010’”).12 Therefore, it is impor-
tant not only to detect the action explicitly or implicitly stated in the text, but also to 
detect when the modificatory provision should act on the normative system. It should 
be underscored, in this regard, that a lavish use normative modifications tends to 
undermine the certainty of the law, all the more so that the changes so introduced are 
sometimes fragmentary and incoherent, making it that much more difficult to arrive 
at a clear understanding of what the law is, or which of several versions of a provi-
sion counts as law. 
If we can automate the process by which to semantically analyze modificatory pro-
visions, including all the connected attributes, we will have made great progress to-
ward simplifying the legal system and consolidating texts of law,13 because we will 
immediately be able to appreciate all the interconnections among provisions as well 
as the way in which one provision acts on the preexisting body of norms. This second 
ability in particular opens the possibility of simulating the effect of legislation during 
the lawmaking process, so as to build quality into our legislation right from the start. 
4   Modificatory Provision under the NormeInRete Standard 
This research is based on the NormeInRete XML standard (or NIR), for Italian legal 
texts; still, we can also apply the same methodology to Akoma Ntoso and CEN 
                                                           
10 In See [11] for a theory of diachronic normative system in the time useful for designing a 
information system. 
11 Council Directive 2007/75/EC of 20 December 2007 amending Directive 2006/112/EC with 
regard to certain temporary provisions concerning rates of value added tax. 
12 Council Directive 2008/9/EC of 12 February 2008 laying down detailed rules for the refund 
of value added tax, provided for in Directive 2006/112/EC, to taxable persons not established 
in the Member State of refund but established in another Member State. 
13 By consolidated text is meant the updated version of a normative text—the version embody-
ing and showing any and all changes overlaid onto the initial norm by norms subsequent to 
it. See [1]. 

 
Model Regularity of Legal Language in Active Modifications 
61 
 
Metalex, whose pattern designs are in certain respects similar, especially as concerns 
the modificatory modelling part (e.g., Akoma Ntoso as a metadata block dedicated to 
modificatory analysis similar to NIR and LKIF-core include a fragment of the modifi-
cation ontology presented in § 5). 
The NIR standard defines some structural elements serving to mark up the main 
partitions of a text of law, as well as its atomic parts (articles, paragraphs, subpara-
graphs, and lettered and numbered items) and any nonstructured text fragment. 
A provision can be qualified through a specially defined space called <meta> in 
which a URN connects the element expressing a qualification with the textual element 
referred to (whether this is an atomic element or a string in the run of text). 
Provisions can be classified on the basis of the taxonomically described functions 
they serve in a legal text [3]: constitutive provisions (e.g., definitions), regulative 
provisions (deontic concepts), and modificatory provisions (active or passive), and it 
is the provisions in this last class that make up the subject of our investigation. 
A modificatory clause can be modelled through the following formalism. 
 
ACTIVENORM (URN) — a provision stating a modification. 
PASSIVENORM (URN, internal/external, complete/incomplete, negative/positive, 
single/multiple) — a provision affected by the modification. The PassiveNorm 
can be multiple when the affected provisions are many, and it is often a prob-
lem to automatically identify all the subparts of a complex string of provisions 
referred to (e.g., “Articles 3, 4, 6, paragraph 2 and 8,” where it is unclear 
whether the 8 identifies paragraph 8 or article 8). It is incomplete where the 
text does not include unambiguous or unique parameters for indentifying the 
provision referred to. Sometimes the passive norm is expressed through a nega-
tive sentence (e.g., “Repeal all chapters except the first one”), making it neces-
sary to express this through a negative proposition: Repeal (¬ (Chapter I)). 
ACTION (TYPE, DURATION, DATE_APPLICATION, IMPLICIT/EXPLICIT) — an action the 
active provision entails for the passive one. Actions are organised into a taxon-
omy, and each action can have a date of application different from the date of 
entry into force of the law where the provision is found. So it is possible to find 
that the modificatory action is retro-activated or postponed, and the provision’s 
application date fixes the time of the action. In most of cases, this action starts 
on the date of entry into force of the document hosting the modificatory provi-
sion. Still, it is not so difficult to find different points in time when the action is 
to be activated. This date is a fundamental element for determining the correct 
and valid chronological sequence of legal events in the diachronic representa-
tion of the normative system. 
TIMES (INFORCE(START,END), EFFICACY(START,END)) — Times refers to two inter-
vals, one indicating the time during which a modificatory provision is in force 
and the other the time during which it is efficacious. The modificatory provi-
sion is ultimately fixed by a triple date: the date of the provision’s entry into 
force, the date on which it becomes efficacious, and the date when the modifi-
cation is applied. A complex algorithm chooses the appropriate date in the trip-
let and it determines the timeline for the events of the process by which change 
is managed in the versioning chain. 

62 
M. Palmirani and R. Brighi 
 
CONTENT (OLD TEXT, NEW TEXT, POSITIONS) — This represents the part of the text 
that models the old text to be replaced or repealed in the modified provision. 
Any new text is inserted in the receiving norm, and the provision may indicate 
where the new text is to be inserted (e.g., “Insert the following paragraph be-
fore the paragraph beginning with ‘If 2557’”).14 
PURVIEW — This part of the modificatory provision is sometimes used to indirectly 
describe a change in the range of application, or to point out an exception in 
this range, or to specify the way the range is to be interpreted. 
SPACE — A parameter used to specify a geographical area across which the modifica-
tion applies (e.g., “Estonia shall be granted a temporary derogation from the 
application of Article 21(1)(b) and (c) until 31 December 2012”).15 
CONDITIONS — (event, space, domain). Sometimes a norm’s efficacy is conditional on 
an event, geographic space, or class (or domain) of application. When a modifi-
catory provision is conditioned by an undefined event, this freezes the action un-
til the conditional is resolved. This part of the language is very complex to detect, 
but the idea is to use a logic formalism to transform these cases into rules, so as 
to logically validate the time at which the conditions are satisfied. That will de-
termine the time when the modificatory provision will take effect. 
REFLEXIVITY — When an ActiveNorm and a PassiveNorm collapse into each other in 
the document, we have a reflexive modificatory provision, one that acts recur-
sively on the same text with an introversion modification. This kind of modifi-
cation is usually aimed at postponing a norm’s application (e.g., “7. The  
percentage referred to in paragraph 1(d) and paragraph 3 shall from 1 January 
2011 be 25 %)”16 or at implementing an exception, condition, or space restric-
tion restricting or expanding a norm’s scope or jurisdiction. This particular 
propriety of the modificatory provision is a challenge to detect, for it is difficult 
to distinguish the acting text string from the string acted upon. 
The NormeInRete standard includes in its Document Type Definitions (DTDs) a 
part dedicated to modifications that make it possible to implement this model into 
XML. Below is an example of how a nonqualified provision can be enriched with 
semantic metadata (bold type) by marking it up in XML through NormeInRete. 
Original text of the Article 2 of the Directive 2005/1/EC: 
Article 2 
Directive 94/19/EC 
In the third subparagraph of Article 3(1) of Directive 
94/19/EC, the words "Banking Advisory Committee" shall 
be replaced by the words "European Banking Committee". 
marked up in XML NormeInRete standard: 
<articolo> 
 <num>Article 2</num> 
 <rubrica>Directive 94/19/EC</rubrica> 
 <comma id="art2-com1"> 
  <corpo>In the third subparagraph of  
   <mod id="mod18"> 
                                                           
14 Commission Directive 96/86/EC. 
15 Directive 2008/3/EC. 
16 Council Directive 2003/48/EC. 

 
Model Regularity of Legal Language in Active Modifications 
63 
 
    <rif id="rif53" xlink:href="urn:nir:unione.europea 
;consiglio:direttiva:1994-05-30;1994-19-ce#art3-com1"> 
   Article 3(1) of Directive 94/19/EC</rif>, the words  
    <virgolette tipo="parola" id="mod18-vir1">"Banking 
Advisory Committee"</virgolette> 
   shall be replaced by the words  
    <virgolette tipo="parola" id="mod18-
vir2">"European Banking Committee"</virgolette> 
   </mod>. 
  </corpo> 
 </comma> 
</articolo> 
and its enrichment with metadata qualification: 
<dsp:sostituzione> 
 
<dsp:pos xlink:href="#art2-com1"/> 
 
<dsp:norma 
xlink:href="urn:nir:unione.europea;consiglio:direttiva:
1994-05-30;1994-19-ce"> 
 
 <dsp:pos xlink:href="#rif53"/> 
 
 <dsp:sub xlink:href="urn:nir:unione.europea; 
consiglio:direttiva:1994-05-30;1994-19-ce#art3-com1"/> 
 
 <dsp:incompleta/> 
 
</dsp:norma> 
 
<dsp:novella> 
 
 <dsp:pos xlink:href="#mod18-vir2"/> 
 
</dsp:novella> 
 
<dsp:novellando> 
 
 <dsp:pos xlink:href="#mod18-vir1"/> 
 
</dsp:novellando> 
</dsp:sostituzione> 
 
Before any semantic annotations are added, the text is marked up with structural 
data as well as with normative references and “quotation mark” elements, meaning 
text matter referring to a passive norm (such as any additional or replacement text, 
along with a string indicating where this text belongs in the passive norm). Semantic 
annotation enriches a text with the <mod> element, which acts to delimit a modifica-
tory clause and the metadata. 
There are several classes that NIR uses to qualify the action of modificatory provi-
sions: these classes are identified by the namespace dsp:, which will be illustrated as 
we go along. 
Every class of modificatory provisions is modelled as well by a number of sub-
elements that further specify it. The DTD also makes it possible to write in your own 
sub-arguments, appropriately identified by a namespace, in case you need an even 
more detailed description of the modificatory action. 
5   How Modifications Are Classified 
A normative modification is a change made to one or more clauses within a text (to its 
articles, paragraphs, etc.), or to the entire text along with its annexes (repeal of an 

64 
M. Palmirani and R. Brighi 
 
entire law), or to the relations that hold among the constituent provisions of a legal 
system (as when a decree-law is made into law). Each such change will correspond to 
an event represented as a point in time when the change takes place. 
We can proceed on this basis to break down normative modifications into five 
main classes as follows: 
TYPE 1. A change made to a norm’s text or form (an integration, substitution, dele-
tion, relocation) or to a norm’s meaning (an interpretation or variation of meaning 
or a modification of clauses); 
TYPE 2. A change made to a norm’s range (an expansion of its subject matter or range 
of application or a provision stating an exception to such a range); 
TYPE 3. A change made to a norm’s temporal parameters (the time of its entry into 
force and the time when it becomes operative); 
TYPE 4. A change made to a norm’s status within the legal system (a decree-law made 
into law, an international treaty transposed into domestic law); 
TYPE 5. A change made to the powers conferred under a norm within the legal system 
(examples being a legge delega, by which the parliament entrusts the government 
with issuing a legislative decree under which certain public laws may be passed; 
or a legislative decree entrusting a ministry to deregulate a certain subject matter 
within its competence; or again a EU directive transposed into domestic law).  
The Fig. 3 shows the complete taxonomy for modificatory provisions. This classi-
fication was arrived at by working together the modificatory forms described in legal 
theory17 and legal informatics [21], on the one hand, and the schemas functional to the 
consolidation of normative texts, on the other. When the objective is to have a con-
solidated text, the legal-theoretical forms need to be specified into further forms  
expressing the actions the passive or target norm is made to receive, but this specifica-
tion must be effected in such a way that the resulting text does not lose its legal use or 
relevance.  
M
MO
ODDIIFFIICCAATTIIO
ONN
NNO
ORRM
M  M
MO
OD
DIIFFIICCAATTIIO
ONN
N
NO
ORRM
MAATTIIVVEE  SSYYSSTTEEM
M  
M
MO
OD
DIIFFIICCAATTIIO
ON
N  
M
MO
OD
DIIFFIICCAATTIIO
ONN    
O
OFF  TTHHEE  CCO
ONNTTEENNTT 
M
MO
OD
DIIFFIICCAATTIIO
ON
N  O
OFF  TTHHEE  
SSCCO
OPPEE 
M
MO
OD
DIIFFIICCAATTIIO
ONN  O
OFF  TTH
HEE  
TTIIM
MEE 
MEANING 
FORCE
EFFICACY
SUSPENSION
POSTPONEMENT OF ENTER IN 
FORCE 
RETROACTIVITY 
PROROGATION OF EFFICACY 
DISAPPLICATION 
REPEAL 
INTEGRATION 
SUBSTITUTION 
RELOCATION 
 
MODIFICATION  
OF TERMS 
INTERPRETATON 
 
EXCEPTION 
EXTENSION 
 
ANNULMENT
POSTPONEMENT OF ENTER 
IN FORCE 
START/END FORCE 
PROROGATION 
RE-ENACTMENT 
TEXT 
CONVERSION 
TRANSPOSE 
IMPLEMENT 
RATIFICATION 
DELEGATION OF POWER 
DEREGULATION 
 
Fig. 3. Modification taxonomy 
                                                           
17 See, among others, [11], [16], [24], [26]. 

 
Model Regularity of Legal Language in Active Modifications 
65 
 
The taxonomy is developed into an ontology within the LKIF-core to support the 
NLP tools with their axioms and properties. In particular, the ontology definitions 
define frames for the NLP semantic analysis. An intermediate class was created, 
called Semantic Annotation, to distinguish the temporal-modification and textual-
modification classes from the other typologies. 
 
Fig. 4. Architecture of the semantic annotation service on a legal text 
6   Regularity of Legal Language in Active Modifications 
In addition to carrying out a legal-theoretical analysis of the changes a norm may 
receive and to developing models by which to represent these changes, we have also 
gone back—by way of testing the system at work—and surveyed a large body of 
norms that legal practitioners have semantically annotated with Norma-Editor on the 
basis of the NIR format. Our specific purpose was to asses the relative impact that 
each type of modification would have on the normative corpus that had been consoli-
dated. We took a heterogeneous collection of documents (about 29,000 dating from 
2005 to 2009), all of them published in the Official National Gazette, issued by the 
High Court of Cassation, and selected on the basis of a project that over the last five 
years CIRSFID worked on turning these documents into an XML format. On this 
body of documents we did a linguistic analysis to isolate patterns for each type of 
modificatory provision. 
The articles processed are 46,483, and the total modifications are 19,203, repre-
senting 41% of the articles. The modificatory documents are 6,026, representing 21% 
of the all the documents processed. 
 

66 
M. Palmirani and R. Brighi 
 
65,5%
21,2%
6,9%
3,6%
2,8%
0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
0,5
0,6
0,7
TextualMod
MeaningMod
ScopeMod
TemporalMod NormativeMod
 
Fig. 5. Relative impact that each modification type had on the sample of norms considered 
This figure shows that the biggest impact was owed to textual modifications (about 
65.5%). Other types of changes seem either very rare or merely procedural (and so do 
not explicitly show up in the text); still, some indicators show that there is a hidden 
qualification in the statistical analysis. For one thing, 7% refers to exceptions and 
extensions, and this means the applicable norms are widely modified. And, for an-
other thing, we see that temporal modifications are the third typology to impact our 
body of law. Significant is the 21% of modifications done without textual alterations 
but simply by paraphrasing (e.g., “The tax is increased by 2%”), so they elude ma-
chine-detection, and sophisticated NLP tools need to be developed to capture them. 
Finally, we discovered that textual modifications contain several hidden temporal 
and exception/extension modificatory provisions and, vice versa, that some excep-
tion/extension undermined some textual modifications. In the following example (see 
Table 1) we can see a substitution producing a side effect on the target norm’s tempo-
ral parameters. 
For this reason we also proceeded, for each modificatory class, to extract meaning-
ful elements and analyze the legal language in which they are expressed and the com-
positional rules or forms used in this language. 
In doing so, we observed a degree of regularity in the language and the forms of 
expression used in writing active modificatory provisions: this holds not only for 
textual modifications but also for exceptions, extensions, and temporal modifications. 
The recurrence of certain terms may suggest that in some cases we can determine 
how this modification should really be classified. 
In certain cases we cannot determine the specific legal class. For example, the ex-
pression “shall apply from” + <data> suggests a temporal modification, but we can-
not distinguish between a change made to a norm’s entry into force from a change 
made to its efficacy; moreover, the expression can be confused with a procedural 
description. 
 
 

 
Model Regularity of Legal Language in Active Modifications 
67 
 
Table 1. Example of substitution that produces a temporal modification as to efficacy 
 
Thus, for example, the recurrent use of certain terms or expressions may suggest a 
temporal modification, but we cannot proceed on the basis of these wordings alone in 
determining how this modification should really be classified (change affecting entry 
into force or change affecting efficacy). To this end we need additional information 
about the provision, and sometimes it proves necessary to do a legal interpretation on 
the text in order to properly qualify it as being of one legal type or another. 
The common language locutions that recur in the different modificatory provisions 
have thus been sorted into different classes of modificatory language, classes de-
signed to be neutral with respect to the legal effect they can produce. For each such 
class we associated one or more legal class or subclass (from the list of five that was 
earlier introduced in Section 4). The idea is that the semantic parser should make a 
neutral classification only once the language has been syntactically analyzed and 
semantically interpreted using the NLP technique. The semantic interpreter uses the 
pattern built by the above-mentioned classification and analysis, and provides a clas-
sification based on the forms of expression alone (on the locutions). And then, in a 
second run, a set of compositional rules—operating in combination with a specialist’s 
interpretation of the text—will make it possible to translate the language-based 
markup of the text into a markup based on a more appropriate set of legal classes, 
types, or forms. 
In analyzing selected textual portions prior to markup, we also found that the stan-
dard locutions are often accompanied by other recurrent elements specifying the rele-
vant modificatory action.  
If we sort out these accompanying elements and make them work with the support 
of formal rules, we can in certain cases automatically map out the relevant legal type, 
and in every such case we can exhaustively mark up a modificatory norm’s action on 
a passive or target norm. 
 
 
2002/954/EC - Amendment 
Article 1 
Decision 2000/185/EC is hereby amended as 
follows: 
1. in the first subparagraph of Article 1 "three 
years running from 1 January 2000 to 31 
December 2002" shall be replaced by 
"four years running from 1 January 2000 
to 31 December 2003"; 
 
2. in the second subparagraph of Article 3, "31 
December 2002" shall be replaced by 
"31 December 2003". 
 
[M1] 
2000/185/EC: Council Decision of 28 February 
2000 
 
Article 3 
 
This Decision shall take effect on the day of its 
publication in the Official Journal of the European 
Communities. 
 
It shall apply from 1 January 2000 to 31 December 
2002. 
 
 
 
 
[ORIGINAL] 

68 
M. Palmirani and R. Brighi 
 
Table 2. An excerpt from the classificatory analysis we carried out ranking modificatory lin-
guistic classes by their impact on the normative system 
Linguistic Category 
Linguistic terminology 
Legal Category 
Insert 
insert, add,  
Integrate 
integration 
(temporal, exception, etc.) 
Delete 
repeal, soppress 
cassate, remove, delate 
repeal 
Update 
substitution, change 
modify, replace 
substitution 
Relocation 
renumber, relocate 
replace 
relocation 
Table 3. List of linguistic elements 
Legal
Category 
Subject 
Object(s) 
Date 
Old 
Text
New 
Text
Position(s) 
Conditional 
Insert 
Fragment 
of
provision
Provision
Text
Schedule
Normative 
Reference 
X 
 
X 
After, Before, 
Between, At the 
end, At the 
beginning, From 
.... to, Following 
Since 
Until
When 
If
Repeal 
Fragment 
of
provision
Provision
Text
Schedule
Normative 
Reference 
X 
X 
 
After, Before, 
Between, At the 
end, At the 
beginning, From 
.... to, Following 
Since 
Until
When 
If
Substitution 
Fragment 
of
provision
Provision
Text
Schedule
Normative 
Reference 
X 
X 
X 
After, Before, 
Between, At the 
end, At the 
beginning, From 
.... to, Following 
Since 
Until
When 
If
Renumbering 
Fragment 
of
provision
Provision
Text
Schedule
Normative 
Reference 
X 
X 
 
After, Before, 
Between, At the 
end, At the 
beginning, From 
.... to, Following 
Since 
Until
When 
If
 
Here is a list of the elements accompanying the standard locutions: 
- Date. A date can express the moment a modification is applied (effective imme-
diately or at some time in the future), or it can modify a term or signal the beginning 
or end of a temporal modification. 
- Quoted text (quotation marks). Text enclosed within quotation marks can be used 
to define a concept, but aside from this case, it can be used in a modificatory clause as 
text to be inserted into the passive or target document to be modified (the intervening 
string is called a novella), or it can specify text to be replaced in the target document 
or deleted from it (in which case the string will be called a novellando), or again it can 
quote something from the target text so as to locate the place where a modification is 
to be made in the same document. 
- Position. This is expressed by function words such as before, after, between, 
from, and to, followed by a quoted string or atomic document partition (paragraph, 

 
Model Regularity of Legal Language in Active Modifications 
69 
 
line, index, title), and it locates the exact point where a modification is to be made in 
the passive or target text. 
- Condition. This is a useful element stating the constraints subject to which a 
modification is to be made. Conditions are generally tied to an event (whether certain 
to happen or otherwise), or to a legal form of some type, or to a place, and the locu-
tions used are since, until, if, and when. 
On the basis of these parameters we can design some frames to feed to the NLP 
tools. Here are some frames relating to substitution: 
Table 4. Example of frames for representing the modificatory provision of substitution 
FRAME1: PassiveRif – quoteTextOld:(optional) – passive verb – quotedTextNew 
<< at the point 4.1 the words “not less of the 80%” are substituted by the words “of the 
100%”; >> 
FRAME2: PassiveRif – quotedPosition:(optional) -quotedOld:(optional) – passive 
verb - quotedNew 
<<In the article 169, first comma, of the decree 16 March 1942, n. 267, after the word 
“council”, the word: “article” is substituted by the following: “article 45,”>>  
FRAME3: PassiveRif – passive verb - ResourceRif 
<<The annex B of the Ministerial dDecree 24 March 2005 is substituted by the annex B of 
this decree.>> 
FRAME4: ResouceRif – verb - PassiveRif 
<<The annex B of this decree substitutes the annex B of the Ministerial Decree 24 March 
2005.>> 
FRAME5: quoteTextNew– verb – PassiveRif 
<<The following text  
“Art. 5. New version 
1. new content” 
substitutes the art.5 of the Ministerial Decree 24 March 2005.>> 
The previous example brings out another important issue in linguistic detection: 
the active and passive verb form defines the role of the subject and object. Thus the 
expression is substituted by implies a preexisting PassiveRif (a passive or target 
norm), as well as it implies a new text in some part of the linguistic tree. Some parts 
of the tree are fundamental and mandatory: 
Table 5. Example of mandatory elements in the substitution frame 
Passive  
PassiveRif[destination] – quotedTextOld [old text] –verb–  
quotedTextNew[new text] 
PassiveRif[destination] – verb –  ResourceRif 
Active 
PassiveRif[destination] – quotedTextNew [new text]– verb –  
quotedTextOld[old text] 
ResourceRif – verb – PassiveRif[destination] 
 

70 
M. Palmirani and R. Brighi 
 
The treebank results (see Appendix) are compared with the amendment frames, 
and we can detect all the parameters and arguments of the action of modification and 
their meaning for passing to the appropriate translation in XML NIR compliant meta-
data. The NLP indeed detects the arguments of the modification but it is not able to 
assign the adequate meaning into the context of the legal text without the support of 
the modification ontology. 
7   Conclusion  
The regularity of the modificatory provisions and the frequency of the textual ones 
encourage research in the direction we have indicated. Moreover, the results from 
NLP application bears out our methodology: a more detailed vocabulary of verbs can 
be extracted from this large database (29,000 normative documents), and that would 
make it possible to reinforce the linguistic categories in conjunction with the taxon-
omy of modificatory provisions. On the other hand, we can also focus more on mod-
elling the textual modifications that include temporal information (postponement or 
retroactivity of the modification) or conditionals (events or facts that block a modifi-
catory action). Another important goal is to detect the overlaps that nontextual modi-
ficatory provisions may come to have as a result of textual amending that can hide a 
modification’s real semantic meaning. Even so, some indirect language covers some 
direct modifications. So we intend to work further on the textual modification pat-
terns, improving them with temporal parameters and conditional attributes. In the 
meantime, we will also be looking to widen our investigation to other neighbouring 
information—such as title, nearest paragraph, and marginal notes—that can help us 
understand a text’s normative meaning. The new version of the NIR, DTD2.2, can 
help in working toward this goal. This approach also opens the prospect of taking into 
account other types of modificatory provisions, like exception and extension, that 
more closely connect with the task of interpreting a norm’s semantic content, which is 
the final ambition of this research. 
Acknowledgments. The authors would like to thank Leonardo Lesmo (University of 
Turin - Department of Computer Science) and all of his team, for their precious 
contributions for implementing an NLP application based on this methodology. We 
thank also the ICT4Law project -http://www.ict4law.org/ -, coordinated by Gianmaria 
Ajani, inside of the Converging Technologies Programme financed by Piedmont 
Region, for supporting this research.  
References 
1. Arnold-Moore, T.: Automatic Generation of Amendment Legislation. In: Procs. of ICAIL 
1997, pp. 56–62 (1997) 
2. Biagioli, C., Francesconi, E., Spinosa, P., Taddei, M.: The NIR project. Standards and 
tools for legislative drafting and legal document Web publication. In: Proc. ICAIL 2003 
(2003) 
3. Biagioli, C., Grossi, D.: Formal Aspects of Legislative Meta-Drafting. In: Legal Knowl-
edge and Information Systems, JURIX 2008, pp. 192–201. ISO Press, Amsterdam (2008) 

 
Model Regularity of Legal Language in Active Modifications 
71 
 
4. Breuker, J., Boer, A., Hoekstra, R., Van Den Berg, C.: Developing Content for LKIF: On-
tologies and Framework for Legal Reasoning. In: Legal Knowledge and Information Sys-
tems, JURIX 2006, pp. 41–50. ISO Press, Amsterdam (2006) 
5. Circolare AIPA/CR/35, Assegnazione dei nomi uniformi ai documenti giuridici, GU n. 262 
del 10/11/2001 
6. Circolare AIPA/CR/40, Formato per la rappresentazione elettronica dei provvedimenti 
normativi tramite il linguaggio di marcatura XML, GU n. 102 del 3/5/2002 
7. Consolidation Interim report of the working group, European Forum of Official Gazettes, 
5th meeting, Madrid (September 25-26, 2008)  
8. De Maat, E., Winkles: Automatic Classification of Sentences in Dutch Laws. In: Legal 
Knowledge and Information Systems, JURIX 2008, pp. 207–216. ISO Press, Amsterdam 
(2008) 
9. De Maat, E., Winkles, R., Van Engers, T.: Automated Detection of Reference Structures in 
Law. In: Legal Knowledge and Information Systems, JURIX 2006, pp. 41–50. ISO Press, 
Amsterdam (2006) 
10. Francesconi, E., Passerini, A.: Automatic classification of provisions in legislative texts. 
In: ICAIL 2007, vol. 15, pp. 1–17 (2007) 
11. Guastini, R.: Teoria e dogmatica delle fonti. Giuffrè, Milan (1998) 
12. Gullickson, K.: Drafting Legislation Using XML in the U.S. House of Representatives. In: 
World e-Parliament Conference 2008, Bruxelles, November 25-26 (2008) 
13. McClure, J.: Legal-RDF Vocabularies, Requirements & Design Rationale. In: Proceedings 
of the V Legislative XML Workshop, pp. 149–160. European Press Academic Publishing 
(2007) 
14. Lupo, C., Vitali, F., Francesconi, E., Palmirani, M., Winkels, R., de Maat, E., Boer, A., 
Mascellani, P.: General xml format(s) for legal sources - Estrella European Project IST-
2004-027655. Deliverable 3.1, Faculty of Law, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam 
(2007) 
15. Mazzei, A., Radicioni, D.P., Brighi, R.: NLP-based extraction of modificatory provisions 
semantics. In: ICAIL 2009, pp. 50–57. ACM Press, New York (2009) 
16. Pagano, R.: Introduzione alla legistica, 2nd edn. Giuffrè, Milan (2001) 
17. Palmirani, M., Brighi, R.: An XML Editor for Legal Information Management. In: Proceed-
ing of the DEXA 2003, Workshop su E-Government, Praga, Settembre 1-5, pp. 421–429. 
Springer, Heidelberg (2003) 
18. Palmirani, M., Brighi, R., Massini, M.: Automated Extraction of Normaive Reference in 
Legal Texts. In: Proc. ICAIL 2003, pp. 105–106. ACM Press, New York (2003) 
19. Palmirani, M.: Time Model in Normative Information Systems. In: The Proceeding of 
workshop "The Role of the Legal Knowledge in the eGovernment", ICAIL 2005 (2005) 
20. Palmirani, M., Contissa, G., Rubino, R.: Fill the Gap in the Legal Knowledge Modelling. In: 
Governatori, G., Hall, J., Paschke, A. (eds.) RuleML 2009. LNCS, vol. 5858, pp. 305–314. 
Springer, Heidelberg (2009) 
21. Saias, J., Quaresma, P.: A Methodology to Create Legal Ontologies, in a Logic Program-
ming Based Web Information Retrieval System. Artificial Intelligence and Law 12(4), 
397–417 (2004) 
22. Sartor, G.: Riferimenti normativi e dinamica dei nessi normativi. In: Il procedimento nor-
mativo regionale, Cedam, Padova (1996) 
23. Soria, C., Bartolini, R., Lenci, A., Montemagni, S., Pirrelli, V.: Automatic Extraction of 
Semantics in Law Documents. In: Biagioli, C., Francesconi, E., Sartor, G. (eds.) Proceed-
ings of the V Legislative XML Workshop, pp. 253–266. European Press Academic Pub-
lishing (2007) 

72 
M. Palmirani and R. Brighi 
 
24. Rescigno, G.U.: L’atto normativo. Zanichelli, Bologna (1998) 
25. Rubino, R., Rotolo, A., Sartor, G.: An OWL ontology of fundamental legal concepts. In: 
Legal Knowledge and Information Systems, JURIX 2006, pp. 101–110. ISO Press,  
Amsterdam (2006) 
26. Zagrebelsky, Il sistema costituzionale delle fonti del diritto Turin: EGES (1984) 
Appendix: Treebank of Some Modificatory Frames 
 
Fig. 6. Example of passive sentence tree processed by TULE and TUT18 
 
Fig. 7. Example of active sentence tree processed by TULE and TUT 
 
                                                           
18 TULE - Turin University Linguistic Environment, TUT - Turin University Treebank. 

 
Model Regularity of Legal Language in Active Modifications 
73 
 
 
Fig. 8. Example of temporal modification tree processed by TULE and TUT 
 

Traceability and Change in Legal Requirements
Engineering
Alexander Boer, Tom van Engers, and Radboud Winkels
Leibniz Center for Law, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands
{A.W.F.Boer,T.M.vanEngers,R.G.F.Winkels}@uva.nl
Abstract. While isomorphism of knowledge representation has been recognized
as important, particularly to maintenance in legal knowledge representation, the
requirements of the maintenance process in general get less attention. Traceability
from knowledge resources used in the organization to the sources of law used in
their production is a central maintenance issue in administrative organizations.
This paper explores a mediating knowledge representation for reconstruction of
traces to sources of law and to implementation knowledge resources, that should
be helpful for analysis of the impact of changing sources of law.
1
Introduction
While isomorphism has been recognized as important to maintenance in legal knowl-
edge representation [1,2], the maintenance process itself gets little attention. Traceabil-
ity from knowledge resources used in the organization to the sources of law used in
their production is a central maintenance issue in administrative organizations. This pa-
per explores a knowledge representation in the form of rules for reconstruction of traces
to sources of law and to implementation knowledge resources, that should be helpful
for analysis of the impact of changing sources of law.
In the context of the Agile project, introduced in section 2, we are working on the
the robustness of traceability of knowledge resources of the organuization to sources of
law, and on dealing with the risks involved in agile network arrangements with other
organizations.
The increasing interest in public administration for traceability to sources of law and
modeling network arrangements is driven by:
1. increasing commercial trafﬁc between jurisdictions, which leads to increasing in-
terest in the complications of legal pluralism1 in its broader sense,
2. the increasing dependenceof service provision on negotiated network arrangements
between organizations, also within the same jurisdiction,
3. the increased formalization of interactions through ICT [3] (XML standards, the
service paradigm, etc), and generally
4. the perception that the pace of change in society increases.
1 The EU and its free trafﬁc of goods, services, and persons should for instance come to mind
here.
P. Casanovas et al. (Eds.): AICOL Workshops 2009, LNAI 6237, pp. 74–92, 2010.
c⃝Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010

Traceability and Change in Legal Requirements Engineering
75
Network arrangements are for instance service contracts, resource sharing, auto-
mated and standardized data exchange, etc, between independent agents that only enter
into such arrangements if and as long as these are beneﬁcial to the participants. No
larger organizational framework creates and enforces the network arrangement. Loose
network arrangements make it harder to organize compliance to the law: meeting obli-
gations no longer necessarily translates to control objectives, to allocation of respon-
sibilities to roles in ﬁxed business processes, and to speciﬁc groups of employees in
departments. The organization that depends on service delivery of others becomes in-
creasingly responsible for (intelligently monitoring and reacting to) what happens out-
side its organization.
An administrative organization may for instance use an electronic service of the tax
administration to perform an income check on behalf a client, yielding a simple yes/no
answer, instead of asking the client to claim an income and provide evidence. This
saves work, increases the reliability of data, and – if used properly – protects the client’s
privacy. It however also creates dependency on the tax administration, thus a need to
understand the requirements and constraints – including but not restricted to the legal
ones – that motivate and constrain service delivery, and a need to monitor for changes
to these requirements and constraints. Network arrangements create opportunities for
increasing efﬁciency and quality, but they also increase exposure to risk.
Traceability is the solution to the legal provenance issue involved in legally justifying
the structures and knowledge resources of the organization. Following implementation
traces back to sources of law is helpful for diagnosis when undesired or unintended
results are produced, and is the starting point of impact analysis when the law changes.
Lastly, it is also a requirement for justifying individual case handling decisions.
In section 3 we position the requirements model as a knowledge resource produced
and used in two feedback loops, from individual case handling processes, and to the
legislator.
Our approach to traceability, explained in section 5, and demonstrated in section
6, is to distinguish between three different universes of discourse, layered on top of
eachother. The entities in each layer are explicitly linked to corresponding entities in
adjacent layers by a logical theory – a set of Agile rules – in order to be able to trace the
impact of changes in sources of law all the way to implementation in an organization,
and back from experiences on the work ﬂoor to the legislator’s actions and intentions.
The logical theory will account for in what sense the sources of law and implemen-
tation knowledge resources are related. Provenance information about the sources of
law, based on MetaLex (section 4), and applicability rules (subsection 5.4) also play an
important role.
We expect that the interjection of an abstract legal institutional layer between law and
implementation in the legal requirements model leads to more accurate documentation
of the impact of changes, and better reﬂects the degrees of freedom the organization
has in implementation. The Agile project, and the pilot implementation projects that are
part of it, will test this hypothesis.
In the concluding section (section 7) we discuss two additional issues raised by the
design choices for the Agile rules, being the design rationale for the three proposed

76
A. Boer, T. van Engers, and R. Winkels
layers in an analysis of the impact of changes, and the commonly held opinion that
(legal) rules should be modeled in a defeasible logic, which we do not do.
2
Background: The Agile Project
The work reported in this paper was performed in the context of the Agile project
(acronym for Advanced Governance of Information services through Legal Engineer-
ing). Agile aims to develop concepts helping administrative organizations to reduce the
time from a request for changes based on a change in the relevant law to implementation
in the organization. The project develops models that are intended to help administrative
organization in developing alternative implementations, estimating required effort and
time, identifying risks and opportunities, providing useful and accurate feedback to the
legislator, and generally to change from a project-centered approach to a maintenance-
centered approach to dealing with change of the law.
The Agile project is speciﬁcally concerned with public administration. Implementa-
tion of changes in the law is in public administration not an occasional isolated interrup-
tion of peaceful stasis, but a core activity of the organization. Moreover, the organizations
in this category usually have a close working relationship with the legislator,at least some
direct inﬂuence on the formation of positive law, and their interpretation of codiﬁed law
is of direct relevance to many others. There is a feedback cycle between legislator, these
organizations that implement the law, and the courts that judge those implementations,
which drives theory construction in many areas of law.
Involved in the Agile project are the Dutch Immigration and Naturalisation Service
(IND) and the Dutch Tax and Customs Administration (DTCA). In both organizations,
timely and efﬁcient adaptation to changing legislation, case law, and patterns of be-
haviour accommodating or evading law in the relevant environment, is seen as an impor-
tant organizational objective, and one whose realization is a constant cause of problems.
Immigrants and taxpayers are notoriously capricious customers to have. The IND and
DTCA have to reinvent themselves continually, and sometimes move to have the law
changed, in response to problems and opportunities arising from their environment.
2.1
Objectives of the Agile Project
In the Agile project we aim at developing a design method, distributed service architec-
ture simulation environment, and supporting tools for legal requirements engineering.
The project aims to take the resilience of existing systems, dependencies on the envi-
ronment, and the unpredictability of change processes explicitly into account [4,5].
The Agile project started in the second half of 2008 and will last for four years,
producing two PhD theses. The project uses knowledge representation technology de-
veloped within the semantic web community, OWL2, and some of the ontologies and
technologies partially developed within our institute, like LKIF [6], MetaLex [7,6], and
the LKIF Core ontology and its predecessor [8], as a starting point.
Note that real world deployment of OWL2-based web services is not intended: actual
technical implementation has to take into account the existing technical infrastructure
of an organization, and the modernization of infrastructure or selection of delivery plat-
forms is not the focus of the project. The primary purpose of modeling implementation

Traceability and Change in Legal Requirements Engineering
77
of legislation in OWL is to account for that implementation, to validate it, to do impact
analysis if something changes, to simulate candidate new service arrangements, and to
provide feedback to the legislator.
The project does include a modest agent simulation activity for simulation of candi-
date realizations of legal services and of the reaction of network partners and clients [5].
This activity is not the focus of our work, and not of this paper, although it is sometimes
alluded to in the explanation of design choices.
Lastly, we also intend to demonstrate the effectiveness of the use of methodological
guidelines empirically in a later stage of the project.
3
Sources of Law in Process and Product Development
The issue of traceability and impact analysis is of relevance not mainly for the pri-
mary business processes, i.e. individual case handling, but for internal product and
process development activities within public administration. Product and process de-
velopment translates the legal requirements into implementation knowledge resources,
which guide primary business processes, but it also takes input from the work ﬂoor
and gives feedback to the legislator. As such the activities can be conceived of as tak-
ing place within two feedback cycles – one with the primary individual case handling
processes as the subject of implementation and monitoring activity, and one in which
product and process development activity is being monitored by the legislator.
See Fig. 1 and Fig. 2 for a visualization of these cycles, using the decomposition of
problem solving activities proposed in [9]. The legislative feedback loop is about the
production and use of sources of law. The individual case handling feedback loop is
about the production and use of implementation knowledge resources. Implementation
directly inﬂuences the law, and vice versa.
The purpose of the legal requirements model mediating between sources of law and
implementation knowledge resources presented in the next sections should be seen in
the context of these two cycles.
The idea of a mediating legal requirements model is in itself not original even outside
of academia: one of the project partners has one, focused on legal concepts, and their
links to the text of the law and implementation knowledge resources. It is considered
hardly helpful for any other purpose than as a resource for acquisition of domain knowl-
edge for new employees of the IT department and external consultants. It doesn’t help
signiﬁcantly for impact analysis, because it links too many things to too many things
without qualiﬁcation.
Our objective is to develop a knowledge representation methodology for a require-
ments model, presented in this paper, that is explicit enough about the relation between
implementation and law to be useful, that is cost-effective to implement, that is com-
patible with existing business process and business rule modeling practices, and that is
conceptually simple enough to be understandable to people with the skill set typically
found in administrative product and process development activities.
The representation explored in this paper is focused on representing the meaningful
uses the sources of law afford (in the sense advocated by for instance [10]), i.e. the
things the organization can or should do, and the things that can happen to it, because

78
A. Boer, T. van Engers, and R. Winkels
Fig. 1. The product and process development feedback cycle
Fig. 2. The legislative feedback cycle
the sources of law exist, or are changed. Legal rules afford avoidance of violations, the
assumption of certain social roles and execution of predictable interaction protocols,
the intentional improvement of one’s legal position, the monitoring of the behaviour of
others, misrepresentation of our intentions to others to our own advantage, etc.
This contextual meaning of legal rules leads us to reject the notion that a knowl-
edge base for a decision support system, or an ontology used to validate case data in
a database, can be considered as the primary (“executable”) speciﬁcation of the mean-
ing of legal rules. The issue is rather which distinct uses the rule affords, and what de-
sign patterns the organization’s knowledge engineers should consider when interpreting
them.

Traceability and Change in Legal Requirements Engineering
79
A simple example: The legal protocol that guides buying and selling, and the for-
mal evidence produced in this protocol in the form of orders, invoices, and receipts,
provides the material for various fraudulent disbursement, money laundering, and tax
evasion schemes. Besides the primary use of legislation about sales transactions for the
execution of sales transactions, a tax administration may for instance use the same rules
to organize information about tax evasion. A fraudulent disbursement is for instance
transaction that follows the sales pattern, but without an actual duality of stock ﬂows,
and a sale far below market price between family members is for instance not an arm’s
length transaction and is therefore classiﬁed as a gift, etc. The tax administration uses
the legal rules in a monitoring and assessment activity, and changes of these rules are
relevant to it. The role these rules play in the activity is however not at all apparent from
studying the content of the rules.
This kind of monitoring activity is quite common and constitutes a reusable design
pattern for administrative organizations; An immigration administration for instance
takes an interest in marriages of convenience, and speciﬁcally develops interpretation
rules for those. While it is very well possible to give a more general account of the
intentions and assumptions behind this design pattern, such an account has only limited
added value for a requirements modeling methodology. We are therefore more inter-
ested in the design pattern than in its reduction to generalized legal reasoning.
Improvements to the legal requirements model are in part to be found in a better ac-
count of the relation between the model and the sources the law, discussed in section 4.
In section 5 we present a modeling approach based on a general ontological stratiﬁca-
tion of our problem domain into three largely separable knowledge domains – abstract
legal institutional reality, the sources of law and their provenance, and implementation
in the organization – and the conception of Agile rules that describe the ways in which
these domains potentially inﬂuence eachother.
4
Bibliographic Identity of Sources of Law
To implement traceability from knowledge representation to sources of law, the Agile
project builds on the results of our work on MetaLex XML (cf. for instance [6,7,11]), an
XML metastandard for legal and legislative resources. MetaLex is a common document
format, processing model, and metadata set for software development, standardized by
a CEN/ISSS2 committee speciﬁcation in 2006 and 2010.
MetaLex requires adherence to a URI3 based, open, persistent, globally unique,
memorizable, meaningful, and “guessable” naming convention for legislative resources
based on provenanceinformation.This provenanceinformation can be extracted in RDF
form and used in OWL2 [12].
MetaLex is especially useful for our purposes because it standardizes legal biblio-
graphic identity. The determination of bibliographic identity of sources of law is essen-
tial for deciding on the applicability in time of legal rules presented in those sources of
law.
2 http://www.cen.eu
3 Uniform resource identiﬁer.

80
A. Boer, T. van Engers, and R. Winkels
MetaLex and the MetaLex naming convention strictly distinguish the source of law
as a published work from its set of expressions over time, and the expression from its
various manifestations, and the various locatable items that exemplify these manifes-
tations, as recommended by the Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Records
(FRBR; cf. [13]).
Fig. 3. Taxonomy of bibliographic entities in MetaLex, and their relata, based on FRBR
MetaLex extends the FRBR with a detailed but jurisdiction-independent model of
the lifecycle of sources of law, that models the source of law as a succession of con-
solidated versions, and optionally ex tunc consolidations to capture the possibility of
retroactive correction (errata corrige) or annulment after the fact of modiﬁcations to a
legislative text by a constitutional court. In these cases the version timeline is changed
retroactively: the conceptual time travel involved is an excellent example of the weird
applications of constitutiveness. See for instance [14] for an explanation of the prac-
tical ramiﬁcations of annulment, and more generally an overview of the complexities
involved in change of the law. Note that while MetaLex permits the identiﬁcation of
versions in different tiimelines, the involved reasoning requires defeasibility.
The use of MetaLex identiﬁcation and referencing solves one aspect of the trace-
ability problem. In current organizational practice links are more often than not made
to locatable items, often without formal agreements about the permanence of the used
item identiﬁers even between different departments of the same organization. Correct
traceability to the right bibliographic abstraction (generally work or expression depend-
ing on the purpose of the reference) is – particularly at the levels below formal law –
a notable weak point in organizational practice, and ex tunc change scenarios are not
explicitly modeled, or even recognized. MetaLex makes this aspect of the traceability
problem at least explicit, and provides some tools to address it.

Traceability and Change in Legal Requirements Engineering
81
In the MetaLex metadata set, speciﬁed in an OWL ontology,the realizes property
between expressions and works represents the connection between the two ontological
levels at which documents exist that are of relevance to their real world use (see Fig. 3).
The source of law on the expression level for instance cites other rules on the work level,
while the legal rules we represent knowledge about are necessarily identiﬁed by their
representation in a discrete number of expressions [11].
A citation (text fragment) w applies to (concept) C should for instance be read as
each legal rule that is represented by an expression-level text fragment that realizes
work fragment w applies to C. This representation technique plays an important role in
the Agile project, and is observed to signiﬁcantly cut down on rather pointless mainte-
nance operations redirecting reference pointers.
The idea of the MetaLex standard is of course that provenance metadata will be
supplied by the publisher of the used XML manifestation, and is extracted from it in
OWL form by organizations that use it.
4.1
Actions Performed on Documents
In MetaLex provenance information is organized around actions performed on docu-
ments.
Provenance metadata more often than not exists of simple predicate-object state-
ments about electronic documents, even though permitting different perspectives on the
same action, because its identity was not made explicit, may yield incompatible meta-
data descriptions. This results in unnecessary duplication of metadata, and separate oc-
casions in which to make mistakes. It therefore creates unnecessary maintenance, and,
lastly, the loss of relevant references between documents [15].
An action generally plays the mediating role between relevant entities and the re-
source the metadata description is about. The natural coherence between for instance
author, publication date, and publication channel information (e.g. state gazette bibli-
ographic information) is apparent to all: all are participants in the publication (promul-
gation) event. There is also a natural coherence between an old consolidation, the new
consolidation, the modifying legislation, the modifying authority, and the modiﬁcation
date: the modiﬁcation event links them together.
Because actions also play a central role on the other layers, we choose for a uniform
representation of action inspired by MetaLex. Generally, we try to build on analogies
between the legislative domain and the implementation domain, choosing the same rep-
resentation solutions for both.
5
Agile Rules
Conceptually, Agile knowledge representation is based on a distinction between three
universes of discourse (see Fig. 4):
1. sources of law,
2. legal institutional reality, and
3. implementation in brute reality.

82
A. Boer, T. van Engers, and R. Winkels
Between these three systems we ﬁnd simple and uniform interfaces, existing of a
representation4 relation, which interfaces written law and legal institutional reality, and
a constitutiveness or counts as relation, which interfaces legal constitutional reality and
implementation in brute reality.
The Agile knowledge representation consists of logical rules describing these three
systems individually, and the interfaces between them. Logical rules functioning as
interfaces between these systems may be presumed to be defeasible in practical use.
Logical rules that describe the structure of one layer are not: we assume that the organi-
zation commits to using a transparent interpretation of the ontological structure of the
sources of law, legal institutional reality, and the working ﬂoor at any point in time, and
that the legislator usually has no intention of creating confusion.
The ﬁrst domain addresses the relevant provenance and efﬁcacy information about
the sources of law. The sources of law include not only legislation and case law, as
already pointed out, but also policy statements and guidelines of lower level rule makers
used in the organization. This is in essence the metadata of the sources of law that is
relevant in positioning them.
Fig. 4. Law, legal institutional reality, and implementation in brute reality
In the next domain we ﬁnd abstract legal institutions, whose presence is produced
by the sources of law [16,17,11]. We take the source of law to be a writing that may
be used to back an argument concerning the presence of a certain institutional entity, a
legal rule, created by the legislator in a certain legal institution [7]: The source of law
is the result of a legislative act performed with the intent of creating that institutional
entity, and functions as evidence of the legislative act.
Finally, in the third domain, there is the implementation of the legal institutions in
brute reality. The institutional reality as represented in the sources of law only comes to
life through the brute reality that constitutes (or counts as) it. The raising of a hand for
instance counts as a bid in an auction. The issuing of a document invented by some ad-
ministrative agency tasked with issuing residence permits similarly counts as an ofﬁcial
residence permit.
The legal rules presented by the sources of law constrain the structure of institutional
reality and the superposition of institutional reality on brute reality. Any logical rule in
the Agile model mapping brute reality (the raising of the hand) to institutional reality
(the bid) may either be backed by the applicability of a legal rule presented by the sources
of law or simply by knowledge of the domain, as for instance represented by business
process and service speciﬁcation resources. Both legal rules and the various rules one
may ﬁnd in software (production rules, integrity constraints) are from the perspective
4 Or presentation if one prefers to take that ontological stance.

Traceability and Change in Legal Requirements Engineering
83
of the mediating model identiﬁable resources, in the domain being represented by the
rules of the legal requirements model.
5.1
Implementation Knowledge Resources
In the context of Agile, brute reality means business processes, and services. Related
to these are resources, the implementation knowledge resources, such as documents
and forms, ﬁelded software, business process speciﬁcations, manuals, etc, but also the
declarative, logical rules in ﬁelded knowledge bases.
An affordance of a legal rule may for instance be implemented by:
1. a computer-registered event or an accountancy event that counts as the performance
of a legal act performed by a person;
2. an executable declarative rule used by a decision support application;
3. an integrity constraint in a database that triggers an event if the constraint is vio-
lated;
4. an explanation of the legal rule in a document; and
5. a non-executable business rule in a business process or software speciﬁcation.
Concepts in the model may be used by:
1. a class in a business process or software speciﬁcation;
2. a database schema or application data structure;
3. a ﬁeld in a form;
4. an explanation of the concept in a document.
Part of the implementation knowledge resources we are dealing with are information
artifacts arising from interaction protocols and reasoning strategies. In particular we
need to address two categories of such artifacts that take a prominent place in computer
science & law: defeasible rules, and representations of argument, particularly adversar-
ial argument with its attack relations (e.g. [22]).
We however consider these second-hand knowledge resources. The use of a legal
rule, and even the choice for the interpretation of its meaning in the organization, is
tightly linked to workﬂow and resource allocation considerations. Workﬂow considera-
tions are modeled through event-condition-action (ECA) orchestration mechanisms [5].
This view of the use of legal rules makes a singular approach to the defeasibility issue in
reasoning with legal rules a less pressing concern, although we of course acknowledge
that a generic defeasible reasoning ability to validate arbitrary sets of claims and rules
would be a very valuable addition to requirements analysis tools.
The agent deﬁnition in the project, which is based on ECA orchestration [5], has
little in common with the (more ambitious) normative agent system approach outlined
in for instance [18].
5.2
OWL2, Validation, and Defeasibility
The entities named in Agile rules, including knowledge resources, are all URI-
identiﬁable and may serve as anchors for reference from other knowledge resources.

84
A. Boer, T. van Engers, and R. Winkels
The ability to make some sort of URI-based hyperlinks from other knowledge resources
is increasingly common, and doesn’t impose a high implementation burden.
Agile knowledge representation is based on OWL2 axioms, augmented with the Met-
aLex OWL2 schema and a rule formalism [19] that allows for additional constraints on
RDF graphs not expressible in OWL2. The example in section 6 will be based on OWL2
expressiveness only.
Agile rules are OWL2 axioms reiﬁed using the RDF reiﬁcation mechanism. An as-
sertion of a reiﬁcation of an RDF triple does not implicitly assert the RDF triple itself:
this means that there are no entailment relationships which hold between a triple and
a reiﬁcation of it, although semantic extensions may include such interpretations. Any
other information is also expressed in the form of reiﬁed RDF triples.
Because Agile rules are reiﬁed, they may carry provenance information, and can be
easily version managed on work and expression level, to reﬂect improved understanding
of the law over time. Provenance information on reiﬁed OWL2 rules create the possibil-
ity for a belief base revision approach to defeasibility [20,11], and is also the preferred
approach to extending the operational semantics of Agile Rules in other directions.
The intention in Agile is not to commit to a defeasible logic, but rather to come to
an account of which argument schemes are – in the proper context – recognized as a
defensible basis for decision making in the organization. In section 7.1 we return to the
discussion of defeasibility in Agile models.
5.3
Constitutiveness and Representation
Institutional events are constituted by events in brute reality. The main function of the
constitutive rule is to deﬁne the interface through which the state of the institution can be
changed through necessary and indicative conditions. Constitutive rules may be defea-
sible. Institutional rules map out a logical space of possible models of the institution:
they form the institution’s ontology, and can be interpreted as terminological axioms
[16,11]. They are not to be considered defeasible as a matter of convention, because
permitting ambiguity about the institutional ontology makes no sense from the admin-
istrative organization’s perspective.
Constitutiveness is modeled through the constitutes (inverse constitutedBy) property
in OWL2 [11]. This property applies to legal things, and not legal propositions: we do
not follow the custom of talking about legal facts arising from brute facts in representa-
tion. Newly created legal things must be constituted by another thing, which means in
essence that one of the constitutive rules that can create a legal fact must be applicable
[11]: a legal thing is constitutedBy some thing, and a legal rule is applicable to it.
Constitutiveness is often accompanied by (re)presentation, modeled through the rep-
resents (inverse representedBy) property. A formal act is an act of representation of a
legal proposition, with the intent of being constitutive of that proposition. This pattern
is typical for legislation itself, and is also often found in administrative transactions.
The use of formal acts creates confusion between proposition and the use of for-
mal representations of a proposition as evidence. For immigration, the proposition that
someone is married may for instance be legally relevant; In the implementation of this
criterion this for instance becomes the proposition that someone has supplied a marriage
certiﬁcate, but even if the marriage certiﬁcate must be renewed every year, a certiﬁcate

Traceability and Change in Legal Requirements Engineering
85
may in fact be still valid at the moment of decision making while the marriage is not at
that point in time in existence. Moreover, some issuers of certiﬁcates in foreign coun-
tries may be notoriously unreliable, etc.
Behind a single proposition in the law are often complete forms, procedures, checks,
constraints, etc, and many subtle differences in meaning in all those places where the
proposition exists. The formal act of marriage remains of course a single, unique event,
but not the only one to which the applicable rule is relevant.
5.4
Applicability
Applicability plays a central role for knowledge engineers as soon as the identity of the
legal rule and the interpretation of its logical meaning are distinguished. The logical rule
must assert explicitly that the legal rule is being applied. The law also frequently iden-
tiﬁes rules: a special class of legal rules, applicability rules (e.g. [21,22,11], constrains
the applicability of other rules, or make the application of one legal rule conditional on
the application of another legal rule.
Applicability is modeled through the applicable (inverse appliesTo) property [11].
This property applies to the legal thing the rule is about, regardless of its left hand or
right hand side position in the axiom. Together constitutedBy and applicable explain
how a legal thing arose.
Applicability is wherever possible attached to legal actions as a methodological
choice. Since we do not determine conﬂuence of applicability rules from subsump-
tion between propositions, or sets of them, we have to be sure that rules about the same
subject apply to the same thing. Actions are the focal objects.
One of the great challenges in understanding applicability is the distinction between
its dispositional and categorical meaning (i.e. if the rule were applied to something, the
result would have some quality that it wouldn’t have if it were inapplicable, vs. the rule
has been as a matter of fact applied). In its epistemological applications (of which [22]
is an example) in defeasible reasoning, and in implementation resources, it is generally
taken to be dispositional. Why make explicit the application of a rule at all, unless it is
defeasible?
While the effect of switching “switching the OWL2 axioms on and off” may be real-
ized by an extra condition to the OWL2 axiom styled as a form of dispositional applica-
bility statement about the legal rule, this is an unnecessary epistemological commitment
not explicitly warranted by the legal corpus itself. Such dispositional use of concepts in
essence tries to capture it is consistent to assume that, which refers to reasoning strategy
rather than to the meaning of the legal rule per se. Section 6 gives an example of the
categorical use of applicability we prefer for Agile rules.
We also do not attempt to account directly for metalegal principles like lex supe-
rior (higher rules defeat lower rules), lex specialis (more speciﬁc rules defeat general
rules), and lex posterior (newer rules defeat older rules). Following [11] we are of the
opinion that lex specialis and lex posterior are based on generic principles of practical
communication and cognitive function that give rise to temporal and logical nonmono-
tonicity, and do not as such have to be speciﬁcally accounted for in legal knowledge
representation.

86
A. Boer, T. van Engers, and R. Winkels
Lex superior is on the other hand clearly a design feature: sources of law are ex-
plicitly stratiﬁed in order to make it possible to instruct the reader to not apply intu-
ititions about temporal and logical nonmonotonicity. The legislator sometimes imme-
diately regulates reasoning, explanation, and communication strategy. The legislator
however does so in his own words, and the representation of these constraints on rea-
soning activity can be left to the organization representing their interpretation of those
words. Generally the application of lex superior depends on provenance information
about the sources of law (e.g. acts promulgated by government and parliament defeat
acts promulgated by the crown).
Applications of these three principles that have entered the legal corpus, or are
deeemed prudent by the organization, enter the Agile model as applicability rules that
make the applicability of a legal rule dependent on the applicability of another legal
rules.
6
Rules Example
The example source of law for this paper consists of two sentences presenting two
simplistic rules:
t1 The publication of a text presenting a rule counts as the creation of that rule.
t2 Rule t1 applies to text published by a rule maker.
The legislative example is qua design pattern representative of formal legal acts in
bureaucratic environments (see subsection 6.1).
Agile knowledge representation consists of making rigorous distinctions between
entities in different domains.
Firstly, we distinguish the text, which is a MetaLex expression object, from the legal
rules: t1 represents legal rule r1, and t2 represents legal rule r2. This distinction makes
alternative interpretations of the same text, and the maintenance of provenance infor-
mation about these different interpretations, possible. We moreover also distinguish the
legal rules from the (logical) OWL2 rules a1 and a2 describing their meaning.
Rule r1 is clearly constitutive. Rule r1 (represented as an OWL axiom written in a
compact Manchester syntax-like notation for purposes of readability) demonstrates an
interesting pattern relating the constitutes and represents relations:
if :Publication that
(:resultsIn some (:Text that
(agile:represents some :Rule)))
then
(agile:constitutes some (:Creation that
(:resultsIn some :Rule) and
(agile:applicable value :r1)))
This pattern is typical of implementation of legal acts as formal acts, and occurs often
in public administration. Here we also see the major expressive limitations of OWL: it
describes treelike patterns, and here we would like to add the constraint that the rule

Traceability and Change in Legal Requirements Engineering
87
Fig. 5. The structure of interest in rule 1 of section 6
represented by the text is the rule being created (as in Fig. 5). Some workarounds are
possible in OWL2, but these sacriﬁce readability. We use the extension to description
graphs in [19].
The second rule r2 limits the applicability of r1, but also of any other rules derived
from any future or alternative version of t1, as follows, showcasing the subtle biblio-
graphic identity distinctions made by MetaLex:
if (agile:representedBy some
(metalex:realizes value :t1))
then
(agile:appliesTo all ((:actor some :RuleMaker) and
(agile:applicable value :r2)))
Because of the distinction allowed by MetaLex, we can refer to the work, and repre-
sent the expression in Agile rules.
In the universe created by this small set of rules, the entities r1, r2, any instance of
Rule, Creation, and RuleMaker are institutional (and this is enforceable through domain
and range restrictions), and the rest are implementation entities. Texts t1, t2 represent
information, while rules r1, r2 are institutional entities.
Note that, although these two rules are consistent, the applicability assertions may
turn out to be in logical conﬂict with respect to some common types of cases. We
intentionally do not resolve this defeasibility between t2 and t1 in the rules, because
there are alternative, equally reasonable ways to resolve it depending on the knowledge
representation language semantics used, and on the disposition one has towards these
rules. The problem is to enumerate prototypical roles rules play in the organization and
its environment.
We believe that this method of representing applicability results in better and more
durable isomorphism between sources of law and implementation resources [1] over
time. More gains will come from the distinction between resource (here for instance t1)
and the thing it presents (r1).

88
A. Boer, T. van Engers, and R. Winkels
6.1
Rationale of the Example
The example shows that the conceptual frameworks that relate the three knowledge do-
mains are not actually different: In both the constitutiveness and representation concepts
play key roles. They are only different from the implementing organization’s point of
view, to the extent that it sees itself as addressee of formal legislation only, and perceives
a disjointness between legislative and implementation domains that is non-existent on-
tologically in our interpretation of institutions.
We tend to focus on the representation issue when talking about the sources of law
simply because this, and not the legislator’s abstract legal act, is our point of access
to the law as knowledge engineers. We focus on constitutiveness when talking about
implementation, because implementation is to a large extent a matter of designing ways
to perform legal acts. The centrality of constitutiveness is itself only a relatively recent
realization in academic knowledge engineering and requirements engineeering, which
hasn’t been fully absorbed by the business community yet.
In implementation in administrative processes, representation however also plays a
central role. It is the marriage certiﬁcate that represents the legally relevant marriage,
the receipt that represents the ﬁnancial transaction, the written administrative decision
that represents the change of legal position, and an ODBC update in some database that
represents the fact that the administrative organization ofﬁcially recognized a legally
relevant new fact in some procedure.
The example patterns can be trivially reused for marriage certiﬁcates, etc.
7
Conclusions and Discussion
In this paper we focused on ontological stratiﬁcation as a modeling device, and on ap-
plicability reasoning using features of MetaLex. We believe these are areas were quick
gains are to be made in large organizations, as opposed to for instance the normative
reasoning aspect of legal knowledge representation which is often perceived as very
academic on the work ﬂoor.
In our approach, a deviation from mainstream legal knowledge representation is
found in the rigorous ontological stratiﬁcation (cf. [23,24]) of legal entities and im-
plementation entities (as opposed to propositions) we have chosen for Agile. Legal
knowledge representation literature does propose “counts-as” or constitutive rules (cf.
for instance [25]), although it often considers them just one type of rule, among other
(notably normative) ones [26]. On the other hand, in [27,11] we do for instance ﬁnd
useful reconstructions of obligation and violation in terms of constitutiveness. We aim
to add a similar reconstruction of norms.
We expect increased precision in traceability as a result. Good traceability tools are
however not the only important aspect of impact analysis. Importantly, the organization
also faces an increasing need to model its behaviour and the behaviour of agents it
interacts with. To explain the services it provides, it needs to have an understanding of
the effects its actions have on the agents that request those services, and the reasons
why those services are requested. It, in other words, needs to engage in agent modeling
to understand its own services and its performance of those services, and the impact of
changes.

Traceability and Change in Legal Requirements Engineering
89
Network arrangements increase the stakes in agent modeling. When the organiza-
tion itself plays the role of client requesting service of other organizations, it needs to
understand why those services are provided and how those services are implemented.
It needs to keep an eye on the legislation governing the performance of those services,
and to resist the temptation to merely defend those arrangements against change.
The Agile project includes an agent simulation activity for simulation of candidate
realizations of legal services and of the reaction of network partners and clients [5].
This activity is not the focus of our work, and not of this paper. For the business pro-
cess compliance aspect (cf. e.g. [28]) of this project, we could refer to existing work
in legal knowledge representation, for instance [29]. The business process compliance
perspective does not, however, cover all relevant perspective on the use of legal rules,
as indicated in section 3. Moreover, if we do take this wider perspective, we come to the
conclusion that so much relevant knowledge must be added that the generic normative
agent is hardly a realistic point of departure for the Agile project.
Tax evasion behaviours, tactics to postpone realization of taxable assets, and the ten-
dency of immigrants to try out every conceivable loophole or delay tactic in immigra-
tion legislation of developed countries, are to some extent predictable. Therefore they
are suitable subjects of agent simulation. But clients are likely to game the system, and
their behaviour is not simply a correlative function of their obligations, abilities, rights,
etc. On the other side of the system boundary the bureaucracy also uses the possibili-
ties it has to improve enforceability and efﬁciency. A change in the law may create an
advantage to be exploited by redesign, instead of just a reason to perform a compli-
ance check. Moreover, the organization is in a position to ask for changes that are in its
interest.
In the translation from law to requirements, and to a question of compliance, the
opportunity aspect of law is of course easily lost. Moreover this aspect will, in our view,
resist attempts at recovering it through an extension to automated normative reasoning
as for instance performed in [29]. The problem is in our view a knowledge acquisition
problem rather than a reasoning problem. Our methodological approach to this problem
is to focus on providing a framework for modeling prototypical agent patterns, and to
ask the organization to explicitly reassess the applicability of patterns in the impact
analysis process.
In the following two subsections we conclude with an explanation for our decision
not to include defeasible reasoning in the Agile project deﬁnition, and for our claim that
the ontological stratiﬁcation into three domains helps with impact analysis.
7.1
Defeasibility
The requirements model aims at an ontological account of the interpretation(s) of legal
reality accepted by the organization, without however aiming at global consistency of
its deﬁnition. It is important to keep in mind that although Agile rules have a deﬁnite
semantics in OWL2, and are as such subject to OWL2 consistency checking, they are
RDF reiﬁcations of OWL2 axioms and therefore not by default asserted in any speciﬁc
OWL graph with which they must be consistent. The act of asserting them in a certain
graph, for purposes of validation or simulation of reasoning, is a design decision.

90
A. Boer, T. van Engers, and R. Winkels
In OWL-based applications, OWL statements may amongst others be found in
knowledge bases, in queries, and in query premises [30]. For instance, a knowledge
base may contain “somebody raised his hand to greet someone”, and a query may be
“if raising a hand constitutes a bid and the applicability of legal rule r to that bid, has
a bid been made?”. Since the knowledge base may also contain “if a bid is made then
r2 is applicable to it and it is not constituted by raising a hand to greet someone”, the
consistency of the query premises with the background knowledge base being queried
has to be checked explicitly.
From OWL aware knowledge bases we generally expect functionality to merge two
graphs, to determine consistency of a graph, to query a graph, based on the OWL2
deﬁnition of entailment of OWL2 graphs by OWL2 graphs, and ideally – for purposes
of implementing defeasible reasoning and for explanation – to determine the prime
implicants of an entailed graph in a graph (i.e. the minimal subgraphs that still entail
some graph).
Merging, consistency and entailment are common features of all OWL reasoner
APIs. The Pellet reasoner and the Protégé editor for instance supports prime implicant-
based explanation [20,31], and Pellet has been used for an implementation of default
rules [20], while OWL-QL for instance advocated the use of query premises [30]. This
provides the necessary ingredients for modeling some forms of defeasible reasoning,
and emulating some kinds of stratiﬁed production rules-based decision support.
We have deﬁned simple knowledge base generation and validation tools based on
these functionalities, that will be developed in a later stage of the project. We do not
intend to commit to a generic defeasible reasoning mechanism that could be applied to
the whole of the Agile model, amongst others because making the most of the resilience
of existing systems (including existing production rules systems) is an explicit goal of
the project. The expectation is that the Agile model is not introduced in a green ﬁeld,
and that the organization’s preferences for the description of reasoning strategy depend
on speciﬁc technology choices.
7.2
Design Rationale for the Three Domains of Discourse
We believe that changes can often be isolated to one of the domains of Fig. 4, and the
interfaces between them. If the requirement for a valid passport is for instance dropped
from immigration law and replaced by the more general requirement that an immi-
grant should be identiﬁed, the implementing organization may still opt to retain the
requirement for a valid passport in a fast track service implementation, and delegate
the handling of cases where no valid passport can be shown to the fully manual appeal
procedure. The business process remains the same, while its legal justiﬁcation changes.
Generally, we distinguish between:
1. changes of the law that change institutional reality, and necessitate change of im-
plementation,
2. changes of the law that change institutional reality, but do not necessitate change of
implementation,
3. changes of the law that do not change institutional reality (for instance codiﬁcation
of case law or practices already developed within the organization),

Traceability and Change in Legal Requirements Engineering
91
4. changes of institutional reality due to a new interpretation (not coerced by the law)
that necessitate change of implementation,
5. changes of institutional reality due to a new interpretation (not coerced by the law)
that do not necessitate change of implementation, and
6. change of implementation for it’s own sake, for instance due to work ﬂoor feedback.
Any change can be classiﬁed without much trouble in this framework.
We maintain that many of the common organizational problems in tracing resources
and actions back to the sources of law are based on not understanding the distinction
between abstract legal entities and their implementation. Organizations that are unique
in their institutional status, and have no others to compare themselves to or learn lessons
from, are bound to suffer from this problem most.
Acknowledgements
Agile is a Jacquard project funded by the Netherlands Organisation for Scientiﬁc Re-
search (NWO). In the Agile project, The Leibniz Center for Law of the University
of Amsterdam cooperates with the Technical University of Delft, and commercial and
public administration partners.
References
1. Bench-Capon, T., Coenen, F.: Exploiting isomorphism: development of a KBS to support
British coal insurance claims. In: Sergot, M. (ed.) Proceedings of the third International Con-
ference on AI and Law, pp. 62–69. ACM, New York (1991)
2. Bench-Capon, T., Gordon, T.F.: Isomorphism and argumentation. In: ICAIL 2009: Proceed-
ings of the 12th International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Law, pp. 11–20.
ACM, New York (2009)
3. Boer, A., van Engers, T.: Agile: From source of law to business process speciﬁcation. In:
Casellas, N., Francesconi, E., Hoekstra, R., Montemagni, S. (eds.) LOAIT 2009: 3rd Work-
shop on Legal Ontologies and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Techniques joint with 2nd Workshop
on Semantic Processing of Legal Text, Barcelona, Spain, IDT-UAB. IDT Series, vol. 2, pp.
27–44 (2009)
4. Janssen, M.: Adaptability and accountability of information architectures in interorganiza-
tional networks. In: ICEGOV 2007: Proceedings of the 1st international conference on The-
ory and practice of electronic governance, pp. 57–64. ACM, New York (2007)
5. Gong, Y., Janssen, M., Overbeek, S., Zuurmond, A.: Enabling ﬂexible processes by eca or-
chestration architecture. In: ICEGOV 2009: Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference
on Theory and Practice of Electronic Governance, pp. 19–26. ACM, New York (2009)
6. Boer, A., Winkels, R., Vitali, F.: Metalex XML and the Legal Knowledge Interchange For-
mat. In: Sartor, G., Casanovas, P., Casellas, N., Rubino, R. (eds.) Computable Models of the
Law. LNCS (LNAI), vol. 4884, pp. 21–41. Springer, Heidelberg (2008)
7. Boer, A., Vitali, F., de Maat, E.: CEN Workshop Agreement on MetaLex XML, an open XML
Interchange Format for Legal and Legislative Resources (CWA 15710). Technical report,
European Committee for Standardization, CEN (2006)
8. Breuker, J., Hoekstra, R.: Core concepts of law: taking common-sense seriously. In: Pro-
ceedings of Formal Ontologies in Information Systems, FOIS 2004, pp. 210–221. IOS Press,
Amsterdam (2004)
9. Breuker, J.: A suite of problem types. In: Breuker, J., de Velde, W.V. (eds.) CommonKADS
Library for Expertise Modelling, pp. 57–88. IOS Press/Ohmsha, Amsterdam/Tokyo (1994)

92
A. Boer, T. van Engers, and R. Winkels
10. Scarantino, A.: Affordances explained. Philosophy of Science 70(5), 949–961 (2003)
11. Boer, A.: Legal Theory, Sources of Law, & the Semantic Web. Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence and Applications, p. 195. IOS Press, Amsterdam (2009)
12. Boer, A.: Metalex naming conventions and the semantic web. In: Governatori, G. (ed.) Legal
Knowledge and Information Systems, pp. 31–36. IOS Press, Amsterdam (2009)
13. Saur, K.G.: Functional requirements for bibliographic records. UBCIM Publications - IFLA
Section on Cataloguing 19 (1998)
14. Governatori, G., Rotolo, A.: Changing legal systems: legal abrogations and annulments in
Defeasible Logic. Logic Jnl IGPL, jzp075 (2009)
15. Boer, A.: Using event descriptions for metadata about legal documents. In: Winkels, R.,
Francesconi, E. (eds.) Electronic Proceedings of the Workshop on Standards for Legislative
XML, in conjunction with Jurix 2007 (2007)
16. MacCormick, N.: Norms, institutions, and institutional facts. Law and Philosophy 17(3),
301–345 (1998)
17. Hindriks, F.A.: Rules & Institutions; essays in meaning, speech and social ontology. PhD
thesis, Erasmus University Rotterdam (2005)
18. Boella, G., Pigozzi, G., van der Torre, L.: Five guidelines for normative multiagent systems.
In: Proceeding of the 2009 conference on Legal Knowledge and Information Systems, pp.
21–30. IOS Press, Amsterdam (2009)
19. Glimm, B., Horridge, M., Parsia, B., Patel-Schneider, P.F.: A syntax for rules in owl 2. In:
OWL Experiences and Directions (OWLED 2009), Washington D.C., USA (2009)
20. Halaschek-Wiener, C., Katz, Y., Parsia, B.: Belief base revision for expressive description
logics. In: Online Proceedings of the Second OWL: Experiences and Directions Workshop
(OWLED), Athens, Georgia, USA (2006),
http://owl-workshop.man.ac.uk/accepted06.shtml
21. Prakken, H., Sartor, G.: On the relation between legal language and legal argument: assump-
tions, applicability and dynamic priorities. In: ICAIL 1995: Proceedings of the 5th interna-
tional conference on Artiﬁcial intelligence and law, pp. 1–10. ACM, New York (1995)
22. Kowalski, R.A., Toni, F.: Abstract argumentation. Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Law 4, 275–296
(1996)
23. Borgo, S., Guarino, N., Masolo, C.: Stratiﬁed ontologies: The case of physical objects. In:
Proceedings of the ECAI 1996 Workshop on Ontological Engineering (1996)
24. Smith, B.: An essay in formal ontology. Grazer Philosophische Studien 6, 39–62 (1978)
25. Boella, G., van der Torre, L.W.N.: Regulative and constitutive norms in normative multiagent
systems. In: Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on the Principles of Knowledge
Representation and Reasoning, Whistler, CA (2004)
26. Mazzarese, T.: Towards the semantics of “constitutive” in judicial reasoning. Ratio Iuris 12,
252–262 (1999)
27. Boella, G., van der Torre, L.W.N.: Obligations as social constructs. In: AI*IA, pp. 27–38
(2003)
28. Siena, A., Mylopoulos, J., Perini, A., Susi, A.: From laws to requirements. Requirements
Engineering and Law, 6–10 (2008)
29. Governatori, G., Sadiq, S.: The journey to business process compliance. In: Handbook of
Research on BPM, pp. 426–454. IGI Global (2009)
30. Fikes, R., Hayes, P., Horrocks, I.: Owl-ql–a language for deductive query answering on the
semantic web. Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 2(1),
19–29 (2004)
31. Horridge, M., Parsia, B., Sattler, U.: Laconic and precise justiﬁcations in owl. In: Sheth, A.P.,
Staab, S., Dean, M., Paolucci, M., Maynard, D., Finin, T., Thirunarayan, K. (eds.) ISWC
2008. LNCS, vol. 5318, pp. 323–338. Springer, Heidelberg (2008)

 
P. Casanovas et al. (Eds.): AICOL Workshops 2009, LNAI 6237, pp. 93–112, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
When a FrameNet-Style Knowledge Description Meets  
an Ontological Characterization of Fundamental Legal 
Concepts 
Tommaso Agnoloni1, Meritxell Fernández-Barrera2, Maria Teresa Sagri1,  
Daniela Tiscorni1, and Giulia Venturi3 
1 Institute of Legal Information Theory and Techniques, CNR, Firenze, Italy 
2 European University Institute, Firenze, Italy 
3 Institute of Computational Linguistics, CNR, Pisa, Italy 
{tommaso.agnoloni,mt.sagri,daniela.tiscornia}@ittig.cnr.it, 
Meritxell.Fernandez@eui.eu, 
giulia.venturi@ilc.cnr.it  
Abstract. The need for bridging the gap between linguistically-oriented knowl-
edge resources (i.e. lexicons) and domain-oriented ones (i.e. ontologies) is ac-
knowledged within both the NLP and the AI&Law community. In this paper we 
propose to face this need by comparing a FrameNet-style and an ontological 
characterization of the ‘obligation’ Fundamental Legal Concept. In particular, 
we carried out a case-study aimed at investigating whether and to which extent 
different views on this Fundamental Legal Concept offered by the FrameNet re-
source can be mapped to an ontological characterization of the complex concept 
of ‘public function’, stemmed from the basic normative position ‘obligation’.  
Keywords: Legal Ontologies, Semantic Lexicons, Fundamental Legal  
Concepts, FrameNet. 
1   Introduction 
The increasing improvements in Natural Language Processing techniques result 
nowadays in a fast growing of Ontology Learning strategies based on bottom-up ap-
proaches.  At the same time, within the Ontology Engineering field big efforts are 
devoted at developing networking tools which link accurate and specialized Domain 
Ontologies, rather than at building time-consuming and complex Core or Founda-
tional Ontologies.   
Consequently, two parallel directions of research are followed: the first one is 
aimed at making local ontologies more inter-operational through the definition of 
standards and mapping procedures; the second one is aimed at improving NLP tech-
niques with a view to higher-level semantic potentialities.  
According to these premises, bridging the gap between linguistically-oriented 
knowledge resources (i.e. lexicons) and domain-oriented ones (i.e. ontologies) is more 
and more a strategic phase. Namely, it is aimed, on one hand, at lexicalizing the on-
tology and, on the other hand, at structuring the literal meaning in accordance with 
many domain perspectives. 

94 
T. Agnoloni et al. 
 
Currently, the gap between the lexicon and knowledge cannot be considered com-
pletely filled by automatic procedures, nor it is realistic to think that it will be in a 
short time; but aside from the technical aspects, there is a lively debate within the 
sector about theoretical assumptions, meta-models and formal architectures that are 
able to express the links between lexical meaning and conceptual/ontological  
meaning.  
The goal of this paper is to contribute to the aforementioned discussion by describ-
ing the results of an experiment carried out in the law field. The representation of le-
gal concepts in an ontological framework has become very popular within several 
applications to the legal domain, as legal ontologies provide a shared vocabulary, able 
to support the inferential process, case-based reasoning and argumentation. Even if 
ontological models are often built on the conceptualization provided by domain ex-
perts, it is widely agreed that a flexible and re-usable methodology would require a 
middle-out approach, able to respect both the reference to written sources and the 
generalization of coherent shared models. 
The represented study is aimed, on one hand, at testing a methodology for enrich-
ing, through the lexicalization, the models formulated by legal doctrine and imple-
mented in core and domain legal ontologies and, on the other hand, at assessing the 
potentialities of a semantic lexicon such as FrameNet1, developed in the NLP com-
munity, in providing a description of legal knowledge based on linguistic principles. 
As a consequence, we expect to consolidate the design of the meta-model reported in 
Dalos [1], which expresses links between conceptual models and terminology ex-
tracted from normative statements; in order to capture the multi-layered structure of 
legal discourse the framework should be extended to include ‘local’ meanings as de-
fined within national systems, or the extensional meanings inducted from case-law or 
common sense interpretations, while keeping distinct different levels of localization. 
In particular, we have carried out a case-study meant to explore evidence for map-
ping ontological models that describe Fundamental Legal Concepts [2], expressed by 
the deontic operators of obligation, permission, etc. with suitable linguistic structures 
(i.e. FrameNet Semantic Frames which describe ‘deontic’ situations). We have chosen 
this case-study for several reasons: they concern the availability of formal reformula-
tions of the Fundamental Legal Concepts [3], [4], [5], the availability of their onto-
logical description in the Core ontologies as LKIF-Core and CLO [6], the availability 
of semantic models of the legislative provisions [7], [8] and of their formal specifica-
tion [9]. Moreover, the deontic operators are domain independent and they are ex-
pressed by a relatively limited number of linguistic structures. This feature allows the 
portability of our approach to several different legal sub-domains.  
By stemming our analysis from the Fundamental Legal Concepts, we have the op-
portunity to model complex legal concepts from the basic ones. In fact, the Hof-
heldian concepts formalised in classes of normative positions (duty, liability, claim, 
power, etc..) as reifications of deontically qualified situations, are the building blocks 
on which it is possible to express complex concepts like, for example, delegation, 
entitlement, authorization, etc. Accordingly, in our case-study, we model on the nor-
mative positions the concept of ‘public function’, a key concept in the ontology of the 
services proposed in [10].  
                                                           
1 http://framenet.icsi.berkeley.edu 

When a FrameNet-Style Knowledge Description Meets an Ontological Characterization 
95 
 
In what follows, we will provide an overview of the existing projects aimed at 
bridging the gap between linguistically-oriented (lexicons) and domain-oriented (on-
tologies) knowledge resources, which have been developed both for the open-domain 
and for the legal domain (Section 2). Section 3 reports teorethical approaches to the 
formal specification of fundamental legal concepts and the state of the art on the ex-
isting Core Legal Ontologies, where they are represented. In Section 4, we show the 
potentialities of the FrameNet lexical model we have chosen. The case-study we car-
ried out is reported in Section 5. Section 6 reports some reflections on the obtained 
results. 
2   State of the Art and Related Projects 
Interoperability is a crucial issue, as large scale applications mainly depend on the 
possibility to map and to connect different models and structures. One point under 
discussion is the definition of consistent models for interfacing resources and ontolo-
gies, as argued in [11] «There is an implicit mapping assumption between lexical and 
conceptual knowledge, which underlies “ontology lexicalization”, namely that (inten-
sional) senses from a lexical model are mapped to (extensional) interpretations on 
ontology elements (individuals, classes, restrictions, properties). The lexical semantic 
content of the lexicalizations, originating from linguistic/terminological resources 
such as term banks, thesauri and dictionaries, is considered to be lightweight, and in 
need of formalization. Classes, properties or individuals of the ontological meta-
model can be provided with lexicalizations from the separate linguistic model in the 
form of lexemes, i.e., units of form and meaning. This model contains a set of data 
categories that captures all the relevant linguistic/terminological information associ-
ated with concepts such as lexicalizations, lexicalization types and multilinguality.» 
The Linguistic Meta-model LMM [12] is based on a semiotic perspective, that 
takes into account the social-cognitive aspects on which the DOLCE foundational 
ontology is inspired, in order to offer a new linguistic layer to the foundational con-
ceptualization and an adequate linguistic interpretation of terms and predicates ex-
pressed in a language with a formal semantics. The LMM framework allows several 
notions of concept (as a synset, a frame, a thesaurus descriptor, etc.) to be connected 
and both intensional (through class relations and restrictions) and extensional (among 
instances, e.g., Synsets) meaning to be expressed.  
Lexical semantic databases can be combined by means of a meta-model as LMM 
or by aligning semantic structures, as in [13]. Here a FrameNet and a WordNet-like 
database are mapped and lexical units (LUs and synsets) are merged in a unified lexi-
cal ontology where sense distinctions and semantic structures are preserved. In 
Kyoto2 a collaborative and multi-perspective definition of meaning will be allowed by 
the creation of platforms “different organization principles will enable semantic  
resources expressing multiple points of view and different layers of linguistic and 
conceptual information to be interconnected, while keeping distinct different concep-
tualization models”. 
                                                           
2 http://www.kyoto-project.eu/ 

96 
T. Agnoloni et al. 
 
In the legal domain, projects aimed at providing multi-layered frameworks where 
lexical and conceptual meaning are combined, have been proposed in [14], [15]. 
Methodological issues are discussed in [16]. Even if the work on ontology and the 
linkage between terminology and ontology have been carried out manually, neverthe-
less the project outcomes are promising, both from the perspective of dealing with the 
language/law interdependencies and at the level of improving semantic annotation. 
3   Ontologies on Fundamental Legal Concepts  
The initial trend in legal ontology engineering was to heavily draw on legal theory 
and built relatively highly axiomatised ontologies of the legal domain. One of the 
consequences of this trend was the development of several core ontologies early in 
the history of legal ontology engineering. Core ontologies are formal ontologies 
which contain the general basic concepts of a specific domain, for instance, the legal 
domain. They can be called generic domain ontologies as well, in the sense that they 
make commitments to a certain domain but in a very generic way that enables reuse in 
other subdomains [17]. Despite their nature being mainly theoretical, core legal on-
tologies have not been contextualised yet in the history of legal thought. This section 
provides some initial insights in this direction (3.1), as well as a brief overview of the 
core legal ontologies so far developed and their main characteristics (3.2). 
3.1   A Short History of Informal Ontologies on Fundamental Legal Concepts 
It has been acknowledged that legal theories contain ontological assumptions about 
the sources of legal knowledge and that their primitive concepts could be translated 
into an ontology [18]. In this line, similarly, if we take a broad notion of ontology as 
meaning the result of the effort to provide a clear conceptualisation of a domain 
(therefore excluding the requirement of formalisation), it is possible to talk about a 
history of core legal ontologies. By this concept we refer to the identification and 
clear definition of the basic conceptual units of the legal language. The most signifi-
cant efforts in this direction took place during the XIXth century. Indeed, partly influ-
enced by the positivist paradigm, partly driven by the desire to give law a scientific 
methodology, decades of legal research were committed to this endeavour. Apart 
from the philosophical underpinnings of the effort, practicalities were as well at issue, 
for the development of a common terminology for legal reasoning was deemed essen-
tial for achieving clarity and correctness in legal thought. In the common law sphere 
several scholars referred indeed to the need of establishing a clear usage of legal 
terms that would set free legal discourse from obscurity (for instance Bentham, Austin 
or Wigmore). This is the stream of thought corresponding mainly to analytical  
jurisprudence, with roots in Bentham’s thought and that starting from Austin’s The 
Province of Jurisprudence determined (1832) [19], leaded the quest for the main con-
ceptual components of the law. In continental legal thought a similar line of thought 
was manifested in the works of the German pandectists. Represented by main legal 
scholars such as Savigny, Ihering, Puchta and Windscheid, and with origins in Hugo, 
it developed in the context of a strong debate on the suitability of codification which 

When a FrameNet-Style Knowledge Description Meets an Ontological Characterization 
97 
 
would eventually culminate in the German Civil Code, which has been considered 
more similar to a doctrinal treatise than to a legislative piece of work3. 
Core conceptualisations of the law include different types of basic legal concepts. 
Firstly, they contain general concepts about the entities that populate the domain, such 
as legal person, norm, responsibility, and so on. Secondly, they refer to 
deontic concepts that are in charge of expressing the normativity of legal discourse. 
The latter are the result of the detailed and logical4 analysis of rights and duties aimed 
at providing a formal account of legal discourse and reasoning. The one to provide a 
complete and detailed framework for such notions and to go down in history for such 
an achievement was Hohfeld [21], [22], who built up the following system of correla-
tives: right/duty; privilege/no-right; power/liability; immu-
nity/disability
5. 
Even if focus has shifted in legal thought during some periods from analytical con-
ceptualism to more pragmatic approaches, modern computable models of the law 
have revived the need of giving a formal account of core legal concepts such is the 
case of core legal ontologies and not infrequently have drawn inspiration from some 
of these informal historical models, specially Hohfeld’s. 
3.2   Core Legal Ontologies 
Early attempts to conceptualise the legal domain for computational purposes can be 
found in representational formalisms proposed as languages containing the lowest 
common denominators of legal discourse for expressing legal knowledge. In this line, 
a pioneer in the application of formal methods to the law was L.E. Allen, who built on 
the Hofheldian conceptualisation of legal relations as a model for representing the 
deontic structure of norms [25]. Similarly, McCarty proposed a representational for-
malism for the law which despite not being an ontology embodies a general concep-
tual model of the legal domain, based on a compositional syntax and  well-defined 
semantics and inference mechanism [26], [27]. 
Later on a variety of core conceptualisations of the law have been proposed explic-
itly as ontologies. Among them we can at least mention the following seven: FOLaw 
[28]; Frame Based Ontology [17]; Ontology of causality [29], [30]; Applied Legal 
Epistemology [31]; LRI-Core [32], [33]; Core Legal Ontology [6]; LKIF-Core [34]. 
Some of them take a more epistemological approach by representing the categories 
of legal knowledge (for instance, FOLaw and Applied Legal Epistemology); some 
others represent just a fragment of the basic conceptual blocks of the law (such as the 
Ontology of causality); some others put an emphasis on building an actual ontological 
representation of the law distinguished from its epistemological component (LRI-
Core); and still some others try to ground a core legal conceptualisation on a sound 
                                                           
3 The BGB (German Civil Code) has actually been criticised for embodying an abstract system 
of private law, in accordance to the conceptual apparatus built by the pandectists rather than a 
system adapted to actual conditions of life in society [20]. 
4 In late XIXth century legal discourse the adjective ‘logic’ was used to characterise something 
analytical, clear, ordered, not contradictory, but by no means included a precise reference to 
the properties of modern symbolic logic. 
5 Some other legal scholars had already lingered on the clarification of the concepts of rights 
and duties for a while (see for instance [19], [23], [24]). 

98 
T. Agnoloni et al. 
 
philosophical scheme (such is the case of CLO, an extension of the DOLCE founda-
tional ontology which draws inspiration from cognitive science studies and from tra-
ditional philosophical categories, such as endurants and perdurants). Nevertheless, 
even if core legal models are already there, a current issue is still how to connect 
those language-independent models with actual textual manifestations, so that beyond 
philosophical accuracy those abstract conceptual models support concrete applica-
tions. Following this line, this paper explores the issue of the missing bridge between 
conceptual core legal notions and their linguistic expressions as presented in legal 
texts. 
4   A FrameNet Resource for the Legal Domain 
Amongst the various existing kinds of lexical resources, we have chosen the Frame-
Net project model [35] (hereafter referred to as FN) to ground our study. We believe 
that the organization principles underlying the FN lexicon can adequately represent 
events and situations typically expressed in legal documents. 
As a matter of fact, in the legal knowledge modelling community, it is pointed out 
the need for capturing and handling all possible stereotypical situations distinguished 
by law [36]. Thus, the importance of taking into account the context where legal enti-
ties move is acknowledged. Accordingly, legal experts state that, despite their utility, 
WordNet-like resources are not completely satisfactory in order to represent the inner 
structure of complex situations in terms of their participants, e.g. “under which Cir-
cumstances, which State of affairs is sanctioned by which Principle”. In fact, in the 
WordNet (hereafter referred to as WN) model [37], words are organized in synsets 
(i.e. sets of synonyms) in turn linked by hierarchical or taxonomical relations such as 
hyponymy and hyperonymy. Under this view, the meaning of a word is intended as a 
distinct, atomic semantic object, fully identified by its position in the general semantic 
network. 
4.1   The FrameNet Project  
The FN resource considered here is a lexical resource for English, based on Fill-
more’s Frame Semantics theory [38] and supported by corpus-evidence. The goal of 
the FN project is to document the range of semantic and syntactic combinatory possi-
bilities of each word in each of its senses. Typically, each sense of a word belongs to 
different Semantic Frame, conceived in «a script-like conceptual structure that de-
scribes a particular type of situation, object or event along with its participants and 
properties». For example, the APPLY_HEAT frame describes a common situation in-
volving participants such as “Cook” and “Food”, etc., called Frame Elements (FEs), 
and is evoked by Lexical Units (LUs) such bake, blanch, boil, broil, brown, simmer, 
etc. As shown by the following example, the frame-evoking LU can be a verb (bolded 
in the example) and its syntactic dependents (those written in subscript) are its FEs: 
[Matilde COOK] fried [the catfish FOOD] [in a heavy iron skillet HEATHING_INSTRUMENT]. FN cur-
rently contains more than 800 Frames, covering roughly 10,000 Lexical Units; these 
are supported by more than 135,000 FN-annotated example sentences. 

When a FrameNet-Style Knowledge Description Meets an Ontological Characterization 
99 
 
The type of representation produced by FN is a network of “situation-types” 
(frames) organized across inheritance relations between Frames (frame-to-frame rela-
tions), as opposed to a network of meaning nodes, as in the case of WN. In FN, Frame 
Elements can be also specified with Semantic Types (i.e. ontological categories) em-
ployed to indicate the basic typing of fillers that are expected in the Frame Element. 
Most of these semantic types correspond directly to synset nodes of WN, and can be 
mapped onto already existing ontologies. The latter is the case of [39], who developed 
a semi-automatic approach for linking FN Frame Elements to the Suggested Upper 
Merged Ontology (SUMO)6 [40] classes. 
4.2   Towards a FN-Like Resource for the Legal Domain: The General Approach 
It should be noted that the case-study presented in Section 5 is part of a broader pro-
ject which we are currently carrying out. It is aimed at developing a FN-like resource 
specialized for the legal domain, by extending and refining the general purpose FN 
resource.  
To our knowledge, the most notable example of legal-domain specialization of an 
open-domain lexical resource is represented by the JurWordNet ontology-driven se-
mantic lexicon [41], developed for the Italian language, together with its multilingual 
extension LOIS [42]. Note that both JurWordNet and LOIS have been developed fol-
lowing the organization principles underlying WordNet model. However, legal ex-
perts claim that, despite its utility, the taxonomical organization of legal concepts is 
not the only possible one. This is the reason why we faced the need for building a 
lexical resource initiated from the organization principles underlying the FN model. A 
detailed description of a number of design issues encountered so far is provided  
in [43]. 
5   A Case Study 
In the first phase the  modelling activities were directed to achieve two distinct and 
independent tasks, namely: 
a) testing the expressiveness of the Framenet model in capturing the deontic mo-
dalities in legal statements. 
b) testing the possibility of building complex legal concepts from the Basic Hof-
heldian positions. 
The second step was devoted to the main goal, i.e. is to combine the two conceptu-
alizations in order to evaluate how far the lexical manifestations of normative position 
are from the abstractions of legal theory. This goal, as explained above, is of interest 
not only from a purely methodological point of view, but also in the light of building 
tools and framework for interfacing lexical and formal models in order to support 
practical applications. 
Following this idea, we have built on the conceptualisation of the legal notion of 
public function, a fragment of an 'ontology of public services' (which can be viewed as 
the 'operative' expression of the notion of public function) and we have evaluated how 
                                                           
6 http://www.ontologyportal.org/ 

100 
T. Agnoloni et al. 
 
mapping frame elements to ontological class could at the same time enrich the onto-
logical representation and support the process of linguistic knowledge acquisition. 
In order to investigate how domain-specific knowledge is differently represented 
from a linguistically-oriented and from a domain-oriented point of view, we carried 
out a case-study by comparing a FN-style and an ontological characterization of the 
‘obligation’ Fundamental Legal Concept. As domain for the case-study we have cho-
sen the European norms on consumer protection and the Italian regulations on car tax 
payment. The two corpora have been analysed in order to annotate suitable examples 
for testing how the ‘obligation scenario’ is defined in the FN resource (see Section 
5.1). The concept of ‘public function’, formally modelled starting from the ‘obliga-
tion’ normative position (see Section 5.2) and the derived ontology (see Section 5.3) 
mainly rely on the taxation norms. In Section 5.4, we suggest an example for linking 
the two differently-grounded views. 
5.1   A FrameNet-Style Description of the ‘Obligation’ Scenario   
In order to provide corpus-evidence of how the ‘obligation scenario’ is defined in 
terms of Semantic Frames, we have analysed some sample sentences taken from two 
different corpora, i.e. a corpus of European Directives on consumer protection and a 
corpus of Italian and regional regulations on car tax payment domain. Considering 
two document collections containing texts which regulate two different domains is 
made fundamental in order to verify that the semantic (conceptual) representation of 
deontic modalities is domain independent. Moreover, this approach can be suitable to 
highlight different linguistic realizations of the same deontic semantics. 
The study we conducted concerns:  
• 
the selection of which Semantic Frames fully characterize ‘obligation’; 
• 
the study of the frame-to-frame relations, such as Inheritance, Using, Causa-
tive_of, Perspective_on, etc., between the selected Semantic Frames, as 
modelled in the general FN; 
• 
the annotation of some sample sentences containing frame-evoking Lexical 
Units (e.g. must, obligated, etc.) with frame information. 
According to [35], the frame-to-frame relations are inheritance and «directed (asym-
metric) relation[s] between two frames, where one frame (the less dependent, or more 
abstract) can be called the Super_frame and another (the more dependent, or less ab-
stract) can be called Sub_frame». Figure 1 shows a portion of the net drawn by those 
relations that link Semantic Frames expressing ‘obligation’. Interestingly enough, this 
deontic modality is seen under different views. For example, the Perspective_on rela-
tion provides two different perspectives on the non-lexical (with no frame-evoking 
lexical units) OBLIGATION_SCENARIO frame. The one is offered by the BE-
ING_OBLIGATED frame which represents an obligation situation focusing on the ‘Re-
sponsible_party’ which is required to perform some ‘Duty’, as shown in the following 
sentences7:  
                                                           
7 In these and in the following examples the frame-evoking Lexical Unit is bolded; the textual 
span instantiating the Frame Elements is in squared brackets. It should be noted that the first 
examples are taken from the corpus of European Directives on consumer protection and the 
second one from the corpus of Italian and regional regulations on car tax payment domain. 

When a FrameNet-Style Knowledge Description Meets an Ontological Characterization 
101 
 
[Unless the parties have agreed otherwise CONDITION], [the supplier RESPONSI-
BLE_PARTY] must [execute the order DUTY] [within a maximum of 30 days from 
the day following that on which the consumer forwarded his order to the sup-
plier TIME]. (Dir. 97/7/CE, art.7) 
 
[gli autoveicoli adibiti al trasporto del latte, delle carni macellate fresche, delle 
immondizie e spazzature, dei generi di monopolio e i carribotte per la 
vuotatura dei pozzi neri RESPONSIBLE_PARTY] sono soggetti [al pagamento della 
tassa sulla portata, ridotta del 50% 
DUTY] (art. 22. legge 21 maggio 
1955, n. 463) (lit. [vehicles used to the transport of milk, of fresh slaughtered 
meats, of garbage and rubbish, of monopoly provisions and liquid manure 
spreaders used to empty cesspools RESPONSIBLE_PARTY] are subject [to the pay-
ment of carrying capacity tax, reduced of 50% DUTY] ) 
 
The other perspective is offered by the the BEING_OBLIGATORY frame which con-
versely describes the situation from the ‘Duty’ point of view which needs to be ful-
filled by a ‘Responsible_party’, as the following sentences exemplify: 
 
[This Regulation DUTY] shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable 
in all Member states. (Reg. (CE) n. 522/96) 
 
[La tassa di circolazione regionale DUTY] è dovuta [in misura fissa CONDITION] 
[per anno solare TIME] (lit. [The local circulation tax DUTY] is due [in permanent 
measure CONDITION] [per calendar year TIME]) 
 
Fig. 1. Some of the relations that link Semantic Frames expressing ‘obligation’8 
                                                           
8 The net has been visualized through the FrameGrapher tool available at  
   http://framenet.icsi.berkeley.edu/FrameGrapher/ 

102 
T. Agnoloni et al. 
 
Moreover, the Causative_of relation by linking the IMPOSING_OBLIGATION and the 
BEING_OBLIGATED frame puts the focus on the situation offered by the IMPOS-
ING_OBLIGATION Frame. Figure 2 reports how this Frame is shown in the FrameNet 
resource. Firstly, the Definition of the Frame describes in details the situation-type 
framed. Some few examples follow. Secondly, the Frame Elements (FEs) are listed, 
distinguishing between Core, i.e. compulsory to uniquely pinpoint the IMPOS-
ING_OBLIGATION Frame (e.g. ‘Duty’, ‘Obligator’, etc.), and Non-Core, i.e. optional 
(e.g. ‘Condition’, ‘Time’, etc.).  It should be noted that for each Frame Element a 
short description and a sample sentence are reported. The Frames linked to the IMPOS-
ING_OBLIGATION Frame by one of the listed Frame-to-Frame relations are reported 
(e.g. the IMPOSING_OBLIGATION Frame Is Causative of the BEING_OBLIGATED Frame 
since they are linked by a Causative_of relation). Finally, the list of frame-evoking 
Lexical Units are shown (e.g. bind.v, charge.n, etc.)9. Interestingly, the focus is put on 
the presence of an ‘Obligator’ who imposes on a ‘Responsible_party’ a ‘Duty’, ac-
cording to a ‘Principle’ which regulates how the ‘Responsible_party’ should respond 
to a ‘Situation’, as the following sentences show:  
 
[Article 3 of Directive 79/112/EEC PRINCIPLE] made it mandatory, [in the la-
belling of beverages containing more than 1,2 % by volume of alcohol CONDI-
TION], [to indicate the actual alcoholic strength by volume DUTY] (Dir. 
87/250/CEE)  
 
Visto [l’articolo 8 della legge regionale 23 settembre 2003, n. 23, 
“Disposizioni in materia di tasse automobilistiche” PRINCIPLE_ANT]10, [il quale 
PRINCIPLE_REL] dispone [l’assoggettamento alla tassa di circolazione DUTY] [per 
le autovetture ed i motoveicoli che abbiano compiuto 30 anni dalla costruzione 
RESPONSIBLE_PARTY] (lit. Considering [article 8 of the regional law 23rd Septem-
ber 2003, n. 23 “Provisions about car tax” PRINCIPLE_ANT], [which PRINCIPLE_REL] 
provides [the subjugation to the circulation tax DUTY] [for what concerns vehi-
cles and motorcycles 30-year old from the construction RESPONSIBLE_PARTY) 
 
The Using relation between REQUIRED_EVENT and the BEING_NECESSARY frame im-
plies that a part of the scene evoked by the Sub_frame (i.e. the REQUIRED_EVENT 
frame) refers to the Super_frame (i.e. the frame). Namely, a more abstract situation 
where “a ‘Dependent’ state-of-affairs has a ‘Requirement’ as a prerequisite for obtain-
ing or occurring”, is specifically referred to a less abstract situation where “unless a 
particular ‘Required_situation’ obtains, ‘Negative_consequences’ will follow.”. Ex-
amples of the BEING_NECESSARY frame are provided in the following sentences: 
 
[The labelling REQUIREMENT] shall [convey information relating to the three 
parts of the footwear as defined in Annex I, namely … DEPENDENT] Dir. 
94/11/CE, art.1, par.2 
                                                           
9 Note that each frame-evoking Lexical unit is followed by the corresponding part-of-speech, 
i.e. verb, noun, etc. 
10 In this example both the antecedent of relative pronoun (i.e. the article 8…) and the relative 
pronoun (i.e. which) are annotated as instantiation of the ‘Principle’ Frame Element. 

When a FrameNet-Style Knowledge Description Meets an Ontological Characterization 
103 
 
Infatti, [come prescritto dall’art. 11 della legge 27 luglio 2000, n. 212 
CONDITION] e [come ampiamente illustrato nella Risoluzione n. 1/Uff del 23 
gennaio 2002 CONDITION], [le procedure di interpello DEPENDENT] devono [essere 
istruite dall’ente impositore REQUIREMENT], [nel caso di specie dalla regione cui 
è affidata la gestione del tributo REASON]. (lit. [As it is prescribed by art. 11 of 
law 27th July 2000, n. 212 CONDITION] and [as broadly showed within the Reso-
lution n. 1/Uff of 23rd January 2002 CONDITION], [the summoning  procedures 
DEPENDENT]  must be [instructed by the assessing body REQUIREMENT], [in this 
case by the region keeping the duties REASON]. 
 
In particular, the frame-to-frame relations link one or more single Frame Element(s) 
of the two considered Frames. As Figure 3 visualizes in detail, it follows for example 
from the Using relation that the ‘Required_situation’ Frame Element of the BE-
ING_NECESSARY frame is dependent on the more abstract ‘Requirement’ Frame  
Element of the REQUIRED_EVENT frame. This relation highlights a link between the 
‘Dependent’ state-of-affairs which cannot hold without the ‘Requirement’ within the 
BEING_NECESSARY frame and the ‘Explanation’, i.e. the reason why the ‘Re-
quired_situation’ is necessary, in the REQUIRED_EVENT frame. 
 
Fig. 2. The Imposing_obligation Frame 

104 
T. Agnoloni et al. 
 
 
Fig. 2. (continued) 
 
Fig. 3. Some of the FE-to-FE relations 

When a FrameNet-Style Knowledge Description Meets an Ontological Characterization 
105 
 
Moreover, the Causative_of relation, which links the Super_frame IMPOS-
ING_OBLIGATION and the Sub_frame BEING_OBLIGATED, results in a relationship be-
tween the ‘Duty’ imposed on a ‘Responsible_party’ within an IMPOSING_OBLIGATION 
situation and the ‘Duty’ which the ‘Responsible_party’ must perform within the BE-
ING_OBLIGATED situation. Interestingly enough, as it will be described more in detail 
in Section 5.2, such a Causative_of relation between the two considered frames is 
similar to the domain-oriented (ontological) relationship between public bodies and 
citizens. Namely, similar to the fact that when a ‘Principle’ imposes an obligation on 
a ‘Responsible_party’ he/she is obligated to perform an action, when a public body 
imposes a duty on citizens they are obligated to perform such a duty. 
5.2   A Formal Characterization of the Concept of ‘Public Function’ and of 
‘Fiscal Function’ 
The notion of public function has been defined by legal doctrine as the subjective 
situation of the public body which has a power directed to the satisfaction of objective 
interests of someone else [44]. Following the formalisation of fundamental legal con-
cepts proposed in [4] we can distinguish: 
On the one hand, the notion of obligation11 (since the power exists in the interest of 
citizens): 
Ox Bring (Z): (obligation of x of bringing about a certain state of affairs Z) 
On the other hand, the notion of power: 
Powx Bring (Z)  (power of x of bringing about a certain state of affairs Z) 
A particular subclass of public function is the function of burdening citizens with 
taxes in order to collect the economic surplus and meet social public needs. Similarly, 
thus, this function is composed of: 
Firstly, the power of imposing the obligation on citizens of paying taxes, which cor-
responds to the power of creating norms that create an obligation for certain people: 
PowState [Bring (Oblcitizens (pay.taxes))] (power of the state of bringing about the 
state of affairs in which citizens 
have the obligation to pay taxes) 
Secondly, the obligation of creating these norms: 
OState [Brings (Oblcitizens (pay.taxes))] (obligation of the state of bringing about 
the state of affairs in which citi-
zens are obliged to pay taxes) 
And thirdly, the obligation of ensuring the fulfillment of the obligation created by 
the norm:  
Ostate [Brings (pay.taxescitizens)] (obligation of the state of bringing about the  
state of affairs in the world in which 
citizens pay taxes) 
These concepts together with the conceptual framework of the ontology of services 
suggested in [10], provide the main building blocks for the ontology of fiscal function 
that we present in the following section. 
                                                           
11 Formalised in [4] as “Obl Doesj”: it is obligatory that j does something, and “Obl Bringsj”: it 
is obligatory that j brings it about that something happens. 

106 
T. Agnoloni et al. 
 
5.3   The Ontology of Fiscal Function 
In the ontological characterisation of services, as reported in [10] “at the core of any 
service there is a commitment situation in which (the service provider) guarantees the 
execution of some kind of action(s) in the interest of somebody who agrees (the ser-
vice customer), at a certain cost and in a certain way. This action is executed by the 
service producer, who may coincide with the service provider, may be somebody else 
delegated by the service provider, or even coincide with the service customer [...] ser-
vice commitment needs to be distinguished from service content, which concerns the 
kind of action(s) the provider commits to guarantee, and service process, which is a 
set of business processes implementing the service commitment”. 
In the classification of services an important distinction is between public and pri-
vate services, which is connected to the delegation of the commitment situation and to 
the transferability of responsibility in performing the services. This is related to the 
understanding of services as comprising different levels of responsibility. On the one 
hand, the obligation of guaranteeing the delivery of the service exists; on the other 
hand, the obligation of actually delivering the service by performing a set of actions 
exists. The difference between public and private services lies on the fact that whereas 
in the case of private services both obligations are transferable, in the case of public 
services they are not. The public administration committed to guarantee a certain ser-
vice will always maintain the responsibility of ensuring the delivery of that service 
towards the citizen (and could thus be held liable in case it was not delivered), even in 
the case it has delegated the actual delivery of services (actual production of the ser-
vice) to a third party. Thus we assume that, in public services, the commitment situa-
tion is the expression of public function, i.e. both the obligation of public bodies to 
guarantee the service (for instance to ensure, that tax payers perform their duty) in the 
general interest of citizen, and their related power to enact norms on which the obliga-
tion is grounded. (note the similarity with the causative_of relation that in Framenet 
links Imposing_Obligation with Being_obligated). 
For the purpose of our model, the service ontology provides us with the framework 
on which building the ontology: 
 
• 
the commitment situation, expressed by the formalization of the notion of fis-
cal function. Since fiscal function must be performed in the benefit of citizens, 
the previous formalization in terms of power and obligation can be reformu-
lated according to the formalisation of other-directed obligations suggested by 
[4]: Oblk Doesj A (it is obligatory toward k, that j does A). 
 
OState
[citizens] [Brings (Oblcitizens(pay.taxes))] Obligation of the state, in the in-
terest of citizens, of cre-
ating norms that obligate 
to pay taxes: 
OState
[citizens] [Brings (pay.taxescitizens)] Obligation, in the interest of citizens, of 
ensuring that taxes are paid. 
 
A particular instantiation of the previous model corresponds to car taxation. In this 
concrete domain the fiscal function can be translated into an obligation of the state of 
imposing the obligation of paying taxes to those persons who own a car: 

When a FrameNet-Style Knowledge Description Meets an Ontological Characterization 
107 
 
Ostate [citizens] [Brings ((owns.carx)Æ Ob (pay.taxesx)] Obligation of the State, 
in the interest of the citizens, 
of bringing about the state of 
affairs in the world in which if 
a citizen x owns a car, then 
citizen x is obliged to pay 
taxes. 
 
• 
a set of legal roles: in the taxation scenario citizen are at the same time ser-
vices customer and tax-payer; public bodies are both  agents empowered to 
impose obligations and services providers committed to ensure that the obli-
gations are fullfilled 
• 
the class Action in the ontology subsumes not only the service content,i.e., 
the set of activities performed in order to execute the service, (e.g. charging, 
controlling, sanctioning,etc.), but all actions due to fullfill the obligations:  
due to the well known limited expressiveness of Description Logic the  
operator Bring(Z) is represented introducing a CoercitiveAction class that 
reifies such a relationship [45]. The notion of Power and Obligation of a 
PublicBody can then be expressed through binary relations hasPowerOver 
and hasObligationTowards some CoercitiveAction of which for instance Ob-
ligationToPay is a subclass.  In a similar way the ObligationToPay class rei-
fies the complex relation of Obligation for Citizens to PayTaxes by putting in 
relation the corresponding classes Citizen and TaxPayment. 
 
A fragment of the ontology is reported in Figure 4. 
 
Fig. 4. ‘Public function’ ontology 

108 
T. Agnoloni et al. 
 
5.4   Linking a FrameNet-Style Knowledge Description with the Corresponding 
Ontological Characterization 
Figure 5 sketches out how the textual content represented in a FrameNet-style de-
scription can be linked with the corresponding ontological characterization de-
scribed in Section 5.2. In fact, it is possible to map each Frame Element, belonging 
to a given Frame and instantiated in a given sentence, to the corresponding class of 
the provided ontology. For example, given the following sentence, i.e. “Citizens are 
obligated to pay taxes”, evoked by the (are) obligated Lexical Unit, the FE “Re-
sponsible_party” (i.e. citizens) belonging to the BEING_OBLIGATED frame can be 
mapped to the “LegalRole” class; and, the “Duty” (pay taxes) can be mapped to the 
“Action” class.  
Interestingly enough, the example provided in Figure 5 shows a potentiality of our 
approach. The FN-style knowledge organization allows to consider the basic ‘obliga-
tion’ normative position from a number of different points of view. Accordingly, it 
should be noted that even though the two considered sentences (i.e. “Citizens are ob-
ligated to pay taxes” and “Article 18 provides subjection to the payment of circula-
tion tax owners of vehicles”) respectively evoke two different frames, i.e. the  
BEING_OBLIGATED and the IMPOSING_OBLIGATION frame, their Frame Elements can 
be both mapped to the same corresponding class in the ontology. Thus, both the “Re-
sponsible_party” belonging to the BEING_OBLIGATED frame (i.e. citizens) and the 
“Responsible_party” belonging to the IMPOSING_OBLIGATION frame (i.e. owners of 
vehicles) are mapped to the same “LegalRole” class. 
Moreover, we foresaw a second level of mapping. It concerns the linking of the 
lexical filler which instantiates a given Frame Element with a sub-class of the ontol-
ogy. As shown in Figure 5, the lexical filler citizens of the Frame Element “Responsi-
ble_party” is mapped to “Citizen” sub-class of the “LegalRole” class; and, pay taxes 
instantiation of the FE “Duty” is mapped to “TaxPayment” sub-class of the “Action” 
class.  
The mapping suggested in Figure 5, only sketched here to give an idea of the 
whole picture, assumes that a formalization of the FrameNet model in terms of an 
OWL-DL metamodel such as the OWL version of OntoFrameNet [46] is used. 
According to the OntoFrameNet model Frame, FrameElement and Lexi-
calUnit are conceived as classes. Thus the linking of  FrameElement with a 
class of the domain ontology is provided by the objectProperty hasSemantic-
Type. Frame Elements are then mapped to classes of the domain ontology by linking 
their Semantic Types with the most specific ontology class in order to enforce the 
most possible constrained meaning which is useful for semantic parsing purposes. 
Similarly the mapping at the Lexical Unit level requires a formalization scheme 
such as the one introduced in [1] where a mapping between concepts at the ontologi-
cal level and their possible lexicalizations at the lexical level is formalized introduc-
ing the properties  hasLexicalization ↔ isLexicalFormFor between 
concepts and their lexicalizations.  
 

When a FrameNet-Style Knowledge Description Meets an Ontological Characterization 
109 
 
 
Fig. 5. Mapping Frame Elements to ontology classes 
6   Conclusion and Future Directions of Research 
This paper was meant to explore evidence for bridging an ontological and a linguistic 
characterization of Fundamental Legal Concepts. In particular, we carried out a case-
study aimed at investigating i) how the ‘obligation’ Fundamental Legal Concept is 
differently represented in the FrameNet resource, in terms of Semantic Frames, and ii) 
how the concept of ‘public function’ stemmed from the ‘obligation’ Fundamental 
Legal Concept can be ontologically characterized. In the latter case, we proved how it 
is possible to build complex concepts (e.g. the concept of ‘public function’) by draw-
ing upon a basic normative position (e.g. ‘obligation’). 
Several issues worth discussing follow from this investigation. Firstly, they con-
cern the opportunity offered by the FN-style knowledge organization to consider the 
basic ‘obligation’ normative position from a number of different points of view. Inter-
estingly, that affects our proposed mapping approach. This implies that more than one 
Semantic Frame instantiated in different sentences can be mapped to the same ontol-
ogy class. Secondly, the case-study pointed out two possible layered approaches to 
the linking of a linguistic-oriented with a domain-oriented way of modelling the basic 
‘obligation’ normative position. As shown in Section 5.3, the mapping can be carried 
out at the Frame Element level or at the level of their lexical fillers, respectively link-
ing them to more general classes or to their specializations, providing further con-
straints on the lexicalization of the involved concepts. 

110 
T. Agnoloni et al. 
 
A number of future directions of research can be foreseen. They concern, for ex-
ample, the use of machine learning techniques to successfully extract semantic struc-
tures concerning prescriptive qualifications of facts, in terms of legislative provisions. 
These semantic structures can be further mapped [47] to FrameNet with the aim of 
specializing already existing Semantic Frames. An example of a possible methodol-
ogy which can be followed is reported in [48]. 
Acknowledgements 
Although any mistakes remain our own, the authors greatly acknowledge the help and 
contributions of Professor Giovanni Sartor, whose valuable comments and ideas 
helped us to develop section 5.2 of this paper. 
References 
1. Francesconi, E., Tiscornia, D.: Building semantic resources for legislative drafting: the 
DALOS Project. In: Casanovas, P., Sartor, G., Rubino, R., Casellas, N. (eds.) Computable 
Models of the Law. LNCS (LNAI), vol. 4884, pp. 56–70. Springer, Heidelberg (2008) 
2. Hohfeld, W.N.: Some fundamental legal conceptions. Greenwood Press, Westport (1978) 
3. Rotolo, A., Rubino, R., Sartor, G.: An OWL Ontology of Fundamental Legal Concepts. In: 
19th JURIX 2006: Annual Conference Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and Applications, 
pp. 101–110. IOS Press, Amsterdam (2006) 
4. Sartor, G.: Fundamental legal concepts: A formal and teleological characterization. In: Ar-
tificial Intelligence and Law, vol. 14, pp. 101–142. Springer, Netherlands (2006) 
5. Sartor, G.: The Nature of Legal Concepts: Inferential Nodes or Ontological Categories? In: 
Law Working Papers. EUI, Florence (2007) 
6. Gangemi, A., Sagri, M.T., Tiscornia, D.: A Constructive Framework for Legal Ontologies. 
In: Benjamins, V.R., Casanovas, P., Breuker, J., Gangemi, A. (eds.) Law and the Semantic 
Web. LNCS (LNAI), vol. 3369, pp. 97–124. Springer, Heidelberg (2005) 
7. Biagioli, C., Turchi, F.: Model and ontology based conceptual searching in legislative xml 
collections. In: LOAIT – Legal Ontologies and Artificial Intelligence Techniques. IAAIL 
Workshop Series, pp. 83–89. Wolf Legal Publisher, Netherlands (2005) 
8. Biagioli, C., Francesconi, E., Passerini, A., Montemagni, S., Soria, C.: Automatic seman-
tics extraction in law documents. In: ICAIL International Conference on Artificial Intelli-
gence and Law, pp. 133–139. IOS Press, Amsterdam (2005) 
9. Francesconi, E.: An Approach to Legal Rules Modelling and Automatic Learning. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Legal Knowledge and Information Sys-
tems, pp. 59–68. IOS Press, Amsterdam (2009) 
10. Ferrario, R., Guarino, N., Fernández-Barrera, M.: Towards an Ontological Foundation for 
Services Science: the Legal Perspective. In: Sartor, G., Casanovas, P., Biasiotti, M., 
Fernández-Barrera, M. (eds.) Workshop on Approaches to Legal Ontologies (2010) 
(Forthcoming) 
11. Peters, W., Montiel-Ponsoda, E., Aguado de Cea, G.: Localizing Ontologies in OWL.- On-
tolex, Ontologies and Lexical Resources Interfacing Ontologies and Lexical Resources for 
Semantic Web Technologies (2007) 

When a FrameNet-Style Knowledge Description Meets an Ontological Characterization 
111 
 
12. Picca, D., Gliozzo, A.M., Gangemi, A.: LMM: an OWL-DL MetaModel to Represent  
Heterogeneous Lexical Knowledge. In: 6th LREC International Conference on Language 
Resources and Evaluation, pp. 126–142. Springer, Berlin (2008) 
13. Vossen, P., Maks, I., Segers, R., Van der Vliet, H.: Integrating lexical units, synsets and 
ontology in the Cornetto Database. In: Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on 
Language Resources and Evaluation, LREC 2008 (2008) 
14. Agnoloni, T., Bacci, L., Francesconi, E.: Ontology based legislative drafting: design and 
implementation of a multilingual knowledge resource. In: Gangemi, A., Euzenat, J. (eds.) 
EKAW 2008. LNCS (LNAI), vol. 5268, pp. 364–373. Springer, Heidelberg (2008) 
15. Casellas, N.: Modelling Legal Knowledge through Ontologies. OPJK: the Ontology of 
Professional Judicial Knowledge. PhD thesis, Autonomous University of Barcelona (2008) 
16. Sartor, G., Casanovas, P., Biasiotti, M., Fernández-Barrera, M. (eds.): Workshop on Ap-
proaches to Legal Ontologies (2010) (Forthcoming) 
17. Visser, B.-C.: A Comparison of Four Ontologies for the Design of Legal Knowledge Sys-
tems. In: Artificial Intelligence and Law, vol. 6, pp. 27–57. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
Dordrecht (1998) 
18. Valente, A., Breuker, J.: Ontologies: the Missing Link Between Legal Theory and AI & 
Law. In: Soeteman, A. (ed.) Legal knowledge based systems JURIX 1994: The Foundation 
for Legal Knowledge Systems, pp. 138–150. Koninklijke Vermande, Lelystad (1994) 
19. Austin, J.: The province of jurisprudence determined. Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge (1995[1832]) 
20. Wieacker, F.: A history of private law in Europe with particular reference to Germany. 
Clarendon Press/Oxford University Press, Oxford/New York (1955) 
21. Hohfeld, W.N.: Some Fundamental Legal Conceptions as Applied in Judicial Reasoning I. 
Yale Law Journal 23(1), 16–59 (1913) 
22. Hohfeld, W.N.: Some Fundamental Legal Conceptions as Applied in Judicial Reasoning. 
Yale Law Journal 26, 710–770 (1917) 
23. Holmes, O.W.: Codes and the Arrangement of the Laws. American Law Review 5, 1 
(1870) 
24. Holmes, O.W.: The Arrangement of the Law. Privity. American Law Review 7, 46 (1872) 
25. Allen, L.E., Saxon, C.S.: Better Language, Better Thought, Better Communication: The A-
HOHFELD Language for Legal Analysis. In: Proceedings of the Fifth International Con-
ference on Artificial Intelligence and Law, May 21-24. University of Maryland, College 
Park (1995) 
26. McCarty, L.T.: A language for legal discourse, I. Basic features. In: Proceedings of the 
Second International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law, Vancouver, Canada, 
pp. 180–189 (1989) 
27. McCarty, L.T.: OWNERSHIP: A case study in the representation of legal concepts. Pre-
sented at a Conference in Celebration of the 25th Anniversary of the Istituto Documentazi-
one Giuridica, Florence, Italy (1993) 
28. Valente, A., Breuker, J., Brouwer, B.: Int. J. Human-Computer Studies 51, 1079–1125 
(1999) 
29. Lehmann, J., Breuker, J., Brouwer, B.: Causation in AI&Law. In: ICAIL 2003 Workshop 
on Legal Ontologies & Web Based Legal Information Management (2003) 
30. Lehmann, J.: Causation in Artificial Intelligence and Law - A modelling approach. PhD 
thesis, University of Amsterdam - Faculty of Law - Department of Computer Science and 
Law (2003) 
31. Mommers, L.: Applied Legal epistemology. Building a knowledge-based ontology of the 
legal domain, PhD thesis (2002) 

112 
T. Agnoloni et al. 
 
32. Breuker, J., Winkels, R.: Use and reuse of legal ontologies in knowledge engineering and 
information management. In: ICAIL 2003 Workshop on Legal Ontologies and Web Based 
Legal Information Management (2003) 
33. Breuker, J., Hoekstra, R.: Epistemology and ontology in core ontologies: FOLaw and LRI-
Core, two core ontologies for law. In: Proceedings of EKAW Workshop on Core ontolo-
gies. CEUR (2004) 
34. Breuker, J., Hoekstra, R., Boer, A. (eds.): OWL Ontology of Basic Legal Concepts (LKIF-
Core). Deliverable 1.4 (2008) 
35. Ruppenhofer, J., Ellsworth, M., Petruck, M.R.L., Johnson, C.R., Scheffczyk, J.: FrameNet 
II: Extended Theory and Practice (2006),  
 http://framenet.icsi.berkeley.edu/ 
36. Breuker, J.: Dreams and awakenings about legal ontologies. In: Talk taken on the occasion 
of the 3rd Workshop on Legal Ontologies and Artificial Intelligence Techniques (LOAIT 
2009), Barcelona, Spain, June 8 (2009) 
37. Fellbaum, C. (ed.): WordNet: An electronic lexical database. MIT Press, Cambridge 
(1998) 
38. Fillmore, C.J.: Frame semantics and the nature of language. Annals of the New York 
Academy of Sciences (280), 20–32 (1976) 
39. Scheffczyk, J., Pease, A., Ellsworth, M.: Linking FrameNet to the suggested upper merged 
ontology. In: Proc. of FOIS 2006, Baltimore, MD (2006) 
40. Niles, Pease, A.: Towards a standard upper ontology. In: Proceedings of the 2nd Interna-
tional Conference on Formal Ontology in Information Systems (FOIS 2001), Ogunquit, 
Maine (2001) 
41. Sagri, M.-T., Tiscornia, D., Bertagna, F.: Jur-WordNet. In: Proceedings of the Second 
Global WordNet Conference, Brno, Czech Republic, January 20-23, pp. 305–310 (2004) 
42. Peters, W., Sagri, M.T., Tiscornia, D.: The structuring of legal knowledge in Lois. Artifi-
cial Intelligence and Law 15, 117–135 (2007) 
43. Venturi, G., Lenci, A., Montemagni, S., Vecchi, E.M., Sagri, M.T., Tiscornia, D., Ag-
noloni, T.: Towards a FrameNet Resource for the Legal Domain. In: Proceedings of the III 
Workshop on Legal Ontologies and Artificial Intelligence Techniques (LOAIT 2009), 
Barcelona (2009) 
44. Modugno, F.: Funzione. In: Enciclopedia del Diritto, vol. XVIII, pp. 301–313. Giuffrè 
(1969) 
45. Hoekstra, R.: Ontology Representation - Design Patterns and Ontologies that Make Sense. 
Frontiers of Artificial Intelligence and Applications, vol. 197. IOS Press, Amsterdam 
(2009) 
46. Gangemi, A.: What’s in a Schema? In: Huang, C.R., Calzolari, N., Gangemi, A., Lenci, A., 
Oltamari, A., Prevot, L. (eds.) Ontologies and the Lexicon. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge (2009) 
47. Gangemi, A.: Design Patterns for Legal Ontology Construction. In: Casanovas, P., Noriega, 
P., Bourcier, D., Galindo, F. (eds.) Trends in Legal Knowledge: The Semantic Web and the 
Regulation of Electronic Social Systems. European Press Academic Publishing (2007) 
48. Coppola, B., Gangemi, A., Gliozzo, A., Picca, D., Presutti, V.: Frame Detection over the 
Semantic. In: Aroyo, L., Traverso, P., Ciravegna, F., Cimiano, P., Heath, T., Hyvönen, E., 
Mizoguchi, R., Oren, E., Sabou, M., Simperl, E. (eds.) ESWC 2009. LNCS, vol. 5554,  
pp. 126–142. Springer, Heidelberg (2009) 

 
P. Casanovas et al. (Eds.): AICOL Workshops 2009, LNAI 6237, pp. 113–132, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
Application of an Ontology-Based Model to a Selected 
Fraudulent Disbursement Economic Crime  
Jaroslaw Bak  and Czeslaw Jedrzejek 
Institute of Control and Information Engineering,  
Poznan University of Technology, Poland 
{Jaroslaw.Bak,Czeslaw.Jedrzejek}@put.poznan.pl 
Abstract. We present an ontology-based model of a simple economic crime, 
namely fraudulent disbursement. The extension of a previously proposed ontol-
ogy model, called the “minimal model”, is used to capture the mechanism of 
the example case. The conceptual minimal model consists of eight layers of 
concepts, structured in order to use available data on facts to uncover relations. 
Using these concepts and appropriate relations and rules, we are able to map 
crime activity options (roles of particular type of managers). This makes it pos-
sible to phrase these roles in the language of penal code sanctions. Finally, the 
roles of persons in the crime are mapped into a set of sanctions. Prospects on 
future reasoning capabilities of the tool are presented. 
Keywords: Financial crime, money laundering, minimal model ontology,  
reasoning, penal code. 
1   Introduction 
Economic crimes are particularly difficult to model [1] and code into an expert sys-
tem. For example, fraudsters use many types of schemes, techniques and transactions 
to achieve their goals, so it has seemed impossible to construct a simple conceptual 
model of any generality. Only recently has the integrated use of semantics expressed 
by means of ontologies and rules achieved the capability of analyzing large practical 
problems, such as applying reasoning over legal sanctions on the basis of investiga-
tion facts and rules appearing in penal codes.  
In this work we present an ontology-based model of a simple economic crime, 
causing damage to a company (Polish: działanie na szkodę spółki) in the form of asset 
misappropriations, including fraudulent disbursement. Such crime is very widespread 
and intractable across countries and industries. In a 2009 survey [2], asset misappro-
priation constituted two-thirds of all economic crimes. Such a crime is often accom-
panied by money laundering schemes. 
In previous work we used a simplified version of the Hydra case [3, 4]. In this 
work we cover most of the predicate crime of the Hydra case (we do not present a 
money laundering thread).  
The model is based on the suitable application of an ontology that forms a “mini-
mal layer” - it contains only necessary concepts that follow the logical order of un-
covering a crime [3], [4].  

114 
J. Bak  and C. Jedrzejek 
 
We apply the model to describe over 85% of relevant information for the Hydra 
case [5], and, as a result, are able to effectively infer from these facts the legal qualifi-
cations for this case.  
As a result a significant extension is made, which makes the model much more re-
alistic. The extended ontology makes it possible to differentiate roles of key people in 
the crime scheme, and map their crimes into a specific set of penal code articles. The 
paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the Semantic Web Technologies 
which we use in our approach. Section 3 describes our fraud ontology. In subsection 
3.1, state-of the-art ontologies are analyzed with respect to functionalities necessary to 
meet our requirements. Subsection 3.2 introduces the Hydra case, which is used as an 
example showing how our approach can be applied in a real case, together with many 
variants of a given crime typology. In subsection 3.3 we present a fraudulent dis-
bursement minimal ontology model compatible with the Hydra case. In Section 4 we 
analyze law based on the Polish penal code, related to fraudulent disbursement, and 
we derive rules that define logical activities appearing in the Penal Code based on 
physical activities (e.g. signing a document that contains untrue content is a falsifica-
tion). Section 5 is devoted to mapping logical activities corresponding to legal sanc-
tions for crime perpetrators. Conclusions and future work are presented in Section 6. 
2   From Ontology to Reasoning 
In information technology, an ontology is the working model of objects (entities) and 
relations in some particular domain of knowledge. Ontology defines domain knowl-
edge (objects and properties) and also should provide operational knowledge on use 
(how do we use the objects?, what answers can we get?, and how could we query?). 
In general, the model represents machine readable projection of a larger domain  
expressed in formalized language. In Subsection 3.1 we present state of the art on-
tologies focused on completeness. Here, we follow less general but more practical 
bottom-up path. We are interested in legal case description we build hierarchy of 
objects possessing inheritance, along with their properties such as attributes, and 
restrictions that apply to the class. One may apply rules to support reasoning.  
There are various approaches that construct ontologies based of knowledge back-
ground (facts). Notable are approaches [6], [7], that from textual description of case 
facts select applicable factors. Wyner [7] introduced intermediate concepts that allow 
differentiating between cases. This approach is more general than ours used in this 
work, as we mostly concentrate on most precise description of a single case. How-
ever, we do not limit ourselves with only facts of the case. We consider also possible 
variants of the case together with their legal implication. 
In [6], [7] levels of intermediate concepts were used in a logical relation rather than 
lattice-theoretic structure. There were designed to achieve a decision a trade secret has 
been misappropriated. 
The minimal model ontology has been developed in language OWL-DL (Web On-
tology Language Description Logic) [8] which supports maximum expressive power 
without loss of decidability and computational completeness. We also use SWRL 
(Semantic Web Rule Language) [9] language, which, introduces undecidability into 
our ontology but extends the expressivity of OWL supporting the use of ontology 

 
Application of an Ontology-Based Model 
115 
 
axioms in rules. We also use SWRLB language (SWRL Built-ins) [10] to extend 
SWRL with additional functions. Generally, we use SWRLB Comparisons to com-
pare variables and to put some constraints on them.  
Such a model with ontology and rules needs an appropriate reasoner. There are 
several of them, for example: Pellet [11] and KAON2 [12]. Our data are stored in a 
relational database, so we have to use a reasoner which supports querying ‘on-the-fly’ 
according to defined semantics and with the use of rules. We decided to use Jess (Java 
Expert System Shell) [13, 14], a reasoner tool with SDL (Semantic Data Library) [15] 
which is much more efficient than KAON2 (it also enables ‘on-the-fly’ querying). 
We stress that some of the presented facts, for example ApprovalOfWorkNot-
Done(?d), will be put into the system by a prosecutor or other person connected with 
an investigation. We also want to mention that all variables appearing in rules which 
have different names are treated as having different values. To express that we need to 
use SWRLB constructions (for example: swrlb:equal (’=’), swrlb:notEqual (’!=’), 
swrlb:greaterThan (’>’) etc.). But for clarity in this paper we do not use them. 
3   Fraudulent Disbursement Minimal Ontology Model 
3.1   State of the Art Ontologies  
The core of semantic applications are ontologies that are shaping data technology and 
knowledge representation. Perhaps the most successful project, The Gene Ontology 
(GO) [16], provides a set of structured vocabularies for specific biological domains 
that can be used to describe gene products in any organism. GO contains three exten-
sive ontologies that describe molecular function, biological process, and cellular 
components, and provide a community database resource that supports the use of 
these ontologies in a massive way (the number of terms now exceeds 28,000).  
There has been a very large European Union effort to develop various aspects of 
design and use of ontologies within the 5th and 6th Research Frameworks. In particu-
lar, the Neon project [17], see also its portal [18], is making significant advancement 
of integrating ontologies in system engineering methodologies.  
From our perspective, the most important are legal and financial ontologies, and, 
particularly, an ontology of fraud.  
In general, our minimal model ontology overlaps in many respects with the leading 
ontologies, but is much narrower and at the same time more specific, allowing for 
reasoning. There are many ontologies that relate to finance, enterprise or legal areas. 
According to [19] and [20], ontologies can be classified as: 
− 
Base ontologies, 
− 
Domain ontologies, 
− 
Topical ontologies, 
− 
Application ontologies. 
The scope of our work lies in the bottom 3 layers. 
Basically, it borrows from norm structure based on Gangemi Content Ontology De-
sign Patterns [21], like Requirement → Consequence (if the factual knowledge is P, 
then the legal knowledge is Q) , we divide this structure into 3 substructures: Factual 

116 
J. Bak  and C. Jedrzejek 
 
knowledge → Logical meaning of Facts expressed in generic legal language → Legal 
sanctions with a particular penal code (here Polish Penal Code). Only those facts are 
analyzed that could became evidence. This is in line with Norm↔Case (if a situation 
fulfils the conditions for violating a norm, it becomes a legal case), see Fig. 1, CrimeS-
cenario (a crime is committed by a perpetrator and comes to the attention of authorities 
who pursue a criminal process), etc. 
Parameter
Legal role
Value Region
Object
Norm
Case
Classifies
1..*
1..*
Classifies
ConformsTo
ExactLocation
1..*
Setting
1..*
Setting
Uses
Uses
RequisiteFor
Legal task
Action
Uses
RequisiteFor
Setting
Participant
ExactLocation
1..*
1..*
Attitude Towards
Classifies
1..*
 
Fig. 1. The Norm ↔ Case structure [21] 
However, we do not employ Obligation → Right (if A has an obligation towards B, 
then B has a right towards A) structure.  
As regards to fraud ontology, the one developed within the FF Poirot project [19], 
[20] is very broad, and consequently difficult to handle. In Fig. 2 we show the pack-
age structure of the FF Poirot fraud ontology. Some concepts used there may help to 
gain evidence, but in an indirect way (perpetrator’s personality, or trust, a moral 
rather than a legal concept). Within a minimal model we do not use such concepts. 
3.2   The Hydra Case 
In the economic crime considered here, the Chief executive officer, (CEO) of com-
pany A (Hydra) subcontracts construction work. The work is then consecutively sub-
contracted through a chain of phony companies (B, C, and D). Each company is get-
ting a commission for money laundering and falsifies documents stating that the con-
tracted work had been done. Actually, what was to be done as “subcontracted con-
struction work” company A did itself. 
At the end of the chain, the owner of a single person company D attempts to with-
draw cash, and there is a suspicion that this cash reaches the management of company 
A “under the table”. The crime scheme of the Hydra case is presented in Figure 3. 

 
Application of an Ontology-Based Model 
117 
 
Investigation
States:
   Gain
   Loss
Participants:
   Perpetrator
   Collaborator
   Victim
Actions:
   Theft
   Deception
   Conversion
 Objects:
   Assets
   Materials
   Instruments
Attribute:
   Intention
   Trust
Fraud Configuration
 Fraud type:
   by Perpetrator
   by Victim
   by StolenObject
   by Instrument
   by Scheme
 Detection:
   Red flags
   Monitoring
   Predication
 Evidence:
   Testimonial
   Documentary
   Physical
   Observational
Attention points:
...
Prevention:
...
 Actors:
...
 Participant Profile:
...
Perpetration:
…
Resolution:
...
   
Collaboration:
...   
Motivation
 
Fig. 2. Packages of Topical Ontology of Fraud 
In the previous work [4] we considered a simplified version of the Hydra case, 
such that only a single level of authorization existed. Basically, it meant that once an 
approval of the construction job was made, the payment for this work followed with-
out further authorization. Consequently, only one person in company A was responsi-
ble for the crime. 
The situation was created by the authorization of company A’s (CEO) who made 
payment to a subcontractor for work not done, on the basis of falsified documents 
stating that the work had been done. 
In this work a three-level (real) structure of authorization is taken into consideration. 
The facts of the Hydra case are written on 7 pages in a textual form. A formalized 
scenario description of the Hydra case was obtained by manually transforming natural 
language description to data structures (no temporal relations shown). The structures 
related to money, invoices or work flow are the following factors (variables are indi-
cated by a capital letter): 
• 
Company F1 hires company F2 to do work R at location M. 
• 
Company F2 does work R at location M on behalf of F1. 
• 
Company F2 does no work R at location M on behalf of F1. 
 

118 
J. Bak  and C. Jedrzejek 
 
Comp. A
Comp. B
Single 
person
Comp.C
Single 
person
Comp. D
service/goods
invoice 976
fictitious work 
statement
CEO of
Comp. A
CEO of
Comp. B
Owner  of
Comp. D
wire 854 
wire 450 
difference between 
transfers 122  
(commission)
service/goods
service/goods
invoice 854 
invoice 854 
fictitious work 
statement
work done by 
Comp.A  itself
attempt of withdrawal of 
450 cash
intended cash flow
no work statement
wire 976
Owner  of
Comp. C
 
Fig. 3. A basic scheme for the Hydra case 
 
• 
Company F1 issues invoice FA to Company F2 for work R done at  
location M. 
• 
Persons X and Y representing Companies F1 and F2 respectively, sign 
work acceptance document DO related to work R done at location M. 
• 
Company F1 makes payment to Company F2 for invoice FA related to 
work R done at location M, transferring money from account x in bank 
B1 to account y in bank B2. 
• 
Person X gives an order to bank B to perform operation O on account x 
of Company F existing in this bank. 
• 
Bank B performs operation O on account x of Company F existing in 
this bank, ordered by Person X.  
• 
Bank B blocks operation O on account x of Company F existing in this 
bank, ordered by Person X. 
 
One can consider these statements as corresponding to the first 3 levels of concepts 
appearing in Table 1. 
In the next stage the sentences were broken into RDF triples, which were the basis 
for concepts, relations and rules design. We demonstrate with a few examples that 
such a representation largely facilitates asking relevant questions about connections 
between financial entities and people associated with them, which is conducive to 
evidence building and assigning a sanction for a crime.  
3.3   Minimal Ontology 
Based on analysis of about 10 crime cases, we arrived at the data model (called a 
minimal model), based on conceptual graphs [3]. This means that an ontology is 

 
Application of an Ontology-Based Model 
119 
 
crafted to a task rather that attempting to describe the whole conceivable space of 
concepts and relations (top ontologies). The methodology consists of several steps: 
1. Design of a hierarchical data representation with minimal ontology, con-
structed in the sequence of uncovering a crime scheme. This means using 
only necessary concepts that follow in the logical order of uncovering a 
crime. In the first stage, goods/services transfer data is analyzed with relation 
to 3 basic flows: money, invoices, and documents (i.e., confirming that the 
service or goods have been delivered - particularly important for fuel mafia 
type of crimes). In addition, responsible or relevant people within companies 
are associated with particular illegal activities. 
2. Provision of a framework in which the graph building process and queries 
are executed. 
3. Relating answers to queries with crime qualifications. 
This approach is limited, but provides an essential model for evidence-building of a 
very important class of financial crimes: among them acting to do damage to a com-
pany and money laundering.  
The major features of the minimal ontology model are the following: 
• 
Only facts contributing to evidence or possible sanctions are kept. 
• 
We leave to a human the answer to difficult questions: for example, deciding 
that the work has not been done. This requires sending an expert to the field, 
inspection of construction, taking testimonies, finding that a company that 
presumably did the job was a straw company, with no experience in con-
struction, having no equipment, etc. In some cases finding out that the work 
was underpriced or overpriced is very difficult but a critical issue in a case. 
• 
Reduction of possible relations or attributes. Here we give some examples: 
o 
In the case of Hydra, in the first stage it is not necessary to deal with 
the place of construction. The scheme would be a crime no matter 
where the construction was taking place (for a given jurisdiction). 
However, this information has to appear in the indictment. 
o 
An invoice can be issued or received. We combine these two rela-
tions, the only relation for invoices possible in our model. Invoices 
may be lost or destroyed, and there will be some cases for which 
these facts will be of importance, and then possibly we would have 
to enhance the model. 
• 
The knowledge about the case appears explicit as presented by facts, and im-
plicit – such as regular business procedures. Once the payment is approved, 
it is then executed and we are not interested who actually did it.  
Such an approach of complementing a scenario with “external knowl-
edge” is similar to that taken in Abraxas project [6]. This spares us express-
ing a trade code in OWL. 
 
Since the previous model was quite rudimentary (the scheme was correct but many 
details were omitted), we need to extend the minimal model ontology presented in [3-5]. 
“Minimal model” means that the ontology contains a very small number of concepts 
and relations to infer about crime schema and legal sanctions. 

120 
J. Bak  and C. Jedrzejek 
 
The minimal model consists of eight layers that are structured in order of uncover-
ing the facts (Table 1). Concepts are introduced to describe the core of these facts. 
Everything that is not pertinent to legal reasoning is rejected. 
Table 1. Layers of concepts for analysis of economic crimes 
Type 
Concern details 
1. 
General entities as: Companies, Institutions, Single person companies, 
levels of authorization, documents having legal meaning. Money trans-
fer between companies 
2. 
Invoice flow between companies. Tax statements 
3. 
Work/Services flow  
4. 
Roles of decisive people in companies who accepted work in the chain 
of command 
5. 
Mapping potential roles coming from positions in companies to particu-
lar activities resulting in a financial crime 
6. 
People not related to companies but being a part of crimes. Other rela-
tions of people 
7. 
Information about people, e.g., whether they were sentenced in the last 
10 years, their criminal connections; school or business etc., connec-
tions 
8. 
Additional factors (e.g., learning about averted criminal plans) 
 
A definition of the minimal model is application to financial crimes expressed in 
OWL language using the editor Protégé 4.0 is presented in [5]. 
This ontology has a modular structure and contains: 
• 
Person.owl module, describing persons as social entities and groups of  
persons, 
• 
module Document.owl, specifying the legal meaning of documents and their 
content, 
• 
module LegalProvision, defining legal acts and sanctions, 
• 
module Action.owl specifying activities, 
• 
module Object.owl describing other entities, i.e. goods (work or service are 
such entities), 
• 
module MinimalModel.owl defining general concepts and relations of the 
minimal model, it also contains rules, 
• 
module Institution-Organization.owl describing legal entities (rather than 
dealing with intentions, it is more important to establish who knew about 
criminal activities, and whether a crime was perpetrated by a group). 
In relational database notation, the most important concepts that are currently func-
tional are the following: 
 

 
Application of an Ontology-Based Model 
121 
 
Flow (Money Transfer, Invoice, Goods/Service).  
Money Transfer (From Entity, To Entity, Method of Transfer, Date, Value, Title of 
transfer, i.e. for Goods). 
Method of Transfer (Electronic transfer, Cash). 
 
In various legal theory texts, fraud must be proved by showing that the defendant's 
actions involved between five to nine [22] separate elements – Table 2. 
Table 2. Fraud attribute representation 
No 
Fraud attribute 
How it is determined  
1 
a false statement of a material fact 
(in some works these two are sepa-
rated) 
Explicitly (falsified document as 
proof) 
2 
damage to the alleged victim as a 
result 
Explicitly (payment for work not 
done) 
3 
knowledge on the part of the defen-
dant that the statement is untrue 
Conditional (could know, could not 
know, should know – these are the 
variants of the scheme analyzed) 
4 
intent on the part of the defendant to 
deceive the alleged victim 
Testimony 
5 
justifiable reliance by the alleged 
victim on the statement 
Implicitly (had fraud been committed 
payment is automatic – this knowl-
edge comes from normal operation 
procedures in a company)  
 
Such fraud attribute representation is narrower than that used in [20] p. 28, but 
much easier for querying. 
Figure 4 and Figure 5 present the taxonomy of concepts of the modules Person.owl 
and Document.owl, respectively. Corresponding relations and rules (not presented 
here) were used, e.g., to obtain results presented in Tables 3 and 4. 
First, the company had a three-level structure of authorization (this is easy to gen-
eralize to more levels, but the intent is to make it compatible with the Hydra case). 
The chain of activities is the following: in the Hydra case, acceptance of construction 
work done by B at a given site is first signed by a manager in A responsible for a 
work supervision at this site (MiddleLevelManager); this is followed by a signature of 
the higher level manager – a Director of the company responsible for supervision of 
all sites. A Director may be authorized to accept invoices and order a payment – tech-
nically this is and was done by a written authorization on the back of the invoice.  
The Principal might not have known that the work was not being done. However, 
he was the one who signed the contract for subcontracting and thus could be  
implicated. 
Had the Principal of company A been a person who on the basis of the work accep-
tance document had ordered the payment of A to B, upon issuance of an invoice by B, 
he would be directly implicated. 

122 
J. Bak  and C. Jedrzejek 
 
 
Fig. 4. A Taxonomy of concepts of the module Person.owl 
However, in reality the case was more complex. In order to represent elementary 
activities, we need to formalize: 
1. The concept of complex documents. 
2. The Hierarchical chain of responsibility in a company. 
 
Several new basic concepts are defined to achieve a more realistic view of the Hydra 
case, able to describe legal documents: 
a. 
ContractDocument – a document that is drawn up between two parties. This 
ContractDocument is between two companies, and is signed by principals of 
these companies. The signature on behalf of the company can be individual or 
joint, depending on the structure of the company.  
The following general rule for the ContractDocument is defined:  
 
Document(?d), isSignedBy(?d, ?p1), CompanysPrincipal(?p1),  
isSignedBy(?d, ?p2), CompanysPrincipal(?p2) → ContractDocument(?d) 
 
b. InternalLegalDocument – a document drawn up in the company that may be 
authorized in stages up to the highest level of authority. It is signed hierarchi-
cally by the persons with different levels of responsibility. 
 

 
Application of an Ontology-Based Model 
123 
 
 
Fig. 5. Taxonomy of concepts of the module Document.owl 
c. 
ComplexInternalLegalDocument – a virtual hierarchical document which could 
consist of several physical documents, that together authorize a payment (here 
ComplexInternalLegalDocument consists of a construction work acceptance 

124 
J. Bak  and C. Jedrzejek 
 
document, and a payment authorization signature on the back of an invoice). The 
series of authorizations reflects the structure of the company from the lowest to 
the highest rank of management. ComplexInternalLegalDocument is defined 
with the following rules: 
 
Document(?d), concerns(?d, ?w), Work(?w), isSignedBy(?d, 
?p1),worksFor(?p1, ?c), hasLevelOfResponsibility(?p1, ?l1),  
isCosignedBy (?d, ?p2), worksFor(?p2, ?c),  
hasLevelOfResponsibility(?p2, ?l2), swrlb:lessThan(?l1,?l2)  
→ ComplexInternalLegalDocument(?d) 
 
Document(?d), concerns(?d, ?w), Work(?w), isSignedBy(?d, ?p1), 
worksFor(?p1, ?c), hasLevelOfResponsibility(?p1, ?l1),  
isSignedOnBackOfInvoiceBy (?d, ?p2), worksFor(?p2, ?c),  
hasLevelOfResponsibility(?p2, ?l2), swrlb:lessThan(?l1,?l2)  
→ ComplexInternalLegalDocument(?d) 
 
d. FalsifiedComplexInternalLegalDocument – ComplexInternalLegalDocument 
with approval of work which was not done.  
FalisfiedComplexInternalLegalDocument is calculated with the following rule: 
 
ComplexInternalLegalDocument(?d), ApprovalOfWorkNotDone(?d)  
→ FalsifiedComplexInternalLegalDocument(?d) 
 
e. 
Company’s principal – the highest level person making legally binding decisions 
in a company (a member of the executive board or an owner in a single person 
company). 
f. 
Transaction – consists of a contract between two companies, the work, an in-
voice issued for work and payment. It is defined with the following rule: 
 
ContractDocument(?c), concerns(?c, ?w), Work(?w),  
ComplexInternalLegalDocument(?i), Invoice(?i), isIssuedBy(?i, ?f1), 
concerns(?i, ?w), isReceivedBy(?i, ?f2), MoneyTransfer(?mt),  
flowsFrom(?mt, ?f2), flowsTo(?mt, ?f1) 
→ Transaction(?c), hasMoneyTransfer(?c, ?mt), hasInvoice(?c, ?i) 
 
If a contract, work or invoice document turns out to be a FalsifiedDocument, 
then the Transaction will be classified as a FalsifiedTransaction. 
g. FormalHierarchy – the management structure in a company. Cardinality of man-
agers at each level is 1. In future, we will allow some decisions to be taken as a 
group, if roles of managers in the group at the same level were the same. 
h. We can also define (in the description logic) the MoneyTransfer concept: 
 
 
MoneyTransfer ⊆  
                        FlowOfMoneyCPTask  ∧ 
                        ∃ flowsFrom.Company ∧  
                        ∃ flowsTo.Company ∧  
                        (= 1 occurs ∧∀occurs.TimeInstant)  ∧ 
                        (= 1 hasValue ∧ ∀ hasValue.float) ∧ 
                        ∃ isPaymentFor.Invoice 
 

 
Application of an Ontology-Based Model 
125 
 
This definition means that a money transfer has one distinctive value, it occurs at 
exactly one time instant between a pair of companies, and it is connected with 
paying for some invoice. Additionally, it is a specialization of a top level Flow-
OfMoneyCPTask concept coming from ontology developed for the PPBW, the 
Polish Platform for Homeland Security project [5]. 
 
It is essential to recognize that documents may require a legal signature by a subset 
of principals within a company according to a statute. In the Hydra case the board 
consisted of 5 members, and the chairman of the board was authorized to sign docu-
ments without the consent of the others. Since no involvement of the remaining 4 
members was found, here the principal is the CEO. 
In this paper we adopt the 3-level deep company management structure – the “legal 
view” of hierarchy, which determines corporate lines of accountability. We assume 
that these 3 levels of PersonTakingLegalDecisions, starting from the highest levels, 
are: Principal, Director and MiddleLevelManager. In Figure 4, class structure of con-
cepts of the module Person.owl is presented. 
Members of the executive board are principals, the only people who authorize con-
tracts. Certain activities are performed by those in lower ranks: here directors and 
middle level managers are legally bound. 
To show versatility and flexibility of the model, here we admit more options for 
the crime scheme (who could do what), one of which happened in the real case. 
4   Rules That Define Logical Activities Appearing in the Penal 
Code Model 
We can also define the PersonWhoFalsifiedDocument as a (social) person connected 
to a company who can make decisions and is authorized to sign legally binding 
documents (that within a criminal activity may have a falsified content). 
 
PersonWhoFalsifiedDocument ⊆ 
               PersonTakingLegalDecisions ∧ 
               ∃ worksFor.Company ∧ 
               ∃ isAuthorisedToSign. InternalLegalDocument Document ∧ 
               ∃ Signs.(∃ possesses.FalsifiedContent) 
 
PersonWhoUsedFalsifiedDocument ⊆ 
               PersonTakingLegalDecisions ∧ 
               ∃ worksFor.Company ∧ 
               ∃ isAuthorisedToCoSign. InternalLegalDocument Document ∧ 
               ∃ Signs.(∃ possesses.FalsifiedComplexLegalDocument)  
 
Here we introduce the IllicitPersonalGain concept, which is money that was 
fraudulently transferred out of company A and returned to a person that had control 
over company A. This procedure was possible due to a conspiracy between the CEO 
of company A and the owners/managers of companies B, C, and D. These facts were 
established by testimonies and pleas.  
In order to define the Principal roles, we introduce the following properties: isPar-
tofScheme, hadIntent, and isNegligent. 

126 
J. Bak  and C. Jedrzejek 
 
The MiddleLevelManager and the Director (this is what happened in reality, a ver-
sion in which the Director approved the payment) committed intellectual falsification. 
This is established beyond doubt. We can define this role as an UnconditionalFraud-
ster. The principal is UnconditionalFraudster ‘Sequence of activities 1’ in Table 3 
(had known what he signed). The principal is ConditionalFraudster in ‘Sequence of 
activities 4’. We need additional information that he was ‘Part of the crime scheme’. 
This qualification is left to an investigator or a prosecutor.  
The Principal’s involvement in the crime scheme may be established in several ways: 
1. A guilty plea during testimonies or in court. 
2. Other members of the scheme testifying that he was part of the scheme. 
3. Money transfers to his account which cannot be accounted for. 
 
In principle, we could try to design rules for these concepts. Here, these properties are 
determined by a human (an investigator or a prosecutor). Even if he was guilty, he 
could claim being under duress while giving testimony (a victim of coercion by 
prosecutors), or could claim innocence due to mental incompetence at the time.  
For the Principal, the following theoretical possibilities exist, presented in Table 3. 
Table 3. Options in the fraudulent misappropriation case of Hydra: detailed activities of key 
persons of company A having legal meaning 
Number 
 
Sequence of 
activities 1 
Sequence of 
activities 2 
Sequence of 
activities 3 
Sequence of 
activities 4 
Activities 
Principal  
orders  
payment 
Director orders 
payment 
Director orders 
payment 
Director orders 
payment 
Principal 
Principal  
accepts the 
document and 
orders  
payment 
Should have 
known that the 
work has not 
been done, if 
he was not 
negligent 
Might not have 
known that the 
work has not 
been done  
Part of the crime 
scheme 
Director 
Cosigns  
falsified  
construction 
work  
acceptance 
document 
Director  
accepts the 
document and 
orders the 
payment 
Director  
accepts the 
document and 
orders the 
payment 
Director accepts 
the document 
and orders the 
payment 
Manager’s sequence of activities  
MiddleLevel 
Manager 
Falsified  
construction 
work  
acceptance 
document 
Falsified  
construction 
work  
acceptance 
Falsified  
construction 
work  
acceptance 
Falsified  
construction 
work acceptance 

 
Application of an Ontology-Based Model 
127 
 
The Principal could be a part of the scheme (or even the organizer of the scheme), 
or would have approved a payment without knowing that the work had not been done. 
Suppose the principal claims he is innocent. If he were not implicated by the Mid-
dleLevelManager and/or the Director of company A, nor by the Principal of B, nor by 
money coming to his account, then the Principal was not a part of a scheme. The full 
model should decide whether the Principal was negligent (leading to nonfeasance), 
since the Principal was obliged to verify work acceptance documents (he may be 
charged on the basis of Art. 296 § 4 PC).  
The success of our model relies on clear separation of the nature of the facts we use: 
 
1. Concepts and facts in the “minimal model ontology”. 
2. Concepts and facts in the external sources. This, for example, includes 
knowledge of how a standard company operates. An invoice accepted by a 
Principal or Director goes through an accountant and an administrative offi-
cer who actually executes the money transfer. We do not attempt to describe 
these activities, unless there is a crime at these stages.  
3. Certain facts are left for manual input by an investigator and a prosecutor. 
 
In our approach we explicitly use conditions 1 and 2 from Table 2 in the case of the 
Director and the MiddleLevelManager. Element 3 is used to judge the involvement of 
the Principal. Elements 3 and 4 are combined, as knowing about a fraud also indicates 
intent. Element 5 is not analyzed, because it results from standard procedures in a 
company: once a payment was authorized, it is executed.  
For the sake of clarity, here we are only interested in legal sanctions for people re-
lated to company A. The Full Hydra case (10 people sentenced) [23], [24] will be 
presented in our future work. 
The decisive document falsifier (for example, an agent issuing an invoice for work 
not done) having the intent to do damage to a company by illegally transferring 
money from it, and who gains some amount of this illicit money, may be defined by 
the rule: 
 
FraudsterInACompany(?x, ?c)    ← 
 
 
 
PersonWhoFalsifiedDocument(?x) 
 
 
 
Company(?c) ∧ 
 
 
 
initiates(?x, ?mt) ∧ 
 
 
 
MoneyTransfer(?mt) ∧ 
 
 
 
achieves(?x, ?g) ∧ 
IsPartOfTheScheme(?x, ?k) ∧  //k – given case 
IllicitPersonalGain(?g) ∧ 
hasValue(?g,?v2) ∧ Value(?v2) ∧  
hasValue(?mt, ?v1)  ∧  
Value(?v2) ∧ ?v2≤?v1 ∧ 
hasGoal(?x, ?go) ∧  
hasIntentToCommitCrime(?x, ?go) 
 
 

128 
J. Bak  and C. Jedrzejek 
 
The rules for crime activities from Table 3 were defined to obtain results from the 
current state of the knowledge base. Rules enable users to determine which sequence 
of activities is appropriate to a crime schema. The following rules were defined for 
sequence of activities 1: 
 
FalsifiedComplexInternalLegalDocument(?d), isSignedBy(?d, ?p1),  
isSignedOnBackOfInvoiceBy (?d, ?p2), MiddleLevelManager(?p1),  
Director(?p2), Principal(?p3), orders(?p3, ?m), Payment(?m),  
accepts(?p3, ?d), knowsAbout(?p3, ?d)  
→ FraudulentDisbursementCrime(?p1, 1),  
 
FraudulentDisbursementCrime(?p2, 1), 
 
FraudulentDisbursementCrime(?p3, 1) 
 
FraudulentDisbursementCrime(?p1,1), FraudulentDisbursementCrime(?p2,1),  
FraudulentDisbursementCrime(?p3,1), MiddleLevelManager(?p1),  
Director(?p2), Principal(?p3), worksFor(?p1, ?f1), worksFor(?p2, ?f1), 
worksFor(?p3, ?f1) 
→  inConspiracyWith(?p1, ?p2), inConspiracyWith(?p2, ?p3), 
 
inConspiracyWith(?p1, ?p3) 
5   Mapping of Logical Activities to Legal Sanctions for Crime 
Perpetrators 
Analysis of the fraudulent disbursement sanctions in the Polish PC [25] and real cases 
showed that most defendants were accused of the following crimes (number indicates 
a component in a SetOfCrimes:  
 
1. Art. 296 § 1-3 PC – strictly: negligence leading to damage to a company (for per-
sonal benefit). The asset misappropriations including fraudulent disbursement 
(FD) are prosecuted in Poland based on this article. The phrasing of the crime in 
the Polish Penal Code does not exactly agree with its meaning.  
2. Art. 296 § 4 PC – unknowing negligence leading to damage to a company. 
3. Art. 284 § 2 PC – personal benefit resulting from activities sanctioned under art. 
296. 
4. Art. 294 § 1 PC – the offense specified in 284 § 2 PC with regard to property of 
considerable value. 
5. Art. 286 § 1 PC – fraud ( intentionally deceiving a person (here, a legal person - a 
company), which results in a damage to the company.  
6. Art. 271 § 3 PC – lying or issuance (signing) a false document with regard to a 
circumstance having legal significance. 
7. Art. 273 § 1 PC using a document mentioned in art. 271 § 3 PC. 
8. Art. 299 § 1 and 5 PC – money laundering (conscious and together with other 
persons, constituting a crime group). 
9. Art. 18 § 1 PC – directing illegal activity performed by another person. 
Using the defined and derived properties, the logical characterization of a suspect’s 
activities are illustrated in Table 4. 

 
Application of an Ontology-Based Model 
129 
 
Table 4. Logical characterization of activities of key persons of company A in variants of a 
fraudulent misappropriation scheme. Legal sanctions are thosereached by an expert prosecutor 
and the judge. 
Number 
Variant 1 
Variant 2 
Variant 3 
Activities 
MiddleLevelManager 
and Director part of 
conspiracy. 
Principal not part of 
the scheme. 
MiddleLevelManager 
and Director part of 
conspiracy. 
Principal not part of 
the scheme but  
negligent. 
MiddleLevelManager 
and Director part of 
conspiracy. 
Principal part of the 
scheme, actually the 
organizer. 
Principal 
Innocent 
art. 296 § 4 PC 
art. 296 § 1-3 PC 
(depending on the 
cost of the damage) 
and art. 284 § 2 PC 
and art. 294 § 1 PC 
Director 
 art. 286 § 1 PC i art. 
294 § 1 PC, art. 284 
§ 2 PC, art. 273 § 1 
PC;  
art. 286 § 1 PC i art. 
294 § 1 PC, art. 284 § 
2 PC, art. 273 § 1 PC; 
art. 296 § 1-3 PC 
(depending on the 
cost of the damage) 
and art. 284 § 2 PC 
and art. 294 § 1 PC 
art. 273 § 1 PC 
Legal sanctions 
MiddleLevel 
Manager 
art. 294 § 1 PC; art. 
271 § 3 PC 
art. 294 §; 1 PC art. 
271 § 3 PC 
art. 296 § 1,2, 3 PC 
and art. 284 § 2 PC; 
and art. 294 § 1 PC; 
art. 271 § 3 PC 
 
Legal sanctions reached by an expert prosecutor and the judge can be defined as 
rules. Here, we present rules for every variant from Table 4: 
a) Variant 1: 
FalsifiedComplexInternalLegalDocument(?d), MiddleLevelManager(?p1), 
Director(?p2), inConspiracyWith(?p1, ?p2), Principal(?p3),  
NotInConspiracy(?p3), Art_286_1(?a1), Art_294_1(?a2), 
Art_284_2(?a3), Art_273(?a4), Art_271(?a5)  
→  
fallsUnder(?p1, ?a2), fallsUnder(?p1, ?a5), fallsUnder(?p2, ?a1), 
fallsUnder(?p2, ?a2), fallsUnder(?p2, ?a3), fallsUnder(?p2, ?a4), 
Innocent(?p3) 
 
 

130 
J. Bak  and C. Jedrzejek 
 
b) Variant 2: 
FalsifiedComplexInternalLegalDocument(?d), inConspiracyWith(?p1, 
?p2), MiddleLevelManager(?p1), Director(?p2), Principal(?p3),  
notInConspiracy(?p3), Negligent(?p3), Art_286_1(?a1), 
Art_294_1(?a2), Art_284_2(?a3), Art_273(?a4), Art_271(?a5), 
Art_296_4(?a6)  
→  
fallsUnder(?p1, ?a2), fallsUnder(?p1, ?a5), fallsUnder(?p2, ?a1), 
fallsUnder(?p2, ?a2), fallsUnder(?p2, ?a3), fallsUnder(?p2, ?a4), 
fallsUnder(?p3, ?a6) 
 
c) Variant 3: 
FalsifiedComplexInternalLegalDocument(?d), MiddleLevelManager(?p1), 
Director(?p2), Principal(?p3), inConspiracyWith(?p1, ?p2),  
inConspiracyWith(?p2, ?p3), inConspiracyWith(?p1, ?p3),  
Organizer(?p3), Art_296(?a1), Art_294_1(?a2), Art_284_2(?a3), 
Art_273(?a4), Art_271(?a5)  
→  
fallsUnder(?p3, ?a1), fallsUnder(?p3, ?a2), fallsUnder(?p3, ?a3), 
fallsUnder(?p2, ?a1), fallsUnder(?p2, ?a2), fallsUnder(?p2, ?a3), 
fallsUnder(?p2, ?a4), fallsUnder(?p1, ?a1), fallsUnder(?p1, ?a2), 
fallsUnder(?p1, ?a3), fallsUnder(?p1, ?a5) 
 
We have verified our ontology with the Pellet-2.0.1 reasoner [11], which found the 
ontology to be consistent. 
6   Conclusions and Future Work 
The minimal model of the fraudulent disbursement crime can be expressed using 
OWL-DL classes and properties and a reasonable number of rules.  
Our analysis accounts only for crimes of people associated with Hydra – company 
A. We do not here present rules for sanctions for people in companies B, C, and D, 
nor give sanctions for money laundering (here we concentrate only on a predicate 
crime). These are similar, although some new elements appear. The model is not yet 
able to determine the duration of an appropriate penalty. 
Because fraudsters may use many types of schemes, techniques and transactions to 
achieve their goals, we need a conceptual model of economic crime with significant 
generality. In the future, we intend to demonstrate that we can describe not just one 
case but a broad class of economic crimes, such as:  
• 
CausingFraudulentDisbursement, 
• 
CausingAssetMisappropriation, 
• 
CausingDamageToACompany. 
We do not consider this task impossible, although we will always face additional 
factors necessary to extend our minimal model. We could, for example ask: was only 
the CEO of the Management Board in Hydra implicated? At the time of the investiga-
tion, there was no proof otherwise. But apparently the rest of the Board knew about 
the scheme, because several years later they were indicted on a similar count. 
We do not dwell on who exactly had the power to sign (in some cases there are dis-
putes on the validity of supervisory board decisions); this fact must be established by a 

 
Application of an Ontology-Based Model 
131 
 
prosecutor. An extent to which the model can be generalized to treat such more com-
plex schemes will be the subject of a further study. However, after performing quite a 
number of reasoning experiments on the 5 most common economic crime mechanisms 
in Poland (some results are presented in [3, 15, 26]), we are convinced that a general 
model can be constructed that handles a few most common economic crimes with 85% 
use of all pertinent facts (The Hydra case is somewhat easier than average). In this 
regard, application of intermediate levels of factors [7], [27] could be helpful. 
To our knowledge, the work on mapping of crime activities into criminal law arti-
cles has been done [28] only for cyber crimes, which have a much narrower scope, 
although using result of work [7] it could be straightforward for the case. In work [7] 
only OWL ontology was used for T-Box reasoning (although rules were discussed in 
a different aspect) , whereas our approach uses ontology and rules.  
Currently we are working on implementation of the knowledge base and genera-
tion of artificial data to test our approach. In such cases we can assign sanctions to 
people involved in crime schemes. In the next paper we will present and evaluate 
these results, as well as discuss scalability of number of concepts, relations and rules 
for large economic crime cases. 
Our ontology is relatively small, but will be enhanced once we add other fraud  
type typologies. This will make it larger than the ontology used in the well known 
Spanish system for judges [29]. In the future we plan to automatically obtain RDF 
triples from documents [30].  
 
Acknowledgement. This work was supported by the Polish Ministry of Science and 
Higher Education, Polish Technological Security Platform grant 0014/R/2/T00/06/02. 
We thank Drs. J. Martinek, J. Cybulka, and J. Wieckowski for many fruitful  
discussions. 
References 
[1] Kingston, J., Schafer, B., Vandenberghe, W.: No Model Behavior: Ontologies for Fraud 
Detection. In: Benjamins, V.R., Casanovas, P., Breuker, J., Gangemi, A. (eds.) Law and 
the Semantic Web. LNCS (LNAI), vol. 3369, pp. 233–247. Springer, Heidelberg (2005) 
[2] PricewaterhouseCoopers’ 
Global 
economic 
crime 
survey 
2009 
(2009), 
http://www.pwc.com/gx/en/economic-crime-survey/download-
economic-crime-people-culture-controls.jhtml 
[3] Jedrzejek, C., Bak, J., Falkowski, M.: Graph Mining for Detection of a Large Class of Fi-
nancial Crimes. In: 17th International Conference on Conceptual Structures, Moscow, 
Russia, July 26-31 (2009) 
[4] Jedrzejek, C., Cybulka, J., Bak, J.: Application Ontology-based Crime Model for a Se-
lected Economy Crime. In: Tadeusiewicz, R., Ligęza, A., Mitkowski, W., Szymkat, M. 
(eds.) Proc. of 7th Conference on Computer Methods and Systems, CMS 2009, Kraków, 
ONT, pp. 71–74 (2009) 
[5] Jedrzejek, C., Cybulka, J.: Minimal Model of financial crimes (In Polish) Definitions. In: 
OWL, Technical report PPBW 07/2009 extended 09/2009,  
http://www.man.poznan.pl/~jolac/MinimalModel/MinimalModel.owl  
[6] Aleven, V.: Using background knowledge in case-based legal reasoning: a computational 
model and an intelligent learning environment. Artificial Intelligence 150, 183–237 
(2003) 

132 
J. Bak  and C. Jedrzejek 
 
[7] Wyner, A.: An ontology in OWL for legal case-based reasoning. Artif. Intell. Law 16(4), 
361–387 (2008) 
[8] McGuinness, D., van Harmelen, F.: Owl web ontology language overview. W3C Rec-
ommendation (February 10, 2004), http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-features/ 
[9] Horrocks, I., Patel-Schneider, P.F., Boley, H., Tabet, S., Grosof, B., Dean, M.: Swrl: A 
semantic web rule language combining owl and ruleml. W3C Member Submission (May 
21, 2004), http://www.w3.org/Submission/SWRL/ 
[10] SWRL Built-ins,  
http://www.w3.org/Submission/2004/SUBM-SWRL-20040521/ 
[11] Pellet Reasoner, http://clarkparsia.com/pellet/ 
[12] KAON2, http://kaon2.semanticweb.org/ 
[13] Jess (Java Expert System Shell), http://jessrules.com/ 
[14] Friedman-Hill, E.: Jess in Action. Manning Publications Co. (2003) 
[15] Bąk, J., Jędrzejek, C., Falkowski, M.: Usage of the Jess engine, rules and ontology to 
query a relational database. In: Governatori, G., Hall, J., Paschke, A. (eds.) RuleML 
2009. LNCS, vol. 5858, pp. 216–230. Springer, Heidelberg (2009) 
[16] Gene Ontology Consortium, http://wiki.geneontology.org 
[17] http://neon-project.org/ 
[18] http://ontologydesignpatterns.org/wiki/Submissions:Invoice 
[19] Zhao, G., Leary, R.: Topical ontology of fraud 2.3, Deliverable 6.8 (2005) 
[20] Zhao, G.: AKEM: An ontology engineering methodology in FF POIROT, Deliverable 6.8 
(2005) 
[21] Gangemi, A.: Design Patterns for Legal Ontology Construction. In: Casanovas, P., 
Noriega, P., Bourcier, D., Galindo, F. (eds.) Trends in Legal Knowledge: The Semantic 
Web and the Regulation of Electronic Social Systems. European Press Academic Publish-
ing 
[22] Podgor, E.S.: Criminal Fraud. American Law Review 48(4) (1999) 
[23] Wieckowski, J.: Hydra case indictment analysis. District Public Prosecutor’s Office, Po-
land, private communication (2009) 
[24] Jędrzejek, C., Cybulka, J., Bak, J.: Ontological Modeling of a Selected Economic Crime 
(in preparation) 
[25] The Penal Code (in Polish). Ustawa z dnia 6 czerwca 1997 r. Kodeks karny (1997) 
[26] Jędrzejek, C., Falkowski, M., Smolenski, M.: Link Analysis of Fuel Laundering Scams 
and Implications of Results for Scheme Understanding and Prosecutor Strategy. In: 
JURIX 2009, The 22nd International Conference on Legal Knowledge and Information 
Systems, Rotterdam, December 16-18 (2009) 
[27] Bruninghaus, S., Ashley, K.D.: Predicting the outcome of case-based legal arguments. In: 
Sartor, G. (ed.) Proceedings of the ninth international conference on artificial intelligence 
and law (ICAIL 2003), pp. 233–242. ACM Press, New York (2003b) 
[28] Bezzazi, H.: Building an ontology that helps identify articles that apply to a cybercrime 
case. In: 2nd International Conference on Software Technology, Barcelona, Spain (2007) 
[29] Casellas, N.: Modelling Legal Knowledge through Ontologies. OPJK: The Ontology of 
Professional Judicial Knowledge, PhD thesis, Faculty of Law, Universitat Autònoma de 
Barcelona, Spain (2008) 
[30] Boehm, C., Groth, P., Leser, U.: Graph-Based Ontology Construction from Heterogenous 
Evidences. In: Bernstein, A., Karger, D.R., Heath, T., Feigenbaum, L., Maynard, D., 
Motta, E., Thirunarayan, K. (eds.) ISWC 2009. LNCS, vol. 5823, pp. 81–96. Springer, 
Heidelberg (2009) 

Multi-layer Markup
and Ontological Structures in Akoma Ntoso
Gioele Barabucci, Luca Cervone, Monica Palmirani,
Silvio Peroni, and Fabio Vitali
Università degli studi di Bologna
Abstract. The XML documents that represent legal resources contain
information and legal knowledge that belong to many distinct conceptual
layers. This paper shows how the Akoma Ntoso standard keeps these lay-
ers well separated while providing ontological structures on top of them.
Additionally, this paper illustrates how Akoma Ntoso allows multiple in-
terpretations, provided by diﬀerent agents, over the same set of texts
and concepts and how current semantic technologies can use these inter-
pretations to reason on the underlying legal texts.
1
Introduction
Akoma Ntoso is an open legal XML standard for parliamentary, legislative and
judiciary documents. Promoted by the Kenya Unit of the United Nations Depart-
ment for Economics and Social Aﬀairs (UN/DESA) in 2004, it means “Linked
Hearts”: a symbol used by the Akan people of West Africa to represent un-
derstanding and agreement. Originally meant for African Countries, it is now
promoted also in Latin America, Asia and various European countries.
Akoma Ntoso describes structures for legal documents using a vocabulary of
common structures based on XML, references to legal documents across coun-
tries using a common naming convention based on URIs, and a systematic set
of legal metadata values using an ontologically sound approach compatible with
OWL [18] and GRDDL [4].
Akoma Ntoso aims at being extensible for the individual needs of any coun-
try, preserving the legal digital resources over time (even long spans of time, in
decades and centuries even), guaranteeing legal principles and favoring trust by
means of authoritative versions, legal copies, etc.
Akoma Ntoso has been designed so that XML documents can be managed in
any step of the legislative or judiciary life cycle (for instance, in the publishing
phase) without any modiﬁcations of the content published by the body empow-
ered by law to endorse it. Additionally, long term preservation of Akoma Ntoso
documents must be possible even without access to the extensive original docu-
mentation.
The information added by Akoma Ntoso (the markup) can be seen as dis-
tributed over multiple layers, each layer addressing a speciﬁc problem: the text
layer provides a faithful representation of the original content of the legal text,
P. Casanovas et al. (Eds.): AICOL Workshops 2009, LNAI 6237, pp. 133–149, 2010.
c
⃝Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010

134
G. Barabucci et al.
the structure layer provides a hierarchical organization of the parts present in
the text layers, the metadata layer associates information from the underlying
layers with ontological information so that semantic tools can apply inference
rules (e.g. simple description logic rules) or perform advanced reasoning using
logic frameworks like defeasible logic or argumentation [5].
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 illustrates the layered architec-
ture of Akoma Ntoso documents. Section 3 describes the lower layers of the
Akoma Ntoso document architecture where the legal text is described and the
hooks used by upper layers are added. Section 4 shows how authoritative and
non-authoritative legal knowledge (metadata) can be codiﬁed in an Akoma Ntoso
document. Finally, Section 5 illustrates how current semantic tools can use the
generic Akoma Ntoso ontology system to reason over legal documents.
Note: throughout this paper we will use the terms legal text and legal resource
for legal texts as endorsed by an oﬃcial authority; we will use the terms legal
document or legal XML document for their computer representation; we will
use the terms legal content or normative content for pointing out the normative
meaning of the text
2
The Akoma Ntoso Document Architecture
The role of Akoma Ntoso is to mark up legal and legislative texts so that the
legal knowledge and the legal structure of the text can be understood by current
and future computer applications. This means that legal texts form the basis on
which Akoma Ntoso documents exist. Akoma Ntoso documents add information
on top of the actual text (decorate the text in the markup lingo). The added
information can itself be seen as composed of diﬀerent stratiﬁed layers (text,
structure, metadata, etc) [13]. Akoma Ntoso clearly separates the legal text from
these diﬀerent levels of information but still allows higher layers to reference the
underlying layers, thus building knowledge on top of other knowledge, with the
content of the legal text acting as the base knowledge. This architecture allows
diﬀerent actors with diﬀerent ﬁeld experiences (e.g. experts in legal drafting, ex-
perts of document classiﬁcation, experts in legal-knowledge engineering, experts
in normative references, etc.) to mark up independent parts of the document.
As with any technology that deals with legal resources, Akoma Ntoso has been
designed to work on the original text without changing it. Words, punctuation
marks and other typographical symbols are left untouched by the mark up pro-
cess that transforms a plain-text legal document into an Akoma Ntoso-compliant
XML document.
Additionally, Akoma Ntoso maintains a strict separation between data and
metadata and provides an unambiguous deﬁnition of them as well as an opera-
tional distinction in authoriality: as such, data is any information that has been
created or at least approved by the relevant legal author (for example, the whole
of the text of an act), while metadata is any information that was not present
in the original version of the document as it was approved by the relevant legal
author but was added editorially in a later moment of the production process

Multi-layer Markup and Ontological Structures in Akoma Ntoso
135
(e.g., the issue number of the oﬃcial gazette or, even, the page numbers in the
printed version of the same act).
The distinction between data and metadata is not only a theoretical distinc-
tion, since the actual layers of markup in Akoma Ntoso (text, structure and
metadata) are based on it.
Textual markup identiﬁes, within the content of the legal documents, frag-
ments that have a precise legal or referential meaning, e.g., concepts such as
“this piece of text is a date”, “this piece of text is a legal reference” or “this piece
of text contains the name of a party of the trial”. Structural markup identiﬁes
and organize the parts of the content that divide it into containers, and especially
hierarchical containers: “this piece of text is an article” or “this piece of text is the
title of an act”, “this piece of text is the background section of a judgment”, etc.
Metadata markup adds knowledge generated by an interpretation of the legal
text performed by a human or mechanical agent: “the phrase the pre-existing Acts
refers to Act 32 of 1989 and Act 2 of 1990”, or “the person cited in the minutes
as Mr. Gidisu is really Mr. Joe Kwashie Gisidu, the only member of the current
Ghanaian parliament with that name and elected to a seat in it since 2000”.
Moreover, when the typographical styles are used to represent the semantic
role of a piece of text, this role is captured in the metadata section so that the
speciﬁc meaning of that typographical style is not lost.
There are diﬀerent positions in the literature on which category is the most
appropriate for structural data: textual or metadata. In our vision it belongs
to a third, separate category. Actually, the structure represents the wish of the
author of the legal text to organize that text in a certain order and therefore
it is authoritative matter. If an annex is in the third level inside a hierarchical
nested list of exhibits of an act (e.g. Table 1 of the Annex A.1) it embeds a legal
message that belongs to the theory of law and in particular, a message on the
hierarchy of the legal sources. What is ﬁnally voted on by a parliament in the
assembly is a speciﬁc organization of the text that incorporates, through the text
structure, a precise legal message (e.g. the article 50 is in that position because
there is a certain linguistic and legal message to deploy).
The analysis of the textual and structural information is quite straightfor-
ward and its results are rarely disputed. On the contrary, the analysis of more
advanced concepts found in the legal text requires some experience and it is easy
for diﬀerent sources to disagree on the generated interpretation. For this reason
Akoma Ntoso documents have exactly one textual and one structural layer in
each documents while interpretation of the advanced concepts is stored as meta-
data. Akoma Ntoso allows multiple metadata layers in the same document, each
recording various interpretations given by diﬀerent sources.
Finally, each interpretation added by a speciﬁc actor can be linked to a particular
ontology of legal concepts (e.g. “date of enter into force” as modeled in the LKIF-
core ontology or “High Court of South Africa” as modeled in an ontology about
the judiciary system in Africa). This mechanism is used to connect speciﬁc ABox
assertions, described in legal XML document, to more general TBox concepts, re-
lationships, properties and axioms deﬁned in a core or domain-speciﬁc ontology.

136
G. Barabucci et al.
3
The Authorial Layers
Any Akoma Ntoso document is based on a legal resource that has been endorsed
by an authority empowered by law: an act approved by a parliament, a decree
issued by a ministry, a judgment entered by a court. Fidelity to the approved
text is, thus, of primary importance; the data layers of Akoma Ntoso have been
designed so that it is possible to markup a received legal text while preserving
all the information contained in it and without changing its content.
The documents Akoma Ntoso deals with are legal resources whose signiﬁcance
is given by the fact that they have the power to inﬂuence citizens’ life. Legal
texts must, thus, be handled with extreme care and all the measures should be
taken to make sure that the technological tools employed to manipulate the texts
do not change or interfere with their intended meaning.
In Akoma Ntoso, legal documents are created by enclosing parts of the legal
text in XML tags. No pieces of the legal text are discarded, even those that could
be generated by an application (e.g. the article numbers in an act). The resulting
documents are thus augmented versions of the authentic text; the approved text
can be retrieved by simply removing all the XML tags.
The Akoma Ntoso markup process strives to preserve the legal validity of the
text as endorsed by the oﬃcial authority, without adding any additional content
to the text. Obviously, the mere act of marking up a sentence involves an act
of interpretation or annotation and thus cannot be considered perfectly neutral.
However, the kind of markup done at the Akoma Ntoso data layers is almost
objective (to the point that some automatic parsers have been developed [12])
and is rarely subject to disputes. For this reason, Akoma Ntoso documents are
designed to contain only one interpretation of the text and structure layers.
3.1
Text
The text layer, the ﬁrst of the data layers, is the XML representation of the
legal text. It is the base layer on top of which all the other layers are developed.
As discussed in the previous sections, the text layer only adds XML tags to the
existing text.
The loose structure adopted by Akoma Ntoso, technically called mixed con-
tent, contrasts with the more rigid approach used by the ﬁrst generation of XML
standards for legal documents (e.g. EnAct or Formex [10]) which favored an or-
ganized structure where each legal text was treated like a database record. While
<speech
id="sub2 -spe02">
<p>Mr. Opare -Hammond:
Mr. Speaker , page 4 has a repetition of the numbers
25 to 47. I do not know whether
it was a typographical
error or from the printing . It needs
to be corrected.</p>
</speech >
Fig. 1. An example of markup at the text layer in a debate of Ghana

Multi-layer Markup and Ontological Structures in Akoma Ntoso
137
database-oriented documents are easier to process in a computer environment,
mixed content documents are a better choice when working with already-existing
texts, a situation that happens with real-life legal resources and that will keep
on happening in the foreseeable future.
3.2
Structure
The structure layer, the second of the data layers, gives roles to the blocks and
fragments of the text: anonymous blocks thus become articles or clauses or sim-
ple blocks. These associations organize the text in a (often hierarchical) structure
that is used to organize the content, provide a reasonable interpretation and even
a base for the addresses used in the interpretation of the legal text in the meta-
data layer, both of the current document and of other documents. Akoma Ntoso
deﬁnes a set of common section names (for acts they include: part, chapter,
tome, book, paragraph, article, clause) but does not impose a rigid structure on
the way they can be combined so that they can be used diﬀerently in diﬀerent
law systems.
<subsection id="sec4 -sub2">
<num>(2)</num>
<content >
<p>The appointment of an
honorary
game warden -</p>
<list id="sec4 -sub2 -lst1">
<item id="sec4 -sub2 -itma">
<num>(a)</num>
<p>shall be notified
in the Gazette ;</p>
</item >
<item id="sec4 -sub2 -itmb">
<num>(b)</num>
<p>shall be effective unless
sooner
revoked
by the
Director , for a period
of
three
years; and</p>
</item >
[...]
Fig. 2. An example of markup at the structure layer in an act
4
The Editorial Layer
The Akoma Ntoso metadata layer is a collection of pieces of legal knowledge that
can be added onto a legal text as the personal interpretation of the written text,
for example the analysis of the reasoning being performed by the judge while
writing a judgment or the explicit consequences of the text of an amendment
over an act. These pieces of legal knowledge by their nature are often subjective
and dependent on one’s interpretation. Instead of forcing a single interpretation
for each legal document, Akoma Ntoso allows multiple, and even contrasting,
interpretations to be expressed in the same document, and associates a diﬀer-
ent actor to each of them. These interpretations of the underlying text form the
groundwork upon which semantic technologies can make inferences (as discussed
in Section 5).

138
G. Barabucci et al.
4.1
Diﬀerent Kinds of Information
The metadata layer allows agents to provide diﬀerent kinds of information over
the legal text. The following are examples of the information that can be added
to Akoma Ntoso.
Reference disambiguation the references section links pieces of text to on-
tological entities. The usefulness of this information is twofold. First, con-
ﬂicts between ambiguous phrases are resolved: for instance, in a sentence
of
a
speech
the
text
“Speaker”
may
be
related
to
the
TLCRole
/ontology/roles/gha/speaker while in another sentence the same text “Speaker”
may refer to a speciﬁc TLCPerson that is in charge as speaker in the speciﬁc
time when the debate was held: /ontology/persons/gha/parliament/JohnSmith.
<references>
<TLCRole
id="speaker " showAs =" Speaker "
href="/ontology /roles/gha/ speaker "/>
<TLCPerson id="smith" showAs ="Mr. Smith"
href="/ontology /persons /gha/ parliament/JohnSmith"/>
</ references>
[...]
<speech
id="sub2 -spe01" by="smith" as=" speaker ">
<from>Mr. Speaker </from>
<p>Order! Order! Hon. Members , we
shall
take item 2 -- Correction
of Votes
and Proceedings. Page 1...
page 4</p>
</speech >
Fig. 3. Disambiguation of diﬀerent meanings of the word “Speaker”
Additionally, diﬀerent spellings found in the text are consolidated in
a single entity; in a court judgment, phrases like “Ms. Poliey”, “Judge
Poliey” and “Her Honour” can all be linked to the same TLCPerson
/ontology/Person/Poliey.1954.
Legal analysis the analysis section provides information about many legal as-
pects that can be inferred by a legal expert when interpreting the text. An
example is the interpretation of the eﬀects of an amendment in an amend-
ment act.
<textualMod type="substitution" id="am5">
<source
href="#sec4 -sub1 -itma"/>
<destination href="/ke/act/1997 -08 -22/3/ main#sec34 -sub2 -itma"/>
<old href="#mod10 -qtd1"/>
<new href="#mod10 -qtd2"/>
</ textualMod>
Fig. 4. An example of amendment analysis
Another example is the identiﬁcation of the role played by citations of prece-
dents in the judgment argumentation of a judge (e.g. the application of a
rule of law of a precedent, overriding a previous rule, etc.)

Multi-layer Markup and Ontological Structures in Akoma Ntoso
139
<judicial >
<result
type="deny"/>
<supports
id="jdc01">
<source
href="#ref01"/>
<destination href="/gb/ judgement/1829/ QB273/eng@/main.xml"/>
</ supports >
</judicial >
Fig. 5. An example of judicial analysis on the outcome of a trial
Work identiﬁcation the identification section classiﬁes the document using the
FRBR [8] conceptual model. This classiﬁcation is used to inform the seman-
tic tools that the document is the manifestation (in the FRBR sense) of a
certain abstract work, so that they can distinguish between diﬀerent versions
of the same work. A more detailed account of FRBR usage in Akoma Ntoso
can be found in [11].
In addition to the shown kinds of metadata, there are other types of metadata
currently deﬁned (e.g. lifecycle and workflow for tracking the events aﬀecting the
document) and other are being added as Akoma Ntoso extends to reach more
and more types of analysis of the legal text.
4.2
Multiple Interpretations
All the information gathered in the metadata layer is derived from the legal
text (using the data layers) though subjective reasoning. Many diﬀerent inter-
pretation can arise over the same legal text from diﬀerent legal experts. Take,
for instance, the following sentence: “the subsection 3 of the section 42 states a
modiﬁcation of the section 44 of the same act”. Two diﬀerent actors OCSA and
CIRSFID may disagree on the interpretation of that sentence: OCSA sees this
modiﬁcation as an authentic interpretation, CIRSFID sees it as a derogation.
From a legal point of view, the two types of modiﬁcation produce diﬀerent ef-
fects: the authentic interpretation is applied ex-tunc (since the beginning), while
the exception is a derogation of a norm under some conditional. Akoma Ntoso
allows both interpretations to coexists in the same document, even if they are
in contrast.
The Akoma Ntoso XML representation of these two diﬀerent interpretations
would be as shown in the following ﬁgure.
<analysis
source ="#ocsa">
<activeModifications>
<meaningMod type=" authenticInterpretation" id="am1">
<source
href="#sec42 -sub3"/>
<destination href="#sec44"/>
</ meaningMod>
</ activeModifications>
</analysis >
Fig. 6. XML representation of two diﬀerent interpretations of an amendment

140
G. Barabucci et al.
<analysis
source ="#ocsa">
<activeModifications>
<meaningMod type=" authenticInterpretation" id="am1">
<source
href="#sec42 -sub3"/>
<destination href="#sec44"/>
</ meaningMod>
</ activeModifications>
</analysis >
Fig. 6. (continued)
5
Semantic Technologies and Reasoning over
Akoma Ntoso Documents
Currently, there are interesting developments in the area of legal knowledge rep-
resentation and manipulation. Akoma Ntoso documents, with their rich meta-
data layer, can serve as the basis upon which various tools can work on. For
example, representations expressed at the metadata layer can be used to gener-
ate a legal ontology to be used by legal rule modeling technologies like RuleML [7]
or the more specialized LKIF [6].
Akoma Ntoso documents are not tied to a particular semantic technology.
The current format is very loose and permits the conversion of information into
more speciﬁc formats (like RDF [3] or OWL [18]). This strategy warrants that
semantic technologies of the future decades will be able to convert Akoma Ntoso
documents into their own format without going through what, by then, will be
seen as ancient formats.
5.1
Semantically Anonymous Entities
Akoma Ntoso implicitly deﬁnes an ontological structure for representing meta-
data that is grounded in a basic set of concepts called Top Level Classes (TLC).
The word implicitly is used because, on purpose, there is no implemented, ex-
haustive and shared ontology that deﬁnes these classes and the relation among
them: what exists is a sort of guideline that allows users (especially producers)
of Akoma Ntoso documents to develop their own ontology according to their
particular needs.
TLCs, even if represented by a clear label and a particular URI, have neither
formal (logically deﬁned) nor informal (written in natural language) semantics.
The meaning beyond the text of a label of a TLC X does not give implicitly a
meaning to X : it is just a label. Technically speaking, Akoma Ntoso do not de-
ﬁne classes of a particular ontology but only a naming convention based on URIs
and labels that can be used to express particular classes deﬁned in a separate
ontology.
This assumption is needed to allow a great degree of ﬂexibility in what can be
expressed in the metadata layer of Akoma Ntoso documents, in order to adapt
any legal document to any ontological representation of concepts. It is the duty
of a third party (e.g. the document creator or the document users) to associate a

Multi-layer Markup and Ontological Structures in Akoma Ntoso
141
clear and formal semantics to each class using a speciﬁc formalism (e.g. OWL).
This semantical anonymity is an important feature that allows Akoma Ntoso
to maintain documents understandable and consumable independently from the
passing of time: future toolmakers (“The ‘future toolmaker’ is 10 years old now.”
[17]) will have clues about the intended meaning of a marker even in the unfor-
tunate case the formal ontology is no longer available.
Akoma Ntoso makes ten diﬀerent and disjoint TLCs available to document
creators in order to identify individual entities present in the document: Person
(/ontology/Person), Organization (/ontology/Organization), Concept (/ontology/Concept),
Object
(/ontology/Object),
Event
(/ontology/Event),
Place
(/ontology/Place),
Process (/ontology/Process), Role (/ontology/Role), Term (/ontology/Term), Reference
(/ontology/Reference).
Using these TLCs and the canonical FRBR classes Work, Expression, Man-
ifestation and Item, it is possible to store complex assertions in Akoma Ntoso
documents and about Akoma Ntoso documents. It must be underlined that
Akoma Ntoso does not aim at describing neither objective facts nor personal
opinions about such facts according to the author of the document. Rather, it
allows the expression of an interpretation that is due, in a precise moment, to
a particular actor who refers to statements that can be found in the published
legal text.
A fundamental step towards being able to reason over an Akoma Ntoso doc-
ument is to have a mechanism for describing items (actors, legal documents,
properties, concepts, etc) that are involved in the assertions (making assertions
or being the subject of an assertion). Using the references mechanism described in
Section 4 it is possible to relate each of these described items to a TLC, making
it will possible to assert facts about that document, implicitly producing a data
model for its semantic data.
5.2
Ontology URI Naming Conversion
All the items in an Akoma Ntoso document can belong to a particular TLC
simply specifying an URI that must follow a particular naming convention [16].
The following example shows a list of URI references, all pointing to the same
entity representing a judge.
Even if a human may interpret some of these URIs as references to diﬀerent
entities, from an ontological point of view all these three URIs state the same
thing: there exists a resource whose identiﬁer is lewanika and that instance belongs
to the top level class Person. Moreover, all these URI references point exactly to
the same resource, regardless of the actual ontology used.
/ontology / Person /lewanika
/ontology / Person /judges /lewanika
/ontology / Person /za/judges /lewanika
Fig. 7. Diﬀerent URIs for the same entity

142
G. Barabucci et al.
The Akoma Ntoso naming convention contains few precise rules:
– the last fragment of the URI (lewanika in this above example) is the identiﬁer
of the instance being referred to;
– the ﬁrst two fragments of the URI (/ontology/<TLC name>) specify the TLC the
instance belongs to;
– the middle URI fragments (za/judges/), when they are present, provide evoca-
tive information for the human reader and for the systems that cannot ac-
cess the underlying ontology used by the document. They suggest, in fact,
a clear interpretation from a human perspective, e.g., that Lewanika is a
South African person holding the role of judge. Since Akoma Ntoso does not
force any given set of properties on the top level classes, the responsibility to
choose which, and whether, additional fragments should be added lies with
the author of the document.
Taking into account the implicit semantics given to each URI by the Akoma Ntoso
naming convention, it is possible to query an Akoma Ntoso-compliant legal XML
document using XPath [1], without relying on external ontologies. The following
excerpt shows some references to various resources.
<akomaNtoso xmlns ="http: // www. akomantoso.org /1.0">
<references source ="#cirsfid ">
<TLCOrganization id=" parliament"
showAs ="Parliament of Kenya "
href="/ontology / Organization/ke/parliament" />
<TLCOrganization id="cirfid " showAs ="CIRSFID "
href="/ontology / Organization/cirfid " />
<TLCPerson id="fv" showAs ="Fabio
Vitali "
href="/ontology /Person /fv" />
<TLCRole
id="author " showAs =" Author "
href="/ontology /Roles/ author " />
<TLCRole
id="jurist " showAs =" Jurist "
href="/ontology /Roles/ jurist " />
<TLCRole
id="editor " showAs =" Editor "
href="/ontology /Roles/ editor " />
</ references>
[...]
Fig. 8. references section for a Kenyan act
Through XPath, it is possible to perform queries based on the semantic data
that is present in the document. For example, the following queries could be
performed on the data shown in the above excerpt:
– what roles have been involved in the generation of the legal document,
//references/element()[matches(@href,’/Roles/’)];
– which Kenyan organizations are referred to in the legal document,
//references/element()[matches(@href,’/Organization/.*/?ke/’)].
The naming convention used by Akoma Ntoso, together with the presence of
additional middle URI fragments, allows the semantic data available in the doc-
ument to be queried, even in sophisticated ways, without requiring access to any
ontology. When the underlying ontology is available, the additional informa-
tion provided by the middle URI fragments can be discarded and more complex

Multi-layer Markup and Ontological Structures in Akoma Ntoso
143
queries, based on deductive elements such as those gathered through the use of
reasoners, can be performed. The optional middle URI fragments fulﬁll, thus,
two diﬀerent tasks: on the one hand they provide clues to the human readers who
do not have access to the underlying ontologies, on the other hand they allow
semantic data about the referenced entities to be carried also in the document
itself and not only in external knowledge bases.
5.3
Transformation into a Proper Semantic Data Model Format
In order to be able to carry out even more queries on Akoma Ntoso documents, it
is necessary to transform each document into a proper knowledge base based on
a complete ontological model, which means binding the abstract Akoma Ntoso
classes and instances to more concrete representations that the current semantic
tools can work with. Akoma Ntoso does not specify a particular format to use:
it is a precise design choice to allow users to choose their favorite formats and
tools, a choice that the users will take on the base of current standards, their
knowledge and other technical constraints.
An example of a concrete data model format that ﬁts the current technology
scenario is RDF [3]. One way to convert an XML document into a set of RDF
statements is to use a GRDDL transformation. GRDDL (Gleaning Resource De-
scriptions from Dialects of Languages) [4] is a way to glean assertions from XML
documents. It is a W3C Recommendation that explains how to extract semantic
data from XML documents using a combination of one or more XSLT stylesheets
[9], in order to obtain a new document containing those data expressed by RDF
statements. Note that this particular mechanism is also suggested in the current
CEN Metalex proposal [2]:
If metadata is not available as RDFa1, it must be systematically trans-
latable from the custom format to RDF. The translation from a propri-
etary metadata format to RDF must be publicly available following the
Gleaning Resource Descriptions from Dialects of Languages (GRDDL)
speciﬁcation.
In order to use GRDDL, the Akoma Ntoso document must specify the GRDDL
namespace and the references to the XSLT ﬁles used to perform the extraction.
These declarations are added as attributes to the document’s root element as
shown in the following piece of code:
<akomaNtoso xmlns ="http: // www. akomantoso.org /1.0"
xmlns:grddl="http: // www.w3.org /2003/ g/data -view#"
grddl:transformation="xslt/ fromAkomaNtosoToRDF.xsl">
[...]
</ akomaNtoso>
Fig. 9. GRDDL attributes for an Akoma Ntoso document
1 RDFa is technique used to embed RDF statements in XHTML documents.

144
G. Barabucci et al.
Those declarations in an Akoma Ntoso document inform the document readers
(both humans and computer tools) that it is possible to glean all the assertions
embedded in the document itself using the XSLT stylesheet speciﬁed by the
attribute transformation to transform the document into an RDF document.
Unfortunately, RDF statements are not ﬂexible enough to ﬁt the needs of
Akoma Ntoso assertions: while RDF deﬁne assertions as subject-predicate-object
triples of resources, Akoma Ntoso uses octuples to assert facts. The general
schema employed by Akoma Ntoso documents to express assertions is:
the author of a manifestation asserts on the manifestation date
that the author of the corresponding expression asserts on the
expression date in a particular context that subject does predicate
on object.
The following example (extracted from the same Akoma Ntoso document already
shown in the examples of Section 5.2), embeds some of such assertions.
[...]
<analysis
source ="#cirfid ">
<textualMod type="substitution" id="am5">
<source
href="#art4 -cla1 -itma" />
<destination
href="/ke/act /1997 -08 -22/3/ eng/main#art34 -cla2 -itma" />
<old href="#mod10 -qtd1" />
<new href="#mod10 -qtd2" />
</ textualMod>
[...]
<FRBRExpression>
<FRBRthis
value="/ke/act /2003 -12 -10/8/ eng@" />
<FRBRuri
value="/ke/act /2003 -12 -10/8/ eng@" />
<FRBRdate
date="2003 -12 -10" name=" Generation" />
<FRBRauthor href="#parliament" as="#author " />
</ FRBRExpression>
<FRBRManifestation>
<FRBRthis
value="/ke/act /2003 -12 -10/8/ eng.akn" />
<FRBRuri
value="/ke/act /2003 -12 -10/8/ eng.akn" />
<FRBRdate
date="2007 -07 -27" name=" Generation" />
<FRBRauthor href="#cirfid " as="# editor " />
<FRBRauthor href="#fv" as="#editor " />
</ FRBRManifestation>
[...]
Fig. 10. Analysis and FRBR records for an Akoma Ntoso document
One of the assertion contained in the above extract is “CIRSFID and Fabio
Vitali assert on 27th July, 2007 that the Parliament of Kenya asserts on 10th
December, 2003 in the corresponding expression that the ﬁfth text modiﬁcation is
of type substitution”. As already said, this assertion must be expressed using the
format (marker, marking_time, expression_author, content_time, context, sub-
ject, predicate, object); in this instance the corresponding octuple is (CIRSFID
and Fabio Vitali, 2007-07-27, Parliament of Kenya, 2003-12-10, expression, ﬁfth
text modiﬁcation, is of type, substitution).
While RDF lacks a native representation of octuples like those employed to
describe Akoma Ntoso metadata, it is possible to use reiﬁcation to express any

Multi-layer Markup and Ontological Structures in Akoma Ntoso
145
Fig. 11. A possible RDF representation of the octuple (CIRSFID and Fabio Vitali,
2007-07-27, Parliament of Kenya, 2003-12-10, expression, ﬁfth text modiﬁcation, is
of type, substitution)
octuple through RDF statements. Using the reiﬁcation mechanism, it is possible
to associate a particular identiﬁer to any RDF statement and then give it the
role of subject or object in other statements. Figure 11 shows how the previous
octuple can be represented through reiﬁed RDF statements (in the ﬁgure the
oval shapes represent RDF resources, the values in quotation marks are strings
and the base for all the relative URIs is the manifestation).
It is clear that there is not a unique way to express these reiﬁcations: it depends
on how the XSLT stylesheet speciﬁed through GRDDL extract those data.
5.4
No Default Formal Ontology
To have an RDF model of the semantic data on an Akoma Ntoso document
could be useful, for instance, to share these data among diﬀerent organizations
using a common format. Moreover, one of the most appreciable advantages in
using Semantic Web technologies, such as RDF and OWL, is the possibility to
infer new data in an automatic way, for example processing the original data
through reasoners.
The choice to maintain Akoma Ntoso free from any semantic structure con-
straint was born out of the desire to guarantee that any user could independently
decide which particular ontological model they want to use and which data in
an Akoma Ntoso document they are interested in. Independence from a partic-
ular technology is a key point for documents that are supposed to last, without
modiﬁcations, for decades.
In any case, is it easy to convert an Akoma Ntoso document in one of the
formats currently available. For example, FRBR data gleaned from a document

146
G. Barabucci et al.
<FRBRExpression>
<FRBRthis
value="/ke/act /2003 -12 -10/8/ eng@"/>
<FRBRuri
value="/ke/act /2003 -12 -10/8/ eng@"/>
<FRBRdate
date="2003 -12 -10" name=" Generation"/>
<FRBRauthor href="#parliament" as="#author "/>
</ FRBRExpression>
<FRBRManifestation>
<FRBRuri
value="/ke/act /2003 -12 -10/8/ eng.akn"/>
</ FRBRManifestation>
[...]
<TLCOrganization id="parliament" showAs ="Parliament of Kenya"
href="/ ontology /Organization/ke/ parliament"/>
<TLCRole
id=" author " showAs ="Author "
href="/ ontology /Roles/author "/>
Fig. 12. Statements in an Akoma Ntoso document
could be linked, via assertions, to an OWL-implemented FRBR ontology. Such
assertions could be generated, for example, using an additional XSLT stylesheet
linked via the GRDDL mechanism. The following excerpt contains various state-
ments about the legal documents from which it has been extracted, including
statements about its FRBR classiﬁcations.
Using GRDDL and an appropriate XSLT stylesheet, the following RDF state-
ments2 concerning the FRBR metadata can be obtained.
@prefix
za: </ke/act /2003 -12 -10/8/> .
@prefix
an: </ ontology /> .
@prefix
xsd: <http: //www.w3.org/2001/ XMLSchema#> .
za:eng@
a an:FRBRExpression ;
an:hasDate "2003 -12 -10"^^ xsd:date
;
an:hasAuthor an:Organization/ke/ parliament .
an:Organization/ke/parliament a an:Roles /author .
Fig. 13. RDF extracted from the statements in Figure 12
It should be noted that these are plain RDF statements, unrelated to any on-
tological structure. To address particular demands (e.g. reasoning, data sharing)
all the instances, classes and properties must be associated to well-deﬁned on-
tologies. The following code example shows the FRBR ontological data extracted
from the previous excerpt associated to some external ontologies.
@prefix
frbr:
<http: // purl.org/vocab/frbr/core#> .
@prefix
dc: <http: // purl.org/dc/ elements /1.1/ > .
@prefix
owl: <http: //www.w3.org /2002/07/owl#> .
an:FRBRExpression owl:sameAs frbr:Expression .
za:eng@
frbr:realizer an:person/ Organization/ke/parliament .
an:hasDate owl:sameAs dc:date
.
Fig. 14. Other RDF statements extracted from Figure 12
2 All the RDF examples will be illustrated using the Turtle syntax.

Multi-layer Markup and Ontological Structures in Akoma Ntoso
147
Note that, even if OWL oﬀers the possibility to deﬁne semantics in order to in-
fer automatically new data, OWL is not able to make reiﬁed RDF-like statement.
To represent in OWL the Akoma Ntoso octuple statement illustrated previously,
peculiar approaches have to be used. The NeOn project [15] has developed many
elegant and logically-sound techniques to overcome the limitations of OWL; they
have been collected under the name of Ontology Design Pattern [14]. The On-
tology Design Patterns are a set of guidelines that help the design process of on-
tologies; each pattern codiﬁes one or more best practices of the ontology-design
realm. The following examples will use and brieﬂy introduce some of these pat-
terns; a proper description of each used pattern is out of the scope of our paper.
The most straightforward way to handlecomplexassertions, suchasthe octuples
used by Akoma Ntoso, in OWL is to use the n-ary participation pattern. The n-ary
participation pattern is used to describe events happening in a certain moment and
that involve one or more entities. This pattern can also be used to simulate RDF
reiﬁcations in OWL. Figure 15 shows a graphical representation of the previously
shown octuple expressed in OWL using the n-ary participation pattern.
Fig. 15. A possible Akoma Ntoso data extraction into a OWL pattern-based format
Both RDF and OWL oﬀer one or more ways to deﬁne the formal semantics of
Akoma Ntoso statements. However, none of these techniques can be considered
a standard method to express, store and share knowledge like that embodied
in Akoma Ntoso documents. While these techniques are ﬁt for today’s semantic
data exchange, it is not safe to rely on kludges like these (dictated by the cur-
rent technological constraints) when dealing with legal information that must
be preserved for years or decades. For this reason, it is preferable to embed this
data within XML documents that use an ad-hoc vocabulary and to convert to

148
G. Barabucci et al.
a precise data model only when needed so that it is possible to adapt to the
particular needs that are faced in a particular moment.
Another reason to use an ad-hoc XML vocabulary as the base format for
Akoma Ntoso semantic data is its readability. Even if RDF and OWL have been
developed to deﬁne data models, they have been also thought to be machine-
readable. For this reason, their simplest serialization is not particularly com-
prehensible to humans; since legal documents are primarily written by human
beings for other human beings, it is clear that expressing such information in
a domain-speciﬁc XML format ends up being much more understandable by
humans than a complex data model expressed in RDF or OWL.
The ﬁnal goal of Akoma Ntoso is to create legal documents easily under-
standable and completely free from any unneeded constraint. For the reasons
illustrated above, we think XML is the best format in which to represent these
kind of documents.
6
Conclusions
Akoma Ntoso has been designed as a format for legal documents that must be
read and understood for decades and at the same time be useful to computer
reasoners. In order to balance clearness, ﬁdelity to the authentic legal text, inter-
operability and usability with semantical tools, Akoma Ntoso made some clear
choices. In this paper we showed how these choices ﬁt the stated goals: using
XML as the base mark-up format and having clearly separated layers allow docu-
ments to be preserved without modiﬁcations to the endorsed texts. Additionally,
multiple agents can provide their own interpretations of certain legal aspects of
the given legal text. Moreover, computer reasoners can extract semantic infor-
mation from Akoma Ntoso document and reason over them.
The approach used by Akoma Ntoso allows the development of systems that
use advanced formal logic modeling frameworks, like non-monotonic or non-
deductive logics in order to apply sophisticated legal reasoning theories, more
suitable for the complex legal domain, ﬁlling the gap between all the semantic
web layers while preserving interdependency and expressiveness.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Flavio Zeni (Kenya Unit of UN/DESA) and all
of his team for supporting the Akoma Ntoso project and for permitting this re-
search project. The authors would also like to thank Alexander Boer and Enrico
Francesconi for their precious contributions on the deﬁnition of the URI syntax.
References
1. Boag, S., Berglund, A., Kay, M., Robie, J., Siméon, J., Fernández, M.F., Cham-
berlin, D.: XML Path Language (XPath) 2.0. Recommendation. W3C (January
2007),
http://www.w3.org/TR/2007/REC-xpath20-20070123/,
Latest
version
available at http://www.w3.org/TR/xpath20

Multi-layer Markup and Ontological Structures in Akoma Ntoso
149
2. Boer, A., Hoekstra, R., de Maat, E., Hupkes, E., Vitali, F., Palmirani, M., Rátai,
B.: CEN Metalex Workshop Agreement (2009-08-28 proposal) (August 2009),
http://www.metalex.eu/WA/proposal
3. Carroll, J.J., Klyne, G.: Resource Description Framework (RDF): Concepts and
Abstract Syntax. Recommendation, W3C (Febuary 2004),
http://www.w3.org/TR/2004/REC-rdf-concepts-20040210/,
Latest
version
available at, http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-concepts/
4. Connolly,
D.: Gleaning
Resource
Descriptions from
Dialects
of Languages
(GRDDL). Recommendation, W3C (September 2007),
http://www.w3.org/TR/2007/REC-grddl-20070911/,
Latest
version
available,
http://www.w3.org/TR/grddl/
5. Gordon, T.F., Governatori, G., Rotolo, A.: Rules and Norms: Requirements for
Rule Interchange Languages in the Legal Domain. In: Governatori, G., Hall,
J., Paschke, A. (eds.) RuleML 2009. LNCS, vol. 5858, pp. 282–296. Springer,
Heidelberg (2009)
6. Gordon, T.F.: Constructing Legal Arguments with Rules in the Legal Knowledge
Interchange Format (LKIF). In: Computable Models of the Law: Languages,
Dialogues, Games, Ontologies, pp. 162–184 (2008)
7. Hirtle, D., Boley, H., Grosof, B., Kifer, M., Sintek, M., Tabet, S., Wagner, G.:
Schema Speciﬁcation of RuleML 0.91 (August 2006), http://ruleml.org/0.91/
8. IFLA Study Group on the Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Records:
Functional requirements for bibliographic records: ﬁnal report. K. G. Saur (1998)
9. Kay, M.: XSL Transformations (XSLT) Version 2.0. Recommendation. W3C
(January
2007),
http://www.w3.org/TR/2007/REC-xslt20-20070123/,
Latest
version available at http://www.w3.org/TR/xslt20
10. Lupo, C., Vitali, F., Francesconi, E., Palmirani, M., Winkels, R., de Maat,
E., Boer, A., Mascellani, P.: General XML format(s) for legal sources. Estrella
European Project IST-2004-027655 (2007)
11. de Oliveira Lima, A., Palmirani, M., Vitali, F.: Moving in the Time: An Ontology
for Identifying Legal Resources. In: Computable Models of the Law, Languages,
Dialogues, Games, Ontologies, pp. 71–85 (2008)
12. Palmirani, M., Benigni, F.: Norma-System: A Legal Information System for
Managing Time. In: V Legislative XML Workshop, pp. 205–224 (2007)
13. Palmirani, M., Contissa, G., Rubino, R.: Fill the gap in the legal knowledge
modelling. In: Governatori, G., Hall, J., Paschke, A. (eds.) RuleML 2009. LNCS,
vol. 5858, pp. 305–314. Springer, Heidelberg (2009)
14. Presutti, V., Gangemi, A.: Content ontology design patterns as practical building
blocks for web ontologies. In: Li, Q., Spaccapietra, S., Yu, E., Olivé, A. (eds.) ER
2008. LNCS, vol. 5231, pp. 128–141. Springer, Heidelberg (2008)
15. Presutti, V., Gangemi, A., David, S., de Cea, G.A., Suárez-Figueroa, M.C.,
Montiel-Ponsoda, E., Poveda, M.: A Library of Ontology Design Patterns. NeOn
project deliverable D2.5.1 (2008)
16. Vitali, F., Palmirani, M.: Akoma Ntoso: Naming Conventions,
http://www.akomantoso.org/release-notes/akoma-ntoso-1.0-schema/
namingconventions-1
17. Vitali, F., Palmirani, M.: Akoma Ntoso: Potential users,
http://www.akomantoso.org/akoma-ntoso-in-detail/users
18. W3C OWLWorking Group: OWL 2Web Ontology Language Document Overview.
Recommendation, W3C (November 2009),
http://www.w3.org/TR/2009/REC-owl2-overview-20091027/,
Latest
version
available at http://www.w3.org/TR/owl2-overview/

Prescriptive and Descriptive Obligations in
Dynamic Epistemic Deontic Logic
Guillaume Aucher1, Guido Boella2, and Leendert van der Torre1
1 Computer Science and Communications Department - University of Luxembourg,
6, rue Richard Coudenhove - Kalergi L-1359 Luxembourg
{guillaume.aucher,leon.vandertorre}@uni.lu
2 Dipartimento di Informatica - Universit`a di Torino
Cso Svizzera 185, I-10149 Italy
guido@di.unito.it
Abstract. Normative sentences can be used to change or to describe
the normative system, known as prescriptive and descriptive obligations
respectively. In applications of deontic logic it is important to distinguish
these two uses of normative sentences. In this paper we show how they
can be distinguished and analysed in a Dynamic Epistemic Deontic Logic.
1
Introduction
Alchourr´on and Bulygin [1,2] discuss the possibility of a logic of norms, which
they distinguish from the logic of normative propositions. Roughly, the distinc-
tion between norms and normative propositions is that the former are prescrip-
tive whereas the latter are descriptive. In the second sense, the sentence ‘it is
obligatory to keep right on the streets’ is a description of the fact that a certain
normative system contains an obligation to keep right on the streets. In the ﬁrst
sense this statement is the obligation of traﬃc law itself. This distinction goes
back to an old philosophical problem discussed by Von Wright [14,15], who was
hesitant to call deontic formulas ‘logical truths,’ because “it seems to be a mat-
ter of extra-logical decision when we shall say that ‘there are’ or ‘are not’ such
and such norms.” Makinson [10] turns this fundamental problem into the central
challenge in deontic logic, which led to new developments over the past decade
such as deontic update semantics [13], input/output logic [11], imperative based
deontic logic [8], and more.
The relevance of the distinction between prescriptive and descriptive obli-
gations, and the related fundamental problem that norms do not have truth
values, is not only theoretical and conceptual, but it has important practical im-
plications for normative multi-agent systems. For example, assume that you ask
the librarian of your university to get a journal paper available on the Springer
web-site. The library has a list of journals published by Springer containing the
journals for which the library has free access (either a journal of this list is on
open access or the university subscribed to it). This list is updated every month
but the librarian did not check it for some time, and so he does not know if the
P. Casanovas et al. (Eds.): AICOL Workshops 2009, LNAI 6237, pp. 150–161, 2010.
c
⃝Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010

Prescriptive and Descriptive Obligations
151
requested journal is on the list, although he should actually know it. He then
logs on the journal and tries to download the paper. We consider two kinds of
events corresponding to two diﬀerent uses of obligations.
Descriptive use. The Springer web-site informs the librarian that he should
not pay to download any paper of this journal. As a result, the librarian now
knows that this journal was on the list of journals for which the library has
free access.
Prescriptive use. The Springer web-site refuses to download the ﬁle. However,
after the librarian make a new contract with Springer, the web-site declares
that he should not pay to download any paper of this journal since for the
contract the journal is now on free of charge for the library.
As we see in this example, modeling the distinction between prescriptive and
descriptive use of norms is useful for designing normative multi-agent systems.
In this paper we therefore study the following question:
– How can the distinction between prescriptive and descriptive use of obliga-
tion be captured in a dynamic epistemic deontic logic?
We are going to introduce a general and expressive Dynamic Epistemic Deon-
tic Logic combining a simpliﬁed version of Casta˜neda’s deontic logic [6] with
a dynamic epistemic logic. This logic can express the conditional character of
norms, study the interaction between epistemic and deontic notions, and model
norm dynamics. These three features are fundamental to normative systems
(and the representation of legal systems), and also to multi-agent systems as
far as those are intended to model real life. First, in normative systems it is
necessary to express realistic regulations, which have a conditional character.
Secondly, communication is an essential part of normative and multi-agent sys-
tems, and this raises the issue of what it is permitted, prohibited or obliged
to know by agents, for example, when modelling privacy regulations. Thirdly,
normative multi-agent systems have a dynamic character, as witnessed by the
second deﬁnition of normative multi-agent system provided in [5]. These last two
issues, communication and dynamics are both useful for distinguishing when ex-
isting norms are communicated from the case where a norm is actually put into
existence by a declaration, i.e., Alchourr´on’s distinction between the descriptive
and prescriptive use of norms.
The paper is structured as follow. In Section 2 we introduce an epistemic
deontic logic. In Section 3 we extend the logic by introducing update operators
which change beliefs and norms, and in Section 4 we show how the distinction
between descriptive and prescriptive norms can be made in our logic if we map
this distinction to the context of agent communication.
2
Epistemic Deontic Logic (EDL)
2.1
Propositions vs. Practitions
Because of its clear and natural distinction between propositions and practi-
tions and its modal-like character, the well known deontic logic of Casta˜neda [6]

152
G. Aucher, G. Boella, and L. van der Torre
lends itself very well to the introduction of an epistemic logic. Starting from
a linguistic analysis, the insight of Casta˜neda’s well known approach to deon-
tic logic is to acknowledge the grammatical duality of expressions depending
whether they are within or without the scope of deontic operators [6]. This leads
him formally to introduce two sets of propositional letters: Φφ called propositions
which cannot alone be the foci of deontic operators, unlike Φα called practitions.
The former are usually expressed grammatically in the indicative form and the
latter are usually expressed grammatically in the inﬁnitive/subjunctive form.
For example, “the librarian does not pay to access a journal” in the indicative
form is a proposition, but the same sentence in “it is obligatory for the librarian
not to pay to access a journal” in subjunctive/inﬁnitive form is a practition. He
then deﬁnes more general propositions Lφ
DL and practitions Lα
DL as follows.
Lφ
DL : φ ::= p | φ ∧φ | ¬φ | Oα
Lα
DL : α ::= β | ¬α | α ∧α | α ∧φ | φ ∧α
where β ranges over Φα and p over Φφ. We deﬁne the language LDL = Lφ
DL∪Lα
DL,
whose formulas are generally denoted φ∗. In the sequel, Pα is an abbreviation
for ¬O¬α. Oα reads ‘α is obligatory’ and Pα reads ‘α is permitted’.
We now propose a semantics based on modal logic which is equivalent to the
one of Casta˜neda, in the sense that any ‘Casta˜neda’-model [6] can be transformed
into a DL-model satisfying the same formulas, and vice versa.
Deﬁnition 1. A DL-model M is a tuple M = (W, D, V ) where W is a non-
empty set of possible worlds, D is a serial1 accessibility relation on W and V
is a valuation which assigns to each propositional letter p∗∈Φφ ∪Φα a subset
of W, such that for all w ∈W, all p ∈Φφ,
V (p) ∩(D(w) ∪{w}) = D(w) ∪{w} or ∅
(∗)
Let M = (W, D, V ) be a DL-model, w ∈W and φ∗∈LDL, (M, w) is called a
pointed DL-model. We deﬁne M, w |= φ∗inductively as follows.
M, w |= p∗
iﬀ
w ∈V (p∗)
M, w |= φ∗∧ψ∗
iﬀ
M, w |= φ∗and M, w |= ψ∗
M, w |= ¬φ∗
iﬀ
not M, w |= φ∗
M, w |= Oα
iﬀ
for all v ∈D(w), M, v |= α.
Condition (∗) above ensures formally that conditional norms of the form “it is
obligatory that if the librarian knows that a journal is in the list” O(p →α) are
equivalent to “if the librarian knows that journal is on the free access list then
he should not pay” (p →Oα):
|= O(p →α) ↔(p →Oα).
More generally, condition (∗) allows us to show that any deontic formula with
practition(s) Lα
DL involving proposition(s) is actually equivalent to a deontic
formula with ‘pure’ practitions Lα′
DL, i.e. a formula of L′
DL = Lφ
DL ∪Lα′
DL:
1 A relation R is serial iﬀR(w) ̸= ∅for all w ∈W .

Prescriptive and Descriptive Obligations
153
Lα′
DL : α ::= β | ¬α | α ∧α
where β ranges over Φα.
Proposition 1. Let φ ∈LDL. There is φ′ ∈L′
DL such that |= φ ↔φ′.
In other words, instead of dealing with formulas of LDL, we could equivalently
deal only with formulas of L′
DL.
2.2
Adding Beliefs
Just as practitions are the foci of deontic operators, propositions are dually the
foci of knowledge operators, as pointed out by Casta˜neda [7]. An expression φ in
the scope of a belief operator Bφ is always in the indicative form and never in the
subjunctive/inﬁnitive form, even if Bφ is in the scope of a deontic operator O.
We extend Casta˜neda [7]’s intuition to the context of epistemic permissions and
obligations. In a deontic setting the reading of the term knowledge or belief can
also be twofold: either as a proposition or as a practition. On the one hand, in
the sentence “it is obligatory that the librarian knows / for the librarian to know
that he should not pay” the verb ‘to know’ is the focus of a deontic operator
and is in the subjunctive/inﬁnitive form. On the other hand, the sentence “The
librarian knows that he should not pay’ alone describes a circumstance and
the interpretation of the verb ‘to know’ in the indicative form matches the one
usually studied in epistemic logic. The former use of the term knowledge within
the scope of a deontic operator is not studied in epistemic logic. For these reasons
we enrich the language LDL with two knowledge modalities, one for propositions
and the other for practitions. This yields the following language LEDL = Lφ
EDL∪
Lα
EDL whose formulas are generally denoted φ∗.
Lφ
EDL : φ ::= p | ¬φ | φ ∧φ | Bφ | Oα
Lα
EDL : α ::= β | ¬α | α ∧α | α ∧φ | φ ∧α | B′φ
where p ranges over Φφ and β over Φα. As argued above we do not allow formulas
of the form Bα or B′α because they are linguistically meaningless, which is
actually in line with Casta˜neda [7]. Bφ reads ‘the agent believes φ’.
Deﬁnition 2. An EDL-model M is a tuple M = (W, D, R, R′, V ) where W is
a non-empty set of possible worlds, R, R′ and D are accessibility relations on W,
D being serial, and V is a valuation such that:
for all w ∈W, all v, v′ ∈D(w) ∪{w}, (M, v) is RD-bisimilar to (M, v′).2
(∗∗)
The truth conditions for B and B′ are given by:
M, w |= Bφ
iﬀ
for all v ∈R(w), M, v |= φ
M, w |= B′φ
iﬀ
for all v ∈R′(w), M, v |= φ
M |= φ if for all w ∈W, M, w |= φ. (M, w) is called a pointed EDL-model.
2 Two pointed models (M, v) and (M ′, v′) are RD-bisimilar if there is a relation on
W × W ′ satisfying the base condition for Φφ and the back and forth conditions for
R and D (see Blackburn et al. [4] for details).

154
G. Aucher, G. Boella, and L. van der Torre
Note that condition (∗∗) is a generalization of condition (∗) to the epistemic
setting: the worlds of D(w) ∪{w} are not only ‘propositionally bisimilar’ as
in (∗), but also ‘epistemically (and deontically) bisimilar’. Two worlds being
propositionally bisimilar intuitively means that they satisfy the same proposi-
tional formulas, and two worlds being epistemically (and deontically) bisimilar
intuitively means (in a ﬁnite model) that they satisfy the same epistemic (and
deontic) formulas (see [4] for details). Therefore, our conditions (∗) and (∗∗)
somehow intuitively mean that the actual epistemic and propositional context
is ﬁxed for a given normative situation (represented by D(w)).
We do not assume any logical property for our notion of belief (such as con-
sistency or introspection) because it is not really relevant for the topic of this
paper. For the same reason, the operator B stands alternatively for knowledge
or for belief.
Just as for LDL, we can show that the language LEDL is actually ‘equivalent’
to the language L′
EDL = Lφ
EDL ∪Lα′
EDL with ‘pure’ practitions Lα′
EDL:
Lα′
EDL : α ::= β | ¬α | α ∧α | B′φ
Proposition 2. Let φ ∈LEDL. There is φ′ ∈L′
EDL such that |= φ ↔φ′.
In other words, instead of dealing with formulas of LEDL, we could equivalently
deal only with formulas of L′
EDL.
Theorem 1. The semantics of LEDL is sound and complete with respect to the
decidable logic LEDL axiomatized as follows:
A1
All propositional tautologies based on Φφ ∪Φα
A2
⊢(φ →Oα) ↔O(φ →α)
A3
⊢Oα →¬O¬α
A4
⊢O(α →α′) →(Oα →Oα′)
A5
⊢B∗(φ∗→ψ∗) →(B∗φ∗→B∗ψ∗)
R1
If ⊢α then ⊢Oα
R2
If ⊢φ∗then ⊢B∗φ∗
R3
If ⊢φ∗→ψ∗and ⊢φ∗then ⊢ψ∗
where B∗stands for B or B′.
Note that axioms A1 to A4 and rules R1 and R3 provide an alternative axioma-
tization of Casta˜neda’s language LDL.
2.3
Example
Our logic can express conditional norms, like Casta˜neda’s deontic logic does
(i.e., ⊢(φ →Oα) ↔O(φ →α)). Due to its combination of deontic and epis-
temic notions, it can also express the knowledge-based obligations of Pacuit and
Parikh[12]. But because our combination is quite general, we can also express
epistemic norms.

Prescriptive and Descriptive Obligations
155
Example 1 (Journal example). Assume that the librarian does not know whether
the journal requested is on the list of journals to which the library has free
access (¬B¬JInList∧¬BJInList). As a matter of fact, according to the library
regulations, he should know whether it is a journal to which the library has free
access (n1). Besides, he should also know that if it is a journal for which the
library has free access then he should not to pay to download any paper of this
journal (n2). These two epistemic norms are formalized as follows:
n1 = O(B′JInList ∨B′¬JInList)
n2 = OB′(JInList →O¬pay)
where JInList stands for ‘the Journal requested is in the List of journals for
which the library has free access’ and pay stands for ‘pay Springer to download
any paper of the journal’.
This situation is depicted in the EDL-model M of Figure 1, where JInList
stands for the proposition ‘the journal is in the list of journals for which the
library has free access’ and pay for the practition ‘pay Springer to download any
paper of the journal’. The dotted arrows correspond to the deontic accessibility
relation D and the plain arrows correspond to accessibility relations R and R′.
Reﬂexive arrows are omitted, which means that for all v ∈M, we have that v ∈
R(v), v ∈R′(v) and v ∈D(v). w corresponds to the actual world. We therefore
have M, w |= (¬BJInList ∧¬B¬JInList) ∧O(B′JInList ∨B′¬JInList): the
librarian does not know whether the requested journal is on the list of journals
free of charge for the library (some of the R accessible worlds contain ¬JInList).
However, he should know whether this is the case (in all D worlds it is possible
to access via R′ either only worlds where pay is true or ¬pay is true. M, w |=
B(JInList →O¬pay) ∧B(¬JInList →(¬Opay ∧¬O¬pay)): the librarian
knows that if the journal is in the list then he should not pay to download any
paper of the journal (in no world where JInList is true it is possible to access
via D a world where pay is true) and he knows that if it is not in the list then
he might or might not have to pay to download papers of the journal (in each
world where JInList is false, it is not possible to access via D worlds where only
pay or ¬pay is true). For example, because the journal is then on limited access
and some papers might be available for free whereas some others might not.
w : JInList, ¬pay

R,R′
























¬JInList, pay
R,R′

R,R′
 
¬JInList, ¬pay

 	
Fig. 1. Journal example

156
G. Aucher, G. Boella, and L. van der Torre
3
Dynamic Epistemic Deontic Logic (DEDL)
3.1
Changing Norms and Beliefs
We now want to add dynamics to the picture by means of communicative acts
made to the agent. The content of these communicative acts can aﬀect the
situation in two ways: either it aﬀects the epistemic realm (represented in a
EDL-model by the relation R) or it aﬀects the normative realm (represented in
a EDL-model by the relations R′ and D). This leads us to enrich the language
LEDL with two dynamic operators [φ!] and [φ∗!!], yielding the language LDEDL,
whose formulas are generally denoted φ∗:
Lφ
DEDL : φ ::= p | ¬φ | φ ∧φ | Bφ | Oα | [φ!]φ | [φ∗!!]φ
Lα
DEDL : α ::= β | ¬α | α ∧α | α ∧φ | φ ∧α | B′φ | [φ!]α | [φ∗!!]α
where p ranges over Φφ, β over Φα.
[ψ!]φ reads ‘after learning ψ, φ holds’, and [ψ∗!!]φ reads ‘after the promul-
gation/enforcement of ψ∗, φ holds’. Note that it is possible that ψ∗∈Lφ
EDL
because propositions can aﬀect the normative realm via R′. The semantics of
these dynamic operators is inspired by Kooi [9] and deﬁned as follows.
Deﬁnition 3. Let M = (W, D, R, R′, V ) be an EDL-model, φ ∈Lφ
EDL and
ψ∗∈LEDL. We deﬁne the EDL-models M ∗ψ! and M ∗ψ∗!! as follows.
– M ∗ψ! = (W, D, R!, R′, V ) where for all w ∈W,
R!(w) = R(w) ∩||ψ||.
– M ∗ψ∗!! = (W, D!!, R, R′!!, V ) where for all w ∈W,
R′!!(w) =

R′(w) ∩||ψ∗|| if ψ∗∈Lφ
EDL
R′(w)
otherwise.
D!!(w) =

D(w) ∩||ψ∗|| if ψ∗∈Lα
EDL and M, w |= Pψ∗
D(w)
otherwise.
where ||φ∗|| = {v ∈M | M, v |= φ∗}. The truth conditions:
M, w |= [ψ!]φ∗
iﬀ
M ∗ψ!, w |= φ∗
M, w |= [ψ∗!!]φ∗
iﬀ
M ∗ψ∗!!, w |= φ∗.
Just as for LEDL and LDL, we can show that the language LDEDL is actually
‘equivalent’ to the language L′
DEDL = Lφ
DEDL ∪Lα′
DEDL with ‘pure’ practitions
Lα′
DEDL:
Lα′
DEDL : α ::= β | ¬α | α ∧α | B′φ | [φ!]α | [φ∗!!]α
where p ranges over Φφ and β over Φα.
Proposition 3. Let φ ∈LDEDL. There is φ′ ∈L′
DEDL such that |= φ ↔φ′.
In other words, instead of dealing with formulas of LDEDL, we could equivalently
deal only with formulas of L′
DEDL.

Prescriptive and Descriptive Obligations
157
3.2
Examples
Changing beliefs: [φ!]. Our logic is a dynamic epistemic logic, which allows
to express communicative acts changing the beliefs of agents.
Example 2. Let us take up Example 1. A colleague of the librarian informs him
that the journal is actually on the list of journals free of charge for the library
because the university subscribed to this journal.
M, w |= JInList ∧[JInList!]BJInList
After the communicative act the librarian knows that the journal is on the list of
journals for which the library has free access. The resulting situation is depicted
in Figure 2. To evaluate the formula [JInList!]BJInList in M, w it is necessary
to move to M ∗JInList! (illustrated in Figure 2) and evaluate BJInList. All
worlds where JInList is false are not accessible anymore via the R relation. In
particular, from the real world w only itself is accessible via R.
w : JInList, ¬pay
¬JInList, pay
R


¬JInList, ¬pay
R

	
Fig. 2. Update by JInList!
Changing norms: [φ!!]. Our logic is a dynamic deontic logic, which allows to
express communicative acts changing the norms.
Example 3. Let us take up Example 1 again. The Springer web-site declares
that this journal is now free of charge for the library since today to fulﬁl the
newly stipulated contract. This event can be modeled by the communicative act
[¬pay!!]:
M, w |= [¬pay!!](O¬pay ∧BO¬pay)
w : JInList, ¬pay

























¬JInList, pay
R,R′

 
¬JInList, ¬pay
R,R′

R,R′

Fig. 3. Update by ¬pay!!

158
G. Aucher, G. Boella, and L. van der Torre
After this communicative act, one should not pay to download any paper of
the journal and the librarian knows this (it is not possible to access from an
R world a world via D where pay is true). This resulting situation is depicted
in Figure 3. The only diﬀerence with the EDL-model of Figure 1 is that there
is no dotted arrow from the bottom world to the top world on the right. This
modiﬁcation ensures that the only D world where pay is true is not accessible
anymore.
4
How to Model Prescriptive and Descriptive Obligations
Alchourr´on and Bulygin [1,2] discussed the possibility of a logic of norms, which
they distinguish from the logic of normative propositions. Alchourr´on explains
the distinction with the following box metaphor.
“We may depict the diﬀerence between the descriptive meaning (norma-
tive propositions) and the prescriptive meaning (norm) of deontic sen-
tences by means of thinking the obligatory sets as well as the permitted
sets as diﬀerent boxes ready to be ﬁlled. When the authority α uses a
deontic sentence prescriptively to norm an action, his activity belongs to
the same category as putting something into a box. When α, or someone
else, uses the deontic sentence descriptively his activity belongs to the
same category as making a picture of α putting something into a box. A
proposition is like a picture of reality, so to assert a proposition is like
making a picture of reality. On the other hand to issue (enact) a norm
is like putting something in a box. It is a way of creating something,
of building a part of reality (the normative qualiﬁcation of an action)
with the purpose that the addressees have the option to perform the
authorized actions while performing the commanded actions.” [1]
In our logic we can distinguish Alchourr´on’s distinction between descriptive
and prescriptive norms. We map this distinction to the context of agent commu-
nication. The descriptive communicative act of the Springer web-site announcing
that he should not pay can be modeled by the communicative act [O¬pay!]. Note
that informing about the existence of a norm can enable the audience to know
more information: for example, if the librarian should not pay for downloading
any paper of a journal then he knows that this journal is on the list of journals
for which the library has free access. The prescriptive communicative act of the
librarian being informed that the journal is now free of charge can be modeled
by the communicative act [¬pay!!].
This mapping allows to understand the role of agent systems in deontic logic,
since a traditional problem can be solved by stating it in terms of interaction
among agents.
Example 4. Let us take up Example 1. Concerning the descriptive character of
norms, we model the action of communicating that there is a norm obliging not

Prescriptive and Descriptive Obligations
159
to pay to download any paper as the announcement of the obligation O¬pay!.
The resulting situation is the same as the one depicted in Figure 2. After such
announcement to the librarian, not only he believes that he should not pay to
download any paper of the journal but also that the journal is in the list of
journals for which the library has free access:
M, w |= ¬BJInList ∧[O¬pay!](BO¬pay ∧BJInList)
The inference [O¬pay!]BJInList is possible if one should not pay Springer to
download any paper of a journal which is in the list:
JInList →O¬pay
Note that pay is a practition, since it is in the scope of a deontic operator.
Concerning the prescriptive character of obligation, we model the action of
putting a norm into existence, for example, by the Springer web-site announcing
that from now on the library should not pay to download any paper of the
journal as the announcement of the practition ¬pay!!. The resulting situation
is depicted in Figure 3. Note that, in this case, even if JInList →O¬pay, we
cannot derive that the librarian knows that the journal is in the list. This is
intuitively correct: the new norm has just been introduced today so there has
not been enough time to update the list (it is updated every month).
M, w |= ¬BJInList ∧[¬pay!!](O¬pay ∧¬BJInList).
5
Conclusions
Distinguishing the prescriptive and descriptive use of language is a classical chal-
lenge from deontic logic with practical consequences. If one agent tells another
agent that he is obliged to do something, but the second agent would like to dis-
agree, then the second agent should know whether the agent is creating a norm
for him, or whether he is describing an existing normative system. In the ﬁrst
case he may disagree by responding that the agent is not authorized to create
obligations for him, in the second case he may argue that the norm does not
apply to him, or that the norm does not exist. Several formal systems therefore
distinguish between prescriptive and descriptive obligations, but thus far the
distinction was not analyzed in more detail, and the two kinds of obligations
were not related to each other in an integrated framework.
In this paper, we give a more detailed analysis by modeling besides the nor-
mative system also the epistemic states of the agents, and how norms can be
changed over time. Few articles in deontic logic deal with the interaction among
deontic and epistemic notions, though they often entertain a tight relationship.
Citizens must often know their obligations, e.g., people should know that it is
forbidden to speed. Moreover, some obligations hold only in an epistemic con-
text, e.g., the librarian is obliged not to pay if he knows that the journal is on
the free access list [12]. To specify such examples of autonomous agents acting

160
G. Aucher, G. Boella, and L. van der Torre
within a normative system, there is a need for the logical formalization of these
relationships. To model the interaction between epistemic and normative notions
in a dynamic setting we introduced a general Dynamic Epistemic Deontic Logic.
The logic extends a simpliﬁed version of Casta˜neda’s deontic logic of practitions
and propositions with epistemic and dynamic update operators.
In [3] we adapt this Dynamic Epistemic Deontic Logic to the problem of pri-
vacy regulations, introducing the notion of permitted and obligatory announce-
ment, and the notion of compliance. The extended framework can deal with a
new version of the Chinese wall problem, meta-policies specifying if a user can
know the privacy policies and it distinguishes between permissions and obliga-
tions to let the user know with respect to the permissions and obligations to
communicate information by means of messages.
Further research concerns making the logic multi-agent, to study the implica-
tions of our approach for contrary to duties and deontic detachment.
References
1. Alchourr´on, C.: Philosophical foundations of deontic logic and the logic of defeasi-
ble conditionals. In: Meyer, J.-J., Wieringa, R. (eds.) Deontic Logic in Computer
Science: Normative System Speciﬁcation, pp. 43–84. John Wiley & Sons, Chich-
ester (1993)
2. Alchourron, C.E., Bulygin, E.: The expressive conception of norms. In: Hilpinen,
R. (ed.) New studies in deontic logic, pp. 95–124. D. Reidel, Dordrecht (1981)
3. Aucher, G., Boella, G., van der Torre, L.: Privacy regulations in dynamic epistemic
deontic logic. In: Procs. of Non Monotonic Reasoning Workshop 2010 (2010)
4. Blackburn, P., de Rijke, M., Venema, Y.: Modal Logic. Cambridge Tracts in Com-
puter Science, vol. 53. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (2001)
5. Boella, G., Verhagen, H., van der Torre, L.: Introduction to the special issue on
normative multiagent systems. Journal of Autonomous Agents and Multi Agent
Systems, 1–10 (2008)
6. Casta˜neda, H.N.: The paradoxes of Deontic Logic: the simplest solution to all of
them in one fell swoop, pp. 37–86. Synthese library (1981)
7. Casta˜neda, H.N.: Knowledge and epistemic obligation. Philosophical perspec-
tives 2, 211–233 (1988)
8. Hansen, J.: Imperatives and deontic logic: On the semantic foundations of deontic
logic. PhD thesis, University of Leipzig, Germany (2008)
9. Kooi, B.: Probabilistic dynamic epistemic logic. Journal of Logic, Language and
Information 12(4), 381–408 (2003)
10. Makinson, D.: On a fundamental problem of deontic logic. In: McNamara, P.,
Prakken, H. (eds.) Norms, Logics and Information Systems. New Studies on De-
ontic Logic and Computer Science, pp. 29–54. IOS Press, Amsterdam (1999)
11. Makinson, D., van der Torre, L.: Input-output logics. Journal of Philosophical
Logic 29(4), 383–408 (2000)
12. Pacuit, E., Parikh, R.: The logic of knowledge based obligation. Synthese 149(2)
(2006)

Prescriptive and Descriptive Obligations
161
13. van der Torre, L., Tan, Y.: An update semantics for deontic reasoning. In: McNa-
mara, P., Prakken, H. (eds.) Norms, Logics and Information Systems. New Studies
on Deontic Logic and Computer Science, pp. 73–90. IOS Press, Amsterdam (1999)
14. von Wright, G.H.: On the logic of norms and actions. In: Hilpinen, R. (ed.) New
Studies in Deontic Logic: Norms, Actions and the Foundations of Ethics, pp. 3–35.
D.Reidel, Dordrechtz (1981)
15. von Wright, G.H.: Deontic logic - as I see it. In: McNamara, P., Prakken, H.
(eds.) Norms, Logics and Information Systems. New Studies on Deontic Logic and
Computer Science, pp. 15–25. IOS Press, Amsterdam (1999)

Lex Minus Dixit Quam Voluit, Lex Magis
Dixit Quam Voluit:
A Formal Study on Legal Compliance and
Interpretation
Guido Boella1, Guido Governatori2, Antonino Rotolo3, and Leendert van der Torre4
1 University of Turin, Italy
2 NICTA, Australia
3 University of Bologna, Italy
4 University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg
Abstract. This paper argues in favour of the necessity of dynamically restricting
and expanding the applicability of norms regulating computer systems like mul-
tiagent systems, in situations where the compliance to the norm does not achieve
the purpose of the norm. We propose a logical framework which distinguishes
between constitutive and regulative norms and captures the norm change power
and at the same time the limitations of the judicial system in dynamically revis-
ing the set of constitutive rules deﬁning the concepts on which the applicability
of norms is based. In particular, the framework is used to reconstruct some in-
terpretive arguments described in legal theory such as those corresponding to the
Roman maxims lex minus dixit quam voluit and lex magis dixit quam voluit. The
logical framework is based on an extension of defeasible logic.
1
Introduction and Motivation
An important research issue in AI is to design computer systems whose performance is
constrained by suitable sets of legal norms: in this sense, norms establish what legality
criteria should apply to their functioning [22]. However, the general idea of regulating
computer systems with norms can be modelled in different ways. As, e.g., Boella and
van der Torre [4] pointed out in the ﬁeld of normative multiagent systems, norms may
work either as hard or soft constraints. In the ﬁrst case, computer systems are designed
in such a way as to avoid legal violations. In the second case, norms rather provide
standards which can be violated, even though any violations should result in sanctions
or other normative effects applying to non-compliant agents. To do that, it is necessary
to monitor the behaviour of agents and enforce the sanctions.
Soft constraints allow agents to optimize their performance by reasoning about the
trade off between respecting the norm – thus incurring in the related compliance costs
– and the risk of being sanctioned. However, this additional ﬂexibility of norms as
soft constraints is not enough, because it could lead the agent to respect the norm (or
otherwise to be sanctioned) even in circumstances where the respect of the norm does
not give any advantage to the system, thus wasting his resources while the whole system
achieves only a suboptimal state.
P. Casanovas et al. (Eds.): AICOL Workshops 2009, LNAI 6237, pp. 162–183, 2010.
c⃝Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010

A Formal Study on Legal Compliance and Interpretation
163
Norms are like plans which aim at achieving the social goals the members of a so-
ciety decided to share [5]. The legislator tries to specify all the circumstances which a
norm applies to and all the exceptional contexts where it does not apply, but, as well
known in the planning community of AI, universal plans rarely are a practicable strat-
egy [7]. An agent should rather produce a partial plan and revise it when part of it
becomes unfeasible. In the same way as replanning allows an agent to revise its plans
while keeping ﬁxed its original goals, law has a mechanism, called interpretation, to
allow norms to be adapted after their creation to the unforeseen situations in order to
achieve the social goal they have been planned for. After all, not only the world changes,
giving rise to circumstances unexpected to the legislator who introduced the norm, but
even the ontology of reality can change with respect to the one constructed by the law
to describe the applicability conditions of norms (see, e.g., all the problems concerning
the application of existing laws to privacy, intellectual property or technological inno-
vations in healthcare). This adaptation can be made only at the moment of evaluating
whether a given behavior in a particular situation should be considered as a violation,
i.e., by judges in courts.
Thus, the research question of this paper is: how to formalize the interpretation mech-
anism of law, so to design more ﬂexible computer systems regulated by norms? This
splits in the following subquestions: How does the law model the ontology of concepts
to which norms refer to? How can the applicability of norms be restricted or expanded
in some situations? How to model the goals associated to norms and how goals are used
to evaluate the compliance to a norm in unforeseen circumstances? How to model and
at the same time limit the power to interpret norms?
To answer the ﬁrst subquestion we use the notion of constitutive norms besides reg-
ulative ones (henceforth, legal rules). While the latter ones specify the ideal behaviour,
the former ones provide an ontology of institutional concepts to which the conditions
of legal rules refer to. To model the revision of norms, we use as methodology an ex-
tension of Defeasible Logic (DL) [10], which allows us to model constitutive and legal
rules and the norm change process, while keeping linear the complexity of the overall
process. DL allows us as well to reason about goals assigned to norms and to use them
to frame the norm change process within limits.
The layout of the paper is as follows. Section 2 describes the structure of a normative
system and the role of interpretation. In Section 3 we explain the distinction between
norm restriction and norm expansion together with the role of goals in the interpretation
process. Section 4 introduces the variant of DL we use in this paper and Section 5 uses
DL to model the norm restriction and norm expansion processes.
2
Legal Rules and Legal Concepts
2.1
The Structure of a Normative System
As well known, norms have a conditional structure such as b1,...,bn ⇒O l (if b1,...,bn
hold, then l is obligatory), an agent is compliant with respect to this norm if l holds
whenever the obligation l follows from b1,...,bn. Most logical models of legal reason-
ing often assume that conditions of norms give a complete description of their applica-
bility (see Sartor [18]). However, this assumption is too strong, due to the complexities

164
G. Boella et al.
and dynamics of the world. Norms cannot take into account all the possible conditions
where they should or should not be applied, because the legislator cannot consider all
the possible contexts which are exceptional, he cannot foresee unexpected changes of
the world and of the ontology of concepts the norms refer to.
Normative systems regulating real societies have two mechanisms to cope with this
problem. First they distinguish legal rules (obligations, prohibitions and permissions)
from constitutive rules. While the former, which are changed only by the legislative
system, specify the ideal behaviour, the latter ones provide, by means of counts-as deﬁ-
nitions, an ontology of institutional concepts. The applicability conditions of legal rules
very often refer to these institutional concepts, rather than to the so called brute facts.
Second, the judicial system, at the moment in which a case concerning a violation
is discussed in court, is empowered to interpret, i.e., to change norms, under some re-
strictions not to go beyond the purpose from which the legal rules stem. The distinction
between legal and constitutive rules (norms vs ontology) suggests that legal interpre-
tation does not amount to revising norms, but to interpreting legal concepts, i.e., to
revising constitutive rules [19].
In this paper we adopt the view that the ontology of legal concepts is built via con-
stitutive rules having the so-called counts-as form [20]: r : a1,...,an ⇒c b For example,
a bicycle is considered as a vehicle by the following constitutive rule:
r0 : Bike(x) ⇒c Vehicle(x)
This counts-as rule, if instantiated by any bicycle a, says that a counts as a vehicle.
Constitutive rules have a defeasible character, for example, a bicycle for children
cannot be considered as a vehicle:
r1 : Bike(x),ForChildren(x) ;c ¬Vehicle(x)
r0 ≻r1
As usual in DL, our language includes (1) a superiority relation ≻that establishes the
relative strength of rules and is used to solve conﬂicts, (2) special rules marked with
;, called defeaters, which are not meant to derive conclusions, but to provide reasons
against the opposite.
In general, note that in legal systems counts-as rules may either specify conceptual
links between “brute” facts or acts (i.e., non-institutional facts or acts whose status is
independent of the existence of any constitutive rule; example: being over 18 years)
counts as types of institutional facts or acts (e.g., being adult), or rather specify con-
ceptual links where institutional facts or acts (e.g., a contract made by person j in the
name of person k) have the same effects of other institutional facts or acts (e.g., a con-
tract made by k). This view basically implies that the consequents of constitutive rules
always correspond to institutional facts or acts. Indeed, constitutive rules are meant to
“constitute” and deﬁne legal concepts whose existence precisely depends on the exis-
tence of constitutive rules. Moreover, there are two sources of constitutive rules, explicit
norms like the one deﬁning what means to be adult, but also the usual meaning of the
terms, as they appear in a law according to the normal (day to day) meaning and inten-
tion of the lawmaker, e.g., ‘Good pater familiae’, ‘Due diligence’.

A Formal Study on Legal Compliance and Interpretation
165
Here, we will deal with such a type of constitutive rules following the approach
described in [11], where it is convincingly argued that an effective way to capture the
basic properties of the counts-as link is to reframe it in terms of standard DL.
The set of legal rules is kept to be ﬁxed: any judge during the interpretation process
can argue about their applicability conditions but cannot either add new rules nor cancel
them. Only legislators have the power to change legal rules.
Legal rules are for example:
r2 : Vehicle(x),Park(y) ⇒O ¬Enter(x,y)
This rule reads as follows: if x is a vehicle and y is a park, then it is (defeasibly) forbid-
den for any x to enter y.
For the sake of simplicity, we will assume that legal rules only impose duties and
prohibitions, and state permissions: they are captured within a suitable extension of
standard DL [10].
Finally, as usually assumed in legal theory [16,18], we assign goals to legal rules.
In the social delegation cycle [5] norms are planned starting from goals shared by the
community of agents. However, such goals play also another role: they pose the limits
within which the interpretation process of the judicial systems must stay when inter-
preting norms.
Note that the goal alone is not sufﬁcient to specify a norm, since there could be many
ways to achieve that goal and some guidance should be given to the citizens. Thus, the
norm works like a partial plan the legislator set up in advance. The judicial system is left
with the task of dynamically adapt the applicability of the regulative norm by revising
the constitutive norms referring to its applicability conditions, in order to fulﬁl the goal
of the norm also under unforeseen circumstances. This is why law can be considered as
a synecdoche: a term denoting a part of something is used to refer to the whole thing.
In this paper, we deﬁne a set Goal of goals and a function G which maps legal rules
into elements of Goal. For example, if G (r2) = road safety, this means that the goal
of the rule prohibiting to enter into parks is to promote road safety1. The idea is quite
standard in legal theory [16,18,19] and has been already investigated in AI&Law, even
though most works were mainly devoted to case-based reasoning and modeling case-
law [2]. Note that, in this paper, goals are considered here as directly speciﬁed by the
legal rules themselves. In general, the task to determine what goals are supposed to be
promoted by rules is usually accomplished by judges by developing suitable arguments
during the trial.
As largely acknowledged in legal theory, when it is possible to establish the relative
weight of rule goals, this can be used both to determine the relative strength of any
legal rule in case of conﬂicts with other rules and to interpret any legal rule when it is
not clear whether this rule can be applied to a given concrete case [16]. As regards the
ﬁrst issue – solving conﬂicts by referring to rule goals – it seems natural then to deﬁne
a partial order > over Goal to capture cases where any goal g is more important than
any other goal g′. If g > g′ then g is more important than g′, otherwise they have equal
importance. Hence, > may be used to solve conﬂicts between legal rules. Consider the
following rules:
1 Hereafter, we will use bold type expressions to denote goals.

166
G. Boella et al.
r3 : HighWay(x),¬Authorized Area(x) ⇒O ¬Stop(x)
r′
3 : HighWay(x),¬Authorized Area(x),Crash(y) ⇒O Stop(x)
Rule r3 states that it is forbidden for drivers to stop in highways except in authorized
areas; rule r′
3 says that drivers have to stop when they are responsible for serious car
crashes in highways. Suppose that the legal system does not explicitly state what rule
should prevail here. If so, resorting to rule goals can help. In fact, we may assume that
the goal of r3 is to promote road safety, while the one of r′
3 is to protect life when it is
in serious and imminent danger. Since the latter goal should be more important than the
former one, r′
3 will have to prevail over r3.
This mechanism for solving conﬂicts will be added in our framework to the standard
one adopted in Defeasible Logic [1], which is based on a superiority relation ≻directly
applied to rules.
2.2
Revising Constitutive Rules
Checking legal compliance requires to establish if a legal rule r : b1,...,bn ⇒O ¬l is
violated by a fact or action l happened under some circumstances H. Let us assume
that r states that ¬l ought to be the case. However, l is not necessarily a violation,
because we also have to check whether H, via the constitutive rules, matches with the
applicability conditions b1,...,bn of r. In easy cases, these match and l directly amount
to a violation. However, jurists argue that we have cases where this does not hold, as for
example when there is a discrepancy between the literal meaning of b1,...,bn and the
goal assigned to the rule r by the legislator. If so, even though H matches with b1,...,bn,
we do not have a violation because H should not match with b1,...,bn. A non-literal
interpretation of b1,...,bn would exclude H as a circumstance falling within the scope
of r, since the goal of the norm would be achieved anyway: lex magis dixit quam voluit,
the law said more than what the legislator was meaning to say. Analogously, not all
cases in which H mismatches with b1,...,bn are not violations. We could have that lex
minus dixit quam voluit, the law said less than what the legislator was meaning to say:
here a non-literal, goal-based interpretation of r would lead to broaden its applicability
scope to match H, thus making the agent a violator [16].
3
Interpreting Legal Rules
In this section we describe the interpretation process using a running example, ﬁrst
considering a scenario of norm restriction and second a norm expansion.
Suppose Mary enters a park with her bike, thus apparently violating rule r2 above
about vehicles’ circulation. Police stops her when she is still on her bike in the park and
ﬁnes her. Mary thinks this is unreasonable and sues the municipality because she thinks
that here the category “vehicle” should not cover bikes.
3.1
Restricting the Applicability of Norms
In the ﬁrst case the conceptual domain of the normative system, corresponding to a set
of constitutive rules, allows us to derive that any bike a is indeed a vehicle. The goal

A Formal Study on Legal Compliance and Interpretation
167
of the norm r2 is reducing pollution G (r2) = ¬pollution. In court, the judge has to
establish if Mary violated r2 or not.
If T is the case, the judge could argue that Mary should be ﬁned, as r2 clearly applies
to her:
T = {r0 : Bike(x) ⇒c Vehicle(x),
r4 : 2 wheels(x),Transport(x),¬Engine ⇒c Bike(x)}
But suppose that the judge can show that, if Mary’s case fulﬁls the applicability condi-
tions of r2 (Mary’s bike is a vehicle) then a goal which is incompatible with the goal
assigned to r2 would be promoted. Since G (r2) = ¬pollution, prohibiting to circulate
with bikes in parks would encourage people to get around parks by car and then walk.
This would be against the goal of r2 and so the judge has good reasons to exclude that
bikes are vehicles when r2 should be applied. Accordingly, when arguing in this way,
the judge may interpret r2 by reducing its applicability conditions as far as Mary’s case
is concerned, and so by contracting T in order to obtain in T that Mary’s bike is not a
vehicle in the context of the current situation.
3.2
Expanding the Applicability of Norms
Alternatively, the conceptual domain could exclude that bikes are vehicles and the goal
of r2 could be the safety of people walking in the park pedestrian safety:
T ′ = {r4 : 2 wheels(x),Transport(x),¬Engine(x) ⇒c Bike(x),
r5 : Bike(x) ⇒c ¬Vehicle(x),
r6 : Transport(x) ;c Vehicle(x)}
≻= {r5 ≻r6}
T ′ also includes r6, which states that, if we know that some x has purpose of transport,
then we have reasons to block other rules which would lead to exclude that x is a vehicle.
However, in T ′ r6 is made weaker than r5 via the superiority relation ≻, and so, if x is a
bike, we conclude by r5 that x is not a vehicle.
Now, suppose the judge has to settle Mary’s case starting from T ′. Again, the goal
of legal rules such as r2 may be decisive. The judge could argue that Mary should not
be ﬁned, as r2 clearly does not apply. But suppose that, since r2 is not fulﬁlled, this
would be against the goal of r2, which is now pedestrian safety. In this case, the judge
has rather good reasons to consider bikes as vehicles when r2 is concerned. Hence, the
judge may interpret r2 by broadening its applicability conditions as far as Mary’s case
is concerned, and so by revising T ′ in such a way as Mary’s bike is a vehicle.
3.3
Constraints on the Revision
In general, we should note that such types of revisions have to satisfy some requirements
(let’s still bear in mind the case of Mary’s bike):

168
G. Boella et al.
1. there is no other g′ ∈Goal such that
– the revision of T (or of T ′) promotes r2’s goal g which is incompatible, in the
application context of r2, with respect to the goal g′ of another applicable rule
r, and
– G (r2) ̸> G (r) (G (r2) is not more important than G (r));
2. our set of constitutive rules should suggest us that the concept of Bike can be sub-
sumed under the concept of Vehicle;
Point 1 above states that, if by contracting or revising the concept of Bike, we under-
mine at least one equally or more important goal, which is supposed to be promoted by
another applicable rule, then such a contraction or revision is not acceptable. This limit
is well-known by lawyers and legal theorists [18,16], who often argue that any legal
interpretation should be coherent within the legal system as a whole.
Point 2 above is rather connected with the fact that the set of constitutive rules should
inherently provide some conceptual limits for any interpretation. Indeed, suppose that
Mary enters the park with a gun. We could have reasons for arguing that entering with
a gun is dangerous for all people in the park, and so for pedestrians too. However, this
is not enough, of course, for arguing that guns are vehicle. In other words, if we do
not have any other legal rules prohibiting to enter parks with guns, this behaviour will
be permitted. Hence, point 2 has to do with Hart’s [15] theory of penumbra: we have
a core of cases which can be clearly classiﬁed as belonging to the legal concept and a
penumbra of hard cases, whole membership in the concept can be disputed; but hard
cases should exhibit some conceptual link with the core of cases. This idea is formally
captured here by conﬁning the revision of the set of constitutive rules only to those
situations where such a set, though failing to prove that a bike is a vehicle, already
contains reasoning chains suggesting that this may be the case. For example, if we have
r4 : 2 wheels(x),Transport(x),¬Engine(x) ⇒c Bike(x)
r7 : Bike(x) ;c Vehicle(x)
r7 states that, if we know that some x is a bike, this is not sufﬁcient to prove that x is
a vehicle (r7 is a defeater), but it is sufﬁcient to block other rules which would lead to
exclude that x is a vehicle. This means that, possibly, if x is a bike, then it could not
be unreasonable to consider x as a vehicle (for a similar reading of defeaters in terms
of 3, but applied to the concept of permission, see [10,12]). Hence, the revision would
require, for example, that r7 is replaced by
r0 : Bike(x) ⇒c Vehicle(x)
The framework we have informally depicted above suggests that we also need a logical
component to reason about goals. Such a component should enable us to check whether
some situations promote goals or their negations. For our purpose it is sufﬁcient to
introduce a suitable set of rules for goals [11] which should be used to establish what
are the effects of situations where legal rules are violated or complied with, and, in
doing so, to see whether they are consistent with the goals. In other words, we have
to devise a set of rules like d1,...,dn ⇒G e: if applicable in a given context, this rule
allows for deriving G e, meaning that e is a goal promoted by the underlying normative

A Formal Study on Legal Compliance and Interpretation
169
theory D. Consider once again rule r2; suppose that its goal is pedestrian safety and
that Mary’s case is described by the following set H of facts:
H = {Bike(b), Park(p), Enter(b,p),
NarrowSpace(p), UnprotectedChildArea(p)}
H states that Mary enters the park p with her bike b. The park has narrow spaces for
walking and there are unprotected children’s play areas. This set assumes that r2 is
violated, at least in the hypothetical perspective in which Mary should not enter.
Suppose now that rules for goals correspond to the following set:
RG = {r8 : Bike(x),Park(y),Enter(x,y) ⇒G fast circulation,
r9 : NarrowSpace(x),UnprotectedChildArea(x),
Gfast circulation ⇒G ¬pedestrian safety}
Rule r8 states that entering parks with bikes promotes the fast circulation of people in
those parks; rule r9 says that, if fast circulation is promoted (i.e., it is possible to derive
as goal of the normative theory fast circulation, that is, Gfast circulation) and parks
have narrow spaces and unprotected children’s play areas, then the promoted goal is the
negation of pedestrians safety. If so, if Mary’s bike is allowed to enter, then we would
promote a goal which is incompatible with the goal of r2.
4
The Logical Framework
The following framework is an extension of DL; such an extension is in line with works
such as [10,11]. In particular, on account of the informal presentation given in the previ-
ous section, while counts-as rules do not prove modalised literals, the system develops
a constructive account of those modalities that rather correspond to obligations and
goals: rules for these concepts are thus meant to devise suitable logical conditions for
introducing modalities. For example, while a counts-as rule such as a1,...,an ⇒c b, if
applicable, will basically support the conclusion of b, rules such as a1,...,an ⇒O b and
d1,...,dn ⇒G e if applicable, will allow for deriving O b and G e, meaning the former
that b is obligatory, the latter that e is a goal promoted by the facts used to derive it (as
previously explained).
Note that the framework is restricted to essentially propositional DL. Indeed, rules
with free variables are interpreted as rule schemas, that is, as the set of all ground
instances; in such cases we assume that the Herbrand universe is ﬁnite. This assumption
is harmless in this context, as the rule applicability domains at hand always refer to ﬁnite
set of individuals.
In our language, for X ∈{c,O,G}, strict rules have the form φ1,...,φn →X ψ. De-
feasible rules have the form φ1,...,φn ⇒X ψ. A rule of the form φ1,...,φn ;X ψ is a
defeater. A rule can be understood as a binary relationship between a set of premises
and a conclusion. Accordingly, the mode determines the type of conclusion one can
obtain, and the three types of rules establish the strength of the relationship. Strict rules
provide the most stronger connection between a set of premises and their conclusion:

170
G. Boella et al.
whenever the premises are deemed as indisputable so is the conclusion; then we have
defeasible rules: a defeasible rules, given the premises, allows us to derive the con-
clusion unless there is evidence for its contrary; ﬁnally we have defeaters. A defeater
suggests that there is a connection between its premises and the conclusion, but this
connection is not strong enough to warrant the conclusion on its own; on the other hand
a defeater shows that there is some evidence for the conclusion, thus it can be used to
defeat rules for the opposite conclusion.
Deﬁnition 1 (Language). Let PROP be a set of propositional atoms, Goal be a set of
goal atoms, MOD = {c,O,G}, and Lbl be a set of labels. The sets deﬁned below are
the smallest sets closed under the given construction conditions:
Literals and goals
Lit = PROP∪{¬p|p ∈PROP}
GoalLit = Goal∪{¬g|g ∈Goal}
If q is a literal or a goal, ∼q denotes the complementary literal or goal (if q is a
positive literal or goal p then ∼q is ¬p; and if q is ¬p, then ∼q is p);
Modal literals and modal goals
ModLit = {Ol,¬Ol|l ∈Lit}
ModGoal = {Gl,¬Gl|g ∈GoalLit};
Rules. Rul = Ruls ∪Ruld ∪Ruldft, where X ∈{c,O} and Ruls = RulX
s ∪RulG
s , Ruld =
RulX
d ∪RulG
d , and Ruldft = RulX
dft ∪RulG
dft such that
RulX
s = {r : φ1,...,φn →X ψ|r ∈Lbl,A(r) ⊆Lit,ψ ∈Lit}
RulG
s = {r : φ1,...,φn →G ψ|
r ∈Lbl,A(r) ⊆Lit∪ModLit∪ModGoal,ψ ∈GoalLit}
RulX
d = {r : φ1,...,φn ⇒X ψ|r ∈Lbl,A(r) ⊆Lit,ψ ∈Lit}
RulG
d = {r : φ1,...,φn ⇒G ψ|
r ∈Lbl,A(r) ⊆Lit∪ModLit∪ModGoal,ψ ∈GoalLit}
RulX
dft = {r : φ ;X ψ|r ∈Lbl,A(r) ⊆Lit,ψ ∈Lit}
RulG
dft = {r : φ1,...,φn ;G ψ|
r ∈Lbl,A(r) ⊆Lit∪ModLit∪ModGoal,ψ ∈GoalLit}
We use some obvious abbreviations, such as superscripts for the rule mode (c,G,O),
subscripts for the type of rule, and Rul[φ] for rules whose consequent is φ, for
example:
Rulc = {r : φ1,...,φn →c ψ| →∈{→,⇒,;}}
Rulsd = {r : φ1,...,φn →X ψ|X ∈MOD,→∈{→,⇒}}
Ruls[ψ] = {φ1,...,φn →X ψ|X ∈MOD}
We use A(r) to denote the set {φ1,...,φn} of antecedents of the rule r, and C(r) to
denote the consequent ψ of the rule r.
A normative theory is the knowledge base which is used to reason about the applicabil-
ity of legal rules included in the theory itself.

A Formal Study on Legal Compliance and Interpretation
171
Deﬁnition 2 (Normative Theory). A normative theory is a structure
D = (F,G,Rc,RO,RG,≻,G ,>)
where
– F ⊆Lit∪ModLit∪ModGoal is a ﬁnite set of facts;
– G ⊆GoalLit is a set of rule goals,
– Rc ⊆Rulc is a ﬁnite set of counts-as rules,
– RO ⊆RulO is a ﬁnite set of obligation rules,
– RG ⊆RulG is a ﬁnite set of goal rules,
– ≻is an acyclic relation (called superiority relation) deﬁned over (Rc ×Rc)∪(RO ×
RO)∪(RG ×RG),
– G : RO →G is a function assigning a goal to each obligation rule,
– > is a partial order over G deﬁning the relative importance of the rule goals.
Proofs are sequences of literals and modal literals together with the so-called proof tags
+Δ, −Δ, +∂and −∂. If X ∈{c,O,G}, given a normative theory D, +ΔXq means that
literal q is provable in D using only facts and strict rules for X, −ΔXq means that it has
been proved in D that q is not deﬁnitely provable in D, +∂Xq means that q is defeasibly
provable in D, and −∂Xq means that it has been proved in D that q is not defeasibly
provable in D.
Deﬁnition 3. Given a normative theory D, a proof in D is a linear derivation, i.e, a
sequence of labelled formulas of the type +ΔXq, −ΔXq, +∂Xq and −∂Xq, where the
proof conditions deﬁned in the rest of this section hold.
Deﬁnition 4. Let D be a normative theory. Let # ∈{Δ,∂} and X ∈{O,G}, and P =
(P(1),...,P(n)) be a proof in D. A literal q is #-provable in P if there is a line P(m),
1 ≤m ≤n, of P such that either
1. q is a literal and P(m) = +#cq or
2. q is a modal literal or a modal goal X p and P(m) = +#X p or
3. q is a modal literal or a modal goal ¬X p and P(m) = −#X p.
A literal q is #-rejected in P if there is a line P(m) of P such that
1. q is a literal and P(m) = −#cq or
2. q is a modal literal or a modal goal X p and P(m) = −#X p or
3. q is a modal literal or a modal goal ¬X p and P(m) = +#X p.
The deﬁnition of ΔX, X ∈{c,O,G} describes just forward (monotonic) chaining of
strict rules2:
+ΔX: If P(n +1) = +ΔXq then
(1) q ∈F if X = c or Xq ∈F or
(2) ∃r ∈RX
s [q] : ∀a ∈A(r) a is Δ-provable.
2 For space reasons, in the remainder we present only the proof conditions for +Δ and +∂.
Conditions for the negative tags are obtained using the so-called principle of strong negation
and the notion of #-rejected [10].

172
G. Boella et al.
To show that a literal q is defeasibly provable with the mode X we have two choices:
(1) We show that q is already deﬁnitely provable; or (2) we need to argue using the
defeasible part of a normative theory D. For this second case, some (sub)conditions
must be satisﬁed. First, we need to consider possible reasoning chains in support of
∼q with the mode X, and show that ∼q is not deﬁnitely provable with that mode (2.1
below). Second, we require that there must be a strict or defeasible rule with mode X for
q which can be applied (2.2 below). Third, we must consider the set of all rules which
are not known to be inapplicable and which permit to get ∼q with the mode X (2.3
below). Essentially, each such a rule s attacks the conclusion q. For q to be provable,
s must be counterattacked by a rule t for q with the following properties: (i) t must be
applicable, and (ii) t must prevail over s. Thus each attack on the conclusion q must be
counterattacked by a stronger rule. In other words, r and the rules t form a team (for q)
that defeats the rules s. Note that in our framework, in addition to ≻, also goals can be
used to determine the relative strength of any legal rule in case of conﬂicts with other
rules; the following deﬁnition enables us to handle together goal preferences and the
superiority relation ≻.
Deﬁnition 5. Let D = (F,G,Rc,RO,RG,≻,G ,>) be a normative theory. A rule r pre-
vails over another rule s iff
– G (r) > G (s) or
– r ≺s and G (s) ̸> G (r)
+∂X: If P(n +1) = +∂Xq then
(1)+ΔXq ∈P(1..n) or
(2) (2.1) −ΔX∼q ∈P(1..n) and
(2.2) ∃r ∈RX
sd[q] such that ∀a ∈A(r) a is ∂-provable, and
(2.3) ∀s ∈RX[∼q] either ∃a ∈A(s) such that a is ∂-rejected, or
(2.3.1) ∃t ∈RX[q] such that ∀a ∈A(r) a is ∂-provable and
t prevails over s
Deﬁnition 6. Given a normative theory D, D ⊢±#Xl (i.e., ±#Xl is a conclusion of D),
where # ∈{Δ,∂} and X ∈{c,O,G}, iff there is a proof P = (P(1),...,P(n)) in D such
that P(n) = ±#Xl.
It is worth noting that our logic enjoys nice computational properties:
Theorem 1. For every normative theory D, the conclusions of D can be computed in
time linear to the size of the theory, i.e., O(|UD|∗|R|), where UD is the Herbrand base
of the normative theory D.
Proof. The proof comes directly from the result provided in [11,10]. In fact, the current
logic is structurally similar to those presented there.
5
A Framework for Revising Constitutive Rules
5.1
Legal Compliance: Why Interpret?
The informal discussion presented in Section 3 requires to formally characterise those
situations where a context and an action or fact make a norm applicable, fulﬁl it and

A Formal Study on Legal Compliance and Interpretation
173
those situations where the behaviour of the agent either promotes or undermines the
goal of a norm.
Deﬁnition 7 (Context). A context H is a set of literals {f1,..., fm}.
The context just identiﬁes a set of literals ‘relevant’ for a particular case. In particular
we will use the context as the set of factors used to determine whether we need to extend
or restrict the interpretation to terms. Another possible use of the context is to set up
hypothetical scenarios.
Deﬁnition 8 (Rule Applicability). Given a context H, let
D = (F ∪H,G,Rc,RO,RG,≻,G ,>)
be a normative theory.
A rule r ∈RO is applicable in D iff, for all b ∈A(r), b is ∂c-provable in D.
Remark 1. The notion of rule applicability is technically straightforward. It expresses
the idea that a norm r is applicable iff all the antecedents of r are provable using the
constitutive rules of the theory. Notice that we focus only to the case where the an-
tecedents are defeasibly provable (∂-provable). This does not mean that, given the rule
r, if the antecedents are indisputably provable (Δ-provable), the rule is not applicable
at all. Quite the contrary. The reason why we work only on defeasible provability is
that, in our framework, the process of revision of the applicability conditions of a rule
is possible only when the antecedents are defeasibly derivable. Indeed, as we will see,
blocking the applicability of a rule requires resorting to defeaters and so can be done
only when the applicability of a rule is not indisputable (defeaters are weaker in our
logic than strict rules).
We now introduce the notion of compliance to a norm and violation:
Deﬁnition 9 (Rule Fulﬁlment and Violation). A normative theory
D = (F,G,Rc,RO,RG,≻,G ,>)
and a context H fulﬁl r ∈RO
sd iff,
– if we have that
D′ = (F ∪H,G,Rc,RO,RG,≻,G ,>) ⊢+∂OC(r)
– r is applicable in D′
then, either
– D′ ⊢+∂cl when C(r) is a positive literal l (r is a conditional obligation) or
– D′ ⊢−∂cl or D′ ⊢+∂c¬l when C(r) is a negative literal ¬l (r is a conditional
prohibition).
D and H violate the rule r whenever D and H do not fulﬁl r.

174
G. Boella et al.
Remark 2. For the notion of rule fulﬁllment and violation it is not sufﬁcient for a norm
to be applicable, but the conclusion of the norm should be derivable +∂OC(r) too, since
other rules with higher priority could defeat it. In this case, the norm is fulﬁlled if the
object of the norm l is defeasibly derivable, +∂cl, (or the contrary is not derivable, −∂cl
in case of prohibitions, i.e., obligations concerning a negated literal ¬l). It is violated in
the opposite case.
Example 1. Suppose we have a context H with the following facts:
H = {Park,Bike,Enter}
The set of constitutive rules contains only the following
r0 : Bike ⇒c Vehicle
while the set of legal rules only includes
r2 : Vehicle,Park ⇒O ¬Enter
Clearly, rule r2 is violated because it is applicable, we can obtain +∂O¬Enter (rule r is
not defeated) but we have Enter.
Before revising a rule, the judge has to consider whether the goal of the norm has been
violated or promoted.
Deﬁnition 10 (Goal Violation and Promotion). A normative theory
D = (F,G,Rc,RO,RG,≻,G ,>)
and the context H = { f1,..., fm} violate the goal g of r : b1,...,bn →O l ∈RO
sd iff
(F,G,Rc,RO,RG,≻,G ,>) ⊢−∂G¬g
(F ∪H,G,Rc,RO,RG,≻,G ,>) ⊢+∂G¬g
D and H promote the goal g of r iff
(F,G,Rc,RO,RG,≻,G ,>) ⊢−∂Gg
(F ∪H,G,Rc,RO,RG,≻,G ,>) ⊢+∂Gg
Remark 3. The goal is violated if the opposite goal is derived, while it is promoted if
it follows from the normative theory using the goal rules. Note that to verify whether
the goal of the norm is violated, it is not sufﬁcient that the opposite goal is defeasibly
derived from the context (+∂G¬g), but it is necessary to verify that from the normative
theory itself does not defeasibly derive the opposite goal. The same must be done for
goal promotion.
Example 2. Let us assume to have the rules of Example 1 and the following context H:
H = {Park,Bike,Enter}

A Formal Study on Legal Compliance and Interpretation
175
Table 1. Violation and Interpretation
Applicable Rule Fulﬁlment Rule Goal What-if
Judiciary
Law-making
0
no
no
no
no
ineffective
1
no
no
no
yes
expand, violation
restrictive
2
no
no
yes
no
contradictory
3
no
no
yes
yes
superﬂuous
4
no
yes
no
no
like 0
5
no
yes
no
yes
like 2
6
no
yes
yes
no
expand
7
no
yes
yes
yes
like 3
8
yes
no
no
no
restrict
ineffective
9
yes
no
no
yes
violation
10
yes
no
yes
no
restrict
like 2
11
yes
no
yes
yes
restrict
superﬂuous
12
yes
yes
no
no
ineffective
13
yes
yes
no
yes
contradictory
restrict
14
yes
yes
yes
no
15
yes
yes
yes
yes
superﬂuous
Suppose now that the goal of r2 is pedestrian safety. The set of goal rules consists of
r10 : Bike,Park,¬Enter ⇒G pedestrian safety
r′
10 : Bike,Park,Enter ⇒G ¬pedestrian safety
We can apply rule r′
10 and so we obtain +∂G¬pedestrian safety, which could not be
proved if we did not consider the context H. Hence, H and D violate the goal of r2. On
the contrary, if H contains ¬Enter instead of Enter, we obtain +∂Gpedestrian safety,
thus promoting the goal of r2.
The concepts above are sufﬁcient to deﬁne an exhaustive taxonomy of cases among
which we can identify those that require the restriction or expansion of the applicability
conditions of legal rules.
Let us consider in Table 1 a normative theory D and a legal rule r : b1,...,bn →O
l (→∈{→,⇒}) in it, such that the goal of r is g. As informally discussed before,
we have to assess if ∼l and a certain set of circumstances H amount to a violation
of r or not. There are several parameters to consider: the applicability of the norm,
its fulﬁlment or violation (whether we have l or ∼l), and the satisfaction or not of
the goal associated to the norm. Besides these factors, we should consider for each
combination whether a different behaviour of the agent would result in a situation which
is advantageous for the law or not (column “What if” considers the goal satisfaction
assuming the opposite of what indicated in the column Rule Fulﬁlment)3. The last two
columns classify the cases under two dimensions: ﬁrst (“judiciary”), the judge should
or should not change the applicability conditions of the norm in the case under exam
3 In other words, if the column “Rule Fulﬁlment” indicates “no” (∼l), the column “What-if”
indicates whether the rule goal is promoted by having l, and viceversa.

176
G. Boella et al.
of the judicial system (with the two subcases of restricting or expanding applicability
conditions); second (“Law-making”), the norm is not adequate from the juridical point
of view (the legislator should change it).
We focus on the cases which are relevant for the judiciary point of view: the agent
ﬁned by the police goes to a court to defend his case. Case 1 is the prototypical case for
expansion: the norm is not applicable but if it were applicable, the agent would have
violated it by not achieving l. This behaviour does not satisfy the goal g of the norm, so
considering the agent a violator would be useless. Before deciding that it is necessary
to enlarge the norm applicability conditions to cover the current case, the judge must
make a what-if hypothetical analysis and verify that the goal would have been achieved
if the agent complied with the norm. Otherwise we have just an ineffective norm, whose
satisfaction does not contribute to the goal (see Case 0). Case 6 requires expansion too,
but only from the point of view of the legislator, since the agent is fulﬁlling the norm.
The situation for norm restriction is more complicated. In Case 8 the agent should
considered as a violator, since he did not respect an applicable norm. His behaviour
does not achieve the goal of the norm, but before declaring him a violator the judge has
to check if a compliant behaviour would have achieved the goal of the norm. If yes, the
agent is really violating the norm (Case 9), otherwise the norm must be restricted since
in the current situation the norm is useless (Case 8). Cases 10 and 11 do not instead
require a what-if analysis since the agent is achieving the goal even if he violates the
norm. In both cases the judge declares the agent non violator and restricts the applica-
bility conditions of the norm to exclude the current situation. The two cases differ only
from the juridical point of view, but discussing this dimension is beyond the scope of
the paper.
5.2
Revising the Rule Scope
Before formally presenting the operations of expansion and contraction of the appli-
cability conditions of rules, let us introduce an auxiliary concept, which is needed to
identify possible reasoning chains leading to a conclusion we want to contract (in the
case Lex magis dixit quam voluit), or reinstate or introduce (in the case Lex minus dixit
quam voluit).
Deﬁnition 11 (Reasoning chains). Let
D = (F,G,Rc,RO,RG,≻,G ,>)
be a normative theory. A counts-as reasoning chain C in D for a literal l is a ﬁnite
sequence R1,...,Rn where
– Ri ⊆Rc, 1 ≤i ≤n,
– Rn = {a1,...,am →c l| →∈{→,⇒,;}},
– Rk ⊆Rc, 1 < k ≤n, is such that ∀rk ∈Rk, ∀b ∈A(rk) : ∃rk−1 ∈Rk−1 : b =C(rk−1).
For all s ∈Ri, 1 ≤i ≤n, we will say that s is in C . If a literal p occurs in the head or
the body of any s in C , we will say that p is in C . We deﬁne analogously a goal or an
obligation reasoning chain C in D for a literal l when all rules in C are in RG or RO,
respectively.

A Formal Study on Legal Compliance and Interpretation
177
Remark 4. The concept of reasoning chain is nothing but the proof-theoretic version
of the notion of argument for a literal l in the Argumentation Semantics for DL [8].
Consider the following example:
c
a
f
e
b
g
d
r : e ⇒c f
s : f ⇒c a
t : d ⇒c g
u : g ⇒c b
w : a,b ⇒c c
The tree on the left side is the argument for the literal c we can build using the rules r,
s, t, u, w on the right side (provided that e and d hold). The structure can be reframed
in terms of a reasoning chain: Rn, n = 3, contains the rule w; Rn−1 contains the rules s
and u; ﬁnally, Rn−2 contains r and t. Note that the main difference between the notion
of argument and that of reasoning chain is that we allow in reasoning chains to have
defeaters in any sets, whereas the arc of an argument can correspond to a defeater only
if it is at the top of the tree. Indeed, a defeater cannot prove anything but only block
conclusions. On the contrary, we want to select here also those chains in which defeaters
can be replaced, for instance, by defeasible rules in order to reinstate or introduce new
conclusions (Lex minus dixit quam voluit).
We are now ready to formally deﬁne the operations of expansion (Lex minus dixit quam
voluit) and contraction (Lex magis dixit quam voluit) of the applicability conditions of
a norm corresponding to the cases 1, 8, 10, and 11 of Table 1. The following operations
thus implement the intuitions we have illustrated above and in Section 3.
Deﬁnition 12 (Rule Expansion). Let
D = (F,G,Rc,RO,RG,≻,G ,>)
be a normative theory, r : b1,...,bn →O l ∈RO be a legal rule, and H be a context. If
1.

bk,...bk+j

⊆A(r) and, for all bt, k ≤t ≤k + j,
(F ∪H,G,Rc,RO,RG,≻,G ,>) ̸⊢+∂cbt
2. D and H ∪{∼l} violate the goal g of r, and
3. D and H ∪{l} promote the goal g of r, and
4. there exist the counts-as reasoning chains Ck,...Ck+j in D for bk,...bk+j, such that
for each f ∈H, f is in Ch, k ≤h ≤k + j,
then the expansion of the applicability conditions of a legal rule r with respect to the
context H corresponds to the following operation D∗
bk,...,bk+j over D:
D∗
bk,...,bk+j = (F,G,R′c,RO,RG,≻′,G ,>)
where
R′c =Rc −

r′ : d1,...,dn ;c e|r′ is in Ch

∪

r′ : d1,...,dn ⇒c e

≻′=(≻∪

r′ ≻s|r′ is in Ch,s ∈Rc[∼C(r′)]

)−

t ≻r′|t ∈Rc[∼C(r′)]


178
G. Boella et al.
such that
D′ = (F ∪H,G,R′c,RO,RG,≻′,G ,>) ⊢−∂G¬g′
where g′ is the goal of any rule z ∈RO
sd applicable in D′ such that g ̸> g′.
Remark 5. This deﬁnition considers the situation where a norm r is only partially ap-
plicable since some of the conditions cannot be derived from the facts F and context H
(1). However, in this situation, not respecting the norm (i.e., ∼l) leads to a violation of
the goal g of norm r (2). This violation of the goal would be avoided by complying with
the norm, i.e., by achieving l (3). Moreover, the constitutive rules suggest that some
elements of the context could be interpreted as the missing applicability conditions of
the rule r (4). Thus, the normative theory should be expanded by transforming some
defeater rules among the constitutive rules, in defeasible rules. The resulting normative
theory is however subject to the ﬁnal constraint that no other more important goal g′ of
any norm would be violated (−∂G¬g′).
Example 3. Consider the following normative theory augmented with the context H
regarding Mary’s case4:
F = {Park, UnprotectedChildArea, NarrowSpace}
H = {2 wheels, Transport, ¬Engine}
G = {fast circulation, pedestrian safety}
Rc = {r4 : 2 wheels, Transport, ¬Engine ⇒c Bike,
r7 : Bike ;c Vehicle,
r11 : Transport,¬Engine ⇒c ¬Vehicle}
RO = {r2 : Vehicle,Park ⇒O ¬Enter,
r12 : Vehicle,NarrowSpace ⇒O ¬Stop}
RG = {r8 : Bike,Park,Enter ⇒G fast circulation,
r9 : NarrowSpace,UnprotectedChildArea,Gfast circulation ⇒G ¬pedestrian safety,
r13 : NarrowSpace,Vehicle ⇒G fast circulation,
r10 : Bike,Park,¬Enter ⇒G pedestrian safety}
≻= {r11 ≻r7}
G = {G (r2) = pedestrian safety, G (r12) = fast circulation}
>= {pedestrian safety > fast circulation}
Suppose Enter holds. This may correspond to a potential violation of r2. This is not
the case, because r2 is not triggered and we do not derive Vehicle. However, we obtain
the negation of the goal pedestrian safety via r9, i.e., the goal of r2 is undermined.
Condition 3 of the deﬁnition above is satisﬁed, since, via r10 the compliant situation
(¬Enter) promotes the goal of r2.
Since we have r7 we can construct a counts-as reasoning chain supporting Vehicle,
and so the judge can expand the applicability conditions of r2 by transforming it in the
defeasible rule r4:
4 Rules with free variables are interpreted as the set of all ground instances. Hence, we represent
the facts and rules discussed in Section 3 as constituted by propositional literals.

A Formal Study on Legal Compliance and Interpretation
179
r4 : Bike ⇒c Vehicle
By considering bicycles as vehicles we trigger r13 and promote fast circulation, which
is incompatible with pedestrian safety (via r9). However, pedestrian safety is more
important than fast circulation.
The remaining case concerns contracting the applicability conditions of a norm in the
cases illustrated in Table 1.
Deﬁnition 13 (Rule Contraction). Let
D = (F,G,Rc,RO,RG,≻,G ,>)
be a normative theory, r : b1,...,bn →O l ∈RO be a legal rule, and H = { f1,..., fm}
be a context. If
1. D and H ∪∼l violate the rule r, and
2. either
– Case 8 of Table 1:
(a) D and H ∪{∼l}, and D and H ∪{l}, violate the goal g of r, and
(b) there exists a bk ∈A(r), such that bk occurs in every goal reasoning chain
C for ¬g in at least one of the following normative theories
(F ∪H ∪{∼l},G,Rc,RO,RG,≻,G ,>)
if ∼l is in C
(F ∪H ∪{l},G,Rc,RO,RG,≻,G ,>)
if l is in C
– Case 10 of Table 1:
(a) D and H ∪{∼l} promote the goal g of r, and D and H ∪{l} violate the
goal g of r,
(b) there exists a bk ∈A(r), such that bk occurs in every goal reasoning chain
C for X in at least one of the following normative theories
(F ∪H ∪{∼l},G,Rc,RO,RG,≻,G ,>)
if ∼l is in C , X = g
(F ∪H ∪{l},G,Rc,RO,RG,≻,G ,>)
if l is in C , X = ¬g
– Case 11 of Table 1:
(a) D and H ∪{∼l}, and D and H ∪{l}, promote the goal g of r,
(b) there exists a bk ∈A(r), such that bk occurs in every goal reasoning chain
C for g in at least one of the following normative theories
(F ∪H ∪{∼l},G,Rc,RO,RG,≻,G ,>)
if ∼l is in C
(F ∪H ∪{l},G,Rc,RO,RG,≻,G ,>)
if l is in C
then the contraction of the applicability conditions of a legal rule r with respect to the
context H corresponds to the following operation D−
bk over D:
D−
bk = (F,G,R′c,RO,RG,≻′,G ,>)
where
R′c =Rc ∪{r : f1,..., fm ; ∼bk}
≻′ = ≻−{s ≻r | r ∈R′c −Rc}.

180
G. Boella et al.
– such that
D′ = (F ∪H,G,R′c,RO,RG,≻′,G ,>) ⊢−∂G¬g′
where g′ is the goal of any rule z ∈RO
sd applicable in D′ such that g ̸> g′.
Remark 6. The applicability conditions of a legal rule should be contracted if the rule
is applicable in the current context and it is violated by ∼l according to Deﬁnition 9 (1)
and one of the conditions 8, 10 and 11 of Table 1 is satisﬁed (2).
In Case 8 we have that the goal is violated not only by ∼l but also by complying
with the norm (a); moreover, there exists at least one of the antecedents of the legal rule
which is used in all goal reasoning chains, in which either l or ∼l occur, to prove ¬g
(the goal violation of the legal rule) (b). Thus, we have reasons to block the counts-as
derivation of such an antecedent.
In Case 10, we have that the violation of the norm (∼l) unexpectedly promotes the
goal g of the norm, while compliance (l) doesn’t (a); moreover, there exists at least
one of the antecedents of the legal rule which is used in all goal reasoning chains, in
which l occurs, to prove g (the goal promotion of the legal rule), while an antecedent is
used in all goal reasoning chains, in which ∼l occurs, to prove ¬g (the goal violation
of the legal rule) (b). Thus, we have reasons to block the counts-as derivation of such
antecedents.
Finally in Case 11, we have that the goal of the norm is promoted independently
from the fulﬁlment or violation of the norm (a); moreover the same as part (b) of Case
8 must hold.
If (1) and (2) hold, the normative theory can be contracted by adding defeaters to the
rules which can make true the condition bk identiﬁed in the (b) steps of the cases above.
As for the case of expansion, the resulting normative theory is however subject to
the ﬁnal constraint that no other more important goal g′ of any norm would be violated
(−∂G¬g′).
Example 4. Let us simplify the normative theory of the Example 3 to illustrate Case 10
of Table 1. (The other cases of contraction in the table have a similar treatment.)
F = {Enter}
H = {Bike,Park}
G = {fast circulation}
Rc = {r′
7 : Bike ⇒c Vehicle}
RO = {r2 : Vehicle,Park ⇒O ¬Enter}
RG = {r8 : Bike,Park,Enter ⇒G fast circulation,
r14 : Park,Vehicle,¬Enter ⇒G ¬fast circulation}
≻= {r14 ≻r8}
G = {G (r2) = fast circulation}
> =
/0
The facts in F and H make all rules applicable, with the exception of r14. The violation
of r2, which allows for deriving +∂O¬Enter, leads to promote the goal of this rule,

A Formal Study on Legal Compliance and Interpretation
181
while the compliance implies the violation of the goal. Hence, conditions 1 and (a) of
Case 10 in Table 1 are satisﬁed. The only literal we can contract is Vehicle, which occurs
in the goal reasoning chain supporting ¬fast circulation (Bike and Park are facts and
cannot be removed). Thus, we can contract the applicability conditions of r2 by adding
a defeater r15 : Bike,Park ;c ¬Vehicle and by stating that r15 is stronger than r′
7.
Note that the operations D∗
bk,...,bk+j and D−
bk introduced in Deﬁnitions 12 and 13 cor-
respond to special cases of AGM revision and contraction of conclusions in DL [3].
Indeed, under some preconditions, expanding the applicability conditions of a norm
amounts to modifying the rules and the superiority relation even if the negation of one
or more elements in bk,...,bk+j are derivable in D. However, due to the sceptical nature
of DL, we still do not get a contradiction. On the other hand, under suitable precondi-
tions, contracting the applicability conditions of a norm corresponds to preventing the
proof of bk. R′c ensures that if bk has been proven, a defeater with head ¬bk will ﬁre. [3]
provided a reformulation within DL of AGM postulates for revision and contraction:
the results provided there can be trivially extended to our framework.
Theorem 2. If preconditions 1, 2, 3, and 4 of Deﬁnition 12 hold, D∗
bk,...,bk+j satisﬁes the
reformulation of AGM postulates for revision given in [3]. If preconditions 1 and 2 of
Deﬁnition 13 hold, D−
bk satisﬁes the reformulation of AGM postulates for contraction
given in [3].
6
Related Work and Conclusions
In this paper we proposed a formal method for modelling extensive and restrictive inter-
pretations in statutory law. The contribution is based on the idea that the interpretation
of legal concepts may require to change the counts-as rules deﬁning them. Indeed, if
our ontology does not classify a bike as a vehicle, but we have reasons that this is the
case, then this implicitly leads to conclude that the ontology must be revised and that a
bike, at least in the contexts under consideration, is a vehicle. In this paper we assume
that a reason is a chain of rules (or better a tree) a set of premises (corresponding to
the context) to the conclusion we want to support, and that we can revise it if there are
defeaters in the chain that prevent a positive derivation of the conclusion. The operation
we perform for expansion is to strengthen such defeaters to defeasible rules, while for
contractions we simply introduce new defeaters. In the expansion case, the transforma-
tion of defeaters in defeasible rules allows us to derive the desired conclusion; in the
case of contraction the new defeaters prevent its derivation, but at the same time they
do not allow for the derivation of the opposite. The technique presented here is not the
only possible; another option, not considered in this paper is to look again at chain of
rules, and instead of changing the strength of the rules we can change the superiority
relation (i.e., the relative strength of rules), as proposed in [9].
This revision operation presented in this paper are driven and constrained by con-
sidering the goal of the legal rules in which these concepts occur. To the best of our
knowledge, there is no work so far devoted to the dynamics and revision of constitutive
rules, and no proposal regarding how to model the interpretation of legal rules in these
terms. In our perspective, it is possible to identify some interesting logical links between

182
G. Boella et al.
the process of legal interpretation and AGM operations of contraction and revision in
rule-based systems such as DL (Theorem 2). In addition, our work has the advantage of
using a logical framework which is computationally feasible (see Theorem 1).
An extensive literature is devoted to legal ontologies (see, e.g., the survey in [6]),
but it is oriented to develop applications in the ﬁeld of semantic web and rule inter-
change languages for the legal domain, applications which are not our primary concern.
Also, these approaches usually fail to deal with the defeasibility and dynamics of legal
concepts.
The possibility to model legal and normative ontologies via constitutive rules has
a solid philosophical backgrounds (see [20,19]). In the ﬁeld of normative multi-agent
systems, the only work which addressed the problem of the penumbra of legal concepts
within a complete theory of counts-as rules is [13]. [13] provides very complex modal
account of counts-as rules in which the problem of the penumbra is analysed here in
terms of the notion of context. A ‘penumbral meaning’ is then nothing else but the
set of individuals on which the contextual interpretation of the concept varies. How-
ever, [13] does not explain how the different extensions of a concept are related to the
contexts depending on the regulative norm whose violation is discussed. In addition,
what is lacking in that work is that it does not address the problem of the dynamics of
constitutive rules and does not consider the role of normative goals in determining the
applicability conditions of legal rules.
Several works in the literature of AI & Law have considered the role of teleological
reasoning in the legal interpretation. Indeed, this idea is standard in legal theory and
the goals of legal rules are recognised by jurists as decisive in clarifying the scope of
the legal concepts that qualify the applicability conditions for those rules [2,17,21,14].
[2,17] use goals and values in frameworks of case based reasoning for modelling prece-
dents mainly in a common law context. [21] analyses a number of legal arguments even
in statutory law, which include cases close to the ones discussed here. The proposal
which is closer to our contribution is [14]. In [14] Jaap Hage addresses, among others,
the problem of reconstructing extensive and restrictive interpretation. This is done in
Reason-Based Logic, a logical formalism that can deal with rules and reasons: the idea
is that the satisfaction of rules’ applicability conditions is usually a reason for applica-
tion of these rules, but there can also be other (and possibly competing) reasons, among
which we have the goals that led the legislator to make the rules.
All these approaches in AI & Law highlight the importance of rule goals, and [14], in
particular, follows this idea to formalise extensive and restrictive interpretation. How-
ever, it seems that no work so far has attempted to couple this view with a framework
for reasoning with counts-as rules and their dynamics. In this perspective, we believe
that this paper may contribute to ﬁll a gap in the literature.
References
1. Antoniou, G., Billington, D., Governatori, G., Maher, M.J.: Representation results for defea-
sible logic. ACM Trans. Comput. Log. 2(2), 255–287 (2001)
2. Bench-Capon, T.J.M.: The missing link revisited: The role of teleology in representing legal
argument. Artif. Intell. Law 10(1-3), 79–94 (2002)

A Formal Study on Legal Compliance and Interpretation
183
3. Billington, D., Antoniou, G., Governatori, G., Maher, M.J.: Revising nonmonotonic belief
sets: The case of defeasible logic. In: Burgard, W., Christaller, T., Cremers, A.B. (eds.) KI
1999. LNCS (LNAI), vol. 1701, pp. 101–112. Springer, Heidelberg (1999)
4. Boella, G., van der Torre, L.: Fulﬁlling or violating obligations in multiagent systems. In:
Procs. IAT 2004 (2004)
5. Boella, G., van der Torre, L.: Norm negotiation in multiagent systems. Int. Journal Coop. Inf.
Syst. 16(1), 97–122 (2007)
6. Casanovas, P. (ed.): Proc. LOAIT 2007. CEUR (2008)
7. Ginsberg, M.L.: Universal planning: An (almost) universally bad idea. AI Magazine 10(4),
40–44 (1989)
8. Governatori, G., Maher, M.J., Billington, D., Antoniou, G.: Argumentation semantics for
defeasible logics. Journal of Logic and Computation 14, 675–702 (2004)
9. Governatori, G., Olivieri, F., Scannapieco, S., Cristani, M.: Superiority based revision of
defeasible theories. In: Proc. NMR 2010. CUER (2010)
10. Governatori, G., Rotolo, A.: BIO logical agents: Norms, beliefs, intentions in defeasible
logic. Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems 17(1), 36–69 (2008)
11. Governatori, G., Rotolo, A.: A computational framework for institutional agency. Artif. In-
tell. Law 16(1), 25–52 (2008)
12. Governatori, G., Rotolo, A., Sartor, G.: Temporalised normative positions in defeasible logic.
In: Proc. ICAIL 2005, pp. 25–34. ACM, New York (2005)
13. Grossi, D.: Desigining Invisible Hancuffs. Formal Investigations in Institutions and Organi-
zations for Multi-Agent Systems. PhD thesis, Utrecht University (2007)
14. Hage, J.: Reasoning with Rules: An Essay on Legal Reasoning and Its Underlying Logic.
Kluwer, Dordrecht (1997)
15. Hart, H.L.A.: Positivism and the separation of law and morals. Harvard Law Review 71(4),
593–629 (1958)
16. Peczenik, A.: On law and reason. Kluwer, Dordrecht (1989)
17. Prakken, H.: An exercise in formalising teleological case-based reasoning. Artif. Intell.
Law 10, 113–133 (2002)
18. Sartor, G.: Legal reasoning: A cognitive approach to the law. Springer, Dordrecht (2005)
19. Sartor, G.: Fundamental legal concepts: A formal and teleological characterisation. Artif.
Intell. Law 14(1-2), 101–142 (2006)
20. Searle, J.R.: The Construction of Social Reality. The Free Press, New York (1995)
21. Skalak, D.B., Rissland, E.L.: Arguments and cases: An inevitable intertwining. Artif. Intell.
Law 1, 3–44 (1992)
22. van der Torre, L., Boella, G., Verhagen, H. (eds.): Normative Multi-agent Systems. Special
Issue of JAAMAS, vol. 17(1) (2008)

 
P. Casanovas et al. (Eds.): AICOL Workshops 2009, LNAI 6237, pp. 184–204, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
Legal Electronic Institutions and ONTOMEDIA: 
Dialogue, Inventio, and Relational Justice Scenarios 
Pompeu Casanovas 
Institute of Law and Technology (IDT), Autonomous University of Barcelona,  
Bellaterra, Barcelona-08193, Spain  
pompeu.casanovas@uab.cat  
Abstract. Since the seminal work by Perelman, Olbrechts-Tyteca, Toulmin, 
Ong, Giuliani and many others in late fifties and sixties, dialogue and argumen-
tation have increasingly been at the center of philosophical discussions. Mode-
lization of arguments and “argumentation schemes” constitute one of the main 
domains within the AI & Law field. The construction of Legal Electronic Insti-
tutions (LEI), and Ontomedia, an Online Dispute Resolution (ODR) platform in 
the context of the research carried out within the Catalan White Book on Me-
diation, has enhanced the discussion about fundamental issues on the theoretical 
approach taken in building such Web 2.0 and Web 3.0 tools. In this paper, I will 
address the question of how the content of ancient stasis, ekphrasis and inventio 
may be captured and reelaborated to define their theoretical backbones. I will 
call “relational justice” the conceptual legal framework in which Semantic Web 
strategies can be nested to offer a better user-centered service.   
Paraules clau: argumentation, dialogue, dialectic, rhetoric, Semantic Web, 
ODR, Electronic Legal Institutions, stasis, inventio, relational justice. 
1   Introduction 
During the last year, the Institute of Law and Technology (IDT-UAB) and many other 
research Institutes and Universities in Catalonia are currently developing the Catalan 
White Book on Mediation.1 Those are the preliminary works to draft a general statute 
introducing and defining mediation as a complementary dispute resolution tool for 
courts, local and regional administrations (municipalities and regional councils, e.g.), 
and social and economic institutions (such as hospitals, schools, consumer agencies or 
chambers of commerce).  
This is a sustained effort covering many fields of law —divorce and family prob-
lems, adult and juvenile crimes, labor conflicts, consumer complaints, commercial 
disputes, etc. Technology is certainly an issue. It is one of the areas being explored to 
set up online tools to facilitate business, citizens, customers and consumers to solve, 
or at least better manage, their disputes before suing and going to the courts. 
                                                           
1 See http://llibreblancmediacio.com  

 
Legal Electronic Institutions and ONTOMEDIA 
185 
 
A twofold strategy is being followed. First, in the spirit of the CONSOLIDER Pro-
ject Agreement Technologies2 and the COST initiative ICO801,3 an automated proto-
col and negotiation prototype is under construction by Pablo Noriega and Carlos 
López using electronic institutions technologies [1]. Second, Ontomedia, a general 
platform for mediation services, is being developed within two adjacent national pro-
jects as well. Several objectives have been already reached. The state of the art of 
ODR services has been established and updated [2, 3],4 and a preliminary middle-out 
mediation core-ontology is ready to be populated and worked out [7]. 
In this paper, I will reflect on the general purposes and theoretical background of 
these approaches to foster an interdisciplinary dialogue, and to open up the discussion 
to a broader audience. The paper is structured as follows. I will introduce, first, Legal 
Electronic Institutions (LEI) and Ontomedia.  Section 3 and 4 will reflect on their 
theoretical grounds, linking both strategies with the revival of the ancient traditions of 
dialectics, rhetoric and logic. Finally, in section 5, I will introduce the idea of rela-
tional justice to make sense of the technology and philosophical grounds described in 
the previous sections. 
2   LEI Strategy and Theoretical Approach  
It may be quickly noticed that, in fact, there is not a unique generic platform under 
construction, but two. In what it follows, the two strategies and theoretical approaches 
will be briefly described. 
2.1   ODR as Legal Electronic Institution  
The prototype proposed by Noriega and López [1] is based on the notion of electronic 
institution (EI) and assembled through the EIDE tools developed in the IIIA.5 It corre-
sponds to an attempt to automate as much as possible the ongoing interaction flow 
between two sides within conflict scenarios. In this situation, a multiagent system 
(MAS) may perform several interactive moves towards an eventual agreement. The 
whole process is plotted in Fig. 1, assuming a standard of non-intrusive mediation, 
arbitration and some forms of negotiation, not necessarily mediated. 
I will follow briefly now the authors’ own description. For a more complete and 
detailed explanation, the reader is invited to go directly to [1]. 
Electronic Institutions (EI) assume that all interactions are among autonomous 
agents, and that all interactions among agents are speech acts (that count as actions in 
the world). Noriega and López mention three main EI components: (i) the dialogical 
framework (specifying the content and interpretation of the admissible speech acts); (ii) 
the performative structure (indicating how the interactions are organized within the 
institution); (iii) the rules of behavior that put constraints on the actions (illocutions) 
that individuals who are playing a given role may take at some point in the enactment. 
                                                           
2  http://www.agreement-technologies.org/  
3  http://www.agreement-technologies.eu/  
4  “None of the service providers reviewed seems to have truly sophisticated ODR technologies 
like the ones reported in academic fora.” [1]. See the previous technical reports by  Stranieri, 
Yearwood and Zeleznikow [4], Tyler and Bretherton [5], and Thiessen and Zeleznikow [6]. 
5  http://e-institutions.iiia.csic.es    

186 
P. Casanovas 
 
When an EI is entitled to perform legal acts, or at the end of successive steps may pro-
duce a result with legal value, or an agreement that can be alleged in Court or before 
other appropriate ruling institutions, we face an Legal Electronic Institution (LEI). LEIs 
pose some interesting problems to the current legal theory that can be treated separately. 
I will not go deeper here. 
The authors show the complete performative structure of a mediation institution in 
Fig. 2, where the first box and the last one correspond to scenes and dark boxes corre-
spond to mediation activities: (i) a scene where the claimant chooses the type of nego-
tiation she wants to use, (ii) four different negotiation conventions, (iii) a scene for 
standard non-intrusive mediation, (iv) and two ensuing scenes for arbitration and 
recommendation. 
 
Fig. 1. Prototype structure. Source: [1]. 
The two starting and ending boxes start and terminate enactments. Lines connect-
ing boxes (and widgets) indicate transitions, labeled with the roles that may move 
from one scene to another. In this particular institution three roles have been modeled: 
parties (the two sides of a mediation process), staff (taking care of institutional func-
tions like time-keeping or record handling) and mediator.  
It may be noticed that this performative structure allows different institutional ways 
of ODR (negotiation, mediation, arbitration) following iterative cycles. However, it is 

 
Legal Electronic Institutions and ONTOMEDIA 
187 
 
not necessary to complete one full cycle (e.g. negotiation). It may be possible to go 
directly to the arbitration process, if this is the case.  
The important point is that in each separate box may be nested an autonomous ar-
gumentative process between the parties. This process may contain procedural rules 
which can be (at least partially) operated trough automated reasoning inferences. 
 
Fig. 2. Performative structure of a Legal Electronic Institution. Source: [1]. 
2.2   The Ontomedia Strategy 
Let’s go to the second model, now. Ontomedia follows a different strategy, a user-
centered approach which takes into account a more restricted definition of negotiation 
and mediation as ODR institutional devices, following the spirit of the EU Directive 
52/2008.6 It is not intended, at least primarily, to cover conciliation or arbitration 
                                                           
6 Art. 3.a. “‘Mediation’ means a structured process, however named or referred to,  hereby two 
or more parties to a dispute attempt by themselves, on a voluntary basis, to reach an agree-
ment on the settlement of their dispute with the assistance of a mediator” ; art. 3.b. ‘Mediator’ 
means any third person who is asked to conduct a mediation in an effective, impartial and 
competent way, regardless of the denomination or profession of that third person in the 
Member State concerned and of the way in which the third person has been appointed or re-
quested to conduct the mediation.” It is worth to mention R. (9): “This Directive should not is 
in any way prevent the use of modern communication technologies in the mediation process.” 

188 
P. Casanovas 
 
issues. They are not excluded of the underlying model, but what is intended to build 
up is a multi-layered and indirect strategy to assist either lay or professional people in 
their dispute resolution processes. This is a platform to be used by citizens, admini-
strations, institutions and professional mediators as well.  
In a nutshell, Ontomedia will allow users and professionals to meet in a commu-
nity-driven Web portal where contents are provided by users and annotated by the 
ODR Web Platform [7, 8]. Its usability is tailored on the domains previously identi-
fied within the Catalan White Book: commercial and business disputes, consumer 
complaints, labor conflicts, family, restorative justice (adult and juvenile mediation in 
criminal issues), community problems, local administration, health care, environ-
mental management, and education. 
It is worth noticing that to the extent that these are broad domains, the platform is 
conceived as generic. However, the means used to solve or manage a conflict are 
close up to the nature of the conflict. In a quarrel among teenagers in a high school, 
race, culture, family and class may constitute separate issues. The dispute components 
may be different from those in a contract-breaching problem between providers and 
consumers. A collective quarrel about the placement of a new mosque—not an infre-
quent social problem in Spanish towns—usually requires different interventions and 
several negotiation techniques in addition to mediation. To the extent that such con-
flicts may need a set of different negotiation tools, the use of an online platform re-
quires different functionalities linked to a previous definition of the available tools. 
This is usually called a “bus of services” or “service bus” [7, 8, 9]. 
 
Fig. 3. Layered Diagram of Ontomedia Mediation Platform. Source: [8] [9]. 
 

 
Legal Electronic Institutions and ONTOMEDIA 
189 
 
Citizens (both professionals and users of mediation services) may use any kind of 
device to access the portal (computers, mobiles), and in any format suitable for their 
purposes (text, speech, video, pictures). We are confident that this flexibility will 
allow users to participate in mediation services as in a face-to-face basis, but with the 
advantages of distributed and even remote access. 
Some ontologies are being constructed to annotate all kind of contents and also to 
help analyze multimedia content (see Fig. 3). The multimedia analysis is devoted to 
enhancing the information a mediator possess during a mediation session, capturing 
mood changes of the parties and any other psychological information that can be 
useful for mediators, just as if they were in a room with the users of the mediation 
service. All types of metadata can be automatically extracted and stored to be further 
used within the mediation process (provided the previous authorization by users). 
Ontomedia will also develop tools to encourage users to exploit the advantages of 
sharing information and experiences with others. In this way, users have the possibility 
to tag and store content that are useful or interesting to them, and to find similar cases. 
In doing so, they can create social communities of people with common interests. 
2.3   Inner and Outer Strategies between Web 2.0 and Web 3.0 
Conceptual models underlying strategies for the mediation LEI and Ontomedia are 
not incompatible, and they may be envisaged into the broader framework of the sec-
ond generation of Semantic Web developments.   
Both may comply with the features pointed out by Motta and Sabou [10, 11]: (i) 
reuse (vs. semantic data generation); (ii) multi-ontology systems (vs. single-ontology 
systems); (iii) openness with respect top semantic resources, (iv) scale as important as 
data quality, (v) openness with respect to Web (non-semantic resources), (vi) compli-
ance with the Web 2.0 paradigm, (vi) openness to services. 
LEI may incorporate the necessary flexibility to be interoperable and nested into a 
structure such Ontomedia. Easy and friendly access to justice can be offered through 
the so-called “Web of data”.7  The usage of RDF Schema (RDFS) and the Web On-
tology Language (OWL) allow the inference of relationships between data in different 
applications or in different parts of the same application.  Objects, and not only web-
sites, can be directly linked among them. Diagram of Fig. 4 shows a simple way to 
draw the encroachment between both LEI and Ontomedia. I have developed else-
where what it does mean for future developments of law [13]. I have lean on recent 
work from James Hendler to analyze the link between the two approaches (Fig. 3). 
The first one remains highly theoretical, on top of the intertwined Webs 2.0 and 3.0, 
but able to be nested within the Ontomedia environment. The second, on the contrary, 
offers a park of legal services on mediation.  
                                                           
7  “RDF Schema (RDFS) and the Web Ontology Language (OWL) provide the ability to infer 
relationships between data in different applications or in different parts of the same 
application. These Semantic Web languages allow for the assertion of relationships between 
data elements, which developers can use, via custom code or an emerging toolset, to enhance 
the URI-based direct merging of data into a single RDF store” [12]. 

190 
P. Casanovas 
 
Linked 
Data 
(RDF, 
SPARQL)
Semantic Web (RDFS, 
OWL)
Web 2.0
Web 3.0
O
N 
T
O
M
E
D
I
A
Legal Electronic Institution (LEI)
Linked 
Data 
(RDF, 
SPARQL)
Semantic Web (RDFS, 
OWL)
Web 2.0
Web 3.0
O
N 
T
O
M
E
D
I
A
Legal Electronic Institution (LEI)
 
Fig. 4. James Hendler’s diagram. Source: [12], modified by P.C. 
3   Discussion: Dialogue, Dialectic and Rhetoric 
I will split up the discussion of the legal philosophical groundings of these models in 
two different parts. For the sake of clarity, in this section I will consider the general 
foundation for dialogue, and the revival of dialectic and rhetoric in argumentation and 
philosophy of law. Section 4 will face the pragmatic developments of such a revival.  
It would be naïve to link the whole conception to a single philosophical source. 
LEI models follow previous theoretical approaches made by Douglas North (on insti-
tutions) [14], Cristiano Castelfranchi (on rationality, and normative and interactive 
behavior—trust, deception…) [15], and John R. Searle (on speech acts and social 
institutions) [16]. Collective properties emerging out of the process, and the accurate 
conceptual representation of the whole process (e.g. turn taking, decision making, 
iterative cycles, and final move forward…) are taken into account.  
It seems to me that the disputation model figured out by Noriega and Lopez fits 
nicely into the main flow of contemporary argumentation theory and formal dialectic 
systems. However, it should be immediately noticed that the main structure of the 
proposal is not necessarily related to automated reasoning, but rather to the way of 
conceiving the architecture of the system of dialogue interactions. 
3.1   Dialogue Systems 
Dialogue systems built up in the AI & Law domain use to be symmetrical, iterative, 
cyclic and procedurally-driven [17]. Legal procedural rules have received a privileged 
attention [18], and their main requirements are defining the parties, describing their 
positions, and setting a controlled step-by-step process to manage the disputes. The 
ODR model recently presented by J. Zeleznikow, A. Lodder and E. Bellucci   [19, 20, 
21] is following this well-trodden path too. It combines game-theory, case-based 
reasoning and the Harvard model for dispute resolution (BATNA) to offering advice 
in divorce situations. 

 
Legal Electronic Institutions and ONTOMEDIA 
191 
 
The main dialogue structure assumed by all these developments comes from the 
ancient dialectic and has been described several times by D. Walton [22, 23] as the 
“fundamental building blocks” of any dialectical system: (i) the two participants, 
called the proponent and the respondent, (ii) the types of moves (taking the form of 
various speech acts) that the two participants are allowed to make, as each takes his or 
her turn to speak, (iii) the sequence of moves, in which the appropriateness of each 
move depends on the type of preceding move made by the other party, (iv) the goal of 
the dialogue as a whole. 
Walton identifies four kinds of moves in such systems: (i) the asking of questions, 
(ii) the making of assertions, (iii) the retracting of assertions, and (iv) the putting 
forward of arguments.  
Similarly, dialogue types may be classified according to their main objectives as 
follows: (i) persuasion, (ii) inquiry, (iii) negotiation, (iv) information-seeking, (v) 
deliberation, (vi) eristic. These types of dialogue would proportionate the main sce-
narios in which different dialogues may take place.  
From a legal point of view, stemming from a goal-oriented approach, Sartor has 
expanded this taxonomy adding three more types of dialogue: (i) epistemic inquiry, 
(ii) practical inquiry, (iii) and reconciliation [24]. 
This means that such a structured valued framework —more specifically, a teleo-
logical notion of law as a cognitive technology being organized through a valid nor-
mative system— may determine the structure of dialectic interactions.  
Sartor’s position is far from simple. The thesis is “that legal reasoning has a collec-
tive (interactive) dimension, in regard to which diverse dialectical patterns may be 
required, according to the goals to be achieved and the context in which they are to be 
pursued” [24]. 
I would say that this collective, interactive dimension, especially if it is produced 
through the Internet, is a regulatory one. There is a regulatory order that emerges out 
from the interactions. However, not all regulatory patterns are “law” or “legal” in the 
normative sense. Law components, as we know them so far —i.e., rules (norms), 
statutes, judicial decisions, rulings, and legal rights and duties— have to be combined 
with social emergent patterns of behavior and social rights and duties to operate 
through the Web. Governance, soft-law, reputation systems and, especially, trust, are 
not mandatory elements. Dialectic systems and argumentative models have to repre-
sent conceptually this kind of hybrid, mixed, mashed-up scenarios as well if they are 
going to be used or taken into account.       
3.2   Dialectic, Rhetoric and Logic 
This is linked to another line of arguments. But I should warn the reader at this point 
that I will follow a historical thread. Only at the end I will come back to the mediation 
models. The main scope of this historical turn is setting a broader interpretative legal 
context on dialogue and law in which our proposals may acquire an added sense to be 
properly understood and evaluated.   
It seems to me that Walton and Sartor’s taxonomies, and the procedural way in 
which they face the modeling of dialogues, are deeply rooted in a conception of rea-
son that stems from the classic (and complex) relationships between logic, dialectic 
and rhetoric. It has been observed many times that ancient dialectic and rhetoric have 

192 
P. Casanovas 
 
a strong legal flavor. Dialectic mirrors legal dialogical controversies, and ancient 
rhetoric, as it may be found e.g. in the works by Cicero and Quintilian, mirrors 
speeches in judicial settings [25, 26].  
Leff [27] sketches four points of contrast between the two disciplines: (i) dialectic 
deals with general, abstract issues, rhetoric with specific, circumstantial issues; (ii) 
dialectic considers the link of propositions and follows logical rules of rationality, 
rhetoric considers the relationship between propositions and situations and follows 
rules (or norms) that refer to appropriate social relationships; (iii) dialectic proceeds 
through question and answer (and the interlocutors seek to persuade each other), 
rhetoric proceeds through a flow of uninterrupted discourse, and the speakers seek to 
persuade the audience; (iv) dialectic employs a technical language, rhetoric uses plain 
natural language for persuasive purposes. 
This is a schematic, but still useful summary to realize the complexity of the issue. 
Regarding logic, Aristotle and the ancient tradition tried to maintain separated reason-
ing related to truth, dialogical reasoning regarding opinions and beliefs, and the places 
or topoi regarding the ways in which these beliefs are conveyed and shared (that is to 
say, rhetoric). The medieval tradition played endlessly with those distinctions, until 
the coming of Humanism in the 15th, 16th and 17th centuries. Conflicts, disputes, con-
troversies, were placed at the center of this ars discendi et disserendi [28]. 
It is generally accepted by historians of philosophy that the humanist tradition of 
German, Dutch, English and Italian Universities [29, 30, 31] worked out the Greek 
and Latin texts and mixed up the medieval syllogistic logic (e.g. from Petrus His-
panus) to elaborate an educational discourse, more adapted to everyday life, to social 
and economic new problems, and to the structures of political power of the recently 
born European states. Even the Catholic and Imperial Spain, crashed under the Inqui-
sition, received their impact [32, 33]. 
Dialogue emerged at the beginning as a new framework to contain the classical to-
poi; and, in this way, logic became a part of dialectic. That is to say, inner discourse 
with the soul could convey truth (and not only beliefs), and outer discourse could 
reflect the moves of what was intended as “thought” (and not only language). Rhe-
torical speech (verba) was the way to concrete this thought in different dramatic, legal 
or political scenarios [28].  
There is a string line going from the works by Agricola, Melanchton and Sturm, to 
Talon and Ramus [34, 35]. This common thread was cut up with the violent defeat of 
Ramism and the Jansenist Logic of Port Royal under the Ancient Régime. But it was 
weaved by protestant countries and transferred into the common law [36, 37].   
Interestingly enough, the subject/object philosophical approach was reversed in 
this long history, as the judicial object was.8 Paradoxically, it was the influence of 
Ramism into judicial procedures what excluded the discussion of facts out from dia-
logue and left them entirely to the decision of an authoritative judge. As W. Ong [39], 
                                                           
8  Pozzo [32] has shown convincingly how the pair of Greek concepts ‘subject’ (hupokemeinon) 
and ‘object’ (antikemeinon) actually mean the opposite of their post-Cartesian usages. The 
former refers to what we call today a formal approach (the logical mind), and the latter to the 
investigative activity of senses (the subjective conditions of experience). 

 
Legal Electronic Institutions and ONTOMEDIA 
193 
 
C. Perelman [40] and A. Giuliani [37], among others, explain, a judicial asymmetric 
order would substitute to the isonomic order of ancient dialectic.9  
It would be worth noticing here that almost all the discourses on the revival of an-
cient dialectic and rhetoric in the second half of the 20th c. escape the response to the 
question of what happened in between with the topics of legal dialectic and rhetoric 
during the 18th and 19th centuries. This is surprising, because we have detailed ac-
counts on humanistic and rationalistic thought. It seems that dialogue had just disap-
peared from legal and political theory. 
Still, this is not an easy issue. However, at least regarding to legal reasoning, the 
answer could lie on the prevailing of syllogistic judicial reasoning after the Code de 
Napoleon (1804), and the coming of the German Historical School, Pandectas and the 
conceptualist schools of law.  The answer points then to the establishment of a new 
political and administrative form of government called Rechtstaat, État de Droit, 
Estado de Derecho, Rule of Law, in which the old topoi were subjected to the proce-
dural ring of constitutions and systems of legal norms. However, as Tocqueville early 
noticed [L’Ancien Régime et la Révolution, 1856], all the legal administrative appara-
tus (including the judiciary) of the legal state built up in the Ancient Régime would 
remain along the Enlightenment and the 19th century.  
3.3   The Legal Methods 
I will pursue elsewhere this historical explanation [41].  The point I would like to 
stress here is that, with independence of the guaranties, constraints and requirements 
of the judicial decision, the modern state, and not society, community or individual 
interactions, built up the main framework for the setting, procedures, roles and devel-
opment of legal arguments. Under those conditions, arguments, topoi, places and 
reasoning were bound to be put under a legal interpretation theory (the legal content 
of Sätze, Instituta, Normen or rules addressed to an authoritative judge). “Legal 
method” or the “science of law” were the umbrella under which this interpretative 
turn took place.  
In this way, from Savigny, Puchta, Jhering and Gerber (19th c.), to Gény, Jellinek, 
Kelsen and Hart (20th c.), dialogue was definitively excluded from law and legal the-
ory, and left to the more “insecure” domain of political arena or private economic 
markets. Decisions were placed under a set of norms which would constitute the 
choice for a judicial syllogism, based on the burden of proof and the consistency of a 
non-contradictory argumentation as warrants or pre-requisites for the judicial induc-
tion —assigning probable truth values to inferences sorted out from premises contain-
ing insufficient information. 
Along with fallacies, these constitute precisely the points chosen by Walton to ree-
laborate the problem of innovation and creation of new arguments [23, 42]. This goes 
directly to the core of one of more pervasive and persistent problems of cognitive sci-
ences and philosophy. How the potential creativity of the mind can be described and 
explained? Are there rules or patterns to be followed for innovation? Or, as the ancient 
philosophy would put it, how can be filled up the gap between rhetoric and logic? 
                                                           
9  « Puisque la preuve judiciaire n’est pas différente de la preuve scientifique. Il faut que 
controverse et dialogue soient exclus du procès ; la ‘questio facti’ —considérée comme auto-
nome par rapport à la ‘questio iuris’— est confiée tout court à l’arbitrium iudicis » [37]. 

194 
P. Casanovas 
 
4   Discussion: Pragmatics, Mediation, and Innovation 
Argumentation schemas may be defined as “forms of arguments representing prem-
ise-conclusion and inference structures of common types of arguments” [43].  For 
Walton’s “new dialectic” the old topoi, loci or places constitute “defeasible argumen-
tation schemas” to be combined and aligned to produce a full chain of reasoning. 
Argument schemas are presumptive and open to revision and change. 
As we will see, these inferences are conceived to be “rationally binding” between 
the participants engaged in any dialogue [42]. This approach fits particularly well in a 
judicial perspective, in which either the judge or the lawyer have to find new and 
convincing arguments to sustain proof. According to Walton’s proposal, the gap be-
tween logic and rhetoric may be filled up leaning gradually on the identification, 
analysis, and evaluation processes (dialectic), and on the innovative one (rhetoric). 
Heuristics are used to find new arguments, but the crucial point is called dialectic 
relevance, a method of chaining both forward and backward to get the chain of argu-
mentation to match up in the middle [23, 42]. The whole process is recursive and 
iterative, going from (i) acceptable premises to (ii) rules of inference, and (iii) a 
chaining recursive device. Diagrams may be plotted for visualization.10  
4.1   Dialectic Systems and Pragmatics 
Dialectic relevance is not the only way proposed to connect truth and persuasion. 
There is another tradition to be taken into account. Models by Sartor, Walton and 
Lodder lean heavily on logic (dialectic). On the contrary, the second set of models 
stems from pragmatics and focus on communication. 
Pragma-dialectics is an approach to argumentation which tries to combine both 
perspectives, but leaning on the use of language for resolving disputes [44]. Walton’s 
pragmatic perspective on conversation tries to deepen into it to reconstruct the pro-
positional content of the hidden or tacit arguments of both sides: their “argumentative 
reasoning patterns” [43]. On the contrary, the Pragma-dialectics school (van Eemeren, 
Grootendorst, Jackson, Jacobs…) lean on the techniques of practical persuasion. They 
define dialectics as “a method of regimented opposition” in verbal communication 
and interaction “that amounts to the pragmatic application of logic, a collaborative 
method of putting logic into use so as to move from conjecture and opinion to more 
secure belief” [44].  Therefore, they are much more interested in the effects of com-
munication than in its truth. They consider three different aspects of “strategic ma-
noeuvring”: (i) the topical potential associated with a particular discussion stage, (ii) 
the audience demands in this stage, (iii) the presentational demands appropriate for 
the moves made in that stage. 
It is worthwhile to mention here that we owe to the works carried out by Jackson 
[45], Jacobs [46], and Aakhus [47, 48, 49] some detailed accounts of mediation ex-
periences and practices. The new wave of Pragma-dialectics faces the “pragmatic 
reconstruction” of arguments11, the “collaborative design of the disagreement space”, 
and the types of rationality that mediators employ in interpreting conflict situations 
                                                           
10  http://araucaria.computing.dundee.ac.uk  
11  “The hallmark of pragmatic reconstruction lies in the way a form of argumentative dialogue is 
tailored  to circumstances of the dispute in order to achieve a particular type of outcomes” [47]. 

 
Legal Electronic Institutions and ONTOMEDIA 
195 
 
(critical discussion, bargaining, and therapy). “We do not take the central problem of 
pragmatics to be how communicators assign functional meaning to specific messages 
or disambiguate speaker intention, but how is that people mutually negotiate social 
activity with language and thus participate in everyday life” [50]. 
4.2   Inventio and Judicium 
Both ways to tackle innovative arguments have their roots in dialectics and rhetorics. 
However, it seems to me that this second perspective takes more into account the shift 
of Humanist tradition we mentioned before, and more specifically, the discursive side 
of Agricola’s notion of dialectic.  
Rudolf Agricola (1444-1485) set a phenomenology of language and speech which 
originated a revolution in the way old rhetorical texts were interpreted [51]. We may 
find in his major contribution, De Inventione Dialectica Libri Tres (1479) at least five 
new starting points that lead to an abductive notion of interaction and reasoning: (i) 
human interaction as a negotiated and complex shared dialogical object (ii) thought as 
a product of discourse (speech), (iii) cognitive and emotional empathy as the basis for 
a common human (inner and outer) understanding, (iv) context as a shared sequence 
of already known scenarios which help the selection of features given to a term to 
produce meaning, (v) discovering as a collective process to build a systematic path 
through dialectic from the known to the unknown. 
We usually find in the literature on Agricola that his notion of place and his taxon-
omy of topics would allow him to reason in a new pedagogical way, but through the 
syllogistic “middle term” that would relate his logical perspective to the Middle Age 
and not to the formal developments of Descartes and Leibniz.12 Agricola extends the 
scope of dialectic to include all kind of (reasoned) discourses, and the places of dia-
lectic to the level of concepts. Doing so, his philosophy attends less to the truth and 
validity of arguments than to their effects.   
This is right. But we may interpret it as “psychologism” or, from a cognitive sci-
ence perspective, as closer to contemporary notions such as “schema”, “script”, “folk 
model”, “category” and “difference”. 
As it is well known, the art of rhetoric was divided in five parties: inventio,  dispo-
sitio, elocutio, memoria and declamatio. During the Renaissance, Inventio was situ-
ated as the first part of dialectics, while its second part, judicium, was supposed to 
temper, modulate and guide in a syllogistic manner the subject matter discovered or 
created in the first one [51].13  
                                                           
12  See e.g. [39], following Bochenski. 
13  “The instrument of ‘inventio’ was one of the main tools of classical rhetoric, and paired with 
judicium, it was the first and most important of the five parts of classical rhetoric. It was the 
art of finding and searching suitable ideas, reasons and arguments for a specific purpose, by 
using the search formulas ‘topoi’ or ‘loci’. These ‘arguments’ were intended to approach the 
truth as closely as possible, and were often classified according to the dominant means of 
persuasion: by employing reason or logic (logos), arousing emotion (pathos), or demonstrat-
ing trustworthy character (ethos). But the instrument of inventio  did not so much intend to 
lead the user to new metaphysical insights; is purpose was of a more practical nature, it was 
designed to produce an object or work: a poem, a speech, an emblem or proverb, etc…” [51, 
esp. chap. 2]. 

196 
P. Casanovas 
 
Agricola argues for an extension of places or ‘seats of arguments’ related to the na-
ture of language “by whose instruction as if by signs of some sort [velut signis 
quibusdam], we surround the mind with the things themselves and thereby perceive 
what is in each thing both probable and suitable to the purpose of our discourse” [Inv. 
I, 1], “A place therefore is nothing else but a certain common characteristic of a thing 
[communis quedam rei nota], by observing which all that is probable about a given 
thing can be discovered. Let then a place be so defined by us.” [Inv. I, 2] [52, 53, 54].     
4.3   Stasis and Ekphrasis 
Stasis (status) is the proper manner of discovering the question to be answered in 
every situation. Ekphrasis (descriptio) is the ability to elicit suitable contents on any 
subject from any of the places: the description of one term relatively to another to 
discover agreement and difference.  
Status, in the classical rhetoric of Hermogenes, Cicero, and Quintilian, intended to 
define the different stages of a judicial plea between accusation and defense. It was 
translated into the common law tradition as issue (e.g. by Thomas Wilson and Black-
stone), although this legal term does not express exactly the original meaning [55].  
First, the status was supposed to give the litigants an understanding of their dispute 
through a categorization of the conflicting statements. But it indicated too the disposi-
tion to reason and to debate what the conflict was about.14 There is a procedural dy-
namic within the status.  
We should emphasize here the visual or pictorial side of the arguments as con-
ceived dialectically: ekphrasis is the graphic or discursive description in visual terms 
of stasis [56]. People, literally, may see in one single shot the object of dispute and 
the content of the arguments used to describe their positions and to eventually solve 
the issue at dispute. 
To Agricola, language, but also the interactive capacity of the mind to recognize 
and understand other minds, are extraordinary important to depict this narrative object 
and to convey emotions: “To me an emotion seems to be nothing else but a certain 
impulse of the mind by which we are driven to desire or avoid something more in-
tensely than we would in a calm state of mind. Every emotion, therefore, arises from 
interest in objects of desire or avoidance. We desire whatever things are in fact or in 
appearance good, and we avoid those which are, or are felt might be, harmful. Nor are 
we moved only by those things which we think are good or bad for ourselves; we also 
grieve, rejoice, become angry or sad because of the situation of another.”  (emphasis 
added) [De Inv. III.1] [52] 
5   Relational Justice: Dialogue, Abduction and Reasoning 
There are several ways to understand the old tradition of dialectic and rhetoric from 
contemporary theory of argumentation. Logical, rhetorical and dialogical approaches 
are usually considered as theoretically different [57]. Stasis and ekphrasis may be 
                                                           
14  “The suggestion that the status or issue had to be espied, that it was not given, that questions 
required work, that, for issue to be joined, much debating was sometimes necessary is char-
acteristic of the common law pleading tradition.” [55]  

 
Legal Electronic Institutions and ONTOMEDIA 
197 
 
considered from the dynamics of the strictly judicial point of view [26], in which the 
issue at stake is identified with the object of dispute, or from a broader perspective, in 
which stasis is produced through an abductive process of reasoning among the differ-
ent parties [55].  Similarly, it seems to me that the old notion of ekphrasis may be 
(partially) captured by the notion of visual abduction [58].    
5.1   Mediation as a Transformative Process 
Context, environment and possible argumentation scenarios constitute a big issue. 
There is a common trend towards normativity in the contemporary argumentation 
theorists: (i) implicit contexts considered as norms within the language and discourse 
[59, 60], (ii) implicit contexts linked to types of dialogues that guide the functioning 
of dialectical relevance [22, 23], (iii) implicit contexts linked to the notion of practical 
reasoning and intention [24], (iv) implicit contexts linked to the environment of 
Multi-Agent Systems, where actions of electronic agents shape a social and institu-
tional behavior [15] (v) implicit contexts linked to a pragmatic normative version of 
dialectic, in which “dispute mediators, in the course of their work, perform normative 
construction like a critical analyst” [49].  
Perhaps the legal perspective of the old rhetoric still weights in the way norms are 
conceived. However, with mediation processes in mind, the construction of the “in-
ner” and “outer” environments through dialogue—in Herbert Simon’s sense [61]—is 
not a predetermined task. In a mediation process, in real conflicts, contexts may shift 
within types of dialogues, and they cannot be easily categorized as belonging to a 
single type. Imagination, or “moral imagination”, as Paul Lederach puts it, is an es-
sential feature of mediators [62]. Listen to this narration from a professional mediator: 
Two guys take a car after having a drink. The guy who was driving was not the 
owner of the vehicle. The car went up in fire and the driver could get out and save his 
life. The other guy died. The mediation process takes place two years later between 
the mother of the dead guy and the surviving driver. He asks for mediation. The me-
diator (a woman) ought to understand de conflict first, and she prepared the individual 
session with the mother. The key questions were: How do you feel? Because I believe 
that you blame yourself, while everyone knows that you are not guilty at all; who are 
you angrier with over the death of your son? She cried for more than 30 minutes, and 
so did the mediator. They embraced each other. They went for a coffee. In a week 
there was no more need for mediation. She could rebuild again her relationship with 
him without being helped, and she could accept as well the therapy that she had been 
rejecting so far.15     
Some of the taxonomies built up to capture these transformative features reflect 
this creative character, especially in hard cases of restorative justice [63]. Victim-
offender mediation styles may be also combined to form typologies of dialogue, de-
pending upon the ordered preferences of the different styles: (i) therapeutic (media-
tor-conducted), (ii) empowerment (victims’ healing, offenders’ assumption of respon-
sibility), (iii) or narrative (management of the memories and expression of feelings) 
(Fig. 4). 
                                                           
15  I thank Maria Munné (mediator), for writing down this personal communication.  

198 
P. Casanovas 
 
 
Fig. 5. Victim-sensitive Offender Mediation Typology. Source: Adapted from [64]. Umbreit, 
Bradshaw and Coates were reporting on crimes with severe violence. 
5.2   Ontomedia and LEI 
Let’s go back now to the models underlying Legal Electronic Institutions and Ontome-
dia. After the examination of some of their philosophical foundations, our conclusion is 
similar to Leff’s assertion: “In sum, neither the rhetoric of effective persuasion nor the 
logic of rational persuasion should adopt theoretically purified goals.” [27] 
Fig. 6 shows how LEI and Ontomedia strategies may be related. The rational side 
of dialogue an its discursive, expressive or emotional side are understood not as sepa-
rate sets of discrete entities but rather as a continuum covering intertwined processes 
and outcomes. The link between inventio and judicium, or between the propositional 
content of assertions and creative innovative moves, can be assumed following the 
same continuum line.         
 
Fig. 6. Dialectic and rhetorical links related to LEI and ONTOMEDIA 

 
Legal Electronic Institutions and ONTOMEDIA 
199 
 
This continuum is not meant to equate eclectically different theoretical trends. Dif-
ferences can and should be maintained. Contemporary argumentation theories closer 
to the dialectic approach tend to assume speech act theory, felicity conditions and 
rules of inference, combined with some heuristics. Non-monotonic logic is usually 
applied leaning on Toulmin’s shoulder. Pragma-dialectics, on the contrary, lies more 
on the heuristic side of rhetoric and explicitly rejects speech act theories based on 
non-situated or unbound conditions [50]. Still, Ducrot’s notion of argumentation dans 
la langue leads to a semantic notion of pragmatics in which every utterance has an 
enunciative and argumentative value [60]. 
However, LEI and Ontomedia may adopt different notions of pragmatics and dif-
ferent pragmatic approaches as well that may be combined and operated according to 
the chosen functionalities. 
Ontomedia adopts a user-centered approach, in which the professional mediator 
may chose among a box of tools to perform her work. LEI tends to guide the user 
through a process that automates the procedural parts of mediation through successive 
stages.      
5.3   Web 3.0 and Relational Justice Scenarios 
Justice, reason and argumentation have been linked to power since the beginning.  It 
would be naïve, then, trying to understand the functions, intentions and meaning of 
Greek and Latin literature on the subject without any understanding of the underlying 
principles of ancient societies. To put only one example, the Aristotelian notion of 
“distributive justice” is better understood through some notion of the market (or 
“proto-market”) in which distributive problems arose and the concept was coined 
[65]. Recent empirically-based studies on organizations state clearly that “justice and 
power are intertwined: one cannot really understand justice dynamics without under-
standing power dynamics and vice versa, because the concern for justice acts check 
on the use of power” [66]. 
As I showed before, conflict and argumentation as we know them today are linked 
to the emergence of the modern state. Legal reasoning has been historically shaped as 
well through concepts, procedures and structures related to a kind of judiciary often 
tensioned by the king and parliamentary powers. Not surprisingly, rhetoric and reason 
in the 16th and 17th centuries are linked to the emergence and counterbalance of raison 
d’état [67, 68].  
Therefore, Ontomedia and LEI cannot be conceived in a vacuum, but having into 
account that new scenarios of conflict resolution and management are arising in the 
broad technological environment of the Internet. It is my contention that the imple-
mentation and use of technology changes the nature of law, in any way we may con-
ceive it. Through the Internet environments, law cannot be defined solely as related to 
the national state or even to the institutions of the Rule of Law, but to all the regula-
tory devices at stake, including languages, protocols, electronic agents and reputation 
systems.   
Therefore, disputes, controversies, and conflicts may be better represented and nested 
as scenarios of relational justice. In computing, a scenario is a representation of  
the types of interactions end-users will maintain with the system, the way in which the 
system faces the interface with them in their daily activity. In the case of Ontomedia, the 

200 
P. Casanovas 
 
different domains from the White Book on Mediation (health, education, family, con-
sumers’ complaints, and so on) are being used as scenarios. What these scenarios have 
in common is that they have been chosen and constructed in social fields where some 
experiences on mediation and Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) have already 
arisen.  
This means that these are fields in which some conflicts (social, political or eco-
nomic) have originated some kind of social bottom-up resilience to fix the problem. 
In some cases as well, increasingly, administrations have reacted to give the opportu-
nity to citizens to maintain a more effective interaction with them. In both cases, some 
forms of Online Dispute Resolution can be (or have been already) adopted. Therefore, 
we have chosen a middle-out strategy as ontological methodology, and we have situ-
ated our intervention under the label of relational justice. 
I broadly define relational justice as the justice through the Internet, that is to say, by 
means of a technological framework in which controversies, disputes, conflicts and 
litigation may be managed (and sometimes solved) online, or in a mixed combination of 
economic, social or political organizations and institutions [3, 13]. It is important to 
keep in mind that these scenarios of relational justice do not belong exclusively to a 
virtual reality, but rather to the interface between the Web and the real world. Therefore, 
they may be used in several ways, and systems and platforms may contain a set of tools 
to be used only in a single phase of the conflict or in some steps of the process. 
6   Conclusions and Further Work 
I have briefly examined in this paper the rational grounds for the two strategies for 
ODR being followed in the context of the Catalan White Book on Mediation. Several 
historical threads have been followed to understand the roots of the revival of argu-
mentation theories. I have argued that history has to be taken in a whole, explaining 
the contexts in which models of state and legal methodology emerged. 
I have showed how dialectical and rhetorical traditions may be assembled to pro-
duce a technological outcome. 
Rationality is another issue. Normative approaches can be tempered with a vision 
of rationality taking into account the expressivity and creative heuristics of the stake-
holders [69]. It is worth to point out that at the present level of Web 2.0 and 3.0 de-
velopments, rationality is affected by the integration of data. This will have an impact 
on the original models of dialectic, rhetoric and argumentation. 
E.g., scalability affects reasoning: “[…] because the Semantic Web combines het-
erogeneity, variable data quality, and scale, the applications we envision will exhibit 
intelligent behavior owing less to an ability to carry out complex inferencing than an 
ability to exploit the large amounts of available data. That is, as we move from classic 
KBSs to Semantic Web applications, intelligence becomes a side effect of scale, 
rather than of sophisticated logical reasoning. An important corollary here is that, as 
logical reasoning becomes less important and scale and data integration becomes key 
issues, other types of reasoning —based on machine learning, linguistic, or statistical 
techniques— become crucial, especially and because they frequently need to integrate 
and use other, non-semantic data” [11]. 

 
Legal Electronic Institutions and ONTOMEDIA 
201 
 
These conditions concerning the Web environments have to be integrated in the 
design of platforms and tools. 
Finally, in the next future, use cases and cognitive walkthroughs will be developed, 
measured and tested in some relational justice scenarios.  
References 
1. Noriega, P., López, C.: Toward a platform for Online Mediation. In: Poblet, M., Shield, U., 
Zeleznikow, J. (eds.) Proceedings of the Workshop on Legal and Negotiation Support Sys-
tems 2009, in conjunction with the 12th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence 
and Law (ICAIL 2009), Barcelona, June 12. IDT Series, vol. 5, pp. 67–75 (2009), 
http://www.huygens.es/site/service4.html, CEUR-482,  
http://ftp.informatik.rwth-aachen.de/Publications/ 
CEUR-WS/Vol-482/ 
2. Poblet, M., Noriega, P., López del Toro, C., Suquet, J.: Mediación en línea: estado del arte 
y escenarios de uso. In: Casanovas, P., Díaz, L., Magre, J., Poblet, M. (eds.) Materiales del 
Libro Blanco de la Mediación en Cataluña, Barcelona: Generalitat de Catalunya, Departa-
ment de Justícia, Centre d’Estudis Jurídics i Formació Especialitzada, pp. 159–169 (2009) 
3. Casanovas, P., Poblet, M.: Concepts and fields of Relational Justice. In: Casanovas, P., 
Sartor, G., Casellas, N., Rubino, R. (eds.) Computable Models of the Law. LNCS (LNAI), 
vol. 4884, pp. 323–339. Springer, Heidelberg (2008) 
4. Stranieri, A., Yearwood, J., Zeleznikow, J.: Tools for World Wide Web based legal deci-
sion support systems. In: ICAIL 2001, St. Louis, Missouri, USA, pp. 206–214. ACM, New 
York (2001) 
5. Tyler, M.C., Bretherton, D.: Seventy-six and Counting: an Analysis of ODR sites. In: 
Lodder, A., et al. (eds.) Essays on legal and technical aspects of Online Dispute Resolu-
tion. Papers from the ICAIL 2003 ODR Workshop, Ediburgh, Scotland, UK, June 28, pp. 
13–28 (2003) 
6. Thiessen, E., Zeleznikow, J.: Technical Aspects of Online Dispute Resolution: Challenges 
and Opportunities, Thiessen E and Zeleznikow. J. Technical aspects of ODR: Challenges 
and opportunities; Conley Tyler, M., Katsh, E., Choi, D. (eds.) In: Proceedings of the 
Third Annual Forum on Online Dispute Resolution. The International Conflict Resolution 
Centre, The University of Melbourne in collaboration with the United Nations Economic 
and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (2005) 
7. Poblet, M., Casellas, N., Torralba, S., Casanovas, P.: Modeling Expert Knowledge in the 
Mediation Domain: A Middle-out Approach to Design ODR Ontologies. In: Casellas, N., 
Francesconi, E., Hoekstra, R., Montemagni, S. (eds.) Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on 
Legal Ontologies and Artificial Intelligence Techniques joint with 2nd Workshop on Se-
mantic Processing of Legal Text (LOAIT 2009), Barcelona, June 8. IDT Series, vol. 1, pp. 
19–28 (2009), http://www.huygens.es/site/service4.html 
8. Poblet, M., Casanovas, P., López-Cobo, J.M.: Online Dispute Resolution for the Next Web 
Decade: The Ontomedia Approach. In: ITAIS 2009, Sardinia, Costa Esmeralda (October 5, 
2009) 
9. Poblet, M., Casanovas, P., López-Cobo, Cabrerizo, A., Prieto, J.M.: Mediation, ODR and 
2.0: A Case for Relational Justice. In: AICOL 2009 in conjunction with JURIX 2009, Rot-
terdam, December 16 (2009) 

202 
P. Casanovas 
 
10. Motta, E., Sabou, M.: Next Generation Semantic Web Applications. In: Mizoguchi, R., 
Shi, Z.-Z., Giunchiglia, F. (eds.) ASWC 2006. LNCS, vol. 4185, pp. 24–29. Springer, Hei-
delberg (2006) 
11. D’Aquin, M., Motta, E., Sabou, M., Angeletou, S., Gridinoc, L., Lopez, V., Guidi, D.: 
Toward a new Generation of Semantic Web Applications. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 20–
28 (May/June 2008) 
12. Hendler, J.: Web 3.0 emerging. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 88–90 (January 2009) 
13. Casanovas, P.: The future of law: Relational Justice and Second Generation of Semantic 
Web Services. In: Fernández-Barrera, M., et al. (eds.) The Future of Law, EPAP, Florence 
(2009) 
14. North, D.C.: Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge (1990) 
15. Castelfranchi, C.: Limits of strategic Rationality for Agents and M-A Systems. In: Boman, 
M., Van de Velde, W. (eds.) MAAMAW 1997. LNCS, vol. 1237. Springer, Heidelberg 
(1997) 
16. Searle, J.R.: The construction of social reality. Free Press, New York (1995) 
17. Lodder, A.: Dialaw. On Legal Justification and Dialogical Models of argumentation. Klu-
wer A. P., Dordrecht (2001) 
18. Gordon, T.: The Pleadings Game. An artificial Intelligence Model of Procedural Justice. 
Kluwer A. P., Dordrecht (1995) 
19. Zeleznikow, J., Bellucci, E.: Family_Mediator - Adding Notions of Fairness to Those of 
Interests. In: Engers, T.v. (ed.) Legal Knowledge and Information Systems - JURIX 2006: 
The Nineteenth Annual Conference on Legal Knowledge and Information Systems, Paris, 
France, December 7-9, pp. 121–130. IOS Press, Amsterdam (2006) 
20. Lodder, A., Zeleznikow, J.: Developing an Online Dispute Resolution Environment: Dia-
logue Tools and Negotiation Support Systems in a Three-Step Model. Harvard Negotiation 
Law Review, 10, 287–336 (2005) 
21. Bellucci, E., Zeleznikow, J.: Developing Negotiation Decision Support Systems that Sup-
port Mediators: A Case Study of the Family_Winner System. AI & Law 13(2), 233–271 
(2005) 
22. Walton, D.: The Place of Dialogue in Logic Computer Science, and Communication Stud-
ies. Synthese 123, 327–346 (2000) 
23. Walton, D.: The New Dialectic. Conversational Context of Argument. The University of 
Toronto Press, Toronto (1995) 
24. Sartor, G.: A Teleological Approach to Legal Dialogue. EUI working paper LAW No. 28 
(2006) 
25. Sloane, T.O.: Reinventing inventio. College English 51(5), 461–473 (1989) 
26. Hohmann, H.: The Dynamics of Stasis: Classical Rheorical Theory and Modern Legal Ar-
gumentation. American Journal of Jurisprudence 34, 171–197 (1989) 
27. Leff, M.: Rhetoric and Dialectic in the Twenty-First Century. Argumentation 14, 241–254 
(2000) 
28. Fumaroli, M.: L’Âge de l’éloquence : rhétorique et « res literaria » de la Renaissance au 
seuil de l’époque classique. Droz, Paris (1980) 
29. Heath, T.: Logical Grammar, Grammatical Logic, and Humanism in Three German Uni-
versities. In: Studies in the Renaissance, vol. 18, pp. 9–64 (1971) 
30. Jardine, L.: The Place of Dialectic Teaching in Sixteenth-Century Cambridge. Studies in 
the Renaissance 21, 31–62 (1974) 

 
Legal Electronic Institutions and ONTOMEDIA 
203 
 
31. Hamilton, D.: Instruction in the making: Peter Ramus and the beginning of modern school-
ing. Annual Convention of the American Educational Research Association, Chicago, 
April 21-25 (2003) 
32. Grau-Arau, A.: Humanisme i Escolàstica en el Renaixement. Comprendre 2(1), 5–14 
(2000) 
33. Olmos Gómez, P.: La polémica antiescolástica y la Lógica humanista en la España del 
siglo XVI. Revista de Hispanismo Filosófico 12, 65–83 (2007) 
34. Pozzo, R.: Logic and Metaphysics in German Philosophy from Melanchton to Hegel. In: 
Seet, W., et al. (eds.) Approaches to Metaphysics, pp. 61–74. Springer, Heidelberg 
35. Meerhoff, K.: Logic and Eloquence: A Ramusian Revolution? Argumentation (5), 357–
374 (1991) 
36. Giuliani, A.: Les règles de la ‘discussion légitime’ dans la logique de Port-Royal. Argu-
mentation 5, 263–273 (1991) 
37. Kelley, D.R.: Jurisconsultus Perfectus: The Lawyer as Renaissance Man. Journal of the 
Warburg and Courtauld Institutes (51), 84 (1988) 
38. Pozzo, R.: Ramus and Other Renaissance Philosophers on Subjectivity. Topoi (22), 5–13 
(2003) 
39. Ong, W.J.: Ramus, Method, and the Decay of Dialogue. From the Art of Discourse to the 
Art of Method. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago and London (1959) 
40. Perelman, C.: Pierre de la Ramée et le déclin de la rhétorique. Argumentation 5, 347–356 
(1991) 
41. Casanovas, P., Poblet, M.: La médiation ou la puissance imaginative du dialogue, Collo-
ques de Cérisy, La Sérendipité dans les sciences, les arts et la décisión, Juillet 28 (2009) 
42. Walton, D.: An Automated System for Argument Invention in Law Using Argumentation 
and Heuristic Search Procedures. Ratio Juris 18(4), 434–463 (2005) 
43. Macagno, F., Walton, D.: Argumentative Reasoning Patterns. Artificial Intelligence and 
Law 11, 1–43 (2003) 
44. van Eemeren, F.H., Houtlosser, P.: Rhetorical Analysis within a Pragma-Dialectical 
Framework. Argumentation 14, 293–305 (2000) 
45. Jackson, S.: Disputation by Design. Argumentation 12, 183–198 (1998) 
46. Jacobs, S.: Maintaining neutrality in dispute mediation: managing disagreement while 
managing not to disagree. Journal of Pragmatics 34, 1403–1426 (2002) 
47. Aakhus, M.: Designing reflective dialogue to support learning from experience. SIG-
GROUP Bulletin 22(2), 29–37 (2001) 
48. Aakhus, M.: Technocratic and Design Stances Toward Communication Expertise: How 
GDSS Facilitators Understand Their Work. Journal of Applied Communication Re-
search 29(4), 341–371 (2001) 
49. Aakhus, M.: Neither Naïve nor Critical Reconstruction: Dispute Mediators, Impasse, and 
the Design of Argumentation. Argumentation 17, 265–290 (2003) 
50. Aakhus, M., Aldrich, A.: Crafting Communication Activity: Understanding Felicity in ‘I 
wish I...’ Compliments”. Research on Language and Social Interaction 35(4), 395–425 
(2002) 
51. Atkinson, C.: Inventing Inventors in Renaissance Europe Polydore Vergil’s De inventori-
bus rerum. Spatmittelalter und Reformation Neue Reihe No. 33. Mohr Siebeck (2007) 
52. McNally, J.R.: Rudolph Agricola’s De Inventione Dialectica Libri Tres: A Translation of 
Selected Chapters. Communication Monographs 34(4), 393–422 (1967) 
53. MacNally, J.R.: Dux Illa Directrixque Artium: Rudolph’s Agricola’s Dialectical System. 
Quartely Journal of Speech 52(4), 337–347 (1966) 

204 
P. Casanovas 
 
54. McNally, J.R.: ‘Prima pars dialectica’: The Influence of Agricolan Dialectic Upon English 
Accounts of Invention. Renaissance Quarterly 21(2), 166–177 (1968) 
55. McEvoy, S.: Issues in Common Law Pleading and Ancient Rhetoric. Argumentation 5(3), 
245–261 (1991) 
56. Mack, P.: Agricola’s Use of the Comparison between Writing and the Visual Arts. Journal 
of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes (55), 169–179 (1992) 
57. Feteris, E.T.: A Survey of 25 Years of Research on Legal Argumentation. Argumenta-
tion 11, 355–376 (1997) 
58. Thagard, P., Shelley, C.: Abductive reasoning: Logic, visual thinking, and coherence. In: 
Dalla Chiara, M.L., et al. (eds.) Logic and Scientific Methods, pp. 413–427. Kluwer, 
Dordrecht (1997) 
59. McEvoy, S.: The Construction of Issues: Pleading Theory and Practice, Relevance in 
Pragmatics, and the Confrontation Stage in the Pragma-Dialectical Theory of Argumenta-
tion. Argumentation 13, 43–52 (1999) 
60. McEvoy, S.: L’invention defensive. Poétique, linguistique. Éditions Métailié, droit., Paris 
(1995) 
61. Simon, H.A.: The Sciences of the Artificial. MIT Press, Cambridge (1996) 
62. Lederach, J.P.: Moral Imagination. The Art and Soul to Building Pace. MIT Press, Cam-
bridge (1966) 
63. Casanovas, P., Poblet, M.: Microfoundations of Restorative Justice: A General Frame-
work. In: Mackay, R., Bošnjak, M., Declerck, J., Pelikan, C., Stokkom, B.v., Wright, M. 
(eds.) Images of Restorative Justice Theory, pp. 234–258, Verlag für Polizeiwissenschaft, 
Frankfurt am Main (2007) 
64. Umbreit, M., Bradshaw, W., Coates, R.B.: Victim Sensitive Offender Dialogue in Crimes 
of Severe Violence. Differing Needs, Approaches, and Implications, Office for Victims of 
Crime, U.S., Department of Justice (2001) 
65. Polanyi, K., Arensberg, C.M., Pearson, H.W., et al.: Trade and Markets in the Early Em-
pires. Free Press, Glencoe (1957) 
66. Aquino, K., Tripp, T., Bies, R.J.: Getting Even or Moving On? Power, Procedural Justice, 
and Types of Offense as Predictors of Revenge, Forgiveness, Reconciliation, and Avoid-
ance in Organizations. Journal of Applied Psychology 91(3), 653–668 (2006) 
67. Goyet, F.: Le Sublime ‘lieu commun’ : L’Invention Rhétorique dans l’Antiquité et à la 
Renaissance. Honoré Champion, Paris (1996) 
68. Goyet, F.: La prudence : entre sublime et raison détat. In: Cogitore, I., Goyet (dir.), F., Roi, 
D. (eds.) Essais sur la littérature adressée au Prince, Grenoble, ELLUG, pp. 163–180 
(2001) 
69. Chase, V.M., Hertwig, R., Gigerenzer, G.: Visions of Rationality. Trends in Cognitive Sci-
ences 2(6), 206–214 (1998) 

P. Casanovas et al. (Eds.): AICOL Workshops 2009, LNAI 6237, pp. 205–216, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
Mediation, ODR, and the Web 2.0: A Case  
for Relational Justice 
Marta Poblet1, Pompeu Casanovas2, José Manuel López-Cobo3,  
Alvaro Cabrerizo4, and Juan Antonio Prieto4 
1 ICREA, UAB Institute of Law and Technology, Campus UAB, 08193 Bellaterra, Spain 
2 UAB Institute of Law and Technology, Campus UAB, 08193 Bellaterra, Spain 
3 Playence KG, Schlögelsbach 26a, A6123 Terfens, Austria 
4 XimetriX Network Thoughts, José Galán Merino, 41015 Sevilla, Spain 
{Marta.Poblet,Pompeu.Casanovas}@uab.cat  
ozelin.lopez@playence.com  
{alvaro.cabrerizo,juan.prieto}@ximetrix.com 
Abstract. Dialogue, negotiation and mediation are renewed sources of contem-
porary law, and technology plays an active role in this process. User-centered 
strategies of the next Web generation are most suited to a relational justice 
model based on cooperative behavior, agreement, negotiation, and dialogue 
among both natural and artificial actors. In this paper we introduce Ontomedia, 
a project implementing the relational justice model by developing a web plat-
form for online mediation. Ontomedia is designed as a semantically-driven web 
service that allows end-users to negotiate and mediate their conflicts in different 
domains (i.e. family and commerce). We situate this project within the next 
generation of Semantic Web services, and the so-called Web 2.0 (and Web 3.0) 
developments. 
Keywords: Mediation, online dispute resolution, relational justice, Web 2.0, 
social Web. 
1   Introduction: Relational Justice and ODR 
Law and legal practices are evolving fast in the contemporary world. However, some 
of the new legal trends rely heavily on the cherished old forms of dialogue—the sub-
ject-matter of dialectical systems [1]. This is the case of negotiation, conciliation, and 
mediation, widely adopted practices in courts, law firms, counseling services, etc.  
In a broad sense, relational justice (RJ) may be defined as the justice produced 
through dialogue and cooperative behavior, negotiation, and agreement among natural 
or artificial actors [2, 3]. To our perspective, online dispute resolution (ODR) and its 
different standard and hybrid techniques—negotiation, conciliation, mediation, arbitra-
tion—are instantiations of the relational justice model. ODR is often seen as the online 
equivalent of alternative dispute resolution methods (ADR) that fall outside the judicial 
domain. However, there are two reasons to refrain from an exact correspondence be-
tween the two. On the one hand, ODR procedures might not necessarily satisfy the 
“alternative” aspect of ADR, since they may form part of the judicial process (i.e. online 

206 
M. Poblet et al. 
mediation to assist divorcing couples in drafting parenting plans). On the other hand, the 
technical aspects of ODR pave the way to specific procedures that vary from those 
applicable in ADR (i.e. automated, blind-bidding negotiation) and facilitate flexible, 
hybrid forms of mediation and arbitration (Med-Arb). A basic typology of ODR proce-
dures is shown in Fig. 1 below: 
 
Fig. 1. Online Dispute Resolution standard techniques 
Curiously enough, technology fuels this return to dialogue [4, 5, 6]. Take one of 
the salient trends of the present Web: personalization. As Fromm puts it:  
The Internet is shifting from discrete units of websites and Web pages to discrete 
units of information (e.g. people, organizations, articles and videos, product offerings, 
store listings, and blog posts) and associated meta data (e.g. images, addresses,  
reviews, ratings) that move seamlessly around the Web, being slotted where appropri-
ate. These units of information can be organized in ways that are relevant and  
personal to each individual, using data gleaned from social graphs as well as recom-
mendation and personalization services that allow users to set their preferences [7]. 
From a technological point of view, relational justice may be defined as well as 
“the substantive and formal structure that allows end users, in the broader sense (as 
citizens, consumers, customers, clients, managers, etc.) to participate in the making of 
their own regulation and legal outcomes through all the mixed and plural strategies of 
the Semantic Web. This implies the coexistence of legal and social norms, rights and 
duties to be shared by subjects (artificial or natural agents) in a flexible and dynamic 
structured environment” [3].  
The goal of this paper is to show how state-of-the art technologies of the Web 2.0 
are critical to facilitate the full transformation of the ODR domain in an area of hu-
man-machine interaction where agents can freely discover, organize, and exchange 
information, data, as well as experiences of users (user-contributed content) related to 
disputes affecting them. In this regard, we present Ontomedia, a web-based platform 
that uses a combination of Web 2.0 and Semantic Web technologies for online media-
tion. The Ontomedia focus, yet, is neither the online component nor the disputes to be 
resolved, but the users who have to deal with disputes and use the Web to get them 
resolved in a more effective, efficient, and inexpensive way. 
2   ODR 1.0 
ODR services have flourished in the Internet since the mid 1990s, counting different 
failures and successes throughout these fifteen years. At present, the main ODR service  
 
 

 
Mediation, ODR, and the Web 2.0: A Case for Relational Justice 
207 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 1. ODR service providers 
 

208 
M. Poblet et al. 
providers are primarily US-based, and only a few are provided from Europe and third 
countries. While different in scope and procedures offered, they all share three features: 
(i) proprietary software licenses, (ii) stable platforms, (iii) PC-based. We call the present 
ODR service providers as ODR 1.0, to distinguish them from the upcoming generation 
of open source, unstable platforms (or “perpetual beta”), and crowdsourced software 
systems [8] that are increasingly used to manage conflicts and emergencies. Table 1 
below summarizes recent research done in comparing ODR 1.0 services [9]. The classi-
fication distinguished different services:   
− Negotiation. The system facilitates the exchange of offers between the parties at 
different degrees of automatization: full (SmartSettle, e-Bay-PayPal) or partial 
(DisputeManager).  
− Mediation. The process is also automatized at different degrees. The mediation 
parties may interact online (by videoconference, as in MARS) or through structured 
messages, as in ODRworld). In some cases, the service provider selects the media-
tor, and in some others the parties choose him from a list.  
− Arbitration, recommendation, conciliation. The service provider in those cases 
holds the responsibility to make a recommendation which is as binding for the  
parties as they have previously decided. In some cases, the ODR service provider 
arbiters and executes the decision (PayPal). In some others, recommendations are 
calculated automatically (SmartSettle).   
− Complaints management: Usually, ODR service providers receive complaints and 
manage them through a mediation-like process.  
− Ancillary services, such as training for mediators and arbiters, trust marks, or psy-
chometric profiling for mediators. Express mediation and arbitration are also pro-
vided on demand.   
3   ODR 2.0 
The notion of “Web 2.0” has a half-baked, conversational, and collaborative geneal-
ogy. Quoting Scott Dietzen, Eric Knorr welcomed Web 2.0 in December 2003 as a 
“universal, standards-based integration platform” [10]. Shortly after, the term popped 
up in a brainstorming session between Dale Dougherty (co-founder of O’Reilly Me-
dia) and Craig Cline, and reached larger audiences after the O’Reilly Media Web 2.0 
conference in late 2004. The notion would then spread rapidly to become one of the 
most successful paradigms of the recent Internet era.  
Perhaps as the clue of its nearly immediate success, there was no clear consensus on 
what Web 2.0 was, neither where the precise boundaries where.1 Again, and following 
discussions with other commenters, O’Reilly posted in a forum a compact definition of 
Web 2.0 which included as a chief rule for success “to build applications that harness 
network effects to get better the more people use them” [12]. And, indeed, as people 
                                                           
1  Greg Boutin provides a humorous view of the story: “First, let me clarify that both Web 2.0 
and Web 3.0 are marketing concepts (think Tim O’Reilly). Actually, I suspect they might 
even have been sponsored by venture capitalists...! And obviously, they were relayed by 
journalists. So what we had was perhaps the three most reviled professions on the planet unit-
ing to package a mix of innovations and labeling it with a simplistic term whose definition 
could morph on demand...” [11]. 

 
Mediation, ODR, and the Web 2.0: A Case for Relational Justice 
209 
started using them, the focus gradually shifted towards the social component of Web 
2.0, to the point that Web 2.0 became equivalent to “the social Web”. Today’s social 
Web breeds an ever-growing number of online communities that share all types of con-
tents (documents, images, videos, music, etc.), knowledge, and expertise in a number of 
areas. Some recent figures may give an idea of the impressive growth rate of online 
social communities. From a time spent perspective, Nielsen Online reports that member 
communities surpassed e-mail for the first time in February 2009 [13]. Previously, video 
audiences had already surpassed e-mail audiences in November 2007 [13]. 
Social networking has also a transformational role for specific profiles of users. 
Data on the digital behavior of moms reveals that “new moms (younger, one child), 
are much more likely to visit social networking sites and publish or own a blog than 
most other online users” [12]. For instance, new moms “are 85% more likely to spend 
time with Facebook compared to the average online consumer” [13]. To Nielsen ana-
lysts, “becoming a mother is a dramatic inflection point and drives women to the Web 
in search of advice and a desire to connect with others in her shoes” [13]. 
To what extent are new moms connected to ODR potential users? Well, even 
though in a very different sense, being involved in a dispute may also be sensed as a 
singular event inducing a disputing party to search the Web for appropriate venues to 
get the dispute handled and, eventually, resolved. Especially when the judicial system 
alternative is perceived too costly or inappropriate for a number of reasons (nature 
and/or value of the dispute, physical location of the parties, etc.) ODR has the poten-
tial to become an efficient default system. This is certainly the case for disputes 
emerging from online interactions, as the e-Bay community has largely proved.2 But it 
can also be expanded beyond the successful domain of e-commerce.  
So, how may ODR benefit from both the trends and opportunities of Web 2.0? 
Colin Rule predicted in 2006 that “ODR will be one of the biggest beneficiaries of 
these new technologies, because they are squarely aimed at ODR’s core functionality 
areas: communication, collaboration, and interactivity” [15]. However, he also 
warned that “too many ODR providers rely on outdated platforms and technology 
because they are reluctant to make the investments in time and resources needed to 
bring their platforms up to Web 2.0 standards” [15]. Sanjana Hattotuwa went a step 
further anticipating unwanted consequences of ODR lagging behind the curve of Web 
2.0, [T]he most obvious being that ODR itself may cease to exist. With the ubiquity 
of broadband wired and wireless connectivity, the ability to roll-out dispute resolution 
service online is possibly going to be seen as a normal service provision of ADR 
service providers, just like automated online tech support is now part and parcel of 
customer support mechanisms of many large software companies [16]. 
The Ontomedia project is an attempt to incorporate state-of-the-art Web technolo-
gies to offer, use, and organize IT supported mediation services online. The main aim 
of Ontomedia is to provide a domain independent platform for both mediation ser-
vices and users flexible enough to adapt to multiple mediation sub-domains, proce-
dures, and cases. With Ontomedia we expect to comply with the Web 2.0 rule that “it 
gets better the more people uses it”, a golden rule entwined with the preexistent 
scholarly debate on the positive externalities of belonging to a network (“network 
externalities” or “network effect”) [17]. 
                                                           
2  The dispute resolution center at e-Bay and PayPal handles roughly 40 million disputes a year 
using software and automated processes to assist parties in solving their disputes [14]. 

210 
M. Poblet et al. 
4   The Ontomedia Mediation Platform 
The Ontomedia project combines technologies and trends aimed to the effective pro-
vision of a set of functionalities to a broad community of professionals—mediators—
and users of mediation services. The platform development is based on three main 
paradigms: Open Source, Semantic Web technologies and SOA. 
Open Source appears as a clear alternative in situations where features such as 
scalability, stability, security and performance are requested. This approach guaran-
tees the community to be part of the project, contributing with ideas, enhancements 
and facilitating the maintenance. 
From the technological standpoint, the adoption of Semantic Web technologies 
promotes the reutilization of the information generated by the platform. Such infor-
mation can be used by the platform and third parties alike—humans or machines 
accessing the platform guided by the library of ontologies developed. As a result, the 
platform will generate a common understanding framework. Moreover, the develop-
ment of the platform oriented to SOA, promotes the reutilization of the developed 
components as services. 
Figure 2 represents the high level architecture of the platform. Citizens can play 
two different roles: mediator or mediation party. Since a key element for success 
depends on the devices that can connect to Ontomedia we envisage a version avail-
able for mobile and Smartphones with multimedia capabilities. 
The architecture is composed of five main components: a repository, a library of 
ontologies, communication services, an enterprise service bus, and management tools. 
 
Fig. 2. Ontomedia high level architecture 

 
Mediation, ODR, and the Web 2.0: A Case for Relational Justice 
211 
4.1   Repository 
Although this component is treated as a unique element, the repository is actually a 
group of different storage systems with different capabilities: 
− Ontology repository. It provides functionalities to locally store and access ontolo-
gies and ontologies instances. 
− Multimedia repository. A very specific component in charge of store and retrieve, 
via streaming, the modified version of the videoconference sessions. 
− Shared Folders. A regular data repository with advanced permission capabilities. 
4.2   Ontologies 
Ontologies will play the role of structuring all the information related with mediation 
cases and the mediation process. Thus, ontologies facilitate to retrieve and share the 
stored data and they will provide platform personalization for different mediation 
scenarios (e.g. family mediation and consumer mediation). The Mediation Core On-
tology (MCO) has already been developed to capture the nature of the mediation 
process [18]. 
4.3   Communication Services 
The platform has been conceived as an initial core that will grow adding new services 
to satisfy upcoming users’ demands. Figure 3 below shows a list of the initial features 
provided. This set can be easily transformed into the software components we intend 
to integrate. As key elements we highlight: 
− e-mail. The platform will provide e-mail server and client capabilities. 
− IM. Instant messaging has been rapidly adopted by Internet users, helping them to 
communicate synchronously. Thus the platform will work as IM server. 
− Shared Calendar to organize and communicate different events or simply to show 
personal availability. 
− Videoconference to enable synchronic visual communication. 
4.4   Enterprise Service Bus 
Enterprise Service Bus (ESB) [19] is a message-based, open standard solution to 
integrate distributed components. The main function of an ESB is to provide a reliable 
framework to communicate different technological resources. ESB constitutes a basic 
building block within SOA and can be complemented with features such as Service 
Orchestration. ESB will be the core of the platform, providing functionalities for the 
invocation, discovering and publication of the new mediation oriented services. 
4.5   Management 
Management includes a group of services focused on the platform maintenance. This 
category consists of different tasks, namely machine monitoring, network monitoring, 
fault detection, fault corrections or platform adaptation. 

212 
M. Poblet et al. 
5   Functionalities of the Ontomedia Platform: The Mediator Side 
To citizens, Ontomedia may be viewed as a reference point when they need to resolve 
a dispute. Through Ontomedia they will be able to ask for a piece of advice, collect 
information, share their experience with other citizens or even decide if it is suitable 
to start a mediation process.  
While the main goal of Ontomedia is to facilitate citizens’ access to a faster, 
cheaper and more efficient justice, the platform is two-sided to meet the needs of 
mediators (i.e. to establish communication with other colleagues or to supervise or 
review different mediation processes). Ontomedia will therefore provide a set of func-
tionalities for users acting as mediators, divided into five different sets: information, 
repository, training, communication and management. 
 
Fig. 3. Ontomedia functionalities to fulfill mediator’s needs 
The Information layer bundles all the platform capabilities that help users to share 
and show different corporate data and retrieve information related with the current 
legislation. For example, in this section we may find lists of companies or people 
offering mediation services, links to books, articles and sentences. It is the project 
intention to create a community of mediators that populates this section. 
The next group of functionalities composes the repository layer, which can be 
viewed as a case store with retrieval and visualization capabilities. The repository will 
store all the information available related to mediation cases and provide functional-
ities for data and metadata management (working as an ontology repository, metadata 
registry and data repository) [20]. All data generated within the mediation process 

 
Mediation, ODR, and the Web 2.0: A Case for Relational Justice 
213 
will be stored, according to MCO, in the repository layer. The information we expect 
to manage includes multimedia sessions, e-mails, text documents, chat sessions, and 
mediators’ personal notes.  
The repository is also in charge of the information retrieval and visualization func-
tionalities. Again, the MCO will play a main role since it will be the schema helping 
users to formulate and to recover the information stored in the platform. This func-
tionality can be classified as Semantic Search [21]. Finally, visualization will provide 
functionalities at the visual user interface level, helping users to navigate and extract 
reports with relevant information (i.e. a timeline representing the evolution of the 
mediation process). 
Training can be viewed as a showcase where different users will post events, courses, 
call for papers, etc. Next, the Communication layer is oriented to facilitate discussion 
among mediators and help them to get in contact with the platform webmaster. The first 
goal can be achieved by providing instant message capabilities, mailing lists, forum, etc. 
Other specific functionalities considered are a monitor to let other mediators supervise 
and evaluate mediation processes, a shared calendar to see which people is busy or free 
to help or accept a case, or even case forwarding capabilities. 
The last group of functionalities is labeled Management and it covers the part of the 
mediation process in charge of the communication between parties and the mediator, 
that is, the core mediation process. Since the platform offers functionalities before, 
during, and after the mediation process, we can group them in two main categories: (i) 
services enabling the communication (i.e. audio conference, video conference, e-mail, 
shared folders or instant messaging), and (ii) services helping the mediator to create a 
post-session diagnostic and maintain a registry of events. 
5.1   An Example of Use Case 
In this section we present a use case3 that shows a regular interaction between the 
mediator and the platform. 
 
Use Case: Mediator plans a meeting with the parties. 
Goal in Context: Mediator reviews data from a mediation process and decides to plan 
a new meeting with the parties. 
Scope: Mediation Platform 
Level: Summary 
Preconditions: Mediator has an account on the platform, has logged in and is watch-
ing his homepage. The mediation process had started before, and the platform has 
stored different kind of information related to previous sessions. 
Primary Actor: Mediator 
Success End Condition: Mediator sends citations to parties, and the event is reflected 
in the mediator’s agenda. 
Main Success Scenario 
1. Mediator asks the platform all the cases he is involved in. 
                                                           
3 http://alistair.cockburn.us/Basic+use+case+template 

214 
M. Poblet et al. 
2. Platform shows a list of the active mediation processes that belong to the mediator. 
3. Mediator selects one of the list and clicks on it. 
4. Platform shows a timeline where the summaries of previous sessions are marked 
as milestones. Close to each milestone there is a panel with annotations made by 
the mediator. 
5. Mediator clicks on the last session (i.e. the last milestone). 
6. Platform shows a new page, where mediator can replay a modified version of the 
last recorded session that was performed by videoconference. This page also con-
tains a notepad to write comments. 
7. Mediator reviews the last session video, adds new comments and saves them. 
8. The platform saves changes within the repository. 
9. Mediator clicks on the homepage link. 
10. Platform shows a personalized homepage. 
11. Mediator clicks on a shared calendar. 
12. Platform shows a calendar. 
13. Mediator clicks on a day of the calendar, creates a new event, and invites the parties. 
14. Platform registers the event, and sends e-mails to the parties and the mediator. 
6   Conclusion and Future Work 
In this paper we have presented the Ontomedia platform as a tool for online mediation 
that includes state-of-the-art technologies of the Web 2.0. At this stage of research, 
Ontomedia is also a proof of principle of how ODR may benefit from the latest  
Semantic Web technologies. Even though the development of the Ontomedia platform 
is on early stage, and it is relatively soon to extract definitive conclusions, we can 
point out the advantages of using SOA and Semantic Web technologies to obtain 
reusable components, both software artifacts and data gathered. Furthermore, ontolo-
gies will be a key element to personalize and adapt the platform to different scenarios 
(e.g. familiar mediation or consumer mediation). 
Future work includes the tailoring of end user functionalities from the citizens’ side  
and the implementation of a broader spectrum of devices, namely mobile phones. 
Acknowledgments. The research presented in this paper has been developed within 
the framework of two different projects: (i) ONTOMEDIA: Platform of Web Services 
for Online Mediation, Spanish Ministry of Industry, Tourism and Commerce (Plan 
AVANZA I+D, TSI-020501-2008, 2008-2010); (ii) ONTOMEDIA: Semantic Web, 
Ontologies and ODR: Platform of Web Services for Online Mediation (2009-2011), 
Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation (CSO-2008-05536-SOCI). 
References 
1. Walton, D.: The Place of Dialogue in Logic, Computer Science, and Communication Stud-
ies. Synthese 123, 327–346 (2000) 
2. Casanovas, P., Poblet, M.: Concepts and Fields of Relational Justice. In: Casanovas, P., 
Sartor, G., Casellas, N., Rubino, R. (eds.) Computable Models of the Law. LNCS (LNAI), 
vol. 4884, pp. 323–339. Springer, Heidelberg (2008) 

 
Mediation, ODR, and the Web 2.0: A Case for Relational Justice 
215 
3. Casanovas, P.: The Future of Law: Relational Justice, Web Services and Second-
generation Semantic Web. In: Sartor, G. (ed.) The Future of Law, p. 155. European Aca-
demic Press Publishing, Florence (2009) 
4. Lodder, A., Thiessen, E.: Artificial Intelligence and ODR. In: Katsh, E., Choi, E. (eds.) 
Proceedings of the United Nations Forum on Online Dispute Resolution (ODR): Technol-
ogy as the “Fourth Party”, Palais des Nations, Geneva, June 30 - July 1 (2003),  
http://www.odr.info/unece2003/ 
5. Thiessen, E., Zeleznikow, J.: Technical Aspects of Online Dispute Resolution -Challenges 
and Opportunities. In: Conley Tyler, M., Katsh, E., Choi, D. (eds.) Proceedings of the 
Third Annual Forum on Online Dispute Resolution, Melbourne, Australia, July 5-6 (2004) 
http://www.odr.info/unforum2004/thiessen_zeleznikow.htm 
6. Kersten, G., Lai, H.: Negotiation Support and E-negotiation Systems: An Overview. Group 
Decision and Negotiation 16, 553–586 (2007) 
7. Fromm, K.: The Real-Time Web: A Primer (2009),  
http://www.readwriteweb.com/archives/ 
the_real-time_web_a_primer_part_3.php 
8. Kazman, R., Chen, H.-M.: The Metropolis Model. A New Logic for Development of 
Crowsourced Systems. Communications of the ACM 52(7), 76–84 (2009) 
9. Poblet, M., Noriega, P., López de Toro, C., Suquet, J.: ODR y mediación en línea: estado 
del arte. In: Casanovas, P., Magre, J., Díaz, L., Poblet, M. (eds.) Materiales para el Libro 
Blanco de la Mediación en Cataluña, pp. 155–164. Generalitat de Catalunya, Centre 
d’Estudis Jurídics i Formació Especialitzada, Barcelona (2009) 
10. Knorr, E.: 2004 - The Year of Web Services. IT magazine CIO, 90 (December 2003),  
http://books.google.com/books?id=1QwAAAAAMBAJ&printsec=front
cover&source=gbs_summary_r&cad=0_0#PPA90,M1 (accessed May 12, 2009) 
11. Boutin, G.: The definitive definition of Web 3.0 (2008),  
http://www.semanticsincorporated.com/2008/10/ 
the-definitive-definition-of-web-30.html (accessed May 12, 2009) 
12. O’Reilly, T.: Web 2.0 Compact Definition: Trying Again (2006),  
http://radar.oreilly.com/archives/2006/12/ 
web-20-compact.html (accessed May 12, 2009) 
13. Nielsen Online, The global online media landscape: Identifying opportunities in a chal-
lenging market (April 2009),  
http://nielsen-online.com/emc/0904_report/ 
nielsen-online-global-lanscapefinal1.pdf (accessed May 12, 2009) 
14. Rule, C.: Making Peace on eBay: Resolving Disputes in the World’s Largest Marketplace. 
In: The PON Dispute Resolution Forum (October 19, 2008),  
http://www.pon.harvard.edu/events/making-peace-on-ebay-
resolving-disputes-in-the-worlds-largest-marketplace/  
(accessed May 18, 2009) 
15. Rule, C.: “ODR and Web 2.0” (2006),  
http://www.odr.info/colin/smu/odr%20and%20web%202.doc  
(accessed May 11, 2009) 
16. Hattotuwa, S.: The Future of Online Dispute Resolution (ODR): Technologies to Keep an 
Eye On. In: Crystal Ball Session at the 2008 Online Dispute Resolution Forum (June 22, 
2008), http://ict4peace.wordpress.com/2008/06/ (accessed May 13, 2009)  
17. Shapiro, C., Varian, H.R.: Information Rules: A Strategic Guide to the Network Economy. 
Harvard Business School Press, Boston (1998) 

216 
M. Poblet et al. 
18. Poblet, M., Casellas, N., Torralba, S., Casanovas, P.: Modeling Expert Knowledge in the 
Mediation Domain: A Mediation Core Ontology. In: Casellas, N., et al. (eds.) LOAIT 
2009, 3rd Workshop on Legal Ontologies and Artificial Intelligence Techniques joint with 
2nd Workshop on Semantic Processing of Legal Texts, Barcelona. IDT Series, vol. 2 
(2009) 
19. Chappell, D. A.: Enterprise Service Bus. O’Reilly Media, Sebastopol (June 2004) 
20. García-Castro, R., et al.: D1.2.5 Architecture of the Semantic Web Framework v2. Techni-
cal Report. Knowledge Web Network of Excellence (December 2007) 
21. Guha, R., McCool, R., Miller, E.: Semantic Search. In: The Twelfth International World 
Wide Web Conference, Budapest, Hungary (May 2003) 

 
P. Casanovas et al. (Eds.): AICOL Workshops 2009, LNAI 6237, pp. 217–228, 2010. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
Legal “Neutral Dialogue”, Implementing the Work  
of Bruce Ackerman in the Field of Law 
Antoni Abad-Ninet 
Stanford Law School Crown Quadrangle 
Stanford, CA 94305-8610, U.S.A. 
antonii@buffalo.edu 
Abstract. This legal theory paper deals from a strictly jus philosophical 
perspective with the work of Bruce Ackerman and relates to the configuration 
of a theory of neutral dialogue applied in the field of law .The core of this essay 
is the analysis and complementation of some of the characteristics of this 
Ackerman’s theory with other less abstract theories such as Prakken’s formal 
model of adjudication, Walton’s and Krabbe’s commitment in dialogue, and 
Sartor’s double face of legal concepts. The major and long term purpose is to 
achieve a feasible and comprehensible notion of neutral dialogue among these 
different notions. The more realistic and immediate goal is to provide 
theoretical data to a more general and multidisciplinary notion of hybrid 
dialogue. This paper aims to supply legal theoretical background to empirical 
fields such as the Online Dispute Resolution and Relational Justice. The final 
thesis of this article is to state that neutrality does not necessarily means 
denaturalized of the arguments used by parties in law and politics. 
Keywords: Dialogue, Constrictiveness, Principle of Neutrality, Relational 
Justice, Alternative Dispute Resolutions. 
1   Introduction 
The paper is segmented in three main parts, the first segment deals with a preliminary 
characterization and definition of legal language. Can we define legal language as a 
sort of distinctive communication? To answer this question I will analyze the 
differing doctrines [22, 18, 31, 32]. 
In the second segment of this paper I figure out if is possible to achieve a feasible 
notion of neutral or hybrid dialogue in a liberal society. I define in this epigraph from 
a theoretical perspective the notions of dialogue and neutral dialogue through the 
premises of Bruce Ackerman. Subsequently the work is complemented with the 
dialectical debate between Ackerman and Fishkin supplemented with Prakken’s 
theory in [25]. In this segment the essay moves from the world of the theory to the 
world of praxis make use of Habermas terminology [17]. 
Once the concept of dialogue is characterized I link the resulting theory of 
neutrality with the field of law. To do this exercise I make use of the main definitions 
of Relational Justice and Restorative Justice that Casanovas employs [8]. The last 
segment of the paper is a short conclusion advocating the necessity of complementing 

218 
A. Abad-Ninet 
 
the jus-philosophical theories of dialogue with the real experiences and programs of 
Artificial Intelligence. This essay is an exercise of legal theory that tends to 
consolidate the Ackerman’s neutral dialogue as an input to be taken into consideration 
by the more specialized and empirical theories of legal dialogue. 
2   Peculiarity of Legal Language 
The first issue that I address in this paper is to answer the question, if oral and written 
language used by lawyers, judges and other juridical operators has a specific 
peculiarity that generates a different language? Or if otherwise is the legal language 
different from the standard language in a relevant way? If we check the different 
doctrine that deals with this issue, we will appreciate that there is no unanimous 
answer to this important question. In order to simplify the exposition of this issue I 
divide this doctrine in two main parts. The first doctrinal sector, which I call 
(Objectivists) considers that legal language is an autonomous type of communication. 
In this sense, as affirmed in [35] all the anomalousness and idiosyncrasies of the 
speech and writing of lawyers have some historical basis. As stated in [16]: “this 
specifically distinctive evolution caused a gap between legal and ordinary language 
consolidating a parallel development where even different signifies are given to 
identical signifiers… Globalization and communication issues have also affect the 
legal field, where an international perspective is becoming more and more 
widespread. When the difference became large enough, there were generally protests 
and attempts to improve the situation”. 
Jurists themselves have traditionally regarded language as the primary means for 
the formulation and interpretation of legal concepts. Jackson in [21] remarks upon a 
number of characteristics of legal language the following two: a) the diversity of 
forms of legal language; b) the much-discussed problem of comprehensibility of legal 
writing, and the solutions which have been proposed to improve it. Written legal 
language may be considered a particular register of the “grapholect”: it shares the 
grammar of the standard form of the language, and is capable of utilizing any part of 
lexicon. In the autopoietic theory of Luhman [22], law is understood as a self-
referential, self-reproducing system, rather than a form of social integration. As 
affirmed in [20]: Autopoiesis is a term derived from evolutionary biology, referring to 
the systems that reproduce themselves autonomously: “law produces by itself all the 
distinctions and concepts which it uses”. This author continues remarking that one of 
the main practical issues related with this paper is how to come through of the 
“operative clousure” that is law. Clousure does not mean total isolation, but refers to 
the autonomy of the internal self-referring, communicative order in Luhmann terms 
“informational” or “semantic” clousure. There is an absolute boundary between law 
and non-law that we need to overcome to enable a feasible public sphere [6] where 
citizens will be able to participate in legal issues. This legal semantic clousure may 
have direct repercussions for the development of fields such as Mediation or Online 
Dispute Resolution; therefore as suggested in [13], we should at least qualify the 
direct application of this principle to the field of law. 

 
Legal “Neutral Dialogue”, Implementing the Work of Bruce Ackerman 
219 
 
However there is no unanimity about this “radical objectivism” [18]. The second 
doctrinal sector (Deniers) considers that legal language is not an autonomous type of 
communication. 
As stated in [35], law is framework for human action, and law itself is essentially 
based on communication: communication between legislators and citizens, between 
courts and litigants, between the legislator and the judiciary, communication between 
contracting parties, communication within a trial. This author continues stating: that 
human interaction and communication have to be at the center of any theory of law, 
rather than individuals or legal systems as such, he continues stating that: The 
meaning of law is never entirely determined by its author, but constantly refined and 
sometimes thoroughly changed through the interpretation and adjudication process, 
which is codetermined by its background of legal culture. This legal culture is the 
product of general culture. 
According to [20] Habermas is concerning with the legitimation of law in 
democratic societies where traditional sources of authority are discredited. He 
(Habermas) seeks to elaborate an ideal of democratic participation where public 
sphere and the principle of discourse play a nuclear role. Habermas argues in [18] that 
systems theory cannot offer a coherent view of how social sub-systems interact, and 
how they impact and act though the ordinary “lifeworld” of members of society, 
without assuming some underlying general social communication (e.g. ordinary 
language) which is at odds with the “architectonic of system theory”. 
Habermas does not establish any type of specialty for legal language because he 
reduces the concept simply to language in general, without taking into account the 
fact that legal language has a series of characteristics of its own. Consequently, as 
asserted in [24], Habermas reduces the concept of legal discourse to linguisticity. The 
German author applies a foreign discourse to the law in order to legitimate legal 
norms and general legal principles regardless of their hierarchical rank. I understand 
that neutrality cannot be built on this type of acculturation. In law, we find 
propositions that can be qualified as metalinguistic. The linguistic analysis of legal 
norms involves, among other things, their interpretation. 
Inevitably, the same legal norms establish their own interpretative criteria, 
differentiating between those that are interpretative and those that are not. The 
application of Ackerman’s constructivist theory of language to the Habermasian 
principle of discourse can be a good theoretical exercise in order to improve a 
comprehensive notion of neutral dialogue applied to legal norms, and even to propose 
a more responsive democracy. In order to develop this theoretical exercise, we must 
take in account Ackerman’s definition of the concept of dialogue. He establishes two 
varieties of legal discourse: the discourse of reactive legislation, and that of 
interventionist legislation. The use of one or other type will depend on the role 
granted to the law in society. Reactive legislation is generated by social, economic or 
political agreements produced in society. In this kind of legislation no legal debate is 
acceptable if it requires the jurist to question the social agreements mentioned. 
Therefore, the jurist, making use of Habermas’s terms, will be guided by the de 
facto existence of a social act and not by the validity or legitimation of a particular 
social agreement. As stated in [24]: this category of legal discourse reacts to social 
agreements; it does not intervene or generate them. The consensus on dialogue in 
Ackerman is not based on a sociological understanding of the contextual distortions 

220 
A. Abad-Ninet 
 
caused by the instrumental and institutional power. In this kind of legal debate, 
dialogue is limited to the reactive imperative and to the evaluation of specific actions 
against the background of a prevailing social practice; the legitimacy of a practice will 
never become a legal question. 
In the legislation based on reactive discourse, in reference to the law the only 
decisive question raised is whether the sanctionable conduct does not comply with the 
institutionalized positive norms. The legitimacy of legal norms per se is not 
questioned. The syllogism that is produced is direct: social agreement as a premise 
and legal discourse as a consequence; the order or the content of the initial premise 
can never be altered. The other kind of discourse is based on interventionist 
legislation. This discourse is not limited to the appraisal of individual acts against the 
background of the presumably legitimate social practice. Habermas [18] and 
Ackerman [1] both support a kind of interventionist legal discourse, because the 
application of legal rules questions the legitimacy of agreements of all kinds. This 
type of legal discourse is the one that affects the constitutional norms of the State.  
The practical inability of Habermas’s position from the legal standpoint derives 
from the very nature of the normative idealism of his theory, but furthermore, it must 
be possible to consider this ideal theory as a benchmark. I believe that Ackerman's 
hypothetical condition is superior to Rawls and Habermas starting points, the original 
position and the Principle of Discourse. As remarked in [34] Ackerman affirms that 
his own approach is more realistic because it accepts people as they are, permitting 
them to know their life plans. In this sense, Fishkin [14] makes an excellent 
comparison between Rawls and Ackerman. There are obvious similarities between 
both works. Both seek to figure out a solution to the issue of distributive justice under 
ideal conditions and both are based on a kind of impartial decision-making process. 
For Rawls this procedure is the original position, and for Ackerman is the principle of 
neutral dialogue under ideal conditions of perfect technologies of justice.  
Besides these similarities there are certain connections between the two works that 
should be highlighted: 
a) The two theories provide structural principles of justice. These principles are 
a sort of ethical criteria that compare the status of certain situation in terms 
of results (payoffs). For “payoff” Fishkin [14] refers to a specific 
characterization of what is valuable (i.e. necessary items, utility, health, etc) 
by individuals. The structural principle must take into consideration these 
criteria of results and which values individuals give to these assessments. In 
relation with these assessments both theories prescribe a sort of rating. 
b) Both theories aim to be unique (uniqueness). The characterization of Rawls’s 
original position is configured to regulate exclusively the principles of his 
own theory. Ackerman similarly aspires to this feature, although is not 
supported throughout his work. 
c) Both theories try to maintain equality. As stated in [14] that the principle of 
equality in Ackerman is so strict that its implementation could have 
devastating consequences for equality. 
 
I consider that the principle of neutrality sterilizes partially the question about the 
nature of legal language. The principle of neutrality filters some of the main 
distinctive characters related by the Objectivists and empirical experiences such as the 

 
Legal “Neutral Dialogue”, Implementing the Work of Bruce Ackerman 
221 
 
popular Jury confirms the possibility of overcoming the dialectical differences. In this 
sense, I highlight the critic of linguistic approaches that Sartor in [31] has made. As 
synthesized in [31] Dworkin has stated that legal concepts have an interpretative 
nature, in that need to be understood and developed by considering how they can 
contribute to legal practice to the values that inhere it. 
In [31] Sartor links legal validity with its consequential side, namely, with legal 
bindingness, and must examine the role of the latter concept in legal decision-making 
and more generally in legal reasoning. Legal decision-making is aimed at providing 
solutions to single cases, solutions that may be coercively enforced upon their 
addressees (in case they do not spontaneously comply). Similarly, legal reasoning by 
officers and citizens, even outside a disputational framework, aims at establishing 
normative determinations that are to be implemented by the individuals concerned 
and, if necessary, publicly enforced. In many cases legal reasoning can be performed 
without taking a reflexive attitude: One just uses the facts and norms that come to 
mind, without further reflection. Consider, for instance, the reasoning of a police 
officer who stops a car exceeding the speed limit: On the basis of the rule establishing 
the speed limit and of the fact that the car is running at a higher speed, the police 
office concludes, without any further ado, that the car is breaking the limit, and acts 
accordingly. 
Once highlighted the peculiarity of legal language and some of the characters of 
this specific communication. We need to know if legal dialogue is suitable and which 
are the real possibilities of dialogue in the field of law. In other words, we need to 
know where dialogue produces effects in the field of law.  
Sartor in [31] brings clairvoyance to this question by differentiating between the 
double face of legal concepts – one face being precondition-oriented and the other 
being consequence –oriented. This division explains why legal debates make sense 
even in situations of apparent conceptual disagreement, and why they cannot be 
overcome by conceptual stipulation. As stated in [31] when we are discussing the 
preconditions for applying a concept we view the consequences of the concept as 
fixed in relation to our debate, when we are discussing the consequences of a certain 
concept we view the preconditions for applying such a concept as fixed. The Italian 
author continues affirming, the preconditional side and the consequential side of a 
legal concept are not always susceptible to debate in the same way: While both sides 
of certain concepts are equally controversial, other concepts are characterized in such 
a way that only the preconditional side is likely to be subject to debate, while their 
consequential side is usually controversial. Sartor continues defining in [31] both 
fields and how can dialogue decisive when a norm passes his justificatory test (the 
reasons supporting its use as a premise of legal reasoning outweigh the reasons 
against it) and how legal validity can be checked as an evaluative concept. As stated 
in [31] legal validity is indeed an evaluative attitude and therefore dialogue plays a 
major role. Dworkin seems to omit the well-know distinction between internal and 
external models of law that Sartor [30] employs in order to develop the two different 
uses of legal information systems. This division is shows how dialogue can affect to 
the core of law. 
The next segment commences with an introduction of the concept of dialogue in 
Ackerman’s works and afterward it deals with the process of “purification” or “filter” 
of this language through the principle of neutrality.  

222 
A. Abad-Ninet 
 
3   Ackerman’s Notion of Neutral Dialogue 
Ackerman [3] concedes a special role to the concept and functions of dialogue in his 
work. For this author dialogue is the first obligation of citizenship. As a citizen I had 
an especially strong obligation to participate in the dialogic search for the moral 
truth……a refusal to talk simply disqualifies her (liberal citizen in dialogue) as a 
participant in a liberal state unless she is willing to participate. Dialogue is therefore 
a nuclear element of liberal societies. Ackerman [4] considers that these sorts of 
societies must create places where dialogue between citizens can be developed. 
Dialogue has a fundamental social function but also it is a compulsory element for our 
moral self-definition, since it is the mechanism through we take into consideration the 
rest of citizens. 
Ackerman assumes that dialogue between citizens of a liberal society is of 
constrictive, that is, the citizens through the dialog attempt to convince the other 
members of the society in a competitive way and not in a neutral way. The Yale 
professor highlights among the functions of dialogue the fact that it serves to control 
in a sensitive way the power of repression, the establishment of moral truth in both 
individual and collective levels is something crucial when implementing the legal 
framework that regulates the State or certain rules that should serve as general 
principles of law. As Ackerman states [1] the best way to understand the liberal 
tradition is precisely through the effort to define and justify a large force in the power 
of dialogue. The notion of constrained conversation should serve as the organizing 
principle of liberal thought. Ackerman [3] considers that in undertaking this exercise 
in liberal conversation, citizen P not try to convince the rest other fellows P2, to 
change their minds and see, at long last, the compelling truth of P. Instead, the 
conversation has a more pragmatic intention. Therefore as Ackerman states in a 
liberal dialogues citizens do not feel free to introduce moral arguments to the field of 
conversation, but they try to reach a conversational win far away from the dialogical 
ideal situation.  
I understand that the definition of constrained dialogue is applicable to the 
communication between legal operators. Certainly there are differences between legal 
and political validity. At this point I should mention [23]: “Legal norms do not by 
themselves constitutive reasons for justifying actions and decisions (like those of 
judges), unless they are conceived as deriving from moral judgments; normative 
propositions that exhibits the distinctive traits of autonomy, justificatory finality, 
universalisability, generality, supervinience and finality”.  
Dialogue between parties in a court of justice is constrictive as Ackerman 
characterizes. The main objective is to convince the jury or mediator about my own 
claims. After the analysis of the transcendence of dialogue in modern societies, 
Ackerman introduces the concept of neutrality, which is the one that should rule the 
modern liberal societies. As affirmed in [1]: In these sorts of societies (liberals) a sort 
of purification of the "constrictiveness" is done. A political community of diverse 
individuals can organize its power struggle consistently with Neutral discourse if it 
takes steps to assure that: 
a. 
No citizen genetically dominates another. One of the basic requirements in order 
to be able to define dialogue under conditions of neutrality is to prove that there 

 
Legal “Neutral Dialogue”, Implementing the Work of Bruce Ackerman 
223 
 
are no differences based on genetics. In this regard, I extend the concept to other 
aspects such as race, religion or language; 
b. 
Each citizen receives a liberal education. Education has a fundamental role in 
Ackerman's work. Education must provide the basis to establish the liberal 
principles. Regarding education, I want to remark the risk of normalization 
(Foucault) and standardized education; liberal education may be address to 
generate self-determined citizens in a Derrida sense [11, 12]. 
c. 
Each citizen begins adult life under conditions of material equality. According 
to [34], this requirement disables the feasibility of Ackerman’s theory sentenced 
to the realm of the ideas.  
d. 
Each citizen can freely exchange his initial entitlements within a flexible 
transactional network; 
e. 
Each citizen, at the moment of his death, can assert that he has fulfilled his 
obligations of liberal trusteeship, passing on to the next generation a power 
structure no less liberal than the one he himself enjoyed. 
 
All discussions about the legitimacy of relations of power must be subject to the 
principle of neutrality. The Principle of neutrality limits the types of arguments that 
are acceptable in a liberal debate, no reason is good if it requires the force to state a) 
that the argument given is better than another expressed by another fellow, b) despite 
the conception of good (the argument) is inherently superior to another fellow’s 
argument. Fishkin grounds part of his criticism on Ackerman’s assumption that many 
people in developed Western societies do accept the neutrality principle. As stated in 
[34], (Ackerman) attempts to show that the consequences of this presupposition lead 
to a much more extensive egalitarianism than is generally accepted in liberal society. 
In the particular issue analyzed in this paper, the application of the principle of 
neutrality to the field of law, this controversy could be settled by establishing a 
procedural requirement to the parties. These procedural requirements are focus in the 
principle of neutrality enforcement. 
I believe that this constrictiveness, a nuclear element of Ackerman’s theory of 
neutrality, is an essential feature of the language employed by the juridical operators, 
especially in courts. Therefore, this contrictiveness may be purified in order to 
facilitate the implementing of alternative dispute resolution processes. In this sense, 
Neutral dialogue, in short, marks the boundary of the most extensive form of dialogic 
community- embracing all who can participate in a mutually intelligible effort to 
control the power struggle that is their common predicament. In this sense I consider 
really enlighten [36, 37] to figure out the commitment and how parties attempt to 
advance in their own interest (What Ackerman calls in a “constrictive way”. In this 
sense, see esp. Chapters three and for [37]. 
Ackerman offers in [1] a four part arguments to shape his liberal dialectical 
vindication. In my understanding this four step theory merits Ackerman’s notion of 
neutral dialogue to be implemented in the field of law. His first central aim is that is 
possible to conceive of a world where a band of citizens might solve their problem 
entirely through Neutral dialogue; Second, if we consider Neutral dialogue as a 
coherent conceptually option, only a step-by step approach will permit us to confront 
a second intellectual challenge. Ackerman purpose is to frame empirical issues in 
ways that permits specialists to see the broader normative implications of their 

224 
A. Abad-Ninet 
 
particular empirical studies. Following this goal I try to implement the Neutral 
dialogue theory to the field of law. The third is the “egalitarian decision rule”. The 
author recognizes that this sort of rule will lead to a great deal of frustration, nor that 
some will feel more pain than others. Equality is justified not on the basis of what is 
felt but what is said by people trying to make sense of their predicament. The last 
requirement consists in Ackerman’s hope to persuade contractarians to abandon their 
basic political metaphor and shift their allegiance to the concept of liberal dialogue. 
As stated in [2] his main aim is to provoke dialectical engagement and response – 
if a reader will explain why he finds each of the four arguments unpersuasive, these 
reactions may provide grist for the further dialogical defense of Neutrality; and on 
and on so long as the questioner finds further dialogue necessary to resolve his 
doubts about liberalism. In short rather than fearing rigorous dialectical 
examination, the liberal’s last, best, hope lies in the encouragement of philosophical 
reflection:”The only proper response to liberal political philosophy is more 
philosophy”. 
It seems clear to me that some of these requirements are not exclusive to the sphere 
of politics. I claim an application of this main dialogical content to different fields of 
law, i.e. an egalitarian decision rule can be adopted in some of the alternative dispute 
resolution procedures.  
Thigpen and Downing in [34] detract Ackerman’s neutrality principle stating: “that 
perhaps Ackerman’s background as a law professor has affected his conception of 
neutral decisions, for although he never acknowledges it, he has an adversarial 
approach to decision making. It is adversarial in several senses. First, the procedure 
is designed to settle disputes, not to answer abstract questions apart from cases. 
Second, the parties to the procedure must have what we (Thigpen and Downing) can 
call standing; they must be living beings who have a stake in the outcome decision 
and who capable of engaging dialogue. Third the people must speak for themselves”. 
The principle of Neutral dialogue and a feasible appliance has been hardly 
criticized. I consider that Ackerman’s theory has been misinterpreted. Criticism mixes 
two different spheres, rules of dialogue and arguments channelized by this rules. 
Ackerman’s neutrality affects the first sphere and no arguments, whereas the goal is 
to introduce dialogical rules to facilitate understanding and agreement instead of 
vanish the constrictiveness. 
Prakken’s formal model of adjudication in [26] is an example of integration of 
logical models of legal reasoning (especially in those using tools from nonmonotonic 
logic) with dialogue models of argumentation. The author considers in [25] that the 
resulting models regulate the use of argumentative speech acts, such as making, 
disputing 
and 
conceding 
claims 
and 
putting 
forward 
arguments 
and 
counterarguments, and they define the outcome of a dispute in terms of effects of 
these speech acts on the “information state” of the dispute. Prakken’s goal in [25] is to 
show how procedural models of legal argument can give more realistic accounts of 
the judge’s role in legal disputes. I consider that Ackerman’s theory of neutral 
dialogue main goal is to depurate the dialogical constrictiveness between juridical 
operators. From a strict abstract level Ackerman introduces a device to facilitate legal 
disputes. If we want to enable a suitable application of Ackerman’s neutral dialogue 
to the field of law, Prakken’s formal model of adjudication [26] can be the best 
empirical example to do so. 

 
Legal “Neutral Dialogue”, Implementing the Work of Bruce Ackerman 
225 
 
While Benhabib considers in [7] that the principle of neutrality is not very useful 
since it merely states that the law must be neutral. I believe that some of the principles 
and notions of Ackerman’s “adversarial approach” are applicable to the different 
spheres of litigation, arbitration and mediation in law. In this same sense, Sartor in 
[31] when defining the double face of legal concepts he affirms that any 
characterization of the ultimate preconditions of legal validity appears to be based 
upon assumptions pertaining to morality, and cannot therefore hope to have any merit 
of neutrality stretching beyond such assumptions. 
Despite Sartor, I consider that neutrality is feasible even recognizing moral 
assumptions. Ackerman’s [1] dialogical patterns (in an abstract sense) may facilitate 
the implementation of a hybrid dialogue between juridical operators that encourages 
mediation or agreement. Therefore one of the main goals of this essay is to initiate a 
sort of complementation between the work of Sartor and Ackerman. 
Ackerman’s work can be a theoretical complementation to relational law, relational 
justice and restorative justice. Both notions (Ackerman’s & Casanovas) are focus in 
the procedure without distorting the arguments of the parties. 
To figure out the real possibilities of a juridical implementation of the neutrality 
principle, we need to check as characterized in [8] how are evolving some of the main 
experiences of law.  
As Casanovas defines in [9] citizens - as individual persons as much as citizens 
belonging to a political boby – require a greater participation and faster and more 
effective ways of facing their legal activities. Dialogue, flexibility and autonomy seem 
to be the aim of new legal forms of relational justice. Originally, we coined this 
concept for the sake of Restorative Justice, in a broad sense. Relational Justice was 
defined as a bottom –up justice produced through cooperative behavior, agreement, 
negotiation, or dialogue among actors in a post-conflict situation. The Restorative 
Justice field included Alternative Dispute Resolution and Online Dispute Resolutions, 
mediation, commercial, labor and economic mediation, victim-offender mediation, 
restorative justice (dialogue justice un criminal issues, for juveniles and adults), 
transactional justice (negotiated justice in the aftermath of violent conflicts in fragile, 
collapsed or failed states), community justice, family conferencing and peace 
processes. 
In seems clear that all these concepts related (cooperative behavior, agreement, 
negotiation) require the dialogue among actors. As stated [8] this fact evidences the 
main transcendence of dialogue also in the future of law. I consider that the theory of 
neutral dialogue will help to achieve this sort of agreements. Actors in this post-
conflict situation still using "constrictiveness" to win, not only from a dialogical way 
but also from a juridical perspective therefore the purification that neutrality brings to 
dialogue should be understood as constructive.  
Casanovas continues affirming in [9] that Relational Justice may be defined as: the 
substantive and formal structure that allows end users, in the broader sense (as 
citizens, consumers, customers, clients, managers, officials…) to participate in the 
making of their own regulation and legal outcomes through all the mixed and plural 
strategies that the semantic web framework allows. This implies the coexistence of 
legal and social norms, rights and duties to be shared by subjects (artificial or 
natural agents) in a structured environment…..  

226 
A. Abad-Ninet 
 
Legal theorist with a high degree of commitment with the Restorative Justice 
movement use to emphasize the role of privileged actors to counter-balance power in 
the political arena. Neutral dialogue will “equalize” or at least dismiss this privileges. 
Casanovas continues stating that global justice and governance have been 
described many times as relational, to emphasize the contrast with public law theories 
based on the abstraction of a social contract to found some kind of sovereignty. In this 
sense, I refer to the last requirement of Ackerman’s neutrality principle addressed to 
the contractarians in order to abandon their basic political metaphor and shift their 
allegiance to the concept of liberal dialogue. 
4   Conclusion 
This paper is the first step of a theoretical major project related with the concept of 
dialogue, the principle of neutrality and law. Neutral dialogue has enormous 
potentialities in the field of law that we need to engage. This paper promotes the 
development of the “neutrality in second – best theory”, when Ackerman in [3] moves 
from theory to praxis. I understand that the highest level of practicability of 
Ackerman's theory makes it suitable to be applied in the field of law, and concretely 
to the compulsory dialogue between parties and judges, mediators and the rest of 
juridical operators. I understand that neutrality in Ackerman’s sense does not mean 
denaturalized the arguments used by parties in law and politics. Neutral dialogue 
affects procedural rules of dialogue and not the argumentation of parties. 
I wonder if the most specialized doctrine in legal dialogue, [32, 29] analyzing legal 
reasoning and linking artificial intelligence and law (e.g. especially logical research 
on nomonotonic or defeasible legal reasoning) In this sense [30, 27, 15, 28, 19, 36] 
are developing from a more empirical perspective the main goals of Ackerman’s 
principle of neutrality. That is to purify the constrictiveness of dialogue, and to ensure 
some commitment (Ackerman’s second-best conditions) by the parties confronted 
without affecting the argumentations. I understand that Ackerman’s neutrality 
principle has been misinterpreted; neutrality does not mean denaturalized the 
arguments used by parties, but to introduce dialogical, (dialogue and logic) rules to 
facilitate understanding and agreement. 
In this sense, I also wonder if HYPO, CABARET and CATO [29] (implemented 
systems and abstracts models that are a useful complement to the development of 
actual systems and computational models) are devices to implement neutrality. I 
really think so, especially considering that regardless the differences between these 
systems, they do not implement a notion of “winning” a dispute (purification of 
constrictiveness), but they assume that the final choice is made outside the system, 
(outside the rules of dialogue).  
References 
1. Ackerman, B.: Social Justice in the Liberal State. Yale University Press, New Haven 
(1981) 
2. Ackerman, B.: What is Neutral about Neutrality? Ethics 93(2), 372–390 (1983) 
3. Ackerman, B.: Why Dialogue? Journal of Philosophy 86(1) (1999) 

 
Legal “Neutral Dialogue”, Implementing the Work of Bruce Ackerman 
227 
 
4. Ackerman, B., Fishkin, J.: Deliberation Day. Yale University Press, New Haven (2004) 
5. Arendt, H.: The Revolutionary Tradition and Its Lost Treasure. The Portable Hannah 
Arendt. Penguin Classics, New York (2003) 
6. Arendt, H.: On Revolution. Viking, New York (1963) 
7. Benhabib, S.: Models of Public Sphere, Hannah Arendt, The Liberal Tradition and 
Habermas J. In: Calhoun, C. (ed.) Habermas’s and the public sphere, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology Press, Cambridge (1992) 
8. Casanovas, P., Poblet, M.: micro-foundations of restorative justice. In: Mackay, R., et al. 
(eds.) Images of Restorative justice Theory, pp. 235–256. Polizei und Wissenschaft, 
Frankfurt (2007) 
9. Casanovas, P.: The Future of Law: Relational Justice, Web Services and Second 
generation semantic Web. Working paper (2009) 
10. Casebeer, K.: Paris in Closer than Frankfurt, The New American Exceptionalism. Law & 
Society Review 28, 931 (1994) 
11. Derrida, J.: Rogues, Two essays on Reason. Stanford University Press, Palo Alto (2005) 
12. Derrida, J.: The sovereign and the Beast, vol. 1. University of Chicago Press, Chicago 
(2009) 
13. Evangelisti Allori, P.: The linguistic formulation of power: modality and power relations in 
two sets of sports-related arbitration rules. In: Bathia, V.K., Candin, C.N., Evangelisti 
Allori, P. (eds.) Language, Culture and the Law, The formulation of Legal Concepts across 
Systems and Cultures. Peter Lang AG, Frankfurt a M (2008) 
14. Fishkin, J.S.: Can There Be a Neutral Theory of Justice. Ethics 93(2), 348–356 (1983) 
15. Gordon, T.F.: The Pleadings Game. An Artificial Intelligence Model of Procedural Justice. 
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht (1995) 
16. Gotti, M.: The formulation of legal concepts in arbitration normative texts in a 
multilingual, multicultural context. In: Bathia, V.K., Candin, C.N., Evangelisti Allori, P. 
(eds.) Language, Culture and the Law, The formulation of Legal Concepts across Systems 
and Cultures. Peter Lang AG, Frankfurt a. M (2008) 
17. Habermas, J.: Theorie und Praxis: sozialphilosophische Studien. Luchterhand, Neuwied 
am Rhein (1963) 
18. Habermas, J.: Faktizität und Geltung. Beiträge zur. Diskurstheorie des Rechts und des 
demokratischen. Rechtsstaats. VS Verlag, Frankfurt a.M (1992) 
19. Hage, J.C.: A theory of leagl reasoning and a logic to match. In: Prakken, H., Sartor, G. 
(eds.) Logical Models of Legal Argument, pp. 43–117. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
Dordrecht (1997) 
20. Hutton, C.: Language, Meaning and the Law. Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh 
(200) 
21. Jackson, B.S.: Making Sense in Law, Linguistic. In: Psychological and semiotic 
Perspectives. Deborah Charles Publications, Liverpool (1995) 
22. Luhmann, N.: Die Wirtschaft der Gesellschaft. Suhrkamp, Frankfurt a. M (1988) 
23. Nino, C.S.: The Constitution of Deliberative Democracy. Yale University Press, New 
Haven (1993) 
24. Pattaro, E.: A Treatise of Legal Philosophy and General Jurisprudence, vol. 9. Springer, 
Heidelberg (2009) 
25. Prakken, H.: A formal model of adjudication dialogues. Artil. Intell. Law. 16, 305–328 
(2008a) 
26. Prakken, H.: Formalising ordinary legal disputes: a case study. Artil. Intell. Law 16, 333–
359 (2008b) 

228 
A. Abad-Ninet 
 
27. Prakken, H.: Logical tools for modeling legal Argument. Doctoral dissertation. Free 
University Amsterdam (1993) 
28. Prakken, H., Sartor, G.: A system for defeasible argumentation, with defeasible priorities. 
In: Gabbay, D.M., Ohlbach, H.J. (eds.) FAPR 1996. LNCS (LNAI), vol. 1085, pp. 510–
524. Springer, Heidelberg (1996) 
29. Prakken, H., Sartor, G.: Modelling Reasoning with precedents in a Formal Dialogue Game. 
In: Sartor, G., Branting, K. (eds.) Judicial applications of Artificial Intelligence. Kluwer 
Academic Press, Dordrecht (1998) 
30. Sartor, G.: Artificial Intelligence and Law. Complex 1/93. Norwegian Research Center for 
Computers and Law, Oslo (1993) 
31. Sartor, G.: Legal Validity: An Inferential Analysis. Ratio Juris 21(2), 212–247 (2008) 
32. Sartor, G., Branting, K. (eds.) : Introduction: Judicial Applications of Artificial 
Intelligence. In Judicial applications of Artificial Intelligence. Kluwer Academic Press, 
Dordrecht (1998) 
33. Tiersma, P.: Legal language. University of Chicago Press, Chicago (1999) 
34. Thigpen, R.B., Downing, L.A.: Liberalism and the neutrality principle. Political 
Theory 11(4), 586 (1983) 
35. Van Hoecke, M.: Law as communication. Hart Publishing, Oxford (2002) 
36. Walton, D.: Argumentation schemes for presumptive reasoning. Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates, Mahwah (1996) 
37. Walton, D., Krabbe, E.: Commitment in dialogue. Basic concepts of interpersonal 
reasoning. State University of New York Press, Albany (1995) 

Legal Multimedia Management through
JPEG2000 Framework
Jorge Gonz´alez-Conejero
Universitat Aut`onoma de Barcelona
Institute of Law and Technology
UAB-IDT, Cerdanyola del Vall`es, 08290 Spain
{jorge.gonzalez.conejero@uab.es}
Abstract. In the judicial domain, the multimedia contents have become
an important source of data, producing severe storage requirements. Nev-
ertheless, there is no protocol establishing how to obtain and store these
legal multimedia ﬁles. JPEG2000 is one of the latest standards developed
by the JPEG committee. It is composed by 13 diﬀerent parts addressing
the encoding, transmission and manipulation of still images and video. In
this work, we discuss the suitability of some parts of the standard to deal
with legal multimedia contents. We also propose a centralized database
scheme where all the multimedia contents are stored. Furthermore, tak-
ing advantage of the features provided by the JPEG2000 framework,
these ﬁles could be compressed and transmitted over the network, ensur-
ing the access control and the data integrity, among other security tools.
Keywords: Legal multimedia and JPEG2000 standard.
1
Introduction
Nowadays, multimedia has become an important issue in many diﬀerent ﬁelds.
The recent explosion of multimedia legal contents and the improvements achieved
by sensors and video recorders in the last years increase the size of these ﬁles,
producing an enormous demand of storage capability. The compression can help
to reduce the huge storage requirements and the transmission bandwidth. Im-
ages and videos usually contain highly redundant information, which can be
exploited to compress and reduce, in some degrees, the amount of data needed
to store these ﬁles. In addition, in some environments, the encoding process can
allow a loss of information, which helps to enhance the compression eﬃciency.
When multimedia ﬁles are encoded through a process that produces some loss
of the original information, the compression is called lossy. On the other hand,
when no loss of information is produced, the compression is named lossless.
Apart from compression, the manipulation of multimedia currently requires
other advanced features. Some of these features are the availability to transmit
images and videos interactively over the network, to support error resilience or
even to supply capabilities of watermarking and ﬁngerprinting. Encoding systems
must take these needs into account to provide a ﬂexible framework that allows an
P. Casanovas et al. (Eds.): AICOL Workshops 2009, LNAI 6237, pp. 229–241, 2010.
c
⃝Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010

230
J. Gonz´alez-Conejero
eﬃcient management. JPEG2000 [1] is one of the latest standards developed by
the Joint Photographic Experts Group (JPEG) and is structured in 13 diﬀerent
parts, addressing the encoding, transmission, security, and manipulation of still
images and video.
In Spain, the Civil Procedure Act of January 7th, 2000 (1/2000) introduces
the video recording of oral hearings. Consequently, Spanish civil courts are cur-
rently producing a massive number of multimedia ﬁles that have substituted the
written transcripts and have become part of the judicial ﬁle, together with suits,
indictments, injunctions, judgments and pieces of evidence. Lawyers, prosecu-
tors and judges need to access these contents when preparing similar cases or
when appealing to superior courts. Furthermore, the 1/2000 Civil Procedure Act
does not include a protocol establishing how to obtain audiovisual records. In
addition, the procedures to store, classify and retrieve audiovisual records may
vary even from court to court, with no common database available to store the
audiovisual records.
In this work, we discuss the suitability of the standard JPEG2000 to compress
and manage multimedia ﬁles provided by legal procedures, and propose a scheme
of a centralized database to store indexed and/or tagged multimedia documents
(see [2] and [3]), monitoring the access by parts and ensuring the integrity of the
data, among other security features.
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 reports an overview of the
JPEG2000 standard; Section 3 describes the parts of JPEG2000 framework
suitable to handle legal multimedia ﬁles and proposes the centralized database
scheme to store and manage this kind of data; and Section 4 summarizes the
work.
2
JPEG2000 Overview
JPEG2000 has become a powerful standard that provides even more features
than those initially planned. The technologies supported by the standard have
been described in many diﬀerent works. To mention only some of them, the
JPEG2000 features and the most important techniques used in it are reviewed
in [4,5]; an in-depth overview is described in [6,7]. Although the standard was
initially structured in six parts, in 2001 seven more parts were proposed. The
main purposes of each part are summarized in Table 1. Among other features,
the JPEG2000 Part 1 provides scalability by quality, spatial location, resolution,
and component. These scalabilities fulﬁll most of the requirements of applications
and scenarios where images are used.
The scheme depicted in Figure 1 reports the basis of the JPEG2000 stan-
dard, that is composed by two main stages: 1) an encoder to compress the image
producing a binary ﬁle that contains the compressed image (JP2 ﬁle format);
and 2) a decoder to decompress the binary stream, obtaining a recovered im-
age. In Figure 1, the input for the JPEG2000 Encoder is a color image (RGB)
taken from the repository of the Institute of Law and Technology (IDT), that
is composed by many still images and videos produced by diﬀerent legal proce-
dures. It corresponds to a Preliminary Audience celebrated on 2007. From the

Legal Multimedia Management through JPEG2000 Framework
231
Table 1. Description of the 13 parts of the JPEG2000 standard
– JPEG2000 Part 1 Core coding system [8]: description of the minimal
decoder and a simple ﬁle format. This part has a limited number of options in
order to facilitate the interchange among applications. It is the basis of the other
parts, and allows lossy and lossless compression for still images.
– JPEG2000 Part 2 Extensions [9]: extensions of the core coding system,
providing advanced coding features which can be used to enhance the coding
performance or to manipulate unusual data types. This part also provides an
enhanced ﬁle format.
– JPEG2000 Part 3 Motion JPEG2000 [10]: extensions of the core coding
system devised to support the manipulation of image sequences (motion).
– JPEG2000 Part 4 Conformance testing:
information for the compliance
and conformance among JPEG2000 implementations.
– JPEG2000 Part 5 Reference Software:
two implementations of the core
coding system: JJ2000, developed in Java, and JasPer, developed in C.
– JPEG2000 Part 6 Compound image ﬁle format [11]: additional ﬁle format
for tailored and compound documents.
– JPEG2000 Part 7: this part has been abandoned.
– JPEG2000 Part 8 Secure JPEG2000 [12]: description of a ﬁle syntax for in-
terpreting secure image data and a normative process for registering security tools.
– JPEG2000 Part 9 Interactivity tools, APIs and protocols [13]: description
of the transmission protocol JPIP, devised to interactively transmit JPEG2000
images.
– JPEG2000 Part 10 Volumetric JPEG2000:
coding of volumetric data,
providing enhanced coding features for ﬂoating point data.
– JPEG2000 Part 11 Wireless JPEG2000:
description of error protection
techniques for JPEG2000 ﬁles aimed to detect and correct errors produced during
the data transmission.
– JPEG2000 Part 12 ISO base media ﬁle format:
deﬁnition of the ISO
ﬁle media ﬁle, providing an extensible format which facilitates interchange,
management and editing.
– JPEG2000 Part 13 An entry level JPEG2000 encoder: deﬁnes a normative
entry level JPEG2000 encoder providing one or more optional complete encoding
paths that use various features deﬁned in ISO/IEC 15444.

232
J. Gonz´alez-Conejero
JP2 ﬁle, the JPEG2000 Decoder is able to obtain either a recovered image with
diﬀerent degrees of quality (scalability by quality), or a reduced version of the
original image (scalability by resolution), or a random access to the JP2 binary
ﬁle aimed to recover only certain regions within the original image (scalability
by spatial location), or a concrete component of the input image (scalability by
component). One of the most important features of JPEG2000 is the possibility
to decode a selected image taking into account these scalabilities without need-
ing to decompress the whole compressed ﬁle (compress once decompress many
ways).
The JP2 ﬁle format contains the compressed image and the required informa-
tion to allow the scalabilities mentioned above (see Figure 1). However, many
applications could ﬁnd useful to store additional information to enhance the in-
terpretation and classiﬁcation of the compressed data. In order to address this
issue, JPEG2000 framework considers the deﬁnition of metadata boxes to store
this relevant information in the same ﬁle. The JP2 ﬁle format provides two
mechanism for embedding metadata into a ﬁle:
– XML (Extensible Markup Language) boxes allow XML documents to be
embedded within the JP2 ﬁle. The meaning of the data is speciﬁed through
the XML Document Type Deﬁnition (DTD).
– UUID (Universal Unique Identiﬁer) boxes allow binary data to be embedded
within the ﬁle. The UUID number is generated by the application developer
when the format of the data to be contained in the box is determined.
Both methods allow to add metadata to image ﬁles. Additionally, XML and
UUID boxes may be placed almost anywhere in the ﬁle, where it is more appro-
priate for the target application.
Fig. 1. Basis of the JPEG2000 standard (Part 1)

Legal Multimedia Management through JPEG2000 Framework
233
3
Multimedia Management
In the judicial domain, lawyers and judges are used to consume an important
part of their time searching, retrieving and managing legal ﬁles. The metadata
boxes enables to index, tag or annotate every ﬁle. In the literature, several works
have been presented to implement an automatic and semantic annotation for le-
gal multimedia ﬁles. On the other hand, there are works to carry out a semantic
search among these ﬁles (see [14,15,16]). Consequently, the save of time and
resources is considerable. Ontologies provide many tools to carry out the knowl-
edge acquisition, enabling the semantic search and diﬀerent annotations in the
legal multimedia ﬁles [17].
The Moving Pictures Experts Group (MPEG) committee has developed many
standards for still image and video compression. The last one is the MPEG-
7 [18] that improves the MPEG-4 [19] including: Description Deﬁnition Lan-
guage, audio-visual Descriptor, and Description Schemes (see [20]). All of them
aimed to deﬁne, at diﬀerent levels, syntax and semantic capabilities [21]. These
standards are used in a commercial application named as e-Sentencias [22]. The
aim of the e-Sentencias Project is to develop a software-hardware system for
legal professionals to access and manage the multimedia ﬁles related to their
cases. Nevertheless, the JPEG2000 framework provides support for semantic
information through the metadata boxes, and several features and capabilities
to manage multimedia contents as diﬀerent scalabilities, eﬃcient compression of
compound documents, security tools, and interactivity tools, APIs and protocols
for the transmission over the network.
In this section, ﬁve diﬀerent parts of the JPEG2000 standard are presented,
and the suitability to handle legal multimedia ﬁles is discussed. Part 2 [9], re-
ported in Section 3.1, presents several extensions for the JP2, an enhanced ﬁle
format, and stores unusual data. Part 3 [10] is reported in Section 3.2 and en-
ables the coding and display of timed sequences of images (motion). Part 6 [11],
reported in Section 3.3, can be used to store multi-page documents with many
objects per page (document imaging, for pre-press and fax-like applications,
etc.). Part 8 [12] that addresses security aspects as encryption, source authenti-
cation, data integrity, conditional access, and ownership protection is reported
in Section 3.4. The last part, Part 9 [13] of the standard, is reported in Sec-
tion 3.5 and deﬁnes tools for supporting image and metadata delivery through
the network. Finally, Section 3.6 shows how to combine the JPEG2000 parts of
the standard to manage legal multimedia ﬁles.
3.1
Extensions to the JPEG2000 Part 1
The JP2 ﬁle format is devised for applications that are limited to the storage of
RGB and grayscale images. The JPX ﬁle format deﬁned in Part 2 of the stan-
dard expands its capabilities to allow other types of images and transformations
devised to improve the compression eﬃciency, and deﬁnes a set of standard meta-
data ﬁelds. The JPX ﬁle format also allows the speciﬁcation of multiple images
within a single ﬁle, and the combination of those images through composition

234
J. Gonz´alez-Conejero
Fig. 2. JPEG2000 standard ﬁle formats. Left: Part 2 of the standard stores several
compressed images and their corresponding metadata information to provide semantic
capabilities. Right: Part 3 of the standard enables the management of motion sequences
and the metadata aimed to provide semantic capabilities.
and animation. While this is similar to the capabilities of the motion JPEG2000
format, it is aimed at simpler applications that do not include synchronized
sound or real-time frame rates.
In the legal multimedia management scenario, the most important features that
the Part 2 of the standard provide are: the possibility to store several compressed
images in the same ﬁle, a deﬁned metadata structure in XML to enable an Intellec-
tual Property box, and the inclusion of metadata to provide semantic capabilities
to each image. Figure 2 (Left) depicts a scheme of this ﬁle format.
3.2
Motion JPEG2000
Motion JPEG2000 is expected to be used in a variety of applications, particularly
where the coder and decoder are already available for other reasons. The appli-
cation areas include, but are not limited to, digital still cameras, PC-based video
capturing, error-prone environments such as wireless and the internet, and high
quality digital video recording for professional broadcasting and motion picture
production. Motion JPEG2000 is a ﬂexible format, permitting a wide variety
of usages such as editing, display, interchange and streaming from streaming
servers using a variety of protocols.
MJ2 ﬁle format is composed of media-data (eg. video frames and sound sam-
ples) and metadata. The metadata can be subdivided into “structural” meta-
data that is required to allow the ﬁle decompression and “descriptive” metadata.
While the structural metadata is described in detail in the standard, the descrip-
tive metadata is an open box to store information from diﬀerent scenarios where
the MJ2 ﬁle format is used.

Legal Multimedia Management through JPEG2000 Framework
235
A simple MJ2 presentation may be composed by a single video and a single
mono or stereo audio track. However, a more complex one might have multi-
ple video tracks overlapping in time, such as in layers. Stored in the disk, the
presentation may be in two forms: self-contained in a single ﬁle or in multiple
ﬁles. In the last case, a parent MJ2 presentation ﬁle conforms the MJ2 format
and contains all the conforming metadata. Figure 2 (Right) depicts a schematic
description of the MJ2 ﬁle format.
The MPEG-4 speciﬁcation supports the edition, local playback and streaming
for multimedia ﬁles. So, the MP4 ﬁle format resulting from this work is able to
contain a variety of multimedia data, and it uses the same box structures as
the JP2 format. Motion JPEG2000 is based on the MPEG-4 MP4 ﬁle format,
and JPEG2000 is represented as a peer coding system to MPEG-4 visual. In
addition, the JPX ﬁle format is able to include a metadata box containing the
metadata provided by the MPEG-7 in a binary format. Consequently, we provide
a common ﬁle format for multimedia data, including motion JPEG2000, MPEG-
4 and MPEG-7.
For our purposes, focused on legal multimedia management, the motion
JPEG2000 is able to provide a video compression format that allows: video
streaming, edition and the inclusion of metadata. In our scenario, the metadata
boxes are aimed to provide semantic capabilities to the multimedia ﬁles. This
ﬁle format is also able to manage information from the MPEG-4 and MPEG-7
standards.
3.3
Compound Documents
This format, named as JPM, is an extension of the JP2 ﬁle format and uses boxes
deﬁned for both the JP2 and the JPX ﬁle formats. This part of the standard is
useful for applications storing multiple pages, images with mixed content and/or
images that need more structure than the provided in JP2.
This International Standard is based on the multi-layer Mixed Raster Con-
tent (MRC) [23] imaging model. It makes provisions for processing, interchange
and archiving of these image types in multiple layers, and deﬁnes composition
models which regenerate the desired image. The eﬃciency is realized in the seg-
mentation in layers of diﬀerent types of images, since it allows an image speciﬁc
compression.
Figure 3 shows an example of how the JPEG2000 Part 6 handles the com-
pound documents. In this ﬁgure, the original document is composed by a color
and grayscale images and text. First, a segmentation process is applied to divide
the document in three diﬀerent layers: color image, grayscale image and text.
The JPM ﬁle format allows to encode each layer with a diﬀerent compression
algorithm, so if we consider the text as a bi-level image (black and white), we can
apply the JBIG2 [24,25] standard that is speciﬁcally devised to encode bi-level
images and documents. Metadata boxes are also considered in this ﬁle format
to store some additional information about documents and to provide semantic
capabilities.

236
J. Gonz´alez-Conejero
Fig. 3. JPEG2000 Part 6 (JPM ﬁle format). The original document is composed by
color and grayscale images and text. Then, the document is segmented in three diﬀerent
layers and a speciﬁc encoding is applied. The compressed binary streams from the three
layers and the needed metadata are store in an unique ﬁle.
3.4
Security Tools
The Internet, and the new information technology radically simpliﬁes the access
of content for the user. Therefore, it is expected that tools and protective meth-
ods that are recommended in JPEG2000 must ensure the security of transaction,
protection of content (IPR), and protection of technologies. Security issues, such
as authentication, data integrity, protection of copyright and Intellectual Prop-
erty, privacy, conditional access, conﬁdentiality, transaction tracing, to mention
a few, are among important features in many imaging applications targeted by
JPEG2000.
The protection of digital contents is described and can be achieved in many
ways such as digital watermarking, digital signature, encryption, metadata,

Legal Multimedia Management through JPEG2000 Framework
237
authentication and integrity checking. Part 8 of JPEG2000 standard intends
to provide tools and solutions in terms of speciﬁcations that allow applications
to generate, consume and exchange Secure JPEG2000 binary streams. This is
referred as JPSEC.
Some interesting features for the legal multimedia management are:
– Access control: The prevention of unauthorized use of a resource, including
the prevention of use of a resource in an unauthorized manner.
– Authentication: The process of verifying an identity claimed by or for a
system entity.
– Source authentication: Source authentication is the veriﬁcation that a
source entity is in fact the claimed source.
– Conﬁdentiality: Conﬁdentiality is the property that information is not
made available or disclosed to unauthorized individuals, entities or processes.
– Encryption: Transformation of data by a cryptographic algorithm to hide
the information content of the data.
– Fingerprints: Fingerprints are characteristics of an object that tend to
distinguish it from other similar objects. They enable the owner to trace
authorized users distributing them illegally.
– Data integrity: Image data integrity denotes the property that data has
not been altered or destroyed in an unauthorized manner.
– Watermarking: Watermarking inserts imperceptibly data representing
some information into multimedia data.
This is a summary of the features provided by the JPEG2000 framework con-
sidering security aspects. The interested reader is referred to [12].
3.5
Protocols for Transmission over the Network
Part 9 of JPEG2000 deﬁnes tools for supporting image and metadata delivery.
The main component of Part 9 is a client-server protocol called JPIP. JPIP
may be implemented on top of HTTP, but is designed with a view to other
possible transports. To facilitate its deployment in systems with varying degrees
of complexity, JPIP handles several diﬀerent formats for the image data returned
by the server: these include ordinary image formats such as complete JPEG
or JPEG2000 ﬁles. JPIP also supports both stateless and stateful modes of
operation, enabling cache-modelling to eliminate the redundant transmission of
data.
JPIP provides selective access to the image metadata that may be contained
within JPEG2000 ﬁles. Although Part 9 is focused on the application of tech-
nology from Part 1, including the JP2 ﬁle format, it supports some ﬁle format
extensions from Part 2. A mechanism has also been provided for selection from
amongst multiple binary streams in JPX (Part 2), MJ2 (Part 3) and JPM (Part
6) ﬁles. Potentially this could be applied to any ﬁle format containing images,
not just to the JPEG2000 framework.
In our scenario, focused on legal multimedia management, the JPIP protocol
is useful to transmit these ﬁles and their corresponding metadata information
over the network.

238
J. Gonz´alez-Conejero
Fig. 4. Representation of the centralized scheme. The documents are stored in a
JPEG2000 standard ﬁle format in a database, where the access is monitored to prevent
external attacks and unauthorized connections. JPSEC provides security features and
JPIP allows the transmission of these ﬁles over the network.
3.6
Centralized Scheme
In the previous sections, the suitability to handle legal multimedia ﬁles through
the JPEG2000 standard has been discussed. In this section, we propose a central-
ized scheme with two main features: 1) it stores all the legal digital documents
in a centralized database in a JPEG2000 ﬁle format, and 2) all of these legal
multimedia ﬁles could be transmitted over the network taking into account many
security aspects.
Figure 4 depicts the main idea of the proposed scheme. The still images are
compressed through the JP2 and JPX ﬁle formats, the MJ2 is the ﬁle format for
motions, and JPM is used for compound documents. For every ﬁle, the JPSEC
provides security aspects to ensure the data integrity, source authentication,
access control, etc. Finally, the JPIP protocol allow the transmission of these
ﬁles over the network. The access to the database is monitored to prevent either
attacks devised to aﬀect the normal operation of the system, or the attempt to
compromise evidences and documentation produced by a judicial procedure.
4
Summary
In the last years, the use of multimedia legal contents has been increased, becom-
ing part of the judicial proﬁles. Furthermore, in Spain, the Civil Procedure Act

Legal Multimedia Management through JPEG2000 Framework
239
of 7th January, 2000 (1/2000) introduces the video recording of oral hearings,
producing an enormous demand of storage capability. Nevertheless, the 1/2000
Civil Procedure Act does not consider any protocol establishing how to obtain
audiovisual records.
The compression can help to reduce the storage and bandwidth requirements.
However, besides the compression, the manipulation of images requires other ad-
vanced features as: transmition of images over the network, error resilience and
supply of security tools. JPEG2000 is one of the latest standards developed by
the Joint Photographic Experts Group (JPEG) and it is structured in 13 diﬀer-
ent parts addressing the encoding, transmission and security of still images and
video. JPEG2000 fulﬁlls most of the requirements in many diﬀerent scenarios.
The JPEG2000 standard also considers the inclusion of additional useful infor-
mation through the metadata boxes. In the judicial domain, legal professionals
consume an important amount of their time searching, retrieving and managing
legal ﬁles. Therefore, this metadata boxes enables to index, annotate and tag
every ﬁle, providing semantic capabilities.
In this work, we discuss the suitability of some parts that compose the
JPEG2000 standard to the legal multimedia scenario as well as we propose a
scheme of a centralized database to store indexed and tagged multimedia docu-
ments. This scheme, based on the JPEG2000 framework, allows the monitoring
of the access to the legal data and takes into account several security aspects.
Part 1 is the core coding system and the basis of the other parts. It pro-
duces the JP2 ﬁle format that contains the compressed image and the minimal
information to allow the recovering of the input image. Part 2 is an extension
of Part 1, providing XML metadata boxes and the possibility to store many
images in the same ﬁle with their corresponding metadata. It produces the JPX
ﬁle format. Part 3 is devised to the compression, edition and streaming of mo-
tion sequences, deﬁning the MJ2 ﬁle format. Part 6 is focused on the encoding
of compounded documents and produces the JPM ﬁle format. It carries out a
segmentation process to divide the document into diﬀerent types of images and
text, enabling the encoding of each part with diﬀerent methods to improve the
compression eﬃciency. Part 8 is named as JPSEC and addresses the security
issues. Finally, the Part 9 deﬁnes protocols and APIs to enable the delivery of
compressed images and metadata over the network. In our proposed central-
ized scheme, legal multimedia ﬁles are stored in a centralized database in the
corresponding JPEG2000 standard ﬁle format. All of these legal ﬁles are also
accessible through the net, monitoring the access and providing security tools
to ensure the integrity of evidences and other legal ﬁles as the data integrity,
source authentication, watermarking, etc.
Acknowledgments. This work has been partially supported by the Spanish
Government (Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovaci´on and Ministerio de Industria,
Turismo y Comercio) under Grants TSI-020501-2008-131 and CSO2008-05536.

240
J. Gonz´alez-Conejero
References
1. Taubman, D., Marcellin, M.: JPEG 2000: Image Compression Fundamentals, Stan-
dards, and Practice. Kluwer International Series in Engineering and Computer
Science, vol. 642 (2002)
2. Ballan, L., Bertini, M., Del Bimbo, A., Serra, G.: Video Annotation and Retrieval
Using Ontologies and Rule Learning. IEEE Multimedia (2010) (in press)
3. Smeulders, A., Worring, M., Santini, S., Gupta, A., Jain, R.: Content-Based Image
Retrieval at the End of the Early Years. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence 22(12), 1349–1380 (2000)
4. Skodras, A., Christopoulos, C., Ebrahimi, T.: The JPEG 2000 still image compres-
sion standard. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine 18(5), 36–58 (2001)
5. Skodras, A., Christopoulos, C., Ebrahimi, T.: JPEG2000: The upcoming still image
compression standard. ELSEVIER Pattern Recognition Letters 22(12), 1337–1345
(2001)
6. Rabbani, M., Joshi, R.: An overview of the JPEG 2000 still image compression
standard. Signal Processing: Image Communication 17(1), 3–48 (2002)
7. Taubman, D., Marcellin, M.: JPEG2000: Standard for interactive imaging. Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE 90(8), 1336–1357 (2002)
8. ISO/IEC 15444-1: JPEG2000 image coding system. Part 1: Core coding system
(December 2000)
9. ISO/IEC 15444-2: JPEG2000 image coding system. Part 2: Extensions (May 2004)
10. ISO/IEC 15444-3: JPEG2000 image coding system. Part 3: Motion JPEG2000
(September 2002)
11. ISO/IEC 15444-6: JPEG2000 image coding system. Part 6: Compound image ﬁle
format (October 2003)
12. ISO/IEC 15444-8: JPEG2000 image coding system. Part 8: Security (July 2006)
13. ISO/IEC 15444-9: JPEG 2000 image coding system - Part 9: Interactivity tools,
APIs and protocols (December 2005)
14. Declerck, T., Wittenburg, P., Cunningham, H.: The automatic generation of formal
annotations in a multimedia indexing and searching environment. In: Proceedings
of the workshop on Human Language Technology and Knowledge Management,
Morristown, NJ, USA, pp. 1–8. Association for Computational Linguistics (2001)
15. Holling, L., Schreiber, A., Wielemaker, J., Wielinga, B.: Semantic annotation of
image collections. In: Proceedings of the K-CAP 2003 Workshop on Knowledge
Markup and Semantic Annotation, Florida, USA (2003)
16. Schreiber, A.T.G., Dubbeldam, B., Wielemaker, J., Wielinga, B.: Ontology-based
photo annotation. IEEE Intelligent Systems 16(3), 66–74 (2001)
17. Breuker, J., Casanovas, P., Klein, M.C., Francesconi, E.: Law, ontologies and the
semantic web: Channeling the Legal Information Flood. Frontiers in Artiﬁcial In-
telligence and Applications, vol. 188. IOS Press, Amsterdam (2009)
18. Chang, S.F., Sikora, T., Puri, A.: Overview of the MPEG-7 standard. IEEE Trans-
actions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology 11(6), 688–695 (2001)
19. ISO/IEC 14496-14: Information Technology—Coding of audio-visual objects. Part
14: MP4 ﬁle format (November 2003)
20. Sikora, T.: The MPEG-7 Visual Standard for Content Description – An Overview.
IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology 11(6), 696–702
(2001)

Legal Multimedia Management through JPEG2000 Framework
241
21. Troncy, R., Bailer, W., Hausenblas, M., Hofmair, P., Schlatte, R.: Enabling Mul-
timedia Metadata Interoperability by Deﬁning Formal Semantics of MPEG-7
Proﬁles. In: Avrithis, Y., Kompatsiaris, Y., Staab, S., O’Connor, N.E. (eds.)
SAMT 2006. LNCS, vol. 4306, pp. 41–55. Springer, Heidelberg (2006)
22. Casanovas, P., Binefa, X., Gracia, C., Teodoro, E., Galera, N., Bl´azquez, M., Poblet,
M., Carrabina, J., Monton, M., Montero, C., Serrano, J., L´opez-Cobo, J.M.: The
e-Sentencias Prototype: A Procedural Ontology for Legal Multimedia Applica-
tions. In: Law, ontologies and the semantic web: Channeling the Legal Information
Flood. Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Applications, vol. 188, pp. 199–219.
IOS Press, Amsterdam (2009)
23. ISO/IEC 16485: Information technology – Mixed Raster Content, MRC (2000)
24. ISO/IEC 14492: Information technology – Lossy/lossless coding of bi-level images
(2001)
25. Howard, P.G., Kossentini, F., Martins, B., Forchhammer, S., Rucklidge, W.J.: The
emerging JBIG2 standard. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video
Technology 8, 838–848 (1998)

Author Index
Abad-Ninet, Antoni
217
Agnoloni, Tommaso
93
Ajani, Gianmaria
1, 27
Aucher, Guillaume
150
Bak, Jaroslaw
113
Barabucci, Gioele
133
Boella, Guido
150, 162
Boer, Alexander
74
Boulet, Romain
39
Bourcier, Dani`ele
39
Brighi, Raﬀaella
54
Cabrerizo, Alvaro
205
Casanovas, Pompeu
1, 184, 205
Cervone, Luca
133
Fern´andez-Barrera, Meritxell
93
Gonz´alez-Conejero, Jorge
229
Governatori, Guido
162
Jedrzejek, Czeslaw
113
L´opez-Cobo, Jos´e Manuel
205
Mazzega, Pierre
39
Pagallo, Ugo
1, 12
Palmirani, Monica
54, 133
Peroni, Silvio
133
Poblet, Marta
205
Prieto, Juan Antonio
205
Rossi, Piercarlo
27
Rotolo, Antonino
162
Sagri, Maria Teresa
93
Sartor, Giovanni
1
Tiscorni, Daniela
93
van der Torre, Leendert
150, 162
van Engers, Tom
74
Venturi, Giulia
93
Vitali, Fabio
133
Winkels, Radboud
74

