Causal Inference and EPR
93
C
Causal Inference and EPR
Mauricio Su´arez
The status of causality in the EPR experiment has always been a source of con-
troversy. A condition of local causality is implicit in the original EPR criterion of
reality: “If, without in any way disturbing the system, we can predict with certainty
(i.e., with probability equal to unity) the value of a physical quantity, then there ex-
ists an element of physical reality corresponding to this physical quantity.” In the
EPR set-up both systems have separated and are no longer interacting so it is as-
sumed that “no real change can take place in the second system in consequence
of anything that may be done to the ﬁrst system” [1, p. 779]. The non-disturbance
clause in the antecedent is hence satisﬁed, and we may predict with certainty the val-
ues of properties in the distant wing. In other words: although the theory does not
represent causal inﬂuences, there seems prima facie to be physical determination of
values across a spatial gap. This notoriously led EPR to draw the conclusion that
the theory is incomplete; but in the aftermath of  Bell’s theorem it is customary to
draw the alternative conclusion – that there is non-local causation in nature. Indeed
Bell’s theorem has been the driving force of scepticism regarding local causality in
the literature. In the last two decades the scepticism has linked up to a more general
worry concerning the inference of causal hypotheses from statistical correlations in
quantum mechanics. For physicists these issues matter to the evaluation of the com-
patibility of quantum mechanics with special relativity theory, and the prospects of
a uniﬁed quantum gravitational theory. For philosophers these issues are key to a
thorough assessment of the philosophical implications of quantum mechanics; and
in addition EPR has become one benchmark against which all methodologies of
causal inference are routinely tested.
The EPR Experiment Brieﬂy Reviewed
Recall that in Bohm’s version of the EPR experiment two particles (“1” and “2”)
are simultaneously created at some event “e” in the singlet state  and move in
opposite directions. In a Minkowski space-time diagram, both particles describe
symmetric paths along the time axis (see Fig. 1). The  Stern–Gerlach apparati
that measure these particles’  spin at each wing of the experiment are at rest in the
laboratory frame so their world lines are represented by vertical lines “A1” and “A2”
in that frame. Each time the experiment is repeated, laboratory technicians can freely
select a particular orientation of the measurement apparatus in each wing, and we
denote such events as “a” and “b”. Each particle’s spin is measured on interaction

94
Causal Inference and EPR
“A2”
“A1”
“s1”
“s2”
“b”
“a”
“1”
“2”
“e”
Fig. 1 EPR in space-time setting
with the associated measuring device on the corresponding wing. The outcomes
that are produced are denoted by “s1” and “s2”, respectively, and are known as the
“outcome-events”:
The Argument Against Causality in EPR
An essay by Bas van Fraassen [2] has been particularly inﬂuential in setting a
default view against causality in EPR among philosophers of physics and founda-
tional physicists alike. Van Fraassen’s argument tracks Bell’s own reasoning, with
the notorious factorizability condition playing a key role. But there is a signiﬁcant
difference: whereas Bell was concerned with factorizability as a condition of phys-
ical  locality, Van Fraassen takes it to be a condition of causality, in the tradition
of Reichenbach’s Principle of the Common Cause. The putative conclusion of this
inﬂuential argument is that the principle of the common cause fails in quantum me-
chanics: there are quantum phenomena that have no causal explanation.
Let us brieﬂy review the argument. Van Fraassen rules out a direct causal link
between the wings by appeal to special relativity theory. I will not discuss this as-
sumption here, although it is controversial (see e.g. [10] for an extended critique).
The main statistical condition at the heart of Bell’s theorem (the notorious “factor-
izability” condition) is:
prob s1 & s2
"a & b &  = prob s1
"a &  prob s2
"b &  (FACT)
The condition can be further analysed into three Reichenbachian screening-off
conditions, which in different versions have received the names “causality” or “out-
come independence”; “hidden locality” or “parameter independence”; and “hidden
autonomy”:

Causal Inference and EPR
95
C
prob s1
"s2 & a & b &  = prob s1
"a & b & 
prob

s2
"
s1 & a & b & 

= prob

s2
"
a & b & 

(Causality)
prob

s1
"
a & b & 

= prob

s1
"
a & 

prob

s2
"
a & b & 

= prob

s2
"
b & 

(Hidden Locality)
prob


"
a & b

= prob ()
(Hidden Autonomy)
However, in the  Aspect Experiment a violation of (Hidden Locality) would be as
much in conﬂict with relativity as a direct causal link; while a violation of (Hidden
Autonomy) would entail backwards-in-time causation. Hence (Causality) must bear
the blame for the violation of factorizability, and indeed it is easy to show that in
an EPR experiment with parallel settings and perfect anticorrelation, (Causality) is
false. This seems to imply that no causal model is viable for the EPR correlations,
and that Reichenbach’s principle of the common cause is false as a matter of fact:
not all well established correlations admit of a screening-off causal model.
Arguments in Favour of Causality in EPR
However inﬂuential, the above argument is not conclusive, and several authors ex-
plicitly or implicitly take issue with it. Maudlin [10] argues that direct causation
between the wings remains compatible with relativity, and objects to the analysis
of factorizability in terms of the three conditions above. Healey [8] and Cartwright
and Jones [4] object to the screening-off condition on common causes more gen-
erally. Fine [6] accepts the argument but claims that no causal explanation was
required in the ﬁrst place. Bohmian mechanics is widely believed to reject “hidden
locality”. Price [11] rejects “hidden autonomy”, and builds “backwards in time”
models following Costa de Beauregard [5]. H¨ofer-Szabo et al. [9] argue that Van
Fraassen’s proof assumes not just common causes, but what they term common com-
mon causes; without this assumption, they claim, Reichenbach’s Principle may be
rescued (their claim has also been recently contested – see Butterﬁeld [3]). Some of
the various options are mapped out in detail in [12]. (See also  Bohm’s approach
to EPR paradox; EPR problem; Indeterminism).
Primary Literature
1. A. Einstein, B. Podolski, N. Rosen: Can Quantum-Mechanical Description of the World Be
Considered Complete? Physical Review, 47, 777–780 (1935)
2. B. Van Fraassen: The Charybdis of Realism: Epistemological Implications of Bell’s Inequality.
Synthese, 52, 25–38 (1982)

96
Cluster States
Secondary Literature
3. J. Butterﬁeld: Stochastic Einstein Locality Revisited. The British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science 58, 805–67 (2007)
4. N. Cartwright, M. Jones: How to Hunt Quantum Causes. Erkenntnis, 35, 205–231 (1991)
5. O. Costa de Beauregard: Time Symmetry and the Einstein Paradox. Nuovo Cimento, 42B,
41–64 (1977)
6. A. Fine: Do Correlations Need to Be Explained?, in J. T. Cushing, E. McMullin (eds.), Philo-
sophical Consequences of Quantum Theory (Notre Dame University Press 1989, 175–194)
7. Grasshoff et al.: Minimal Assumption Derivation of a Bell-type Inequality. The British Journal
for the Philosophy of Science, 56, 663–680 (2005)
8. R. Healey: Chasing Quantum Causes: How Wild is the Goose. Philosophical Topics, 20,
181–204 (1992)
9. G. H¨ofer-Szabo, M. Redei, L. Szabo: On Reichenbach’s Common Cause Principle and
Reichenbach’s Notion of Common Cause. The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science,
50, 569–589 (1999)
10. T. Maudlin: Quantum Non-Locality and Relativity (Blackwell, Oxford 1995)
11. H. Price: Time’s Arrow and Archimedes’ Point (Oxford University Press, Oxford 1997)
12. M. Su´arez: Causal Inference in Quantum Mechanics: A Reassessment, in F. Russo,
J. Williamson (eds.), Causality and Probability in the Sciences (London College Texts 2007,
65–106)
Clauser-Horne-Shimony-Holt (CHSH) –
Theorem
See  Bell’s theorem; Loopholes in Experiments.
Cluster States
Hans J. Briegel
1
Introduction
Cluster states [1] form a class of multiparty entangled quantum states with surprising
and useful properties. The main interest in these states draws from their role as a
universal resource in the one-way quantum computer [2, 3]: Given a collection of
sufﬁciently many particles that are prepared in a cluster state, one can realize any
 quantum computation by simply measuring the particles, one by one, in a speciﬁc
order and basis (see Fig. 1). By the measurements, one exploits  correlations in
quantum mechanics which are rich enough to allow for universal logical processing.

