Experimental Observation of Decoherence
223
E
Experimental Observation of Decoherence
Maximilian Schlosshauer
In the 1980s, theoretical estimates showed that on macroscopic scales decoherence
occurs extremely rapidly, thus effectively precluding the observation of nonclassi-
cal  superposition states [21–23]. This immediately led to the question of how
we may experimentally observe the continuous action of  decoherence and thus
the smooth transition from quantum to classical. Several challenges have to be
overcome in the design of such experiments. The system is to be prepared in a non-
classical superposition of mesoscopically or even macroscopically distinguishable
states ( Schr¨odinger-cat state) with a sufﬁciently long decoherence time such that
the gradual action of decoherence can be resolved. The existence of the superposi-
tion must be veriﬁed, and a scheme for monitoring decoherence must be devised that
introduces a minimal amount of additional decoherence. Starting in the mid-1990s,
several such experiments have been successfully performed, using physical systems
such as:
• Cavity QED (atom–photon interactions) [1];
• Fullerenes (C60, C70) and other mesoscopic molecules [2];
• Superconducting systems (SQUIDs, Cooper-pair boxes) [3].
Other experimental domains are promising candidates for the observation of de-
coherence; however, the necessary superposition states have not yet been realized:
• Bose–Einstein condensates [24];
• Nano-electromechanical systems [4].
These ﬁve classes of experiments are described below (for a more detailed account,
see, e.g., Chap. 6 of [21]). Such experiments are important for several reasons.
They are impressive demonstrations of the possibility of generating nonclassical
states of mesoscopic and macroscopic objects. They show that the boundary be-
tween quantum and classical is smooth and can be moved by varying the relevant
experimental parameters. For example, by engineering different strengths and types
of environmental interactions, wide ranges of decoherence rates can be obtained
and the system can be driven into different preferred (“environment-superselected”)
bases [5]. The experiments also allow us to test and improve decoherence models.
Finally, they may reveal deviations from unitary quantum mechanics and thus may
be used to test quantum mechanics itself [3]. This would require sufﬁcient shielding
of the system from decoherence so that an observed (full or partial)  wave function
collapse could be unambiguously attributed to some novel nonunitary mechanism in
nature, such as that proposed by the  GRW theory. However, this shielding would
be extremely difﬁcult to implement in practice: The large number of atoms required
for the collapse mechanism to be effective also leads to strong decoherence [6].
None of the superpositions realized in current experiments disprove existing col-
lapse theories [7].

224
Experimental Observation of Decoherence
Cavity QED
In 1996 Brune et al. at Ecole Normale Sup´erieure in Paris generated a superposition
of radiation ﬁelds with classically distinguishable phases involving several photons
( light quantum) [1, 8, 24]. This experiment was the ﬁrst to realize a mesoscopic
 Schr¨odinger-cat state and to observe and manipulate its decoherence in a con-
trolled way.
The experimental procedure is as follows. A rubidium atom is prepared in a su-
perposition of distinct energy eigenstates |g⟩and |e⟩corresponding to two circular
Rydberg states. The atom enters a cavity C containing a radiation ﬁeld containing
a few photons. The ﬁeld effectively measures the state of the atom: If the atom
is in the state |g⟩, the ﬁeld remains unchanged, whereas if the state is |e⟩, the
 coherent state |α⟩of the ﬁeld undergoes a phase shift φ, |α⟩−→|eiφα⟩. The
experiment achieved φ ≈π. The linearity of the evolution implies that the initial
superposition of the atom is ampliﬁed into an entangled atom-ﬁeld state of the form
1
√
2 (|g⟩|α⟩+ |e⟩|−α⟩). The atom then passes through an additional cavity, further
transforming the superposition. Finally, the energy state of the atom is measured.
This disentangles the atom and the ﬁeld and leaves the latter in a superposition of
the mesoscopically distinct states |α⟩and |−α⟩.
To monitor the decoherence of this superposition, a second rubidium atom is sent
through the apparatus. One can show that, after interacting with the ﬁeld superposi-
tion state in cavity C, the atom will always be found in the same energy state as the
ﬁrst atom if the  superposition has not been decohered. This correlation rapidly de-
cays with increasing decoherence. Thus, by recording the measurement correlation
as a function of the wait time τ between sending the ﬁrst and second atom through
the apparatus, the decoherence of the ﬁeld state can be monitored. Experimental
results were in excellent agreement with theoretical predictions. The inﬂuence of
different degrees of “nonclassicality” of the ﬁeld superposition state was also inves-
tigated. It was found that decoherence became faster as the phase shift φ and the
mean number ¯n = |α|2 of photons in the cavity C was increased. Both results are
expected, since an increase in φ and ¯n means that the components in the superposi-
tion become more distinguishable. Recent experiments have realized superposition
states involving several tens of photons [9].
Fullerenes and Other Mesoscopic Molecules
These experiments were carried out by the group of Anton Zeilinger and Markus
Arndt at the University of Vienna [2] and are also described in  Mesoscopic
Quantum Phenomena. Basically, they represent sophisticated versions of the
 double-slit experiment. Spatial interference patterns are here demonstrated for
mesoscopic molecules such as the fullerenes C60 and C70 (containing O(1,000)
microscopic constituents), the ﬂuorinated fullerene C60F48 (mass m = 1632 amu),

Experimental Observation of Decoherence
225
E
and the biomolecule C44H30N4 (m = 614 amu, width over 2 nm). Since the  de
Broglie wavelength of these rather massive molecules is on the order of picome-
ters and since it is impossible to manufacture slits of such small width, standard
double-slit interferometry is out of reach. Instead the experiments make use of the
Talbot–Lau effect, a true interference phenomenon in which a plane wave incident
on a diffraction grating creates an “image” of the grating at multiples of a distance
L behind the grating. In the experiment, the molecular density (at a macroscopic
distance L) is scanned along the direction perpendicular to the molecular beam.
An oscillatory density pattern (the image of the slits in the grating) is observed,
conﬁrming the existence of coherence and interference between the different paths
of each individual molecule through the grating.
Decoherence is measured as a decrease of the visibility of this pattern. Such
decoherence can be understood as a process in which the environment obtains in-
formation about the path of the molecule (see also  Which-way experiment). This
leads to a decay of spatial coherence at the level of the molecule. As described under
 Mesoscopic Quantum Phenomena, controlled decoherence induced by collisions
with background gas particles and by emission of thermal radiation from heated
molecules has been observed, showing a smooth decay of visibility in agreement
with theoretical predictions. These successes have led to speculations that one could
perform similar experiments using even larger particles such as proteins, viruses,
and carbonaceous aerosols. Such experiments will be limited by collisional and ther-
mal decoherence and by noise due to inertial forces and vibrations [10].
Superconducting Systems
See also  Superconductivity. The idea of using superconducting quantum two-
state (“qubit”) systems for the generation of macroscopic superposition states goes
back to the 1980s [11]. The main systems of interest are superconducting quantum
interference devices (SQUIDs) and Cooper-pair boxes.
SQUIDs A SQUID consists of a ring of superconducting material interrupted
by thin insulating barriers, called Josephson junctions (Fig. 1a). At sufﬁciently
a
delay time τ (ns)
80%
60%
40%
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
0
probability for
b
Josephson junction
superconducting
ring
supercurrent
Fig. 1 (a) Schematic illustration of a SQUID. A ring of superconducting material is interrupted
by Josephson junctions, which induce the ﬂow of a dissipationless supercurrent. (b) Decoherence
in a superconducting qubit. The damping of the oscillation amplitude corresponds to the gradual
loss of coherence from the system. Figure adapted with permission from [14]. Copyright 2003 by
AAAS

226
Experimental Observation of Decoherence
low temperatures, electrons of opposite spin condense into bosonic Cooper pairs
( BKS theory). Quantum-mechanical tunneling of Cooper pairs through the junc-
tions leads to the ﬂow of a persistent resistance-free “supercurrent” around the loop
(Josephson effect), which creates a magnetic ﬂux threading the loop. The collective
center-of-mass motion of a macroscopic number (∼109) of Cooper pairs can then
be represented by a  wave function labelled by a single macroscopic variable,
namely, the total trapped ﬂux Φ through the loop. The two possible directions of
the supercurrent deﬁne a quantum-mechanical two-state system with basis states
{|⟳⟩, |⟲⟩}. By adjusting an external magnetic ﬁeld, the SQUID can be biased such
that the two lowest-lying energy eigenstates |0⟩and |1⟩are equal-weight super-
positions of the persistent-current states |⟳⟩and |⟲⟩. Such superposition states
involving μA currents ﬂowing in opposite directions were ﬁrst experimentally ob-
served in 2000 by Friedman et al. [12] and van der Wal [13] using spectroscopic
measurements.
The decoherence of these superpositions was ﬁrst measured by Chiorescu et al.
[14] using Ramsey interferometry [24]. Two consecutive microwave pulses are ap-
plied to the system. During the delay time τ between the pulses, the system evolves
freely. After application of the second pulse, the system is left in a superposition of
the persistent-current states |⟳⟩and |⟲⟩with the relative amplitudes exhibiting an
oscillatory dependence on τ. A series of measurements in the basis {|⟳⟩, |⟲⟩} over
a range of delay times τ then allows one to trace out an oscillation of the occupation
probabilities for |⟳⟩and |⟲⟩as a function of τ (Fig. 1b). The envelope of the oscil-
lation is damped as a consequence of decoherence acting on the system during the
free evolution of duration τ. From the decay of the envelope we can thus infer the
decoherence timescale. Chiorescu et al. [14] measured a characteristic decoherence
timescale of 20 ns. Recent experiment have achieved decoherence times of up to
4 μs [15].
Cooper-pair boxes Superpositions states and their decoherence have also been
observed in superconducting devices whose key variable is charge (or phase), in-
stead of the ﬂux variable Φ used in SQUIDs. Cooper-pair boxes consist of a tiny
superconducting “island” onto which Cooper pairs can tunnel from a reservoir
through a Josephson junction. Two different charge states of the island, differing
by at least one Cooper pair, deﬁne the basis states. Coherent oscillations between
such charge states were ﬁrst observed in 1999 [16]. In 2002, Vion et al. [17] reported
thousands of coherent oscillations with a decoherence time of 0.5 μs. Similar results
have been obtained for phase qubits.
Prospective Experimental Domains
Bose–Einstein condensates (BECs) In  Bose-Einstein condensation, a macro-
scopic number of atoms undergoes a quantum phase transition into a condensate
in which the atoms lose their individuality and occupy the same quantum state
[24]. While quantum effects such as interference patterns – created by the over-

Experimental Observation of Decoherence
227
E
lap of different condensates or by coherently splitting and recombining a single
condensate – have been experimentally observed, the preparation of superposition
states involving macroscopically distinguishable numbers of particles have to date
been unsuccessful. Theoretical studies of decoherence in BECs have played an im-
portant role in qualitatively and quantitatively understanding the challenges and
conditions for the generation of such superpositions (see, e.g., [18]). The domi-
nant source of decoherence was found to be collisions between condensate and
noncondensate atoms. Decoherence models have suggested improved experimen-
tal procedures that may soon enable production of the desired superposition states.
Existing proposals include: Modiﬁed condensate traps for faster evaporation of
the decoherence-inducing thermal cloud of noncondensate atoms; creation of su-
perpositions of relative-phase (instead of number-difference) states; environment
engineering to shrink the thermal cloud; and faster generation of the superposition.
Nano-electromechanical systems (NEMS) NEMS are nanometer-to-micrometer-
sized crystalline mechanical resonators, such as a cantilever or beam, coupled to
nanoscale electronic transducers that detect the high-frequency vibrational motion
of the resonator (Fig. 2a) [4]. Despite their macroscopic size, the resonators can
be effectively treated as one-dimensional quantum harmonic oscillators (represent-
ing the lowest, fundamental ﬂexural mode). NEMS are interesting systems from
both applied and fundamental points of view and offer many opportunities for a
study of quantum behavior at the level of macroscopic mechanical systems. In
particular, Armour, Blencowe, and Schwab [19] have proposed a scheme for the
experimental generation of superpositions of two well-separated displacements of
the resonator and a measurement of the decoherence of this superposition (Fig. 2b).
Here, a Cooper-pair box (prepared in a superposition of two charge states |0⟩and
|1⟩) is electrostatically coupled to the displacement of the resonator. This creates an
entangled box-resonator state of the form
1
√
2 (|0⟩|P0⟩+ |1⟩|P1⟩), where |P0⟩and
|P1⟩are distinct center-of-mass states of the resonator. Existence of the superpo-
sition may subsequently be conﬁrmed through interferometric techniques. Due to
strong decoherence, no such superpositions have yet been experimentally realized.
transducer
nanomechanical
resonator
2 μm
|1
|P0
P1
a
b
resonator
|0
Cooper-pair
box
electrostatic
coupling
“+”
Fig. 2 (a) Nano-electromechanical system built by the Schwab group at Cornell University.
(b) Proposed scheme for creating a superposition of two displacements of the resonator (see text).
Figure reprinted with permission from [20]. Copyright 2004 by AAAS

228
Experimental Observation of Decoherence
Theoretical models of decoherence in NEMS are currently being developed to
suggest improvements to experimental structures that could lead to sufﬁciently
long-lived spatial superposition states.
Primary Literature
1. J. M. Raimond, M. Brune, S. Haroche: Manipulating quantum entanglement with atoms and
photons in a cavity. Rev. Mod. Phys. 73, 565–582 (2001).
2. M. Arndt, K. Hornberger, A. Zeilinger: Probing the limits of the quantum world. Phys. World
18, 35–40 (2005).
3. A. J. Leggett: Testing the limits of quantum mechanics: motivation, state of play, prospects.
J. Phys. Condens. Matter 14, R415–R451 (2002).
4. M. Blencowe: Quantum electromechanical systems. Phys. Rep. 395, 159–222 (2004).
5. J. F. Poyatos, J. I. Cirac, P. Zoller: Quantum reservoir engineering with laser cooled trapped
ions. Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 4728–4731 (1996).
6. M. Tegmark: Apparent wave function collapse caused by scattering. Found. Phys. Lett. 6,
571–590 (1993).
7. A. Bassi, G. C. Ghirardi: Dynamical reduction models. Phys. Rep. 379, 257–426 (2003).
8. M. Brune, E. Hagley, J. Dreyer, X. Maˆıtre, A. Maali, C. Wunderlich, J. M. Raimond,
S. Haroche: Observing the progressive decoherence of the “meter” in a quantum measurement.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 4887–4890 (1996).
9. A. Auffeves, P. Maioli, T. Meunier, S. Gleyzes, G. Nogues, M. Brune, J. M. Raimond,
S. Haroche: Entanglement of a mesoscopic ﬁeld with an atom induced by photon graininess in
a cavity. Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 230405 (2003).
10. K. Hornberger, Thermal limitation of far-ﬁeld matter-wave interference. Phys. Rev. A 73,
052102 (2006).
11. A. J. Leggett: Macroscopic quantum systems and the quantum theory of measurement. Suppl.
Prog. Theor. Phys. 69, 80–100 (1980).
12. J. R. Friedman, V. Patel, W. Chen, S. K. Yolpygo, J. E. Lukens: Quantum superposition of
distinct macroscopic states. Nature 406, 43–46 (2000).
13. C. H. van der Wal, A. C. J. ter Haar, F. K. Wilhelm, R. N. Schouten, C. J. P. M. Harmans,
T. P. Orlando, S. Lloyd, J. E. Mooij: Quantum superposition of macroscopic persistent-current
states. Science 290, 773–777 (2000).
14. I. Chiorescu, Y. Nakamura, C. J. P. M. Harmans, J. E. Mooij: Coherent quantum dynamics of
a superconducting ﬂux qubit. Science 21, 1869–1871 (2003).
15. P. Bertet, I. Chiorescu, G. Burkard, K. Semba, C. J. P. M. Harmans, D. P. DiVincenzo, J. E.
Mooij: Dephasing of a superconducting qubit induced by photon noise. Phys. Rev. Lett. 95,
257002 (2005).
16. Y. Nakamura, Y. A. Pashkin, J. S. Tsai: Coherent control of macroscopic quantum states in a
single-Cooper-pair box. Nature 398, 786–788 (1999).
17. D. Vion, A. Aassime, A. Cottet, P. Joyez, H. Pothier, C. Urbina, D. Esteve, M. H. Devoret:
Manipulating the quantum state of an electrical circuit. Science 296, 886–889 (2002).
18. D. A. R. Dalvit, J. Dziarmaga, W. H. Zurek: Decoherence in Bose–Einstein condensates:
Towards bigger and better Schr¨odinger cats. Phys. Rev. A 62, 013607 (2000).
19. A. D. Armour, M. P. Blencowe, K. C. Schwab: Entanglement and decoherence of a micro-
mechanical resonator via coupling to a Cooper-pair box. Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 148301 (2002).
20. M.D. LaHaye, O. Buu, B. Camarota, K.C. Schwab: Approaching the quantum limit of a non-
mechanical resonator. Science 304, 74–77 (2004)

Experimental Observation of Decoherence
229
E
Secondary Literature
21. M. Schlosshauer: Decoherence and the Quantum-to-Classical Transition (Springer, Berlin
2007).
22. E. Joos, H. D. Zeh, C. Kiefer, D. Giulini, J. Kupsch, I.-O. Stamatescu: Decoherence and the
Appearance of a Classical World in Quantum Theory (Springer, New York 2003).
23. W. H. Zurek: Decoherence, einselection, and the quantum origins of the classical. Rev. Mod.
Phys. 75, 715–775 (2003).
24. R. Kaiser, C. Westbrook, F. David (Eds.): Coherent Atomic Matter Waves, Les Houches
Session LXXII, Les Houches Summer School Series (Springer, Berlin 2001).

