Neuroﬂex: Intraneural and Extraneural
Flexible Sensor Architectures for Neural
Probing
Anoop C. Patil and Nitish V. Thakor
Contents
1
Introduction: Communicating with the Neural Tissues. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
532
2
Flexible Architectures for Neural Probing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
535
2.1
Intraneural Interfaces. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
535
2.2
Extraneural Interfaces. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
538
3
New Opportunities Road Map. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
543
3.1
Thin-Film Conducting Materials. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
545
3.2
Thinner/Smaller Form Factors. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
546
3.3
New Design Architectures. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
547
4
Concluding Opinion and Future Outlook. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
549
References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
551
Abstract
The development of ﬂexible, ultra-compliant neural interfaces has evolved to
be a prerequisite to the realization of seamlessly integrable soft neural systems
destined to be implanted within the neural milieu. The chapter provides a
holistic view of Neuroﬂex, a class of ﬂexible interface architectures employed to
A. C. Patil ()
The N.1 Institute for Health, Center for Life Sciences, National University of Singapore,
Singapore, Singapore
e-mail: lsiacp@nus.edu.sg
N. V. Thakor
Neuroengineering and Biomedical Instrumentation Laboratory, Department of Biomedical
Engineering and Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Neurology,
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA
e-mail: eletnv@nus.edu.sg
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2023
N. V. Thakor (ed.), Handbook of Neuroengineering,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-5540-1_16
531

532
A. C. Patil and N. V. Thakor
communicate with the neural tissues either by penetrating (intraneural mode of
communication) or by being in contact with the target tissue surface (extraneural
mode of communication). This ﬂexible conformal class of neural interface
designs is highly compatible for integration with the bendable electronic sys-
tems and has demonstrated tremendous potential as a starting point for the
realization of soft ﬂexible bioelectronics. We appreciate this motivation that
led to the development of Neuroﬂex and further discuss the substrate materials
and the electrode materials (for conductive traces and sensing sites) that have
enabled such ﬂexible designs. We provide brief descriptions of the design
innovations in the intraneural and extraneural ﬂexible electrode interfaces for
the neural tissues such as the brain and the peripheral nerve. The chapter
concludes with a road map of the ﬂexible neural interface development and
the application-speciﬁc material compatibility, the result of which identiﬁes
Neuroﬂex as a well-suited domain for future research toward preclinical studies
and possibly clinical translation. The authors observe that Neuroﬂex has provided
an invaluable opportunity to reimagine conventional biointegrated sensors and
electronics.
Keywords
Flexible neural interface · Intraneural · Extraneural · Neural electrode ·
Neural probe
Acronyms
2-D
two-dimensional
3-D
three-dimensional
CNT
carbon nanotube
CP
conducting polymer
ECoG
electrocorticography
OECT
organic electrochemical transistor
PEDOT:PSS poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate)
SELINE
self-opening neural interface
Si NMs
silicon nanomembranes
SUN
spiked ultraﬂexible neural interface
1
Introduction: Communicating with the Neural Tissues
An attractive aspect of neural interfacing from the standpoint of research and
development is the conﬂuence of ﬂexible materials design and conventional neural
probing mechanisms. Traditional neural interface designs were realized on rigid

Neuroﬂex: Intraneural and Extraneural Flexible Sensor Architectures for. . .
533
Fig. 1 Schematic illustration of a neural interface communicating with the neural tissue to either
record or modulate the neural activity as shown in (a) and (b), respectively. During recording of
neural activity (a), electrically active neurons in the tissue inject charges into the extracellular
media. A corresponding compound potential is developed at the interface due to the injected
charges, which is then picked up through the interconnects and read by the signal acquisition
system connected to the interface. During modulation of neural activity (b), the charges are injected
into the extracellular media from the interface toward the neural tissue. In response, the excitable
cells within the neural tissue ﬁre, producing action potentials locally
planar substrates [1–4], and the onset of ﬂexible materials fabrication technology
spurred the transformation into form factors that can bend and ﬂex and conform
to the curvilinear geometries of the neural tissue [5–18]. Realizing thin ﬂexible
substrates, ultrathin conductive layers, thin-ﬁlm two-dimensional (2-D) electrode
sites, and/or three-dimensional (3-D) microelectrodes on thin substrates serves as
critical milestones to the development of the ﬂexible neural interface technology.
This chapter will highlight new design perspectives that have enabled ﬂexible
neural electrode architectures in the past decade. In the scope of this chapter, we
deﬁne Neuroﬂex by the niche class of ﬂexible conformal sensor designs for neural
interfacing application. Speciﬁcally, we identify two signiﬁcant neural interfacing
architectures (intraneural and extraneural), different interface design approaches
in the scope of these architectures, the materials choice, and generic fabrication
methodologies for realizing the neural interfaces in form factors that are ﬂexible
and conformal. We preface this chapter with a basic description of a neural
interface along with a brief summary of the historical design approaches for neural
interfacing.
A neural interface is a critical component in neurotechnology wherein a man-
made sensor establishes a communication pathway with the neural tissues to either
record (Fig. 1a) or modulate the neural activity (Fig. 1b) [19–21]. The sensor-tissue
communication can be established either with the insides of the target neural tissue
or at its surface. We refer to the former as the intraneural mode of interfacing and
the latter as the extraneural type. At a fundamental level, intraneural interfaces
comprise needlelike structures fabricated with a rigid material (such as glass, metal,

534
A. C. Patil and N. V. Thakor
Fig. 2 Rigid interfaces for the neural tissue. (a) Rigid penetrating tungsten wires as neural
interfaces (scale bar = 1 cm). These wires measured ∼50 μm in diameter with ∼1 μm tip diameters.
(Adapted with permission from [29]; Copyright 1967, Elsevier). (b) The Utah electrode array
consisting of 25 rigid silicon electrode needles on a 2 × 2 mm base. The needle-to-needle spacing
is 400 μm, and the needle electrode length is 1 mm. (Adapted with permission from [30]; Copyright
2000, Elsevier). (c) The Utah Slanted Electrode Array (USEA) consisting of ten rows of ten silicon
electrode needles each. (Adapted with permission from [51]; Copyright 2014, Elsevier). (d) (Left)
A variety of Michigan probes. (Right) Four 64-site Michigan probes assembled to form a three-
dimensional structure. (Adapted with permission from [46]; Copyright 2007, Springer)
and silicon) [22–30] so that they can be pushed into the neural milieu such as the
brain and the nerves, for interfacing. Such an architecture comprises either multiple
sensing sites on one penetrating shaft or multiple penetrating structures each with
one sensing site and has historically taken the form of microwires [31–37] and
microelectrode needle arrays [38–50] as shown in Fig. 2a–d.
A popular example of a rigid intraneural interface is the Utah microelectrode
array design (Fig. 2b) comprising conventional silicon needle electrodes arranged in
a pattern on a rigid platform for deployment inside the cortex [30, 38, 52] and the
slanted derivative of the same (Fig. 2c) [50, 51, 53–55] for nerve interfacing. The
extraneural mode of neural interfacing, historically, was limited to planar electrodes
realized on rigid substrates that couldn’t mechanically deform/bend (Fig. 2b–d)
[56, 57] (such as glass and silicon) and was employed for in vitro stimulation and
recording studies mainly involving hippocampal and neuronal cell cultures [58–
63]. These rigid versions of extraneural interfaces couldn’t be deployed in vivo,
and their impact on in vivo neural probing was initially insigniﬁcant. The preﬂex
era of neurotechnology design was mainly dominated by the rigid needle-based

Neuroﬂex: Intraneural and Extraneural Flexible Sensor Architectures for. . .
535
intraneural interfaces. The extraneural sensor architectures had to wait for the advent
of ﬂexible materials coupled with micro- and nanofabrication techniques, for a
complete overhaul in terms of form factors and sensor density [1, 15]. In the next
section, we discuss how the ﬂexible materials and the ability to deﬁne thin form
factors of these materials inﬂuenced Neuroﬂex.
2
Flexible Architectures for Neural Probing
In the past decade, there has been a considerable interest in the use of ﬂexible
materials for the development of smaller, thinner, and denser neural probes. The
motivation for such a shift in neurotechnology trends is attributed to the fact that the
conventional silicon and metal-based neural probes induce stresses to the neural
tissue, compromising the chronic viability of such rigid technologies. Flexible
polymers (such as parylene, polyimide, carbon ﬁbers) provided capabilities to
realize neural probes with thinner form factors and smaller biological footprint,
leading to reduced tissue scarring and consequently improving the chronic stability
of the neural probe implants. More speciﬁcally, there have been conscious attempts
to design ﬂexible neural probes with stiffness tailored to be similar to the target
neural tissue [64–71]. In this section, we consider a few notable achievements in
the ﬁeld of Neuroﬂex design that serve as milestones for ﬂexible neurotechnology
development over the past decade. In doing so, we highlight design architectures
in intraneural and extraneural probing that exploit thin ﬂexible materials to enable
intimate interactions with the neural milieu.
2.1
Intraneural Interfaces
Intraneural probes have stood the test of time as a critical technology for acquiring
and modulating the neural activity within the depths of the neural tissue. As these
probe types leave a mechanical footprint within the biology, it was necessary to
apply ﬂexible materials design to create ﬂexible probes that are smaller and more
robust and augur well with the micromotion of the surrounding tissue. For the
cortical tissue, the rigid silicon and metal probes have paved way for advanced
biomaterials such as carbon and ultrathin metal, in reengineered forms such as
carbon ﬁber probes, metallic nanowires, and polymer meshes that can be deployed
seamlessly within the target tissue. Emerging trends in penetrating neural probe
technologies for the peripheral nerves involve 3-D microneedles assembled on thin-
ﬁlm ﬂexible substrates and self-opening ﬂexible probes that rest within the nerve
insides. As we revisit a few notable intraneural probe designs from the current
decade for both the cortex (Fig. 3) and the peripheral nerves (Fig. 4), the reader can
appreciate that the primary focus in the design of such probes has been to render the
probe implants ﬂexible, thin, and soft, in order to improve their biointegration and
chronic viability.

536
A. C. Patil and N. V. Thakor
Fig. 3 Intraneural ﬂexible sensor architectures employed in cortical interface design. (a) Scanning
electron microscopy (SEM) image of an ultrasmall ﬂexible carbon ﬁber microelectrode. (Adapted
with permission from [72]; Copyright 2012, Nature). (b) A carbon ﬁber array consisting of
16 electrodes bundled together (top right). The tip of the array is shown on the lower right.
(Adapted with permission from [73]; Copyright 2013, IOP Publishing). (c) SEM image of a
Au NW-tungsten tip electrode. (Adapted with permission from [74]; Copyright 2014, American
Chemical Society). (d) Close-up optical image of a soft ﬂexible free-standing reduced graphene
oxide probe. (Adapted with permission from [75]; Copyright 2015, Wiley). (e) Photograph of a
multimodal all-polymer probe inclusive of optical stimulation, drug delivery, and neural recording
capabilities. (Adapted with permission from [76]; Copyright 2015, Nature). (f) Photograph of a 3-D
macroporous nanoelectronic probe implanted in the cortical tissue. (Adapted with permission from
[77]; Copyright 2015, Nature). (g) Optical micrographs of bilayered 3-D electrodes. (i) Photograph
of the bilayered probe. (ii) SEM image of the 3-D protruding Pt electrode sites. (iii) Magniﬁed
image of (ii). (iv) Side view of the 3-D protruding electrode site. (v) SEM image of the protruded
side of the Pt electrode site. (Adapted with permission from [78]; Copyright 2018, IOP Publishing)
2.1.1
Interfaces to the Brain
The ultrasmall carbon ﬁber microelectrode [72] (Fig. 3a) was the ﬁrst signiﬁcant
effort to design and test a ﬂexible, strong biofunctionalized probe with a subcellular
cross-sectional dimension. The carbon probe was insulated with ultrathin parylene
N coating and was rendered protein-resistant with polyethylene glycol methacrylate

Neuroﬂex: Intraneural and Extraneural Flexible Sensor Architectures for. . .
537
polymer. Measuring ∼8 μm in diameter, the carbon ﬁber probes were demonstrated
to be stable for over 5 weeks as suggested by the in vivo neural recording from
the rat motor cortex. An array of implantable carbon ﬁber probes realized in
[73] (Fig. 3b) served as the ﬁrst scalable platform for ultrathin cortical probe
technology, wherein a 16-electrode carbon ﬁber array was used to obtain stable
multiunit recordings from the motor neurons of zebra ﬁnch. The probe bundle (with
16 individual probes) was ∼26 μm in diameter with a penetrating tip height of
∼90 μm. In [74], single-crystalline gold nanowires with a diameter of ∼100 nm
were employed to design nanowire cortical probes (Fig. 3c) for recording single-
neuron activities in a live mouse brain. Inspired by the excellent mechanical and
electrical properties of conductive composites, Apollo et al. [75] reported the design
of free-standing neural recording and stimulation probes using strong conductive
microﬁbers (measuring ∼50 μm in diameter) (Fig. 3d) spun from graphene oxide
dispersion. In another ﬁrst-of-its-kind effort, a set of polymeric materials commonly
used in medical devices (polyetherimide, polyphenylsulfone, polycarbonate and
cyclic oleﬁn copolymer, conductive polyethylene, and tin) were employed to man-
ufacture multimodal neural probes [76] for simultaneous optogenetic stimulation,
neural recording, and drug delivery in freely moving mice (Fig. 3e). These probes
yielded signiﬁcantly less foreign body response over 3 months after implantation
in vivo. The cortical probe design transcended into mesh forms for the ﬁrst time
with nanoelectronic mesh probes [77] (Fig. 3f) designed using longitudinal metallic
interconnect sandwiched between passivating SU-8 polymer layers. The mesh
probes achieve intimate integration with the neural tissue and were functionally
validated by acute recording of neural activity from the rodent cortex. Other efforts
include 3-D protruding electrode stubs supported on thin-ﬁlm polymer substrates
that can be penetrated into the visual cortex [78] (Fig. 3g).
2.1.2
Interfaces to the Peripheral Nerves
The development of intraneural interfaces for the peripheral nerves has been
fundamentally limited by the challenging geometry of the nerves, the relatively
stiffer material properties of the nerve fascicle bundle, and less know-how regarding
the functional consequences of chronic deployment within the nerve insides. The
intraneural architectures for the peripheral nerves include the traditional microwires,
longitudinal intrafascicular probes, and their transverse counterparts [1,79]. Notable
achievements in the intraneural probe technologies for the nerves include (i)
spiked ultraﬂexible neural interface (SUN) design (Fig. 4a) with 3-D microneedle
electrodes hoisted onto a thin-ﬁlm polymer support wherein the needles penetrate
the epineurium while the polymer support rests on the nerve surface [80], and (ii) a
self-opening neural interface (SELINE) design (Fig. 4b), a 3-D thin-ﬁlm technology
that provides an anchorage system to the nerve and confers stability post nerve
penetration [81–83]. Chronic implantation results have demonstrated that SELINEs
produce negligible changes in the fascicular organization of the target nerve and
negligible signs of nerve degeneration [81].
Futuristic trends for intraneural cortical and nerve probes point toward high-
density mesh and/or ﬁber-based interfaces with recording and stimulation sites that

538
A. C. Patil and N. V. Thakor
Fig. 4 Intraneural ﬂexible sensor architectures employed in nerve interface design. (a) Schematic
illustration of a SUN design. (Adapted with permission from [80]; Copyright 2018, Wiley).
(b) Optical micrograph of a SELINE polyimide-based multichannel electrode. (Adapted with
permission from [83]; Copyright 2017, Elsevier)
have long-term stability for chronic deployment within the neural tissue, supporting
pursuits for chronic neural activity mapping and next-generation brain-machine
interfaces.
2.2
Extraneural Interfaces
Most of the electrode technologies for the neural tissue focused on penetrating
probes made of silicon or metal in various forms [1], which can provide a high-
ﬁdelity communication with the target neural tissue but at the cost of damaged tissue
insides and inﬂammatory responses resulting from the probe insertion. Over the past
couple of decades, the neurotechnology community has primarily addressed this
classic problem of intraneural electrode technology through the extraneural designs
[83]. The extraneural class of neural interfaces has attracted a lot of interest due
to the possibility of using thin-ﬁlm ﬂexible materials for the development of 2-D
interfaces with thickness values (∼1–20 μm) signiﬁcantly smaller compared to the
geometry of the target neural tissue. The thin-ﬁlm form factors of the extraneural
designs enabled conformal and seamless integration of the sensors with the neural
tissue surfaces with negligible/no damage to the neural milieu. Here, we consider a
few signiﬁcant works on thin-ﬁlm surface electrode arrays that set the trends for the
extraneural electrode technologies for the cortex and the peripheral nerves.
2.2.1
Interfaces to the Brain
High-resolution neural recordings from the cortical surface have been proved to be
quintessential in understanding the functioning of the underlying neural circuitry.
Obtaining rich spatial information requires high-density electrode arrays that can
sample large areas of the brain. This in turn translates to the need for each electrode
site in the array to be individually wired to the signal acquisition system ex vivo.
Actively multiplexed high-density electrode arrays realized using ﬂexible silicon

Neuroﬂex: Intraneural and Extraneural Flexible Sensor Architectures for. . .
539
electronics technology on polyimide ﬁlms [16] addressed this issue and served
as a milestone in the design trends for the non-penetrating cortical interfaces. The
array comprised 360 electrode sites with each site measuring 300 × 300 μm2 and
accessible through a transistor pair. The array was deployed on the surface of the
visual cortex in a feline model (Fig. 5a) to map neural activity at high resolution
(inter-electrode spacing ∼500 μm, high-speed multiplexing (<5 μs), sampling rates
>10 kS per s per electrode). This work was followed by a higher-resolution surface
array design [87] with 196 electrode sites arranged in an area of 12.25 mm2 with
a cortical surface resolution of 250 μm and less than 30 readout lines. Passive
and actively multiplexed arrays designed using bioresorbable silicon (Fig. 5b) were
reported in [9]. These arrays were realized using resorbable components such
as silicon nanomembranes (Si NMs) serving as electrode sites and poly(lactic-
co-glycolic acid) layer that served as a dissolvable support to the array. These
arrays could record in vivo electrophysiological signals such as the physiologic
and epileptiform activity from the cortical surface and the subgaleal space in rat
model. In yet another ﬁrst-of-its-kind effort, organic electrochemical transistors
(OECTs) designed using CP (conducting polymer) (Fig. 5c) were employed to
record brain activity in vivo
[84]. Highly conformable arrays of OECTs (17
transistors with channel length 6 μm and width 15 μm; array thickness ∼4 μm)
were functionally validated by carrying out ECoG (electrocorticography) on the
somatosensory cortex of rats. The next generation of such transistor-based ECoG
probes was reported in [85]. In this work, transparent, ultraﬂexible, and actively
multiplexed OECT arrays (Fig. 5d) were fabricated with transparent CP-based
transistors and transparent gold interconnect (Fig. 5d, left). These OECT arrays
were multiplexed using organic ﬁeld effect transistors (Fig. 5d, right) and realized
the spatial mapping of electrocorticogram electrical signals from an optogenetic rat
with lower light artifacts than the noise level. Recently, in a ﬁrst-of-its-kind effort,
nontransient hydrated silk ﬁlms were used to design cortical electrode arrays [86]
(Fig. 5e), in contrast to conventional resorbable class of silk bioelectronic devices
[88–95]. These silk links were used to record micro-electrocorticogram signals from
the cortical surface in a rat ischemia model [96]. The recordings prior to and post
ischemia served to validate the functionality of these interfaces.
Futuristic trends point toward transistor sheet arrays that could possibly open up
avenues for further exploration of neural circuitry in the cortex with highly localized
optical stimulation capabilities.
2.2.2
Interfaces to the Peripheral Nerves
Extraneural ﬂexible interfaces to the peripheral nerves take myriad forms, thanks
to the tubelike geometry of the nerves. Traditionally, ﬂexible electrode arrays
for the peripheral nerves were realized through cuff architectures [105–108] that
form a “ring” around a part of the nerve with electrode sites spread on the inner
surface of the ring in contact with the epineurium. Utilizing thin-ﬁlm materials
technology to design ﬂexible and bendable extraneural probes for the nerves has
enabled different methodologies for interfacing electrode arrays to the epineurium.
Rendering the epineural probes tetherless has been a signiﬁcant achievement so

540
A. C. Patil and N. V. Thakor
Fig. 5 (continued)

Neuroﬂex: Intraneural and Extraneural Flexible Sensor Architectures for. . .
541
far [97] as it enabled wireless communication with the nerves, showing excellent
promise for stable chronic performance compared with the wired counterparts.
Realized as neural motes (Fig. 6a), these thin-ﬁlm probes enabled passive wireless
and batteryless recording of electrical activity from the epineurium via ultrasonic
backscattering. In a separate effort, soft materials such as engineered hydrogels have
been used to design soft epineural interfaces with mechanical properties similar to
those of the nerves [98]. In this work, electrically conductive hydrogels have been
used to fabricate elastic interfaces that have been conformably deployed around
the sciatic nerve (Fig. 6b) to function as in vivo nerve stimulators. Other thin-ﬁlm
epineural architectures include models such as (i) strip [99, 109] that are deployed
like a “Band-Aid” to the nerve, (ii) sling [100, 110] with thin-ﬁlm arms that go
around the circumference of the nerve, (iii) split ring [101] deﬁned by a ring of
electrode sites and a split in the circumference that assists in deployment of the
ring interface around the nerve, and (iv) ribbon [102] that wraps around the nerve.
The designs for the strip, sling, split-ring, and ribbon architectures are illustrated in
Fig. 6c.
Nerve clip, inspired by a standard off-the-shelf paper clip design, represents
another signiﬁcant epineural architecture for the nerves. First realized in [103], the
nerve-clip design consists of a customizable trapdoor design (Fig. 6d) that can be
ﬂexed and snapped around the nerve. The thin-ﬁlm version of the nerve-clip design
was reported in [104]. These clips realized using thin-ﬁlm polyimide (Fig. 6e, i)
were deployed on various nerves such as the sural, the common peroneal, the tibial,
the vagus, and the pelvic (Fig. 6e, ii–iv). Recently, nontransient hydrated silk ﬁlms
were employed in the design of bionic links for the peripheral nerves (Fig. 6f) [86].
The soft ﬂexible silk sensors could conform intimately with the slimy wet nerve
surfaces. These prototypes were deployed on the rat sciatic nerve, in a Band-Aid
and wraparound manner, to capture electroneurograms. This work holds potential
for further development of surface neural interface technology using nontransient
silk.
◀
Fig. 5 Extraneural 2-D ﬂexible sensor architectures employed in cortical interface design. (a) A
ﬂexible multiplexed electrode array deployed on the visual cortex in a feline model. (Adapted with
permission from [16]; Copyright 2011, Nature). (b) Optical micrograph of an actively multiplexed
high-resolution ECoG transistor electrode array realized using bioresorbable support and sensing
layers. (Adapted with permission from [9]; Copyright 2016, Nature). (c) (Left) Optical image of
the ECoG transistor array (scale bar = 1 mm). (Right) Magniﬁed image of the channel of a single
transistor in the array showing the source and drain terminals along with a passive gold electrode
(scale bar = 10 μm). (Adapted with permission from [84]; Copyright 2013, Nature). (d) (Left)
Transparent OECT array deployed on the cortical surface of an optogenetic rat (scale bar = 1 mm).
(Right) Microscope image of a 3 × 5 OECT array (scale bar = 500 μm) with the magniﬁed image
of the channel in the inset (scale bar = 30 μm). (Adapted with permission from [85]; Copyright
2017, National Academy of Sciences). (e) (Left) Optical photograph of a nontransient silk cortical
link. (Right) A nontransient silk link deployed on the rat cortex. (Adapted with permission from
[86]; Copyright 2019, Elsevier)

542
A. C. Patil and N. V. Thakor
Fig. 6 (continued)

Neuroﬂex: Intraneural and Extraneural Flexible Sensor Architectures for. . .
543
3
New Opportunities Road Map
Fundamentally, the ﬂexible neural probe technologies provide means for con-
formably communicating with the nervous system. Recent years have seen the two
key areas of neurotechnology, namely, the materials choice and the electrode-tissue
interface, which provide a platform for new opportunities that are refashioning the
existing crop of Neuroﬂex. The selection of materials for substrates, insulation, and
conducting layers is critical as it determines the efﬁciency with which the ﬂexible
interfaces integrate with the neural tissues and the chronic stability of the implanted
probes. The electrode-tissue interface, on the other hand, deﬁnes the electrical
behavior of the neural probe. This includes the impedance of the electrode sites
in contact with the neural tissue and the charge injection capacity of the conducting
material serving as individual electrode sites within the probe. Recent innovations in
materials have focused on new sensing modalities at the electrode-tissue interface,
thinner form factors, and new design architectures for neural probe designs. This
section provides insights on each of these facets of innovation in neurotechnology,
concisely captured in Fig. 7.
◀
Fig. 6 Extraneural 2-D ﬂexible sensor architectures employed in nerve interface design. (a)
Neural dust interface for the peripheral nerve. A neural dust mote deployed on the rat sciatic
nerve (scale bar = 1 mm). (Adapted with permission from [97]; Copyright 2016, Elsevier). (b) 3-D
reconstructed confocal micrograph of hydrogel-based microelectrodes on a soft elastic substrate
conformably wrapping around a sciatic nerve. (Adapted with permission from [98]; Copyright
2019, Nature). (c) (Top left) Polyimide strip interface for the peripheral nerve. (i) Photographs
of the polyimide strip arrays showing the arrangement of the electrode sites. (ii) Photograph
of the strip arrays on the main sciatic nerve and the sciatic nerve branches in vivo. (Adapted
with permission from [99]). (Top right) Sling electrode interface for the peripheral nerve. (i)
Photograph of the polyimide sling electrode array showing the arrangement of the electrode sites.
(ii) Photograph of the sling array on the sciatic nerve in vivo. (Adapted with permission from
[100]; Copyright 2017, Elsevier). (Bottom left) Split-ring interface for the peripheral nerve. (i)
Photograph of the polyimide split-ring electrode array. (ii) Photograph of the split-ring array on the
sciatic nerve in vivo. (Adapted with permission from [101]; Copyright 2017, Elsevier). (Bottom
right) Ribbon interface for the peripheral nerve. (i) Schematic illustration of the deployment
of the ribbon array on the peripheral nerve. (ii) Photograph of the ribbon array on the sciatic
nerve branches in vivo (A, peroneal nerve; B, tibial nerve; C, sural nerve; D, sciatic nerve; scale
bar = 1 mm). (Adapted with permission from [102]; Copyright 2016, Wiley). (d) 3-D-printed
clip electrodes for small-diameter nerves. (i) A trapdoor design forming a clip interface with
integrated CNT ﬁber electrodes. (ii) SEM image of the device as designed in (i). (iii) Optical
image of the clip interface implanted on the tracheal syringeal nerve. (Adapted with permission
from [103]; Copyright 2017, IOP Science). (e) Polyimide clip interfaces for the peripheral nerves.
(i) Photograph of the polyimide clip interface showing the electrodes. (ii) Polyimide clip interfaces
deployed on the sciatic nerve branches. (iii) Polyimide clip on the vagus nerve. (iv) Polyimide clip
integrated with wireless receiver, deployed on the pelvic nerve. (Adapted with permission from
[104]; Copyright 2017, Wiley). (f) (Left) Optical photograph of a nontransient silk link deployed
as a strip on the rat sciatic nerve. (Right) A nontransient silk link wrapped around the rat sciatic
nerve (scale bar = 1 mm). (Adapted with permission from [86]; Copyright 2019, Elsevier)

544
A. C. Patil and N. V. Thakor
Fig. 7 (continued)

Neuroﬂex: Intraneural and Extraneural Flexible Sensor Architectures for. . .
545
3.1
Thin-Film Conducting Materials
Traditionally, chemically inert metals such as gold and platinum have deﬁned
electrode sites in Neuroﬂex designs [12, 117]. This choice of conducting material
for electrode sites was mainly due to their inertness in biological environments and
biocompatibility. However, advancements in improving the quality of the electrode
sites (marked by reduction in impedance at the electrode-tissue interface and/or
increase in charge injection capacity) needed increase in effective surface area of
the electrode sites without compromising the ﬂexible form factors. Advancements
in this domain came in the form of the following:
•
Engineered rough/porous electrode surfaces due to microscale coatings of IrO2
and TiN, enabling capacitive electrode-tissue interfaces
•
Nanotextured porous surfaces due to electropolymerization of CPs such as
poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) onto
metallic electrode surfaces, enabling electropolymerized electrode-tissue inter-
faces
•
Nanoscale carbonaceous deposits using forms of carbon such as graphene and
carbon nanotubes (CNTs) on metallic electrode sites, enabling carbonaceous
electrode-tissue interfaces
•
Transistors with gates (deﬁned by either doped semiconductors, graphene, CNTs,
or CPs) acting as electrode sites
The aforementioned ﬂexible material-based electrode technologies are summarized
in Table 1.
◀
Fig. 7 Advancements in thin-ﬁlm materials, ﬂexible form factors, and design architectures at
the electrode-tissue interface. (a) Porous graphene electrode array. (i) Photograph of a porous
graphene electrode array with 64-electrode sites. (ii) A close-up SEM image of the porous graphene
array (scale bar = 1 mm). The inset shows a magniﬁed image of a single graphene electrode site
(scale bar = 100 μm). (iii) SEM image of the cross-sectional view of the porous graphene array
showing the porous graphene that serves as the electrode site (scale bar = 100 μm). (Adapted with
permission from [111]; Copyright 2016, Nature). (b) Silicon nanowire electrode array. (i) SEM
image of the silicon nanowires that serve as electrode sites. (ii) SEM image of a cluster of nanowire
electrodes. (iii) SEM image of a nanowire electrode cluster interfaced with a rat cortical cell. (iv)
SEM image of multiple clusters of silicon nanowires for multi-site interfacing with the neuronal
culture. (Adapted with permission from [112]; Copyright 2012, Nature). (c) Silicon nanowire
transistors as neural probes. SEM image of a transistor probe with yellow arrow showing the kinked
nanowire site (scale bar = 5 μm). Inset shows the nanowire probe penetrating the membrane of
living cells to measure intracellular signals. (Adapted with permission from [113]; Copyright 2011,
Nature). (d) Optical image of a 3-D electronic scaffold with recording and stimulation electrodes
(scale bar = 100 μm). (Adapted with permission from [114]; Copyright 2017, National Academy
of Sciences). (e) Syringe-injectable electronics. (i) Mesh electronic component being injected
into saline medium by a needle. (ii) Optical image of mesh electronics being injected into saline
medium with the lower end of the mesh unfolded completely in the aqueous medium. (Adapted
with permission from [115]; Copyright 2015, Nature). (f) Nanoelectronic thread interfaces (scale
bar = 200 μm). (Adapted with permission from [116]; Copyright 2018, Wiley)

546
A. C. Patil and N. V. Thakor
Table 1 Thin-ﬁlm material advancements at the electrode-tissue interface
Technology
Materials choice
Motivation
Beneﬁts
Capacitive
electrodes
[2,12,118,119]
Microscale
coatings of IrO2
or TiN on
metallic
electrode sites
To increase charge
injection limits for
stimulation
interfaces
Reliable stimulation due
to enhanced surface area,
decrease in electrochemical
impedance, and improvement
in charge injection capacity
Electropolymerized
metallic
electrodes
[120–122]
Thin coatings of
CPs such as
PEDOT:PSS on
metallic
electrode sites
To achieve an
electronic/ionic
interface for high
charge capacity and
lower impedance
Electrode surfaces that are
biochemically functionalized;
higher signal-to-noise ratios
(SNRs) in neural recordings;
improved
electrode/device
performance targeting
longevity in operation as a
tissue interface
Metal
carbonaceous
nanocomposite-
based
microelectrodes
[111,123,124]
Carbonaceous
nanostructures
such as
graphene and
CNTs on
metallic
electrode sites
(such as Au)
CNTs – excellent
thermal and
electrical
conductivity,
mechanical and
chemical stability,
and wide
electrochemical
window; graphene
– high conductivity,
low toxicity
(compared with
CNTs) and optical
transparency
CNT-modiﬁed electrodes –
low impedances and high
charge densities; graphene
electrode sites – low-toxic,
transparent electrode sites
allowing simultaneous
electrical recording of neural
activity, neural imaging, and
optogenetics
Thin-ﬁlm
transistor
electrodes
[16,84,85,125–
128]
Transistors as
sensing sites
To sense neural
signals as a result
of changes in
conductance
induced by
ﬂuctuating
biosignals in the
neural milieu;
signal acquisition at
the molecular scale
High ampliﬁcation of
acquired neural signals
consequently reducing the
effects of external noise;
multiplexed readout of
measured signals
3.2
Thinner/Smaller Form Factors
Form factors of electrode sites are critical in deﬁning the manner in which the
neural probes integrate with the neural milieu. For example, as compared with the
conventional inorganic, planar metallic electrode sites, those with 3-D protruding
structures such as foam, nanoneedles, and nanowires offer enhanced electrical
addressability along with increased surface area and deeper integration with the
neural tissue. Table 2 captures these electrode forms along with the insights on
design motivation and application. Notable achievements in refashioning the form
factors of electrode sites are as below:

Neuroﬂex: Intraneural and Extraneural Flexible Sensor Architectures for. . .
547
Table 2 Form factor innovations at the electrode-tissue interface.
Electrode form
Substrate/sensing
site/encapsulation
Design inspiration
Functional
validation
Porous/foam
[111,129]
Polyimide/graphene
foam/SU-8
Direct growth of
graphene on ﬂex
substrates eliminates
electrode delamination;
porous/foam structure of
graphene provides a 3-D
interface to the neural
tissue without
compromising the
ﬂexibility of the neural
probe
In vivo recording of
cortical activity from
the pial surface of
the rat cortex
Nanoneedle [112]
Silicon-on-insulator
(SOI)/Ti-Au-coated
Si/silicon oxide
Design of electrodes that
are small enough for
neuronal cell coupling;
scalable realization for
coupling with multiple
cells
Stimulation and
recording of
neuronal activity
from rat cortical
neurons cultured
on the nanoneedle
electrode array
Nanowire/nanotube
[113,125,130,131]
SU-8
(support)/SiNW
FET (n-type silicon
nanowire FET)
Rather than forcing the
neuronal probe to
conform to the target
tissue cells, a
movable/bendable
nanoelectronic device
that can probe within the
cell membrane is
designed for localized
tunable 3-D biosignal
sensing
Electrical recording
from cardiomyocyte
monolayer
on
an
elastomeric support
•
Foam electrodes deﬁned by graphene deposits on polyimide substrates (Fig. 7a)
•
Nanoneedle electrodes deﬁned by silicon nanowires coated with Ti and Au
(Fig. 7b)
•
Nanowire electrodes in the form of silicon nanowire transistors (Fig. 7c)
3.3
New Design Architectures
Neurotechnology has evolved from the traditional rigid interfaces to ﬂexible
conformable counterparts. Over the past few years, researchers and engineers have
realized that designing electrode structures that provide tailored mechanics and
geometries suited to those of the target neural tissues can lead to an efﬁcient
electrode-tissue integration. This has been a key area of development, attract-
ing novel design architectures that can inﬂict minimal tissue damage and are

548
A. C. Patil and N. V. Thakor
consequently suitable for chronic deployment within the neural tissue. Figure 7d–f
shows a collection of architectures ranging from 3-D structures and ultrathin thread
probes to electronic meshes. The 3-D structures with recording and stimulation
electrode sites enabled volumetric interfacing with the neuronal tissues and marked
a signiﬁcant change in the design trends due to its open-type geometries (Fig. 7d).
The concept and capabilities of mesh electronics [132–143] enabled ﬂoating tissue
interfaces that could be delivered into the milieu through a syringe or as a pre-
rigidiﬁed penetrating probe that softens and spreads into a mesh in vivo (Fig. 7e).
Recently, focus on minimizing the tissue damage resulting from the insertion of
penetrating probes into the cortex led to a rigorous miniaturization of such probes.
This came in the form of ultraﬂexible ultrathin probes of thickness <2 μm and
width ∼10 μm that were popularly known as nanoelectronic threads (Fig. 7f) and
are currently the state of the art in penetrating Neuroﬂex. The thread, the mesh, and
the 3-D open-type architectures are summarized in Table 3.
Table 3 Design architecture innovations at the electrode-tissue interface
Flexible material
innovation
Substrate/sensing
site/encapsulation;
critical dimension
Design inspiration
Functional validation
Ultrathin
nanoelectronic
probes
[116,144–147]
Su-8/Pt or
Au/Su-8;
10 × 1.5 μm
(cross-sectional
area)
Probe dimensions
comparable to/smaller
than that of average
cells/capillaries;
sufﬁciently ﬂexible
architecture for
compliance with tissue
microenvironments;
inspiring the
development of reliable
glial scar-free neural
probe designs
In vivo electrical
recording of cortical
activity from the
somatosensory and
visual cortices of
mice; 16 probes with
80 electrodes in all
over a period of
4 months
3-D mesh [115]
SU-8/nanowire
transistors +
Cr-Au-Cr/SU-8;
mesh thickness
∼1 μm
Seamless and minimally
invasive 3-D
interpenetration of
macroporous mesh
electronics within the
neural milieu
Acute in vivo 16-
channel recording
using mesh electronics
injected into a mouse
brain
3-D
mesostructures
[114]
Su-8 epoxy/Au
bilayer; Au-epoxy
(50 nm/7 μm) on a
circular base
(30 μm thick)
Sophisticated scaffolds
with electronic and
optoelectronic
components formed in
2-D planar designs that
allow interaction with
the biology in 3-D
3-D electronic cage
with integrated and
separately addressable
electrodes for
stimulation and
recording of dorsal
root ganglion (DRG)
neuronal networks

Neuroﬂex: Intraneural and Extraneural Flexible Sensor Architectures for. . .
549
4
Concluding Opinion and Future Outlook
The challenge of creating an optimal Neuroﬂex interface is multidisciplinary and
requires advancements in many facets of neurotechnology, including mechanically
compliant electrode substrates [21, 86, 148–150], transducer materials [149, 151],
and robust wireless technologies [152–157] that can enable chronic implantable
bio-interfaced systems. Flexible materials capabilities that have enabled signiﬁcant
improvements in compliance and transduction mechanisms have reached appre-
ciable maturity, supporting chronic reliability studies for ﬂexible neural probes
and associated electronic implants [9, 76, 83, 149–151, 156, 158, 159]. Each such
realization is a result of multifaceted sophistication spanning materials (both
conductive and insulating), microfabrication, and packaging [158,160–167]. A few
research highlights directly impacting Neuroﬂex are as listed below:
•
Considerable progress has been made in the ﬁeld of semiconductor-based
fabrication for implantable bioelectronics – in the form of ultrathin ﬂexible
silicon slices or in other words Si NMs [9, 168–170]. These monocrystalline
Si NMs have led to the creation of thin-ﬁlm ﬂexible transistors, leading to
multiplexing of multiple electrode sites, consequently reducing the number of
electrical readout traces required to communicate with the high-density neural
interface.
•
Ultrathin silicon electronics technology has been applied to realize bioresorbable
neural links for transient diagnostic and therapeutic applications [168,171,172].
•
The design of CP-based transistors, investigation of such ﬂexible transistors as
electrode sites in the Neuroﬂex, and development of ﬂexible multiplexing strate-
gies to realize transistor arrays [128,173–176] have improved the acquisition of
the neural signals at the electrode-tissue interface.
The next decade will witness the addressing of a few key issues (as listed below)
in Neuroﬂex design for enabling chronic neural interfaces:
•
One of the key issues will be to advance materials research to ﬁnd candidate
materials for substrate, insulation, and electrically conductive layers in Neuroﬂex
designs that are robust and ﬂexible and at the same time integrate well with the
in vivo environment. Several proof-of-concept studies that include excellently
biocompatible materials in the design of neural interfaces point us toward such a
possibility [9,76,98].
•
Key design principles of a fully implantable chronic Neuroﬂex include the devel-
opment of tetherless ultrathin interfaces, robust ﬂexible readout circuitry that
supports wireless communication between the interface and the ex vivo environs,
and seamless integration of electrodes and circuitry [156, 157, 177]. Such a
development has to be backed up with rigorous chronic testing and optimization

550
A. C. Patil and N. V. Thakor
of mechanical robustness of the ﬂexible sensors, circuit implants, and their
integration. These challenges provide motivation and signiﬁcant opportunities
for the conﬂuence of materials, devices, and fabrication processes.
•
The other limiting factors in ﬂexible neurotechnology are the number of electrode
sites that the current versions of Neuroﬂex provide, limited understanding of
“how many electrode sites would be enough for a speciﬁc diagnostic and/or
therapeutic neural interface?” and limited know-how of the underlying neural
circuitry and coding.
An open question in the ﬁeld of neural interface engineering is how to design
the neural interface to seamlessly mimic the in vivo environment. The current
versions have characteristics that often turn out to be nonideal because of the foreign
nature of the man-made interface (and consequently the rejection of the interface
implant by the body through scarring), the sophisticated construction of the neural
milieu, and the dynamics of the electrode-tissue interface. The next generation of
ﬂexible neural interfaces needs to build on the current ones by overcoming these
limitations through materials that seem more natural/biological to the neural tissue
and integrated design architectures that are long-lasting. It is currently unclear
whether the current crop of ﬂexible neural sensors would provide such a solution.
Although the number of electrode sites that can be read from has increased
over the past decade, we are fundamentally limited in our capabilities to granularly
control the neural circuitry and consequently the number of different signals that can
be written into the neural circuitry. Also limited is the know-how regarding the opti-
mal number of electrode sites required for an efﬁcient neural recording/modulation
either at the surface or at the depths of the neural milieu. Emerging strategies for
realizing a reliable electrode-tissue interface and high-density penetrating and non-
penetrating arrays (with higher resolutions for neural interfacing) provide promise
to speciﬁcally address the aforementioned limitations [136, 137, 156, 176, 178–
196]. In addition, the rapid progress in the application of soft materials for ﬂexible
bioelectronics can very well support the development of chronically stable neural
interfaces [13,133,134,177,197–199].
Even though the emerging materials technologies and neural interfacing method-
ologies hold signiﬁcant promise in advancing basic neural recording and stimulation
capabilities and, in turn, basic neuroscience research, few neural interface designs
have found relevance in clinical use. The design and development of the neural inter-
face have to evolve toward chronic clinical applications, taking into consideration
the harsh in vivo environment and the rigors the sensor implants go through during
chronic use. The advancement of neurotechnology from the basic research scope
to clinical practice is possible through translational research, inclusive of chronic
validation studies for establishing reproducible reliable electrode performance under
target speciﬁcations (in vivo conditions). Several neural interface designs are
following this route [13, 83, 198, 200], and such an approach (chronic validation)
should be considered independent of basic research and consciously pursued.

Neuroﬂex: Intraneural and Extraneural Flexible Sensor Architectures for. . .
551
In the short term, however, Neuroﬂex that can mimic the material properties
of the in vivo environs in early chronic animal models will be a remarkable
development in the pursuit of chronically viable neurotechnology
[200–202].
Combining biointegrated bidirectional sensors with active signal conditioning could
result in Neuroﬂex sensor systems that can serve as engineered toolboxes for
accessing the neural circuitry.
References
1. Patil, A.C., Thakor, N.V.: Implantable neurotechnologies: a review of micro-and nanoelec-
trodes for neural recording. Med. Biol. Eng. Comput. 54(1), 23–44 (2016)
2. Cogan, S.F.: Neural stimulation and recording electrodes. Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 10, 275–
309 (2008)
3. Grill, W.M., Norman, S.E., Bellamkonda, R.V.: Implanted neural interfaces: biochallenges
and engineered solutions. Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 11, 1–24 (2009)
4. Lebedev, M.A., Nicolelis, M.A.: Brain–machine interfaces: past, present and future. Trends
Neurosci. 29(9), 536–546 (2006)
5. Wellman, S.M., Eles, J.R., Ludwig, K.A., et al.: A materials roadmap to functional neural
interface design. Adv. Funct. Mater. 28(12), 1701269 (2018)
6. Pandit, A., Biggs, M.: Advanced functional materials solutions to engineering the neural
interface. Adv. Funct. Mater. 28(12), 1800827 (2018)
7. Ma, Z., Williams, J.C., Park, D.W., et al.: Transparent and ﬂexible neural electrode arrays. US
Patent 9,861,288 (2018)
8. Someya, T., Bao, Z., Malliaras, G.G.: The rise of plastic bioelectronics. Nature 540(7633),
379 (2016)
9. Yu, K.J., Kuzum, D., Hwang, S.W., et al.: Bioresorbable silicon electronics for transient
spatiotemporal mapping of electrical activity from the cerebral cortex. Nat. Mater. 15(7), 782
(2016)
10. Litt, B., Viventi, J.: Flexible and scalable sensor arrays for recording and modulating
physiologic activity. US Patent 9,107,592 (2015)
11. Rogers, J., Dae-Hyeong, K., Litt, B., et al.: Conformable actively multiplexed high-density
surface electrode array for brain interfacing. US Patent 8,934,965 (2015)
12. Jeong, J.W., Shin, G., Park, S.I., et al.: Soft materials in neuroengineering for hard problems
in neuroscience. Neuron 86(1), 175–186 (2015)
13. Minev, I.R., Musienko, P., Hirsch, A., et al.: Electronic dura mater for long-term multimodal
neural interfaces. Science 347(6218), 159–163 (2015)
14. Rogers, J.A., Dae-Hyeong, K., Omenetto, F., et al.: Implantable biomedical devices on
bioresorbable substrates. US Patent 8,666,471 (2014)
15. Kim, D.H., Ghaffari, R., Lu, N., et al.: Flexible and stretchable electronics for biointegrated
devices. Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 14, 113–128 (2012)
16. Viventi, J., Kim, D.H., Vigeland, L., et al.: Flexible, foldable, actively multiplexed, high-
density electrode array for mapping brain activity in vivo. Nat. Neurosci. 14(12), 1599 (2011)
17. Fattahi, P., Yang, G., Kim, G., et al.: A review of organic and inorganic biomaterials for neural
interfaces. Adv. Mater. 26(12), 1846–1885 (2014)
18. Lacour, S.P., Benmerah, S., Tarte, E., et al.: Flexible and stretchable micro-electrodes for in
vitro and in vivo neural interfaces. Med. Biol. Eng. Comput. 48(10), 945–954 (2010)
19. Donoghue, J.P.: Bridging the brain to the world: a perspective on neural interface systems.
Neuron 60(3), 511–521 (2008)

552
A. C. Patil and N. V. Thakor
20. Hatsopoulos, N.G., Donoghue, J.P.: The science of neural interface systems. Annu. Rev.
Neurosci. 32, 249–266 (2009)
21. Yuk, H., Lu, B., Zhao, X.: Hydrogel bioelectronics. Chem. Soc. Rev. 48(6), 1642–1667 (2019)
22. Renshaw, B., Forbes, A., Morison, B.: Activity of isocortex and hippocampus: electrical
studies with micro-electrodes. J. Neurophysiol. 3(1), 74–105 (1940)
23. Woldring, S., Dirken, M.: Spontaneous unit-activity in the superﬁcial cortical layers. Acta
Physiol. Pharmacol. Neerl 1(3), 369–379 (1950)
24. Li, C.L., Jasper, H.: Microelectrode studies of the electrical activity of the cerebral cortex in
the cat. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 121(1), 117–140 (1953)
25. Dowben, R.M., Rose, J.E.: A metal-ﬁlled microelectrode. Science 118(3053), 22–24 (1953)
26. Green, J.: A simple microelectrode for recording from the central nervous system. Nature
182(4640), 962 (1958)
27. Hubel, D.H., Wiesel, T.N.: Receptive ﬁelds of single neurones in the cat’s striate cortex. J.
Physiol. (Lond.) 148(3), 574–591 (1959)
28. Wolbarsht, M., MacNichol, E., Wagner, H.: Glass insulated platinum microelectrode. Science
132(3436), 1309–1310 (1960)
29. Marg, E., Adams, J.E.: Indwelling multiple micro-electrodes in the brain. Electroencephalogr.
Clin. Neurophysiol. 23(3), 277–280 (1967)
30. Branner, A., Normann, R.A.: A multielectrode array for intrafascicular recording and
stimulation in sciatic nerve of cats. Brain Res. Bull. 51(4), 293–306 (2000)
31. Nicolelis, M.A., Ghazanfar, A.A., Faggin, B.M., et al.: Reconstructing the engram: simulta-
neous, multisite, many single neuron recordings. Neuron 18(4), 529–537 (1997)
32. Williams, J.C., Rennaker, R.L., Kipke, D.R.: Long-term neural recording characteristics of
wire microelectrode arrays implanted in cerebral cortex. Brain. Res. Protoc. 4(3), 303–313
(1999)
33. Nicolelis, M.A., Dimitrov, D., Carmena, J.M., et al.: Chronic, multisite, multielectrode
recordings in macaque monkeys. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 100(19), 11041–11046
(2003)
34. Polikov, V.S., Tresco, P.A., Reichert, W.M.: Response of brain tissue to chronically implanted
neural electrodes. J. Neurosci. Methods 148(1), 1–18 (2005)
35. Jackson, A., Fetz, E.E.: Compact movable microwire array for long-term chronic unit
recording in cerebral cortex of primates. J. Neurophysiol. 98(5), 3109–3118 (2007)
36. Lehew, G., Nicolelis, M.A.: State-of-the-art microwire array design for chronic neural
recordings in behaving animals. In: Methods for Neural Ensemble Recordings, vol. 2, pp.
361–371. CRC Press, Boca Raton (2008)
37. Prasad, A., Xue, Q.S., Sankar, V., et al.: Comprehensive characterization and failure modes
of tungsten microwire arrays in chronic neural implants. J. Neural Eng. 9(5), 056015 (2012)
38. Campbell, P.K., Jones, K.E., Huber, R.J., et al.: A silicon-based, three-dimensional neural
interface: manufacturing processes for an intracortical electrode array. IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng. 38(8), 758–768 (1991)
39. Nordhausen, C.T., Maynard, E.M., Normann, R.A.: Single unit recording capabilities of a 100
microelectrode array. Brain Res. 726(1–2), 129–140 (1996)
40. Bai, Q., Wise, K.D., Anderson, D.J.: A high-yield microassembly structure for three-
dimensional microelectrode arrays. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 47(3), 281–289 (2000)
41. Branner, A., Stein, R.B., Normann, R.A.: Selective stimulation of cat sciatic nerve using an
array of varying-length microelectrodes. J. Neurophysiol. 85(4), 1585–1594 (2001)
42. Xu, C., Lemon, W., Liu, C.: Design and fabrication of a high-density metal microelectrode
array for neural recording. Sens. Actuat. A 96(1), 78–85 (2002)
43. Kipke, D.R., Vetter, R.J., Williams, J.C., et al.: Silicon-substrate intracortical microelectrode
arrays for long-term recording of neuronal spike activity in cerebral cortex. IEEE Trans.
Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 11(2), 151–155 (2003)
44. Wise, K.D., Anderson, D.J., Hetke, J.F., et al.: Wireless implantable microsystems: high-
density electronic interfaces to the nervous system. Proc. IEEE 92(1), 76–97 (2004)
45. Biran, R., Martin, D.C., Tresco, P.A.: Neuronal cell loss accompanies the brain tissue response
to chronically implanted silicon microelectrode arrays. Exp. Neurol. 195(1), 115–126 (2005)

Neuroﬂex: Intraneural and Extraneural Flexible Sensor Architectures for. . .
553
46. Cheung, K.C.: Implantable microscale neural interfaces. Biomed. Microdev. 9(6), 923–938
(2007)
47. Kipke, D.R., Williams, J.C., Hetke, J., et al.: Intracranial neural interface system. US Patent
7,548,775 (2009)
48. Kim, S., Bhandari, R., Klein, M., et al.: Integrated wireless neural interface based on the Utah
electrode array. Biomed. Microdev. 11(2), 453–466 (2009)
49. Piret, G., Hébert, C., Mazellier, J.P., et al.: 3D-nanostructured boron-doped diamond for
microelectrode array neural interfacing. Biomaterials 53, 173–183 (2015)
50. Christensen, M.B., Wark, H.A., Hutchinson, D.T.: A histological analysis of human median
and ulnar nerves following implantation of utah slanted electrode arrays. Biomaterials 77,
235–242 (2016)
51. Christensen, M., Pearce, S., Ledbetter, N., et al.: The foreign body response to the utah slant
electrode array in the cat sciatic nerve. Acta Biomater. 10(11), 4650–4660 (2014)
52. Rousche, P.J., Normann, R.A.: Chronic recording capability of the utah intracortical electrode
array in cat sensory cortex. J. Neurosci. Methods 82(1), 1–15 (1998)
53. Normann, R.A.: Technology insight: future neuroprosthetic therapies for disorders of the
nervous system. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 3(8), 444 (2007)
54. Wark, H., Sharma, R., Mathews, K., et al.: A new high-density (25 electrodes/mm2) pen-
etrating microelectrode array for recording and stimulating sub-millimeter neuroanatomical
structures. J. Neural Eng. 10(4), 045003 (2013)
55. Mathews, K.S., Wark, H.A., Normann, R.A.: Assessment of rat sciatic nerve function
following acute implantation of high density utah slanted electrode array (25 electrodes/mm2)
based on neural recordings and evoked muscle activity. Muscle Nerve 50(3), 417–424 (2014)
56. Spira, M.E., Hai, A.: Multi-electrode array technologies for neuroscience and cardiology. Nat.
Nanotechnol. 8(2), 83 (2013)
57. Fejtl, M., Stett, A., Nisch, W., et al.: On micro-electrode array revival: its development,
sophistication of recording, and stimulation. In: Advances in Network Electrophysiology, pp.
24–37. Springer, Boston (2006)
58. Gross, G.W.: Simultaneous single unit recording in vitro with a photoetched laser deinsulated
gold multimicroelectrode surface. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 26(5), 273–279 (1979)
59. Pine, J.: Recording action potentials from cultured neurons with extracellular microcircuit
electrodes. J. Neurosci. Methods 2(1), 19–31 (1980)
60. Regehr, W.G., Pine, J., Rutledge, D.B.: A long-term in vitro silicon-based microelectrode-
neuron connection. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 35(12), 1023–1032 (1988)
61. Hoogerwerf, A.C., Wise, K.D.: A three-dimensional microelectrode array for chronic neural
recording. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 41(12), 1136–1146 (1994)
62. Fromherz, P., Stett, A.: Silicon-neuron junction: capacitive stimulation of an individual neuron
on a silicon chip. Phys. Rev. Lett. 75(8), 1670 (1995)
63. Maher, M., Pine, J., Wright, J., et al.: The neurochip: a new multielectrode device for
stimulating and recording from cultured neurons. J. Neurosci. Methods 87(1), 45–56 (1999)
64. McGarvey, K.A., Lee, J.M., Boughner, D.R.: Mechanical suitability of glycerol-preserved
human dura mater for construction of prosthetic cardiac valves. Biomaterials 5, 109–117
(1984)
65. Borschel, G.H., Kia, K.F., Kuzon, W.M. Jr, et al.: Mechanical properties of acellular
peripheral nerve. J. Surg. Res. 114, 133–139 (2003)
66. Sharp, A.A., Ortega, A.M., Restrepo, D., et al.: In vivo penetration mechanics and mechanical
properties of mouse brain tissue at micrometer scales. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 56, 45–53
(2008)
67. Maikos, J.T., Elias, R.A., Shreiber, D.I.: Mechanical properties of dura mater from the rat
brain and spinal cord. J. Neurotrauma 25, 38–51 (2008)
68. Elkin, B.S., Ilankovan, A., Morrison, B.: Age-dependent regional mechanical properties of
the rat hippocampus and cortex. J. Biomech. Eng. 132, 011010 (2010)
69. Ogneva, I.V., Lebedev, D.V., Shenkman, B.S.: Transversal stiffness and young’s modulus of
single ﬁbers from rat soleus muscle probed by atomic force microscopy. Biophys. J. 98, 418–
424 (2010)

554
A. C. Patil and N. V. Thakor
70. Ju, M.S., Lin, C.C.K., Chang, C.T.: Researches on biomechanical properties and models of
peripheral nerves-a review. J. Biomech. Sci. Eng. 12, 16–00,678 (2017)
71. Karimi, A., Shojaei, A., Tehrani, P.: Mechanical properties of the human spinal cord under
the compressive loading. J. Chem. Neuroanat. 86, 15–18 (2017)
72. Kozai, T.D.Y., Langhals, N.B., Patel, P.R., et al.: Ultrasmall implantable composite microelec-
trodes with bioactive surfaces for chronic neural interfaces. Nat. Mater. 11(12), 1065 (2012)
73. Guitchounts, G., Markowitz, J.E., Liberti, W.A., et al.: A carbon-ﬁber electrode array for
long-term neural recording. J. Neural Eng. 10(4), 046016 (2013)
74. Kang, M., Jung, S., Zhang, H., et al.: Subcellular neural probes from single-crystal gold
nanowires. ACS Nano 8(8), 8182–8189 (2014)
75. Apollo, N.V., Maturana, M.I., Tong, W., et al.: Soft, ﬂexible freestanding neural stimulation
and recording electrodes fabricated from reduced graphene oxide. Adv. Funct. Mater. 25(23),
3551–3559 (2015)
76. Canales, A., Jia, X., Froriep, U.P., et al.: Multifunctional ﬁbers for simultaneous optical,
electrical and chemical interrogation of neural circuits in vivo. Nat. Biotechnol. 33(3), 277
(2015)
77. Xie, C., Liu, J., Fu, T.M., et al.: Three-dimensional macroporous nanoelectronic networks as
minimally invasive brain probes. Nat. Mater. 14(12), 1286 (2015)
78. Leccardi, M.J.I.A., Vagni, P., Ghezzi, D.: Multilayer 3D electrodes for neural implants. J.
Neural Eng. 16(2), 026013 (2018)
79. Boretius, T., Badia, J., Pascual-Font, A., et al.: A transverse intrafascicular multichannel
electrode (time) to interface with the peripheral nerve. Biosens. Bioelectron. 26(1), 62–69
(2010)
80. Wang, J., Thow, X.Y., Wang, H., et al.: A highly selective 3D spiked ultraﬂexible neural
(SUN) interface for decoding peripheral nerve sensory information. Adv. Healthcare Mater.
7(5), 1700987 (2018)
81. Cutrone, A., Del Valle, J., Santos, D., et al.: A three-dimensional self-opening intraneural
peripheral interface (SELINE). J. Neural Eng. 12(1), 016016 (2015)
82. Cutrone, A., Bossi, S., Micera, S.: Development of a self-opening neural interface. J. Med.
Dev. 7(2), 020938 (2013)
83. Wurth, S., Capogrosso, M., Raspopovic, S., et al.: Long-term usability and bio-integration of
polyimide-based intra-neural stimulating electrodes. Biomaterials 122, 114–129 (2017)
84. Khodagholy, D., Doublet, T., Quilichini, P., et al.: In vivo recordings of brain activity using
organic transistors. Nat. Commun. 4, 1575 (2013)
85. Lee, W., Kim, D., Matsuhisa, N., et al.: Transparent, conformable, active multielectrode array
using organic electrochemical transistors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 114(40), 0554–
10559 201703886 (2017)
86. Patil, A.C., Bandla, A., Liu, Y.H., et al.: Nontransient silk sandwich for soft, conformal bionic
links. Mater. Today 32, 68–83 (2020)
87. Escabi, M.A., Read, H.L., Viventi, J., et al.: A high-density, high-channel count, multiplexed
μecog array for auditory-cortex recordings. J. Neurophysiol. 112(6), 1566–1583 (2014)
88. Kim, D.H., Kim, Y.S., Amsden, J., et al.: Silicon electronics on silk as a path to bioresorbable,
implantable devices. Appl. Phys. Lett. 95(13), 133701 (2009)
89. Kim, D., Viventi, J., Amsden, J.J., et al.: Dissolvable ﬁlms of silk ﬁbroin for ultrathin
conformal bio-integrated electronics. Nat. Mater. 9(6), 511 (2010)
90. Tsioris, K., Raja, W.K., Pritchard, E.M., et al.: Fabrication of silk microneedles for controlled-
release drug delivery. Adv. Funct. Mater. 22(2), 330–335 (2012)
91. Tao, H., Kainerstorfer, J.M., Siebert, S.M., et al.: Implantable, multifunctional, bioresorbable
optics. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 109(48), 19584–19589 (2012)
92. Tien, L.W., Wu, F., Tang-Schomer, M.D., et al.: Silk as a multifunctional biomaterial substrate
for reduced glial scarring around brain-penetrating electrodes. Adv. Funct. Mater. 23(25),
3185–3193 (2013)
93. Tao, H., Hwang, S.W., Marelli, B., et al.: Silk-based resorbable electronic devices for remotely
controlled therapy and in vivo infection abatement. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 111(49),
17385–17389 (2014)

Neuroﬂex: Intraneural and Extraneural Flexible Sensor Architectures for. . .
555
94. Wu, F., Tien, L.W., Chen, F., et al.: Silk-backed structural optimization of high-density ﬂexible
intracortical neural probes. J. Microelectromech. Syst. 24(1), 62–69 (2015)
95. Rockwood, D.N., Preda, R.C., Yücel, T., et al.: Materials fabrication from bombyx mori silk
ﬁbroin. Nat. Protoc. 6(10), 1612–1631 (2011)
96. Liao, L.D., Bandla, A., Ling, J.M., et al.: Improving neurovascular outcomes with bilateral
forepaw stimulation in a rat photothrombotic ischemic stroke model. Neurophotonics 1(1),
011007 (2014)
97. Seo, D., Neely, R.M., Shen, K., et al.: Wireless recording in the peripheral nervous system
with ultrasonic neural dust. Neuron 91(3), 529–539 (2016)
98. Liu, Y., Liu, J., Chen, S., et al.: Soft and elastic hydrogel-based microelectronics for localized
low-voltage neuromodulation. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 3(1), 58 (2019)
99. Sanghoon, L.: Flexible neural interfaces for recording and stimulation of peripheral and
visceral nerves, ScholarBank@NUS Repository. PhD thesis (2017). https://scholarbank.nus.
edu.sg/handle/10635/136078
100. Lee, S., Wang, H., Shi, Q., et al.: Development of battery-free neural interface and modu-
lated control of tibialis anterior muscle via common peroneal nerve based on triboelectric
nanogenerators (TENGs). Nano Energy 33, 1–11 (2017)
101. Lee, S., Sheshadri, S., Xiang, Z., et al.: Selective stimulation and neural recording on
peripheral nerves using ﬂexible split ring electrodes. Sens. Actuat. B 242, 1165–1170
(2017)
102. Xiang, Z., Yen, S.C., Sheshadri, S., et al.: Progress of ﬂexible electronics in neural
interfacing–a self-adaptive non-invasive neural ribbon electrode for small nerves recording.
Adv. Mater. 28(22), 4472–4479 (2016)
103. Lissandrello, C.A., Gillis, W.F., Shen, J., et al.: A micro-scale printable nanoclip for electrical
stimulation and recording in small nerves. J. Neural Eng. 14(3), 036006 (2017)
104. Lee, S., Peh, W.Y.X., Wang, J., et al.: Toward bioelectronic medicine-neuromodulation of
small peripheral nerves using ﬂexible neural clip. Adv. Sci. 4(11), 1700149 (2017)
105. Rodri, F.J., Ceballos, D., Schu, M., et al.: Polyimide cuff electrodes for peripheral nerve
stimulation. J. Neurosci. Methods 98(2), 105–118 (2000)
106. Loeb, G., Peck, R.: Cuff electrodes for chronic stimulation and recording of peripheral nerve
activity. J. Neurosci. Methods 64(1), 95–103 (1996)
107. Badia, J., Boretius, T., Andreu, D., et al.: Comparative analysis of transverse intrafascicular
multichannel, longitudinal intrafascicular and multipolar cuff electrodes for the selective
stimulation of nerve fascicles. J. Neural Eng. 8(3), 036023 (2011)
108. Naples, G.G., Mortimer, J.T., Scheiner, A., et al.: A spiral nerve cuff electrode for peripheral
nerve stimulation. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 35(11), 905–916 (1988)
109. Lee, S., Yen, S.C., Sheshadri, S., et al.: Flexible epineural strip electrode for recording in ﬁne
nerves. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 63(3), 581–587 (2016)
110. Lee, S., Yen, S.C., Liao, L.D., et al.: Flexible sling electrode for bidirectional neural signal
recording and selective stimulation. In: IEEE 29th International Conference on Micro Electro
Mechanical Systems (MEMS), pp. 375–378. IEEE (2016)
111. Lu, Y., Lyu, H., Richardson, A.G., et al.: Flexible neural electrode array based-on porous
graphene for cortical microstimulation and sensing. Sci. Rep. 6, 33526 (2016)
112. Robinson, J.T., Jorgolli, M., Shalek, A.K., et al.: Vertical nanowire electrode arrays as a
scalable platform for intracellular interfacing to neuronal circuits. Nat. Nanotechnol. 7(3),
180 (2012)
113. Dvir, T., Timko, B.P., Kohane, D.S., et al.: Nanotechnological strategies for engineering
complex tissues. Nat. Nanotechnol. 6(1), 13 (2011)
114. Yan, Z., Han, M., Shi, Y., et al.: Three-dimensional mesostructures as high-temperature
growth templates, electronic cellular scaffolds, and self-propelled microrobots. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 114(45), E9455–E9464 (2017)
115. Liu, J., Fu, T.M., Cheng, Z., et al.: Syringe-injectable electronics. Nat. Nanotechnol. 10, 629–
637 (2015)
116. Wei, X., Luan, L., Zhao, Z., et al.: Nanofabricated ultraﬂexible electrode arrays for high-
density intracortical recording. Adv. Sci. 5(6), 1700625 (2018)

556
A. C. Patil and N. V. Thakor
117. Ferro, M.D., Melosh, N.A.: Electronic and ionic materials for neurointerfaces. Adv. Funct.
Mater. 28(12), 1704335 (2018)
118. Wang, K., Liu, C.C., Durand, D.M.: Flexible nerve stimulation electrode with iridium oxide
sputtered on liquid crystal polymer. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 56(1), 6–14 (2009)
119. Zhou, D.D., Greenbaum, E.: Implantable Neural Prostheses 1: Devices and Applications.
Springer, New York (2009)
120. Sun, K., Zhang, S., Li, P., et al.: Review on application of pedots and pedot: Pss in energy
conversion and storage devices. J. Mater Sci. Mater. Electron. 26(7), 4438–4462 (2015)
121. Le, T.H., Kim, Y., Yoon, H.: Electrical and electrochemical properties of conducting
polymers. Polymers 9(4), 150 (2017)
122. Ganji, M., Elthakeb, A.T., Tanaka, A., et al.: Scaling effects on the electrochemical per-
formance of poly (3, 4-ethylenedioxythiophene (pedot), au, and pt for electrocorticography
recording. Adv. Funct. Mater. 27(42), 1703018 (2017)
123. Kim, G.H., Kim, K., Nam, H., et al.: Cnt-au nanocomposite deposition on gold microelec-
trodes for improved neural recordings. Sens. Actuat. B 252, 152–158 (2017)
124. Lu, Y., Liu, X., Hattori, R., et al.: Ultralow impedance graphene microelectrodes with high
optical transparency for simultaneous deep two-photon imaging in transgenic mice. Adv.
Funct. Mater. 28(31), 1800002 (2018)
125. Tian, B., Cohen-Karni, T., Qing, Q., et al.: Three-dimensional, ﬂexible nanoscale ﬁeld-effect
transistors as localized bioprobes. Science 329(5993), 830–834 (2010)
126. Blaschke, B.M., Tort-Colet, N., Guimerà-Brunet, A., et al.: Mapping brain activity with
ﬂexible graphene micro-transistors. 2D Mater. 4(2), 025040 (2017)
127. Wang, C.W., Pan, C.Y., Wu, H.C., et al.: In situ detection of chromogranin a released from
living neurons with a single-walled carbon-nanotube ﬁeld-effect transistor. Small 3(8), 1350–
1355 (2007)
128. Rivnay, J., Inal, S., Salleo, A., et al.: Organic electrochemical transistors. Nat. Rev. Mater. 3,
17086 (2018)
129. Liu, X., Lu, Y., Kuzum, D.: High-density porous graphene arrays enable detection and
analysis of propagating cortical waves and spirals. Sci. Rep. 8(1), 17089 (2018)
130. Zhou, W., Dai, X., Lieber, C.M.: Advances in nanowire bioelectronics. Rep. Prog. Phys. 80(1),
016701 (2016)
131. Patolsky, F., Timko, B.P., Yu, G., et al.: Detection, stimulation, and inhibition of neuronal
signals with high-density nanowire transistor arrays. Science 313(5790), 1100–1104 (2006)
132. Vogt, N.: (2015) Injectable meshes for neural recordings. Nat. Methods 12(8), 702
133. Zhou, T., Hong, G., Fu, T.M., et al.: Syringe-injectable mesh electronics integrate seamlessly
with minimal chronic immune response in the brain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 114(23),
5894–5899 (2017)
134. Fu, T.M., Hong, G., Viveros, R.D., et al.: Highly scalable multichannel mesh electronics for
stable chronic brain electrophysiology. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 114(47), E10046–
E10055 (2017)
135. Schuhmann Jr T.G., Yao, J., Hong, G., et al.: Syringe-injectable electronics with a plug-and-
play input/output interface. Nano Lett. 17(9), 5836–5842 (2017)
136. Hong, G., Yang, X., Zhou, T., et al.: Mesh electronics: a new paradigm for tissue-like brain
probes. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 50, 33–41 (2018)
137. Dai, X., Hong, G., Gao, T., et al.: Mesh nanoelectronics: seamless integration of electronics
with tissues. Acc. Chem. Res. 51(2), 309–318 (2018)
138. Schuhmann, T.G. Jr, Zhou, T., Hong, G., et al.: Syringe-injectable mesh electronics for stable
chronic rodent electrophysiology. J. Vis. Exp. (137), e58003 (2018)
139. Lieber, C.M., Schuhmann, T.G., Yao, J., et al.: Interfaces for syringe-injectable electronics.
US Patent App. 15/977710 (2018)
140. Liu, J.: Syringe injectable electronics. In: Biomimetics Through Nanoelectronics, pp. 65–93.
Springer, Cham (2018)
141. Schuhmann, T.G.: Injectable nanoelectronic sensors for brain-machine interfacing. PhD thesis
(2019)

Neuroﬂex: Intraneural and Extraneural Flexible Sensor Architectures for. . .
557
142. Zhou, T.: Syringe-injectable mesh electronics: seamless integration with the central nervous
system and biomedical applications. PhD thesis (2018)
143. Zimmerman, J.F., Tian, B.: Injectable electronics as a modern day ‘ship in a bottle’. NPG
Asia Mater. 7(9), e214 (2015)
144. Luan, L., Wei, X., Zhao, Z., et al.: Ultraﬂexible nanoelectronic probes form reliable, glial
scar–free neural integration. Sci. Adv. 3(2), e1601966 (2017)
145. Luan, L., Sullender, C.T., Li, X., et al.: Nanoelectronics enabled chronic multimodal neural
platform in a mouse ischemic model. J. Neurosci. Methods 295, 68–76 (2018)
146. Zhao, Z., Li, X., He, F., et al.: Parallel, minimally-invasive implantation of ultra-ﬂexible neural
electrode arrays. J. Neural Eng. 16(3), 035001 (2019)
147. Zhao, Z., Luan, L., Wei, X., et al.: Nanoelectronic coating enabled versatile multifunctional
neural probes. Nano Lett. 17(8), 4588–4595 (2017)
148. Rogers, J.A.: Materials for biointegrated electronic and microﬂuidic systems. MRS Bull.
44(3), 195–202 (2019)
149. Fallegger, F., Schiavone, G., Lacour, S.P.: Conformable hybrid systems for implantable
bioelectronic interfaces. Adv Mater. 32, 1903904 (2019)
150. Wang, C., Xia, K., Zhang, Y., et al.: Silk-based advanced materials for soft electronics. Acc.
Chem. Res. 52, 2916–2927 (2019)
151. Schiavone, G., Lacour, S.P.: Conformable bioelectronic interfaces: mapping the road ahead.
Sci. Transl. Med. 11(503), eaaw5858 (2019)
152. Ho, J.S., Yeh, A.J., Neofytou, E., et al.: Wireless power transfer to deep-tissue microimplants.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 111(22), 7974–7979 (2014)
153. Montgomery, K.L., Yeh, A.J., Ho, J.S., et al.: Wirelessly powered, fully internal opto-
genetics for brain, spinal and peripheral circuits in mice. Nat. Methods 12(10), 969
(2015)
154. Agrawal, D.R., Tanabe, Y., Weng, D., et al.: Conformal phased surfaces for wireless powering
of bioelectronic microdevices. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 1(3), 0043 (2017)
155. Zhang, Y., Castro, D.C., Han, Y., et al.: Battery-free, lightweight, injectable microsystem for
in vivo wireless pharmacology and optogenetics. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 116(43),
21427–21437 (2019)
156. Zhang, Y., Mickle, A.D., Gutruf, P., et al.: Battery-free, fully implantable optoﬂuidic cuff
system for wireless optogenetic and pharmacological neuromodulation of peripheral nerves.
Sci. Adv. 5(7), eaaw5296 (2019)
157. Xie, Z., Avila, R., Huang, Y., et al.: Flexible and stretchable antennas for biointegrated
electronics. Adv. Mater. 32(15), 1902767 (2020)
158. Song, E., Chiang, C.H., Li, R., et al.: Flexible electronic/optoelectronic microsystems with
scalable designs for chronic biointegration. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 116(31), 15398–
15406 (2019)
159. Viveros, R.D., Zhou, T., Hong, G., et al.: Advanced one-and two-dimensional mesh designs
for injectable electronics. Nano Lett. 19(6), 4180–4187 (2019)
160. Rivnay, J., Wang, H., Fenno, L., et al.: Next-generation probes, particles, and proteins for
neural interfacing. Sci. Adv. 3(6), e1601649 (2017)
161. Park, S., Loke, G., Fink, Y., et al.: Flexible ﬁber-based optoelectronics for neural interfaces.
Chem. Soc. Rev. 48(6), 1826–1852 (2019)
162. Ledesma, H.A., Li, X., Carvalho-de Souza, J.L., et al.: An atlas of nano-enabled neural
interfaces. Nat. Nanotechnol. 14(7), 645–657 (2019)
163. Capadona, J.R., Shoffstall, A.J., Pancrazio, J.J.: Neuron-like neural probes. Nat. Mater. 18(5),
429 (2019)
164. Vachicouras, N., Tarabichi, O., Kanumuri, V.V., et al.: Microstructured thin-ﬁlm electrode
technology enables proof of concept of scalable, soft auditory brainstem implants. Sci. Transl.
Med. 11(514), eaax9487 (2019)
165. Li, J., Li, R., Du, H., et al.: Ultrathin, transferred layers of metal silicide as faradaic electrical
interfaces and bioﬂuid barriers for ﬂexible bioelectronic implants. ACS Nano 13(1), 660–670
(2019)

558
A. C. Patil and N. V. Thakor
166. Song, E., Li, J., Rogers, J.A.: Barrier materials for ﬂexible bioelectronic implants with
chronic stability–current approaches and future directions. APL Mater. 7(5), 050902
(2019)
167. Rogers, J.A., Fang, H., Jianing, Z., et al.: Encapsulated ﬂexible electronics for long-term
implantation. US Patent App. 16/162,613 (2020)
168. Shin, J., Yan, Y., Bai, W., et al.: Bioresorbable pressure sensors protected with thermally
grown silicon dioxide for the monitoring of chronic diseases and healing processes. Nat.
Biomed. Eng. 3(1), 37 (2019)
169. Phan, H.P., Zhong, Y., Nguyen, T.K., et al.: Long-lived, transferred crystalline silicon carbide
nanomembranes for implantable ﬂexible electronics. ACS Nano 13(10), 11572–11581 (2019)
170. Rogers, J.A., Khang, D.Y., Sun, Y., et al.: Stretchable form of single crystal silicon for high
performance electronics on rubber substrates. US Patent App. 16/272,488 (2020)
171. Shin, J., Liu, Z., Bai, W., et al.: Bioresorbable optical sensor systems for monitoring of
intracranial pressure and temperature. Sci. Adv. 5(7), eaaw1899 (2019)
172. Bai, W., Shin, J., Fu, R., et al.: Bioresorbable photonic devices for the spectroscopic
characterization of physiological status and neural activity. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 3, 644–654
(2019)
173. Donahue, M.J., Sanchez-Sanchez, A., Inal, S., et al.: Tailoring pedot properties for applica-
tions in bioelectronics. Mater. Sci. Eng. R. Rep. 140, 100546 (2020)
174. Harris, A.R., Wallace, G.G.: Organic electrodes and communications with excitable cells.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 28(12), 1700587 (2018)
175. Malliaras, G.: Interfacing with the brain using organic electronics. Bull. Am. Phys. Soc. 62
(2017)
176. Gao, D., Parida, K., Lee, P.S.: Emerging soft conductors for bioelectronic interfaces. Adv.
Funct. Mater. 30(29), 1907184 (2019)
177. Huang, X., Wang, L., Wang, H., et al.: Materials strategies and device architectures of
emerging power supply devices for implantable bioelectronics. Small 16(15), 1902827 (2020)
178. Wozny, T.A., Richardson, R.M.: The future of neural recording devices: Nanoscale, ﬂexible,
and injectable. Neurosurgery 77(6), N17–N19 (2015)
179. Hong, G., Lieber, C.M.: Novel electrode technologies for neural recordings. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 20(6), 330–345 (2019)
180. Patel, S.R., Lieber, C.M.: Precision electronic medicine in the brain. Nat. Biotechnol. 37(9),
1007–1012 (2019)
181. Lee, M., Shim, H.J., Choi, C., et al.: Soft high-resolution neural interfacing probes: Materials
and design approaches. Nano Lett. 19(5), 2741–2749 (2019)
182. Patil, A.C., Ze, X., Thakor, N.V.: Towards nontransient silk bioelectronics: engineering silk
ﬁbroin for bionic links. Small Methods 4, 2000274 (2020)
183. Yang, X., Zhou, T., Zwang, T.J., et al.: Bioinspired neuron-like electronics. Nat. Mater. 18(5),
510 (2019)
184. Woeppel, K., Yang, Q., Cui, X.T.: Recent advances in neural electrode–tissue interfaces. Curr.
Opin. Biomed. Eng. 4, 21–31 (2017)
185. Feiner, R., Dvir, T.: Tissue–electronics interfaces: from implantable devices to engineered
tissues. Nat. Rev. Mater. 3(1), 1–16 (2017)
186. Shoffstall, A.J., Srinivasan, S., Willis, M., et al.: A mosquito inspired strategy to implant
microprobes into the brain. Sci. Rep. 8(1):1–10 (2018)
187. Fujishiro, A., Kaneko, H., Kawashima, T., et al.: In vivo neuronal action potential recordings
via three-dimensional microscale needle-electrode arrays. Sci. Rep. 4, 4868 (2014)
188. Buzsáki, G., Stark, E., Berényi, A., et al.: Tools for probing local circuits: high-density silicon
probes combined with optogenetics. Neuron 86(1), 92–105 (2015)
189. Chen, R., Canales, A., Anikeeva, P.: Neural recording and modulation technologies. Nat. Rev.
Mater. 2(2), 1–16 (2017)
190. Won, S.M., Song, E., Zhao, J., et al.: Recent advances in materials, devices, and systems for
neural interfaces. Adv. Mater. 30 1800534 (2018)

Neuroﬂex: Intraneural and Extraneural Flexible Sensor Architectures for. . .
559
191. Lee, J.M., Hong, G., Lin, D., et al.: Nanoenabled direct contact interfacing of syringe-
injectable mesh electronics. Nano Lett. 19(8), 5818–5826 (2019)
192. Yamagishi, K., Nojiri, A., Iwase, E., et al.: Syringe-injectable, self-expandable, and ultracon-
formable magnetic ultrathin ﬁlms. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 11(44), 41770–41779 (2019)
193. Chen, Y., Zhang, Y., Liang, Z., et al.: Flexible inorganic bioelectronics. NPJ Flex. Electron.
4(1), 1–20 (2020)
194. Xie, C., Wang, X., He, H., et al.: Mussel-inspired hydrogels for self-adhesive bioelectronics.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 30, 1909954 (2020)
195. Won, S.M., Song, E., Reeder, J.T., et al.: Emerging modalities and implantable technologies
for neuromodulation. Cell 181(1), 115–135 (2020)
196. Cao, H., Coleman, T., Hsiai, T.K., et al.: Interfacing Bioelectronics and Biomedical Sensing.
Springer, Cham (2020)
197. Salatino, J.W., Ludwig, K.A., Kozai, T.D., et al.: Glial responses to implanted electrodes in
the brain. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 1(11), 862–877 (2017)
198. Chung, J.E., Joo, H.R., Fan, J.L., et al.: High-density, long-lasting, and multi-region electro-
physiological recordings using polymer electrode arrays. Neuron 101(1), 21–31 (2019)
199. Li, J., Li, R., Chiang, C.H., et al.: Ultrathin, high capacitance capping layers for silicon
electronics with conductive interconnects in ﬂexible, long-lived bioimplants. Adv. Mater.
Technol. 5(1), 1900800 (2020)
200. Chiang, C.H., Won, S.M., Orsborn, A.L., et al.: Development of a neural interface for high-
deﬁnition, long-term recording in rodents and nonhuman primates. Sci. Transl. Med. 12(538),
eaay4682 (2020)
201. Obidin, N., Tasnim, F., Dagdeviren, C.: The future of neuroimplantable devices: A materials
science and regulatory perspective. Adv. Mater. 32(15), 1901482 (2020)
202. Stieglitz, T.: Of man and mice: translational research in neurotechnology. Neuron 105(1),
12–15 (2020)

