E
Economic Thought in the Middle
Ages
GIOVANNI CECCARELLI
Dipartimento di Economia-Sezione di Scienze
Economiche
Facolta` di Economia
Universita` di Parma
Parma
Italy
Abstract
In the High Middle Ages, a distinctive Christian approach
to economics starts to take form in relation to ecclesiasti-
cal properties. A paradigm of unselﬁsh but productive use
of wealth is set, using poverty as a model. From the
eleventh century, canon law unfolds this broad paradigm
drawing on Roman law: a juridical condemnation of usury
is put forward which, however, is linked to derogations
grounded on nonlegal principles.
During the thirteenth century, theologians take the
lead in economic debates, inﬂuenced by two diverging
approaches. A doctrine of usury and a theory of just
price are developed, drawing on Aristotle. Loan on interest
is rationally condemned on the assumption that money is
sterile, economic exchange is explained as an objective
process guided by proportional reciprocity.
Debates on voluntary poverty, on the other hand,
reafﬁrm the importance of high-medieval conceptions.
Trade is described as an activity from which the commu-
nity derives beneﬁts, and the merchant’s wealth is seen as
the result of his status of expert trained in determining the
value of goods. Canon law exceptions, combined with
high-medieval emphasis on productivity, slowly under-
mine the usury doctrine. Credit provided by reputed
professionals or institutions (merchant-bankers, munici-
palities) is seen as productive and permitted, while usury
is associated with moneylenders.
The distinctiveness of the Christian approach emerges
in comparison with other traditions. Jewish conceptions,
developed within talmudic jurisprudence, rely on the idea
that money is a material object without productive poten-
tial. This rationale is used to explain prohibitions of usury
and to allow credit proﬁts in the form of loans on security.
Islamic tradition is heavily inﬂuenced by the predomi-
nance of religion. Economic issues, mainly discussed
within Islamic jurisprudence, are rarely considered in
purely philosophical terms. This leads to a distinctive
approach, condemning credit gains except if lenders suffer
the risk of losing their capital.
Strictly speaking, it is difﬁcult to claim the existence of
medieval economic thought. Though issues related to
economics are considered in a number of texts, these are
generally analyzed in the context of broader frameworks
that refer to theological, legal, and philosophical prob-
lems. In spite of the fact that medieval thinkers put for-
ward principles that in the long run will have an impact on
economic analysis, these concepts belong to the different
spheres (religious, legal, moral, etc.) in which they are
embedded. These ideas are also by-products of the lan-
guage in which they are described, a century-old vocabu-
lary that often takes form outside any concerns for
economy. Given the inﬂuence of religion, one needs to
take into account various economic traditions (Christian,
Jewish, and Islamic), overlapping at times but also pro-
foundly different. These traditions are not self-contained.
They often interact with other ones, for example, Greek
philosophy and Roman law. Such a complex frame needs,
thus, a multilevel investigation.
The economic vocabulary that takes form during the
Middle Ages goes back to the basic text of the Christian
tradition: the Bible. The Gospels, for instance, provide
a wide range of metaphors related to trade and money
that hint at a productive use of riches combined with
charitable redistribution. Perhaps one of the strongest
economic images is provided by the mystery of the Incar-
nation, by the choice made by God, inﬁnitely powerful
and wealthy, to become human, a decision that leads to the
apparent contradiction of a Christ who embraces poverty
while preserving his divine richness. This metaphor,
named the ‘‘sacred commerce,’’ reveals, as well as many
others (e.g., the parable of the talents and that of Jesus
feeding the ﬁve thousand), a crucial point: the dialectical
Henrik Lagerlund (ed.), Encyclopedia of Medieval Philosophy, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9729-4,
# Springer Science+Business Media B.V., 2011

relation between wealth and poverty, both in spiritual and
in material terms (Todeschini 2008b).
The ideas included in the Bible are further developed
by the fathers of the church. Stimulated by this tradition,
thinkers
like
Basil
of
Caesarea,
John
Chrysostom,
Ambrose of Milan, Saint Augustine, and many others do
address economic and social subjects. Charity is not seen
as goods and money going from the hands of the wealthy
to those of the needy, but it is considered as a complex
exchange through which the opposition between material
and spiritual wealth can be solved. Through the good use
of riches, exempliﬁed by charitable donations controlled
by ecclesiastical authority, the poor gain the material aid
that they need, while the rich earn salvation. Another
relevant contribution comes from the monastic experience
of the High Middle Ages. The choice of individual poverty
by monks aiming to follow the example of Christ is com-
bined with the collective possession of land by monaster-
ies. Moreover, monastic rules insist on good management
of these properties, since an efﬁcient system of exploita-
tion provides goods that are not only necessary for self-
consumption but also useful to relieve the poor in case of
need (Todeschini 2008a).
In the following centuries economic issues are discussed
in a number of writings, such as Carolingian laws, early
papal norms, local synods, and councils. Yet, it is in the
second half of the eleventh century, during the so-called
Gregorian reform, that these discussions are carried on
more systematically. The aim of this reform is primarily
political (i.e., to restore the principle of the church’s self-
government). Some relevant economic principles are, how-
ever, also put forward; possibly the most fruitful on theo-
retical grounds is that the church has a right to possess
goods and revenues. Such a statement implies a juridical
deﬁnition of what is ecclesiastical property, a deﬁnition that
is ﬁrst set by Peter Damian in a letter concerning episcopal
goods. This deﬁnition can be brieﬂy summarized in three
points: (1) The ecclesiastical patrimony is sacred and thus
inalienable; it can be increased but it cannot be reduced.
(2) The church is not the owner of this patrimony but
simply a manager of it on behalf of Christ and the poor.
(3) A productive use of this patrimony is to be considered
useful, since Christian society as a whole, and especially the
poor, will beneﬁt from such a use. It should be added that
the content of this letter, shortly after its publication (1051),
was embodied in ecclesiastical legislation (Todeschini 2004;
Ceccarelli 2006).
After the Gregorian reform, the Christian tradition is
ready to extend its vision from ecclesiastical institutions to
lay economy as well. During the second half of the twelfth
and the ﬁrst decades of the thirteenth centuries a relevant
contribution to this process comes from the expansion of
the church’s legislation. Two major works set the begin-
ning and the end of this period of intense juridical activity:
the Decretum, a selection of various ecclesiastical writings
(biblical passages, patristic works, papal norms, etc.) com-
piled around 1140 by the Camaldolese friar Gratian, and
the Liber extravagantium, a collection of papal decrees and
canons of general councils issued by Pope Gregory IX in
1234. In these texts issues emerging in the current ‘‘Com-
mercial Revolution’’ are discussed in the light of the Chris-
tian tradition, in speciﬁc sections (addressing to theft,
buying and selling, ﬁnancial activity, etc.). It should be
recalled, however, that in these juridical collections eco-
nomic issues are still mainly treated in connection to
clerics and the church, and that issues such as simony,
tithes, and ecclesiastical revenues continue to be widely
discussed (Todeschini 2008b; Ceccarelli 2006).
The ‘‘rediscovery’’ of Roman law starting at the end of
the eleventh century also gives a strong boost toward
a more theoretical approach. Besides opening a discussion
on the connection among existing juridical systems (civil
and canon legislation, natural and divine law, etc.), it
provides a set of legal deﬁnitions (i.e., contracts), princi-
ples, and terms in which the economic ideas embedded in
the Christian tradition could be organized. Furthermore,
it favors a wide-ranging work of interpretation by lawyers
in which canon and Roman law systems are often com-
bined together according to the principle of utriusque ius.
The relevance of these interpreters should not be
undervalued, since their inﬂuence is often comparable to
that of the main juridical texts, and in some cases their
comments will be included in the latter in the form of
ofﬁcial glosses. It is in this period that, under the inﬂuence
of law, the still jumbled tradition of the High Middle Ages
tends to evolve into more systematic reasoning, and the
ﬁrst technical deﬁnitions of concepts like usury and just
price start to take form.
Concerning usury, biblical prohibitions and their
high-medieval interpretation were to be taken into
account. While the Bible suggested a somewhat broad
juridical deﬁnition of usury, in patristic and Gregorian
texts this activity is rather described as antisocial conduct
(e.g., the tendency of hoarding wealth). If Gratian’s
Decretum describes usury as ‘‘to receive something in
excess of the principal’’ initially lent, the canon lawyer
Huguccio of Pisa, at the end of the twelfth century, pro-
vides a deﬁnition grounded on the formal distinction
between lease and loan contracts. While in the latter the
ownership of the loaned good passes to the borrower, in
the former such a transfer does not occur; therefore,
whereas the lessor can rightly claim a payment, a loan
284 E
Economic Thought in the Middle Ages

must be free of charge (otherwise it turns into usury).
Huguccio hints at a principle that will turn out to be
very successful in subsequent discussions: the use and
the ownership of money may not be separated (Langholm
1992; Ceccarelli 2006). This still embryonic theory of
usury is inﬂuential to the point that civil lawyers will
shift their discussion on credit agreements from the cate-
gory of loan to that of deposit contracts (Santarelli 1984).
In their quest for a deﬁnition of usury, ecclesiastical
law and canon lawyers enlarge the analysis to a broader set
of contracts: loans on security, partnerships, ‘‘life rents,’’
buying and selling on credit, dowries, etc. This way of
reasoning allows detection of many cases of ‘‘hidden
usury,’’ but also the discovery of several exceptions to the
prohibition of receiving something in excess of the capital:
12 in all, according to the renowned list provided by Henry
of Susa in the mid-thirteenth century. The rationale
behind these derogations has two basic features. One
(connected to the theories of the Gregorian reform) points
out that due to its special status the church could receive
something in excess of the capital. The other comes from
two Roman law principles, ‘‘loss occurring’’ (damnum
emergens) and ‘‘proﬁt ceasing’’ (lucrum cessans), which
allowed consideration of interest as a form of compensa-
tion. During the thirteenth century, canon lawyers will
cautiously start to combine these two features (i.e., status
and compensation) in order to explain why merchant-
bankers may claim the payment of interest without neces-
sarily being considered usurers (Ceccarelli 2006).
In this century, theologians gradually supersede jurists
in discussing economic issues. Initially included in major
theological genres (such as Summae, commentaries on
the Sentences of Peter Lombard, quodlibetal questions),
by the last decades of the century economic discussions are
also addressed in speciﬁc writings devoted to buying and
selling, usury, and restitution of disreputable gains.
Though scholastic reasoning does not create legal norms,
the great authoritativeness enjoyed by theologians leaves
a strong mark on the Christian tradition of economics.
A good example can be found in penitential handbooks
that, from the late thirteenth century, aimed at populariz-
ing theological teaching through confession in order to
bring the rules of Christian economic conduct to the
masses (Langholm 2003).
Besides canon law and its interpretation, theological
reasoning concerned with economics has two basic points
of reference: Aristotle and voluntary poverty. In the
Nicomachean Ethics and in the Politics, translated in
Latin in the mid-thirteenth century, theologians ﬁnd
a language and a logical framework suitable for describing
medieval economy both on technical and moral grounds.
Starting with Albert the Great, scholastic thinkers can
draw on Aristotle for a number of concepts: the distinction
between commutative and distributive justice; the just
price as the benchmark to follow in exchange; the idea
that money measures the value of goods and hence in itself
is not productive (Langholm 1992; Kaye 1998). Greek
philosophy’s inﬂuence is even greater regarding the
approach followed, since it fosters efforts to explain in
rational terms biblical prohibitions and canon law rulings.
This leads scholastic thinkers to develop the so-called
theories of usury and of the just price, in an attempt to
provide a synthesis between Aristotle’s teachings and reli-
gious doctrines (Langholm 1984).
Another relevant, and usually underestimated, stimu-
lus comes from the issue of poverty in which some of the
major scholastic thinkers of the thirteenth century are
involved: Bonaventura of Bagnoregio, Thomas Aquinas,
John Pecham, Peter John Olivi, etc. Dominicans and
Franciscans, in order to defend their vow of mendicancy,
are forced to deﬁne what poverty is in either theological,
juridical, or economic terms. Drawing on the principles of
the Gregorian reform (i.e., individual poverty, common
property, and productive management of it), the writings
in defense of voluntary mendicancy stress the importance
of how material goods are used. This emphasis is rather
common, but it is particularly clear among Franciscans,
whose rule forbids even collective property, claiming the
right to use goods without possessing them. In short, the
issue of poverty leads to a thorough analysis on subjective
needs, and on the ways to evaluate material goods, that
will have an incidental but substantial fallout on ideas
concerning wealth and proﬁt. As a matter of fact during
the last decades of the thirteenth century many of these
concepts ﬂow into writings devoted to lay economy. This
explains why the great majority of scholastic thinkers who
address economic issues come from the ranks of the
Dominican and Franciscan orders. Their judgment of
individual enrichment is related to poverty, just as much
as it is to the Gospels, canon law and Aristotle (Lambertini
1994–1997; Piron 2001; Todeschini 2008b).
Drawing on patristic teachings, theologians argue that
the Edenic condition of common property was altered by
the fall of man. Private ownership is considered a by-
product of positive law and political institutions, yet scho-
lastic thinkers generally agree that it may be revoked only
under exceptional circumstances, namely, extreme eco-
nomic need. With private wealth taken for granted, theo-
logical writings may focus on how gains are generated in
economic transactions (Langholm 1992; Wood 2002).
A signiﬁcant section of scholastic thought thus deals
with trade and the proﬁts that derive from it. By the
Economic Thought in the Middle Ages E
285
E

mid-thirteenth century, the unfavorable view of trade
based on the biblical episode of Christ’s eviction of the
merchants from the Temple is replaced by a positive image
of commerce that stressed its social usefulness. Among
Franciscan in particular, merchants are depicted as pro-
fessionals who satisfy the needs of a community by
transporting goods from a region in which there is an
abundance to another in which there is scarcity. The
peak of this line of reasoning can be found in John Duns
Scotus, who argues that where there is a lack of merchants,
rulers should promote policies to attract them, in order to
support the economic well-being of the state (Langholm
1992; Wood 2002; Todeschini 2008b).
Theologians also try to establish why a merchant may
buy a commodity at a certain price and resell it at a higher
one. These discussions are inﬂuenced by three different
traditions: (a) Aristotle’s commutative justice, which
suggested that a criterion of proportional reciprocity
should be followed in exchange, thanks to a medium
able to measure the value of goods (i.e., money); (b)
Roman
law,
which
establishes
that
the
cost
of
a commodity is determined by free bargaining, as long as
it does not exceed by half the price normally ﬁxed in the
marketplace (principle of laesio enormis); (c) the fathers of
the church who teach that an object’s value depends on its
subjective utility and that only those who have a good
reputation
are
to
be
allowed
in
the
marketplace
(Langholm 1992; Kaye 1998).
It is only in the thirteenth century that, strictly speak-
ing, the debate about just price gets started. Although
scholastic thinkers do acknowledge that objective factors
– such as supply, demand, and production costs – have
a direct incidence on prices, the idea of just price relies
heavily on a subjective conception of value. A good exam-
ple is provided by Peter John Olivi who, around 1290,
argues that a good’s economic value is dependent on its
utility, either subjective (complacibilitas) or objective
(virtuositas), and on its scarcity (raritas), but also on
labor, expenses, and risks (labor, expensae, periculi) that
individuals undergo during its production and commer-
cialization (Langholm 1992; Todeschini 2008b).
According to theologians, the number of features that
need to be taken into account during the exchange does
not allow precise determination of a just price; therefore,
such a measure may ﬂuctuate within a wide range of
values (latitudo). This concept, derived from the debate
on voluntary poverty, overcomes the problem, still
unsolved in Thomas Aquinas, of the strict equivalence
between exchanged goods claimed by divine law. By the
end of the century many theologians put forward the idea
that the just price must be seen in the light of positive law,
a framework in which a geometrical, and thus unbalanced,
notion of justice is possible. In John Duns Scotus, for
example,
the
perfect
equivalence
between
things
exchanged claimed by divine law (equivalentia rei et rei)
is replaced by a latitude of values by referring to positive
law (Kaye 1998; Piron 2001).
In practical terms the issue appears to be less compli-
cated, since the just price tends to equal the one deter-
mined by the marketplace in normal conditions. In order
to explain an equivalence as such, scholastic thinkers
adopt an expression – ‘‘common estimation’’ (communis
aestimatio) – that has a twofold signiﬁcance. On the one
side, it may be considered as the result of supply and
demand in its entirety, suggesting thus the idea of
a supra-personal and self-regulated process (Langholm
1992; Kaye 1998). On the other side, ‘‘common estima-
tion’’ refers to the price settled by those individuals that
the ‘‘market community’’ acknowledges as public profes-
sionals of commerce. For instance, according to Henry of
Ghent it is the fully experienced merchant (expertissimus
mercator) who marks the just price of a commodity in the
marketplace, and not the other way around; determining
thus, through his professional skills (industria), the just
value of a good (Todeschini 2008b).
When discussing issues related to credit and usury,
theologians have to deal with a frame in which the
overlapping teachings of religion, law, and philosophy
interact with everyday economic life. Usury is thus
a complex phenomenon: it is a sin condemned by the
Bible (i.e., divine law); it can be broadly seen as an
improper use of wealth, as it was during the Gregorian
reform, or strictly deﬁned on juridical grounds, as canon
lawyers do; it can be considered on its own, but it usually
involves different contracts and contracting parties;
ﬁnally, following Aristotle, it may also be explained in
rational terms.
Focussing on this latter feature, it must be acknowl-
edged that scholastic thinkers during the thirteenth and
fourteenth centuries spare no effort to work out the so-
called doctrine of usury. In order to prove, in rational
terms, that usury is not only a sin, but also against nature,
a number of arguments are elaborated. Some are logically
weak and quickly rejected, but others receive long-lasting
approval. Drawing on canon law, theologians pick up the
idea that in a loan property passes to the borrower and
thus that it is unjust for the lender to ask for interest. Many
arguments refer to the principle, inferred from Aristotle,
that money in itself bears no fruit and that, therefore,
it is unreasonable to claim a compensation for its use.
Another successful argument is that of ‘‘economic duress,’’
by which scholastic thinkers mean that a needy borrower
286 E
Economic Thought in the Middle Ages

does not fully consent to pay for a loan (Langholm 1984,
1992; Wood 2002).
This theoretical framework does not conclude the theo-
logical debate on usury, but it has to coexist with several
other points of view that tend to undermine its basis. Like
canon lawyers, theologians are concerned with those cases
in which payment of interests is not assimilated to usury.
While the principle of ‘‘loss occurring’’ is rapidly accepted,
that of ‘‘proﬁt ceasing’’ is more controversial, but by the end
of the thirteenth century it ﬁnds a good number of sup-
porters, especially among Franciscans (Langholm 1992).
Exceptions do not only refer to juridical abstractions
but more commonly are inspired by everyday life. Scho-
lastic thought widely acknowledges a peculiar status to
a prominent ﬁgure of the late-medieval economy, the
multispecialized businessman devoted to trade, banking
activity, and textile manufacturing. This entrepreneur,
whom theologians name mercator, responds to the
model of good management and productive use of wealth
propounded by the church, since he prefers to reinvest
proﬁts rather than hoarding them. As Peter John Olivi
argues, money borrowed or lent by such businessmen
ceases to be a barren measure of value and becomes
a productive capital. Following this approach, in the four-
teenth century, the Catalan theologian Francis Eixemenis
can state, without putting the doctrine of usury in doubt,
that merchants may sell the use of their money (Ceccarelli
2001; Piron 2001; Todeschini 2008a).
The emphasis on contracting parties’ status is favored
by a shift in ecclesiastical legislation starting in late thir-
teenth century. Canon law leaves aside the contracts in
which usury can be found and focuses on those who
commit this sin, heavily condemning a speciﬁc profes-
sional category: public money-lenders. During the four-
teenth century, theologians are still concerned with the
technicalities of usury but they also devote great attention
to a feature like the public reputation of the contracting
parties (Ceccarelli 2006; Todeschini 2008b).
Another element complicating the picture comes from
the discussion of annuities, a widespread type of loan on
interest that was the result of a sale combined with usu-
fruct of real estate (a parcel of land, a mill, a house). In the
last decades of the thirteenth century theologians reject
the idea that such a contract amounts to usury and instead
make a distinction between money and the right to receive
money. Such a distinction bypasses many arguments
concerning the doctrine of usury, yet it does not lead to
its dismissal (Langholm 1992; Kaye 1998; Wood 2002).
It may appear to be the by-product of a formalistic way of
reasoning, typical of scholasticism, but as a matter of fact
it is connected to the economic paradigm developed
during the Gregorian reform. While canon lawyers limited
this type of credit to ecclesiastical institutions, theologians
like Godfrey of Fontaines and Geral of Abbeville deem it
extendable to laymen. Not surprisingly, during the four-
teenth century, the sale of a right to receive money is
adopted by some theologians to support an emerging
form of institutional credit: public debt (Armstrong
1999; Todeschini 2008b).
A ﬁnal feature that has to be considered derives from
the Franciscan claim to use goods without possessing
them. By shifting this idea from the realm of poverty to
that of proﬁt, John Duns Scotus suggests that the use and
ownership of money may in some cases be separated,
implicitly putting in doubt a basic argument of the ratio-
nal condemnation of usury. This argument is seldom
adopted, yet it may explain why, around 1320, two Fran-
ciscans, Gerard Odonis and Francis of Meyronnes, state
that usury can only be condemned on the basis of the
Bible, since no rational arguments prove that it is unjust
(Langholm 1992; Ceccarelli 2006).
The Christian tradition is not the only one which has
addressed economics. It is possible to ﬁnd evidences of
economic reasoning in medieval Jewish and Islamic
sources as well. As in the previous case, religion is signif-
icant to the point that it is possible to consider two distinct
economic conceptions that are typical of Islamic and Jew-
ish tradition.
The latter one is grounded on the Talmud, a juridical
text of the third century in which the broad economic
prescriptions of the Torah are presented in a systematic
form. From the eighth century, this source (in which
religious and legal realms are strictly related) undergoes
a process of revision through the two main genres of
Jewish jurisprudence. Rabbinic advices on speciﬁc issues
(responsa or teshuvot), allow interpretation of the Talmud’s
general norms in the light of the economic context of the
communities of the diaspora. Talmudic commentaries
expand economic reasoning by explaining and elucidating
its juridical content. This latter approach reaches its
highest point with Maimonides’ Mishne Torah (1178–
1180), in which Aristotelian teachings are used to review
the Jewish tradition and to provide an updated set of
economic
rules
(Ohrenstein
and
Gordon
1992;
Soloveitchik 2005).
Notwithstanding Aristotle’s inﬂuence, the distinctive
feature of talmudic jurisprudence lies in a material con-
ception of money. Being considered only as a metal object,
money is seen as an unreliable tool in establishing the
value of commodities. In the exchange process, the price
of money is determined by the quantity of goods that it
allows one to purchase, and not the other way around.
Economic Thought in the Middle Ages E
287
E

This approach, which basically denies any abstract or
productive
meaning
to
money,
does
not
affect
a substantially favorable opinion as to economic exchange
and trade. Although buying and selling are seen as an
extension of barter (in which monetary prices have only
a surrogate function), prices established by market trans-
actions are generally considered to be just. On the mar-
ketplace the commodity embodies, in monetary terms,
both objective factors (labor and costs) and individual
judgments concerning its usefulness. On the same basis,
investments in commercial ventures (iska) can determine
a proﬁt for the lender, since this gain is determined not by
the money lent, but by the merchandises exchanged
(Ohrenstein and Gordon 1992).
The talmudic conception of money is crucial to under-
stand the way credit contracts are dealt with in the Jewish
tradition. Drawing on the Torah, the Talmud forbids both
usury (neschek) and lending on interest (tarbith) among
Jews, while it allows them when the counterparts are
foreigners. In general terms, rabbinic advices and talmudic
commentaries connect these prescriptions to the religious
obligation of communal solidarity. Yet they also explain
them on juridical-economic grounds. The payment of
interest is forbidden since it is impossible to establish the
price of money in abstract terms, that is, without an
immediate relation to other goods. On the contrary,
such value can be determined when the money lent is
related to commodities by means of a pledge on
a borrower’s property that, in case of default, passes to
the lender. This logical frame is employed by medieval
talmudic jurisprudence to develop a multifaceted system
of credit structured on a number of contracts: double sale,
deposit,
mortgage
loan,
and
simple
pawnbroking
(Soloveitchik 2005). This approach is not only revealing
as to the uniqueness of this tradition, it may also explain
the growing hostility towards Jewish moneylending
expressed in Christian writings (Todeschini 2004).
From the eighth to the fourteenth century a number of
Muslim thinkers are engaged in discussing economic
issues, in particular within the Sunni tradition. The most
inﬂuential contributions come from two well-deﬁned, but
different genres. The ﬁrst is Islamic juridical literature, and
it follows a peculiar approach: a case by case analysis,
on the basis of agreement among diverging opinions
and reasoning by analogy, which leaves little space for
theory. These texts aim at determining whether contracts
are consistent with the Islamic law (sharı¯’a), that is,
the teachings of the Qurʾa¯n and the Sunna, integrated
by the interpretation (ﬁqh) provided by the leading
Sunni legal schools. The second genre is that of the polit-
ical–philosophical treatises, mainly in the form of
‘‘Mirrors for Princes.’’ It is inﬂuenced by the Aristotelian
tradition of the oikonomika (the ‘‘science of household
administration’’) and thus opened to a broader theoretical
reasoning (Ghazanfar 2003).
Differences also concern the topics that are addressed:
while jurisprudence deals with credit activity, political
philosophy focuses on merchants and trade. Such parti-
tion is determined by Islamic law prohibitions concerning
economy: riba¯’ (broadly identiﬁable with lending on inter-
est), h:ara¯m (commerce of impure goods), and g˙arar
(selling of risk). By the eleventh century, jurists (especially
in the prevailing Hanaﬁte school), supported by the
ʿAbba¯sid caliphs who favored the merging of Islamic
and civil law, obtain full jurisdiction on these issues. The
results of these processes are signiﬁcant in economic dis-
cussions: (a) they deeply interconnect religious and legal
spheres; (b) they exclude theological–philosophical rea-
soning from juridical interpretation (Johansen 1999).
Discussions on credit are thus developed focusing on
single types of contracts to determine whether riba¯’ or
g˙arar are involved. Since these bans were not originally
set in juridical terms, the judgment provided by legal
experts is not only dependent on the formal structure of
contracts but also on other elements (e.g., the kind of
commodity). Along with a general disapproval of loans
on interest, and an unfavorable opinion of credit sales,
a number of particular cases and diverging opinions tend
to coexist. There are rare attempts to ﬁnd a rational basis
of the prohibitions. Some, like al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ (1058–1111) and
Averroes (1126–1198), echoing Aristotle, argue that they
derive from a broader ban to sell goods (e.g., money,
provisions, etc.) that are used as a medium in economic
exchange. Others, like Ibn Qayyim (1292–1350), state that
they aim at safeguarding economically those who are in
need from exploitation (Vogel and Hayes 1998).
The most common rational explanation put forward
by Abu¯ Da¯wu¯d and Ibn Ma¯ja during the ninth century
claims that the prohibitions condemn riskless gains. It is
drawn from juridical discussions of commercial partner-
ship contracts (mudaraba), in which the lender is entitled
to receive a share of proﬁt as long as he is liable for the
invested capital. This rationale is highly inﬂuential, and it
is adopted to argue in favor of several types of agreements
in which capital and labor are involved, well beyond the
realm of trade investment. It also fosters a peculiar
approach concerning risk, setting a distinction between
reasonably foreseeable events from which it is possible to
proﬁt, and highly unpredictable occurrences whose eco-
nomic exploitation is forbidden by g˙arar. The link
between capital liability and credit proﬁts can be consid-
ered the most distinctive feature of the Islamic tradition. It
288 E
Economic Thought in the Middle Ages

allows development of a conception of ﬁnance consistent
with religious and legal teachings, in which principles such
as ‘‘loss occurring’’ and ‘‘proﬁt ceasing’’ are not needed
(Voegel and Hayes 1998).
Besides considering partnership contracts as standard
trading techniques, and reasserting that riba¯’ is forbidden
by Islamic law, the political–philosophical literature sel-
dom addresses credit activities. Money is generally seen as
the medium that allows measurement of the value of
goods, yet this argument is never considered in relation
to the prohibition of riba¯’. This lack of interest is
counterweighted by a wide-ranging acknowledgment of
marketplace functioning and by a favorable opinion of
wealth derived from commerce. Drawing on al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s
moral justiﬁcation of trade proﬁts, political–philosophical
treatises explain price increase in terms of a compensation
for labor, costs, and risks suffered by merchants. The
interplay between supply and demand as price determi-
nants is fully described in the twelfth century by al-
Dimashqı¯, al-Dı¯n al-T˙u¯sı¯, and later further developed by
Ibn Khaldu¯n (1332–1406). The latter even provides rele-
vant insights concerning consumption by distinguishing
between the satisfaction of necessities and the desire of
conveniences. However, ‘‘Mirrors for Princes’’ do not
emphasize the role of merchants in Muslim society, and
seldom refer to trade as an activity that can increase the
economic well-being of the community (Ghazanfar 2003).
See also: ▶Albert the Great ▶Canon Law ▶Church
Fathers ▶Francis of Meyronnes ▶al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, Abu¯ H˙ a¯mid
Muh:ammad ▶Gerard Odonis ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad
ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) ▶John Duns Scotus
▶John Pecham ▶Natural Law ▶Natural Rights ▶Peter
Damian ▶Peter John Olivi ▶Peter Lombard ▶Poverty
▶Thomas Aquinas
Bibliography
Primary Sources
(1922) Corpus Iuris Canonici, 2 vols, ed. Friedberg A. Bernard Tauchnitz,
Leipzig
(1935–1948) The Babylonian Talmud, 35 vols, ed. Epstein I et al. Soncino,
London
al-Dimashqı¯ Jafar (1917) Kitab al-Ishara ila Mahasin al-Tijara. In:
Ritter H (ed) Ein Arabisches Handbuch de Handelswissenschaft.
Der Islam 7:1–19
Aquinas Thomas (1895) Summa theologiae, ii–ii. In: Thomas Aquinas,
Opera omnia, vol 8. Rome
Duns Scotus John (2001) Opus oxoniensis, IV, 15. In: Wolter AB (ed)
Duns Scotus political and economic philosophy. The Franciscan
Institute, St. Bonaventure
Henry of Ghent (1979) Opera omnia, vol 5, ed. Macken R. Leuven
University Press, Leuven
Henry of Susa (1574) Summa aurea. Venice
Ibn Khaldun (1958) “The Muquaddimah”: an introduction to history,
3 vols. Pantheon, New York
Ibn Rushd (2000) The distinguished jurist’s primer: Bidayat alMujtahid,
2 vols, ed. Ahsan Khan Nyazee I, Abdul Rauf M. Garnet, Reading
Maimonides (1988–2002) Mishneh Torah, 26 vols, ed. Tougher E.
Moznam, New York/Jerusalem
Odonis Gerald (2009) Tractatus de contractibus, Quaestio 13. In:
Ceccarelli G, Piron S (eds) Gerald Odonis’ Economics Treatise.
Vivarium 47:164–204
Olivi Peter (1980) Tractatus de emptionibus et venditionibus, de usuris,
de restitutionibus, ed. Todeschini G. Istituto Storico Italiano per il
Medio Evo, Rome
Raymond of Pen˜afort (1976) Summa de paenitentia, ed. Ochoa X, Diez A.
Commentarium pro religiosis, Rome
Secondary Sources
Armstrong L (1999) The politics of usury in Trecento Florence:
the Questio de monte of Francesco da Empoli. Medieval Stud
61:1–44
Ceccarelli G (2001) Risky business. Theological and canonical thought on
insurance from the thirteenth to the seventeenth century. J Mediev
Early Mod Stud 31(3):602–652
Ceccarelli G (2006) Whatever economics’: economic thought in
Quodlibeta. In: Schabel C (ed) Theological Quodlibeta in the Middle
Ages: the thirteenth century. Brill, Leiden, pp 475–505
Ghazanfar SM (ed) (2003) Medieval Islamic economic thought: ﬁlling the
great gap in European economics. Routledge, London
Johansen B (1999) Contingency in a sacred law: legal and ethical norms in
the Muslim Fiqh. Brill, Leiden
Kaye J (1998) Economy and nature in the fourteenth century: money,
market exchange, and the emergence of scientiﬁc thought. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge
Lambertini R (1994–1997) Usus and usura: poverty and usury in the
Franciscans’ responses to John XXII’s Quia vir reprobus. Francisc
Stud 54:185–210
Langholm O (1984) The Aristotelian analysis of usury. Universitet-
forlaget, Bergen
Langholm O (1992) Economics in the medieval schools. Wealth,
exchange, value, money and usury, according to the Paris theological
tradition, 1200–1350. Brill, Leiden
Langholm O (2003) The merchant in the confessional. Trade and price in
the pre-Reformation Penitential handbooks. Brill, Leiden
Ohrenstein RA, Gordon B (1992) Economic analysis in Talmudic litera-
ture. Rabbinic thought in the light of modern economics. Brill,
Leiden
Piron S (2001) Perfection e´vange´lique et moralite´ civile: Pierre de Jean
Olivi et l’e´thique e´conomique franciscaine. In: Molina B, Scarcia
G (eds) Ideologia del credito fra Tre e Quattrocento: dall’Astesano
ad Angelo da Chivasso. Centro Studi sui Lombardi e sul credito nel
Medioevo, Asti, pp 103–143
Santarelli U (1984) La categoria dei contratti irregolari. Giappichelli,
Torino
Soloveitchik H (2005) The Jewish attitude in the high and late Middle
Ages (1000–1500). In: Quaglioni D, Todeschini G, Varanini GM (eds)
Credito e usura fra teologia, diritto e amministrazione. Linguaggi
a confronto (secc. XII–XIV). E´cole Franc¸aise de Rome, Rome, pp
115–127
Todeschini G (2004) Franciscan economics and Jews in the Middle Ages:
from a theological to an economic lexicon. In: McMichael SJ, Myers
SE (eds) Friars and Jews in the Middle Ages and Renaissance. Brill,
Leiden, pp 99–117
Economic Thought in the Middle Ages E
289
E

Todeschini G (2008a) Theological roots of the medieval/modern merchants’
self-representation. In: Jacob MC, Secretan C (eds) The self-perception
of early modern capitalists. Palgrave-MacMillan, New York, pp 17–46
Todeschini G (2008b) Richesse franciscaine. De la pauvrete´ volontaire a` la
socie´te´ de marche´. Verdier, Paris (forthcoming English translation)
Vogel FE, Hayes SL III (1998) Islamic law and ﬁnance: religion, risk, and
return. Brill, Leiden
Wood D (2002) Medieval economic thought. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge
Emotions
SIMO KNUUTTILA
Faculty of Theology
University of Helsinki
Helsinki
Finland
Abstract
Two basic ancient approaches to emotions were the com-
positional theory of Plato and Aristotle and the Stoic
judgement theory. Ancient philosophical theories were
employed in early Christian discussions of sin and spiritual
experiences. The most inﬂuential theological themes were
the monastic idea of supernaturally caused feelings and
Augustine’s analysis of the relations between the emotions
and the will. Early medieval Latin discussions were formed
by the reception of ancient themes through monastic,
theological,
medical,
and
philosophical
literature.
Avicennian faculty psychology strongly inﬂuenced early
thirteenth-century theories of the nature and taxonomy
of emotions. Albert the Great and Thomas Aquinas com-
bined Avicennian and Aristotelian themes. Aquinas’
account of emotions in his Summa theologiae was the
most extensive medieval contribution to the subject. The
increasing interest in psychological voluntarism led many
Franciscan authors to abandon the traditional view that
emotions belonged only to the lower psychosomatic level.
John Duns Scotus, William Ockham, and their followers
argued that there were also emotions of the will, such as
the unpremeditated acts of complacence and dislike and
the moods of pleasure or distress – ideas which Adam
Wodeham developed into the direction of Stoic cognitive
theory. Aquinas’ taxonomy of emotions and Scotus’ anal-
ysis of the emotions of the will were the medieval theories
which continued to inﬂuence early modern discussions.
The medieval psychology of emotions was essentially
based on ancient sources. The new developments included
the discussion of emotions as part of the Avicennian
faculty psychology, thirteenth-century systematic taxon-
omies, and late medieval reevaluations of the sharp divide
between the emotions and the will.
The philosophical analysis of emotions (passions) was
introduced by Plato and developed further by Aristotle,
who distinguished between four basic components of an
occurrent emotion. First, the ‘‘cognitive’’ element is an
unpremeditated evaluation that something positive or
negative is happening or may happen to the subject or to
someone else in a way that is relevant to the subject.
Second, the ‘‘affective’’ element is a pleasant or unpleasant
feeling about the content of the evaluation. Third, the
‘‘dynamic’’ element is a behavioral impulse toward action
typically associated with the actual emotion. Fourth, there
are typical ‘‘physiological’’ reactions.
This compositional approach has been very inﬂuential
in western thought. As for the ﬁrst element, practically all
ancient and medieval theories were cognitive, associating
some kind of evaluation with an emotion. While the Stoics
argued that emotions were basically false judgments of the
rational soul, it was more usual to follow Plato and
Aristotle, who distinguished between the nonemotional
intellectual power and the lower emotional parts. This was
the prevailing medieval view until John Duns Scotus
introduced the conception of passions of the intellectual
faculty of the will.
Plato and Aristotle taught that emotions were
noneliminable psychosomatic reactions of an emotional
part of the soul, which was divided into concupiscible and
irascible powers. The Stoics argued that emotions were
eliminable value judgements by which people mistakenly
evaluated things from their subjective perspective. They
divided emotions into four basic types, depending on
whether the object was evaluated as a present or future
good or a present or future evil:
This classiﬁcation was quoted in many popular works,
such as Boethius’ Consolatio philosophiae, and was gener-
ally known in medieval times. The best-known part of
Stoic philosophy is the philosophical therapy of emotions
(therapeia) described in works by Cicero, Seneca, and
Epictetus. Stoic therapy aimed at apatheia, the extirpation
of emotions. The Stoic therapy was cognitive because
Emotions. Table 1 The four basic emotions of the Stoics
Time
Present
Future
Value
Good
Pleasure
Desire
Evil
Distress
Fear
290 E
Emotions

emotions were regarded as false judgements. Other Helle-
nistic philosophers mostly followed Plato and Aristotle,
arguing for the moderation of emotions (metriopatheia)
– apatheia was regarded as impossible and inhuman.
While Plato and his followers stressed the control and
shrinking of emotions by the intellect, Aristotle also
taught the ediﬁcation of emotions as part of the good
life and the importance of learning to feel right. Plotinus
argued for apatheia, though this did not involve the
disappearance of the emotional part – earthly emotions
became useless in higher Neoplatonic spheres.
The Alexandrian theologians Clemens and Origen
combined Stoic and Platonist ideas, arguing that freedom
from emotion was part of Christian perfectibility and the
precondition of divinization through participation in
divine love (agape). This mystical union was described in
highly emotional language, but supranaturally caused
spiritual feelings, as experiences of the apathetic soul,
were not called emotions. John Cassian made this combi-
nation of divine love with freedom from mundane emo-
tions known in western monasticism. The Cappadocian
fathers and Augustine, in contrast, were more inclined to
metriopatheia. Monastic psychology also made use of the
originally Stoic doctrine of ﬁrst movements, which Ori-
gen, followed by Augustine and many others, applied to
the Christian conception of sin. The Stoic idea, described
by Seneca in On Anger (2.1–4), was that even apathetic
people might react quasi-emotionally on exceptional
occasions, but this was not really an emotion because it
did not involve judgemental assent. Augustine taught that
sinful thoughts which frequently occurred because of orig-
inal sin became sins through assent. This was later devel-
oped into a detailed theory of the modes of assent as the
degrees of venial and mortal sin. The monastic literature
on mystical ascent also developed introspective analysis of
subjective feeling, which Bernard of Clairvaux called the
sense of being affected by divine action.
In early medieval times, a new nonreligious impulse
to analyze emotions was supplied by Latin translations of
some philosophical and medical works. One of these was
the late eleventh-century partial translation of the Arabic
medical encyclopedia of ‘Alı¯ ibn al-‘Abba¯s al-Mag˙u¯sı¯, the
Pantegni, which contained various remarks on the emo-
tions based on Galen’s medical philosophy. Some ele-
ments of ancient medical and philosophical theories of
emotions were also included in the translations of
Nemesius of Emesa’s De natura hominis from the late
fourth century and John Damascene’s De ﬁde orthodoxa
from the eighth century. An important psychological
source book was the translation of the sixth book of
Avicenna’s Shifa¯’, often called Avicenna’s De anima.
Aristotle’s De anima, which became the principal textbook
in the middle of the thirteenth century, was translated c.
1150 by James of Venice.
The medical theory of the emotions concentrated on
the Galenic ideas of the humors and the system of the
spirits, the vitalizing spirits in the heart and the psychic
spirits in the nerves and the brain. In the Pantegni, the
physical aspects of the emotions were dealt with as slow or
quick movements of the vital spirits toward the heart or
away from it. This led to a popular medical classiﬁcation
of emotions:
Avicenna divides the faculties of the sensory soul into
apprehensive powers and moving powers. The apprehen-
sive powers involve ﬁve external senses and ﬁve internal
senses. The moving powers are divided into commanding
and executive powers. Emotions are acts of the sensory
commanding moving power, triggered by occurrent eval-
uations by estimative powers and accompanied by bodily
affections and behavioral changes. The moving power of
the intellectual soul is the will which, together with prac-
tical intellect, should control the emotions. The sensory
commanding faculty is divided into the concupiscible and
the irascible. The reactions of the concupiscible power are
desires for things taken to be pleasurable and the reactions
of the irascible power are desires to defeat adversaries and
repel things regarded as harmful. Avicenna also analyzed
feelings as pleasant or unpleasant perceptions associated
with estimative and moving acts. An inﬂuential part of his
theory was that the estimative power moves the com-
manding power by noticing the helpful and harmful
aspects of things, which are called ‘‘intentions.’’ As an
occurrent emotion involves the acts of two separate pow-
ers, there must be some kind of governing awareness
which combines these two acts.
Many authors employed the Avicennian view of emo-
tions, one problem of which was that classiﬁcation of
emotions into those of concupiscible and irascible powers
did not unproblematically correspond with Aristotle’s
view that these powers had contrary acts. An inﬂuential
new taxonomic idea introduced to solve this problem in
the 1230s was that the objects of the contrary concupisci-
ble acts were simply pleasurable or painful, and the objects
Emotions. Table 2 The medical classification of the emotions
Direction
Centrifugal
Centripetal
Intensity
Slow
Joy
Distress
Quick
Anger
Fear
Emotions E
291
E

of the irascible acts were in addition arduous, difﬁcult to
obtain or to avoid. (Early examples of this terminology are
found in the anonymous treatises De anima et potentiis
eius and De potentiis animae et obiectis.)
The most detailed early thirteenth-century classiﬁca-
tion was developed in John of la Rochelle’s Summa de
anima. He regarded emotions as the acts of two moving
powers, the concupiscible and irascible, both of which
have several reaction types divided into contrary pairs.
The concupiscible pairs are associated with contrary dis-
positions of liking (placentia) or disliking (displicentia)
and irascible emotions with strength (corroboratio) and
weakness (debilitas). The new systematic idea was to use
these dispositions of feeling and behavior reactions as
classiﬁcatory principles. The contrary emotions of the
concupiscible power are classiﬁed as follows:
Of irascible emotions with the ‘‘arduous and difﬁcult
objects’’ ambition and hope (spes) pertain to future
honor and prosperity, hope involving the belief that
they will be achieved. The opposites are poverty of spirit
and despair. Three emotions, pride, lust for power, and
contempt, are associated with attempts to strengthen
one’s social ranking and power. The opposite of pride
and lust for power is humility, and the opposite of con-
tempt is reverence. Of the acts directed toward evil
things, courage is a desire to meet the enemy with con-
ﬁdence, anger is a desire for revenge, and magnanimity is
rising up against evil. Three forms of the ﬂight from evil
are somehow opposites of courage: penitence toward
past evil things, impatience with present evil things,
and fear of future evil things.
Also following Avicenna’s faculty psychology, Albert
the Great and Thomas Aquinas treated emotions as acts of
the sensory moving powers. While Albert employed the
classiﬁcations of Nemesius of Emesa and John Damascene,
Thomas Aquinas put forward a new taxonomy which
was probably inﬂuenced by John of la Rochelle. Albert
argued that emotions should be regarded as qualities as
Aristotle
described
them
in
Categories 8. Aquinas
defended the traditional characterization of them as
movements of the soul, ﬁnding the basic classiﬁcatory
principles of emotions in Aristotle’s doctrine of contrary
movements in Physics V.5.
In
discussing
emotions
in
Summa
theologiae
II–1.22–48, Aquinas ﬁrst divided them in terms of objects:
the concupiscible emotions react to what seems good or
evil at the sensory level, whereas the irascible emotions
react to arduous sense-good and sense-evil. The sensory
moving faculties are activated by objects through cogni-
tion, and the modes of the resulting emotional move-
ments
serve
as
further
qualiﬁcations
in
deﬁning
particular emotions. The Aristotelian contraries of move-
ments are of two types: approach to something and
retreat from it, or movements associated with contrary
endpoints. The contrary movements of the concupiscible
power are of the second type, toward contrary ends
(sense-good and sense-evil). The contrary movements of
the irascible power are of the ﬁrst type, with respect to
same objects.
Aquinas classiﬁes (1) love, (2) desire, and (3) pleasure
or joy as the three self-regarding concupiscible emotions
with respect to the sense-good; the contrary movements
with respect to sense-evil are (4) hate, (5) aversion, and
(6) pain or distress. As for the irascible emotions, the
arduous future sense-good may give rise to (7) hope or
(8) despair, the arduous future sense-evil to (9) fear or
Emotions. Table 3 Aquinas‘ classification of the emotions
Self-regarding reactions
Other-regarding reactions
First orientation Action initiation Toward results
Toward
durable results
Desiring good or
evil for others
Distress about
results
Liking
Appetite
Desire
Joy
Delight
Love Hate
Disliking
Distaste
Aversion
Pain
Distress
Envy Pity
Strength
Ambition
Hope
Pride
Lust for
power
Contempt
Courage
Anger
Magnanimity
Weakness
Poverty of
spirit
Desperation Humility
Reverence
Fear
Penitence
Impatience
292 E
Emotions

(10) courage, and the arduous present sense-evil to
(11) anger – this is without a contrary pair.
Aquinas’ attempt to deal with emotions using
Aristotle’s doctrine of movement was not without its
problems. In distinguishing between love, desire, and
pleasure as the incipient movement, actual movement,
and rest, he confusingly seems to treat emotions as the
behavioral changes they are suppose to cause. These
movements are not included in the distinction between
the formal constituent, that is, the movements of the
moving power, and the material constituent, that is, the
physiological changes, such as the movements of the heart,
the spirits and the humors. The background of the some-
time equation of emotions with behavioral movements is
that these are more appropriate to the analysis through
Aristotle’s Physics than the movements of the moving
power which remain less clear. As for pleasure and distress,
Aquinas explains that while one might speak about a stone
as loving its natural place and desiring to be there, it does
not make sense to speak about the pleasure or pain of
a stone. Like Aristotle and Avicenna, Aquinas holds that
pleasure or distress is a pleasant or unpleasant awareness
and this is an aspect of emotions in general since some
kind of pleasure is involved in positive emotions and some
kind of pain in negative ones.
Aquinas’ discussion of emotions, the most extensive in
medieval literature, involves detailed terminological, psy-
chological, and ethical remarks on each emotion type.
Like all medieval authors, Aquinas argues that the intel-
lectual soul should keep emotions under strict control, but
he also criticized the Stoic apatheia. His theory and tax-
onomy was very inﬂuential until the seventeenth century.
John Duns Scotus regarded the taxonomies based on
the notion of arduousness as artiﬁcial and he also criti-
cized the inﬂuential Avicennian idea that there are ‘‘inten-
tions’’ in things which can be grasped by an estimative
power which then moves the motive power – representa-
tions of a certain kind simply cause behavioral changes in
some animals and in others. The original part of Scotus’
approach to emotions was to question the sharp divide
between the passions of the sensory soul and the analo-
gous phenomena in the will. According to Scotus, when
one’s will is fulﬁlled or frustrated, the next step is the
apprehension of the actuality of what was desired or its
contrary. Regarding this stage, Scotus says, ‘‘there follows
a passion of the will, joy or distress, which is caused by the
object present in this way.’’ These passions are not directly
caused by the will and are not free (Ordinatio III.15).
Scotus’ longer list of the factors which are sufﬁcient to
cause distress as a passion of the will involves apprehensions
that something takes place contrary to one’s (1) actual will
against it, (2) natural inclination to happiness even though
no particular act of will is actual, (3) emotional dispositions
of the sensory soul, or something takes place (4) in accor-
dance to what is reluctantly willed in circumstances in
which the opposite is preferred but cannot be achieved
(velleitas). There are corresponding factors which are suf-
ﬁcient to cause pleasure of the will. The intellectual soul is
regarded as very emotional – its feelings are inﬂuenced by
actual volitions or nolitions as well as by the inclinations
of the will and the sensory part of the soul.
Scotus
also
treats
liking
and
disliking,
the
unpremeditated ﬁrst reactions and necessary concomitants
of other acts, as analogous to sensory emotional reactions
except that they are free acts. Ockham’s theory of emotions
is largely based on Scotus’ ideas. John Buridan, who oth-
erwise followed Scotus and Ockham, stated that liking and
disliking as immediate reactions are not free and in this
respect are also similar to sensory emotions in general.
Inﬂuenced by Scotus’ idea of emotional will, Adam
Wodeham argued that volitions and nolitions are valua-
tions, to which all human emotions can be reduced because
of the unity of the soul. This assimilation of emotions to
evaluative thoughts shows similarities to the Stoic theory,
although Wodeham does not refer to Stoic authors.
Medieval theories of emotions were discussed in many
inﬂuential Renaissance works, some of these concentrat-
ing on the differences between the theories of Scotus and
Aquinas. John of la Rochelle’s taxonomy of emotions was
also known through a paraphrase in Gregor Reisch’s pop-
ular
early
sixteenth-century
encyclopedia
Margarita
philosophica (12.4–5).
See also: ▶Adam Wodeham ▶Albert the Great ▶Augus-
tine ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶Internal Senses
▶John Duns Scotus ▶John of La Rochelle ▶Philosoph-
ical Psychology ▶Thomas Aquinas ▶Will ▶William of
Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Albert the Great (1951) De bono, ed. Ku¨hle H et al. Opera omnia, vol 28.
Aschendorff, Muenster
Anonymous (1952) De potentiis animae et obiectis, ed. Callus DA. In: The
powers of the soul: an early unpublished text. Recherches de
the´ologie ancienne et medievale 19:131–170
Anonymous (1982) De anima et potentiis eius, ed. Gauthier RA. In: Le
traite´ De anima et potenciis eius d’un maıˆtre e`s arts (vers 1225),
introduction et texte critique. Revue des sciences philosophiques
et the´ologiques 66:3–55
Aquinas Thomas (1948–1950) Summa theologiae, ed. Caramello P.
Marietti, Turin
Avicenna (1952) Avicenna’s psychology. An English translation of Kita¯b
al-naja¯t, Book II, Chapter VI with historico-philosophical notes and
Emotions E
293
E

textual improvements on the Cairo edition, trans. Rahman F. Oxford
University Press, London
Avicenna (1972) Liber de anima seu Sextus de naturalibus, ed. Van Riet S.
Avicenna latinus I–III. Peeters/Brill, Louvain/Leiden; Avicenna
(1968) IV–V. E´ditions Orientalistes/Brill, Louvain/Leiden
Buridan John (1513) Quaestiones super decem libros Ethicorum. Paris
Duns Scotus John (1986) John Duns Scotus on the will and morality,
ed. and trans. Wolter AB. Catholic University of America Press,
Washington DC
Duns Scotus John (2006) Opera omnia, vol IX (The Vatican edition).
Typis Vaticanis, Vatican City
John of la Rochelle (1995) Summa de anima, ed. Bougerol JG. Textes
philosophiques du moyen aˆge, vol 19. Vrin, Paris
al-Mag˘u¯sı¯ ‘Alı¯ ibn al-‘Abba¯s (1515) Pantegni, trans. Constantine of Africa.
Opera Omnia Ysaac, vol 2. Lyons
McGinn B (ed) (1977) Three treatises on man. A Cistercian anthropology.
The Cistercian Fathers series, vol 24. Cistercian Publications,
Kalamazoo
Nemesius of Emesa (1987) De natura hominis, ed. Morani M. Teubner,
Leipzig; English trans. (1955) Cyril of Jerusalem and Nemesius of
Emesa, ed. Telfer W. The library of Christian classics, vol 4.
Westminister, Philadelphia; (1975) De natura hominis: Traduction
de Burgundio de Pise, ed. Verbeke G, Moncho JR. Corpus Latinum
Commentariorum in Aristotelem Graecorum, suppl 1. Brill, Leiden
Reisch Gregor (1504) Margarita philosophica. Strasburg
Wodeham
Adam
(1990)
Lectura
secunda
in
librum
primum
Sententiarum, ed. Wood R, Ga´l G. St. Bonaventure University,
St. Bonaventure
Secondary Sources
Boulnois O (2003) Duns Scot: existe-t-il des passions de la volonte´? In:
Besnier B, Moreau P-F, Renault L (eds) Les Passions antiques et
me´die´vales. The´ories et critiques des passions. Presses Universitaires
de France, Paris, pp 281–295
Gil-Sotres P (1994) Modelo teo´rico y observacio´n clı´nica: las pasiones del
alma en la psicologı´a medica medieval. In: Comprendre et maıˆtriser
la nature au Moyen Age. Me´lagnes d’histoire des sciences offerts a`
Guy Beaujouan. E´cole pratique des Hautes E´tudes, Sciences
historiques et philologiques, 5. Hautes e´tudes me´die´vales et
modernes, 73. Droz, Geneva, pp 181–204
Hirvonen V (2004) Passions in William Ockham’s philosophical psychol-
ogy. Studies in the history of the philosophy of mind, vol 2. Kluwer,
Dordrecht
King P (1999) Aquinas on the passions. In: MacDonald S, Stump E (eds)
Aquinas’s moral theory: essays in honor of Norman Kretzmann.
Cornell University Press, Ithaca/London, pp 101–132
King P (2002) Late scholastic theories of the passions: controversies in the
Thomist tradition. In: Lagerlund H, Yrjo¨nsuuri M (eds) Emotions
and choice from Boethius to Descartes. Studies in the history of the
philosophy of mind vol 1. Kluwer, Dordrecht, pp 229–258
Kitanov S (2006) Beatiﬁc enjoyment in scholastic philosophy and theol-
ogy 1240–1335. PhD dissertation, University of Helsinki
Knuuttila S (2004) Emotions in ancient and medieval philosophy.
Clarendon, Oxford
Lottin O (1948, 1959) Psychologie et morale aux XIIe et XIII sie`cles, vol 2.
Abbaye de Mont Ce´sar, Louvain. vol 5. Duculot, Gembloux
Marmo C (1991) Hoc autem etsi potest tollerari. . . Egidio Romano
e Tommaso d’Aquino sulle passione dell’ anima. Documenti e studi
sulla tradizione ﬁlosoﬁca medievale 2.1:281–315
Murphy CE (1999) Aquinas on our responsibility for our emotions.
Mediev Philos Theolog 8:163–205
Epistemology
CHRISTOPHE GRELLARD
Philosophy
University of Paris 1 Panthe´on-Sorbonne
Paris
France
Abstract
In a general sense, epistemology aims to provide criteria
for knowledge, and in a more restricted sense, an elabora-
tion of a theory of scientiﬁc knowledge. The Medievals,
under the inﬂuence of Aristotle and a brand of Platonism,
defend a heightened conception of knowledge defending
the infallibility of objects (due to their necessity and uni-
versality) in as much as that of discursive methods (theo-
ries of demonstration). After a refresher on this double
heritage, we will examine three models of scientiﬁc rea-
soning developed in the Middle Ages bolstered by different
procedures of guaranteeing the certainty of knowledge
and its application to a contingent world.
In general terms, epistemology can be taken to be a theory
of knowledge, the examination of criteria of cognitive
apprehension broadly construed, or in a more restricted
sense, a theory of scientiﬁc knowledge the result of which
being discursive procedures of deduction. The common
ground between these two conceptions of knowledge is the
central role played by a set of recurring concepts: certainty,
truth, and assent. They are distinguished by their essential
differences at the level of the objects of knowledge and
above all, by their procedures of justiﬁcation. If the ﬁrst
mode of knowledge reﬂects a quasi-everyday sense of the
term, the second designates a perfect or even ideal state. In
the Middle Ages, the term notitia was used to capture the
ﬁrst sense, and scientia to capture the second. Notitia
includes fallible epistemic states that may turn out to be
false, and which would merit more the name belief, while
scientia is construed as that which uncovers the criteria of
infallibility. The common point of the medieval approach
to this notion is the exclusion of falsity, in virtue of the
principle of nihil scitur nisi verum. Our interest here is in
this stricter sense.
Medieval reﬂections on scientia primarily aim toward
the elaboration of a theory of demonstrative knowledge,
largely inspired by the Aristotelian tradition of the Poste-
rior Analytics. This tradition, which stresses the deductive
procedures that a science must put in place, is reinforced
by Aristotle’s remarks about science being an epistemic
294 E
Epistemology

virtue, that is an habitus, characterized by its permanence
and its inclination toward truth as opposed to mere opin-
ion (Categories Ch. 8, Nichomachean Ethics VI, 3). Infalli-
bility is thereby assured both by the subject and in method.
This Aristotelian tradition is reinforced by a convergence
with another tradition: the Platonism disseminated by
St. Augustine. This tradition thus adds a demand of uni-
versality and immutability in the object of knowledge:
science is certain knowledge of a universal and immutable
object. This double heritage drove the Medievals to estab-
lish a theory of strict scientiﬁc knowledge and to face the
gap that imposes itself between this conception of science
and other forms of discourse. We will put the emphasis in
this perspective on two points salient to medieval episte-
mology, one part being the status of its object, in partic-
ular its contingent objects, the other part the question of
the epistemic criteria required to distinguish cognitive
states.
Medieval conceptions of epistemology are rooted pri-
marily in the theory developed in Aristotle’s Posterior
Analytics. The difﬁculty of this text, which is ampliﬁed
by problems of translation, created as many problems
regarding epistemological thought for the Medievals as it
did solutions. In a general way, the following elements
must be underscored. First, we ﬁnd in this text an objec-
tive and discursive double determination of science.
Indeed, science must be based on a universal, necessary,
and eternal object (Posterior Analytics 1, 2, 71b 9–12; see
also I, 30). We seem able, therefore, to exclude the idea of
a science of the particular and contingent. Nevertheless,
the exclusion of separate Forms (Posterior Analytics 1, 11)
provides an empirical basis to science. Second, from the
discursive point of view, knowledge is obtained by means
of demonstration, so that all science is syllogistic and rests
on a deductive structure. One such structure requires
a kind of epistemic primacy of premises that guarantee
a transfer of evidentness and truth. It is thus necessary that
the premises, in addition to their necessity and universal-
ity required by the nature of the object, are equally true,
primary, better known, prior to, and the cause of the
conclusion (Posterior Analytics 1, 2, 71b 20–22). Even
though the notion of certainty is not explicitly addressed
by Aristotle, it is this focus on the primacy of premises and
on the transference of their epistemic qualities that makes
it possible for the Medievals to explicitly develop the
question of the reliability of science and its objects. The
junction of these two determinations, objective and dis-
cursive, thus leads to the recovery of the ontological order
by the discursive order, and a kind of isomorphism
between them. In this way, to have scientiﬁc knowledge
is to have a causal knowledge of an essence. This strict
conception of science, as a body of adequate propositions
to a particular kind of object, introduces a difference of
kind between science and opinion. Since there is no
science of that which can be otherwise, the disposition of
reason toward this type of object cannot be described as
science (Posterior Analytics 1, 33). This kind of epistemic
state, capable of truth and falsity and marked by instabil-
ity, is called opinion, and is able to induce accounts of
different natures. Aristotle, by notoriously excluding that
the same thing can be both an object of science and an
object of opinion, seems to introduce a difference of kind
and not merely of degree between science and opinion;
a difference already reinforced by the exclusion of opinion
from the set of intellectual virtues (Posterior Analytics I, 33,
Nichomachean Ethics VI, 3). It is thus a strict conception of
knowledge that the Medievals inherit from the Posterior
Analytics. This conception is reinforced by one of the
important mediations in the receptions of the text, namely
Themistius’ paraphrase, translated (from an Arabic ver-
sion) by Gerard of Cremona. At the beginning of the
second chapter (p. 247), the Byzantine commentator
opposes a common sense and a proper sense of the notion
of scientia. According to this latter sense, there is science if
and only if we are capable of accounting for the reason why
some thing exists, such that we accept that it cannot be
otherwise. The Medievals ﬁnd themselves thus confronted
by a text that offers schema apt to guarantee the certain
acquisition of truth, but at the cost of a strong dichotomy
between science and opinion and the necessary and the
contingent, at the heart of the ﬁeld of epistemology. We
have an example of the distress that may have given rise to
this situation in one of the ﬁrst medieval readers of the
Posterior Analytics, John of Salisbury. In the Metalogicon,
all the while emphasizing the difﬁculty of the text on
account of both the translation and the subject matter,
John emphasizes that the modes of reasoning central to
the book are primarily mathematical reasoning which
deals with necessary objects. Thus, demonstrative logic is
reduced to the mathematical, while the contingent is the
object of probable logic that ﬁnds its tools in the Topics
(see IV, 6, 8 and II, 3).
One of the aims of medieval epistemology is thus to
soften, as much as possible, the scope of science without
giving up the deductive rigor and certainty of its
principles.
What makes the task of medieval philosophers more
difﬁcult is that these elements of the Aristotelian doctrine
are reinforced by the second ancient tradition, namely, the
tradition of Augustine’s Platonism. In the Theaetetus (of
which the Medievals were unaware) and the Meno (trans-
lated in the twelfth century but not widely read), Plato
Epistemology E
295
E

criticizes different deﬁnitions of science based on sensa-
tion and opinion, emphasizing from his position the gap
between knowledge and opinion and between necessity
and contingency. One such criticism opens the door for
the Theory of Forms. Thus in the Timeaus, which is the
principal source of information on Platonism in the
Middle Ages, Plato contrasts the plausible knowledge of
the sensible from the knowledge of the universal and
necessary
forms
(27–28).
This
contrast
is
further
reinforced by Augustine who is the chief ﬁgure in the
Christian incorporation of Platonism. In the 83 Diverse
Questions, q. 9, Augustine insists on the impossibility of
perception of attaining authentic truth (scincera veritas),
given the mutability of its object. In this way, only intan-
gible objects that participate in the Divine and that are
only knowable by the intellect falls within the scope of
science as self-evident.
This act of excluding the sensible and the contingent
from the domain of science rests on the Platonic theory of
Forms assimilated in the Divine Idea and transposed in the
Divine Intellect. These Ideas, both speciﬁc and generic,
constitute the ontological structure of the world since it is
from them that God created the sensible world (83 Diverse
Questions, q. 46). These Ideas give an account of the nature
of things and enable their permanence and stability since
they are eternal and immutable. The Augustinian position
is basic since it legitimates the rationality of the sensible
world and the legitimacy of a scientiﬁc study of creation,
all the while echoing the foundation of such a science in
God’s knowledge. The principle that governs the creation
of each thing (the special formulation), which is found in
the Divine Understanding, must be found. It comes back
to the human soul to know these Ideas, insofar as it is
rational and reﬂects God’s image, and once it is puriﬁed
(that is to say, turned from the sensible). It is thus in the
contemplation of these immutable Ideas where the highest
activity of the rational soul is located. Augustine states
explicitly (Trinity XII, 4) that it is in this activity that the
soul reﬂects God’s image. Science is thus that through
which the soul becomes like God. To ﬁll in this notion of
the contemplation of Divine Ideas, Augustine develops an
account which is one part theory of illumination and
another which reinvests into the changing Stoic distinc-
tion between science and wisdom. In the ﬁrst place, since
truth is accessible to God and to Divine Ideas, human
knowledge requires Divine Support: on the model that
light illuminates sensible objects and renders vision pos-
sible, Divine Truth must illuminate intelligible objects in
order to make them accessible to human intellect (On the
Teacher, c. 39–40). Science as the certain and complete
apprehension of an intelligible object is then not
conceived on the model of abstraction but on that of
perception or immediate universal intuition. Nonethe-
less, the understanding of a necessary and immutable
universal is not exclusive to a worldly knowledge for, on
the one hand, the process of the soul’s turning to God
depends on the sensible (see for example De Ordine II, c.
30–40), and on the other, like Plato, Ideas function to
stabilize the sensible, so that Augustine distinguishes sci-
ence as apprehension of the temporal with wisdom as the
apprehension of the Divine.
Despite this distinction at the level of objects, the
epistemic properties of certainty, evidence, and truth
may be the same. To this Platonic dimension is a text
which was important in the early Middle Ages for the
theory of the faculties implicated in the knowledge of
the sensible and the intelligible, respectively. It is the
distinction between cognitive faculties proposed by Boe-
thius in the ﬁfth book of the Consolation of Philosophy.
This fundamental text for the theory of knowledge in
medieval philosophy, prior to the rediscovery of Aristotle,
proposes a complete description of the ways of knowing,
paralleling and compatible Augustine’s. The context is that
of God’s knowledge of future contingents and Boethius
aims to show that one object is known differently
depending on the quality of the faculty. At a ﬁrst level is
situated the activity proper to each sense. Sight and touch
have different objects, given their functional differences
(for instance, the simultaneity of sight opposes the suc-
cession of vision). At a second level, imagination allows
the passage of matter to form (ﬁgura). It is the ﬁrst level of
abstraction that consists in a synthesis of the sensible given
and to set aside the sensible particularities. At a third level,
reason introduces true abstraction, that is, universalized
abstraction. The particular form of imagination is robbed
of its individual characteristics, which leads to the creation
of a common form by means of an abstractive induction.
Finally at the last level, intelligence allows the constructed
universal to pass into a simple form (the Divine Idea) by
the direct contemplation of the mind’s eye. There is thus
a set of faculties hierarchically organized by the function of
their objects. Each superior faculty contains the inferior
and has thus access to its objects, which implies
a limitation of the inferior faculties: the senses are not
moved without a material object, the imagination has
not the capacity to abstract the universal, and reason
lacks access to simplicity. In contrast, reason knows the
particular since it rests on the senses and imagination to
construct its object (i.e., a deﬁnition). Intelligence is the
synthesis of all faculties: it is knowledge of the simple
and the complex, the material and the spiritual, the
particular
and
the
universal.
This
triple
heritage,
296 E
Epistemology

Platonic, Augustinian, and Boethian, informs all episte-
mological reﬂection prior to the rediscovery of Aris-
totle. We ﬁnd this in Bernard of Chartres, for instance,
in
his
commentary
of
the
Timeaus (Glosae super
Platonem, 8, 325–353, with portent to Timeaus, 51de).
Indeed, Bernard crosses reﬂection on objects and the
faculties to reach a hierarchy of faculties tied two at
a time to the difference of nature between objects and to
the degrees of epistemic justiﬁcation implied. At a ﬁrst
level, sensation is tied to the sensible and produces an
opinion entirely dependant on the testimony of the senses.
On its own, this opinion can turn out to be true or false.
Thus, opinion must be conﬁrmed by reason which alone
will be stabilized by the intellect. At the level of reason and
intelligence, the objects are the intelligibles which are
immutable; an immutability that bases certainty. Science
is thus the certain apprehension of immutable objects.
Since the end of the twelfth century, the medieval
philosophers were seeking to determine the criteria of
knowledge inheriting a double tradition proposing an
elevated cognitive model, tied to a demand of infallibility
in the object of knowledge as well as in the subject. Phil-
osophical thought on knowledge must then face the inev-
itable gap (already noted by John of Salisbury) between,
on the one hand, a restrictive conception of scientiﬁc
discourse and, on the other hand, the extension of the
domain of objects. To account for the appropriation of
ancient thought on science and its softening, we will
brieﬂy look at three models accounting for the three
distinct approaches to this key question of infallibility.
The ﬁrst model, exempliﬁed by Robert Grosseteste, con-
sists in taking up the double Aristotelian and Augustinian
heritage to articulate the distinction between science and
wisdom. The second model, exempliﬁed by Thomas
Aquinas, proposes a naturalist reading of science that
accounts for the contingency of the sensible. Finally, the
last model, which we can call nominalist, and which is
exempliﬁed here by John Buridan, seeks an account for the
science of the contingent in an Aristotelian framework.
The importance of Robert Grosseteste for medieval
thought on Epistemology is measured in two ways: he is
the ﬁrst known commentator of the Posterior Analytics
(c. 1220), a commentary which is marked by a strong
consideration for Themistius; and he elaborates a theory
of scientia which blends the double inﬂuence of Augustine
and Aristotle. This ﬁrst form of incorporation of
Aristotle’s discourse on science will have a lasting impact
throughout the whole Middle Age.
Robert Grosseteste proposes a general deﬁnition for
science in relation to the notion of belief in his commen-
tary on chapter 33 of the Posterior Analytics. Here, he gives
a broad meaning of opinio as assensus or ﬁdes which
includes both science and belief since all that is known is
believed. This brand of assent is speciﬁed in science and
belief both by the function of the considered object and
the degree of possible certainty. Belief is indeed the adher-
ence of a proposition accompanied by fear (timor) that the
opposite is true. In other words, belief leaves the possibil-
ity open that what we assent to turns out to be false. Belief
can thus not exclude the possibility of error. Grosseteste
restricts the notion of belief further by making it pertain
exclusively to contingent things (Commentarius, I, 19,
p. 278, 16–279, 29). Because of this, belief is not knowledge
of the thing in its purity, that is to say its essence, but
merely in its appearance, thus qua material and mutable
thing. It is the possibility for the object to change that
impedes the certainty of belief (280, 49–53 & 61–67).
Conversely, knowledge eludes this deﬁciency at the level
of object and its consequences at the level of certainty.
Knowledge is indeed one disposition (habitus) acquired by
necessary means and based in necessary things that cannot
be otherwise, since it obtains purity and truth of the
essence (281, 85–88 & 283, 136–137). In this way, it can
be deﬁned as complete knowledge of the thing in itself
(278, 10–11). Nevertheless, Grosseteste distinguishes
between several more or less strict senses of scientia. In
a broad sense, science is the apprehension of truth, includ-
ing contingent things (be it the indeﬁnite contingent or
the contingent understood as that which is produced most
often). This broad sense of knowledge captures most of the
restricted sense of opinion and it permits the preservation
of the everyday use of knowledge to designate epistemic
states that are not infallible. In contrast, the proper
sense of knowledge rests on immutable objects and
assumes the apprehension of the cause of the thing by
means of demonstrative procedures (I, 2, 99, 9–100, 25).
Like John of Salisbury, Robert Grosseteste maintains that
this strict sense is exclusively concerned with mathematics,
which is absolutely exempt from deceit (I, 11, 179,
141–142).
Grosseteste thus defends a conception of knowledge as
justiﬁed true belief (assent) and makes a distinction cen-
tral in his general deﬁnition between different kinds serv-
ing as part of the nature of justiﬁcation and part of the
nature of the object in question. Knowledge in its strictest
sense must appeal to demonstrative procedures apt to
discovering the immutable essences of things. There is
then no science of the contingent, properly speaking,
since it is a form of essentialism that guarantees the cer-
tainty and infallibility of science. The nature of the known
object conditions the type of certainty accessible. This
essentialism is in turn guaranteed by the superior level
Epistemology E
297
E

that of the Forms or Divine Ideas (I, 7, 139, 96–130). It is
at this level that Grosseteste reintroduces the Augustinian
theory of illumination into the Aristotelian schema. This
seems like the ultimate guarantee for knowledge and offers
the highest possible degree of certainty by granting access
to an absolutely immutable object. Thus, the role of
abstraction is otherwise reduced, at least subordinated to
the intellectual perception of Divine Ideas, made possible
by illumination (I, 14, 212, 216–216, 291). In this way,
despite the privileged granted to demonstrative proce-
dures, knowledge is conceived on the model of vision;
spiritual vision that apprehends intelligible when the
mind’s eye is illuminated by spiritual light (I, 19, 279,
29–280, 49).
The second model of scientia, exempliﬁed by Thomas
Aquinas, abandons the attempt to articulate Plato and
Aristotle and goes no further than a natural model of
abstraction to account for both the certainty of science
and the possibility of knowing the contingent.
Strictly speaking, knowledge must beneﬁt from
a degree of certainty that guarantees absolutely its infal-
libility. This infallibility is grounded in both the nature of
the discursive procedures employed and in the nature of
the objects known. Because of this, by lecturing chapter
33 of the ﬁrst book of the Posterior Analytics (Expositio
posteriorum, L. I, l. 44), Thomas takes up the distinction
between knowledge and belief by means of the distinc-
tion between objects. Belief is deﬁned as the adherence to
immediate and nonnecessary propositions (I, 44, 5).
Belief does not necessarily call to discursive procedures,
and rests on contingent things that are able to be other-
wise. This opposition between science and belief, inten-
siﬁed
by
the
opposition
between
necessary
and
contingent, drives Thomas to a strict conception of
knowledge as complete and evident knowledge of the
thing’s essence (I, 4, 2). Thus, it is essentialism that
guarantees epistemology but which also introduces
a radical difference between intellectual knowledge and
sensible knowledge which belongs to opinion (I, 42, 6).
The guarantee brought by essentialism, however, is
reinforced by the discursive structure of science, which
is a demonstrative habitus. Thomas thus develops
a foundationalist conception of knowledge where the
epistemic justiﬁcation is primarily inferential: it is the
reduction or resolution of conclusions to their principles
that allows for the accordance with certainty required by
knowledge. The syllogism serves to make explicit this
reduction to principles and allows thus to evaluate the
certainty of the known proposition. It is thus, overall, the
certainty of the principles, by transference of justiﬁca-
tion, that guarantees the certainty of knowledge in
general (see for instance Met. L IV, 1 6, n. 12). It is
therefore the double essentialist and axiomatic model
that grounds the infallibility of science for Thomas, at
the cost of an important limitation in its scope.
This double essentialist and foundationalist orienta-
tion of science is nonetheless balanced by a strong dose of
empiricism. Indeed, empiricism is reintroduced at a ﬁrst
level as a condition for the abstraction of essences and the
access to principles. Thomas proposes a strict empiricist
reading of the last chapter of book 2 of the Posterior
Analytics: it is by an inductive step based on repeated
experiences that we are able to abstract the necessary
universal from the multiplicity of sensible contingents, in
identifying an ontological structure vouching for perma-
nence (Expositio, L II, l. 20, n. 12–14). Contrary to
Grosseteste then, Thomas excludes all intuition of
essences, which are necessarily built for us. Empiricism
works on a second level in allowing the reintroduction of
a connection between science and opinion. Effectively,
Thomas admits that, in a broad sense or by analogy, we
are able to label as science the certain assent (existimatio
certa) to some contingent objects (Expositio, I, 42, 9). This
extension of the sense of science is tied in part to the
revival of the notion of materia subiecta introduced by
Aristotle in the ﬁrst book of the Nichomachean Ethics.
Indeed, Thomas emphasizes in his commentary that sci-
entiﬁc method must be adapted to its object and that it is
wrong to demand a mathematical certainty for contingent
things (Sententia ethicorum, I, 3, 1–5). In the case of
natural science, Thomas admits that there is no science
of the contingent as such. On the other hand, the scientiﬁc
knowledge of essences makes a quasi-science of the con-
tingent possible, insofar as we consider things that happen
for the most part (ut in pluribus, ut frequenter). There
would be no demonstration in the strict sense in the case
of natural events that are frequent without being neces-
sary. Through discursive procedures we obtain the cer-
tainty that the thing is true, not absolutely (simpliciter),
but relatively (secundum quid) (II, 12, 5). The double
empiricist
and
essentialist
dimension
of
Thomas’
epistemology allows an extension of the notion of science
since there exists ontological structures that guarantee the
regularity of phenomena and since we are able to
recognize these structures. The contingent is an object of
science in a broad sense that no longer allows complete
infallibility but preserves a strong degree of certainty
nonetheless. The science of the physical world will not be
a demonstrative science in the strict sense, but it
approaches it enough in the science elaborated in the
Posterior Analytics to be qualiﬁed, despite all, scientiﬁc
knowledge.
298 E
Epistemology

The third medieval model of scientia that we will
examine draws on this weakened notion of knowledge to
bolster the possibility of a science of the contingent.
This model, used by the nominalists, notably John
Buridan, separates the isomorphism between discourse
and objectivity which underlies the two preceding models.
The demands of necessity and universality, put forth by
Aristotle and understood in a strict discursive sense, are
taken to mean that the object of science is always the
particular contingent. The aim is then to preserve a form
of certainty independent of all objective determination.
The contribution of a nominalist like John Buridan to the
theory of science plays out on a double level: on the one
hand, in the preservation of a qualiﬁed infallibility of
knowledge; on the other, in the semantic reinterpretation
of the Aristotelian demands of necessity and universality.
Buridan deﬁnes knowledge by stressing its psycholog-
ical dimension: knowledge is a species of the genus assent,
in the same way as opinion. Knowledge and opinion are
borne on an immediate or mediate proposition (the con-
clusion of reasoning). The distinction between these two
kinds of assent does not primarily stem from the object in
the place but from logical and psychological determina-
tions that accompany each assent, since both science and
opinion are able to bear on the same object (Quaestiones
super posteriorum, I, 32). Distinguishing these two assents
is thus primarily the manner in which they relate to their
object. Opinion, according to the classic deﬁnition,
accompanies the fear that the opposite is not true (cum
formidine). Conversely, knowledge accompanies both cer-
tainty or ﬁrmness and evidentness. It is this double con-
straint of certainty and evidentness that guarantees the
truth of the proposition known and begets the infallibility
of knowledge (see Quaestiones super posteriorum I, 32; and,
I, 2 et I, 7; Summulae VIII, 4, 3). Evidentness adds an
objective determination to certainty which, understood
as a psychological quality, could eventually accompany
a false belief. It is thus at the level of evidentness that we
ﬁnd the deﬁnition of the true as the infallible apprehen-
sion of the truth. Yet Buridan distinguishes between two
forms of evidentness: the ﬁrst is said to be absolute, it is the
evidentness of known by reﬂection that absolutely restrain
assent; the second is said to be relative and depends on the
ordinary course of nature. It gives an account of the
evidentness of the principles of natural science known by
induction. These principles, founded on the regularity of
nature and a certain necessity of natural phenomena, can
be made false by a supernatural power. But this hypothesis
that underscores simply the contingency of creation does
not consider the formation of reliable propositions about
natural events. Natural science is thus the apprehension of
conclusions relative to regular phenomena deduced from
principles known by induction (thus by means of experi-
ment) and warranted by sufﬁcient practical evidence, even
if theoretically a counterexample cannot be absolutely
counted out. On the side of knowledge, certainty and
evidentness of knowledge guarantee both a certain dispo-
sition toward propositions and the permanence of this
disposition.
From here, Buridan can resume the question of the
status of the objects of science. While endorsing his Aris-
totelian orthodoxy and rejecting the idea of a science of
the contingent (Quaestiones super posteriorum, I, 32),
Buridan proposes no less than the grounding of science
in a world of concrete particulars. Effectively, the distant
objects of all science are those things signiﬁed by the terms
that compose known propositions, and these terms are
individual contingents (Quaestiones super posteriorum, I,
15; Super ethicorum, VI, q. 6). It must be explained how
premises are able to be presented as necessary and eternal
by Aristotle (74b5-7). Buridan holds that no creature (thus
no proposition) can be eternal and necessary in this tem-
poral sense. Similarly, nothing signiﬁed can be said to be
necessary in itself. It is thus at the level of terms that the
question of the necessity of eternity must be settled, by
strict semantic means. Buridan effectively appeals to natu-
ral supposition to account for the omnitemporal reference
of terms used in scientiﬁc propositions and to account for
the unfalsiﬁable character of these propositions. Common
concepts that compete for individual apprehension are
indifferent to temporal determinations (Quaestiones super
posteriorum, I, 16). The common concept indifferent to
time is conceived on the model of genus and species and
the elimination of specifying and individuating differ-
ences. Thus, we have general and abstract common con-
cepts that are indifferent to the issue of time. These
concepts form the basis of general signiﬁcation of terms
taken as universals and induce their omnitemporality:
signiﬁcation sine tempore. The mind then possesses the
tools (a copula that cosigniﬁes all times) to compose these
concepts and form propositions indifferent to time. The
natural supposition must then account for the supposi-
tion of terms of one such mental proposition. Terms with
such supposition have thus one form of perpetuity that
allows saving Aristotle’s intention to make premises and
conclusions of propositions necessary and eternal, in the
omnitemporal sense. Thus, a scientiﬁc proposition is an
omnitemporal point of view, that is, unfalsiﬁable and
evident, on a particular and contingent world.
See also: ▶Adam Wodeham ▶Albert the Great ▶Aristo-
telianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac, Arabic, and Hebrew
Epistemology E
299
E

Traditions ▶Augustine ▶Certainty ▶Epistemology, Byz-
antine ▶Gerard of Cremona ▶Gregory of Rimini
▶Henry of Ghent ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad
al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) ▶Induction ▶Intentionality ▶Intu-
itive and Abstractive Cognition ▶John Buridan ▶John
Duns Scotus ▶John Mair ▶John of Salisbury ▶Logic
▶Mental Language ▶Natural Philosophy ▶Nicholas
Oresme ▶Oxford Calculators ▶Peter Auriol ▶Philo-
sophical Psychology ▶Posterior Analytics, Commentaries
on Aristotle’s ▶Realism ▶Robert Grosseteste ▶Robert
Holcot ▶Roger Bacon ▶Sense Perception, Theories of
▶Skepticism ▶Species, Sensible and Intelligible ▶Sup-
position Theory ▶Syllogism, Theories of ▶Themistius,
Arabic ▶Thomas Aquinas ▶Thomism ▶Truth, Theories
of ▶Universals ▶Walter Burley ▶William Crathorn
▶William Heytesbury ▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Aristotle (1962) Analytica posteriora. Translationes Iacobi, Anonymi sive
Ioannis Gerardi et Recensio Guillelmi de Moerbeke, ed. Minio-Paluello
L, Dod BG. Aristoteles Latinus. Descle´e de Brouwer, Bruges/Paris
Aquinas Thomas (1969) Sententia ethicorum. Opera omnia XLVII.
Commissio Leonina, Rome
Aquinas Thomas (1989) Expositio libri posteriorum. Opera omnia I∗-2.
Commissio Leonina, Rome/Paris
Buridan John. Quaestiones in primum librum analyticorum posteriorum,
ed. Hubien H (unpublished)
Buridan John (2001) Summulae de demonstrationibus, ed. De Rijk LM.
Groeningen, Ingenium
Buridan John (1513) Quaestiones super decem libros ethicorum
Aristotelis ad Nicomachum. Poncet Le Preux, Paris (repr Minerva,
Frankfurt, 1968)
Burley Walter (2000) Quaestiones super librum posteriorum, ed.
Sommers MC. PIMS, Toronto
Duns Scotus John (1950–) Opera omnia, ed. Balic´ C et al. Typis Polyglottis
Vaticanis, Vatican City
Grosseteste Robert (1981) Commentarius in posteriorum analyticorum
libros, ed. Rossi P. L.S. Olschki, Florence
John of Salisbury (1991) Metalogicon libri III, ed. Hall JB. Brepols,
Turnhout
Themistius (1958) Themistius’ paraphrasis of the Posterior Analytics in
Gerard of Cremona’s translation, ed. O’Donnell JR. Mediev Stud
20:239–315
William of Ockham (1974) Summa logicae. Opera philosophica, I. Saint-
Bonaventure, New York
Secondary Sources
Biard J (2004) Les controverses sur l’objet du savoir et les ‘‘complexe
signiﬁcabilia’’ a` Paris au XIVe sie`cle. In: Caroti S (e´d) Quia inter
doctores est magna dissensio. Les de´bats de philosophie naturelle a`
Paris au XIVe sie`cle. Olschki, Firenze, pp 1–31
Biard J (2004) L’organisation des sciences spe´culatives selon Jean Buridan.
In: Grellard C (e´d) Me´thodes et statut des sciences a` la ﬁn du Moyen
Aˆ ge. Presses universitaires du Septentrion, Lille, pp 26–40
Biard J (2006) John Buridan and the mathematical demonstration. In:
Hirvonen V, Holopainen TJ, Tuominen M (e´ds) Mind and modality.
Studies in the history of philosophy in honour of Simo Knuuttila.
Brill, Leiden/Boston, pp 199–215
Bloch D (forthcoming) John of Salisbury on Science
Burnyeat M (1981) Aristotle on Understanding Knowledge. In: Berti
E (ed) Aristotle on Science: the ‘‘Posterior Analytics’’. Editrice
Antenore, Padua, pp 97–139
Byrne E (1968) Probability and opinion. A study in the medieval pre-
suppositions of post-medieval theories of probability. Martin
Nijhoff, The Hague
Corbini A (2006) La teoria della scienza nel xiii secolo. I commenti agli
Analitici secondi. Edizioni del Galuzzo, Firenze
Demange D (2007) Jean Duns Scot. La the´orie du savoir. Vrin, Paris
Fitzgerald (2003) The medieval roots of reliabilist epistemology: Albert
of Saxony’s View of Immediate Apprehension. Synthese 136(3):409–434
Grellard C (2005) Croire et savoir. Les principes de la connaissance selon
Nicolas d’Autre´court. Vrin, Paris
King P (1987) Jean Buridan’s Philosophy of Science. Stud Hist Philos Sci
18:109–132
Livesey SJ (1989) Theology and science in the fourteenth century. Three
questions on the unity and subalternation of the sciences from John
of Reading’s Commentary on the Sentences. Brill, Leiden
Panaccio C (2009) Le savoir selon Guillaume d’Ockham. In: Nadeau
R (ed) Philosophies de la connaissance. Vrin/Presses de l’universite´
de Laval, Paris/Que´bec
Pasnau R (1995) William Heytesbury on knowledge: epistemology with-
out necessary and sufﬁcient conditions. Hist Philos Q 12:347–366
Pasnau R (1997) Theories of cognition in the later Middle Ages. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge
Pasnau R (2009) Science and certainty. In: Pasnau R (ed) Cambridge
history of medieval philosophy. Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, pp 357–368
Perini-Santos E (2006) La the´orie ockhamienne de la connaissance
e´vidente. Vrin, Paris
Rossi P (1995) Robert Grosseteste and the object of scientiﬁc knowledge.
In: McEvoy J (ed) Robert Grosseteste: new perspectives on his
thought and scholarship. Brepols, Turnhout, pp 53–75
Scott TK (1965) John Buridan on the objects of demonstrative science.
Speculum XL:654–673
Sereene E (1979) Robert Grosseteste on induction and demonstrative
science. Synthese 40:97–115
Zupko J (2003) John Buridan. Portrait of fourteenth century arts master.
Notre Dame University Press, Notre Dame
Epistemology, Byzantine
BO¨ RJE BYDE´N
Department of French, Italian and Classical Languages
Stockholm University
Stockholm
Sweden
Abstract
Byzantineviewson knowledgeare strongly inﬂuencedbylate
antique Neoplatonic Aristotelianism. A basic assumption
300 E
Epistemology, Byzantine

in this tradition is that the nature of cognitive states is
dependent on the nature of the cognitive objects (which
have independent existence). Thus, the possibility of
knowledge is secured by the existence of knowable things.
Modiﬁcations of the Neoplatonic views are sometimes
prompted by religious considerations, but these are
more to do with emphasis than with content. It was
strongly emphasized by the Byzantines, for instance, that
God’s essence is beyond knowledge. Likewise, the Platonic
theory of recollection was repeatedly condemned because
it seemed to entail the soul’s pre-existence; on the other
hand, the idea that the soul at birth is a tabula rasa was in
conﬂict with the Christian doctrine that it is created per-
fect, and therefore Aristotle’s theory of concept formation
was interpreted (e.g., by Eustratios of Nicaea) in a way that
allowed for rational principles to be innate. In fact it is not
uncommon to ﬁnd in Byzantine writers rationalist
accounts tracing the source of knowledge to innate soul-
principles side by side (or nearly so) with endorsements
of empiricist views suggesting that the ﬁrst principles of
knowledge are constructed from the individual forms of
things.
There are no writings from the Byzantine period
purporting to deal exclusively or exhaustively with ques-
tions relating to the nature, scope, and sources of knowl-
edge. Such questions are addressed primarily in four
different (although partly overlapping) contexts: in dis-
cussions of the soul’s various cognitive states and faculties,
in discussions of the several divisions of philosophy, in
discussions of Aristotle’s theory of demonstration, and in
discussions of Plato’s theory of recollection. In addition to
the relatively few works that partly focus on knowledge,
there are of course numerous philosophical texts that
allow inferences about some of the epistemological
assumptions of their authors.
One pervasive assumption, inherited by the Byzantine
philosophical writers from antiquity, is that the nature of
cognitive states (e.g., knowledge [episte¯me¯], skill [techne¯],
experience [empeiria], and practice [peira]) is dependent
on the nature of the cognitive objects. Thus, knowledge is
infallible on account of the unchangeability of its objects,
which are universals, whereas skill is liable to err on
account of the propensity of its objects, which are indi-
viduals, to change. Different cognitive objects are cognized
by different cognitive faculties. Individuals are cognized by
sensation, if they are present, and by imagination, if they
are absent; universals are cognized by opinion, reason, and
intellect. At any rate, this is what many Byzantine students
of philosophy imbibed from textbooks such as David’s
Prolegomena or Nikephoros Blemmydes’ Epitome logica.
On occasion, Byzantine writers expressly identify the
objects of the three parts of theoretical philosophy, that
is, natural philosophy, mathematics, and theology with
the objects of opinion, reason, and intellect, respectively.
The idea that human intelligence is insufﬁciently
equipped for the knowledge of things divine has always
been present in Greek philosophical thought. In Greek
Patristics, this idea is endorsed in a radical version,
inasmuch as God’s essence (ousia) is considered to be in
principle indescribable and incomprehensible and the
object of faith alone; on the other hand, his attributes,
including existence, unity, and being the creator of the
world, are thought to be susceptible of proof. In the late
Byzantine period, Gregory Palamas (1296–1359) intro-
duced the notion that God’s activities (energeiai) can be
directly perceived as ‘‘uncreated light.’’ This perception
(aisthe¯sis) involves both body and mind.
Apart from that, the inﬂuence not only of the Patristic
but also especially of the Platonic tradition contributed to
instil in Byzantine thinkers a general distrust of the senses
as sources of knowledge. In his Semeioseis gnomikai
(c. 1326), Theodore Metochites expressed sympathies
for a view, which he ascribed to the ancient skeptics and
traced back to the elenctic dialogues of Plato, namely that
knowledge is impossible, at least in the domains of nat-
ural philosophy, ethics, and the arts (technai), where the
objects studied are in constant ﬂux. Theology, he
thought, was a different case: the truth about things
divine can be attained, but only through inspiration
from above. As for mathematics, Metochites argued, in
the Semeioseis gnomikai and elsewhere, that it is superior
to natural philosophy, in that it alone studies objects that
are in the strict and proper sense knowable (episte¯ta).
Usually, he described these objects as being mental forms
resulting from a process of abstraction starting with sense-
objects, but he left no doubt in his Poem 10 that he really
conceived of abstraction as only an aid to the recognition
of forms already pre-existing in the soul, and thus proba-
bly adhered to the ‘‘projectionism’’ of late antique philos-
ophers of mathematics such as Iamblichus and Proclus.
A concern with skepticism is evidenced also by two
later attempts to refute skeptical arguments: a very short
pamphlet by Nicholas Chamaetos Kabasilas in the mid-
fourteenth century, and a slightly longer one of uncertain
date, transmitted as chapter 3 of the so-called Metaphysics
of Herennius, but this is not sufﬁcient to justify some
earlier scholars’ belief in a revival of skepticism in the
fourteenth century. Doubts about the possibility of knowl-
edge tout court were never entertained in Byzantium,
although such doubts concerning the realm of coming-
to-be and passing-away may to some extent account for
Epistemology, Byzantine E
301
E

the apparent difﬁculties faced by Byzantine thinkers in
dealing with Aristotle’s theory of demonstration, to
which we shall now turn. The Posterior Analytics was
probably never included in the standard curriculum, but
it is preserved in more than 100 manuscripts, and at least
four commentaries on the second book were written in the
Middle and Late Byzantine periods, only one of which has
been edited, namely that of Eustratios of Nicaea (c. 1050–
1130), to which we shall return after some brief remarks
on the Aristotelian theory itself.
According to it, we have scientiﬁc knowledge of a fact
if and only if we can demonstrate not only that it is a fact
but also that it is a necessary consequence of other facts
that are already known
(‘‘for science involves an
account’’). For fear of an inﬁnite regress, Aristotle assumes
that all the propositions that make up an individual sci-
ence follow from a number of indemonstrable and neces-
sary propositions or ﬁrst principles. The problem dealt
with in Posterior Analytics 2.19 is how we come to know
the ﬁrst principles. Part of Aristotle’s solution to this
problem is his theory of concept-formation. Scientiﬁc
propositions typically take the form of one term’s predi-
cation of another, quantiﬁed, term; as a consequence,
knowledge of scientiﬁc truths is largely reducible to the
possession of scientiﬁc concepts. At any rate Aristotle does
not seem to feel the need to distinguish between the
questions of how we come to know the ﬁrst principles of
science and how we come to have scientiﬁc concepts.
Scientiﬁc concepts are universals: species, genera, dif-
ferentiae, properties, and accidents. The Neoplatonic the-
ory of ‘‘three types of universals’’ was widely embraced in
Byzantium. According to this theory, the word ‘‘dog’’ can
refer (a) to the Form of Dog in God’s mind (the universal
ante res); (b) to the universal canine features somehow
exhibited by Max, Meg, and Millie (the universals in
rebus); and (c) to the concept of a dog in a human mind
(the universals post res). The universals in rebus were
thought of as being inseparable from the individuals by
whom they were exhibited. Universals post res, which
constitute the terms of scientiﬁc propositions, were
thought of as being formed by a process of ‘‘conglomera-
tion’’ from individual forms received by the senses. This
raises the question of what such a process must be like in
order to convert the collected memories, or experience, of
what is normally a proper subset of all existing individual
cases into a true universal. Given the above-stated view on
universals in rebus, it seems that this process must involve
the abstraction of all the individual features with which
the universal features are inextricably united in the indi-
viduals; more alarmingly, perhaps, it must allow for terms
to be predicated of other terms with necessity, in spite of
the fact that our experience of the things referred to by
those terms is normally limited to a proper subset of all
existing individual cases (the problem of induction).
The standard late antique interpretation of Aristotle’s
theory of concept-formation assigns a crucial role in this
process to the active intellect. Exactly what the active intel-
lect is was explained very differently by the commentators:
for Alexander of Aphrodisias it is a single and external
entity, but for the Neoplatonic commentators it is part of
each individual human soul. Its function is to make poten-
tial objects of intellect into actual ones, as light makes
potential colors into actual ones. Sensible forms stored in
imagination are potential objects of intellect, so far every-
one agreed. But how are they reduced to intelligibility? The
Neoplatonists would say that they must be matched against
other forms, or rational principles (logoi), constantly being
inscribed in the soul by the active intellect. For them, it is
the reading of this script that Plato has in mind when he
formulates his theory of recollection. This theory, as
known from the Meno and the Phaedo, was universally
repudiated in Byzantium, since it was considered to entail
the pre-existence and even transmigration of souls.
It has been argued recently (Ierodiakonou, forthcom-
ing) that Eustratios introduces a Christian alternative to
both Plato’s theory of recollection and Aristotle’s theory of
concept-formation, which allows for innate knowledge
without necessitating the assumption of the pre-existence
of the soul. In a digression from his general introduction
to Posterior Analytics 2.19 (257.33–258.27), Eustratios
explains that the common and self-evident concepts in
the soul are resonances of the conceptions (or ‘‘intuitions,’’
epibolai) of the intellect. They are originally concealed
owing to the inﬂuence of the vegetative and the animal
parts of the soul, but with guidance from sense-perception
or rational account the rational soul will eventually arrive
at reﬂection upon them – which is not, Eustratios stresses,
the same as recollection. Ierodiakonou drew the conclu-
sion that Eustratios wished to ‘‘clearly distinguish his view
from those of Plato and Aristotle in part in order to be in
line with Christian dogma,’’ more speciﬁcally the doctrine
that the soul, when it is created, is created perfect (ibid.).
That Eustratios did have this Christian doctrine in
mind is borne out by a passage in his commentary on
Nicomachean Ethics 6.3, where Aristotle’s statement that
the principles must be better known than the conclusions
in order for there to be scientiﬁc knowledge is defended
as being ‘‘neither newfangled nor at loggerheads with
[the Christian doctrine of] the ﬁrst creation of man’’
(297.15–16). Here Eustratios explicitly states that the fact
that man is created perfect from the beginning entails that
he is active on the level of intellect, not only on that of
302 E
Epistemology, Byzantine

discursive thought, which is to say that he comprehends the
intelligibles immediately by simple intuition. But he can
only do this insofar as he retains the position allotted to him
by the Creator and directs his desire toward the intellectual
realm: since he inclines toward a sensual life, he is deprived
of his proper perfection and his intellectual eye is clouded.
This is why he has recourse to sense-perception: through its
activity, that is, the immediate cognition of particulars,
it provides the intellect with material from which to con-
struct universal concepts, which are likewise immediately
cognized and from which scientiﬁc propositions follow. In
this way, man is healed from his afﬂiction and can again
turn his attention toward the intellectual realm and his
Creator. As to its substance, intellect is not liable to destruc-
tion, but its activities in this world involve imperfect and
destructible things and will therefore perish. ‘‘It is natural,
then,’’ Eustratios concludes, ‘‘that the inductive construc-
tion of the axioms of the sciences supervenes on the original
perfection of the intellectual part of the soul and its subse-
quent defection’’ (298.4–6).
What is not so clear is to what extent Eustratios believed
that his view was different from Aristotle’s. The account in
the late antique commentators that is probably closest to
Eustratios’ is the commentary on De anima 3.4, 429b29–
430a2 by Philoponus, another Christian. Philoponus dis-
tinguishes between different degrees of ‘‘ﬁrst’’ as well as
‘‘second potentiality,’’ and does not hesitate to ascribe to
Aristotle the view that ‘‘the active intellect perfects the
potential intellect and brings it to actuality, not by placing
in it forms which are not there, but by bringing to light
forms that are latent and concealed, owing to the torpor
ensuing from birth’’ (40.34–37  Sophonias, 135.22–24).
Now, Eustratios ascribes to Aristotle the view that intellect
is potentially present in the soul from the beginning, and
brought to actuality through sense-perceptions (In An.
post. 257.30–32). He also interprets him as saying that
the soul, prompted by the senses, brings the rational
principles (logoi) in itself from a non-active to an active
state (265.18–24, and cf. 265.6–10), and he seems to agree
that this is true. On the other hand, he repudiates the view
that souls ‘‘substantially (kat’ ousian) proceed from poten-
tiality to actuality and come to cognition of the immediate
premisses through the senses’’ (258.22–23). It should be
noted, however, that he never ascribes this view to Aris-
totle; and so possibly, like Philoponus, he distinguishes the
substantial actualization that he denies from the actuali-
zation that he afﬁrms and ascribes to Aristotle, as starting
out from a more remote potentiality.
Even if Eustratios sought for a position that he felt was
‘‘in line with Christian dogma,’’ he evidently did not have to
abandon the paradigm of Neoplatonic Aristotelianism to
ﬁnd it. A position close to his was taken by Nikephoros
Choumnos (1250/1255–1327), in his essay Against Ploti-
nus. Choumnos’ express purpose is to prove that souls do
not exist prior to their bodies; he admits that the acquisi-
tion of knowledge poses a problem to which the theory of
recollection may at ﬁrst sight seem to offer the only solu-
tion; but this theory entails the pre-existence of souls to
their bodies, and therefore he submits an alternative theory.
According to the latter, since the soul is a perfect and ever-
moving, that is, eternally active, thing (as in Plato’s Phae-
drus 245c–e), its activities are likewise perfect and eternal.
Thus, the human intellect – which is created simultaneously
with the body – is exercising perfect knowledge from the
very start, although its activity is often obscured through its
immersion in ﬂesh and matter. In some domains, no exter-
nal aid is required; but in others, the intellect needs organs,
in the ﬁrst place discursive reason and opinion, and more
remotely, sense-perception and imagination, to tear apart
the material veil and show forth its cognitive light, which is
of such a nature and intensity as to saturate all knowledge.
What is commonly thought of as the acquisition of
knowledge, then, seems on Choumnos’ view to be in fact
only the intellect’s becoming aware of the actual knowl-
edge that it already has. In fact, his account is not dissim-
ilar to Neoplatonic accounts of recollection; yet he argues
vehemently that since knowledge, being a substantial
activity of the immortal soul, cannot be lost, that is,
forgotten, neither can it be recollected. It is not quite
clear whether the domains in which he considers no exter-
nal aid to be required include theology or mathematics, or
both. Probably he would assume, like Socrates in the
Meno, that discursive reason is needed to become aware
of mathematical knowledge. It is even less obvious exactly
how the veil surrounding the intellect is supposed to be
torn apart by the lower soul-faculties, but one may note
that there is no reference in Choumnos’ text to the exercise
of any Christian virtues or ascetic practices.
A rationalist epistemology of Neoplatonic type was
also propounded in Barlaam of Calabria’s First Letter
(1336), written in reply to Gregory Palamas’ doctrines.
Αccording to Barlaaam, scientiﬁc knowledge rests on
innate ‘‘substantial principles’’ (ousio¯deis logoi) in our
souls, which are images of the creative principles in the
Divine Intellect and thus indicative of the true causes of
the natures of things. In other writings, however, Barlaam
took a more empiricist stance (see Sinkewicz 1981). The
same apparent inconsistency is shown by his adversary,
Nikephoros Gregoras, who railed, in his Florentius
(c. 1333), against Barlaam’s Aristotelianism and the notion
that the ﬁrst principles of science can be created from
individual forms, pointing out that the latter are constantly
Epistemology, Byzantine E
303
E

changing. Later, however, in the context of his criticism of
Palamas’ doctrines, he argued that all scientiﬁc knowledge
has its ultimate source in ‘‘self-taught’’ sense-apprehension;
for God, he says, ‘‘has wisely distributed and deposited in
nature beforehand this kind of primitive (or ‘principle-
generating’, archegonous) roots like seeds, a very strong
support for all the scientiﬁc disciplines and proofs, on
the basis of which the very incontrovertible deductions
of the truth are brought to a conclusion’’ (Hist. 3:405.6–
406.17). A way to reconcile these passages might be to
assume that Gregoras found fault with Aristotle not so
much for being an empiricist on the source of knowledge
as for being a radical conceptualist on universals; it is the
conjunction of these two views that is asserted in the
Florentius to be incompatible with the view that there is
scientiﬁc knowledge. Empiricism requires the existence of
universal forms in the particulars; conversely, to save con-
ceptualism within the domain of natural philosophy, one
must have recourse to some other source of knowledge.
See also: ▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac,
Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions ▶Barlaam of Calabria
▶Epistemology
▶Eustratios
of
Nicaea
▶Gregory
Palamas ▶John Philoponus ▶Metaphysics, Byzantine
▶Nicholas Chamae¨tos Kabasilas ▶Nicomachean Ethics,
Commentaries on Aristotle’s ▶Nikephoros Blemmydes
▶Nikephoros Gregoras ▶Philosophical Psychology, Byz-
antine ▶Philosophy, Byzantine ▶Posterior Analytics,
Commentaries on Aristotle’s ▶Sense Perception, Theo-
ries of ▶Skepticism ▶Theodore Metochites ▶Universals
Bibliography
Primary Sources
(1885) Nicephori Blemmidae Epitomes isagogicae liber primus: Epitome
logica, ed. Wegelin J. In: Migne J-P, Patrologia graeca, vol 142. Paris,
pp 685–1004
(1892) Eustratii et Michaelis et anonyma in ethica Nicomachea
commentaria, ed. Heylbut G. In: CAG 20
(1904) Davidis prolegomena et in Porphyrii isagogen commentarium, ed.
Busse A. In: CAG 18.2
(1907)
Eustratii
in
analyticorum
posteriorum
librum
secundum
commentarium, ed. Hayduck M. In: CAG 21.1
(1966) Jean Philopon: Commentaire sur le De anima d’Aristote.
Traduction de Guillaume de Moerbeke, ed. Verbeke G. In: CLCAG
3. Louvain & Paris
Barlaam Calabro (1954) Epistole Greche. In: Schiro` G (ed) Istituto Siciliano
di Studi Bizantini e Neogreci. Testi e Monumenti. Testi. 1. Palermo
Choumnos Nikephoros (2002) 5os Logos: Antithetikos pros Plo¯tinon peri
psyche¯s. In: Chrestou pp 58–86
Metochites Theodoros (2003) Stoicheiosis astronomike 1:1–5. In: Byde´n
(2003) pp 416–474
Metochites Theodoros (2006) Poem 10. In: Polemis
Nicephorus Gregoras (1855) Historia Byzantina, vol 3, ed. Bekker I.
Corpus scriptorum historiae Byzantinae. Weber, Bonn
Secondary Sources
Byde´n B (2002) To every argument there is a counter-argument: Theodore
Metochites’ defence of scepticism (Semeiosis 61). In: Ierodiakonou
K (ed) Byzantine philosophy and its ancient sources. Oxford Uni-
versity Press, Oxford
Byde´n B (2003) Theodore Metochites’ Stoicheiosis astronomike and the
study of natural philosophy and mathematics in early Palaiologan
Byzantium. Studia Graeca et Latina Gothoburgensia 66. Acta
Universitatis Gothoburgensis, Go¨teborg
Chrestou KP (2002) To philosophiko ergo tou Nike¯phorou Choumnou.
Ekdotikos Oikos Kyromanos, Thessalonike
de Haas FAJ (2000) Recollection and potentiality in Philoponus. In:
Kardaun M, Spruyt J (eds) The winged chariot: collected essays on
Plato and Platonism in honour of L. M. de Rijk. Brill, Leiden
Demetrakopoulos
IA
(1999)
Nikolaou
Kabasila
Kata
Pyrro¯nos.
Plato¯nikos philoskeptikismos kai aristotelikos antiskeptikismos ste¯
buzantine¯ dianoe¯se¯ tou 14ou aio¯na. Parousia, Athens
Ierodiakonou K (forthcoming) Eustratios’ comments on Posterior Ana-
lytics B19. In: de Haas FJ, Leunissen M, Martijn M (eds) Interpreting
Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics in Late Antiquity and the Byzantine
Period. Brill, Leiden
Podskalsky G (1977) Theologie und Philosophie in Byzanz: Der Streit um
die
theologische
Methodik
in
der
spa¨tbyzantinischen
Geistesgeschichte (14./15. Jh.), seine systematischen Grundlagen
und seine historische Entwicklung. Byzantinisches Archiv 15. C. H.
Beck’sche Verlagsbuchhandlung, Munich
Polemis I (2006) Theodo¯ros Metochite¯s, Peri tou mathe¯matikou eidous te¯s
philosophias, kai malista peri tou harmonikou. Poie¯ma 10. Eisago¯ge¯,
kritike¯ ekdose¯, metaphrase¯, se¯meiso¯seis. Adolf M. Hakkert, Amsterdam
Sinkewicz RE (1981) The solutions addressed to George Lapithes by
Barlaam the Calabrian and their philosophical context. Mediaeval
Stud 43:151–217
Sinkewicz RE (1982) The doctrine of the knowledge of God in the early
writings of Barlaam the Calabrian. Mediaeval Stud 44:181–242
Eriugena, John Scottus
▶John Scottus Eriugena
Essence and Existence
JEFFREY C. WITT
Department of Philosophy
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA
USA
Abstract
The dispute over essence and existence has a long and
storied history in the Middle Ages, and for good reason.
304 E
Eriugena, John Scottus

For medieval thinkers these concepts form the backbone
of nearly every other metaphysical concern they have. The
scholastic tradition looks to Boethius and Avicenna to go
beyond an Aristotelian system that sees little need to make
a distinction between essence and existence. Through the
writings and disputes of Thomas Aquinas, Giles of Rome,
and Henry of Ghent among others, a highly sophisticated
debate took form about the nature of this distinction:
whether it is real, rational, or somewhere in between? It
was a debate that left a lasting imprint on the rest of
scholasticism, reaching all the way to Suarez. At stake in
the dispute are concerns about the complexity of the
created order, its created and therefore contingent status,
as well as concerns about the nature of possibility and its
knowability. Amid the highly technical debates ranging
from Boethius to Suarez, medieval thinkers knew that it
was in the precise and technical formulation of the rela-
tionship between essence and existence that such critical
issues were to be decided.
In 1982, John Wippel wrote: ‘‘A complete history of this
controversy concerning the relationship between essence
and
existence
remains
to
be
written’’
(Wippel
1982b:392n37). This claim stands as true today as it did
then. The dispute itself is as long as it is complicated.
Questions of interpretation are debated today almost as
ﬁercely as the problem itself in its own day. Given this
complexity, this article can only serve to point out the
general contours of the debate and to highlight the most
inﬂuential contributions.
Early Influences
To begin we must turn to Boethius. However, to turn here
ﬁrst is already to make an interpretative choice. On the
one hand, Boethius’ inﬂuence on the later scholastic dis-
putes on the question is unmistakable. On the other hand,
there is no scholarly consensus over whether Boethius
himself ever actually conceived of such a distinction
between essence and existence. The center of the contro-
versy is found in the second axiom laid down by Boethius
in a small theological treatise, referred to in its abbreviated
form as Quomodo substantiae. Here, Boethius writes:
diversum est esse et id quod est, ‘‘‘being’ and the ‘that
which is’ are diverse.’’ Evidently, Boethius believes
something to be distinct, but determining just what
the esse and the id quod est are has proved to be an
extremely difﬁcult task.
There are some who see Boethius as simply making
an Aristotelian distinction between primary (id quod est)
and secondary (esse) substances (see Nash-Marshall
2000:234). However, others think Boethius is going
beyond Aristotle and identifying existence as a separate
ontological component of every existing individual.
Pierre Hadot, who pays particular attention to the Neo-
Platonic inﬂuences of Boethius, argues that the distinc-
tion in Boethius is not between essence and a concrete
instantiation. He insists, rather, that it is a distinction
between the absolute act of existence and the individual
being, which receives its own existence through its par-
ticipation in the said act of existence (Hadot 1963).
Granting this interpretation, we can see a real beginning
to the essence–existence distinction. The essence of the id
quod est cannot be said to be the cause of its existence.
Rather, the id quod est is a composition between the abso-
lute act of existence, ipsum esse, and the ﬁnite form that
participates in that existence. By such participation, form
limits and constricts the absolute existence to its ﬁnite
character as it exists in the id quod est (see Nash-Marshall
2000:231).
In the end, the right interpretation of Boethius is less
important to the history of this medieval discussion than
what his medieval successors took away from Boethius.
Here, they saw proof that an Aristotelian essence of a thing
was not sufﬁcient to account for its actuality. This essence
required something else, namely, esse and the causal efﬁ-
cacy of a divine creator. Much of the subsequent contro-
versy is a reoccurring consideration of precisely this issue:
is essence sufﬁcient for existence, and, if not, what else is
needed, where does it come from, and how is it related to
its essence?
In addition to the early inﬂuence of Boethius on later
scholastics, the work of Avicenna must also be recognized.
While Boethius’ contribution focuses primarily on the
notion of the absolute activity of esse and the insufﬁciency
of an essence to explain existence, later scholastic thinkers
generally looked to Avicenna to ﬁnd a strong notion of
a thing’s essence as having a kind of reality in its own right,
distinct from its concrete existence. This is particularly
noteworthy, given that it remains controversial whether
this emphasis on essence actually distorts Avicenna’s posi-
tion. Some scholars continue to argue that, in the end,
existence is the true primary concept for Avicenna (e.g.,
Druart 2006:337).
The locus classicus of this distinction, as Avicenna
describes it, is found in his Metaphysics of the Healing,
Book I, chap. 5. It is here that he makes a famous distinc-
tion between what he calls the ‘‘existent’’ and the ‘‘thing.’’
The former, for Avicenna, is the concrete existing thing
replete with all the attributes and accidental predications
that come with being a part of the actual world. The latter –
the ‘‘thing’’ – is that which has a nature that makes it
what it is (I.5.9). This nature of a ‘‘thing’’ is the true and
Essence and Existence E
305
E

essential core of any particular existent. Now, somewhat
surprisingly, the term existence can be predicated of both
the ‘‘existent’’ and the ‘‘thing.’’ The ‘‘thing,’’ Avicenna says,
can be signiﬁed by the term existence, but only to signify,
what he calls, the proper existence of some entity. But
existence can also signify the afﬁrmative existence of an
entity. While the former sense of existence indicates the
‘‘whatness’’ of any reality stripped of every concomitant
feature, the latter is meant to signify something beyond the
mere essence of a ‘‘thing,’’ namely, that the ‘‘thing’’ is.
For Avicenna, that a kind of existence is predicated of
a ‘‘thing’’ and its essence is not necessarily an indication
that he thinks an essence somehow has its own separate
ontological status and then is subsequently composed
with a further existence. On the contrary, it is more likely
that this is his way of indicating that the same entity can be
looked at from different perspectives. We can, on the one
hand, consider something as an extra-mental reality par-
taking of all its accidental properties. From this vantage
point, we are emphasizing its afﬁrmative existence and its
status as an existent. But we can also see the same reality
stripped of its accidental characteristics including its
extra- or even intra-mental existence. Here, we are atten-
tive to the essential core of what exists, and thus we are
attentive to its proper existence as a ‘‘thing.’’ (See the entry
on Avicenna, sect. 3.)
With this said, it is important to recognize that scho-
lastic commentators have not always read Avicenna this
way. In fact, many contemporary scholars have been work-
ing hard to combat precisely the reading given by these
later scholastic interpreters (e.g., Rahman 1958, 1981).
Henry of Ghent, for one, points to a certain text in Book
V of Avicenna’s Metaphysics as the source of his under-
standing of the ‘‘being of essence’’ or esse essentiae (Henry
of Ghent, Quodlibet 1, q. 9). With this phrase – which
would quickly enter into scholastic parlance generally – he
meant to attribute a kind of independent existence to an
essence prior to its status as actually existing. In Book V,
cited by Henry, Avicenna does give explicit attention to the
proper existence as distinct from its afﬁrmative existence.
Here, Avicenna is at pains to identify the whatness or
essence of any reality, stripped of all concomitant and
extraneous features. In considering animality, he notes
that even though, inasmuch as it exists, it ‘‘exists with
another,’’ its proper existence remains distinct. Any addi-
tional element, such as its actual or afﬁrmative existence,
whether in the mind or extra-mental reality, should be
seen as an addition that ‘‘occurs to it’’ (V.1.18 trans.
Marmura 2005:153). To the minds of his scholastic
readers, this phrase, ‘‘occurs to it,’’ suggests that the
‘‘thing’’ with its proper existence need not be seen as
dependent on the mind or some concrete instantiation
for its meaning and reality. Concern will often be raised
about the somewhat ambiguous ontological status of the
being of an essence independent of its actual existence.
Suarez, for one, will point to this as a fatal ambiguity that
mars the discussion of essence and existence from this
point forward (see Wells 1962:437, 444). Despite these
ambiguities and possible concerns, Avicenna remains
extremely important. It is from these inﬂuential passages
that Aquinas and all of the major thinkers in the thirteenth
century will take their starting point.
The Scholastic Controversies
Aquinas supplies ready evidence of Avicenna’s inﬂuence as
well as the nature of the scholastic reception suggested
above. In his commentary on Aristotle’s Metaphysics, he
offers what will become the general characterization of
Avicenna’s position in the Middle Ages. There, he writes
that Avicenna is correct to assert that existence is other
than its essence, but, if existence as ‘‘occurring to’’ (accidit
ei) an essence is to be understood as a kind of accident,
then he misspoke (bk. 4, lect. 2, n. 558). (For an argument
that this is not what Avicenna is doing, see Rahman 1981.)
Aquinas does not want us to see a thing’s existence as
something different from the concrete existing individual
itself. He writes that ‘‘it designates the same thing as the
term which is applied to it by reason of its essence’’
(n. 558). While Aquinas’ position on essence and existence
is most famous for its insistence on a real distinction
between essence and existence, he does not allow himself
to suggest that essence might have an existence of its own
or some reality apart from its existence: thus, his rejection
of Avicenna’s language of existence as ‘‘occurring’’ to an
essence.
Aquinas’ most deﬁnitive treatment on the subject is, of
course, found in his treatise De ente et essentia. This is one
of Aquinas’ earliest works and marks the beginning of the
most formative period of the dispute over essence and
existence. In this work, he indicates one of the major
theological issues at stake in this question for thirteenth-
century theologians. He also provides one of the key
arguments that will be considered again and again either
as support for the real distinction or as an argument that
must be refuted.
The key theological issue at stake for Aquinas is the
simplicity of God. Aquinas’ metaphysical presuppositions
force him to deny any material composition in angels. But
this leaves him with a real difﬁculty of explaining just why
angels do not possess the same absolute simplicity as God.
He ﬁnds his answer to this conundrum in the real distinc-
tion between essence and existence. While angels do not
306 E
Essence and Existence

have a material composition, they remain like other mate-
rial creatures on account of the fact that their existence is
not their own, but is received from another (DEE, c. 4,
para. 6).
The most compelling argument that Aquinas gives
for this distinction and the consequent complexity in
creatures is found in the fourth chapter of his treatise.
He argues that whatever cannot be conceived of apart
from something is in no way distinct from it. But, he
reasons, the essence of man and of a phoenix, for that
matter, can be conceived without being conceived as
existing. Thus, their essence and existence must be dis-
tinct (DEE, c. 4, para. 6). Those who want to deny the real
distinction will repeatedly face this objection and more
often than not will deny the minor premise, viz., that an
essence can truly be conceived without also conceiving its
existence.
Aquinas’ treatise marks one of the ﬁrst formalized
scholastic defenses of the real distinction. However, his is
not the only inﬂuential voice. In fact, what later came to be
identiﬁed as the Thomistic position may owe less to
Aquinas himself than to one of his students, Giles of
Rome. Giles treats the distinction between essence and
existence in several places, but his two most explicit
works on the topic are his Theoremata de esse et essentia
and his later Quaestiones disputatae de esse et essentia. With
these two works, undoubtedly inﬂuenced by his well-
documented disagreements with his Parisian colleagues,
Henry of Ghent and Godfrey of Fontaines, Giles
established himself as one of the central disputants in
perhaps the most contentious debates at Paris during the
1270s and 1280s.
Though divine simplicity seems to be the dominant
concern of Aquinas, in these works and others, Giles
repeatedly indicates that he thinks the real issue at stake
here is the possibility of creation and the truly contingent
nature of reality. Without a real composition, Giles argues
that all creation is impossible and all reality is in fact
necessary (e.g., TCC, prop. 29). This is something that
comes out clearly in the ﬁfth theorem of his Theoremata
as he provides an analogy as to how we are to understand
this composition. He writes: ‘‘to understand the creation
of beings, which requires a composition of essence and
existence, we may think of that kind of generation which
Plato speaks of’’ (TEE, th. 5, Murray 1953:37). Giles is
referring to the way a Platonic Form, even as it enters into
a kind of composition with the particular thing, remains
its own distinct and separate entity. He compares this to
the way the ‘‘self-existing’’ existence remains separate from
the existence of a thing, ‘‘in so far as from this separate
existence the existence ﬂows into the essence of a creature
in which the essence participates’’ (TEE, th. 5, Murray
1953:37).
Two elements of this description need to be empha-
sized since they are repeatedly afﬁrmed by Giles. The ﬁrst
is that existence must be seen as its own reality apart
from its attachment to any essence. Thus, the composi-
tion
of
essence
and
existence
must
be
seen
as
a composition of two things (duae res) (e.g., TEE, th. 19;
QDEE q. 9). The second, which follows from this, is that
Giles, unlike Aquinas, introduces the separability criterion
of the real distinction; namely, he insists that essence and
existence are, in principle, separable things. Both of these
elements will become essential components of the stan-
dard formulation of the real distinction. Likewise, it will
increasingly become the standard description of the Tho-
mistic position, much to the dismay of those Thomists
who believe Giles has severely distorted the true position
of Aquinas.
Giles is not immune from the critiques of his own
contemporaries either. While among them is, as noted
above, Godfrey of Fontaines, his most severe critic is
Henry of Ghent. Henry looks at Giles’ description of
essence and existence as two realities (duae res) and insists
that if essence is going to be considered an independent
thing apart from its afﬁrmative or actual existence,
then essence and existence cannot really be distinct
(Quodlibet 1, q. 9). In order to explain why this is so,
Henry introduces what he calls an ‘‘intentional distinc-
tion’’ between essence and existence. With echoes of Avi-
cenna in the background, Henry argues that if essence is
separable and prior to its actual existence in the world, as
Giles suggests, then it must retain a kind of existence and
therefore cannot really be separated from existence. To
clarify his position Henry identiﬁes two kinds of existence:
the being of the essence (esse essentiae) and the being of
existence (esse existentiae). Henry insists that an essence
prior to its creation has a kind of existence that it receives
from its formal cause (i.e., the ideas of the divine mind or
the divine exemplar). To say something has esse existentiae,
therefore, is not to attribute existence to something that
previously existed without existence (as if this made
sense), nor is it to attribute existence to a thing twice.
Rather, it is to indicate a new relation of efﬁcient causality
in addition to the relation of formal causality between God
and the creature. Thus, Henry concludes that there is not
a real distinction between essence and existence, but an
intentional one (Quodlibet 10, q. 7). While notoriously
ambiguous, the notion of an intentional distinction is
generally taken to mean that there is a recognizable differ-
ence between a thing’s existence and a thing’s essence that
is not merely a product of the mind. Nevertheless, contra
Essence and Existence E
307
E

Giles, there is no sense that essence and existence can ever
be truly separate or that one can be entirely without the
other.
Besides the disagreement over terms and formula-
tions, Henry’s different position can also be attributed to
a difference in concern from either that of Aquinas or
Giles. While Aquinas is concerned with divine simplicity
and Giles is preoccupied with preserving the possibility of
creation, Henry is most explicitly concerned with preserv-
ing a kind of scientiﬁc knowledge of possibilities. For him,
having knowledge about the merely actual is deemed
insufﬁcient as long as the actual could, in principle, be
different. To have knowledge, then, derived from what is
merely possible is thought to provide a much higher level
of certainty. One of the most conspicuous places where
this concern is raised is in Henry’s interest in the proofs for
God’s existence. Knowledge of God’s existence derived
from the actual existence of a creature was thought by
Henry to be inferior and less certain than knowledge of
God’s existence derived from the mere possibility of crea-
turely existence (see SQO a. 25). However, in order for
such knowledge to be possible, he needs to ﬁnd an object
of such a science. Clearly, the ability to posit a kind of
existence for not yet actualized, but possible, essences is
a key component of preserving this kind of knowledge.
While the voices of Aquinas, Giles, and Henry are
certainly the most inﬂuential for any further discussions
of the distinction within the scholastic tradition, some of
the earliest historical perspectives on this distinction
divide up the history of the dispute slightly differently.
No one has done more to shape the way we think about the
history of the dispute than Francis Suarez. In his 31st
question of his Disputationes metaphysicae he recognizes
three distinct schools of thought.
The ﬁrst school is what Suarez labels the thomisticae.
He asserts that this school holds that the distinction
between essence and existence was a distinction between
duae res, two distinct or independent realities that could in
principle be separated (DM 31, I, 3–10). Thus, we can see
how dramatically the inﬂuence of Giles would come to
distort the original position of Aquinas for centuries.
The second school is identiﬁed as the scotisticae.
Suarez describes the distinction defended by Scotus and
those of his school as a modal distinction between the
essence as a genuine reality and its existence as particular
mode of being. While this is the picture that posterity
attributes to Scotus, we receive little clarity on the matter
by looking to Scotus himself. Scotus devotes little to no
explicit positive attention to how he views the relationship
between essence and existence (O’Brien 1964:61). What
little there is to be found comes indirectly from
a discussion on the nature of Christ and his human exis-
tence (Ord. III, d. 6, q. 1). From this discussion, Suarez
concludes that this modal distinction is a weaker type of
real distinction, where the essence remains an indepen-
dent reality, but that the same cannot be said of existence.
As a mode, existence acquires an ontological status similar
to that of whiteness, which cannot exist without a subject,
even though the subject can exist without whiteness (DM
31, I, 11). Contemporary scholars remain divided over
whether Scotus ever actually recognized a modal distinc-
tion and where it fell among the distinctions of real,
formal, and rational. Suarez further shows his lack of
historical precision on the matter by attributing this posi-
tion to Henry of Ghent as well. While this is not
a particularly accurate description of Henry’s position,
Suarez certainly characterizes him this way because of
the resemblance of the intentional distinction to Scotus’
modal distinction.
Finally, Suarez points to a third historical position,
which asserts that the essence and existence of a creature
are distinguished by reason alone. Under this heading,
Suarez includes an eclectic mix of people that cannot be
said to form one particular school. Here, he includes
Godfrey of Fontaines, Durand of St. Pourcain, Peter
Auriol, and Gregory of Rimini among many others
(DM 31, I, 12). Having mentioned the nominalist Gregory
of Rimini, it is notable that Suarez fails to mention Wil-
liam of Ockham, who should be included in such a list.
And while no one position can capture such an eclectic
mix of people, Ockham’s rejection of any thing other than
a rational distinction between essence and existence is nota-
ble for its simplicity and reliance on the formulation of the
real distinction provided by Giles. In Quodlibet 2, q. 7,
Ockham considers the claim that essence and existence
are two distinct things (duae res) and therefore separable.
He concludes that if essence and existence are really two
things, they must be either substances or accidents. But,
being neither, they therefore cannot be two things nor can
they be separated. Thus, no real distinction exists.
Final Remarks
Suarez’ historical survey of this distinction, while perhaps
misleading at times, is nevertheless helpful in that he
brings a critical eye to the long tradition that has preceded
him. In ending his survey, he points to what he sees as
a critical ambiguity that has haunted the dispute as far
back as Avicenna. For him, this ambiguity lies in the
notion of essence and its status as an independent reality
(res), a proper existence, or the being of an essence (esse
essentiae). Suarez argues that in any conception of the
distinction between essence and existence, an essence can
308 E
Essence and Existence

be seen both as an actuality and as a mere potentiality.
However, it is extremely important to be aware of which
perspective one takes. He argues that any real distinction,
either between two things or a thing and its mode, is
simply nonsensical when essence is considered as actual.
What else can we mean by an actual essence accept that it is
in existence? Thus, there is no distinction in this case. But
if essence or the esse essentiae is conceived as the mere
potentiality of some actual essence, then clearly actual
existence need not be involved. However, in this case,
Suarez insists that we are not talking about some reality
or a thing, but about no-thing (DM 31, II, 1). In this way,
he can explain away what has always been one of the most
critical arguments on behalf of the real distinction since
Aquinas ﬁrst raised it: namely, that it appears that we can
think of an essence apart from its existence. Suarez will
gladly admit this, yet he will point out that what is being
thought of in this case is not the actual essence of some
reality, but a potentiality or mere possibility that is distinct
from existence. Moreover, this possibility cannot be attrib-
uted to some existing essence. Rather, the possibility
belongs to the potency within the cause of the actual
essence, not the essence itself. In the case of creatures,
the possibility of an actual essence lies in the potency of
God to make such a reality exist (DM 31, II, 2). In this
light, the afﬁrmative existence (esse existentia) becomes,
for Suarez, a superﬂuous entity. It can bear no relation to
the nonentity of a potential essence, nor is it needed to
accompany an actual essence, for such an entity, simply by
being actual, already exists.
In this ﬁnal analysis, Suarez draws out what has been
a central tension of this controversy almost from its incep-
tion. He draws attention to the fact that the problem of
essence and existence is really a problem about the nature
of possibility and reality. It is a dispute that asks about the
ontological status of possibilities. It asks: how can such
possibilities be known scientiﬁcally if they do not ﬁrst have
some ontological weight? It is equally a question about the
source of possibility. If possibility is a feature of language
and derived from the actual world, then in what sense can
the world be said to be contingent? If possibility retains its
own independent status, does this allow for contingency,
but at the same time limit the range of God’s power? But if
possibility is identiﬁed with God’s power absolutely, then
is there any sense in which possibility can be understood
scientiﬁcally, and does this render God’s actions altogether
inscrutable and ultimately arbitrary? The dispute over
essence and existence, therefore, forms the metaphysical
backbone of nearly every other issue important to medi-
eval thinkers. Thus, it is only appropriate that Aquinas
begins his treatise on essence and existence with the saying
of the Philosopher: ‘‘a small error in the beginning leads to
a large error in the end.’’ It is undoubtedly the scholastics’
deep appreciation of this point that motivates their tireless
investigation of essence and existence and the metaphysi-
cal subtleties that follow.
See also: ▶Being ▶Boethius ▶Giles of Rome ▶Henry of
Ghent ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶John Duns
Scotus ▶Thomas Aquinas
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Aquinas Thomas (1926) De ente et essentiae (DEE). In: Le ‘De ente et
essentia’ de S. Thomas d’ Aquin. Texte e´tabli d’apre`s les manuscrits
Parisiens, ed. Roland-Gosselin MD. Bibliothe`que Thomiste, VIII.
Belgium. (English translation in Maurer A (1968) On being and
essence. Pontiﬁcal Institute of Medieval Studies, Toronto)
Avicenna (2005) Metaphysics of the healing, trans. Marmura ME.
Brigham Young University Press, Provo Utah
Boethius (1973) Quomodo substantiae. In: The theological tractates,
trans. Stewart HF, Rand EK, Tester SJ. LCL 74. Harvard University
Press, Cambridge
Duns Scotus John (1950–) Ordinatio III. In: Opera omnia, IX. Vatican
Polyglot Press, Vatican City
Giles of Rome (1503) Quaestiones disputatae de esse et essentiae
(QDEE). Venice
Giles of Rome (1554) Theoremata de Corpore Christi (TCC). (repr.
Minerva, Frankfurt am Main, 1968)
Giles of Rome (1930) Theoremata de esse et essentiae (TEE), ed.
Hocedez E. Museum Lessianum, Louvain. (English translation in
Murray M (1953) Theorems on existence and essence. Marquette
University Press, Milwaukee)
Henry of Ghent (1520) Summae questionum ordinariarum (SQO),
2 vols. Paris. (repr. The Franciscan Institute Press, St. Bonaventure,
1953)
Henry of Ghent (1979–) Quodlibeta in Henrici de Gandavo quodlibet, ed.
Macken R. Louvain University Press, Louvain
Suarez Francisco (1856–1877) Disputationes metaphysicae (DM). In:
Opera omnia, XXV–XXVI, Vives. (English translation of disputation
XXXI in Wells N (1983) On the essence of ﬁnite being as such, on the
existence of that essence and their distinction. Marquette University
Press, Marquette)
William of Ockham (1967–1986) Quodlibet II. Quodlibeta septem, ed.
Wey JC. Opera theologica, IX. Franciscan Institute Press, St. Bona-
venture.
(English
translation
in
Freddoso
AJ,
Kelley
FE
(1991) Quodlibetal questions. Yale University Press, New Haven)
Secondary Sources
Druart T (2006) Metaphysics. In: Adamson P, Taylor RC (eds) Cambridge
companion to Arabic philosophy. Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, pp 97–120
Hadot P (1963) La distincition de L’etre et de L’etant dans le ‘De
Hebdomandibus’ de Boece. In: Wilpert P (ed) Die Metaphysik im
Mittelalater: Ihr Ursprung and ihre Bedeutung, vol 2. Gruyter, Berlin,
pp 147–153
Hocedez E (1927) Gilles de Rome et Henri de Gand sur la distinction reele
(1276–1287). Gregorianum 8:358–384
Essence and Existence E
309
E

Kopaczynski G (1978) Some Franciscans on St. Thomas’ essence-
existence doctrine. Franciscan Stud 38:283–298
Marrone S (1988) Henry of Ghent and Duns Scotus on the knowledge of
being. Speculum 63(1):22–57
Marrone S (1998) Duns Scotus on metaphysical potency and possibility.
Franciscan Stud 56:256–289
McGinnis J (2005) The Avicennan sources for Aquinas on being: supple-
mental remarks to Brian Davies’ ‘Kenny on Aquinas on being’. Mod
Schoolman 82(2):131–142
Nash P (1950) Giles of Rome on Boethius’ ‘Diversum est esse et id quod
est’. Mediaevel Stud 12:57–91
Nash-Marshall S (2000) Participation and the good: a study in Boethian
metaphysics. Crossroad, New York
O’Brien A (1964) Duns Scotus’ teaching on the distinction between
essence and existence. New Scholasticism 38:61–77
Rahman F (1958) Essence and existence in Avicenna. Mediaeval Renaiss
Stud 4:1–16
Rahman F (1981) Essence and existence in Ibn Sı¯na¯: the myth and the
reality. Hamdard Islamicus 4(1):3–14
Wells N (1960) Capreolus on essence and existence. Mod Schoolman
38:1–24
Wells N (1962) Suarez, historian and critic of the modal distinction
between essential being and existential being. New Scholasticism
36:419–444
Wells N (1966) Existence: history and problematic. Monist 50:34–43
Wippel J (1974) Godfrey of Fontaines and Henry of Ghent’s theory of
intentional distinction between essence and existence. In: Ko¨hler T
(ed) Sapientiae procerum amore. Melanges Medievistes Offertes
a Dom Jean Pierre Muller O.S.B. Editrice Anselmiana, Rome
Wippel J (1982a) The relationship between essence and existence in late-
thirteenth-century thought: Giles of Rome, Henry of Ghent, Godfrey
of Fontaines, and James of Viterbo. In: Morewedge P (ed) Philoso-
phies of existence: ancient and medieval. Fordham University Press,
New York, pp 131–164
Wippel J (1982b) Essence and existence. In: Kretzmann N, Kenny A,
Pinborg J (eds) The Cambridge history of later medieval philosophy.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 385–410
Wippel J (1990) The Latin Avicenna as a source of Thomas Aquinas’s
metaphysics. FZPhTh 1(1):51–90
Zedler B (1976) Another look at Avicenna. New Scholasticism 50:504–521
Ethics
BONNIE KENT
Department of Philosophy
University of California, Irvine, School of Humanities
Irvine, CA
USA
Abstract
Neoplatonists, who argued for the immortality of the soul
and complete happiness only after the death of the body,
seemed to early medieval thinkers the best of ancient
moral philosophers. The study of Aristotle’s Nicomachean
Ethics in the thirteenth century did not altogether change
this perception. It did mark the beginning of heated
debates about what people can know by reason, unaided
by special grace, about human freedom of choice, the
relation between virtue and happiness, and a host of
other issues. Naturally acquired virtues, which play only
a small role in the ethics of Thomas Aquinas, gained
greater importance in the ethics of later masters. Taking
a closer look at Aristotle’s Ethics, fourteenth-century mas-
ters wondered which of his various claims were meant to
be conceptual, not merely generalizations about empirical
psychology. Does Aristotle think that moral virtues are by
their very nature inseparable, so that there is a necessary
connection between them, or only that people rarely
acquire one moral virtue without acquiring all the others?
Arguments focused especially on what virtuous disposi-
tions explain about morally good actions. If only someone
with a virtuous disposition can choose morally good acts
for good reasons, how can they make the choices necessary
to acquire a virtuous disposition? Aristotle’s theory looks
circular. Maybe virtuous dispositions instead explain how
someone can choose morally good actions consistently,
easily, and with pleasure. But do these factors make the
actions any better in moral terms? If not, do virtuous
dispositions truly ﬁgure in ethical theory, or are they
important only in psychological accounts of human
action? These fourteenth-century arguments represent
a signiﬁcant advance in ethical theorizing, at least as
philosophers understand it today.
A full account of medieval ethics would have to include the
Byzantine, Muslim, and Jewish traditions, each with its
own periodization and leading theorists. Here we shall
focus on medieval ethics in the Latin West, which many
think reached its peak in the thirteenth century, with the
study of Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics. The work of
Thomas Aquinas (d. 1274) attracts particular attention
by today’s philosophers. Indeed, interest in the ethics of
Aristotle and Aquinas runs so high that two clariﬁcations
are necessary.
First, scholars of the Latin West did not need Aristotle
to introduce them to the naturalistic ethical theories of
antiquity. They learned about Stoic and Neoplatonic
ethics – even something about Epicureanism – from
works by Cicero, Seneca, Macrobius, and many other
authors. With no access to Aristotle’s Ethics at all, Peter
Abelard (d. 1142) developed an impressively complete
ethical theory. Second, Aquinas belonged to the very ﬁrst
generation of Latin scholars to study the complete text of
Aristotle’s Ethics. Masters of later generations usually gave
the kind of naturally acquired virtues that Aristotle
310 E
Ethics

describes a larger role in their ethical theories than
Aquinas himself did. Reading only selections from
Aquinas’ work, people today sometimes mistake his dis-
cussions of God-given virtues for discussions of naturally
acquired virtues. A closer look at Aquinas’ Summa
theologiae reveals that naturally acquired virtues play
only a small, strictly subordinate role in his ethical theory.
In Questions 63 and 65 of the Prima secundae (the ﬁrst
part of the second part of the Summa), Aquinas argues
that all virtues we acquire through our own resources,
without any special grace, are intrinsically imperfect or
incomplete (imperfectus). They constitute virtues only in
a relative sense (secundum quid), for they have as their end
the imperfect happiness attainable in this life, not the
ultimate end of complete happiness in the afterlife.
Aquinas therefore places more weight on faith, hope, and
charity: theological virtues supernaturally ‘‘infused’’ by
God. More important, he posits a long list of infused
moral virtues with the same names as their naturally
acquired counterparts (justice, courage, temperance,
etc.). These God-given moral virtues, presented by
Aquinas as virtues simpliciter, differ in kind, not merely
in degree, from naturally acquired virtues. They take as
their rule divine law, not human reason, and can be
increased only by God, not by our own actions. According
to Aquinas, seven other God-given dispositions rank even
higher infused moral virtues on the scale of excellence.
These are the Gifts of the Holy Spirit discussed in patristic
writings and mentioned in scripture: wisdom, knowledge,
understanding, counsel, courage, piety, and fear.
The questions about grace and merit with which the
Prima secundae ends represent a transition to the Secunda
secundae (the second part of the second part), where
Aquinas seldom even mentions naturally acquired virtues.
He organizes this part of the Summa around seven God-
given virtues: the three theological virtues of faith, hope,
and charity, followed by the cardinal virtues of prudence,
justice, courage, and temperance. More speciﬁc God-given
virtues appear as parts of the cardinals: either as integral
parts of a cardinal virtue, different species (‘‘subjective’’
parts), or related secondary virtues that an individual
might or might not develop (‘‘potential’’ parts). The
seven Gifts are included, too, with four woven into the
section on theological virtues, and the remaining three
woven into the section on the cardinal virtues.
Other than Aquinas’ fellow Dominicans, most later
medieval thinkers rejected his dual scheme of naturally
acquired and infused moral virtues. The secular masters
Henry of Ghent (d. 1293) and Godfrey of Fontaines
(d. 1306/1309), the Franciscans John Duns Scotus
(d. 1308) and William of Ockham (d. 1347), even the
Dominican Durand of St. Pourc¸ain (d. 1334), all argued
strongly against positing moral virtues infused by God.
They thought a simpler scheme, with only naturally
acquired virtues and the infused virtues of faith, hope,
and charity, far superior. The growing importance
attached to naturally acquired virtues drew sharp criticism
from the Augustinian Gregory of Rimini (d. 1358). In his
commentary on Book II of the Sentences (dist. 26–28, q. 1),
Gregory argued that only God-given moral virtues are
genuine virtues; nobody lacking God’s special grace can
even perform a morally good act. Gregory listed Aquinas
among the ‘‘saints and doctors’’ who agreed with him. In
fact, Aquinas occupied a middle ground between the
warring factions; but at least Gregory came closer to
understanding his ethics than readers who overestimate
its Aristotelian aspects.
Can one even abstract a moral philosophy from
Aquinas’ works? Of course, the answer depends on one’s
conception of moral philosophy. Medieval discussions of
the subject changed considerably over time. We might
distinguish roughly between three periods: the ﬁrst,
when most scholars took Neoplatonic ethics as the ﬁnest
example of ancient moral philosophy; the second period,
beginning in the early thirteenth century and ending in
1277, when theologians at Paris successfully opposed
a new, more narrow conception of moral philosophy;
and the third, enormously diverse period from the end
of the thirteenth century onward, when scholars turned
more toward problems of ethical theory. One such prob-
lem was whether ethics can qualify as a ‘‘science’’ in the
strict Aristotelian sense.
Moral Philosophy and Moral Science
Scholars of the Roman Empire divided philosophy into
logic, physics, and ethics, giving ethics pride of place. The
main purpose of philosophy as a whole was the same as the
purpose of moral philosophy: to articulate a conception of
the highest or supreme good (summum bonum) – that
which makes us happy and which we seek strictly for its
own sake – and to explain how we can attain it. In order to
explain how we can attain it philosophers had to specify
the role of virtue. Is virtue constitutive of, partly consti-
tutive of, or instrumentally related to the happy life?
Equally important, philosophers were expected to present
their view of God (or the gods) and spell out the implica-
tions for human life. While they were free to claim, as
Epicureans did, that the soul dies with the body and that
the gods take no interest in human affairs, it was incum-
bent upon them to argue for these points.
Augustine (d. 430) suggested that pagan thinkers got
the big questions right but usually got the answers wrong.
Ethics E
311
E

For him the supreme good was God, not happiness, virtue,
or any other human state of mind. In Book VIII, Chapter 9
of City of God (De civitate Dei) Augustine praised ‘‘the
Platonists’’ – meaning Neoplatonists – for recognizing that
the soul is immortal, that God is the supreme Good, and
that our own happiness lies in the enjoyment of God.
Nevertheless, he faulted all pagan philosophers for teach-
ing that we can make ourselves good and happy.
For Augustine, both virtue and happiness are gifts of
God’s grace, not natural consequences of human self-
development.
Augustine’s idea of moral philosophy survived well
into the twelfth century. Consider, for example, Abelard’s
Dialogue (Collationes) between a Philosopher, a Jew, and
a Christian. Describing ethics as the branch of learning at
which all others aim, the Christian suggests that there are
differences only about how to name it. Christians call this
discipline ‘‘divinity’’ because it aims at reaching God,
whereas philosophers call it ‘‘morals,’’ because people
come to God by means of good behavior. Not only does
Abelard’s Philosopher agree, he also agrees that ethics
concerns the supreme good and how we attain it, that
the soul is immortal, and that philosophers look forward
to happiness in the afterlife.
The thirteenth century witnessed striking changes in
the intellectual milieu. With the rise of universities came
conﬂicts between two newly created professional classes:
the faculty of theology and the (lower) faculty of arts,
dedicated to the study of logic, grammar, and rhetoric,
and Aristotle’s works. Thanks to the labors of translators,
a vast body of material about natural philosophy, psychol-
ogy, and ethics became available in a fairly short time – not
only works by Aristotle but also works by various com-
mentators, including and especially the Muslim commen-
tator Averroes. While this new material attracted interest
in all universities, members of the Paris arts faculty
embraced it with exceptional enthusiasm. Bonaventure
(d. 1274), Aquinas, and other theologians soon began
writing and preaching against doctrines circulating in
arts: the denial that the individual soul is immortal, that
humans have free choice, and other doctrines many con-
sidered ruinous to moral philosophy.
The controversy at Paris came to a head in 1277, when
the bishop condemned over 200 theses as ‘‘obvious and
loathsome errors.’’ Among them were the claims that
‘‘Happiness is had in this life and not in another,’’ that
‘‘After death a human being loses every good,’’ and sundry
theses either denying or limiting the will’s free choice – all
propositions the bishop believed members of the arts
faculty had declared ‘‘true according to philosophy.’’ The
condemnation did not imply that philosophy proved the
condemned propositions false, only that it did not prove
them true, and no mention was made of Aristotle. In
theology as well as arts, at Paris and elsewhere, Aristotle
remained the most heavily cited philosophical authority
until the end of the Middle Ages.
Some masters continued the Neoplatonic pattern,
treating as central to moral philosophy the immortality
of the individual soul and happiness in the afterlife.
Others, convinced that we cannot know these truths by
natural reason unaided by grace, conceived of moral phi-
losophy along different lines. The study of Aristotle’s
works
raised
important
new
issues
and
generally
transformed the language of debate. In substance, though,
medieval ethics remained heavily eclectic. Most scholars,
even masters of arts, had at best a weak sense of the
historical Aristotle. Sometimes their distortions of his
Ethics arose from efforts to interpret it charitably; some-
times they probably owe more to ignorance of what the
text actually says.
One should not assume that most medieval scholars
studied Aristotle’s Ethics in the period after 1246–1248,
when they had access (in theory) to a complete Latin
translation of the work. While virtually all students of
arts and theology heard lectures on some books of the
Ethics, many never heard lectures on all of it, let alone read
the text. The references to Aristotle with which they
embroider their works often come from collections of
excerpts, works by other masters, or a combination of
the two.
In a way, the Ethics did less than the Posterior Analytics
to shape later medieval discussions of ethics as a ‘‘science’’
or area of knowledge. (Scientia, the Latin word often
translated as ‘‘science,’’ can equally be translated as
‘‘knowledge.’’) Following Aristotle, masters distinguished
between theoretical sciences, practical sciences, and mere
arts or skills, such as medicine and navigation. Where
theoretical sciences aim at truth for its own sake and
practical sciences guide us in choosing actions, arts and
skills aim at producing some external result beyond the
action itself. Nobody doubted that ethics is practical; but is
it a science in the strict sense? Despite Aristotle’s references
to ethics as a science, one might wonder how it could
satisfy the stringent requirements set forth in Book I,
Chapters 1–4, of the Prior Analytics. There Aristotle argues
that someone can have unqualiﬁed knowledge or science
(episte¯me¯) only of self-evident propositions and conclu-
sions deduced from them through a demonstrative
syllogism.
Are at least some moral principles self-evident (per se
nota)? Aquinas, Duns Scotus, and William of Ockham all
agreed that some are. By the same token, all singled out
312 E
Ethics

some ﬁrst principle of practical reason – a very general
one, such as ‘‘Good is to be done; bad is to be avoided’’ –
and presented it as the foundation for precepts of natural
law. Natural law ﬁgures no less prominently in the works
of Scotus and Ockham than it does in the works of
Aquinas (Mo¨hle 2003; McGrade 1999). All three believed
that ordinary people can, and often do, recognize the truth
of basic moral principles.
Why, then, are Scotus and Ockham sometimes seen as
proponents of divine command theory? Confusion arises
partly from comparisons between nontechnical discus-
sions by Aquinas and highly technical discussions two or
three generations later, by masters preoccupied with
Aristotle’s requirements for unqualiﬁed knowledge. For
example, Aquinas claims that all other precepts of natural
law are ‘‘based on,’’ or ‘‘ﬂow from’’ from the ﬁrst, founda-
tional principle. God could add new precepts, but even
God cannot dispense from such basic principles as the one
that prohibits killing an innocent person. Aquinas grants
that God can command such a killing, as he did in order-
ing Abraham to sacriﬁce Isaac; yet Aquinas denies that this
was really a case of dispensing from the prohibition
against killing.
As Scotus sees it, the command to Abraham shows that
God can dispense from the prohibition against killing, and
indeed, from all precepts of the Decalogue except the ﬁrst
three. Scotus, however, divides the ﬁrst three precepts
from the others with reference to requirements more
stringent than Aquinas’. The ﬁrst group consists of prin-
ciples either true by the very meaning of their terms or
that follow necessarily from such principles. Although
precepts of the second group fail to meet these high
standards, Scotus describes them as evidently true and
immediately recognized to be greatly in accord with
principles that do meet the standards.
Ockham takes a more expansive view of self-evident
moral principles. He includes not only principles true by
the meaning of their terms but also principles evident
from experience, such as ‘‘An angry person is to be molli-
ﬁed by fair words.’’ Ockham shares Scotus’ view that God’s
command can override a moral principle that the agent
would otherwise be obliged to follow, as it did in the case
of Abraham. But what modern authors usually mean by
‘‘divine command theory’’ involves a more radical thesis,
attributed to Ockham in the seventeenth century by
Francisco Suarez (d. 1617): no act is bad except insofar
as it is prohibited by God. There is no persuasive evidence
that Ockham defended this view (Kilcullen 1993).
On the whole, divine command theory represents
a concern for early modern thinkers, not for their medie-
val predecessors. For examples of issues that did interest
later medieval thinkers readers might consult a work by
John Capreolus (d. 1444): the Defenses of the Theology of
St. Thomas Aquinas (Defensiones theologiae Divi Thomae
Aquinatis). The leading Dominican at Paris in the early
ﬁfteenth century, Capreolus labored to defend Aquinas
against criticisms raised by Scotus, Durand, Gregory of
Rimini, and other fourteenth-century authors. No objec-
tions connected with divine command theory were among
them. Instead Capreolus included arguments about the
natural desire for happiness, about the connection of the
cardinal virtues, and about ‘‘whether naturally acquired
virtues (virtutes habituales) are necessary for human
beings.’’ Disputes on the ﬁrst two topics began in the
early Middle Ages. The third did not emerge as an area
of concern until the fourteenth century, when scholars
began arguing about the place of virtues in ethical theory.
Happiness and the Supreme Good
Is happiness the supreme good? Is it our sole ultimate
end, so that whatever actions we choose, we always
choose them for the sake of happiness? Medieval
thinkers addressed these questions long before they
encountered the puzzling line of argument in Book
I of the Nicomachean Ethics. Their differences of opinion
owe something to different impressions they had of
Augustine’s teachings.
Again and again Augustine claims that the supreme
good is neither virtue nor pleasure nor any other psycho-
logical aspect of a human being. The supreme good is
God; happiness lies rather in our enjoyment of God.
In declaring the supreme good something external to
human beings Augustine ﬁrmly rejects the anthropocen-
trism dominant in ancient ethics. As we are made happy
by God, so too are we made good by God, not by our own
learning and practice.
Did Augustine regard happiness as the ultimate end of
all human actions? His successors came to different con-
clusions, with good reason. In some places, especially in
early works, Augustine seems to accept the thesis that
whatever we seek, we seek for the sake of happiness. He
aims mainly to establish that only eternal, God-given
happiness can truly satisfy us. In other works Augustine
stresses instead two different kinds of motivations, which
he relates to two different kinds of goods: a worthy or
intrinsic good (bonum honestum), which has value in its
own right, and a merely useful good (bonum utile), which
has value only as a means to something else. Worthy goods
have ‘‘intelligible beauty’’; these are goods to be enjoyed,
never used. Indeed, Augustine claims that the greatest
human perversion consists in willing to use objects
of enjoyment, or willing to enjoy objects of use.
Ethics E
313
E

The emphasis here – on different motivations we might
have for valuing an object or person, not on the all-
embracing quest for happiness – accords with Augustine’s
conviction that we truly love something only if we love it
for its own sake.
Boethius (d. c. 524) solved the problem of the supreme
good in a way readers today ﬁnd rather strange. In Book
III of his Consolation of Philosophy (De consolatione
philosophiae), Lady Philosophy argues that the supreme
good is happiness and the supreme good is God. Because
there cannot be two different supreme goods, God himself
is happiness. The argument depends on the idea that
happiness, like goodness and justice, belongs to the divine
essence. As it is more correct to say God is goodness and
justice than that God is good and just (because God has no
accidental properties), so it is more correct to say that God
is happiness than that God is happy.
Anselm of Canterbury (d. 1109) agreed that God is the
supreme good, that God is goodness, and that God is
justice, but he resisted identifying God with happiness.
Hence Chapter 1 of Anselm’s Monologion moves directly
from the axiom that whatever we desire, we desire because
we regard it as good, to distinguishing between goods with
intrinsic worth (honestum) and goods that are only useful.
In later works, such as On the Fall of the Devil, Anselm
enlists the distinction between two goods to argue for two
related inclinations (affectiones) of the will. If we always
will whatever we do for the sake of happiness, even for the
great reward of eternal happiness, God looks like nothing
more than a means to our own ends. Focusing on the
problem of motivation, Anselm argues that God must
have created humans and angels, beings he holds morally
responsible for their actions, with two inclinations of the
will: the inclination to happiness or what is advantageous
(commodum), which even animals have, and the inclina-
tion to justice, righteousness (rectitudo), or what has
intrinsic worth. Anselm considers the inclination to
one’s own advantage natural and inalienable. In contrast,
he thinks that the inclination to justice was separated from
human nature through Adam’s sin and can be restored
only through God’s grace. Without this inclination,
Anselm laments, the will is never free, because our natural
freedom of choice is useless.
The study of Aristotle’s Ethics did not alter the basic
division between theorists who saw nothing morally prob-
lematic about happiness as the end of all our actions and
those who did. Like Boethius, Aquinas argued that the
highest good of human beings is happiness. Happiness is
our ultimate end, so that whatever we desire, we desire
for the sake of happiness. Happiness, however, can be
understood either as an object or as our attainment or
possession of that object. In the ﬁrst sense, Aquinas
explains, God himself is happiness; in the second, happi-
ness is our enjoyment of God. His ethical theory repre-
sents the best-known example of medieval eudaimonism.
As Aquinas endorsed, with modiﬁcations, the position
of Boethius, so Scotus endorsed, with more radical mod-
iﬁcations, the position of Anselm. Detaching Anselm’s
analysis from its theological mooring, Scotus recast the
inclination to justice as an inalienable feature of the
human will, indispensable for moral agency. On his view,
even fallen human beings without God’s grace can choose
actions because we regard them as good in themselves, not
merely because we regard them as good for us. Granted,
our natural inclination to happiness is so strong that we
could not reject (nolle) perfect happiness if offered. Nev-
ertheless, Scotus contends, we could still not will
(non velle) such happiness; so the will’s choice would still
be free, not necessitated by the natural appetite for
happiness.
Ockham carried this line of reasoning to a more
extreme conclusion: we could choose to reject even per-
fect happiness if offered. Did Ockham also claim that we
can will evil as such or will evil for its own sake? On this
topic there is room for doubt. Unlike most of his pre-
decessors, Ockham considers the axiom, ‘‘whatever we
will, we will under the aspect of a good,’’ either true
although completely trivial or substantive but false. If
what one means by ‘‘good’’ is just anything at all that
people will, the axiom is true. On the other hand, if one
means by ‘‘good’’ something useful, pleasurable, or
intrinsically valuable, the axiom loses its status as a true
but empty proposition and becomes a substantive prop-
osition about human psychology. In this second sense,
Ockham argues, the proposition is false, because we can
will an act we believe to be neither useful, nor pleasur-
able, nor intrinsically valuable, such as worshipping false
gods. Ockham does not say that we can will such an act
because we believe it to be evil, only that we can will it
while recognizing that it is good in none of the three ways
indicated.
The Connection of the Virtues
Of all ancient arguments for the unity of the virtues, the
arguments by early Stoics conﬂicted most sharply with
common sense. They presented every virtue as an aspect
of a single, indivisible wisdom. On this view, whoever
truly has one virtue has them all; whoever lacks any virtue
actually has no virtues. Stoics embraced two paradoxical
corollaries: that all sins or faults (peccata) are equal, and
that an individual progresses in an instant from having
nothing but vices to having all of the virtues.
314 E
Ethics

As Stoics saw all virtues as aspects of human wisdom,
so Augustine saw all virtues as aspects of God-given char-
ity. The superﬁcial resemblance of his position to Stoic
teachings made him all the more concerned to spell out
the differences. He did so in a letter to Jerome attacking
the intellectualism and perfectionism of Stoic ethics
(Letter 167). For Stoics, Augustine explains, virtue is
a kind of wisdom that hardly anyone ever achieves. For
Christians virtue is a kind of love that many people have as
a gift of grace. Where Stoics insist that those who fall short
of perfect virtue have no genuine virtues at all, Christians
recognize that nobody on the face of earth has perfect
virtue. None are without sin; and since sin comes from
vice, none are without vice. But this does not imply that
Christians with charity have no virtues. They progress by
degrees, increasing in virtue over time, like someone mov-
ing from darkness into light.
Augustine’s letter attracted considerable attention in
the Middle Ages. Not only did the Christian in Abelard’s
Dialogue use it refuting the all-or-nothing conception of
virtue and the equality of sins, Peter Lombard included
excerpts from it in Book III, Distinction 36 of his Sentences
(Sententiae). The Sentences, compiled entirely from Peter
took to be patristic teachings, went on to become the
standard theology textbook for medieval universities.
When they had only Books I–III of Aristotle’s Ethics,
readers assumed that he regarded moral virtues as separa-
ble. Surely a person could perform just acts (for example)
without performing brave ones, thereby acquiring the
virtue of justice without the virtue of courage. Only
when they had the complete Ethics did scholars learn the
argument in Book VI, Chapter 13, for the mutual connec-
tion between all moral virtues and the intellectual virtue of
prudence. Some found the argument convincing. Others
suggested that only the four cardinal virtues are insepara-
ble from each other. Peter John Olivi (d. 1298), one of
Aristotle’s sharpest critics, attacked a key premise in his
argument:
that
prudence
has
an
indivisible
unity.
According to Olivi, each moral virtue does have a pru-
dence related to it, but these various prudences are distinct
dispositions. Thus a person can be virtuous in one area,
such as matters involving temperance, and still vicious and
imprudent in other respects.
Perhaps the most signiﬁcant development of the four-
teenth century was Scotus’ reframing of the dispute as one
about the necessary connection of virtues. In his commen-
tary on Book III, Distinction 36 of the Sentences, Scotus
divides prudence much as Olivi does. He grants that no
moral virtue can exist without the prudence related to it,
because the very concept of moral virtue includes pru-
dence. Nevertheless, he argues, there is no necessary
connection between moral virtues or between the pru-
dences related to them. An individual might even attain
perfection in one virtue while wholly lacking another, just
as she/he might have perfect hearing while wholly lacking
the capacity to see. Scotus does not suggest that this is
likely. His interests lie chieﬂy in conceptual issues, not in
empirical psychology.
Dispositions, Actions, and Free Choice
Early medieval thinkers knew that ancient philosophers
classiﬁed virtue as a psychological disposition (habitus),
not as a kind of passion or mental act. Whether Augustine
also regarded virtue as a disposition, albeit one given by
God, became a topic of dispute in the late twelfth and
early thirteenth centuries. But by the mid-thirteenth cen-
tury the idea that God infuses virtuous dispositions into
human adults, perhaps even into baptized babies, was well
entrenched. As a result, the ﬁrst Latin commentators on
Aristotle’s Ethics saw no conﬂict between philosophers and
theologians about classifying virtues as dispositions. They
did, however, see a major conﬂict between the structure of
pagan and Christian ethics. The anonymous commentator
of the Paris arts faculty and Robert Kilwardby (d. 1279)
both explained it in the same way. Philosophers teach that
our own good actions precede and produce virtuous dis-
positions; theologians teach that virtuous dispositions are
infused by God, so that the disposition precedes and
causes good actions. Philosophers think that actions are
worth more than dispositions, whereas theologians take
the opposite view (Buffon 2004).
Do naturally acquired dispositions sufﬁce to ensure
morally good actions? Even scholars who studied the
complete Ethics resisted its suggestion that truly virtuous
people are beyond the reach of temptation. As they saw it,
even the best disposition never ensures that someone will
act well; it only inclines him to do so. The virtuous person
can fail to choose good actions, even choose bad ones, so
that his character gradually degenerates.
Is a virtuous disposition at least necessary for morally
good acts? In Article 1 of On the Virtues in General
(De virtutibus in communi), Aquinas says that we should
distinguish between what someone does and the way in
which she does it. Someone without a virtuous disposition
can indeed choose morally good acts for good reasons.
However, she cannot choose such acts consistently, easily,
and with pleasure. According to Aquinas, these are the
three reasons why people need virtuous dispositions.
Discussion in the early fourteenth century turned to
a different problem: what virtuous dispositions explain
about morally good actions – not whether they beneﬁt
us but why it is necessary for a theorist to posit such
Ethics E
315
E

dispositions. Working to develop a naturalistic account of
ethics, masters took a closer look at Aristotle’s theory.
Does
it
avoid
circularity?
If
only
someone
with
a virtuous disposition can choose a morally good act for
the right reason, how can anyone choose the kind of
actions he must in order to acquire a virtuous disposition?
On the other hand, if virtuous dispositions do not account
for the moral goodness of a person’s actions, what do they
explain?
If we must posit dispositions in order to explain how
someone can choose morally good acts, consistently, eas-
ily, and with pleasure, do these factors make the chosen
acts better in moral terms, or do dispositions ﬁgure only in
psychological explanations? Are consistency, ease, and
pleasure even features of actions, or rather features of
agents? Scotus pioneered this line of reasoning in Book I,
Distinction 17 of his Ordinatio. Durand took it farther,
developing it into a full-scale assault on Thomistic ethics.
His objections were not soon forgotten. A century later,
when Capreolus penned his Defenses, he casts Durand as
Aquinas’ chief critic on this topic (Kent 2005, 2008).
Fourteenth-century debate about virtuous disposi-
tions can be perplexing, for virtually all participants
agree that an action is morally good only if the agent’s
choice accords with ‘‘the dictates of right reason.’’ By this
they mean a correct judgment by the agent herself about
what she should do in this particular situation, including
the appropriate end of action. For example, it is not
enough that she choose to return money she borrowed
from Joe when she promised to return it; she must choose
to return the money because she owes it to Joe, not
because she hopes to be praised or fears that he might
harm her. On what issue, then, did fourteenth-century
scholars divide? Some, such as Gerald Odonis (d. c.
1349), endorsed what they took to be Aristotle’s position:
only people with virtuous dispositions can make morally
good choices, because they alone can have the right moti-
vations. Others, including Scotus and Durand, insisted
that people without virtuous dispositions can have the
right motivations and make morally good choices. If ordi-
nary, non-virtuous people lack this capacity, how can they
ever make the kind of choices necessary in order to acquire
a virtuous disposition?
This is not to say that ordinary people are able to judge
and choose correctly in all of the complex situations that
a virtuous person can; nor is it to say that they will ﬁnd it
as easy as a virtuous person to choose the correct act for
the right reason, rather than from some self-serving moti-
vation. The thesis is more modest: it is possible for ordi-
nary people to make morally good choices in some
situations, however seldom they do. This is the very
position that Buridan attributes to Aristotle in Question
4 of his commentary on Book VI of the Ethics. On his view,
Gerald’s interpretation leaves Aristotle with a circular
account of the relation between virtuous dispositions
and morally good actions.
Philosophers still worry that Aristotle’s Ethics looks
circular, just as they still wonder whether various pre-
mises in his arguments are meant to be conceptual truths
or claims about empirical psychology. The range of inter-
pretations is no smaller than it was in the fourteenth
century, when scholars of the West began arguing about
the place of virtues in the overall structure of Aristotle’s
theory.
See also: ▶Anselm of Canterbury ▶Augustine ▶Boethius
▶Durand of St. Pourcain ▶Ethics, Arabic ▶Ethics, Byz-
antine ▶Ethics, Jewish ▶Godfrey of Fontaines ▶Gregory
of Rimini ▶Happiness ▶Henry of Ghent ▶John
Capreolus ▶John Duns Scotus ▶Nicomachean Ethics,
Commentaries on Aristotle’s ▶Peter Abelard ▶Robert
Kilwardby ▶Thomas Aquinas ▶Voluntarism and Intel-
lectualism ▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Abelard Peter (1971) Scito teipsum, ed. Luscombe D. Peter Abelard’s
Ethics. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Abelard Peter (2001) Collationes, ed. Marenbon J, Orlandi G. Oxford
University Press, Oxford
Anselm of Canterbury (1968) Opera omnia, 2 vols, ed. Schmitt F.
Frommann, Stuttgart/Bad Cannstatt
Aquinas Thomas (1882–) Opera omnia. Leonine edition, Rome
Aquinas Thomas (1965) Quaestiones disputatae de virtutibus in
communi. Quaestiones disputatae, vol 2, ed. Bazzi P et al. Marietti,
Turin/Rome
Augustine (1904) Epistulae, ed. Goldbacher A. Corpus Scriptorum
Ecclesiasticorum
Latinorum,
vol
44.
F.
Tempsky/G.
Freytag,
Vienna/Leipzig
Augustine (1955) De civitate Dei, ed. Dombart B, Kalb A. Corpus
Christianorum, Series Latina, vols 47–48. Brepols, Turnhout
Augustine (1975) De diversis quaestionibus octoginta tribus, ed.
Mutzenbecher A. Corpus Christianorum, Series Latina, vol 44A.
Brepols, Turnhout
Boethius (2000) De consolatione philosophiae, ed. Moreschini C. K.G.
Saur, Munich/Leipzig
Capreolus John (1900–1908) Defensiones theologieae Div Thomae
Aquinatis, 7 vols, ed. Paban C, Pe`gues T. Cattier, Tours (repr.
Minerva, Frankfurt/Main, 1967)
Duns Scotus John (1950–) Opera omnia, ed. Balic´ C. Typis Polyglottis
Vaticanis, Vatican City
Durand of St. Pourc¸ain (1571) In Petri Lombardi sententias theologicas
commentariorum libri IIII. Venice (repr. N.J. Gregg Press, Ridge-
wood, 1964)
Gerald of Odo (1500) Expositio in Aristotelis ethicam. Venice
Gregory of Rimini (1980) Lectura super primum et secundum
Sententiarum, vol 6, ed. Trapp AD. De Gruyter, Berlin/New York
316 E
Ethics

Henry of Ghent. Quodlibeta. Paris (repr. Bibliothe`que S.J., Louvain,
1961)
Lombard Peter (1971/1981) Sententiae in IV libris distinctae, 2 vols, ed.
Brady I. Collegium S. Bonaventurae, Grottaferrata
Olivi Peter John (1981) Quaestiones de incarnatione et redemptione,
Quaestiones de virtutibus, ed. Emmen A, Stadter E. Bibliotheca
Franciscana Scholastica Medii Aevi 24. Collegium S. Bonaventurae,
Grottaferrata
Piche D (1999) La condamnation parisienne de 1277: texte latin,
traduction, introduction et commentaire, with Laﬂeur C. J. Vrin,
Paris
Suarez Francisco (1971–1981) De legibus, 8 vols, ed. Perena L et al.
Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientiﬁcas, Madrid
William of Ockham (1967–1989) Opera philosophica et theologica,
17 vols, ed. Ga´l G et al. The Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure
Secondary Sources
Bejczy I (ed) (2007) Virtue ethics in the Middle Ages: commentaries on
Aristotle’s Nicomachean ethics, 1200–1500. Brill, Leiden
Bejczy I, Newhauser R (eds) (2005) Virtue and ethics in the twelfth
century. Brill, Leiden
Buffon V (2004) Philosophers and theologians on happiness: an analysis
of early Latin commentaries on the Nicomachean ethics. Laval The´ol
Philos 60:449–476
Courtenay W (1990) Between despair and love: some late medieval
modiﬁcations of Augustine’s teachings on fruition and psychic states.
In: Hagen K (ed) Augustine, the harvest, and theology (1300–1650).
Brill, Leiden
Inglis J (1999) Aquinas’s replication of the acquired moral virtues. J Relig
Ethics 27:3–27
Kent B (2003) Rethinking moral dispositions: Scotus on the virtues. In:
Williams T (ed) The Cambridge companion to Duns Scotus. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge
Kent B (2008) Aristotle’s ethics, situationist psychology, and a fourteenth-
century debate. Hist Philos Q 25:95–114
Kilcullen J (1993) Natural law and Will in Ockham. Hist Philos Yearbook
1:1–25
Lagerlund H, Yrjo¨nsuuri M (eds) (2002) Emotions and choice from
Boethius to Descartes. Kluwer, Dordrecht
Lines D (2005) Moral philosophy in the universities of medieval and
renaissance Europe. In: Feingold M (ed) History of universities, vol
20(1). Oxford University Press, Oxford
Lottin O (1942–1960) Psychologie et morale aux XIIe et XIIIe sie`cles, 6
vols in 7. Abbaye du Mont Ce´sar, Louvain
MacDonald S (1990) Egoistic rationalism: Aquinas’s basis for Christian
morality. In: Beaty M (ed) Christian theism and the problems
of philosophy. University of Notre Dame Press, Notre Dame/
London
Marenbon J (1997) The philosophy of Peter Abelard. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge
McGrade AS (1999) Natural law and moral omnipotence. In: Spade P (ed)
The Cambridge companion to Ockham. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge
Mo¨hle H (2003) Scotus’s theory of natural law. In: Williams T (ed) The
Cambridge companion to Duns Scotus. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge
Mu¨ller S (2004) The ethics of John Capreolus and the Nominales.
Verbum: Analecta Neolatina 6:301–314
Normore C (1998) Picking and choosing: Anselm and Ockham on choice.
Vivarium 36:23–39
Pope S (ed) (2002) The ethics of Aquinas. Georgetown University Press,
Washington
Vos A et al (eds) (2003) Duns Scotus on divine love: texts and commen-
tary on goodness and freedom, God and humans. Ashgate, Aldershot
Wolter AB (1986) Duns Scotus on the will and morality. Catholic
University of America Press, Washington
Ethics, Arabic
RAFAEL RAMO´ N GUERRERO
Facultad de Filosoﬁa
Universidad Complutense de Madrid
Madrid
Spain
Abstract
Revealed religions have presented very vigorous moral
codes and placed great emphasis on personal and social
salvation, attainable through the respect of the law received
directly from God. All of them have created norms origi-
nating in a conception of humans as ethical beings
searching for happiness through the improvement of their
natures and modes of conduct. Because these religions were
closely linked to community life, ethics became linked to
politics. In the Arab world, ethics developed from the
Qurʾa¯n and other religious sources, and also from Greek
philosophical texts. Whatever forms it took, ethics strove to
establish the criteria by which a given form of human
behavior could be considered morally good. The subject
received serious theoretical consideration in the work of
some philosophers, subsequent to their readings of Plato’s
Republic and Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics. Arabic phi-
losophers saw it as being within an anthropology inspired
by Greek philosophy and also linked it to politics. Its
purpose was to understand human life and reach human-
kind’s ultimate goal: happiness.
The difﬁculties entailed in the distinction between morals
and ethics are well known. The amount of entries on the
topic in the most notable dictionaries and philosophical
lexica shows the difﬁculties involved in disentangling the
meanings of these terms. Sometimes, the ﬁeld in which
they are used is presented as the deﬁning difference
between them: while morals seem to have more to do
with religion, ethics could be taken as being more linked
to philosophy. In support of this differentiation based on
the area of use, it is usually advanced that Socrates is
considered as the pioneer of the part of philosophy to
Ethics, Arabic E
317
E

which ethics and politics belong, practical philosophy,
which studies individual or collective human action.
However, this distinction is not clear: that morality is
more closely related to precepts and norms, to laws and
rules, and ethics is more concerned with human behavior
in relation to virtue or excellence, does not prevent ethics
from being the science of morals, the part of philosophy
that has taken up the study of human behavior.
This is related to the way in which the issue of ethics
has been formulated in the Islamic world, whose founda-
tional text in itself contained a hermeneutics to which its
followers had to commit: Muslims must read the word, the
word of God, which is the text revealed to the Prophet. But
this is not merely about reading what is written. Laid
down as eternal and immutable, the Qurʾa¯n is not impas-
sive: the purpose in reading it is to give meaning to the
text, to interpret it, to understand it. This is a reading that
wishes to discover what the text really says, even if what it
really says is actually different for each of the believers who
read and interpret it. From this emerged the science of
interpretation, whose aim was to reach the true and orig-
inal meaning of the revealed text, hidden behind its appar-
ent meaning.
The reading and interpretation of the revealed text
gave rise to different applicable levels of meaning. These
outlined a set of ideas that were subsequently developed,
explained, and commented upon by very diverse groups of
thinkers who, in trying to unravel what is hidden behind
the text, revealed the sometimes-invisible contradiction
between the apparent or external and the hidden or inter-
nal that is found at many of these levels. The ethical–
juridical ﬁeld was one of the main areas of interpretation,
a fact that allowed the Qurʾa¯n to become the sole law of
Islam; at once, a religious, political, and ethical law, by
which all of Muslim society must be governed.
In addition to containing the doctrinal principles of
Islam, the Qurʾa¯n became a behavioral guide for believers
that covered all aspects of human life. Its dogmatic content
is very limited; nevertheless, it has functioned as
a normative ethical code, which attempts to determine
how one should live under the one God. It contains
numerous passages regulating the moral life of believers;
but strictly speaking, it is not a book of ethics, which sets
out moral theories. Nevertheless, Islamic law was founded
on this Book and developed into a system of obligations; it
established what form should be taken by human beings’
relationship with God, with other humans, and with
themselves. Fundamentally, it prescribes that God is in
command and humankind must obey, and therefore,
must ‘‘submit’’ to Him. Morality was, therefore, expressed
in terms of divine acts and dictates. Reason had to abide by
divine mandate and recognize that which God has willed
for all eternity; therefore, morality could not be based on
autonomous reason, but on the imperatives of the Law.
However, because human conduct is based more on
moral than legal judgments, it was necessary to make
decisions and formulate valid behavioral rules, which
were taken by jurists to have emanated from Divine Will.
For this reason, it was in the ﬁeld of law that the ﬁrst
developments of scriptural morality appeared. Along with
the reﬂections of the theologians, the aim was to provide an
answer to the main question surrounding the divine man-
date: should it be obeyed because whatever God orders is
inherently good or, conversely, is it good because it is a
divine mandate? Similar issues received a double theoreti-
cal formulation on whether ethics should be considered an
objective or subjective set of norms. The answer depended
on the legitimacy conceded to human reason as a source of
ethical knowledge. If its legitimacy was accepted, then the
objectivity of the mandates had to be recognized, because
they are good and just in themselves. This was the solution
arrived at by the Muʿtazilite theologians. However, if the
independence of reason was not accepted, rather it was
excluded from revelation, then the mandate had to be
considered as good, and this precisely because God has
willed so; therefore, ethical normativity would depend
entirely on the will of God, a position that asserts ethical
subjectivism. This was the voluntarist solution formulated
by the majority of traditionalist theologians.
As this idea impregnated all aspects of Muslim life,
morality was externalized into a wide range of expressions,
which cannot be exclusively limited to philosophical ethics,
but took in other ﬁelds, such as education and literature
(adab), which reﬂected profane morality, as well as reli-
gion itself. This moral feeling can be seen in general liter-
ary works, in gnomic, mystical, and religious texts.
Ideas from non-Islamic traditions were added to the
ﬁrst ethical reﬂections by jurists and theologians. On
the one hand, there was literature of Persian origin with
ethical–religious ideas based primarily on Zoroastrianism,
embodied in fables, aphorisms, poems, anthologies, and
other texts. On the other hand, there were materials from
the Greek world, which in addition to its gnomic litera-
ture, brought a folk ethics, understood as medicine for the
soul, and a philosophical ethics, which favored the appear-
ance of a moral thought that was focused more on human-
kind than on God or the law – a moral thought which
reconciled and ordered reason and desires in an attempt to
avoid conﬂict between them and to ascribe human reason
its true worth.
All of this paved the way for the development of the
four types of ethical thought, which, according to Hourani
318 E
Ethics, Arabic

(1975), appeared in the Islamic world: (1) Normative reli-
gious ethics, (2) Normative secular ethics, (3) Ethical anal-
ysis in the religious tradition, and (4) Ethical analysis by
philosophers. It is this last point that concerns us here.
The ethical theories born out of the Greek philosoph-
ical tradition reﬂect Platonic and Aristotelian thought,
and combine them with some elements taken from Stoi-
cism. With a few exceptions, almost all of these theories
show a close link between ethics and politics, considering
them as two sides of the same reality relating to human-
kind, understood in its individual and social dimensions
that were inseparable in a society, like the Islamic one, that
had its beginnings in the link between religion and com-
munity. The union of ethics and politics was seen in this
way by Ibn Rushd (On Plato’s Republic): ‘‘This art has been
divided into two parts. In the ﬁrst part, the habits
and volitional actions and conduct are treated generally,
and here, is made known their relation to each other and
which of these habits is for the sake of the others. In the
second part is made known how these habits are
established in the souls, which habit is ordered to which
other habit so that the resulting action from the intended
habit may become as perfect as can be, and which habit
hinders which other habit’’ (Lerner 1974).
On the other hand, the ethical reﬂections seem to
correspond to two different traditions. One is more pop-
ular, understanding ethics as medicine or therapy for the
soul, as a necessary preparation for initiation into the
study of philosophy. The other is more scientiﬁc and is
based on the knowledge of Greek philosophical texts,
considering ethics as demonstrative knowledge.
Plato’s dialogues were known, and it was soon discov-
ered that Socrates had been the instigator of the ethico-
political current in Greek philosophy, as stated by several
Arab biographers and historians of Greek culture and
philosophy. The attribution of numerous statements and
anecdotes of ethical nature to Socrates show the high
appreciation that the Greek philosopher’s ﬁgure had in
the Islamic world and in Arabic literature for his remark-
able contribution to the ethics. The Islamic thinkers knew
Aristotle’s different works on ethics, but it was the
Nicomachean Ethics that deﬁnitively shaped ethical
thought in Arabic philosophy. This work offers a model
of the ideal life different to that presented in the Qurʾa¯n, as
well as instructions on how this can be achieved in human
society. Aristotle’s text was translated, although informa-
tion on the translation is not very clear among the Arab
bibliographers. Regardless of the translator’s identity, it is
important to emphasize the wide spread and inﬂuence
enjoyed by this work in the Arab world. Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ wrote
a commentary on it. Ibn Sı¯na¯ seems to have been inspired
by it. Traces of it can be seen in Ibn Ba¯jja. Ibn Rushd wrote
a commentary or paraphrase on it, of which the Hebrew
and Latin versions still survive. Aristotle’s work was, there-
fore, much read and commented in the Islamic world.
Al-Kindı¯ (d. c. 870) showed a degree of interest the
ethics of politics and a certain Stoic inﬂuence, maybe
originating in Simplicius’ commentary on Epictetus’
Manual. In his Epistle on the Quantity of Aristotle’s Book,
al-Kindı¯ grants ethics a place among the sciences as the
ﬁrst of the practical sciences. His conception of the soul is
linked to Neoplatonism. He maintains that the soul
belongs to the spiritual or divine world, to which it must
return. In order to return to its world of origin, the soul
must free itself from sensory ties, through the four Pla-
tonic virtues: wisdom, justice, courage, and moderation.
In another of his treatises, related to the ‘‘consolation of
philosophy’’ genre, he insists on the idea of abandoning
mundane things to focus on the intelligible world.
Humankind’s goal should be the Platonic idea of imitation
of God, attained by way of human virtues. This is what
human happiness is about, something attainable by each
person through his or her individual action.
Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯(d. 950) wrote his Enumeration of the Sciences
with a deﬁnite program, which does not include ethics
among the sciences described. He knew Greek ethics,
because he had read Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics. The
Aristotelian idea that ethics is part of politics is picked up
and assimilated by this Muslim philosopher, as can be seen
from the use made of it in his works on politics. When
dealing with the political regime most able to guarantee
excellence and human virtue to citizens, he presents philos-
ophy as a reﬂection on happiness and how it can be
achieved in human community. The idea that all things
tend toward good is the guiding principle of his thought on
happiness, the ultimate aim aspired to by humans as com-
posed of the body and soul. His ethical doctrine, which
leads to politics, is set within an Aristotelian psychology and
involves a metaphysical exploration of reality. He also rec-
ognizes the importance of Socrates’ way, characterized as
consisting on the investigation of justice and the virtues.
Happiness is studied in several of his books: the aim of
human life is to attain happiness. But the happiness he
concerns himself with is not happiness as understood in
the Qurʾa¯n, where it seems to refer to the state that will be
reached by the blessed in the next life (XI, 105–108). The
happiness that al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ is thinking of is reached in this
world; it is the happiness related to humankind in general
and not to Muslims in particular. This happiness is
obtained on two levels, the individual and the social: it is
a happiness that only humans, in the realization of their
potential as individuals, can reach by cultivating moral
Ethics, Arabic E
319
E

and intellectual virtues, something that it is only possible
to achieve within a society. His concept of freedom, which
is of Greek origin, is pervaded by the Muslim tradition in
which he lived, as can be seen in the abundant use of
Islamic terminology.
Happiness is every man’s ultimate goal: ‘‘Because the
purpose of man’s existence is the attainment of ultimate
happiness, in order to obtain it, he must know what it is,
establish it as his aim and give it his attention; then, he
must know what qualities are needed to reach happiness
and then, he must put them in to practice,’’ he states in The
Political Regime. This is a happiness that implies knowl-
edge and action, theoretical and practical learning:
humans must ﬁrst of all discover those things that help
to attain happiness and must then carry them out.
It is difﬁcult to deﬁne the nature of happiness.
At times, it seems to be a purely theoretical activity, at
others, an exclusively political one; at yet other times, it
appears to both a theoretical and political activity. The
purpose of human life is the attainment of happiness,
since it is a purpose chosen for itself, not for any other
reason. Whoever wishes to attain it must follow a path:
‘‘The human things through which nations and citizens of
cities attain earthly happiness in this life and supreme
happiness in the life beyond, are of four kinds; theoretical
virtues, deliberative virtues, moral virtues, and practical
arts’’ (The Attainment of Happiness) (Mahdi 1969). The
ﬁrst three virtues mentioned relate to philosophy in the
narrower sense. Therefore, happiness can only be reached
through philosophy.
In this text, he makes no reference to the individual as
the most important subject of happiness, and instead, uses
the terms ‘‘nations’’ and ‘‘citizens,’’ and therefore, speaks
in the plural. Human nature can only be perfected in
a social context: ‘‘In order to preserve himself and to attain
his highest perfections, every human being is, by his very
nature, in need of many things which he cannot provide all
by himself. . . Therefore, man cannot attain the perfection,
for the sake of which his inborn nature has been given to
him, unless many societies of people who co-operate come
together who each supply everybody else with some par-
ticular need of his’’ (The Perfect State) (Walzer 1985).
Faithful to the Muslim community in which he lives and
to the Platonic and Aristotelian tradition, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ does
not see happiness or humankind’s supreme and ultimate
perfection as pertaining to the isolated and solitary indi-
vidual, but as something that can only be attained in
a society, with the help of someone to point out the way.
He follows Plato in maintaining that humans need
a teacher or guide who can lead them toward happiness.
This teacher or guide is the philosopher, who must
become the ruler of the excellent or perfect city, the only
society in which humans can achieve true happiness.
The philosopher–ruler must have perfect knowledge
of the political science, because this is the only route to
happiness: political science is primarily concerned with
happiness. It also deals with actions, ways of living, moral
qualities, customs, and voluntary habits. Political science
is about the knowledge of those things that the inhabitants
of cities can use to reach happiness through political
association. Politics then, becomes a science integral to
the purpose of humankind. Using politics, the philoso-
pher–ruler must ﬁnd the excellent, perfect, ideal city in
which citizens have the best possible conditions so that
each, according to their abilities, can realize their ultimate
potential, their perfect ethical life.
Life in society is necessary for the attainment of this
goal. A person cannot tackle life’s necessities and assure his
existence in solitude. People must unite with others in
perfect or imperfect communities. There are several
kinds of societies, but true happiness must be obtained
in the right kind of City: ‘‘The most excellent good and the
utmost perfection is, in the ﬁrst instance, attained in a city,
not in a society which is less complete than it. But since
good, in its real sense, is such as to be attainable through
choice and will and evils are due to will and choice only,
a city may be established to enable its people to co-operate
in attaining some aims that are evil. Hence, felicity is not
attainable in every city. The city, then, in which people aim
through association at co-operating for the things by
which felicity in its real and true sense can be attained, is
the excellent city, and the society in which there is a co-
operation to acquire felicity is the excellent society’’ (The
Perfect State, Walzer 1985).
This city fulﬁlls the order of the universe and society is
ordered in its image. It falls to the prophet–legislator to
make this perfect state into a reality, through the enlighten-
ment received from the Active Intelect. It is also necessary
that humans believe in this mission, which implies knowl-
edge of the hierarchical order of the universe and reﬂection
on it in order to perceive clearly the place and function of the
prophet–legislators, philosopher–ruler, and ﬁrst chief.
This chief should possess all the perfect qualities and
bring together all governing duties, applying political sci-
ence as its greatest expert. He is a statesman, philosopher
and prophet, legislator, and educator. He is a philosopher
because he is endowed with speculative and practical
knowledge. Through philosophy, he can know the divine
order of the universe; it follows that the Excellent City’s
most important governor must have a thorough knowl-
edge of theoretical philosophy, because only through this
can he set about ordering society in the same way that God
320 E
Ethics, Arabic

Most High has ordered the universe. This imitation is the
supreme purpose of all philosophy, according to the
maxim he takes from Plato. The task of practical knowl-
edge lies in the awareness of all the actions needed to
establish and preserve virtuous customs and habits in the
city, those able to lead the inhabitants toward true happi-
ness; a task that requires long experience.
This ruler, on whom depend the good deeds of citizens
aimed at reaching happiness, has the ability to deﬁne,
determine, and direct these actions toward happiness.
Only the government of the state by philosophy can guar-
antee this. In this way, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ established how the state
he had in mind – a true likeness of Plato’s Republic –
should be governed by norms originating in reason, by
virtue of the knowledge of the whole universe acquired by
the philosopher. Any community that was not governed
by rational laws would be an imperfect state.
However, the attainment of happiness also has another
aspect, the individual, because living in a city is not
enough to obtain supreme happiness. There is one prom-
inent idea in al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s writing: the attainment of happi-
ness is an individual task, because humankind’s path
toward it begins with the realization of one’s individual
potentialities; a human being does not achieve perfection
alone due to a set of innate principles with which he or she
is born, but through activity. The attainment of intellec-
tual virtues leads humans, with the aid of moral virtues, to
theoretical
contemplation,
but
only
after
choosing
between the different options offered by reason. This
path is not found in the city, but in an individual’s per-
sonal life, as can be inferred from The Perfect State: ‘‘The
presence of the ﬁrst intelligibles in man is his ﬁrst perfec-
tion, but these intelligibles are supplied to him only in
order to be used by him to reach his ultimate perfection,
that is felicity. Felicity means that the human soul reaches
a degree of perfection in its existence where it is in no need
of matter for its support, since it becomes one of the
incorporeal things and of the immaterial substances and
remains in that state continuously for ever. But its rank is
beneath the rank of the Active Intellect’’ (Walzer 1985).
The attainment of individual happiness must follow
a path from grammar to logic and from there to the rest
of philosophy.
Ibn Sı¯na¯ (d. 1037) emphasized the distinction between
theoretical philosophy and practical philosophy. The pur-
pose of the latter is to acquire opinions on human action.
He divided it into three classical parts: ethics, economics,
and politics. Ethics is concerned with showing humans
what their actions and habits should be like so that their
lives in this world and the next can be happy. However, he
did not deal with ethics in his vast work. He insisted on
humankind’s need for a social context, in which to develop
perfectly, which makes it seem that his conception of
ethics is much related to politics: Muslim law is the
norm that deﬁnes the conduct humans should follow in
individual and social life.
Ibn Ba¯jja (d. c. 1138) adopted the Aristotelian con-
templative ideal, according to which humankind’s happi-
ness depends on fully realizing the intellectual life. This is
achieved when the human intellect becomes one with the
Active Intellect, which leads the author to develop the
classical theme of intellectual progression, from a state of
pure intellectual potentiality to maximum focus and con-
tact with the Active Intellect, only attainable by some. This
purpose, intellectual perfection, can only be achieved in
the perfect and virtuous state, founded on nature, whose
inhabitants are united by love and whose actions are
always upright.
But as the perfect city does not exist, the only happi-
ness in the four imperfect, unjust, and perverse states is
that of the recluse, the individual who obtains happiness
by his or her own thought and by his or her own reason.
Ibn Ba¯jja’s most important work, The Regimen of the
Solitary, is not a treatise on political science, rather
a guide to the attainment of true happiness, intended for
the philosopher living in the imperfect city. This man
orients his search for happiness toward the only place
where no external authority can oppress or subjugate
him, that is, inside himself, in so far as Ibn Ba¯jja trans-
forms the political and community reason of his prede-
cessors into individual ethical reason, rejecting the
political role of the philosopher and favoring the solitary
life. Because of this, in his thought reason becomes ethical
reason, because the problem he debates in his work is
fundamentally ethical: the only attainable happiness in
the cities is that of the recluse who reaches happiness
through his own cognitive abilities and their inherent
perfection. The individual, therefore, becomes the true
subject of ethical life, a truly free, autonomous, and self-
sufﬁcient subject, who achieves the inherent and speciﬁc
function of the human being: the perfection of intellectual
ability. Moral actions perfect life, correspond to the spir-
itual form, and ennoble humans; but purely intellectual
acts convert them into the most excellent and divine
beings.
Ibn T˙ufayl (d. 1185) took this view of ethics to its
extreme. A person cannot reach true happiness using
reason even while living in a society: the philosopher
must live totally alone, outside society; nonphilosophers
cannot be enlightened, because they are ruled by external
ritual norms, imposed by a religion. Happiness is only
reached in solitude.
Ethics, Arabic E
321
E

Ibn Rushd (d. 1198) dealt explicitly with ethics and
politics as interrelated forms of knowledge, convinced that
the supreme good, ultimate perfection, and happiness of
humankind could only be reached in the perfect city. In his
paraphrase of Aristotle’s Rhetoric, he develops the theory of
eudemony as an essentially community and social happi-
ness. He highlights the importance of political discourse for
the community, since language should give rise to virtuous
and just actions as an essential condition for an honest and
reasonable life. Finally, he states that rhetoric is composed
of the arts of discourse and ethics; that is, of politics.
Throughout the Fas:l al-Maqa¯l, Ibn Rushd speaks of
the ultimate human happiness linked to the religious Law.
At the beginning of his paraphrase of Plato’s Republic, he
states that the work deals with practical or political science,
whose object differs from that of the theoretical sciences,
because its purpose consists of actions that belong to
volition, based on free will and choice: actions that must
be characterized as ethical depend on human volition, and
as such, humans are able to control them. Two areas are
distinguished within the science of ethics. The ﬁrst is
general or theoretical and deals with the customs and
habits of the soul, the general problems on which political
actions are based. The second is strictly practical: it shows
how those customs and habits are established in the soul
and how their organization takes place within social
groups. According to Ibn Rushd, Aristotle’s Nicomachean
Ethics is related to the ﬁrst area, while the second area is the
subject of Aristotle’s Politics and Plato’s Republic.
In his commentary on the Nicomachean Ethics, where
Aristotle talks about the subordination of the sciences and
states that politics is the science that can provide humans
with the most desirable purpose, as the good of human-
kind, Ibn Rushd insists that the main purpose of ethical
discourse is the government of the city and, more specif-
ically, the good that must be striven for in that govern-
ment. He recognizes that the most important thing about
politics is the noble art of governing the city, and therefore,
what must be taught is how political government should
be directed toward the happiness of the citizens. Politics
should also contain observations relating to human hap-
piness, which can only be attained if humans are consid-
ered as citizens of a state and not as isolated beings, as
maintained by Ibn Ba¯jja and Ibn T˙ufayl. The virtues by
which human beings can reach happiness can only be
obtained while living in a community: a lone human
being cannot achieve all the virtues, that are impossible
to reach unless there is cooperation within a group of
individuals. In order to develop their ethical lives, humans
need the help of others: the ﬁnal result is a society in which
religious law and political law make possible the
attainment of happiness through philosophy, whose
study is commanded by the religious law itself.
See also: ▶Doxographies, Graeco-Arabic ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯
Nas˙r ▶Ibn Ba¯jja, Abu¯ Bakr ibn al-Sa¯’ig˙ (Avempace) ▶Ibn
Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) ▶Ibn
Sı¯na¯, Abu¯
ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶Ibn T˙ufayl, Abu¯
Bakr
(Abubacer) ▶al-Kindı¯, Abu¯ Yu¯suf Yaʿqu¯b ibn Ish:a¯q
▶Nicomachean
Ethics,
Commentaries
on
Aristotle’s
▶Political Philosophy, Arabic
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Akasoy Anna A, Fidora Alexander (eds) (2005) The Arabic version of the
Nicomachean Ethics, intro and annot English trans. Dunlop DM.
Brill, Leiden
Avempace (1997) Tadbı¯r al-mutawah:h:id, El re´gimen del solitario (Nueva
traduccio´n: Lomba Fuentes J). Editorial Trotta, Madrid
Avempace (2002) Il Regime del solitario. In: Campanini M, Illuminati
A (a cura di) Testo arabo a fronte. Biblioteca Universale Rizzoli,
Mila´n
Averroes (1974) On Plato’s ‘‘Republic’’ trans with an intro and notes:
Lerner R. Cornell University Press, Ithaca
Averroes (1986) Exposicio´n de la ‘‘Repu´blica’’ de Plato´n traduccio´n
y estudio preliminar de Cruz Herna´ndez M. Editorial Tecnos, Madrid
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (1962) Alfarabi’s philosophy of Plato and Aristotle, trans.
Mahdi, M, The Free Press, Glencoe (repr. Cornell University Press,
Ithaca, 1969)
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯(1985) On the perfect state. Abu¯ Nas˙r al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s Maba¯di’ a¯ra¯ ahl
al-madı¯na al-fa¯d˙ila (a revised text with intro, trans and comment:
Walzer R.), Clarendon Press, Oxford (trad. esp.: La Ciudad Ideal,
presentacio´n Cruz Herna´ndez M, trad. Alonso M, Editorial Tecnos,
Madrid, 1985)
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (1987–1988) Kita¯b al-tanbı¯h ‘ala¯ sabı¯l al-sa‘a¯da, trans. Mallet D.
Le rappel de la voie a` suivre pour parvenir au bonheur. Bulletin
d’E´tudes Orientales 39–40:113–140
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (2002) El camino de la felicidad traduccio´n, introduccio´n
y notas: Ramo´n Guerrero R. Editorial Trotta, Madrid
Secondary Sources
Alon I (1991) Socrates in medieval Arabic literature. J. Brill/The Magnes
Press, Leiden/Jerusalem
Berman LV (1967) Excerpts from the lost Arabic original of Ibn Rushd’s
Middle Commentary on the Nicomachean Ethics. Oriens 20:31–59
Daiber H (1986) Prophetie und Ethik bei Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (gest. 339/950). In: We´nin
Ch (ed) L’homme et son univers au Moyen Age, vol II. E´ditions de
l’Institut Supe´rieur de Philosophie, Louvain-la-Neuve, pp 729–753
Fakhry M (1991) Ethical theories in Islam. J. Brill, Leiden (2nd edn, 1994)
Galston M (1992) The theoretical and practical dimensions of happiness as
portrayed in the political treatises of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯. In: Butterworth ChE
(ed) The political aspects of Islamic philosophy. Essays in honor of
Muhsin S. Mahdi. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, pp 95–151
Gutas D (1975) Greek wisdom literature in Arabic translation. A study of the
Graeco-Arabic Gnomologia. American Oriental Society, New Haven
Hourani GF (1975) Ethics in medieval Islam: a conspectus. In: Hourani
GF (ed) Essays on Islamic philosophy and science. State University of
New York Press, Albany, pp 128–135
322 E
Ethics, Arabic

Lomba Fuentes J (1993) Lectura de la e´tica griega por el pensamiento de
Ibn Ba¯yˆyˆa. Al-Qant:ara 14:3–46
Pohl S (1997) Die aristotelische Ethik im Kita¯b al-Sa‘a¯da wa-l-is‘a¯d des
Abu¯ l-H˙ asan al-‘A¯mirı¯. In: Endress G, Kruk R (eds) The ancient
tradition in Christian and Islamic Hellenism. Studies on the
transmission of Greek philosophy and sciences dedicated to
H. J. Drossaart Lulofs. Research School CNWS, Leiden, pp 201–238
Rahman F (1985) Law and ethics in Islam. In: Hovannisian R (ed) Ethics
in Islam. Undena Publications, Malibu, pp 3–15
Vallat Ph (2004) Farabi et l’E´cole d’Alexandrie. Des pre´misses de la
connaissance a` la philosophie politique. J. Vrin, Parı´s
Ethics, Byzantine
GEORGE ZOGRAFIDIS
Department of Philosophy
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki
Thessaloniki
Greece
Abstract
Ethics in Byzantium was not a systematic philosophical
discipline, but an occasional response to particular prob-
lems posed in everyday life or in interpreting the Scripture.
Ethical views on virtues and vices, evil and passions, the
Good, the commandments and their observance, labor,
marriage and family, sexual life, spiritual exercises, death,
resurrection, deiﬁcation are scattered through a diversity
of texts, philosophical, theological, and hagiographical,
letters, “mirrors of princes,” etc. Moral reasoning was
inseparable from theology and ethics could not be auton-
omous but, with few exceptions, was a Christian ethics for
a particular Christian society. The two ingredients of
Byzantine ethics were early Greek Patristic thought and
ancient Greek ethical theories (Stoic, Neoplatonic, and
Aristotelian). Revelation, hence scriptural authority and
tradition, was the ultimate source of Byzantine ethics.
The Nature of Byzantine Ethics
It is questionable whether the notion of philosophical ethics
as an autonomous inquiry that examines or establishes the
principles of human morality existed in Byzantium. Cer-
tainly, moral concerns were present in everyday life and
the formulation of codes of moral behavior was familiar to
Byzantine culture. However, Byzantine ethics, that is, in
the sense of a second-order activity that reﬂects on and
makes self-conscious this morality, did not seem to exist.
Nevertheless, we must be aware that the concept of ‘‘Chris-
tian ethics’’ is also questionable, at least before modernity.
In Byzantine texts occur ethical judgments, exhortations
to virtue, and statements describing moral experience in
a way that is perhaps more important to the ﬁelds of
religion and psychology; and there are also statements
deﬁning ethical terms. Concepts and maxims did not
form a whole of universalizable and justiﬁed proposi-
tions that evaluate or determine kinds of behavior. One
may get the impression that the Byzantines deal with
problems in a rather unsystematic way as an occasional
response to particular problems posed by practice or while
interpreting Scripture. This tendency is reﬂected in
texts that are abundant in admonitions and edifying
stories – with recurring themes as spiritual exercises, the
treatment of the body, virtues, or marriage – but include
no systematic treatises. Also, ethics did not ﬁnd its way to
the philosophy curriculum.
Another basic aspect of Byzantine ethics is that it is an
ethics for a Christian society, that is, shaped in the context
of a premodern spirituality according to which human
conduct is dependent on God’s will and the society has an
eschatological
orientation.
Hence,
there
is
no
sharp distinction between religious and secular ethics or
between the public and the private; moral reasoning is
inseparable from theological and the realm of ethics
cannot
be
autonomous.
A
non-Christian
ethics
is
inconceivable in Byzantium and Byzantine ethics cannot
in principle be something distinct from (or independent
from) religious ethics – with few interesting exceptions.
Being Christian, Byzantine ethics does not avoid an
inherent paradox: it is addressed to man in general (as an
image of God) claiming for universality, but it is adjusted
to a particular society; it can only have temporal character,
codifying the way of life of a community that heads to the
Kingdom of Heaven, and it seems solidiﬁed in a society
that understands itself as the realized Kingdom of God. In
addition, it conceives moral precepts and goodness in
terms of commandments and obedience respectively, and
at the same time in terms of personal relation and love.
Such an ethics cannot be easily characterized as deonto-
logical, of divine command or virtue ethics.
If the questions ‘‘how should I live?’’ or ‘‘what kind of
life is ethical?’’ were central questions of Greek ethics, for
the Byzantines philosophy – as theoretical endeavor – is
not entitled to answer such fundamental questions. It was
only in twelfth century that the question of the nature of
ethics as a discipline was put by the commentators of
Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics; and the answer was that
it could be a science but not in the strict Aristotelian sense,
because it does not proceed from universal premises.
Perhaps the only possible mission of Byzantine ethics
would be the rational and systematic exposition of
Ethics, Byzantine E
323
E

principles already accepted or the discussion of moral
problems with the help of Greek moral thought. What
Byzantines preferred was to see ethics (and ‘‘Christian
philosophy’’) as a way of life based on the imitation of
Christ and aiming at the formation of the ‘‘new man.’’ The
essence of Christianity was not taken to be a moral teach-
ing or a law, that is, to impose moral rules and principles.
Byzantines did not seek to determine what action is right
in any given circumstance (judged by justiﬁed general
principles) but to evaluate a person’s life considered as
a whole; it is the communion of human being with the
source of goodness that warrants its authentic relations
with other people and ﬁnally the realization of itself.
Ethics concerns the individual, its horizontal relations to
other individuals (after Jesus’ command to love one’s
neighbor as oneself), and also man’s vertical relation to
God, a personal relation with the ﬁnal goal of the restora-
tion of the ‘‘society of righteous.’’
The Sources of Byzantine Ethics
The two ingredients of Byzantine ethics are Greek patristic
thought and Greek moral philosophy.
(a) Patristic Foundations: Byzantine ethics is indissolu-
bly bound to the moral teaching of the Early Church
that was based on Scripture, through its interpreta-
tion by the Greek Fathers (especially in cases where
the allegorical method was used to extract its ‘‘moral
meaning’’). The scriptural basis of Byzantine ethics
is revealed in almost every text and is exempliﬁed in
the long tradition of exegetical treatises (e.g., on Job
or on Paul’s Epistles). In the Greek East there was not
a single ﬁgure whose thought inﬂuenced ethics, like
Augustine in the West. Inﬂuential texts were Clem-
ent of Alexandria’s Paedagogus, Origen’s On Princi-
ples III, Cyril of Alexandria’s Catecheses, the speeches
of John Chrysostom, and the Cappadocians’ ethical
works. Basil of Caesarea wrote many ascetic and eth-
ical works that inﬂuenced the development of Eastern
monasticism and addressed many issues concerning
the attainment of the perfect virtuous life.
The numerous and popular Lifes of ascetics were
a reminder that spiritual perfection though an ideal can
be attained in this life. Toward this ideal aimed hundreds
of practical Chapters (e.g., Maximus the Confessor),
a series of works On Virginity, numerous Sayings of
Fathers, and ascetic manuals like that of Macarius,
Evagrius Pontikos, Neilos, and Diadochus of Photike.
This kind of literature and its theology of temperance
reached its climax at the Collection of Philokalia (Love
for What Is Beautiful/Good) that has remained popular for
centuries among Orthodox people. The terms ‘‘ethics’’ and
‘‘ethical’’ occurred in Patristic literature mainly to denote
Christian moral life, and Byzantine Fathers of the fourth
and ﬁfth century (e.g., John Chrysostom and Theodoret)
insisted on the organic relation between ethics and dogma.
(b) Ancient Greek ethical tradition is the second ingredi-
ent of Byzantine ethics. In the formation of their
moral teaching, the Fathers used ideas and concepts
derived from Greek philosophy. They owe much to
this tradition and this fact was recognized by pagans
and by Christians. Origen and Gregory of Nyssa had
already accepted the utility of certain aspects of pagan
ethics and in many issues the Greek ethics was not to
be reversed but integrated. The late antique amalgam
of Platonism, Stoicism, and popular moral tradition
was quite familiar to Fathers and the Byzantines learn
it both indirectly and directly through ﬂorilegia and
by studying the ancient texts.
Some major topics of Late Antiquity ethics found their
way to other literary forms such as epistolography; for
example, a considerable bulk of letters of consolation
based on a long tradition, Christian and Pagan. The ideal
of a wise man and the ﬁgure of the philosopher teacher as
a paradigm, moral exhortation, the inner relation between
virtue and knowledge (and vice to ignorance) passed to
Christian morality. Greek ethical concepts as pleasure and
happiness (eudaimonia) lost their importance; the assim-
ilation to God was the ultimate goal, but even this echoed
a Platonic dictum. Stoic ethics was present in the Christian
adaptations of Epictetus’ Manual and can be traced later
on in Barlaam’s Ethics According to the Stoics and mainly in
Pletho’s On Virtues, greatly indebted to Epictetus. (Neo)
Platonic ethical theory inﬂuenced Byzantine ethics in
many issues, like its solution to the problem of evil.
More importantly, the main structure of Byzantine
moral theological thought (via the Cappadocian Fathers)
owes much to later Platonic tradition: to overcome the
passions and the corporeal existence; the puriﬁcation of
the soul by virtue in order to attain to the supreme good
and contemplate (or unite with) God; or the ethical con-
notations of the ascend to the ontological hierarchy. The
popularization of philosophical ethics and the therapeutic
role of philosophy contributed so that the moral treatises
of the Christian writers found an audience prepared and
eager to use them as a practical guide to moral growth.
Aristotelian Ethics and Its Byzantine Reception
The presence of Aristotelian ethics can be attested in two
ways: the inﬂuence of Aristotle’s ethical views and the
occupation with Aristotelian texts. While Aristotelian
324 E
Ethics, Byzantine

logic had a continuous presence in Byzantine thought and
education through handbooks and the Organon itself, the
fate of Nicomachean Ethics was different. A great number
of the manuscripts (almost 200) of the three Aristotelian
ethical treatises veriﬁes the interest in reading and
commenting on them in the twelfth century, when the
Byzantines undertook the task to write commentaries on
works of Aristotle, among them the Nicomachean Ethics.
So did Eustratios of Nicaea, Michael of Ephesus, and
others. Eustratios used Platonic and Christian elements
and discussed not only deﬁnitions and terms but also the
ethical views of Aristotle. Michael followed Alexander of
Aphrodisias and Alexandrian Neoplatonists; the comments
on Books 2–4 are a compilation of Neoplatonic scholia.
Pachymeres in Philosophia XI was not an ‘‘explanator’’
and omitted several chapters of Nicomachean Ethics; his
text is more like an epitome with few additional remarks.
Two paraphrases were composed later by Konstantinos
Palaeokappas (?) and Ps.-Olympiodorus; the latter –
once attributed to Emperor John VI Kantacuzene – must
be a paraphrase of the comments by the Neoplatonic
Olympiodorus. It is difﬁcult to say that the study of
Nicomachean Ethics changed ethical reasoning in Byzan-
tium as it did in the West. Anyway, the interest in Aristotle
was not conﬁned to commentaries but it is evident in texts
of Psellos, John Italos, Nikephoros Blemmydes, and other
Byzantine philosophers and scholars who were familiar
with the Aristotelian texts. The debate of Platonists and
Aristotelians in the ﬁfteenth century touched also ethical
issues. Of interest is the critique of Aristotelian ethics by
Plethon, who doubted whether the Aristotelian mean
helps to make the fundamental distinction between good
and evil (as a result of Aristotle’s degradation of the soul)
or to understand the relation of pleasure to happiness.
Texts and Thinkers
Certainly, a uniﬁed picture of Byzantine ethics throughout
12 centuries is misleading; the same is true for a dual-
aspect approach that distinguishes sharply between an
ascetic and a ‘‘humanistic’’ current. There are differences
and tensions between monks, clergymen, and intellec-
tuals; they depend on many factors, like the writers’ intel-
lectual and religious background and milieu, their
apprehension of ecclesiastical and historical realities, and
their intended audience. The texts produced mostly in
Constantinople, in monastic circles or in the imperial
court and addressed to the Emperor, monks, intellectuals,
laypersons, or ordinary people.
Secular ethics as such could not exist in Byzantium
and the superiority of ‘‘extreme philosophy,’’ that is,
ascetic morality, is stressed in many Patristic texts. We
can discern two aspects of religious ideal behavior, the
ascetic ideal (the mortiﬁcation of the ﬂesh and the life of
a hermit) and the monastic ideal (the virtue of humility
and the communal life). The majority of early theological
literature and treatises like On Virginity emphasized these
ideals. The same line of thought continued in early Byzan-
tium with Maximus the Confessor’s various Chapters,
John of Climacus’ Heavenly Ladder; later with topically
arranged ﬂorilegia like John of Damascus’ Sacra Parallela;
and, ﬁnally, with Symeon’s the New Theologian Ethics and
Catecheses, Nicetas Stethatos’ Three Hundred Practical
Chapters (on the puriﬁcation of the intellect, on love,
and on the perfection of life), and the Hesychastic move-
ment with Gregory Palamas. Nicholas Kabasilas’ On the
Life in Christ is a landmark in Byzantine spirituality.
Although this rigorous discipline was addressed mainly
to monks, it played a decisive role in the formation of
Byzantine ethics.
A few reactions against the unqualiﬁed acceptance of
these ideals were noted; intellectuals such as Bishop
Eustathios of Thessalonike (twelfth century) praised also
virtuous married people and Plethon attacked Christian
monasticism in general. There are also moderate views
that are not antireligious but relatively independent from
the Orthodox learning and inﬂuenced by Greek philoso-
phy (Psellos, Metochites’ Ethical Discourse). Subversive
texts like the Lifes of Fools in Christ (St. Symeon,
St. Andrew) and the Didactic Admonitions (known as
Spaneas) or the idiosyncratic case of anti-Christian ethics
(Plethon). The primacy of religious ethics did not prevent
several forms of secular ideals of behavior to emerge in
texts of Psellos, Kekaumenos, or Eustathios concerning
family and women, the moderate enjoyment of life, the
knightly ideal, etc. The optimistic view trusted God, no
matter how weak human nature was considered to be, but
many intellectuals held a pessimistic attitude – especially
in the Empire’s hard times – and were reluctant to endorse
Christian virtues without qualiﬁcation, while expressing
a feeling of vanity not calmed by the acknowledgment of
God’s providence.
Ethical views are scattered through a diversity of texts,
not only philosophical or theological. Hagiography and
epistolography are valuable sources for everyday morality
and historiography offers pages where moral criteria are
applied at the description of characters. The ‘‘mirrors of
princes’’ were more an ethical discourse than a political
treatise; in many examples of this genre is depicted the
ideal image of the Emperor – a combination of Christian
virtues and other moral principles. Rhetoric speeches and
exercises, though full of cliche´s and conventional themes,
contributed to the discussion of characters and virtues. All
Ethics, Byzantine E
325
E

these literary genres often function as a magnifying or
a distortive mirror, nevertheless they are indispensable
for the study of Byzantine ethics.
Concepts and Themes
Major and favorable themes are: virtues and vices, evil
and passions, the Good, the commandments and their
observance, labor, marriage and family, sexual life,
spiritual exercises, asceticism, Church and secular
power, social problems, wealth and poverty, war,
death, resurrection, and deiﬁcation. Moral consider-
ations are grounded in human nature and its relation
to God not in the abstract but in the postlapsarian
condition. The scope of ethics is determined by the
evaluation of this condition – whether man is totally
corrupted or likeness to God was dimmed but remains
capable to attain similitude. In either case man cannot
be the foundation of ethics, notwithstanding the pos-
sibility of moral knowledge. Revelation, hence scrip-
tural authority and tradition, turns to be the ultimate
source of Byzantine ethics.
How can good be deﬁned? The Euthyphro’s dilemma
can be Christianized: Is the good because God loves it
[or: commands it] or God loves it [or: commands it]
because it is good? For the Byzantines, the second option
is unthinkable because it assumes a morality independent
of God’s will. Their choice of the ﬁrst option was not
weakened by the obvious difﬁculty that in this case
morality could be the product of an arbitrary will. In
their theological perspective, God is conceived not as an
impersonal cause but as a person whose will created
the world; and this will is also expressed by the moral
order of this world.
For human beings the options are two: (a) estrange-
ment from God and good, and a voluntary spiritual death.
(b) The care of the self: deliberate obedience to divine
commands and puriﬁcation of the intellect and of the
senses. The ultimate goal of homo byzantinus is deiﬁcation,
to live a ‘‘life proper and according to nature, i.e., assim-
ilating to divine nature.’’ This goal cannot be achieved
without God’s cooperation and it is in this life that man
has to regain his authentic being: holy men and, primarily,
Jesus are the embodied models to be imitated. Pleasure
was almost expelled (see however Metochites), but the
vocabulary of love reenters to express the personal relation
of man to God. Man is united with the object of its desire –
‘‘sinks in God’s beauty and love; pleasure and divine
sweetness surge within him’’ (Symeon). This mystic com-
munication with God is suitable to the realities of homo
byzantinus who, although a member of the Church, felt
insecure and subordinated himself to various political and
social hierarchies. The superiority of contemplative life is
undeniable, not only in its ascetic form.
As for the practice of Byzantine ethics, we have to keep
in mind that though the texts are full of canons and pre-
cepts and declare constantly the ideal of a pious ascetic life
we must not get the wrong impression that this normative
ethics ruled over Byzantine society – no matter how theo-
centric it was. The attitudes of Byzantines toward sexual
life, wealth and poverty, philanthropy, or marriage reveal
an antinomic element in ethical theory and practice. On
the one hand, obedience to prescriptive rules enacted from
above (God, Emperor), intolerance and repression; on the
other hand, dispensation, adaptation of the rules to given
circumstances and to man’s condition, that is, the princi-
ple of ‘‘economy,’’ accepted by the Church and justiﬁed by
Incarnation. There was a dissonance between the immu-
table principles of ‘‘ofﬁcial’’ religious ethics and the moral
behavior of everyday faithful people.
Virtues and Vices
Virtue (arete), excellence of character, is in accordance
with human nature, while vice and evil are against nature.
Byzantine texts treat of moral subjects by using cliche´s,
maxims, and conventional themes (topoi) that were com-
mon in Greek literature and rhetoric; for example, the
theme of the man at a crossroad and the choice between
a life of virtue and one of vice. Catalogs of virtues and vices
were inherited from the Stoic and Platonic tradition and
from the Bible, and the Byzantines adopted Greek deﬁni-
tions and classiﬁcations. In Fathers like Maximus or Greg-
ory Palamas and also in theologians and philosophers like
Psellos, Blemmydes, or Metochites, virtue is connected to
knowledge and it serves as a means to the knowledge of
God. It is through exercise that human beings can control
irrational desire and replace it by rational will. However, in
the theological literature the attainment of virtue is not
possible by the soul’s own faculties, but it is considered as
a gift; other thinkers, especially in the Paleologan renais-
sance, appreciated more the contribution of reasoning and
knowledge to this goal.
Maximus in his Chapters on Love recapitulated the
earlier Patristic tradition: to the cardinal (‘‘general’’) vir-
tues of the ‘‘heavenly man’’ – righteousness (justice),
moderation, prudence, and courage – the three main
theological virtues are introduced: faith, hope, and love.
To all these many were added, some in a new Christian
sense: philanthropy, piety, humility, mildness, and clem-
ency. Vice (kakia) is a habitually evil disposition, an
inclination to wrongdoing and to sin that alienates from
God. To the eight sinful desires (logismoi) that named
Origen – gluttony, fornication, avarice, grief, wrath,
326 E
Ethics, Byzantine

torpor, vainglory, and arrogance – many were added. They
belong either to the reasoning faculty, to emotion, or to
desire. The vices of reasoning (impiety, heretical opinion,
faithlessness, and blasphemy) are worse in effects than
those of the two lower parts of the soul, for example,
anger, wrath, bitterness, fear, cowardice, zeal, envy, vain-
glory, or luxuriousness, prostitution, theft, divinations,
painting of the face. Reasoning is enlightened when love
and charity as well as purity and virtue rule over the two
other parts. Intellect is where morality resides since there
occur the deliberations of acts; so there could be no actual
evil if not a previous evil thought – the sin concerns ﬁrst of
all the intellect.
Free Will and the Problem of Evil
For the Byzantines, the cause of evil can be neither God
nor matter. The Neoplatonic doctrine for the evil as the
privation of the good makes evil compatible with free will
and providence but it does not solve the empirical prob-
lem. One solution is that God has his own unknown
reasons to permit wrongdoing; this purposefulness of
evil supports a ‘‘soul-making theodicy.’’ The choice of
evil is a matter of free will, though it may be due to
ignorance, weakness of will, pride, or disobedience. Even
if the blame is put on devil, it is by his own will that he
became the originator of the evil. Besides, a man who
would never commit the evil in virtue of his nature is
not free. So, the existence of evil is the proof of man’s
freedom and a consequence of its use. Yet the threat to the
existence of ethics is not removed if God’s foreknowledge
makes all human actions predestinated and determined.
Thinkers like Photios and Blemmydes believed that pre-
destination (too close to the Greek concept of fate) is
incompatible to the Christian conception of freedom.
Many others, like Germanos, John of Damascus, Psellos,
Metochites, and Scholarios, asserted that the belief in
Providence does not contradict human free will; fore-
knowledge is not the cause of things to happen. So rational
action and moral responsibility are possible in regard to
‘‘things that depend on us.’’ The issue was also present in
the Platonists–Aristotelians controversy in the ﬁfteenth
century; thus Plethon argued for fate (hemarmene) and
necessity, whereas Theodore Gazes demonstrated Plato
and Aristotle in agreement.
We can say that for the Byzantines behavior is judged
as ‘‘good’’ or ‘‘bad,’’ but this evaluation is not the ultimate
insofar as it is made on general ethical principles. Putting
aside the emphasis on reasoning or experience, what
counts is whether behavior, that is, human life, is
grounded in ‘‘real life’’ (‘‘in Christ,’’ as Kabasilas would
phrase it) or leads to (spiritual) death; hence the
‘‘ontological’’ character of Byzantine ethics. In a context
that is characterized by theological traditionalism and
philosophical antiquarianism, the emphasis would be on
ascetic or on secular features, on rigorous canons or on
their ‘‘economical’’ enforcement, on sin or on penitence.
Goodness and holiness can be seen as two aspects of the
human life that is being lived as a response to God’s
‘‘wishing-to-be-in-us’’ (Rowan Williams). And thus Byz-
antine ethics appears not so much as a theoretical disci-
pline to be found in statements or arguments, but as
a practice narrated in a variety of texts.
See also: ▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac,
Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions ▶Ethics ▶Eustratios of
Nicaea ▶Happiness ▶Maximus the Confessor ▶Michael
of Ephesus ▶Nicomachean Ethics, Commentaries on
Aristotle’s ▶Political Philosophy, Byzantine
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Ethical Treatises
Anonymi (1999) [Paraphrases of Epictetus’s Manual]. Boter G. The
encheiridion of Epictetus and its three Christian adaptations. Brill,
Leiden
Anonymus. On virtues and vices: Patrologia Graeca [=PG] 95, 85–92
Barlaam of Calabria. Ethics according to the Stoics [in Latin]: PG 151,
1341–1364
Blemmydes Nikephoros (1985) Proof that the term of every man’s life is
not predetermined: Gegen die Vorherbestimmung der Todesstunde,
ed. Lackner W. Academy of Athens, Athens; (1784) On virtue and
askesis, ed. Voulismas D. Leipzig, pp 121–140
Gazes Theodoros (1942) On voluntary and non voluntary. In: Mohler L
(ed) Kardinal Bessarion, vol 3. Scho¨ningh, Paderborn, pp 239–250
(repr Scientia, Aalen 1967)
Germanos I of Constantinople. On predestined terms of life: PG 98,
89–132; Garton C, Westerink LG (trans) (1979) Germanos on
predestined terms of life. Arethusa Monographs 7, Buffalo, NY
Italos John (1956) On moral virtue and the others: Quaestiones
quodlibetales, ed. Joannou P et al. Studia Patristica et Byzantina 4,
Ettal, qu. 63
John of Damascus. Sacra parallela: PG 95, 1041–1588; 96, 9–442
Kekaumenos
(1972)
Strategikon,
ed.
Litavrin
GG.
Moscow;
(1993) Strategikon, ed. Tsounkarakes D. Kanakes, Athens
Kydones Demetrios (1901) Discourse proving that the fear of death is
irrational: De contemnenda morte, ed. Deckelmann H. Teubner,
Leipzig; (German translation: Blum W (1973) Furcht vor dem Tod.
Die Schrift des Demetrios Kydones ‘‘U¨ ber die Verachtung des Todes’’.
Aschendorff, Munich)
Metochites Theodore (1995) Ethical discourse or on education, ed.
Polemis J. Kanakis, Athens
Plethon (George Gemistos) (1987) On virtues: Traite´ des vertus, ed.
Tambrun-Krasker B. Academy of Athens, Athens
Psellos Michael (1948) On virtues: De Omnifaria doctrina, ed. Westerink
LG. Nijmegen, chapters 66–81
Scholarios George (Gennadios II) (1928) On divine providence and des-
tination: Œuvres comple`tes, vol 1, ed. Petit L, Side´ride`s X, Jugie M.
Maison de la Bonne Presse, Paris, pp 390–460; (1930) Whether those
Ethics, Byzantine E
327
E

who do evil things act voluntary or non voluntary: Œuvres comple`tes,
vol 3, pp 407–416
Sebastokrator Isaak (1977/1979/1982) On the substance of evils. In:
Proclus, Trois e´tudes sur la providence, ed. Isaac D. Les belles letters,
Paris (vol 1 (1977), pp 153–223; vol 2 (1979), pp 99–169; vol 3
(1982), pp 127–200)
Simokattes Theophylaktos (1978) On predestined terms of life. In:
Garton C, Westerink LG (trans) Theophylactus Simocates on
predestined terms of life. Buffalo
Commentaries on Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics
Anonymous on Book 7, ed. Heylbut G. Commentaria in Aristotelem
Graeca [¼CAG] 20. Reimer, Berlin, 1892, 407–460
Anonymous (13th century) on Books 2–4. CAG 20:122–255; Mercken
(1973)
Eustratios of Nicaea (c.1050–c.1120) on Books 1 and 6. Michael Ephesius,
Eustratius Nicaenus, Anonymous in Ethica Nicomachea. CAG 20:
1–121, 256–406; Mercken HPF (1973) The Greek commentaries on
the Nicomachean Ethics of Aristotle in the Latin translation of
Robert Grosseteste, 1: Eustratius on Book I and the Anonymous
Scholia on Books II–IV. Corpus Latinorum Commentariorum in
Aristotelem Graecorum 6/1. Brill, Leiden
Konstan David (trans) (2001) Commentators on Aristotle on friendship:
anonymous paraphrase of Aristotle N.E. 8 and 9, Michael of Ephesus
on Aristotle N.E. 9. Duckworth, London
Konstantinos Palaeokappas [Heliodoros of Prussa] (14th century) Para-
phrase, ed. Heylbut G. CAG 19/2, 1889, 1–246
Michael of Ephesus (11th/12th century) on Book 5, ed. Hayduck M. CAG
22/3, 1901, 1–72; on Books 9–10. CAG 20:461–620
Pachymeres George (1242–c. 1310) Philosophia, Book 11. Nicomachean
Ethics: Filοsοfίa biblίοn ε῾ndέkatοn, ed. Oikonomakos C.
Commentaria in Aristotelem Byzantina 3. Academy of Athens,
Athens, 2005
Ps.-Olympiodorus (second half of 14th century) Paraphrase [of
Olympiodorus’ Scholia], unedited; see Nicol DM (1968)
Secondary Sources
Arabatzis G (1998) E´thique du bonheur et orthodoxie a` Byzance (IVe-XIIe
sie`cles). Association Pierre Belon, Paris
Barber C, Jenkins D (eds) (2009) Medieval Greek commentaries on the
Nicomachean Ethics. Brill, Leiden
Bargeliotes L (1974) Pletho’s philosophy of religion and ethics. Diotima
2:125–149
Bebis G (1975) The concept of Eυdaimοnίa in the Fathers of the Eastern
Church. Kleronomia (Thessaloniki) 7:1–7
Beck H-G (1986) Byzantinisches Erotikon. Beck, Munich
Benakis L (2002) Texts and studies on Byzantine philosophy. Parousia,
Athens
Frede M (2002) John of Damascus on human action, the will, and the
human freedom. In: Ierodiakonou K (ed) Byzantine philosophy and
its ancient sources. Clarendon, Oxford, pp 63–95
Giocarinis K (1959) An unpublished late 13th century commentary on the
Nicomachean Ethics of Aristotle. Traditio 15:299–326
Hinterberger M (2010) Emotions in Byzantium. In: James L (ed)
A companion to Byzantium. Blackwell, Oxford, pp 123–134
Hunger H (1958) Der ’Ηyikος des Theodoros Metochites. In: Actes du
IXe`me Congre`s Internationale des Etudes Byzantines, Thessaloniki.
vol 3, pp 141–158
Ierodiakonou K (2005) Byzantine commentators on the epistemic status
of ethics. In: Adamson P et al (eds) Philosophy, science and exegesis
in Greek, Arabic, and Latin commentaries, vol 1. Institute of Classical
Studies, London, pp 221–238
Ioannidis A (1984) The term arete in Greek philosophy and in Greek
Patristic literature [in Greek]. Thessaloniki
Mercken HPF (1990) The Greek commentators on Aristotle’s Ethics. In:
Sorabji R (ed) Aristotle transformed. Duckworth, London, pp
407–443
Mullett M (1988) Byzantium: a friendly society? Past Present 118:3–24
Munitiz JA (1999) The predetermination of death: the contribution of
Anastasios of Sinai and Nikephoros Blemmydes to a perennial Byz-
antine problem. Dumbart Oaks Pap 55:9–20
Nicol DM (1968) A paraphrase of the Nicomachean Ethics attributed to
the Emperor John VI Cantacuzene. Byzantinoslavica 29:1–16
Ethics, Jewish
HAVA TIROSH-SAMUELSON
Department of History
School of Historical, Philosophical, and Religious Studies
and Center for Jewish Studies, Irving and Miriam Lowe
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ
USA
Abstract
In the Aristotelian schema of the sciences, ethics and
politics were closely intertwined: ethics had social dimen-
sions, even though it studied the individual, and politics
was ethical, even though it focused on society and the
state. In medieval Islam and Christendom, Jewish ethics
evolved through the interaction with non-Jewish philoso-
phy. The goal of Jewish ethics was to produce the virtuous
individual who possesses the character traits necessary for
the attainment of wisdom that culminates in the knowl-
edge of God. Jewish ethics posited a dialectical relation-
ship between religion and philosophy: the cultivation of
the virtuous character was a rational project predicated on
the study of philosophy and the employment of reason,
but the goal of this endeavor was the knowledge of God to
the extent this is feasible for humans. The knowledge of
God, in turn, was expressed in actions that imitated God’s
perfection in the socio-political sphere. The dominant
theme of medieval Jewish philosophical ethics was the
meaning of happiness and the ways to attain it. Within
the discourse on happiness, Jewish philosophers reﬂected
on the meaning of being human, the relationship between
body and soul, the conditioning of character through
acquisition of virtues, desirable virtues and undesirable
vices, the human propensity to sin, and God’s rewards and
punishments in his works and in the afterlife. These
themes were discussed in diverse literary genres, such as
328 E
Ethics, Jewish

self-standing philosophical treatise, commentaries on
Aristotle’s Ethics, super-commentaries on Averroes’ com-
mentaries on the Ethics, biblical commentaries, and ethical
wills. The major contributor to Jewish philosophical
ethics was Moses Maimonides (d. 1204) who effected
the most extensive integration of Aristotelianism and
rabbinic Judaism. Post-Maimonidean Jewish philosoph-
ical ethics in Christendom was framed in the context of
the interreligious debate on the salvation of the indi-
vidual soul, a contested terrain between Judaism and
Christianity.
Jewish Ethics: A Religio-Philosophic
Discourse
Within medieval Jewish philosophy ethics holds a peculiar
status. On the one hand, the number of Jewish philosoph-
ical texts devoted exclusively to ethics (i.e., a theory of
character formation and right action) was relatively small.
On the other hand, ethical reﬂections were inseparable
from metaphysics, cosmology, psychology, epistemology,
politics, and theology so that ethics was inherently linked
to reﬂections on the origin and structure of the world, the
nature of human beings, the purpose of human life, the
production and effects of knowledge, philosophy as a way
of life, the ideal political regime, and the relationship
between humans and God. The broad scope of Jewish
philosophical ethics was especially evident from the sec-
ond half of the twelfth century, after it absorbed the
Aristotelian classiﬁcation of the sciences. For Aristotle
and the Aristotelians, ethics belonged to practical philos-
ophy that studies voluntary actions and involves deliber-
ations about things that are subject to change. Although
ethics studies the individual and politics studies on society
and state, ethics and politics were closely intertwined:
ethics has social dimensions and politics is ethical.
Jewish ethics evolved through the interaction with
non-Jewish philosophy in medieval Islam and Christen-
dom. Utilizing concepts and theories articulated ﬁrst by
non-Jews, Jewish philosophers adapted them to the case of
Judaism, often in order to argue the spiritual superiority
of Judaism over the competing religions and schools of
thought. Since Jewish philosophers held that, in principle,
human reason and divine revelation cannot be in conﬂict
with each other, non-Jewish sources were used to the
extent that they were deemed to be true. If an apparent
conﬂict between the ethical ideals of Judaism and other
ethical teachings arose, it was due either to misunder-
standing of philosophy or to misinterpretation of the
divinely revealed tradition.
The goal of Jewish ethics was to produce the virtuous
individual who possesses the character traits necessary for
the attainment of wisdom that culminates in the knowl-
edge of God. To be virtuous, one had to observe divinely
revealed commandment, but such observance was predi-
cated on holding true opinions about God and the world,
knowledge that could be obtained only through the study
of philosophy. Jewish ethics, thus, posited a dialectical
relationship between religion and philosophy: the cultiva-
tion of the virtuous character was a rational project pred-
icated on the study of philosophy and the employment of
reason but the goal of this endeavor was the knowledge of
God to the extent this is feasible for humans. The knowl-
edge of God, in turn, was expressed in actions that imitate
God’s perfections in the social-political sphere. Thus,
ethics exempliﬁes the fundamental compatibility between
divinely revealed Judaism and the pursuit of wisdom in
medieval Jewish philosophy.
The dominant theme of philosophical ethics was the
meaning of happiness (hatzlaha; osher) and the ways to
attain it. In accord with Aristotle, happiness was under-
stood to mean human ﬂourishing, or well being, and it
was regarded as an objective standard rooted in the nature
of human beings, a standard that organizes all activities
into a meaningful patter for the duration of one’s entire
life. The happy or ﬂourishing life is a life in which what is
objectively good for human beings is attained when they
conduct themselves in a particular manner and undertake
those activities that promote what is objectively good for
humans as members of the human species. Within the
discourse on happiness, Jewish philosophers reﬂected on
the meaning of being human, the relationship between
body and soul, the conditioning of the character through
acquisition of virtues, desirable virtues and undesirable
vices, the human propensity to sin, and God’s rewards and
punishments in this world and in the afterlife. The views of
medieval philosophers about happiness changed over
time, reﬂecting changing historical circumstances and
varying interactions with non-Jewish schools of thought.
Jewish ethical writings were composed in various liter-
ary genres. One literary type was the self-standing treatise
devoted primarily to ethical issues as articulated by the
prevailing philosophical conventions. Maimonides inau-
gurated a second literary genre when he included his ethical
reﬂections as part of his legal works, thus demonstrating
that Aristotelian ethics was integral to Judaism. Maimon-
ides paved the way for Jewish commentaries on Aristotle’s
Ethics, a third literary genre, mostly written as super-
commentaries on Averroes’ commentaries on the Ethics.
Whereas these commentaries were composed for the small
intellectual elite of trained philosophers, they inﬂuenced
the larger educated public when their ideas were incorpo-
rated in philosophical commentaries on the Bible. Thus the
Ethics, Jewish E
329
E

biblical commentary itself served as vehicle for the dissem-
ination of philosophical ethics. A ﬁfth literary genre for
Jewish ethics was the ‘‘ethical will,’’ namely, texts of moral
instruction technically addressed to the son of the author
but intended for the education of the larger reading public.
Finally, philosophical ethics was popularized when authors
trained in Jewish philosophy composed rhymed prose to
critique certain social classes or expose social ills. By using
satire and parody they eloquently and wittily inspired the
reading public to cultivate certain virtues and avoid certain
vices. Although these texts are not technically philosophi-
cal, they reﬂected the philosophical education of their
authors and the philosophic sensibility they intended to
disseminate. Through these genres ethics played an impor-
tant role in the formation of medieval Jewish culture and
education. Ethics was an applied science par excellence.
Rationalist Religious Ethics in Islam
Saadia Gaon (d. 941) inaugurated Jewish philosophical
ethics in the tenth treatise of al Ama¯na¯ wa-l-i‘tiqada¯t
(The Book of Doctrines and Beliefs) (Rosenblatt 1948).
Saadia wrote this text to defend rabbinic Judaism against
the critique of the Karaites, Jews who regarded Scripture
alone as normative source of Jewish law and who denied
the authority of rabbinic Oral Law. Following the example
of the Muʿtazilite school of kala¯m (i.e., Muslim speculative
theology), Saadia attempted to demonstrate that rational
arguments are compatible with Scriptural and rabbinic
teachings. As a Jewish Muʿtazilite, he was concerned with
the themes of divine unity, divine justice, rewards and
punishments, and good and evil actions. Saadia was the
ﬁrst to introduce philosophical anthropology as the basis
of Jewish ethics and the ﬁrst to note that the goal of Jewish
philosophic learning is the attainment of happiness.
Saadia establishes that happiness pertains to the qual-
ity of the human soul and, therefore, he examines various
theories on the nature of the human soul and its associa-
tion with the body. According to Saadia, humans are
a temporary combination of two substances – body and
soul – both created by God and are united by him. The
soul is not strictly speaking a non-corporeal substance;
rather, it is made of a reﬁned substance that is not devoid
of matter altogether, even though it is qualitatively differ-
ent from the corporeal body, ‘‘a dark place’’ in which the
luminous soul is imprisoned for the duration of its life on
earth. The human soul needs the body as its instrument of
action and, therefore, the well-being of the soul is predi-
cated on the well-being of the body, although the latter
requires control of the body by the soul.
The interdependence of body and soul explains why
Saadia insists on the doctrine of bodily resurrection: even
though on earth the two substances separate and the soul of
the righteous continues to live on as immortal substance, in
the end of time as a result of divine intervention, the
individual soul will be recombined with its corresponding
body. For the duration of human life on earth, a proper
balance between soul and body constitutes the morally
good life, for which one is rewarded with eternal life and
the recombination of body and soul in the eschatological
remote future. The ethically good life is thus a balanced life
in which all the aspects of the human composite are given
appropriate expression within a hierarchy of goods. The
ideal practice that yields the good life is rooted in moder-
ation and self-control, but Saadia does not provide the
details how to achieve the ideal balance because the moral
path is already charted by the precepts of the revealed Torah
as interpreted by the rabbis.
During the tenth and eleventh centuries, two strands
shaped Jewish philosophical ethics in Islam: the socio-
cultural program known as adab and systematic philoso-
phy (falsafa), especially the blend of Neoplatonism and
Aristotelianism generated by the Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯s. The adab cul-
ture was based on knowledge culled from prose books of
tales, fables, anecdotes, practical advice, and populariza-
tion of scientiﬁc information, all gleaned from the philo-
sophic and scientiﬁc heritage of the Hellenistic world
interspersed with some material from India. In the adab
program the Hellenistic ideals of moderation and self-
control were combined with educational ideals that ﬁt
the needs of the Muslim state and the peculiarities of the
Muslim religion. The philosophers (fala¯sifa) shared the
adab culture but went beyond it by establishing ethics as
‘‘the science of character’’ (‘ilm al-Ahkla¯q) (Fakhry 1994).
These speculations were based on Aristotle’s Nicomachean
Ethics which was translated into Arabic by Ish˙a¯q b.
H˙ unayn (d. 911). The most thorough reworking of Greek
ethics in Islam was articulated by al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (d. 950), who
composed a commentary on Aristotle’s Nicomachean
Ethics (no longer extant) as well as systematic reﬂections
on happiness in several works. His fusion of Aristotelian
ethics, Plato’s political philosophy, and Plotinus meta-
physics will exert deep inﬂuence on Moses Maimonides
(d. 1204), but until then Jewish philosophers were
inﬂuenced by the Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯ strand of Shı¯ʿite Islam whose,
spread by the religious brotherhood from Basra, Ikhwa¯n
al-S˙afa¯’ (Sincere Brethren of Purity). Their philosophic
encyclopedia blended elements from Neo-Pythagorean-
ism, Neoplatonism, Hermeticism, and Aristotelianism,
an amalgam that did not appear to threaten the religious
mentality of Muslims or Jews, because it retained the belief
in the personal immortality and viewed the pursuit of
intellectual perfection as a religious activity.
330 E
Ethics, Jewish

Solomon ibn Gabirol (d. 1058) in Muslim Spain is
a typical example of a Jewish thinker whose ethics com-
bined the adab culture with the Aristotelian ‘‘science of
character’’ and Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯ metaphysics. Gabirol drew on
H˙ unayn b. Ish:a¯q’s collection of aphoristic, biographical,
gnomic, anecdotal literature entitled Adab al-Fala¯sifa,
which was translated into Hebrew under the title Musrey
ha-Philosophim (The Moral Teachings of the Philosophers).
For this reason, another collection of Arabic moral apho-
risms that circulated in a Hebrew translation under the
title Mivhar ha-Peninim (Choice of Pearls) was attributed
to Solomon ibn Gabirol. From the vast encyclopedic
knowledge of Arabic learning, Ibn Gabirol culled his phil-
osophic-scientiﬁc knowledge, molding it all into his own
philosophy that had a strong Neoplatonic tinge, while also
departing from prevailing Neoplatonism on some impor-
tant
points.
His
Is˙la¯kh˙
al-Akhla¯q
(Tikkun
Middot
ha-Nefesh; Improvement of Moral Qualities) is a distinct
Jewish contribution to the ‘‘science of character’’ in
Islamic philosophy.
For Gabirol, human temperaments are rooted in
human physiology, as understood by the medical ethics
of Galen and Hippocrates. Hence, moral training is bio-
logically based. Echoing a common theme in the writings
of the Ikhwa¯n, Gabirol presents the human species as
a microcosm in which the four elements and the four
humors reﬂect the mathematical assumptions of the
Pythagorean tradition. The rational soul is deﬁned as
‘‘pure, stainless, and simple’’ and the proper management
of the body by the soul should exhibit the control of the
rational soul. Human well-being in this life requires the
hegemony of reason over the passions and appetites of the
body. If reason fails, one falls prey to the irrational desire
of the body and loses the ‘‘enduring happiness which man
can reason in the intellectual world, the world to come’’
(Wise 1966 [1902]:31). The principles that underlie
proper human conduct constitute the medicine of the
soul, which is analogous to the medicine of the body.
The wise man is like ‘‘skillful physician who prepares pre-
scriptions, taking of every medicine a divine quality’’
(Wise 1966 [1902]:34).
The ultimate end of this medical management is not
life in the temporal order but rather the everlasting
existing of the rational soul in the intelligible realm. The
ideal person is one who reaches a well-balanced condition
of body and soul: he makes the rational soul govern his
passions. The ideal virtues include: meekness, modesty,
capacity to love, compassion and mercy, cheerfulness and
good disposition, good will and contentment, alertness,
generosity and valor. The vices include price, impudence,
capacity to hate, cruelty, wrath, envy, sloth, niggardliness,
and cowardice. The virtues are generally in accord with
rabbinic tradition, except for the virtue of magnanimity,
which reﬂects his courtier social setting. The moral life
means the conditioning (or ‘‘improvement’’) of the soul’s
desire: by perfecting oneself morally and intellectually the
human soul can attain the ultimate religious goal of
human life.
Other Jewish philosophers in the eleventh century –
Joseph ibn Zaddik and Abraham bar Hiyya – shared this
outlook, whose most elaborate expression can be found in
the work of Bahya ibn Paquda (d. 1156) Fara¯’id˙ al Qulu¯b
(Hovot ha-Levavot, Duties of the Heart) (Mansoor 1973).
Ibn Paquda shared the intellectualist religiosity of the
Jewish
thinkers
and
the
Neoplatonic
metaphysics
presupposed by them, but he was critical of a superﬁcial
endorsement of the adab culture among the Jewish cour-
tiers. He held that the essence of being human is the
intellect and human well-being depends on the excellence
of the intellect. Since the rational soul does not belong to
this world, the happiness of the soul cannot be experi-
enced in this world, but only in the afterlife. The quality of
one’s life will determine whether or not the individual
rational soul will attain the desired perfection. Bahya’s
book is most similar in orientation to al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s Kimyat-
yi Saadat (The Alchemy of Happiness) whose goal was to
show how life in accordance with the teaching of the
Qurʾa¯n leads to love of God, the ultimate end of human
life. Like al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, Bahya offers a therapeutic program
that can either prevent the sickness of the soul or halt it
in case sickness takes root. Yet the proper care of the soul is
feasible only for those who possess an accurate knowledge
of the structure of the universe created by God and
a correct understanding of the human condition.
By the mid-twelfth century the notion that happiness
pertains to the perfection of the soul and that it is attain-
able for those who observe the Torah and ensure that their
reason controls their emotion and bodily urges was shared
by many Jewish philosophers. However, the more Jewish
philosophers gained access to the teachings of Aristotle,
the more they understood the perfection of the soul exclu-
sively in terms of perfection of the rational soul, namely,
the intellect. Consequently, reﬂections on virtue and hap-
piness were now intertwined with an elaborate theory of
knowledge and much of it was derived from the Hellenis-
tic commentators on Aristotle.
The most extensive integration of Aristotelianism and
Jewish
ethics
was
effected
by
Moses
Maimonides.
Although he was deeply indebted to Muslim and Jewish
predecessors, especially al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Ibn Ba¯jja, Ibn Gabirol,
and Ibn Paduada, Maimonides created a new ethical dis-
course on virtue and happiness by making explicit the
Ethics, Jewish E
331
E

Aristotelian foundation of rabbinic ethics (Weiss 1991).
For Maimonides, Aristotle’s teachings, to the extent that
they are true, are perfectly compatible with the revealed
Torah and that as such they are authoritative to Jews.
Moreover, Maimonides claims that the Torah should be
read as an esoteric text whose inner meaning is identical
with Aristotle’s physics and metaphysics. The Torah
teaches philosophical truths necessary for the attainment
of happiness in the language of human beings, namely
through ﬁgurative speech. Finally Maimonides claims
that the Torah established the ideal political regime in
which human happiness can be attained, provided one
know how to interpret the Torah correctly and under-
stands its philosophical meaning.
Maimonides adopts the Aristotelian notion that to
become morally virtuous humans must practice the mid-
dle way (Weiss and Butterworth 1975), but he also
departed from the Aristotelian ideal in some important
respects. Maimonides agrees with Aristotle that a human
being is born with certain disposition, due to a particular
material make up, and that humans can acquire good
character traits by habitually practicing good deeds.
When humans act ‘‘just right’’ they acquire the intrinsic
states of character out of which ﬂow good actions. Mai-
monides has to work out the tension between moderation
and supererogation that existed in rabbinic moral philos-
ophy. He does so by asserting that the middle between
extremes characterizes God’s mode of operation; the ways
of God describe those moderate traits. The Torah com-
mands humans to walk in God’s path, namely, to choose
the mean between extreme (Maimonides 1949, Hilkhot
Deot 28:9).
The moral virtues require the exercise of practical
reasoning, and its excellence is the virtue of practical
wisdom. On the surface it seems that practical reasoning
is unnecessary because the Torah itself determines what
the right action is in each and every case. Yet practical
reason played an important role in Maimonides’ virtue
ethics (Kreisel 1999). On the basis of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s Aphorisms
of the Statesman, Maimonides speaks about the practical
intellect (‘aql al-‘a¯malı¯) as a faculty involved in ethics and
politics, enabling humans to govern, and to produce
‘‘knowledge of the regimen to be adopted by the individ-
ual or by society in the pursuit of its well being’’ (Kreisel
1999:75) Maimonides, however, subsumed practical rea-
son into the activity of the imagination, a mental capacity
that is particularly strong among prophets and legislators,
all except the Prophet Moses, whose imagination was
perfect, but whose prophetic experience itself did not
involve the imagination. It was only the communication
of Moses’ perfect cognitive experience to the people of
Israel at Sinai that involved the power of imagination,
translating conceptual knowledge into ﬁgurative speech.
Much of Maimonides’ philosophical ethics focuses on
analysis of the perfection of Moses’ prophecy that anchors
the perfection of Mosaic Law.
Practical wisdom is indeed an intellectual virtue that
features prominently in the good life, but it does not
constitute the ultimate end of human life; that status is
reserved to theoretical wisdom. To be fully perfect, the
human intellect must transcend the feature that makes it
human, namely, its association with the body (Kellner
1991). By cognizing the intelligible order of reality, the
human
rational
potential
is
both
actualized
and
substantialized. The perfect intellect – the acquired intel-
lect – is a substance separable from the body as Aristotle
hinted in De anima III:3. This state of being is what the
rabbis designated as the world-to-come (olam ha-ba),
which Maimonides deﬁnes as ‘‘the ultimate end toward
which all our efforts ought to be devoted . . . the ultimate
and perfect reward, the ﬁnal bliss that will suffer neither
interruption nor diminution’’(Mishneh Torah, Hilkhot
Teshuvah 9:2). Maimonides’ interpretation of olam ha-
ba diminishes the apocalyptic and eschatological features
of that concept in rabbinic Judaism, since olam ha-ba is
but a state of being of the perfected rational soul. But who
can achieve such elevated state of being? Maimonides
leaves the answer to this question rather obscure, giving
rise to on-going controversy. In general, Maimonides
understood olam ha-ba as an ideal whose pursuit gives
direction to human life, but whose attainment is nearly
impossible because it requires acquisition of the sciences,
as well as acting in accordance with the Torah’s prescrip-
tions. Such restrictive interpretation of olam ha-ba makes
the traditional belief in personal immortality highly sus-
pect. While Maimonides listed this belief among the Thir-
teen Dogmas of Judaism, he viewed it as necessary for the
life of the Jewish polity rather than a true belief.
Jewish Ethics in Medieval Christendom
In the thirteenth century, rationalist vision of the philo-
sophical life disseminated among the learned Jewish elites
in Spain, Provence, and Italy through translations of phil-
osophical texts from Arabic into Hebrew, philosophic-
scientiﬁc encyclopedias, summaries and paraphrases of
philosophical texts, and philosophical commentaries on
the Bible that implemented Maimonides’ hermeneutical
principles. Demographic and political changes shifted
Jewish life from Islam to Christendom but Jewish thinkers
perpetuated the terminology, themes, authoritative texts,
and outlook of the Judeo-Arabic philosophical tradition.
Jewish philosophical ethics was now composed in
332 E
Ethics, Jewish

a Christian environment and written exclusively in
Hebrew. Jewish thinkers helped to translate the Aristote-
lian corpus from Arabic and Hebrew into Latin, but, in
turn, Aristotelian scholasticism would shape the Jewish-
Christian intellectual and religious encounter. Whereas in
Islam philosophic ethics generated political theories about
the ideal regime necessary for the attainment of happiness,
in the Christian West, philosophical ethics was conﬁgured
in the context of the inter-religious debate about the
salvation of the individual soul, a contested terrain
between Judaism and Christianity.
Shem Tov Falaquera (d. 1290) in Christian Spain illus-
trates the transition of Judeo-Islamic philosophic tradi-
tion to the new Christian milieu (Jospe 1988). Falaquera’s
Reshit Hokhmah (Beginning of Wisdom) was based on
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s Enumeration of the Sciences and it illustrated
how philosophic knowledge constitutes human happi-
ness: through the study of philosophy one could acquire
correct knowledge about the world and the proper ways to
conduct oneself in the world. Falaquera, who was familiar
with Aristotle’s Ethics, radicalizes the legacy of Maimoni-
des by clarifying that moral perfection in itself does not
constitute the ultimate end of human life. The ultimate
end of human life is contemplation of necessary truths,
culminating in the knowledge of God. Taking his cue from
the philosophical elitism of Ibn Ba¯jja, Falaquera (even
more than Maimonides) highlights the alienation of the
philosopher, who devotes his life to the contemplation of
truth, and the uneducated masses who pursue imaginary
happiness. Falakera proposed asceticism conﬂict with the
political nature of humans, emphasized by Plato, Aristotle,
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, and Maimonides, and even calls into question
the need of humans to propagate the species through sex.
Since female sexuality is one of the major detriments to
philosophic happiness, Falaquera’s book is replete with
misogynist comments (Jospe 1986). In general, Jewish
Aristotelian philosophers excluded women from the
attainment of intellectual perfection and the blissful joy
of the world-to-come.
The philosophic ethos was not only a cultural posture;
it also affected the interpretation of Scriptures as the
followers of Maimonides applied his general hermeneuti-
cal principles to the interpretation of Scripture. One such
example was the Provenc¸al thinker Joseph ibn Kaspi (d. c.
1335) whose knowledge of Aristotle’s Ethics was derived
not only from Arabic summaries of the text, as was the
case of Falaquera, but also from Averroes’ Middle Com-
mentary on the Ethics, which was now available in
a Hebrew translation by Samuel ben Judah of Marseilles
(Berman 1967). Ibn Kaspi summarized this rather cum-
bersome translation in his Terumat ha-Kesef (Offering of
Silver) in addition to a digest of Aristotle’s Ethics (Mesch
1975). He regarded the Ethics as a practical guide for the
urbane, philosophically sophisticated Jews who wished to
harmonize rabbinic Judaism and philosophy. Entitled
Yoreh Deah (Teacher of Morals), Ibn Kaspi’s ‘‘ethical will’’
to his son, Solomon, is a kind of Jewish adab literature
(Abrahams 1954 [1926]). Referring to Adab al-Fala¯sifa of
Ish˙a¯q b. H˙ unayn and to Aristotle’s Ethics, Ibn Kaspi
claims that that the Torah itself (both Written and Oral),
if interpreted correctly with the help of Maimonides’
Guide and Aristotle’s works (especially Physics, Metaphys-
ics, and the Ethics), enables one’s soul to experience the
world-to-come, the summum bonum (ha-tov ha-shalem).
The very commandments of the Torah perfect the practi-
cal and theoretical aspects of the soul, leading one to
eternal life. For Ibn Kaspi, then, there is no tension what-
soever between Aristotle’s Ethics and the Torah, because
‘‘the Greek philosopher lived during the Second Temple,
and he learned from the Jewish Sages all the true things
that he wrote’’ (Abrahams 1954 [1926]:133). In fact, Aris-
totle ‘‘had presumed to interpret our precious truths,
attributing the exposition to himself, while he stole it all
from the books written on the subject by King Solomon
and others’’ (Abrahams 1954:141).
Although Jewish philosophers became more familiar
with Aristotle’s Ethics in the early fourteenth century, the
science of ethics remained secondary in importance to
physics and metaphysics for the following reasons. First,
with respect to ethics, there was little conﬂict between
traditional Judaism and philosophy; they both shared the
pursuit of wisdom, the ethos of self-control, and the ideal
of moderation. The main challenge of Aristotelianism lay
in physics and metaphysics, and for this reason Jewish
philosophers devoted their attention to these sciences.
Second, in the Aristotelian schema of the sciences, ‘‘prac-
tical philosophy’’ was secondary in importance to ‘‘theo-
retical philosophy’’ and ethics was viewed either as the
preparatory acquisition of the virtues or as the application
of theoretical knowledge to social reality. And third, in
Judaism the praxis of religious life was determined by
halakhah. The Jewish philosophers lived by the strictures
of Jewish law but after Maimonides none of them made
a signiﬁcant contribution to the study of halakhah. The
science of ethics was thus absorbed into philosophy of law,
rather than viewed as an independent science that charts
its own praxis.
During the ﬁfteenth and sixteenth centuries Aristotle’s
Nicomachean Ethics began to engage Jewish philosophers
more than ever before. In 1405 the Ethics was translated
anew into Hebrew by Rabbi Meir Alguades, the Chief
Rabbi of Castilian Jewry and a personal physician to
Ethics, Jewish E
333
E

several Castilian kings. He consulted not the Arabic orig-
inal of Averroes’ Middle Commentary but also the Latin
translation by Hermann the German, which had been
composed in 1240 and was the standard version among
Christian scholastics, the original translation of Samuel
ben Judah and another anonymous translation, which was
ascribed not to al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, the actual author, but to Thomas
Aquinas (Berman 1978, 1988). Thus by the early ﬁfteenth
century, the Ethics was available in Hebrew in a hybrid text
that fused elements from Ibn Rushd, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, and
Aquinas, and this Hebrew translation generated new
Hebrew commentaries by Joseph ibn Shem Tov in the
1440s (Regev 1983). He composed a short commentary,
a summary on Ethics, and eventually a long commentary.
On the basis of these studies, he was able to compose
Kevod Elohim (The Glory of God), a systematic attempt
to prove that Aristotle’s ethics and Judaism were perfectly
compatible (Ibn Shem Tov 1556). As a ﬁnancier in the
court of King Enrique IV, Ibn Shem Tov was familiar with
Latin commentaries on the Ethics and with the function of
the Ethics as a guide to right conduct among the governing
elite. Like the authors of the adab literature in Islam, who
were interested in the Ethics because it showed how to wed
wisdom and politics, Ibn Shem Tov appreciated the rele-
vance of the Ethics to his own life at the court. Although by
the 1440s the Jewish courtiers lost their political power in
Spain, the Ethics could still provide them with ideological
justiﬁcation
to
their elitist
self-perception
(Tirosh-
Rothschild 1998:212–224).
For Ibn Shem Tov the Ethics is to be read as
a recommendation for the social-moral life. What Aris-
totle says about human happiness (both practical and
theoretical aspects) pertains merely to temporal life in
this world, because as a pagan he did not have access to
the revelation of Scriptures. Jews should consult Aristotle
if they wish to know how to conduct themselves in this
world, especially, if they wish to hold their position in the
court. Aristotle was correct to state that human happiness
does not lie in the acquisition of wealth, power, honor,
fame, or bodily pleasures, as most people assume, but in
an activity of the soul in accordance to virtue. He was also
correct to subordinate the moral virtues to the intellectual
ones, and to place speculative reason above practical rea-
son. But most important, Aristotle was right when he
emphasized that only the knowledge of God constitutes
ultimate happiness. Through the contemplation of God,
man lives not only human life, but the ‘‘divine life which is
the most happy.’’
Taking his cue from Thomas Aquinas’ commentary on
the Ethics, Ibn Shem Tov argues that Aristotle spoke only
about temporal, imperfect happiness in this world, which
is not the ultimate end of human life. The ultimate felicity
or perfect happiness is to be found only in the afterlife and
is only attainable by following the Torah. The distinction
between two orders of happiness – an imperfect, natural,
and temporal happiness, and a perfect, supernatural, and
eternal happiness correspond to the distinction between
the natural and the supernatural, between philosophy and
revealed knowledge, between conventional law and divine
law, and between reason and faith. This outlook was
shared by most Jewish thinkers in the second half of the
ﬁfteenth century, giving Jewish philosophy a much more
traditional bent.
Alguades’ new translation of the Ethics together with
Ibn Shem Tov’s commentary became the standard text
among Sephardic Jewish intellectuals in the late ﬁfteenth
and throughout the sixteenth centuries. Isaac Arama
(d. c. 1492), for example, used it extensively and adopted
Ibn Shem Tov’s views (Septimus 1999). Like Ibn Shem Tov
and Aquinas, Arama also distinguished between two
orders of happiness – temporal and transcendent. With
great respect for the practical reasoning of the Ethics,
Arama attempted to show that the moral teachings of
the Torah were compatible with it. Whether the Torah is
‘‘this-worldly’’ or ‘‘other-worldly’’ was one of the bones of
contention in the Jewish-Christian polemics. Arama was
involved in various polemical exchanges and he reports
a debate with a Christian preacher in which Arama used
the practical reasoning of the Torah as a claim for its
superiority over the Christian doctrine of grace. In the
ﬁfteenth century the Ethics was commonly used by Jewish
philosophers who viewed it either as response of practical
wisdom, useful especially for the ruling classes, or as a text
that showed the compatibility of rational knowledge and
religious faith, or as support against Christian polemicists.
In the last decade of the ﬁfteenth century, another Hebrew
translation of the Ethics with a commentary was com-
posed by Baruch ibn Ya‘ish, indicating not only the con-
tinued Jewish interest in the ethics but also familiarity
with new humanists translations of the Ethics (Tirosh-
Samuelson 2003:423).
The Italian humanists translated the Ethics anew and
composed new commentaries, comparing Aristotle’s anal-
ysis of human well-being with post-Aristotelian moral
philosophies,
especially
Stoicism
and
Epicureanism
(Trinkaus 1965, 1970). In 1416–1417 Leonardo Bruni
composed a new Latin translation to the translation of
Robert Grosseteste’s text, and in 1457 the Byzantine
humanist, Johannes Argyropolous, translated the Ethics
into Latin from the Greek original. The humanists in
Italy were obsessed with the meaning and purpose of
human life, perhaps because they did not belong to any
334 E
Ethics, Jewish

existing social institution or more personally, because of
the precariousness of the tumultuous politics of Italian
city-states in the ﬁfteenth century. The basic insecurity of
the humanists led them to adopt Stoic themes and pos-
tures toward the vicissitudes of life. The humanist dis-
course on happiness has a noticeable pessimistic strain
and ‘‘snobbish aloofness’’ even when it is expressed by
people who were successful in politics and quite wealth.
The Stoics’ emphasis on virtue as the only good, their
rejection of external goods, and the counsel of apathy
were easily combined with Christian values and postures.
The Ethics continued to inspire European translations into
vernacular languages as well. It was translated into Italian
by Bernardo Segni (1504–1508) and in the 1540s and
1550s the Italian Benedictine scholar, Joachim Perion, an
avowed Ciceronian, translated the Ethics once more into
Italian, provoking much criticism from other humanists.
His translation lead to yet another Italian translation
published in Venice in 1558 and later in Paris by the
French humanist Denys Lambin.
Jewish intellectuals in Italy were fully aware of the
humanist movement and in some cases contributed to it
by teaching leading humanists and introducing them to
Jewish and Muslim philosophic sources and to kabbalah,
the Jewish mystical tradition (Idel 1983). Yohanan
Alemanno (d. 1504) is an example of a Jewish humanist
who embraces the new cultural sensibilities and involves
himself in the expansion of the discourse on happiness.
His Song of Solomon Virtues was composed as the intro-
duction to his commentary on the Song of Songs entitled
Hesheq Shelomo (The Desire of Solomon) at the request of
Pico della Mirandola in 1488–1489. The biblical king
was considered the author of the Song of Songs, which
the medieval scholars (Jewish and Christians) largely
interpreted as an allegorical text about the progression of
the soul, culminating in the mystical union with the Active
Intellect or with Christ. Pico was interested in the Song
of Song as a guide for the attainment of intellectual
perfection in this life. Alemanno translated for Pico the
commentary of Moses Narboni on Ibn T˙ufayl’s Hai ibn
Yaqzan and composed his own commentary on the Song
of Songs to help Pico better grasp the meaning of the
allegorical text.
Alemanno composed the Song of Solomon’s Virtues to
present a Jewish alternative to Renaissance Platonism
(Lesley 1976). He believed that a proper exposition of
Solomon’s successful attainment of perfection would
inspire other Jews to follow the rigorous but not impossi-
ble program to achieve perfection within the boundaries
of Jewish life. As a biography of an illustrious historical
persona, it was also in accord with the humanist attempt
to draw lessons from history. To instruct Jews of his time
how to attain perfection in this life, Alemanno composed
the detailed analysis of King Solomon’s virtues and
achievements, culminating in conjunctions with God, or
more precisely with the six Seﬁrah, Tife’eret, the center of
the Seﬁrot that emanated from God. Combining Aristotle
analysis of the virtues in the Ethics with post-Aristotelian
treatment of the Roman rhetoricians, especially Cicero,
Alemanno articulates an elaborate analysis of human vir-
tues and the requisite knowledge that enables one to
acquire the virtues. The virtues, the arts, and the sciences
are all arranged in an architectonic order from the lowest
to the highest. This structure comprises a ‘‘ladder of per-
fections’’ that Solomon himself ascended and, which the
reader is invited to imitate.
The impact of humanism on Jewish thought was evi-
dent not only in Italy but also in the Ottoman Empire
where Jewish refugees from Iberia reconstituted Jewish
cultural life and consolidated the medieval intellectual
heritage. This community absorbed individuals who for
decades lived as Crypto-Jews under the watchful eye of the
Inquisition. When these ex-conversos joined the Jewish
fold they introduced their coreligionists to university
learning in which Aristotle’s Ethics was paramount. The
most important contribution to Jewish ethics in the
sixteenth century was made by Moses Almosnino (d.
c. 1581), a teacher, preacher, judge, and communal leader
in Salonica (Bnaya 1996). His new commentary on the
Ethics, Peney Moshe (The Countenance of Moses), shows
intimate familiarity was a long list of Christian commen-
taries on the by Ethics by Eustratius, Albert the Great,
Thomas Aquinas, Gerald Odonis, John Buridan, Walter
Burley,
Faber
Stapulensis
Jacobus
(Jacques
Lefvre
d’Etaples), and Agostino Nifo. Relying on these commen-
taries is indicative not only of the breadth of Almosnino’s
knowledge but also of the continued interest in Aristotle’s
work during sixteenth century.
Like other humanist scholars, Almosnino devoted
much effort to determine the correct text of Aristotle’s
Ethics by comparing the textual variants at his disposal
(Tirosh-Samuelson 2003:426–438). Yet the main contri-
bution of Peney Moshe lies not in philological observations
but in the attempt to anchor the Ethics in the Bible and
rabbinic literature while disseminating an ethics derived
from late scholastic commentaries. The commentary on
the Ethics enabled Almosnino to preach and teach that
moral perfection for Jews could not come except through
a unique blend of philosophy and faith. The teaching of
Arisottle, so Almonino argued, are best exempliﬁed by the
moral teachings of King David and King Solomon,
recorded
in
Psalms,
Proverbs,
and
Ecclesiastes
as
Ethics, Jewish E
335
E

interpreted by the rabbinic sages. Like Alemanno,
Almosnino portrays King Solomon as the embodiment
of the Renaissance ideal homo universalis, the wisest of
all ancient sages, and claims that the religious poetry of
King David compares favorably to Greek and Roman
poetry. The very attempt to prove that the Bible equals
the aesthetic, moral, and intellectual achievements of
the ancients necessitates a rereading of Scripture against
this background of humanist culture. The result was
a distinct Jewish moral philosophy that fused Jewish,
Aristotelian,
Platonic, and Stoic elements.
In
the
ancient Jewish sources Almosnino rediscovered the
humanist emphasis on the dignity and worth of the
human personality, the primacy of the human will, and
the striving for personal immortality through cultiva-
tion of moral virtues. As much as intense suffering
made the Iberian Jews receptive to the humanist
emphasis on human emotions and passions, so did
the Bible provide them with evidence that the virtuous
man who lives by the Torah is able to transcend the
limitations of this world.
In regard to the moral virtues, Almosnino takes
a different approach than Maimonides and his Greek
source, Aristotle. For Almosnino, the moral life is not
only a means to an end but the very core of religious life
in this world. The moral life that is guided by practical
reason is informed by values of religious tradition. By
imitating divine perfections revealed in the Torah, the
devotee can acquire the moral virtues and attain the nec-
essary self-spiritualization that leads to devequt in this
world
and
eternal
life
after
death.
Moreover,
for
Almosnino the moral life of action is the very arena
where one manifests the perfection of the will and the
total devotion to God. Hence, the highest virtue in this
life is not the intellectual virtue of philosophical wisdom
but rather the virtue of prudence. Such an approach is
closer to the Christian understanding of the moral life
than to Maimonides’. Unlike Maimonides, Almosnino
views love as the perfection of the will, and therefore, the
perfection of practical reason. The love of God belongs to
the realm or praxis (ma`aseh) rather than theoria (iyyun).
The ultimate end of human life is the love of God, a love of
the honorable that enables the human will to resist the
passions. It is through the love of God that one attains the
perfection of all virtues in this world and for which one is
rewarded with eternal life. The love of God is everlasting
and inexhaustible because it is an unconditional love. Love
is not communication between two perfect intellects but
love of the inﬁnite details of the beloved. Only a perfect
will that can discern the inﬁnite variations of particulars
can love God, the most perfect will, unconditionally.
Those who unconditionally love the Torah, the manifes-
tations of God’s inﬁnite love, love God and enjoy everlast-
ing salvation.
Almosnino’s religious ethics was expressed didactically
in his Regimento de la vida (Sefer Hanahagat Ha-Hayyim;
The Book of the Regimen of Living), which he composed in
Spanish with a Hebrew introduction for the instruction of
his
nephew
(Zemke
2004).
Moral,
intellectual,
and religious training, which lead to human well-being,
must begin at a young age since the disciplined acquisition
of virtues liberates the soul from its corporeal condition-
ing, restoring it to its heavenly abode. The book was most
popular in the community of ex-conversos in Amsterdam
and was printed in Latin characters in 1729. But it was in
this very community that medieval Jewish philosophical
ethics encountered the most devastating critique when
Spinoza (d. 1677) challenged the identiﬁcation of Torah
and Wisdom that undergirded the entire discourse. His
ethical theory is deeply rooted in medieval philosophy
(Jewish as well as Christian) but also resonates with Stoic
teachings that enjoyed signiﬁcant revival during the six-
teenth century.
With Spinoza, the premodern discourse on virtue
and happiness within the Jewish religious tradition
reaches closure. Although the discourse changed over
time in accordance with Judaism’s interaction with sur-
rounding civilizations, the discourse perpetuated certain
themes. Jewish approach to happiness has much in
common with Aristotle’s view since both Jews and the
Greek philosophers agree that happiness is predicated on
the cultivation of virtues and the attainment of knowl-
edge. At the core of the Jewish conception of happiness
is the identiﬁcation of Torah and Wisdom, which entails
that Jews pursue wisdom as part of their loyalty to God.
As Jews encounter philosophy and its related sciences in
medieval Islam, they expand the category of ‘‘wisdom’’
and devise new courses of study for the education of the
virtuous person. These changes provoked debates about
the curriculum and generated the rise of alternatives to
rationalist philosophy – kabbalah. Yet both philosophy
and kabbalah agree that the ultimate end of life pertains
to the soul and that it can be experienced fully only in
the afterlife. Since focus on the salvation of the soul was
also the bone of contention between Jews and Christians
and the cause of much of Jewish suffering in the late
Middle Ages, the debate on happiness shaped the inter-
action between the two monotheistic religions, even
though Jewish intellectuals expressed themselves in
terms
borrowed
from
their
cultural
environment.
Aristotle’s Ethics, the major text that analyzed virtue and
happiness,
provided
the
conceptual
vocabulary
for
336 E
Ethics, Jewish

reﬂections on virtue and happiness in the matrix of the
Jewish religion.
See also: ▶Aristotle, Arabic ▶Ethics, Arabic ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯,
Abu¯ Nas˙r ▶Happiness ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn
Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) ▶Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’, Encyclope-
dia of ▶Moses Maimonides ▶Nicomachean Ethics, Com-
mentaries on Aristotle’s ▶Philosophical Psychology,
Jewish Tradition ▶Political Philosophy, Arabic ▶Political
Philosophy, Jewish ▶Saadia Gaon ▶Virtue and Vice
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Ibn Gabirol S (1966 [1902]) The improvement of the moral qualities, ed.
and trans. Wise S. Columbia University Press, New York
Ibn Paquda Bahya (1973) The book of direction to the duties of the heart,
ed. Mansour M. Routledge, London
Ibn Shem Tov Joseph (1556) Kevod Elohim. Ferrara
Maimonides Moses (1949) The code of Maimonides (Mishneh Torah).
Yale University Press, New Haven
Rosenblatt Samuel (ed) (1948) Saadia Gaon: the book of beliefs and
opinions. Yale University Press, New Haven
Secondary Sources
Abrahams I (1976 [1954, 1926]) Hebrew ethical wills. Jewish Publication
Society of America, Philadelphia
Berman L (1967) Greek into Arabic: Samuel ben Judah Marseilles, four-
teenth century philosopher and translator. In: Altmann A (ed) Jewish
medieval and Renaissance studies. Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, pp 289–320
Berman L (1978) Ibn Rushd’s middle commentary on the Nicomachean
ethics in medieval Hebrew literature. In: Jolivet J (ed) Multiple
averroes. Belles Lettres, Paris, pp 287–311
Berman L (1988) The Latin to Hebrew translation of the Nicomachean
ethics [Hebrew]. In: Idel M, Schweid E, Harvey WZ (eds) Sholmo
pines jubilee volume, vol 1, (= Jerusalem studies in Jewish thought
7), pp 147–168
Bnaya MZ (1996) Moshe Almosnino of Salinoka: his life and work
[Hebrew]. Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv
Fakhry M (1994) Ethical theories in Islam. Brill, Leiden/New York/Ko¨ln
Idel M (1983) The magical and Neoplatoinic interpretations of the Kab-
balah in the Renaissance. In: Cooperman BD (ed) Jewish thought in
the sixteenth century. Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
pp 186–242
Jospe R (1986) Rejecting moral virtues as the ultimate end. In: Brinner W,
Rickes SD (eds) Studies in Islamic and Judaic traditions. Scholars,
Atlanta, pp 185–204
Jospe R (1988) Torah and Sophia: the life and thought of Shem Tov ibn
Falaquera. Hebrew Union College, Cincinnati
Kellner M (1991) Maimonides on human perfection. Scholars, Atlanta
Kreisel HT (1999) Maimonides’ political thought: studies in ethics, law,
and the human ideal. Statue University of New York Press, Albany
Lesley A (1976) The song of Solomon’s ascents by Yochanan Alemnno:
love and human perfection according to a Jewish colleague of
Giovanni Pico. Ph.D. Dissertation, University of California, Berkeley
Mesch B (1975) Studies in Joseph ibn Caspi: fourteenth century philos-
opher and exegete. Brill, Leiden
Regev S (1983) Theology and rational mysticism in the writings of R. Joseph
ben Shem Tov. Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Jerusalem, Hebrew
Septimus B (1999) Isaac Arama and the ethics. In: Assis YT, Kaplan
Y (eds) Jews and Conversos at the time of the expulsion. The Zalman
Shazar Center for Jewish History, Jerusalem
Tirosh-Rothschild (1998) Human felicity – ﬁfteenth-century Sephardic
perspective on happiness. In: Cooperman BD (ed) Iberia and
beyond: Hispanic Jews between two cultures. University of Delaware
Press, Newark, pp 191–243
Tirosh-Samuelson H (2003) Happiness in premodern Judaism: virtue,
knowledge and well-being. Hebrew Union College Press, Cincinnati
Trinkaus C (1965) Adversity’s noblemen: the Italian humanists on hap-
piness. Octagon, New York
Trinkaus C (1970) In our image and likeness: humanity and divinity in
Italian humanist thought. University of Chicago Press, Chicago
Weiss RL (1991) Maimonides’ ethics: the encounter of philosophic and
religious morality. University of Chicago Press, Chicago
Weiss RL, Butterworth C (1975) Ethical writings of Maimonides. Dover,
New York
Zemke J (2004) Mosˇe ben Baruk Almosnino: Regimiento de la vida;
Tratado de los suenyos. Arizona Center of Medieval and Renaissance
Studies, Tempe
E´tienne Tempier
▶Parisian Condemnation of 1277
Eustratios of Nicaea
KATERINA IERODIAKONOU
Department of Philosophy and History of Science
University of Athens
Athens
Greece
Abstract
Eustratios of Nicaea was an extremely erudite Byzantine
scholar who produced commentaries on Aristotle’s ethical
and logical treatises. He seems to have belonged to the
intellectual circle of Anna Komnene in the 1120s/1130s.
His works, in which he followed ancient commentaries,
some of which are now lost, but also added his own
remarks, were particularly instrumental in the transmission
and rediscovery of Aristotelian thought in the Latin West.
Biography
Eustratios was born in c. 1050 and died in c. 1120. He was
a pupil of John Italos, but during his master’s trial in 1082,
he managed together with some other pupils of Italos to
Eustratios of Nicaea E
337
E

convince the synod of their innocence, and signed a letter
in which they anathematized Italos’ heretical doctrines.
At the time, Eustratios was merely a deacon, but he soon
became the Metropolitan of Nicaea. He was also asked by
the emperor Alexios I to participate in various theological
debates with the Latin Church and with the Armenians (or
Monophysites), until he himself was ﬁnally condemned
for heresy in 1117. The reasons for his condemnation are
a rather complicated matter involving both theological
and political issues, but the main charge against him was
his sharp distinction between the divine Logos and Christ
incarnated, a distinction that presented Christ as less than
equal to his Father. In this connection, it is also important
to note that Eustratios, just like his teacher Italos, was
famous for his strong conviction of the propriety of
using Aristotle’s syllogistic in theology; he even stated
that Christ himself had argued with the help of Aristote-
lian syllogisms. Indeed, Eustratios tried in his theological
treatises to prove the truth of Christian dogmas by using
logical arguments, which often take the form of a series of
standard syllogisms of the three Aristotelian ﬁgures or of
Stoic indemonstrable arguments. The titles of two of these
treatises are indicative: Syllogistical Demonstration of How
to Honour and Worship the Holy Icons, and Refutation of
Those Who Claim that Christ Has One Nature, on the Basis
of Logical, Physical and Theological Arguments. Thus, he
was forced to abdicate but was rehabilitated after his death
and cited as an authority at the council of 1157. Most
probably, during the years of his theological disgrace,
Eustratios took part in Anna Komnene’s project for the
revival of Aristotelian scholarship and produced his exe-
getical works. Anna Komnene in the Alexiad (14.8), the
history she wrote of the events during the reign of her
father Alexios I (1081–1118), presents Eustratios as an
extremely erudite scholar both of religious and of secular
literature as well as a master of dialectic.
Thought
What we have of his work as a commentator are his
comments on the ﬁrst and sixth book of the Nicomachean
Ethics and his commentary on the second book of the
Posterior Analytics, all of which are in the tradition of the
large exegetical commentaries of Late Antiquity. It may be
that in the case of the Nicomachean Ethics the reason why
he chose to comment on these particular books was that
the rest of Aristotle’s ethical treatise had been commented
on or was commissioned to be commented on by Michael
of Ephesos and other anonymous commentators. It is not
clear, however, why Eustratios chose to comment only on
the second book of the Posterior Analytics, especially since
it seems that the whole of Alexander of Aphrodisias’
commentary was still accessible. The comments on the
Nicomachean Ethics were translated in the thirteenth cen-
tury by Robert Grosseteste and became very inﬂuential in
the West through the agency of Albert the Great.
In interpreting Aristotle’s works, Eustratios followed
the Neoplatonic philosophers, though at certain places he
advocated theses, which slightly deviated from those of all
ancient philosophers and tried to be more in close agree-
ment with his Christian beliefs. For instance, concerning
the issue of the knowledge of ﬁrst principles, Eustratios’
view differs both from what Plato and the Platonists stan-
dardly held about the knowledge of the Ideas as well as
from what Aristotle said about the understanding of ﬁrst
principles. Commenting on Posterior Analytics 2.19,
Eustratios started his account in a clearly Neoplatonic
manner, by claiming that, since in the hierarchy of beings
the soul comes right after the intellect, it participates more
than anything else in what the intellect grasps, and thus the
common and self-evident notions, which it possesses are
nothing but resonances of what the intellect grasps. But in
what follows he did not defend the view that the human
soul regains pieces of knowledge, which it possessed at
some former time, nor that it has only potential knowl-
edge, which then becomes actual. On the contrary, he
argued that the human soul has full knowledge of the
principles, the common, self-evident concepts, already
when we are born, but that this knowledge is obscured by
our bodily impulses. It is only when our soul is guided
either by our sense perceptions or by appropriate teaching
that the common and self-evident notions come forth, so
that we, as it were, wake up and can immediately assent to
the ﬁrst principles. There should be no doubt that
Eustratios is inﬂuenced here by Neoplatonic views, which
he tried to integrate into his Christian outlook. For the
human soul, according to Christian doctrine, when cre-
ated by God, is created with all the knowledge it needs. If
human beings lose sight of the knowledge and under-
standing that their soul possesses, it is only because they
are susceptible to and overwhelmed by the impulses gen-
erated by their body. On the other hand, if human beings
manage to purify themselves from the bodily passions,
they can come to have knowledge of the ultimate truth.
Concerning the problem of universals, Eustratios, just
like his teacher Italos and many other Byzantine philoso-
phers, defended the Neoplatonists’ theory according to
which universals exist in three modes; namely, they exist
as universals ‘‘before the many (particulars)’’ in God’s
mind, as universals ‘‘in the particulars’’ within perceptible
individuals, and ﬁnally as universals ‘‘after the particulars’’
in the form of concepts acquired by our mind by abstrac-
tion
of
the
common
characteristics
of
perceptible
338 E
Eustratios of Nicaea

individuals. Joannou, and more recently Lloyd, have
presented
Eustratios
as
following
Italos
in
being
a nominalist, that is, in adhering to the position that
universals are mere names stripped of all reality and
existing only in the human mind. However, on Giocarinis’
view Eustratios should not be regarded as a nominalist,
since he follows the Platonic tradition, which treats the
universals before the particulars as the thoughts of Intel-
ligence, and thus they enjoy actual existence; as to the
other types of universals, they are solely in intellectu as
bare concepts or thoughts, which are not acquired by
abstraction but the human mind possesses them right
from
the
beginning.
Finally,
Benakis
has
labeled
Eustratios’ position on universals conceptual or moderate
realism, and stressed that it is not a nominalist position,
since even the a posteriori status of the universals after the
particulars does not alter the fact that they do exist.
In this context, Eustratios’ account of the distinction
between gene and eide is pertinent. According to
Eustratios, gene do not subsist (anupostata), whereas eide
can be said to subsist; for since eide come right after the
particulars while gene come after eide, gene are mere con-
cepts or thoughts (ennoemata), and have only a faint
resemblance to perceptible individuals, whereas eide, as
soon as matter is added to them, actually subsist in per-
ceptible individuals. In fact, Eustratios recognized three
different senses of eidos: it can be understood either as
a species, or as a form common to many perceptible
individuals, or ﬁnally as the form in a speciﬁc individual.
Hence, when Eustratios draws a distinction between gene
and eide as having different ontological status, he thought
of eide not as species, because eide as species are, just like
gene, mere concepts or thoughts which do not subsist; he
rather thought of an eidos understood either as a form
common to many perceptible individuals or as the form in
a speciﬁc individual, and it is in these two senses that eide
are said to subsist insofar as they subsist in the perceptible
individuals. Against Plato, therefore, he would object that
eide do not have separate existence outside the divine
mind, while against Aristotle he would object that gene
and eide, understood as species, are not even secondary
substances. In fact, Eustratios uses every chance to stress,
in his commentaries as well as in his theological treatises,
that God’s thoughts and the particulars are substances
(hupostaseis) and exist per se, whereas what the human
mind acquires by abstraction from the common charac-
teristics of perceptible individuals either merely subsists or
does not even subsist.
See also: ▶Albert the Great ▶Epistemology, Byzantine
▶John Italos ▶Logic, Byzantine ▶Michael of Ephesus
▶Nicomachean
Ethics,
Commentaries
on
Aristotle’s
▶Robert
Grosseteste
▶Syllogism,
Theories
of
▶Universals
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Demetrakopolos AK (ed) (1866) Ekklesiastike bibliotheke, vol I. Leipzig,
pp 47–198. Reprinted G. Olms, Hildesheim, 1965
Hayduck M (ed) (1907) Eustratii in analyticorum posteriorum librum
secundum commentarium. [Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeca vol
21.1]. Reimer, Berlin
Heylbut G (ed) (1892) Eustratii et Michaelis et anonyma in ethica
Nicomachea commentaria. [Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeca
vol 20]. Reimer, Berlin
Joannou P (1952) Eustrate de Nice´e. Trois pie`ces ine´dites de son proce`s.
Revue des E´tudes Byzantines 10:24–34
Joannou P (1954) Die Deﬁnition des Seins bei Eustratios von Nikaia. Die
Universalienlehre in der Byzantinischen Theologie im IX Jh.
Byzantinische Zeitschrift 47:358–368
Secondary Sources
Benakis L (1982) The problem of general concepts in Neoplatonism and
Byzantine thought. In: O’Meara DJ (ed) Neoplatonism and Christian
thought. State University of New York Press, Albany, pp 75–86/248–
249
Browning R (1962) An unpublished funeral oration on Anna Comnena.
Proc Camb Philol Soc 188:1–12. Repr. Sorabji R (ed) (1990) Aristotle
transformed:
the
ancient
commentaries
and
their
inﬂuence.
Duckworth, London, pp 393–406
Giocarinis K (1964) Eustratios of Nicaea’s defense of the doctrine of ideas.
Franciscan Studies 24:159–204
Ierodiakonou K (2005a) Byzantine commentators on the epistemic
status of ethics. In: Adamson P, Baltussen H, Stone MWF (eds)
Philosophy, science and exegesis in Greek, Arabic, and Latin
Commentaries, suppl. Bulletin of the Institute for Classical Studies,
pp 221–238
Ierodiakonou K (2005b) Metaphysics in the Byzantine tradition:
Eustratios of Nicaea on universals. Quaestio 5:67–82
Joannou P (1954) Der Nominalismus und die menschliche Psychologie
Christi. Das Semeioma gegen Eustratios von Nikaia. Byzantinische
Zeitschrift 47:369–378
Lloyd AC (1987) The Aristotelianism of Eustratios of Nicaea. In: Wiesner
J (ed) Aristoteles, Werk und Werkung, vol II. Walter de Gruyter,
Berlin, pp 341–351
Mercken HPF (1990) The Greek commentators on Aristotle’s ethics. In:
Sorabji R (ed) Aristotle transformed: the ancient commentaries and
their inﬂuence. Duckworth, London, pp 407–443
O’Meara DJ (2004) Praktische Weisheit bei Eustratios von Nikaia. In:
Bormann F-J, Schro¨er C (eds) Abwa¨gende Vernunft. Walter de
Gruyter, Berlin, pp 110–116
Papamanolakis A (2007) L’e´chelle ne´oplatonicienne des vertus chez
Psellus et chez Eustrate de Nice´e. In: D’Ancona C (ed) The libraries
of the Neoplatonists. Brill, Leiden, pp 231–242
Eustratios of Nicaea E
339
E


