Quantum Logic
601
Q
not too large, only those transitions take place where just one of the electrons makes
a “jump”, i.e., only one alters its orbital quantum number l by ±1 (see, e.g., [1, 2nd
ed.], p. 85). After initial protest, the scientiﬁc community learned to live with prob-
lems of interpretation by simply ignoring them as best as possible and developing a
rather instrumentalistic attitude ( quantum theory, crisis period). A deeper under-
standing of selection rules and other features of the semi-classical atomic models
only became possible after the discovery of  spin and the advent of quantum me-
chanics in 1925/26. Formerly useful mental models like electron ‘orbits’, ‘jumps’,
etc. no longer made sense because of  Heisenberg’s uncertainty relation. See also
 quantum jump experiments.
Literature
1. G. Herzberg: Atomic Spectra and Atomic Structure (New York: Prentice-Hall 1937, 2nd edn.
New York: Dover Publications 1944)
2. M. Jammer: The Conceptual Development of Quantum Mechanics (New York: McGraw-Hill
1966)
Quantum Logic
Peter Mittelstaedt
The Early History of Quantum Logic
Already in his pioneering work “Mathematische Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik”
of 1932, J. von Neumann mentioned that projection operators ( projection) in
 Hilbert space correspond to elementary propositions in quantum mechanics, and
that also the logical connectives ∧(and), ∨(or), and ¬ (not) can adequately be ex-
pressed in terms of projection operators. Compared to classical logic, the calculus
of propositions, that is based on projection operators, is essentially restricted by the
mutual commensurability or incommensurability of the propositions in question.
This calculus was investigated more in detail in the work of G. Birkhoff and J.
von Neumann in 1936 [1]. In terms of lattice theory, the authors could show, that
the lattice of quantum mechanical propositions is given by an orthocomplemented
lattice that is not distributive and in general also not modular. The title of their paper
“The logic of quantum mechanics” indicates the similarity and distinctness between
this “logic” and the well known classical proposition logic, which is given by a
Boolean lattice LC.
The lattice of quantum mechanical propositions that correspond to projection
operators in Hilbert space, was further elaborated by Piron [2] and Jauch [3] and

602
Quantum Logic
found to be an orthocomplemented, orthomodular lattice LQ with a zero-element 0
and a unit element I. In addition, the lattice of projection operators is atomic and
it fulﬁls the covering property. Together with these additional properties, the lattice
will be denoted here by LQ∗.
Is Quantum Logic a Genuine Logic?
The propositional logic L Q which corresponds to the lattice LQ is often called
“quantum logic”. At ﬁrst, this terminology is merely based on the analogy with
the classical propositional logic L C, which corresponds to a Boolean lattice, i.e.
to an orthocomplemented, distributive lattice LC. However, at this stage of the dis-
cussion, it is by no means clear, whether the structure L Q is at all a logic in the
genuine sense of this concept. This problem can be treated by recourse to the oper-
ational justiﬁcation of intuitionistic and classical logic by means of a semantic that
refers to calculi [4] or to dialogs [5]. Making use of the mutual incommensurability
of elementary quantum mechanical propositions one ﬁnds, that these elementary
propositions are only “restrictedly available” in a calculus [6] or in a dialog [7].
On the basis of a “quantum dialog game” with a “restricted availability” of ele-
mentary propositions, a calculus L Qi for an “intuitionistic quantum logic” can be
established. It can be shown that the calculus L Qi is consistent and complete with
respect to the semantic of quantum dialogs [8]. Under the additional assumption that
elementary propositions are value deﬁnite, i.e. fulﬁl generally the law A ∨¬A = I
of the excluded middle (tertium non datur) – we arrive at the calculus L Q of full
quantum logic.
The Lindenbaum-Tarski algebra of the calculus L Q is an orthocomplemented,
orthomodular lattice with universal bounds 0 and I, which we denoted here by LQ.
The Lindenbaum-Tarski algebra of the calculus L Qi of intuitionistic quantum logic
is also a lattice LQi, but this structure 1 is of less interest, since there are no physi-
cal reasons to dispense with the value deﬁniteness of elementary propositions. The
calculus L Q can be further elaborated. If we assume, that the elementary propo-
sitions refer to one single quantum system, then we arrive at a calculus L ∗
Q, the
Lindenbaum-Tarski algebra of which is the lattice LQ∗mentioned above with the
additional properties of atomicity and the covering property [9].
Irrespective of the successful logical reconstruction of the lattice LQ∗and the
completeness and consistency of the logical calculi L Qi and L Q, Jauch and Piron
[10] had argued that the lattice LQ must not be considered as a logic, since the
operation of material implication “A→B” cannot be expressed by ¬A ∨B as in
a Boolean lattice. The material implication is indispensable for the application of
the modus ponens lawin logical inference. However, it could be shown [11] that the
slight generalisation ¬A ∨(A ∧B) of the formula mentioned fulﬁls in LQ almost
all requirements that are fulﬁlled by ¬A ∨B in LC. Moreover, it could be shown
1 The lattice LQi is described in detail in P. Mittelstaedt (1978), chapter V.

Quantum Logic
603
Q
that in the lattice LQi of intuitionistic quantum logic for any two elements A and B
there exists a uniquely deﬁned generalised material implication A→B, which can,
however, not be expressed by the other connectives ∧, ∨, and ¬ [12]. If value def-
initeness of elementary propositions is presupposed, the proposition A→B agrees
with the proposition ¬A ∨(A ∧B) mentioned above.
Hence, the calculi L Q and L Qi fulﬁl the most important requirements of a logical
calculus. The difference between these calculi and the calculi L C and L i of classical
and intuitionistic logic is, that in the traditional calculi for any two propositions A
and B the compound propositions A →(B →A) and B →(A →B) are formally
true, whereas in the quantum logical systems L Q and L Qi these propositions are
formally true if and only if the propositions A and B are commensurable. In L Q the
difference to L C can also be expressed by the fact that for two propositions A and
B the distributive law A = (A ∧B) ∨(A ∧¬B) is formally true in L C but not in
L Q 2, [18].
The Bottom-Top Reconstruction of Quantum Mechanics
On the basis of the logical reconstruction of the lattice LQ∗described above, a
bottom-top reconstruction of quantum mechanics in Hilbert space was envisaged by
several authors. Starting from a formal language of quantum physics it seemed to be
possible to proceed in a few steps to quantum logic, to the lattice LQ∗and ﬁnally to
the lattice LH of closed subspaces of Hilbert space. The last step was strongly moti-
vated by the Piron-McLaren theorem3 [2,13,14] which states that a lattice LQ∗(of
length at least 4) is isomorphic to the lattice LH(D) of closed subspaces of a Hilbert
space H(D) over a division ring D, where D is given by the real, the complex, or
the quaternion numbers. If the real and the quaternion numbers could be excluded
by experimental evidence, we would arrive at the Hilbert space H over the complex
numbers and thus at quantum mechanics in Hilbert space.
However, the lattice LQ∗does not restrict the choice of the division ring per
se to the real, the complex and the quaternion numbers. Quite surprisingly, Keller
[15] proved a negative result in 1980. There are lattices LQ∗that fulﬁl all the
conditions of the Piron-McLaren theorem but nevertheless allow for non-classical
Hilbert spaces over non-Archimedean division rings. This unexpected result was
considered by some authors as demonstrating the fundamental impossibility of the
quantum logic approach to quantum mechanics in a Hilbert space over the complex
numbers. Hence, the bottom-top reconstruction of quantum mechanics mentioned,
was supposed to be impossible4 [19, 20]. However, this discouraging conclusion
has been contradicted by an important result by Sol`er that allows for a purely
lattice-theoretical characterisation of classical Hilbert spaces. In fact, every lattice
2 Cf. P. Mittelstaedt, (1978) and (2005), Chapter 13.
3 Cf. Piron (1964), McLaren (1965), and Varadarajan (1968).
4 For more details cf. Dalla Chiara et al. 2001, pp. 48–50 and Dalla Chiara et al. 2004, pp. 72–74.

604
Quantum Logic
which satisﬁes in addition to the conditions of the Piron-McLaren theorem also
the so-called “angle bisecting condition” [16], is isomorphic to a classical Hilbert
lattice [17].
Although this mathematical result provides some hope to achieve one day the
main goal of quantum logic, the bottom-top reconstruction of classical Hilbert lat-
tices, this goal is still far away. The missing link is an operational condition for
quantum mechanical propositions that ﬁnally leads – within the lattice-theoretical
formulation of quantum logic – to the “angle-bisecting condition” mentioned above.
Only if this “operational Sol`er condition” can be formulated and justiﬁed by plau-
sible physical reasoning, the quantum logical reconstruction of quantum mechanics
could be considered as ﬁnally established.
Primary Literature
1. G. Birkhoff, J. von Neumann: The logic of quantum mechanics. Ann. Math. 37, 832–43 (1936).
2. C. Piron: Axiomatique quantique. Helv. Phys. Acta 37, 439–68 (1964).
3. J.M. Jauch: Foundations of Quantum Mechanics. Addison-Wesley, Reading. MA (1968).
4. P. Lorenzen: Einf¨uhrung in die operative Logik und Mathematik. Springer, Heidelberg (1955).
5. P. Lorenzen: Metamathematik. BI-Wissenschaftsverlag, Mannheim (1962).
6. P. Mittelstaedt: Untersuchungen zur Quantenlogik. Verlag der Bayerischen Akademie der
Wissenschaften, M¨unchen (1959).
7. P. Mittelstaedt: Philosophische Probleme der Modernen Physik. BI-Wissenschaftsverlag,
Mannheim (1963).
8. E.-W. Stachow: Completeness of Quantum Logic. J. Philos. Logic 5, 237–80 (1976).
9. E.-W. Stachow: Structures of a quantum language for individual systems, In: Recent De-
velopments in Quantum Logic, eds. P. Mittelstaedt, E.-W. Stachow: BI-Wissenschaftsverlag,
Mannheim, 129–45 (1984).
10. J. M. Jauch, C. Piron: What is Quantum Logic? In: Quanta, Essays in Theoretical Physics ded-
icated to Gregor Wentzel, eds. P.G.O. Freund, C. G. Goebel, Y. Nambu: University of Chicago
Press, 166–81 (1970).
11. P. Mittelstaedt: On the interpretation of the lattice of subspaces of the Hilbert space as a propo-
sitional calculus, Zeitschrift f¨ur Naturforschung, 27a, 1358–362 (1972).
12. P. Mittelstaedt: Quantum Logic. D. Reidel Publishing Company, Dordrecht (1978).
13. M. D. McLaren: Nearly modular orthocomplemented lattices, Trans. Am. Math. Soc. 114,
401–16 (1965).
14. V. S. Varadarajan: Geometry of Quantum Theory. vol.1 Van Nostrand, Princeton.
15. H. A. Keller: Ein nichtklassischer Hilbertraum, Mathematische Zeitschrift 172, 41–9 (1980).
16. R. P. Morash: Angle bisection and orthoautomorphism in Hilbert lattices. Can. J. Math. 25,
261–72 (1973).
17. M. P. Sol`er: Characterisation of Hilbert spaces by orthomodular lattices. Commun. Algebra
23 (1), 219–43 (1995).
Secondary Literature
18. P. Mittelstaedt with P. Weingartner: Laws of Nature. Springer, Heidelberg (2005).
19. M. L. Dalla Chiara, R. Giuntini: Quantum Logics. arXiv:quant-ph/0101028 v2 (2001).
20. M. L. Dalla Chiara, R. Giuntini, R. Greechie: Reasoning in Quantum Theory. Kluwer,
Dordrecht (2004).

