Hilbert Space
291
H
4. L. de Broglie: La m´ecanique ondulatoire et la structure atomique de la matiˆere et du rayon-
nement. Journal de Physique et du Radium 8, 225 (1927)
5. A. Einstein, B. Podolsky, N. Rosen: Can quantum-mechanical description of physical reality
be considered complete? Physical Review 47, 777 (1935)
6. J. von Neumann: Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics (Princeton University
Press, Princeton, 1955, 305–324)
7. N. Bohr: Can quantum-mechanical description of physical reality be considered complete?
Physical Review 48, 696 (1935)
8. J.S. Bell: On the problem of hidden variables in quantum theory. Reviews of Modern Physics
38, 450 (1966). Reprinted with numerous related articles in Speakable and Unspeakable in
Quantum Mechanics (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2004). The name “contextual-
istic” was introduced by A. Shimony: Experimental test of local hidden variable theories, in
B. d’Espagnat ed.: Foundations of Quantum Mechanics (Academic, New York 1971), and a
shortening to “contextual” was performed by E.G. Beltrametti and C. Cassinelli: The Logic of
Quantum Mechanics (SIAM, 1983)
9. A. Gleason: Measures on the closed subspaces of a Hilbert space. Journal of Mathematics and
Mechanics 6, 885 (1957)
10. J.S. Bell: Ref. [8], sect. 5.
11. S. Kochen, E. Specker: The problem of hidden variables in quantum Mechanics. Journal of
Mathematics and Mechanics 17, 59 (1967)
12. F. Belinfante: A Survey of Hidden-Variables Theories (Pergamon, Oxford, 1973). This sketch of
a proof is ﬁlled out in E. de Obaldia, A. Shimony, and F. Wittel: Ampliﬁcation of Belinfante’s
demonstration of the non-existence of a dispersion free state. Foundations of Physics 18,
1013 (1988)
13. N.D. Mermin: Hidden variables and the two theorems of John Bell. Reviews of Modern Physics
65, 803 (1993)
14. J.S. Bell: Ref. [8] (1966) p. 451 and (2004), p. 9.
15. S. Gudder: On hidden-variable theories. Journal of Mathematical Physics 11, 431 (1970)
16. J.S. Bell: On the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen Paradox. Physics 1, 195 (1964); reprinted in Bell,
Ref. [8] (2004), 14.
17. A. Aspect: Introduction: John Bell and the second quantum revolution, in Bell: Ref. [8] (2004),
xvii–xxxix
Hilbert Space
Erhard Scholz and Werner Stulpe
Hilbert space, a generalization of the concept of Euclidean vector space, i.e., of a
ﬁnite-dimensional real vector space equipped with a scalar product. A Hilbert space
H [7–12] is a vector space over the real or complex numbers (sometimes over the
quaternions) in which a scalar product is deﬁned and which is complete w.r.t. the
norm induced by the scalar product.
The scalar product in a complex Hilbert space H associates any two vectors
φ, ψ ∈H with a complex number ⟨φ|ψ⟩such that (i) ⟨φ|ψ⟩is linear in ψ, i.e.,
⟨φ|χ + ψ⟩= ⟨φ|χ⟩+ ⟨φ|ψ⟩and ⟨φ|λψ⟩= λ⟨φ|ψ⟩where φ, χ, ψ ∈H and
λ ∈C, (ii) ⟨φ|ψ⟩= ⟨ψ|φ⟩where the bar denotes complex conjugation, (iii)
⟨φ|φ⟩⩾0 for all φ ∈H, and (iv) ⟨φ|φ⟩= 0 if and only if φ = 0; as a con-
sequence of (i) and (ii), the scalar product is antilinear in the ﬁrst argument, i.e.,

292
Hilbert Space
⟨φ +χ|ψ⟩= ⟨φ|ψ⟩+⟨χ|ψ⟩and ⟨λφ|ψ⟩= λ⟨φ|ψ⟩. Property (i) refers to the physi-
cists’ convention, according to the mathematicians’ convention the scalar product is
linear in the ﬁrst argument and antilinear in the second.—For a real Hilbert space,
λ ∈C in (i) is replaced by λ ∈R, (ii) reads ⟨φ|ψ⟩= ⟨ψ|φ⟩, and the scalar product
is linear in both arguments.
An important consequence of the properties (i)–(iv) of the scalar product is the
Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, stating that |⟨φ|ψ⟩| ⩽∥φ∥∥ψ∥where ∥φ∥= √⟨φ|φ⟩.
This inequality becomes an equality if and only if the vectors φ and ψ are linearly
dependent. The properties (i)–(iv) and the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality entail that the
association of every φ ∈H with the real number ∥φ∥is a norm, i.e., (i) ∥φ∥⩾0
and ∥φ∥= 0 if and only if φ = 0, (ii) ∥λφ∥= |λ| ∥φ∥where φ ∈H and λ ∈C
(λ ∈R in case of a real Hilbert space), and (iii) the triangle inequality holds, i.e.,
∥φ + ψ∥⩽∥φ∥+ ∥ψ∥where φ, ψ ∈H. In the triangle inequality of a norm that
is induced by a scalar product, equality holds if and only if the vectors φ and ψ are
linearly dependent.
The Hilbert-space norm enables one to deﬁne some analytical and topological
concepts in H. In particular, a sequence of vectors φn ∈H converges to the limit
ψ ∈H if ∥φn −ψ∥→0 as n →∞, i.e., for every ϵ > 0 there exists a positive
integer N(ϵ) such that ∥φn −ψ∥< ϵ for n ⩾N(ϵ). A sequence of vectors φn
is called a Cauchy sequence if, for every ϵ > 0, there exists an N(ϵ) such that
∥φn −φm∥< ϵ for all m, n ⩾N(ϵ). Every convergent sequence is a Cauchy
sequence; conversely, in the general case of a vector space equipped with a norm, a
Cauchy sequence need not have a limit. By deﬁnition, a Hilbert space is complete,
i.e., every Cauchy sequence in H is convergent.
A subset S of a Hilbert space H is called dense in H if every ϵ-neighborhood of
any ψ ∈H contains an element φ ∈S, i.e., for any ψ ∈H and every ϵ > 0 there
exists a vector φ ∈S such that ∥φ −ψ∥< ϵ. A Hilbert space is called separable if
there exists a sequence of vectors φn ∈H being dense in H.
A subset S ⊆H is called closed if the limit of every in H convergent sequence
of vectors φn ∈S belongs to S, brieﬂy, if from φn ∈S and ∥φn −ψ∥→0 as
n →∞, ψ ∈H, it follows that ψ ∈S. A linear submanifold S of a Hilbert space
can be closed (in which case S is often called a subspace of H), but need not (a
ﬁnite-dimensional submanifold is closed); a subspace is, with the scalar product in-
herited from H, a Hilbert space itself. A linear submanifold can be dense in H; dense
submanifolds play an important role as domains of linear operators ( operator).
A real or complex vector space equipped with a norm is called a normed space.
The concepts limit of a sequence, Cauchy sequence, completeness, dense subset
or dense linear submanifold, closed subset or submanifold, and separability apply
more generally to normed spaces. A complete normed space is called a Banach
space. Hilbert spaces are particular Banach spaces, namely those whose norm is
induced by a scalar product.
Two vectors φ, ψ of a Hilbert space H (two subsets S1, S2 of H) are called or-
thogonal to each other if ⟨φ|ψ⟩= 0 (if ⟨φ|ψ⟩= 0 for all φ ∈S1 and all ψ ∈S2).
For a subset S ⊆H, the orthocomplement S⊥consists of all vectors χ ∈H satisfy-
ing ⟨χ|φ⟩= 0 for all φ ∈S; S⊥is a subspace, i.e., a closed linear submanifold. If

Hilbert Space
293
H
X is a subspace of H, every vector ψ ∈H can, according to ψ = φ + χ, uniquely
be decomposed into a vector φ ∈X and a vector χ ∈X ⊥; that is, the Hilbert space
can be represented as the direct sum H = X ⊕X ⊥. The latter decomposition of
H entails that, for every subspace X, there exists the orthogonal projection onto X
( projection).
A family of vectors φi ∈H where i belongs to some index set I, is called
an orthonormal system if ⟨φi|φj⟩= δij. A maximal orthonormal system is called a
complete orthonormal system in H, a Hilbert basis of H, or an  orthonormal basis.
In every Hilbert space, there exists a complete orthonormal system, and different
such systems have the same cardinality, the latter being called the Hilbert-space di-
mension of H. Given a Hilbert basis φi, i ∈I, every vector ψ ∈H can be expanded
into the series ψ = 
i∈I αiφi where αi = ⟨φi|ψ⟩and only countably many αi
are not zero. Different Hilbert spaces are isomorphic, i.e., there exists a one-to-one
correspondence between the spaces that preserves linearity and the scalar products
( unitary operator), if and only if their bases have the same cardinality.—A Hilbert
space is separable if and only if it has a countable Hilbert basis φ1, φ2, . . .. All
inﬁnite-dimensional separable Hilbert spaces are isomorphic. Although in a separa-
ble inﬁnite-dimensional Hilbert space there exist only countably many mutually or-
thogonal vectors, there always exist uncountably many linearly independent vectors.
The standard realization of a ﬁnite-dimensional complex (real) Hilbert space is
the space Cn (Rn). The straightforward inﬁnite-dimensional generalization of Cn
is the separable Hilbert space l2 of the square-summable complex sequences u =
(ξ1, ξ2, . . .), ξi ∈C, ∞
i=1 |ξi|2 < ∞, with the scalar product ⟨u|v⟩= ∞
i=1 ξ iηi.
The other typical example of a separable inﬁnite-dimensional Hilbert space is the
space L2(M, dx) of the (equivalence classes of the) square-integrable complex-
valued functions on M where M is R, Rn, or a measurable subset of Rn of nonzero
Lebesgue measure and dx indicates the Lebesgue measure; φ ∈L2(M, dx) satisﬁes

M |φ(x)|2dx < ∞, the scalar product is deﬁned by ⟨φ|ψ⟩=

M φ(x)ψ(x) dx, and
functions differing only on a set of measure zero are considered to be equal. More
generally, if (, %, μ) is any measure space, the space L2(, %, μ) of the w.r.t. μ
square-integrable functions on  is a (possibly nonseparable) Hilbert space. Besides
L2(M, dx), an important particular case is the separable Hilbert space L2(R, μ)
where % is the σ-algebra of the Borel sets of R and μ a ﬁnite Borel measure.
Hilbert spaces are useful in functional analysis, in classical physics, and in quan-
tum physics where they serve as state spaces of quantum systems. Their study
was initiated in analytical terms by David Hilbert (1862–1943). His student Er-
hard Schmidt (1876–1959) introduced the geometric language of function spaces to
the ﬁeld. An axiomatic deﬁnition of inﬁnite-dimensional separable Hilbert spaces
was given by Johann von Neumann (1903–1957) in one of his ﬁrst papers on the
foundations of quantum mechanics [1].
The space l2 was introduced by Hilbert in a famous series of publications on
integral operators (1904–1910). He proved that integral operators with a symmet-
ric kernel (those being particular compact self-adjoint operators,  operator) can
be diagonalized by a suitable change of the basis [2]. Moreover, l2 was shown
to be isomorphic to the Hilbert space L2(M, dx) where M is the real line or any

294
Hilbert Space
of its intervals (Riesz-Fischer theorem, 1906). David Hilbert and Erhard Schmidt
further showed that every completely continuous (“vollstetig”) Hermitian opera-
tor in a separable Hilbert space can be diagonalized, i.e., in modern language,
every compact symmetric (self-adjoint) operator has a complete orthonormal sys-
tem of eigenvectors (Hilbert-Schmidt theorem). This result can be generalized to
the spectral theorem for all bounded Hermitian (self-adjoint) operators and even
for unbounded self-adjoint ones ( self-adjoint operator). These insights became
important for quantum theory.
In order to characterize states of a physical system which do not behave pointlike
but appear in some way or other as “spread out” (probabilistically or in the sense of
a classical continuous ﬁeld), the quantum theorists of the 1920s found sufﬁciently
useful inﬁnite-dimensional linear spaces for describing and understanding basic
quantum properties of matter. Werner Heisenberg (1901–1976), supported by Pas-
cual Jordan (1902–1980) and Max Born (1882–1970), introduced inﬁnite matrices
(comparable to Hilbert’s matrices in l2,  matrix mechanics) as essential symbolic
representatives for the new quantum mechanics, whereas Erwin Schr¨odinger (1887–
1961) introduced function spaces (similar to L2(M, dx)) for his wave functions
( wave function,  wave mechanics) and linear operators as symbolic represen-
tatives. The seemingly different approaches of Heisenberg and Schr¨odinger were
subsumed in a common formal framework by Paul A. M. Dirac (1902–1984) in his
“bra-ket” formalism to express the duality structure of the underlying normed vec-
tor spaces. On the other hand they could be conceptually uniﬁed in the language of
Hilbert spaces. The latter approach, at that time mathematically better founded, was
initiated by David Hilbert, Lothar Nordheim (1899–1985), Johann von Neumann,
and Hermann Weyl (1885–1955) between 1926 and 1928. It was spelt out by von
Neumann in the late 1920s in a series of path-breaking publications.
Central to the usefulness of Hilbert spaces in quantum physics is the peculiar
 superposition of quantum probabilities which allows successfully to characterize
pure ( states, pure & mixed) of quantum systems by normed Hilbert-space vectors
or, more precisely, by rays in Hilbert space (a ray is a vector up to any complex
nonzero factor). For mixed states, density matrices ( density operator) in Hilbert
space have to be used [3, 4]. Physical quantities ( observable) can be encoded by
self-adjoint operators and their spectrum, time evolution and symmetries by unitary
group representations ( unitary operator,  symmetry).
The most important operators used by Schr¨odinger are unbounded and are not
deﬁned on the entire Hilbert space L2(M, dx). Thus the main challenge for von
Neumann was to develop a whole new ﬁeld of mathematical properties of un-
bounded operators acting in Hilbert space. In particular he succeeded in ﬁnding
a convincing generalization of the spectral theorem for bounded Hermitian opera-
tors to the case of unbounded self-adjoint ones. On this basis he concluded Hilbert’s
attempts at a (ﬁrst) axiomatization of quantum mechanics [4, 5]. His later researches
on a quantum logical interpretation ( quantum logic) of the orthomodular lattice of
the closed subspaces of a separable Hilbert space were less successful in achieving
their original goals. They contributed, however, to a highly consequential research
program for the study and classiﬁcation of C∗-algebras ( algebraic quantum me-
chanics) [5].

Holism in Quantum Mechanics
295
H
Challenging questions remain open in the theory of nonseparable Hilbert spaces.
These arise mathematically from inﬁnite tensor products of separable Hilbert spaces
and physically from the study of quantum ﬁelds.
Primary Literature
1. J. von Neumann: Mathematische Begr¨undung der Quantenmechanik. Nach- richten G¨ottinger
Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften, 1–57 (1927). In Collected Works, Vol. I (Pergamon, New
York 1961, 151–207)
2. D. Hilbert: Grundz¨uge einer allgemeinen Theorie der Integralgleichungen (Teubner, Leipzig
1912)
3. H. Weyl: Gruppentheorie und Quantenmechanik (Hirzel, Leipzig 1928, second edition 1931);
English The Theory of Groups and Quantum Mechanics (Dutten, New York 1931)
4. J. von Neumann: Mathematische Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik (Springer, Berlin 1932,
reprint 1968); English Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics (Princeton Univer-
sity Press, Princeton 1955)
5. J. Lacki: The early axiomatization of quantum mechanics: Jordan, von Neumann and the con-
tinuation of Hilbert’s program. Archive for History of Exact Sciences 54, 279–318 (2000)
6. M. R´edei: Von Neumann’s concept of quantum logic and quantum probability. In John von
Neumann and the Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, ed. by M. R´edei and M. St¨oltzner
(Kluwer, Dordrecht 2005, 153–172)
Secondary Literature
7. F. Riesz and B. Sz.-Nagy: Functional Analysis (Frederick Ungar Publishing, New York 1955;
reprint Dover Publications, Mineola 1991)
8. M. Reed and B. Simon: Methods of Modern Mathematical Physics I: Functional Analysis
(Academic, New York 1972, second edition 1980)
9. W. Młak: Hilbert Spaces and Operator Theory (Springer, Dordrecht 1991)
10. D. Werner: Funktionalanalysis (Springer, Berlin 1995, third edition 2000)
11. G. Ludwig: Foundations of Quantum Mechanics I (Springer, New York 1983), Appendix IV
12. E. Prugoveˇcki: Quantum Mechanics in Hilbert Space (Academic, New York 1971, second
edition 1981; reprint Dover Publications, Mineola 2006)
Holism in Quantum Mechanics
Richard Healey
In slogan form, holism is the thesis that the whole is more than the sum of its parts.
Explanatory holism is the view that a satisfactory explanation of the behavior of
a system cannot be given by explaining the behavior of its parts. Property holism

