828
Wave Packet
Wave Packet
Helge Kragh
A wave packet is a concentrated train of (quantum) waves of various wavelengths
or momenta with the property that the packet is conﬁned within a small region of
space. Such a packet can be constructed by adding a very large number of waves so
chosen that their sum interferes destructively everywhere except in a small region. If
harmonic waves of different momenta are superposed, the packet can be expressed
in the form ψ(x) =

A(k)eikxdk where k = p/ℏand A(k) is the amplitude corre-
sponding to the wave number k.
Although speculative attempts to identify atoms with systems of standing waves
can be found back in the nineteenth century, in a quantum context it was Schr¨odinger
who invented wave packets and related them to atomic particles. In his second
communication on  wave mechanics Schr¨odinger discussed the possibility of
constructing a wave group or packet equivalent to a pointlike particle, such as an
electron, and in a subsequent paper of 1926 he provided a more elaborate discus-
sion in which he introduced the  superposition principle. Analyzing the case of
a one-dimensional harmonic oscillator, Schr¨odinger constructed for the ﬁrst time a
wave packet as an exact solution of the  Schr¨odinger equation. Making use of the
superposition principle, he constructed a wave packet of the form ψ =  anψn/n!,
where a is a large number, ψn are the eigenstates, and 0 ⩽n ⩽∞. The result-
ing wave packet, he showed, remains compact as time goes on and it has an energy
which is exactly the same as the one of the classical oscillator. Schr¨odinger’s wave
packet was a “minimum uncertainty wave packet,” the ﬁrst example of what later
became known as “ coherent states.” He believed that this result would be valid
also for electrons moving in atomic orbits and, if so, that it indicated that perhaps
electrons and other particles are wave packets. At the end of his paper he foresaw
that it was only a matter of time until “the representation by wave mechanics of the
hydrogen atom”  Bohr’s atom model would be achieved.
However, in letters to Schr¨odinger from June 1926, Lorentz demonstrated that
a permanent wave packet cannot be constructed for an atomic electron and that
Schr¨odinger’s success with the harmonic oscillator was accidental. “In the present
form of your theory you will be unable to construct wave packets that can repre-
sent electrons moving in very high Bohr orbits,” Lorentz wrote. It is unknown how
Schr¨odinger reacted, but most likely Lorentz’ critique contributed to a change in his
ontology: by the fall of 1926 Schr¨odinger concluded that his original belief in the
primacy of waves was not an integral part of wave mechanics.
Some of Lorentz’s objections were independently made by Heisenberg in his
famous paper of 1927 in which he introduced the  Heisenberg uncertainty prin-
ciple, which he derived by means of arguments based on wave packets. According
to Heisenberg, “Schr¨odinger’s reasoning is only viable for the case of the harmonic

Wave Packet
829
W
oscillator treated by him; in all other cases a wave packet spreads out in the course
of time over the whole immediate neighborhood of the atom.” He observed that the
peculiar properties of the wave packet Schr¨odinger had found was a consequence of
the fact that the energy levels of the harmonic oscillator are equally spaced (namely,
given by En = (n + 1/2)ℏω). Moreover, Heisenberg found that the size of the
probability wave packet – ψ ψ* rather than ψ – representing a freely moving parti-
cle would increase indeﬁnitely with the time.
Wave packets were not only important in the chain of arguments that led Heisen-
berg to his uncertainty relations, they also played a crucial role in Bohr’s physical
interpretation of quantum theory and his formulation of the  complementarity prin-
ciple in the fall of 1927 where he used wave packets to represent both  light quanta
and  electrons. The problem with the wave packet picture illustrated to Bohr that
“the contrast between the wave theory superposition principle and the assumption
of the individuality of particles” was irremediable. At that time, Schr¨odinger had
abandoned his wave ontology and no longer thought of electrons as constituted by
wave packets.
The papers by Schr¨odinger and Heisenberg were discussed by several physicists
in 1927–1928, including George Darwin, Earle Kennard and Arthur Ruark, who all
recognized that electrons cannot be represented just as wave packets. Or, as Kennard
expressed it, “the electron must always be assigned a greater degree of reality than
that of a wave packet.”
As indicated by the title of Schr¨odinger’s paper of 1926, “The Continuous Tran-
sition from Micro- to Macromechanics,” his aim was to understand the behaviour of
macroscopic bodies from quantum principles. Although wave packets would not do
as representations of subatomic particles, in 1927 Paul Ehrenfest showed that there
were no corresponding problems with spreading wave packets (Fig. 1) in the case of
macroscopic bodies. As an example he calculated the time it would take for a par-
ticle of mass m and represented by a probability wave packet of width Δ to spread
Fig. 1 Example of a wave packet. Source: Wikimedia Commons

830
Wave-Particle Duality: Some History
out to double its initial size. His result was T ∼= Δ√m/ℏ. Because of the smallness
of  Planck’s constant (ℏ= 1.05 × 10−34 Js) this means that the doubling time is
nearly inﬁnite for a macroscopic particle. For a particle of linear size Δ = 0.001 cm
and mass m = 1 g, the doubling time is about 10,000 times the age of the universe.
Another important work, relating to Schr¨odinger’s and Ehrenfest’s, was due
to Peter Debye, who showed that  wave packet, simulating mass and charge
points, can be constructed also without using the special expansion coefﬁcient that
Schr¨odinger had used in his treatment of the harmonic oscillator. Debye discussed
in 1927 the behaviour of wave packets of one degree of freedom for any kind of
force, and found that their maxima move in accordance with the classical laws. His
work was one of many that aimed at showing the correspondence-like connection
between quantum mechanics and classical physics.
Primary Literature
1. E. Schr¨odinger: Der stetige ¨Ubergang von der Mikro- zur Makromechanik. Die Naturwis-
senschaften 14, 664–666 (1926)
2. W. Heisenberg: ¨Uber den anschaulichen Inhalt der quantentheoretischen Kinematik und
Mechanik. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik 43, 172–198 (1927)
3. K. Przibram ed.: Briefe zur Wellenmechanik (Springer, Vienna 1963)
Secondary Literature
4. M. Jammer: The Philosophy of Quantum Mechanics (Wiley, New York 1974)
5. F. Steiner: Schr¨odinger’s Discovery of Coherent States. Physica B 151, 323–326 (1988)
6. H. Kragh, B. Carazza: Classical Behavior of Macroscopic Bodies from Quantum Principles:
Early Discussions. Archive for History of Exact Sciences 55, 43–56 (2000)
Wave-Particle Duality: Some History
Bruce R. Wheaton
Our modern understanding of light is the result of dispute since the scientiﬁc revo-
lution of the seventeenth century. The roots of that contention, however, precede the
contributions of Aristotle, and I daresay the ﬁnal story has yet to be written.
Following Plato and his student Aristotle, what we see in our lives are “sec-
ondary” qualities that originate from an unseen world of “primary” events. In their
view whatever the primary causes of sound should seem similar to the water, and
of matter to the rocks we encounter in life. The earlier philosophers tended to ﬁnd

