Ithaca Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics
325
I
Ithaca Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics
Jeffrey A. Barrett
The Ithaca Interpretation of quantum mechanics was proposed by the physicist
N. David Mermin (*1935) as an attempt to understand quantum mechanics by sup-
posing that the only proper subject of physics is correlations between  observables.
Further, while correlations are taken to have physical reality, that which they corre-
late is not. Quantum mechanics with no dynamical collapse is then taken to be an
entirely adequate physical theory since it can be understood as describing correla-
tions without correlate.
Mermin’s presentation of the Ithaca Interpretation starts by taking quantum me-
chanics without the collapse postulate as given. ( Wave function collapse). He
then seeks to infer what physical reality must be in order for this theory to be taken
as providing a complete and accurate physical description. What Mermin refers to
as the Theorem of the Sufﬁciency of Subsystem Correlations, the SSC Theorem,
plays a central role in characterizing what he takes to be the essential structure of
quantum-mechanical states – Mermin cites Wootters [3] for an earlier proof of the
theorem.
The SSC Theorem says that the mean values of the products of subsystem observ-
ables, over a particular resolution of a system into subsystems, sufﬁce to uniquely
determine the quantum-mechanical state of a given system. Mermin understands
this to mean that the quantum-mechanical state of a complex system is nothing more
than a coding of the correlations, or joint probabilities, between the observables of
its subsystems. And since the quantum-mechanical state of a system determines
the correlations between observables of its subsystems and nothing more, he con-
cludes that the quantum-mechanical description of the reality extends only to such
 correlations. On the assumption that the quantum-mechanical state of a system
provides a complete description of physical reality, since the state determines the
joint probabilities for observables of its subsystems but not the probabilities of phys-
ical properties in fact obtaining, Mermin concludes that physical reality consists in
correlations without there being any physical correlata described by the correlations.
Once one recognizes that physics, properly conceived, concerns correlations with-
out correlata, he argues, one recognizes that the quantum-mechanical description is
entirely adequate as a complete and accurate description of the physical world since
it fully characterizes precisely these correlations.
Using quantum mechanics to determine the proper subject of physics, then judg-
ing the adequacy of quantum mechanics as a physical theory using the standard of
adequacy derived from the theory itself is clearly circular, but Mermin argues that
there are historical precedents for such an argument. Just as electrodynamics taught
us that it is possible to have physical ﬁelds without there being any physical medium
to support them, quantum mechanics teaches us that it is possible to have physical
correlations without there being any physical correlata to support them. The argu-

326
Ithaca Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics
ment is that one should listen to what quantum mechanics is trying to tell us rather
than to try to impose our intuitions concerning the interpretation of joint probabili-
ties and the nature of probabilistic explanation on quantum mechanics. The central
question then in judging the adequacy of the Ithaca Interpretation concerns the de-
gree to which one should be willing to allow a physical theory to determine the
explanatory standards for its own assessment.
Part of the puzzle here is that Mermin recognizes that the quantum measurement
problem remains a problem in the context of the Ithaca Interpretation. He concedes
that “When I look at the scale of the apparatus I know what it reads. Those ab-
surdly delicate, hopelessly inaccessible, global system correlations obviously vanish
completely when they connect up with me” He insists, however, that explaining the
particular outcome of a measurement when there are no physical correlata (and,
for that matter, explaining why we have to update our probability calculations af-
ter performing a measurement) “is a puzzle about consciousness which we should
not get mixed up with the efforts to understand quantum mechanics as a theory of
subsystem correlations in the non-conscious world” ([1], 759).
One way to understand the argument would be to suppose that while Mermin
takes quantum mechanics to provide a complete and accurate description of physical
reality, he does not take physical reality to determine the mental states of observers.
Indeed, on the Ithaca Interpretation of quantum mechanics, reality is explicitly
deﬁned to be “physical reality plus that on which physics is silent, its conscious
perception” ([1], 766). This distinction allows one, if one wished, to locate correlata
as features of the nonphysical conscious world and thus to explain how it is possible
to know the result of a measurement when physical reality consists in only corre-
lations without correlata. The cost of this line of explanation would, it seems, be a
commitment to a strong variety of mind-body dualism.
Primary Literature
1. D. N. Mermin: What is Quantum Mechanics Trying to Tell Us? American Journal of Physics
66/9, 753–767 (1998)
2. D. N. Mermin: The Ithaca Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics. Notes for a lecture given at the
Golden Jubilee Workshop on Foundations of Quantum Theory, Tata Institute, Bombay, Septem-
ber 9–12, 1996. arXiv:quant-ph/9609013 v 1: 17 Sep 1996
Secondary Literature
3. W. K. Wootters in Complexity, Entropy, and the Physics of Information, W.H. Zurek ed.
(Addison-Wesley, Redwood City, CA 1990, 39–46)

