PALGRAVE STUDIES IN PRAGMATICS, 
LANGUAGE AND COGNITION
Conditionals
Edited by
Stefan Kaufmann
David E. Over
Ghanshyam Sharma
Logic, Linguistics 
and Psychology

Palgrave Studies in Pragmatics, Language and
Cognition
Series Editors
Richard Breheny, Psychology and Language Sciences,
University College London, London, UK
Nicole Gotzner, University of Potsdam, Potsdam, Germany

Palgrave Studies in Pragmatics, Language and Cognition is a series of high
quality research monographs and edited collections of essays focusing on
the human pragmatic capacity and its interaction with natural language
semantics and other faculties of mind. A central interest is the interface
of pragmatics with the linguistic system(s), with the ‘theory of mind’
capacity and with other mental reasoning and general problem-solving
capacities. Work of a social or cultural anthropological kind is included if
ﬁrmly embedded in a cognitive framework. Given the interdisciplinarity
of the focal issues, relevant research comes from linguistics, philosophy
of language, theoretical and experimental pragmatics, psychology and
child development. The series aims to reﬂect all kinds of research in the
relevant ﬁelds - conceptual, analytical and experimental.
Series editorial board
Kent Bach
Anne Bezuidenhout
Noel Burton-Roberts
Robyn Carston
François Recanati
Deirdre Wilson
Sam Glucksberg
Francesca Happé

Stefan Kaufmann · David E. Over ·
Ghanshyam Sharma
Editors
Conditionals
Logic, Linguistics and Psychology

Editors
Stefan Kaufmann
Department of Linguistics
University of Connecticut
Storrs Mansﬁeld, CT, USA
Ghanshyam Sharma
Department of South Asian Studies
National Institute of Oriental Languages
and Civilisations (INALCO)
Paris, France
David E. Over
Department of Psychology
Durham University
Durham, UK
ISSN 2946-2576
ISSN 2946-2584
(electronic)
Palgrave Studies in Pragmatics, Language and Cognition
ISBN 978-3-031-05681-9
ISBN 978-3-031-05682-6
(eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-05682-6
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Switzerland AG 2023
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher,
whether the whole or part of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation,
reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other
physical way, and transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer
software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt
from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors, and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in
this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher
nor the authors or the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material
contained herein or for any errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains
neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
This Palgrave Macmillan imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Switzerland
AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland

Contents
Introduction
1
Stefan Kaufmann, David E. Over, and Ghanshyam Sharma
Conditionals, Indeterminacy, Probability and Truth
13
Dorothy Edgington
Gibbardian Collapse and Trivalent Conditionals
37
Paul Égré, Lorenzo Rossi, and Jan Sprenger
The Logic and Pragmatics of Conditionals Under
Uncertainty: A Mental Probability Logic Perspective
73
Niki Pfeifer
Rethinking the Acceptability and Probability of Indicative
Conditionals
103
Michał Sikorski
Indicative and Counterfactual Conditionals
in the Psychology of Reasoning
139
David E. Over and Nicole Cruz
v

vi
Contents
Inferentialism: A Manifesto
175
Igor Douven, Shira Elqayam, and Karolina Krzy˙zanowska
Independence Conditionals
223
Nicole Cruz and David E. Over
Experimenting with (Conditional) Perfection: Tests
of the Exhaustivity Theory
235
Fabrizio Cariani and Lance J. Rips
The External Syntax of Conditional Clauses
275
Liliane Haegeman and Manuela Schönenberger
Toward a Uniﬁed Linguistic Approach
to Conditionals—Some Empirical Evidence
321
Ghanshyam Sharma
Should Past-as-Modal Theorists Also Be Past-as-Past
Theorists?
371
John Mackay
How Fake Is Fake Past?
389
Stefan Kaufmann
Counterfactual Hypothetical vs. Biscuit Conditionals:
A Semantic/Pragmatic Analysis of Their Morphological
Differences
425
Eva Csipak and Maribel Romero
Events Are the Source of Causal Readings in the Simplest
English Conditionals
459
Bridget Copley
Index
499

List of Contributors
Cariani Fabrizio University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA
Copley Bridget SFL (CNRS/Université Paris 8/UPL), Paris, France
Cruz Nicole Institute for Psychology, University of Innsbruck, Inns-
bruck, Austria
Csipak Eva Department of Linguistics, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada
Douven Igor IHPST / CNRS / Panthéon–Sorbonne University, Paris,
France
Edgington Dorothy Birkbeck, University of London, London, UK
Égré Paul Institut Jean-Nicod (CNRS/ENS/EHESS), Département
de philosophie & Département d’études cognitives, Ecole normale
supérieure, PSL University, Paris, France
Elqayam Shira School of Applied Social Sciences, De Montfort Univer-
sity, Leicester, UK
vii

viii
List of Contributors
Haegeman Liliane Research Groups Ugent, DiaLing, University of
Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland
Kaufmann Stefan University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, USA
Krzy˙zanowska Karolina ILLC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam,
Netherlands;
Arché, University of St Andrews, Scotland, UK
Mackay John Department of Philosophy, University of Wisconsin-
Madison, Madison, WI, USA
Over David E. Department
of
Psychology,
Durham
University,
Durham, UK
Pfeifer Niki Department of Philosophy, University of Regensburg,
Regensburg, Germany
Rips Lance J. Psychology
Department,
Northwestern
University,
Evanston, IL, USA
Romero Maribel Department of Linguistics, University of Konstanz,
Konstanz, Germany
Rossi Lorenzo Center for Logic, Language and Cognition (LLC),
Department of Philosophy and Educational Science, Università degli
Studi di Torino, Torino, Italy
Schönenberger Manuela University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland
Sharma Ghanshyam Department of South Asian Studies, National
Institute of Oriental Languages and Civilisations (INALCO), Paris,
France
Sikorski Michał Warsaw University of Technology, Warsaw, Poland
Sprenger Jan Center for Logic, Language and Cognition (LLC),
Department of Philosophy and Educational Science, Università degli
Studi di Torino, Torino, Italy

List of Figures
The Logic and Pragmatics of Conditionals Under
Uncertainty: A Mental Probability Logic Perspective
Fig. 1
Conditional event responses (n = 20). The solid line
was generated using the locally weighted scatter plot
smoother method (lowess, see Cleveland [1981];
implemented in R)
92
Indicative and Counterfactual Conditionals in the
Psychology of Reasoning
Fig. 1
Basic building blocks of Bayesian network structures
162
Inferentialism: A Manifesto
Fig. 1
The soritical color series from the materials of Douven
et al. (2018)
194
ix

x
List of Figures
Experimenting with (Conditional) Perfection: Tests of the
Exhaustivity Theory
Fig. 1
Standard endorsement rates for the four inference patterns
modus ponens (mp), modus tollens (mt), afﬁrming
the consequent (ac), and denying the antecedent (da)
across previous experiments (data from Evans et al. 1993,
Table 2.4 and are weighted averages from seven earlier
experiments)
244
Fig. 2
The effect of polar question vs. no question
on endorsement of modus ponens (mp), modus tollens
(mt), afﬁrming the consequent (ac), and denying
the antecedent (da), Experiment 1
251
Fig. 3
The effect of [CONS?] versus [ANT?] questions
on endorsement of modus ponens (mp), modus tollens
(mt), afﬁrming the consequent (ac), and denying
the antecedent (da), Experiment 2
252
Fig. 4
The effect of [CONS?] versus [ANT?] questions
on endorsement of modus ponens (mp), modus tollens
(mt), afﬁrming the consequent (ac), and denying
the antecedent (da). Experiment 3, with memory checks
254
Fig. 5
The effect of [CONS?] versus [ANT?] questions
on endorsement of modus ponens (mp), modus tollens
(mt), afﬁrming the consequent (ac), and denying
the antecedent (da), Experiment 4, with explicit indication
of exhaustivity
255
Fig. 6
The effect of [CONS?] versus [ANT?] questions
on endorsement of modus ponens (mp), modus tollens
(mt), afﬁrming the consequent (ac), and denying
the antecedent (da), Experiment 5, with information
about speaker’s knowledge and willingness
256
Fig. 7
The effect of [CONS?] versus [ANT?] questions
on endorsement of modus ponens (mp), modus tollens
(mt), afﬁrming the consequent (ac), and denying
the antecedent (da), Experiment 6, with explicit
exhaustivity
258
Fig. 8
The effect of [CONS?] versus [ANT?] questions
on endorsement of a conditional, its contrapositive, its
converse, and its obverse, Experiment 7
261

List of Figures
xi
Toward a Uniﬁed Linguistic Approach to
Conditionals—Some Empirical Evidence
Fig. 1
Branching-futures model (adapted from Dahl 1997)
349
Fig. 2
Tree representing Branching-aspects model
356
How Fake Is Fake Past?
Fig. 1
The ﬁlter-funnel model of time
391
Fig. 2
Interpretation of sentence (4): true at ⟨w, S⟩and

w′′, S

;
false at

w′, S

394
Fig. 3
Forward-extended doxastic modal base at ⟨w, S⟩. The set
of

w′, S′
that forms the modal background in evaluating
conditionals at ⟨w, S⟩is a subset (subject to an ordering
source and possibly further contextual parameters)
of the rectangle extending to the right
401
Fig. 4
Past-as-Modal (left) and Past-as-Past (right) expansion
of the modal background
406
Fig. 5
SP (left) and PP (right) expansion of the modal background
415

List of Tables
Gibbardian Collapse and Trivalent Conditionals
Table 1
Truth tables for the de Finetti conditional (left)
and the Cooper conditional (right)
44
Table 2
Strong Kleene truth tables for negation, conjunction,
and the material conditional
45
Table 3
Truth tables for trivalent quasi-conjunction
and quasi-disjunction and the material conditional based
on quasi-disjunction, as advocated by Cooper (1968)
50
Table 4
Overview of which premises of Gibbard’s proof are
satisﬁed by the logics DF/TT, CC/TT and QCC/TT. CE =
conjunction elimination (=a sufﬁcient surrogate for (iii)),
TRM = transitivity, monotonocity and reﬂexivity
of the logic. ≡, ↔, ⊃⊂concern whether logical,
indicative, or material equivalence holds between ⊃
and →
52
Table 5
Overview of the satisfaction/violation of Fitelson’s
conditions (5)–(7) in different trivalent logics
57
xiii

xiv
List of Tables
The Logic and Pragmatics of Conditionals Under
Uncertainty: A Mental Probability Logic Perspective
Table 1
p of all 16 possibilities in the sample task (i.e., a die
with two covered sides and two black circles, one
white circle, and one black triangle; the conditional
in the conclusion is: if circle, then white)
89
Table 2
Summary statistics of p for the sample task (see Table 1)
89
Table 3
Summary statistics of p values for tasks 1–20 (T1–T20)
90
Table 4
Response frequencies, classiﬁed by interpretation,
and mean (and SD) conﬁdence in correctness responses
for tasks 1–20 (T1–T20; n = 20)
93
Rethinking the Acceptability and Probability of Indicative
Conditionals
Table 1
An example of a conditional bet and the corresponding
conditional
126
The External Syntax of Conditional Clauses
Table 1
Three types of conditional clauses
307
Toward a Uniﬁed Linguistic Approach to
Conditionals—Some Empirical Evidence
Table 1
Speaker’s epistemic stance
326
Table 2
Types of marked clauses in conditionals
331
Table 3
Grammaticality test of presence or absence of P and Q
markers
337
Table 4
Markers in an inverted ordering of clauses
339
Table 5
Grammaticality test of Hindi conditional constructions
340
Table 6
Clause marking in Chinese
342
Table 7
The ﬁve classes of conditionals discussed above
344
Table 8
A complete inﬂectional inventory of Hindi verb caln¯a
‘to walk’ or ‘to move’ in combination with the Hindi
TAM elements (grammatical accord: 3rd person,
masculine and singular)
352

List of Tables
xv
How Fake Is Fake Past?
Table 1
Available readings for some Present antecedents
from the text. The two middle columns labeled
“scheduling” are where the Certainty Condition
induces a scheduling reading; these cases comprise
both non-predictive and predictive readings.
Since ’now’ with non-statives locates the reference
time in the immediate future, it is hard to tell
whether an intermediate reading with S < S′ < RA is
available for (10b), hence the ‘?’ in the corresponding cell
402

Introduction
Stefan Kaufmann, David E. Over,
and Ghanshyam Sharma
Humans think and talk a great deal about hypothetical states of affairs.
What will be, is, or would have been the case under certain suppositions
informs many of our basic mental and social activities, such as plan-
ning, explaining, and deciding (“nothing will happen if I just have one
S. Kaufmann (B)
Department of Linguistics, University of Connecticut,
Storrs Mansﬁeld, CT, USA
e-mail: stefan.kaufmann@uconn.edu
D. E. Over
Department of Psychology, Durham University, Durham, UK
e-mail: david.over@durham.ac.uk
G. Sharma
Department of South Asian Studies, National Institute of Oriental Languages
and Civilisations (INALCO), Paris, France
e-mail: ghanshyam.sharma@inalco.fr
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Switzerland AG 2023
S. Kaufmann et al. (eds.), Conditionals, Palgrave Studies in Pragmatics, Language
and Cognition, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-05682-6_1
1

2
S. Kaufmann et al.
drink”), attitudes like relief and regret (“if only I had not been drink-
ing”), and social relations to do with trust and power (“you will go to
jail if you drink and drive”). It is therefore not surprising that hypo-
theticals permeate the way we talk about the world, ourselves, and each
other. Conditional sentences—exempliﬁed by the English if–then family
of constructions and their counterparts in other languages—are the kind
of expression most typically associated with suppositional reasoning, and
the most widely studied, both as the overt expression of such reasoning
and as a window into its underlying structures and mental processes.
Part of what makes conditionals a fascinating research topic is their
interdisciplinary appeal. We use them in both talking and theorizing
about deep and thorny problems—knowledge and ignorance, causality
and chance, ﬁction and fact, inferences and truth. Viewed as interpreted
linguistic forms, conditionals exhibit highly intricate structural subtleties
and interactions between grammatical categories (such as tense, aspect,
modality and mood) and contextual factors.
In short, conditionals are of great interest to logicians (both philo-
sophical and mathematical), linguists, and psychologists, among others.
They also hold tremendous promise as a potential area for joint inter-
disciplinary research. However, for reasons that are hard to pin down,
the history of research on conditionals in these diverse disciplines has
been marked by long periods of relative isolation and parochialism,
punctuated by occasional bursts of mutual interest and intellectual
cross-fertilization. The record shows, however, that such bouts of inter-
disciplinary activity can lead to signiﬁcant progress within the indi-
vidual disciplines themselves.
In linguistics, the formal semantic study of conditionals and modality
received a transformational impulse from the ideas of Robert Stalnaker,
David Lewis and others, which were adapted for linguistic research
primarily through the work of Angelika Kratzer in the late Seventies and
early Eighties. After this, though, the basic ideas and tools underwent
only small incremental changes until about the turn of the millennium.
Meanwhile, the ﬁne syntactic and morphological details that drive and
constrain the interpretation of conditionals went largely unaddressed
even by linguists working in formal semantics, and were appreciated even
less within philosophy.

Introduction
3
Until about the turn of the millennium, most psychological studies of
conditionals uncritically assumed the correctness of the truth-functional,
material conditional interpretation of the natural language conditional
(Pfeifer this volume), according to which if A then C is logically equiv-
alent to the disjunction, not-A or C. The most inﬂuential psychological
study of conditionals is found in the mental model theory of Johnson-
Laird and Byrne (1991), who presupposed the validity of inferring if A
then C from not-A and from C, two jarringly counterintuitive conse-
quences of the material conditional interpretation. They went so far as
to claim that a conditional with a false antecedent “… can hardly be false,
and so, since the propositional calculus allows only truth and falsity, it
must be true” (p. 7). The propositional calculus speciﬁes the logic of the
material conditional, but there have long existed other logical systems
in which conditionals with false antecedents could be false, as well as
logical systems in which truth and falsity are not the only options (see the
papers by Cariani and Rips; Égré et al.; Over and Cruz; and Pfeifer in this
volume). Johnson-Laird and his collaborators have recently revised their
position to make both conditionals and disjunctions equivalent to modal
conjunctions (see, for example, Khemlani et al. 2018). This position has
also been heavily criticized (for example, in Bringsjord and Govindara-
julu 2020; Oaksford 2022; Over 2022). Williamson (2020) is a recent
sophisticated defense of the material conditional analysis of the natural
language conditional.
So, what happened around the turn of the millennium? Or rather we
should ask, what began then? For, with hindsight, it is clear that we are
still very much in the middle of a process that was initiated by what
is arguably the most consequential burst of cross-disciplinary interac-
tions yet. Multiple new developments contributed to this event. One
that affected all three disciplines was the rise—or more accurately, the
return—of causality as a respectable notion in statistics and the social and
cognitive sciences. Most prominently associated with Pearl (2000), this
development, with its attendant toolbox for the formalization of notions
such as intervention and independence (see in this volume, Copley;
Kaufmann; and Over and Cruz), provided the study of counterfactual
conditionals in particular with a much-needed new perspective.

4
S. Kaufmann et al.
In another stimulating conﬂuence, psychologists ﬁnally awoke to the
hypothesis that the probability of the conditional if A then C is the
conditional probability of C given A (see in this volume, Edgington;
Over and Cruz; and Pfeifer). This hypothesis, sometimes simply called
The Equation or The Thesis by philosophers, originated as a philosophical
position in the works of Ernest Adams, Robert Stalnaker, and others. Its
deep roots lie in the even earlier mathematical studies of subjective prob-
ability by de Finetti and Ramsey (Pfeifer this volume), but for a long
time it had failed to attract the attention of psychologists. When it even-
tually did (Evans et al. 2003), psychologists soon uncovered a burgeoning
stream of evidence in support of it and of the probabilistic, or Bayesian,
approach to the study of conditionals in general (Oaksford and Chater
2007, 2020; Over and Cruz this volume). These ﬁndings in turn moti-
vated philosophers and even linguists to show renewed interest in The
Thesis, and the unique challenges involved in its formal implementation.
In linguistics, since the turn of the millennium, there has been an
increasing interest in the long-neglected syntactic and morphological
ﬁne-print of conditionals and their related semantic subtleties, including
the marking of counterfactuality, the semantic ramiﬁcations of tense
and temporal reference, the role of contextual factors, and so forth.
These ﬁndings in turn have fed into a better understanding of the rele-
vant logical properties, as well as potentially into a better design of
experimental stimuli.
This is an exciting time to be working on conditionals, for all the
reasons already mentioned, plus one more: while we have made much
progress in the last two decades or so, we are not much closer to a
single, generally accepted theoretical framework. Proposals abound, each
with its staunch defenders. An optimistic take on this situation, however,
is that it may well be for the best: deepening our understanding of a
phenomenon is not the same as, and does not require, agreeing on a
single approach.
This optimistic stance is the one we take in presenting this collection
of papers. Our goal in assembling them is to showcase both the range of
current research questions and the variation in theoretical and method-
ological perspectives. We can do justice to neither in a single volume, but
we hope to have succeeded in giving an impression of the multifaceted

Introduction
5
nature and truly interdisciplinary appeal of the phenomenon. Despite
the diversity of perspectives and approaches on display, the individual
essays, like guests at a lively dinner party, end up engaging with each
other in a web of overlapping conversations. We would like to point out
some of the larger themes at the center of these conversations.
One recurring theme involves the relation between truth and proba-
bility, which is particularly fraught in the case of conditionals. Many ﬁnd
The Thesis (that the probability of a conditional if A, C is the conditional
probability of C, given A) intuitively appealing. Yet it does not sit well
with a semantic framework in which conditionals have objective truth
conditions: a conditional probability cannot in general be identiﬁed with
the probability that a proposition is true, as Lewis (1976) was the ﬁrst to
point out, and as a wealth of subsequent work has reafﬁrmed. For those
who seek to reconcile The Thesis with truth conditions, all known ways
out of this quandary offend against some beliefs that people hold dear,
e.g., that conditionals are always either true or false.
The main challenge for truth-conditional accounts of conditionals lies
in the case where the antecedent is false. Attempts to reconcile truth
conditions with probabilities are not exempt from the difﬁculties this
raises. Dorothy Edgington, one of the foremost experts on the topic,
addresses precisely this problem in her contribution, asking: what is the
truth value of a conditional if A, C when A is false? She argues for the
view that conditionals have truth conditions, which may, however, fail to
yield a determinate truth value when the antecedent is false. This allows
her to argue that conditionals denote propositions, albeit ones whose
values are not always fully determined by the facts.
Paul Égré, Lorenzo Rossi, and Jan Sprenger also address this problem
in their chapter, but their starting point is an argument by Allan Gibbard
that, under three assumptions which Gibbard considered uncontro-
versial, any semantic treatment of the conditional as a propositional
operator implies that it is the material conditional. Most subsequent
work has seen this unwelcome result as evidence against one of the three
assumptions, namely the so-called Import–Export Principle, which main-
tains that if A, then if B, C is equivalent to if A and B, then C. Égré et al.
instead give up a further assumption which Gibbard made and which

6
S. Kaufmann et al.
has not been questioned as widely in subsequent work: that the condi-
tional is a bivalent propositional operator that is always true or false.
They assume instead that the conditional is a trivalent truth-functional
operator, which takes on a third value (which could be interpreted as
either undeﬁned or void) when the antecedent is false. The move to a
trivalent logic opens up a host of related theoretical choices. Égré et al.
carefully chart these options and argue that they hold much promise for
a more satisfactory account of conditionals.
Niki Pfeifer’s chapter explores yet another line on the problem of
false antecedents. The logical foundation of his account is coherence-
based probability logic, a family of approaches based on de Finetti’s (and
Ramsey’s) subjectivist deﬁnition of probability and his account of coher-
ence based on the concept of a “Dutch book” (a series of bets that the
bettor must lose). The semantic treatment of a conditional if A then C is
based on the notion of a conditional event C|A, a trivalent entity whose
value is that of C when A is true and which is void when A is false.
According to this approach, the assertion of if A then C by a speaker is
comparable to a conditional bet, if A then I bet C, which is called off,
becoming void, when A is false. Unlike the trivalent truth tables explored
in Égré et al .’s contribution, these conditional events are associated with
conditional probabilities, which are taken to be formally primitive within
this framework, i.e., not deﬁned as the ratio of the probability of A &
C to the probability of A. Pfeifer deploys this logic in a model of prob-
abilistic inference, focusing speciﬁcally on the treatment of special cases,
such as zero-probability antecedents, where the predictions of his frame-
work differ sharply from those suggested by the material conditional
analysis.
Michał Sikorski’s paper takes a step back and reviews the challenges
facing attempts to reconcile The Thesis with a truth-conditional approach
under which probability is understood as the probability of truth in an
objective sense. He examines The Thesis and proposals about when the
assertion of a conditional is acceptable. He considers the experiments
that conﬁrm The Thesis and points out that some recent studies appear
to cast doubt on its full generality. The probability of if A then C may
only be the probability of C given A when A raises the probability of C,

Introduction
7
and not when A and C are independent or when A lowers the probability
of C.
The psychological evidence for and against The Thesis is taken up in
the chapters by David E. Over and Nicole Cruz on the one hand, and
Igor Douven, Shira Elqayam, and Karolina Krzy˙zanowska on the other.
Over and Cruz explore the relationship between indicative and coun-
terfactual conditionals from a Bayesian perspective, arguing that when
beliefs are updated with new information, a belief in a counterfactual
can sometimes “collapse” to a belief in an indicative, and a belief in an
indicative can sometimes “expand” to a belief in a counterfactual. In their
Bayesian approach, the value of a conditional with a false antecedent is
the conditional probability itself. They cover possible limitations to the
conditional probability hypothesis and criticize truth condition inferen-
tialism, which is the view that a “standard” conditional if A then C can
only be true when there is a deductive, inductive, or abductive (or some
other epistemic) relation between A and C. Pfeifer, in his chapter, also
ﬁnds fault with inferentialism.
In contrast, Douven, Elqayam, and Krzy˙zanowska, with the support
of philosophical arguments and appeals to experimental evidence, put
forward their own version of truth condition inferentialism. In their
account, a “standard” conditional if A then C can only be true when
there is a compelling argument from A to C. They closely compare if A
then C to an inference that leads from A as a premise to C as a conclu-
sion, and hold that it must be a belief bias effect which causes people
to endorse if A then C as “true”—when C is believed to be true—in
the absence of a compelling argument from A to C. They also argue in
support of the position that modus ponens, inferring C from if A then C
and A, does not always preserve truth.
Cruz and Over reply to the points made by Douven et al. They deﬁne
an “independence conditional” as a conditional if A then C that is used,
in a particular context, as part of an argument that A and C are inde-
pendent of each other. They argue that independence conditionals are
of importance in themselves and should not be labeled “non-standard”
conditionals, or “unconditionals”. They also question the positions taken
by Douven et al. on “belief bias” and modus ponens.

8
S. Kaufmann et al.
Fabrizio Cariani and Lance Rips study
conditional perfection, the
inference of the biconditional, A if and only if C, from an assertion of the
conditional, if A then C. They interpret an assertion of a conditional as
a statement that C is true when A is true across a range of contextually
given possible worlds. This is a “strict” interpretation, and it allows if A
then C to be false in some contexts when A is false. According to the
exhaustivity hypothesis, there will be evidence for conditional perfection
when there is an increased endorsement in experiments of the fallacies
of afﬁrming the consequent, inferring A from if A then C and C, and
denying the antecedent, inferring not-C from if A then C and not-A. In
seven experiments, Cariani and Rips ﬁnd that only a speaker’s explicit
statement that A is the sole way to bring C about tends to induce
perfection.
All the chapters mentioned so far are concerned in one way or another
with issues relating to the truth conditions of conditionals and the
reasoning underlying their interpretation and use. A host of additional
questions open up, however, when we turn to conditionals qua linguistic
expressions. As we mentioned above, linguists, especially those working
in the formal semantic tradition that is heavily indebted to philosoph-
ical logic, were slow to start paying close attention to the ﬁner details
of the syntactic and morphological makeup of conditionals. One major
exception to this is Angelika Kratzer’s argument that there is no binary
sentential operator in natural-language conditionals; rather, the conse-
quent (the matrix clause, in linguistic terms) is just a standalone sentence
headed by a (covert or overt) modal operator, while the if-clause is an
optional modiﬁer. This view, though articulated early on and now stan-
dard in linguistic theory, is not, however, a syntactic analysis, and does
not do justice to the structural intricacies of the clauses involved. As in
philosophy, the constituents were treated as the unanalyzed wholes A and
C.
The linguistic chapters included in this collection show how far the
ﬁeld has moved on from that early view. From a syntactic perspec-
tive, the claim that conditional if -clauses are modiﬁers is not saying
very much, as Liliane Haegeman and Manuela Schönenberger show in
their contribution. They identify three classes of conditional adverbial

Introduction
9
clauses, distinguished by their syntactic properties, and with corre-
sponding semantic differences. It is fair to say that the implications
of this classiﬁcation for semantic theory have yet to be fully explored
(but see, for instance, Csipak and Romero this volume, on “biscuit
conditionals”).
With the aim of bridging the gap between logical and linguistic
traditions, Ghanshyam Sharma’s contribution reexamines Greenberg’s
Universal 14, and looks into the parameters laid down by Comrie (1986)
for cross-linguistic typological research. In doing so, Sharma reassesses
some much debated topics and terms, such as clause inversion, the conse-
quent marker then, and the role of grammatical categories such as tense
and aspect in producing a counterfactual construal. He argues that the
role of aspect in counterfactuality still remains underexplored.
Another long-standing open issue in the linguistic expression of
conditionals concerns the morphological marking of the class of “coun-
terfactual” or “subjunctive” conditionals, as opposed to their “indicative”
counterparts. Many languages use some form of Past or Perfect marking
on counterfactuals, even when they refer to future states of affairs;
English in fact has not one but two such forms. Just how exactly these
“fake Pasts” contribute to the interpretation of conditionals is an unre-
solved question in linguistics and philosophy, with authors disagreeing
on whether or to what degree fake Past retains at least some of the
temporal meaning of the ordinary Past, or whether it is used as a purely
modal marker indicating a kind of “remoteness” from reality. The chap-
ters by John MacKay and Stefan Kaufmann discuss different facets of
this open issue. Mackay argues that both camps are partly right and
proposes a hybrid account: Past marking in conditionals can be temporal
or modal, and which reading is available depends in part on certain prop-
erties of the context of the utterance. Kaufmann argues for a different
kind of hybrid account: fake Past is always “modal” in that it signals a
(hypothetical) intervention
upon the actual course of events; in addi-
tion, though, which of the English forms is used depends on whether
that intervention lies in the past of the speech time.
Eva Csipak and Maribel Romero are also concerned with the temporal
morphology in counterfactual conditionals, but they focus on the special

10
S. Kaufmann et al.
sub-class of so-called biscuit conditionals, so named after John Austin’s
(1956) example “There are biscuits on the sideboard, if you want some”.
Biscuit conditionals, unlike the more familiar hypothetical conditionals,
are concerned with a connection between the truth of the antecedent
and the relevance, rather than the truth, of the consequent. Csipak and
Romero take a uniﬁed semantic approach to biscuit conditionals and
hypothetical conditionals, but observe that unlike hypothetical coun-
terfactuals, English biscuit counterfactuals do not allow fake Past in
the consequent (similarly, Spanish biscuit counterfactuals have indica-
tive mood in the consequent, unlike their hypothetical counterparts).
Hypothetical counterfactuals exhibit the requisite marking (fake Past in
English, subjunctive mood in Spanish) in both constituents, but there
is a “mismatch” of sorts between the antecedent and the consequent in
biscuit conditionals. Csipak and Romero view this difference as a modal
analog of similar mismatches in the domain of tense and temporal refer-
ence, known as violations of Sequence of Tense (Sequence of Tense is
observed in “Mary said that she was coming tomorrow”; it is broken
in “Mary said that she is coming tomorrow”).
Bridget Copley’s chapter uses causal models to deal with the role
of temporal semantics in the interpretation of conditionals. For some
conditionals If A, C a reading under which C is a causal consequence
of A is very salient; others lack this particular ﬂavor. Copley argues that
the aspectual properties of the constituents—in particular, the distinction
between stative and eventive clauses—play a central role in determining
this behavior.
The idea of this collection was hatched in the aftermath of the
summer school Conditionals in Paris—Logic, Linguistics, and Psychology,
at which many of the contributors taught for a highly stimulating week
in June, 2019. The summer school was organized by Ghanshyam Sharma
and Lucia Tovena and held under the auspices of the French National
Research Center (CNRS) and the Laboratory of Excellence: Empir-
ical Foundations of Linguistics (LABEX-EFL) in Paris. We want to use
this opportunity to express our deepest gratitude to the organizers and
sponsors of this event, which was conceived in the same spirit of inter-
disciplinarity that we aim to capture in this book. We are also most

Introduction
11
grateful to all contributors to the book and to the publishers for their
generosity, patience, and endurance during the challenging times of
a global pandemic. Finally, Stefan Kaufmann gratefully acknowledges
support from the National Science Foundation (#2116972, “Research
on conditional and modal language”) and the University of Connecticut
Humanities Institute.
References
Austin, J. L. (1956). Ifs and cans. In Proceedings of the British Academy, 42,
109–132. Reprinted in Urmson, J. O. and G. J. Warnock, editors (1961).
J. L. Austin: Philosophical Papers. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Bringsjord, S., & Govindarajulu, N. S. (2020). Rectifying the mischaracteriza-
tion of logic by mental model theorists. Cognitive Science, 44, e12898.
Comrie, B. (1986). Conditionals: A typology. On Conditionals, 77–99. Trau-
gott, E. C., ter Meulen, A., Reilly, J. S. and C. A. Ferguson, editors.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Handley, S. J., & Over, D. E. (2003). Conditionals
and conditional probability. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 29, 321–335.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (1991). Deduction. Hove & Hammer-
smith: Erlbaum.
Khemlani, S. S., Byrne, R. M. J., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2018). Facts and
possibilities: A model-based theory of sentential reasoning. Cognitive Science,
42(6), 1887–1924.
Lewis, D. (1976). Probabilities of conditionals and conditional probabilities.
The Philosophical Review, 85, 297–315.
Oaksford, M. (2022). Mental models, computational explanation and Bayesian
cognitive science: Commentary on Knauff and Gazzo Castañeda (2022).
Thinking & Reasoning, 1–12.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (2007). Bayesian rationality: The probabilistic
approach to human reasoning. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (2020). New paradigms in the psychology of
reasoning. Annual Review of Psychology, 71, 305–330.
Over, D. E. (2022). The new paradigm and massive modalization. Thinking &
Reasoning. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/357433854

12
S. Kaufmann et al.
Pearl, J. (2000). Causality: Models, reasoning, and inference. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Williamson, T. (2020). Suppose and tell: The semantics and heuristics of condi-
tionals. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Conditionals, Indeterminacy, Probability
and Truth
Dorothy Edgington
1
Introduction
This paper defends a slightly different view of conditionals from the view
I have advocated for a long time. Many of the ingredients remain in
place: conditionals essentially involve suppositions; conditionals are often
uncertain, and the best tool for handling uncertain conditionals is condi-
tional probability—the probability of the consequent on the supposition
of the antecedent; a conditional probability cannot be equated with the
probability of the truth of a proposition. Hence, on this view, condi-
tionals do not express propositions. I took this to mean that conditionals
do not have truth conditions. One disadvantage of this is that we no
longer have an account of conditionals embedded in wider contexts,
either in terms of truth, or in terms of probability.
D. Edgington (B)
Birkbeck, University of London, London, UK
e-mail: dorothy.edgington@philosophy.ox.ac.uk
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Switzerland AG 2023
S. Kaufmann et al. (eds.), Conditionals, Palgrave Studies in Pragmatics, Language
and Cognition, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-05682-6_2
13

14
D. Edgington
I have been impressed by an idea of Richard Bradley’s (2012), who
argues that, although conditionals do not express (ordinary) proposi-
tions, they may express something to which truth conditions can be
ascribed, such that the probability of truth is a conditional probability,
after all; and thus the problem of embedded conditionals is solved. But
in order to make Bradley’s view acceptable, I have had to develop some
ideas of my own. The most important is this: even if they can be given
truth conditions, such that the probability of truth is the conditional
probability, I argue that it is often indeterminate (when the antecedent
is false) what the truth value of the conditional is. I link the treatment
of this indeterminacy to another species of indeterminacy—that due to
vagueness.
Another issue I develop is the relation between the indicative condi-
tional and a certain reading of the counterfactual. Indicative conditionals
are the main focus of this paper, but as we have to decide what to say
about them should the antecedent be false, the counterfactual form of
words comes into the story too.
The rest of this introduction is a summary of the advantages and
disadvantages of the suppositional view.
Will she accept if she is offered the job? Will I be cured if I have the
operation? To assess a conditional, you suppose the antecedent is true,
and consider what you think about the consequent, on that basis. The
idea goes back to Frank Ramsey: ‘If two people are arguing “if p, will
q?” and are both in doubt as to p, they are adding p hypothetically to
their stock of knowledge, and arguing on that basis about q’ (1929, in
1931 p. 247). Often, this procedure yields verdicts which fall short of
certainty: ‘I think she’ll accept if she’s offered the job, but she might
not’; ‘It’s around 90% likely that you will be cured if you have the oper-
ation’. Here the notion of conditional probability is what is needed: the
probability of q on the supposition that p. Ramsey’s remark continues:
‘they are ﬁxing their degrees of belief in q given p’ (ibid.).
This well-known and much-used notion, a conditional probability,
cannot be equated with the probability that a proposition is true. It
essentially involves a supposition. When considering how likely it is that
A, you are comparing A and ¬A; you ask yourself which is more likely,
and by how much, A or ¬A? When considering how likely it is that if A,

Conditionals, Indeterminacy, Probability and Truth
15
B, that is, B on the supposition that A, you ask yourself which is more
likely, and by how much, A&B, or A&¬B?
Ramsey realized that this treatment of conditionals was not equivalent
to treating them as propositions: ‘Many sentences express cognitive atti-
tudes without being propositions. … This is even true of the ordinary
hypothetical’ (1929, in 1931, pp. 239–30). David Lewis (1976) was the
ﬁrst to prove that there is no proposition the probability of whose truth
can be systematically equated with a conditional probability, and there
have been many subsequent proofs. Rather than give proofs now, I shall
illustrate the difference between the suppositional approach and various
propositional accounts with some examples.
First example: we have an ordinary coin, and I’m not sure whether
Jane is going to toss it or not. How likely is it that if she tosses, it lands
heads? I reckon toss-and-heads is no more or less likely than toss-and-
tails; so my answer is 50%. That is the suppositionalist approach. Let’s
now add that it’s 50% likely that she tosses the coin. Here are the three
relevant possibilities, together with their probabilities:
(1) No toss (50%)
(2) Toss and heads (25%)
(3) Toss and tails (25%).
For those who accept the truth-functional, material implication account,
the conditional is equivalent to ‘Either she won’t toss it, or she will and it
will land heads’. So their answer to the question is 75%: the conditional
is true except in case (3), so it has a 75% probability of being true.
Let us look at David Lewis’s truth conditions (1973). (Lewis restricted
these to counterfactuals, but he applied them widely, for instance to the
forward-looking conditionals used in decision making.) Our conditional
is true if case (2) obtains. It is false if case (3) obtains. And it is false
if case (1) obtains, because it is not the case that the consequent is true
in all relevant (closest) antecedent worlds. So the conditional gets only
25%.
Lewis accepts centring: if antecedent and consequent are both true,
the conditional is true. But there are also theories which do not accept

16
D. Edgington
centring [e.g. Lycan (2001), Gillies (2009)]: a conditional involves quan-
tiﬁcation over a set of relevant possibilities—it is true if and only if
every relevant antecedent-world is a consequent-world. On this strict-
conditional reading, our example, ‘How likely is that if she tosses, it lands
heads?’ deserves 0: the consequent is not true in all relevant antecedent
worlds, and is therefore certainly false.
We have above three theories which (a) disagree with the supposi-
tional theory, and (b) give bad answers to the question. They are not
well suited to uncertain conditionals. There is nothing special about the
example. Here is another. Jane hasn’t decided whether she will accept if
she is offered the job; but she is leaning in the direction of accepting.
Suppose I think it is only about 10% likely that she will be offered the
job. That divides into two possibilities: offered and accepts; offered and
declines. I evaluate these two at 9% and 1% respectively. That is, on the
supposition that she is offered the job, I think it’s only about 10% likely
that she will decline. As above, according to the truth-functional theory,
it’s 91% likely that if she’s offered, she’ll decline (i.e. either she is not
offered, or she is offered and declines). According to a Lewisian theory,
it’s only 1% likely; and according to a strict-conditional theory, it’s 0%
likely. Thus these truth conditions either underestimate or overestimate
the probabilities we naturally assign to conditionals.
(I have left Robert Stalnaker’s theory aside. Stalnaker’s aim was to
provide truth conditions for conditionals such that the probability of
truth is the conditional probability of consequent given antecedent
(1968, 1970). He did not succeed, but it is not surprising that there
are no glaring, blatant, differences between Stalnaker’s and the supposi-
tional assignment of probabilities to conditionals. An amended version
of Stalnaker’s account will be defended later.)
Can we live with the idea that conditionals don’t have truth condi-
tions? One issue concerns the validity of arguments containing condi-
tionals, such as those employing modus ponens or modus tollens. A valid
argument is often deﬁned as one such that the truth of the premises guar-
antees the truth of the conclusion. Fortunately, Ernest Adams (1975)
found a good way to treat the validity of arguments in this context. Take
an argument which just consists of propositions, no conditionals, which
necessarily preserves truth. Then, demonstrably, it necessarily preserves

Conditionals, Indeterminacy, Probability and Truth
17
probability, in the following sense: the uncertainty (i.e. 1—the proba-
bility) of the conclusion cannot exceed the sum of the uncertainties of
the premises.1 Applying this latter criterion of validity to arguments with
conditionals (where the uncertainty of a conditional is 1—the condi-
tional probability of consequent given antecedent) gives us a criterion of
validity for arguments with conditionals.
There are other problems, however, if we give up truth conditions.
What are we to say of complex sentences which have conditionals
as parts? For instance, mother says ‘If it rains tomorrow, we’ll go to
the cinema, and if it doesn’t rain, we’ll go to the beach’. If the two
contained conditionals are assessed by conditional probability, and hence
are not propositions, we have no established means of assessing their role
embedded in a conjunction—not in terms of truth value, and not in
terms of probability either, for probability theory does not embed condi-
tional probabilities in wider contexts. There have been some proposals
to deal with this, which I shall discuss later, but they have not been an
unqualiﬁed success.
A remaining problem is that it is just counterintuitive to deny that
some conditionals are plainly true, and some are plainly false, depending
on how the world is, whether or not we know their truth value. This
can be so even when the antecedent is false. For example: one of these
two boxes contains the prize, I know not which, and I must choose only
one box. ‘If I choose the box on the left, I’ll get the prize’ is true if the
prize is in the left box, false if not (irrespective of whether it has a false
antecedent). In addition, there are the necessities, and impossibilities: ‘If
it’s a square, it has four sides’, ‘If it’s a pentagon, it has six sides’, which,
intuitively, are as true or as false as anything is.
Then there is the case when the antecedent turns out to be true. It is
natural to think that in this case, the truth of the consequent veriﬁes the
conditional, the falsity of the consequent falsiﬁes the conditional. (Not all
agree: advocates of the ‘strict conditional’ approach, who deny centering,
hold that the truth of antecedent and consequent is insufﬁcient for the
truth of the conditional. This is at odds with the suppositional approach:
1 Suppose two premises, A and B, entail C. Then ¬C entails (¬A or ¬B). So p(¬C ) ≤p(¬A
or ¬B) ≤p(¬A) + p(¬B). This two-premise case easily extends to any number of premises.

18
D. Edgington
the strict-conditional approach has the consequence that one may be
certain that A, certain that B, but uncertain about whether if A, B. But
if the probability of A is 1, and the probability of B is 1, it follows that
the probability of B given A is 1. The truth-functional and Lewis’s truth
conditions and the suppositional view all agree that that A&B entails if
A, B).
It will do no great harm if the suppositionalist agrees that we can speak
of truth and falsity in the true-antecedent case, but it is of little help
unless we have an account of what to say about the false-antecedent case.
Some have suggested that there is no truth value if the antecedent is
false.2 Then the probability of the conditional cannot be equated with
the probability that it is true, for it is true if and only if A and B are
true, and a conditional can be highly probable while A, and hence A&B,
are highly improbable. It is not a fault in a conditional that it has a
false antecedent, and hence, on this view, is not true. I say, ‘If you press
that button there will be an explosion’. You don’t press it—a disaster is
avoided—thanks to the fact that my conditional is not true (for it has a
false antecedent). If we are to reinstate truth conditions in a useful way,
the focus must be on the case where the antecedent is false.
Before looking at Bradley’s solution to this problem, I shall discuss the
two issues I think need to be in place if it is to succeed.
2
Indeterminacy
Suppose we are to assign truth conditions to conditionals. Then, I shall
argue, it is often the case that conditionals whose antecedents turn out
to be false are not merely uncertain, but indeterminate—neither deter-
minately true not determinately false. Nevertheless, the probabilities we
assign to them are in good order. Here are some examples.
(1) 90% of the red balls in the bag have a black spot. You are to shake
the bag, put your hand in and select a ball. It’s 90% likely that if
you pick a red ball, it will have a black spot. In fact, the ball you
2 See, for example, Bruno de Finetti (1936), Nuel Belnap (1970).

Conditionals, Indeterminacy, Probability and Truth
19
pick is not red. It’s 90% likely that if you had picked a red ball, it
would have had a black spot. This probability judgement is unassail-
able. But there is, typically at least, no fact of the matter as to which
red ball you would have picked, had you picked a red ball.3 This is
so whether or not our world obeys deterministic laws. If some inde-
terminism is involved in the picking of balls, the result is obvious.
But assuming determinism is no help. If determinism governs the
case, the past and the laws rule out your picking a red ball. They say
nothing about which red ball you would have picked, had you done
so.4 These are probabilities without outcomes.
(2) A dog almost always, but not quite always, attacks and bites when
strangers approach. We can’t tell the difference between the cases in
which it does, and the few cases in which it does not. ‘It’s very likely
that you will be bitten if you approach’, I’m told. I don’t approach.
‘It’s very likely that I would have been bitten if I had approached’, I
say. Assume determinism. We can distinguish two kinds of case: (a)
whether the dog bites is determined by some standing feature of the
person approaching, such as the shape of their nose, but we haven’t
ﬁgured this out. In that case, the uncertainty is mere ignorance. (b)
Whether the dog bites depends on very ﬁne details of the manner of
approach. There’s no fact of the matter about how exactly, down to
this level of detail, I would have approached, had I done so. In this
case, even under determinism, again we have not mere uncertainty,
but indeterminacy. The probability judgement is in order, either way.
(3) ‘It’s about 90% likely that you will be cured if you have the opera-
tion’ I’m told. I decline the operation. ‘It’s about 90% likely that you
would have been cured if you had had the operation’, I’m told later.
Again, we can distinguish two scenarios: (a) the uncertainty is due to
some feature of the present state of my body, which can’t be discov-
ered until I am opened up—this is the case of mere uncertainty;
(b) the uncertainty depends, at least in part, on very ﬁne details of
the hand movements and cuts the surgeon would have made, had I
3 An exception would be a case in which your hand hovers over two balls, such that if you
don’t pick one you will pick the other.
4 That is why Lewis (1979a) required ‘small miracles’, relative to the laws of the actual world,
in assessing counterfactuals, under the assumption of determinism.

20
D. Edgington
gone ahead. In this case we have not mere uncertainty, but indeter-
minacy. This metaphysical difference has no effect on the probability
judgements.
As we have seen, there are various sources of indeterminacy. Indeter-
minism is one. But even under determinism, our ordinary antecedents
can typically be realized in many ways. (Which red ball would I have
picked? How exactly would I have approached the dog? Exactly what
would the surgeon’s hand movements have been?) And the outcome
depends on ﬁne details not speciﬁed in these ordinary antecedents. Also,
the vocabulary of the conditional might not be suitable for subsump-
tion under deterministic laws of nature, if such there be. This may be
true of the counterfactuals we accept and assert about our own and
others’ mental lives. Even if determinism is true, these are not the cate-
gories that belong with deterministic laws. On the other hand, when the
antecedent together with the present state of the world is a sufﬁcient
condition for the truth (or falsity) of the consequent, the conditional is
determinately true (or determinately false), although we may be ignorant
of these facts—as in ‘If I pick the left box I will win’.
One ﬁnal example: a lottery is called off at the last minute. Had it gone
ahead, one of the tickets would have won, each individual ticket would
very probably have lost, but there is no determinate fact of the matter
about which ticket would have won. Had it gone ahead, the world would
have been this way or this way or …; but it is indeterminate which.
This counterfactual indeterminacy is, to my mind, similar in struc-
ture to the indeterminacy brought about by vagueness. One second after
noon is noonish. 10,000 seconds after noon is not noonish. Therefore,
it’s not the case that for all n, if n seconds after noon is noonish, n +
1 seconds after noon is noonish. Therefore, for some n, n seconds after
noon is noonish and n + 1 seconds after noon is not noonish. That is,
there is a last noonish second.5 But it is indeterminate which the last
noonish second is. That is like: one of the tickets would have won—the
world would have been this way or that way or …—but it is indetermi-
nate which. I have argued that the indeterminacy due to vagueness is best
5 This example is from Sorensen (2001), p. 58.

Conditionals, Indeterminacy, Probability and Truth
21
theorized using the notion ‘degree of closeness to clearly true’, and giving
this notion probabilistic structure (Edgington 1996). For me this is a nice
rapprochement. But whether or not I am right about vagueness-related
indeterminacy, it is unavoidable to give counterfactual indeterminacy
probabilistic structure.
It is also important. We use these judgements in inferences. ‘She prob-
ably didn’t approach, because she is unhurt, and it’s very probable that
she would have been bitten if she had approached’. ‘You probably don’t
have the virus, because the test was negative, and if you had the virus,
it probably would have shown up on the test’. It makes no difference to
us in practice, whether the uncertainty is mere uncertainty, or involves
some indeterminacy.
3
The Transition From the Indicative
to the Counterfactual
We have seen examples above of indicative conditionals which, should
the antecedent prove false, transform seamlessly into equivalent counter-
factual conditional judgements. This is indeed very common. ‘Don’t go
in there’, I say, ‘If you go in you will get hurt’. You look sceptical but stay
outside, when there is a large crash as the ceiling collapses. ‘You see’, I
say, ‘If you had gone in you would have got hurt—just as I said’. ‘If they
arrive by eight, we’ll eat at nine’ is rephrased hungrily at ten, ‘If they had
arrived at eight, we would have eaten at nine’. But there are pairs which
do not ﬁt this pattern. The most famous example (Adams 1970):
If Oswald didn’t kill Kennedy, someone else did.
If Oswald hadn’t killed Kennedy, someone else would have.
One may accept the ﬁrst, yet reject the second. Certainly this is so on a
natural reading of the second. But counterfactuals, in different contexts,
admit of different readings. Counterfactuals involve a change in perspec-
tive away from your present epistemic state. More than one change can
be permissible, and there is always available the reading which matches
the indicative. First consider this exchange: ‘Why did you arrest Smith?’.

22
D. Edgington
‘We knew the crime was committed by either Smith or Jones. If it
hadn’t been Jones, it would have been Smith’.
Similarly, the police are asked: ‘You already had Oswald; why did you
round up other people from that part of the crowd?’ Answer: ‘We didn’t
know it was Oswald; if it hadn’t been Oswald it would have been one of
them’.
Here is another telling case: argument by modus tollens. Take any
indicative conditional, if A, B. Suppose you believe it. You then discover
that not B; you argue: not A, because if it had been the case that A, it
would have been the case that B, and it isn’t the case that B. You use
the counterfactual form merely to re-express what you expressed in the
indicative when you considered A to be a possibility. Thus, any indicative
conditional judgement can be re-expressed as a counterfactual, should
the antecedent turn out to be false.
4
Stalnaker’s Truth Conditions
Stalnaker wrote:
Consider a possible world in which A is true, and which otherwise differs
minimally from the actual world. ‘If A, then B’ is true (false) just in case
B is true (false) in that possible world. (1968, p. 35)
There is no need for qualms about weird entities called possible worlds.
Typically they are just a partition of possibilities, ﬁne enough for the
problem at hand, identiﬁed by a set of propositions, like the lines of
a truth table. They are integral to probabilistic thinking, and do not
involve a change in commitments.
Stalnaker’s semantics assumes that there is a unique world minimally
different from the actual world. He is aware that this is often unrealistic,
and suggests that when this is not so we need to use supervaluations and
say: true if true for all admissible selections, false if false for all admis-
sible selections, otherwise indeterminate—neither true nor false, he says
(Stalnaker 1981, pp. 87, 90).

Conditionals, Indeterminacy, Probability and Truth
23
I agree that when the antecedent is false, the conditional is often inde-
terminate, but that verdict is not very helpful as it stands. ‘If you had
tossed the coin ten times, you would have got at least one head’ and ‘If
you had tossed the coin ten times, you would have got ten heads’ are
both indeterminate, but one is almost certain, the other incredible. We
need ﬁner distinctions.
Further, when something is indeterminate, ‘neither true nor false’ is
not the correct verdict, in my view. Rather, we should say it is indeter-
minate whether it is true or false. This is different, for if it is not true,
and not false, it is not indeterminate whether it is true or false. In the
indeterminate examples of §2, if they were neither true nor false, the
probability that they are true would be 0. This is wrong: it’s 90% likely
to be true that if you had picked a red ball it would have had a black
spot, that the dog would have bitten if I had approached, that I would
have been cured if I had had the operation, etc., even when the uncer-
tainty is not mere uncertainty, but indeterminacy. (Similarly, I argue, for
vague judgements: if it is indeterminate whether the patch is red, it is
indeterminate whether it is true that the patch is red, rather than not
true, and not false either).
This point is crucial in what follows. It is not an idiosyncratic point
of view, but quite widely held in the philosophical literature on vague-
ness and indeterminacy. See, for example, Elizabeth Barnes and Robert
Williams (2011). In the case of vagueness, Crispin Wright argues against
the ‘not true and not false’ verdict, by saying that it ‘cannot do justice to
the … datum that in general borderline cases come across as hard cases
where we are bafﬂed to choose between conﬂicting verdicts about which
polar verdict applies, rather than as cases which we recognize as enjoying
a status inconsistent with both’ (2001, pp. 69–70). Similar remarks are
made by Stephen Schiffer (2003, p. 191).
5
Bradley’s Amendments
Bradley’s ﬁrst amendment to Stalnaker’s account is to abandon the
notion ‘minimally different from the actual world’, or ‘most similar to
the actual world’, in favour of a probability distribution over the relevant

24
D. Edgington
antecedent worlds. I think this is right. Consider this example: the short
straws.
You pick a straw from a collection of 100 straws. From the angle you
can see them—end on—they all look the same; and they are the same,
except for the length. 90 are of length 10 cm, 1 is 11 cm, and 9 are 20
cm. The straw you pick is 10 cm. long. Consider the conditional:
If you had picked a longer straw, it would have been less than 15 cm.
long.
This does not deserve much credence, as only one in ten of the longer
straws are less than 15 cm, long. But if we go by minimal difference from
the actual world, it should be clearly true.
Bradley’s second amendment is to distinguish conditionals from
propositions. Conditionals involve two propositions which play different
roles, one a supposition, one a judgement within its scope. They cannot
be represented by the set of worlds in which they are true. Indeed
conditionals are not ‘in’ worlds—they are cross-world entities. Bradley
proposes that the content of a conditional A→B can be represented by
the set of pairs of worlds, <wi, wj> such that, if wi is actual, and wj is
the world that would be actual if A were true, the conditional would be
true, because B is true at wj. I shall call the world that would be actual if
A were true, the potential A-world.6 It may not be determinate which the
potential A-world is, (just as it is not determinate which the last noonish
second is).
It is not ad hoc or unheard-of to claim that some kinds of content
cannot be represented by a set of worlds. Some examples: to capture the
content of indexical thoughts using ‘I’, ‘now’, etc., we need the richer
notion of a ‘centred world’—an ordered triple of a world, an individual
and a time [see Lewis (1979b)]. Allan Gibbard (1990) proposes that the
content of a normative judgement can be represented by a set of ordered
pairs <w, n> where w is a world and n is a system of norms. Sarah
Moss (2018) argues that the contents of probability judgements are not
propositions but sets of probability spaces.
6 Bradley continues to speak, in Stalnaker-Lewis terms, of the ‘nearest’ A-world; but as there is
no ordering relation of worlds, this name is not apt.

Conditionals, Indeterminacy, Probability and Truth
25
It is important to be clear about the sense in which conditionals are
not propositions. As I have said, they cannot be represented by the set of
worlds in which they are true. Some argue that propositions are, in any
case, more ﬁne-grained than the set of worlds in which they are true—for
instance, they deny that ‘John is asleep’ expresses the same proposition
as ‘John is asleep and 2 + 2 = 4’, despite their being true at the same
set of worlds. This debate is not relevant to the present issue, for even
the ﬁne-grained propositions can be mapped (many-one) on to the set
of worlds in which they are true.
One might be more liberal with the word ‘proposition’ and allow that
the content of any thought is a proposition, whether or not it can be
represented by the set of worlds in which it is true. Andrew Bacon (2018)
calls the content of vague thought propositions, while insisting that they
cannot be represented by a set of possible worlds. This dispute ‘is just
disagreement about which entities we should grant the honoriﬁc title
“propositions” to’, he says (p. 75). Perhaps there is a liberal sense in which
conditionals do express propositions—what matters here is whether they
can be mapped on to the set of possible worlds in which they are true.
6
Bradley’s Theory
Two types of uncertainty, Bradley notes, are involved in assessing a condi-
tional A→B: uncertainty about the facts—about which world is actual;
and uncertainty about what would be the case if some supposition were
true. (Note: ‘the facts’ are construed as not containing conditionals.
Note also: this second type of uncertainty may turn out to be not mere
uncertainty but indeterminacy, but that does not fundamentally alter
the picture, I have argued.) We have a probability distribution over the
facts; and, for antecedent A, we have a probability distribution over
the candidate A-worlds. They can be combined into a joint probability
distribution over these ordered pairs.
We do not need to divide logical space any ﬁner than is needed for a
particular example, so for this example we say there are just three possible
worlds (classes of worlds if you prefer, but I shall call them worlds): at

26
D. Edgington
w1, A and B are true; at w2, A is true and B is false; at w3, A is false.
These generate the following four possibilities for the conditional A→B.
A→B
w1
A,B
<w1,w1>
T
(1)
w2
A,¬B
<w2,w2>
F
(2)
w3
¬A
<w3,w1>
T
(3)
<w3,w2>
F
(4)
The probabilities of these four lines sum to 1.
The ﬁrst two lines are the cases in which the antecedent is true, so in
those the ‘potential’ A-world is the actual world (Thus we have centering.
As already mentioned, this is essential for the suppositional conditional).
If on the other hand w3 is actual, that does not tell us whether the
potential A-world is w1, in which case the conditional is true, or w2, in
which case the conditional is false.
The crucial rule governing this non-propositional entity, Bradley
proposes, is this: the probability of A→B given A, is the same as the
probability of A→B given ¬A; the conditional is probabilistically
independent of its antecedent.
This guarantees that p(A→B) = p(B|A) (using, as I shall henceforth,
this standard notation for ‘p(B given A)’). By the law of total probability,
p(A→B) = p((A→B)|A)p(A) + p((A→B)|¬A)p(¬A).
If p((A→B)|A) = p((A→B)|¬A), it follows that
p(A→B) = p((A→B)|A)·(p(A) + p(¬A)) = p((A→B)|A).
But p((A→B)|A) = p(A&B|A) = p(B|A).
Therefore, p(A→B) = p(B|A).
It is not a new discovery that if there is a conditional the probability of
whose truth is a conditional probability, it must be probabilistically inde-
pendent of its antecedent. Bas van Fraassen (1976) was the ﬁrst to show
this, in the wake of Lewis’s proof. But if we construe the conditional as
an ordinary proposition, there are always some probability distributions
in which it is not independent of its antecedent, as I shall now show.
Suppose we just redescribe the four lines above as four possible worlds,
four ways the world might be, in two of which the conditional is true—as
Stalnaker did:

Conditionals, Indeterminacy, Probability and Truth
27
A→B
w1
A, B
T
(1)
w2
A, ¬B
F
(2)
w3
¬A, w1 is the potential A-world
T
(3)
w4
¬A, w2 is the potential A-world
F
(4)
Suppose we start off thinking each of the four is equally likely. Then
we learn ¬(A&B): the ﬁrst line goes out. We learn nothing other than
that. p(B|A) is now 0. But p(A→B) is not 0: the third line remains a
possible way the world might be, and we haven’t eliminated that. Indeed,
if probabilities change by conditionalization, the third line now has a
probability 1/3. But we need not assume anything as strong as condi-
tionalization: it is built into the picture that these are four exclusive
and exhaustive ways the world might be, a bit like a four-horse race.
It is built into the picture that it is possible that (1) is false and (3) is
true, so that we can eliminate (1), without eliminating (3). So, on the
propositional picture, p(A→B) is not 0, although p(B|A) is 0. (This
is one illustration of the result that there is no proposition the proba-
bility of whose truth is the probability of consequent given antecedent
in all probability distributions. Indeed, no two contingent propositions
are probabilistically independent in all probability distributions.)
On Bradley’s approach, if line (1) is eliminated, line (3) gets 0 as well,
for p(A→B) must be the same in the ¬A-worlds as it is in the A-worlds.
Having eliminated A&B, and thus completely rejected B on the suppo-
sition that A, then, should A prove false, on my present evidence I also
eliminate the corresponding counterfactual: if A were true, B would be
true.
It’s not as if you have to go through the latter, rather convoluted,
thought process to evaluate ‘if A, B’. You suppose that A, and judge how
likely it is that B, on that supposition, and that’s all you have to do. But,
as we saw from examples in §§2 and 3, there is always available a reading
of the corresponding counterfactual which you are committed to, to the
same degree, should the antecedent prove false. It is a sort of reﬂection
of your conditional belief on to the false-antecedent case.

28
D. Edgington
Thus, the non-propositional nature of the conditional is essential here.
And it is a new discovery that there is this non-propositional entity the
probability of whose truth is a conditional probability.
Some remarks about this independence: ﬁrst, this is synchronic inde-
pendence, and does not imply diachronic independence. It does not
have any consequences for what happens on changing, or updating
your beliefs. Conditional beliefs do not change by conditionalization,
on this view—as we saw in the argument above. Nor does it follow that
acquiring the belief that if A, B has no effect on your attitude to A. After
all, you might already be pretty sure that B is false, in which case you will
infer that A is probably false. The claim is just that at a given time, in a
given epistemic state, your attitude to if A, B is indifferent to whether A
is true or false.
Second, it is generally agreed that conditionals are typically indepen-
dent of their antecedents. Recall: ‘If you go in you will get hurt’. The
ceiling collapses. ‘You see’, I say, ‘If you had gone in you would have got
hurt—just as I said’. Countless conditionals have that pattern.
Some have argued that there are relatively rare cases where indepen-
dence fails. Here is one example adapted from Brian Ellis (1979). A spy,
Smith, has been captured. The questions are whether he will confess, and
whether he will be killed if he confesses. These could go either way. But
Smith has very skilled judgement on such matters: if he confesses, he
almost certainly won’t be killed. Now suppose he doesn’t confess. Is it
not now more likely that he would have been killed if he had confessed?
Certainly that is one way, perhaps the most natural way, of reading the
counterfactual, but it is not the only way. Suppose he doesn’t confess.
If he had confessed, that would have been because he had compelling
evidence that he wouldn’t be killed. So if he had confessed he wouldn’t
be killed. It is this latter reading that is relevant here. There is always
available the reading of the counterfactual as a mere reﬂection from the
indicative to the case in which the antecedent is false.

Conditionals, Indeterminacy, Probability and Truth
29
7
Truth Conditions
Returning to the diagram that displays Bradley’s truth conditions, I want
to stress that they do deserve that name. We could express them like this:
the conditional is true iff either A&B, or ¬A and the world that would
be actual if A were true is a B-world, false iff A&¬B, or ¬A and the
world that would be actual if A were true is a ¬B-world. And we have
probabilities over these alternatives. The truth conditions are in order, I
argue, even in the case when, A being false, it is not determinate whether
a B-world or a ¬B-world would obtain if A had been true. We know, and
can state, what has to be the case for the conditional to be true, but it
may be indeterminate whether it is true. Think again of the lottery that
is called off. Had it gone ahead, I know how the world would have to
be for my ticket to have won, but it may be indeterminate whether the
world would have been that way. Truth conditions are in order, even if
truth value is indeterminate.
In my view, the same holds for vague statements. We can write a truth
table in the usual way for, e.g. ‘The ball is large and red, or it’s heavy’.
But it might be indeterminate which of the eight lines is the true one. (In
my view they have ‘verities’ as I called degrees of closeness to clear truth,
which sum to 1.) Also, we saw, there is a last noonish second, although
it is indeterminate which second that is. Analogously, there is a way the
world would have been if A had been true, but it may be indeterminate
which way that would have been.
I should emphasize that this appeal to indeterminacy is not found in
Bradley. It is rather something I had to think about before I could accept
his framework. Bradley writes in hyper-realist vein, as though it is always
mere ignorance when we don’t know which world would be actual if A
were true. His name for the ways things would be if some supposition
were true is ‘the counterfacts’. His ofﬁcial stance, however, is neutrality
on this metaphysical issue: ‘Realists can construe both the facts and the
counterfacts … as different features of reality about which we can be
uncertain …. Antirealists can construe the use of counterfacts to ﬁx the
truth conditions of conditionals as merely a formal device to support a
compositional semantics’ (2012, p. 560).

30
D. Edgington
I don’t accept either of these options. His ‘realist’ is what I called
‘hyper-realist’—according to whom it is always determinate, e.g. which
red ball I would have picked, if I had picked a red ball, although it is not
ﬁxed by any feature of the actual world. I ﬁnd this view unbelievable.7
But I am not an antirealist in Bradley’s sense: I do not see his construc-
tion as ‘merely a formal device’, of only instrumental value, at best a kind
of ﬁctionalism. I am not an antirealist at all: I think counterfactual inde-
terminacy is how things really are; probabilities can be assigned to the
various possible outcomes of a counterfactual supposition, even if it is
indeterminate which would have obtained. And the truth conditions of
a counterfactual are given in terms of the various ways things might have
turned out, if A had been the case, even if it is indeterminate which of
these possibilities would have obtained.
8
Compounds of Conditionals
With truth conditions in place, Bradley’s framework readily extends to
truth-functional compounds, such as conjunctions of conditionals, to
which probabilities of truth can be assigned—always subject to the rule
that for any contained conditional A→B, the probability of A→B given
A (which is just p(B|A) is equal to the probability of A→B given ¬A.
I will brieﬂy discuss some of the difﬁculties with previous attempts
to extend the suppositional-probabilistic approach to compounds of
conditionals.8
First, the truth-value-gap approach: according to de Finetti (1936),
A→B is true if A&B, false if A&¬B, and has no truth value—is unde-
ﬁned—if ¬A. Its probability is not the probability of its truth, but
the probability that it is true given that it has a truth value. He then
gave 3-valued tables for, e.g. conjunctions of conditionals: the conjunc-
tion is true iff both conjuncts are true, false iff at least one conjunct
is false, otherwise undeﬁned. The probability of the conjunction is
7 This hyper-realism has a history in Jesuit theology, and is sometimes called ‘Molinism’ after
the sixteenth-century Jesuit theologian Luis de Molina.
8 I discuss these alternative approaches in more detail in Edgington (2020).

Conditionals, Indeterminacy, Probability and Truth
31
again the probability of truth given either true or false. Now consider
a conjunction of conditionals with incompatible antecedents, e.g.
(R) If it doesn’t rain tomorrow we’ll go to the beach, and if it rains
we’ll go to the cinema.
On this account, there is no way (R) can be true. On the other hand it
might be false, due to some unlikely contretemps such as illness. So the
probability that it is true, given that it has a truth value, is 0. One might
be 99% conﬁdent of each conjunct, but one must have zero conﬁdence
in the conjunction. This is a bad result!
Second, the Expected Value approach, which is more speciﬁc about
the third semantic value: A→B gets 1 (=true) if A&B, 0 (=false) if
A&¬B, and gets a semantic value equal to p(B|A) if ¬A.9 Its ‘prob-
ability’ is the expected value of this entity: a weighted average of the
semantic values, the weights being their probability. That is, p(A→B)
= p(A&B)0.1 + p(A&¬B)0.0 + p(¬A).p(B|A), which simpliﬁes to
p(B|A).
Considering again a conjunction of conditionals with incompatible
antecedents, (A→B)&(¬A→C ), we can prove that its probability is the
product of the probabilities of the two conditionals.10
This is in the right ballpark for (R) above: if each conditional gets
0.9, the conjunction gets 0.81. But for other examples it yields curious
answers. Return to this example: I must choose one of two boxes, call
them Left and Right. One and only one contains a prize. It’s 50–50
which contains the prize. Consider these two conjunctions:
(C1) If I choose Left, I’ll win, and if I choose Right, I’ll win.
(C2) If I choose Left I’ll win, and if I choose Right I won’t win.
9 See e.g. Vann McGee (1989), Richard Jeffrey (1991), and Stalnaker and Jeffrey (1994).
10 In the case of incompatible antecedents, the expected value of the conjunction turns out to
be p(A&B)p(C|¬A) + p(¬A&C )p(B|A) which simpliﬁes to p(B|A)p(C|¬A).

32
D. Edgington
Intuitively, (C1) is deﬁnitely false, and deserves 0 probability. (C2)
deserves 0.5 probability. On the present proposal, both get the value
0.25.11
Let us turn to Bradley. When a sentence contains two conditionals,
with two antecedents, A1 and A2—for instance, a conjunction of condi-
tionals—its semantics requires not ordered pairs but ordered triples of
worlds, <wi, wj, wk> such that if wi is actual and wj is the poten-
tial A1-world and wk is the potential A2-world, the sentence is true. We
shall consider a sentence of the form: (A→B)&(¬A→B). There are four
possible worlds, w1-w4, A&B, A&¬B, ¬A&B and ¬A&¬B, respec-
tively. Now for a conditional of this form, one of the antecedents is true
and the other false. Given centring, the truth value of the conditional
with the true antecedent depends just on the truth value of B in the
actual world; but the truth of the conditional with the false antecedent
can go either way, depending on whether the potential antecedent-world
is a consequent-world. Thus there are eight cases to consider12:
A→B
¬A→B
(A→B)&(¬A→B)
w1
A&B
T
T
T
(1)
T
F
F
(2)
w2
A&¬B
F
T
F
(3)
F
F
F
(4)
w3
¬A&B
T
T
T
(5)
F
T
F
(6)
w4
¬A&¬B
T
F
F
(7)
F
F
F
(8)
Consider (C1) ‘If I choose Left I’ll win, and if I choose Right I’ll win’.
Let A be ‘I choose Left’. In the context, we can use ¬A for ‘I choose
Right’. Let B be ‘I’ll win’. In this example, we know that the two condi-
tionals can’t have the same truth value, so we can eliminate, i.e. assign
11 Mark Lance (1991) has a similar example: there is a werewolf. It’s 50% likely to be in our
area tonight. If it is, it kills everyone outside. ‘If John went out, he was killed’ gets 0.5. ‘If
John went out the front door, he was killed, and if John went out the back door, he was killed’
still deserves 0.5; but it gets only 0.25 on the present proposal.
12 I could have listed the eight ordered triples alongside the following eight lines (e.g. line 1 is
<w1, w1, w1> and line 2 is <w1, w1, w2>). But I thought this would be less useful than my
explanation above.

Conditionals, Indeterminacy, Probability and Truth
33
probability 0 to, four of these lines: lines (1), (4), (5) and (8) get 0 prob-
ability. We are left with the four lines in which the two conditionals get
opposite truth values. These each get equal value of 0.25. The probability
of (C1) is 0; the probability of each of its constituent conditionals is 0.5;
and each conditional has the same probability given A as it does given
¬A. (C2), If I choose Left, I’ll win and if I choose Right, I won’t win’,
gets probability 0.5.
Returning to (R)—rain, beach and cinema—on Bradley’s approach, if
you are 90% conﬁdent in each conditional, you must be at least 80%
conﬁdent in the conjunction. Demonstrably, as there is an entailment
of the conjunction from the two conditionals as premises, the uncer-
tainty of the conclusion cannot exceed the sum of the uncertainties
of the premises (see Note 1). I said 81% was in the right ballpark,
but it doesn’t have to be 81%. If the reasons for the uncertainty are
things such as illness, or car breakdown, which would prevent both
outings, the conjunction could be 90%. All we can say in general is that
the probability of the conjunction is between 80 and 90% inclusive—
the probability of a conjunction is not, in general, determined by the
probabilities of the conjuncts.
9
Concluding Remarks
Bradley’s theory is considerably more conservative than the rivals I have
considered. Just one tweak to the classical notion of a proposition, and
suppositional conditionals have truth conditions. Their probability is the
probability of their truth. Validity is necessary preservation of truth, and
hence demonstrably, validity preserves probability in Adams’s sense (see
Note 1). Some conditionals can be straightforwardly true or false, even
when they have false antecedents, whether we know their truth value
or not. Many with false antecedents are neither determinately true nor
determinately false, I have argued, but can be given truth conditions
nevertheless—we know what would make them true; and they still have

34
D. Edgington
probabilities. And the theory gives reasonable results for compounds of
conditionals.13
The theory does not, I think, describe a method we use in assessing
conditionals. But then, formal semantics is typically too abstract for that.
For simple conditionals, the suppositional method is ﬁne as it stands.
For e.g. conjunctions, one will be guided by such facts as that if two
contained conditionals are highly probable, the conjunction cannot be
much less probable; and if the two contained conditionals have prob-
abilities that sum to 1 or less than 1, their conjunction may have 0
probability. What Bradley provides is a valuable theoretical framework
which justiﬁes our use of ‘true’ and ‘false’ in suppositional contexts.
So I was wrong, all these years [see e.g. Edgington (1995)], in saying
conditionals don’t have truth conditions! I was not wrong to deny that
they express classical propositions about how the world is, or to insist that
they essentially involve suppositions, or to claim that they are assessed by
conditional probability. It had not occurred to me that there was this
slightly different entity to which truth and falsity apply. And I have
argued here that although truth and falsity do apply, there are many
cases in which the truth value of a conditional with a false antecedent
is indeterminate.14
References
Adams, Ernest W. 1970. ‘Subjunctive and Indicative Conditionals’, Foundations
of Language, 6, 89–94.
Adams, Ernest W. 1975. The Logic of Conditionals. Dordrecht: Reidel.
Bacon, Andrew 2018. Vagueness and Thought. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Barnes, Elizabeth and Williams, J. Robert G. 2011. ‘A Theory of Metaphysical
Indeterminacy’, in Karen Bennett and Dean W. Zimmerman (eds.), Oxford
Studies in Metaphysics, vol. 6. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 103–148.
13 Bradley makes brief remarks about nested conditionals, which will involve ordered pairs as
members of ordered pairs, but the details have still to be worked out. Quantiﬁcation should
be unproblematic.
14 My thanks to Scott Sturgeon and to two anonymous reviewers for helpful comments.

Conditionals, Indeterminacy, Probability and Truth
35
Belnap, Nuel. 1970. ‘Conditional Assertion and Restricted Quantiﬁcation’,
Noûs, 4, 1–13.
Bradley, Richard. 2012. ‘Multidimensional Possible-World Semantics for
Conditionals’, Philosophical Review, 122(4), 539–571.
de Finetti, Bruno. 1936. ‘La logique de la probabilité’, translated as ‘The Logic
of Probability’, Philosophical Studies, 77 (1995), 181–190.
Ellis, Brian. 1979. Rational Belief Systems. Oxford: Blackwell.
Edgington, Dorothy. 1995. ‘On Conditionals’, Mind, 104, 235–329.
Edgington, Dorothy. 1996. ‘Vagueness by Degrees’, in R. Keefe and P. Smith
(eds.) Vagueness: A Reader. Cambridge MA: MIT Press, 294–316.
Edgington, Dorothy. 2020. ‘Compounds of Conditionals, Uncertainty and
Indeterminacy’, in Shira Elqayam, Igor Douven, Jonathan St B. T. Evans
and Nicole Cruz (eds.), Logic and Uncertainty in the Human Mind. London:
Routledge, 42–56.
Gibbard, Allan. 1990. Wise Choices, Apt Feelings. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Gillies, Anthony. 2009. ‘On Truth Conditions for If (But Not Quite Only If)’,
Philosophical Review, 118(3), 325–349.
Jeffrey, Richard. 1991. ‘Matter of Fact Conditionals’, Proceedings of the Aris-
totelian Society, 65, 161–183.
Lance, Mark. 1991. ‘Probabilistic Dependence among Conditionals’, Philosoph-
ical Review, 100, 269–276.
Lewis, David. 1973. Counterfactuals. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Lewis, David. 1976. ‘Probabilities of Conditionals and Conditional Probabili-
ties’, Philosophical Review, 85, 297–315.
Lewis, David. 1979a. ‘Counterfactuals and Time’s Arrow’, Noûs, 13, 455–476.
Lewis, David. 1979b. ‘Attitudes De Dicto and De Se’, Philosophical Review, 88,
513–543.
Lycan, William. 2001. Real Conditionals. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
McGee, Vann. 1989. ‘Conditional Probabilities and Compounds of Condi-
tionals’, Philosophical Review, 98, 485–542.
Moss, Sarah. 2018. Probabilistic Knowledge. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Ramsey, Frank. 1929. ‘General Propositions and Causality’ in Ramsey, Frank
1931, The Foundations of Mathematics. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul,
237–255.
The Foundations of Mathematics. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 237–255.
Schiffer, Stephen. 2003. The Things We Mean. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sorensen, Roy. 2001. Vagueness and Contradiction. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.

36
D. Edgington
Stalnaker, Robert. 1968. ‘A Theory of Conditionals’, in Studies in Logical
Theory, American Philosophical Quarterly (Monograph Series 2), Oxford:
Blackwell, 98–112, reprinted in Frank Jackson (ed.). 1991, Conditionals.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 28–45. Page reference to the reprint.
Stalnaker, Robert. 1970. ‘Probability and Conditionals’, Philosophy of Science,
37, 64–80.
Stalnaker, Robert. 1981. ‘A Defense of Conditional Excluded Middle’, in W. L.
Harper, R. Stalnaker and G. Pearce (eds.), Ifs. Dordrecht: Reidel, 87–103.
Stalnaker, Robert and Richard Jeffrey. 1994. ‘Conditionals as Random Vari-
ables’, in E. Eells and B. Skyrms (eds.), Probability and Conditionals.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 31–46.
Van Fraassen, Bas. 1976. ‘Probabilities of Conditionals’, in W. Harper and C.
Hooker (eds.), Foundations of Probability Theory, Statistical Inference, and
Statistical Theories of Science, Volume I. Dordrecht: Reidel.
Wright, Crispin. 2001. ‘On Being in a Quandary’, Mind, 110, 45–98.

Gibbardian Collapse and Trivalent
Conditionals
Paul Égré
, Lorenzo Rossi
, and Jan Sprenger
1
Introduction
In conditional logics, the law of Import-Export denotes the principle that
a right-nested conditional of the form A →(B →C) is logically equiv-
alent to the simple conditional (A ∧B) →C where both antecedents
are united by conjunction. The law holds in classical logic for the mate-
rial conditional, and several reasons can be given for its plausibility in
the case of indicative conditionals. For instance, to use an example from
(Cooper 1968, 300), the sentences “If Smith attends and Jones attends,
then a quorum will be present”, and “if Smith attends, then if Jones
P. Égré (B)
Institut Jean-Nicod (CNRS/ENS/EHESS), Département de philosophie &
Département d’études cognitives, Ecole normale supérieure, PSL University,
Paris, France
e-mail: paul.egre@ens.fr
L. Rossi (B) · J. Sprenger (B)
Center for Logic, Language and Cognition (LLC), Department of Philosophy
and Educational Science, Università degli Studi di Torino, Torino, Italy
e-mail: lo.rossi@unito.it
J. Sprenger
e-mail: jan.sprenger@unito.it
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Switzerland AG 2023
S. Kaufmann et al. (eds.), Conditionals, Palgrave Studies in Pragmatics, Language
and Cognition, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-05682-6_3
37

38
P. Égré et al.
attends, a quorum will be present” appear to convey the same hypothet-
ical information. The same appears to hold more generally, at least when
A, B, and C themselves are non-conditional sentences, and the equiv-
alence has been described as “a fact of English usage” (McGee 1989).
Some psycholinguistic experiments thus indicate that pairs of sentences
of the form “if A, then if B, C ” and “if A and B, C ” get similar answer
proﬁles both regarding truth evaluations and regarding probabilistic
assignments (see van Wijnbergen-Huitink et al. 2015, 799).1
In a celebrated paper, however, Allan Gibbard (1980) showed that a
binary conditional connective “→” collapses to the material conditional
of classical logic “⊃” if the following conditions hold: (i) the conditional
connective satisﬁes Import-Export, (ii) it is at least as strong as the mate-
rial conditional (A →C |=L A ⊃C), where |=L is the consequence
relation of the target logic of conditionals, (iii) it is supraclassical in the
sense that it reproduces the valid inferences of classical logic in condi-
tional form (|=L A →C whenever A |=CL C). From (i)–(iii) and some
natural background assumptions, Gibbard infers A ⊃C |=L A →C.
Given (ii), →and ⊃are thus logically equivalent, according to the logic
of conditionals (|=L) under consideration. Prima facie, the conditional
then needs to support all inference schemes validated by the material
conditional in classical logic. However, various inferences based on the
material conditional enjoy little plausibility in ordinary reasoning with
conditionals (for instance, the inference from ¬(A →C) to A ∧¬C).
Gibbard’s result poses a challenge for theories that compete with the
material conditional as an adequate analysis of the indicative condi-
tional.2 For example, Stalnaker’s logic C2 (Stalnaker 1968) and Lewis’s
logic VC (Lewis 1973) are both supraclassical and make the conditional
stronger than the material conditional, but they invalidate Import-
Export for that matter.
1 Import-Export has been challenged on linguistic grounds, see for instance Khoo and
Mandelkern (2019), drawing on examples from Fitelson. The alleged counterexamples are subtle,
however, and even Khoo and Mandelkern accept a version of the law. See also Appendix A.
We return to some objections to the principle in the conclusion.
2 Notable defenders of the material conditional analysis are Lewis (1976), Jackson (1979), and
Grice (1989).

Gibbardian Collapse and Trivalent Conditionals
39
Not all theories make that choice, however. In this paper, we explore
how certain trivalent logics of conditionals address Gibbard’s challenge.
These logics analyze an indicative conditional of the form “if A then C ”
as a conditional assertion that is indeterminate, or void, if the antecedent
turns out to be false, and that takes the truth value of the consequent
C if A is true (Reichenbach 1935; de Finetti 1936; Quine 1950; Belnap
1970, 1973). This analysis assigns a third truth value (“neither true nor
false”) to such “void” assertions, and gives rise to various logics that
combine a truth-functional conditional connective with existing frame-
works for trivalent logics (e.g., Cooper 1968; Farrell 1979, 1986; Milne
1997; Olkhovikov 2002 [2016]; Cantwell 2008; Baratgin et al. 2013;
Égré et al. 2021a, b).
By retaining truth-functionality, these trivalent logics allow for simple
algorithmic calculation of the truth value of even the most complex
nested conditionals. Modal analyses and non truth-functional anal-
yses are, by contrast, far more complex. Truth-functional analyses in
particular avoid the problem of determining the right context for eval-
uating the conditional; there is much less inter-speaker variety than, for
example, in Kratzer (2012)’s approach where it is variable to what degree
(and in what way) the possible worlds need to be restricted for evaluating
the consequent.3 In the logics we consider, there is a fact of the matter
as to the truth value of a conditional, and so, after getting to know the
truth values of the components, there is no disagreement about whether
the conditional is true, false, or indeterminate. Yet, as discussed in Égré
et al. (2021a), these logics avoid some of the problems that have plagued
two-valued truth-functional accounts.
We begin our investigation with a precise explication of Gibbard’s
result, including a more formal version of his original proof sketch
(Sect. 2). Then we present two trivalent logics of indicative conditionals,
paired with Strong Kleene semantics for conjunction and negation, and
we examine how they deal with Gibbardian collapse (Sects. 3 and 4).
3 See in particular Kratzer (2015) for a reassessment of the beneﬁts of truth-functionality to
evaluate certain embedded conditionals.

40
P. Égré et al.
We then turn to trivalent logics that replace the Strong Kleene oper-
ators with Cooper’s quasi-connectives where the conjunction of the
True and the third truth value is the True (Sect. 5). Speciﬁcally, we
show why rejecting supraclassicality—and retaining both Import-Export
and a stronger-than-material conditional—is a viable way of avoiding
Gibbardian collapse.
In the second part of the paper, we consider a recent strengthening
of Gibbard’s result due to Branden Fitelson (2013) and apply it to the
above trivalent logics (Sects. 6, 7, and 8). From this analysis it emerges
that Gibbard’s result may be better described as a uniqueness result: we
cannot have two conditional connectives that satisfy Import-Export as
well as Conjunction Elimination, where one is strictly stronger than
the other, and where the weaker (already) satisﬁes Modus Ponens. We
conclude the paper with a response to an objection raised by David E.
Over against the Export principle in relation to the paradoxes of the
material conditional.
We also provide three appendices: Appendix A rebuts a recent attempt
at a reductio of Import-Export, Appendix B provides the proofs of various
lemmata stated in the paper, and Appendix C gives a more constrained
derivation of Gibbardian collapse than his original proof, of particular
relevance for the ﬁrst trivalent system we discuss. For more in-depth
treatment of trivalent logics of conditionals, we refer the reader to our
comprehensive survey and analysis in Égré et al. (2021a, b).
2
Gibbard’s Collapse Result
The Law of Import-Export is an important bridge between different
types of conditionals: it permits to transform right-nested conditionals
into simple ones. Import-Export is of speciﬁc interest in suppositional
accounts of indicative conditionals that assess the assertability of a condi-
tional by the corresponding conditional probability (as per Adams’ thesis,
viz. Adams 1965). Import-Export is then an indispensable tool for
providing a probabilistic analysis of embedded conditionals. However,
when Adams’ Thesis, originally limited to conditionals with Boolean

Gibbardian Collapse and Trivalent Conditionals
41
antecedent and consequent, is extended to nested conditionals, Import-
Export creates unexpected problems.4 Thus, a famous result by David
Lewis (1976) shows that combining this latter equation with the usual
laws of probability and an unrestricted application of Import-Export triv-
ializes the probability of the indicative conditional.5 Gibbard establishes
a second difﬁculty with Import-Export, namely that any conditional
satisfying Import-Export in combination with other intuitive principles
collapses to the material conditional.
Gibbard’s original proof (Gibbard 1980, 234–235)—in reality more
of an outline—was based on semantic considerations and left various
assumptions implicit. Here we provide a more formal derivation. In
particular, Gibbard only stressed conditions (i)–(iii) below, but implicitly
assumed two further conditions, here highlighted as (iv) and (v), as well
as structural constraints on the underlying consequence relation. In what
follows we use |=CL for classical consequence, and ≡L for the conjunc-
tion of |=L and its converse. Under (v) we mean that ⊃obeys classical
principles, that is classical logical laws, inferences, and metainferences.6
Theorem 1 (Gibbard) Suppose L is a logic whose consequence relation |=L
is at least transitive, with ⊃and →two binary operators, obeying principles
(i)–(v) for every formulae A, B, C. Then →and ⊃are provably equivalent
in L.
(i)
A →(B →C) ≡L (A ∧B) →C
Import-Export
(ii)
A →B |=L (A ⊃B)
Stronger-than-Material
4 The unrestricted version of Adams’ equation is often called Stalnaker’s Thesis (going back
to Stalnaker 1970) or simply “The Equation”, with the latter name being prevalent in the
psychological literature. Adams defends it in his 1975 monograph, too.
5 On the reasons to defend Import-Export in relation to probabilities of conditionals, see
McGee (1989) and Arló-Costa (2001). For some objections linked to Lewis’s triviality result,
see for example (Sanﬁlippo et al. 2020, 151), whose theory assigns distinct expected values
to a right-nested conditional and its simpliﬁed counterpart. A discussion of the links between
Gibbardian collapse and Lewisian triviality lies beyond the scope of this paper, but we refer
to Lassiter (2020) for a survey of Lewisian triviality results and their treatment in a trivalent
framework.
6 An inference is a relation between (sets of) formulae: for instance, the relation between
(A ⊃B) ∧A and A ∧B; a metainference is a relation between inferences, for example, the
relation between A |= B and |= A ⊃B. See for instance Ripley (2013) and Dicher and Paoli
(2019) about the distinction and its underpinnings.

42
P. Égré et al.
(iii)
If A |=CL B, then |=L A →B
Supraclassicality
(iv)
If A ≡L A′ then A →B ≡L A′ →B
Left Logical Equivalence
(v)
⊃obeys classical principles in L
Classicality of ⊃
Proof
1.
(A ⊃B) →(A →B) ≡L ((A ⊃B) ∧A) →B
by (i)
2.
((A ⊃B) ∧A) ≡L (A ∧B)
by (v) (classical inferences)
3.
(A ⊃B) ∧A) →B ≡L (A ∧B) →B
by 2 and (iv)
4.
(A ∧B) →B ≡L (A ⊃B) →(A →B)
1, 3 and the transitivity of |=L
5.
A ∧B |=CL B
Conjunction Elimination
6.
|=L (A ∧B) →B
5 and (iii)
7.
|=L (A ⊃B) →(A →B)
4, 6, and the transitivity of |=L
8.
(A ⊃B) →(A →B) |=L (A ⊃B) ⊃(A →B)
by (ii)
9.
|=L (A ⊃B) ⊃(A →B)
7, 8 and the transitivity of |=L
10.
A ⊃B |=L A →B
by 9 and (v) (classical metainference)
□
This is not the only proof of Gibbard’s result. In particular, Fitelson
(2013) and Khoo and Mandelkern (2019) give more parsimonious
derivations. But our presentation closely matches the structure of his
original argument: ﬁrst Gibbard shows that (A ⊃B) →(A →B) is a
theorem of L (step 1–7), from that he derives |=L (A ⊃B) ⊃(A →B)
(step 8–9) and ﬁnally, he infers A ⊃B |=L A →B (step 10).
With Gibbard we can grant that the assumptions (ii) and (iii) intro-
duced alongside Import-Export are fairly weak.7 Stronger-than-Material
is shared by all theories that classify an indicative conditional with true
antecedent and false consequent as false.8 Supraclassicality, a restricted
7 Our reconstruction of Gibbard’s proof requires the two “directions” of the Import-Export
principle (i.e., importing and exporting the outer conditional operator, see Kaufmann and
Kaufmann (2015) for more on the two directions in a modal setting). For a variant of Gibbard’s
proof by Khoo and Mandelkern (2019) that requires only the Export direction, see Appendix
C. Whether we can get a collapse from Import alone is an open question.
8 We use “stronger” in a reﬂexive sense (as opposed to “strictly stronger”). The name MP is
sometimes used for this principle, see Unterhuber and Schurz (2014), or Khoo and Mandelkern
(2019) who call it Modus Ponens. We ﬁnd more appropriate to use “Stronger-than-Material”
since Modus Ponens is strictly speaking a two-premise argument form. The two principles are
not necessarily equivalent: in the system DF/TT introduced below, for instance, Stronger-than-
Material holds but not Modus Ponens (in the form A →B, A |= B).

Gibbardian Collapse and Trivalent Conditionals
43
version of the principle of Conditional Introduction, means that deduc-
tive relations are supported by the indicative conditional. Even that could
be weakened by just assuming the conditional to support conjunction
elimination as in step 6.
Assumptions (iv) and (v), on the other hand, are stronger than meets
the eye. While the substitution rule LLE was taken for granted by
Gibbard, likely on grounds of compositionality, it raises issues in rela-
tion to counterpossibles and other forms of hyperintensionality (see
Nute 1980; Fine 2012). However, even if one is inclined to give up
principle (iv), one may not ﬁnd fault with applying it in this partic-
ular case. Similarly, (v) implies that the material conditional supports
classical absorption laws (step 2 of the proof) and (meta-inferential)
Modus Ponens (step 10) in L—two properties not necessarily retained
in non-classical logics.
Gibbard’s result also leaves a number of questions unanswered. One
of them concerns the implication of the mutual entailment between
→and ⊃. Does the collapse imply that the two conditionals can be
replaced by one another in all contexts, for example? The answer to this
question is in fact negative, as we proceed to show using trivalent logic
in the next section.
3
The Trivalent Analysis of Indicative
Conditionals
From his result, Gibbard drew the lesson that if we want the indica-
tive conditional to be a propositional function, and to account for a
natural reading of embedded indicative conditionals, then the function
must be “⊃”, namely the bivalent material conditional. We disagree with
this conclusion: trivalent truth-functional accounts of the conditional
can satisfy Import-Export and yield a reasonable account of embeddings
without collapsing to the material conditional. We now explain why one
may want to adopt such an approach, and then, in the next two sections,
how they deal with Gibbard’s result.
Reichenbach and de Finetti proposed to analyze an indicative condi-
tional “if A, then C ” as an assertion about C upon the supposition that

44
P. Égré et al.
Table 1
Truth tables for the de Finetti conditional (left) and the Cooper
conditional (right)
A is true. Thus the conditional is true whenever A and C are true, and
false whenever A is true and C is false. When the supposition (=the
antecedent A) turns out to be false, there is no factual basis for evaluating
the conditional statement, and therefore it is classiﬁed as neither true nor
false. This basic idea gives rise to various truth tables for A →C. Two of
them are the table proposed by Bruno de Finetti (1936), and the one ﬁrst
proposed by William Cooper (1968), later rediscovered by Nuel Belnap
(1973), by Grigory Olkhovikov (2002 [2016]), and by John Cantwell
(2008) (see Table 1).9 In both of them the value 1/2 can be interpreted
as “neither true nor false”, “void”, or “indeterminate”. There is moreover
a systematic correspondence and duality between those tables: whereas
de Finetti treats “not true” antecedents (<1) in the same way as false
antecedents (=0), Cooper and Cantwell treat “not false” antecedents
(>0) in the same way as true ones (=1) (and likewise Belnap 1973).
Thus in de Finetti’s table the second row copies the third, whereas in
Cooper’s table it copies the ﬁrst.
One way to deﬁne the other logical connectives is via the familiar
Strong Kleene truth tables (see Table 2). Conjunction corresponds to
the “minimum” of the two values, disjunction to the “maximum”, and
negation to inversion of the semantic value. In particular, beside the
indicative conditional A →C, the trivalent analysis also admits a Strong
9 In Égré et al. (2021a, b), we call it the Cooper–Cantwell conditional, but there we actually
missed Belnap’s 1973 contribution, as well as Olkhovikov’s. In Belnap (1970), published under
nearly the same title, Belnap originally worked with the de Finetti conditional instead. Belnap
himself underemphasized the change in his 1973 paper (“I now choose to treat the case when
A is nonassertive as on the side of the case when A is true rather than on the side of the case
when A is false”, p. 51), despite the centrality of this move. Henceforth we ﬁnd simpler to
call this conditional “Cooper’s conditional”, but we still name it the CC conditional to avoid
confusion. We are indebted to Hitoshi Omori for bringing Olkhovikov’s work to our notice.

Gibbardian Collapse and Trivalent Conditionals
45
Table 2
Strong Kleene truth tables for negation, conjunction, and the material
conditional
Kleene “material” conditional A ⊃C, deﬁnable as ¬(A∧¬C) (see again
Table 2).
To have a logic, however, we also need a deﬁnition of validity. This
question is non-trivial in a trivalent setting since preservation of (strict)
truth is not the same as preservation of non-falsity. Like Cooper and
Cantwell, but with independent reasons,10 we opt for a tolerant-to-
tolerant (TT-) consequence relation where non-falsify is preserved: an
inference A1, ..., An |= C is valid if, for any valuation function (of the
appropriate kind) v from the sentences of the language to the values
{0, 1/2, 1}, whenever v(Ai) ∈{1/2, 1} for all i ≤n, then also v(C) ∈
{1/2, 1}. This choice yields two logics depending on how the conditional
is interpreted: the logic DF/TT based on de Finetti’s truth table, and the
logic CC/TT based on Cooper’s table.11
Both logics make different predictions, but they agree on a common
core, and they give a smooth treatment of nested conditionals. In partic-
ular, both DF/TT and CC/TT satisfy the Law of Import-Export. We now
investigate how they deal with Gibbardian collapse.
10 Other trivalent consequence relations come with problematic features (Fact 3.4 in Égré et al.
2021a): they either fail the Law of Identity (i.e., ̸|=A →A), or they license the inference
from a conditional to its converse (i.e., A →C |= C →A). Belnap (1973) too compares
several options for validity in a trivalent setting, including the nontransitive notion ST (going
from true premises to a non-false conclusion, see Cobreros et al. (2012), Belnap calls it weak
implication). Like for Cooper, Belnap’s favored notion of validity is the preservation of non-
false values, alternatively the preservation of non-false and true values (i.e., the schemes we call
TT and SS ∩TT in Égré et al. 2021a). We return to the SS ∩TT notion of validity in the
conclusion.
11 The system CC/TT actually matches Cantwell’s system. Cooper’s logic, called OL, rests on
a different choice of truth tables for conjunction and disjunction, and restricts valuations to
two-valued atoms.

46
P. Égré et al.
4
Gibbardian Collapse in DF/TT and CC/TT
We ﬁrst consider Gibbard’s triviality result in the context of DF/TT with
its indicative and material conditionals. DF/TT is contractive, reﬂexive,
monotonic, and transitive. An inspection of the principles (i)–(v) in
Theorem 1 shows that:
• Assumption (i) holds. In particular, both sides of the Law of Import-
Export receive the same truth value in any DF-valuation.
• Assumption (ii) also holds: if there is a DF-valuation v such that
v(A ⊃
B) = 0, then v(A) = 1 and v(B) = 0, but then
v(A →B) = 0 as well, thus failing to make A →B tolerantly
true.
• Assumption (iii) holds in DF/TT. We prove this in Appendix B.
• Assumption (iv) fails in DF/TT. In fact, A
|=DF/TT
B and
B |=DF/TT A if, for any DF-valuation v, one of the following is given:
(a) v(A) = 1 = v(B)
(c) v(A) = 1; v(B) = 1/2
(b) v(A) = 1/2 = v(B)
(d) v(A) = 1/2; v(B) = 1
Therefore, letting v(C) = 0, cases (c) and (d) provide counterexam-
ples since either A →C̸|=DF/TTB →C or B →C̸|=DF/TT A →C.
A concrete example is the following:
p ∨¬p |=DF/TT (p →¬p) ∨(¬p →p)
(p →¬p) ∨(¬p →p) |=DF/TT p ∨¬p
but
[(p →¬p) ∨(¬p →p)] →(p ∧¬p)̸|=DF/TT(p ∨¬p) →(p ∧¬p)
• Assumption (v) fails in general of ⊃in DF/TT. In particular, step 2 of
Gibbard’s proof fails: (A ⊃B) ∧A̸|=DF/TT A ∧B, assuming v(A) =
1/2 and v(B) = 0.

Gibbardian Collapse and Trivalent Conditionals
47
The failure of Gibbard’s conditions (iv) and (v) may seem to make DF/TT
irrelevant for the discussion of his result. But this is not so: despite
assumptions (iv) and (v) failing for DF/TT’s indicative conditional and
material conditional, the two conditionals turn out to be equivalent.
More precisely, DF/TT validates the equivalence of A ⊃B and A →B,
as a reciprocal entailment (≡DT/TT), as a material biconditional (denoted
by ⊃⊂), and as an indicative biconditional (denoted by ↔).
Lemma 2 For every A, B ∈For(L):
A ⊃B ≡DF/TT A →B
|=DF/TT (A ⊃B) ⊃⊂(A →B)
|=DF/TT (A ⊃B) ↔(A →B)
This result is not a coincidence. As it turns out, Gibbard’s result can be
derived using only principles (i), (ii), (iii), (v) and structural assumptions
on logical consequence, in such a way that all uses of (v) are DF/TT
sound. This result directly follows from the version of Gibbard’s result
established by Khoo and Mandelkern (2019), as we prove in Appendix
C. We also give a sequent-style proof of the collapse in Appendix B,
making use of the system presented in our Égré et al. (2021b).
However, such an extended form of equivalence between the indica-
tive and the material conditional in DF/TT does not mean that the
two conditionals are identiﬁed with each other or indistinguishable. In
fact, they obey very different logical principles, such as the following
connexive law:
A →B |=DF/TT ¬(A →¬B) but (A ⊃B) ̸|=DF/TT ¬(A ⊃¬B).
This shows that indicative and material conditional cannot be validly
replaced in complex formulae in DF/TT. Put differently, DF/TT fails the
classical principle of replacement of equivalents.
What is, then, the import of DF/TT’s equivalences between different
conditionals? Not much, one might argue. A look at the DF semantics
and the status of the premises of Gibbard’s Theorem in DF/TT shows
that such equivalences are largely a byproduct of (i) the fact that the DF

48
P. Égré et al.
truth table assigns value 0 to an indicative conditional in the same cases
in which it assigns value 0 to a material conditional, and (ii) the fact that
the tolerant–tolerant consequence relation does not distinguish between
value 1 and 1/2.
Notably, things are different when we move to CC/TT, keeping
the tolerant-tolerant notion of consequence ﬁxed, but moving to a
truth table for the conditional which assigns value 0 to the indicative
conditional in more cases. Like DF/TT, CC/TT is contractive, reﬂexive,
monotonic, and transitive. Moreover:
• Assumption (i) and (ii) hold in CC/TT for the same reasons as DF/TT.
• Assumption (iii) fails in CC/TT. For example, A ∧¬A |=CL B, but
̸|=CC/TT (A ∧¬A) →B. A CC-valuation v s.t. v(A) = 1/2 and
v(B) = 0 provides a counterexample.
• Assumption (iv) holds in CC/TT. As in the DF/TT case, we have that
A |=CC/TT B and B |=CC/TT A if, for any CC-valuation v, one of
the following is given:
(a) v(A) = 1 = v(B)
(c) v(A) = 1; v(B) = 1/2
(b) v(A) = 1/2 = v(B)
(d) v(A) = 1/2; v(B) = 1
However, the row of value 1 is identical to the row of value 1/2 in
CC-truth tables of the indicative conditional. Therefore, whenever one
of (a)–(d) holds, for every formula C, we have that v(A →C) =
v(B →C), proving the claim.
• Assumption (v) fails in CC/TT, for the same reason it fails in DF/TT.
One of (i)–(iv) thus fails for CC/TT as it does for DF/TT, and (v) fails
in both. The failure of assumption (iii), supraclassicality, is irrelevant for
blocking the proof since the only classically valid inference required for
the proof is Conjunction Elimination (A∧B |= A). This inference is also
validated by CC/TT. The proof is thus blocked exclusively by the failure
of assumption (v): ⊃does not behave classically in CC/TT (i.e., step 2 in
our reconstruction of Gibbard’s proof fails). Unlike DF/TT, CC/TTavoids
Gibbardian collapse: it declares both conditionals materially equivalent,

Gibbardian Collapse and Trivalent Conditionals
49
but neither logically equivalent nor equivalent according to the indicative
biconditional:
Lemma 3 For every A, B ∈For(L):
A →B |=CC/TT A ⊃B but A ⊃B̸|=CC/TT A →B
|=CC/TT (A ⊃B) ⊃⊂(A →B)
̸|=CC/TT(A ⊃B) ↔(A →B)
In general, the indicative conditional of CC/TT is strictly stronger than
its material counterpart: A →B entails A ⊃B, but is not entailed by
it. Altogether, DF/TT and CC/TT avert Gibbardian triviality in different
ways. In both of them the material conditional is not fully classical, but
an extensional collapse takes place in DF/TT anyway; this, however, does
not make the material conditional always replaceable by the indicative in
DF/TT. On the other hand, the indicative conditional of CC/TT is more
remote from its material counterpart: not only does it validate different
conditional principles (removing the most pressing paradox of the mate-
rial implication), but it is also extensionally distinct from the material
conditional within CC/TT itself.
Summing up, while Gibbardian collapse is avoided more markedly
in CC/TT than in DF/TT, in neither logic does it constitute a form of
“triviality”: even when indicative and material conditionals are declared
to be equivalent, they are ﬁrmly set apart by their inferential behavior.
This concludes our study of Gibbard’s original collapse result in triva-
lent logics based on Strong Kleene connectives. In the next section, we
expand the scope of our analysis and look at trivalent logics of condi-
tionals with a different semantics for the standard logical connectives.
5
Gibbardian Collapse in QCC/TT
The logics DF/TT and CC/TT solve a large set of problems related to the
indicative conditional, but they also have important limitations. First,
both CC/TT and DF/TT validate the Linearity principle (A →B) ∨
(B →A) for arbitrary A and B. This schema was famously criticized by

50
P. Égré et al.
Table 3
Truth tables for trivalent quasi-conjunction and quasi-disjunction and
the material conditional based on quasi-disjunction, as advocated by Cooper
(1968)
MacColl (1908): one may reject both “if John is red-haired, then John is
a doctor” and “if John is a doctor, then he is red-haired”. So it is unclear
on which basis we should accept, or declare as true, the disjunction of
both sentences.
In a similar vein, some highly plausible conjunctive sentences can
never be true on DF/TT or CC/TT. The schema (A →A) ∧(¬A →
¬A) (“if A, then A; and if ¬A, then ¬A”) is always classiﬁed as neither
true nor false, although each of the conjuncts is a DF/TT- and CC/TT-
theorem.12 Likewise, an ensemble of conditional predictions of the form
(A →B)∧(¬A →C) will always be indeterminate or false (see Belnap
1973, 60–61; Bradley 2002, 368–370). However, a sentence such as:
(1) If the sun shines tomorrow, Paul will go to the ofﬁce by bike; and if
it rains, he will take the metro.
seems to be true (with hindsight) if the sun shines tomorrow and Paul
goes to the ofﬁce by bike.
A principled reply to these challenges consists in modifying the truth
tables for trivalent conjunction and disjunction, as proposed by Cooper
(1968) (see also Belnap 1973; Dubois and Prade 1994; Calabrese 2002).
In these truth tables, reproduced in Table 3, the conjunction of value
1 and value 1/2 is value 1, and similarly the disjunction of the value 0
with 1/2 is 0. This is coherent with the idea that a conditional assertion
with two components (e.g., in Bradley’s examples) should be classiﬁed
12 We are indebted to Paolo Santorio for this example.

Gibbardian Collapse and Trivalent Conditionals
51
as true if one of the assertions came out true, and the other one void.
Notably, the (quasi-)material conditional A ⊃C (deﬁnable as ¬A ∨
B or as ¬(A ∧¬B)) of a TT-logic based on these quasi-connectives
blocks the paradoxes of the material conditional (¬A̸|=A ⊃C, C̸|=A ⊃
C), reﬂecting the fact that quasi-disjunction fails to validate Disjunction
Introduction (A̸|=A ∨B).
Adopting “quasi-conjunction” and “quasi-disjunction” (the termi-
nology is due to Adams 1975) invalidates Linearity and gives non-trivial
truth conditions for ensembles or partitions of conditional assertions.
In particular, (A →A) ∧(¬A →¬A) is always true, and so is
(A →B) ∧(¬A →C) when one of its conjuncts is true, irrespective
of whether →is the DF or CC conditional. We call the resulting logics
QDF/TT and QCC/TT.13 However, when paired with DF/TT, quasi-
conjunction leads to a violation of Import-Export, but not so in CC/TT.
So the system of interest for us in this section is QCC/TT.
How does QCC/TT then fare with respect to the ﬁve premises of
Gibbard’s proof?
• Assumption (i) holds since both sides of the Law of Import-Export
receive the same truth value in any QCC-valuation.
• Assumption (ii) fails since the (quasi-)material conditional is strictly
stronger than the indicative conditional. The valuation v(A) = 1 and
v(B) = 1/2 is a model of A →B, but not of A ⊃B, which takes the
same truth values as ¬A ∨B.
• Assumptions (iii) and (v) fail with the same countermodels as in
CC/TT.
• Assumption (iv) holds: it is independent of the interpretation of the
standard connectives and the proof for CC/TT can be transferred.
In QCC/TT, two steps of Gibbard’s proof are blocked, corresponding to
the failure of assumptions (ii) and (v). As before, the failure of (iii) is
inessential since the proof just requires Conjunction Elimination instead
of the more general property of Supraclassicality (Table 4).
13 QCC/TT is almost identical to Cooper’s logic OL, except that Cooper requires valuations to
be bivalent on atomic formulae.

52
P. Égré et al.
Table 4
Overview of which premises of Gibbard’s proof are satisfied by the
logics DF/TT, CC/TT and QCC/TT. CE = conjunction elimination (=a sufficient
surrogate for (iii)), TRM = transitivity, monotonocity and reflexivity of the logic.
≡, ↔, ⊃⊂concern whether logical, indicative, or material equivalence holds
between ⊃and →
Since the material conditional is strictly stronger than the indicative
in QCC/TT, Gibbardian collapse does not happen, and moreover, neither
the material nor the indicative conditional declares the two connectives
equivalent:
Lemma 4 For every A, B ∈For(L):
A ⊃B |=QCC/TT A →B but A →B̸|=QCC/TT A ⊃B
̸|=QCC/TT(A ⊃B) ⊃⊂(A →B)
̸|=QCC/TT(A ⊃B) ↔(A →B)
In QCC/TT, the connectives are thus more distinct than in DF/TT
(where they are logically and materially equivalent) and CC/TT (where
they are not logically, but still materially equivalent). The way out
provided by QCC/TT is notable for another reason, too. Most theo-
rists react to Gibbardian collapse either by giving up or restricting
Import-Export (e.g., Stalnaker, Kratzer), or by endorsing a material
conditional analysis of the indicative conditional (e.g., Grice, Lewis,
Jackson). Denying that ⊃satisﬁes the classical laws in a logic of condi-
tionals—the road taken by CC/TT—is already less common. However,
Cooper’s original approach is probably unique in entertaining the possi-
bility of an indicative conditional that is strictly weaker than the material
conditional. The explanation is probably that bivalent logic has been
the default framework for formal work on conditionals and the mate-
rial conditional represents, in that framework, the weakest possible

Gibbardian Collapse and Trivalent Conditionals
53
conditional connective. The logic QCC/TT thus shows an original and
surprising way of deﬁning the relationship between the two connec-
tives.
6
Fitelson’s Generalized Collapse Result
Our rendition of Gibbard’s original argument has revealed that one of the
premises—namely that |= A →C whenever A classically implies C —is
stronger than needed: we only require that (A ∧C) →C be a logical
truth. On the other hand, Gibbard’s argument uses some properties of
classical logic and the material conditional, such as the fact that A ∧
(A ⊃C) is logically equivalent to A ∧C. Gibbard’s result can thus be
generalized along two dimensions: ﬁrst, use premises only as strong as we
need them for the proof of the collapse result; second, make explicit the
classicality assumptions (compare Sect. 2) and extend the result to other
logics than just classical logic with the material conditional.
Branden Fitelson (2013) has provided one such generalized result. It
concerns the relation between two binary connectives represented by the
symbols →and ⇝in an arbitrary logic L, whose consequence relation
we denote with |=L. Letting A, B, and C stand for arbitrary formulae of
L, and |=L for some consequence relation deﬁned for the language of L,
Fitelson states eight independent conditions sufﬁcient to derive a general
collapse result:14
(1)
|=L (A ∧B) ⇝A
(Conjunction Elimination for ⇝)
(2)
|=L (A ∧B) →B
(Conjunction Elimination for →)
(3)
|=L A ⇝(B ⇝C) if and only if
|=L (A ∧B) ⇝C
(Import-Export for ⇝)
(4)
|=L A →(B →C) if and only if
|=L (A ∧B) →C
(Import-Export for →)
(5)
If |=L A →B, then |=L A ⇝B
(→implies ⇝)
(6)
If |=L A ⇝B, then A |=L B
(Conditional Elimination for ⇝)
14 Our notation swaps the meaning of the symbols →and ⇝in Fitelson’s work to make it
consistent with the rest of our paper. We should note that Fitelson’s result assumes something
strictly speaking weaker than Conjunction Elimination, but we do not go into the details for
reasons of simplicity.

54
P. Égré et al.
(7)
If A ≡L B and |=L A →C, then
also |=L B →C
(Left Logical Equivalence)
(8)
If A |=L B and A |=L C, then
A |=L B ∧C
(Conjunction Introduction)
In short, Fitelson’s result concerns the relationship between two condi-
tionals which satisfy both Conjunction Elimination (1+2) and Import-
Export (3+4), and of which one is stronger than the other one (5). The
stronger conditional, represented by the normal arrow →, is supposed
to represent the indicative conditional. Moreover, it is assumed that
the weaker connective ⇝satisﬁes Conditional Elimination15 relative to
the logic |=L (6), which means—given certain structural assumptions
on L, such as transitivity and monotonicity—that ⇝satisﬁes (meta-
inferential) Modus Ponens. The ﬁnal conditions concern the substitution
of |=L-equivalents in the premises of →-validities (7) and Conjunction
Introduction (8): if two propositions follow from a third, then so does
their conjunction.
Fitelson shows that these axioms are logically independent from each
other and that they are sufﬁcient to show that the two connectives →
and ⇝are logically equivalent:
Theorem (Fitelson 2013):
From conditions (1)–(8) it follows that
A ⇝B |=L A →B
and
A →B |=L A ⇝B
As Fitelson emphasizes, this result should not be taken to imply that the
connective →collapses to the material conditional, or that the indica-
tive conditional “If A, then C” should be interpreted as “not A or C”.16
15 What we call Conditional Elimination is the converse of Conditional Introduction; the two
properties together are known as the Deduction Theorem.
16 Fitelson (p.c.) has recently sharpened his result, showing that Import-Export for →is actually
equivalent to the collapse, over (1)–(3) and (5)–(8). We thank Branden Fitelson for bringing this
to our attention. While technically and conceptually interesting, this sharpening does not affect
the trivalent analysis of Fitelson’s generalized collapse: the ways in which trivalent conditionals

Gibbardian Collapse and Trivalent Conditionals
55
Fitelson’s result is interpretation-neutral and concerns any two connec-
tives with the said properties; speciﬁcally, it does not presuppose that
the weaker connective ⇝corresponds to the material conditional ⊃.
Whether the material conditional A ⊃C (i.e., ¬A ∨C) satisﬁes the
properties of ⇝(i.e., conditions (1), (3), (5), and (6)) will depend on
which logic we choose to interpret |=L, and we will soon see that it need
not in a trivalent setting. What Fitelson shows is rather that if a condi-
tional connective satisﬁes Conjunction Elimination, Import-Export, and
(meta-inferential) Modus Ponens, then in any logic with Conjunction
Introduction, there cannot be a strictly stronger conditional connec-
tive that satisﬁes these conditions as well as axiom (7)—the substitution
of equivalents in the premises of its theorems. In this sense, Fitelson
proves the existence of an upper bound for the strength of a condi-
tional that satisﬁes these intuitively desirable logical properties. Moreover
Fitelson shows that such a connective must also validate some central
intuitionistic principles.
7
Fitelson’s Result and Trivalent Logic
What does Fitelson’s result mean for trivalent logics when his two
connectives →and ⇝are identiﬁed with the indicative and the mate-
rial conditional? Keeping the tolerant-to-tolerant character of the logical
consequence relation ﬁxed (see Sect. 4 for why), we have to assign values
to the following parameters:
• the truth table for the indicative conditional (de Finetti or Cooper–
Cantwell);
• the truth table for conjunction and disjunction (Strong Kleene opera-
tors or Cooper’s quasi-conjunction and disjunction);
• which connective in Fitelson’s result represents the indicative condi-
tional, and which connective represents the material conditional.
block the weaker version of Fitelson’s result immediately extend to the sharper version. For this
reason, we will focus on the 2013 version in what follows.

56
P. Égré et al.
This leaves us with eight different logics, characterized by the choice of
the truth table for the indicative conditionals (DF or CC), the truth tables
for conjunction and disjunction (Strong Kleene or Cooper), and the
assignment of conditionals to Fitelson’s connectives (→and ⇝). Fitelson
suggests that the stronger connective →stands for the indicative condi-
tional. However, the properties of ⇝, which include Modus Ponens,
Conjunction Elimination, and Import-Export, could also square well
with the indicative conditional. Moreover, the indicative conditional can
be weaker than the material conditional in QCC/TT. Thus, we have to
carefully examine all ways of distributing Fitelson’s connectives to truth
tables.
As noticed in the previous section, QDF/TT does not satisfy Import-
Export for the indicative conditional and so we set it aside (either
condition (3) or condition (4) will fail). All the other logics satisfy condi-
tions (1)–(4) and also condition (8). Thus our discussion will be limited
to those logics and the more controversial properties (5), (6), and (7).
Actually, we see that none of our trivalent logics satisﬁes all of these
principles:
DF/TT with →=→DF Satisﬁes (5)—material and indicative conditional
are DF-equivalent—, but neither (6) nor (7). For (6), consider a valu-
ation v such that v(A) =
1/2, v(B) = 0, and for (7), consider
v(A) = 1/2, v(B) = 1, and v(C) = 0.
DF/TT with →=⊃Satisﬁes (5), but neither (6) and (7). Consider the
same examples as above.
CC/TT with →=→CC Satisﬁes (5) and (7), but not (6). Consider again
v such that v(A) = 1/2 and v(B) = 0.
CC/TT with →=⊃Q Satisﬁes (6), but neither (5) nor (7). For (5),
consider v such that v(A) = 1/2 and v(B) = 0; for (7) consider v
such that v(A) = 1/2, v(B) = 1, and v(C) = 0.
QCC/TT with →=→CC Satisﬁes (6) and (7), but not (5). Consider v
such that v(A) = 1 and v(B) = 1/2.
QCC/TT with →=⊃Q Satisﬁes (5) and (6), but not (7). The coun-
terexample is given by some v such that v(A) = v(C) = 1/2 and
v(B) = 1.
Table 5 summarizes our ﬁndings. As we see, none of our trivalent candi-
date logics for the indicative conditional obeys all of these axioms. Since
there are no obvious alternatives to the (various forms of the) material

Gibbardian Collapse and Trivalent Conditionals
57
Table 5
Overview of the satisfaction/violation of Fitelson’s conditions (5)–(7) in
different trivalent logics
conditional as the second connective in Fitelson’s theorem, Gibbardian
collapse is blocked for the entire range of trivalent logics that we study. In
particular, since at least one of the axioms fails for all conﬁgurations we
have looked at, the connective →must also fail one of the principles of
the intuitionistic conditional (this is, as mentioned above, a consequence
of satisfying conditions (1)–(8)).
8
Blocking Fitelson’s Collapse Strongly
and Weakly
In order to better assess the distinct ways in which Fitelson’s collapse
is blocked in trivalent logics, we introduce a useful distinction. We say
that a logic of indicative conditionals L blocks the collapse strongly if
at least one of conditions (1)–(8) is not satisﬁed by letting →=→ind,
where →ind is the connective that, in L, is taken to model the indicative
conditional. We say that the L blocks the collapse weakly if →=→ind
and ⇝=⊃, where ⊃is the material conditional in L. In other words,
L blocks Fitelson’s collapse strongly if some of Fitelson’s premises fails
in L once →is interpreted as L’s candidate for the indicative condi-
tional, regardless of how the other conditional ⇝is interpreted. On the
other hand, L blocks Fitelson’s collapse only weakly if some of Fitelson’s
premises fails in L once →is interpreted as L’s candidate for the indica-
tive conditional and ⇝is interpreted as L’s material conditional. In the

58
P. Égré et al.
former case, L’s indicative conditional is non-trivial (in the sense of the
collapse) by itself , whereas in the latter case it is non-trivial only if we
assume (at least some of) the features of ⊃in L for the other conditional.
A glance at our ﬁndings shows that Fitelson’s collapse result is blocked
strongly for the DF/TT-logics, and only weakly for all (Q)CC/TT-logics.
The failure of collapse in the (Q)CC/TT-logics is due to both features of
the Cooper–Cantwell conditional in a TT-consequence relation and the
choice of the material conditional as the interpretation of the weaker
connective ⇝. Does this show that the indicative conditional of the
(Q)CC/TT-logics is “trivial”, or in some sense uninteresting? Not really.
All Fitelson’s result can be used to argue for is that, given (1)–(8),
the indicative conditional of (Q)CC/TT-logics is L-equivalent to (i.e.,
inter-L-inferrable with) an unspeciﬁed conditional which: (i) cannot be
the material conditional of L (since (Q)CC/TT-logics weakly block the
collapse), and (ii) satisﬁes conditions (1), (3), (5), and (6), over a back-
ground logic which satisﬁes (8).17 Now, not only are these properties
unproblematic—by themselves, they do not give rise to any paradox
of implication—, they are indeed desirable. Hence, it should actually
be a welcome result that an indicative conditional is equivalent to a
conditional with such properties.
In summary, since the trivalent logics we have examined block
Fitelson’s collapse result systematically, we do not ﬁnd ourselves in the
dilemma of having to sacriﬁce Import-Export, or another plausible
condition to avoid triviality. To us, the most reasonable construal of
Fitelson’s theorem is as a uniqueness result: it is impossible to have two
conditional connectives both satisfying Import-Export and Conjunction
Elimination, such that one is strictly stronger than the other and where
the weaker one satisﬁes Conditional Elimination. This leaves Left Logical
Equivalence (condition (7)) out of the picture, but as Table 5 shows,
this condition is only required to prevent collapse in one case, namely
QCC/TT, in which the material conditional is stronger than the indica-
tive conditional. For all other combinations there is a tension between
the relative strength of the connectives (as codiﬁed by (5)) and the
17 Respectively: Conjunction Elimination (1), Import-Export (3), being entailed by indicative
conditionals (5), Conditional Elimination/Modus Ponens (6), and Conjunction Introduction
(8).

Gibbardian Collapse and Trivalent Conditionals
59
fact that the weaker connective should satisfy Conditional Elimination
(namely (6)).
9
Conclusion
This paper has given a precise reconstruction of Gibbard’s informal argu-
ment that any indicative conditional that satisﬁes Import-Export and is
supraclassical and stronger than the material conditional must collapse
to the material conditional. Speciﬁcally, we have seen that Gibbard’s
argument requires additional premises (e.g., structural assumptions on
the underlying logic L) and that the premises are not tight either (e.g.,
Supraclassicality can be replaced without loss of validity by Conjunction
Elimination).
We have then explored how a family of trivalent logics, all based on
the idea that a conditional is void when its antecedent turns out false,
fare with respect to Gibbardian collapse. The logics we have examined
all block an important premise of Gibbard’s proof, namely the clas-
sical behavior of the material conditional ⊃, as well as one additional
premise (different for each logic). Nonetheless, in DF/TT—the tolerant-
to-tolerant logic based on de Finetti’s truth table for the indicative condi-
tional—Gibbardian collapse occurs, but this does not mean that both
conditionals obey the same logical principles. In contrast, Cantwell’s
logic CC/TT and Cooper’s logic QCC/TT, based on their common truth
table for the indicative, avoid Gibbardian collapse altogether. This shows
us that the apparent lesson from Gibbard’s result—that one has to give
up Import-Export or endorse the material analysis of the conditional—is
mistaken.
We conﬁrmed that diagnosis by looking at these logics in the context
of the strengthening of Gibbard’s result proposed by Fitelson (2013).
Speciﬁcally, we have re-interpreted Fitelson’s result as showing the impos-
sibility of having two distinct connectives that both satisfy a set of charac-
teristic properties (Conjunction Elimination, Import-Export), where the
weaker one also satisﬁes Conditional Elimination. A logic of indicative
conditionals does not have to choose between forswearing Import-Export

60
P. Égré et al.
and embracing the material conditional analysis: trivalent logics of condi-
tionals offer a simple, yet articulate and fully truth-functional alternative
that avoids both problems.
Some challenges remain for the logics we presented, however. One
issue we have set aside is whether the Export principle is as fundamental
as the Import principle toward the intuition that the law of Import-
Export is valid. As stressed by David E. Over, from the Export principle,
and from the validity of A ∧B →A, it follows that A →(B →A) is
valid. If →obeys Modus Ponens, then this implies that B →A follows
from A, a version of the paradox of material implication. In a system like
CC/TT, which supports both MP and Export, this prediction is borne
out. But even in DF/TT, in which MP fails, B →A follows from A.
In order to avoid this feature, one option is to make validity more
demanding, for instance, by requiring the preservation of both non-false
values and of true values, namely using so-called SS ∩TT-validity (see
Belnap 1973; Dubois and Prade 1994; McDermott 1996). In DF/SS∩TT
as in CC/SS∩TT, the law of Import-Export remains valid, but B →A
does not follow from A. In Égré et al. (2021a), we did not select this
notion of validity because it rules out sentential validities such as A →A
(see Footnote 10). However, back then we also admitted that systems like
CC/TT and DF/TT fall prey to the paradoxes of the material conditional.
Obviously, systems like CC/SS∩TT or DF/SS∩TT also block Gibbardian
collapse, being subsystems of the logics we discussed. Of the Gibbardian
assumptions (i), (ii), (iii) and (v), CC/SS∩TT too preserves (i), (ii), and
fails (iii) and (v). And DF/SS∩TT likewise preserves (i) and (ii), but this
time it fails (iii) beside (v).
The upshot is that Export need not be viewed as more suspect than
Import in this context.18 The issue, instead, is whether it matters to
preserve sentential validities based on the conditional (formulae such as
A ∧B →A), or whether argument forms sufﬁce to capture condi-
tional reasoning. We think that this is an important foundational issue.
We shall not pursue it here, but we conclude that this makes the choice
18 Setting aside complexity considerations: D. Over points out that Import corresponds to a
simplifying assumption, unlike Export. We agree, but our point here is merely about the logical
problem raised by Export.

Gibbardian Collapse and Trivalent Conditionals
61
between trivalent options for validity more complex than acknowledged
in our previous work.
Funding
Funding for this research was provided by grants ANR-17-
EURE-0017 (program FrontCog), and ANR-19-CE28-0004-01 (program
Probasem) (P.E.) and by the European Research Council (ERC) through
Starting Grant No. 640638 (J.S.). P.E. also thanks the University of Torino
for a research invitation in June 2021. We are indebted to David E. Over, to
Stefan Kaufmann, and to an anonymous reviewer for valuable comments and
criticisms. Thanks also to Colin Caret, Michael De, Mario Günther, Branden
Fitelson, Dan Lassiter, Matt Mandelkern, Hitoshi Omori, Hans Rott, and to
audiences in Regensburg and in Utrecht for very helpful exchanges.
Appendices
Appendix A: Import-Export Revisited
Our case study on trivalent logics shows that it is possible to have
Import-Export without restriction in a conditional logic without running
into undesirable results of collapse to the material conditional, or to other
connectives that are clearly too weak. Speciﬁcally, even if a conditional
connective →validates Import-Export, the schema (A∧B) →A, and is
stronger than the material conditional, it need not be logically equivalent
to the latter.
This observation raises the suspicion that the scope of Gibbardian
collapse results may have to do with the absence or presence of bivalence.
Note that the third truth value has been essential to constructing suit-
able counterexamples to Fitelson’s conditions (1)–(8), and to blocking a
generalized collapse theorem. In other words, we conjecture that Gibbar-
dian collapse is a characteristic feature of conditional connectives with
Import-Export in bivalent logic.
This conjecture shall now be probed by studying a recent reductio
argument against Import-Export. Matthew Mandelkern (2020) argues
that Import-Export, when conjoined with other plausible principles,

62
P. Égré et al.
leads to absurd conclusions (compare also Mandelkern 2019). Speciﬁ-
cally, for a logic (L, |=L) with formulae A, B, and C and a connective
→representing the indicative conditional, Mandelkern considers (and
defends) the following three principles:
If
A|=L B
then
|=L A →B (Conditional Introduction)
If
|=L A →B then A →(B →C)≡L A →C
(Nothing Added)
If A →C≡L B →C then
A ≡L B
(Equivalence)
where ≡L means, as before, that both |=L and its converse hold.
Conditional Introduction is valid in all trivalent logics we considered,
whereas Nothing Added and Equivalence hold in (Q)CC/TT, but not in
(Q)DF/TT.19 Mandelkern requires another premise, restricted to atom-
classical formulae A (i.e., such that all propositional variables have a
classical value), but without restrictions on B:
For atom-classical A :
|=L (A ∧¬A) →B
(Quodlibet)
Quodlibet too holds in the trivalent logics we surveyed. From these four
principles Mandelkern derives the following intermediate result:
For atom-classical A :
A |=L ¬A →B
(Intermediate)
Intermediate also holds in CC/TT, and plausibly so: If A holds then any
conditional assertion with ¬A as a premise is void, and thus valid in
a logic with a tolerant-to-tolerant consequence relation. Intermediate is
equivalent to ¬A |=L A →B, from which Mandelkern derives:
For atom-classical A :
¬(A →B) |=L A
(Ex Falso)
The lesson Mandelkern takes from this is:
[Intermediate] is clearly false [...]. For this conclusion entails that the
falsity of ¬A →B entails the falsity of A; more succinctly (given classical
19 Countermodel for Nothing Added in (Q)DF/TT: v(A) = 1, v(B) = 1/2, v(C) = 0.
Countermodel for Equivalence in (Q)DF/TT: v(A) = v(C) = 0, v(B) = 1/2.

Gibbardian Collapse and Trivalent Conditionals
63
negation, which is not in dispute here), the falsity of A →B entails the
truth of A. (Mandelkern 2020, symbolic notation changed)
Ex Falso is deﬁnitely an unacceptable principle for a theory of indica-
tive conditionals. As it turns out, it is invalidated in our trivalent logics,
including CC/TT (Consider v(A) = 0.) What happened in the step
from Intermediate to Ex Falso? As hinted by Mandelkern’s parenthetical
remark, the step is blocked in CC/TT because trivalent negation is no
longer classical. In particular, TT-consequence does not obey Contraposi-
tion. This feature suggests a tradeoff: the trivalent logics of conditionals
we considered validate Import-Export without restriction, and they do
not fall prey to Mandelkern’s reduction. However, they no longer vali-
date Contraposition without restriction, and because CC/TT satisﬁes
the full Deduction Theorem, the associated conditional fails Contrapo-
sition too. For indicatives as well as for counterfactuals, Contraposition
is moot, however, in that regard the way in which Mandelkern’s reductio
is blocked here does not appear problematic.20
Appendix B: Proofs
In this appendix, we ﬁrst prove that assumption (iii) of Gibbard’s
Theorem holds in DF/TT. Then, we give a syntactic proof of the mutual
DF/TT-entailments of A →B and A ⊃B (cf. Lemma 2), in the
three-sided sequent calculus for DF/TT from (Égré et al. 2021b). The
remaining claims of the Lemma are then immediate. The calculus is
sound and complete for DF/TT, so the proof immediately establishes
the corresponding semantic claims, but we believe that a syntactic proof
provides a good illustration of how one can, rather naturally, reason in
trivalent logics. Similar proofs are available for the corresponding claims
in CC/TT.
20 Mandelkern does not dispute the validity of Import-Export for simple right-nested condi-
tionals where it looks very compelling; he just thinks that Import-Export has less than general
scope. Speciﬁcally, he has doubts about the application of Import-Export to compound condi-
tionals with left-nesting, such as A →((B →C) →D). Naturally, it is very difﬁcult to ﬁnd
reliable empirical data or expert intuitions on how such sentences are, or should be, interpreted.

64
P. Égré et al.
Lemma 5 Supraclassicality holds in DF/TT.
Proof We prove the contrapositive. Suppose ̸|=DF/TT A →B. Then
there is a DF-evaluation v : For(L) −→{0, 1/2, 1} s.t. v(A) = 1
and v(B) = 0. We then claim that, in this case, then there is always
a classical evaluation vcl : For(L) −→{0, 1} s.t. for every C ∈For(L),
if v(C) = 1, then vcl(C) = 1 and if v(C) = 0, then vcl(C) = 0,
thus showing that A̸|=CLB. We prove this by induction on the logical
complexity (cp) of A and B:
• cp(A) = cp(B) = 0. Then, A →B has the form p →q, and
v(p) = 1, v(q) = 0. vcl is any classical evaluation which agrees with
v on p and q, so clearly p̸|=CLq.
• cp(A) = m +1 and cp(B) = 0. Then A →B has the form C →q,
for C a logically complex sentence. We assume the claim as IH up to
m, and reason by cases:
– C is ¬D. Then v(¬D) = 1 and v(q) = 0, and v(D) = 0. By
IH, then, there is a classical evaluation vcl s.t. vcl(D) = 0 and
v(q) = 0, so that C̸|=CLq.
– C is D ∨E. Then v(D ∨E) = 1 and v(q) = 0. There are several
cases, all similar between them, where at least one of the disjunct
receives value 1:
v(D) = 1 and v(E) = 1
v(D) = 1 and v(E) = 1/2
v(D) = 1 and v(E) = 0
v(D) = 1/2 and v(E) = 1
v(D) = 0 and v(E) = 1
Let X be the (or “a”) disjunct which receives value 1 by v. By IH,
vcl(X) = 1, and then vcl(D ∨E) = 1 and vcl(q) = 0, hence
C̸|=CLq
– The case where C has the form D ∧E is similar to the above one.
– C is D →E. Then v(D →E) = 1 and v(q) = 0, and therefore
v(D) = v(E) = 1. By IH, then, vcl(D) = vcl(E) = 1, hence
C̸|=CLq.

Gibbardian Collapse and Trivalent Conditionals
65
• The cases where cp(A) = 0 and cp(B) = n +1, and where cp(A) =
m + 1 and cp(B) = n + 1 are dealt with similarly.
□
Notice that, in this proof, a DF-valuation for the language including
the conditional is mapped to a classical valuation for the same language,
i.e., a classical valuation which also interprets formulae of the form
A →B. However, the proof does not specify how formulae of the form
A →B are classically interpreted—that is, A →B may or may not
be interpreted as a classical material conditional. We also note that an
attempted proof along the lines of the above one would fail for CC/TT
exactly because the conditions under which an indicative conditional
receives value 0 under a CC-evaluation strictly exceed the conditions
under which a material conditional receives value 0 under a classical
evaluation, unlike in a DF-evaluation.
We now present a formal derivation of the interderivability of the
material conditional and the conditional in DF/TT. Readers unfamiliar
with the three-sided sequent calculus are invited to look at the sequents
semantically. From a semantic point of view, a three-sided sequent of
form  |  |  is satisﬁed by a three-valued valuation v provided either
some element of  gets the value 0 under v, or some element of  gets
the value 1/2 or some element of  gets the value 1. When  = , this
matches the deﬁnition of TT consequence.
Lemma 6 Let 
⊢DF/TT
 indicate that there is a derivation of
the three-sided sequent  |  |  in the calculus developed in Égré et al.
( 2021b), §§3.1–3.2. Then, for every A, B ∈For(L):
A ⊃B ⊢DF/TT A →B
and
A →B ⊢DF/TT A ⊃B
Proof We write ¬(A ∧¬B) for A ⊃B, as the two formulae are deﬁ-
nitionally equivalent in DF/TT. The following derivation establishes that
A ⊃B ⊢DF/TT A →B:

66
P. Égré et al.
We now show that A →B ⊢DF/TT A ⊃B. First, let D0 be the
following derivation:
Second, let D1 be the following derivation:
Finally, combining D0 and D1 yields the desired result:
□

Gibbardian Collapse and Trivalent Conditionals
67
Appendix C: Gibbardian Collapse Without Left
Logical Equivalence
Khoo and Mandelkern (2019, 489) prove Gibbard’s collapse result using
Reasoning by Cases. They do not use Left Logical Equivalence (as in
our reconstruction of Gibbard’s original proof) and explicitly refer to
principles (i)–(iii) only (i.e., Import-Export, Stronger-than-Material, and
Supraclassicality). However, like Gibbard, they actually make use of more
assumptions, in particular (v): the classicality of ⊃. Their proof can be
formalized thus:
Theorem 7 Let L be a reﬂexive, monotonic, and transitive consequence rela-
tion, with ∨satisfying Reasoning by Cases. Then if (i), (ii), (iii), and (v)
hold in L, ⊃entails →, that is, for any A, B ∈For(L), A ⊃B |=L
A →B.
1. ¬A ∧A |=CL B, classical logic
2. |=L (¬A ∧A) →B, by 1 and (iii)
3. |=L ¬A →(A →B), by 2 and (i)
4. ¬A →(A →B) |=L ¬A ⊃(A →B), by (ii)
5. |=L ¬A ⊃(A →B), by 3, 4 and Transitivity
6. ¬A |=L ¬A ⊃(A →B), by 5 and Monotonicity
7. ¬A |=L ¬A, by Reﬂexivity
8. ¬A |=L A →B, by 6, 7 and (v), using (meta) Modus Ponens for ⊃
9. B ∧A |=CL B, classical logic
10. |=L (B ∧A) →B, by 9 and (iii)
11. |=L B →(A →B), by 10 and (i)
12. B →(A →B) |=L B ⊃(A →B), by (ii)
13. |=L B ⊃(A →B), by 11, 12, and Transitivity
14. B |=L B ⊃(A →B), by 13 and Monotonicity
15. B |=L B, by Reﬂexivity
16. B |=L A →B, by 14, 15, (v), using (meta) Modus Ponens
17. ¬A ∨B |=L A →B, by 8, 16 and Reasoning by Cases
18. A ⊃B |=L A →B, by 17 and (v)

68
P. Égré et al.
This version does not use the replacement principle (iv) of Gibbard’s
original proof, making it particularly interesting, notably in relation to
DF/TT. Indeed, Reasoning by Cases is valid in DF/TT and CC/TT, as
are structural assumptions on logical consequence. We know that CC/TT
fails Supraclassicality and so steps 2 and 10 of the proof are blocked.
Interestingly, however, all steps of the proof here are sound in DF/TT.
Although principle (v) does not hold of ⊃in full generality in DF/TT,
all instances of (v) are sound in this case, unlike in Gibbard’s original
proof. Readers may observe that the proof of A ⊃B ⊢DF/TT A →B
produced in the sequent-system of Appendix B also mirrors Reasoning
by Cases (see Lemma 6): on the third line from the root of the tree, the
left branch of the derivation tree actually establishes that ¬A ⊢DF/TT
A →B, while the right branch establishes that B ⊢DF/TT A →B.
References
Adams, Ernest W. (1965). The logic of conditionals. Inquiry 8, 166–197.
Adams, Ernest W. (1975). The logic of conditionals. Dordrecht: Reidel.
Arló-Costa, Horacio (2001). Bayesian epistemology and epistemic conditionals:
On the status of the Export-Import laws. The Journal of Philosophy 98, 555–
593.
Baratgin, Jean, David Over, and Guy Politzer (2013). Uncertainty and the de
Finetti tables. Thinking & Reasoning 19, 308–328.
Belnap, Nuel D. (1970). Conditional assertion and restricted quantiﬁcation.
Noûs, 1–12.
Belnap, Nuel D. (1973). Restricted quantiﬁcation and conditional assertion. In
Hugues Leblanc (ed.), Truth, syntax and modality, Volume 68, pp. 48–75.
Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics: Elsevier.
Bradley, Richard (2002). Indicative conditionals. Erkenntnis 56 , 345–378.
Calabrese, Philip (2002). Deduction with uncertain conditionals. Information
Sciences 147, 143–191.
Cantwell, John (2008). The logic of conditional negation. Notre Dame Journal
of Formal Logic 49, 245–260.
Cobreros, Pablo, Paul Égré, David Ripley, and Robert van Rooij (2012).
Tolerant, classical, strict. Journal of Philosophical Logic 41, 347–385.

Gibbardian Collapse and Trivalent Conditionals
69
Cooper, William S. (1968). The propositional logic of ordinary discourse.
Inquiry 11, 295–320.
de Finetti, Bruno (1936). La logique de la probabilité. In Actes du congrès
international de philosophie scientiﬁque, Volume 4, Paris, pp. 1–9. Hermann
Editeurs.
Dicher, Bogdan and Francesco Paoli (2019). ST, LP and tolerant metain-
ferences. In Can Baskent and Thomas Ferguson (eds.), Graham Priest on
dialetheism and paraconsistency, pp. 383–407. Springer.
Dubois, Didier, and Henri Prade (1994). Conditional objects as nonmono-
tonic consequence relationships. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics 24, 1724–1740.
Égré, Paul, Lorenzo Rossi, and Jan Sprenger (2021a). De Finettian logics of
indicative conditionals. Part I: Trivalent semantics and validity. Journal of
Philosophical Logic 50, 187–213.
Égré, Paul, Lorenzo Rossi, and Jan Sprenger (2021b). De Finettian logics of
indicative conditionals. Part II: Proof theory and algebraic semantics. Journal
of Philosophical Logic 50, 215–247.
Farrell, Robert J. (1979). Material implication, conﬁrmation, and counterfac-
tuals. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 20, 383–394.
Farrell, Robert J. (1986). Implication and presupposition. Notre Dame Journal
of Formal Logic 27, 51–61.
Fine, Kit (2012). Counterfactuals without possible worlds. The Journal of
Philosophy 109, 221–246.
Fitelson, Branden (2013). Gibbard’s collapse theorem for the indicative condi-
tional: An axiomatic approach. In Maria Paola Bonacina and Mark E. Stickel
(eds.), Automated reasoning and mathematics: Essays in memory of William
W. McCune, pp. 181–188. Beriln: Springer.
Gibbard, Allan (1980). Two recent theories of conditionals. In William Harper
(ed.), Ifs, pp. 211–247. Springer.
Grice, H. Paul (1989). Studies in the way of words. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Jackson, Frank (1979). On assertion and indicative conditionals. Philosophical
Review 88, 565–589.
Kaufmann, Magdalena, and Stefan Kaufmann (2015). Conditionals and
modality. In Shalom Lappin and Chris Fox (eds.), The handbook of contem-
porary semantic theory, pp. 237–270. Wiley Online Library.
Khoo, Justin, and Matthew Mandelkern (2019). Triviality results and the
relationship between logical and natural languages. Mind 128, 485–526.

70
P. Égré et al.
Kratzer, Angelika (2012). Modals and conditionals: New and revised perspectives,
Volume 36. Oxford University Press.
Kratzer, Angelika (2015). Chasing hook: Quantiﬁed indicative conditionals.
In Lee Walters and John Hawthorne (eds.), Conditionals, probability, and
paradox: Themes from the philosophy of Dorothy Edgington, pp. 40–56. Oxford
University Press Oxford.
Lassiter, Daniel (2020). What we can learn from how trivalent conditionals
avoid triviality. Inquiry, 63(9–10), 1087–1114.
Lewis, David (1973). Counterfactuals. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Lewis, David (1976). Probabilities of conditionals and conditional probabili-
ties. Philosophical Review 85, 297–315.
MacColl, Hugh (1908). ‘If’ and ‘Imply’. Mind 17, 453–455.
Mandelkern, Matthew (2019). Crises of identity. In Julian J. Schlöder, Dean
McHugh, and Floris Roelofsen (eds.), Proceedings of the 22nd Amsterdam
Colloquium, pp. 279–288.
Mandelkern, Matthew (2020). Import-Export and ‘and’. Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research 100, 118–135.
McDermott, Michael (1996). On the truth conditions of certain ‘if’-sentences.
The Philosophical Review 105, 1–37.
McGee, Vann (1989). Conditional probabilities and compounds of condi-
tionals. The Philosophical Review 98, 485–541.
Milne, Peter (1997). Bruno de Finetti and the logic of conditional events. The
British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 48, 195–232.
Nute, Donald (1980). Topics in conditional logic, Volume 20. Springer
Science & Business Media.
Olkhovikov, Grigory (2002 [2016]). On a new three-valued paraconsistent
logic. IFCoLog Journal of Logic and Applications 3, 317–334. Originally
published in Russian in 2002, in Logic of Law and Tolerance, pp. 96–113,
Yekaterinburg. English translation by T. Ferguson.
Quine, W. V. O. (1950). Methods of logic. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Reichenbach, Hans (1935). Wahrscheinlichkeitslehre. Leiden: Sijthoff.
Ripley, D. (2013). Paradoxes and failures of cut. Australasian Journal of
Philosophy 91, 139–164.
Sanﬁlippo, Giuseppe, Angelo Gilio, David E Over, and Niki Pfeifer (2020).
Probabilities of conditionals and previsions of iterated conditionals. Interna-
tional Journal of Approximate Reasoning 121, 150–173.

Gibbardian Collapse and Trivalent Conditionals
71
Stalnaker, Robert (1968). A Theory of Conditionals. In Studies in Logical
Theory: American Philosophical Quarterly Monograph Series, No. 2. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Stalnaker,
Robert
(1970).
Probability
and
conditionals.
Philosophy
of
Science 37, 64–80.
Unterhuber, Matthias and Gerhard Schurz (2014). Completeness and corre-
spondence in Chellas-Segerberg semantics. Studia Logica 102, 891–911.
van Wijnbergen-Huitink, Janneke, Shira Elqayam, and David E. Over (2015).
The probability of iterated conditionals. Cognitive Science 39, 788–803.

The Logic and Pragmatics of Conditionals
Under Uncertainty: A Mental Probability
Logic Perspective
Niki Pfeifer
1
Introduction
In the last two decades, a new research paradigm has emerged within
the psychology of reasoning. It is characterised by the use of probability
theory instead of bivalent truth-functional logic1 as the gold standard
1 In the psychology of reasoning, if not speciﬁed otherwise, “logic” refers traditionally to stan-
dard bivalent truth-functional logic, i.e., either to the standard propositional calculus, or—in
the context of quantiﬁers—to the predicate calculus. For extensions of logic or alternative logics
see, e.g., the various volumes of the Handbook of Philosophical Logic, edited by Dov M. Gabbay
and Franz Guenthner. For a recent overview, speciﬁcally on conditional logic, see, e.g., Égré
and Rott (2021).
N. Pfeifer (B)
Department of Philosophy, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany
e-mail: niki.pfeifer@ur.de
URL: https://go.ur.de/np
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Switzerland AG 2023
S. Kaufmann et al. (eds.), Conditionals, Palgrave Studies in Pragmatics, Language
and Cognition, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-05682-6_4
73

74
N. Pfeifer
for evaluating the rationality of human inference (see, e.g., Elqayam
et al. 2020; Evans and Over 2004; Oaksford and Chater 2007, 2020;
Pfeifer and Kleiter 2005; Pfeifer 2013a). The new paradigm is driven by
the observation that human reasoning about the truth values of condi-
tionals (i.e., if A, then C constructions) violates the bivalent semantics
implied by the material conditional A ⊃C, which is the conditional
of classical (bivalent truth-functional) logic. The material conditional is
at the core of this logic: it is closely related to the logical consequence
relation (via the deduction theorem) and to logical validity. However, for
formalising common sense arguments, the material conditional is inap-
propriate. One may even doubt that the material conditional is a genuine
conditional since it is logically equivalent to the disjunction not-A or C,
i.e., (A ⊃C) ≡(¬A ∨C) is a tautology. The material conditional is
false if A ∧¬C is true and true in each of the other three possible truth
table cases.
It has already been observed in truth table tasks that people’s judge-
ments about the truth values of if A, then C agree with the ﬁrst two
cases of the truth table of A ⊃C (i.e., A ∧C and A ∧¬C, respec-
tively) but diverge in the third and fourth cases (i.e., ¬A ∧C and
¬A ∧¬C, respectively). People judge false antecedent cases to be “irrel-
evant”, “undetermined”, or in similar terms, but not—as implied by
the material conditional—as true (see, e.g., Wason 1966; Evans 1982).
The corresponding response pattern was pejoratively called “defective
truth table pattern”. With the probabilistic turn in the psychology of
reasoning, however, this response pattern was rehabilitated. Speciﬁcally,
this response pattern corresponds to the semantics of the conditional
object which is measured by the conditional probability: namely, the
conditional event C|A, which is what is measured by the conditional
probability, p(C|A). The conditional event C|A is true when A ∧C is
true, false when A ∧¬C is true, and void (or undetermined) when ¬A
is true (see de Finetti 1936/1995, who used the term triévénement in
the Actes du Congrès International de Philosophie Scientiﬁque [Sorbonne,
Paris] in 1935 but preferred later the term conditional event). Thus, while
human reasoning about the truth conditions of conditionals appears to
be irrational by the standards of bivalent truth functional logic, it is
rational by the standards of probability theory. Instead of “defective truth

The Logic and Pragmatics of Conditionals Under Uncertainty …
75
table pattern”, the term “de Finetti table” became popular in honour of
Bruno de Finetti’s work on conditional events.
Among various probabilistic approaches to the psychology of
reasoning, I advocate Mental Probability Logic (MPL; see, e.g., Pfeifer
2006, 2013a, 2014, 2021; Pfeifer and Kleiter 2005, 2009). The research
focus of MPL is on reasoning competence. Descriptive and normative
research questions are how people solve (and how they should solve,
respectively) epistemic reasoning and argumentation problems. The key
assumptions are that everyday life reasoning is based on incomplete
information and on uncertain premises. Moreover, conclusions are defea-
sible. People interpret the uncertainty of conditionals (if A, then C )
by conditional probabilities (p(C|A)). The computational level problem
description (in the sense of Marr 1982) is ﬁrst to reason to an interpre-
tation of the premises and second to draw a rational conclusion. This
process requires us to
1. make any implicit assumptions and logical relations explicit,
2. assign uncertainty to the premises, and
3. transmit the uncertainty from the premises to the conclusion.
The long term goal of MPL is the development of a uniﬁed, normatively,
and descriptively adequate theory of human reasoning under uncertainty.
The underlying rationality framework of MPL is coherence-based
probability logic (see, e.g., Coletti and Scozzafava 2002; Gilio 2002;
Gilio et al. 2016; Pfeifer and Kleiter 2009). “Coherence” refers to the
subjective interpretation of probability which originated with Bruno de
Finetti (see, e.g., de Finetti 1931, 1970/1974). The coherence principle
was generalised, for example, to conditional probability and to imprecise
probability (see, e.g., Berti et al. 1998; Biazzo et al. 2005; Capotorti et al.
2003, 2007; Coletti and Scozzafava 2002; Gilio 1990, 1996; Gilio and
Sanﬁlippo 2013; Gilio et al. 2016; Holzer 1985; Lad 1996; Petturiti and
Vantaggi 2017; Regazzini 1985; Walley et al. 2004) as well as to nested
conditionals in terms of previsions in conditional random quantities (see,
e.g., Gilio and Sanﬁlippo 2014, 2019, 2021; Gilio et al. 2020; Sanﬁlippo
et al. 2020, 2017). In the framework of coherence, probability is inter-
preted as a degree of belief . Of course, degrees of belief are naturally of

76
N. Pfeifer
more interest to psychologists compared, for example, to frequentistic
interpretations of probability, since psychologists are interested in belief
formation and reasoning about beliefs and not in the measurement of
probability in the ontological sense of an objective quantity belonging to
the outside world. In betting terms, a degree of belief (i.e., a subjective
probability assessment) is coherent if and only if in any ﬁnite combina-
tion of n bets, it cannot happen that—after discarding the cases where
the bet is called off—the remaining values of the random gain are all
positive or all negative. Intuitively, coherence requires that no Dutch Book
should be constructible. For an example of a Dutch Book consider that
you pay 100 EUR for receiving either 50 EUR (when you “win”) or lose
the 100 EUR (when you lose): after discarding the case of calling off the
bet, you will lose money for sure.
Some approaches (e.g., Kolmogoroff 1933), require a complete algebra
and deﬁne conditional probability by the fraction of the probability of
the conjunction of the conditioned and the conditioning event (i.e.,
p(A ∧C)), divided by the probability of the conditioning event (i.e.,
p(A)):
p(C|A) =def.
p(A ∧C)
p(A)
,
provided that
p(A) > 0.
In the coherence approach, however, conditional probability is prim-
itive and properly managed even if p(A) = 0, while the above-
mentioned deﬁnition in terms of a fraction is undeﬁned in case the
denominator (p(A)) is equal to zero. The ability to deal with zero-
probability antecedents is not only important from theoretical points of
views (e.g., they allow for reducing the complexity of the probabilistic
inference). Practical implications are that different results are obtained
depending on whether zero-probability antecedents are allowed (and
properly managed!) or excluded by assumption. Two illustrative examples
are given below.
Coherence allows for imprecise probabilities, which is relevant in
cases under incomplete probabilistic knowledge, i.e., when only interval-
valued probabilities are available. In everyday contexts, we are usually
faced with partial and incomplete knowledge. Thus, premises may

The Logic and Pragmatics of Conditionals Under Uncertainty …
77
often be evaluated by lower and/or upper probability bounds only,
instead of (precise) point-valued probabilities. Moreover, even if you
start reasoning from a premise set consisting of precise-probability assess-
ments, you will often end up with concluding interval-valued probability
assessments. In a further reasoning step, such conclusions can function as
a(n imprecise) premise of a further argument. For an example, consider
the following instance of the probabilistic modus ponens2:
p(I take the train at ﬁve) = .7
p(I am home in time for dinner | I take the train at ﬁve) = .9
Therefore, p(I am home in time for dinner) ∈[.63, .93] is
coherent.3
The conclusion, p(I am home in time for dinner) ∈[.63, .93], can then
function in a further argument as a premise which is, naturally, imprecise
(if, of course, coherence does not force it to a point-value in the light of
other premises of the new argument).
Probability logic refers to the study of uncertain argument forms,
where the assigned uncertainty of the premises is transmitted to the
conclusion. As the probability propagation rules are derived deduc-
tively within coherence-based probability theory, this transmission of the
uncertainties is deductive. Hence, the consequence relation between the
premise set and the conclusion remains deductive in coherence-based
probability logic.
In this chapter we will use coherence-based probability logic as a ratio-
nality framework for studying selected semantic and alleged pragmatic
phenomena. Speciﬁcally, we will look at a paradox of the material condi-
tional and the role of zero-probability antecedents in the interpretation of
2 The probability propagation rule for the probabilistic modus ponens is as follows: from
p(A) = x and p(C|A) = y infer p(C) ∈[xy, xy + 1 −x] is coherent (see, e.g., Pfeifer and
Kleiter 2006, 2009).
3 The values in the square brackets [x, y] indicate the lower (x) and the upper probability bound
(y). Here and in what follows the given bounds are always understood as the tightest possible
coherent bounds, i.e., all assessments inside these bounds are coherent, whereas assessments
outside these bounds are not coherent. If the tightest bounds coincide with the unit interval
for all probability assessments of the premises, the corresponding argument form is called
probabilistically non-informative, since the premise probabilities do not constrain the coherent
bounds on the conclusion.

78
N. Pfeifer
conditionals. What is semantics and what is pragmatics? Carnap (1948)
gives a classic deﬁnition:
In an application of language, we may distinguish three chief factors: the
speaker, the expression uttered, and the designatum of the expression,
i.e., that to which the speaker intends to refer by the expression [...] An
investigation of a language belongs to pragmatics if explicit reference to a
speaker is made; it belongs to semantics if designata but not speakers are
referred to; it belongs to syntax if neither speakers nor designata but only
expressions are dealt with. (Carnap 1948, p. 8)
Some psychologists of reasoning appeal to pragmatics when predictions
from semantic considerations lead to counterintuitive consequences;
likewise, when normative predictions turn out to be unreliable descrip-
tions of actual reasoning behaviour. As an example, consider the
following paradox of the material conditional:
C; therefore, if A, then C.
This inference is called a paradox of the material conditional, since if
the conditional is interpreted by the material one (i.e., by A ⊃C), the
resulting argument
C; therefore A ⊃C
is logically valid. Thus, classical truth-functional semantics suggests that
it is impossible that the premise C is true and the conclusion A ⊃C is
false; hence, normatively, the inference should hold. However, it is easy
to ﬁnd instantiations for A and C, where this inference appears coun-
terintuitive: e.g., according to this argument form, from Ludwig is rich
it follows that if Ludwig donates all his money, then Ludwig is rich. To
block such paradoxes, for example, Johnson-Laird and Byrne (2002) use
a principle of “pragmatic modulation”, which “can modulate the core
interpretation of a conditional” (p. 659). The danger of such pragmatic
considerations is that anything can be explained away by pragmatics.

The Logic and Pragmatics of Conditionals Under Uncertainty …
79
From a probabilistic point of view, the above-mentioned paradox is
blocked on purely semantic grounds since the inference is probabilis-
tically non-informative (Pfeifer 2014). I.e., for all probability values
x:
p(C) = x; therefore p(C|A) ∈[0, 1] is coherent.4
If an inference is probabilistically non-informative, it does not allow
for constraining the conclusion probability, as all you can infer is
the unit interval. Hence, probabilistically non-informative inferences
are generally not probabilistically valid (p-valid; see Pfeifer and Kleiter
2009). Therefore, if an inference is probabilistically non-informative, the
corresponding inference pattern is blocked.
The probabilistic analysis of the previous paradox allows us also
to illustrate the importance of zero-probability antecedents. When the
conditional probability is deﬁned by the above-mentioned fraction, then
p(C|A) = 1 (or undeﬁned if p(A) = 0) in the special case when
p(C) = 1. It appears strange to say that the inference is probabilistically
non-informative for all probability assessments except for probability one
in the premise: why should a premise-probability inﬁnitesimally close to
one block the paradox but not a premise-probability equal to one? To
explain away this unwanted consequence Bonnefon and Politzer (2010)
proposed to use pragmatic considerations. In the coherence approach,
however, the probability propagation rule states that the coherence of
p(C|A) ∈[0, 1] follows from p(C) = x, even if p(C) = 1 (for a
proof see Pfeifer 2014). Thus, within coherence-based probability logic,
by exploiting and properly managing zero-probability antecedents, this
paradox is blocked on semantic grounds without the need of employing
pragmatic considerations. Experimental data suggest that people under-
stand that this paradox is probabilistically non-informative even if the
premise-probability is equal to one (Pfeifer and Kleiter 2011).
Let me stress that I do not want to argue that pragmatic considerations
are never useful. Rather, I argue that if we can deal with the problem
4 If not otherwise stated, A and C are logically independent, i.e., they are contingent and any
logical relation needs to be made explicit.

80
N. Pfeifer
at hand within semantics alone, we do not need to use pragmatic
considerations to explain away unwanted consequences.
Another example, which highlights the importance of zero-probability
antecedents, is transitivity. Probabilistic transitivity is probabilistically
non-informative (see, e.g., Gilio et al. 2016); for all probability values
x and y:
p(B|A) = x
p(C|B) = y
Therefore, p(C|A) ∈[0, 1] is coherent.
Blocking (unrestricted) transitivity is a good thing, since validity of tran-
sitivity would imply antecedent strengthening, which is a psychologically
implausible inference scheme.5 If, however, the conditioning events are
assumed to be positive, then, in the extreme case when x = y = 1, the
probability of the conclusion of transitivity jumps to one. If conditioning
events are not assumed to be positive (i.e., zero-probability antecedents
are left as a possibility), probabilistic transitivity is probabilistically non-
informative even if x = y = 1 within the framework of coherence.
Similar to the above case of the paradox of the material conditional,
approaches which have to assume positive conditioning events to avoid
fractions over zero, end up with probability one in the conclusion in the
special case when x = y = 1.
Having considered the relevance of zero-probability antecedents in the
context of probabilistic argument forms, let us now turn to the seman-
tics of conditionals. Frank P. Ramsey’s (1929/1994) famous footnote
inspired qualitative and quantitative accounts of conditionals:
5 Antecedent strengthening would, for example, validate inferences like if Tweety is a bird, then
Tweety can ﬂy, therefore, if Tweety is a bird and a penguin, then Tweety can ﬂy. Therefore,
while ﬁrst order logic is monotonic and hence validates antecedent strengthening, we do not
want to validate (unrestricted) monotonicity. Intuitively, monotonicity means that you cannot
simply retract conclusions (e.g., Tweety can ﬂy) in the light of new evidence (that Tweety is a
penguin). Coherence-based probability logic is nonmonotonic and allows in principle to revise
conclusions when new premises are available.

The Logic and Pragmatics of Conditionals Under Uncertainty …
81
If two people are arguing ‘If A will C ?’ and are both in doubt as to A,
they are adding A hypothetically to their stock of knowledge and arguing
on that basis about C; so that in a sense ‘If A, C ’ and ‘If A, ¬C’ are
contradictories. We can say they are ﬁxing their degrees of belief in C given
A. If A turns out false, these degrees of belief are rendered void. (Ramsey
1929/1994, p. 155, adjusted notation; my emphasis)
Let me highlight three important points in this quote.
First, Ramsey’s footnote makes an intuitive justiﬁcation, why it does
not make sense to conditionalise on contradictions, i.e., why the condi-
tioning event must not be equivalent to ⊥. Ramsey talks about adding
the antecedent A (or the conditioning event) hypothetically to a stock
of knowledge. On traditional accounts of knowledge, knowledge implies
truth. Even if it is unknown whether A is true or false, it must in prin-
ciple be possible that A is true. However, if A is a contradiction (i.e.,
A ≡⊥), then A is by deﬁnition false under all interpretations. Thus,
⊥can never, not even hypothetically, be consistently assumed to be
true (as it is impossible). However, for an A ̸≡⊥it could very well
be that p(A) = 0, which can be added to the stock of knowledge.
In other words, conditionalising on a non-contradictory conditional
event A with probability zero makes sense. As mentioned above, zero-
probability antecedents are properly managed in the coherence approach
to probability. Note that of course if A ≡⊥, then p(A) = 0, but
the converse does not hold: p(A) = 0 does not imply that A ≡⊥.
Consider, for example, the following coherent assessment on a coin toss:
p(heads) = .5, p(tails) = .5, and p(coin lands standing on its edge) =
0. The latter event with probability zero is of course contingent and not
a logical contradiction. In this example it is also natural to conditionalise
on a zero-probability antecedent, like p(heads in the second toss | coin
lands standing on its edge in the ﬁrst toss) = .5.
Second, the idea that A →C and A →¬C (where “→” denotes
an uninterpreted conditional) cannot both be true is intuitively plausible
and a key principle in connexive logic (for an overview on connexive
logic see, e.g., Wansing 2020), namely Abelard’s First Principle, i.e.,

82
N. Pfeifer
¬((A →C) ∧(A →¬C)). However, under the material condi-
tional interpretation, Abelard’s First Principle, i.e., ¬((A ⊃C) ∧(A ⊃
¬C)) is contingent, since it is logically equivalent to A. Abelard’s First
Principle is thus not a theorem of binary truth functional logic, but can
be validated in probability logic (Pfeifer and Sanﬁlippo 2021). Further-
more, experimental data suggest that people think that the negation of a
self-contradictory conditional is true, i.e., the connexive principle called
Aristotle’s thesis holds. This is invalid in binary truth-functional logic,
but holds in probability logic (see, e.g., Pfeifer 2012, 2021).
Third, Ramsey’s term “void” can be understood within coherence-
based probability logic in a qualitative and in a quantitative sense. Under
the qualitative interpretation of void, consider the trivalent conditional
event C|A, which is void if ¬A is true, true if A ∧C is true, and false if
A∧¬C is true. Under the quantitative interpretation, consider the corre-
sponding conditional probability assessment, p(C|A) = x. In betting
terms, the probability assessment p(C|A) = x (for x ∈[0, 1]) means
that, for every real number s (for stakes s ̸= 0), you agree
to paythe amount sx in order to receive
⎧
⎨
⎩
s,
if A ∧C is true,
0, if A ∧¬C is true,
sx, if ¬A is true.
In this case, when s is positive, “you” refers to a person who is paying
the price sx for the bet in order to receive, according to the conditions
speciﬁed above, s, 0, or sx; when s is negative, “you” refers to a person
who agrees to receive the amount −sx in order to pay −s, 0, or −sx,
when A ∧C is true, A ∧¬C is true, and when ¬A is true, respectively.
Intuitively, this means that the person who is buying a betting ticket
(the bettor) and the person who is selling a betting ticket (the bank)
can in principle change roles. You (in the role of the bettor) win, or
lose, or get your money back, when A ∧C is true, or A ∧¬C is true, or
when ¬A is true, respectively. You (in the role of the bank) lose, or win,
or return the money paid, when A ∧C is true, or A ∧¬C is true, or
when ¬A is true, respectively.
Let us now turn to an experiment on a generalised probabilistic truth
table task, which involves imprecise probabilities, to investigate how

The Logic and Pragmatics of Conditionals Under Uncertainty …
83
people interpret conditionals.6 The experiment uses the probabilistic
truth table task material for incomplete probabilistic knowledge as in
Pfeifer (2013a) but measures additionally how sure participants are in
the correctness of their solutions (for similar tasks involving complete
probabilistic knowledge see Fugard et al. 2009, 2011, 2011; Kleiter et al.
2018). Moreover, two additional tasks are used to investigate whether
previously observed low frequencies of material conditional responses
may be due to difﬁculties in calculating the respective values. Contrary
to the current sample, the sample reported by Pfeifer (2013a) involved
naive participants in the sense that they did not receive a special training
in logic or statistics.
2
Method
2.1
Participants and Procedure
Twenty Carnegie Mellon University students (ten female and ten male)
in the age between 18 and 40 years old (mean: 22.95) participated in
the experiment. The students received $10 for their participation. Most
participants had a formal background like mathematics, logic, proba-
bility, statistics, or decision theory. They were administered the paper and
pencil tasks in the Laboratory for Empirical Approaches to Philosophy
(LEAP) at the Department of Philosophy (CMU). To ensure optimal
experimental conditions, the participants were tested individually and
not in groups. The experimenter was present in the background and
asked each participant to re-read the instructions in case of questions.
2.2
Method
The instructions informed the participants that they were taking part
in a study on reasoning about uncertainty, that they should read the
instructions carefully, and that they could ask the experimenter if they
6 Originally, the probabilistic truth table tasks were formulated in terms of complete
probabilistic knowledge (Evans et al. 2003; Oberauer and Wilhelm 2003).

84
N. Pfeifer
had questions. They were given as much time as they needed to solve
the tasks and were also told that most of the participants needed about
half an hour. Four introductory examples explained the task material
as follows: Example 1 explained the response format for point-valued
responses and its meaning on a scale. Example 2 explained that question
marks indicated covered sides. In such cases of incomplete probabilistic
knowledge, participants were told that the response could be given in
terms of at least and at most. Example 3 explained how to respond with
a point-value in the response format which also allows for interval-valued
responses (e.g., at least 2 out of 6 and at most 2 out of 6). Example 5
introduced the question “How conﬁdent are you that the answer you
just gave is correct?”, which asks for a mark on the conﬁdence scale.
After 23 target tasks, participants were asked to rate the overall
clearness of the instructions and the difﬁculty of the tasks.
The target tasks were formulated on separate pages. Here is a sample
task:
Illustrated here are all sides of a six-sided die. The sides have two
properties: a color (black or white) and a shape (circle, triangle, or square).
Question marks indicate covered sides.
Imagine that this die is placed in a cup. Then the cup is randomly shaken.
Finally, the cup is placed on the table so that you cannot see what side of
the die shows up.
Question: How sure can you be that the following sentence holds?
If the side facing up shows a circle, then the side shows white.

The Logic and Pragmatics of Conditionals Under Uncertainty …
85
The depicted/covered sides of the die contain the information of the
premise set of the probabilistic truth table task. For example, they allow
the construction of the following (imprecise) probabilities of the truth
table cases7:
p(circle ∧white) ∈
1
6, 3
6

=
1
6, 1
2

p(circle ∧¬white) ∈
2
6, 4
6

=
1
3, 2
3

p(¬circle ∧white) ∈
0
6, 2
6

=

0, 1
3

p(¬circle ∧¬white) ∈
1
6, 3
6

=
1
6, 1
2

Because only intervals can be derived from the above-mentioned
premises, we are in a situation of incomplete probabilistic knowl-
edge. The shapes and colours (black/white) which were depicted in the
premises and mentioned in the conditional in the conclusion as well as
the number of question marks were manipulated systematically, such
that the predictions concerning the target interpretations differed for
each task. The three target interpretations are (i) the conditional proba-
bility interpretation, (ii) the probability of the conjunction, and (iii) the
probability of the material conditional. For the above-mentioned die, the
predictions according to the target interpretations are as follows:
(i) Conditional probability: p(white|circle)
=
p

circle ∧white
circle

∈
	 1
5, 3
5

(ii) Probability of the conjunction: p(circle ∧white)
∈
	 1
6, 3
6

=
	 1
6, 1
2

7 Of course, coherence requires that the probabilities of all truth table cases must add up to
one. Therefore, when a coherent (point or interval-valued) probability assessment on n −1
truth table cases is given, the coherent probability assessment on the remaining truth table case
is determined.

86
N. Pfeifer
(iii) Probability of the material conditional: p(circle
⊃
white)
=
p(circle ∧white) +p(¬circle ∧white) + p(¬circle ∧¬ white)
= 1 −p(circle ∧¬white) ∈
	2
6, 4
6

=
	 1
3, 2
3

Predictions concerning other interpretations are (iv) the probability of
the material equivalence (or material bivalence) and (v) the probability
of the biconditional event interpretation. The latter was proposed, for
example, in a developmental psychological context (see, e.g., Gauffroy
and Barrouillet 2009):
(iv) Probability of the material equivalence: p(circle
≡
white)
=
p(circle ∧white) +p(¬circle ∧¬ white) ∈
	 2
6, 4
6

=
	 1
3, 2
3

(v) Probability of the biconditional event: p(white || circle)
=
p

circle ∧white
circle ∨white

∈
	 1
5, 3
5

The latter two interpretations ((iv) and (v)) overlap with target
interpretations ((i)–(iii)) in the current example. However, we will see
later that—depending on the conﬁguration of the premises—these two
biconditional interpretations do not overlap with the same target inter-
pretations in all tasks. This will allow us to differentiate the target
interpretations from other interpretations.
Of course, if instead of question marks, the ﬁgures behind the covered
sides were known, we would be in a situation of complete probabilistic
knowledge, which would result in point-valued assessments in the truth
table cases. Then, the predictions concerning the probability of the
conditional would be point-valued.
Probabilistic truth table tasks under incomplete probabilistic knowl-
edge allow also for investigating three interpretations, which were
proposed by Pfeifer and Tulkki (2017a). They can be seen as a “halfway
conditional event strategy”, as they are characterised by ignoring covered
sides. Speciﬁcally, when faced with covered sides, some people may take
a mental shortcut by computing the conditional probability based on the
visible sides only (thereby ignoring possible cases marked by the question
mark). This may impose a lower burden on the cognitive computational
load compared to computing the best possible bounds on the condi-
tional probabilities, where the possibilities entailed by the covered sides
have to be considered. Such a strategy can be used for (vi) the lower

The Logic and Pragmatics of Conditionals Under Uncertainty …
87
bound only (indicated by l), (vii) the upper bound only (u), or (viii)
for both bounds together (lu). For the above-mentioned premises, the
corresponding predictions are:
(vi) Conditional probability l: p(white|circle)l ∈
	 1
3, 3
5

(vii) Conditional probability u: p(white|circle)u ∈
	1
5, 1
3

(viii) Conditional probability lu: p(white|circle)lu = 1
3
The previous three strategies ((vi)–(viii)) simplify the tasks by reducing
them partially (in case of l or u) or completely (in case of lu) to tasks
under complete probabilistic knowledge. In principle also other halfway
response strategies can be constructed (for example, based on the material
conditional, conjunction, or the biconditional interpretation). However,
we will see that the strategies (i)–(viii) already explain roughly 90% of
the data. Therefore, other strategies can be neglected.
The response format was designed to keep mental arithmetics to a
minimum and was depicted as follows:
The conﬁdence ratings were coded from −5 (“fully conﬁdent that your
answer is incorrect”) to 5 (“[...] is correct”).
Since both lower and upper bound responses needed to match for
the classiﬁcation according to the predictions, the a priori chance for
guessing any speciﬁc interpretation is very low (i.e., 1/(422) = 0.0006;
see Pfeifer and Tulkki 2017a).

88
N. Pfeifer
Then, the target task was separated by a dotted horizontal line from
the following question:
How conﬁdent are you that the answer you just chose is correct?
The latter question was intended to investigate the participants’ meta-
cognitive feeling about the rightness of their responses (see, e.g.,
Thompson et al. 2011).
Inferentialist accounts of conditionals claim that some inferential
connection between the antecedent A and the consequent C is needed
in order to support a belief in the conditional if A, then C, which could,
for example be
• deductive, inductive, or abductive (see, e.g., Douven et al. 2020); or
• the relevance of A for C; which can be measured, e.g., by p (see,
e.g., Skovgaard-Olsen et al. 2016).
p emerged in the context of causal reasoning and is deﬁned as follows:
p(If A, then C) =def. p(C|A) −p(C|¬A)
For probabilistic truth table tasks under complete probabilistic knowl-
edge, p can be calculated straightforwardly. However, for those tasks
under incomplete probabilistic knowledge, it is not straightforward. For
two covered sides, for instance, 16 possible conﬁgurations need to be
considered (see Table 1). The median (or mean) can be used as a proxy
for p (see Table 2 for summary statistics for the example in the text).
Table 3 presents summary statistics of proxies for p values for tasks
1–20. Positive p values would imply for inferentialists high degrees of

The Logic and Pragmatics of Conditionals Under Uncertainty …
89
belief in conditionals, whereas zero or negative values should decrease the
belief in conditionals as the inferential strength is smaller.
Table 1
p of all 16 possibilities in the sample task (i.e., a die with two
covered sides and two black circles, one white circle, and one black triangle;
the conditional in the conclusion is: if circle, then white)
c1
c2
w1
w2
#wc
#c
#w¬c
#¬c
p(w|c)
p(w|¬c)
p
no
no
no
no
1
3
0
3
0.33
0.00
0.33
no
no
no
yes
1
3
1
3
0.33
0.33
0.00
no
no
yes
no
1
3
1
3
0.33
0.33
0.00
no
no
yes
yes
1
3
2
3
0.33
0.67
−0.33
no
yes
no
no
1
4
0
2
0.25
0.00
0.25
no
yes
no
yes
2
4
0
2
0.50
0.00
0.50
no
yes
yes
no
1
4
1
2
0.25
0.50
−0.25
no
yes
yes
yes
2
4
1
2
0.50
0.50
0.00
yes
no
no
no
1
4
0
2
0.25
0.00
0.25
yes
no
no
yes
1
4
1
2
0.25
0.50
−0.25
yes
no
yes
no
2
4
0
2
0.50
0.00
0.50
yes
no
yes
yes
2
4
1
2
0.50
0.50
0.00
yes
yes
no
no
1
5
0
1
0.20
0.00
0.20
yes
yes
no
yes
2
5
0
1
0.40
0.00
0.40
yes
yes
yes
no
2
5
0
1
0.40
0.00
0.40
yes
yes
yes
yes
3
5
0
1
0.60
0.00
0.60
Note “c1” (resp., “c2”) denotes whether the first (resp., second) question
mark covers a circle and whether the corresponding figure is white (w1 and
w2, respectively). “#wc” (resp., “#w¬c”) denotes the number of white circles
(resp., not-white circles), #c (resp., #¬c) denotes the number of circles (resp.,
not-circles), and p = p(w|c) −p(w|¬c). For summary statistics (see Table 2)
Table 2
Summary
statistics of p for the
sample task (see
Table 1)
p
Minimum:
−0.3333
1st quartile:
0.0000
Median:
0.2250
Mean:
0.1625
3rd quartile:
0.4000
Maximum:
0.6000

90
N. Pfeifer
Table 3
Summary statistics of p values for tasks 1–20 (T1–T20)
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
T7
# covered
0
0
0
1
2
3
2
Minimum
0.4000
0.3333
0.7500
0.0000
−0.8000
−0.8000
−0.5000
1st quartile
0.4000
0.3333
0.7500
0.3000
−0.6167
−0.5000
−0.2500
Median
0.4000
0.3333
0.7500
0.4500
−0.4500
−0.2500
0.0000
Mean
0.4000
0.3333
0.7500
0.3750
−0.4208
−0.2344
0.0000
3rd quartile
0.4000
0.3333
0.7500
0.5250
−0.2500
0.0000
0.2500
Maximum
0.4000
0.3333
0.7500
0.6000
0.0000
0.3333
0.5000
T8
T9
T10
T11
T12
T13
T14
# covered
1
2
1
3
0
2
3
Minimum
0.2500
0.0000
0.0000
−0.6000
−0.5000
−0.6000
−0.3333
1st quartile
0.3125
0.2500
0.1875
−0.2125
−0.5000
−0.4000
0.0000
Median
0.4167
0.3333
0.2917
0.0000
−0.5000
−0.2250
0.2500
Mean
0.4375
0.3542
0.2708
0.0719
−0.5000
−0.1625
0.2344
3rd quartile
0.5417
0.5000
0.3750
0.3333
−0.5000
0.0000
0.5000
Maximum
0.6667
0.7500
0.5000
0.7500
−0.5000
0.3333
0.8000
T15
T16
T17
T18
T19
T20
# covered
1
3
2
1
0
3
Minimum
−0.5000
−0.7500
−0.4000
−0.5000
0.7500
−0.5000
1st quartile
−0.3750
−0.3333
−0.2000
−0.1250
0.7500
−0.1750
Median
−0.2917
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.7500
0.2500
Mean
−0.2708
−0.0719
0.0958
−0.0750
0.7500
0.2844
3rd quartile
−0.1875
0.2125
0.3333
0.0500
0.7500
0.6875
Maximum
0.0000
0.6000
0.6667
0.2000
0.7500
1.0000
Note “#covered” denotes the number of covered sides

The Logic and Pragmatics of Conditionals Under Uncertainty …
91
2.3
Results
On the average, 89.75% of the response frequencies are explained by the
categorisation given by the predictions in Table 4. The conditional prob-
ability interpretation is the best predictor for the responses: 54.75% of
the responses coincide exactly with the best possible coherent lower and
upper probability bounds of the conditional event. Figure 1 shows the
conditional probability responses as a function of the item position. The
frequency drops after the ﬁrst three tasks (T1–T3 are relatively easy, since
they do not involve covered sides), but then increases again during the
course of the experiment. The shift towards conditional probability inter-
pretation is not as pronounced as reported in Pfeifer (2013a). This can
be explained by the different samples: in Pfeifer (2013a) no students of
mathematics, philosophy, computer science, or psychology were included
in the sample, whereas in the current sample, participants had some
formal background.
Two participants gave almost consistently probability of the material
conditional responses. Probability of the conjunction responses were a bit
more frequent but still rare. Likewise, both biconditional interpretations
receive high frequencies only if they overlap with the conditional proba-
bility interpretation (which is an artefact). Thus, they occurred also rela-
tively seldom. Cases in which conditional probability responses occurred
just under 50% can be explained by halfway conditional event strategies.
In those tasks, which allow for unambiguously differentiating among the
halfway strategies, no participant used the shortcut of ignoring covered
sides for both bounds at once: the strategy was used either for the lower
or for the upper bound alone. The frequencies of unambiguous halfway
response strategies were higher in the ﬁrst half of the tasks (T1–T10)
compared to the last half (T11–T20).
Overall, the responses appear not to depend on p, which poses a
challenge to inferentialist accounts of conditionals. According to infer-
entialist accounts, to hold a high degree of belief in a conditional some
additional inferential connection between the antecedent and the conse-
quent is required, beyond conditional probability. Thus, for negative p
values (or p = 0), conditional probability should not be the best
predictor. However, as can be seen in Table 4, conditional probability

92
N. Pfeifer
5
10
15
20
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Target task number (1−20)
Frequency of conditional event responses (n=20)
Fig. 1
Conditional event responses (n = 20). The solid line was generated using
the locally weighted scatter plot smoother method (lowess, see Cleveland
[1981]; implemented in R)
remains the best predictor for the data even in cases where p is negative
or equal to zero. Pfeifer (2013b, Table 1) presents eight candidates for
measures of argument strength, which are based on prominent measures
of conﬁrmation: p is one of them. Without going into the details of
these measures, note that except for tasks 7, 17, 18, and 21, each sign
(+, −, or 0) of their medians coincides with the respective sign of the
median of p. Thus, replacing p by similar other measures does not
yield a better predictive validity compared to the conditional probability
interpretation of conditionals.8
Task 20 was pragmatically special as it showed a die with three white
circles and three question marks while it asked for the conditional
8 For this chapter a publicly available R subroutine for calculating the predictions in the prob-
abilistic truth table task and an interactive R Shiny App have been developed (see Schöppl
2021).

The Logic and Pragmatics of Conditionals Under Uncertainty …
93
Table 4
Response frequencies, classified by interpretation, and mean (and SD) confidence in correctness responses for
tasks 1–20 (T1–T20; n = 20)
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
T7
T8
T9
T10
T11
T12
T13
T14
T15
T16
T17
T18
T19
T20
P(C|A)∗
13
14
14
12
8
7
10
8
9
12
12
14
10
9
7
11
13
11
13
12
P(A ⊃C)∗
2
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
P(A ∧C)∗
2
2
2
2
4
4
2
3
3
2
3
4
3
3
2
4
4
4
4
5
P(C||A)
[13]
[14]
[14]
0
[4]
[4]
[2]
[8]
[9]
0
[12]
[4]
[3]
2
[2]
[11]
[13]
[4]
[13]
[12]
P(A ≡C)
[2]
[1]
[1]
0
[4]
[4]
[2]
[2]
[2]
0
[2]
[4]
[3]
0
[2]
[2]
[2]
[4]
[2]
[2]
P(C|A)l
–
–
–
1
2
3
2
3
4
1
[12]
–
3
1
2
[11]
[13]
2
–
[12]
P(C|A)u
–
–
–
[12]
3
2
[10]
4
2
[12]
0
–
1
[9]
2
0
0
[11]
–
0
P(C|A)lu
–
–
–
[1]
0
0
[2]
0
0
[1]
[0]
–
0
[1]
0
[0]
[0]
[2]
–
[0]
Other
3
3
3
3
1
2
4
0
0
3
3
0
1
3
5
3
1
1
1
1
Mean
4.20
4.25
4.10
3.20
3.10
3.05
3.35
3.40
3.15
3.70
3.70
4.35
3.65
3.55
3.80
3.85
3.25
3.70
4.00
2.65
SD
1.24
1.41
1.52
2.48
2.07
2.28
2.21
2.16
2.18
1.89
2.05
1.27
1.95
1.85
1.77
1.42
2.05
1.92
1.45
2.43
Md.(p)
+
+
+
+
−
−
0
+
+
+
0
−
−
+
−
0
0
0
+
+
Note “ ∗” denotes target interpretations. Square brackets denote response frequencies consistent with multiple predic-
tions. Halfway interpretations are undefined for complete probabilistic knowledge tasks (i.e., those without covered
sides)
“Md.(p)” denotes whether the median value of p is positive (+), negative (−) or zero (0; see also Table 3)

94
N. Pfeifer
involving different patterns (If the side facing up shows a square, then
the side shows black). The visible patterns validate the material condi-
tional interpretation, since circle validates the disjunct ¬ square, which
in turn makes the material conditional ¬ square ∨black true. For
the conditional probability interpretation, however, the visible sides are
irrelevant and the participant has to reason about the possible patterns
behind the question marks. This could lead to some pragmatic oddness
of this task, which is reﬂected by a slight decrease of the mean conﬁdence
rating.
After Task 20, participants were presented with a die consisting of
six white circles. The target conditional was the same as in Task 20,
i.e., its antecedent was inconsistent with all visible patterns. In this task,
14 participants responded with zero, three with one, two with the unit
interval ([0, 1]), and one participant responded with .5. If participants
interpret the visible sides as the only logically possible side-patterns (i.e.,
there can only be a white circle), then the antecedent of the conditional
is logically impossible and hence conditional probability is undeﬁned. As
there was no opt-out option, except for three probability 1 responses, all
other responses (0, [0, 1], and .5 as a kind of guessing) can be interpreted
as rejecting such conditionals. The mean conﬁdence in the correctness of
the responses in Task 21 was 3.20 (SD = 2.09).
To investigate in general whether there are any difﬁculties with calcu-
lating the probability of the material conditional, tasks 22 (all sides
visible) and 23 (one covered side) formulated a material conditional in
terms of disjunctions (e.g., the side facing up does not show black or
the side shows a circle). In Task 22, 17 out of 20 participants inferred
correctly the probability of the material conditional (mean conﬁdence
in correctness: 3.45, SD = 1.82). In Task 23, which involves incom-
plete probabilistic knowledge, 11 out of 20 participants made correct
inferences (mean conﬁdence in correctness: 2.35, SD = 3.15). Thus,
the probability of the material conditional is not too hard to calculate
for most participants; rather, people interpret conditionals differently,
namely as conditional probabilities.
After the target tasks, the participants answered two questions Were
the instructions clear to you? and How difﬁcult were the tasks? on rating
scales with the extreme poles very unclear (very difﬁcult, resp.; coded as

The Logic and Pragmatics of Conditionals Under Uncertainty …
95
0) and very clear (very easy, resp.; coded as 10). The overall clearness of
the tasks was rated by 8.75 (SD = 1.48) on the average. The overall
difﬁculty was rated by 6.10 (SD = 2.31) on the average. This indicates
that the task formulation was clear and that the tasks had an appropriate
discriminatory power (i.e., they were neither too easy nor too hard).
3
Concluding Remarks
I presented Mental Probability Logic as a competence theory of human
inference, which uses coherence-based probability logic as the ratio-
nality framework. Zero-probability antecedents are important not only
for theoretical reasons, but also for practical reasons. If properly
managed, they allow for explaining some alleged pragmatic effects in
purely semantic terms. I also presented an experiment on a generalised
probabilistic truth table task. The main result is that, like naive partic-
ipants, most mathematically minded participants interpret degrees of
beliefs in conditionals in terms of conditional probabilities. Some make
cognitive shortcuts by ignoring some possibilities when reasoning about
lower or upper probability bounds on conditionals. Participants’ ratings
appear independent of p, which poses a challenge for inferentialist
accounts of conditionals which propose p (or similar measures) of
inferential strength.
Under inferentialism, one would expect differences in the probabilistic
truth table tasks which involve neutral material (like circle/square and
black/white) compared to causal or abductive task material (like if a drug
is administered, then symptoms are diminished or if symptoms are dimin-
ished, then a drug was administered, respectively). However, the data of
probabilistic truth table tasks which compared such task material suggest
that there are no such differences and conditional probability is the best
predictor (Over et al. 2007; Pfeifer and Stöckle-Schobel 2015; Pfeifer
and Tulkki 2017a).
Another challenge for inferentialism is Centering (from A and C infer if
A, then C ), which does not hold in inferentialist accounts (e.g., Douven
2016, p. 40). However, Centering holds in probability logic (Sanﬁl-
ippo et al. 2018). Consistently with the formal predictions of probability

96
N. Pfeifer
logic, experimental data suggest that most responses are in line with the
predictions of Centering (see, e.g., Cruz et al. 2015, 2016; Pfeifer and
Tulkki 2017b; Politzer and Baratgin 2016). Thus, Centering challenges
inferentialist accounts of conditionals from both, formal and descriptive
points of views (see also the chapter by Over and Cruz in press, in this
volume).
Frequencies play a communicative role in probabilistic truth table
tasks: they allow for clearly communicating uncertainties to the partic-
ipants. This does not mean, however, that here a frequentistic interpre-
tation of probability is more appropriate compared to the subjective
interpretation of probability. First, the task is about a singular event.
Speciﬁcally, it is about the particular outcome of throwing a speciﬁc
die, which is made clear to the participants in the instruction (“imagine
that this die is placed in a cup”). It is well-known that frequentistic
approaches cannot deal with probabilities of singular events, while coher-
ence can properly manage the uncertainty of singular events. Second, the
task explicitly asks participants to infer how sure they can be that the
respective sentence holds, i.e., the task asks for the participants’ degrees
of belief. Thirdly, using frequencies is one of several possibilities for
forming degrees of belief. The resulting beliefs do not imply the ontolog-
ical existence of an objective probability.9 Epistemically, however, there
are correct solutions to the tasks.
The probabilistic truth table task paradigm is a fair and clear litmus
test for how people interpret various kinds of conditionals. It is not
restricted to precise-probability assessments. Future research could be
devoted to investigating other logical connectives with the truth table
task (and looking also at corresponding halfway interpretations), to
combining truth table tasks with neuroscientiﬁc methods, or to studying
to what extent mental disorders modulate reasoning about conditionals.
The latter strand of future research is inspired by the pioneer of the exper-
imental psychology of deductive reasoning, Gustav Störring, who argued
that “in the pathological cases nature makes experiments for us” (Störring
1900, p. 11; my translation): studying reasoning processes with people
9 This is in line with de Finetti’s famous and provocative slogan “Probability does not exist”
(1970/1974, p. vii, Vol. 1): probability is not an objective frequentistic quantity existing in the
outside world; rather, probability is subjective and coincides with coherent degrees of belief.

The Logic and Pragmatics of Conditionals Under Uncertainty …
97
suffering from mental disorders can give us supplementary insight for
the understanding of normal reasoning processes.
Acknowledgements This
work
is
supported
by
the
BMBF
project
01UL1906X. The Department of Philosophy at the Carnegy Mellon Univer-
sity funded the author’s research stay at the Center for Formal Epistemology
(CMU) and the reimbursement of the participants. David Danks, Angelo
Gilio, Stefan Kaufmann, Kevin T. Kelly, Tim Kraft, David E. Over, Katrin
Pfeifer, Hans Rott, Giuseppe Sanﬁlippo, Romina Schmid, and participants of
the seminar “Current Topics in Theoretical Philosophy” (Summer term, 2021)
at the Department of Philosophy at the University of Regensburg provided
useful comments to an earlier draft. Leon Schöppl assisted in the data analysis.
References
Berti, P., Regazzini, E., & Rigo, P. (1998). Well calibrated, coherent forecasting
systems. Theory of Probability & Its Applications, 42(1), 82–102.
Biazzo, V., Gilio, A., Lukasiewicz, T., & Sanﬁlippo, G. (2005). Probabilistic
logic under coherence: Complexity and algorithms. Annals of Mathematics
and Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 45(1–2), 35–81.
Bonnefon, J.-F., & Politzer, G. (2010). Paradoxes, mental models and one
paradox of the material conditional. Mind & Language, 26 (2), 141–155.
Capotorti, A., Galli, L., & Vantaggi, B. (2003). Locally strong coherence and
inference with lower-upper probabilities. Soft Computing, 7 (5), 280–287.
Capotorti, A., Lad, F., & Sanﬁlippo, G. (2007). Reassessing accuracy rates of
median decisions. American Statistician, 61(2), 132–138.
Carnap, R. (1948). Introduction to semantics. Chicago: Harvard University
Press.
Cleveland, W. S. (1981). LOWESS: A program for smoothing scatterplots by
robust locally weighted regression. The American Statistician, 35(1), 54.
Coletti, G., & Scozzafava, R. (2002). Probabilistic logic in a coherent setting.
Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Cruz, N., Baratgin, J., Oaksford, M., & Over, D. E. (2015). Bayesian reasoning
with ifs and ands and ors. Frontiers in Psychology, 6 , Article 192.
Cruz, N., Baratgin, J., Oaksford, M., & Over, D. E. (2016). Centering and
the meaning of conditionals. In A. Papafragou, D. Grodner, D. Mirman, &

98
N. Pfeifer
J. Trueswell (Eds.), Proceedings of the 38th annual meeting of the cognitive
science society (pp. 1104–1109). Austin, TX: The Cognitive Science Society.
de Finetti, B. (1931). Sul signiﬁcato soggettivo della probabilitá. Fundamenta
Mathematicae, 17, 298–329.
de Finetti, B. (1936/1995). The logic of probability. Philosophical Studies, 77,
181–190.
de Finetti, B. (1970/1974). Theory of probability (Vols. 1, 2). Chichester: Wiley.
Douven, I. (2016). The epistemology of indicative conditionals: Formal and
empirical approaches. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Douven, I., Elqayam, S., Singmann, H., & Wijnbergen-Huitink, J. (2020).
Conditionals and inferential connections: Toward a new semantics.
Thinking & Reasoning, 26 , 311–351.
Égré, P., & Rott, H. (2021). The logic of conditionals. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.),
The Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy (Fall 2021 ed.). Metaphysics Research
Lab, Stanford University. https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/logic-condition
als/.
Elqayam, S., Douven, I., Evans, J. S. B. T., & Cruz, N. (Eds.). (2020). Logic
and uncertainty in the human mind: A tribute to David E. Over. London:
Routledge.
Evans, J. St. B. T. (1982). The psychology of deductive reasoning. London:
Routledge.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Handley, S. J., & Over, D. E. (2003). Conditionals
and conditional probability. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 29(2), 321–355.
Evans, J. St. B. T., & Over, D. E. (2004). If . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Fugard, A. J. B., Pfeifer, N., & Mayerhofer, B. (2011). Probabilistic theo-
ries of reasoning need pragmatics too: Modulating relevance in uncertain
conditionals. Journal of Pragmatics, 43, 2034–2042.
Fugard, A. J. B., Pfeifer, N., Mayerhofer, B., & Kleiter, G. D. (2009). How
people interpret an uncertain If. In T. Kroupa & J. Vejnarová (Eds.), Proceed-
ings of the 8th workshop on uncertainty processing (pp. 80–91). Liblice,
CZ.
Fugard, A. J. B., Pfeifer, N., Mayerhofer, B., & Kleiter, G. D. (2011). How
people interpret conditionals: Shifts towards the conditional event. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 37 (3), 635–648.
Gauffroy, C., & Barrouillet, P. (2009). Heuristic and analytic processes in
mental models for conditionals: An integrative developmental theory. Devel-
opmental Review, 29, 249–282.

The Logic and Pragmatics of Conditionals Under Uncertainty …
99
Gilio, A. (1990). Criterio di penalizzazione e condizioni di coerenza nella
valutazione soggettiva della probabilità. Bollettino dell’Unione Matematica
Italiana, 4–B, 645–660.
Gilio, A. (1996). Algorithms for conditional probability assessments. In D.
A. Berry, K. M. Chaloner, & J. K. Geweke (Eds.), Bayesian analysis in statis-
tics and econometrics: Essays in honor of Arnold Zellner (pp. 29–39). New
York: John Wiley.
Gilio, A. (2002). Probabilistic reasoning under coherence in System P. Annals
of Mathematics and Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 34, 5–34.
Gilio, A., Pfeifer, N., & Sanﬁlippo, G. (2016). Transitivity in coherence-based
probability logic. Journal of Applied Logic, 14, 46–64.
Gilio, A., Pfeifer, N., & Sanﬁlippo, G. (2020). Probabilistic entailment and
iterated conditionals. In S. Elqayam, I. Douven, J. S. B. T. Evans, & N. Cruz
(Eds.), Logic and uncertainty in the human mind: A tribute to David E. Over
(pp. 71–101). London: Routledge.
Gilio, A., & Sanﬁlippo, G. (2013). Quasi conjunction, quasi disjunction, t-
norms and t-conorms: Probabilistic aspects. Information Sciences, 245, 146–
167. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2013.03.019.
Gilio, A., & Sanﬁlippo, G. (2014). Conditional random quantities and
compounds of conditionals. Studia Logica, 102(4), 709–729.
Gilio, A., & Sanﬁlippo, G. (2019). Generalized logical operations among
conditional events. Applied Intelligence, 49(1), 79–102.
Gilio, A., & Sanﬁlippo, G. (2021). Compound conditionals, Fréchet-
Hoeffding bounds, and Frank t-norms. International Journal of Approximate
Reasoning, 136 , 168–200.
Holzer, S. (1985). On coherence and conditional prevision. Bollettino
dell’Unione Matematica Italiana, 4(6), 441–460.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (2002). Conditionals: A theory of
meaning, pragmatics, and inference. Psychological Review, 109(4), 646–678.
Kleiter, G. D., Fugard, A. J. B., & Pfeifer, N. (2018). A process model of
the understanding of uncertain conditionals. Thinking & Reasoning, 24(3),
386–422.
Kolmogoroff, A. N. (1933). Grundbegriffe der Wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer.
Lad, F. (1996). Operational subjective statistical methods: A mathematical,
philosophical, and historical introduction. New York: Wiley.
Marr, D. (1982). Vision. A computational investigation into the human represen-
tation and processing of visual information. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman.

100
N. Pfeifer
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (2007). Bayesian rationality: The probabilistic
approach to human reasoning. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (2020). New paradigms in the psychology of
reasoning. Annual Review of Psychology, 71, 305–330.
Oberauer, K., & Wilhelm, O. (2003). The meaning(s) of conditionals:
Conditional probabilities, mental models and personal utilities. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 29(4), 680–693.
Over, D. E., & Cruz, N. (in press). Indicative and counterfactual condi-
tionals in the psychology of reasoning. In S. Kaufmann, D. E. Over, &
G. Sharma (Eds.), Conditionals—Logic, linguistics, and psychology. London:
Palgrave Macmillan. https://link.springer.com/book/9783031056819
Over, D. E., Hadjichristidis, C., Evans, J. St. B. T., Handley, S. J., & Sloman,
S. (2007). The probability of causal conditionals. Cognitive Psychology, 54,
62–97.
Petturiti, D., & Vantaggi, B. (2017). Envelopes of conditional probabili-
ties extending a strategy and a prior probability. International Journal of
Approximate Reasoning, 81, 160–182.
Pfeifer, N. (2006). On mental probability logic. Unpublished doctoral disser-
tation, Department of Psychology, University of Salzburg. (The abstract is
published in The Knowledge Engineering Review, 2008, 23, 217–226.)
Pfeifer, N. (2012). Experiments on Aristotle’s Thesis: Towards an experimental
philosophy of conditionals.The Monist, 95(2), 223–240.
Pfeifer, N. (2013a). The new psychology of reasoning: A mental probability
logical perspective. Thinking & Reasoning, 19(3–4), 329–345.
Pfeifer, N. (2013b). On argument strength. In F. Zenker (Ed.), Bayesian
argumentation. The practical side of probability (pp. 185–193). Dordrecht:
Synthese Library (Springer).
Pfeifer, N. (2014). Reasoning about uncertain conditionals. Studia Logica,
102(4), 849–866.
Pfeifer, N. (2021). Probability logic. In M. Knauff & W. Spohn (Eds.),
Handbook of rationality (pp. 277–284). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Pfeifer, N., & Kleiter, G. D. (2005). Coherence and nonmonotonicity in
human reasoning. Synthese, 146 (1–2), 93–109.
Pfeifer, N., & Kleiter, G. D. (2006). Inference in conditional probability logic.
Kybernetika, 42, 391–404.
Pfeifer, N., & Kleiter, G. D. (2009). Framing human inference by coherence
based probability logic. Journal of Applied Logic, 7 (2), 206–217.
Pfeifer, N., & Kleiter, G. D. (2011). Uncertain deductive reasoning. In
K. Manktelow, D. E. Over, & S. Elqayam (Eds.), The science of reason:

The Logic and Pragmatics of Conditionals Under Uncertainty …
101
A Festschrift for Jonathan St. B.T. Evans (pp. 145–166). Hove: Psychology
Press.
Pfeifer,
N.,
&
Sanﬁlippo,
G.
(2021).
Interpreting
connexive
princi-
ples incoherence-based probability logic. In J. Vejnarová & J. Wilson
(Eds.), Symbolic and quantitative approaches to reasoning with uncertainty
(ECSQARU 2021) (LNAI, Vol. 12897, pp. 672–687). Cham: Springer.
Pfeifer, N., & Stöckle-Schobel, R. (2015). Uncertain conditionals and counter-
factuals in (non-)causal settings. In G. Airenti, B. G. Bara, & S. G. (Eds.),
Proceedings of the EuroAsianPaciﬁc Joint Conference on Cognitive Science (4th
European Conference on Cognitive Science; 10th International Conference on
Cognitive Science) (Vol. 1419, pp. 651–656). Aachen: CEUR Workshop
Proceedings. Retrieved from http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1419/paper0108.pdf.
Pfeifer, N., & Tulkki, L. (2017a). Abductive, causal, and counterfactual condi-
tionals under incomplete probabilistic knowledge. In G. Gunzelmann,
A. Howes, T. Tenbrink, & E. Davelaar (Eds.), Proceedings of the 39th Cogni-
tive Science Society Meeting (pp. 2888–2893). Austin, TX: The Cognitive
Science Society.
Pfeifer, N., & Tulkki, L. (2017b). Conditionals, counterfactuals, and rational
reasoning. An experimental study on basic principles. Minds and Machines,
27 (1), 119–165.
Politzer, G., & Baratgin, J. (2016). Deductive schemas with uncertain premises
using qualitative probability expressions. Thinking & Reasoning, 22(1), 78–
98.
Ramsey, F. P. (1929/1994). General propositions and causality (1929). In
D. H. Mellor (Ed.), Philosophical papers by F. P. Ramsey (pp. 145–163).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Regazzini, E. (1985). Finitely additive conditional probabilities. Rendiconti del
Seminario Matematico e Fisico di Milano, 55, 69–89.
Sanﬁlippo, G., Gilio, A., Over, D. E., & Pfeifer, N. (2020). Probabilities of
conditionals and previsions of iterated conditionals. International Journal of
Approximate Reasoning, 121, 150–173.
Sanﬁlippo, G., Pfeifer, N., & Gilio, A. (2017). Generalized probabilistic modus
ponens. In A. Antonucci, C. L., & O. Papini (Eds.), Lecture notes LNAI
(Vol. 10369, pp. 480–490). Dordrecht: Springer.
Sanﬁlippo, G., Pfeifer, N., Over, D. E., & Gilio, A. (2018). Probabilistic
inferences from conjoined to iterated conditionals. International Journal of
Approximate Reasoning, 93, 103–118.

102
N. Pfeifer
Schöppl,
L.
(2021).
Dice
task
subroutine
(v1.0)
[computer
software].
Retrieved from https://github.com/leon-schoeppl/ptt-calculator/releases/tag/
DTSv1.0/ on September 2, 2021.
Skovgaard-Olsen, N., Singmann, H., & Klauer, K. C. (2016). The relevance
effect and conditionals. Cognition, 150, 26–36.
Störring, G. W. (1900). Vorlesungen über Psychopathologie in ihrer Bedeutung
für die normale Psychologie mit Einschluss der psychologischen Grundlagen der
Erkenntnistheorie. Leipzig: Wilhelm Engelmann.
Thompson, V. A., Prowse-Turner, J. A., & Pennycook, G. (2011). Intuition,
reason, and metacognition. Cognitive Psychology, 63, 107–140.
Walley, P., Pelessoni, R., & Vicig, P. (2004). Direct algorithms for checking
consistency and making inferences from conditional probability assessments.
Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference, 126 (1), 119–151.
Wansing, H. (2020). Connexive logic. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The Stanford ency-
clopedia of philosophy (Spring 2020 ed.). https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/
spr2020/entries/logic-connexive/.
Wason, P. C. (1966). Reasoning. In B. M. Foss (Ed.), New horizons in psychology
I (pp. 106–137). Harmandsworth: Penguin.

Rethinking the Acceptability
and Probability of Indicative Conditionals
Michał Sikorski
1
Introduction
Indicative conditionals, like:
(1) If you press this button, the ﬁre alarm goes off.
are an important part of our language. We use them, for example, to
express our prediction or generalizations. Partly because of their impor-
tance, conditionals are interesting for philosophers and psychologists.
They are interested, for example, in truth conditions of conditionals or
updating our beliefs with them. Two other issues which received a lot
of attention are the probability and acceptability of indicative condi-
tionals.
M. Sikorski (B)
Warsaw University of Technology, Warsaw, Poland
e-mail: michalpsikorski@gmail.com
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Switzerland AG 2023
S. Kaufmann et al. (eds.), Conditionals, Palgrave Studies in Pragmatics, Language
and Cognition, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-05682-6_5
103

104
M. Sikorski
In the case of probability, the reasons for all this attention are clear.
For instance, if we were able to deﬁne the probabilities of conditionals,
we could incorporate reasoning with conditionals into the popular and
successful framework of Bayesian epistemology.
In the case of acceptability, the attention is a bit harder to explain. The
acceptability conditions of other complex expressions are not so widely
discussed. They are, to be sure, studied as a part of pragmatics or epis-
temology, but it seems that there is not, for example, a special problem
of the acceptability conditions for conjunction. What is different in the
case of conditionals? It seems to me that it is an inﬂuence of a very
popular philosophical position called the non-truth value view (NTV).
It claims that conditionals do not have truth values.1 The proponents of
NTV have to deal with at least two problems. Firstly, we systematically
recognize that some conditionals are appropriate to utter in some situa-
tions while others are not. In the case of other sentences, it can be often
explained by the difference between truth and falsity. So how can we
explain that without postulating truth values for conditionals? Secondly,
if we claim that conditionals are not truth-apt, it seems natural to assume
that they are not probability-apt. The probability of a sentence is the
probability of that sentence being true and if a sentence is not truth-apt
(think for example about commands or questions), it makes little sense
to ask about its probability. If it is so, we even in principle cannot incor-
porate the conditionals to the Bayesian framework. The answer to both
challenges is provided by the notion of acceptability. We can use graded
acceptability as a substitute for probability and categorical acceptability
as a substitute for truth.
The discussion concerning the probability and the acceptability of
conditional (A →B), is mainly organized around two inﬂuential theses.
The ﬁrst of them is so fundamental for the currently dominant paradigm
of thinking about conditionals (see, e.g. Over and Cruz 2018) that it
usually just called the Equation:
Equation P(A →B) = P(B|A)
1 For the details and motivation of the view see, e.g., Bennett (2003) or Edgington (1995). For
the critical discussion see: Douven (2015).

Rethinking the Acceptability and Probability …
105
The second thesis is called Adams’ thesis:
AT ac(A →B) = P(B|A)
where P(B|A) indicates conditional probability and “ac()” indicates
acceptability. AT in this form is not a good substitute for truth condi-
tions. It does not provide us with a threshold of acceptability above
which a conditional would be acceptable. Such a threshold is provided
by another version of AT, the Qualitative Adams’ Thesis:
(QAT) An indicative conditional “If A, B” is assertable for/acceptable to
a person if and only if the person’s conditional degree of belief,
P(B|A), is high.2
All three theses were evaluated from both empirical and theoretical
perspectives. In this chapter, I will examine both of these perspectives
and show that there are no convincing reasons to accept any of them,
and therefore we should rethink their role in the future study of condi-
tionals. In the second section, I will discuss the experiments dedicated
to all three theses. Then I will discuss the theoretical considerations for
and against them. In the last section, I will conclude and point to some
alternative conceptualizations of the probability of conditionals.
2
Empirical Support
In this section, I will discuss empirical experiments concerning the three
theses. Before that, I will make a distinction useful in this context.
Conditionals can be divided into positively relevant, irrelevant, and
negatively relevant. The positively relevant conditionals are condi-
tionals whose antecedents are positively probabilistically relevant for
their consequents. If a sentence is positively probabilistically relevant
for another one, then the truth of the ﬁrst sentence makes the second
one more probable. The negatively relevant conditionals are conditionals
2 The source of this formulation is Douven and Verbrugge (2012).

106
M. Sikorski
whose antecedents are negatively probabilistically relevant for their
consequents, which means that the truth of the antecedent decreases
the probability of the consequent. Irrelevant conditionals are the condi-
tionals whose antecedents are probabilistically irrelevant for their conse-
quents. The concept of relevance can be mathematically represented in
at least two ways. Firstly, we can use P = P(B|A) −P(B|¬A) as
a measure of relevance, as proposed in Spohn (2012). If the value of
P is 0 the corresponding conditional is irrelevant; when it is higher,
then it is positively relevant, and when it is lower, the conditional is
negatively relevant. Secondly, relevance can be conceptualized as the
difference measure, P(B|A) −P(B). As in the case of P, when the
value of difference measure is 0, the conditional is irrelevant; if it is lower,
it is negatively relevant; and if it is higher, it is positively relevant. Both
conceptualizations classify conditionals in the same way, but the exact
level of relevance will differ in some cases.3 Both notions have been used
in experiments on conditionals, and the difference will not matter for
our conclusions.
An example of an intuitively irrelevant conditional is:
(2) If I eat an apple today, I will not inherit 1,000,000$ today.
And a negatively relevant one is:
(3) If he smokes, he will not develop lung cancer.
Going back to our three theses, all of them have been traditionally
regarded as descriptively true.4 Philosophers generally found all of them
conﬁrmed by their introspective case-by-case studies. Many such cases
3 For a detailed discussion of the difference between the two notions and an experi-
ment indicating that P predicts intuitive relevance better than the difference measure, see
Skovgaard-Olsen et al. (2016a).
4 For example McGee, 1989: “Ernest Adams (1965, 1975) has advanced a probabilistic account
of conditionals, according to which the probability of a simple English indicative conditional is
the conditional probability of the consequent given the antecedent. The theory describes what
English speakers assert and accept with unfailing accuracy, yet the theory has won only limited
acceptance.”

Rethinking the Acceptability and Probability …
107
were presented, for example, in Bennett (2003), Edgington (1995), or
Jackson (1987).
More systematic experimental studies were, ﬁrstly, directed toward
the Equation. The results of most of these experiments support it.
For example, Evans et al. (2003), Over et al. (2007) or Oberauer
and Wilhelm (2003) found signiﬁcant correlation between participants’
responses concerning the probability of conditionals and conditional
probability while using different types of conditionals. Over et al. (2007)
used “causal” conditionals, i.e., conditionals justiﬁed by causal relations,
while Oberauer and Wilhelm (2003) uses conditionals that describe rela-
tions between frequency distributions. Results of those, and many similar
studies (e.g., Fugard et al. 2011; Barrouillet and Gaufﬁroy 2015; Evans
et al. 2007; Cruz et al. 2016), support the Equation. They convinced
many philosophers and psychologists that the Equation is a correct
description of how people reason with conditionals and made it, and
probabilistic theories based on it, a dominant paradigm for thinking
about conditionals.5
Both AT and QAT did not receive so much attention. AT was
ﬁrst tested in Douven and Verbrugge (2010). In the experiment, the
authors used inferential conditionals divided into inductive, abduc-
tive, and deductive conditionals. Inferential conditionals are condi-
tionals that express inferences. Inductive conditionals express induc-
tive inferences, deductive conditionals express deductive inferences, and
abductive conditionals express abductive inferences. In the ﬁrst exper-
iment, the authors tested Adams’ Thesis and four weaker versions of
it:
(WAT1) Ac(A →B) ≈Pr(B|A)
(WAT2) Ac(A
→
B)
is
high/middling/low
iff
Pr(B|A)
is
high/middling/low.
(WAT3) Ac(A →B) highly correlates with Pr(B|A).
(WAT4) Ac(A →B) at least moderately correlates with Pr(B|A).
5 See, e.g., Over and Cruz (2018) or Evans and Over (2004).

108
M. Sikorski
The theses were tested by comparing their prediction with responses
given by participants to questions concerning the acceptability and
probability of a given conditional.
Surprisingly, only a weak correlation between the conditional proba-
bility and the acceptability of conditionals was found. The correlation
was especially weak in the case of inductive conditionals. It was not
enough to support AT or even two weaker versions of it. Just the weakest
version (WAT4) was supported for all kinds of conditionals (induc-
tive, deductive, and abductive). In the third experiment presented in the
paper, participants were asked to judge the conditional probability of
the consequent given the antecedent and the probability of the condi-
tional. The results of the ﬁrst experiment and the third experiment
were compared. The comparison showed a signiﬁcant difference between
participants’ judgments concerning the acceptability and the probability
of conditionals. I will discuss this issue later on.
QAT was, also, tested the ﬁrst time by Igor Douven and Sara
Verbrugge. The experiment was presented in Douven and Verbrugge
(2012). The authors tested the predictions of QAT and the so-called
Evidential Support Theory presented in Douven (2008):
EST An indicative conditional (A →B) is assertable/acceptable if and
only if Pr(B|A) is not only high but also higher than Pr(B).
The idea behind EST is that a high conditional probability is not enough
for a conditional to be acceptable, and positive relevance has to be
included as an additional condition. Results show that QAT predicted
judgments of speakers worse than EST, and especially poorly in the
case of irrelevant and negatively relevant conditionals. This result was
replicated in Krzy˙zanowska et al. (2017).
A similar idea, of using irrelevant and negatively relevant conditionals,
was adopted by Skovgaard-Olsen et al. (2016b). The authors tested the
Equation and AT. The items include positively relevant and, crucially,
irrelevant and negatively relevant conditionals. The results showed a
signiﬁcant correlation between the conditional probabilities and the
probabilities of the positively relevant conditionals. At the same time,
this was not the case for irrelevant and negatively relevant conditionals.

Rethinking the Acceptability and Probability …
109
There the probabilities of conditionals were much lower than the condi-
tional probabilities. The results for acceptability were almost the same.
The failure of AT is not that surprising if we take into consideration
the failure of its qualitative version and the results from Douven and
Verbrugge (2010), but the poor performance of the Equation is unex-
pected given the rich history of experiments that supported it. This
result was replicated in experiments with different experimental designs.
For example, the results of Krzy˙zanowska et al. (2017), Skovgaard-Olsen
et al. (2016a), Vidal and Baratgin (2017), and Fugard et al. (2011) all
suggest the Equation (by itself) does not correctly predict the proba-
bility of conditionals in the case of irrelevant and negatively relevant
conditionals. This interpretation of the results is controversial. First, it
is not clear how it squares with the earlier results, and second, there is an
alternative interpretation of the effect.
How should we explain this discrepancy between the results presented
in Skovgaard-Olsen et al. (2016b) and earlier experiments supporting
the Equation? The authors claim that previous studies do not include
irrelevant or negative relevant conditionals and therefore cannot support
the unrestricted version of the Equation. For example, all conditionals
considered in Over et al. (2007) seem to be intuitively positively relevant
one.6 The case of Oberauer and Wilhelm (2003) is similar. The successful
replications and the lack of irrelevant and negatively relevant conditionals
in the stimuli used in the earlier experiments strongly suggest that the
effect of the relevance on the assessment of the probability or accept-
ability is robust, and the support for the Equation provided by those
experiments should be re-evaluated.
A defender of the Equation may claim that the effect of the relevance
of conditionals is pragmatic, and therefore the unrestricted version of
the Equation can still be preserved. This solution is somewhat supported
by the results of Skovgaard-Olsen et al. (2017) which suggests that the
effect of relevance on the assessment of truth is much weaker than its
effect on the acceptability or probability of conditionals. This suggests
that the effect of relevance is pragmatic in nature. On the other hand,
6 E.g., “If Adidas get more superstars to wear their new football boots then the sales of these
boots will increase” or “If the cost of petrol increases then trafﬁc congestion will improve.”

110
M. Sikorski
results of different experiments do suggest that relevance inﬂuence truth
assessments, for example, Krzy˙zanowska et al. (2017) or Douven et al.
(2017).7 The hypothesis that the effect is pragmatic was also tested
directly in Skovgaard-Olsen et al. (2019). The authors tested three
hypotheses describing different pragmatic mechanisms generating the
reason-relation part of the content of indicative conditionals responsible
for the effect. Firstly, they checked if it is cancelable in the way conver-
sational implicatures are, secondly, they tested if its projection behavior
resembles that of presuppositions, and ﬁnally, they tested if it is treated
as not-at-issue content which is believed to be one of the characterizing
features of the conventional implicature. Surprisingly, the results of all
three experiments were negative, which suggests that the reason-relation
part of the content is not conversational implicature, presupposition, nor
conventional implicature, and therefore, likely, not pragmatic content.
The authors in discussing their results point out that the features of
conventional implicature (including it being not-at-issue content) are
still very controversial and therefore, given the results of Skovgaard-Olsen
et al. (2017) it is likely that the reason-relation part of the content of
conditionals is conventional implicature. This, in the opinion of the
authors, does not necessarily make it a part of the pragmatic content.
Conventional implicature has been classiﬁed both as part of pragmatic
and semantic content by different authors in the relevant literature. In
light of that, it seems that the pragmatic origin of the effect of relevance
on probability or acceptability of conditionals is not supported by the
existing evidence.
Finally, we may wonder if it is possible to restrict the Equation to make
it consistent with the available evidence? It seems possible. A version of
the Equation restricted to the positively relevant conditionals seems to be
in line with the results of all the mentioned experiments. Such a version
can look, for example, like this:
Equation+ If P > 0 then P(A →B) = P(C|A)
7 For the discussion see: Douven et al. 2017.

Rethinking the Acceptability and Probability …
111
All this seems to weaken the position of the unrestricted Equation. At
the same time, it puts all the theses in a somehow similar position. All of
them were initially regarded as intuitive and supported by introspective
case-by-case examination. In light of the available empirical evidence,
both QAT and AT seem to be empirically inadequate. QAT performs
poorly (Douven and Verbrugge 2012) in comparison to an EST. AT
was disconﬁrmed by results of Skovgaard-Olsen et al. (2016b) which
show that it fails in the case of the irrelevant conditionals, and by the
results of Douven and Verbrugge (2010), which show that it is not
supported in the case of the inductive conditionals. Similarly, the results
which were considered to be evidence for the Equation are to some
degree undermined by the results of Skovgaard-Olsen et al. (2016b) and
considerations concerning the conditionals used in the studies.
3
Theoretical Arguments
The theoretical studies concerning the Equation, AT and QAT have a
longer history than the empirical ones. Still, it seems that there is not
much theoretical justiﬁcation for the three theses. Even some of their
defenders seem to agree. For example, Douven (2015) says about the
Equation:
While there is no known argument for this thesis showing that it has any
normative force, to many the proposal does ring true, at least prima facie.
In this section, I will discuss the theoretical considerations presented
for and against the Equation, ST, and QAT. I will start by discussing
the Ramsey Test, which is commonly used to argue for the Equation
or AT. Then I will move to trivialization proofs. I will discuss them
with special attention dedicated to the two most popular ways to block
them: denying that conditionals are propositions and postulating that the
meaning of a conditional depends on the beliefs of the speaker. Finally,
I will discuss the relationship between the semantics of conditionals and
their probability.

112
M. Sikorski
3.1
Ramsey Test
The Ramsey test was presented by Ramsey (1990):
If two people are arguing ‘If p will q’ and both are in doubt as to p, they
are adding p hypothetically to their stock of knowledge and arguing on
that basis about q; so that in a sense ‘If p, q’ and ‘If p, ¯q’ are contradic-
tories. We can say that they are ﬁxing their degrees of belief in q given p.
Ramsey (1990, p. 155)
The test is very popular among philosophers and psychologists,8 and
it is typically interpreted as the procedure for evaluating acceptability
or probability of indicative conditionals (see, e.g., Gibbard 1981;
Edgington 1995; Bennett 2003). and many cases in which its predictions
are correct were considered and discussed.9 Because of this intuitive-
ness, but also simplicity, the procedure served as a direct inspiration for
three successful research programs: belief revision theory, possible world
semantics for conterfactuals, and suppositional theories of indicative
conditionals. The theories from the last group are typically committed
to the Equation or AT. The Equation is a probabilistic reinterpretation
of Ramsey test, and, therefore, the argument from the one to the other is
straightforward: If you accept the Ramsey test and conditionalization as
a rule for belief revision, which is typically accepted in this context (see,
e.g., Pettigrew 2020), then you have to accept the Equation which is just
its probabilistic reformulation.10
There are two problems with this argument. Firstly, the intuition
behind the plausibility of both Ramsey test and the Equation seems to
be exactly the same. The second is merely a reformulation of the ﬁrst,
and in all cases in which Ramsey test delivers a correct result, the Equa-
tion will give us just as satisfying an answer. Therefore, it seems that by
8 E.g., “Most theorists of conditionals accept the Ramsey test thesis for indicatives” Bennett
(2003).
9 See, e.g., Evans and Over (2004, pp. 21–22).
10 See, e.g., Bennett (2003) or Evans and Over (2004).

Rethinking the Acceptability and Probability …
113
appealing to the test we do not provide any independent evidence for the
Equation.
Secondly, the close parallel between the Equation and the Ramsey
test, and the empirical results which established limits of the Equation,
point toward possible limits of the test. As we have seen in the previous
section, the Equation seems to fail for the irrelevant and negatively rele-
vant conditionals. The situation seems to be similar in the case of the
Ramsey test; considers once again a negatively relevant conditional:
(4) If he smokes, he will not develop a lung cancer.
Let us say that the lifestyle of the person in question is perfect and he
does not have any genetic predispositions to developing cancer, so even
in the case he smokes the probability that he will develop cancer is really
low, for example 1%. In such a case, if we conduct the Ramsey test on (4)
we will get the conditional probability of 99% and therefore we should
believe in (4). Still, because antecedent of (4) is negatively relevant for
its consequent, (4) is hard to accept. The intuition that negatively rele-
vant indicative conditionals are defective is supported by the results of
experiments that test acceptability and probability of negatively relevant
conditionals (e.g., Douven and Verbrugge 2012; Skovgaard-Olsen et al.
2016b; Douven et al. 2017). This deﬁciency of the Ramsey test was
considered, and the revised version of the test was proposed in Rott
(1986).
To sum up, it seems that the intuitions behind the Ramsey test are
the same intuitions that underline the Equation; therefore, appealing
to the former does not provide any independent justiﬁcation for the
latter. Secondly, the plausibility of the Ramsey test may be restricted to
positively relevant conditionals.
3.2
Triviality Proofs
Triviality proofs show that accepting the Equation leads to unacceptable
conclusions. For example, the ﬁrst proof from Lewis (1976) showed that

114
M. Sikorski
we can infer from the Equation that P(A →B) = P(B) which is
generally false:
(5) P(A →B)
(6) P(A →B|B)P(B) + P(A →B|¬B)P(¬B)
(7) P(B|A, B)P(B) + P(B|A, ¬B)P(¬B)
(8) P(B)
As we have already mentioned, the conclusion is clearly unacceptable.
The two most popular ways to block the proof is to deny that condi-
tionals are propositions (e.g., Bennett 2003; Edgington 1995) or to
postulate that the meaning of conditionals depends on the beliefs of the
speakers (e.g., Douven 2015; van Fraassen 1976).
The ﬁrst option involves accepting NTV: that the conditionals are
not propositions and are therefore not truth-apt. If conditionals are not
propositions, they cannot occur in Boolean combinations; therefore, for
example, we cannot use the law of total probability on conditionals, and
therefore, Lewis’ proof is blocked.
But how plausible is NTV? Several arguments for this view have been
presented, I will discuss one of them later on and all of them were, in my
opinion convincingly, countered in Douven (2015). On the oher hand,
the rejection of the propositional view seems to be costly, and these costs
are rarely acknowledged.
First of all, one of the consequences of NTV is that conditionals
no longer have a probability. The probability of a sentence is typically
understood as the probability of this sentence being true; therefore if a
sentence is not truth-apt, it is also not probability-apt. Because of that,
we have to replace the Equation with AT. It describes the acceptability of
conditionals, and therefore, does not require them to have probabilities.
Secondly, the NTV has a problem with explaining the way condi-
tionals are regularly used as premises in reasoning. Typically, we under-
stood the validity of reasoning as the preservation of truth. If one of
the premises is not truth-apt, there is nothing to be preserved. There-
fore, NTV makes reasoning involving conditionals unexplainable, if
one understands validity as truth preservation. This is an instance of

Rethinking the Acceptability and Probability …
115
the so-called Frege-Geach problem.11 In general, the problem consists
in the fact that a view that denies that expressions of a given class
are truth-apt, has to explain possible occurrences of such expressions
in truth-functional contexts (see, e.g., Schroeder 2008). To solve the
problem one would have to propose an alternative, revisionary way of
understanding the validity of reasoning. One such proposal, p-validity,
was presented in Adams (1975) in which AT was also defended:
...an inference to be probabilistically valid (abbreviated p-valid) if and
only if the uncertainty of its conclusion cannot exceed the sum of the
uncertainties of its premises. (Adams 1998, p. 131)
This proposal on its own will not help us with our problem. As we have
seen above, one of the consequences of NTV is that conditionals cannot
have probability, or at least not in the sense the truth-apt sentences do,12
therefore p-validity cannot be directly used to assess the validity of argu-
ments with mixed conditional and unconditional promises. Perhaps we
can use some proxy-quantity, in place of the probability of conditionals,
to compute p-validity? There seem to be two natural candidates, accept-
ability and conditional probability, but neither of them is unproblematic.
As quoted above p-validity is deﬁned in terms of uncertainty. Uncer-
tainty of a sentence, according to Adams, equals 1—probability of the
sentence. In light of that, the acceptability cannot be used in computing
p-validity as we have no idea if and how it relates to uncertainty. Addi-
tionally, acceptability is typically believed to have different properties
than probability (therefore it can be used to avoid Lewis’ trivialization),
so it is not clear if we can extend the p-validity framework to incorporate
acceptability. What about conditional probability? According to one of
11 see e.g., Kölbel (1997).
12 In fact Adams (1975) claims that this natural interpretation of probability is not applicable
to conditionals. He seems to be aware of how problematic the consequences of NTV are, for
example:
“The author’s very tentative opinion on the ‘right way out’ of the triviality argument is
that we should regard the inapplicability of probability to compounds of conditionals as
a fundamental limitation of probability, on a par with the inapplicability of truth to
simple conditionals.”
Adams (1975, p. 35).

116
M. Sikorski
the interpretations of the theory presented in (Adams 1975), the condi-
tional probability differs signiﬁcantly from (unconditional) probability.
In light of that, someone may assume that conditionals have conditional
probabilities, without having truth values or unconditional probabili-
ties. Adams (1975) seems to be using this assumption, when analyzing
cases of inference with mixed premises (e.g., antecedent restriction).
His framework delivers many plausible results concerning the validity
of such inferences (e.g., he shows that contraposition is not generally
valid). At the same time, this approach seems to be based on question-
able foundations. As discussed in (Hájek 2012), the Adams’ conditional
probability is in many respects dissimilar to (unconditional) probability.
For example, in contrast to probability, Adams’ conditional probabili-
ties do not attach to the Boolean combination of sentences. As we have
seen, p-validity was deﬁned in terms of (unconditional) probability and,
as it stands, conditional probability cannot be used when we calculate it.
Additionally, given the discussed differences, it is not clear if p-validity
can be easily generalized to be able to incorporate acceptability or condi-
tional probability. This problem can be seen as a probabilistic version of
the Frege-Geach problem, a probabilistic framework (e.g., Bayesianism
or p-validity) that cannot accommodate conditionals that do not have a
probability. Using p-validity to understand reasoning with mixed condi-
tional and non-conditional premises is questionable if conditionals do
not have truth values, and therefore probabilities.
Thirdly, accepting NTV makes it hard to make sense of conditionals
embedded in truth-functional contexts like disjunction or conjunction,
for example:
(9) Either he is in Rome, if he is in Italy, or he is in Bordeaux, if he is in
France.13
According to NTV, conditionals are not the type of things that can occur
in such contexts. The evaluation of the whole sentence requires its argu-
ments to be true or false but according to NTV conditionals are neither.
The defenders of AT developed elaborate ways of explaining away such
13 Example from Kölbel (2000).

Rethinking the Acceptability and Probability …
117
sentences (see, e.g., Edgington 1995); at the same time, others come up
with new examples harder to explain away (see, e.g., Kölbel 2000). The
other way to solve this problem is to provide an alternative, non-truth-
functional analysis of contexts like disjunction or conjunction. Perusing
this strategy may be challenging. In doing so, one not only goes against
a well-entrenched understanding of logical connectives, but also for sake
of completeness will have to provide a similar analysis for other truth-
functional contexts in which conditionals can occur (e.g., It is true that
i f A →B etc.).
All these problems seem to suggest that conditionals behave as truth-
apt propositions. It is also suggested by the reaction of participants of the
experiment asked to assess truth values or probabilities of conditionals.
They perfectly well understand both questions about truth values (see,
e.g., Douven et al. 2020; Krzy˙zanowska et al. 2017) and probabilities of
conditionals (e.g., all the articles which test the Equation) and do not
seem to be confused by either of them. This is, once again, unexpected if
conditionals are not propositions, consider for example asking somebody
about the truth value of a question. In light of that, denying that the
conditionals are propositions is both unintuitive and costly.
The second popular way to dodge triviality was explored in Douven
(2015) (after van Fraassen 1976). The prove uses a generalized version of
the Equation, GSH14:
GSH P(A →B|C) = P(B|A, C)
It was used to infer (7) from (6). Lewis derives GSH from three assump-
tions. The ﬁrst assumption claims that the considered class of probability
functions is closed under conditionalization. The second assumption is
the Equation, and the third is that the interpretation of the natural
language indicative conditionals does not depend on the belief states of
the speaker. I will refer to this assumption as the independence assump-
tion or IA. Both Douven (2015) and van Fraassen (1976) argue against
the assumption in order to save the Equation.
14 The Equation is sometimes called Stalnaker Hypothesis(SH), therefore its generalized version
is called Generalized Stalnaker Hypothesis (GSH).

118
M. Sikorski
Van Fraassen believes that the source of Lewis’ assumption is his
metaphysical view, so-called modal realism. According to modal realism,
possible worlds are real and objective in the sense in which the actual
world is. If we combine modal semantics, which deﬁnes the meanings
of conditionals in terms of the properties of possible worlds, with modal
realism, the meanings of conditionals do not depend on our beliefs but
on the objective properties of possible worlds. Van Fraassen claims that,
if we adopt a less realistic notion of possible worlds, the assumption loses
its appeal. If possible worlds are not objective and in some sense depend
on our beliefs, then the meanings of conditionals will also depend on
them.
Douven (2015) discusses the IA in more detail. He gives three
arguments against it, and attacks some of the arguments, which were
presented for it. I will start by discussing his three arguments:
Firstly, some of the popular and promising semantic theories proposed
for conditionals suggest that IA is false. The two theories mentioned by
the author are Stalnaker style modal semantics which uses the notion of
similarity between possible worlds and inferentialist semantics.
Stalnaker semantics can also be interpreted in a way in which it
supports IA. The realistic interpretation held, according to Van Fraassen,
by Lewis is an example of such interpretation. More importantly, Stal-
naker semantics is inconsistent with the Equation (see, e.g., Stalnaker
1976). Therefore appealing to it in order to attack IA and defend the
Equation is not a convincing strategy.
The inferentialist semantics presented in Krzy˙zanowska et al. (2014)
seems to be a very promising theory. Its main claim is:
Deﬁnition 1 “A speaker S’s utterance ‘If p, q’ is true iff (i) q is a
consequence-be it deductive, abductive, inductive, or mixed-of p in
conjunction with S’s background knowledge, (ii) q is not a consequence-
whether deductive, abductive, inductive, or mixed-of S’s background
knowledge alone but not of p on its own, and (iii) p is deductively consis-
tent with S’s background knowledge or q is a consequence (in the broad
sense) of p alone” (Krzy˙zanowska et al. 2014, p. 5).

Rethinking the Acceptability and Probability …
119
If we consider this formulation, it is not clear why inferentialist semantic
supports rejection of IA. The meanings of conditionals are here relative to
the knowledge but not to the beliefs of the speaker. The authors explain
that it would be counter-intuitive to treat as true conditionals whose
consequences were inferred from antecedents with the use of false beliefs.
Douven (2015) presents a different version of the theory (see also
Douven et al. 2020; Douven, Elqayam, and Krzy˙zanowska, this volume):
Deﬁnition 2 “A conditional is true in a given context iff the consequent
follows via a number of steps from the antecedent, possibly in conjunc-
tion with contextually accepted background premises where, ﬁrst, the
steps are valid in deductive, inductive or abductive sense, and second the
consequents does not follow (in the same generalized sense) from the
premises alone” (Douven 2015, p. 38).
According to him the belief sensitivity of conditionals is imposed by
this version of the semantics because the acceptability of potential back-
ground premises depends on the beliefs of the speaker or evaluator. This
dependence causes the second formulation of inferentialist semantics to
collide with IA, but it also makes the proposal vulnerable to the problem
which motivated the phrasing of the ﬁrst formulation.
If the speaker or the evaluator is liberal in accepting the background
premises, for example, he accepts as premises all beliefs of the speaker,
then his false beliefs can be a basis for true conditionals.
For example, let us assume that I believe that the moon is made of
cheese and all my beliefs are acceptable premises for my conditionals. It
is known to all of my interlocutors that I share this preposterous belief.
It is easy to see that according to Deﬁnition 2 a conditional:
(10) If we bring the moon to the surface of the earth, we will end the
world hunger.
Uttered by myself is true. Still, it seems to me that none of my sane
interlocutors would agree to it. The fact that they know that I believe
that the moon is made of cheese seems to make no difference for their
assessment of (10) uttered by me. This seems to suggest that Deﬁnition

120
M. Sikorski
2 is too permissible in the way it relates the truth of a conditional to the
beliefs of the speaker or evaluator.
Secondly, Lindström (1996) proposed rejecting IA as a way out of
the so-called Gärdenfors’ Paradox (Gärdenfors 1986). The paradox shows
that no non-trivial belief system can at the same time satisﬁes both the
Ramsey Test and the following Preservation Condition:
(P) If a proposition B is accepted in a given state of belief K and A
is consistent with the beliefs in K , then B is still accepted in the
minimal change of K needed to accept A. (Gärdenfors 1986, p. 82)
(P) seems to be a very natural assumption while the Ramsey Test, as
we have seen, is a popular procedure for testing conditionals. Lind-
ström shows that we can have both if we drop IA. As we have already
noted, appealing to the Ramsey test, of which the Equation is a
probabilistic reformulation, to defend the Equation seems not to give
us a lot of additional independent evidence. Secondly, the empirical
evidence concerning the effects of relevance on the probability of condi-
tionals suggests that the intuitiveness of the Ramsey test may be limited,
so despite its popularity, it may not be worth preserving.
As an independent justiﬁcation for the rejection IA, Lindström
presents the certeris paribus cases. These are cases in which we cease to
accept a conditional after we have learned some additional evidence. An
example of such a case is:
(11) If I pass today’s exam, I will go for a beer afterward.
Which is true, or at least acceptable, about me. But it ceases to be the
case if I learn that I have another, very hard exam tomorrow. Lind-
ström claims that when I learn about the second exam, (11) changes
its meaning. If (11) conveys the second meaning it is false while if it has
the ﬁrst meaning (the meaning it had before I learned about the second
exam), it is, still, true. This explanation of the ceteris paribus cases seems
to have an unintuitive consequence. Let us consider a discussion between
me and my friend: she knows about the second exam of which I am still
unaware. We disagreed about (11). According to Lindström’s proposal,

Rethinking the Acceptability and Probability …
121
we talk past each other, because each of us means different things by
(11). This is unintuitive.
Finally, Douven (2015) points out that similar proposals were made
for different expressions (e.g., taste predicates, modal operators). This
is undoubtedly true but as far as I know, neither of these proposals is
uncontroversial (see, e.g., Hirvonen et al. 2019). Even if it was the case
that these proposals were uncontroversial, it is not clear why their success
should tell us anything about conditionals. It is possible, and maybe even
plausible, that IA may be false, for example, in the case of taste predicates
for reasons absent in the case of conditionals.
It seems that the postulated relativity should be reﬂected in the way
we use conditionals. As far as I know, the only reported phenomenon
which can suggest it is the so-called Gibbard phenomenon. Consider the
following story:
Sly Pete and Mr. Stone are playing poker on a Mississippi riverboat. It
is now up to Pete to call or fold. My henchman Zack sees Stone’s hand,
which is quite good, and signals its content to Pete. My henchman Jack
sees both hands, and sees that Pete’s hand is rather low, so that Stone’s
is the winning hand. At this point, the room is cleared. A few minutes
later, Zack slips me a note which says ‘If Pete called, he won,’ and Jack
slips me a note which says ‘If Pete called, he lost.’ I know that these notes
both come from my trusted henchmen, but do not know which of them
sent which note. I conclude that Pete folded. (Gibbard 1981, p. 231)
Now according to Gibbard, if both conditionals are true, they would
together with the so-called conditional non-contradiction rule:
CNC ¬((A →¬B) ∧(A →B))
lead to inconsistency. Both conditionals are based on true beliefs and the
support for them seems to be symmetrical. Therefore, there is no reason
why we should ascribe to them different truth values or judge either of
them false. Gibbard concludes that both conditionals are acceptable, and
the existence of such pairs is an argument for NTV. There seems to be a
problem with this argument. The observation that in this situation both

122
M. Sikorski
conditionals are acceptable is in tension with the Equation (and even
more so with QAT).15
It is easy to see that according to the Equation, it cannot be the case
that both (A →B) and (A →¬B) are highly probable at the same
time. Therefore, it is the case that two acceptable conditionals of these
forms cannot have, at the same time, a high probability (>50%). That
seems to show that using the example to argue for NTV to defend the
Equation or AT is misguided.
The phenomenon is very controversial; many different interpretations
were proposed. For example, Lycan (2003) denies that the support for
both conditionals is symmetrical and therefore claims that just one of
them is true. Finally, following Krzy˙zanowska et al. (2014), one can
claim that the meaning of conditionals depends on the beliefs of the
speaker. In the case described by Gibbard, it is clear that both Zack
and Jack based their conditionals on different beliefs based on different
evidence. Because of that, both conditionals, despite their superﬁcial
form, are not in any tension and therefore not inconsistent even when
combined with CNC; they are based on different beliefs and therefore
they express different relations. This interpretation of the phenomenon,
in fact, supports rejections of IA.
It seems to me that it is unclear if natural language speakers are willing
to accept the Gibbard-like pairs of conditionals. Even If they were, it is
even less clear how to interpret this phenomenon. In light of that, this
argument does not make IA signiﬁcantly less plausible.
At the same time, it should be noted that rejection of IA can have
potentially unwelcome consequences. For example, as noted by Lewis
(1976), it is not clear whether we can explain a disagreement about
conditionals if their meaning is relative in the proposed way (in line with
15 It is also discussed in Jackson (1987): “When A is consistent, there is something quite
generally wrong with asserting both (A →B) and (A →not-B). We cannot assert in the
one breath ‘If it rains, the match will be cancelled’ and ‘If it rains, the match will not be
cancelled’. This conforms nicely with [AT]; for, by it, we have As(A →B) = 1 −As(A →
not-B), from the fact that P(B/A) = 1 −P(not-B/A). Thus, the fact that (A →B) and
(A →not-B) cannot be highly assertible together when A is consistent is nicely explained by
[AT] as a reﬂection of the fact that P(B/A) and P(not-B/A) cannot both be high when A is
consistent. Indeed, [AT] explains the further fact that (A →B) and (A →not-B) have a kind
of ‘see-saw’ relationship. As the assertibility of one goes up, the assertibility of the other goes
down.”

Rethinking the Acceptability and Probability …
123
our discussion of (11) above). It was countered by Douven (2015) that
it is not necessary for the disagreement that the arguing parties interpret
the proposition in question in exactly the same way. On the other hand,
it seems that we should agree with Lewis that it may be hard to account
for disagreement on the basis of the theory which makes the meaning of
conditionals relative to opaque features of the speaker (her beliefs). As
we have seen, in the case of Deﬁnitions 1 and 2 it is not clear if such
explanation which does not run into other problems is available.
Finally, it seems that rejecting IA would be in tension with the Equa-
tion. The Equation claims that the probability of a conditional depends
just on the conditional probability of its antecedent given its consequent
and not on any other factors. If we reject IA, we claim that the meaning
of a conditional and therefore its truth condition depends on some other
factors, namely the beliefs of the user. If we assume that the probability
of a sentence is determined by its truth condition, which seems to be a
natural assumption, then it seems that meaning relativized to beliefs does
not correspond well to a probability which is not explicitly relativized.
A number of other triviality proofs were proposed, for example, Carl-
strom and Hill (1978), Milne (2003) or Fitelson (2015).16 As far as I
know, all of these proofs are blocked by NTV but not by rejecting IA.
For example, in order to block a triviality proof from Hájek (1989),
Douven has to claim that no ﬁnite model can represent a rational agent
belief state (Douven 2015). Discussing the plausibility of this assumption
goes beyond this scope of the paper.
It is hard to consider the triviality proofs conclusive arguments against
the Equation. The two discussed ways to block the proofs, despite their
problematic consequences, are available, and they are hardly the only
ones (see, e.g., Bradley 2000 or Sanﬁlippo et al. 2020 which I will brieﬂy
discuss in the next subsection). On the other hand, as far as I know, none
of these ways can be considered especially attractive and therefore the
triviality proofs show, at the very least, that sticking to the Equation is
costly.
Hájek (2012) argued that AT is also susceptible to a triviality proof
analogous to one he presented in Hájek (1994) against the Equation.
16 For discussion see: Hájek and Hall (1994).

124
M. Sikorski
He points there that a plausible conceptualization of the acceptability
has to share features with probability which made it susceptible to his
argument.
3.3
Truth Conditions and Probability
What is the relation between the truth conditions of a sentence and its
probability? Let us start by considering sentences that are not truth-apt
and therefore have no truth conditions. In such cases attributing prob-
ability to such sentences seems to be a category mistake. As we have
already seen, it seems nonsensical to ascribe probabilities to questions
(e.g., “Should I open the window?”) or commands (e.g., “Open the
window!”), uncontroversial and prototypical examples of non-truth-apt
sentences. If a sentence S in question is truth-apt, as I already hinted, a
natural and straightforward interpretation seems to be:
SP The probability of S is the probability of it being true.
This interpretation of the relation between semantics and probability
seems to be uncontroversial to the point that, as far as I know, no alterna-
tive has been explicitly proposed.17 SP captures the relation between the
probabilities of complex sentences and their components, for example,
the general probability rule for disjunction: P(A or B) = P(A) +
P(B) −P(A and B) reﬂects its truth conditions: (A or B) is true iff
(A) is true or (B) is true.
Is the relation the same in the case of conditionals? It seems so. If
we adopt the NTV view we are in the ﬁrst case and, as we have already
shown, we have to retreat from the Equation to AT, which does not claim
anything about the probability of conditionals. Therefore SP is trivially
fulﬁlled; no truth and no probability. Otherwise, we have to explain
how it is possible that conditionals do not have truth values but have
probabilities.
17 Adams (1975) reject SP for conditionals but as far as I understand, he does not provide an
alternative. At the same time, his theory is usually interpreted as describing the acceptability of
conditionals rather than their probability.

Rethinking the Acceptability and Probability …
125
Propositional semantics also adheres to SP. For example, the authors
of Johnson-Laird and Byrne (2002) defend the mental model theory
according to which the truth conditions of natural language conditionals
are those of material implication: (A →B) is true iff (A) is false or
(B) is true. Consequently, they propose a ﬁtting probability deﬁnition:
P(A →B) = P(¬A or B). So, the relation between semantic prop-
erties and probability of conditionals conforms to SP, and therefore the
theory, despite its other well-described shortcomings (see, e.g., Bennett
2003), provides a coherent picture of truth and probability.
In light of that, it is interesting to see if there is a semantic theory
that can provide a basis for the Equation, or conversely what semantic
properties are suggested by it.
The best candidate seems to be trivalent semantics proposed by de
Finetti. The theory is part of a more general subjective Bayesian theory
of reasoning. In his de Finetti (1980)18 he divided knowledge into three
levels. Level 0 describes the objective knowledge and is well described by
the bivalent logic. Level 1 describes categorical knowledge as possessed by
humans and therefore it includes the third logical value uncertain, which
represents a given individual being uncertain about a given sentence.
Finally, Level 2 is human knowledge represented in a graded numer-
ical way. De Finetti’s three-valued semantics for conditionals is a part
of a description of Level 1. According to it, a conditional is true if both
antecedent and consequent are true, is false if the antecedent is true and
consequent is false, and it is uncertain or void if the antecedent is false.
The semantics is often justiﬁed by the analogy between the conditionals
and conditional bets (for more details, see Egré, Rossi, and Sprenger, this
volume and Over and Cruz, this volume). A conditional bet is called
off if its condition is not satisﬁed, similarly a conditional is void if its
antecedent is false (see Table 1). The semantics is supported by the results
of experiments in which participants tend to produce so-called defective
truth tables, that is ones in which conditionals with false antecedents are
judged to be devoid of value (see, e.g., Douven et al. 2020; Over and
Baratgin 2017). On the other hand, the semantics performed poorly
18 See de Finetti (n.d.) and Baratgin et al. (2018) for discussion.

126
M. Sikorski
Table 1
An example of a conditional bet and the corresponding conditional
A
B
Conditional bet (B if A)
(A →B)
P(wn)
w1
1
1
win
1
0.25
w2
1
0
loss
0
0.25
w3
0
1
called off
v
0.25
w4
0
0
called off
v
0.25
in other experiments, for example, Skovgaard-Olsen et al. (2019) or
Douven et al. (2020).19
What do these truth conditions tell us about the probability of
conditionals? In the words of Over and Cruz (2018):
The probability of the conditional if
p then q for de Finetti is the
probability that p&q holds given that the conditional makes a non-void
assertion, that p holds, and this probability is of course the conditional
probability of q given p, P((p&q)|p) = P(q|p).
As we see the semantics implies the Equation. But there seems to be a
hidden assumption used in the derivation of probability. Consider the
following example:
The probability of each of the situations (w1, ..., w4) is 0.25. If we use
the trivalent truth conditions to calculate the probability of (A →B),
we will get 0.25. The conditional is true just in w1, it is false in w2 and
void in w3 and w4. So the probability that (A →B) is true equals 0.25.
At the same time, P(B|A) in the described situation will be 0.5. In order
to equate the probability of (A →B), derived by means of the truth
conditions with P(B|A), we have to condition on the conditional not
being void or, in other words, ignore the cases in which antecedent is false
and therefore the conditional is void during the assessment of probability.
Is this assumption justiﬁed? w3 and w4 seem to be just as legitimate cases
as w1 or w2 and it is not clear why we should ignore them.20
In light of that, at the very least, it is not clear if the assumption neces-
sary for connecting trivalent semantics and Equation is justiﬁed. Perhaps
19 See e.g., Egré et al. (2019). For discussion of defective truth tables see: Baratgin et al. (2018)
or Over and Baratgin (2017).
20 See e.g., van Wijnbergen-Huitink et al. 2015.

Rethinking the Acceptability and Probability …
127
the “void” value can be interpreted in a way that implies that a condi-
tional does not have an objective truth value in false antecedent cases,
and therefore these cases should not contribute to the calculation of its
probability (see Over and Cruz 2018; Over and Cruz, this volume).
If the assumption is granted, the resulting theory has many attractive
features. An example of such theory is a recent version of the trivalent
semantics combined with Equation presented in Sanﬁlippo et al. (2020).
The theory does not validate the import-export principle:
IE P(B →(A →C)) = P((A ∧B) →C)
assumed in Lewis’ proof, and because of that, is not susceptible to this
version of trivialization. Additionally, the authors show that their theory
can be generalized to deal with iterated and nested conditionals. Because
of these features, it is clearly a promising proposal (see also Over and
Cruz, this volume, and Pfeifer, this volume). On the other hand, IE is
often regarded to be plausible and therefore wanted (see, e.g., Egré et al.,
this volume). Secondly, as we have seen there are versions of triviality
arguments that do not use the import-export principle; an example of
such proof was proposed in Hájek (1989).
It seems worthwhile to consider how those theoretical considera-
tions square with the results of psychological experiments. As we have
seen, there is growing empirical evidence suggesting that the Equation
holds only for the positively relevant conditionals. De Finetti seman-
tics, combined with the discussed assumption, supports the unrestricted
Equation and therefore accepting it commits us to the pragmatic expla-
nation of results of, for example, Skovgaard-Olsen et al. (2016b). At the
same time, it is unclear if and how the semantics can be modiﬁed in order
to support the qualiﬁed version of the Equation. Perhaps combining the
truth conditions deﬁned by de Finetti’s truth tables with the additional
requirement of positive relevance would be a way to construct such a
theory. As far as I know, this step has not been taken in the literature.
Therefore it seems that we are dealing here with a curious situation in
which empirical and theoretical considerations pull in opposite direc-
tions. The unrestricted version of the Equation is theoretically justiﬁed
by the corresponding semantics, but not supported by the totality of

128
M. Sikorski
empirical results, while it is not clear if the restricted version supported
by the empirical evidence can be supported by any semantics theory.
The situation is a bit more complicated in the cases of QAT and AT.
That is so because it is not clear what the relation is between the truth
and the acceptability of a given sentence. In light of that, it seems that if
we are to have any theoretical justiﬁcation for QAT or AT, it will come
from their relation to the Equation.
3.4
Probability and Acceptability
In this section, I will discuss the possible conceptual relation between all
three theses.
The relation between probability and acceptability is a well-discussed
topic in philosophy. The most straightforward way to relate the two
notions is the Lockean Thesis21:
LT A proposition ϕ is acceptable iff the probability of ϕ is high.
From the Equation and LT we can deduce QAT. The intuition behind LT
seems, also, to support AT. If categorical acceptance coincides with high
probability then, it seems natural that, if there is something like graded
acceptability, it will coincide with probability. But what if we accept the
NTV and therefore deny that conditionals have probabilities? It seems
that in such a case we have to reject LT in order to be still able to claim
that conditionals have acceptability at all. If we endorse any other theory
of acceptability22 it seems that we are losing the theoretical basis for QAT
and AT. In this place, we should also point out another controversial
issue, namely the differences in our intuitions concerning the accept-
ability and the probability of conditionals. Results from Skovgaard-Olsen
et al. (2016b) found no signiﬁcant differences between assignments of
acceptability and probability to conditionals made by participants. This
suggests that P(A →B) = ac(A →B). On the other hand,
Douven and Verbrugge (2010) found a signiﬁcant difference in the case
21 LT seems to be quite popular, see, e.g., Foley (2009).
22 Alternative theories are usually more complex see, e.g., Proust (2012).

Rethinking the Acceptability and Probability …
129
of inductive and abductive conditionals. A possible explanation is that
Skovgaard-Olsen et al. (2016b) used causal, non-inferential conditionals
while Douven and Verbrugge (2010) used inferential conditionals. If so,
it may be the case that there is a difference in intuitions concerning
acceptability and probability is restricted to the inferential conditionals.
It seems that more evidence should be collected in order to settle this
issue. Replicating both experiments may be a good ﬁrst step.
4
Conclusion
I will conclude by judging how the theses stand against the presented
evidence, then I will discuss the proposed and possible alternatives to the
three theses.
How do the three theses (the Equation, AT, and QAT) stand against
the presented evidence? Let us start with the theoretical considerations.
All three seem to be in a similar situation. There seem to be no strong
theoretical arguments for any of them. The intuitions behind the Ramsey
test seem to be the same intuitions that initially make the theses plau-
sible. Therefore appealing to the test does not give us additional reasons
to believe it. The Equation is supported by de Finetti’s three-valued
semantics, if we ignore the void cases when we consider the probability
of conditionals. QAT is supported by the Equation if we accept LT and
unsupported otherwise. AT seems to be, to some degree, supported by
QAT.
At the same time, we have strong arguments against the Equation in
the form of triviality proofs. Neither of the proofs is conclusive, given the
possible ways to dodge them. On the other hand, they convinced some
philosophers to abandon the Equation (e.g., Stalnaker 1976) and showed
that sticking to it is costly. For example, we have to abandon IA which,
as I tried to show in the third section, is plausible. A triviality argument
of similar strength was also presented against AT. I am not aware of any
comparable theoretical arguments against QAT.
As we have seen, all three theses were traditionally regarded as descrip-
tively true, but the results of the empirical studies seem to paint a
different picture. The situation is more complicated in the case of the

130
M. Sikorski
Equation than in the case of AT and QAT. QAT and AT attracted much
less attention than the Equation but, as far as I know, they were not
supported by the results of any of the relevant studies. AT was discon-
ﬁrmed by Skovgaard-Olsen et al. (2016b) which showed that it fails
in the case of the irrelevant and negatively relevant conditionals, and
Douven and Verbrugge (2010) which showed that it is not supported in
the case of inductive conditionals. QAT performs poorly (Douven and
Verbrugge 2012) in comparison to EST.
The Equation has a long tradition of good performance in empirical
studies. On the other hand, the results of Skovgaard-Olsen et al. (2016b)
strongly suggest, that it fails in the cases of irrelevant and negatively
relevant conditionals. The result was conceptually replicated by a few
subsequent studies. At the same time, as is pointed out in Skovgaard-
Olsen et al. (2016b), the experiments which conﬁrmed the Equation
did not include irrelevant on negatively relevant conditionals and there-
fore did not use a representative sample of conditionals. This seems to
undermine them and together with results of Skovgaard-Olsen et al.
(2016b) suggests that overall the unrestricted Equation is not empirically
adequate. There is some evidence suggesting that the effect of relevance
is pragmatic in nature (e.g., Skovgaard-Olsen et al. 2017) but different
studies suggest that it is not the case (e.g., Krzy˙zanowska et al. 2017;
Douven et al. 2017). In light of all that, it seems that we have neither
theoretical nor empirical reasons for accepting the theses beyond their
initial intuitiveness. Therefore, it seems that their role in the future study
of indicative conditionals should be rethought.
On the other hand, I did not show that any of the theses is false.
Conclusive arguments against them, as far as I know, do not exist and
maybe never will. Speciﬁcally, someone impressed with the intuitiveness
of any of the theses may treat it as a desideratum to be satisﬁed by a
successful theory of conditionals. Even in such cases, the tension between
them and some of the empirical ﬁndings and involved theoretical costs
should remain clear.
Now we can discuss alternative proposals. I will start with the Eviden-
tial Support Theory proposed by Douven (2008). As we have seen, the
core of the theory is the Evidential Support Thesis (EST):

Rethinking the Acceptability and Probability …
131
EST An indicative conditional ‘If A, B’ is assertable/acceptable if and
only if Pr(B|A) is not only high but also higher than Pr(B).
(Douven and Verbrugge 2012, p. 484)
This is a counterproposal to QAT. In Douven and Verbrugge (2012), it
was shown that EST predicts intuitions of natural language users much
better than QAT. This is a clear advantage of EST and a good reason to
prefer it over QAT. On the other hand, as it stands now, this approach
also lacks theoretical justiﬁcation.
EST is not supported by the Equation in a way in which QAT is and,
as far as I know, it is not supported by any proposed semantics for condi-
tionals. Perhaps further work on inferentialist semantics can provide a
theoretical basis for EST.
As we have seen, EST is empirically more successful than QAT because
it classiﬁes irrelevant and negatively relevant conditionals as not accept-
able. Consequently, it seems natural that users of language will judge the
acceptability and the probability of conditionals as lower in such cases.
Skovgaard-Olsen et al. (2016b) showed that this is true. If so, maybe we
can restrict the Equation and AT to be more in line with this ﬁnding. As
we have seen a restricted version of both may look for example:
Equation+/AT+ If P > 0 then P/ac(A →B) = P(C|A)
The Equation+ and AT+ are more consistent with the available empirical
evidence than the original theses. Because of the restriction, they are not
undermined by the results of Skovgaard-Olsen et al. (2016b), but AT+
is still undermined by the results of Douven and Verbrugge (2010).
What about their theoretical position? Once again we lack any theoret-
ical motivation for both theses. The situation is even worse in the case of
the Equation+. There is nothing in it which would block a triviality proof
analogous to Lewis’ restricted to the positively relevant conditionals. The
result of the proof will be that for all positively relevant conditionals
P(A →B) = P(B). This is just as unacceptable as the original unre-
stricted result. The bottom line here seems to be that if the Equation
is proposed for any kind of conditionals we can make Lewis-like argu-
ment for these conditionals. P(A →B) = P(B) is true for irrelevant

132
M. Sikorski
conditionals, but the Equation restricted just to them would be both
uninteresting and empirically inadequate (as suggested by the results of
Skovgaard-Olsen et al. 2016b).
Let us move to theoretical considerations concerning conditionals.
Can they point us toward a new deﬁnition of probability (or accept-
ability)? Triviality proofs do not give us clear help concerning the
probability and acceptability of conditionals. They provide us with a
purely negative lesson concerning the Equation (and AT), and it seems
hard to predict which of the alternative proposals will be susceptible to
analogous triviality proofs.
Perhaps a more promising and natural approach is to start with the
truth conditions proposed by some of the plausible semantics, and on the
basis of that, work out corresponding probability conditions. Most of the
popular semantic theories postulate complex and subtle truth conditions
which translate into similarly complex deﬁnitions of probability.23 For
example, if we combine, the already presented inferentialist semantics
(for more on this semantics and the debate about it, see Cruz and Over,
this volume, Douven et al, this volume, Over and Cruz, this volume, and
Pfeifer, this volume), with SP we will get:
IP The probability of “If p, q” uttered by a speaker S is the proba-
bility that (i)q is a consequence-be it deductive, abductive, inductive,
or mixed-of p in conjunction with S’s background knowledge, (ii)
q is not a consequence-whether deductive, abductive, inductive, or
mixed-of S’s background knowledge alone but not of p on its own,
and (iii) p is deductively consistent with S’s background knowledge
or q is a consequence (in the broad sense) of p alone.
It is easy to see that IP is less elegant and harder to test than the
Equation. At the same time, it is directly justiﬁed by the inferentialist
semantics. That alone puts IP in a better theoretical position than the
Equation and perhaps it is enough to make it worth further studies.
23 As we have seen the material implication theory is an exception. It provides us with truth
conditions that can be easily translated into the deﬁnition of probability. Sadly, both the
deﬁnition of probability and truth conditions proposed by the material implication theory are
unintuitive.

Rethinking the Acceptability and Probability …
133
Can it accommodate the existing evidence concerning the probability
of conditionals? Can we construct trivialization arguments against it or
perhaps show that it is impossible? Answering those questions goes well
beyond the scope of this paper. On the other hand, I hope that this
example shows that there are promising alternatives to the Equation and
further investigation of such alternative proposals is justiﬁed.
Acknowledgments I would like to thank Jan Sprenger, Rafał Urbaniak,
Vincenzo Crupi, Andrea Iacona, Matteo Colombo, Karolina Krzy˙zanowska,
Igor Douven, and the anonymous referees for their useful comments. I would
also thank the editors of this volume, David E. Over and Stefan Kaufmann for
the many suggestions which helped me to improve the paper.
Funding Information
The research was supported by Starting Investigator
Grant No. 640638 (“OBJECTIVITY—Making Scientiﬁc Inferences More
Objective”) of the European Research Council (ERC).
References
Adams, E. W. (1975). The logic of conditionals: An application of probability to
deductive logic. D. Reidel Pub. Co.
Adams, E. W. (1998). A primer of probability logic. Stanford: Csli Publications.
Baratgin, J., Politzer, G., Over, D., & Takahashi, T. (2018). The psychology of
uncertainty and three-valued truth tables. Frontiers in Psychology, 9, 1479.
Barrouillet, P., & Gaufﬁroy, C. (2015). Probability in reasoning: A develop-
mental test on conditionals. Cognition, 137.
Bennett, J. (2003). A philosophical guide to conditionals. Oxford University
Press.
Bradley, R. (2000). A preservation condition for conditionals. Analysis, 60(3),
219–222.
Carlstrom, I. F., & Hill, C. S. (1978). Book review: The logic of conditionals
ernest w. adams. Philosophy of Science, 45(1), 155–158.
Cheng, P. (1997). From covariation to causation: A causal power theory.
Psychological Review, 104, 367–405.
Cruz, N., Over, D., Oaksford, M., & Baratgin, J. (2016). Centering and the
meaning of conditionals.

134
M. Sikorski
de Finetti, B. (1980). Probabilità [probability]. Encyclopedia.
de Finetti, B. (n.d.). La logique de la probabilité. In Actes du congrés inter-
national de philosophie scientiﬁque.
Douven, I. (2008). The evidential support theory of conditionals. Synthese,
164(1), 19–44.
Douven, I. (2015). The epistemology of indicative conditionals: Formal and
empirical approaches. Cambridge University Press.
Douven, I., Elqayam, S., Singmann, H., & van Wijnbergen-Huitink, J. (2020).
Conditionals and inferential connections: Toward a new semantics. Thinking
and Reasoning, 26 (3), 311–351.
Douven, I., Elqayam, S., Singmann, H., & Wijnbergen-Huitink, J. (2017).
Conditionals and inferential connections: A hypothetical inferential theory.
Cognitive Psychology, 101.
Douven, I., & Verbrugge, S. (2010). The adams family. Cognition, 117 (3),
302–318.
Douven, I., & Verbrugge, S. (2012). Indicatives, concessives, and evidential
support. Thinking and Reasoning, 18(4), 480–499.
Edgington, D. (1995). On conditionals. Mind, 104(414), 235–329.
Egré, P., Rossi, L., & Sprenger, J. (2019). De ﬁnettian logics of indicative
conditionals.
Eva, B., Hartmann, S., & Rad, S. R. (2019). Learning from conditionals.
Mind. fzz025.
Evans, J., Handley, S., Neilens, H. L., & Over, D. (2007). Thinking about
conditionals: A study of individual differences. Memory & Cognition, 35,
1772–1784.
Evans, J., Handley, S., & Over, D. (2003). Conditionals and conditional prob-
ability. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition.
Evans, J., & Over, D. (2004). If . Oxford University Press.
Fitelson, B. (2015). The strongest possible lewisian triviality result. Thought: A
Journal of Philosophy, 4(2), 69–74.
Foley, R. (2009). Beliefs, degrees of belief, and the lockean thesis. In F.
Huber & C. Schmidt-Petri (Eds.), Degrees of belief (pp. 37–47). Springer.
Fugard, A., Pfeifer, N., & Mayerhofer, B. (2011). Probabilistic theories of
reasoning need pragmatics too: Modulating relevance in uncertain condi-
tionals. Journal of Pragmatics, 43, 2034–2042.
Fugard, A., Pfeifer, N., Mayerhofer, B., & Kleiter, G. (2011). How people
interpret conditionals: Shifts toward the conditional event. Journal of
Experimental Psychology Learning Memory and Cognition, 37, 635–648.

Rethinking the Acceptability and Probability …
135
Gärdenfors, P. (1986). Belief revisions and the ramsey test for conditionals.
Philosophical Review, 95(1), 81–93.
Gibbard, A. (1981). Two recent theories of conditionals. In W. Harper, R. C.
Stalnaker, & G. Pearce (Eds.), Ifs (pp. 211–247). Reidel.
Hájek, A. (1989). Probabilities of conditionals—Revisited. Journal of Philosoph-
ical Logic, 18(4), 423–428.
Hájek, A. (1994). Triviality on the Cheap? In E. Eells, B. Skyrms, & E.
W. Adams (Eds.), Probability and conditionals: Belief revision and rational
decision (pp. 113–140). Cambridge University Press.
Hájek, A. (2012). The Fall of “Adams’ Thesis”? Journal of Logic, Language and
Information, 21(2), 145–161.
Hájek, A., & Hall, N. (1994). The hypothesis of the conditional construal
of conditional probability. In E. Eells, B. Skyrms, & E. W. Adams (Eds.),
Probability and conditionals: Belief revision and rational decision (p. 75).
Cambridge University Press.
Hirvonen, S., Karczewska, N., & Sikorski, M. P. (2019). On hybrid expres-
sivism about aesthetic judgments. Grazer Philosophische Studien, 96 (4).
Jackson, F. (1987). Conditionals. Blackwell.
Johnson-Laird, P., & Byrne, R. (2002). Conditionals: A theory of meaning,
pragmatics, and inference. Psychological Review, 109, 646–678.
Kölbel, M. (1997). Expressivism and the syntactic uniformity of declarative
sentences. Crítica; revista hispanoamericana de ﬁlosofía, 29, 3–51.
Kölbel, M. (2000). Edgington on compounds of conditionals. Mind,
109(433), 97–108.
Krzy˙zanowska, K., Collins, P. J., & Hahn, U. (2017). Between a condi-
tional’s antecedent and its consequent: Discourse coherence vs. probabilistic
relevance. Cognition, 164, 199–205.
Krzy˙zanowska, K., Wenmackers, S., & Douven, I. (2014). Rethinking
Gibbard’s Riverboat Argument. Studia Logica, 102(4), 771–792.
Lewis, D. (1976). Probabilities of conditionals and conditional probabilities.
Philosophical Review, 85(3), 297.
Lindström, S. (1996). The ramsey test and the indexicality of conditionals:
A proposed resolution of gärdenfors’ paradox. In A. Fuhrmann & H. Rott
(Eds.), Logic, action and information. de Gruyter.
Lycan, W. G. (2003). Real conditionals. Philosophical Quarterly, 53(210), 134–
137.
Milne, P. (2003). The simplest lewis-style triviality proof yet? Analysis, 63.

136
M. Sikorski
Oberauer, K., & Wilhelm, O. (2003). The meaning (s) of conditionals:
Conditional probabilities, mental models, and personal utilities. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning Memory and Cognition, 29, 680–693.
Over, D., & Baratgin, J. (2017). The “defective” truth table: Its past, present,
and future. In The thinking mind: A festschrift for ken manktelow.
Over, D., & Cruz, N. (2018). Probabilistic accounts of conditional reasoning.
Over, D., Hadjichristidis, C., Evans, J., Handley, S., & Sloman, S. (2007). The
probability of causal conditionals. Cognitive Psychology, 54, 62–97.
Pettigrew, R. (2020). What is conditionalization, and why should we do it?
Philosophical Studies, 177 (11), 3427–3463.
Proust, J. (2012). The norms of acceptance. Philosophical Issues, 22(1), 316–
333.
Ramsey, F. P. (1990). General propositions and causality. In D. H. Mellor (Ed.),
Philosophical Papers. Cambridge University Press.
Rott, H. (1986). Ifs, though, and because. Erkenntnis, 25(3), 345–370.
Sanﬁlippo, G., Gilio, A., Over, D. E., & Pfeifer, N. (2020). Probabilities of
conditionals and previsions of iterated conditionals. International Journal of
Approximate Reasoning, 121, 150–173.
Schroeder, M. (2008). What is the frege-geach problem? Philosophy Compass,
3(4), 703–720.
Skovgaard-Olsen, N., Collins, P., Krzy˙zanowska, K., Hahn, U., & Klauer, K.
C. (2019). Cancellation, negation, and rejection. Cognitive Psychology, 108,
42–71.
Skovgaard-Olsen, N., Kellen, D., Krahl, H., & Klauer, K. (2017). Relevance
differently affects the truth, acceptability, and probability evaluations of
’and’, ’but’, ’therefore’, and ’if then’. Thinking and Reasoning, 23.
Skovgaard-Olsen, N., Singmann, H., & Klauer, K. C. (2016a). Relevance and
reason relations. Cognitive Science, 41(S5), 1202–1215.
Skovgaard-Olsen, N., Singmann, H., & Klauer, K. C. (2016b). The relevance
effect and conditionals. Cognition, 150(1), 26–36.
Spohn, W. (2012). The laws of belief: Ranking theory and its philosophical
applications. Oxford University Press.
Sprenger, J., & Hartmann, S. (2019). Bayesian philosophy of science. Oxford
University Press.
Stalnaker, R. (1976). Stalnaker to Van Fraassen. In W. H. C. Hooker (Ed.),
Foundations of probability theory, statistical inference, and statistical theories of
science.

Rethinking the Acceptability and Probability …
137
Talbott, W. (2016). Bayesian epistemology. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The Stan-
ford encyclopedia of philosophy (Winter 2016). Metaphysics Research Lab,
Stanford University.
van Fraassen, B. (1976). Probabilities of conditionals. In W. H. C. Hooker
(Ed.), Foundations of probability theory, statistical inference, and statistical
theories of science.
van Wijnbergen-Huitink, J., Elqayam, S., & Over, D. (2015). The probability
of iterated conditionals. Cognitive Science, 39(4), 788–803.
Vidal, M. & Baratgin, J. (2017). A psychological study of unconnected
conditionals. Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 29(6), 769–781.

Indicative and Counterfactual
Conditionals in the Psychology
of Reasoning
David E. Over and Nicole Cruz
1
Introduction
Our objective in this chapter is to introduce the study of indictive
and counterfactual conditionals in the psychology of reasoning, and to
discuss how psychology can make progress in understanding the rela-
tionship between these conditionals in people’s thinking and reasoning.
There is a great deal of psychological research on both indicative and
counterfactual conditionals, but to a large extent, the two research topics
have not been closely connected in the psychology of reasoning. For
D. E. Over (B)
Psychology Department, Durham University, Durham, UK
e-mail: david.over@durham.ac.uk
N. Cruz
Institute for Psychology, University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria
e-mail: Nicole.Cruz@uibk.ac.at
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Switzerland AG 2023
S. Kaufmann et al. (eds.), Conditionals, Palgrave Studies in Pragmatics, Language
and Cognition, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-05682-6_6
139

140
D. E. Over and N. Cruz
example, Byrne (2017) reviews recent psychological research on counter-
factuals, but does not mention indicative conditionals, even in passing,
while doing so (see Egré and Cozic 2016, for a logical and philosophical
review that covers both conditionals). We can illustrate the importance
of relating the two topics using the classical example of the difference
between these two conditionals (Adams 1970):
(1) If Oswald did not kill Kennedy, then someone else did.
(2) If Oswald had not killed Kennedy, then someone else would have.
The indicative (1) and counterfactual (2) can appear to be quite different
from each other, with (1) probably true, and (2) probably false. Someone
who uses (2) also suggests that its antecedent is false, and that is not so of
(1). We will focus in this chapter on uses of the counterfactual form that
suggest, at least initially, that the antecedent is false (see Edgington 2014,
on other uses). But suppose new scientiﬁc forensic evidence suddenly
makes it probable that Oswald did not kill Kennedy. We could then
infer, by modus ponens (MP), the believable conclusion that someone
else did. For in this case, (2) would no longer seem improbable to us,
and we would have a high level of conﬁdence in the MP conclusion.
After learning that the antecedent of (2) is probable, we would increase
our conﬁdence in (2), but what then would be the difference between
(1) and (2)?
When we no longer believe that the antecedent of a counterfactual
conditional is probably false, we will say that it collapses to an indica-
tive conditional (Over 2020). It is an empirical question whether a
given counterfactual, like (2), collapses to a given indicative, like (1), in
people’s judgments in circumstances like those we have described. Our
example occurs in a context of dynamic inference and belief updating
(Oaksford and Chater 2013, 2020). But our position is that psychol-
ogists of reasoning can throw light on the topic of how indicative
and counterfactual conditionals are related to each other, by exam-
ining contexts in which people come to believe that the antecedent of
the counterfactual is probably true and, more generally, update their
beliefs about conditionals, changing counterfactuals into indicatives, and
indicatives into counterfactuals.

Indicative and Counterfactual Conditionals …
141
Our topic is far too substantial to be thoroughly covered in a single
chapter, but we can get insight into it by considering MP and other infer-
ences in conditional reasoning that have been, and could be, studied
in the psychology of reasoning. Experiments have already been run
on MP and counterfactuals, which we will come to below, but these
can be greatly extended, and experiments developed for other forms of
conditional reasoning. Psychology should tell us, if any subject does,
something about people’s conditional beliefs, conditional reasoning from
those beliefs, and belief updating. We will introduce, later below, the
new Bayesian approach in the psychology of reasoning, which has the
precise goal of understanding people’s degrees of belief, as reﬂected in
their subjective probability judgments, and how these beliefs are updated
in dynamic reasoning (Oaksford and Chater 2013, 2020). But we will
begin by making more points about how counterfactuals and indicatives
are related to each other as our beliefs change.
2
The Rerunning History Hypothesis
We have given an example above of how a counterfactual can collapse,
as we have put it, to an indicative conditional, as a result of learning that
the antecedent is probably true. This learning happens as we go forward
in time. But much previous research has focused on a hypothesis about
evaluating counterfactuals by going back in time to earlier beliefs. Adams
(1975) termed this proposal the “epistemic past tense” view. It is more
intuitively called the rerunning history hypothesis (Kaufmann 2005 this
volume; Pearl 2013). According to it, a counterfactual like (2) can be
evaluated by returning to a corresponding indicative conditional before
we came to believe that its antecedent is probably false. For the classic
example, that indicative would be:
(3) If Oswald does not kill Kennedy, then someone else will.
We will say that an indicative conditional expands to a counterfactual
when we come to believe that its antecedent is probably false. In this
sense, (3) expands to become (2) as we acquire a high degree of belief

142
D. E. Over and N. Cruz
that Oswald did kill Kennedy. The rerunning history hypothesis goes in
the other direction. It is the claim that, to assess (2), we go back to a time
before we became convinced that Oswald killed Kennedy. At that earlier
time, we would judge (3) to be improbable, just as we later judge (2)
to be improbable. There is some experimental support for the result of
formulating this claim as a psychological hypothesis and restricting it to
a type of counterfactual that could be justiﬁed by referring to a possible
causal relationship (Over et al. 2007, Experiment 3; Over 2017).
Nevertheless, the rerunning history hypothesis has some intuitive
counterexamples if it is not carefully qualiﬁed (Adams 1975; Edgington
2008, 2014; Kaufmann 2005). We must be careful about the beliefs we
retain when we mentally rerun history. A simple example can illustrate
the problem. Suppose a fair coin is being tossed, and a friend of ours is
going to call “heads” or “tails” for the outcome. Consider this indicative
conditional:
(4) If she calls “heads”, then she will be right.
The intuitive probability of (4) is 0.5. But assume further that, in fact,
she decided to call “tails”, and that the coin does come up tails. Our
friend has turned out to be right in calling “tails”, but we make a
judgment about this counterfactual:
(5) If she had called “heads”, then she would have been right.
By the rerunning history hypothesis, the probability of (5), after the
coin toss, is supposed to equal the probability of (4), 0.5, before the
coin toss. But intuitively, the probability of (5) is 0. We could try to
save the hypothesis by taking the knowledge that the coin will come up
tails with us when we evaluate (4) at the earlier time, as that will make
the probability of (4) intuitively 0 as well (see Kaufmann 2005, for a
normative analysis designed to solve the problems with the rerunning
history hypothesis). But with any such qualiﬁcation of the hypothesis,
we are not fully returning, in a mental simulation, to an earlier time
before we came to believe the antecedent of (5) is false. People may do

Indicative and Counterfactual Conditionals …
143
that as a way of processing some counterfactuals, as Over et al. (2007)
conﬁrm to some extent. But in the present example, we are apparently
constructing a representation in which the antecedent of (5) is uncertain,
while retaining the belief that the result of the coin toss was tails.
We might get the same effect in an experiment by asking partici-
pants to assume, at a given time, that the antecedent of (5) has become
uncertain, and then asking them to evaluate:
(6) If she did call “heads”, then she was right.
In (6), we have an indicative conditional with the same probability,
0, as the counterfactual (5). In the experiment, we could ask partici-
pants for their conﬁdence in a counterfactual like (5), and to take (5)
as a premise along with the supposition that the antecedent of (5) is
uncertain, rather than deﬁnitely false. On this basis, we could ask them
whether the indicative (6) followed in an inference, and what their conﬁ-
dence in (6) was as a conclusion. This kind of inference could be another
way to collapse a counterfactual to an indicative conditional. It could
provide further evidence that people go mentally back in time when eval-
uating counterfactuals, and that differences in the intuitive probability
of counterfactuals just come from the different pieces of information
people carry with them when they go into this mental process. An exper-
iment like this could allow us to narrow down the factors that determine
whether a piece of information will be retained or left aside when going
back in time and give us a better understanding of the scope of the
rerunning history analysis as a psychological hypothesis.
Going in the other direction, we could also see whether the indica-
tive (6) expands to the counterfactual (5) by using (6) as a premise,
along with the supposition that its antecedent is probably false, and
then observing whether participants in the experiment inferred that the
counterfactual (5) followed with the same probability as (6). These exper-
iments could help us discover how people process the two types of
conditional and relate them to each other, either collapsing or expanding
one into the other, as they update their beliefs.

144
D. E. Over and N. Cruz
3
Lewis’ Dialogue Technique and MP
We referred above to a form of MP in which the conditional premise is
a counterfactual, but the categorical premise states that the antecedent
of the conditional is in fact true or probable, rather than false. One
might ask at this point how such inferences can be made sense of in
a psychological experiment, when the use of the counterfactual form
often suggests that the antecedent is false, and yet the categorical state-
ment afﬁrms it to be true. Lewis (1973, 1.7) gave us a way to deal with
this problem. He used a thought experiment to support his position
that MP is logically valid for counterfactuals (and not merely because its
premises are inconsistent). He described a dialogue in which one speaker
asserts a counterfactual, suggesting pragmatically, as Lewis held, that its
antecedent is false. An apparently more knowledgeable second speaker
then corrects the suggestion, by reporting that the antecedent is actually
true. At this point, Lewis argued, the premises for MP ﬁt well together
pragmatically, and the conclusion of the inference intuitively follows.
One can question whether Lewis’ dialogue technique really solves the
normative problem he was worried about. He was trying to argue that
MP is valid for counterfactuals, justifying its use as a rule of inference in
his formal system. He did not illustrate his thought experiment with (1)
and (2), but as we have seen above, a dialogue can cause (2) to collapse to
(1). At least awkwardly for Lewis, he did use the difference between (1)
and (2) to try to argue that indicative conditionals and counterfactuals
are essentially different from each other (Lewis 1973, 1.1). He also used
possible worlds for the semantics of counterfactuals, and not subjective
probabilities or degrees of belief (see Jeffrey 1991, on de Finetti). The
semantic contents of Lewis’ indicative and counterfactual conditionals
do not change when they have different subjective probabilities, and so
it is unclear whether he could explain how (2) can become equivalent
to the supposedly totally different (1) in the course of a dialogue, where
degrees of belief are updated.
In any event, Thompson and Byrne (2002) used Lewis-style dialogues
in experiments on counterfactuals and found that their participants
happily endorsed the resulting MP inferences. An important conclusion
not drawn by Thompson and Byrne from their experiments is that

Indicative and Counterfactual Conditionals …
145
people do not understand a counterfactual to imply logically that its
antecedent is false. We can infer from their studies of dialogues between
two people that the ﬁrst speaker’s suggestion that the antecedent of a
counterfactual is false is easily canceled by the second speaker in the
dialogue, collapsing the counterfactual to the equivalent of an indicative
conditional. If that were not so, the experimental participants would
ﬁnd the dialogue inconsistent. It is logically valid to infer any conclusion
from an inconsistency in many logical systems for conditionals (Adams
1998; Lewis 1973; Stalnaker 1968), but it seems likely that ordinary
people would be uncertain what to infer from a logical inconsistency in
the premises for MP, and there does not appear to be evidence of this in
the results of Thompson and Byrne (2002).
Some psychologists have deﬁned a counterfactual in a way that makes
it inconsistent with the truth of its antecedent. For them, it supposedly
represents the negation of its antecedent as a deﬁnite fact, unqualiﬁed by
a degree of belief (Johnson-Laird and Byrne 2002). The data on MP and
counterfactuals shows what is wrong with doing that. We can proﬁtably
study conditionals like (2) in logic, linguistics, and psychology for some
time without being able to deﬁne their class as precisely as we would
hope to in the end (Adams 1975, Ch. 4; Lewis 1973, 1.1), but our ﬁrst
step should not be a deﬁnition of “counterfactual” that causes problems
for that study. Moreover, using and understanding a counterfactual often
depends on a degree of belief less than certainty that the antecedent is
false. To represent such beliefs, and how they are updated over time,
we can adopt the new Bayesian approach in psychology of reasoning,
in which degrees of belief, and equivalently subjective probabilities, are
fundamental.
4
The New Bayesian Paradigm
in the Psychology of Reasoning
In traditional psychology of reasoning, the study of reasoning was usually
focused on inferences from arbitrary assumptions, which were sometimes
highly unbelievable (Evans and Over 2004). This traditional approach

146
D. E. Over and N. Cruz
was also binary, in classifying propositions only as true or false, and infer-
ences as only valid or invalid. In contrast, the new Bayesian approach
in the psychology of reasoning (Elqayam and Over 2013; Oaksford
and Chater 2007, 2020; Over 2009, 2020; Over and Cruz 2018) takes
account of the fact that real-world reasoning, in everyday contexts and
in science, is primarily from degrees of belief, or hypotheses that have
reasonable subjective probability. In this reasoning, we do not usually
accept the premises and conclusions as deﬁnitely true, but rather think
of them as more or less probable. We judge the inferences to be relatively
strong or weak, and not only valid or invalid, and our reasoning is often
dynamic and aimed at belief updating, changing our degrees of belief, as
new evidence and information is acquired and processed. Taking these
points into account, the new Bayesian paradigm is developing radically
different theories of reasoning, and of conditionals, than were found in
the traditional binary paradigm (Oaksford and Chater 2013, 2020; Over
2020; Over and Cruz 2018).
The new approaches have taken versions of a mental process called
the Ramsey test as a basis for evaluating conditionals. Ramsey’s original
proposal was restricted to indicative conditionals (Ramsey 1929/1990),
but Stalnaker (1968) extended the test to counterfactuals like (2). In
this version, we evaluate a conditional, if p then q, by hypothetically
supposing p, while making minimal changes to preserve consistency in
our beliefs, and then judging our degree of belief in q under this suppo-
sition of p. The clause about minimal changes to preserve consistency
is what allows the test to be applied to conditionals with antecedents
that are known, or believed to be, false. The result is that our degree of
belief in the conditional, P(if p then q), its believability, is the conditional
subjective probability of q given p, P(q|p). The Ramsey test has long
been of great signiﬁcance in logic and philosophy (Edgington 1995), and
it is now fundamental to probabilistic accounts of conditionals (Evans
and Over 2004; Over 2020; Over and Cruz 2018; Pearl 2013).
The consequences of the Ramsey test are so important in Bayesian
accounts of conditionals and conditional reasoning that P(if p then q)
= P(q|p) has simply been called the Equation (Edgington 1995; Oaks-
ford and Chater 2007). A conditional that satisﬁes the Equation has
been called a probability conditional in the literature (Adams 1998), and

Indicative and Counterfactual Conditionals …
147
also a conditional event (de Finetti 1936, 1937, 1964, 1995; Pfeifer this
volume). The material conditional of binary extensional logic, logically
equivalent to not-p or q, is not a probability conditional, since P(not-
p or q) only coincides with P(q|p) in extreme cases (Gilio and Over
2012). Lewis (1976) also proved that conditionals like his (Lewis 1973)
and Stalnaker’s (Stalnaker 1968), which are objectively true or false at
every possible world, are not probability conditionals. The probabilities
of their conditionals will not often be the conditional probability (on
Lewis’ proof, see Douven and Dietz 2011, Edgington 1995, Evans and
Over 2004, pp. 27–30; Sanﬁlippo et al. 2020).
In a research line going back to de Finetti’s work, a Jeffrey semantics
(Jeffrey 1991) can be given for the probability conditional if p then q by
specifying that it is true in the case in which p & q is true, and false in
the case in which p & not-q is true. In the cases in which not-p is true,
it has the subjective conditional probability P(q|p) as its value, which
can vary from person to person, with different beliefs, and context to
context, as in the kind of dialogues we have used as examples above.
In what we are calling Jeffrey semantics, P(q|p) is the expected value, or
prevision in de Finetti’s terms, of if p then q as a conditional assertion
(Over 2020; Over and Baratgin 2017; Over and Cruz 2018; Pfeifer and
Kleiter 2009; Sanﬁlippo et al. 2018, 2020). To take this Bayesian line
is to think of truth and falsity as having epistemic utility, and P(q|p)
is then the expected epistemic utility of an assertion of if p then q,
expressing someone’s conditional belief. Epistemic utility, like subjec-
tive probability, can vary from person to person, and from context to
context. Truth has high utility for dedicated scientists, and low utility
for propagandists, and such differences could potentially be measured in
psychological studies.
Do people understand conditionals in natural language as probability
conditionals? In psychological research, the Equation becomes the condi-
tional probability hypothesis that people will judge the probability of a
natural language conditional, P(if p then q), to be P(q|p). The ﬁrst exper-
iments on the conditional probability hypothesis used rather abstract
indicative conditionals about arbitrary frequency distributions. Evans
et al. (2003) asked participants to imagine a pack of cards with shapes

148
D. E. Over and N. Cruz
of different colors printed on them. There were 4 cards with yellow
diamonds, 1 card with a yellow circle, 16 with red circles, and 16 with
red diamonds. Participants were then given a conditional like:
(7) If the card is yellow (y), then it has a circle printed on it (c).
To ensure that participants interpreted (7) as singular rather than general
conditional, they were told that the conditional was about one card that
was going to be randomly drawn from the pack, rather than about a set
of cards (see Cruz and Oberauer 2014, on general conditionals). Partic-
ipants were asked how likely (7) was to be true. By the conditional
probability hypothesis, they were predicted to respond that P(if y then
c) was P(c|y), which in the example was 1/5, or 0.2. The hypothesis was
conﬁrmed for the majority of participants in this and similar experiments
(Oberauer and Wilhelm 2003). There was also a minority response that
P(if y then c) was the probability of the conjunction, P(y & c), 1/37
in our example. Such a minority conjunctive response is typically found
in experiments of this type, about invented frequency distributions, but
it tends to be replaced by the conditional probability response as the
participants make more and more probability judgments (Fugard et al.
2011).
There is a deep theoretical correspondence between a probability
conditional, which satisﬁes the Equation, P(if p then q) = P(q|p), and a
conditional bet on q given p (de Finetti 1936/1995; Ramsey 1926/1990;
Sanﬁlippo et al. 2018, 2020). Consider again the pack of 37 cards that
we described above for example (7). Suppose that we randomly pick a
card from this pack and assert as a conditional bet, “If the card is yellow
then we bet it has a circle printed on it”. For a clear analysis, let us look
at this conditional bet more formally as a kind of “lottery”. Let us also
say that we know the above frequency distribution in the pack and are
prepared to pay 0.2 of a Euro, 20 cents, for a “ticket” that will have
the following payout conditions. We will win 1 Euro when y & c is the
outcome of the random selection of the card, and we get 0 Euro when
y & not-c is the outcome and lose the 20 cents. If the card is red, and
not-y holds, then the bet will be called off, becoming “void”, and we will

Indicative and Counterfactual Conditionals …
149
get our 20 cents back. It is easy to see that the expected value of this bet
is 20 cents, and that the probability of our winning the bet is the condi-
tional probability of the y & c outcome given the bet is non-void, that y
holds, which is P((y & c)|y) = P(c|y) = 0.2.
If (7) is a probability conditional, we can say that (7) is “true” when
y & c is the outcome, is “false” when y & not-c is the outcome, and
is in some sense “void” when not-y holds, having no objective truth
value. These non-binary truth conditions for a probability conditional
parallel the non-binary payout conditions for a conditional bet. In an
exact parallel with the conditional bet, the probability of (7) is the prob-
ability of the y & c outcome given the assertion is non-void, that y holds,
which is P((y & c)|y) = P(c|y) = 0.2 Psychologists have conﬁrmed that
there is this close parallel between indicative conditionals and conditional
bets in people’s judgments (Baratgin et al. 2013; Oberauer and Wilhelm
2003; Politzer et al. 2010). Using Jeffrey semantics, and representing
“true” with 1 and “false” with 0, we can derive (Jeffrey 1991) that the
expected value of the assertion of (7) in this context is 0.2.
Notice that there is a strong case for describing (7) as in some sense
“void” when not-y holds (de Finetti 1936/1995; Ramsey 1929/1990).
We would not look directly at a red card and, referring to it, begin
a conditional by saying, “If the card is yellow …”. We would instead
switch to a counterfactual beginning, “If the card had been yellow, …”
We can predict that, in the not-y outcome, the probability of (7), 0.2,
would be transferred to the corresponding counterfactual (Baratgin et al.
2013, p. 312). This “switch” prediction has not yet been tested in an
experiment, but it could be, using:
(8) If the card had been yellow, then it would have had a circle printed
on it.
Probability judgments about (8) could be compared with probability
judgments about (7) as expressed before the draw. There are also experi-
mental techniques for making the outcomes of random draws uncertain
(Baratgin et al. 2013). Using these techniques would allow us to study
the relation between (7), (8), and this past tense indicative:

150
D. E. Over and N. Cruz
(9) If the card was yellow, then it had a circle printed on it.
Such possible extensions to the original experiments could give us some
insight into the relation between indicatives and counterfactuals and the
rerunning history hypothesis about the relation between the two kinds
of conditional, when these are about frequency distributions.
5
Conditionals and Relations
Over et al. (2007) studied “causal” indicative and counterfactual condi-
tionals that could be assessed for probability on the basis of evidence
about causal relations, rather than by given frequency distributions,
as in the example about cards above. A counterfactual that could be
justiﬁed by referring to a causal relation between unemployment and
homelessness is:
(10) If unemployment had risen, then homelessness would have
increased.
For each conditional if p then q in the experiments, participants gave
their judgment about P(if p then q), and their judgments about the
four logical possibilities, P(p & q), P(p & not-q), P(not-p & q), and
P(not-p & not-q), which were to sum to 100%. In Experiment 3 of
this article, focused on counterfactuals, participants gave their judgments
about the four logical possibilities at a time ﬁve years in the past. An
implicit conditional probability judgment, P(q|p), could be derived for
each participant by using P(p & q)/(P(p & q) + P(p & not-q)), and
that implicit P(q|p) compared with the explicit P(if p then q). The
results conﬁrmed the conditional probability hypothesis for counterfac-
tual conditionals like (10), and there were no signiﬁcant conjunctive
responses. There was also initial evidence for the rerunning history
hypothesis about counterfactuals, which we referred to above, because
the judgments about the four possibilities concerned a time ﬁve years
earlier than the counterfactual assertion.

Indicative and Counterfactual Conditionals …
151
Over et al. (2007) also found support for the conditional probability
hypothesis in their ﬁrst two experiments, for present tense indicative
conditionals like, “If global warming continues then London will be
ﬂooded”. But they did not study past tense indicative conditionals, such
as:
(11) If unemployment rose last year, then homelessness increased.
We would expect that (7) to (9) would not be signiﬁcantly different in
probability, and similarly for (10) and (11). We would also expect a reply
to the assertions of (8) and (10), in dialogue, with the minor premise
for MP, not to have a signiﬁcant effect on the probabilities of (8) and
(10). Whether these intuitions would match those of participants in an
experiment is an open question, but studying the possible differences
between conditionals like (7), (8), (9), (10), and (11), on the one hand,
and (1) and (2) on the other, should lead to a greater understanding of
the similarities and differences between indicatives and counterfactuals.
There is evidence, in some recent psychological research, that people’s
judgments of the probability of indicative conditionals, if p then q,
deviates from the corresponding conditional probability when there is
no causal or epistemic relation between p and q (but see Pfeifer, this
volume). Skovgaard-Olsen et al. (2016a, b) have results supporting
this conclusion about a possible qualiﬁcation, or limitation, of the
conditional probability hypothesis. They distinguish between positive
relevance, when P(q|p) > P(q|not-p), and p is a reason to increase belief
in q, negative relevance, when P(q|not-p) > P(q|p), and p is a reason
to decrease belief in q, and irrelevance, when P(q|p) = P(q|not-p).
Irrelevance produces a missing-link conditional (Douven 2016, 2017).
Without positive relevance, people tended to judge that P(if p then q)
was lower than P(q|p). That is, in these experiments, people assigned a
lower probability to if p then q when p did not raise the probability of
q. The underlying criterion here is delta-p: P(q|p) – P(q|not-p). When
delta-p is positive, p raises the probability of q, and there is positive rele-
vance. When delta-p is 0, there is irrelevance and a missing-link, and
when delta-p is negative, there is negative relevance. There is a relevance
effect when p does not have positive relevance for q, and P(if p then q)
is less than P(q|p).

152
D. E. Over and N. Cruz
It is plausible that people would expect a speaker to be able to support
a counterfactual like (10) by reference to a causal relation, which would
make delta-p positive. They would interpret the speaker as intending to
convey that such a causal relation exists, and their probability could be
about the existence of this relation. For example, people who doubt that
unemployment causes homelessness might see (10) and (11) as missing-
link conditionals. They might infer as well, pragmatically, that a speaker
who asserts (10) or (11) has an unlikely, as they believe, causal link in
mind, and their low probability judgment could be about the existence
of that link.
We have just suggested a pragmatic explanation of why missing-link
conditionals can be assigned a relatively low probability in experiments,
producing a relevance effect. Cruz et al. (2016) and Lassiter (2022)
make further pragmatic points about missing-link conditionals. We
could make similar suggestions about conditionals where there is nega-
tive relevance, but we will mostly restrict our points here to missing-link
conditionals. Consider the stronger theory, which we will call truth
condition inferentialism, that a missing-link conditional is not only prag-
matically misleading when asserted, but not true, because the truth
conditions for if p then q require a deductive, or a sufﬁciently strong
inductive or abductive, connection between p and q (Douven et al.
2020; Mirabile and Douven 2020). These inferentialists are uncertain
whether a missing-link conditional is false or neither true nor false
(Douven et al. 2020). But in any case, some of the examples of missing-
link conditionals used to try to support the theory are so pragmatically
bizarre, “If raccoons have no wings they cannot breathe under water”
(Krzy˙zanowska et al. 2017), that it is hard to see what relevance they can
have to understanding ordinary discourse, where non-bizarre missing-
link conditionals are not uncommon. To investigate these uses more fully,
we suggest studying a wider range of linguistic forms, conditional and
non-conditional, and including more realistic examples.
Cruz et al. (2016) found that participants’ probability judgments for
missing-link indicative conditionals were reduced to a degree similar
to their probability judgments for conjunctions and disjunctions with
missing links. This indicates that the effect of a missing-link on prob-
ability judgments cannot be speciﬁc to conditionals. And if it is not

Indicative and Counterfactual Conditionals …
153
speciﬁc to conditionals, then how can it be a central, let alone the sole,
criterion for the meaning of conditionals? The ﬁnding that the effects
of missing links are not speciﬁc to conditionals suggests that the role
of a missing-link is not to determine the truth conditions of a state-
ment, conditional or not, but that its impact on probability judgments
lies elsewhere. One could hardly argue, for example, that a missing-link
conjunction, p & q, was false, or neither true nor false, when p and q
were both true. Future studies could also include missing-link counter-
factuals, and other conditional speech acts such as conditional promises
(see also Over 2020, on missing-link disjunctions).
Consider an example of a conditional promise. A father promises his
daughter that, if she gets a distinction in her piano exam, he will buy her
a new bike, when he intends to buy her the bike in any event, because
she has already been working hard for the exam. He always rewards hard
work, and not merely getting the highest grades, and for participants,
in an experiment, who knew these facts about him, delta-p would be 0.
Suppose the daughter gets the distinction, and the father buys her the
bike. Then the father would seem to be “as good as his word”, and it
appears highly unlikely to us that the participants would judge his orig-
inal promise to have been untrue and a lie, because of their conﬁdence
in the perfectly good, in our view, missing-link counterfactual that, if his
daughter had not got the distinction, he would have bought her the bike
anyway.
There is strong experimental evidence that the problem with a
missing-link conditional is not that it is false, or neither true nor false
(Wang et al. 2022). Skovgaard-Olsen et al. (2017) ran a truth table study
in which participants were asked, for cases of positive relevance, irrele-
vance, and negative relevance, whether if p then q was true or false when p
and q were both true. For all three degrees, they responded that if p then
q is “true” in that truth table row (Skovgaard-Olsen et al. 2017, Fig. 1).
Truth condition inferentialism implies, contrary to these ﬁndings, that
the participants should have responded, for that row, with “false” for if
p then q when there was negative relevance, and with “false”, or “neither
true nor false”, when there was irrelevance.
Truth condition inferentialism allows if p then q to be “true” when p is
true and q is false, making MP an “invalid” inference form. It proposes

154
D. E. Over and N. Cruz
that a conditional if p then q is true if there is a deductive, inductive, or
abductive relation between p and q, but p can be true and q false when
there is an inductive or abductive relation between p and q. As Mirabile
and Douven (2020) remark, their “… account is consistent with there
being true conditionals with a true antecedent and a false consequent …”
(see also Krzy˙zanowska et al. 2014). Inductive and abductive arguments
provide only inconclusive grounds for a conclusion, and consequently
such grounds can exist when p is true and q is false. However, the results
of Skovgaard-Olsen et al. (2017) show that the participants judge if p
then q false when p is true and q is false for all degrees of relevance
(Skovgaard-Olsen et al. 2017, Fig. 1). More generally, MP is among the
most highly endorsed inferences in the psychology of reasoning (Evans
and Over 2004), and supporters of truth condition inferentialism have
not produced an example in which if p then q is intuitively true when p
is true and q false, where neither p nor q contain conditionals.
Let us consider:
(12) If Lincoln was assassinated, then John Wilkes Booth did it.
The evidence that Booth caused Lincoln’s death by shooting him is
extremely strong, and so by the inferentialist truth conditions, (12) could
be “true” even if Lincoln was assassinated and yet Booth did not do it. In
this way, MP would not always preserve truth and so would be “invalid”.
But we do not see how (12) can be true if Booth was innocent, and
someone else was responsible for the assassination.
There are contexts in which missing-link conditionals are pragmati-
cally felicitous, such as when a fair coin is tossed to determine who will
serve ﬁrst in a tennis match. Consider (4) again, about calling “heads”
while a fair coin is tossed. This is a missing-link conditional: there is
no relation between calling “heads” and the coin landing heads. Truth
condition inferentialism implies that (4) should be as unacceptable as
any other missing-link conditional. Yet intuitively the probability of (4)
is 0.5, and we would expect participants in an experiment to agree with
that. There would be no relevance effect in this case, and truth condition
inferentialists themselves point out that explaining people’s probability
judgments about conditionals is a challenging problem for them (see

Indicative and Counterfactual Conditionals …
155
Douven et al. 2020; Mirabile and Douven 2020, who acknowledge some
of the problems and open questions in their theory).
The results of Skovgaard-Olsen et al. (2019) provide evidence, for
their materials, that the relevance requirement in conditionals is a
conventional implicature, which can be seen as an aspect of semantic
meaning over and above truth conditions (see also Skovgaard-Olsen
2020). But conventional inferentialism is like truth condition inferen-
tialism in having a problem with conditionals like (4) and with non-
interference conditionals, such as the following example from Douven
(2016):
(13) If we triple her salary, Bettie will leave the Department.
Supporters of conventional inferentialism also must explain why their
account does not apply to conditionals like (13). Some inferentialists
have gone so far as to deny that non-interference conditionals are condi-
tionals, dismissing them as “unconditionals” (Douven et al. 2020). But
(13) looks like an acceptable conditional to us, as does this linked
counterfactual:
(14) If we had tripled her salary, Bettie would have left the Department.
Research on inferentialism is further limited by the paucity of studies
in which the polarity of the conditionals is manipulated, with AA (afﬁr-
mative antecedent, afﬁrmative consequent), AN (afﬁrmative antecedent,
negated consequent), NA, and NN examples (but see Over et al. 2007).
Such a polarity manipulation can produce many missing-link examples
that are hard to dismiss as “unconditionals”. Here is an NA example:
(15) If our friends are not at Westminster Abbey (not-w), then they are
in London (l ).
A speaker using (15) might believe that the friends have reason to be in
London that has nothing to do with being, or not being, at the Abbey.
Note as well that delta-p is (slightly) negative for this use of (15), with
P(l|w) = 1 greater than P(l|not-w), which we can imagine is high but

156
D. E. Over and N. Cruz
less than 1. Yet (15) is not at all infelicitous or odd, and we would make
the same points about the counterfactual corresponding to (15). An AN
example would be, “If you turn the key, the car will not start”, used when
the car is out of fuel. Inferentialists have to rule out these examples as
“unconditionals”, but that stipulation decreases the falsiﬁability of their
theory, if it does not remove it completely (Cruz et al. 2016; Lassiter
2022). They have to say more than that their theory applies to all uses
of “if” that do not falsify it.
A related point on falsiﬁability concerns the ﬁnding that the believ-
ability of a conditional is affected by the believability of its consequent,
regardless of the presence of a deductive, inductive, or abductive relation
between the antecedent and consequent (Douven et al. 2018, 2020).
The conditional probability hypothesis implies this ﬁnding, because
P(q|p) will be high when P(q) is high and q is independent of p.
But puzzlingly, this absence of an effect of an inferential connection on
people’s judgments about conditionals was interpreted by some infer-
entialists (Douven et al. 2018, 2020) as evidence in favor of their
theory. Their argument is that the absence of the effect of an inferen-
tial connection in conditionals is like belief bias in inferences, which is
the tendency to be affected by the believability of the conclusion of an
inference when making a judgment about its deductive validity (Evans
and Over 2004). But it is a mystery to us how this evidence against an
effect of inferential connections—deductive, inductive, or abductive—
can be recast as evidence for the essential place of these connections
in people’s understanding of conditionals. The conditional probability
hypothesis is directly supported by the “belief bias” results without
auxiliary hypotheses and analogies.
A further important problem for inferentialism, which limits the
extent to which it can be subjected to empirical test, is that it does
not specify a logic, either for its “real” conditionals or its “uncondi-
tionals”, although truth conditional inferentialism seemingly implies the
highly counterintuitive (as we see it) position that MP is “invalid” for the
former, but valid for the latter. The role of relations in conditionals has
a clear formal speciﬁcation in other accounts. For example, Stalnaker’s
extended Ramsey test can be applied to (13), (14), and (15). These are
not “unconditionals” for him, but perfectly good conditionals, as they are

Indicative and Counterfactual Conditionals …
157
for Lewis (1973). Crupi and Iacona (in press) and Rott (2019) analyze
conditionals in the context of theories of explanatory power, without
committing to a particular theory of the semantics of conditionals. But
the probability conditional has a fully speciﬁed formal theory of condi-
tional reasoning, as we will explain in the next section. It has its own
logical system that is sometimes called System P (Gilio 2002), and Adams
(1998) proves that it is sound, complete, and decidable.
6
The Probability Conditional
and Inference
As we have emphasized above, the new probabilistic approach in the
psychology of reasoning recognizes that most ordinary and scientiﬁc
reasoning is from degrees of belief. In our decision making, we reﬂect
on possible actions that we have some conﬁdence we can put into effect.
Counterfactual conditionals are evaluated by supposing what we do not
believe, but they enable us to infer what follows from the supposition and
our background beliefs, and to improve our decision making in similar
antecedent conditions in the future. We also assume what we do not
believe for reductio ad absurdum arguments, with the aim of rejecting
the assumption by deriving an inconsistency from it, but this derivation
will usually depend on background beliefs. The central place of belief
in human reasoning is fully recognized by the new Bayesian approach.
To develop it in the psychology of reasoning, we need to generalize the
binary logical notions of consistency and validity, and this is accom-
plished with the concepts of coherence and probabilistic validity (see
Over and Cruz 2018; Over 2020, on how these concepts are used in
the psychology of reasoning).
Degrees of beliefs are said to be coherent if and only if they conform
to probability theory. For example, it is binary inconsistent to hold that
p & q is true (of value 1) but p is false (of value 0), but more generally,
it is incoherent to judge that P(p & q) > P(p). A one-premise inference
is binary valid when it preserves truth, and it is probabilistically valid,
p-valid, if and only if its conclusion cannot coherently have a lower
probability than its premise. Consider &-elimination, inferring p (or q)

158
D. E. Over and N. Cruz
from p & q. It is binary valid to infer p from p & q because p cannot
be false (value 0) and p & q true (value 1), and it is p-valid to infer p
from p & q because P(p) cannot be coherently lower than P(p & q). It
is binary valid and p-valid to infer the material conditional, not-p or q,
from not-p, but it is not p-valid to infer the probability conditional, if p
then q, from not-p, because P(q|p) can be coherently lower than P(not-p).
To deﬁne p-validity for more than one premise, let the uncertainty of
p be one minus its probability, 1 – P(p). An inference is then p-valid if
and only if the uncertainty of its conclusion cannot be coherently greater
than the sum of the uncertainties of its premises (Adams 1998). More
informally, a p-valid inference is one that cannot possibly increase our
uncertainty. System P is a precise set of inference rules for p-validity.
Two further examples of p-valid inferences are MP and the and-to-if
inference, which is inferring if p then q from p & q. We shall call the
and-to-if inference one-premise centering (see Lewis 1973, on centering
as a semantic condition). That one-premise centering is p-valid for the
probability conditional, P(if p then q) = P(q|p), follows immediately
from the fact that P(p & q) = P(p)P(q|p), and there is experimental
evidence that people treat this inference as valid, at least for indicative
conditionals (Cruz et al. 2015, 2016).
Precise coherence intervals can also be derived for p-valid and p-invalid
inferences (Cruz 2020; Evans et al. 2015; Pfeifer and Kleiter 2009). For
&-elimination, P(p) must fall in the interval between P(p & q) and 1 to
be coherent, and for the p-invalid inference of inferring p & q from p,
P(p & q) must be in the interval between 0 and P(p) to be coherent. Two
coherence intervals of special importance for our discussion of indica-
tive and counterfactual conditionals are those for MP and two-premise
centering, inferring if p then q from p and q as separate premises. As an
example, consider the following as a probability conditional:
(16) If Booth smoked cigars (s), then he damaged his lungs (d ).
We do not know whether Booth smoked cigars or not, but cigar
smoking was popular in his day, and we judge that P(s) = 0.5.
We have a causal model relating cigar smoking to lung damage and
infer from it that P(d|s) = 0.8. From these two judgments, we

Indicative and Counterfactual Conditionals …
159
can derive a coherence interval for MP, inferring d from if s then
d and s, by using the total probability theorem from probability
theory:
P(d) = P(s)P(d|s) + P(not-s)P(d|not-s)
To be coherent, we must judge that P(not-s) = 1 – P(s) = 0.5. But
P(d|not-s) could be completely open for us. It might be that P(d|not-s) is
high because, if Booth did not smoke cigars, then he smoked a pipe, or
it might be that P(d|not-s) is low because, if Booth did not smoke cigars,
he did not smoke at all. In any event, P(d|not-s) cannot be coherently
higher than 1 or lower than 0. Therefore, for coherence, the conclusion
of MP, P(d ), cannot be lower for us than P(s)P(d|s), which is 0.4, or
higher for us than P(s)P(d|s) + P(not-s), which is 0.9. And that is the
coherence interval for MP in this case, assuming that (16) is a probability
conditional.
For two-premise centering, we observe that this reverses the direction
of MP. Instead of beginning with the two premises, if s then d and s,
to infer d using MP, we begin with the two premises, s and d, to infer
if s then d by two-premise centering. Suppose then we start off with the
judgments that P(s) = 0.5 and P(d ) = 0.6. We now wish to infer, coher-
ently, a judgment about P(d|s) = P(s & d )/P(s). The minimum overlap
of P(s) and P(d ) is P(s) + P(d ) – 1, which is 0.1. This is the minimum
value that P(s & d ) can have in this example, and so the minimum value
of P(d|s) = P(s & d )/P(s) is 0.1/0.5 = 0.2. If P(s) + P(d ) – 1 had
been a negative number, leaving open the possibility that P(s) and P(d )
did not overlap at all, then the minimum value of P(d|s) would have
been 0. The maximum value of P(d|s) in this example is clearly 1, since
P(d ), at 0.6, is greater than P(s), at 0.5. If P(d ) had been less than
P(s), then the maximum value of P(d|s) would have been P(d )/P(s). In
sum, the coherence interval for two-premise centering, in the example,
is a minimum value of 0.2 and a maximum value of 1, still assuming
of course that P(if s then d ) = P(d|s). There is a formal account of
two-premise centering in Sanﬁlippo et al. (2018), and a psychological
study of it in Cruz et al. (2015), showing that participants endorse it
as a valid inference for indicative conditionals. A current limitation of
this work is that it has yet to specify the psychological mechanisms that
allow people to make coherent judgments and to distinguish between

160
D. E. Over and N. Cruz
those inferences that preserve truth and probability, from their premises
to their conclusion, and those that do not.
Clearly, MP and two-premise centering are very closely related to each
other for the probability conditional. Staying with our last example,
suppose that we made a two-premise centering inference with P(s) =
0.5 and P(d ) = 0.6, but with the incoherent conclusion that P(if s then
d ) = P(d|s) = 0.1. Now turn this round and see it as an MP inference,
with premises P(d|s) = 0.1 and P(s) = 0.5, and the conclusion P(d )
= 0.6. The maximum coherent value that P(d ) can have, given those
premises, and the coherence interval for MP, is (0.1)(0.5) + 0.5 = 0.55.
Since our MP conclusion is that P(d ) = 0.6, we are incoherent. This
incoherent outcome illustrates a point about the probability conditional.
If the conclusion of a two-premise centering inference is incoherent, then
the corresponding MP conclusion will be incoherent. In general, given
three judgments, P(if p then q) = P(q|p) = x, P(p) = y, and P(q) = z,
we can test their coherence either by arranging them as an MP inference,
or as a two-premise centering inference, and then checking whether the
conclusion, P(q) = z, or P(if p then q) = P(q|p) = x, is in the MP,
or in the two-premise centering, coherence interval, respectively. There
are other ways to check the coherence of the three judgments, but we
can exploit the connection between MP and two-premise centering to
extend experiments on MP for indicative and counterfactual conditionals
to studies of two-premise centering, for the purpose of understanding the
relationship between the two conditionals.
People may switch back and forth between centering and MP to
achieve coherence in their conditional reasoning, with indicative condi-
tionals and counterfactuals replacing each other in a dynamic process of
belief updating. Suppose for example that people acquire some conﬁ-
dence that Booth did not smoke cigars. They may then expand the
indicative (16) to the counterfactual:
(17) If Booth had smoked cigars, then he would have damaged his lungs.
Let us now imagine that this dynamic process continues. They learn that
that Booth probably did smoke cigars, and he had damaged lungs, and
(17) collapses back to (16). Given high values for P(s) and P(d ), people

Indicative and Counterfactual Conditionals …
161
may use a procedure grounded in centering to infer an even higher
probability value for (16). But because the coherence interval for two-
premise centering is relatively complex, they might then go the other way
and check the coherence of this high value by relying on the coherence
interval for MP, with (16) as the major premise, s as the minor premise,
and d as the conclusion. If they were within this MP coherence interval,
they could be happy with the even higher probability for (16).
For a more complete picture of the relation between indicative and
counterfactual conditionals, there must be an account of how people
make probability judgments about counterfactuals like (17), and those in
Over et al. (2007), which can be justiﬁed by referring to causal relations.
Some recent research has employed causal Bayes nets for this purpose,
and the next section will be about this research.
7
Bayesian Networks
We have described how people may switch back and forth between MP
and centering inferences to make their judgments of P(p), P(q), and
P(q|p) coherent. We described how, to evaluate a counterfactual like (2),
people may sometimes “rerun history” and engage in a mental simula-
tion in which they go back in time to when it was uncertain whether
Kennedy would be assassinated, allowing them to reduce the evalua-
tion of the counterfactual (2) to that of (3), the corresponding indicative
conditional. And we have pointed out how a counterfactual can collapse
to an indicative conditional because of a dialogue in which the degree
of belief in the minor premise of MP is updated. These assessments
and changes in subjective probability judgments over time depend on
dynamic reasoning, and the advent of the Bayesian approach has greatly
extended the tools available in psychology for modeling this reasoning
(Oaksford and Chater 2013, 2020).
Bayes’ theorem relates a set of probabilities to one another at a ﬁxed
point in time, here at time 0:
P0(q|p) = (P0(p|q)P0(q))/P0(p)
But suppose that, in a process of belief revision, we learn p is true
as we move from the initial state to time 1, P 1(p) = 1. We can then

162
D. E. Over and N. Cruz
use simple Bayesian conditionalization, in dynamic reasoning, to infer
that P 1(q) = P 0(q|p), provided that P 0(q|p) has remained invariant
in this process, P 0(q|p) = P 1(q|p). If at time 1 we do not learn
p for certain but only with some lower probability, we can gener-
alize simple Bayesian conditionalization to Jeffrey conditionalization:
P1(q) = (P0(q|p)P1(p) + P0(q|not-p)P1(not-p)
This generalization can be justiﬁed by the total probability theorem
with, again, the added assumption that invariance holds in the condi-
tional probabilities. How closely people conform to these principles of
Bayesian dynamic reasoning has been of interest to psychologists, with a
growing number of ﬁndings showing people follow the principles more
often than expected by chance. They also sometimes deviate from them
when, for instance, this requires the integration of larger pieces of infor-
mation or the processing of negations (Bramley et al. 2017; Cruz et al.
2020a, b; Hadjichristidis et al. 2014; Madsen et al. 2020; Oaksford and
Chater 2013; Pilditch et al. 2019; Zhao and Osherson 2010).
The Bayesian approach can be powerfully extended by the use of
Bayesian networks (Pearl 1988) to represent causal relations and the coun-
terfactuals that can be justiﬁed by reference to them. Examples of basic
building blocks of such networks, in which there are three variables that
are connected in different ways, are shown in Fig. 1.
Bayesian networks are directed acyclic graphs, which means that their
arrows go in only one direction: an arrow from p, to q, to r, and so
on, will not form a loop leading back to p. The variables, or nodes, p,
q, and r above, can take a range of values. We will assume here that
these nodes are propositions that take the values of truth, 1, or falsity,
Fig. 1
Basic building blocks of Bayesian network structures

Indicative and Counterfactual Conditionals …
163
0. Nodes from which arrows start are called parent nodes, and nodes to
which arrows are directed are called child nodes. Every node is associated
with a probability table. For instance, consider a minimal network p →
q, which could be used to represent a causal relation between p and q
and for the evaluation of the counterfactual, if p were the case, then q
would be the case. There is one node here without a parent, p; the table
for it would simply give the probability of p, P(p). There is also one
node here with a parent, q, and the table for it would list the conditional
probabilities of the truth of the node given each possible combination of
the truth or falsity of its parent. For p →q, these probabilities would be
P(q|p) and P(q|not-p).
An important underlying assumption in Bayesian networks is the
Markov condition. It states that a given node is conditionally independent
of nodes further upstream in the network, given the values of its parent
nodes. In other words, a node p can only inﬂuence the value of another
node q via the nodes that have direct incoming connections to q, so that
if the nodes with direct connections to q are held constant, any nodes
further upstream from q cease to have an inﬂuence. A related assumption
is that a network makes explicit all relevant probabilistic dependencies
between nodes, so that an arrow connects two nodes if and only if there
is a probabilistic dependency between them. These assumptions make it
easy to keep track of the pattern of probabilistic dependencies between
variables, and they enable us to make precise quantitative predictions
about how a change in the value of one variable “propagates” through the
network affecting the values of other variables it is connected to. People’s
causal reasoning has sometimes been found to violate the Markov condi-
tion. But there is evidence that this is because people elaborate on the
given causal information, based on knowledge about causal mechanisms,
and that adherence to the Markov condition is stronger when this causal
knowledge is taken into account (Park and Sloman 2013; Rehder and
Burnett 2005).
Bayesian networks make it possible to represent causal relations
between events, and the associated counterfactuals, in a formally precise
way (Spirtes et al. 1993; Pearl 2000). The strength of these causal rela-
tions can be quantiﬁed using the relative values of P(q|p) and P(q|not-p).
Psychologists have been interested in how far they can use these networks

164
D. E. Over and N. Cruz
to model people’s causal reasoning (Cheng 1997; Fernbach et al. 2010;
Hayes et al. 2014; Holyoak and Cheng 2011; Grifﬁths and Tenenbaum
2009; Oaksford and Chater 2017; Pilditch et al. 2019; Sloman and
Lagnado 2015; Waldmann 2017). There has also been psychological
interest in whether the networks provide tools to help individuals and
organizations make decisions about complex real-world causal scenarios
(Cruz et al. 2020a, b).
The information in Bayesian networks, as directed acyclic graphs, and
the associated tables can also be given in structural equations, where the
relationships between the variables are formally written out (Pearl 2000).
It is more plausible psychologically to hypothesize that people have
mental representations more like Bayesian networks than structural equa-
tions, but the two formal representations, the graphs and the equations,
are formally equivalent. Pearl (2013) argues for the use of structural equa-
tions to implement the Ramsey test (which he calls Ramsey’s idea). But
let us, returning to (17) as an example, assume that a simple network
with an arrow from cigar smoking to lung damage can model people’s
knowledge of how the former can cause the latter.
For the counterfactual (17), people might well not have a view on
whether Booth was a cigar smoker or not, and they could implement the
Ramsey test in the following way. They could set the s node, or variable,
at 1 or “true” in their Bayesian network representation and take the asso-
ciated P(d|s) as their conﬁdence in (17). As Pearl (2013) would put it,
this dynamic progress would be like rerunning history, under different
conditions, to work out the effects of cigar smoking on Booth’s lungs.
This process would also be very similar to, if not identical with, the evalu-
ation of the indicative (16). In both cases, we could interpret “rerunning
history” as making an intervention to assign one or more nodes of the
network a speciﬁc value and seeing what would unfold over time by
inferring the consequences of those network changes (Kaufmann 2005;
Sloman and Lagnado 2005; Rips 2010; Rips and Edwards 2013).
People’s use of a Bayesian network for (2) could not be so simple. They
would have to intervene to cut off arrows leading into the node repre-
senting Oswald’s killing of Kennedy, changing the value of this variable
from 1, or true, to 0, or false, while considering also other possible causes
of Kennedy’s assassination (Cruz et al. 2018; Fernbach et al. 2010). Yet

Indicative and Counterfactual Conditionals …
165
people can make judgments about counterfactuals, like (2), embedded in
complex causal scenarios. They would also have to go through a complex
process to revise their actual beliefs if, as we imagined above, new forensic
evidence demonstrated that Oswald did not in fact kill Kennedy, and (2)
collapsed to (1).
There is active research in cognitive psychology on whether the
Bayesian network analysis of conditional reasoning accurately describes
people’s actual conditional reasoning (Ali et al. 2011; Cruz et al. 2018;
Fernbach and Erb 2013; Lucas and Kemp 2015; Sloman and Lagnado
2005; Rips 2010; Rips and Edwards 2013). More generally, Bayesian
network representations provide a general framework that could help
connect different ﬁndings about indicative and counterfactual condi-
tionals and probabilistic reasoning, which were previously studied almost
entirely in isolation from each other (Adams 1998; de Zoete et al. 2019).
8
Concluding Remarks on Truth
The probability conditional and its Jeffrey semantics ﬁt well with the
use of a Bayesian network representation (compare Oaksford and Chater
2020). The expected value of the assertion of a probability conditional,
if p then q, is the conditional subjective probability, P(q|p), which can
be inferred from a Bayesian network. Judgments about P(q|p) can vary
from context to context, and person to person, and such changes could
be represented in corresponding networks. Not all conditional assertions
have causal justiﬁcations, and not all Bayesian networks can be usefully
interpreted in a causal manner. For example, a network representation
for indicative (7) and counterfactual (8), about a random card from
a frequency distribution, could be purely probabilistic. There is not a
causal relation between a card being yellow in the pack and having a
circle on it: there is only the frequency distribution.
As we have noted above, Lewis (1976) proved that the probability of a
conditional that is objectively true or false at every possibility cannot, in
general, be the corresponding conditional probability. But a probability
conditional if p then q is not objectively true or false at every possibility,
as its value is the subjective conditional probability, P(q|p), when not-p

166
D. E. Over and N. Cruz
holds. Lewis’ proof does not apply to a probability conditional (Sanﬁl-
ippo et al. 2020). There is a long history of ﬁndings, in studies of the
so-called “defective” truth table, that people do not judge conditionals
like (7) to be true or false when their antecedents are false (Evans and
Over 2004; Over and Baratgin 2017). There does not indeed appear to
be an objective fact to make (7) and (8) true or false, rather than more or
less probable, when a red card is randomly selected out of a distribution
that contains some yellow cards with circles on them and some yellow
cards with diamonds on them (compare Stalnaker 2020). People do call
other examples of conditionals “true” when their antecedents are false,
but the question is whether these are objective uses of “true”, or whether
they are simply based on high degrees of belief.
People apparently use “true” pragmatically at times just to express a
high degree of belief in, or endorsement of, an utterance, even one that
is, not only deontic, but an expression of purely subjective preference
or taste. For example, after we say, “If you visit Oaxaca on your trip
to Mexico, then you should try chapulines”, one listener might reply,
“That is true”, and another, “That is false”, without there being an objec-
tive way to decide between them. But there are also uses that would
have a ground in objective logical or in causal relations. An example of
the former would be if p & q then q, which we think that people will
call “true” even when p & q is false. An example of the latter might
be (17), which people might judge to be “true” when they were sure
that there is a causal relation between smoking and lung damage. We
would predict that the people who made these truth judgments would
also assess P(q|(p & q)) at 1, and of lung damage given smoking as at or
near 1. These cases would be covered by Jeffrey semantics. The expected
values of these conditionals would be at or near 1 for these people, and
that would be the Jeffrey value of the conditionals when their antecedents
were false.
Some philosophers have taken the view that a natural language condi-
tional, if p then q, is never objectively true, or false, not even when p &
q, or p & not-q, is true (Bennett 2003). But not even they have claimed
that people do not apply the words “true” and “false”, in some senses, to
conditionals, and they have referred to pleonastic (Edgington 2003) and
pragmatic notions of truth (Adams 1998). We have followed de Finetti

Indicative and Counterfactual Conditionals …
167
in closely comparing conditionals and conditional bets, and our posi-
tion is that the outcomes p & q, and p & not-q, are objective conditions
for settling conditional bets and making indicative and counterfactuals
conditionals true or false. But we also want to explain people’s other uses
of “true” and “false” as applied to conditionals in natural language when
their antecedents are false. Unfortunately, the psychology of reasoning
has not yet systematically studied those uses (but see Over 2020; Pfeifer
2012; Skovgaard-Olsen 2020; Wang and Yao 2018, for some relevant
points). This must change before we can get a deeper understanding
of how people use indicative and counterfactual conditionals and relate
them to each other as their beliefs change. In this investigation, it is
certain that psychologists will beneﬁt greatly from what philosophical
logicians and linguists say about “true” and “false”.
References
Adams, E. (1970). Subjunctive and indicative conditionals. Foundations of
Language, 6 , 89–94.
Adams, E. (1975). The logic of conditionals: An application of probability to
deductive logic. Dordrecht: Reidel.
Adams, E. (1998). A primer of probability logic. Standford: CLSI Publications.
Ali, N., Chater, N., & Oaksford, M. (2011). The mental representation of
causal conditional reasoning: Mental models or causal models. Cognition,
119, 403–418.
Baratgin, J., Over, D. E., & Politzer, G. (2013). Uncertainty and de Finetti
tables. Thinking & Reasoning, 19, 308–328.
Bennett, J. (2003). A philosophical guide to conditionals. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Bramley, N. R., Dayan, P., Grifﬁths, T. L., & Lagnado, D. A. (2017). Formal-
izing Neurath’s ship: Approximate algorithms for online causal reasoning.
Psychological Review, 124(3), 301–338.
Byrne, R. M. J. (2017). Counterfactual thinking: From logic to morality.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 26 (4), 314–322.
Cheng, P. W. (1997). From covariation to causation: A causal power theory.
Psychological Review, 104, 367–405.

168
D. E. Over and N. Cruz
Crupi, V., & Iacona, A. (in press). Three ways of being non-material. Studia
Logica.
Cruz, N. (2020). Deduction from uncertain premises? In S. Elqayam, I.
Douven, J. S. B. T. Evans, & N. Cruz (Eds.), Logic and uncertainty in the
human mind (pp. 27–41). Abingdon: Routledge.
Cruz, N., & Oberauer, K. (2014). Comparing the meanings of “if” and “all”.
Memory &. Cognition, 42, 1345–1356.
Cruz, N., Baratgin, J., Oaksford, M., & Over, D. E. (2015). Bayesian reasoning
with ifs and ands and ors. Frontiers in Psychology, 6 , 192.
Cruz, N., Connor, D., Dewitt, S., Hahn, U., Lagnado, D., Liefgreen, A.,
Phillips, K., Philditch, T., & Teši´c, M. (2020a). Widening access to
Bayesian problem solving. Frontiers in Psychology. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fpsyg.2020.00660
Cruz, N., Hahn, U., Fenton, N., & Lagnado, D. (2020b). Explaining
away, augmentation, and the assumption of independence. Frontiers in
Psychology, 11, 502751
Cruz, N., Over, D., & Oaksford, M. (2018, July). Dynamic reasoning with
counterfactuals. In M. Oaksford, V. Thompson, & N. Adams (Chairs), The
11th London Reasoning Workshop. London: Birkbeck, University of London.
Cruz, N., Over, D., Oaksford, M., & Baratgin, J. (2016). Centering and the
meaning of conditionals. In A. Papafragou, D. Grodner, D. Mirman, & J.
C. Trueswell (Eds.), Proceedings of the 38th Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 1104–1109). Austin: Cognitive Science Society.
de Finetti, B. (1936/1995). The logic of probability [translation of 1936
original by R. B. Angell]. Philosophical Studies, 77, 181–190.
de Finetti, B. (1937/1964). Foresight: Its logical laws, its subjective sources
[translation of 1937 original]. In H. E. Kyburg, & H. E. Smokler (Eds.),
Studies in subjective probability (pp. 55–118). New York: Wiley.
de Zoete, J., Fenton, N., Noguchi, T., & Lagnado, D. (2019). Resolving the so-
called “probabilistic paradoxes in legal reasoning” with Bayesian networks.
Science & Justice. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scijus.2019.03.003
Douven, I. (2016). The epistemology of indicative conditionals. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Douven, I. (2017). How to account for the oddness of missing-link condi-
tionals. Synthese, 194, 1541–1554.
Douven, I., & Dietz, R. (2011). A puzzle about Stalnaker’s hypothesis. Topoi,
30, 31–37.

Indicative and Counterfactual Conditionals …
169
Douven, I., Elqayam, S., Singmann, H., & van Wijnbergen-Huitink, J. (2018).
Conditionals and inferential connections: A hypothetical inferential theory.
Cognitive Psychology, 101, 50–81.
Douven, I., Elqayam, S., Singmann, H., & van Wijnbergen-Huitink, J.
(2020). Conditionals and inferential connections: Toward a new semantic.
Thinking & Reasoning, 26 (3), 311–351.
Edgington, D. (1995). On conditionals. Mind, 104, 235–329.
Edgington, D. (2003). What if? Questions about conditionals. Mind and
Language, 18, 380–401.
Edgington, D. (2008). Counterfactuals. The Presidential Address, Proceedings of
the Aristotelian Society, CVIII (1), 1–21.
Edgington, D. (2014). Estimating conditional chances and evaluating counter-
factuals. Studia Logica, 102, 691–707.
Elqayam, S., & Over, D. E. (2013). New paradigm psychology of reasoning:
An introduction to the special issue edited by Elqayam, Bonnefon, & Over.
Thinking & Reasoning, 19, 249–265.
Egré, P., & Cozic, M. (2016). Conditionals. In M. Aloni & P. Dekker (Eds.),
The Cambridge handbook of formal semantics (pp. 490–524). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Handley, S. J., & Over, D. E. (2003). Conditional
and conditional probability. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 29, 321–335.
Evans, J. St. B. T., & Over, D. E. (2004). If . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Thompson, V., & Over, D. E. (2015). Uncertain deduction
and conditional reasoning. Frontiers in Psychology, 6 , 398.
Fernbach, P. M., Darlow, A., & Sloman, S. A. (2010). Neglect of alterna-
tive causes in predictive but not diagnostic reasoning. Psychological Science,
21(3), 329–336.
Fernbach, P. M., & Erb, C. D. (2013). A quantitative causal model theory of
conditional reasoning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 39(5), 1327–1343.
Fugard, J. B., Pfeifer, N., Mayerhofer, B., & Kleiter, G. D. (2011). How
people interpret conditionals: Shifts toward conditional event. Journal of
Experimental Psychology-Learning Memory and Cognition, 37, 635–648.
Gilio, A. (2002). Probabilistic reasoning under coherence in System P. Annals
of Mathematics and Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 34, 5–34.
Gilio, A., & Over, D. E. (2012). The psychology of inferring conditionals from
disjunctions: A probabilistic study. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 56 ,
118–131.

170
D. E. Over and N. Cruz
Grifﬁths, T. L., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2009). Theory-based causal induction.
Psychological Review, 116 (4), 661–716.
Hadjichristidis, C., Sloman, S. A., & Over, D. E. (2014). Categorical induc-
tion from uncertain premises: Jeffrey’s doesn’t completely rule. Thinking &
Reasoning, 20(4), 405–431.
Hayes, B. K., Hawkins, G. E., Newell, B. R., Pasqualino, M., & Rehder, B.
(2014). The role of causal models in multiple judgments under uncertainty.
Cognition, 133, 611–620.
Holyoak, K. J., & Cheng, P. W. (2011). Causal learning and inference as a
rational process: The new synthesis. Annual Review of Psychology, 62, 135–
163.
Jeffrey, R. C. (1991). Matter of fact conditionals. Aristotelian Society Supple-
mentary Volume, 65, 161–183.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (2002). Conditionals: A theory of
meaning, pragmatics, and inference. Psychological Review, 109, 646–678.
Kaufmann, S. (2005). Conditional predictions: A probabilistic account.
Linguistics and Philosophy, 28, 181–231.
Krzy˙zanowska, K., Collins, P., & Hahn, U. (2017). Between a conditional’s
antecedent and its consequent: Discourse coherence vs. probabilistic rele-
vance. Cognition, 164, 199–205.
Krzy˙zanowska, K., Wenmackers, S., & Douven, I. (2014). Rethinking
Gibbard’s riverboat argument, Studia Logica, 102, 771–792.
Lassiter, D. (2022). Decomposing relevance in conditionals. Mind & Language.
Available at: https://web.stanford.edu/~danlass/
Lewis, D. (1973). Counterfactuals. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Lewis, D. (1976). Probabilities of conditionals and conditional probabilities.
Philosophical Review, 85, 297–315.
Lucas, C. G., & Kemp C. (2015). An improved probabilistic account of
counterfactual reasoning. Psychological Review, 122(4), 700–734.
Madsen, J. K., Hahn, U., & Pilditch, T. (2020). The impact of partial
source dependence on belief and reliability revision. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 46 (9), 1795–1805.
Mirabile, P., & Douven, I. (2020). Abductive conditionals as a test case for
inferentialism. Cognition, 200, 104232.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (2007). Bayesian rationality: The probabilistic
approach to human reasoning. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Oaksford M., & Chater, N. (2013). Dynamic inference and everyday condi-
tional reasoning in the new paradigm. Thinking & Reasoning, 19, 346–379.

Indicative and Counterfactual Conditionals …
171
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (2017). Causal models and conditional reasoning.
In M. Waldmann (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of causal reasoning. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (2020). New paradigms in the psychology of
reasoning. Annual Review of Psychology, 71, 305–330.
Oberauer, K., & Wilhelm, O. (2003). The meaning(s) of conditionals:
Conditional probabilities, mental models and personal utilities. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning Memory and Cognition, 29, 680–693.
Over, D. E. (2009). New paradigm psychology of reasoning. Thinking &
Reasoning, 15, 431–438.
Over, D. E. (2017). Causation and the probability of causal conditionals. In M.
Waldmann (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of causal reasoning (pp. 307–325).
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Over, D. E. (2020). The development of the new paradigm in the psychology
of reasoning. In S. Elqayam, I. Douven, J. St. B. T. Evans, & N. Cruz
(Eds.), Logic and uncertainty in the human mind (pp. 243–263). Abingdon:
Routledge.
Over, D. E., & Baratgin, J. (2017). The “defective” truth table: Its past, present,
and future. In N. Galbraith, D. E. Over, & E. Lucas, (Eds.), The thinking
mind: The use of thinking in everyday life (pp. 15–28). Hove: Psychology
Press.
Over, D. E., & Cruz, N. (2018). Probabilistic accounts of conditional
reasoning. In L. J. Ball, & V. A. Thompson (Eds.), International handbook
of thinking and reasoning (pp. 434–450). Hove: Psychology Press.
Over, D. E., Hadjichristidis, C., Evans, J. St. B. T., Handley, S. J., & Sloman,
S. A. (2007). The probability of causal conditionals. Cognitive Psychology,
54, 62–97.
Park, J., & Sloman, S. A. (2013). Mechanistic beliefs determine adherence
to the Markov property in causal reasoning. Cognitive Psychology, 67 (4),
186–216.
Pearl, J. (1988). Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: Networks of plausible
inference. San Francisco: Morgan-Kaufmann.
Pearl, J. (2000). Causality: Models, reasoning, and inference. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Pearl J. (2013). Structural counterfactuals: A brief introduction. Cognitive
Science, 37, 977–985.
Pfeifer, N. (2012). Experiments on Aristotle’s Thesis: Towards an experimental
philosophy of conditionals. The Monist, 95(2), 223–240.

172
D. E. Over and N. Cruz
Pfeifer, N., & Kleiter, G. D. (2009). Framing human inference by coherence
based probability logic. Journal of Applied Logic, 7, 206–217.
Pilditch, T. D., Fenton, N., & Lagnado, D. (2019). The zero-sum fallacy in
evidence evaluation. Psychological Science, 30(2), 250–260.
Politzer, G., Over, D. E., & Baratgin, J. (2010). Betting on conditionals.
Thinking & Reasoning, 16, 172–197.
Ramsey, F. P. (1926/1990). Truth and probability. In D. H. Mellor (Ed.),
Philosophical Papers (pp. 52–94). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ramsey, F. P. (1929/1990). General propositions and causality. In D. H.
Mellor (Ed.), Philosophical Papers (pp. 145–163). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Rehder, B., & Burnett, R. C. (2005). Feature inference and the causal structure
of categories. Cognitive Psychology, 50, 264–314.
Rips, L. J. (2010). Two causal theories of counterfactual conditionals. Cognitive
Science, 34, 175–221.
Rips, L. J., & Edwards, B. J. (2013). Inference and explanation in counterfac-
tual reasoning. Cognitive Science, 37, 1107–1135.
Rott, H. (2019). Difference-making conditionals and the relevant Ramsey test.
The Review of Symbolic Logic, 1–32.
Sanﬁlippo, G., Gilio, A., Over, D. E., & Pfeifer, N. (2020). Probabilities of
conditionals and previsions of iterated conditionals. International Journal of
Approximate Reasoning, 121, 150–173.
Sanﬁlippo, G., Pfeifer, N., Over, D. E., & Gilio, A. (2018). Probabilistic
inferences from conjoined to iterated conditionals. International Journal of
Approximate Reasoning, 93, 103–118.
Skovgaard-Olsen, N. (2020). Relevance and conditionals: A synopsis of open
questions and semantic issues. In S. Elqayam, I. Douven, J. St. B. T.
Evans, & N. Cruz (Eds.), Logic and uncertainty in the human mind
(pp. 192–206). Abingdon: Routledge.
Skovgaard-Olsen, N., Collins, P, Krzy˙zanowska, K., Hahn, U., & Klauer, C.
(2019). Cancellation, negation, and rejection. Cognitive Psychology, 108, 42–
71.
Skovgaard-Olsen, N., Kellen, D., Krahl, H., & Klauer, C. (2017). Relevance
differently affects the truth, acceptability, and probability evaluations of
‘and’, ‘but’, ‘therefore’, and ‘if then’. Thinking & Reasoning, 23, 449–482.
Skovgaard-Olsen, N., Singmann, H., & Klauer, K. C. (2016a). The relevance
effect and conditionals. Cognition, 150, 26–36.
Skovgaard-Olsen, N., Singmann, H., & Klauer, K. C. (2016b). Relevance and
reason relations. Cognitive Science, 41, 1202–1215.

Indicative and Counterfactual Conditionals …
173
Sloman, S. A., & Lagnado, D. A. (2005). Do we “do”? Cognitive Science, 29,
5–39.
Sloman, S. A., & Lagnado, D. A. (2015). Causality in thought. Annual Review
of Psychology, 66, 223–247.
Spirtes, P., Glymour, C., & Scheines, R. (1993). Causation, prediction, and
search. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Stalnaker, R. (1968). A theory of conditionals. In N. Rescher (Ed.), Studies in
logical theory (pp. 98–112). Oxford: Blackwell.
Stalnaker, R. (2020). Counterfactuals and probability. In L. Walters, & J.
Hawthorne (Eds.), Conditionals, paradox, and probability (pp. 100–121).
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Thompson, V. A., & Byrne, R. M. J. (2002). Reasoning counterfactually:
Making inferences about things that didn’t happen. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 28, 1154–1170.
Waldmann, M. R. (2017). Causal reasoning: An introduction. In M. R. Wald-
mann (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of causal reasoning (pp. 1–9). New York:
Oxford University Press.
Wang, M., Over, D., & Liang, L. (2022). What is required for the truth of
a general conditional? Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 75(11),
2105–2117. https://doi.org/10.1177/17470218221089331
Wang, M., & Yao, X. (2018). The dual reading of general conditionals:
The inﬂuence of abstract versus concrete contexts. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 71, 859–869.
Zhao, J., & Osherson, D. (2010). Updating beliefs in light of uncertain
evidence: Descriptive assessment of Jeffrey’s rule. Thinking & Reasoning, 16 ,
288–307.

Inferentialism: A Manifesto
Igor Douven, Shira Elqayam, and Karolina Krzy˙zanowska
At various junctures in the history of thinking about indicative condi-
tionals,1 the idea has surfaced that their truth requires the presence
of a connection between their antecedent and consequent. The current
authors have been working on a new version of this view since 2013.
1 Roughly, indicative conditionals are sentences of the form “If A, B” whose main auxiliary is
in the indicative mood. From here on, we mostly refer to them simply as “conditionals.”
The authors contributed equally to the paper and are listed alphabetically.
I. Douven (B)
IHPST / CNRS / Panthéon–Sorbonne University, Paris, France
e-mail: igor.douven@univ-paris1.fr
S. Elqayam
School of Applied Social Sciences, De Montfort University, Leicester, UK
e-mail: selqayam@dmu.ac.uk
K. Krzy˙zanowska
ILLC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands
e-mail: k.h.krzyzanowska@uva.nl
Arché, University of St Andrews, Scotland, UK
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Switzerland AG 2023
S. Kaufmann et al. (eds.), Conditionals, Palgrave Studies in Pragmatics, Language
and Cognition, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-05682-6_7
175

176
I. Douven et al.
In this paper, we summarize the progress that has been made over the
past years and respond to objections that have been leveled at the new
position. But ﬁrst we recapitulate the main tenets of our position.
1
Inferentialism
Most work in the psychology of reasoning is concerned with how
normal people respond to normal cases, most notably, normal instances
of common inference patterns, or normal conditionals.2 By contrast,
logicians, and also philosophers interested in non-deductive forms of
inference, have tended to focus on edge cases: sentences or inferences
of which, at least initially, we do not know how to make sense. Paradigm
cases are Gödel (1931) “This sentence is unprovable” and Tarski (1936)
“This sentence is false,” or the inference to the conclusion that our
lottery ticket will lose, given its low probability of winning, or that there
is bound to be some error in our recently ﬁnished monograph, given
human fallibility—inferences which lead to highly probable conclusions
but which, according to mainstream thinking, are to be resisted if we
want to avoid ending up with contradictory beliefs (see Kyburg 1961;
Makinson 1965).
Both approaches—the psychologists’ and the philosophers’—are valu-
able. We need the former to become clearer about the descriptive
adequacy of our theoretical commitments when applied to central cases,
while the latter’s focus on edge cases helps us develop a feeling for where
the limits of our theories may lie.
Recently, both philosophers and psychologists working on condi-
tionals have started paying attention to a type of conditionals that,
although not typically encountered in quotidian speech, are not bafﬂing
in the way the Gödel or Tarski sentence is. To the contrary, there is no
reason why they should be outside the scope of any of the main semantics
for conditionals. However, when applied to the said type of condi-
tionals, these semantics yield verdicts which sit badly with pre-theoretic
judgments.
2 Below, we are more speciﬁc about what we mean by “normal conditionals.”

Inferentialism: A Manifesto
177
The conditionals we have in mind have been dubbed “missing-link
conditionals” (Douven 2016a, 2017a), their characterizing feature being
that—as the name suggests—there appears to be no link between their
antecedent and consequent. The recipe for constructing such condi-
tionals could not be more straightforward: take any propositions A and
B that, for all you know, are entirely unrelated—being informed about
the truth value of one of them would not tell you anything about the
truth value of the other—and then construct the conditional “If A, B”
(or, just as well, “If B, A”). For concreteness, consider
(1) If Eisenhower was the 34th American president, Newton is the
author of the Principia Mathematica.
This conditional is odd. Given that the truth value of its consequent
came to be settled long before that of the antecedent, it appears about
as absurd as the notion of backwards causation. Nonetheless, supposing
the material conditional account, according to which “If A, B” is equiv-
alent to “not-A or B,” (1) is true. Similarly for Stalnaker’s possible world
semantics, according to which a conditional is true if its consequent is
true in the nearest possible world in which its antecedent is true. In this
case, that nearest world is the actual world, and (1)’s consequent holds
in the actual world.
To delve already a bit deeper into why conditionals like (1) strike us
as being odd, note that there is a reason why sentences of the form “If A,
B” are called “conditionals”: we sense that the consequent is conditional
on, depends on, the antecedent. What (1) and similar conditionals help to
bring out is that this sense of conditionality is not adequately captured
by the main semantics for conditionals. For the disjunction “not-A or B”
to be true, there need not be any kind of connection between A and B.
Nor need there be any connection between them for B to be true in the
nearest A-world.
In psychology, the advent of the New Paradigm (Over 2009; Elqayam
and Over 2013) has occasioned a shift of attention from the above
semantics of conditionals to the probabilistic semantics as advocated by
Adams (1975) and others. Central to this semantics is the probability

178
I. Douven et al.
conditional, which is any conditional whose probability equals that of
its consequent on the supposition of its antecedent.3
Unfortunately, Adams’ proposal does not fare any better than the
material conditional account or Stalnaker’s semantics when it comes to
accounting for the oddness of (1) and other missing-link conditionals.
On Adams’ (1975) original proposal, conditionals do not have truth
conditions and so also, seemingly paradoxically, no probabilities. There
is no real contradiction here, however, because for Adams the probability
operator, when applied to conditionals, is to be interpreted as measuring
those conditionals’ degree of acceptability and assertability. On this view,
a conditional “If A, B” is highly acceptable/assertable precisely if Pr(B|A)
is high.
But (1) is neither highly assertable nor highly acceptable, despite the
fact that most people will assign its consequent unit probability, and will
assign unit probability to that consequent also on the supposition of the
conditional’s antecedent, which is completely unrelated to the truth of
the consequent.
More generally, note that Pr(B|A) will be high whenever B is highly
probable and A and B are probabilistically independent. In fact, it can
be high even if the probability of B is (slightly) diminished on the
supposition of A. But although probabilistic independence and negative
dependence suggest that the truth of B does not depend on that of A,
respectively, that B is somewhat undermined, or disconﬁrmed, by the
truth of A, according to Adams’ proposal, “If A, B” can still be highly
acceptable/assertable.
That on Adams’ account conditionals lack truth conditions has reper-
cussions unrelated to the present topic. Most signiﬁcantly, Adams’
account makes it hard to see how conditionals can occur in compound
expressions, for instance, how we can account for conjunctions of condi-
tionals, or for nested conditionals. The recognition of this problem
3 It has been said that the claim that natural language conditionals are probability conditionals is
intuitively supported by the fact that we sometimes report conditional probabilities—especially,
objective conditional probabilities—using “if” instead of “given that” or “on the supposition
that” (see van Fraassen 1976). Naturally, it does not follow from this (nor has anyone claimed
otherwise) that conditional probabilities generally equal the probabilities of the corresponding
conditionals.

Inferentialism: A Manifesto
179
inspired work aimed at combining Adams’ proposal with de Finetti’s
three-valued semantics for conditionals. Leaving details aside here, the
important observation to make is that, on the resulting account, any
conditional with a true antecedent and consequent—such as (1)—still
comes out true.
At this point, proponents of the above accounts tend to reach for
pragmatics band aid, their point being that any seeming support for
the thought that true conditionals require a connection between their
component parts is, in actuality, only support for the idea that we have
little use for conditionals whose components are unconnected—such
conditionals can still be true or acceptable, but by asserting them we may
mislead our audience, given that we normally only assert conditionals
whose components are connected. Here is, for instance, how Over et al.
(2007, p. 92) invoke pragmatics to account for their ﬁnding of an effect
of probabilistic relevance of antecedent to consequent in their data:
An Adams conditional [i.e., a probability conditional] is not equivalent
to an explicit statement that A raises the probability of B, . . .nor that A
causes B. . .A conditional probability Pr(B|A) can be high when A does
not raise the probability of B and when A does not cause B. For example,
Pr(B|A) can be high simply because Pr(B) is high. Does this mean that
supporters of the view that these conditionals are Adams conditionals
cannot account for the weak negative effect of Pr(B|A) in the current
studies? [This is the just-mentioned relevance effect.] Not necessarily, for
they can argue that the use of a conditional pragmatically suggests, in
certain ordinary contexts, that A raises the probability of B or that A
causes B.4
There is nothing wrong per se with the appeal to pragmatics here. As
Grice (1989) convincingly argued, what we convey by our assertions is
not just the semantic content of those assertions but also what our audi-
ence can reasonably be expected to infer from the fact that we asserted
what we asserted when we asserted it in the circumstances in which we
asserted it. To give a well-worn example, when you are attending a party
and are being asked what time it is, then by responding “The guests are
4 Notation slightly altered for uniformity of reading; comments in square brackets are ours.

180
I. Douven et al.
already leaving” you will be interpreted as suggesting that it is already
late and that, moreover, you are not in a position to give any more
precise indication of the time. That is not because that is what your
response means, but because it is the best explanation of why you gave
that response to the given question under the given circumstances (Bach
and Harnish 1979; Dascal 1979; Hobbs 2004; Douven 2012a, 2022,
Ch. 1). Similarly, the best explanation of why someone asserts a condi-
tional could be that there is some kind of link between its component
parts, or at least that the person believes such a link to be present.
Still, there are reasons to be wary of the move Over and colleagues
make in the above passage, and that others have made to account for
linguistic phenomena apparently going against their favored semantics
of conditionals. While our understanding of pragmatics is not nearly at
the level of that of logic—we have been studying logic for over 2000
years, the study of pragmatics only seriously took off with the work of
Austin, Grice, and Searle in the second half of the past century—by now
a number of principles have been identiﬁed that guide us in working
out the content conveyed by an assertion that goes beyond the semantic
content of that assertion. The ﬁrst candidates for such principles were
provided by Grice and termed “maxims” by him, but they have been
reﬁned and supplemented by later authors (see, e.g., Levinson 2000).
However, Over et al. (2007) make no reference to any speciﬁc pragmatic
principles and, more generally, make no attempt to explain how the
implicature (“the pragmatic suggestion”) of a link (whether causal, proba-
bilistic, or inferential) between a conditional’s antecedent and consequent
is brought about. May we request anyone wanting to rescue their seman-
tics of conditionals by invoking pragmatics to at least sketch how the
pragmatic explanation of whatever exactly it is that they are trying to
explain pragmatically is supposed to go?
To forestall misunderstanding, there is a maxim of relevance in
Gricean pragmatics, and the name might suggest that that is precisely
what is needed here. But that is not so. According to this maxim, we
should make our contributions to an ongoing conversation relevant.
What needs explaining, however, is why a conditional whose antecedent
is not relevant (in some sense) to its consequent does not relevantly
contribute to an ongoing conversation (Douven 2008, 2016a).

Inferentialism: A Manifesto
181
One could conjecture that the relevance requirement applies also to
the clauses of complex or compound sentences. It is in fact an assump-
tion of discourse coherence theory that the hearer will always attempt
to conjure up connections between any two consecutive elements of
discourse, so that it can be interpreted as coherent (Kehler 2002; Asher
and Lascarides 2003). Any discourse coherence violations might then
seem as odd as missing-link conditionals, and if that is the case, the
oddness of missing-link conditionals might be explained away in terms
of discourse coherence violations.5 This hypothesis turned out to be
false, however. Krzy˙zanowska et al. (2017) report a study in which
they compared the assertability of conditionals with the assertability
of their consequents in the contexts in which the antecedents have
already been asserted. They introduced two manipulations: the presence
or absence of a common topic of the clauses, understood in discourse-
coherence-theoretic terms, and the presence or absence of a stronger,
inferential connection.6 For instance, one of the vignettes used in the
experiment introduced a protagonist, Patrick, who plans to take his girl-
friend, Sophie, for holidays and discusses his ideas with Matt. Since they
have enjoyed hiking in the Alps before, Patrick considers a trip to the
Pyrenees. In the conversational exchange condition, Patrick tells Matt
“Sophie likes the Alps,” and Matt responds with a statement that is
either both relevant (i.e., there is an inferential connection between the
two statements) and on the same topic: “She will enjoy hiking in the
Pyrenees,” irrelevant (no inferential connection) and on a different topic:
“More and more people in Western Europe care about animal welfare,”
or on the same topic but irrelevant: “Mountaineering can be dangerous.”
In the conditionals condition, in the same context, Matt asserts a condi-
tional consisting of Patrick’s statement in the antecedent and Matt’s
response in the consequent, for instance, “If Sophie likes the Alps,
then she will enjoy hiking in the Pyrenees” in the same topic relevant
condition. The participants are asked to evaluate to what extent Matt’s
assertion is natural or makes sense in the context. What Krzy˙zanowska
5 Cruz et al. (2016) may be interpreted as hinting at such a possibility.
6 Krzy˙zanowska and colleagues operationalized the presence or absence of an inferential
connection as probabilistic relevance. In general, this is problematic; see below.

182
I. Douven et al.
and colleagues found is that while the same topic is sufﬁcient to make B
assertable after A has been asserted (e.g., “Mountaineering can be danger-
ous” in response to “Sophie likes the Alps”), it is not enough to make “If
A, B” (e.g., “If Sophie likes the Alps, then mountaineering can be danger-
ous”) assertable in the same context. Conditionals turned out to require
a stronger kind of relationship than the presence of a common topic of
discourse.
One could also try to argue that the oddity of missing-link condi-
tionals is not due to the lack of a connection between their antecedent
and consequent but rather to a violation of Grice’s maxim of quantity:
“Make your contributions as informative as required (for the current
purposes of the exchange)” (Grice 1989, p. 26). After all, it is typically
when the antecedent and consequent of a missing-link conditional are
both known to be true, or at least warrantedly assertable, that we are
facing a discrepancy between what an account of conditionals renders
acceptable, or true, and what we may be compelled to accept as such.
A missing-link conditional whose antecedent and consequent are known
to be true would not be odd because of its missing link, but because
the speaker asserting such a conditional is violating the maxim of quan-
tity—they assert a weaker statement when they are justiﬁed in asserting a
stronger one, for instance, the consequent on its own, or the conjunction
of both clauses.7 This conjecture has been tested, too. Using different
dependent variables in a series of four studies, Krzy˙zanowska et al. (2021)
compared conditionals, whose antecedents and consequents were known
to be true, to the corresponding conjunctions and, in Experiment 2,
to materially equivalent disjunctions. When A and B were inferentially
connected, participants did not prefer the supposedly more informative
“A and B” over “If A, (then) B,” and both types of sentences received
relatively high ratings. But when there was no connection between A
and B, the participants rated conditionals as signiﬁcantly less assertable,
less acceptable, and as making less sense to say. Thus, it is not the case
that a true antecedent and a true consequent are sufﬁcient to make a
7 This argument was put forward by Grice (1989) in the context of a defense of the material
account of conditionals, but see Krzy˙zanowska (2019) for a discussion of how it can be adapted
to serve any theory of conditionals that validates and-to-if inferences and thus needs to deal
with their counterintuitive consequences.

Inferentialism: A Manifesto
183
conditional unassertable. The presence or absence of the connection,
however, did not affect the corresponding conjunctions, and neither did
it affect the disjunctions. Indeed, all disjunctions of the form “not-A or
B,” regardless of whether A and B were connected, received very low
ratings. These results do not only falsify the conjecture derived from
Grice’s maxim of quality, but they also show that the requirement that
the clauses are inferentially connected is speciﬁc to conditionals.
The connection between the antecedent and consequent might be
conversationally implicated nevertheless. It is possible, after all, that even
if we have not yet established how it is supposed to be calculated and
which of the Gricean or neo-Gricean maxims missing-link conditionals
violate, we might do so in the future. Such a possibility notwithstanding,
one could, in principle, test if a certain aspect of meaning is a conversa-
tional implicature by testing for its necessary characteristics. Grice (1989)
proposed a number of such tests, none of which seems to be conclu-
sive,8 yet there seems to be a consensus that the least controversial and
the most practical one is cancelability (Sadock 1978; Levinson 2000).9
A proposition conveyed by an utterance is cancelable when it can be
canceled by the speaker of that utterance or by the context in which it
was uttered. In particular, when a speaker’s utterance S conveys a propo-
sition P in some context, but the speaker does not intend to convey P
in that context, they can follow up S with “. . . but I didn’t mean to
say / suggest / imply that P.” When P is a conversational implicature,
such cancelations are felicitous. Take, for instance, a well-worn example
of a scalar implicature: when Sally says “Some of my students passed the
exam,” she conversationally implicates that not all of them did, but if
she adds “Oh, I didn’t mean to suggest that not all of them passed, I’ve
marked only a couple” that initial implicature is canceled. By contrast,
an attempt to cancel the meaning which is semantically entailed rather
than implicated is infelicitous. In fact, the speaker who makes such
8 See Sadock (1978) for a critical discussion of all these tests.
9 Already Sadock (1978) argues that, while cancelability (and, also, reinforceabilty which
Grice does not discuss) are necessary characteristics of implicatures, they are not sufﬁcient
to distinguish them from other pragmatic phenomena. Others have suggested that there are
conversational implicatures that are not cancelable (e.g., Lauer 2013), though Zakkou (2018)
argues that the cancelability test is reliable when restricted to non-ﬁgurative use of language.

184
I. Douven et al.
an attempt appears to be contradicting themselves, as for instance in:
“Susan and Steve passed the exam . . . oh, I didn’t mean to suggest
that Steve passed the exam.” If it then turned out that the connec-
tion between the antecedent and consequent of a conditional could be
canceled, it would be a strong indication that it may be conversationally
implicated, while if it is not cancelable, then the conversational implica-
ture hypothesis is strongly undermined. In fact, Skovgaard-Olsen et al.
(2019) tested the cancelability of the connection and demonstrated that
a speaker who asserts “If A, then B” and then attempts to cancel the
relation between A and B is perceived by participants as saying some-
thing contradictory. By contrast, the connection between the conjuncts
in a conjunction turned out to be cancelable.10 Taking all these consid-
erations together, we can be rather conﬁdent that the connection or
relevance relation between a conditional’s antecedent and consequent is
not conversationally implicated.
The oddity of missing-link conditionals does not seem to arise due
to presupposition failure either. One of the deﬁning features of presup-
position is that it projects under embeddings, and under negation in
particular. For instance, the sentence “John quit smoking” presupposes
that John smoked in the past, and so does its negation, “It is not the
case that John quit smoking.” If we know that John never smoked in his
life, both sentences sound inappropriate. If the inferential connection
between a conditional’s antecedent and consequent were a presupposi-
tion, then a missing-link conditional, “If A, C,” and its negation, “It is
not the case that if A, C,” should receive similarly low ratings. However,
Skovgaard-Olsen and colleagues (2019) tested this hypothesis in their
Experiment 2 and did not ﬁnd any evidence supporting it.
10 Implicatures cannot only be canceled, but also reinforced. For instance, “Some of my students
passed the exam” can be followed up with “Not all of them did” and, even though the former
utterance conversationally implicates the latter, that extra bit of information is not perceived
as redundant or unnecessary, unlike attempts to reinforce semantic entailments. A recently
published study by Rostworowski et al. (2021) shows that when a conditional “If A, B” is
followed by a statement emphasizing that there is a causal, deductive, or abductive connection
between A and B (e.g., “A will result in B” or “A entails B”), the latter is perceived as redundant.
Moreover, Krzy˙zanowska (2019) argues that the connection does not pass any other test for
conversational implicature put forward in the literature.

Inferentialism: A Manifesto
185
Then how about stipulating “if” to generate the conventional impli-
cature that the antecedent is relevant to its consequent? In that case, we
would not have to rely on any maxims to work out the said suggestion
but would simply infer this from the use of “if,” which generates the
suggestion by convention. There are again several problems to be faced.
First, Bach (1999) makes a case against the existence of conventional
implicatures generally. According to him, they are theoretical artefacts.11
Second, even granting there are conventional implicatures, the
number of words that have been said to carry such implicatures is modest
at best. So it requires an argument that a given word carries a conven-
tional implicature and does not contribute the supposed implicature to
what is said (as opposed to what is indicated or suggested).
In the case of the aforementioned examples, the arguments have all
pointed at utterances which can be rephrased without the word at issue
while retaining their truth value, although not their information content.
For instance, it has been said that
(2) She is poor but honest.
is true precisely if
(3) She is poor and honest.
The supposed difference is that (2), but not (3), suggests a contrast
between the conjuncts. Indeed, according to Grice (1989) detachability
is a litmus test for whether a word generates a conventional implica-
ture, which we can conduct by asking: can we say the same thing while
avoiding the implicature?12
So, is the suggestion of a connection detachable in the case of a condi-
tional? It is difﬁcult to see how we could capture the semantic content
of
11 Potts (2015), who does hold that there are conventional implicatures, points out that it is
not entirely obvious which side of the semantics–pragmatics divide they belong to.
12 Admittedly, the usefulness of this test has been questioned by Sadock (1978, pp. 287–290),
who has argued that it requires presupposing what it is supposed to be a test for.

186
I. Douven et al.
(4) If global warming continues, London will be ﬂooded.
while somehow abstaining from using “if” and not giving any impression
that we see a connection between the continuation of global warming
and London being ﬂooded in the future. Here, advocates of the material
conditional account might seem to have an advantage. They could claim
that the following does the trick:
(5) Global warming does not continue or London will be ﬂooded.
Note, though, that while the intuition that (2) and (3) have the same
truth conditions is broadly shared, the claim that (4) and (5) have the
same truth conditions is highly contested. Besides, the material condi-
tional account faces a barrage of other problems, not least that it is
inconsistent with virtually all known data about how people use condi-
tionals—which is why no one in the psychology of reasoning community
takes it seriously anymore.13
Setting the detachability question aside, one may wonder whether
the connection between antecedent and consequent belongs to the at-
issue content of a conditional, or to its not-at-issue content, where the
latter term covers both conversational and conventional implicatures,
as well as presuppositions.14 And this is, indeed, what Skovgaard-Olsen
and colleagues (2019) investigated in their Experiment 3, following the
diagnostic tests proposed by Tonhauser (2012), who observed that the
at-issue content is what can be accepted or denied directly, whereas the
not-at-issue content can only be denied in a way that interrupts the ﬂow
of a conversation (e.g., “Hey, wait a minute . . .”). The participants were
asked to react to an assertion by an English language learner asserting “If
A, then C” (or “A therefore C”), choosing the most appropriate justiﬁca-
tion for their choice. For instance, in a scenario whose protagonists learn
13 Proponents of the suppositional theory might claim that (4) can be paraphrased by, “London
will be ﬂooded supposing that/assuming that/provided that global warming continues.” But
note that these paraphrases would be equally infelicitous when there is no connection between
the component clauses.
14 Note that whether the at-issue versus not-at-issue distinction is determined by semantic or
pragmatic considerations itself depends on how implicatures and presuppositions are deﬁned
(Potts 2015).

Inferentialism: A Manifesto
187
that A and C are both true, but A is irrelevant for C, the participants
could choose between “Yes, A and C” and “No, A is not a reason that
C.” If the participants preferred the former choice, that would indicate
that the reason relation is not-at-issue. The study showed, however, that
the relevance relation is, in fact, perceived as content at-issue. Since the
same pattern of responses was obtained for both “If A, then B” and “A,
therefore B”—the paradigmatic example of Gricean conventional impli-
cature—Skovgaard-Olsen et al. maintain that their results are compatible
with the possibility that the connection is a conventional implicature
after all. However, this interpretation of their results is not compatible
with treating conventional implicatures as strictly pragmatic phenomena.
They are, after all, conventional and at-issue.
As an independent reason to be wary of the sort of appeal to prag-
matics that Over et al. (2007), and also Over and Cruz (2021), make,
note that pragmatics is about assertion, while the problem of dealing with
missing-link conditionals also concerns their acceptability: we are not just
disinclined to assert missing-link conditionals, we are also disinclined to
incorporate such conditionals into our system of beliefs.
In fairness, we note that probably no party to the present debate (so
including inferentialists) can, at this point, make very deﬁnite statements
about the proper interpretation, qua semantic or pragmatic, of their
experimental results. For one, that is because, at least currently, we are far
from having a consensus view on where to draw the line between seman-
tics and pragmatics, if such line can be drawn at all. See for instance the
schema in Levinson (2000, p. 195), showing the wide variety of views
on what should count as semantics and what as pragmatics, also illus-
trating his claim that “[the Gricean] program ...renders problematic and
‘up for grabs’ the correct division of labor between semantics and prag-
matics in the explanation of many aspects of meaning” (Levinson 2000,
p. 165). Furthermore, in recent years, many philosophers of language
and linguists have been busy identifying aspects of meaning that cannot
be easily classiﬁed as either semantic or pragmatic, that rather seem to
lie in between the two. It is not only the aforementioned conventional
implicatures that can be seen as having both semantic and pragmatic
characteristics. There are also pragmatic processes or contextual contri-
butions that affect the truth-conditional content, including ones that are

188
I. Douven et al.
necessary for the utterance to express a truth-evaluable proposition in the
ﬁrst place (see, e.g., Carston 2002, or Recanati 2003).
For another, the experimental results reported in Krzy˙zanowska and
Douven (2018) should discourage anyone from making strong claims
about whether they have shown a phenomenon to be semantic, or to
be pragmatic. Krzy˙zanowska and Douven sought to determine whether
people distinguish between the truth and the assertability of a sentence,
and whether they distinguish between the assertability and the accept-
ability of a sentence. In their paper, they report the results from two
experiments strongly supporting a negative answer to both of their
research questions. They used as materials sentences that, according
to standard semantic theorizing, were all true but that, according
to standard pragmatic theorizing, also all carried false implicatures.
Krzy˙zanowska and Douven found no reliable differences among assess-
ments of the truth of the items in their materials, assessments of those
items’ acceptability, and assessments of their assertability. Distinctions
among those concepts, theoretically important as they may be, appear
to have little signiﬁcance in the minds of laypeople.
However, as we and other inferentialists have noted, there are strictly
theoretical reasons (including simplicity) to favor an account of condi-
tionals that does not require explaining away data by reference to
pragmatics, but can explain the oddness of conditionals such as (1)
semantically—an account on which such conditionals come out as
not being true. Any semantics that requires the presence of a link
between a conditional’s antecedent and consequent will be able to do
so. And indeed, semantics of this type go back to the ancient Greek
philosophers (Kneale and Kneale 1962), with later proponents including
Mill (1843/1872), Ryle (1950), Mackie (1973), and, in psychology,
Braine and O’Brien (1991). In particular, it has been proposed that
the consequent must follow, in some sense, from the antecedent for the
conditional to be true.
With the possible exception of Mill (Skorupski 1989, p. 73 f.), the
aforementioned authors meant the sense in which the consequent ought
to follow from the antecedent to be deductive. However, as pointed
out in Krzy˙zanowska et al. (2014) and elsewhere, this insistence on a
deductive–inferential link between antecedent and consequent makes the

Inferentialism: A Manifesto
189
proposal open to immediate counterexamples. There are many condi-
tionals we regard as true even though the truth of the antecedent does
not guarantee the truth of the consequent. To give an example from
Douven et al. (2018), we have no difﬁculty imagining a context in which
we would deem true the statement “If Betty misses her bus, she will be
late for the movies,” even if, in that context, we are unable to rule out
completely that Betty is transported from her present location to the
cinema after missing the bus but still before the beginning of the movie.
As we have argued in a number of publications (Krzy˙zanowska et al.
2013, Krzy˙zanowska et al. 2014; Krzy˙zanowska 2015; Douven 2016a;
Douven et al. 2018, 2020), it would be a mistake to insist on “infer-
ence” as meaning deductive inference. Rather, we should adopt a broader
notion of inference which encompasses, besides deduction, also induc-
tion and abduction and possibly other forms of inference as well (such
as analogical inference, if that is different from inductive inference; see
Douven et al. 2021). To illustrate, while
(6) If x + 1 = 7, then x = 6.
embodies a clear deductive link, as does
(7) If the marble is green all over, it is not red all over.
supposing plausible meaning postulates (Carnap 1952), the conditional
(8) If John lives in Chelsea, he is rich.
rather features an inductive–inferential connection, on the (to our
knowledge, true) supposition that virtually everyone living in Chelsea
is rich. Or consider
(9) If Patricia and Peter are jogging together, they have patched up their
friendship.
in which antecedent and consequent would appear to be connected
via an abductive–inferential link. Supposing—as the conditional

190
I. Douven et al.
suggests—that they had ended their friendship, that they are jogging
together is best explained by their having patched up their friend-
ship. As said, there may be other relevant forms of inference
still. For instance, Douven et al. (2021) look at conditionals such
as
(10) If Jim’s son likes ice skating, he will like ice hockey.
where the consequent follows from the antecedent by analogy, in the
manner of Carnap (1980) and Paris and Vencovská (2017). It is to be
noted that, unlike deductive inference, the forms of inference mentioned
are not 100% safe, in that the truth of their premise or premises does
not guarantee the truth of their conclusion; for instance, a couple of
people living in Chelsea may be poor nonetheless, and John may happen
to be one of them. Nevertheless, as Schurz and Hertwig (2019) point
out, in people’s actual reasoning, these non-deductive forms of inference
probably play a much bigger role than deduction, for which, in our daily
lives, we have limited use.
Speciﬁcally, our proposal has been that a conditional “If A, B” is true
if there is a compelling argument from A plus contextually determined
background premises to B, with A being pivotal to that argument (i.e.,
with A removed, the argument would cease to be compelling), false if
there is a compelling argument from A plus contextually determined
background premises to the negation of B, and indeterminate otherwise.
“Compelling,” as we pointed out, does not mean “conclusive.” While the
steps in a conclusive argument would all have to be deductively valid, an
argument can be compelling even if it contains inductive or abductive
steps, or other steps (e.g., ones involving analogical reasoning) that we
take to transmit justiﬁcation. An intuitive way to put the broad idea
underlying the proposal is that anyone justiﬁed in believing A should
become justiﬁed in believing B upon becoming justiﬁed in believing “If
A, B,” supposing the receipt of the conditional information that if A, B,
does not undermine the person’s justiﬁcation for A.15 That is what we
15 That the latter can happen is demonstrated by the drivers license example from Douven
(2012b).

Inferentialism: A Manifesto
191
take compelling arguments to do: to transmit whatever justiﬁcation one
may have for their premises to their conclusion.16
Thereby, inferentialism gives clear content to the idea of condition-
ality that was mentioned previously, the idea that the consequent is
conditional on the antecedent.17
In general, being informed of a conditional “If A, B,” we can move to
accepting B on condition that we are in a position to accept A. We had
already a ﬁrst stab at explaining why missing-link conditionals like (1)
strike us as odd. Inferentialism allows us to expand on this. According to
inferentialism, the oddness of those conditionals is not explained simply
by those conditionals’ perceived lack of truth. Nor is it explained by the
fact that we might be unable to reconstruct the argument connecting their
constituent parts. After all, we have no issue accepting some conditionals
as true despite not having effectively identiﬁed the connecting argument:
being informed that if A, B by someone we trust will normally sufﬁce to
convince us of the presence of a compelling argument from A plus back-
ground premises to B even if the speaker does not provide that argument
or we are unable to see it ourselves. Rather, the problem missing-link
conditionals present us with is that it is so exceedingly clear that there is
no compelling argument starting from their antecedent and ending with
their consequent.
To this philosophical, or computational-level theory (to use Marr’s
1982, terminology), we later added a psychological theory, Hypothetical
Inferential Theory, or HIT, to provide an algorithmic-level explana-
tion of how inferentialism is represented in the mind. HIT tops up
inferentialism with a couple of psychological principles. According to
16 For related ideas, see Oaksford and Chater (2010, 2013, 2014, 2017, 2020), Vidal and
Baratgin (2017), and van Rooij (2019).
17 Note that inferentialism is not the only way to cash out the idea of conditionality. As said
in Douven (2016a, p. 36), to claim that there must be some kind of connection between
a conditional’s antecedent and consequent leaves the nature of that connection wide open:
“[I]t could be logical, statistical, causal, explanatory, metaphysical, epistemic; or the ‘connector’
could be a second-order functional property, notably, the property that there is some ﬁrst-order
property or other that links antecedent and consequent, much in the way in which some have
argued that truth is a second-order functional property, instantiated by correspondence to the
facts in some domains of discourse, by assertability or veriﬁability in other domains, and by yet
some other ﬁrst-order property in yet other domains.” Inferentialism is the substantive thesis
that the nature of the “connector” is inferential.

192
I. Douven et al.
the principle of relevant inference, the relevant mental representation of
the conditional is by default the one in which there is an inferential
relation between antecedent and consequent; and according to the prin-
ciple of bounded inference, this inferential link between antecedent and
consequent need only be strong enough, in the sense of being subjec-
tively supported. Thus, the strength of the connection is bounded by
Simon-style satisﬁcing (Simon 1982).
Note that when we say that, in the case of missing-link conditionals,
it is immediately obvious that there is no argument that could reason-
ably connect their component parts, we mean that this is so given
a set of contextually determined background premises. In particular,
we do not want to suggest that some conditionals are intrinsically or
objectively missing-link conditionals. Indeed, it was already emphasized
in Krzy˙zanowska et al. (2014) that whether a conditional embodies a
deductive, abductive, inductive inferential connection, or no connection
at all, is a question that can only be answered relative to a given body
of background knowledge. What for one person is a deductive inferen-
tial conditional may be an abductive or inductive inferential conditional,
or even a missing-link conditional, for another person, or for the same
person at a different moment in time, when the person had or will have
a different set of background beliefs. That also means that one and the
same conditional can be true for one person and false for another, or true
and false for the same person at different points in time. Thus, there is a
clear perspectivalist aspect to inferentialism.18
In Sect. 3, we respond to Over and Cruz (2021)’s criticisms of infer-
entialism. We already mention here that they have clearly misunderstood
the notion of a missing-link conditional. In particular, they appear
to believe that such conditionals can be characterized probabilistically.
According to them (p. 16), when the probability of the consequent of
a conditional given its antecedent minus the probability of the same
consequent given the negation of the antecedent is 0, the conditional is a
18 Confusion could arise on this point given that, for obvious reasons, we have always chosen
examples of missing-link conditionals whose status as such is likely to be preserved under all
reasonable changes of our background knowledge.

Inferentialism: A Manifesto
193
missing-link conditional. Not so.19 Consider a coin with unknown bias;
the bias could be anything. Then Pr (The coin will land heads | The coin
is fair) = 0.5 but also Pr (The coin will land heads | It is not the case that
the coin is fair) = 0.5. (If the latter is not clear, integrate the probability
of heads over the unit interval—which yields 0.5—and subtract the inte-
gral of heads over the single point 0.5, which equals 0.) Nevertheless, “If
the coin is fair, it will land heads” is not a missing-link conditional. (To
forestall further misunderstanding, that does not mean it is true. There
is an inferential connection between antecedent and consequent alright,
but it is too weak to afford a compelling argument from the former to
the latter, making the truth value of the conditional indeterminate.)
2
Evidence for Inferentialism
Inferentialism has clear empirical content, and over the past years we
have been concerned to test that content. Here, we focus on the main
experimental work done on inferentialism.
2.1
Soritical Series and Inference Strength
The ﬁrst evidence for inferentialism in the form we advocate came from
an experiment reported in Douven et al. (2018), which concerned the
soritical color series shown in Fig. 1. In this series, colored patches grad-
ually shift from clearly green to clearly blue, through various shades of
blue and green, including borderline blue-green shades. The participants
in Douven and colleagues’ experiment were asked to evaluate several
conditionals pertaining to this series, all having the schematic form
If patch number i is X , then patch number j is X ,
with i
∈
{2, 7, 8, 9, 10, 13}, and with X standing for either “blue”
or “green,” depending on whether the participant had been assigned to
19 We cannot think of a missing-link conditional whose component parts are not probabilisti-
cally independent of each other. That does not mean that whenever a conditional’s component
parts are probabilistically independent of each other, that conditional is a missing-link
conditional.

194
I. Douven et al.
Fig. 1
The soritical color series from the materials of Douven et al. (2018)
the blue condition or to the green condition.20 What values j could take
depended on whether the participant had been assigned to the small or
to the large condition: if the ﬁrst, then the patch referred to in the conse-
quent was either one or two steps away from the patch referred to in the
antecedent; if the second, the distance between the patches was either
one or three steps (Fig. 1).
As Douven et al. explain, one can naturally associate an argument with
each of the resulting conditionals. For example, an argument backing
(11) If patch number 6 is green, then so is patch number 7,
would look something like this: Patches become greener as we move to
the right in the color series; on the supposition that patch number 6 is
green, and given that patch number 7 is to the right of patch number 6,
patch number 7 must be green. Similarly, we can with
(12) If patch number 6 is green, then so is patch number 5,
associate an argument to the effect that because adjacent patches are very
similar in color, and because patch number 5 is adjacent to patch number
6, patch number 5 must be green on the supposition that patch number
6 is green.
For the experiment, it was crucial that the arguments that can be
associated with the conditionals in Douven et al.’s materials can vary in
strength. For instance, while (11) and (12) both refer to adjacent pairs of
patches, in the former the consequent patch is to the “greener” side of the
antecedent patch, in the latter it is to the “bluer” side of the antecedent
patch. The argument associated with (12) is certainly not weak, but it
is not as strong as the argument associated with (11), given that, for the
20 This split was made strictly for control purposes.

Inferentialism: A Manifesto
195
former argument but not for the latter, there is a consideration that at
least somewhat weakens the conclusion.
Douven and coauthors were speciﬁc about what the main determi-
nants for argument strength in the context of their materials were:
direction—is the consequent patch to the left or to the right of the
antecedent patch?—and distance: how close is the consequent patch to
the antecedent patch? Comparing again (11) and (12) above should
be enough to see why they thought direction mattered to argument
strength. As for distance, compare (12) with
(13) If patch number 6 is green, then so is patch number 4.
With (13), we can associate an argument that is more or less identical to
the one we associated with (12). However, because patches that are two
steps away from each other are not quite as similar as patches that are
only one step away, the argument associated with (12) is a bit weaker.
In their analysis, Douven et al. found that these factors indeed
predicted with great accuracy the rates at which their participants had
judged the conditionals to be true, in support of inferentialism.
Another noteworthy ﬁnding (replicated across four experiments) was
a belief-bias analogue in truth judgments. Belief bias (Evans et al. 1983)
is the effect of belief on inference, regardless of the inference’s validity
(for deductive arguments) or strength (for informal arguments). Classic
belief bias has two components: a main effect of belief, in which argu-
ments with believable conclusions are endorsed more than arguments
with unbelievable conclusions; and an interaction of belief bias and argu-
ment validity, in which the difference between arguments with believable
and unbelievable conclusions is larger for invalid arguments. Douven
et al. drew an analogue between the conditional’s antecedent and an
argument’s premise, and between a conditional’s consequent and an argu-
ment’s conclusion, an analogy not just in line with inferentialism, but
necessitated by it. If the analogy is correct, then we should expect to see
both belief bias effects in the truth evaluation of conditionals as well.
First, we should expect a main effect of consequent, in which condi-
tionals with a true consequent will be more often evaluated as true.
Second, and importantly, we would expect an interaction: this effect

196
I. Douven et al.
should be stronger for “invalid” conditionals, that is, conditionals whose
direction was “wrong.” This is exactly what was found. We call this the
“quacks like a duck” principle: if it quacks like a duck, it is a duck; if it
behaves like an inference—bias and all—it is an inference.
In their (2020), the same authors went a step further and re-analyzed
the data from their earlier paper to explicitly compare inferentialism with
the main rival semantics of conditionals, including the material condi-
tional account and Stalnaker’s possible worlds semantics, ﬁnding that
inferentialism predicted those data much more accurately than did any
of the rivals.
While providing strong support for inferentialism, it is to be admitted
that, as Mirabile and Douven (2020) note, the data from Douven et al.
(2018) concerned a somewhat artiﬁcial setting. While their materials are
not entirely abstract, they are not entirely realistic either. Naturally, it is
more important to know how well a semantics of conditionals is able to
handle realistic conditionals than it is to know how the semantics handles
conditionals of a sort we rarely if ever encounter in everyday life.
Therefore, Mirabile and Douven devoted two of their experiments to
testing the same hypothesis that had been the focus of Douven et al.
(2018)—whether the strength of the argument from a conditional’s
antecedent to its consequent predicts the likelihood with which it will
be endorsed—but now using realistic materials. More speciﬁcally, their
materials for those experiments consisted of abductive conditionals, that
is, conditionals, like (9), in which the connection between a conditional’s
component parts consists of an explanatory link between those parts:
the consequent explains, to a higher or lower degree, the antecedent.
For such conditionals, the strength of the argument they embody is a
function of how well the consequent explains the antecedent (Douven
et al. 2018). Using these materials, Mirabile and Douven tested the said
hypothesis both between subjects and within subjects, both tests yielding
strongly favoring evidence.
In their ﬁnal experiment, Mirabile and Douven also looked at the
endorsement rates of the conclusions of Modus Ponens arguments. Their
aim was to determine whether the strength of the argument embodied
by the major premise of a Modus Ponens argument would predict the
likelihood with which the conclusion would be endorsed. Not only that:

Inferentialism: A Manifesto
197
they wanted to know whether argument strength was a better predictor
of that likelihood than the probability of the major premise’s conse-
quent given its antecedent. To that end, they conducted an experiment
in three phases, spaced one week apart. One phase sought to determine
conditional probabilities, another phase sought to determine argument
strength, and the third sought to determine endorsement rates. For
instance, in the phase in which endorsement rates were determined, one
of the items was
(14) Dennis tells you that John did well on his exam. Now suppose that
if John did well on his exam, then he studied hard.
Participants were then asked to indicate how strongly they agreed
that John studied hard. Corresponding to this argument, the partici-
pants were, in the phase that sought to determine explanation quality,
presented with the following:
(15) Suppose we observe that John did well on his exam. We propose to
explain this by the fact that he studied hard.
They were then asked to rate the quality of this explanation. Again corre-
sponding to the same example, the remaining part asked to assign proba-
bilities to the four rows in the truth table of conjunction with “John did
well on his exam” and “John studied hard” as atomic propositions; from
those probabilities Mirabile and Douven derived the conditional proba-
bility that John studied hard on the supposition that he did well on his
exam. In their analysis, they found, again in support of inferentialism,
that while conditional probability was a good predictor of conclusion
endorsement, argument strength was a signiﬁcantly better predictor.
2.2
Modus Ponens and Inference Strength
Psychologists have looked not only at how accurately various semantics
of conditionals are able to predict truth judgments of conditionals but
also at whether the inferences people are willing to make are in line with

198
I. Douven et al.
the commitments of those semantics. The inference rule studied more
than any other is, of course, Modus Ponens (MP). In all experiments
concerning this rule, it came out as being highly endorsed.
While typically highly endorsed, MP was, equally typically, not univer-
sally endorsed in those experiments. Absence of universal endorsement
might be partially just noise. But proponents of the New Paradigm have
also pointed out that, when experimenters request their participants to
suppose the premises of an argument, they cannot expect those partic-
ipants to follow suit exactly. Participants may bring their own beliefs
about those premises to the experiment, and those beliefs may affect
their judgment of whether the argument’s conclusion follows from its
premises. Most notably, uncertainty about the major premise in an
MP argument might diminish a participant’s willingness to endorse the
conclusion.
Mirabile and Douven proposed an inferentialism-based explanation
of the fact that endorsement rates of MP arguments tend not to be
entirely at ceiling. As they note, from an inferentialist perspective, one
can think of conditionals as conduits or pipes which, if accepted, allow
one to transfer whatever grounds one has for believing the antecedent
to the consequent. That, after all, is what compelling arguments do:
transferring grounds of belief in the premises to grounds for belief in
the conclusion (see Sect. 1). But precisely because compelling arguments
need not be conclusive, we should conceive of conditionals as pipes that
can, to varying extents, be leaky, in that the argument they embody may
fail to carry over all the support we have or may have for the antecedent
to the consequent.
Mirabile and Douven hypothesized that, if the inferentialism-based
explanation were true, then endorsement rates of MP arguments with
as major premise one of the abductive conditionals from the materials
used in their experiments described earlier should be predicted by the
strength of the explanatory argument connecting the antecedent and
consequent of the given conditional. Experiment 3 in their paper tested
this prediction and found again strong support for it. Not only that:
Mirabile and Douven compared their hypothesis with the rival hypoth-
esis that endorsements rates would be predicted by the conditional prob-
ability corresponding to the major premise—so the probability of the

Inferentialism: A Manifesto
199
consequent of the premise given its antecedent—ﬁnding that the infer-
entialist predictor was much more reliable than the probabilistic one.
That conclusion strongly favored inferentialism over the suppositional
account.
2.3
Probabilities of Conditionals
No semantics of conditionals is complete if it does not account for
the probabilities that people assign to conditionals. In our early work
on inferentialism, we had been silent on the matter of probabilities.
It was only recently addressed in Douven et al. (2021). To work out
the implications of inferentialism for the probabilities of conditionals,
these authors start by unpacking the truth conditions that inferen-
tialism assigns to conditionals, noting that probabilities are probabilities
of truth, and thus in particular that the probability of “If A, B” is
the probability that “If A, B” is true, which is the probability that the
truth conditions of “If A, B” are realized. As a result, inferentialists
must hold that the probability of a conditional is the probability that
there is a compelling argument from the conditional’s antecedent (plus
background knowledge) to the conditional’s consequent, in the sense
explained above.
As the authors also note, however, it is in general not a priori (in the
colloquial sense of this expression) whether we can make a compelling
case for a proposition on the basis of another proposition together with
background knowledge. For example, we are somewhat conﬁdent that
we can make a compelling case for the claim that the economy will
speedily recover on the supposition that we get the COVID-19 outbreak
under control, but we are, at the moment, not entirely convinced of this.
We would have to think more carefully about whether other conditions
for a quick economic recovery are in place (e.g., whether the pandemic
has not done long-term damage to consumer conﬁdence), whether other
factors (e.g., Brexit) will not start to have a negative impact on European
economies, what the effects of a growing Chinese economy will be in the
coming years, and so on. If asked now for the probability we assign to

200
I. Douven et al.
(16) If we can control the COVID-19 outbreak, the economy will
quickly recover.
we will estimate the likelihood that we can make a compelling case for
the consequent, starting from the antecedent plus background knowl-
edge, and give that as our answer. Importantly, in making that esti-
mate we use the heuristic of gauging the inferential strength between
antecedent and consequent, that is to say, of gauging how strongly the
consequent follows from the antecedent.
Douven et al. (2021) test this “inference heuristic” (as they call it)
in two experiments, both presenting participants with three tasks, all of
which used the same set of 50 conditionals. In one task, participants were
asked to judge the probability of each of those conditionals; in a second
task, they were asked to judge the strength of the inferential connec-
tion between antecedent and consequent for each of the conditionals;
and the third task was meant to determine their conditional probabilities
corresponding to the conditionals, where these conditional probabilities
were measured via a probabilistic truth-table task in one experiment and
by asking participants to engage in suppositional thinking in the other
experiment.
In both experiments, inference strength judgments were strongly
predictive of probability ratings, in support of inferentialism. Also in
both experiments, and so independently of how conditional proba-
bilities were measured, inference strength judgments predicted proba-
bility ratings much more accurately than conditional probability ratings
did, an outcome strongly favoring inferentialism over the suppositional
account.
It is particularly worth noting, also in connection with Over and
Cruz’s objections to be discussed below, that the materials used by
Douven et al. (2021) included ten missing-link conditionals.21 Inferen-
tialism and the suppositional account make very different predictions
about such conditionals, given that they are characterized by the absence
of an inferential connection between antecedent and consequent but
21 That is, in this case, conditionals that relative to any reasonable background premises will be
perceived as lacking a connection between their component parts.

Inferentialism: A Manifesto
201
can nonetheless have any corresponding conditional probability. The
ten missing-link conditionals in Douven and colleagues’ materials had
been chosen in the hope that the corresponding conditional probabil-
ities would be more or less evenly distributed across the [0, 1] scale,
which indeed turned out to be the case. Also, entirely as expected,
ratings of inference strength were invariably low. As the authors noted,
on the suppositional account, according to which inferential consider-
ations do not matter in the interpretation of conditionals, one expects
their probability ratings to be simply correlated with their conditional
probabilities. By contrast, from an inferentialist viewpoint, one would
expect inferential strength rather than conditional probability to be more
strongly correlated with judgments of the probability of a missing-link
conditional. The results were again clearly in favor of the inferentialist
proposal, revealing a strong correlation between inference strength and
probability ratings and a very weak one between conditional probabilities
and those same probability ratings.
2.4
Similarity-Based Arguments
Douven et al. (2021) report experimental work primarily concerned with
the study of a speciﬁc type of reasoning in the context of the concep-
tual spaces framework as developed in Gärdenfors (2000). Conceptual
spaces are (typically) built on top of similarity spaces of the kind studied
by Shepard (1964), Nosofsky (1988, 1989), and Petitot (1989), among
many others. A similarity space is a one- or multidimensional metric
space that is meant to represent people’s judgments of how similar given
items are in a speciﬁc respect. For instance, color similarity space is
a three-dimensional space such that Euclidean distances in that space
represent “dissimilarities” among color shades: the further apart two
shades are—as represented in that space—the more dissimilar they are in
people’s perception; conversely, the closer they are in the space, the more
similar we perceive them to be (Fairchild 2013; Jraissati and Douven
2018). The new proposal in Gärdenfors (2000) was that concepts (i.e.,
the mental correlates of words) can be represented as regions in simi-
larity spaces. For example, the concept red is a region in color similarity

202
I. Douven et al.
space, and the concept sour is a region in taste space. This opened up
the possibility of studying concepts by geometric and topological means,
which has led to a research program in its own right. Much of the theo-
retical modeling undertaken in this program was also recognized to have
clear empirical content. This recognition in turn led to a signiﬁcant
amount of experimental work being devoted to the conceptual spaces
framework, virtually all of it yielding supporting evidence.
Douven et al. (2021) used the conceptual spaces framework to study a
particular type of non-deductive arguments, to wit, those which project
a property from one object onto another, based on the similarity between
the objects. Taking their cue from a theoretical proposal in Osta-Vélez
and Gärdenfors (2020), they hypothesized that the strength of such argu-
ments would depend on the degree of similarity between the object
designated in the premise and the object designated in the conclusion.
Their materials involved objects that could be precisely located within
a conceptual space whose geometry and topology had been established
in Douven (2016b). They found that distances in that space between
premise-object and conclusion-object were indeed strongly predictive of
how compelling participants deemed the corresponding argument to be.
Given the connection that inferentialism postulates between the truth
value of a conditional and the strength of the argument for its consequent
based on its antecedent, Douven et al. (2021) realized that they should
also be able to predict endorsement rates of the conditionals corre-
sponding to the arguments in their materials on the basis of distances
in the conceptual space they had used for testing their hypothesis about
argument strength. To clarify, if we can predict the strength of the argu-
ment for the conclusion that Jim’s son will like ice hockey starting from
the premise that the son likes ice skating based on how similar the two
sports are, then, supposing inferentialism, that same similarity should
allow us to predict the likelihood with which (10) would be endorsed.
This observation inspired Douven et al. (2021) to present partici-
pants with a set of conditionals matching the similarity-based arguments
in their materials, asking the participants how strongly they agreed
that those conditionals were true. In their analysis, they regressed the
responses on the argument strength judgments as well as, separately, on

Inferentialism: A Manifesto
203
the distances in the relevant conceptual space between the antecedent-
object and the consequent-objects. Both turned out to accurately predict
endorsement rates for conditionals, leading to the overall conclusion
that the conceptual spaces framework can be fruitfully mustered for
explaining certain non-deductive inferences as well as for the evaluation
of conditionals embodying such inferences.
3
Objections and Replies
In their contribution to this volume, Over and Cruz (2021) criticize
inferentialism, as part of a defense of their own preferred position,
which combines Adams’ and de Finetti’s work on conditionals, yielding
a version of the probability conditional coupled with a (non-classical)
truth-conditional semantics. The concerns about inferentialism that
Over and Cruz raise appear reasonable and might be shared by others.
We thus believe it to be worth responding to them in some detail. Gener-
ally put, the objections are that (i) inferentialism is incomplete; (ii) it is
too narrow; and (iii) it is implausible, for theoretical as well as empirical
reasons. We discuss these objections in turn.
3.1
Inferentialism Is Incomplete
Inferentialism, in the version at issue, is a new semantics for conditionals.
As mentioned, we started working on it in 2013. We are the ﬁrst to admit
that there remains important work to be done (see Sect. 4). By contrast,
the position Over and Cruz are advocating—a version of the so-called
suppositional account—has been in the making for almost a century,
starting with Ramsey’s and de Finetti’s important work from the 1920s,
and further building on equally important contributions from Adams
made in the 1960s. So it should surprise no one that more is known
about their favorite account than is known about inferentialism. That
being said, Over and Cruz are right when they point out that, whereas
there is a logic of the probability conditional, there is no logic of the
inferential conditional. How damaging is this situation?

204
I. Douven et al.
First, there is recent work by Crupi and Iacona (2020, 2021a, 2021b)
and Raidl et al. (2021), which is aimed at formalizing the idea that a
conditional’s antecedent should support its consequent for that condi-
tional to be true. In this work, the notion of support is mostly taken as
primitive. In the end, one might want to have a logic of conditionals
more closely tied to the ﬁner mechanics of the notion of support, for
instance, one that is sensitive to the different types of inference that
realize the support. But of course, one could equally hope for a logic
of the probability conditional that is sensitive to the reasons people have
for assigning the probabilities they do, which one day we may be able to
model formally as well. We do not think it is incumbent on the advocates
of the probability conditional to do that work, but similarly, inferen-
tialists might be happy to embrace one of the logics developed by the
aforementioned authors.22
We are not here committing to any of these logics and indeed could
imagine a very different approach to developing the logic of the inferen-
tial conditional. From the start, we have taken a rather detailed look at
the sort of support the antecedent needs to provide to the consequent
for the conditional to be true. First and foremost, this was to high-
light the difference between our position and earlier attempts to give
content to the idea that the truth of a conditional requires the presence
of an inferential link between its component parts. As already pointed
out, almost invariably, previous authors assumed that the link had to be
deductive, which for the reasons indicated current proponents of infer-
entialism believe to be a bad idea. Hence, our emphasis on inductive and
abductive inference in relation to inferentialism.
Recently, much has been done to clarify both inductive and abduc-
tive reasoning; on inductive reasoning, see Schurz (2019), on abductive
reasoning, Douven (2017b, 2021, 2022). Neither of these authors offers
anything deserving of the name “logic,” but suppose we had logics of
induction and abduction, and possibly of other forms of non-deductive
inference as well. Then it would make a lot of sense to try to build a logic
of the inferential conditional on those.
22 The somewhat different approach to developing the logic of an inferentialist type of
conditional taken by Berto and Özgün (2021) also appears promising to us.

Inferentialism: A Manifesto
205
But second, in the absence of such logics, and of a logic of the inferen-
tial conditional speciﬁcally, we point out that, for all anyone has shown,
it is not true that only notions that can be properly formalized can play
a role in human psychology. Indeed, we should at least reckon with the
possibility that human psychology is inherently messy, and that neatly
formalized notions of inference or support can at best play a marginal
role in understanding how the mind works.23,24
To underpin this, we mention Douven and Williamson (2006) proof
to the effect that there can be no purely logico-mathematical deﬁnition
of the notion of (categorical) belief.25 No one would suggest that the
notion of belief cannot do any substantive work in the psychology of
reasoning.
Even more to the point, Carnap spent a large part of his career
trying to develop an inductive logic. Several published attempts were
severely criticized by Goodman, Putnam, Quine, and others, which did
not keep Carnap from trying to “get it right.” Only in posthumously
published work (Carnap 1980), he gave up, arguing that an inductive
logic could not be had. In that same work, he presented a theory of
inductive reasoning by introducing a precursor of the conceptual spaces
23 From the perspective of the classical computational theory of mind, the idea of a conditional
logic makes a lot of sense. If the mind is, at bottom, a Turing machine, then there must
be rules for manipulating expressions involving the conditional symbol. Uncovering those rules
would yield the logic of conditionals. But in particular in light of the successes of connectionist
approaches to the mind, the computational theory has lost much of its erstwhile appeal.
24 In this connection, we would also like to refer to a remark speciﬁcally about counterfactuals
that Over and Cruz make (p. x), to wit, that we can proﬁtably study such conditionals “for
some time” even if we cannot precisely deﬁne what counts as a counterfactual and what does
not. One could go one step further and omit the “for some time”: even if we will never have a
deﬁnition of the said kind, no one can deny that we know much more about counterfactuals
now than we did ﬁfty years back, and there is no reason to believe that any further progress can
only be made by ﬁrst ﬁnding a precise deﬁnition of counterfactuals. The decisive point is that
we can identify clear instances of counterfactuals and also clear instances of conditionals that
are not counterfactuals. If the class of counterfactuals remains vague around the edges, then
that might hamper progress somewhat, but probably no more than vagueness does in many
other areas of science that have nevertheless managed to report important successes. (Think of
color science, which Clark 1993, p. vii, calls “the success story of scientiﬁc psychology so far,”
but in which vagueness is rampant; see, e.g., Douven et al. 2017).
25 There have been attempts to escape the proof but these have serious drawbacks; see Douven
et al. (2018) and Douven and Elqayam (2021).

206
I. Douven et al.
framework. Suppose Carnap is right and there will never be an induc-
tive logic (his arguments seem pretty compelling to us). Would that
mean all the work that has been done on inductive reasoning (e.g.,
on category-based induction) was for naught? It seems to us that, to
the contrary, that furthered our understanding of how people reason
inductively considerably, whether or not we will ever have an inductive
logic.
In short: True, there currently is no logic of the inferential conditional,
but help may well be on its way. Even if, in the end, it turned out that the
logics of conditionals now being developed cannot be brought fully in
line with inferentialist commitments, or even if no logic could, it is hard
to see why that would be bad for inferentialism. It is simply not a priori
that our usage of everyday conditionals is governed by a logic. This is
not to say that there are no inferential principles concerning conditionals
that people tend to rely on. But those need not amount to anything
worthy of the name “logic” (e.g., it might turn out to be impossible to
gather them into an axiomatic system). And absent any logic of condi-
tionals, we should still be able to make progress on understanding the
role conditionals play in people’s reasoning.
3.2
Inferentialism Is Too Narrow
We have made it clear from when we started working on inferentialism
that our aim was to develop a semantics for indicative conditionals only,
and then only for standard or normal ones.26 Among the types of condi-
tionals we excluded were so-called non-interference conditionals, such
as,
(17) If hell freezes over, Betty will leave the department.
It is important to be clear about the claim we made about such condi-
tionals. According to Over and Cruz (p. x), we “have gone so far as
to deny that non-interference conditionals are conditionals.” We have
26 And really only a semantics. At this point, we have nothing to say about conditional threats
or conditional promises, which are not the kind of things that can be true or false.

Inferentialism: A Manifesto
207
done no such thing. What we have done is draw attention to a distinc-
tion that linguists have been making for decades between standard and
non-standard conditionals, the latter sometimes also being referred to as
“nonconditional conditionals” (Geis and Lycan 1993; Lycan 2001) or
“unconditionals” (Merin 2007).27
Among the non-standard conditionals are, next to non-interference
conditionals, so-called relevance or speech act conditionals or biscuit
conditionals, such as
(18) If you’re hungry, there are biscuits on the table.
and Dutchman conditionals, such as
(19) If Harry passes the exam, I’m a Dutchman.
As said, we have, from the start, limited our proposal to standard condi-
tionals, but not because we thought it would be impossible to account,
in inferentialist terms, for conditionals of the aforementioned types, but
rather because, in view of how little progress has been made on the
semantics of conditionals, it would seem prudent for anyone wanting
to develop a semantics for conditionals to start modestly and focus on
standard conditionals ﬁrst. One step at a time!
Even supposing inferentialism will not be able to account for non-
interference conditionals, why would that be so bad? We cannot ﬁnd a
real argument in Over and Cruz (2021), except that they appear to think
any semantics should be able to account for (at least) non-interference
conditionals because (17) “looks like an acceptable conditional to us”
(p. 20).
Not knowing who Betty is, how are we to tell? Well, the idea is
of course to imagine a context in which a ﬁctional colleague is ﬁrmly
decided to leave our department and that nothing can change her mind.
And yes, in such a context (17) may well be acceptable. What follows?
27 The point is also missed in Mellor and Bradley (2021).

208
I. Douven et al.
Consider that it is easy to imagine a context in which (18) is perfectly
acceptable, but that there is nothing conditional about it: it asserts uncon-
ditionally that there are cookies on the table (the antecedent mentions
the type of circumstance under which that information is relevant). Simi-
larly, (19) may be acceptable in a context, but again there is nothing
conditional about it: it expresses that the speaker deems it highly unlikely
that Harry will pass his exam. And the same once more with respect
to (17). There is nothing conditional about it: the consequent is asserted
unconditionally. In the context we sketched, we understand the condi-
tional as asserting that Betty has decided to leave the department and
that nothing is going to change her mind.28,29
We have two further comments on this. First, while we have wanted
to focus on indicative conditionals, it was already pointed out in Douven
(2016a, p. 38 f.) that it would take little effort to extend the semantics to
cover subjunctive conditionals. Moreover, it would seem equally easy to
give an inferentialist account of concessives, by deﬁning “[Even] if A, B”
to be true if, and only if, there is a compelling argument for B from back-
ground premises alone and also from those premises revised (in the sense
of Alchourrón et al. 1985) with A (i.e., given one’s current background
knowledge, there is a compelling argument from A to B, but A would
not be essential to that argument). Finally, an inferentialist account of
non-interference conditionals could plausibly look as follows: “If A, B”
is true if, and only if, there is a compelling argument from background
knowledge alone to B, also from background knowledge revised by A to
B, and from background knowledge revised by not-A to B. Right now,
these are just hypotheses, lacking any empirical support. We leave a full
investigation for later, as there is still enough empirical work to be done
on the original proposal pertaining to standard indicative conditionals.
Second, suppose inferentialism were forever limited to normal indica-
tive conditionals, so non-interference conditionals never being in its
28 We should also note that the ﬁrst author has referred to the standard vs. non-standard
distinction in publications long predating the time that we started working on inferentialism
(see, e.g., Douven 2008). So the suggestion that the appeal to the distinction was ad hoc—not
made in print but often in discussions—is demonstrably unfair.
29 For an interesting discussion of what deﬁnes a conditional see also Elder and Jaszczolt (2016),
whose starting point is an observation (based on the International Corpus of English-GB) of
the disparity between the syntactic category of a conditional and the conditional meaning.

Inferentialism: A Manifesto
209
scope. It is a mystery to us why Over and Cruz (2021, p. x) believe
that, in that case, inferentialism would be unfalsiﬁable. Consider, again,
the experiments described in the previous section. Which of those was
guaranteed to conﬁrm inferentialism, or to favor it over the account
Over and Cruz prefer, just because non-interference conditionals were
excluded from the materials? For instance, there was no way in advance
to tell that inferential strength would come out as being a much stronger
predictor of the probabilities of conditionals than conditional proba-
bility, as was found in Douven et al. (2021). Similarly for the results
reported in Mirabile and Douven (2020). Could Over and Cruz have
predicted that the results would favor inferentialism over their account,
just because the materials consisted of abductive inferential conditionals?
If so, we would like to see their argument. As far as we can see, the
account preferred by Over and Cruz could have prevailed in all experi-
ments on inferentialism carried out so far. If it had, that would have been
bad news for inferentialism.30
3.3
Inferentialism Is Implausible
As Over and Cruz rightly point out, Modus Ponens (MP) is not valid,
given inferentialism. There can be a compelling argument from A to B,
and B can still be false even if A is true. That is a consequence of the fact
that “compelling” does not imply “conclusive.” Over and Cruz appear
to ﬁnd this quite damning for inferentialism. And indeed, is MP not
a rule of inference one would, pre-theoretically, want any semantics of
conditionals to validate? Both from our own experience and looking at
experimental data from cognitive psychology, it is obvious that we all
tend to rely on this rule almost routinely in our reasoning. In light of
this, inferentialism would appear implausible.
As explained in previous publications (e.g., Krzy˙zanowska et al. 2014),
however, that inferentialism invalidates MP is not really a problem,
30 Would it have falsiﬁed inferentialism? We are talking statistics here, so the old Popperian
terminology is not very helpful. But it would have disconﬁrmed inferentialism, to an extent
depending on how badly inferential strength would have failed to yield accurate predictions.

210
I. Douven et al.
given that it will be typically the case that if there is a compelling argu-
ment from A to B, and A is true, then B is true as well. Because in
daily practice we tend to rely much more on compelling-but-inconclusive
arguments than on deductively valid ones (Schurz and Hertwig 2019),
we would be in big trouble if the arguments we judge to be compelling
were not highly truth-conducive. But then MP is, from an inferen-
tialist perspective, highly truth-conducive as well. And why should that
not sufﬁce to account for people’s reliance on that rule of inference?
As was already noted by McGee (1985), who argued on independent
grounds that MP is invalid for natural language conditionals, we should
not expect our intuitions about validity to be sensitive to the difference
between a rule of inference that is guaranteed to preserve truth and one
that preserves truth in close to 100% of its applications.
Another objection involves the fact that, as Over and Cruz rightly
remark, there are experimental data showing that people judging A true
and B false tend to judge “If A, B” false, even if there is an inferen-
tial connection between A and B. For instance, (8) is, as said, generally
considered to be an inductive–inferential conditional. Given that the vast
majority of people living in Chelsea are rich, we are inclined to conclude
that John is rich from the assumption that he lives in Chelsea. Although
the inferential connection would appear quite strong, we tend to regard
the conditional as false if we know that John is poor, or at least not
rich, even if he lives in Chelsea. Over and Cruz appear to think that
inferentialism is in tension with these data.
Over and Cruz are conﬂating two things here. According to infer-
entialism, a conditional is true if, relative to contextual background
premises, there is a compelling argument from antecedent to conse-
quent, where the antecedent is essential to the argument (without the
antecedent, it loses its compellingness). Now consider that the kind of
case Over and Cruz consider concerns conditionals whose consequent
is known, or at least judged, to be false. And we simply do not deem
anything a compelling argument for something we know, or judge, to be
false. If we are convinced that John is poor, then nothing will strike us as
a compelling argument for the claim that he is rich. Even if 99% of the
people who live in Chelsea are rich, that will not convince us that John

Inferentialism: A Manifesto
211
is rich, given that we know, or are independently convinced, that he is
poor.31
To be sure, someone may point out to us that our grounds for
believing John to be poor are faulty. Maybe we have been informed of
that by an otherwise reliable witness, who, however, in this case had
a self-serving reason to lie about John’s ﬁnancial status. Then we may
abandon our belief that John is poor and we may come to consider his
living in Chelsea—if that is where he lives—as being excellent grounds
for believing that he is rich. If we are informed that John lives in
Chelsea indeed, we may go from suspension of judgment about John’s
wealth to believing that he is rich. But already in the situation in which
we have suspended our judgment on John’s wealth, one might regard
(8) to be true. (Whether we will may depend on whether we believe
purely inductive support can be enough for a compelling argument,
which is debatable; see Nelkin 2000; Douven 2003, for discussion.) To
emphasize, in the experiments whose outcomes Over and Cruz deem
problematic for inferentialism, the participants were not in this situa-
tion. They believed certain conditionals to have a false consequent, and
thus they judged the conditionals to be false, entirely consistent with
inferentialism.
To put Over and Cruz’s misunderstanding more succinctly, according
to inferentialism A can be true, B can be false, and still “If A, B” can
be true (from someone’s perspective) because there is a compelling argu-
ment from A to B (relative to that person’s background knowledge). Over
and Cruz seem to misread this as: A person can judge A to be true, judge
B to be false, and yet judge “If A, B” to be true. The crucial difference is
between the consequent being false, and the person judging the condi-
tional’s truth value believing (rightly or wrongly) the consequent to be
false.32
31 This should also answer Over and Cruz’s question of why inferentialists have not produced
an intuitive example of a true conditional with a true antecedent and a false consequent (Over
and Cruz 2021, p. 18). It is a bit as if Over and Cruz were challenging someone who holds
that there are things she was once ﬁrmly convinced of that are no longer among her beliefs
simply because they slipped from her memory to give an example of such a thing.
32 Skovgaard-Olsen et al. (2017) also miss this point.

212
I. Douven et al.
3.4
Inferentialism Is Unfalsifiable
Above, we brieﬂy touched upon Over and Cruz’s claim that inferen-
tialism is unfalsiﬁable because it focuses on standard conditionals. They
make the same claim in connection with the belief bias analogue that, as
mentioned earlier, we found (and replicated several times over). Speciﬁ-
cally, we found that conditionals with believable consequent tended to be
evaluated as true more often than conditionals with unbelievable conse-
quent. We compared this to the well-documented effect of belief bias,
in which inferences with believable conclusions tend to be evaluated as
valid more often than inferences with unbelievable conclusion. Over and
Cruz argue that this constitutes evidence against, rather than in favor of,
inferentialism, and that the conditional probability hypothesis is directly
supported by this pattern “without auxiliary hypotheses.”
Alas, we think that Over and Cruz fell prey here to a normativist
fallacy (Elqayam and Evans 2011): the idea that a theory of thinking
must be backed by a normative system. This inevitably leads researchers
to narrow their focus to where a normative system can be found. This
is also the source of Over and Cruz’s subsequent argument, that inferen-
tialism cannot be empirically tested because it does not specify a logic.
These are related arguments, and they lead Over and Cruz to argue that
inferentialism is not falsiﬁable, or has limited falsiﬁability.
We beg to differ.33 As argued, formal logic is neither necessary nor
sufﬁcient for an effective theory of conditionals, or for its empirical
testing. Inferentialism has a very simple basic tenet: for agent A, the truth
of a conditional, C, is a function of A’s estimate of her ability to draw
a compelling argument from C’s antecedent to its consequent, given
background knowledge. This tenet can be simply and directly tested
by asking participants to draw an inference from antecedent to conse-
quent, and measure the predictive power of this inference to the truth
value of the conditional. Evidence against inferentialism can be entirely
straightforward, if this predictive power fails. So far we found no such
evidence.
33 We ﬁnd the term “falsiﬁable” rather puzzlingly Popperian and will instead refer to testability,
and to evidence for or against the theory.

Inferentialism: A Manifesto
213
It is not, by any stretch of the imagination, an auxiliary hypothesis to
expect inference to behave like inference. After more than half a century
of empirical science of reasoning, we know a fair few things about how
people draw inferences. Belief bias is a prominent feature of this knowl-
edge. Moreover, this is not an isolated one-off, but rather a persistent
pattern found across studies, and, more to the point, across other psycho-
logical patterns of inference. The similarity-based study in Douven et al.
(2021) is a case in point. In both cases, understanding how people draw
inference generates unique, testable predictions.
One ﬁnal observation: Over and Cruz only refer to inferentialism, but
as early on as Douven et al. (2018), we presented a rounded theory of
conditionals, Hypothetical Inferential Theory (HIT), with inferentialism
as the computational-level theory, supported by a suite of psychological
principles constituting the algorithmic-level theory. What we say about
inferentialism and the psychological patterns of inference is even more
relevant to HIT as a psychological theory. This makes the argument that
our belief bias hypothesis serves as an auxiliary even more unsustainable.
4
Conclusion
We hope to have shown that inferentialism, in the version we have been
advocating for a number of years now, has already much going for it.
Not in the least, it holds the promise of accounting for what is probably
our most fundamental intuition about conditionals, to wit, that there
is a dependency of the consequent of a conditional on its antecedent.
Supposing inferentialism, there is no need to explain away this intuition
as being somehow mistaken, nor for waving our hands in the direction of
pragmatics, hoping that someday someone will come up with a detailed
explanation of how the suggestion of a connection between a condi-
tional’s component parts is brought about pragmatically (or just hoping
that readers will be happy enough with the hand-waving and not ask for
details). In addition to this, inferentialism is backed by the outcomes of
several experiments that have been undertaken in the past years, using a
wide variety of materials and methodologies.

214
I. Douven et al.
The position has not remained without criticism, as we saw. As
argued, however, these criticisms have largely sprouted either from
misunderstandings of inferentialism—concerning its scope, for instance,
or concerning the role background knowledge plays in the semantics—
or from (implicitly) making unreasonable demands, like that there are
still open questions about the logic of the inferential conditional (as if
the critics could honestly claim that their own position saw the light
of day with all details fully worked out). We welcome the research on
conditional logics that take seriously the idea of their being a connection
between a conditional’s component parts and ﬁnd much of this research
to be promising. At the same time, we noted that it is not a priori that
there must be a logic of the conditional as used in everyday language. In
our view, there is a real possibility that this usage is not governed by prin-
ciples that can be regimented into anything worthy of the name “logic.”
We also noted that inferentialism was ﬁrst presented as a semantics of
normal indicative conditionals. We may well be able to extend it beyond
those, but—to repeat—we prefer to take one step at a time.
Naturally, this is already to acknowledge that there is still work to be
done. This is so even if, at least for a while, we keep conﬁning ourselves
to normal indicative conditionals. For example, Mirabile and Douven
(2020) based predictions about endorsement rates of MP arguments on
inferentialist tenets, but that work should be expanded to cover other
argument forms involving one or more conditional premises as well—
and there are many more than are usually considered in the psychology of
reasoning literature (see Douven 2016a, Ch. 5). We also need to develop
our processing account more fully. Although we made some progress
by postulating an inference heuristic, we still lack a model of how this
inference works.
Work also remains to be done on compounds of conditionals and
embedded conditionals, such as negated conditionals (some of which
are of the form “If A then not B”), which—inferentialism predicts—
deny the presence of an inferential connection between antecedent and
consequent. Besides, we have so far only looked at simple conditionals,
that is, conditionals whose antecedent and consequent are not themselves
conditional in form. There are many conditionals not of that sort—so-
called nested conditionals—which make perfect intuitive sense yet which

Inferentialism: A Manifesto
215
have proven a stumbling block for some of the main semantics (e.g.,
they pose well-known problems for the suppositional account). At least
theoretically, inferentialism has no difﬁculty accounting for nested condi-
tionals. Here is, for instance, one of our favorite examples of a both left-
and right-nested conditional (i.e., a conditional whose antecedent and
consequent are both conditional in form):
(20) If your mother gets angry if you come home with a B, then she’ll
get furious if you come home with a C.
According to inferentialism, (20) is true precisely if there is a compelling
argument for the claim that your mother will get furious if you come
home with a C from the premise that your mother gets angry if you come
home with a B, which can be further analyzed as: there is a compelling
argument for the conclusion that {you can compellingly argue that your
mother gets furious from the premise that you come home with a C}
from the premise that {you can compellingly argue that your mother
gets angry from the premise that you come home with a B}. Whether
this analysis would stand experimental scrutiny remains to be seen,
however.34
References
Adams, E. W. (1975). The logic of conditionals. Dordrecht: Reidel.
Alchourrón, C. E., Gärdenfors, P., & Makinson, D. (1985). On the logic of
theory change: Partial meet contraction and revision functions. Journal of
Symbolic Logic, 50, 510–530.
Asher, N. & Lascarides, A. (2003). Logics of conversation. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Bach, K. (1999). The myth of conventional implicature. Linguistics and
Philosophy, 22, 327–366.
34 We are greatly indebted to Paul Égré and Lance Rips for valuable comments on an earlier
version of this paper.

216
I. Douven et al.
Bach, K. & Harnish, R. (1979). Linguistic communication and speech acts.
Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Berto, F. & Özgün, A. (2021). Indicative conditionals: Probabilities and
relevance. Philosophical Studies, in press.
Braine, M. D. S. & O’Brien, D. P. (1991). A theory of if : Lexical entry,
reasoning program, and pragmatic principles. Psychological Review, 98,
182–203.
Carnap, R. (1952). Meaning postulates. Philosophical Studies, 3, 65–73.
Carnap, R. (1980). A basic system of inductive logic II. In R. C. Jeffrey
(ed.), Studies in Inductive Logic and Probability (pp. 7–155). Berkeley CA:
University of California Press.
Carston, R. (2002). Thoughts and utterances: The pragmatics of explicit commu-
nication. Oxford: Blackwell.
Clark, A. (1993). Sensory qualities. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Crupi, V. & Iacona, A. (2020). The evidential conditional. Erkenntnis. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10670-020-00332-2.
Crupi, V. & Iacona, A. (2021a). Probability, evidential support, and the logic
of conditionals. Argumenta, 6 , 211–222.
Crupi, V. & Iacona, A. (2021b). Three ways of being non-material. Studia
Logica, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11225-021-09949-y.
Cruz, N., Over, D., Oaksford, M., & Baratgin, J. (2016). Centering and the
meaning of conditionals. In A. Papafragou, D. Grodner, D. Mirman, &
J. C. Trueswell (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1104–1109). Austin TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Dascal, M. (1979). Conversational relevance. In A. Margalit (ed.), Meaning
and use (pp. 153–174). Dordrecht: Reidel.
Douven, I. (2003). Nelkin on the lottery paradox. Philosophical Review, 112,
395–404.
Douven, I. (2008). The evidential support theory of conditionals. Synthese,
164, 19–44.
Douven, I. (2012a). The lottery paradox and the pragmatics of belief. Dialec-
tica, 66 , 351–373.
Douven, I. (2012b). Learning conditional information. Mind & Language, 27,
239–263.
Douven, I. (2016a). The epistemology of indicative conditionals. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Douven, I. (2016b). Vagueness, graded membership, and conceptual spaces.
Cognition, 151, 80–95.

Inferentialism: A Manifesto
217
Douven, I. (2017a). How to account for the oddness of missing-link condi-
tionals. Synthese, 194, 1541–1554.
Douven, I. (2017b). Inference to the best explanation: What is it? And
why should we care? In K. McCain & T. Poston (eds.), Best explanations:
New essays on inference to the best explanation (pp. 4–22). Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Douven, I. (2021). How explanation guides belief change. In Trends in cognitive
sciences, in press.
Douven, I. (2022). The art of abduction. Cambridge MA: MIT Press, in press.
Douven, I., & Elqayam, S. (2021). Rethinking the lottery paradox: A dual
processing perspective. In I. Douven (ed.), Lotteries, knowledge, and rational
belief (pp. 110–127). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Douven, I., Elqayam, S., Gärdenfors, P., & Mirabile, P. (2021). Conceptual
spaces and the strength of similarity-based arguments. Manuscript.
Douven, I., Elqayam, S., & Mirabile, P. (2021). Inference strength predicts the
probability of conditionals better than conditional probability. Manuscript.
Douven, I., Elqayam, S., Singmann, H., & van Wijnbergen-Huitink, J. (2018).
Conditionals and inferential connections: A hypothetical inferential theory.
Cognitive Psychology, 101, 50–81.
Douven, I., Elqayam, S., Singmann, H., & van Wijnbergen-Huitink, J.
(2020). Conditionals and inferential connections: Toward a new semantics.
Thinking & Reasoning, 26 , 311–351.
Douven, I., & Kr˙zyzanowska, K. H. (2019). The semantics–pragmatics inter-
face: An empirical investigation. In A. Capone, M. Carapezza, & F. Lo
Piparo (eds.), Further advances in pragmatics and philosophy: Theories and
applications (pp. 81–100). Dordrecht: Springer.
Douven, I. & Mirabile, P. (2018). Best, second-best, and good-enough expla-
nations: How they matter to reasoning. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Language, Memory, and Cognition, 44, 1792–1813.
Douven, I. & Rott, H. (2018). From probabilities to categorical beliefs: Going
beyond toy models. Journal of Logic and Computation, 28, 1099–1124.
Douven, I., Wenmackers, S., Jraissati, Y., & Decock, L. (2017). Measuring
graded membership: The case of color. Cognitive Science, 41, 686–722.
Douven, I., & Williamson, T. (2006). Generalizing the lottery paradox. British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 57, 755–779.
Elder, C.-H., & Jaszczolt, K. M. (2016) Towards a pragmatic category of
conditionals. Journal of Pragmatics, 98, 36-53.

218
I. Douven et al.
Elqayam, S., & Evans, J. St. B. T. (2011). Subtracting ‘ought’ from ‘is’: Descrip-
tivism versus normativism in the study of human thinking. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 345, 233-248.
Elqayam, S., & Over, D. E. (2013). New paradigm psychology of reasoning.
Thinking & Reasoning, 19, 249–265.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Barston, J. L., & Pollard, P. (1983). On the conﬂict between
logic and belief in syllogistic reasoning. Memory & Cognition, 11, 295–306.
Fairchild, M. D. (2013). Color appearance models. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Gärdenfors, P. (2000). Conceptual spaces. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gärdenfors, P. (2014). The geometry of meaning. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Geis, M. L., & Lycan, W. G. (1993). Nonconditional conditionals. Philosoph-
ical Topics, 21, 35–56.
Gödel, K. (1931). Über formal unentscheidbare Sätze der Principia Mathe-
matica und verwandter Systeme, I. Monatshefte für Mathematik und Physik,
38, 173–198.
Grice, H. P. (1989). Studies in the way of words. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Hobbs, J. R. (2004). Abduction in natural language understanding. In
L. Horn & G. Ward (eds.), Handbook of pragmatics (pp. 724–741). Oxford:
Blackwell.
Jraissati, Y., & Douven, I. (2018). Delving deeper into color space. i-Perception,
9, 1–27, https://doi.org/10.1177/2041669518792062.
Kehler, A. (2002). Coherence, reference, and the theory of grammar. Stanford,
CA: CSLI Publications.
Kneale, W., & Kneale, M. (1962). The development of logic. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Krzy˙zanowska, K., Wenmackers, S., & Douven, I. (2013). Inferential condi-
tionals and evidentiality. Journal of Logic, Language and Information, 22,
315–334.
Krzy˙zanowska, K. H. (2015). Between “If” and “Then.” Doctoral dissertation.
University of Groningen.
Krzy˙zanowska, K. H. (2019). What is wrong with false-link conditionals?
Linguistics Vanguard, 5, s3, https://doi.org/10.1515/lingvan-2019-0006.
Krzy˙zanowska, K. H., Collins, P. J., & Hahn, U. (2017). Between a condi-
tional’s antecedent and its consequent: Discourse coherence vs. probabilistic
relevance. Cognition, 164, 199–205.
Krzy˙zanowska, K. H., Collins, P. J., & Hahn, U. (2021). True clauses and false
connections. Journal of Memory and Language, in press.

Inferentialism: A Manifesto
219
Krzy˙zanowska, K. H., & Douven, I. (2018). Missing-link conditionals: Prag-
matically infelicitous or semantically defective? Intercultural Pragmatics, 15,
191–211.
Krzy˙zanowska, K. H., Wenmackers, S., & Douven, I. (2014). Rethinking
Gibbard’s river-boat argument. Studia Logica, 102, 771–792.
Kyburg, H. (1961). Probability and the Logic of Rational Belief . Middletown,
CT: Wesleyan University Press.
Lauer, S. (2013). Towards a Dynamic Pragmatics. Doctoral dissertation. Stan-
ford University.
Levinson, S. C. (2000). Presumptive meanings. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lycan, W. G. (2001). Real conditionals. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mackie, J. L. (1973). Truth, probability and paradox: Studies in philosophical
logic. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Makinson, D. (1965). The paradox of the preface. Analysis, 25, 205–207.
Marr, D. (1982). Vision. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
McGee, V. (1985). A counterexample to modus ponens. Journal of Philosophy,
82, 462–471.
Mellor, D. H., & Bradley, R. (2021). Conditionals: Truth, safety, and success.
Mind & Language, in press.
Merin, A. (2007). Unconditionals. Unpublished manuscript, available at http://
semanticsarchive.net/Archive/WUwZTk5M/unconditionals.pdf.
Mill, J. S. (1843/1872). A system of logic: Ratiocinative and inductive (8th ed.).
London: Longmans, Green, Reader, & Dyer.
Mirabile, P., & Douven, I. (2020). Abductive conditionals as a test case for
inferentialism. Cognition, 200, 104232, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.
2020.104232.
Nelkin, D. K. (2000). The lottery paradox, knowledge, and rationality.
Philosophical Review, 109, 373–409.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1988). Exemplar-based accounts of relations between clas-
siﬁcation, recognition, and typicality. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 14, 54–65.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1989). Further tests of an exemplar-similarity approach to
relating identiﬁcation and categorization. Perception and Psychophysics, 45,
279–290.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (2010). Causation and conditionals in the
cognitive science of human reasoning. The Open Psychology Journal, 3,
105–118.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (2013). Dynamic inference and everyday condi-
tional reasoning in the new paradigm. Thinking & Reasoning, 19, 346–379.

220
I. Douven et al.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (2014). Probabilistic single function dual process
theory and logic programming as approaches to non-monotonicity in
human vs. artiﬁcial reasoning. Thinking & Reasoning, 20, 269–295.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (2017). Causal models and conditional reasoning.
In M. R. Waldmann (ed.), The Oxford handbook of causal reasoning
(pp. 327–346). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Oaksford, M. & Chater, N. (2020). Integrating causal Bayes nets and infer-
entialism in conditional inference. In S. Elqayam, I. Douven, J. St. B.
T. Evans, & N. Cruz (eds.), Logic and uncertainty in the human mind
(pp. 116–132). London: Routledge.
Osta-Vélez, M., & Gärdenfors, P. (2020). Category-based induction in concep-
tual spaces. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 96 , 102357, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jmp.2020.102357.
Over, D. E. (2009). New paradigm psychology of reasoning. Thinking &
Reasoning, 15, 431–438.
Over, D. E., & Cruz, N. (2021). Indicative and counterfactual conditionals in
the psychology of reasoning. Manuscript.
Over, D. E., Hadjichristidis, C., Evans, J. St. B. T., Handley, S. J., & Sloman,
S. A. (2007). The probability of causal conditionals. Cognitive Psychology,
54, 62–97.
Paris, J. B., & Vencovská, A. (2017). Combining analogical support in pure
inductive logic. Erkenntnis, 82, 401–419.
Petitot, J. (1989). Morphodynamics and the categorical perception of phono-
logical units. Theoretical Linguistics, 15, 25–71.
Potts, C. (2015). Presupposition and implicature. In S. Lappin & C. Fox
(eds.), The handbook of contemporary semantic theory (2nd ed, pp. 168–202).
Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.
Raidl, E., Iacona, A., & Crupi, V. (2021). The logic of the evidential
conditional. Review of Symbolic Logic, in press.
Ramsey, F. P. (1929/1990). General propositions and causality. In his Philosoph-
ical Papers, edited by D. H. Mellor (pp. 145–163). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Recanati, F. (2003). Literal meaning. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rostworowski, W., Pietrulewicz, N., & B˛edkowski, M. (2021). Conditionals
and speciﬁc links: An experimental study. Synthese, in press.
Ryle, G. (1950). “If”, “so”, and “because”. In M. Black (ed.), Philosophical
Analysis (pp. 323–340). Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

Inferentialism: A Manifesto
221
Sadock, J. M. (1978). On testing for conversational implicature. In P. Cole
(Ed.), Syntax and semantics Vol. 9: Pragmatics (pp. 281–297). New York:
Academic Press.
Schurz, G. (2019). Hume’s problem solved: The optimality of meta-induction.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Schurz, G., & Hertwig, R. (2019). Cognitive success: A consequentialist
account of rationality and cognition. Topics in Cognitive Science, 11, 7–36.
Shepard, R. N. (1964). Attention and the metric structure of the stimulus
space. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1, 54–87.
Simon, H. A. (1982). Models of bounded rationality. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Skorupski, J. (1989). John Stuart Mill. London: Routledge.
Skovgaard-Olsen, N., Kellen, D., Krahl, H., & Klauer, C. (2017). Rele-
vance differently affects the truth, acceptability, and probability evaluations
of “and,” “but,” “therefore,” and “if then.” Thinking & Reasoning, 23,
449–482.
Skovgaard-Olsen, N., Singmann, H., & Klauer, K. C. (2017). Relevance and
reason relations. Cognitive Science, 41, 1202–1215.
Skovgaard-Olsen, N., Collins, P., Krzy˙zanowska, K., Hahn, U., & Klauer, K.
C. (2019). Cancellation, negation, and rejection. Cognitive Psychology, 108,
42–71.
Stalnaker, R. (1975). Indicative conditionals. Philosophia, 5, 269–286.
Tarski, A. (1936). Der Wahrheitsbegriff in den formalisierten Sprachen. Studia
Philosophica, 1, 261–405.
Tonhauser, J. (2012). Diagnosing (not-)at-issue content. Proceedings of Seman-
tics of Under-represented Languages of the Americas VI, (pp. 239–254).
Amherst: GLSA.
van Fraassen, B. C. (1976). Probabilities of conditionals. In W. L. Harper & C.
A. Hooker (eds.), Foundations of probability theory, statistical inference, and
statistical theories of science (pp. 261–301). Dordrecht: Reidel.
van Rooij, R., & Schulz, K. (2019). Conditionals, causality and conditional
probability. Journal of Logic, Language and Information, 28, 55–71.
Vidal, M., & Baratgin, J. (2017). A psychological study of unconnected
conditionals. Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 29, 769–781.
Zakkou, J. (2018). The cancellability test for conversational implicatures.
Philosophy Compass, 13, e12552.

Independence Conditionals
Nicole Cruz and David E. Over
Douven et al. (this volume) have replied to our critique (Over and Cruz
this volume) of their version of truth condition inferentialism (TCI). They
have generously allowed us to have the last word (in this volume) in this
debate. Their TCI theory is that there must be a compelling argument
from p, plus background information and not from this information
alone, to q for a “standard” conditional, if p then q, to be true. This
argument can be deductive, inductive, abductive, or possibly contain
some other kind of step (such as an analogical inference), and it does
not have to be conclusive (see Douven et al. this volume, for their truth
conditions).
N. Cruz
Institute for Psychology, University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria
e-mail: Nicole.Cruz@uibk.ac.at
D. E. Over (B)
Department of Psychology, Durham University, Durham, UK
e-mail: david.over@durham.ac.uk
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Switzerland AG 2023
S. Kaufmann et al. (eds.), Conditionals, Palgrave Studies in Pragmatics, Language
and Cognition, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-05682-6_8
223

224
N. Cruz and D. E. Over
Our primary aim, however, is not a point-by-point reply to their
counter critique of our arguments, but the positive one of stressing the
importance of what we will call independence conditionals. We deﬁne this
term to refer to pragmatic uses of conditionals to convey information
about the independence of the antecedents and consequents. Thus, a use
of if p then q is an “independence conditional” when this use is intended
to convey, along with background information, that p and q are inde-
pendent of each other, which implies that the probability of q given
p is the probability of q, P(q|p) = P(q), or equivalently that P(q|p) =
P(q|not-p). We will argue that inferentialists should not, as they usually
do, set aside these conditionals as somehow “nonconditionals”, “non-
standard”, or even “unconditionals”. They often do this in very brief
asides in their papers, or in footnotes to them. Consider the following
footnote in Douven et al. (2020), which states that the TCI account
introduced by Krzy˙zanowska et al. (2014) only proposes a semantics for
“standard” conditionals and not “unconditionals”:
To avoid spurious debate, it is to be noted that linguists and philoso-
phers have long recognized that there are special classes of conditionals -
sometimes called ‘nonconditional conditionals’ (Lycan 2001) or ‘uncon-
ditionals’ (Merin 2007; Spohn 2013) - which do not require the exis-
tence of a connection between their antecedent and consequent. These
include Dutchman conditionals (Jackson 1979, 1987), non-interference
conditionals (Bennett 2003; Burgess 2004), and relevance conditionals
(Bennett 2003). Krzy˙zanowska and coauthors explicitly propose their
brand of inferentialism as a semantics for standard conditionals, not for
unconditionals.
It is far from the case that most linguists and philosophers have thought
of conditionals with no compelling arguments making a connection
between the antecedents and the consequents as “unconditionals”, with a
different semantics from what Douven et al. call “standard” conditionals
(see Csipak and Romero this volume, and Lassiter 2022, and the refer-
ences given there). We wish to stress that uses of conditionals if p then
q without a connection between p and q can be perfectly “standard”, in
an ordinary sense, in natural language and can have an important role
in human reasoning, as what we are calling independence conditionals.

Independence Conditionals
225
Suppose a class of students are to take an especially easy test, and we
remark:
(1) If the students do not attend the lectures, they will pass that test.
In using (1) in this context, we would intend to convey the information
that passing this test is independent of attending the lectures: the latter
is unconnected with the former. Some theorists (referred to in the quote
above) would call (1) a non-interference conditional, but we would also
term it an independence conditional. We see nothing non-standard in it,
or its use here to convey what could be, for the students, important infor-
mation about independence. Inferentialists might claim that (1) should
be taken as a concessive conditional, with an implicit “even if” in it:
(2) Even if the students do not attend the lectures, they will pass that
test.
With limited space, we will not examine this claim here, but in any event,
both non-interference and concessive conditionals, like (1) or (2), are
standardly accompanied, usually implicitly but sometimes explicitly, by
other indicative conditionals, which must also be true for independence
to hold. In our example, this other indicative would be:
(3) If the students attend the lectures, they will pass that test.
In most contexts, the use of (3) would not be an independence condi-
tional, as it would convey, pragmatically, that there is a causal connection
between attending the lectures and passing the test, but in the context
that we have described, it would be an independence conditional. Back-
ground knowledge tells us that the test is so easy to pass that attending
the lectures would be redundant. By the TCI truth conditions given in
Douven et al. (2020) and Douven et al. (this volume), (3) in this use,
in this context, should be “neither true nor false”. But we see no justiﬁ-
cation for coming to this conclusion. Independence in this case depends
on the truth of both (1) and (3), and these truths could be established
by a statistical analysis after the test, showing no correlation between

226
N. Cruz and D. E. Over
attending the lectures and passing the test. Notice that (3) would be false
when attending the lectures was correlated with failing the test, because
the lectures contained misinformation. But that is not what we have in
the example we have given.
If participants in an experiment responded that (1) and (3) had a high
probability in the kind of context we have described, we would argue
that a probabilistic account of conditionals (Over and Cruz 2018, this
volume; Sanﬁlippo et al. 2020) had been supported and not TCI (see also
Pfeifer this volume). For in this account, the probability of a conditional,
P(if p then q), is the conditional probability of q given p, P(q|p), and
P(q|p) is high when P(q) is high and q is independent of p. However,
matters are not so quite straightforward with some supporters of TCI.
They claim, as we have seen, that their theory does not have to apply to
a wide range of uses of conditionals. They would have to include (1) and
(3), in the context of our example, among the conditionals that their
TCI theory does not have to apply to. Douven and his collaborators
also claim that there is a belief bias effect in the results of Douven et al.
(2018), which makes people endorse if p then q when they have a high
degree of belief in q, i.e., P(q) is high, although there is not a compelling
argument from p to q. Conditionals if p then q will simply be more
often evaluated as “true” when q is evaluated as “true” (Douven et al.
this volume). We have suggested (Over and Cruz this volume) that the
falsiﬁability of TCI as a psychological hypothesis is called into question
by adding these two claims to it: that critics cause a “spurious debate”
by pointing out cases that go against TCI, and that people have a “belief
bias” when their responses conﬂict with this theory.
Douven and his collaborators go much farther and make the even
stronger claim that the supposed “belief bias” results support their TCI
theory. They argue that they closely compare judging a conditional to
making an inference, and any bias that affects the latter should affect the
former. To analyze this claim more deeply, we must ﬁrst say something
about the psychological study of belief bias. As Thompson and Evans
(2012) point out in their work on informal belief bias, this response was
originally discovered in experiments on syllogisms and logical validity.
To focus on one aspect of these experiments, there was some tendency

Independence Conditionals
227
for participants to judge an invalid syllogism as “valid” when its conclu-
sion was believable. For example, there was a tendency for participants to
respond that the following invalid syllogism with a believable conclusion
was “valid”:
No addictive things are inexpensive.
Some cigarettes are inexpensive.
Therefore, some addictive things are not cigarettes.
As Thompson and Evans (2012) outline, various explanations have been
given of this belief bias response. To simplify, one proposal is that the
participants with belief bias were trying to avoid difﬁculties. They were
asked whether the above syllogistic conclusion necessarily followed from
the premises. If the conclusion had been unbelievable, they might have
examined the inference more closely, but ﬁnding questions about exam-
ples like the above difﬁcult, they perhaps responded “yes” merely because
they believed the conclusion. Clearly, there is at least a prima facie case,
in this kind of experiment on deductive reasoning, with its instructions,
for classifying this response as a “bias”.
However, the inferences in Douven et al. (2018) that supposedly
display “belief bias” are totally unlike syllogistic inferences that are difﬁ-
cult for people who have never studied logic. The former are elementary
inferences about blue or green patches (Douven et al. this volume),
which require no formal training, and it certainly should not be at
all difﬁcult for ordinary people to make unbiased judgments about
conditionals referring to them. Consider:
(4) If grass is green, then the sky is blue.
According to everything Douven and his collaborators have said about
the TCI truth conditions, (4) should be a prime example of a condi-
tional that is “neither true nor false” by those conditions. On the other
hand, according to what they have said about “belief bias”, quite a few
participants in an experiment would judge that (4) is “true” because of
that “bias”. But it is obvious that there is no compelling argument from

228
N. Cruz and D. E. Over
the antecedent of (4) to its consequent, and there is no explanation of
the “true” response as a supposed “bias”.
Moreover, as Thompson and Evans (2012) also point out, it is more
problematic to claim that it is a bias to make use of one’s beliefs in wider
inferences than logical deductions from assumptions. As they explain,
Bayesian principles specify how we should use our prior beliefs in such
reasoning. To take account of this fact, there is a new Bayesian approach
in the psychology of reasoning (Oaksford and Chater 2007, 2020; Over
and Cruz this volume). Suppose some students have a cold, and because
they hope to recover from it quickly for an upcoming test, they have an
interest in the probability of this conditional:
(5) If we take extra vitamin C, we will recover from the cold within a
week.
They consider the argument to the conclusion that they will recover from
the cold within a week, w, from the premise that they take extra vitamin
C, e. A little thought about the colds they have had in the past could
lead them to a judgment that the probability of w, P(w), is high. That
might lead on, after further reﬂection about their past colds, to the infer-
ence that w is highly probable given e, with the result that P(w|e) is
high for them. In our account, making this judgment would give them
a high degree of conﬁdence in (5). They could then notice that this high
probability equals P(w), i.e., P(w|e) = P(w), and they could ﬁnally infer
the conclusion that w is independent of e, with (5) having the same
probability as:
(6) If we do not take extra vitamin C, we will recover from the cold
within a week.
The arguments of Douven and his collaborators imply that there is a
“bias” in the reasoning we have just described, and that (5) and (6) must
be “neither true nor false”. But it is unjustiﬁed, from a Bayesian point of
view, to condemn an inference as necessarily “biased” when its conclu-
sion is highly probable, and its premise, or premises, are independent of
it. The students’ reasoning, as we have described it, could be absolutely

Independence Conditionals
229
consistent with Bayesian principles and Bayes’ theorem (Oaksford and
Chater 2007, 2020). People would, of course, commit a fallacy if they
inferred from (5), in this context, that taking extra vitamin C causes
recovery from a cold within a week. But this is not what happens in our
example, in which the students correctly conclude that recovering from
a cold within a week is independent of taking extra vitamin C.
Douven et al. say that we have misunderstood them, and they do
not themselves consider what we are calling independence conditionals
“unconditionals”. We are sorry for any misunderstanding, but we are less
convinced than ever that it is a “bias” for the participants in Douven
et al. (2018) to endorse a conditional if p then q when q holds indepen-
dently of p. In the TCI account of Douven et al., as they now explain it,
if p then q has more than one meaning and can legitimately be used, in a
“non-standard” sense, when there is no compelling argument from p to
q. The participants in Douven et al. (2018) may be thinking of this sense
when they endorse a use of if p then q without a compelling argument
from p to q, and so we still do not see why they are said to have a “bias”.
The problem for Douven et al. is to explain precisely how one can tell
which sense, “standard” or “non-standard”, is being assigned to if p then
q in a given context, by the participants in an experiment or anyone else.
We have a parallel problem of specifying how we can distinguish one
pragmatic use of a conditional from another. How can we tell whether
(5), for instance, is being used to support an argument that taking extra
vitamin C causes quick recovery from colds, or is part of an argument
that the recovery is independent of taking the vitamin supplement? We
cannot write more about this problem here, but we would point to
Lassiter (2022) as an important source which is relevant to this problem
in pragmatics.
Douven et al. (this volume) also respond to our questions about the
falsiﬁability of their theory. They refer to a number of experimental
results that, in their view, support their position. We do not have the
space here to discuss further problems, from our point of view, with
the interpretation of their experiments. But we are happy to agree
that a straightforward version of TCI can be disconﬁrmed (which as
Bayesians is what we mean by “falsiﬁable”): the psychological hypoth-
esis that people will only endorse if p then q when they believe there is a

230
N. Cruz and D. E. Over
compelling argument from p to q. Some experiments do disconﬁrm this
version of TCI: Cruz et al. (2016), Pfeifer (this volume), and Skovgaard-
Olsen et al. (2017). This version is also disconﬁrmed by the supposed
“belief bias” results in Douven et al. (2018).
As we have seen, Douven et al. (2018, 2020, this volume) argue that
those “belief bias” results support their less straightforward version of
TCI. “Belief bias” is supposed to give people a tendency to endorse if
p then q as true when they believe q, even if there is not a compelling
argument from p to q. But consider their own example, in this volume,
of a conditional that is supposed to be absurd on semantic grounds:
(7) If Eisenhower was the 34th American president, then Newton is the
author of Principia Mathematica.
Douven et al. can certainly predict that some participants in an experi-
ment will not judge (7) to be true. But according to their interpretation
of their “belief bias” results, other participants, who believe that Newton
is the author of Principia Mathematica, will endorse (7) as true. Yet
another possibility, by what Douven et al. say, is that a further group
of participants will interpret (7) as true as a “non-standard” conditional.
We could, of course, make the same points about example (4). There-
fore, we would still question the falsiﬁability of the Douven et al. version
of TCI.
We also remain puzzled by what Douven and his collaborators are
claiming about modus ponens (MP): inferring q from if p then q and
p. Douven et al. (2020), and Mirabile and Douven (2020), argued that
MP does not always preserve truth, and so is logically invalid, according
to TCI. Their argument was that there can be a compelling, but non-
conclusive, argument from p to q, making if p then q true by the TCI
truth conditions, although p is true and q is false. Mirabile and Douven
suggested that this fact could explain, from a TCI point of view, why
fewer than 100% of participants in experiments on reasoning endorse
MP as a valid inference. The endorsement rate of MP is extremely high,
but not quite 100%. Douven and his collaborators know that the slightly
lower rate of just under 100% might be the noise that is found in all
experiments on reasoning, but they also hypothesize that this lower rate

Independence Conditionals
231
could result from some participant awareness that MP does not always
preserve truth. In our chapter (this volume), we asked for an example of
if p then q that was “true” when p is true and q false, and we referred to
experimental evidence that, when participants are presented with a true
p and a false q, they respond that if p then q is false, whether or not there
is a general correlation between p and q (Skovgaard-Olsen et al. 2017).
With questionable consistency, Douven et al. (this volume) respond
that our request is impossible to satisfy, because, when p is true and q is
false, there is not really a compelling argument from p to q to make if p
then q true, and that participants in experiments are aware of this fact. To
begin with, this claim undercuts the Mirabile and Douven proposed TCI
explanation of why MP is not endorsed at a rate of 100% in experiments.
If participants in an experiment cannot conceive of a true if p then q with
a true p and a false q, then they will not hesitate to endorse the validity
of MP, and the slightly less than 100% endorsement rate will only be the
noise that the vast majority of psychologists of reasoning take it to be.
Douven et al. now seem to be saying no more than that some people
can believe that if p then q is “true” when they are unaware that p is true
and q is false. Such people can mistakenly believe that q is true when they
come to believe p, but with the major premise false, this is not a case in
which MP fails to preserve truth. Curiously for us as well, Douven and
his collaborators refer to the claimed counterexample to MP in McGee
(1985) as if it could be a case in which if p then (if not-q then r) is true
when p is true and (if not-q then r) is false. But if a debatable example
of the supposed failure of MP to preserve truth, as implied by TCI, can
be given in this compound case, then we do not see why a debatable
example cannot be given, as we requested, for a simple if p then q and
p and q. Basically, if MP does sometimes fail to preserve the truth for
such an if p then q, as held by Douven and his collaborators, then there
should be an example of this.
We would like, however, to end on a positive note, stressing the impor-
tance of what we call independence conditionals. As we have recalled
above, we are arguing for a probabilistic account of conditionals, in
which P(if p then q) = P(q|p). This fundamental relation allows condi-
tionals to be interpreted pragmatically as epistemic or causal conditionals
in some contexts, when p raises the probability of q, P(q|p) > P(q|not-p),

232
N. Cruz and D. E. Over
and also as independence conditionals in other contexts, when q is inde-
pendent of p, P(q|p) = P(q|not-p). But we would observe further that
these two general uses of conditionals are closely related in our reasoning.
For example, we could not successfully reason about causes and effects
unless we could sometimes infer, and convey in our use of conditionals,
that q is independent of p. Reasoning about causes and effects goes hand
in hand with reasoning about independence, and conditionals are central
to all of this reasoning in our probabilistic account.
References
Bennett, J. (2003). A philosophical guide to conditionals. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Burgess, J. P. (2004). Review of J. Bennett. A philosophical guide to condi-
tionals. Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, 10(4), 565–570. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S1079898600003632
Cruz, N., Over, D., Oaksford, M., & Baratgin, J. (2016). Centering and the
meaning of conditionals. In A. Papafragou, D. Grodner, D. Mirman, & J.
C. Trueswell (Eds.), Proceedings of the 38th Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 1104–1109). Austin, US: Cognitive Science Society.
Douven, I., Elqayam, S., Singmann, H., & van Wijnbergen-Huitink, J. (2018).
Conditionals and inferential connections: A hypothetical inferential theory.
Cognitive Psychology, 101, 50–81.
Douven, I., Elqayam, S., Singmann, H., & van Wijnbergen-Huitink, J.
(2020). Conditionals and inferential connections: Toward a new semantics.
Thinking & Reasoning, 26(3), 311–351.
Jackson, F. (1979). On assertion and indicative conditionals. Philosophical
Review, 88(4), 565–589. https://doi.org/10.2307/2184845
Jackson, F. (1987). Conditionals. Oxford: Blackwell.
Krzy˙zanowska, K., Wenmackers, S., & Douven, I. (2014). Rethinking
Gibbard’s riverboat argument. Studia Logica, 102, 771–792.
Lassiter, D. (2022). Decomposing relevance in conditionals. Mind & Language.
Available at: https://web.stanford.edu/~danlass/
Lycan, W. G. (2001). Real conditionals. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
McGee, V. (1985). A counterexample to modus ponens. Journal of Philosophy,
82(9), 462–471.

Independence Conditionals
233
Merin, A. (2007). Unconditionals (Unpublished manuscript). Retrieved from
http://semanticsarchive.net/Archive/WUwZTk5M/unconditionals.pdf
Mirabile, P., & Douven, I. (2020). Abductive conditionals as a test case for
inferentialism. Cognition, 200, 104232.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (2007). Bayesian rationality: The probabilistic
approach to human reasoning. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (2020). New paradigms in the psychology of
reasoning. Annual Review of Psychology, 71, 305–330.
Over, D. E., & Cruz, N. (2018). Probabilistic accounts of conditional
reasoning. In Linden J. Ball & Valerie A. Thompson (Eds.), International
handbook of thinking and reasoning (pp. 434–450). Hove: Psychology Press.
Sanﬁlippo, G., Gilio, A., Over, D. E., & Pfeifer, N. (2020). Probabilities of
conditionals and previsions of iterated conditionals. International Journal of
Approximate Reasoning, 121, 150–173.
Skovgaard-Olsen, N., Kellen, D., Krahl, H., Klauer, C. (2017). Relevance
differently affects the truth, acceptability, and probability evaluations of
‘and’, ‘but’, ‘therefore’, and ‘if then’. Thinking & Reasoning, 23, 449–482.
Spohn, W. (2013). A ranking-theoretic approach to conditionals. Cognitive
Science, 37 (6), 1074–1106. https://doi.org/10.1111/cogs.12057
Thompson, V. A., & Evans, J. St. B. T. (2012). Belief bias in informal
reasoning. Thinking & Reasoning, 18, 278–310.

Experimenting with (Conditional)
Perfection: Tests of the Exhaustivity
Theory
Fabrizio Cariani and Lance J. Rips
1
Introduction
Conditional claims like (1) can, in the right context, convey additional
information—the sort of information carried by (2) or (3):
(1) If she turns in the ﬁnal paper, she will pass the class.
(2) Only if she turns in the ﬁnal paper, will she pass the class.
(3) If she does not turn in the ﬁnal paper, she will not pass the class.
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-05682-6_9.
F. Cariani
University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA
e-mail: fabrizio@umd.edu
L. J. Rips (B)
Psychology Department, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA
e-mail: rips@northwestern.edu
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Switzerland AG 2023
S. Kaufmann et al. (eds.), Conditionals, Palgrave Studies in Pragmatics, Language
and Cognition, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-05682-6_9
235

236
F. Cariani and L. J. Rips
More generally, in the appropriate contexts, from an utterance of If A, B
hearers can infer the biconditional A if and only if B. Following Geis and
Zwicky (1971), we will call this inference conditional perfection (some-
times simply perfection, since it is the only kind of perfection we will be
concerned with).
There is strong reason to think that perfection is not a purely logical
inference—that is, it’s not to be explained exclusively as a semantic
entailment of conditional sentences.1 After all, theories of conditionals
universally agree that If A, B does not entail If B, A (and that it does
not entail A if and only if B). Moreover, there are many conditional
statements and contexts that do not trigger perfection.
(4) If this cactus grows native to Idaho, then it’s not an Astrophytum
(Lilje 1972).
(5) If you look at this Canaletto painting, you’ll get a good idea of what
the Canal Grande looks like (Herburger 2015).
It is natural, then, to explore the idea that perfection arises, when it does,
from some kind of pragmatic reasoning. Perhaps this sort of pragmatic
reasoning is systematic enough to be derivable from general pragmatic
principles (that is without leveraging very speciﬁc assumptions about
context).
In this paper, we present a series of experiments designed to test one of
the most promising pragmatic accounts of perfection. This is von Fintel’s
(2001) idea that whether perfection arises depends on what kinds of
questions are, implicitly or explicitly, driving the inquiry of the partic-
ipants to the conversation (we present the essentials of this account in
the next section). Because our ﬁndings are mostly negative, we empha-
size at the outset that von Fintel’s proposal is avowedly speculative. We
are interested in testing it experimentally because it is a plausible working
hypothesis. Even if it were not the whole story, it is worthwhile exploring
which elements of it are supported by experimental scrutiny and which
aren’t.
1 We will later consider a view on which conditional perfection does arise as a semantic entail-
ment, but only when additional covert material is present. In other words, even at that point,
we remain committed to the view that it is not a semantic entailment of the conditional.

Experimenting with (Conditional) Perfection …
237
Before proceeding, note that, while perfection is interesting in its
own right as a problem for pragmatics, it has a wider signiﬁcance. For
instance, we believe that an account of conditional perfection might illu-
minate why participants in reasoning experiments are sometimes willing
to endorse the fallacious inferences of Afﬁrming the Consequent and
Denying the Antecedent—the invalid cousins of Modus Ponens and Modus
Tollens.2 Indeed, the link between perfection and these argument forms
is at the center of our experiments.
2
From Implicatures to Exhaustivity
Conditional perfection, we said, is not a purely logical inference. More
generally, it seems wrong to maintain that it is the sort of inference that
arises solely on the basis of the linguistic material that is explicitly made
available by a conditional sentence. Geis and Zwicky (1971) illustrated
the phenomenon of perfection with:
(6) If you mow the lawn, I will give you ﬁve dollars.
No doubt, they had in mind a context in which (6) conveys the infor-
mation that mowing the lawn is the only way for the hearer to get the
ﬁve dollars. But it’s easy to come up with contexts in which this is not
true. For instance, imagine (6) being uttered immediately after:
(7) If you tidy your room, I will give you ﬁve dollars.
In this case, the surrounding discourse seems to block perfection.
In general, linguistic context can determine whether the inference is
licensed or blocked.
2 The connection between conditional perfection and the fallacies is already made in Geis and
Zwicky (1971, p. 562). For reviews of the experimental ﬁndings concerning the conditional
fallacies, see Evans and Over (2004, Chapter 3) and Oaksford and Chater (2007, Chapter 5).
For a proposal about how to account for the ﬁndings, given a story about perfection, see
Cariani and Rips (2017).

238
F. Cariani and L. J. Rips
Another important aspect of conditional perfection is that there are
multiple paths to generate a biconditional interpretation from a condi-
tional (Van Canegem-Ardijns and Van Belle 2008). In particular, for a
given conditional If A, B, we may note at least four distinct paths to
perfection, depending on whether we strengthen with:
• converse: if B, A
• obverse: if
~A, ~B
• exhaustiﬁed conditional: Only If A, B
• exhaustiﬁed contrapositive: Only If
~B, ~A.
As Van Canegem-Ardijns and Van Belle (2008) note, these paths are not
equivalent (see also Bonnefon and Polizer 2010; Franke 2009, p. 235).
For instance, they claim that (8) invites the inference to (9) but not to
(10).
(8) If you empty a bucket of oil on the street, the street will get slippery.
(9) If you do not empty a bucket of oil on the street, the street won’t
get slippery.
(10) Only if you empty a bucket of oil on the street, will the street get
slippery.
The focus in our experiments is on perfection inferences that go via
converse and obverse.
So, what features of context license perfection? There is a long history
of controversial pragmatic analyses.3 Fast-forwarding to one of the later
stages of this debate, Horn (2000) proposes a view that (with interpreta-
tional help from von Fintel 2001) we understand as follows: conditional
perfection is licensed when If A, B is in Gricean competition with B,
no matter what. By uttering If A, B, a cooperative speaker conveys her
inability to make the stronger statement that B holds unconditionally
(that is, to assert: B, no matter what). That does license a hearer to infer
something that goes beyond If A, B. But, as von Fintel (2001) points out,
that license is well short of perfection. Even if one’s assertive utterance of
3 In addition to Geis and Zwicky (1971), see van der Auwera (1997), Horn (2000), and von
Fintel (2001).

Experimenting with (Conditional) Perfection …
239
If A, B signals reluctance to assert B, no matter what, it does not rule out
another antecedent D, not equivalent to A, such that If D, B. So it does
not imply that A is the only such antecedent (i.e., that A is necessary as
well as sufﬁcient for B).
The exact upshot of Horn’s proposal depends on the background
theory of conditionals. Let us adopt one theory as a starting point.
Suppose that conditionals are universal quantiﬁers over a contextually
set domain of possible worlds.
Strict: If A, B is true in context C at world w iff for all v ∈C (w), either
A is false at v or B is true at v .
Here, C (·) denotes a function from worlds to sets of worlds. Intuitively,
this is interpreted as the set of worlds that are relevant to the evaluation
of the conditional, given that the world of evaluation is w.
Given this semantics, the most likely explanation for one’s not being
in a position to assert B, no matter what would be that one believes
that B might be false in some of the relevant worlds. But if the addi-
tional information conveyed by If A, B is just that B might be false
in some salient possibility, we are far from perfection. Perfection would
require not just that B fails at some of the relevant worlds at which A
fails; it requires the truth of the converse conditional (i.e., If B, A), and
so it requires that every relevant B-world is an A-world.4 Taking stock:
Gricean competition between If A, B and B, no matter what seems to get
at a real phenomenon. But that phenomenon is not perfection.
Why, then, is it sometimes possible to get the full perfection infer-
ence? Von Fintel (2001) sketches a different sort of pragmatic account,
following an insight in Cornulier (1983). Commenting on the example,
(11) One can take this seat if one is disabled or one is older than 70.
Cornulier remarks:
4 Or at least, minimally, that both A and B fail at the actual world. The Horn-inspired proposal
fails this more minimal standard as well.

240
F. Cariani and L. J. Rips
For we can suppose, very roughly, that in [One can take this seat if one is
disabled or if one is older than 70] the word if keeps its merely sufﬁcient
condition meaning, and that the utterance situation suggests that if other
sufﬁcient conditions (allowing one to sit there) did exist, they would have
been mentioned, so that the only mentioned property (to be disabled or
to be older than 70) is the only property which gives one the right to sit
there (presumption of exhaustivity). (Cornulier 1983: 248)
Incidentally, Cornulier’s example is especially interesting because it is a
conditional permission, which might actually trigger a particularly strong
form of perfection inference (see Sect. 3 for discussion; however, our
experiments did not target conditional permissions).
Von Fintel’s (2001) central move is to connect Cornulier’s talk about
exhaustivity with off-the-shelf work on exhaustivity in response to ques-
tions (speciﬁcally Groenendijk and Stokhof 1984; for a survey of work
on exhaustivity see van Rooij and Schulz 2003; for another development
of Cornulier’s insight, see Franke 2009). The key assumption is that we
generally, though not always, interpret simple answers to questions as
exhaustive. If the doctor asks, “What did you drink last night?” and Lucy
replies “Two glasses of wine,” we take Lucy to provide an exhaustive list
of what she drank.
This idea can be extended to conditionals. Consider a question Q such
that (i) If A, B is a possible answer to Q and (ii) when if A, B is provided
as an answer to Q, the conditional is naturally given an exhaustive inter-
pretation. There are many different questions conditionals might be used
to answer. It will be useful to isolate two categories of questions: the ﬁrst
category consists of questions about how the consequent might come
about. We call them consequent-directed (abbreviated [CONS?]). Here
are some examples of [CONS?] questions:
• What are all the ways in which B?
• How might B happen?
• Is B true?
The second category consists of questions about what follows from the
antecedent.

Experimenting with (Conditional) Perfection …
241
• What follows from A?
• What happens if A?
To make this concrete, consider an example like (6). This might be an
answer to [CONS?] questions like: “What are all the ways in which I
might get ﬁve dollars?”, “Will I get ﬁve dollars?”; it might also be an
answer to [ANT?] questions like “What happens if I mow the lawn?”.
Moreover, we should not suppose that these are the only questions:
[CONS?] and [ANT?] questions are not exhaustive categories.
Von Fintel’s claim is that [CONS?] questions, but not [ANT?] ones,
might help yield something like perfection. His argument starts, like
ours, with the assumption that the truth conditions for If A, B are
captured by Strict.
Here, then is one possible way of deriving perfection given the
assumptions we have on the table. Suppose that a [CONS?] question
Q cons, was asked and that it was answered by If A, B. Then:
Step 1: provided that If A, B is understood as an exhaustive answer to
Q cons, the speaker is not in a position to assert If D, B for any D that
competes with A.
Step 2: provided that the speaker is informed about the truth-values of
these conditionals, she must believe all conditionals of the form If D, B
are false.
Step 3: if all conditionals of the form If D, B are false for every antecedent
that competes with A, then if not A, not B must be true.
To justify the reasoning from Step 2 to Step 3 we need another assump-
tion. One approach might stipulate that the space of competitors to A is
particularly rich:
Competitors: the antecedents that compete with A are all those
antecedents D that do not entail A.

242
F. Cariani and L. J. Rips
This entails that there are lots of alternatives. In particular, it entails that
for each not A world w, there is an alternative conditional (If
Sw, B)
where Sw is a sentence that is only true in w.5
Another way of justifying this step, a more plausible one in our view,
is to assume (i) that conditionals satisfy the principle of Conditional
Excluded Middle (CEM) so that from ~(If D, B) one might infer If D,
~B and (ii) that every relevant possibility is included in some competitor
or other. We think that this second approach ﬁts best with the rest of
von Fintel’s theoretical framework—as von Fintel’s (1997, Section 7)
argues that Strict truth conditions for If can be made compatible with
CEM by hypothesizing that conditionals come with a homogeneity
presupposition.6
Either way, von Fintel’s account predicts that conditional perfection
should arise precisely when the other assumptions in the above reasoning
are satisﬁed. We take Strict to be a valuable working hypothesis, so the
key assumptions to focus on, as we move to the experimental part of
our paper are: (i) that there is some principled way in which the rele-
vant competitors to A are generated; (ii) that If A, B is understood as
an exhaustive answer to [CONS?] questions; and (iii) that the speaker is
relevantly informed.
5 Concluding the reasoning: asserting If A, B would implicate ~(If
Sw, B), which entails that
there is a world that veriﬁes Sw
& ~B. But since only w veriﬁes Sw, then w must verify
~B. Since w was an arbitrary world that does not verify A, it follows that every ~A-world is a
~B-world.
6 Of course, the canonical way of validating CEM is to adopt Stalnaker’s semantics for condi-
tionals (Stalnaker 1968, 1981): If A, B is true at w iff B is true at the selected A-world.
Yet another option, one that we have some stake in, starts with the argument in Cariani and
Santorio (2018) that will is a “selectional” modal (that its contribution is to select a world
out of a modal base). They note that combining a restrictor semantics in the style of Kratzer
(1991, 2012) with selectional modals gives something roughly like Stalnaker’s semantics for
conditionals of the form If A, will B—speciﬁcally, a semantics that validates CEM. One might
extend this insight to a broader class of conditional sentences by postulating that conditionals
can sometimes restrict covert selectional modals (Cariani 2021).

Experimenting with (Conditional) Perfection …
243
3
Designing Experimental Tests
of Perfection Inferences
Before going through the battery of experiments we ran, it’s useful to
describe informally how we set about experimenting with perfection.
There are many decisions to be made in setting up such an experiment,
and small variants might result in signiﬁcant changes.
One guiding idea that motivated us is that if perfection arises, we
should see unusually high endorsement rates for the conditional falla-
cies of Afﬁrming the Consequent (AC) and Denying the Antecedent (DA)
(see Geis and Zwicky 1971).
(AC) B, If A, B. Therefore: A
(DA) not A, If A, B. Therefore: not B.
The idea here is that if, in context, If A, B conveys If B, A then, barring
interference, the endorsement rate for AC should approach the endorse-
ment rate for Modus Ponens. Similarly, if If A, B conveys If not A, not
B, then DA should also approach Modus Ponens.
We have chosen to test endorsement rates for conditional infer-
ences partly because we could rely on a wealth of established and very
robust data concerning people’s endorsement of these patterns. Figure 1
summarizes endorsement rates for MP, MT, AC, and DA from earlier
experiments. Incidentally, it reveals one of the important discoveries in
the psychology of reasoning: The endorsement rate of Modus Ponens
is higher than the endorsement rate of Modus Tollens (even for bare,
non-modalized conditionals).7
7 See the references mentioned in Footnote 3 for reviews of this evidence. The data in Fig. 1
come from Evans et al.’s (1993) review of earlier studies of conditional inference (their Table
2.4). As Evans et al. state, the participants were adults (typically college students). They were
“normally given the premises and conclusions and asked whether it follows, or else given a list
of conclusions including the normal one and ‘nothing follows’ to choose from. All these studies
involve either so called ‘abstract’ problem material or ones which are concrete but arbitrary, so
that prior beliefs and pragmatic associations are not likely to be cued” (pp. 35–36). Recall that
our approach is to test the endorsement rates of AC and DA. When perfection is triggered,
these inferences aren’t fallacies, but actually valid applications of modus ponens or modus

244
F. Cariani and L. J. Rips
Fig. 1
Standard endorsement rates for the four inference patterns modus
ponens (mp), modus tollens (mt), affirming the consequent (ac), and denying
the antecedent (da) across previous experiments (data from Evans et al. 1993,
Table 2.4 and are weighted averages from seven earlier experiments)
We could have chosen a different approach had we decided to test
whether people endorse the inference from If A, B to If not A, not B. As
we just noted, our choice of two-premise arguments (e.g., If A, B and
Not A to Not B) allowed us to use the large set of earlier results, summa-
rized in Fig. 1, as a baseline for our manipulations. One could argue
that the one-premise approach is a more direct test of whether people
perfect conditionals. However, we know of no evidence to suggest that
people ﬁnd the one-premise arguments easier to think about than their
two-premise counterparts. For example, the rate of endorsement for the
inference from If A, B to If not A, not B (for “contingent inferences,” such
as “If the mushroom is red, it is edible,” in Fillenbaum 1975) is within
the range of endorsements for DA arguments in the studies summarized
in Fig. 1. While our data are primarily of the two-premise kind, we
recognize both kinds of data as signiﬁcant to an account of conditional
perfection. We report evidence of the one-premise type in Experiment 7.
tollens. Thus, when we think about, say, AC, there are two possibilities that might lead to
different endorsement rates:
i. people infer from If A, B to If B, A and then apply MP to If B, A and B.
ii. people infer from If A, B to If not A, not B and then apply MT to If not A, not B and B.
This difference might matter to our project, and we should be mindful of it in interpreting
our results.

Experimenting with (Conditional) Perfection …
245
We note that psychological research provides many examples in which
college-aged participants endorse AC and DA at rates greater than those
that appear in Fig. 1. The Fig. 1 experiments used conditionals for which
people do not have strong beliefs in the necessity of the antecedent for
the consequent. But if prior beliefs do suggest (causal) necessity, partic-
ipants ﬁnd AC and DA more congenial (e.g., Cummins et al. 1991;
Marcus and Rips 1979; Staudenmayer 1975; Thompson 1994). For
example, a conditional like If the butter is heated, then it melts accords
with people’s belief that heating is both necessary and sufﬁcient for the
butter melting. It’s difﬁcult to think of other ways to melt butter aside
from heating it. So an AC or DA argument with such a conditional
appears correct to many participants (e.g., If the butter is heated, then
it melts; the butter melts; therefore, the butter was heated ). Effects of this
sort are similar to those of conditional perfection in that they encourage a
reading like that of A iff B, but they arise for reasons other than the prag-
matic considerations that we have discussed so far. Because our intent in
these experiments is to test the pragmatic account of Sect. 2, we chose
conditionals with antecedents that don’t already suggest necessity.8
A more pertinent set of studies have examined conditional promises
[e.g., (6)–(7)] and threats (e.g., If you continue to disrupt the class, you’ll
have to leave the room). These studies have shown greater acceptance of
AC and DA for promises and threats than for ordinary indicatives (e.g.,
If there is an electrical failure, school will be closed, Markovits and Lesage
1990; If the student is doing economics then he is a socialist, Newstead
8 For related reasons, the research we describe here is neutral with respect to probabilistic
theories of conditionals. A number of theorists have proposed that whether a conditional
sentence is appropriate depends on the conditional probability of its consequent given its
antecedent (e.g., Adams 1965; Evans and Over 2004). If these theories are correct, then we
should expect conditional perfection when both the conditional probability of the consequent
given the antecedent and that of the antecedent given the consequent are sufﬁciently high
(as they are in the butter heating example). In addition to constraining the semantics to a
lesser degree, the pragmatic theory we explore here maintains that whatever the success of these
probabilistic accounts, a further source of conditional perfection is a conversational demand for
exhaustivity, which can perfect conditionals even if the conditional probability of the antecedent
given the consequent is not initially high.

246
F. Cariani and L. J. Rips
et al. 1997). Similarly, participants are more willing to accept the infer-
ence from If A, B to If not A, not B under the same circumstances
(Fillenbaum 1975). The goal of a promise or threat is usually to get the
addressee to perform some action (e.g., mow the lawn) or to refrain from
one (disrupting the class). For these speech acts to be effective, speakers
presumably intend not to provide the promised reward if the action is not
taken and not to carry out the threatened punishment if the infraction
is not committed. These presumptions can be overridden in the right
circumstances, as we’ve already noted in Sect. 2. But by default, promises
and threats convey an exhaustive interpretation, as the experiments we’ve
just cited suggest. Our aim in the present experiments is to manipulate
participants’ impression of exhaustivity by means of [CONS?] questions,
so we picked conditionals for our experiments that (unlike promises and
threats) don’t by themselves convey perfection.
The second guiding idea in shaping our tasks was that we needed to
create matched items for purposes of experimental control. One version
of each item used [CONS?] questions; the other either used no ques-
tion at all or [ANT?] questions—depending on the experiment. In the
following, we call this variable question type. Here is an example of one
of our [CONS?] items (modulo some differences in exact wording across
experiments):
John has taken a test on Chapters 4–6 that has not been graded yet.
[You ask Mary, “Did John do well on the test?”]
Mary says, “If John understood Chapter 5, then John did well on the
test.”
Assume that Mary’s response is true and that John did well on the test.
Given this information, then, does Mary’s statement imply that John
understood Chapter 5?
When the [CONS?] question was a polar question (i.e., a yes/no ques-
tion), the matching item did not have a question at all (so it is simply
the result of removing the bit in square brackets).
Other experiments involved more complicated [CONS?] questions,
such as:

Experimenting with (Conditional) Perfection …
247
You ask Mary, “What are all the ways John could manage to do well on
the test?”
Here, the matching item replaced the line in which we asked the
[CONS?] question with a line in which we asked the [ANT?] question:
You ask Mary, “What are all the things that could happen in case John
understood Chapter 5?”
Note also that the sample item above is testing for Afﬁrming the Conse-
quent. For each vignette (there were 16 of them), we had items that
tested Modus Ponens, Tollens, Afﬁrming the Consequent, and Denying
the Antecedent.
In total, this means that we associated each vignette with eight possible
items (four inferences for each of the two possible questions). Partici-
pants saw the vignettes presented one-at-a-time on a computer screen, in
a new random order for each participant. They responded by clicking on
one of two options (e.g., “implies” vs. “does not imply”).
Participants were college students enrolled in an introductory
psychology course, and they completed the experiment as part of a course
requirement. No participant took part in more than one experiment.
Note that [CONS?] questions like “What are all the ways John could
manage to do well on the test?” appear more complex, at least syntac-
tically, than other possible [CONS?] questions, such as “Did John do
well on the test?”. In most of our experiments, we have privileged the
lengthier question because it reduces the permissibility of mention-some
answers, which are partial answers. Consider the question:
(12) Q: Where can I buy Stephen King novels?
A: At Powell’s Books.
In (12), we do not expect the answer to be an exhaustive catalog of the
places where the questioner can buy Stephen King novels. It is important
to avoid this interpretation, for the account of perfection we sketched
above breaks down if the answer is understood to be partial.

248
F. Cariani and L. J. Rips
To have a better chance of ruling out mention-some answers (that is:
for the question to set up the presumption that any answer would be
exhaustive), we might ask a different sort of question, such as9:
(13) Q: What are all the places where I can buy Stephen King novels?
A: At Powell’s Books.
This is why most of our experiments use “What are all the ways in which
B?” as the [CONS?] question. The Online Appendix lists all 16 vignettes
with the full [CONS?] and matched [ANT?] questions for the problems
testing Denying the Antecedent. These are the items as they appeared in
Experiment 2. We mention experimental variations in wording as they
come up in the relevant parts of Sect. 4.
While this is a good reason to run experimental tests with the more
complex phrasing, it is not a good reason not to test the more natural
[CONS?] questions. It is for this reason that our leading experiment
involves a simple polar question, as in our initial example above (in
which “you” ask Mary, “Did John do well on the test?”).10
4
The Sequence of Experiments
A quest for perfection drives the experiments we report here. In each
of them, we present participants with a series of problems, variations
on the standard set that we described earlier. These problems vary the
inference type (Modus Ponens, Tollens, Afﬁrming the Consequent, and
Denying the Antecedent) and question type ([CONS?] and [ANT?]) in
the hope that a demand for an exhaustive set of reasons for the conse-
quent—[CONS?] but not [ANT?]—will lead participants to perfect the
conditional. According to the exhaustivity hypothesis, perfection should
9 Perhaps, even the question in (13) sometimes permits a mention-some answer. We discuss the
implications of this point in Sect. 5.
10 The reason why we did not use an [ANT?] question as a comparison in this case is that
it is implausible to target the antecedent with one such question (say, “Did John under-
stand Chapter 5?”). Except for some recherché contexts, the conditional “If John understood
Chapter 5, then John did well on the test” is not an acceptable answer to the question: “Did
John understand Chapter 5?”.

Experimenting with (Conditional) Perfection …
249
be manifested by increased endorsement of the “fallacies,” Denying the
Antecedent and Afﬁrming the Consequent. As mentioned, these argu-
ments switch from invalid to valid under a perfected conditional, which
should increase the likelihood that participants will accept them. The
same manipulation, however, should have only a weak effect, if any, on
the endorsement of Modus Ponens and Modus Tollens, since these infer-
ences are already valid under the “unperfected” reading of the conditional
and remain so under the perfected reading. This, then, is the perfection
pattern of our quest: Greater endorsement of Afﬁrming the Consequent
and Denying the Antecedent under [CONS?] questions but not [ANT?]
questions, but little change in endorsement of Modus Ponens and Modus
Tollens.
Experiment 1: Polar Questions
We start with our barest experiment.11 As described, this experiment
straightforwardly contrasted a polar [CONS?] question with the same
item with the question removed.
John has taken a test on Chapters 4–6 that has not been graded yet.
[You ask Mary, “Did John do well on the test?”]
Mary says, “If John understood Chapter 5, then John did well on the
test.”
Assume that John did not do well on the test.
Given this information, does Mary’s statement imply that John did not
understand Chapter 5?
The design of the experiment included the standard set of items that
we described earlier. The Online Appendix lists the full set of vignettes
in their Denying the Antecedent versions. Although a given partici-
pant saw a speciﬁc vignette only once (i.e., in only one of its eight
versions), a participant saw each combination of inference type and ques-
tion type, instantiated in two different vignettes. So a participant received
16 trials in all. Across participants, each vignette version appeared equally
often. We tested 32 participants from the population mentioned earlier,
11 Although we lead with this experiment, it is not temporally the ﬁrst experiment we ran. It
was suggested to us by Kai von Fintel as a simpliﬁcation of some later experiments.

250
F. Cariani and L. J. Rips
choosing this number based on the earlier experiments summarized in
Fig. 1 (see Evans et al. 1993, Table 2.4). The experiments we report later
share this same structure.
At the beginning of the session, a computer presented written instruc-
tions informing participants that they would see on each trial several
sentences about a particular conversation. They were asked to read the
problem carefully and then to ask themselves “whether the last of these
statements is implied within the conversation.” They clicked on a button
labeled “implied” or on one labeled “not implied” to record their deci-
sion. We did not provide an explication of “implied,” since we are
interested in participants’ natural understanding of whether the conclu-
sion of the inferences followed from the information in the vignette.
“Implied” has an ordinary language sense—roughly the dictionary sense
of conveying something indirectly—that includes both the semantic and
pragmatic components that are at stake in theories of perfection.
The proportion of “yes” responses showed no difference between the
[CONS?] question and no question at all. As Fig. 2 illustrates, we did
ﬁnd the typical difference in endorsements as a function of inference
type, F (3, 24) = 11.35, p < 0.001. As the ﬁgure suggests, however, we
found no reliable overall difference due to the [CONS?] question (F (1,
15) < 1), and no differential effect of the [CONS?] question on the rate
of endorsement for the individual inference types (F (3, 24) < 1).12
We also checked whether any of the individual vignettes showed an
effect of the [CONS?] question. The analysis used the data from just
Afﬁrming the Consequent and Denying the Antecedent, since the theory
under consideration predicts a difference only for these. However, we
found no overall effect of vignettes and no interaction of the vignettes
and the [CONS?] versus no question variation (F (15, 224) < 1 in both
cases). Planned comparisons found no effect of question for any of the
12 The statistical tests in this and the following experiments are based on a generalized linear
mixed model for binomial data. The models were “maximal” (in the sense of Barr et al. 2013)
in including as random effects: (a) the main effects of participants and vignettes, and (b)
all interactions of participants and vignettes with the ﬁxed effects of interest (question and
inference type).

Experimenting with (Conditional) Perfection …
251
Fig. 2
The effect of polar question vs. no question on endorsement of modus
ponens (mp), modus tollens (mt), affirming the consequent (ac), and denying
the antecedent (da), Experiment 1
individual vignettes (for the largest of these, F (1, 224) = 2.16, p =
0.14).13
Experiment 2: Explicit Demands for Exhaustive Answers
Experiment 2 involved the more complicated [CONS?] questions, ones
that attempt to emphasize the demand for exhaustivity in the question
to Mary:
John has taken a test on Chapters 4–6 that has not been graded yet.
You ask Mary, “What are all the ways John could manage to do well on
the test?”
Mary responds, “If John understood Chapter 5, then John did well on
the test.”
Assume that John did well on the test.
Given this information, does Mary’s statement then imply that John
understood Chapter 5?
As mentioned, the [CONS?] question was intended to make mention-
some answers as impermissible as possible. The [ANT?] question was
13 This analysis was similar to the one just reported but treated vignettes and their interaction
with question as ﬁxed effects rather than as random effects. Denominator degrees of freedom
were estimated using the Satterthwaite method.

252
F. Cariani and L. J. Rips
Fig. 3
The effect of [CONS?] versus [ANT?] questions on endorsement of modus
ponens (mp), modus tollens (mt), affirming the consequent (ac), and denying the
antecedent (da), Experiment 2
also introduced to make [ANT?] items parallel to the [CONS?] items,
controlling for the length and complexity of the vignettes. Speciﬁcally,
in the “Chapter 5” case, we used the [ANT?] question: “What are all the
things that could happen in case John understood Chapter 5?”.
None of these changes, however, led to greater endorsement of
Afﬁrming the Consequent and Denying the Antecedent for [CONS?]
questions relative to [ANT?] questions. Figure 3 graphs the data from
32 participants and shows the usual decrease in endorsement rates from
Modus Ponens to Tollens to Afﬁrming the Consequent to Denying the
Antecedent, F (3, 24) = 12.46, p < 0.001. However, we found no signiﬁ-
cant difference favoring problems with [CONS?] over those with [ANS?]
(F (1, 15) = 2.73, p = 0.120), and no signiﬁcant difference appeared in
the shape of these two functions, F (3, 24) < 1. Explicit demands for
an exhaustive answer to how the consequent could occur do not seem
to elevate Afﬁrming the Consequent and Denying the Antecedent to a
greater extent than they did Modus Ponens or Modus Tollens.
Experiment 3: Checks for Memory for the Questions
Could it be that our participants were ignoring the question? After all,
one could perform the task while skipping the question “you” are asking
Mary and reading just the conditional and the minor premise. That
might explain our difﬁculty in obtaining the perfection pattern.

Experimenting with (Conditional) Perfection …
253
To explore this hypothesis, we ran a variant of Experiment 2. After
answering each item, participants viewed a new screen that prompted
them to recall which question, [CONS?] or [ANT?], they had seen
earlier, and they picked one of them by clicking on it. For the sample
vignette, the choice was between “What are all the ways John could
manage to do well on the test?” and “What are all the things that could
happen in case John understood Chapter 5?” If participants could not
remember what question had been asked, we inferred that the question
did not play a role in their reasoning. Although they could correctly
recognize the question without using it in reasoning, a correct answer
would at least suggest that the question was available for them to reason
with. In addition, since participants saw multiple items, this forced
choice encouraged them to attend to the question as they were working
through the later items in their allotted sequence.
Alas, the results did not ﬁt the perfection pattern. Figure 4 plots the
proportion of endorsements from 33 participants after we removed all
trials on which the participants made a memory error (i.e., selected the
[CONS?] question when they had actually seen [ANT?] or the reverse
error). These errors ranged from 9 to 18% across the eight conditions
shown in the ﬁgure. As the ﬁgure suggests, we found the typical effect of
inference types, F (3, 23) = 10.42, p < 0.001. But neither the effect of
the question nor the interaction between the question and the inference
types was statistically reliable (both F ’s < 1).
Given these results, one might become quite skeptical. Either there is
a problem in the theoretical proposal or in the particular way we had
sought to test it.
Experiment 4: Explicit Speciﬁcation of the Antecedent as the Only
Condition
Are there cases where we do get the perfection pattern using a similar
experimental setup? The next idea, then, was to get very close to forcing a
biconditional reading by semantic means. In the items for the new exper-
iment, Mary does not just answer the question with the conditional: she
overtly asserts information corresponding to one of the paths to perfec-
tion (to make things easier, we underlined the new bit below: it was not
underlined in the stimuli presented to participants).

254
F. Cariani and L. J. Rips
Fig. 4
The effect of [CONS?] versus [ANT?] questions on endorsement of modus
ponens (mp), modus tollens (mt), affirming the consequent (ac), and denying the
antecedent (da). Experiment 3, with memory checks
John has taken a test on Chapters 4–6 that has not been graded yet.
You ask Mary, “What are all the ways John could manage to do well on
the test?
Mary responds, “If John understood Chapter 5, then John did well on
the test.
That is the ONLY way John could have done well on the test.”
Assume that John did well on the test.
Given this information, does Mary’s statement imply that John under-
stood Chapter 5?
In the [ANT?] variant, in addition to the usual difference in question
(i.e., “What are all the things that could happen in case John understood
Chapter 5?”), Mary’s response changes to:
Mary responds, “If John understood Chapter 5, then John did well on
the test.
That is the ONLY thing that could have happened if John understood
Chapter 5.”
Note that the continuation in these [ANT?] variants does not go any
distance toward conveying biconditional information (for it does not rule

Experimenting with (Conditional) Perfection …
255
out that John’s doing well on the test might have come about by some
other means).
At last, these explicit changes did yield a perfection pattern, as shown
in Fig. 5 (based on 32 participants). Not only did we ﬁnd a signiﬁcant
effect of inference type (F (3, 24) = 4.70, p = 0.010), we also found a
signiﬁcant effect of question type (F (1, 15) = 13.38, p = 0.002), and
crucially an interaction of the two (F (3, 24) = 10.56, p < 0.001). This
last effect is the perfection result, apparent in the difference in the shape
of the curves in the ﬁgure.
Essentially, if we explicitly provide the strengthening that is supposed
to be conveyed by pragmatic means, we get precisely the pattern we
would expect. This suggests that our procedure is sensitive to (at least
some kinds of) information that can get participants to interpret a
conditional as a biconditional.
Experiment 5: Speaker’s Knowledge of the Answers and Willingness
to Relate Them
The biconditional interpretation (predictably) arises if we have an explicit
continuation with only, as in Experiment 4. So why were we unable to
ﬁnd a similar pattern in Experiments 1–3? We have already attempted to
rule out that the questions were not sufﬁciently clear in their demand for
Fig. 5
The effect of [CONS?] versus [ANT?] questions on endorsement of modus
ponens (mp), modus tollens (mt), affirming the consequent (ac), and denying the
antecedent (da), Experiment 4, with explicit indication of exhaustivity

256
F. Cariani and L. J. Rips
Fig. 6
The effect of [CONS?] versus [ANT?] questions on endorsement of modus
ponens (mp), modus tollens (mt), affirming the consequent (ac), and denying the
antecedent (da), Experiment 5, with information about speaker’s knowledge
and willingness
an exhaustive answer and that participants were inattentive to the ques-
tions. Another possibility is that we have not completely eliminated a
“mention some” answer. Although our [CONS?] question asks Mary for
all the ways the consequent could come about, her response may reﬂect
only her partial knowledge of these ways or her limited willingness to
produce them. Participants may have interpreted Mary’s statement in
a way that allows for these constraints. If so, they may have doubted
whether her answer does indeed convey all the ways the consequent
could happen.
To encourage participants to think that Mary’s response was exhaus-
tive, we tried “loading up” the context. The items in Experiment 5
looked like this (we underlined the new bit; it was not underlined in
the text that participants saw):
John has taken a test on Chapters 4–6 that has not been graded yet.
You ask Mary, “What are all the ways John could manage to do well on
the test?”
In fact, Mary knows all the ways and is willing to relate them.
Mary responds, “If John understood Chapter 5, then John did well on
the test.”
Assume that John did well on the test.

Experimenting with (Conditional) Perfection …
257
Given this information, does Mary’s statement imply that John under-
stood Chapter 5?
The same underlined information was also inserted in the [ANT?]
version of the problem.
We expected that stipulating that Mary knows all the ways in which
John could do well on the test and is willing to relate them would have
a similar effect to saying explicitly that [Antecedent] is the only way that
[Consequent] could happen.
However, this expectation was not met. Endorsement rates for the four
inference types again differed signiﬁcantly (F (3, 24) = 8.50, p < 0.001),
based on data from 32 participants. But neither the overall difference
between questions (F (1, 15) < 1) nor the interaction between question
and inference type (F (3, 24) = 1.52, p = 0.235) are signiﬁcant. Figure 5
shows a trend toward higher endorsement of Denying the Antecedent for
the [CONS?] questions, but this difference was not fully signiﬁcant, F (1,
24) = 3.93, p = 0.059. Moreover, the [CONS?] question did not affect
endorsement rates for Afﬁrming the Consequent (F (1, 24) < 1). Note,
too, that even for Denying the Antecedent, the boost in endorsement
rates is smaller than what we have seen in the full-blown perfection of
Experiment 4.
Experiment 6: Explicit Speciﬁcation of Exhaustiveness
Even when participants know that the speaker of a conditional is (a)
under explicit pressure to produce an exhaustive answer to the ques-
tion of how the consequent could come about, and (b) knows all the
ways it could come about and is willing to relate them, they do not
produce the full perfection pattern. This failure may be due to a residual
unwillingness on the participants’ part to believe that the speaker really
has produced all the ways. Although Mary may know all the ways and
is willing to tell you about them, she may nevertheless give you just a
sample, perhaps because the list is too long, too complex, or too unre-
lated to present concerns. These considerations suggest that we might be
able to reinstate full perfection if Mary explicitly states that she is in fact
giving all the ways when she asserts the conditional.

258
F. Cariani and L. J. Rips
To check this prediction, we used the vignettes from Experiment
5, but added Mary’s assertion that she was giving all the ways the
consequent could come about:
John has taken a test on Chapters 4–6 that has not been graded yet.
You ask Mary, “What are all the ways John could manage to do well on
the test?”
In fact, Mary knows all the ways and is willing to relate them.
Mary responds, “Here are ALL of them: If John understood Chapter 5,
then John did well on the test.”
Assume that John did well on the test.
Given this information, does Mary’s statement imply that John under-
stood Chapter 5?
The corresponding [ANT?] version likewise included the “Here are ALL
of them” preﬁx in Mary’s answer.
The results from 32 participants appear in Fig. 7 and show that
the new “ALL of them” clause was enough to produce the perfected
interpretation.
When the speaker was asked to give all the ways the consequent could
occur, and the speaker then made it clear that she was providing all the
Fig. 7
The effect of [CONS?] versus [ANT?] questions on endorsement of modus
ponens (mp), modus tollens (mt), affirming the consequent (ac), and denying the
antecedent (da), Experiment 6, with explicit exhaustivity

Experimenting with (Conditional) Perfection …
259
ways, participants were likely to endorse each of the inference types.
When the speaker was asked about all the things that could happen if
the antecedent occurred, however, we ﬁnd the typical decreasing pattern
across inference types. This produced signiﬁcant effects of inference type
(F (3, 24) = 8.29, p < 0.001), question type (F (1, 15) = 9.67, p =
0.007), and an interaction between the two (F (3, 24) = 6.80, p =
0.002). Unlike the results of Experiment 5, the difference due to the
question is signiﬁcant for both Afﬁrming the Consequent (F (1, 24) =
22.60, p < 0.001) and Denying the Antecedent (F (1, 24) = 9.81, p =
0.004).
Experiment 7: Conditional Transformations
The studies we’ve reported so far suggest that demands for exhaustive
answers fail to produce perfection. We get the expected pattern only
when the speaker explicitly states that her answer is exhaustive. A gap
seems to exist between requesting an exhaustive response and accepting
the response as exhaustive. This gap may have been widened, though,
by some aspects of our procedure. For one thing, the question we put
to participants was whether the conditional statement (e.g., “If John
understood Chapter 5, then John did well on the test”), together with
the given assumption (e.g., “John did well on the test”) implied the
conclusion (“John understood Chapter 5”). But one might argue that
pragmatic effects of the kind we’re seeking depend on people’s under-
standing of what the speaker implied rather than what her statement
implied. Emphasis on the statement might have led participants to think
that only what explicitly appears in that statement matters for the infer-
ence. This would help explain the difference between Experiments 4 and
6, where the speaker claims her answer is exhaustive, and Experiments
1–3 and 5, where she doesn’t.
A second reason why the latter experiments may have failed to
produce perfection has to do with the type of inference we asked partic-
ipants to assess. As in traditional experiments on conditional reasoning,
participants had to integrate information from the speaker’s condi-
tional statement with the minor premise that we asked them to assume.
Combining these statements may have required cognitive effort that
suppressed the effect of interest. Of course, this complexity would not
explain the obtained differences between endorsement rates among the

260
F. Cariani and L. J. Rips
four inference types, since all used the same format. For the same reason,
complexity would not explain the differences between Experiments 1–3
and 5, on one hand, and Experiments 4 and 6, on the other. However,
it is possible that complexity masked a weak effect of exhaustivity in the
former experiments.
A third possibility we entertained is that participants may feel that the
problems are too abstract. Our items involve judgments about a char-
acter’s (Mary’s) conditional claims which in turn are about decisions by
third parties (e.g., John’s teacher). We sought to simplify this dynamic by
turning the participant into both the decision-maker and the interpreter
of the conditional sentence.
To examine these factors, we revised the vignettes. First, instead of
asking whether the conditional and the further assumption implied a
conclusion, we asked whether the speaker intended to convey by her
conditional a second conditional: either If A, B (the identical statement),
If not B, not A (the contrapositive), If B, A (the converse), or If not A,
not B (the obverse). These correspond to Modus Ponens, Modus Tollens,
Afﬁrming the Consequent, and Denying the Antecedent when we condi-
tionalize the conclusion of the latter arguments on their minor premise.
So we can usefully compare the acceptance rates for the new problems to
their counterparts in the earlier experiments. Additionally, we changed
the setup so that the participant would also be the decision-maker. For
example, the converse inference for the test-taking vignette appeared like
this (in its [CONS?] version):
John is a high school student, and he is taking Introduction to Calculus.
John pays attention in class, and he studies with his friend Sarah for all
of the exams. John has taken a test on Chapters 4–6 that has not been
graded yet.
As a high school advisor, you need to give advice to John on whether or
not he should take Calculus II based on his current performance. You
want to decide how well John has performed in the class so far.
You ask Mary, “What are all the ways John could manage to do well on
the test?”
In fact, Mary knows all the ways and is willing to relate them. Mary
responds, “If
John understood Chapter 5, then John did well on the test.”

Experimenting with (Conditional) Perfection …
261
Does Mary intend to convey, among other things, that if John did well
on the test then John understood Chapter 5?
Notice that the problem asks whether Mary intended to convey the
conclusion rather than whether her statement implies it.
However, with these changes, we found that [CONS?] questions
produced an increase in the endorsement rates for the converse, which
was not fully signiﬁcant (F (1, 23) = 4.04, p = 0.056), and, this time,
for the contrapositive (F (1, 23) = 5.80, p = 0.024). But there was
no increase for the obverse (F (1, 23) < 1). Figure 8 shows this trend
in data from 32 participants. An analysis parallel to that of the earlier
experiments found the expected difference due to the type of inference
(F (3, 23) = 12.44, p < 0.001) and also an effect of question type (F (1,
15) = 5.84, p = 0.029), but the interaction between question type and
inference was not signiﬁcant (F (3, 23) < 1).
Another way to assess these ﬁndings is to compare them to the results
of Experiment 4, which showed the full perfection pattern. To do this,
we considered just the data from the [CONS?] questions from these
two studies, treating experiment and inference type as the factors of
interest. As in the earlier analyses, inference type had four levels, aligned
across experiments according to the correspondence that we mentioned
earlier (e.g., Afﬁrming the Consequent in Experiment 4 was paired with
Fig. 8
The effect of [CONS?] versus [ANT?] questions on endorsement of a
conditional, its contrapositive, its converse, and its obverse, Experiment 7

262
F. Cariani and L. J. Rips
the inference to the converse in Experiment 7).14 This analysis found a
signiﬁcant effect of inference type (F (3, 24) = 4.10, p = 0.018) and a
signiﬁcant interaction between experiment and inference type (F (3, 179)
= 7.42, p < 0.001). These effects can be seen by comparing the red solid
lines in Figs. 5 and 8. The main effect of experiment was not signiﬁcant,
F (1, 8) = 2.59, p = 0.146. Planned comparisons showed that partic-
ipants endorsed afﬁrming the consequent in Experiment 4 more often
than they endorsed the converse inference in Experiment 7 (F (1, 179)
= 8.46, p = 0.004) and denying the antecedent more often than the
obverse inference (F (1, 179) = 13.68, p < 0.001). If an inference from
one conditional to another (e.g., from a conditional to its converse) is
simpler than a conditional syllogism (e.g., Afﬁrming the Consequent),
then these differences are not due to simplicity.
Despite our efforts to clarify the structure of the problems, Experiment
7 failed to get participants to perfect conditionals to the same extent as
Experiment 4. Moreover, it produced a near-signiﬁcant difference in the
acceptance of the converse but not the obverse, which is not predicted by
any extant model. A clear statement that the antecedent represents the
only way of bringing about the consequent produces the biconditional
reading. But merely stating a conditional in response to a demand for
an exhaustive answer does not fully do so. One could maintain that
the positive results for Experiments 4 and 6 and the null results for the
remaining experiments simply show that the former experiments provide
the right ingredients for obtaining the exhaustivity effect. But although
Experiments 4 and 6 do provide evidence for a biconditional reading,
they don’t provide evidence that the reading was due to the pragmatics
of exhaustivity. To obtain the biconditional effect in these two experi-
ments (i.e., increased endorsement of DA and AC), the vignettes added
semantic material (“This is the ONLY way [the consequent could come
about],” “Here are ALL the ways [the consequent could come about]”)
that signaled the necessity of the antecedent. What’s missing is support
14 We again used a generalized linear mixed model for binomial data, including as random
effects: (a) the main effects of participants (nested within experiments) and vignettes (crossed
with experiments), and (b) the interactions of participants with inference type, vignettes with
inference type, and vignettes with experiments.

Experimenting with (Conditional) Perfection …
263
for the idea that people will perfect a conditional when it is simply a
response to a question about how the consequent could happen.
It is possible, of course, that further tinkering with the vignettes or
with the instructions could succeed where Experiments 1, 2, 3, 5, and 7
did not. At this point, though, we think it worthwhile to consider some
possible reasons for their lack of perfection.
5
Theoretical Discussion
The positive results in Experiments 4 and 6 suggest that true conditional
perfection can, in fact, be linked to exhaustivity. However, the negative
results in Experiments 1–3 and (perhaps to a lesser extent) Experiments
5 and 7 require us to put this ﬁnding in perspective.
Speciﬁcally, a common assumption is that a strong relationship exists
between questions and exhaustivity. This relationship includes at least
the idea that some overt questions trigger exhaustive readings in condi-
tionals. The experimental evidence we have considered suggests that this
is not quite right. In order to trigger exhaustive readings of conditionals,
we need more than just questions.
In closing, we brieﬂy consider how our experiments qualify the rela-
tion among questions, exhaustivity, and perfection. But ﬁrst, we consider
a similar experiment that raises some of the same issues.
5.1
Relation to a Prior Experiment
There is some similarity between the question-variations we used in our
experiments and an earlier experiment by Farr (2011). Farr gave her
participants vignettes like this:
Monika sells seafood on the market. She gets 1 euro for a crab, 2.50 euros
for an eel, 15 euros for a lobster, and 2.50 euros for a pike. Kerstin, an
employee of Monika, cannot remember the prices. Since she does not
want to ask Monika again, she asks Sahra, who also works for Monika.
Sahra knows the prices exactly.

264
F. Cariani and L. J. Rips
At this point in Farr’s experiment, there is a dialogue between Kerstin
and Sahra. This dialogue starts with one of two questions:
what-if-p Kerstin: What happens if I sell an eel?
when-q Kerstin: When do I get 2.50 euros?
Sahra: If you sell an eel, you get 2.50 euros.
Participants are then asked:
Did Sahra answer Kerstin’s question sufﬁciently? [Yes] [No]
Farr (2011) found that when the what-if-p? question preceded the
conditional, participants more often responded that Sahra’s answer was
sufﬁcient than when the when-q? question preceded it. Farr’s interpre-
tation is that when-q? demands an exhaustive answer with respect to
the conditional’s consequent (What are all the cases in which I get
2.50 euros?) and triggers a perfected reading of the conditional (if and
only if you sell an eel do you get 2.5 euros). Because the conditional
mentions only one of the two ways to get 2.50 euros as given in the back-
ground story, participants see it as insufﬁcient. The what-if-p? question
also demands an exhaustive answer, but to a different question (What
are all the things that happen if I sell an eel?) and does not perfect
the conditional. So participants see Sahra’s answer to this question as
sufﬁcient.
Despite the similarities in the setup to the present studies, Farr’s exper-
iment did not end up testing whether Sahra’s conditional gets perfected.
As noted, participants learn from the story that there are two ways to get
2.50 euros but only a single price for an eel. So even a simple (noncondi-
tional) answer like “An eel costs 2.50 euros” is complete with respect to
questions like “How much is an eel?” or “What happens if I sell an eel?”
But the same simple answer is incomplete with respect to “What costs
2.50 euros?” or “When do I get 2.50 euros?” It seems possible, then,
that participants’ dissatisfaction with the answer after the when-q? ques-
tion does not depend on their perfecting the conditional but instead on
their sense of Sahra’s lack of full disclosure. For this reason, we think it

Experimenting with (Conditional) Perfection …
265
important to have a more direct indicator of perfection, such as partic-
ipants’ willingness to accept the conditional’s converse or to accept an
inference like Afﬁrming the Consequent.
5.2
How the Experiments Constrain Explanations
of Perfection
At ﬁrst sight, our experiments appear to refute the idea that ques-
tions trigger perfection. Even explicit questions that demand exhaustive
answers about the consequent (e.g., What are all the ways [the consequent]
could come about?) don’t always yield a perfected conditional (antecedent
iff consequent).
According to the von Fintel/Cornulier account that we have been
pursuing, questions about some event B set up the expectation that a
conditional answer of the form If A, B implies that A is the only way B
could come about. Thus, if ~A, ~B. Together, If A, B and If ~A, ~B,
yield the perfected interpretation, A iff B. For example, questions like
Did John do well on the test? or What are all the ways John could do well on
the test? imply that the answer If John understood Chapter 5, then he did
well on the test supplies all ways he could do well. So John did well if and
only if John understood Chapter 5. Our experiments, however, failed to
produce this pattern of reasoning. In principle, then, this failure could
come about either (a) because participants failed to infer a perfected
conditional from (what they perceived as) an exhaustive answer, or (b)
because they failed to interpret the conditional as exhaustive, in the ﬁrst
place. Let’s consider these two possibilities in turn.
5.2.1 Do People Infer Perfected Conditionals
from Exhaustive Answers?
Perhaps our negative results are partial evidence that people do not reason
from (i) to (ii):
(i) For each alternative D to the antecedent A, ~(If D, B)
(ii) If ~A, ~B

266
F. Cariani and L. J. Rips
In the case of our experiments, failure to infer (ii) from (i) amounts to the
idea that participants understood the antecedent (e.g., John understood
Chapter 5) as the only way that the consequent (John did well on the
test) could occur, and yet did not infer that if John did not understand
Chapter 5, he did not do well.
But on the contrary, Experiments 4 and 6 show that given discourse
that basically entails claims of the form of (i), people will reason their
way to a claim of the form of (ii).15 This suggests that the failure to ﬁnd
the perfection pattern in the remaining experiments is due to participants
failing to interpret the conditional (e.g., If John understood Chapter 5, he
did well on the test) as an exhaustive answer to the question (What are all
the ways John could do well on the test?).
To back up this possibility, we asked participants in a further exper-
iment to decide whether the conditionals mentioned all the ways the
consequent could come about.16 The experiment was very similar to
Experiment 5 (in which Mary is said to know all the ways and is willing
to relate them), but in addition to asking whether participants agreed
with the inference, we also asked them, “Did Mary’s response mention
all the ways?” (Half the participants answered the inference question ﬁrst
and half answered the “all the ways” question ﬁrst, though the order
had no statistically reliable effect on the results.) For [CONS?] questions
(e.g., What are all the ways John could do well on the test?), participants
believed that the conditional response (If John understood Chapter 5, he
did well on the test) mentioned all the ways on only 14.5% of trials.
Of course, our results do not mean that questions never produce the
presumption that a conditional answer is exhaustive. Rather, the results
suggest that even very explicit questions of the proper sort don’t always
trigger an exhaustive reading. Something more is needed to ensure it.
15 Note, incidentally, that if one rejects the Competitor assumption we sketched in Sect. 2, this
would be indirect, and admittedly very defeasible, experimental evidence that people reason
with something like Conditional Excluded Middle.
16 We thank Robert Stalnaker for suggesting this experiment.

Experimenting with (Conditional) Perfection …
267
5.2.2 Why don’t People Believe Conditional Answers
to Questions Are Exhaustive?
Questions don’t always yield exhaustive answers. Still, we might be able
to recover the spirit of the Cornulier/von Fintel proposal on condi-
tional perfection by supposing that questions yield exhaustive answers
by default and giving an independent explanation for why this default
pattern did not emerge in Experiments 1–3, 5, and 7.
Perhaps the explanation is that some property of the vignettes in these
experiments encouraged a mention-some reading. Consider this dialogue:
(14) Q: Who are all the people who came to the party?
A: John came.
Even though the question is phrased as demanding a complete list, a
possible mention-some interpretation of the answer seems available. The
respondent rejects the burden of providing a complete answer to the
question and volunteers instead whatever information she is able to
provide (perhaps expecting that other conversational participants will be
able to ﬁll out the rest of the party-goers list). In the speciﬁc case of
(14), this sort of interpretation might even be invited by the background
knowledge that only extremely unusual parties have only one attendee.
Similarly, it is possible that, when we ask, “What are all the ways in
which [consequent] could come about?” the respondent’s answer is given
a mention-some reading.17
Though we do not think that this assessment is without merit, it has
too many surprising consequences to be plausible. What we found is
that, unless the respondent explicitly avows providing a complete answer,
there is no signiﬁcant pattern of perfection. Though there are slight
17 Demands for exhaustive answers often call for memory searches that exceed people’s abilities,
especially in the context of an on-going conversation. In such situations, speakers may be
thrown back on a satisfactory answer that is informative, but partial. Hearers may likewise
make allowances for this kind of satisﬁcing by leaving open the possibility that the speaker’s
answer is all she can come up with at the moment—that it is temporarily exhaustive, rather than
exhaustive period. In the case of (14), for example, this interpretation is enhanced if the speaker
indicates some hesitancy: “Well…John came.” Viewed in this way, what our results suggest is
that this temporarily exhaustive reading is more available than one might have expected.

268
F. Cariani and L. J. Rips
increases in endorsement rates for the fallacies Afﬁrming the Consequent
and Denying the Antecedent in some experiments, they are typically
not enough to meet standard signiﬁcance thresholds. One might have
expected that in the cases where a mention-all interpretation is possible
but not mandated, we should have seen some participants reach for it. In
Experiments 5 and 7, we even tried as much as possible to “load” up the
context so as to invite a mention-all answer, but without much success.
This is especially striking because mention-all interpretations of answers
to questions are not unusual. According to the received wisdom (see, for
example, van Rooij and Schulz 2003), they should be preferred unless
they are contrary to expectations (as in (14)). More generally, much
recent work on implicatures argues that the computation of implicatures
happens by default (see e.g., Chierchia 2013).
Of course, it is still possible that participants read the [CONS?] ques-
tions as having open-ended answers that respondents were unlikely to
answer exhaustively. In the case of our running example, participants
may have taken the question, What are all the ways John could manage to
do well on the test? as placing an impossible demand on the addressee,
given the many ways John could do well (e.g., cheating, bribing the
instructor, divine intervention, lucky guessing,…). However, some of the
vignettes in our experiments were explicit in listing alternatives for the
antecedent. For example, one of the vignettes began with the sentence
Someone has put a fertilizer, either Easy-gro or Bloom-builder, on the plants.
This was then followed by the [CONS?] question What are all the ways
the plants could manage to grow quickly? and the conditional If Easy-gro
was put on the plants, then the plants grew quickly. Although items like
these are not completely immune to mention-some interpretations, they
seem at least less open to these interpretations than those in which the
alternatives are unspeciﬁed. The initial sentence seems to limit the rele-
vant alternatives to just a few (in this case, Easy-gro or Bloom-builder);
so the speaker of the conditional should ﬁnd it less of a burden to
provide an exhaustive list. However, a re-analysis of Experiment 1 shows
that participants were not more likely to endorse the inferences for the
items with explicitly-provided alternatives than for the remaining open
items (Vignettes 1, 4, 12, and 14 in the Online Appendix have unspec-
iﬁed alternatives, and the remainder speciﬁed ones). Considering just

Experimenting with (Conditional) Perfection …
269
the items with [CONS?] questions, we ﬁnd that participants endorsed
Afﬁrming the Consequent on 54% of trials for the items with alterna-
tives and 62% for the open items. Similarly, they endorsed Denying the
Antecedent on 48% of trials for items with alternatives and 50% for the
open items. These differences are in the wrong direction to explain the
results. We should be cautious here about drawing strong conclusions,
since we did not design the experiment with this difference in mind. Still,
it provides some presumptive evidence against an explanation based on
response burden.
It appears then that pragmatic reasoning based on background ques-
tions is not enough to trigger the relevant exhaustive readings.18 What
turns out to be necessary—in our experiments, at least—is linguistic
material that explicitly directs hearers toward an exhaustive interpreta-
tion.
A very austere development of this idea would be to claim that the
biconditional interpretation requires that such material always be explic-
itly represented. This amounts to the claim that there is no distinctive
pragmatic phenomenon of conditional perfection. Biconditional inter-
pretations arise as entailments when an utterance of If A, B is conjoined
with additional claims that are strong enough to entail their converses.
The immediate problem with this explanation is that several previous
experiments have found evidence of perfection stemming from the
conditional’s status as a promise or threat (e.g., If you disrupt the class,
you’ll have to leave the room). (See the sources cited in Sect. 3.) These
conditionals don’t entail their obverses—they merely suggest them—so
perfection is obtainable without explicit entailment of If ~A, ~B. What
18 It is important to acknowledge in this context that there are theories like Franke (2009,
Section 5.2.2) which maintain that there are two, quite distinct kinds of perfection infer-
ences and that alternative-based strengthening is only one of them. According to Franke some
perfection inferences arise on account of expectations of normality in context. We think this
is quite possible, and if so, there may be ways to construct vignettes (other than those we
used here) that would produce perfection. However, we still require an explanation for why
alternative-based strengthening failed to yield this pattern in our studies.

270
F. Cariani and L. J. Rips
is the case is that questions, in particular, are not always enough to yield
the obverse.19
On the positive side, then, we strongly suspect that there’s more than
one path to perfection. One way to obtain it is through threats, promises,
permissions, and obligations, which convey via practical reasoning that
if the addressee does not perform the key action the reward, punish-
ment, or some other kind of normative status will not be forthcoming.
A second path to perfection is through background information that the
converse of the conditional is true. Section 3 reviewed some evidence
for these possibilities. A third route is through explicit exhaustiﬁcation
devices like the ones we used in Experiments 4 and 6. Pluralism about
perfection may be due to the absence in natural language of expressions
as simple as if that mean iff , leaving if to cover for iff in any of the
variety of situations (outside math classes) in which iff would be more
exact. Provided that there is some contextual reason to think that If B, A
is true, then an utterance of If A, B may suggest A iff B. Because there are
19 Herburger’s (2015) “Whole Truth” account of conditional perfection provides one possible
route to deriving perfection without the need for explicit exhaustiﬁcation devices. Her
preliminary statement of the theory is:
Conditional Perfection and upper-bounding inferences arise as logical entailments when
a sentence S is silently conjoined with only S, resulting in the conjunction S and only
S. S and only S is then taken to express ‘the truth and the whole truth’. (Herburger
2015, p. 6)
Note that Herburger strikes through “and only S” to indicate the fact that it may not be
pronounced. If it is possible to interpret utterances of If A, B as utterances of If A, B and
only If A, B, then that’s when we should expect perfection inferences to arise. According to
this intermediate take, perfection inferences can arise due to overt or covert exhaustiﬁcation.
This sort of approach is difﬁcult to evaluate, experimentally at least, absent some systematic
ideas about when we are allowed to supplement S with the silent and only S. Since it is part
of the proposal that there are no systematic principles that connect the questions made salient
by the discourse to the availability of the strengthened interpretation, it is hard to see what
such principles might look like.
But perhaps a non-experimental argument is available. If perfection is achievable with overt
exhaustiﬁcation devices (as our experiments demonstrate), and if there is precedent for covert
exhaustiﬁcation, we should expect that nothing prevents an exhaustiﬁed interpretation of condi-
tionals. The remaining question, once again, is why we did not ﬁnd much trace of these
exhaustiﬁed interpretations in our ﬁrst experiments.

Experimenting with (Conditional) Perfection …
271
many reasons why If B, A could be true, there are many ways to achieve
perfection.
Here’s where we’ve got to: Questions that explicitly request exhaustive
answers don’t seem sufﬁcient to produce perfection. That’s the exper-
imental ﬁnding. This seems to be because the answers aren’t read as
exhaustive rather than because an exhaustive answer doesn’t yield perfec-
tion. Although it’s possible that the question-to-exhaustive-answer link
is the normal case and something about our experimental materials mili-
tated against it, the usual suspects—the respondent’s lack of knowledge,
uncooperativeness, and response burden—seem to be ruled out by the
results. There may be some unusual suspects responsible for blocking the
normal route to interpreting the answer as exhaustive, but what could
these be? Instead, it seems more likely that an exhaustive interpreta-
tion of an answer requires more than just a question demanding one.
This something more could be an explicit avowal that the response is
exhaustive, but it seems likely that people could settle on exhaustive read-
ings from weaker evidence. Perhaps what listeners require is some reason
to think that an exhaustive conditional answer is in the respondent’s
interest. Otherwise, the listeners’ experience with their own commu-
nicative foibles may make them hesitant to think they’ve gotten the full
story.
Acknowledgements We thank Jonathan Cohen, Paul Égré, Michael Franke,
Joshua Knobe, Paolo Santorio, Katrin Schulz, Eva Wittenberg, and Yimei
Xiang for comments on this project. We also thank audiences at the 2016
Paciﬁc APA, a conference on causal reasoning at the University of Amsterdam,
the UIC Cognitive group, Northwestern Phling, Sembabble at UCSD, and
the Gothenburg Logic Seminar. Kai von Fintel delivered comments on the
paper at the 2016 APA that signiﬁcantly shaped its later incarnations. For their
assistance with the experiments, we thank John Glines, Gabrielle McCarthy,
Jane Ko, Sabrina Kohanzad, Michael Yi, Kathy Tian, Camdyn Parrott, Joshua
Kennedy, Alyssa Pierce, and Nathaniel Yoon. The ﬁnal version is also indebted
to three anonymous reviewers from a prior journal submission.

272
F. Cariani and L. J. Rips
References
Adams, E. (1965). The logic of conditionals. Inquiry, 8, 166–197.
Barr, D. J., Levy, R., Scheepers, C., & Tily, H. J. (2013). Random effect struc-
ture for conﬁrmatory hypothesis testing: Keep it maximal. Journal of Memory
and Language, 68, 255–278.
Bonnefon, J.-F., & Politzer, G. (2010). Pragmatic conditionals, conditional
pragmatics, and the pragmatic component of conditional reasoning. In M.
Oaksford, & N. Chater (Eds.), Cognition and conditionals: Probability and
logic in human thinking (pp. 233–249). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cariani, F. (2021). The modal future. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cariani, F., & Rips, L. J. (2017). Conditionals, context, and the suppression
effect. Cognitive Science, 41, 540–589.
Cariani, F., & Santorio, P. (2018). Will done better: Selection semantics, future
credence, and indeterminacy. Mind, 127, 129–165.
Chierchia, G. (2013). Logic in grammar. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cummins, D. D., Lubart, T., Alksnis, O., & Rist, R. (1991). Conditional
reasoning and causation. Memory & Cognition, 19, 274–282.
de Cornulier, B. (1983). If and the presumption of exhaustivity. Journal of
Pragmatics, 7, 247–249.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Newstead, S. E., & Byrne, R. M. J. (1993). Human
reasoning. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Evans, J. St. B. T., & Over, D. E. (2004). If. Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press.
Farr, M. C. (2011). Focus inﬂuences the presence of conditional perfection:
Experimental evidence. In I. Reich, E. Horch, & D. Pauly (Eds.), Proceedings
of Sinn und Bedeutung, 15, 225–239.
Fillenbaum, S. (1975). If: Some uses. Psychological Research, 37, 245–260.
Franke, M. (2009). Signal to act: Game theory in pragmatics. [Doctoral disserta-
tion, Amsterdam University]. https://www.illc.uva.nl/Research/Publications/
Dissertations/DS-2009-11.text.pdf
Geis, M., & Zwicky A. (1971). On invited inferences. Linguistic Inquiry, 2,
561–566.
Groenendijk, J., & Stokhof, M. (1984). Studies in the semantics of questions and
the pragmatics of answers. CiteSeerX. http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/
download?doi=10.1.1.867.7509&rep=rep1&type=pdf

Experimenting with (Conditional) Perfection …
273
Herburger, H. (2015). Conditional perfection: The truth and the whole truth.
In S. D’Antonio, M. Moroney, & C. R. Little (Eds.), Proceedings of SALT
25 (pp. 615–635).
Horn, L. (2000). From IF to IFF: Conditional perfection as pragmatic
strengthening. Journal of Pragmatics, 32, 289–326.
Kratzer, A. (1991). Conditionals. In A. von Stechow, & D. Wunderlich (Eds.),
Semantics: An international handbook of contemporary research (pp. 651–656).
Berlin: de Gruyter.
Kratzer, A. (2012). Modals and conditionals. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lilje, G. W. (1972). Uninvited inference. Linguistic Inquiry, 3, 540–542.
Marcus, S. L., & Rips, L. J. (1979). Conditional reasoning. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 18, 199–223.
Markovits, H., & Lesage, C. (1990). Pragmatic reasoning schemas for condi-
tional promises: Context and representation. In J.-P. Caverni, J.-M. Fabre, &
M. Gonzalez (Eds.), Cognitive biases (pp. 183–192). Amsterdam: North-
Holland.
Newstead, S. E., Ellis, M. C., Evans, J. St. B. T., & Dennis, I. (1997).
Conditional reasoning with realistic material. Thinking and Reasoning, 3,
49–76.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (2007). Bayesian rationality: The probabilistic
approach to human reasoning. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Stalnaker, R. (1968). A theory of conditionals. In N. Rescher (Ed.), Studies in
logical theory (pp. 98–112). Oxford: Blackwell.
Stalnaker, R. (1981). A defense of conditional excluded middle. In W. Harper,
R. Stalnaker, & G. Pearce (Eds.), Ifs: Conditionals, belief, decision, chance,
and time (pp. 87–104). Dordrecht: Reidel.
Staudenmayer, H. (1975). Understanding conditional reasoning with mean-
ingful propositions. In R. J. Falmagne (Ed.), Reasoning: Representation and
process in children and adults (pp. 55–79). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Thompson, V. A. (1994). Interpretational factors in conditional reasoning.
Memory & Cognition, 22, 742–758.
Van Canegem-Ardijns, I., & Van Belle, W. (2008). Conditionals and types of
conditional perfection. Journal of Pragmatics, 40, 349–376.
van der Auwera, J. (1997). Pragmatics in the last quarter century: The case of
conditional perfection. Journal of Pragmatics, 27, 261–274.
van Rooij, R., & Schulz, K. (2003). Exhaustiﬁcation. CiteSeerX. http://citese
erx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.13.1744&rep=rep1&type=
pdf

274
F. Cariani and L. J. Rips
von Fintel, K. (1997). Bare plurals, bare conditionals, and only. Journal of
Semantics, 14, 1–56.
von Fintel, K. (2001). Conditional strengthening: A study in implicature. MIT.
http://mit.edu/ﬁntel/ﬁntel-2001-condstrength.pdf

The External Syntax of Conditional
Clauses
Liliane Haegeman and Manuela Schönenberger
1
Introduction
1.1
Main Goals and Outline of the Chapter
The chapter looks at the typology of conditional clauses against the back-
ground of the wider typology of adverbial clauses, focusing on their
external syntax. Clauses introduced by the conjunction if display (at
least) three readings: (i) an event conditional (1a) expresses a condition
Manuela Schönenberger’s research was funded by SNSF grant 188933.
This work was ﬁrst presented by Liliane Haegeman at the CNRS summer school Condi-
tionals in Paris—Logic, Linguistics and Psychology (ÉCOLE THÉMATIQUE—CNRS) on
June 4, 2019. We thank the organizers of the summer school for their invitation and
the audience for their comments. Special thanks are due to Andrew Radford and Andrew
Weir for help with the English data, to Anne Breitbarth for her comments on a preﬁnal
version of the paper and to two reviewers for this volume who gave extensive comments
on an earlier version. Of course, none of them can be held responsible for the way these
comments have been interpreted and used.
L. Haegeman (B)
Research Groups Ugent, DiaLing, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland
e-mail: Liliane.Haegeman@UGent.be
M. Schönenberger
University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland
e-mail: manuela.schoenenberger@unige.ch
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Switzerland AG 2023
S. Kaufmann et al. (eds.), Conditionals, Palgrave Studies in Pragmatics, Language
and Cognition, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-05682-6_10
275

276
L. Haegeman and M. Schönenberger
on the realization of the eventuality encoded in the associated clause,
(ii) a factual conditional (Iatridou 1991: 58–96) (1b) introduces a back-
ground assumption which serves as the basis for the contextualization
of the proposition encoded in the associated clause,1 (iii) a speech-event
conditional (1c) encodes a condition on the realization of the speech
event.
 (1) 
a. 
If your back-supporting muscles tire, you will be at increased 
risk of lower-back pain. (Independent on Sunday, Sports, 
14.10.2001, page 29, col 3) 
 
b. When Simenon was asked how the Maigret novels differed 
from his other books – his romans durs – he described them as 
'sketches' […] If the books are sketches, they are the sketches 
of an old master.  
(Observer, 05.01.2020, page 42, cols 1 + 5)
c.
David Davis even said he had been a personal friend of Mr. Clarke
for 30 years. He had just faced his greatest test. If I may say so,
I commend how he has personally responded to, and risen to
that occasion.
(Guardian, 21.07.2005, page 2, col 8)
The three types differ with respect to their external syntax, i.e. how
closely they are integrated with the associated clause: the event condi-
tional in (1a) is more closely integrated than the factual conditional in
(1b), which is more closely integrated than the speech-event conditional
in (1c). See also Van der Auwera (1986) for an early discussion.
The chapter is mainly based on English data focusing on the ques-
tion whether and if so how the three types of clauses can/must be
given different representations in terms of their formal relation with the
1 Various terms are used to refer to the three types of conditionals. What we call factual condi-
tionals have also been labelled pragmatic conditionals (Haegeman 1984b), premise-conditionals
(Haegeman 2003), relevance conditionals (Iatridou 1991), factual P-conditionals (Declerck
2000), conditional assertions (Kearns 2006). Speech-event conditionals are also referred to
as biscuit conditionals (Austin 1961), for discussion of biscuit conditionals see a.o. Ebert et al.
(2008).

The External Syntax of Conditional Clauses
277
associated clause.2 While some properties discussed here pertain only to
conditional clauses, most are shared across all adverbial clauses, reﬂecting
the general line of reasoning adopted which considers conditional clauses
as a subcase of adverbial clauses.
The point of departure is the hypothesis in Haegeman (1984b) that,
depending on their degree of integration with the associated clauses,
we can distinguish ‘central’ adverbial clauses from ‘peripheral’ adver-
bial clauses. The event conditional in (1a) is a central adverbial clause,
the factual conditional in (1b) is a peripheral adverbial clause. Origi-
nally, Haegeman and Wekker (1984) and Haegeman [1984b]) grouped
speech-event conditionals (1c) with factual conditionals (1b) as periph-
eral adverbial clauses. However, based on the properties of their external
syntax, this initial binary distinction between ‘central’ adverbial clauses
and ‘peripheral’ adverbial clauses has to be revised and replaced by a
ternary distinction along the lines of that discussed in Takami (1988)
and Iatridou (1991), a.o., and recently developed in work by Frey (2016,
2018, 2019, 2020).
The chapter is organized as follows: Section 1 is a ﬁrst descriptive
inventory of the typology of conditional clauses in line with that devel-
oped in earlier work by Haegeman (1984a, b, c, 2003). Section 2 focuses
on the external syntax of conditional clauses, presenting the distinc-
tion between event conditionals (1a), which modify the state of affairs
encoded in the associated clause, and factual conditionals (1b), which
provide a background proposition for the contextualization of the asso-
ciated proposition. While the contrasts outlined are relevant to adverbial
clauses in general, this chapter focuses on their relevance for conditional
clauses. Section 3 explores the external syntax of factual conditionals
2 One subset of conditional clauses, those referred to as event conditionals, also function as
clausal arguments. In (i) the bracketed conditional clause is the complement of the preposition
for:
(i) exactly what it says it is perfect for [if 1 you need some cash in your blizzard wallet or you
want to give a gift card to someone for holiday or bday].
(https://www.amazon.com/gp/customer-reviews/R1W5EO8HSSX2CW?ASIN=B012JMS4W2)
We will not go into this pattern here, though it is obviously of independent interest, in
particular because to the best of our knowledge, factual if -conditionals cannot function as
arguments.

278
L. Haegeman and M. Schönenberger
(1b). It turns out that with respect to the distinctive properties identiﬁed
in Sect 2, factual conditionals coincide with epistemic modal adverbials.
An analysis is proposed which aligns the two in relation to the func-
tional hierarchy of the clause as developed by Frey (2016, 2018, 2019,
2020). Section 4 discusses the third type of conditional (and adver-
bial) clauses, namely those like (1c) which modify the speech event
as such, rather than its propositional content. While in earlier work
(Haegeman and Wekker 1984; Haegeman 1984a, b, 1991/2009) speech-
eventconditionals were treated on a par with factual conditionals, both
being categorized as peripheral adverbial clauses, the two types must be
kept distinct. In particular, evidence from the syntax of Verb Second
patterns in Dutch is shown to support the need for this distinction.
The original binary classiﬁcation is replaced by a ternary classiﬁcation
that differentiates between central adverbial clauses (CACs), peripheral
adverbial clauses (PACs) and non-integrated adverbial clauses (NiCs),
but we speculate on a possible reinterpretation of this new classiﬁcation.
Section 5 summarizes the chapter.
1.2
Starting Point: Two Types of Conditional
Clauses: Event Structuring vs. Discourse
Structuring
It is well known that a conjunction introducing an adverbial clause can
often be seen to introduce clauses with quite distinct readings. This is
illustrated for the conjunction while in (2), in which we focus on two
readings.3 For ease of identiﬁcation, we will identify the two uses of
the conjunction while in (2) as while1 and while2. The while1-clause
in (2a) has a temporal reading, while is roughly equivalent to ‘during
the time that’, and the clause modiﬁes the event time of the associated
clause. In (2b) while is similar to ‘whereas’ introducing a ‘conces-
sive’/’adversative’/’contrastive4’ while2-clause which serves to develop the
3 We turn to the speech-event related reading corresponding to (1c) in Sect. 4.1.
4 From now on we will use the term ‘concessive’, though closer study of the semantics of
while2-clauses might reveal the relative appropriateness of the three labels.

The External Syntax of Conditional Clauses
279
argumentation, introducing a background assumption which contextu-
alizes the propositional content of the associated clause. Observe that in
(2c) the content of the while2-clause clearly picks up on, i.e. echoes, the
preceding context, a property that can also be found in factual condi-
tionals (see (1b)). Example (2d) illustrates both uses of while in one
utterance.
(2) 
a. 
According to Smith, a group of Arkansas state troopers who 
worked for Clinton while1 he was governor wanted to go public 
with tales of Clinton's womanizing. (Guardian, G2, 12.03.2002, 
page 3, col 2-3)  
 
b. While2 [Dr Williams'] support for women priests and gay 
partnerships might label him as liberal, this would be a 
misleading way of depicting his uncompromisingly orthodox 
espousal of Christian belief.  
 
 
(Guardian, 02.03.2002, page 9, col 1-2)  
 
c. 
Instead the patriotic duty was dismissing 'random acts of 
criminality'. While2 criminal the rioting indubitably was, random 
it was not.  
 
 
(Guardian, 06.09.2012, page 36, col 2) 
 
d. 
While2 [the lawsuit challenging the legitimacy of lethal 
injections] probably won't stop the use of lethal injection 
altogether, it will certainly delay its use while1 the supreme court 
decides what to do.  
 
 
(Guardian, G2, 12.12.2003, page 4, col 4)   
As shown in (1a) and (1b), if -clauses provide evidence for the same dual
use, though these two uses are perhaps slightly less salient because, infor-
mally speaking, both clause types arguably encode ‘conditions’. We repeat
examples (1a) and (1b) and add some additional illustrations. Examples
(3a) and (3b) contain event conditionals: the conditional clauses specify
the circumstances under which the eventuality in the associated propo-
sition will or will not become true, or, put differently, the conditional
clause encodes an eventuality whose realization has a causal connection
with the realization of the eventuality in the associated clause. In such
examples, the conjunction if 1 can sometimes be replaced by in case, and
some event conditionals can be paraphrased by replacing the conjunc-
tion if 1 with if and when, as in (3c, d). Event conditionals differ from

280
L. Haegeman and M. Schönenberger
factual conditionals illustrated in (3e, f) which echo contextually acces-
sible propositions providing a premise for the contextualization of the
associated clause (Comrie 1982; Declerck and Reed 2001; Biasio and
Castro 2019). Factual conditionals can often be paraphrased with ‘if
it is true that’, ‘now that’, ‘given that’ and they carry the implication
that someone believes that the content of the factual conditional is true.
(For discussion see Iatridou 1991: 60, Declerck 2000). Though factual
conditionals may echo contextually accessible propositions, as in (3e, f),
they do not have to be literal echoes of actual utterances. ‘They may
also be echoes of an internal or mental proposition (thought) such as
the interpretation of an experience, perception etc.’ (Declerck and Reed
2001: 83). A paraphrase with if and when is not available for a factual
conditional, as shown in (3e, f).
(3) 
a. 
If1 your back-supporting muscles tire, you will be at increased 
risk of lower-back pain. (Independent on Sunday, Sports, 
14.10.2001, page 29, col 3) 
 
b. If1 last week you had shown me the piece of pipe system that 
Laila and I built on Tuesday, I would never have believed it.  
 
 
(Guardian, G2, 27.02.2004, page 8, col 3) 
 
c. 
[President Bush and Mr. Blair] will be taking even more [risks] 
if1, and when, a land war starts.  
 
 
(Independent on Sunday, Comment, 14.10.2001, page 25, col 2) 
 
d. 
Air support for the marines will come from US navy fighter-
bombers, some of which may be based at Kandahar airport if1
and when it is considered secure. (Guardian, 27.11.2001, page 3, 
col 8) 
 
e. 
When Simenon was asked how the Maigret novels differed 
from his other books  – his romans durs – he described them as 
'sketches' […]  If2 (*and when) the books are sketches, they are 
the sketches of an old master.  
(Observer, 05.01.2020, page 42, cols 1 + 5)
 
f. 
If2 (*and when) I'm no longer going to be arrested for 
possessing cannabis for my own consumption ('Cannabis laws 
eased in drugs policy shake-up', October 24), shouldn't I be able 
to grow my own?  
 
 
(Jason Cundy, Letter Guardian, 25.11.2001, page 9, col 8) 

The External Syntax of Conditional Clauses
281
Iatridou (1991: 98) signals that while event conditionals are compat-
ible with negative polarity items (NPIs), e.g. lift a ﬁnger in (4a), factual
conditionals are not (4b).
(4) 
a. 
If1 John lifts a finger to help, I'll be surprised. (Iatridou 1991: 
98, her (101c)) 
 
b.  *If2 he (indeed) lifted a finger to help, you should pay him.  
 
 
(Iatridou 1991: 98, her (103a)) 
If, following Giannakidou (1998), we assume that NPIs are licensed by
non-veridicality, deﬁned as in (5), (4) shows that event conditionals are
non-veridical, while factual conditionals are veridical.
(5) 
A propositional operator F is veridical iff F entails p: Fp→p; 
 
otherwise F is non-veridical. 
The contrast in veridicality correlates with some other differences. So-
called ‘putative’ should expresses a ‘potentialis’ mood in event condi-
tionals (6a). This mood is not compatible with factual conditionals (6b).
Putative should may give rise to conditional inversion (Iatridou and
Embick 1994, Biberauer and Roberts 2017), which thus also remains
restricted to event conditionals (6c, d). The bracketed conditional clauses
in (6e) and (6f) are necessarily read as event conditionals.
(6) 
a. 
If1 you (should) see him, tell him I want to talk to him. 
 
b. If2 crime is/*should be falling, why are our prisons full? 
 
c. 
Should you see him, tell him I want to talk to him. 
 
d. 
*Should crime be falling, why are our prisons full? 
 
e. 
It is to your credit that you are concerned with your husband's 
future [should you leave him]. (Guardian, G2, 16.01.2004, page 
6, col 1) 
 
f. 
[Should the court refuse to set the judgement aside, and the 
Orams fail to comply], then we will try, within the spirit of EU 
regulations, to have the judgement registered in the UK and 
have it enforced that way.  
 
 
(Observer, 20.02.2005, page 7, col 1) 

282
L. Haegeman and M. Schönenberger
In factual conditionals, the modal should will receive either an epistemic
reading or an obligation reading. The constructed exchanges in (7) illus-
trate this point. In these contexts, should inversion is not licit (cf. the
B’-examples).
 (7) a.  A:  John and Mary should be able to get here by 8 pm. 
 
 
B:  If2 they should be able to get here by 8 pm, then we might  
 
just as well wait for them.  
B':   *Should they be able to get here by 8 pm, then we 
might just as well wait for them. 
 
b.  A:  John is head of department. He really should be present at  
 
the final meeting. 
 
 
B:  If2 John should be present at the final meeting, it cannot  
 
be scheduled on a Monday because that's his day off. 
 
 
B':  *Should John be present at the final meeting, it cannot be  
 
scheduled on a Monday because that's his day off. 
Factual conditionals are also incompatible with irrealis mood and
with the conditional inversion available for auxiliaries encoding irre-
alis (Iatridou and Embick 1994; Biberauer and Roberts 2017). In
(8a) the conditional clause is an irrealis event conditional; in the
factual conditional in (8b) an irrealis reading is unavailable. Condi-
tional inversion of irrealis had is available in (8a), as shown in (8c), but,
because in English conditional inversion is restricted to non-veridical
auxiliaries (Biberauer and Roberts 2017), it is not available in the
factual conditional in (8b), as shown in (8d). The bracketed condi-
tional clauses in the attested examples (8e) and (8f), which illustrate
conditional inversion with irrealis had, are necessarily read as event
conditionals.

The External Syntax of Conditional Clauses
283
(8) 
a. 
If1 I had seen him, I would have told him to come back. 
 
b. If2 crime had been falling, why were our prisons still full? 
 
c. 
Had I seen him, I would have told him to come back. 
 
d. 
*Had crime been falling, why were our prisons still full? 
 
e. 
Back in 1991 I was a very bad actor and would have been out 
of work [had I not busked my way into a number of kitchens].  
 
 
(Guardian, G2, 31.03.2004, page 14, col 2) 
 
f. 
[Had the money not been returned], the evidence would have 
pointed strongly to a conclusion that the NRCC 'financed' the 
Forum.  
 
 
(Washington Post, 29.04.2003, page A18, col 3) 
2
Differentiating Between the Two Types
of Conditionals: Diagnostics
The interpretive difference between event conditionals and factual condi-
tionals is matched by a number of distributional distinctions, a subset of
which will be illustrated in the present section. The differences shown
jointly lead to the conclusion that event conditionals are more closely
related to or integrated with the associated proposition than factual
conditionals, hence the labels ‘central’ and ‘peripheral’, used originally
in Haegeman and Wekker (1984) and in Haegeman (1984a), a.o., to
distinguish the two. The contrasts discussed have been used as a basis for
postulating a difference in external syntax between event conditionals
and factual conditionals (see, for instance, Rutherford 1970 for early
generative discussion, Haegeman and Wekker 1984; Haegeman 1984b,
1991/2009; Iatridou 1991; Haegeman 2003). Most patterns discussed
here for conditional clauses can be replicated in other adverbial clauses.
For a discussion of the internal syntax of conditionals see Haegeman
(2010, 2012).

284
L. Haegeman and M. Schönenberger
2.1
Coordination of Likes
As shown in (9), a coordination of two event-conditional clauses is
acceptable (9a); an event-conditional clause can also coordinate with a
central adverbial clause (9b). Similarly, two factual conditional clauses
can be coordinated (9c).
(9) 
a. 
The party is also in danger of alienating older people above the 
poverty line, Mr. Cable argues. 'Both these groups will swing to 
the Conservatives if1 the Tories are smart enough and if1 we 
have nothing much to offer them.'  
 
 
(Guardian, 11.02.2002, page 6, col 5) 
 
b. When I was playing at fly half in 2001-02 and if1 something 
went wrong behind the scrum, he'd turn and have a go at me.  
 
 
(Observer, 15.05.2005, page 13, col 5) 
 
c. 
Not only has Sir Richard failed to keep his warring department 
in check but he is claimed to have swerved from readiness to 
do a deal with Mr. Sixsmith to fury at a government 'complete 
cock-up', before finally throwing in his lot with Mr. Byers […] 
But if2 Sir Richard has been tainted by the affair, and if 2 Mr. 
Sixsmith's role may not have been as entirely well-intentioned 
as he claims, the individual most damaged by the row remains 
Stephen Byers.  
 
 
(Guardian, 25.02.2002, page 4, col 3) 
However, a central adverbial clause and a peripheral adverbial clause
cannot coordinate, even when introduced by the same conjunction.
Example (10a) contains an event conditional and a factual conditional.
Though (10b) is acceptable, both if-clauses must get a factual reading.5
Example (10c) is based on (2d), which contains a central while1-clause
and a peripheral while2-clause: though these while-clauses are associated
with the same clause, they cannot coordinate.
5 We added indeed in (10a) and (10b) to ensure the factual reading of the conditional clause.

The External Syntax of Conditional Clauses
285
(10) a. 
If2 the head of department ought indeed to be present, then the 
meeting will be cancelled if1 he's unable to travel. 
 
b. If2 the head of department ought indeed to be present and if*1/2
he's unable to travel, then the meeting will be cancelled. 
 
c. 
*While2 [the lawsuit challenging the legitimacy of lethal 
injections] probably won't stop the use of lethal injection 
altogether and while1 the supreme court decides what to do, it 
will certainly delay its use. 
In the formal literature, it is standardly assumed that coordination is
subject to a ‘likeness’ condition (Williams’s 1978 Law of coordination
of the likes). For discussion of the deﬁnitions and problems associated
with this condition see Whitman (2004). We interpret the condition
here also6 in syntactic terms along the lines of Huddleston and Pullum
(2005):
A coordination of α and β is admissible at a given place in sentence
structure if and only if each of α and β is individually admissible at that
place with the same function. (Huddleston and Pullum 2005: 201, italics
lh, ms)
Adopting this syntactic view on coordination, the proposal would then
be that central adverbial clauses, such as event conditionals, and periph-
eral adverbial clauses such as factual conditionals, cannot coordinate
because they do not occupy the same ‘structural place’, which is inter-
preted here in the sense that they are attached at different heights
in the structural hierarchy, event conditionals being lower, i.e. more
closely integrated with the associated clause, than factual conditionals.
We return to the level of integration of conditional clauses in Sect. 3.
6 Observe that in a cartographic view (cf. Cinque and Rizzi [2008] for an introduction), in
which syntactic structure closely matches semantic interpretation, the height of attachment of
the conditional clauses correlates with a semantic distinction, a point that will become clearer
in Sect. 3.2. So the constraint on coordination of ‘likes’ is both semantic and syntactic.

286
L. Haegeman and M. Schönenberger
2.2
Scope Phenomena
Various scopal properties distinguish central and peripheral adverbial
clauses: in a nutshell, central adverbial clauses are in the scope of opera-
tors in the associated clause while peripheral adverbial clauses are outside
the scope of the same operators. Below are some illustrations of such
scope differences with a focus on conditional clauses (for more examples
see Haegeman 2003, 2012). The scopal distinctions fall out naturally
from an account which postulates different heights for attachment of the
conditional clauses.
2.2.1 Temporal and Modal Subordination
Central adverbial clauses are temporally and modally subordinated to the
associated clause. Temporal and modal subordination is reﬂected in the
tense forms used in English event-conditional clauses. For instance, in
the central if 1-clause (1/3a), repeated as (11a), the present tense verb
tire inherits a futurity reading from the future time expression will be
in the associated clause, a phenomenon sometimes referred to as ‘will
deletion’ (Jespersen 1909; Palmer 1965; McCawley 1971; Leech 1971;
Palmer 1974; Zandvoort 1975; Wekker 1976, 1977; Haegeman and
Robinson 1979; Close 1980; Comrie 1982; Declerck 1984; Niewint
1986; Declerck 1991; Iatridou 1991; Biasio and Castro 2019; a.o. for
discussion and additional references). The central if 1-clause in (3b),
repeated as (11b), illustrates modal subordination: the past tense form
had in the conditional clause inherits the irrealis reading encoded by the
irrealis modal would in the associated clause.
(11) a. 
If1 your back-supporting muscles tire, you will be at increased 
risk of lower-back pain. 
 
b. If1 last week you had shown me the piece of pipe system that 
Laila and I built on Tuesday, I would never have believed it.  
Declerck and Reed (2001: 131) summarize the result of the subordina-
tion as follows:

The External Syntax of Conditional Clauses
287
[In (11) lh, ms], the speaker makes a single (but complex) predic-
tion: she presents the contents of the two clauses as forming a unit.
(Declerck and Reed 2001: 131, italics lh, ms)
In contrast with central adverbial clauses, peripheral adverbial clauses do
not manifest temporal or modal subordination in relation to the associ-
ated clause (but see Sect. 2.4). In the factual conditional (3f), repeated
as (12a), futurity is encoded independently (I’m no longer going to’). The
examples (12b) and (12c) from the literature illustrate the same point.
In the attested (12d), the present tense is worried is not temporally
subordinated: present tense here ‘means’ present time.
(12) a. 
If 2 I'm no longer going to be arrested for possessing cannabis 
for my own consumption ('Cannabis laws eased in drugs policy 
shake-up', October 24), shouldn't I be able to grow my own?  
 
 
(Jason Cundy, Letter to the editor, Guardian, 25.11.2001, page. 
9, col 8) 
 
b. If2 the lava will come down as far as this, all these houses must 
be evacuated at once. (Close 1980: 103) 
 
c. 
If2 he won't arrive before nine, there's no point in ordering for 
him.  
 
 
(Comrie 1982: 148) 
 
d.
If2 Tony Blair is worried about public confidence already, in 
this bright weather, he should think about what it's going to be 
like when we are huddled into the December winds. 
(Independent, Comment 01.11.2001, page 5, col 1)  
Declerck and Reed (2001: 131) provide the following characteriza-
tion:
When the Future Perspective System [will, be going to, lh, ms] is used
in both clauses [as in (12) lh, ms], the speaker makes two independent
predictions: there are, as it were, two illocutionary speech acts. (Declerck
and Reed 2001: 131, italics lh, ms)
Following Hornstein (1990: 43) and much later work, we take it that
temporal and modal subordination are regulated by syntactic structure.

288
L. Haegeman and M. Schönenberger
2.2.2 Negation
Sentential negation can scope over event conditionals (13a, b), but it
cannot scope over factual conditionals (13c). To illustrate: (13a) means
that it is not the case that if it rains the speaker will go to the park;
(13b) means that it will never be the case that if you take the tram
you’ll get home on time. The negation in these examples bears on the
causal relationship between the condition and the main clause event. On
the other hand, in (13c) sentential negation as encoded in not does not
bear on the causal relation between the state of affairs expressed in the
conditional, i.e. the manufacturers being pleased, and the state of affairs
in the associated clause, i.e. the manufacturers being satisﬁed; the fact
that the manufacturers are pleased is not presented as leading to them
being satisﬁed. Thus (13c) could be paraphrased as ‘the manufacturers
are pleased, but they are not satisﬁed’. For reasons of space, we refer the
reader to earlier work by Haegeman (1984a; b, c, 1991/2009) for further
illustrations.
 (13) a. 
If1 it rains, I won't go to the park. 
 
b. You will never get home on time if1 you take the tram. 
 
c. 
Only the chocolate manufacturers could look with pleasure at 
these statistics. But if they are pleased, they are not satisfied.  
 
 
(Guardian, G2, 08.03.2002, page 6, col 1) 
2.2.3 Focus
The two types of adverbial clauses pattern differently in relation to
their focusing potential. While event conditionals can be focused by
only (14a), with subject-auxiliary inversion as a concomitant, this is not
possible for factual conditionals (14b) (cf. Quirk et al. 1985: 1070f.).
(14) a. 
Only if1 you have the courage to follow your heart will you 
succeed on the path of love.  
 
b. The chocolate manufacturers looked with pleasure at the 
statistics. # Only if 1/*2 the manufacturers are pleased are they 
not satisfied. 

The External Syntax of Conditional Clauses
289
While event conditionals can be the focus of an it-cleft (15a),7 this is not
possible for factual conditionals (15b). The latter is only acceptable if the
if-clause is interpreted as an event conditional: the manufacturers are not
satisﬁed if they are pleased.
 (15) a. 
If you download 2 billion links from one index, they will be 
unique. It is only if1 you try to merge both the Fresh index and 
Historic 
index 
that 
you 
will 
get 
duplicate 
links. 
(https://blog.majestic.com/development/topicaltrustflow/) 
 
b. The chocolate manufacturers looked with pleasure at the 
statistics. It is only if1/*2 the manufacturers are pleased that they 
are not satisfied.  
Along the same lines, event conditionals can be the focus of interroga-
tives: (16a, b) illustrate yes/no questions, (16c) illustrates a wh-question.
Examples (16a) and (16b) enquire whether, in the event of being abroad,
the interlocutor would read Belgian papers. In (16c), the if 1-clause
is a reply to the when-question about the conditions under which
the interlocutor would give up eating meat. As shown by the attested
(16d), factual conditionals associated with an interrogative clause remain
outside the scope of the interrogative operator. In (16d) it is taken as a
given that ‘crime is falling’ and therefore this proposition is not within
the scope of the interrogative operator.
(16) a. 
Would you also read Belgian papers if 1 you were abroad? 
 
b. If1 you were abroad, would you also read Belgian papers? 
 
c. 
A: When would you decide to give up eating meat? 
 
 
B: If1 there were enough vegetarian restaurants in my 
hometown. 
 
d. 
We are seeing a fall in the incidence of crime, particularly 
serious crime, and I think we're right to say, 'What's going on?' 
If2 crime is falling, why are we seeing a continuing rise in the 
prison population.  
 
 
(Guardian, 01.11.2001, page 2, col 6) 
7 In clefted if 1-clauses the addition of only is obligatory, a point which we won’t go into here.

290
L. Haegeman and M. Schönenberger
2.3
VP Ellipsis and VP Anaphora
The hypothesis that the two types of conditionals are distinguished by
the height of their syntactic attachment leads us to expect that they are
affected differently by syntactic processes which operate on a relatively
low structural level such as, for instance, so VP anaphora. This expecta-
tion is borne out. So VP anaphora may subsume an event conditional,
as shown in (17a), but it cannot affect a factual conditional, as shown
in (17b). As a result, in (17a) both a strict (i) and a sloppy (ii) iden-
tity reading are available for the possessive pronoun his in the recovered
event conditional ‘if his paper is discussed’. In (17b) the factual condi-
tional clause is not covered by anaphoric so and a sloppy identity reading
is unavailable.
 (17) a. 
John will leave if1 his paper is discussed and so will Bill. 
 
 
(i) 'Bill will also leave if John's paper is discussed.'  
 
 
(ii) 'Bill will also leave if his (own) paper is discussed.'  
 
b. A: John's paper is going to be discussed now. 
 
 
B: John must leave, if2 his paper is going to be discussed now,  
 
and so must Bill. 
 
 
(i) 'Bill must also leave, if John's paper is going to be discussed  
 
now.'  
 
 
(ii) *'Bill must also leave, if his (own) paper is going to be  
 
discussed now.' 
2.4
Embedding of the Conditional Clause
with the Associated Clause
Due to their closer integration with the associated clause, we may expect
that event conditionals can be embedded with the associated clause. This
is illustrated in the attested examples in (18), in which the bracketed
conditionals embed with their associated clause:

The External Syntax of Conditional Clauses
291
(18) a. 
No, I think [that [if1 he had known he would be president], he 
would have started dying his hair, like, 10 years ago].  
 
 
(Michelle Obama https://quotefancy.com/quote/867878/, 
Michelle-Obama-No-I-think-that-if-he-had-known-he-would-
be-president-he-would-have) 
 
b. When asked by FRONTLINE in 2015 about the use of 
vaccines to combat vaccine-prev entable illnesses, she said: "if 
you ask 99.9 percent of parents who have children with autism 
if we'd rather have the measles versus autism, we'd sign up for 
the measles," adding [that [if1 she had another child], she 
wouldn't vaccinate].  
 
 
(https://www.businessinsider.nl/jenny-mccarthy-became-the-
face-of-the-anti-vaxx-move ment-2019-4/?jwsource=cl) 
The examples in (19) show that, despite their lesser integration with
the associated clause, factual conditionals also embed with the associ-
ated clause, which means that factual conditionals are also syntactically
integrated with the associated clause. Observe in particular that the past
tense (thought) in the factual conditional in (19b) arises as the result of
sequence of tenses due to embedding under a past tense verb (here led ),
which is evidence that the factual conditional is in the scope of the past
tense in the main clause. The temporal dependency conﬁrms that the
factual conditional clause is integrated in the syntax of the domain of
embedding.
 (19) a. 
The party now has to prepare for a possible general election as 
early as next May and is already looking at appointing an 
advertising agency to help run the campaign. "I think [that [if2
Theresa May is going to go [for an early election, lh, ms]], it will 
be May or October]," he says. (https://www.theguardian.com/
 
 
politics/2016/sep/24/corbyn-pledge-on-grassroots-after-
leadership-win) 
 
b. He unilaterally announced the award of the George cross to the 
RUC, and was effusive about its history – which led Unionists 
to question [that, [if2 he thought the RUC were so honourable], 
why did he later agree with Patten and strip the police of their 
'Royal' Title?] (Observer, 23.04.2000, page 13, col 4) 

292
L. Haegeman and M. Schönenberger
2.5
Verb Second
Evidence from Verb Second (V2) phenomena in Germanic languages
conﬁrms the conclusion in Sect. 2.4 that both event conditionals and
factual conditionals are syntactically integrated with the associated clause
(cf. for similar claims in a.o. Frey 2016, 2018, 2019, 2020; Frey and
Meinunger 2019).
The label V2 describes the typical word-order restriction in German
and Dutch, by which the ﬁnite verb in the root clause is preceded by one
and only one constituent. In (20), for instance, the ﬁnite auxiliary heeft
‘has’ is preceded by a temporal adjunct (20a), by a direct object (20b),
by the subject (20c), or by the VP (20d), but it cannot be preceded by
more than one such constituent (20e–g).
(20) a. 
[Gisteren]  
heeft  
Hans  dat huis   
gekocht.  
 
 
 
yesterday  
has  
Hans  that house  
bought  
 
 
b. [Dat huis] heeft Hans gisteren gekocht. 
 
 
 
 
c. 
[Hans] heeft gisteren dat huis gekocht. 
 
 
 
 
d. 
[Dat huis gekocht] heeft Hans gisteren. 
 
 
 
 
e. 
*[Gisteren ][dat huis] heeft Hans gekocht. 
 
f. 
*[Hans] [dat huis] heeft gisteren gekocht. 
 
g. 
*[Gisteren] [Hans] heeft dat huis gekocht.  
V2 has received a range of syntactic analyses (see Woods and Wolfe
2020 for an overview), but there is a fair amount of consensus that
the phenomenon is syntactic. According to the approach initiated by
den Besten (1977/1983/1989) and since modiﬁed for theory-internal
reasons, the V2 order is derived by movement of the ﬁnite verb to the
position C, with an additional constituent moving from a TP-internal
position to the speciﬁer position, SpecCP (Holmberg 2020). The simpli-
ﬁed representation in (21) ignores additional functional structure as that
postulated in cartographic approaches (cf. Haegeman 1996; Holmberg
2020).

The External Syntax of Conditional Clauses
293
(21) 
 
          
CP
Spec 
 
C'
C 
           TP
DP (subject)            T'
T 
           VP
…
V 
Like non-clausal adjuncts (20a), event conditionals fulﬁl the V2 require-
ment: when they are the ﬁrst constituent of the root clause, they must
be followed immediately by the ﬁnite verb (22a). Factual conditionals
also serve to fulﬁl the V2 requirement: as the ﬁrst constituent of the
root clause they must also be followed immediately by the ﬁnite verb, as
shown in (22b).
(22) a. 
Als1  het  
regent,  blijf  ik/ *ik blijf 
thuis. 
 
 
if  
it 
rains 
stay 
I/ 
  I stay 
home 
 
 
(but see Haegeman and Greco 2018, 2020 for West Flemish)  
 
b. 
Als2  het  
morgen     waarschijnlijk gaat  regenen,   
 
 
if  
it  
tomorrow probably         goes  rain  
 
 
 
kunnen we/ *we kunnen  beter  met de trein  
gaan. 
 
 
can    we/ 
we can 
better  with the train  go 
 
 
'If it's probably going to rain tomorrow, we'd better go by train.' 
Assuming with Holmberg (2020) that the initial constituent in a V2
conﬁguration originates in a clause-internal position, we conclude that
both types of conditional clauses originate in a position internal to the
clause (labelled TP in (21), but to be modiﬁed in Sect. 3.2). Conversely,
the fact that neither event conditionals nor factual conditionals can be
the ﬁrst constituent in a V2 transgression (Catasso 2015) means that
neither the event conditional nor the factual conditional can function as
clause-external constituents in the sense of Broekhuis and Corver (2016:
1679–1733).

294
L. Haegeman and M. Schönenberger
3
The External Syntax of Factual
Conditionals and Judgement Phrase
The empirical data discussed in Sect. 2 correlate with a structural analysis
according to which both types of conditional clauses, event conditionals
and factual conditionals, are inserted clause-internally and in which the
differences highlighted in Sect. 2 correlate with the relative height of
their insertion, i.e. in terms of the degree of syntactic integration.8
This section investigates the level of attachment of factual conditionals
(and peripheral adverbial clauses in general).
3.1
Epistemic Modals
Importantly, the diagnostics that help to determine the syntactic attach-
ment site of factual conditionals and to differentiate between factual
conditionals and event conditionals, also single out a set of ‘high’ adver-
bial modiﬁers, in the sense of Cinque (1999), illustrated here using the
epistemic modal probably. From (23a) it is clear that the epistemic modal
probably must be located at some clause-internal level: it follows the
canonical subject, the pronominal he, which is assumed to occupy the
highest speciﬁer position of the clausal domain (e.g. SpecTP in a stan-
dard Minimalist format), and the ﬁnite auxiliary will, which occupies the
associated head position (T in the Minimalist format). Importantly for
our purposes, the temporal interpretation of the epistemic modal is tied
to the present speech time rather than to the future: (23a) means that ‘it
is now probable that he will take early retirement’, and it does not mean
that ‘at some future time it will become probable that he takes early
8 A radical alternative to this approach taken in Declerck and Reed (2001) is to deny that the
distinction between central and peripheral adverbial clauses is syntactic:
a subordinate clause is a syntactically dependent clause. Such questions as the scope of
negation, focusing, modality, etc.; in the head clause are immaterial to this, as they pertain,
not to syntactic, but to semantic integration (Declerck and Reed 2001: 37f.).
Given that we endorse a view according to which the various patterns discussed in Sect. 2—
i.e. scope, temporal subordination, focus, etc.—are syntactically encoded, this viewpoint is not
pursued.

The External Syntax of Conditional Clauses
295
retirement’. The assessment of the probability is in the present speech
time. Similarly, in (23b), with a reading such as ‘I consider it probable
that he did not take early retirement’, probably is not within the scope
of sentential negation encoded by not. Like factual conditionals (and
other peripheral adverbial clauses), the epistemic modal probably cannot
be focused, as shown in (23c) and (23d), the latter intended with the
cleft reading, and it cannot be the focus of wh-questions as in (23e). As
shown in (23f), VP ellipsis does not subsume the epistemic modal prob-
ably: ‘his wife has too’ means that ‘his wife has also gone home’ and not
that ‘his wife has also probably gone home’. Like factual conditionals,
the epistemic modal can occur in embedded domains, in which case it
is interpretively tied to the subject of the embedding predicate. In (23g),
for instance, the source of the probability assessment is the main clause
subject Jane. The Dutch analogue of probably, waarschijnlijk, can consti-
tute the ﬁrst constituent in a V2 clause in Dutch (23h), and, conversely,
it does not give rise to a V2 transgression (23i). The latter points again
conﬁrm strongly that the epistemic modal probably is syntactically inte-
grated with the clause it modiﬁes and that, following Holmberg (2020),
it must originate in a clause-internal position.9
(23) 
a. 
He will probably take early retirement. 
b.
He probably did not take early retirement.
c. 
He has (*even) probably taken early retirement. 
d. 
*It is PROBABLY  that he has taken early retirement, 
B: 
*Probably. 
e.
A:
How did he leave?
f.
He has probably gone home, and his wife has too.
g.
Jane thinks that he will probably take earl y retirement.
h.
Waarsc hijnlijk 
komt
hij
morgen
terug.
probably
comes
he
tomorrow 
back
i.
*Waarsc hijnlijk
hij 
komt
morgen
terug.
probably
he
comes tomorrow 
back
not definitely.   
9 Andrew Radford (p.c.) conﬁrms that it is hard to get a probably reading for the deleted VP in
(23f).

296
L. Haegeman and M. Schönenberger
Given the overlap between the properties of the epistemic modal prob-
ably and those of factual conditionals discussed in Sect. 2, it becomes
tempting to view the height of insertion of factual conditionals as related
to the structural layer associated with that of the epistemic modal, as
proposed in Frey (2016, 2018, 2019, 2020).
3.2
Layers of Structure: Krifka (2017; to Appear),
Frey (2020)
In earlier work (Haegeman 1984b, 2003; Coniglio 2011; Frey 2011)
it was proposed that peripheral adverbial clauses such as factual condi-
tionals are adjoined to the topmost layer of the clause, ‘CP’ (or ‘ForceP’
in the cartographic tradition) and thus remain outside the scope of CP-
or TP-internal operators.
(24) 
 
 CP1
CP2
CP1
Spec  
     C'
C1 
 
TP
that 
However, if factual conditionals were located in this position, i.e. outside
the associated CP, they should necessarily precede the complementizer
that, which occupies the position C, as in (25a). But, like central adver-
bial clauses, embedded factual conditionals follow that, as shown in
(19a), the crucial parts of which are repeated for convenience in (25b):
(25) a. 
*I think [[if2 Theresa May is going to go for an early election], 
that it will be   May or October]. 
 
b. I think [that [if 2 Theresa May is going to go for an early 
election], it will be May or October].  

The External Syntax of Conditional Clauses
297
Based on Krifka (2017; to appear), Frey (2016, 2018, 2019, 2020)
assumes the functional hierarchy in (26a), with the various layers char-
acterized as in (26b), based on Frey (2020: 13).
 (26) a. 
ActP > CmP > JP > TP 
 
b. i. 
The Tense phrase (TP) encodes a proposition φ. 
 
 
ii.  The Judgement phrase (JP) encodes a judge and expresses 
 
 
 
 an evaluation of the proposition φ by the judge. 
 
 
iii. The Commitment phrase (CmP) encodes a committer and 
 
 
 
 expresses public commitment of the committer. 
 
 
iv. The Speech act phrase (ActP) encodes the speaker and 
 
 
 
 expresses the occurrence of a specific speech act.  
Crucially for our purposes, the original layer ‘TP’ as used in the Mini-
malist representation is here decomposed into an articulated structural
layer in which TP labels a lower sub-component. The layer JudgementP
(JP) dominates this lower TP-layer and these two layers have specialized
functions: TP encodes the propositional/at-issue content of the clause
while JP contains proposition-external, not-at-issue content. For further
motivation for JP we refer the reader to Krifka’s own work and to Frey
(2018, 2019, 2020); for the concept ‘at-issue’ we refer the reader to Potts
(2015) and to Charnavel (2020), the latter in relation to French puisque
(‘since’).10
10 Krifka’s (2017, to appear) functional layer JP, adopted by Frey (2018, 2019, 2020), could
be reinterpreted as a ‘telescoped’ variant of Cinque’s (1999) topmost four high modal projec-
tions: MoodPspeech act, MoodPevaluative, MoodPevidential and ModPepistemic. Cinque’s hierarchy is
replicated in (i).
(i) MoodPspeech act > MoodPevaluative > MoodPevidential > ModP epistemic > TP (Past >
TP (Future) > MoodPirrealis > ModPalethic > AspPhabitual > AspPrepetitive > AspPfrequentative >
ModPvolitional > AspPcelerative > TP(Anterior) > AspPterminative > AspPcontinuative > AspPretrospective
> AspPproximative > AspPdurative > AspPgeneric/progressive > AspPprospective > ModPobligation >
ModPpermission/ability > AspPcompletive > VoiceP > AspPcelerative > AspPrepetitive > AspPfrequentative
(Cinque 2004: 133, his (3)).
Further research will have to shed light on the question as to what extent the four
distinct levels postulated by Cinque (1999) could or should be correlated to speciﬁc peripheral
adverbial clauses such as, for instance, factual conditionals, concessive while-clauses, rationale
since2/as2/vermits-clauses, etc. For proposals the interested reader is referred to Endo and
Haegeman (2019), who propose a general mechanism for the insertion of adverbial clauses
in relation to their internal syntax, and Charnavel (2020) for a discussion of French rationale
puisque (‘since’) clauses as modiﬁers of Cinque’s MoodPevidential.

298
L. Haegeman and M. Schönenberger
Subjective epistemic modals such as probably are proposition-external
and hence not-at-issue; they are associated with JP. Because they are not-
at-issue, they cannot be focused (for more discussion see Krifka 2017; to
appear; Frey 2018).
To capture the fact that peripheral adverbial clauses are syntactically
integrated but remain outside the scope of TP operators, Frey (2016,
2018, 2019, 2020) postulates that they are associated with JP (27a). In
this chapter Frey’s analysis is applied to factual conditional if 2-clauses
(27b).
(27) a. 
[ CP1 that [ JP [CP2 peripheral adverbial clause] [TP subject… 
 
b. [ CP1 that [ JP [CP2 if2-clause] [TP subject… 
Representation (27) remains compatible with the observation that when
embedded, factual conditional if 2-clauses follow the complementizer
and that in V2 languages factual conditionals may be moved from their
lower position to constitute the ﬁrst constituent in a V2 clause.
Frey’s original analysis, which correlates the syntactic location of
peripheral adverbial clauses, here exempliﬁed by factual if 2-clauses,
with that of the epistemic modals is strengthened by the observations
presented in Sect. 3.1 that several distributional properties of if 2-clauses
overlap with the distributional properties of the English epistemic modal
probably and its Dutch analogue waarschijnlijk.
3.3
Against an Orphan Account for Factual
Conditionals
For completeness’ sake, we brieﬂy turn to an alternative hypothesis
concerning the difference between central and peripheral adverbial
clauses developed in Haegeman (1991/2009), based on Saﬁr (1986),
Fabb (1990), and also endorsed in Shaer and Frey (2004). The idea was
that peripheral adverbial clauses are ‘orphan constituents’, i.e. they are
merged with the associated clause outside the narrow syntax, as extra-
sentential orphan constituents. The proposal is schematically represented
in (28): in this view, the associated clause entertains a discourse-type

The External Syntax of Conditional Clauses
299
relation with the peripheral adverbial clause. For concrete proposals in
relation to the syntax of extra-sentential constituents the reader is referred
to Saﬁr (1986), Fabb (1990), Koster (2000), Shaer and Frey (2004),
Cinque (2008), Axel and Wöllstein (2009), Haegeman et al. (2009),
Giorgi (2014) and Haegeman and Greco (2018, 2020), among many
others.
(28) [CP2 peripheral adverbial clause]  
[CP1 associated clause] 
Upon closer inspection, the orphan analysis raises several issues. One
concerns the diagnostics invoked in Sect. 2 as the basis for (28). As
shown in Sect. 3.1, it turns out that, although peripheral adverbial
clauses, such as factual conditionals, can be distinguished from central
adverbial clauses, such as event conditionals, these diagnostics do not
constitute conclusive evidence for the orphan analysis. On the contrary,
the observed parallelisms with epistemic modals, which are deﬁnitely
not orphan constituents, and the data from embedding and from V2
patterns, show that factual conditionals must be structurally integrated.
In the next section, though, the orphan analysis schematized in (28)
will be shown to be relevant for a different set of conditional clauses,
namely those like that in (1c), which are modiﬁers of the speech event.
4
Speech-Event Modifiers as Syntactic
Orphans
4.1
A Third Type of Adverbial Clause
Central adverbial clauses were opposed to peripheral adverbial clauses,
contrasting event conditionals, as in (29a), with factual conditionals, as
in (29b). However, a third use of conditional clause was illustrated in
(1c), in which what looks like a conditional clause, if I may say so, func-
tions as a modiﬁer not of the event encoded in the associated clause but
of the speech event as such. Another example of this use of a conditional,
based on the literature, is given in (29c). Henceforth we will annotate
the conjunction which introduces a speech-event modifying adverbial

300
L. Haegeman and M. Schönenberger
clause with a subscripted diacritic ‘?’ because the clause it introduces
is distinct from the two categories established so far. Haegeman’s own
earlier work (see also Haegeman and Wekker 1984) grouped conditionals
that modify the speech event (29c) with factual conditionals (29b) and
considered both as peripheral conditionals. Following Takami (1988)
and Iatridou (1991: 50–57), a.o., who argue in favour of a ternary
distinction, we reconsider this binary classiﬁcation here. This section
expands on Haegeman (2012: 181f.), Schönenberger and Haegeman (to
appear) and is heavily indebted to Frey (2016).
 (29) a. 
If1 you don't pass the final exam, you won't get your degree.  
 
b. If2 he won't arrive before nine, there is no point in ordering 
dinner for him. (based on Quirk et al.1972: 781; in Takami 
1988: 271, his (28)) 
 
c. 
If? I may change the subject, I visited one of my friends in 
America last month. (based on Takami 1988: 271, his (29)) 
The need for a ternary classiﬁcation extends to other adverbial clauses.
The temporal while1-clause in (30a) is classiﬁed as a central adverbial
clause. The concessive while2-clause in (30b) provides a background
proposition for the processing of the associated clause, and the while?-
clause in (30c) provides a temporal modiﬁcation of the speech event. In
previous work Haegeman (1984b, 2003; 1991/2009) grouped conces-
sive while2-clauses (30b) with examples such as (30c), treating both as
peripheral adverbial clauses.
(30) a. 
While1 we were talking about Theresa May, the BBC 
announced her resignation. 
 
b. While2 the Prime Minister may be a conservative, her recent 
proposals are very innovative. 
 
c. 
While? we are talking about Theresa May, her recent proposals 
are very innovative. 
In (31) additional attestations of conditional if ?-clauses are provided,
which modify the speech event rather than the event encoded in the asso-
ciated clause. Crucially, interpretively these are not factual conditionals:
they do not echo a contextually salient proposition.

The External Syntax of Conditional Clauses
301
(31) a. 
'If ? you don't mind me asking,' ventures the BAT press officer. 
'Why are you particularly interested in Iran?' (Guardian, 
02.09.2005, page 24, col 1) 
 
b. Leasing out video-conferencing facilities was where it was at, if?
I recall – that and being some kind of ceremonial bag carrier 
for the Lord Lieutenant of Devon. (Guardian, G2, 18.10.2005, 
page 14, cols 2-3) 
 
c. 
In fact, poor old 't' is disappearing even in the middle of words 
– e.g. 'butters' is commonly said as 'buyers'. The most stable 
letters are 'm' and 'n', if ? you're interested: they're very unlikely 
to disappear from spoken language.  
 
 
(Observer, 14.08.2005, page 8, col 3) 
 
d. 
If? Hughes and Oaten are anything to go by, it's a matter of time 
until Lib Dem Front-runner 'Ming' Campbell gets bogged 
down in Scandal.  
 
 
(Independent, 02.01.2006, page 34, col 3) 
While the adverbial clause modifying the speech event arguably has an
event reading in (29c), in (30c) and in (31), and thus interpretively aligns
with ‘central adverbial clauses’, this is not the only type used as a speech-
event modiﬁer: in (32a), the since?-clause also functions as a speech-event
modiﬁer but it provides the rationale for the speech event. Interpretively
it would thus correspond to the rationale since2-clause in (32b), which
has the properties of the peripheral adverbial clauses set out in Sect. 2
(see for French puisque (‘since’) Charnavel (2020), Schönenberger and
Haegeman, to appear).
(32) a.  I possibly have rose-tinged memories because I'd just attained 
my first girlfriend and earned and spent my first own money 
(on a small bottle of Brut for Men by Fabergé, [since? you ask], 
and, yes, it still astonishes me how the acquisition of the second 
did not more violently militate against the acquisition of the 
first). (Observer, 06.11.2005, page 18, col 1) 
 
b. Dr Durieux says it is unrealistic to expect the provincial capital 
to move, [since2 never in human history has a city evacuated 
before a natural catastrophe]. (Guardian, 22.11.2004, page 9, col 4)  

302
L. Haegeman and M. Schönenberger
4.2
Scope Effects and Speech-Event Modifiers
As far as scopal properties are concerned, speech-event modiﬁers align
with peripheral adverbial clauses, which was the basis for grouping the
two sets together in earlier work. We illustrate this point with conditional
clauses.
Like factual conditionals, speech-event conditionals are not temporally
subordinated to the tense in the associated clause: the if ?-clause is related
to the speech time and its tense form and its temporal interpretation
are independent of the tense form or the temporal interpretation of the
associated clause, as shown in (33). Moreover, (33c) shows that speech-
event modiﬁers are not within the scope of the sentential negation of the
associated clause.
(33) If?  I may change the subject,  
 
a. 
I visited one of my friends in America last month.  
 
b. I am visiting one of my friends in America next week.  
 
c. 
I never got a reply to that email I sent to my supervisor.  
Like factual conditionals, speech-event conditionals cannot be clefted
and they cannot be focused by only:
(34)
a. 
*It is if? I may change the subject that I visited one of my friends 
in America last month. (based on Takami 1988: 271, his (29)) 
 
b. *Only if? I may change the subject did I visit one of my friends 
in America last month. (based on Takami 1988: 271) 
Like factual conditionals, speech-event conditionals cannot be the focus
of an interrogative: in (35a), the speech-event conditional is not an
appropriate reply to the wh-question; in (35b), the speech-event condi-
tional is not within the scope of the yes/no operator.
(35) a. 
When did you visit your American friend? 
 
 
! If? I may change the subject. 
 
b. If? I may change the subject, did you visit your friend last 
month? 

The External Syntax of Conditional Clauses
303
In terms of the diagnostics deployed in Sect. 2, speech-event condi-
tionals do pattern with factual conditionals. The next section will
show, however, that speech-event conditionals differ from factual condi-
tionals in several respects. The conclusions reached here extend to other
speech-event modifying adverbials.
4.3
Re-Evaluating the Analyses
4.3.1 Coordination
Section 1.2 invoked the fact that a central adverbial clause, such as an
event conditional or a temporal while1-clause, and a peripheral adverbial
clause, such as a factual conditional or a concessive while2-clause, cannot
coordinate (see examples in (10)) in support of the need to differentiate
between the two clause types in terms of their structural position. The
gist of the argument was that the illicit coordination would violate the
coordination of the likes constraint because in the structural perspective
of Huddleston and Pullum (2005), central adverbial clauses and periph-
eral adverbial clauses do not occupy the same ‘structural place’, i.e. their
level of attachment to the host clause is different.
Observe now that factual conditionals and conditional speech-event
modiﬁers also cannot coordinate, a point made in Ros (2005: 94f.),
shown in (36) (which corresponds to his (24b)). Although both if -
clauses modify the same associated clause in (36a), the factual condi-
tional if 2 John’s wife is French cannot coordinate with the speech-event
conditional if ? I might say so in (36b).
(36)  a. 
John should know about wines if2 John's wife is French, if? I 
might say so. 
 
b. *John should know about wines if2 John's wife is French2 and 
if? I might say so. 
This argument extends to adverbial clauses introduced by other conjunc-
tions. Both while-clauses modify the same associated clause in (37a), but
the concessive while2-clause and the while?-clause modifying the speech
time cannot coordinate in (37b).

304
L. Haegeman and M. Schönenberger
(37) a. 
While? we are talking about Theresa May, while2 the Prime 
Minister may be a conservative, her recent proposals are very 
innovative. 
 
b. *While? we are talking about Theresa May and while2 the Prime 
Minister may be a conservative, her recent proposals are very 
innovative. 
As shown in (36b) above, speech-event conditionals do not coordi-
nate with factual conditionals, and they do not coordinate with event
conditionals either:
 (38)  a. 
Her behaviour will not improve if1 you do not react soon, if? I 
might say so. 
 
b. *Her behaviour will not improve if1 you do not react soon and 
if? I might say so. 
4.3.2 Then Resumption (Takami 1988: 271f.)
Takami (1988: 271f.) signals an additional contrast between event condi-
tionals and factual conditionals, on the one hand, and speech-event
conditionals, on the other: like event conditionals (39a), factual condi-
tionals (39b) can be resumed by then. With speech-event conditionals
(39c, d), then resumption is not licit. This point is also made in Ros
(2005: 96), who cites Wakker (1996).
(39) a. 
If1 you don't pass the final exam, (then) you won't get your 
degree.  
 
b. If2 he won't arrive before nine, (then) there is no point in 
ordering dinner for him. (based on Quirk et al. 1972: 781; in 
Takami 1988: 271, his (28)) 
 
c. 
If? I may change the subject, (*then) I visited one of my friends 
in America last month. (based on Takami 1988: 271, his (29)) 
 
d. 
If? you're interested, (*then) I visited one of my friends in 
America last month.  

The External Syntax of Conditional Clauses
305
4.3.3 Non-Veridicality
Speech-event conditionals pattern differently from both central adver-
bial clauses and peripheral adverbial clauses. However, arguably, being
event modiﬁers, they are to some extent similar to event conditionals, as
they are also compatible with NPIs: (31d), repeated as (40a), contains
the NPI anything. Moreover, speech-event conditionals, just like event
conditionals, are compatible with putative should (40b) and they also
allow conditional inversion with putative should (40c).
(40) a. 
If? Hughes and Oaten are anything to go by, it's a matter of time 
until Lib Dem Front-runner 'Ming' Campbell gets bogged 
down in Scandal.  
 
 
(Independent, 02.01.2006, page 34, col 3) 
 
b. If? you should be interested, the conference is going to be in 
Paris this year. 
 
c. 
Should you be interested, the conference is going to be in Paris 
this year. 
4.3.4 Embeddability
While event conditionals and factual conditionals can be embedded with
the associated clause, as discussed in Sect. 2.4, speech-event conditionals
do not embed, as shown in (41). See also Charnavel (2020) for a similar
observation concerning French puisque-clauses. The conditional if you
are interested in (41a) can be interpreted as a speech-event conditional.
As a speech-event conditional it frames the speech event in relation to
the interlocutor’s interest. However, the conditional clause in (41a) can
also spell out the circumstances in which the eventuality in the asso-
ciated clause itself takes place: whether or not Tom is going to cook
dinner is dependent on the interlocutor being interested. Hence (41a)
is ambiguous, it can be interpreted as a speech-event conditional or as an
event conditional. But (41b), which embeds (41a) as indirect speech,
is not ambiguous. The embedded conditional in (41b) must now be

306
L. Haegeman and M. Schönenberger
interpreted as spelling out the circumstances in which the eventuality
in the associated clause itself will be realized, i.e. whether or not Tom is
going to cook dinner depends on ‘me’, the indirect object of the main
clause and the addressee of the speech act verb told, being interested. The
embedded conditional in (41b) cannot be interpreted as modifying the
embedded speech event itself.
(41) a. 
If1/? you're interested, Tom is going to cook dinner next 
Saturday. 
 
b. Harry told me [that [if1/ *? I was interested], Tom was going to 
cook dinner next Saturday]. 
The embeddability restriction extends to other speech-event modifying
adverbial clauses. For instance, the before-clause in (42a) is a temporal
modiﬁer of the speech event, whereas the embedded before-clause in
(42b) cannot be interpreted as a temporal modiﬁcation of the embedded
speech event. However, (42b) would be acceptable with the reading in
which the temporal before-clause modiﬁes the eventuality encoded in the
embedded clause.
(42) a. 
Before we start, five cabinet ministers will be voting with the 
opposition. 
 
b. The invited speaker announced [that [before we started], five 
cabinet ministers would be voting with the opposition]. 
4.3.5 Verb Second
Based on evidence from Dutch, Sect. 2.5 revealed that both event condi-
tionals and factual conditionals fulﬁl the V2 requirement, providing
evidence for their syntactic integration with the associated clause. In
contrast, as shown in (43a) and (43b), speech-event conditionals do
not satisfy the V2 requirement. Conversely, they can pattern as a ﬁrst
constituent in a V2 transgression (Catasso 2015) and thus behave like
extra-sentential constituents (Broekhuis and Corver 2016: 1679–1733).
This is also true of the before-clause in (43c).

The External Syntax of Conditional Clauses
307
(43) a. 
Als? je   
het  
echt  moet weten,  ik was/*was ik in Rome 
 
 
if     you  
it  
really  must know  I was /   was I  in Rome 
 
 
'If you really want to know, I was in Rome.' 
 
b. 
Als?  u  
het  
zich     herinnert,   
 
 
if  
you  it  
yourself  remember   
 
 
het  boek verscheen/*verscheen  het boek     voor het eerst  in 1982.  
the book appeared  /   appeared  
the book     for the first  
in 1982 
 
 
'If you remember, the book first appeared in 1982.' 
c.  
Voor? we beginnen,  de vergadering  
gaat/ *gaat  
 
 
before  we start  
the meeting   
goes/  goes  
 
 
de  vergadering  
morgen  
niet  
door. 
 
 
the meeting   
tomorrow  
not  
through 
 
 
'Before we start, tomorrow's meeting has been cancelled.' 
4.3.6 Summary
Table 1 summarizes the similarities and differences between the various
conditional clauses.
Table 1
Three types of conditional clauses
Event
conditional
Factual
conditional
Speech-event
conditional
Temporal/modal
subordination
+
−
−
(anchored to
present)
In scope of host clause
negation
+
−
−
In scope of host clause
interrogative
+
−
−
Host clause cleft/host
clause focus
+
−
−
Then resumption
+
+
−
Negative polarity
items/putative
should/conditional
inversion
+
−
+
Embeddable
+
+
−
Dutch: V2 first
constituent
+
+
−
Dutch: V2 transgression
−
−
+

308
L. Haegeman and M. Schönenberger
4.4
A Ternary Typology
4.4.1 Peripheral Adverbial Clauses vs. Non-Integrated
Adverbial Clauses
If the fact that factual conditionals—and peripheral adverbial clauses
in general—are embeddable and interact with V2 is taken as evidence
that they are part of the narrow syntax then the fact that speech-event
conditionals pattern differently on these two scores provides support for
the hypothesis that speech-event conditionals are orphan constituents or
extra-sentential constituents in the sense of Broekhuis and Corver (2016:
1679–1733): they are not part of the narrow syntax, i.e. that they are
not syntactically integrated with the associated clause. Let us, therefore,
adopt Frey’s (2016, 2018, 2019, 2020) ternary typology of adverbial
clauses for the classiﬁcation of conditional clauses, as shown in (44).
(44) Adopting Frey's typology of adverbial clauses (2016) to conditional clauses: 
 
(i)  Event conditional: 
 
 
 
a type of central adverbial clause (Frey's CAC) 
 
(ii)  Factual conditional: 
 
 
 
a type of peripheral adverbial clause (Frey's PAC) 
 
(iii)  Speech-event modifier:  
 
 
 
a type of non-integrated adverbial clause (Frey's NonIC) 
Both CACs (event conditionals) and PACs (factual conditionals) are
syntactically integrated, but they differ in terms of their level of attach-
ment: CACs are attached lower in the tree than PACs, because CACs
modify VP or TP while PACs modify JP.
Elaborating on Frey’s (2016, 2018, 2019, 2020) proposals speech-
event conditionals are considered to be non-integrated adverbial clauses,
which he labels as ‘NonICs’. For a discussion of the discourse syntax
of these non-integrated adverbial clauses, see also Greco and Haegeman
(2018, 2020) and Schönenberger and Haegeman (to appear), in which
the label ‘NiC’ rather than ‘NonIC’ is used because of certain differences
between Frey’s NonICs and their NiCs. For simplicity’s sake, we shall
adopt the label ‘NiC’ here.

The External Syntax of Conditional Clauses
309
4.4.2 PAC vs. NiC: Some Problematic Cases
The empirical data and the diagnostics discussed so far have led to a
ternary distinction between CAC, PAC and NiC. It has been noted in
the literature, however, that some adverbial modiﬁers, including those
that are clausal, may behave either like PACs or like NiCs (see Meinunger
2004 and Frey 2016 for German non-integrated adverbial clauses, see
also Sweetser 1990 for English conditionals). The patterns will brieﬂy be
illustrated here for Flemish.11
In Flemish (45a), the conditional clause als ge het mij vraagt (‘if you
ask me’) is extra-sentential: like NiCs it precedes a full-ﬂedged V2 root
clause. This would correlate with its status as a speech-event modiﬁer: the
conditional clause modiﬁes the speech event itself (which corresponds
to the V2 root clause). In (45b), however, what looks like the same
conditional clause is the ﬁrst constituent of a V2 clause, hence, by our
reasoning (pace Axel and Wöllstein 2009) it is not extra-sentential and
it cannot be classiﬁed as a NiC. Rather, it must be an integral part of
the syntax of the root clause (pace Axel and Wöllstein 2009), and thus it
would be either a PAC or a CAC. Given its interpretation and the fact
that sentential negation cannot scope over it, the PAC label seems the
better option. The two co-existing patterns—V2 transgression and V2—
suggest that the same conditional clause may behave either as a NiC or
as a PAC, and with Frey (2016: 172), we would like to suggest that a
subtle difference in interpretation obtains: while the conditional clause
in (45a) represents a genuine speech-event modiﬁer, that in (45b) should
rather be interpreted as encoding an adverbial modiﬁcation similar to
that encoded in evidential expressions such as ‘in my opinion’, ‘according
to me’. Such modiﬁers may constitute the ﬁrst constituent in a V2 clause
(45c), but they can also be found in middle-ﬁeld position in Flemish
(45d). Crucially, in the latter conﬁguration, they do not require a special
parenthetical intonation.
11 For examples from English in relation to resumptive then with conditional clauses (cf.
Sect. 4.3.2), we refer the reader to Dancygier and Sweetser (1997: 128f.).

310
L. Haegeman and M. Schönenberger
(45) a. 
Als?      ge       het    mij      vraagt,   
 
 
if         you     it       me      ask  
 
 
het      is        vandaag        niet      zo koud            als gisteren. 
 
 
it         is       today             not      as cold              as yesterday 
 
b. Als2    ge       het     mij      vraagt,   
 
 
 
if        you     it        me       ask  
 
 
is   
het  
vandaag  
niet  zo koud 
als  
gisteren  
 
 
is  
   it         today               not       as cold             as         yesterday 
 
 
'If you ask me, today it is not as cold as yesterday.' 
 
c. 
Volgens    mij is het  vandaag          niet      zo koud als gisteren.  
 
 
according me is it    today              not       as  cold  as yesterday  
 
d. 
Vandaag        is het  volgens    mij niet       zo koud         als gisteren.  
 
 
today             is it     according me  not       as cold            as yesterday  
 
 
'According to me, today it is not as cold as yesterday.' 
Similarly, in (46a) the conditional als ik het me goed herinner (‘if
I remember correctly’) precedes a full-ﬂedged V2 clause, it is extra-
sentential and patterns with NiCs. It is interpreted as a speech-event
modiﬁer. In (46b) the same conditional clause is the ﬁrst constituent
of a V2 clause and we assume that here it will be interpreted as a PAC:
the PAC encodes evidential modality, in particular deﬁning the eviden-
tial basis on which the propositional content of the clause is founded,
i.e. the speaker’s own memory.12
(46) a. 
Als?  ik         het        me goed           herinner,  
 
 
if  
I  
it  
me well                            remember  
 
 
het boek      verscheen          voor het eerst   in 1982. 
 
 
the book      appeared          for the first       in 1982  
  
b. 
Als2  ik         het        me goed herinner,  
 
 
if     I           it          me well remember  
 
 
verscheen     het boek           voor het eerst   in 1982. 
 
 
appeared      the book           for the first       in 1982 
 
 
'If my memory serves me right, the book first appeared in 1982.'  
12 It might be objected that the if 2-clause in (47b) is not echoic in any obvious way. One
could perhaps argue that (47b) constitutes a reply to an implicit or explicit question asking
whether the speaker remembers the date of publication.

The External Syntax of Conditional Clauses
311
Not all NiCs can double up as PACs: in (47a), based on Te Velde
(2013: 22, his (IIg)), the conditional clause als u het zich herinnert (‘if
you remember’) patterns as an NiC modifying the speech event, and
it cannot also pattern as a PAC, as shown by the fact that the same
clause cannot be the ﬁrst constituent in a V2 pattern (47b). This is to
be expected: appealing to the interlocutor’s memory (‘if you remember’)
cannot constitute the speaker’s own evidential basis for a propositional
content, since the interlocutor’s memory is inaccessible to him or her.
(47) a. 
Als?    u        het      zich                herinnert,    
 
 
if        you    it         yourself          remember  
 
 
het  boek      verscheen       voor het eerst  in 1982. 
 
 
the  book     appeared         for the first     in 1982 
  'If you recall, the book appeared for the first time in 1982.' 
  (cf. Te Velde 2013: 22, his (IIg)) 
 
b. 
*Als2  u         het      zich                herinnert,  
  if      you     it         yourself          remember  
  verscheen    het boek         voor het eerst   in 1982. 
  appeared     the book        for the first       in 1982 
4.4.3 Speculations on the Ternary Typology
Frey (2018, 2019, 2020) replaces a binary classiﬁcation of adverbial
clauses by a ternary one (see (44)). Many general issues are still to be
addressed regarding the classiﬁcation of adverbial clauses in which non-
integration plays a crucial role. Ultimately, however, we would like to
envisage that the ternary model can be reframed in terms of a binary one
in which integrated clausal modiﬁers—and indeed other modiﬁers—are
opposed to non-integrated ones.
Integrated clauses vary in relation to the point of integration (see
also Endo and Haegeman 2019): for instance, CACs are TP-internal,
hence part of the proposition conveyed by the associated clause, and
hence potentially at-issue, and PACs are TP-external, thus outside of
the at-issue content of the clause. A revised typology of adverbial clauses
is suggested in (48), which includes a tentative non-exhaustive list of
adverbial modiﬁers that would be non-integrated and which could be

312
L. Haegeman and M. Schönenberger
analysed along the lines of recent proposals in Haegeman and Greco
(2018, 2020). Further work must clarify the possible internal organiza-
tion of such non-integrated clauses and shed light on the extent to which
these are to be treated in terms of a (discourse) syntactic analysis.
(48) 
A revised typology of adverbial clauses  
 
(i) 
Integrated clauses, differentiated by the height of attachment (Endo and 
Haegeman 2019) 
 
 
CAC          TP-internal           e.g. temporal while, event conditional  
 
 
PAC          TP-external         e.g. concessive while, factual conditional  
 
(ii) Non-integrated clauses (merged in discourse syntax, cf. Greco and 
Haegeman 2018, 2020) 
  
-  CAC-like speech-event modifiers;  
 
 
-  PAC-like speech-event modifiers;  
 
 
-  CAC modifiers of root proposition (Greco and Haegeman 2020) (49a); 
 
 
-  PAC modifiers of root proposition (not discussed in Greco and 
 
 
Haegeman 2018, 2020) (49b). 
(49) a. 
Oa-me    tuskwamen, de deure stond open en   de  lucht was an. 
 
 
when we home came  the door  was   open and the light  was on 
 
 
'When we arrived home, the door  was open and the light was on.'  
 
 
(Greco and Haegeman 2020: 78, their (25)) 
 
b. 
Oat      et programma  toch   goa  veranderen,   
 
 
if          the schedule    PART   goes change   
 
 
 
ge         zou      beter   ofwachten. 
 
 
you      should  better  off-wait 
 
 
'If the programme is going to change anyway, then you'd better wait.' 
5
Summary
This chapter revisited the typology of conditional clauses as part
of the wider typology of adverbial clauses developed in Haegeman
(1984a, 1984b, 1984c, 1991/2009, 2003, 2012). Like other adverbial
clauses, clauses introduced by the conjunction if display (at least) three
readings: (i) an event conditional encodes a condition on the event

The External Syntax of Conditional Clauses
313
expressed in the main clause; (ii) a factual conditional encodes a back-
ground assumption which serves as the basis for the processing of the
root proposition; (iii) a speech-event conditional encodes a condition on
the speech event. In earlier work by Haegeman (Haegeman and Wekker
1984; Haegeman 1984b, 1991/2009, 2003), two classes of adverbial
clauses were distinguished: peripheral adverbial clauses and central adver-
bial clauses. Both factual conditionals and speech-event conditionals
were treated as belonging to the class of peripheral adverbial clauses and
event conditionals as belonging to the class of central adverbial clauses.
Based on additional properties of the external syntax of adverbial
clauses including the relation to the syntax of V2, the binary distinc-
tion between ‘central’ adverbial clauses and ‘peripheral’ adverbial clauses
was replaced by the ternary distinction argued for in Frey (2016). For
the syntactic analysis, both variation in height of insertion as well as the
opposition between syntactic integration and non-integration were seen
to be relevant, the former pertaining to the difference between event
conditionals and factual conditionals, and the latter serving to distin-
guish between event conditionals and factual conditionals on one hand,
and speech-event conditionals on the other. An important area of study
for future work is the issue of the formalization of the (discourse-)syntax
of non-integrated modiﬁers.
References
Austin, J.L. 1961/1970. Ifs and cans. In J.O. Urmson and G.J. Warnock (eds.),
Philosophical Papers, 153–180. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Second
edition (1970), 205–232.
Auwera, Johan van der. 1986. Conditionals and speech acts. In Elisabeth A.
Traugott, Alice ter Meulen, Judy Snitzer Reilly and Charles A. Ferguson
(eds.), On Conditionals, 197–214. Cambridge: CUP.
Axel, Katrin and Angelika Wöllstein. 2009. German verb-ﬁrst conditionals as
unintegrated clauses. A case study in converging synchronic and diachronic
evidence. In Susanne Winkler and Sam Featherston (eds.), The Fruits of
Empirical Linguistics, II, 1–37. Berlin, New York: Mouton de Gruyter.

314
L. Haegeman and M. Schönenberger
Besten, Hans den. 1977/1983/1989. On the interaction of root transforma-
tions and lexical deletive rules. In Werner Abraham (ed.), On the Formal
Syntax of Westgermania, 47–131. Benjamin: Amsterdam. Reprinted in Hans
den Besten 1989, Studies in Westgermanic syntax. Doctoral dissertation,
Katholieke Universiteit Brabant. Amsterdam and Atlanta, GA: Rodopi.
Biasio, Marco and Enrico Castro. 2019. Will in the English protasis: a proposal
for motivating the constraint. Paper presented at the Incontro di Grammatica
Generativa. Università degli Studi di Padova.
Biberauer, Theresa and Ian Roberts. 2017. Conditional inversion and types
of parametric change. In Bettelou Los and Pieter de Haan (eds.), Word
Order Change in Acquisition and Language Contact: Essays in Honour of
Ans van Kemenade, 57–77. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
[Linguistik Aktuell/Linguistics Today, 243].
Broekhuis, Hans and Norbert Corver. 2016. Syntax of Dutch. Verbs and Verb
Phrases. Volume 3: Chapter 14: Main Clause-External Elements. Amsterdam:
Amsterdam University Press.
Catasso, Nicholas. 2015. On post initial Aber and other syntactic transgres-
sions: some considerations on the nature of V2 in German. Journal of
Germanic Linguistics 27(04): 317–365.
Charnavel, Isabelle. 2020. French causal puisque-clauses in the light of (not)-at-
issueness. In Romance Languages and Linguistic Theory - Selected Papers from
the 47th Linguistic Symposium on Romance Languages (LSRL47), Newark,
Delaware: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Cinque, Guglielmo. 1999. Adverbs and Functional Heads. New York and
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cinque, Guglielmo. 2004. Issues in adverbial syntax. Lingua 114: 683–710.
Cinque, Guglielmo. 2008. Two types of non-restrictive relatives. In Olivier
Bonami and Patrizia Cabredo Hofherr (eds.), Empirical Issues in Syntax and
Semantics 7, 99–137. Paris: CNRS.
Cinque, Guglielmo and Luigi Rizzi. 2008. The cartography of syntactic
structures. Studies in Linguistics, CISCL working papers. Vol. 2.
Close, Reginald A. 1980. Will in if-clauses. In Sidney Greenbaum, Geof-
frey Leech and Jan Svartvik (eds), Studies in English Linguistics, 100–109.
London: Longmans.
Comrie, Bernard. 1982. Future time reference in the conditional protasis.
Australian Journal of Linguistics 22: 143–152.
Coniglio, Marco. 2011. Die Syntax der deutschen Modalpartikeln: ihre Distribu-
tion und Lizenzierung in Haupt- und Nebensätzen. Berlin: Akademie.

The External Syntax of Conditional Clauses
315
Dancygier, Barbara and Eve Sweetser. 1997. Then in conditional constructions.
Cognitive Linguistics 8(2): 109–136.
Declerck, Renaat. 1984. Pure future will in if clauses. Lingua 63: 279–312.
Declerck, Renaat. 1991. Tense in English. London and New York: Routledge.
Declerck, Renaat. 2000. On how to interpret canonical conditional clauses in
discourse. Journal of Literary Semantics 29(3): 149–169.
Declerck, Renaat and Susan Reed. 2001. Conditionals: A Comprehensive Empir-
ical Analysis. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Ebert, Christian, Cornelia Endriss and Stefan Hinterwimmer. 2008. A uniﬁed
analysis of indicative and biscuit conditionals as topics. In Tova Friedman
and Satoshi Ito (eds.), SALT XVIII, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University.
Endo, Yokio and Liliane Haegeman. 2019. Adverbial clauses and adverbial
concord. Glossa-A Journal of General Linguistics 4: 1.
Fabb, Nigel. 1990. The difference between English restrictive and non-
restrictive relative clauses. Journal of Linguistics 26: 57–79.
Frey, Werner. 2011. Peripheral adverbial clauses, their licensing and the preﬁeld
in German. In Eva Breindl, Gisella Ferraresi and Anna Volodina (eds.),
Satzverknüpfung – Zur Interaktion von Form, Bedeutung und Diskursfunktion,
41–77. Berlin: de Gruyter.
Frey, Werner. 2016. On some correlations between formal and interpretative
properties of causal clauses. In Ingo Reich and Augustin Speyer (eds.),
Co- and Subordination in German and Other Languages. Special Issue of
Linguistische Berichte 21: 153–179. Hamburg: Buske.
Frey, Werner. 2018. On the syntax discourse interface with different kinds of
not-at-issue expressions. CGSW 33, 27–28 August 2018, Georg-August-
Universität Göttingen.
Frey, Werner. 2019. Linking some syntactic and semantic features of conces-
sives and adversatives. Paper presented at DGfS, AG 5, Bremen.
Frey, Werner. 2020. On the categorical status of different dependent clauses.
Ms.
Frey, Werner and Andre Meinunger. 2019. Topic marking and illocutionary
force. In Valéria Molnár, Verner Egerland and Susanne Winkler (eds.),
Architecture of Topic, 95–138. Berlin: de Gruyter.
Giannakidou, Anastasia. 1998. Polarity Sensitivity as (Non) Veridical Depen-
dency. (Linguistics today 23). Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Giorgi, Alexandra. 2014. Prosodic signals as syntactic formatives in the left
periphery. In Anna Cardinaletti, Guglielmo Cinque and Yoshio Endo (eds.),
On Peripheries, Exploring Clause Initial and Clause Final Positions, 161–188.
Tokyo: Hituzi Syobe Publishing.

316
L. Haegeman and M. Schönenberger
Haegeman, Liliane. 1984a. Parasitic gaps and adverbial clauses. Journal of
Linguistics 20: 229–232.
Haegeman, Liliane. 1984b. Pragmatic conditionals in English. Folia Linguistica
18: 485–502.
Haegeman, Liliane. 1984c. Remarks on adverbial clauses and deﬁnite
anaphora. Linguistic Inquiry 15: 712–715.
Haegeman, Liliane. 1991. Parenthetical adverbials: the radical orphanage
approach. In Shuki Chiba, Akira Ogawa, Yasuaki Fuiwara, Norio Yamada,
Osamu Koma and Takao Yagi (eds.), Aspects of Modern English Linguistics:
Papers presented to Masatomo Ukaji on His 60th Birthday, 232–254. Tokyo:
Kaitakushi.
Haegeman, Liliane. 1996. Verb second, the split CP and null subjects in early
Dutch ﬁnite clauses. GenGenP. Available on: http://ling.auf.net/lingBuzz/
001059.
Haegeman, Liliane. 2003. Conditional clauses: external and internal syntax.
Mind and Language 18: 317–339.
Haegeman, Liliane. 2009. Parenthetical adverbials: the radical orphanage
approach. In Benjamin Shaer, Philippa Cook, Werner Frey and Claudia
Maienborn (eds.), Dislocated Elements in Discourse: Syntactic, Semantic
and Pragmatic Perspectives, 331–347. London: Routledge. Reprinted from
Haegeman (1991).
Haegeman, Liliane. 2010. The movement derivation of conditional clauses.
Linguistic Inquiry 41: 595–621.
Haegeman, Liliane. 2012. Adverbial Clauses, Main Clause Phenomena and the
Composition of the Left Periphery. Oxford: OUP.
Haegeman, Liliane and Brian Robinson. 1979. A note on some aspects of the
use of will in afﬁrmative declarative sentences. Journal of Linguistics 15: 109–
110.
Haegeman, Liliane and Herman Wekker. 1984. The syntax and interpretation
of futurate adverbials in English. Journal of Linguistics 20: 263–281.
Haegeman, Liliane, Benjamin Shaer and Werner Frey. 2009. Postscript: prob-
lems and solutions for orphan analyses. In Philippa Cook, Werner Frey
and Claudia Maienborn (eds.), Dislocated Elements in Discourse: Syntactic,
Semantic, and Pragmatic Perspectives, 348–365. New York: Routledge.
Haegeman, Liliane and Ciro Greco. 2018. West ﬂemish V3 and the interaction
of syntax and discourse. Journal of Comparative Germanic Linguistics 21(1):
1–56.

The External Syntax of Conditional Clauses
317
Haegeman, Liliane and Ciro Greco. 2020. Frame setters and microvariation
of subject-initial verb second. In Rebecca Woods and Sam Wolfe (eds.),
Rethinking Verb Second, 61–89. New York and Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Holmberg Anders. 2020. On the bottleneck hypothesis of verb second in
Swedish. In Rebecca Woods and Sam Wolfe (eds.), Rethinking Verb Second,
40–60. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.
Hornstein, Norbert. 1990. As Time Goes By. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
The Handbook of English, 159–219. Oxford: Blackwell.
Iatridou, Sabine. 1991. Topics in Conditionals. Ph.D dissertation. Boston: MIT.
Iatridou, Sabine and David Embick. 1994. Conditional inversion. In Mercè
Gonzàlez (ed.), Proceedings of the North Easter Linguistic Society 24, 189–
203. Amherst: Graduate Linguistics Student Association.
Jespersen,
Otto.
1909–49.
A
Modern
English
Grammar.
Heidel-
berg/Copenhagen/London:
Karl
Winter/Einar
Munksgaard/Allen
and
Unwin.
Kearns, John T. 2006. Conditional assertion, denial, and supposition as
illocutionary acts. Linguistics and Philosophy 29(4): 455–485.
Koster, Jan. 2000. Extraposition as parallel construal. Ms. University of
Groningen.
Krifka, Manfred. 2017. Assertions and judgements, epistemics and evidentials.
Paper presented at the Workshop Speech Acts: Meanings, Uses, Syntactic and
Prosodic Realizations, Leibniz-ZAS Berlin, May 29–31, 2017. https://amor.
cms.hu-berlin.de/~h2816i3x/Talks/CommitmentEpistemicsHandout.pdf.
Krifka, Manfred. To appear. Layers of assertive causes: propositions, judge-
ments, commitments, acts. In Jutta M. Hartmann and Angelika Wöllstein
(eds.), Propositionale Argumente im Sprachvergleich: Theorie und Empirie.
Propositional Arguments in Cross-Linguistic Research: Theoretical and Empirical
Issues. [Studien zur Deutschen Sprache]. Tuebingen: Gunter Narr Verlag.
Leech, Geoffrey N. 1971. Meaning and the English Verb, xiv + 132. London:
Longman (2nd and 3rd editions: 1987, 2004).
McCawley, James D. 1971. Tense and time reference in English. In Charles J.
Fillmore and D. Terence Lang˙endoen (eds.), Studies in Linguistic Semantics,
96–113. Irvington: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Meinunger, Andre. 2004. Interface restrictions on Verb Second. Linguistics in
Potsdam 22: 51–81.
Nieuwint, Pieter. 1986. Present and future in conditional protases. Linguistics
24: 371–92.

318
L. Haegeman and M. Schönenberger
Palmer, Frank. 1965. A Linguistic Study of the English Verb. London: Longman.
Palmer, Frank. 1974. The English Verb. London: Longman.
Potts, Christopher. 2015. Presupposition and implicature. In Shalom Lappin
and Chris Fox (eds.), Handbook of Contemporary Semantic Theory (2nd
edition), 168–202. Oxford: Wiley/Blackwell.
Quirk, Randolph, Sidney Greenbaum, Geoffrey Leech and Jan Svartvik. 1985.
A Comprehensive Grammar of the English Language. London: Longman.
Ros, Hilke. 2005. Functional phrase structure: integrating functional ideas in
generative adverbial syntax. Ph.D. dissertation, Ghent University.
Rutherford, William. 1970. Some observations concerning subordinate clauses
in English. Language 46: 97–115.
Saﬁr, Kenneth. 1986. Relative clauses in a theory of binding and levels.
Linguistic Inquiry 17: 663–690.
Schönenberger, Manuela and Liliane Haegeman. To appear. English rationale
since and a reassessment of the typology of adverbial clauses. Ms. Ghent
University/University of Geneva.
Shaer, Benjamin and Werner Frey 2004. ‘Integrated’ and ‘non-integrated’ left
peripheral elements in German and English. In Benjamin Shaer, Werner
Frey and Claudia Maienborn (eds.), Proceedings of the Dislocated Elements
Workshop, ZAS Berlin, November 2003. ZAS Papers in Linguistics 35(2):
465–502.
Sweetser, Eve E. 1990. From Etymology to Pragmatics. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Takami, Ken-ichi. 1988. The syntax of if-clauses: three types of if-clauses and
X’-theory. Lingua 1988: 263–281.
Velde, John te. 2013. West Germanic left-dislocated adverbial clauses: the role
of the semantic interface. Interdisciplinary Journal for Germanic Linguistics
and Semiotic Analysis 18: 163–206.
Wakker, Gerry. 1996. Conditionals at different levels of the clause. In Betty
Devriend, Louis Goossens and Johan van der Auwera (eds.), Complex
Structures, 177–199. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Wekker, Herman C. 1976. The Expression of Future Time in Contemporary
British English. Amsterdam: North Holland.
Wekker, Herman C. 1977. Future reference in adverbial clauses. Interlanguage
Studies Bulletin 2: 64–77.
Whitman, Neal. 2004. Semantics and pragmatics of English verbal dependent
coordination. Language 80(3): 403–434. Retrieved August 20, 2020. www.
jstor.org/stable/4489719.

The External Syntax of Conditional Clauses
319
Williams, Edwin.1978. Across the board rule application. Linguistic Inquiry 9:
31–43.
Woods, Rebecca and Sam Wolfe. 2020. Rethinking Verb Second. New York and
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Zandvoort, Reinart Willem. 1975. A Handbook of English Grammar. London:
Longman.

Toward a Unified Linguistic Approach
to Conditionals—Some Empirical Evidence
Ghanshyam Sharma
Abbreviations
ACC
accusative case
ADV
adverb
COND
conditional
CPM
complementizer
DAT
dative case
ERG
ergative case
F
feminine gender
FUT
future tense
GEN
genitive case
HAB
habitual aspect
IMPFV
imperfective aspect
G. Sharma (B)
Department of South Asian Studies, National Institute of Oriental Languages
and Civilisations (INALCO), Paris, France
e-mail: paris.conditionals@gmail.com
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Switzerland AG 2023
S. Kaufmann et al. (eds.), Conditionals, Palgrave Studies in Pragmatics, Language
and Cognition, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-05682-6_11
321

322
G. Sharma
LOC
locative case
M
masculine gender
NOM
nominative case
PART
particle
PFV
perfective aspect, perfect tense
PL
plural number
POSS
possessive case
PROG
progressive aspect
PRON
pronoun
PRS
present tense
SUFF
sufﬁx
1
Introduction
The purpose of this article is to shed light on the characterization of
conditionals by looking into their typological linguistic structure. As
is well known, a proper understanding of conditional constructions in
human languages is essential for a number of disciplines, including
logic, linguistics, psychology, cognitive science, artiﬁcial intelligence, and
others. However, despite their fundamental importance to a range of
disciplines and despite being a primarily linguistic phenomenon, condi-
tionals have not attracted as much scholarly attention from linguists
as they demand. While there have been some noteworthy typolog-
ical as well as theoretical studies in the last few decades (Comrie
1986; Wierzbicka 1997; Haegeman 2003; Xrakovskij 2005; Bhatt and
Pancheva 2006; Thompson et al. 2007), more linguistic research into
conditional constructions is needed. This paper attempts to make a small
contribution to ﬁlling this gap in the literature. Since the subject itself is
extremely large, and the debates surrounding it have been wide-ranging,
it will not be possible here to deal thoroughly with every argument or to
address all aspects of conditionals. Instead, this paper will limit its scope
to pursuing two principal objectives: revisiting Greenberg’s Universal 14
and, in the light of recent research, reviewing some of the proposals made
by Comrie (1986).

Toward a Unified Linguistic Approach to Conditionals …
323
2
The Conditional Construct and Its
Syntax
Giving a concise deﬁnition of a conditional construct has always been
simpler in logic than in linguistics. In extensional logic, the ‘material
conditional’ relation between two propositions that make up a condi-
tional construction, namely P ⊃Q, is considered the sole criterion for
determining a conditional construction and giving an account of its
truth conditions. As a result, in extensionally oriented linguistic studies,
the concept of the material conditional has been found applicable to
the study of natural language conditionals (Williamson 2020), and is
considered to be synonymous with an if –then construction.1 As we shall
see later, however, there are languages in which the two clauses are not
always marked with any speciﬁc morphological devices comparable to
English if and then markers. Furthermore, since most of the founda-
tional research into conditional constructions has been carried out using
examples drawn from the English language, our understanding of the
complex phenomenon of conditionals is largely dependent on the way
conditionals are structured in this particular language. Obviously, any
generalizations based solely on the conditional constructs of English will
inevitably be limited.
Acknowledging the difﬁculty of describing a conditional construc-
tion in languages other than English, Wierzbicka (1997) comes up with
a seemingly workable solution. She claims that the construct intro-
duced by if is a primitive lexico-grammatical universal and ‘is one of
those relatively simple and clear concepts which cannot be made clearer
by decomposing them into simpler concepts’ (1997: 15). Furthermore,
1 On the viability of using the term ‘material conditional’ in natural language, Barwise (1986:
21) has the following to say: “For those of us involved in the attempt to spell out the relation
between statements and those aspects of reality they are about, conditionals are a thorny issue.
Within this semantic tradition, common wisdom can be summarized rather contentiously as
follows: classical model theory gives us the semantics of the material conditional. It works ﬁne
for mathematical conditionals, but is a disaster if applied to ordinary language conditionals,
especially counterfactual conditionals. Within the possible worlds framework, there are various
treatments, some of which are quite successful for certain types of natural language conditionals,
including counterfactuals, but they are all a disaster when applied to mathematical conditionals.”

324
G. Sharma
deﬁning the concept is of no great importance, according to Wierzbicka,
as ‘there is little point in trying to deﬁne simple concepts (such as, for
example, WANT, THINK, KNOW or SEE) in terms of more complex
ones (such as, for example, “volition”, “deontic modality”, “cognition”,
“epistemic modality”, “information”, “vision” and so on). Similarly, there
is little point in trying to deﬁne if in terms of more complex concepts
such as “hypothetical”, “inference”, or “possible worlds” (1997: 17).
Although Wierzbicka’s claim might seem to pinpoint the difﬁculty in
deﬁning a conditional construct, it needs to be substantiated by more
empirical data and further research. Following Wierzbicka’s line of argu-
ment, one is confronted with a rather obvious question: assuming that
if belongs to a class of lexico-grammatical universal primitives, why do
many languages not exhibit conditionality through a speciﬁc marker
similar to if ? Undoubtedly, conditionality as an abstract concept is
a part of human reasoning and can thus be considered a universal
phenomenon. However, more empirical research is needed to estab-
lish how primitive lexico-grammatical universal concepts are displayed
cross-linguistically. In the context of Wierzbicka’s project—namely, para-
phrasing the object language in the object language itself without any
recourse to a metalanguage or truth conditions—it makes sense to say
that IF cannot be reduced to anything simpler. Regrettably, as things
currently stand, her proposal to abandon any sophisticated terminology,
such as volition, epistemic modality, deontic modality, etc., and adopt
instead her rather embryonic universal primitive lexico-grammatical cate-
gory IF, does not lead to any signiﬁcant insight into the complexity of
conditional constructions.
With respect to the syntax of conditionals, Bhatt and Pancheva (2006)
present a detailed summary of the different proposals for describing
the conditional clause found in modern syntactic theory. These include
regarding the conditional clause as an adverbial, an interrogative or a
correlative. Bhatt and Pancheva (2006: 640) seem to hold to the ﬁrst of
these proposals and maintain that a conditional clause (i.e. an if -clause)
is similar to an adverbial clause:

Toward a Unified Linguistic Approach to Conditionals …
325
Conditional structures involve an adverbial clause, often referred to
as the CONDITIONAL CLAUSE, ANTECEDENT or PROTASIS
(the underlined constituent in (1)), and a main clause, known as the
CONSEQUENT or APODOSIS. Conditional structures are interpreted,
in general terms, with the proposition expressed by the antecedent
clause specifying the (modal) circumstances in which the proposition
expressed by the main clause is true. Thus, (1) states that the possible
worlds/situations in which Andrea arrives late (the denotation of the
conditional clause) are possible worlds/situations in which Clara gets
upset (the denotation of the main clause).
(1) If Andrea arrives late, Clara will get upset.   
...
Conditionals are not unique in their overall structure, rather conditional
clauses belong to a class of adverbial clauses that includes, among others,
clausal adverbials of time, cause, and concession, as illustrated in (3).
(3) a.   If Andrea arrived late, Clara must have gotten upset. 
 
b.    When Andrea arrived late, Clara got upset. 
 
c.   Because Andrea arrived late, Clara got upset. 
 
d.  Although Andrea arrived on time, Clara got upset. 
Like the other clausal adverbials, conditional clauses are typically intro-
duced by a CP-related element, a complementizer or an operator in Spec,
CP (cf. if , when, because, although in (3) above). And like the other
adverbial clauses, conditional clauses may precede or follow the main
clause.
The idea that the if -clause is an ‘adverbial’ is fully developed and
forcefully argued in Haegeman and Schönenberger (this volume), who
present the typology of conditional clauses as part of the wider typology
of adverbial clauses. They maintain that: “like other adverbial clauses,
clauses introduced by the conjunction if display (at least) three read-
ings: (i) an event conditional encodes a condition on the event expressed
in the main clause; (ii) a factual conditional encodes a background

326
G. Sharma
assumption which serves as the basis for the processing of the root propo-
sition; (iii) a speech-event conditional encodes a condition on the speech
event.”
While the conditional clause may appear to be similar to adverbial
clauses syntactically—and thus thought to be comparable with adverbials
of time, cause or concession in presenting a uniform syntactic analysis—
a closer examination reveals that from a semantic point of view these
different types of clauses do not carry the same epistemic stance that a
speaker adopts when making an utterance using them. Thus, an if -clause
cannot be equated semantically with adverbials of time, cause or conces-
sion, as the semantic contribution it makes differs from the contribution
made by these adverbials.
To highlight the difference between an if -clause and other types of
adverbials, let us consider the epistemic stance adopted by the speaker
in uttering each of the propositions listed above in the quotation from
Bhatt and Pancheva, along with an additional counterfactual clause:
Table 1
Speaker’s epistemic stance
Subordinate proposition P
Clause type
Speaker’s epistemic
stance
a. When Andrea arrived late,
Time adverbial
Ks □P
b. Because Andrea arrived
late,
Cause adverbial
Ks □P
c. Although Andrea arrived
on time,
Concession adverbial
Ks □P
d. If Andrea arrived late,
If-clause
¬Ks P ∨¬BsP
e. If Andrea had arrived late
If-clause
(counterfactual)
Ks¬P ∨Bs¬P
P stands for the proposition “Andrea arrived late”
As Table 1 clearly shows, in uttering When Andrea arrived late …,
Because Andrea arrived late … or Although Andrea arrived late …, the
speaker adopts an epistemic stance of certainty (i.e. for all the speaker
knows it is necessarily P), thus indicating that the speaker knows Andrea
arrived late, whereas in uttering If Andrea arrived late …, the speaker
neither knows nor believes that Andrea arrived late. Thus, the truth-
condition of Andrea arriving late in If Andrea arrived late has to be

Toward a Unified Linguistic Approach to Conditionals …
327
ascertained in an alternative world, which is introduced by the protasis
marker if . When it comes to counterfactuals, the speaker’s epistemic
stance is quite the opposite. In uttering If Andrea had arrived late, both
the speaker and the addressee either know or believe for certain that
Andrea did not arrive late. Whether this distinctiveness of the if -clauses
can have repercussions for the syntactic analysis of a conditional state-
ment is a complex subject worthy of further discussion. Nevertheless, we
believe that the difference between the factual nature of time, cause or
concession adverbials and the non-factual nature of if -clause cannot be
considered solely as a semantic issue, because it is also of relevance to
syntactic theory.
Another view on the conditional clause worth mentioning—and the
one we consider the most promising for a comprehensive cross-linguistic
survey of conditional clauses—is that advanced by Bhatt and Pancheva
(2006: 639). This sees conditional clauses as: “… essentially free relatives
of possible worlds. Similarly to the more familiar instances of free rela-
tives of individuals, (i) conditional clauses likely involve clause-internal
operator-movement to Spec, CP; (ii) they receive the interpretation
of deﬁnite descriptions; and (iii) they may participate in correlative
structures, as happens in the subcase of conditionals with the proform
then.”
According to this line of research, just like correlative constructions,
conditional constructions involve a free relative clause adjoined to the
matrix clause and co-indexed with a proform inside it: [free relative]i
[... proformi...]. In fact, in many languages, particularly in many South
Asian languages, conditional constructions are to some extent compa-
rable to correlative constructions. It has also been claimed that in
some languages, the if -clauses are historically derived from correlative
constructions:
Our proposal that if-clauses are free relatives, i.e., deﬁnite descriptions
of possible worlds, naturally predicts that they should be able to appear
in the correlative construction. Geis (1985), von Fintel (1994), Izvorski
(1997) among others have suggested that conditional constructions are
related to correlatives. Geis was perhaps the ﬁrst to note that conditional

328
G. Sharma
constructions in English are the remnants of a strategy of correlativiza-
tion that was once more productive in the language. Treating some
conditionals as correlatives helps us to understand several aspects of the
behavior of conditionals crosslinguistically. In languages where correla-
tivization is a productive strategy, it is apparent that conditionals are
correlatives (e.g. Marathi). (Bhatt and Pancheva 2006: 661)
The literature has made it abundantly clear that providing an exhaus-
tive deﬁnition of conditionals which would encompass all the divergent
syntactic characteristics that are attested cross-linguistically remains a
challenging task. Moreover, this is a task that requires research based
on empirical evidence, rather than pure theoretical discussion. Hoping
that further research into the syntax of conditional constructions and
their detailed cross-linguistic survey will eventually reveal some hitherto
unknown characteristics of conditionals, for the moment, we have no
option but to accept the general description of conditionals given by
Traugott et al., who write as follows: “Conditional (if –then) construc-
tions directly reﬂect the characteristically human ability to reason about
alternative situations, to make inferences based on incomplete infor-
mation, to imagine possible correlations between situations, and to
understand how the world would change if certain correlations were
different” (1986: 3).
3
Clause Order and Clause Marker
A conditional statement is made up of two clauses, namely the protasis
(also known as the conditional clause, subordinate clause, P-clause,
if -clause or antecedent) and the apodosis (also known as the conclu-
sion, principal or main clause, Q-clause, then-clause or consequent).2
2 In line with the linguistics tradition, I have chosen to use the terms ‘protasis’ and ‘apodosis’
here, although I believe the terms ‘antecedent’ and ‘consequent’ are a more appropriate way of
denoting the two clauses in a conditional construct.

Toward a Unified Linguistic Approach to Conditionals …
329
Concerning the ordering of these two clauses, Greenberg’s Universal of
Word Order 14 states the following:
In conditional statements, the conditional clause precedes the conclusion
as the normal order in all languages. (1963: 84)
Greenberg’s Universal 14 is a well-established and widely accepted
syntactic principle. The idea that the protasis-apodosis clause order is the
universal order was examined in detail by Lehman (1974), who reported
that no empirical data could be found to call into question the normal
protasis-apodosis clause order. He concluded that whenever apodosis-
protasis ordering does occur, it is to be considered either non-normal
or highlighted for some reason.
Protasis-apodosis order is congruent with the speaker’s communicative
strategy, whereby the speaker both engages the addressee in contem-
plating a potential disjunction and also uses this potential disjunction as
the grounds for developing an argument. Furthermore, protasis-apodosis
ordering resembles the order of human reasoning and shows ‘parallels
between order of elements in language and order of elements in expe-
rience’ (Traugott et al. 1986: 9). The protasis-apodosis order is also
supported by Haiman (1978), who claims that a conditional clause (i.e.
protasis) shares the typical properties of topic elements found in many
languages and is thus placed ﬁrst.
Granted the foregoing statement, broadening our knowledge of condi-
tional clauses requires a cross-linguistic typological study in which this
widely accepted generalization can be scrutinized. Greenberg’s Universal
establishes that the protasis-apodosis is the normal order; however,
this suggests that apodosis-ﬁrst and protasis-second is possible. In the
following paragraphs, I will argue that, in a conditional statement,
protasis-ﬁrst and apodosis-second is the only possible order. I will further
maintain that the seeming apodosis-protasis order purportedly attested in
various languages is due to the phenomenon of ‘fronting’ the proposition
contained in the apodosis. In other words, it is the proposition contained
in the apodosis which is pre-posed or fronted, not the entire apodosis,

330
G. Sharma
since no language to our knowledge exhibits a “marked apodosis-marked
protasis” order. Furthermore, there are languages such as Hindi in which
the protasis is optionally marked and the apodosis is obligatorily marked,
but the so-called apodosis marker does not move with the apodosis when
it is fronted. This peculiarity reveals the need for further investigation
into the Hindi conditional constructions.
Our subsidiary claim is that the placing of the protasis in the second
position is not due to an afterthought on the part of speaker, as suggested
by Comrie (1986), who says, ‘Given that it seems to be commoner
cross-linguistically for the protasis to be marked overtly as non-factual
than for the apodosis to be so marked …, placing the overtly marked
protasis in front of the unmarked apodosis avoids the apodosis being
interpreted as a factual statement’ (Comrie 1986: 84). As I maintain
elsewhere (Sharma 2011), contrary to widely held belief, no language
actually seems to exhibit a marked apodosis in the sentence-initial posi-
tion. In other words, there is no evidence of any sort to demonstrate the
apodosis-protasis ordering in conditionals. This ﬁnding may have reper-
cussions for syntactic theories that classify the protasis under the blanket
term adverbials.
3.1
Markers of Protasis and Apodosis
The conventional wisdom is that one or both of the two clauses that
make up a conditional construction are marked either overtly (through a
separate morphological device) or covertly (through special verb forms).
Furthermore, it is also believed that the marking of the conditional
clauses may be obligatory either for both clauses or for one clause only, as
is the case in English. To have cross-linguistic validity, however, a uniﬁed
theory of conditionals has to develop tools to analyze data from as many
divergent languages as possible, and necessarily from languages that
are structurally different from well-studied languages such as English.
Keeping in mind this necessity, we can postulate different types of clause
combinations to cover some, if not all, of the possible scenarios (Sharma
2010, 2011):

Toward a Unified Linguistic Approach to Conditionals …
331
Table 2
Types of marked clauses in conditionals
1. Non-overtly marked P + Non-overtly marked Q
–
2. Obligatorily marked P + Obligatorily marked Q
such as Ngiyamb¯a
3. Obligatorily marked P + Non-obligatorily marked Q
such as English, French and Italian.
4. Non-obligatorily marked P + Obligatorily marked Q
such as Hindi
5. Obligatorily marked P + Non-overtly marked Q
such as Chinese
6. Non-obligatorily marked P + Non-overtly marked Q
–
7. Morphologically marked P + Unmarked Q
such as Tamil, Telugu and Kannada.
8. Non-overtly marked P + Obligatorily marked Q
–

332
G. Sharma
As can be seen from Table 2, different types of possible clause markings
can be hypothesized. A uniﬁed approach to conditional clause mark-
ings has to take into account this cross-linguistic diversity—a task which
requires a detailed survey of languages belonging to divergent fami-
lies. However, to offer a glimpse of the diversity involved here, let us
consider ﬁve cases that have attracted major attention already: CLASS I:
Ngiyamb¯a; CLASS II: English, French, Italian, etc.; CLASS III: Hindi,
among others; CLASS IV: Chinese, etc.; and CLASS V: Tamil, Telugu,
Kannada, Malayalam, etc.
3.1.1 Class I: Overtly and Obligatorily Marked P +
Overtly and Obligatorily Marked Q
Ngiyamp¯a (or Ngiyamb¯a)—an Australian aboriginal language—is
reported to belong to this peculiar class in which there is an overt
marking of both clauses. Furthermore, both clauses in this language are
said to be marked by the same clitic, -ma. Given this phenomenon, it is
not clear how a protasis and an apodosis can be identiﬁed independently.
From the literature, all we know is that a conditional sentence has a rigid
clause order with no possibility of clause inversion, and that the ﬁrst
clause of a conditional sentence is considered the protasis. Comrie (1986:
84) cites the following example from Ngiyamb¯a (referencing Donaldson
1980: 251–252), observing that ‘in Ngiyamb¯a, with past tense counter-
factuals, both clauses have the same overt marking (with the clitic -ma),
and the ﬁrst must be interpreted as protasis …’:
ma-ni burray giyi, ngindu-ma-ni yada gurawiyi 
Lit. ‘your-counterfactual-this child   was,  you-counterfactual-this
well  looked-after’
‘If this child had been yours, you would have looked after it well.’
(1) 
Nginuu-
I believe further research is needed to establish whether the so-called
past tense counterfactual morpheme attested in the protasis and the
apodosis in (1) does, in fact, mark both the protasis and the apodosis,
rather than perform different functions in different contexts. A plau-
sible hypothesis is that the -ma particle is a marker of counterfactuality

Toward a Unified Linguistic Approach to Conditionals …
333
rather than a marker of both protasis and apodosis. In fact, marking
counterfactuality through the same morphological device is a widespread
phenomenon. It also remains to be seen whether this phenomenon is
limited solely to counterfactuals, or whether it is found as well in other
types of conditionals in this language. However, the essential point is
that there are languages such as Ngiyamp¯a which are said to exhibit
overt clause marking of both clauses in counterfactuals but which do
not allow a clause inversion. This supports the claim that Q-P order is
not possible.
3.1.2 Class II: Overtly and Obligatorily Marked P +
Overtly But Not Obligatorily Marked Q (The
dubious nature of the English ‘then’)
English, French and Italian, among many other European languages,
belong to this class. It is the most investigated class of languages in which
only the protasis is believed to be obligatorily marked. The apodosis is
thought to be marked by an optional marker. Since our understanding
of conditionals in human language is shaped mainly by the results
obtained from analyses of conditional constructions attested in this class
of languages, particularly English, it is important to look closely into the
structural properties of conditionals in languages belonging to this class.
The data from English, French and Italian, for example, clearly suggest
an obligatory marking of the protasis, which is obtained through if , si
and se, respectively:
(2) 
a.  If  Mary invites John, he will go to her party. 
Si  Mary invite John, il ira à sa fête. 
b.  
c.  Se  Mary invita John, lui andrà alla sua festa. 
As can be observed in (2), the presence of the protasis marker If , Si and
Se in the three examples from English, French and Italian is obligatory.
All three examples are grammatically correct without their respective
apodosis markers then, alors and allora, but not without their respective
protasis markers.

334
G. Sharma
With regard to the former, the optional marking has been widely
discussed. In particular, there has been a long debate on the real contri-
bution of the so-called English apodosis marker then in a conditional
sentence (Geis and Zwicky 1971; Iatridou 1994; Dancygier and Sweetser
1997; van der Auwera 1997; Horn 2000; Cariani and Rips this volume).
It has been argued that the English marker then carries a bi-conditionality
meaning which is derived from the pragmatic scalarity in the protasis.
For example:
(3) 
a.   If you mow my lawn, I’ll pay you ten dollars.  
 
b.   If you mow my lawn, then I’ll pay you ten dollars. 
The example in (3b), according to this line of research, means that
ten dollars will be paid if and only if the lawn is mowed. Given that
the purported English apodosis marker then carries a bi-conditionality
meaning derived from the pragmatic scalarity in the protasis, a plau-
sible explanation of then is that it is associated with the protasis rather
than with the apodosis. According to this proposal, the so-called apodosis
marker then is, in fact, a pragmatic marker which induces implicatures,
giving rise to bi-conditional readings, as discussed by the abovemen-
tioned scholars. To show the pragmatic afﬁliation of then with the
protasis, we can roughly present (3a) and (3b) in the following manner:
(4) 
a. [If you mow my lawn], I’ll pay you five dollars. 
 
b.  [If you mow my lawn then], I’ll pay you five dollars. 
As (4b) shows, “If ” and “then” belong together, which supports the
proposal that then is a pragmatic marker, as it seems to belong to the
protasis not to the apodosis. In order to investigate this phenomenon
further, let us consider some other characteristics of the English then.
First, as Bhatt and Pancheva (2006) have noted, then has to be
adjacent to the protasis, as in (5a):
(5) 
a.   If it rains, then I think that we should stay at home. 
 
b. * If it rains, I think that then we should stay at home.3

Toward a Unified Linguistic Approach to Conditionals …
335
In syntactic terms, it has been argued that the surface location of then
marks a predicate that combines with the if -clause, and therefore that
then must be structurally adjacent to that clause. However, the fact that
then in such circumstances has to be adjacent to the protasis also proves
that it is semantically and pragmatically associated with the protasis
rather than with the apodosis, because it has to pick out the pragmatic
scalarity meaning from the protasis.
Secondly, there is a restriction on the use of then in those situa-
tions in which the protasis contains pragmatic elements expressing other
pragmatic scales. In fact, itself being a pragmatic scalarity marker, then
conﬂicts with other scalarity markers such as even if and only if , as
examples (6) and (7) clearly show:
(6) 
Even if it rains, (*then) the football game will happen. 
(7) 
Only if it is sunny, (*then) will I visit you. 
Thirdly, Iatridou (1994) and Dancygier & Sweetser (1997) have variedly
argued that there is a restriction on the use of then when the protasis
includes a reference to a generic time or event, as in (8):
(8) 
If Mary bakes a cake, (*then) she gives some slices of it to John. 
The ungrammaticality of (8) derives from the fact that the protasis does
not exhibit a deﬁnite pronominal anaphora which then could pick up.
Instead, it has a generic pronominal reference at all times or whenever,
which is not compatible with then.
Yet another restriction on then is ascribed to von Fintel’s observa-
tion concerning its incompatibility with unless (reported by Bhatt and
Pancheva 2006), as in (9):
(9) 
Unless it rains tomorrow, (# then) I won’t leave. 

336
G. Sharma
The ongoing discussion makes it clear that, in English, then is a prag-
matic marker (or discourse marker) rather than a logical connective or
marker of the apodosis. Its presence in a conditional statement seems
to highlight the speaker’s attitude to the protasis and the fact that
the speaker is prepared to assert what is coming next on the basis of
whatever it is that then is referring back to earlier in the sentence. More-
over, whenever then occurs alone, its role is to invoke the protasis in
discourse:
(10) A: Did you know that Oswald would be coming to the party tomorrow.
B: Then, I won’t be.  
= If Oswald is coming to the party tomorrow, then I won’t be coming.
In sum, any cross-linguisticresearch into conditional constructions must
keep in mind this peculiarity of English conditionals and not imme-
diately go in search of equivalent apodosis markers in other languages,
since the presence and contribution of the so-called marker of apodosis
then in English—and probably in all languages belonging to this class
of languages—remains highly dubious. As we will see in Sect. 3.1.3, the
same is true of the supposed apodosis marker to in Hindi which is an
integral part of the protasis (or antecedent). For this reason, we presume
that an apodosis (or consequent) is never marked in any language, even
though an apodosis is commonly called “then-clause”.
3.1.3 Class III: Overtly but Not Obligatorily Marked P +
Overtly and Obligatorily Marked Q (The Supposed
Hindi Apodosis Marker to)
Now, let us focus on the class of languages in which the protasis can be
marked (optional marking), but the apodosis has to be marked (obliga-
tory marking). Hindi belongs to this class of languages. The use of the
so-called Hindi apodosis marker to (then) is obligatory in a conditional
construction, regardless of the presence or absence of the protasis marker
agar/yadi (if ), as can be observed in Table 3:

Toward a Unified Linguistic Approach to Conditionals …
337
Table 3
Grammaticality test of presence or absence of P and Q markers
If Ram comes/came, I will/would ask him
agar
R¯am
¯ay¯a,
to
m˜ε
us = se
p ¯uch˜¯ug¯a
if
Ram
come.pfv.m.sg
then
I
he-abl
ask-fut.m.sg
(a)
√
P-marker
Q-marker
(b)
√
Ø
Q-marker
(c)
?
P-marker
Ø
(d)
*
Ø
Ø
Ø stands for a null marker

338
G. Sharma
It is notable that, in the case of clause inversion, i.e. apodosis-protasis
order, the marker to (then) follows the protasis even when the apodosis
has to dislocate due to fronting of the proposition, as can be observed
in Table 4. Consequently, absence or displacement of to (then) renders a
Hindi conditional either ungrammatical or semantically odd, as can be
observed in (b), (c) and (d) in Table 4:
In a nutshell, as Tables 3 and 4 show, the conditional construc-
tions in Hindi exhibit a peculiarity with respect to the use of the
so-called apodosis marker, in that it is required even when the proposi-
tion contained in the apodosis, for whatever reason, has to be pre-posed
or fronted. Table 5 presents the grammaticality test of Hindi conditional
constructions, as outlined above. Notice that the Hindi Q-marker—
whose presence is obligatory—does not dislocate with Q when it is
pre-posed, as (f) in Table 5 clearly shows:
The unique linguistic characteristic of Hindi conditional sentences
requires further inquiry. Let us consider the so-called ‘biscuit’ condi-
tionals (11), imperative conditionals (12) and interrogative conditionals
(13) in Hindi. Notice that, in the case of clause inversion, the tendency
to place the particle to (then) at the end of the conditional sentence is
prevalent across the language:
(11) a. Biscuit (or relevance) conditionals P-Q  
(agar) ap=ko
bhukh lag     ho          to,    biskut
almar =me
if
you= ACC  hunger  felt    be- SUB  then   biscuits  sideboard=in
rakhe
hε
placed  are 
.
‘If you are hungry, there are biscuits in the sideboard.’ 
b. Biscuit (or relevance) conditionals Q-P  
biskut 
almar =me     rakhe    h     agar 
biscuits   sideboard=in  placed  are   if 
ap=ko
bhukh lag     ho           to
you-ACC   hunger  felt    be- SUB   then 
‘There are biscuits in the sideboard if you are hungry.’ 
ε
.

Toward a Unified Linguistic Approach to Conditionals …
339
Table 4
Markers in an inverted ordering of clauses
Q-P
I will/would ask Ram if he comes/came
(a)
√
m˜ε
R¯am = se
p ¯uch˜¯ug¯a
agar
vo
¯ay¯a
to
I
Ram-abl
ask-fut.m.sg
P-marker
he
come-pfv.m.sg
Q-marker
(b)
*
Q-marker
P-marker
(c)
*
Q-marker
Ø
(d)
*
Ø
Ø
* stands for ungrammatical sentence
Ø is a null marker

340
G. Sharma
Table 5
Grammaticality test of Hindi conditional constructions
P-clause
Q-clause
Marker
Acceptability
(a)
Marked P
-
Marked Q
√
(b)
Unmarked P
-
Marked Q
√
(c)
Marked P
-
Unmarked Q
*
(d)
Unmarked P
-
Unmarked Q
*
Q-clause
P-clause
(e)
Unmarked Q
-
Marked P
?
(f)
Unmarked Q
-
Marked P
Q-marker
√
(g)
Marked Q
-
Marked P
*
(h)
Marked Q
-
Unmarked P
*
(i)
Unmarked Q
-
Unmarked P
*
(12) 
a. Imperative conditionals: P-Q  
agar tum he
apn
ja
a
a
n bac n   ho          
bh go        yah =se  
if      to you   self’s   life   save  be-SUBJ  then  run away   here =from
‘If you want to save your life, run away from here!’ 
 
b. Imperative conditionals: Q-P   
bhago
yaha
agar   tumhe
=se
     jan bac n   ho           
run away  here from   if      to you   self’s   life   save      be-SUBJ   then
‘Run away from here if you want to save your life!’ 
a
 to
 to
apn
(13) 
a. Interrogative conditionals: P-Q  
agar m r
bul
=ne
y
     ky
usk
   tum
  p r
me
=
j oge 
if      Mary=ERG   invited  then  WH   you  her    party=in  will go 
.
‘If Mary invited you, would you go to her party?’ 
b. Interrogative conditionals: Q-P   
ky
m
tum
r =
us=ne
agar
bul y
WH  you  her          party=in   will go   if       she-ERG   invited    then
‘Would you go to Mary’s party if she invited you?’ 
t
  p r
me
=
j oge 
.t
k
 to
 to
It is interesting that this tendency seems to hold also in those Hindi
conditionals containing an element of pragmatic scalarity, although in Q-
P ordering there are issues concerning the acceptability of the conditional
sentences. For example, in protasis-apodosis order, (14a) and (15a), the
apodosis marker to ‘then’ behaves normally, whereas in apodosis-protasis
order, (14b) and (15b), the presence of the marker to ‘then’ seems to

Toward a Unified Linguistic Approach to Conditionals …
341
be in conﬂict with the element of pragmatic scalarity, leaving the Hindi
sentences grammatically unacceptable.
(14)
a. Only if Conditionals: P-Q  
 (agar)  mεr
 mεr
john=ko
bulae
to
h
 if           Mary            John=ACC    invites      then    only 
 he          her                 party=in     will go 
 ‘Only if Mary invites John, will he go to the party.’ 
b. Only if Conditionals: Q-P  
?john
agar 
use
bulaye
to
h
John      party=in       will go         if            Mary   him
invites    then              only
.
‘John will go to the party only if Mary invites him.’ 
vo
usk
part =me
jaega
  part =me
jaega
.
 mεr
 mεr
john=ko
bulae
bulaye
(15) a.  Even if  Conditionals: P-Q  
 (agar) 
to
bh
bh
 if        Mary    John= ACC   invite-SUBJ   then   even 
john
.
    nah    jaega
 John   party=in      not     will/would go 
 ‘Even if Mary invites/invited John, he will/would not go to the party.’
b. Even if  Conditionals: Q-P  
?john
(agar)  
    use   
 John     party=in    not    will go
(if)
Mary  him
to
 invite-SUBJ  then   even
  ‘John will not go to the party even if Mary invites him.’ 
    nah    jaega
  part =me
  part =me
.
Examples (11) through (15) suggest that the so-called Hindi apodosis
marker to (then) is a peculiar case. Even though it looks like a marker
of apodosis, it does not move leftward together with the apodosis when
the latter is fronted or pre-posed. This strongly suggests the hypothesis
that it is only the proposition contained in the apodosis which is fronted,
not the entire apodosis. Another hypothesis worth examining is that the
Hindi apodosis marker to has a dual role to play in the language: at
times, as a proform, it plays the role of a connective, but it can also be

342
G. Sharma
Table 6
Clause marking in Chinese
If Zangsan drinks wine, (then) I will scold him
acceptability
(rúguˇo)
Zhangs¯an
h¯e
jˇıu
wˇo
(jìu)
mà
t¯a
if
Zhangsan
drinks
wine
I
will
scold
him
a
√
rúguˇo
Zhangs¯an
h¯e
jˇıu
wˇo
jìu
mà
t¯a
b
√
rúguˇo
Zhangs¯an
h¯e
jˇıu
wˇo
Ø
mà
t¯a
c
√
Ø
Zhangs¯an
h¯e
jˇıu
wˇo
jìu
mà
t¯a
d
√
Ø
Zhangs¯an
h¯e
jˇıu
wˇo
Ø
mà
t¯a
Ø stands for a null marker
employed as a marker of pragmatic scalarity. Obviously, there is a strong
need for more in-depth research into the role played by the so-called
Hindi apodosis marker to ‘then’.
3.1.4 Class IV: Overtly but Not Obligatorily Marked P +
Overtly but Not Obligatorily Marked Q
Mandarin is said to overtly, but not obligatorily, mark both protasis and
apodosis. Although the marking of two clauses in a conditional state-
ment in Mandarin is not obligatory, their ordering is obligatorily ﬁxed.
In other words, the ﬁrst clause is always protasis whether it is marked or
not. Keeping in mind this peculiarity, Comrie (1986: 85) asserts that ‘the
protasis necessarily precedes the apodosis, whether the protasis alone is
marked for non-factuality (by a conjunction such as rúguˇo ‘if’), whether
the apodosis alone is marked (for instance by nà and/or jìu ‘then, in that
case’), whether both are marked, or whether neither is marked’.
This distinctiveness of Mandarin conditional constructions is illus-
trated by the sentence in Table 6, a widely cited example of a construc-
tion that is correct in all circumstances.
However, according to our informant,3 the so-called apodosis marker
in Mandarin, namely jìu, might mean different things according to
context. This is because jìu can play different grammatical or semantic
roles in the Chinese language. To put it simply, it is questionable
3 Luo Yujia, a native speaker of Chinese and a doctoral candidate at INALCO, Paris.

Toward a Unified Linguistic Approach to Conditionals …
343
to call it an apodosis marker. Having said that, we believe that the
case of Mandarin lends even stronger support to our hypothesis that
protasis-apodosis ordering is the only ordering in conditional statements,
regardless of the presence or absence of any overt clause markers.
3.1.5 Class V: Protasis Marked through a Special
Morphological Form of the Verb + Apodosis
Remaining Unmarked
Languages belonging to this class express conditionality not through
any distinct marker of protasis or apodosis, but rather through a special
verb form contained in the protasis. Many Dravidian languages spoken
in India, such as Tamil, Malayalam, Telugu and Kannada, apparently
belong to this class, as can be seen from the examples (16)–(17) below
(Bhatt 1999). The apodosis seems to remain unmarked except for the
case of counterfactuals in Telugu, where the apodosis also exhibits a
morphological mark of conditionality in the verb, as can be seen in (17c).
This is a highly complex issue worthy of a detailed survey.
(16) If Mary invites him, John will go to her party. 
a. Tamil 
Mary
avan-ai  azhai-t-al       John
Mary.3F   he-ACC   invite-COND  John-3M
aval  parti-kku     po-v-an
her     party-LOC    go-FUT.3M
b. Malayalam 
Mary   joni-ne
ksanicc-al 
avan   aval -ute   partti-kk     po-(k)um
Mary  John-ACC invite-COND  he      she- GEN   party-DAT    go-FUT
c. Telugu 
Mary  pilus-te
John   parti  ki
veL-ta -Du
Mary   call- COND John party DAT  go-FUT-PRON.SUFF
d. Kannada 
Mary           avan-annu  kareda-are,              John-n-u
Mary.NOM   he-A CC       invite-PRS-COND    John-Mas-NOM
Ava-L a
parti-ge
hoog-utt-ane 
she-f- POSS  party-DAT  go-PRS.3SM
.
. .
.
.
. ..

344
G. Sharma
(17) If Mary had invited him, John would have gone to her party. 
a. Tamil 
meri-v-in 
  avan-ai
azhai-tt-iru-nt-al,
 Mary.3SF.GEN   he-ACC    invite-ADV.PART-BE-PAST-COND
 John  aval parti-kku   po-y-iru-nth-iru-pp-an
 John  her    party- LOC  go-BE.PAST-BE.FUT.3M
b. Malayalam 
Mary
joni-ne
ksanicc-iru-nne kil   avan
 Mary   John-ACC  invite-be-COND         he  
aval-ute
partti-kk
po-(k)um-a(y)-irunnu
 she-GEN   party-DAT    go-FUT-be-PFV
c. Telugu 
meri    pilic- i       un-Tee      John   parti    ki   
 Mary   call-CPM    be- COND   John   party   DAT
  veLL-I      un-De          vaDu
 go- CPM    be-COND
PRON Copy 
d. Kannada 
                avan-annu  kared-u-idda-are,
 Mary.NOM    he-A CC        invite- PTCPL-was- COND
 John-n-u
 ava-L-a
parti-ge
 hoog-utt-idd-anu
 John-Mas- NOM    she-F- POSS    party-DAT    go-PROG-was-3 SM
meri
3.2
Summary
Table 7 sums up our discussion of the language classes that exhibit
different possible orderings of the two clauses in a conditional statement.
Table 7
The five classes of conditionals discussed above
P-Q
Class 1
morphologically marked P and morphologically marked Q
Ngiyamp¯a
Class 2
obligatory P-marker and not obligatory Q-marker
English
Class 3
not obligatory P-marker and obligatory Q-marker
Hindi
Class 4
not obligatory P-marker and not obligatory Q-marker
Chinese
Class 5
morphologically marked P and no overt marking in Q
Tamil

Toward a Unified Linguistic Approach to Conditionals …
345
As Table 7 shows, languages belonging to classes 2 and 3 seem to
exhibit the so-called apodosis-protasis (Q-P) ordering. In fact, data from
these languages have led linguists to believe that a conditional statement
may exhibit both clause orderings (i.e. P-Q and Q-P). However, as we
have argued above, these cases in no way violate the universal of condi-
tional clause ordering (namely P-Q), since in cases of Q-P ordering, only
the proposition contained in the apodosis is pre-posed. A null marker at
the end of the conditional string in class 2 effectively indicates that in
these languages, whenever the Q-proposition is pre-posed, it occurs as a
pragmatic strategy of the speaker. Furthermore, data from the languages
belonging to class 3, such as Hindi, indubitably demonstrate that, in
these languages, the so-called apodosis marker, for example, to ‘then’,
cannot be omitted and, except for a few cases, must remain at the end of
the conditional string, even in those cases where the apodosis-proposition
has to be pre-posed or fronted. We believe that the pre-posing of the
apodosis-proposition attested to in languages belonging to classes 2 and 3
(see Table 7) requires further empirical research to be better understood.
One of the reasons for Q-proposition pre-posing seems to be that
conditional statements are always discourse-bound (see e.g. Akatsuka
1986). In fact, the phenomena of Q-proposition pre-posing, reduced
conditionals (i.e. deletion of either P or Q), nonconditional condi-
tionals (see Lycan 2001 for details) and pseudo-conditionals can only
be understood in the light of the discourse-bound nature of condi-
tional statements. Thus, we believe that, depending on the elements of
knowledge shared by the speaker and hearer (available from the previous
part of the discourse), the speaker may consider it necessary to pre-
pose the apodosis in order to highlight the information contained in it,
thus violating the normal clause ordering. Another reason for apodosis-
proposition pre-posing has to do with the type of modality it contains.
When the speaker expresses deontic modality in making requests or
orders, he/she invariably begins the conditional statement by pre-posing
the apodosis-proposition, as in,
 (18) a. Sit down, if you want! 
 
b.? If you want, sit down! 

346
G. Sharma
We believe that similar observations can be made about other conditional
statements where the apodosis carries different kinds of non-assertive
illocutionary force (as is the case in uttering exclamations, interrog-
atives, etc.) and thus expresses a non-epistemic modality. Subject to
further language-speciﬁc research, we can expect apodoses carrying
non-epistemic modal meanings to be always pre-posed—irrespective of
syntactic differences in languages. In sum, our analysis does not support
the widely held belief that conditionals can have both orderings: P-Q
and Q-P.
3.3
The Link between P and Q
In logic, the material conditional allows any two unrelated but true
propositions to be linked together (e.g. ‘If Paris is the capital of France,
two is an even number’). However, as we know, not all combinations of
two propositions result in conditional constructs in a natural language.
In the last few decades, there has been a tremendous amount of research
involving various types of psychological experiments aiming to discover
the type of relation that P and Q may hold in a conditional state-
ment. Although it would be off-topic and rather presumptuous to try
to contribute to this debate in this paper, we deem it appropriate to
mention that there are roughly two schools of thought with opposing
views on this issue. The ﬁrst group of scholars maintains that not all P
and Q are linked together by a clear relation in a conditional construc-
tion. According to their line of reasoning, there are perfectly “standard”
conditionals in natural language called “independence conditionals”,
which do not necessitate P and Q being joined together through any
particular relation (Over 2017; Cruz and Over this volume; Over and
Cruz this volume). Scholars belonging to the other group, instead, claim
that the relation between P and Q is essentially inferential, involving
all three types of reasoning, namely induction, deduction and abduction
(Douven et al. this volume). As mentioned earlier, for the purpose of
typological linguistics research, it will be helpful to adopt a view that
envisages a kind of relation between P and Q, be it causal, inferential
or whatever. In linguistic typological studies, the relation that holds the

Toward a Unified Linguistic Approach to Conditionals …
347
two clauses together is a prerequisite for them being called conditionals,
and is often labeled ‘causal’, although it is not always easy to establish
the cause–effect relationship between P and Q.
The causal relation that is thought to exist between an antecedent and
its consequent has also been the topic of considerable debate in linguis-
tics, and has been studied from different angles, including: mental spaces
(Sweetser 1990), semantic consistency (Wierzbicka 1997; Athanasiadou
and Driven 1997; Declerck and Reed 2001) and syntactic parameters
(Haegeman 2003). The idea of the causal relation as a requirement for a
cross-linguistic study, as proposed by Comrie (1986), has been examined
by Wierzbicka (1997: 19), who writes (example lettering mine):
It is true that “if” implies some sort of connection between two proposi-
tions, and also that a causal link is often involved, too; I claim, however,
that the “if” connection is sui generis, and cannot be reduced to anything
else; and that a link with “because” is not always present. For example,
the sentence:
(a) If he insults me, I will forgive him.
does not imply that I will forgive him BECAUSE he has insulted me: it
is true that I can forgive him only if he has done something bad to me
(e.g., if he has insulted me), but it is not true that the insult will be the
“cause” of my forgiveness. Similarly, the sentence:
(b) If he invites me to dinner, I will not go.
does not mean that I will not go because he has invited me: if he doesn’t
invite me I will not go either; and the sentence:
(c) If he is asleep, I will not wake him up.
does not mean that I will not wake him up because he is asleep: on the
contrary, I could wake him up only if he were in fact asleep.
Consider also the following if -sentences, of a different kind from those
cited above:
(d) If you do this, people will know about it.
(e) If you do this, this will be bad.
Clearly, here, too, there is no causal connection between the two
propositions.

348
G. Sharma
Despite this observation, we believe that Comrie’s idea concerning a
causal link between the two propositions withstands Wierzbicka’s criti-
cism, because (a) and (b) in the citation are not representative examples
of pure conditional constructs, since they require an ‘even if’ reading
which is a special case of conditionals.4 As far as (c) is concerned, there
is no anomaly, since X’s being asleep is in fact the cause for Y’s decision to
not wake up X. Likewise, we can say that “X’s doing something causes
Y’s knowing it” in (d) and “X’s doing Y will be the cause of its being
judged bad” in (e). At any rate, the causal link between protasis and
apodosis is to be viewed from the point of view of speaker and hearer,
and not judged on the basis of common knowledge of how things exist
or ought to be. We maintain that there is a sort of link, causal or other-
wise, between the two propositions which can be established through the
epistemic stance of the speaker and the hearer.
Furthermore, for the purpose of developing the criteria for a cross-
linguistic typological study, we must also bear in mind that not all
combinations of two propositions that are labeled ‘conditionals’ in
English are so in other languages. For instance, the so-called zero condi-
tionals in English (e.g. ‘If you freeze water, it becomes solid.’) are not
conditionals in many languages. Nor are those combinations of two
propositions which have a covert adverbial whenever or at all times in
the protasis (e.g. ‘If I drink too much coffee, I can’t sleep at night.’).
Similarly, all those conditional statements whose protasis is part of the
shared knowledge of speaker and addressee (e.g. “If you are going there,
I will come with you”) are not conditionals in many languages, as these
sentences have other forms similar to ‘Since you are going there, I will
come with you’.
4
Time Reference in Conditionals
It has been convincingly argued that the role of grammatical tenses,
aspects and moods—particularly of grammatical tenses—in non-factual
4 I am grateful to David E. Over for reminding me that even in “even if” conditionals, a link,
albeit of “topic”, can be established.

Toward a Unified Linguistic Approach to Conditionals …
349
conditional constructions is markedly different from their use in other
constructions in a language. The past time reference in counterfac-
tuals in particular has been a dominant topic of debate in linguistics for
many decades. There are signiﬁcant but conﬂicting, linguistic theories
that address the use of tenses in conditionals, particularly counterfac-
tuals (Dahl 1997; Iatridou 2000; Ippolito 2013; Kaufmann 2005, this
volume; Arregui 2007, 2009; Karawani 2014; von Fintel and Iatridou
2020; Mackay 2015; amongst many others), the detailed explication of
which is beyond the scope of this paper. Historically, the oldest and the
accepted view concerning the hypothetical use of the English past tense
is that a type of “back-shifting” in hypothetical conditionals that allows
the speaker to convey a belief concerning the fulﬁllment of the condi-
tion of the precise formulation, which, in turn, is predicated on the
time reference of the conditional clause (Quirk et al. 1985). Modifying
this back-shifting theory, Dahl (1997) considered Tedeschi’s Branching-
futures model (1981) as a suitable tool to elucidate the past tense in
counterfactuals. According to this model, “at any point in time, there is
one past and an inﬁnite set of (possible) futures. A counterfactual situ-
ation, with respect to a point in time t, is located at a branch of the
tree that can be found by going backwards in time from t and then
forwards along an alternative path.” (Dahl 1997: 101). Tedeschi (1981)
used example (19) to illustrate the Branching-futures model, as shown in
Fig. 1:
Fig. 1
Branching-futures model (adapted from Dahl 1997)

350
G. Sharma
(19) If Germany had invaded England, they would have won the war. 
According to this line of research, assume that we are at t3, and that t1 is
the crucial point at which Hitler decided not to invade England. In the
alternative branch, he invaded England at this point (or a little later),
and he won the war at t2. This suggests an interpretation of (19) as in
(20):
It was the case: if Germany invades England, it will be the case:
Germany wins the war.  
(20)
“In Tedeschi’s words, ‘we evaluate counterfactual conditional sentences
as if we returned to the past and looked at possible futures with respect
to that past.’ (Tedeschi 1981)” (Dahl 1997: 102). Therefore, this account
of the semantics of counterfactuals would be able to precisely portend a
combination of past and future marking in such sentences.
Various versions of the aforementioned Branching-futures model have
been expounded upon in linguistic research, notably in formal syntax
and semantics. Against this backdrop, Iatridou (2000) develops a new
line of research and postulates that the past tense semantics can be
applied both temporally and modally. She contends that the past tense
morphology has an “exclusion feature” and, consequently, the “topic set”
excludes the “speaker set”.5 The modal use of the past in counterfac-
tuals, therefore, signals “remoteness”. When used temporally, the past
tense marks the times talked about as distinct from the speaker’s time. On
the other hand, when the past involves a modal use, it marks the worlds
talked about as distinct from the actual world of the speaker. Another
line of research is developed by Ippolito (2003, 2006, 2013) and Arregui
(2005, 2009) among others, who both posit that the additional pasts
in subjunctive conditionals do retain their usual temporal meaning after
all. Using a possible-world semantics technique, Kaufmann (this volume)
offers perhaps the most advanced theory, including a uniﬁed account of
5 It seems that Iatridou (2000) intends this to be either sets of times or sets of worlds; in the
latter case, the “speaker set” is akin to “the world according to the speaker”.

Toward a Unified Linguistic Approach to Conditionals …
351
indicative and subjunctive conditionals. That said, we cannot delve into
the strengths and weaknesses of all these theories in this paper.
Obviously, much of the data discussed in the aforementioned formu-
lation of the theories of tenses in conditionals comes either from English
or from a handful of other thoroughly investigated languages. Hence,
it is important to examine the possible contributions through the
observations of the different uses of tenses and aspects in conditional
constructions in less-commonly investigated languages. In this section,
to highlight the importance of these phenomena from a cross-linguistic
perspective, I discuss the use of verbal tenses and aspects in counterfac-
tuals in Hindi, a subject that has already come under scrutiny in some
important works (Bhatt 1997; Karawani 2014; von Fintel and Iatridou
2020). In doing so, I would like to advance a new proposal concerning
Hindi counterfactuals that has not hitherto been considered in detail. A
closer examination of the structure of Hindi counterfactuals reveals that
it is perhaps the verbal aspect, not the tense, which plays the major role
in expressing counterfactuality in this language. To understand this, the
distinction between ‘normal’ and counterfactual conditionals should be
considered from the perspective of verbal aspects rather than merely from
that of tenses. According to our analysis of Hindi counterfactual condi-
tionals, it is the imperfective aspect—not the past tense marker—that
exhibits counterfactuality. If this idea is tenable, there is no need to coin
new terms such as “fake habitual aspect” (von Fintel and Iatridou 2020)
for an objective analysis of Hindi counterfactual morphology.
As discussed in the literature (van Olphen 1975; Shapiro 2003;
McGregor 1995; Sharma 2002), the Hindi verbal system is structured
around the tense, aspect and mood elements, as set out in Table 8.
Believed to have been derived from the Old Indo-Aryan morphology
(Masica 1991), the perfective/imperfective opposition has ﬂourished in
all the major New Indo-Aryan languages and is one of the most impor-
tant characteristics of the Hindi verbal system, in which it is the aspect
that plays a major role in structuring all the conditional constructions,
particularly counterfactuals. No tense markers exist in Hindi counterfac-
tuals—neither in the protasis nor in the apodosis. Both clauses exhibit
the same imperfective morphology. This unique characteristic—not only

352
G. Sharma
Table 8
A complete inflectional inventory of Hindi verb caln¯a ‘to walk’ or ‘to move’ in combination with the Hindi TAM
elements (grammatical accord: 3rd person, masculine and singular)
Moods
Non-aspectual
Root Subjunctive
1. cale
Future Indicative
2. cale-g¯a
Imperative
3. cal, calo, calie
Imperfective
Perfective
Habitual
Progressive
ROOT
HAB
AUX
ROOT
PROG
AUX
ROOT
PVF
AUX
Indicative
4. cal-
t¯a
Ø
–
5. cal-
¯a
Ø
Aspectual
6. cal-
t¯a
hai
7. cal
rah¯a
hai
8. cal-
¯a
hai
9. cal-
t¯a
th¯a
10. cal
rah¯a
th¯a
11. cal-
¯a
th¯a
Subjunctive
13. cal-
t¯a
ho
13. cal
rah¯a
ho
14. cal-
¯a
ho
Presumptive
15. cal-
t¯a
ho-g¯a
16. cal
rah¯a
ho-g¯a
17. cal-
¯a
ho-g¯a
Counterfactual
18. cal-
t¯a
Ø
–
–
19. cal-
t¯a
ho-t¯a
20. cal
rah¯a
ho-t¯a
21. cal-
¯a
ho-t¯a
prog = progressive aspect
pfv = perfective aspect
aux = auxiliary verb

Toward a Unified Linguistic Approach to Conditionals …
353
of the Hindi counterfactuals but also of those in most New Indo-
Aryan languages—has been discussed by Bhatt (1997). Bhatt makes
some important generalizations regarding the marking of counterfactuals
through imperfective morphology in New Indo-Aryan languages such
as Hindi. First, the imperfective participle alone is the most important
ingredient in the counterfactual morphology. Second, Hindi counterfac-
tuals do not exhibit any periphrastic tense marking. Third, both the
protasis and the apodosis exhibit the same imperfective morphology.
These unique characteristics of Hindi counterfactual morphology have
led some scholars to propose new concepts for explaining counterfac-
tuals, such as “fake habitual aspect” (von Fintel and Iatridou 2020) and
“aspect stacking” (Karawani 2014). Iatridou (2009) maintains that the
imperfective aspect is fake in Hindi counterfactuals, as there is nothing
in the semantics of the imperfective that would make it a necessary
ingredient for rendering a counterfactual reading. Hence, according to
Iatridou, it makes no semantic contribution to counterfactuality. Her
conclusion is based on examples such as (21), as she maintains that there
is a slot for the fake imperfective (i.e. the habitual morpheme) and a slot
for the real imperfective (i.e. the progressive morpheme):
 (21) a. *vo   gaa    rahaa      hotaa 
 
he   sing  PROG   be-HAB  
b. agar  vo   gaa   rahaa              hotaa      to       log      wah   wah     kar 
 
if      he   sing PROG  be-HAB   then   people  wow  wow    do   
 
rahe                  hote 
PROG.M.PL    be.HAB
'If he were singing, people would be going wow wow.'
(example from Bhatt 1997)  
Although Iatridou’s observation that there is a slot for the real
imperfective (the progressive marker rahaa above) and another slot
for the fake imperfective (the so-called habitual sufﬁx -taa above) in
Hindi
appears to be correct, the entire concept of “fake aspect” is
based on the ﬂawed assumption that languages can only exhibit coun-
terfactuality through tense. We maintain that an aspect-based model of

354
G. Sharma
interpretation may turn out to be useful in analyzing counterfactuality
in languages such as Hindi.
Let us consider the Hindi verbal system as depicted in Table 8.
As can be seen, Hindi only has three markers for tenses, namely hai
‘is’, th¯a ‘was’ and a sufﬁx, -g¯a, which marks the future tense. The
remainder of the verbal system is structured around the aspectual oppo-
sition: that is, perfectivity versus imperfectivity. The imperfective aspect
marker, namely t¯a, is the marker of imperfectivity throughout the
language, although it also marks the habitual aspect by default in certain
contexts.
Moreover, the Hindi imperfective marker t¯a does not signal any trace
of the habitual aspect in the other contexts in which it is frequently
employed, as can be seen in (22a), (22b), (22c) and (22d). Thus, it is
incorrect to claim that t¯a is a marker of habitual aspect.
(22) 
a.  rotā              huā        larkā
.
  cry-IMPFV     be-PFV   boy 
 ‘The boy who was crying …’ ≠ ‘The boy who cries habitually…’
b. bhāgtā         huā                 cor … 
 flee-IMPFV   be-PFV.M.SG    thief 
 ‘The fleeing thief …’ ≠ ‘The thief who flees habitually …’ 
c. Ram=ne    cor=ko        bhāgte                hue               dekhā
 Ram= ERG  thief= ACC   flee-IMPFV.OBL  be-PFV.OBL   see-PVF
 ‘Ram saw the thief fleeing’ ≠ ‘Ram saw the thief who flees regularly.’
d. Ram=ne       bhāgte               hue              cor=ko       dekhā
 Ram= ERG    flee-IMPFV.OBL  be-PFV.OBL  thief= ACC  see-PVF
 ‘Ram saw a thief fleeing’ ≠ ‘Ram saw a thief who flees regularly.’
Let us now consider the question of aspect stacking as discussed
by Karawani (2014). Unfortunately, the account that she provides is
only a partial account. Contrary to her claim that it is limited solely to
counterfactuals (2014: 24), aspect stacking is a widespread phenomenon
outside of the realm of conditionality, and is also abundantly attested in
factual expressions. Consider the following examples:

Toward a Unified Linguistic Approach to Conditionals …
355
(23) 
a.  yah   baccā  hamesā   rotā            rahtā             hai 
 this    child   always    cry-IMPFV  stay-IMPFV AUX.PRS
 ‘This child keeps on crying all the time.’ 
b. Ram  bāzār      jātā            rahtā             hai 
 Ram  market   go-IMPFV  stay-IMPFV
AUX.PRS
 ‘Ram keeps on going to the market.’ 
c. pichle sal     Ram  aksar  mandir    jāyā        kartā          thā
 last     year  Ram  often  temple   go-PFV   do-IMPFV  AUX-PST
 ‘Last year Ram used to go to the temple (very often).’ 
d. Ram  kulfī           khātā           jā     rahā           hai 
 Ram  ice  cream  eat-IMPFV    go   stay-PFV   aux-PRS
 ‘Ram continues (keeps on) eating the ice cream.’ 
As can be seen from examples (23a)–(23d), contrary to Karawani’s
claim, aspect stacking is the only tool for obtaining iterativity in Hindi.
Nonetheless, I believe that this paper is not the right place to discuss
all the characteristics of aspect stacking in Hindi, nor to illustrate the
perfective-imperfective dichotomy in the language. Nevertheless,
in
summary, it can safely be afﬁrmed that the imperfective marking sufﬁx
-t¯a is employed in at least four different contexts in Hindi: (1) It is
sufﬁxed to the verbal root, where it expresses the imperfective aspect and
then by default the habitual aspect; (2) it is exploited to obtain imperfec-
tive adjectival and adverbial participles; (3) it is employed throughout the
language to express different types of iterativity via aspect stacking; and
(4) it is used as a modal to express counterfactuality. Thus, we maintain
that the imperfective aspect, not the past tense, is the integral element
in Hindi counterfactuals, and that the imperfective/perfective aspec-
tual dichotomy is sufﬁcient to provide an explanation for all the issues
concerning counterfactuality in Hindi.
In order to determine what an aspect-based branching might look
like, let us now consider a Hindi version of example (19) which was
analyzed by Tedeschi (1981) in his account of his Branching-futures
model:

356
G. Sharma
 (24) (agar)   Germany=ne     England=par   haml     kiy            hot
 
(if)       Germany=ERG   England=on      attack    do-PFV.M    be-IMPFV.M
 
to        vo    jīt     gayī           hotī
 
 then    she  win   go-PFV.F    be-IMFV-F
 
'If Germany had invaded England, they (she) would have won the war.' 
a
a
a
Let us use the same branching-futures tree to illustrate this (Fig. 2):
Assume that we are at t3, and that at t2, for whatever reason, the
action—that could have given Germany a win—was not carried out or
called off. In the alternative branchwhich is expressed via perfectivity, not
tense, in Hindi—Hitler did indeed accomplish the task and win the war.
Thus,
It was the case: if Germany completes invasion of England, it will
be the case: Germany accomplishes the task of winning the war.  
(25)
At this point, tense-theorists might argue that, since the points in time
in the diagram, namely t1, t2 and t3, are expressed through tenses,
how can an aspect-based model address the question of distancing one
event from another—an issue that can only be dealt with appropriately
by tenses? If we look at the English example closely, it is the perfec-
tive aspect (or perfect)—not the simple past tense—that provides the
distance between the two past actions in example (19). Also note that
Fig. 2
Tree representing Branching-aspects model

Toward a Unified Linguistic Approach to Conditionals …
357
only four of the thirteen English tenses listed by Reichenbach (1947:
297) can be considered “pure” (i.e. aspectless) tenses: simple past (E,R—
S), simple present (S,R,E), and simple future (S—R,E and S,R—E). The
remaining nine tenses are obtained in combination with aspect: ante-
rior past or past perfect (E–R–S), posterior past 1 (R–E–S), posterior past
2 (R–S,E), posterior past 3 (R–S–E), anterior past or present perfect (E–
S,R), anterior future or future perfect 1 (S–E–R), anterior future or future
perfect 2 (S,E–R), anterior future or future perfect 3 (E–S–R) and poste-
rior future (S–R–E). Thus, a closer look reveals that the role played by
aspects in counterfactuals has not yet been fully explored. In an aspect-
based model, the anteriority of an imperfect action can be determined
by the speech time. Furthermore, in an aspect-based model, a perfective
aspect may indicate the completion of action prior to the speech time
or reference time (That is E > R > S or E, R > S) whereas an imperfect
aspect indicates the noncompletion of the action either at the reference
time or the speech time. Obviously, E can overlap with the speech time,
or follow it, depending on the aspect.
With regard to the question of the crucial role played by the gram-
matical aspect in counterfactuals, Arregui (2005, 2007, 2009) develops
a new line of research and discusses the following examples from English
in support of her approach. According to her proposal, aspect plays a
central role in counterfactuality, even in English, in which aspect is not
exhibited systematically:
(26) 
You: Could you look after my plants next week while I am away? 
Me:   Of course, but I am rather nervous. If your plants died next week,
          I would be very upset.  
(27)  You: Don't worry about looking after my plants next week. They died.
Me:   I am sorry, but also a bit relieved. If your plants had died next week,
I would have been very  upset.  
Me:   I am sorry, but also a bit relieved. #If your plants died next week,
I would be very upset. 

358
G. Sharma
Your plants do not have enough light. If they had enough light,they
would be fine.  
(28)
With regard to the question of the simple past subjunctive conditionals
in examples (26) and (27), Arregui (2005, 2007, 2009) observes that the
sentence If your plants died next week, I would be very upset is acceptable
in (26), but not in the second option in (27). According to Arregui,
the second option in (27) is anomalous due to aspect restrictions. The
past perfect subjunctive conditionals in (28), however, can always be
counterfactual, regardless of the type of predicate in their antecedent.
Needless to say, we cannot go into details of this proposal in this paper,
despite the fact that it is well worth considering.
5
Degrees of Hypotheticality
Recognizing the difﬁculty of using traditional terminologies such as
open versus closed, real versus irreal or real versus hypothetical in cross-
linguistic research, Comrie (1986: 88) claims that hypotheticality is a
continuum and therefore cannot be classiﬁed according to any bipartite
or tripartite divisions. As mentioned in the previous sections, it is difﬁ-
cult to ﬁnd two languages with a correspondingly equal number of classes
of conditionals. For example, not many Indian languages possess two
separate categories for expressing the difference between the following
two English conditional sentences:
(29) a.  If you give me a kiss, I’ll buy you a beer. 
b.  If you gave me a kiss, I’d buy you a beer. (from Comrie 1986) 
This could be true of many languages that have not been studied thor-
oughly. In this scenario, a cross-linguistic investigation of conditionals
becomes extremely difﬁcult. We believe that, in order to gather data for a
sound analysis of conditionals in a less-commonly investigated language,
it is necessary to determine the exact number of types of conditional by
examining the speaker and hearer’s epistemic stock. In addition, one has

Toward a Unified Linguistic Approach to Conditionals …
359
to begin with only two basic categories of conditionals that are unani-
mously considered to be universal and leave the third category, namely
“If X happened, Y would happen” for subsequent investigation:
Cross-linguistic evidence suggests that “an awareness of the conditional”,
an ability to say “what if …?” or “if … then…”, is indeed a human
universal. I submit that “an awareness of the counterfactual”, an ability
to say “had this not happened, that wouldn’t have happened”, may also
be a human universal, a vital path in the human mental process, an
indispensable element of human language and cognition.
By contrast, cross-linguistic evidence appears to suggest that the “hypo-
thetical conditionals”, situated half-way between the conditionals of
real possibility and counterfactuals, (e.g. “if this happened, that would
happen”), may be a language-speciﬁc phenomenon, and not a universal
feature of human language and human thought. (Wierzbicka, 1997:
52)
Thus, for any cross-linguistic investigation, it is imperative to look
beyond the use of tenses in the English language. Following the logic
of English tenses in any linguistic survey will inevitably lead to only a
partial understanding of the wider situation. For example, the use of
the English future tense in protasis is limited to such rare cases as the
following:
(30) A:  The Universe won’t come to an end for several million years yet.
B: If it won’t come to an end for several million years yet, we’ll still be 
able to go to Florida this winter. (example from Comrie 1986) 
By contrast, in most of the languages spoken in South Asia, the use
of the future tense in protasis is a common phenomenon. Similarly,
most of the examples of English conditionals that exhibit the present
indicative tense are rendered in many languages, including Hindi, via
the subjunctive mood (Oranskaya 2005). Hence, we believe that the
frequently used terms—indicative and subjunctive—are misleading for
any serious cross-linguistic research. Following Wierzbicka, we believe
that we should begin any cross-linguistic survey by identifying two basic

360
G. Sharma
categories of conditionals which could be called: contingent conditionals,
and counterfactual conditionals.
5.1
Types of Speaker’s Epistemic Stances in Factual
Expressions
We believe that before investigating the controversial question of the
precise number of conditional types to be investigated in a particular
language and the various degrees of hypotheticality expressed thereby,
one needs to thoroughly examine the tense-aspect-mood system of that
language. In this regard, some generalizations concerning the speakers’
epistemic stances are of the utmost importance. We propose that, like
all sentences of a natural language, conditionals should be analyzed in
light of the speaker’s communicative stance. However, before we embark
upon a general typology of conditionals (non-factual expressions), we
need to provide a brief sketch of epistemic stances in factual expressions
in a language. The speaker’s communicative epistemic stances and their
respective modal meanings can be described in the following manner
(Sharma 2002):
(31)
Ks □□p: “In order for you to take notice of it and act accordingly, I would
like to communicate to you that, for all I know, it is necessarily P.” In
other words, it is not possible not-P (i.e. Ks¬◊¬P). Almost all natural
languages exhibit this epistemic stance of the speaker through “indicatives”,
which may be loaded with different aspectual morphologies marking
habitual, progressive and perfective. Using Reichenbachian terminology,
the aspectual characterisations can have various representations: past
habitual or progressive E,R>S [such as ‘It used to rain last month’, ‘It was
raining this morning’, and so forth]; past perfective: E>R>S [ ‘It had rained
a lot before I went out’], present habitual or progressive S,R,E (‘It rains
every day in Ireland’ and ‘It is raining in Dublin right now’, respectively),
present perfective (‘It has rained a lot this morning in Dublin’) and future
S<E,R, [‘It will rain tomorrow in Dublin’].

Toward a Unified Linguistic Approach to Conditionals …
361
(32) Ks ◊◊p: “In order for you to take notice of it and act accordingly, I would
like to communicate to you that, for all I know, it is possibly p.” Thus, it
is not necessarily P and it is not necessarily not-P: (that is, Ks ¬□P˄
Ks¬□¬P). In general, natural languages do not need to mark this epistemic
stance of the speaker in their grammar. This can be paraphrased in the
following manner: The speaker knows that it is possible that it rains in
Dublin at any time. We are not aware of any language that expresses
this epistemic stance through grammatical means, although some
languages, such as Hindi, express this epistemic stance through an
iterative habitual aspect.
(33) Bs □□p: In order for you to take notice of it and act accordingly,
I would like to communicate to you that, although I don’t know that P, I
nonetheless believe that it is necessarily P. This means, the speaker believes
that it is not possible not-P (that is, Bs ¬◊¬P). Many languages, including
English, exhibit this epistemic stance through modals such as must, may,
might and the like [for example, ‘It must be raining every day in Dublin
in September’ and ‘It must be raining in Dublin right now’]. In many
languages, including Hindi, this epistemic stance can be well supported
by morphological devices that express various aspectual elements in line
with its tense‐aspect system. For example, a Hindi speaker can exhibit this
epistemic stance with three distinct aspectual markings, which are habitual,
progressive and perfective.
(34)
Bs ◊◊p: In order for you to take notice of it and act accordingly, I
would like to communicate to you that, although I don’t know that
P, I nonetheless believe that it is possibly P. Thus, the speaker believes
that not necessarily P and not necessarily not-P (that is, Bs ¬□P ˄ Bs ¬□¬P).
Many languages have morphological ways of expressing this epistemic
stance, which is often called the subjunctive (also called the optative in
certain languages. For example, ‘It may rain in Dublin tomorrow’), which
may also be loaded with markers of various aspects such as habitual
(‘It is possible that it rains daily in Dublin this week’), progressive
(‘It is possible that it may be raining in Dublin right now’) and perfective
(‘It may have rained in Dublin this morning’) markers.

362
G. Sharma
5.2
Types of Speaker’s Epistemic Stance
in Conditionals
Having illustrated the speaker’s epistemic stance in factual statements
(31)–(34), we now turn to conditionals to discuss the two major
classes of conditionals, namely, contingent conditionals (also known as
indicative conditionals) and counterfactuals (also known as “subjunc-
tive conditionals”). Other classes of conditionals can be discussed in a
cross-linguistic survey following the same line of research.
5.2.1 Conditional Type 1 (The Lowest Degree
of Hypotheticality)
Obviously, one may gather different data-sets from a language that may
appear to belong to the ﬁrst type. However, we propose that, for an in-
depth cross-linguistic survey, it is important to focus solely on a small
specimen of a conditional. Accordingly, let us consider the following
example in (35) in light of the epistemic stock of the speaker and the
hearer, as presented in (36):
(35) 
If Mary invites John, he will go to her party. 
(36) 
Speaker and Hearer’s epistemic stock: 
α = Mary’s Party will take place tomorrow (i.e. S < E,R) 
β = Mary hasn’t extended an invitation to John yet.  
γ = Mary will extend an invitation to John. 
(37)
(a) Ks α ˄Ks Kh α˅Bs Kh α
(b) Ks β ˄Ks Khβ ˅Bs Kh β
(c) Bs γ ˄Bs ¬K h γ
Thus, in view of the Speaker-Hearer’s epistemic stock in (36), the condi-
tional statement in (35) will have the speaker’s epistemic stance as
formulized in (37), which reads as follows: (a) The speaker knows that

Toward a Unified Linguistic Approach to Conditionals …
363
Mary’s party will take place tomorrow and also knows that hearer knows
about it. Or, the speaker at least believes that the hearer knows that
Mary’s party will take place tomorrow; (b) the speaker knows that Mary
hasn’t extended an invitation to John yet and knows that the hearer also
knows about it. Or, the speaker at least believes that the hearer knows
that Mary hasn’t extended an invitation to John yet; and (c) the speaker
believes that Mary will extend an invitation to John and believes that the
hearer does not know that Mary will extend an invitation to John.
Thus, in view of the Speaker-Hearer’s epistemic stock in (36), the ﬁrst
type of conditional in (35) will have the following modal meaning: “In
order for you to take notice of it and act accordingly, I would like to
invite you to evaluate Q (that is ‘John will go to Mary’s party’) in light of
P (that is ‘Mary invites John to her party’). In other words, the speaker
does not believe that the hearer knows that Mary will invite John to
the party and thus wants to inform him that John going to the party is
contingent upon Mary’s invitation to John.
5.2.2 Conditional Type 2 (The Highest Degree
of Hypotheticality)
This class of conditionals is the opposite of type 1; these are counter-
factuals because the speaker invites the hearer to evaluate the counter to
the fact conditions.
(38)
If Mary had invited John, he would have gone to her party.
(39) 
Speaker and Hearer’s epistemic stock: 
α = Mary’s party took place yesterday [i.e. E,R > S] 
β = Mary didn’t extend an invitation to John. 
γ = John didn’t go Mary’s party. 
(40)
(a) Ks α ˄ Ks Kh α
(b) Ksβ ˅ Bs β ˄ Ks ¬Kh β ˅ Ks ¬Bh β
(c) Ks γ ˅ Bs γ ˄ Ks Kh γ ˅ Bs Kh γ

364
G. Sharma
Thus, in view of the Speaker-Hearer’s epistemic stock in (39), the condi-
tional statement in (38) will have the speaker’s epistemic stance as
formulized in (40) which reads as follows: (a) The speaker knows that
Mary’s party took place yesterday and also knows that the hearer knows that
Mary’s party took place yesterday; (b) the speaker furthermore either knows
or believes that Mary didn’t invite John to the party. He also knows that
the hearer either does not know or does not believe that Mary didn’t invite
John to the party; in addition, (c) the speaker either knows or believes that
John didn’t go to Mary’s party, and the speaker knows or believes that the
hearer knows that John didn’t
go to Mary’s party. Equipped with this
epistemic stock, the speaker invites the hearer to consider β as the sole
reason for γ, and to imagine a world in which both β (antecedent) and
γ (consequent) were contrary to the fact.
6
Conclusion
In the preceding sections, we have attempted to evaluate the tenability
of Greenberg’s Universal Word Order 14 in relation to different classes of
languages, and argued that P-Q was the only ordering that was accept-
able in conditional statements. It has been afﬁrmed that the Q, P
ordering attested in some languages is not due to any
type of
afterthought on the part of the speaker (such as
placing P after Q
in order to avoid the risk of making a factual statement, as suggested
by Comrie, 1986), but is the result of a discourse-related (Akatsuka
1986) requirement (for example, an apodosis is fronted if that is the
focus of the discourse), some pragmatic universals ( fronting an apodosis
in imperative conditionals is a universal pragmatic phenomenon) and
other factors that are language speciﬁc. The classiﬁcation of language-
speciﬁc features across different classes of languages is a broad topic that
requires further in-depth research and a detailed survey of less-commonly
scrutinized languages. We have also attempted to show that, contrary
to widely held belief, the so-called apodosis markers, such as then in
English, are actully related to the protasis rather than to the apodosis.
With regard to the types of conditionals found in different languages,

Toward a Unified Linguistic Approach to Conditionals …
365
there seem to be only two universal categories: the so-called indicative
conditionals, which we would prefer to call contingent conditionals,
and counterfactual conditionals. Languages that exhibit more than two
types of conditionals, such as English, French and Italian, amongst many
others, have developed sophisticated morphological tools through which
the speaker can express his/her epistemic stance in the protasis. In addi-
tion, as far as the time reference in counterfactuals is concerned, we
have argued that the past tense reference alone is not sufﬁcient for the
formation of a uniﬁed account of tenses, as it is the verbal aspect that is
responsible for obtaining counterfactuals in many languages.
Acknowledgements I am deeply indebted to my mentors, Stefan Kaufmann
and David E. Over, for their unwavering support and active encouragement
(both academic and personal) without which I would not have been able to
ﬁnish this article. As a linguist by trade, I eagerly and gladly accepted their
advice on a variety of subjects. Obviously, any errors in the paper are my
own. I would also like to thank friends and colleagues from different univer-
sities for their help with the data judgment: John Lowe (Oxford), Tanmoy
Bhattacharya (Delhi), K.V.R. Subbarao (Delhi), Amba Kulkarni (Hyderabad),
Anuradha Sudharsan (Hyderabad) and Prashant Pardeshi (Tokyo). Again, none
of these individuals should be held accountable for any inaccuracies in the
paper.
References
Akatsuka, N. (1986). Conditionals are discourse-bound. In On Conditionals,
Traugott, E. C., Meulen, A. T., Reilly, J. S. & Ferguson, C. A., editors,
333–351. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Arregui, A. (2005). On the accessibility of possible worlds: The role of tense and
aspect. University of Massachusetts (Amherst) Doctoral Dissertation.
Arregui, A. (2007). When aspect matters: The case of would-conditionals.
Natural Language Semantics 15(3): 221–264. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11
050-007-9019-6
Arregui, A. (2009). On similarity in counterfactuals. Linguistics and Philosophy
32: 245–278.

366
G. Sharma
Athanasiadou, A. & Driven, R., editors, (1997). On Conditionals Again.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Barwise, J. (1986). Conditionals and conditional information. In On Condi-
tionals, Traugott, E. C., Meulen, A. T., Reilly, J. S. & Ferguson, C. A.,
editors, 21–54. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bhatt, D. N. S. (1999). The Prominence of Tense, Aspect and Mood.
Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Bhatt, R. (1997). Counterfactuality in Indo-Aryan. Notes assembled for Sabine
Iatridou’s Counterfactuals Project. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsyl-
vania. https://people.umass.edu/bhatt/papers/sjv.pdf
Bhatt, R. & Pancheva, R. (2006). Conditionals. In The Blackwell Companion
to Syntax, Everaert, M. & van Riemsdijk, H., editors, 638–687. Malden,
MA: Blackwell.
Cariani, F. & Rips, L. J. (this volume). Experimenting with (Conditional)
Perfection.
Comrie, B. (1986). Conditionals: A typology. In On Conditionals, Traugott,
E. C., Meulen, A. T., Reilly, J. S. & Ferguson, C. A., editors, 77–99.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cruz, N. & Over, D. E. (this volume). Independence conditionals.
Csipak, E. & Romero, M. (this volume). Counterfactual hypothetical vs.
biscuit conditionals: A semantic/pragmatic analysis of their morphological
differences.
Dahl, Ö. (1997). The relation between past time reference and counterfactu-
ality: A new look. In On Conditionals Again, Athanasiadou, A. & Driven,
R., editor, 97–114. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Dancygier, B. (1998). Conditionals and Prediction: Time, Knowledge and Causa-
tion in Conditional Constructions. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dancygier, B. & Sweetser, E. (1997). Then in conditional constructions.
Cognitive Linguistics 8(2): 109–136.
Declerck, R. & Reed, S. (2001) Conditionals, A Comprehensive Empirical
Analysis. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Donaldson, T. (1980). Ngiyambaa: The language of the Wangaaybuwan.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Douven, I., Elqayam, S. & Krzy˙zanowska, K. (this volume). Inferentialism: A
manifesto.
Edgington, D. (1986). Do conditionals have truth conditions? Crítica, Revista
Hispanoamericana de Filosofía 18(52): 3–39.
Edgington, D. (2007). On conditionals. In Handbook of Philosophical Logic,
127–221. Dordrecht: Springer.

Toward a Unified Linguistic Approach to Conditionals …
367
Edgington, D. (2014). Conditionals. In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy,
Zalta, E. N., editor. http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2014/entries/con
ditionals/
Edgington, D. (this volume). Conditionals, indeterminacy, probability and
truth.
Geis, M. & Zwicky, A. M. (1971). On invited inferences. Linguistic Inquiry 2:
561–566.
Greenberg, J. H. (1963). Some universals of grammar with particular reference
to the order of meaningful elements. In Universals of Language, Greenberg,
J. H., editor, 73–113. (second edition 1966). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Haegeman, L. (2003). Conditional clauses: External and internal syntax.
Mind & Language 18(4): 317–339.
Haegeman, L. & Schönenberger, M. (this volume). The external syntax of
conditional clauses.
Haiman, J. (1978). Conditionals are topics. Language 54: 565–589.
Haiman, J. (1986). Constraints on the form and meaning of the protasis. In
On Conditionals, Traugott, E. C., Meulen, A. T., Reilly, J. S. & Ferguson,
C. A., editors, 215–227. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Horn, L. (2000). From IF to IFF: Conditional perfection as pragmatic
strengthening. Journal of Pragmatics 32: 289–326.
Iatridou, S. (2000). The grammatical ingredients of counterfactuality. Linguistic
Inquiry 31(2): 231–270.
Iatridou, S. 2009. (Collaborative thoughts) about the imperfective in coun-
terfactuals. Handout of a talk given at the Imperfective Workshop at Yale
University.
Iatridou, S. & Embick. D. (1994). Conditional inversion. In Proceedings of
NELS, Vol 24, 189–203. University of Massachusetts at Amherst: GLSA.
Iatridou, S. (1994). On the contribution of conditional then. Natural Language
Semantics 2: 171–199.
Ippolito, M. (2003). Implicatures and presuppositions in counterfactuals.
Natural Language Semantics 11: 145–186.
Ippolito, M. (2006). Semantic composition and presupposition projection in
subjunctive conditionals. Linguistics and Philosophy 29: 631–672.
Ippolito, M. (2013). Subjunctive Conditionals: A Linguistic Analysis. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Karawani, H. (2014). The Real, the Fake, and the Fake Fake: In Counterfactual
Conditionals, Crosslinguistically. LOT 357: Netherlands Graduate School of
Linguistics.

368
G. Sharma
Kaufmann, S. (2005). Conditional truth and future reference. Journal of
Semantics 22: 231–280.
Kaufmann, S. (2013). Causal premise semantics. Cognitive Science 37: 1136–
1170.
Kaufmann, S. (this volume). How fake is fake past?
Lehmann, C. (1974). Prinzipien fur ‘Universal 14’. In Linguistic Workshop II,
Seiler, H., editor, 69–97. Paderborn: Wilhelm Fink Verlag.
Lycan, W. G. (2001). Real Conditionals. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mackay, J. (2015). Actuality and fake tense in conditionals. Semantics and
Pragmatics 8(12): 1–12. https://doi.org/10.3765/sp.8.12
Masica, C. P. (1991). The Indo-Aryan Languages. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
McGregor, R. S. (1995). Outline of Hindi Grammar. Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
Oranskaya, T. I. (2005). Conditional constructions in Hindi. In Typology
of Conditional Constructions, Xrakovskij, V. S., editor, 218–245. Munich:
Lincom Europa.
Over, D. E. (2017). Causation and the probability of causal conditionals. In
The Oxford Handbook of Causal Reasoning, Waldmann, M., editor, 307–325.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Over, D. & Cruz, N. (this volume). Indicative and counterfactual conditionals
in the psychology of reasoning.
Quirk, R., Greenbaum, S., Leech, G. & Svartvik, J. (1985). A Comprehensive
Grammar of the English Language. London & New York: Longman.
Reichenbach, H. (1947). Elements of Symbolic Logic. New York: Dover Publi-
cations [Originally published by Macmillan Company].
Shapiro, M. C. (2003). Hindi. In The Indo-Aryan Languages, George, C. &
Jain, D., editors, 276–314. London and New York: Routledge.
Sharma, G. (2002). On the modal meanings of subjunctive in Hindi. In
The Yearbook of South Asian Languages and Linguistics, 177–198. New
Delhi/Thousand Oaks/London: Sage Publications.
Sharma, G. (2010). On Hindi conditionals. In Annual Review of South Asian
Languages and Linguistics, 107–134. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Sharma, G. (2011). On the role of protases in conditional statements: Some
evidence from Hindi. In Annual Review of South Asian Languages and
Linguistics, 49–78. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Sweetser, E. (1990). From Etymology to Pragmatics. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Toward a Unified Linguistic Approach to Conditionals …
369
Tedeschi, P. (1981). Some evidence for a branching-futures semantic model. In
Tense and Aspect, Volume 14 of Syntax and Semantics, Tedeschi, P. & Zaenen,
A., editors, 239–270. New York: Academic Press.
Thompson, S. A., Longacre, R. E. & Hwang, S. J. J. (2007). Adverbial clauses.
In Language Typology – A Syntactic Description, Shopen, T., editor, Vol 2,
237–299. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Traugott, E. C., Meulen, A.T., Reilly, J. S. & Ferguson, C. A., editors, (1986).
On Conditionals. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
van der Auwera, J. (1997). Conditional perfection. In On Conditionals Again,
Athanasiadou, A. & Dirven, R., editors, 169–180. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins Publishing.
van Olphen, H. (1975). Aspect, tense, and mood in the Hindi verb. Indo-
Iranian Jornal 16 (4): 284–301.
von Fintel, K. (2011). Conditionals. In Semantics: An International Handbook
of Natural Language Meaning, von Heusinger, K., Maienborn, C. & Portner,
P., editors, Vol 2, 1515–1538. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
von Fintel, K. & Iatridou, S. (2020). Prolegomena to a theory of X-marking.
Manuscript submitted to Linguistics & Philosophy.
Wierzbicka, A. (1997). Conditionals and counterfactuals: Conceptual prim-
itives and linguistic universals. In On Conditionals, Athanasiadou, A. &
Driven, R., editors, 15–59. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing
Company.
Williamson, T. (2020). Suppose and Tell: The Semantics and Heuristics of
Conditionals. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Xrakovskij, V. S., editor. (2005). Typology of Conditional Constructions. Munich:
Lincom Europa.

Should Past-as-Modal Theorists Also Be
Past-as-Past Theorists?
John Mackay
1
Introduction
In many languages, the conditionals traditionally labelled “subjunctive”
or “counterfactual” are marked with the past tense. This past tense
appears even where the events or states described by the conditional do
not precede the time of evaluation.
Many accounts of this phenomenon agree that these conditionals
feature an instance of past tense that takes wide scope outside the
antecedent and consequent. Thus, consider example (1), taken from
Romero (2014). Leaving aside all other internal elements of its compo-
sition, it has a structure like the following:
J. Mackay (B)
Department of Philosophy,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA
e-mail: john.mackay@wisc.edu
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Switzerland AG 2023
S. Kaufmann et al. (eds.), Conditionals, Palgrave Studies in Pragmatics, Language
and Cognition, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-05682-6_12
371

372
J. Mackay
(1) If Hubert were here, Stefﬁwould be happy.
PAST (If Hubert is here, Stefﬁwill be happy).
If we further follow Kratzer (1981) in maintaining that the antecedent
of a conditional restricts a modal operator, and follow Abusch (1997) in
identifying “would” as the past tense version of the modal WOLL, we
get a structure like the following:
PAST ([WOLL: if Hubert is here] [Stefﬁis happy]).
However, there is a divergence in view about the meaning of this wide-
scope past tense. According to one type of view, variously known as
“past-as-past” or “temporal distancing”, this past tense receives its stan-
dard temporal interpretation. The would-conditional (1) is true if and
only if the corresponding will-conditional was true at some past time.
Implementations of this broad strategy include Ippolito (2013), Romero
(2014), Arregui (2009), and Khoo (2015). In this approach, the condi-
tional is standardly evaluated with a historical modal base according to
which one world is historically accessible at a time from another if it
shares its history with the other world up until that time.1 Since a coun-
terfactual antecedent is not historically accessible at the time of utterance,
a present-tense conditional with that antecedent is vacuous at the time
of utterance. In order to select worlds of the antecedent, we need to go
back to a time at which the possibility of the antecedent had not yet
been foreclosed. Suppose that (1) is true; in this case, it is so because
the conditional “if Hubert is here, Stefﬁwill be happy” was true at some
time before Hubert decided not to come.
Another type of view is known as “past-as-modal” or “modal distanc-
ing”. In this approach, the wide-scope past tense in these conditionals
receives a modal interpretation conveying something about the rela-
tion between the selected worlds of the antecedent and the worlds of
the context. It does not shift the time of evaluation earlier. Rather,
1 These theorists differ over whether the modal base is always historical; Khoo allows that it is
sometimes epistemic.

Should Past-as-Modal Theorists Also Be …
373
it expands the available worlds to be selected beyond those of the
context set, though these views differ among themselves in the notion
of context involved. Views of this kind include Iatridou (2000), Schulz
(2014), Karawani et al. (2019), and Mackay (2019).2 There are, one
may grant, some broad methodological themes that favour a past-as-past
view, in which the past tense has just the usual temporal interpreta-
tion: in semantics, one tries to assign uniform meanings where possible.
But the issues with explaining the presence of past tense in subjunc-
tive conditionals have remained sufﬁciently complex that both research
programmes remain active.
Setting up the debate in this way, however, presents a puzzling asym-
metry. The past-as-past theorist denies that the modal reading of the past
exists at all. The past-as-modal theorist, by contrast, does not deny that
the past tense receives a temporal interpretation in ordinary non-modal
examples. It is not in dispute that the past tense receives a temporal inter-
pretation in a basic non-modal sentence like “It was raining yesterday”.
Thus, the past-as-modal theorist postulates two readings for the past
tense where the past-as-past theorist postulates just one. Prima facie, if
the past tense has two readings, and the subjunctive conditional contains
the past tense, then the subjunctive conditional itself should have two
readings. The existing past-as-modal literature, however, generally just
discusses the modal reading of the past in the subjunctive conditional
and is not always explicit about whether there exists another reading of
the same conditional in which the past tense is read temporally. This
raises the question whether the intended past-as-modal view is that the
subjunctive conditional itself has two readings, or instead just the one in
which the wide-scope past tense receives the modal interpretation.
These considerations should lead us to divide the available views into
three rather than just two, dividing the “past-as-modal” depending on
whether the wide-scope past tense in the subjunctive conditional can also
receive the temporal reading. This leads to the following options:
2 von Prince (2019) has a view somewhat harder to classify, with elements of both views.

374
J. Mackay
(i) One reading past-as-past. The past tense has just the temporal
reading. All readings of the subjunctive conditional are obtained
from the interaction of the past tense with the other elements of
the conditional.
(ii) One reading past-as-modal. The past tense has a modal reading
as well as a temporal reading. However, the subjunctive conditional
does not appear without the modal interpretation; every subjunctive
conditional contains at least one instance of the past tense with the
modal interpretation in wide-scope position.
(iii) Two readings. The past tense has a modal reading as well as a
temporal reading. Every subjunctive conditional has (at least) two
readings: one where the wide-scope past tense receives a modal
reading and one where it receives a temporal reading.
To be clear, the readings being counted here in the names of the views
are the readings of the subjunctive conditional as a whole sentence. Both
the one-reading past-as-modal view and the two-readings view agree that
the past-tense morpheme has two readings. But the one-reading past-as-
modal theory maintains that the subjunctive conditional does not have
a reading where all instances of the past tense are read temporally.
I will set aside some foundational questions about the relationship
between the two readings of the past tense. Past-as-modal theorists have
generally suggested that the past tense’s meaning involves an abstract
structural property in common between modality and tense, rather than
an accidental ambiguity. But this question will not concern me directly
here.
The past-as-modal theorist owes us an account of whether they favour
a view of type (ii) or of type (iii). At ﬁrst glance, there is something
puzzling about either option. On the one hand, the one-reading past-
as-modal theory seems to propose that a reading is unavailable in some
environments in which general considerations of compositionality would
suggest that it could be interpreted. Why should the past tense be
unable to receive its temporal interpretation in the wide-scope position
of the subjunctive conditional? This theorist owes us an account of what
blocks this reading. On the other hand, the two-readings theory seems

Should Past-as-Modal Theorists Also Be …
375
to postulate two distinct readings for single conditionals where it is not
pretheoretically clear that two readings of the sentence are available.
In this paper, I shall present some data that, I shall argue, suggest that
these two readings do indeed exist. This favours a two-readings theory.
Subjunctive conditionals, therefore, have two readings, one where the
wide-scope past tense takes a modal reading and one where it takes a
temporal reading. However, I shall also present an explanation of why
the temporal reading is unavailable in most contexts; this provides some
explanation of why the existence of the two readings is not obvious.
2
One-Past and Two-Past
It should be clariﬁed that all sides agree that the past tense receives the
temporal interpretation when it appears in narrow-scope position on the
antecedent or the consequent itself.
Compare Romero’s (1) above to (2):
(2) If Hubert had been here, Stefﬁwould have been happy.
PAST ([WOLL: if PAST (Hubert is here)] [PAST(Stefﬁis happy)])
In (2) the antecedent and consequent clauses themselves have another
layer of past morphology, appearing within the conditional as a past
perfect form. Forms like (1) are known as “one-past” while forms like
(2) are “two-past”, in the sense that they contain two layers of past-
oriented morphology. I will follow various theorists on both sides of
the debate in assuming that the combination of wide-scope and narrow-
scope past in (2) manifests itself in the English surface form as a past
perfect; Ippolito (2006) did advocate an aspect-based theory in which
the perfect rather than a second past was involved but came to reject it
in Ippolito (2013).3 The levels of past, meanwhile, can vary indepen-
dently between the antecedent and consequent, as for example in (3),
which has a two-past antecedent and a one-past consequent.
3 See also Schulz (2017).

376
J. Mackay
(3) If Hubert had been here, Stefﬁwould be happy.
PAST ([WOLL: if PAST (Hubert is here)] [(Stefﬁis happy)])
In general—though with exceptions, to be discussed below—we use the
two-past form when the event time of the clause is itself in the past.
Thus, if the event from which Hubert is absent is ongoing at the time
of speech, we use (1); if it precedes the speech time, we use either (2) or
(3) depending on whether Stefﬁ’s counterfactual happiness would also
be in the past. The past-as-modal theorists grant that this second layer of
tense in narrow-scope position receives the standard temporal interpreta-
tion, and that the modal reading is unavailable in this position. And they
have a principled explanation for doing so. If we follow Heim (1994) in
positing that tenses express a presupposition about the value of a vari-
able, a tense must have a variable of the relevant kind to operate on.
The antecedent and consequent clauses can contain a time variable, but
if they lack a modal themselves, there will be no modal base variable for
a narrow-scope past to operate on, and it can only receive the temporal
reading. This stands in contrast with the question about the wide-scope
past tense, where our problem is that the modal theorist does not have a
clear reason to exclude the availability of the temporal reading.
Thus, the debate concerns just the reading of the past tense in the
wide-scope position of the subjunctive conditional. Both sides are in
agreement that the narrow-scope tense on the antecedent and consequent
is just interpreted temporally.
3
One-Past Forms in Past-Oriented
Narratives
The data I will focus on involve the use of the one-past form when the
events or states described by the antecedent and consequent are in the
past relative to the speech time.
As noted above, the general tendency in subjunctive conditionals is
that there is one more layer of past than the event time of the clause
would intuitively suggest. Consider again the examples of Hubert and
Stefﬁat the party. If the event from which Hubert is absent is ongoing

Should Past-as-Modal Theorists Also Be …
377
at the speech time, we use (1). If the party is in the past, and we mean
to convey that Stefﬁwould have been happy in the past as well, we use
(2). If the party is in the past but Stefﬁ’s possible happiness extends to
the present, we use (3).
However, there are two types of exception to this pattern. Ippolito
(2006) observes that in some cases, we can use two more past layers
than the event times would suggest; the conditional (2) can be used
for an ongoing party. This usage conveys some kind of additional
distance between the actual world and the possibility introduced by the
antecedent, for example if Hubert is dead or the party in question has
been cancelled. My focus here, however, is on an exception in the oppo-
site direction: in some cases, we can use the one-past form even when
the event time is in the past.
Theorists on both sides of the debate have claimed that the one-past
form for a past event is unacceptable; in introducing (1), Romero stated
that it cannot be used for past events, and on the past-as-modal side I
endorsed a similar claim in Mackay (2017). However, this claim is too
strong. The form is indeed usually unacceptable for past events out of the
blue, but it can be used for an event that precedes the time of utterance
in the midst of a narrative that makes salient some reference time in
the past which precedes that event or is simultaneous with it. Consider
discourses like (4) and (5).
(4) Anna looked around the room to see which of her friends were
present. She saw that Stefﬁwas there, and looked further for Hubert.
If Hubert were here, Stefﬁwould be happy.
(5) The party was to begin in an hour. If Hubert came to the party, Stefﬁ
would be happy.
In these cases, the conditional is acceptable even though there is only one
layer of past morphology and the antecedent and consequent pertain to
the past relative to the speech time. In the framework of Reichenbach
(1947), the discourse preceding the conditionals introduces a reference
time which precedes both the speech time and the event times of the
conditional’s antecedent and consequent. Relative to that reference time,
the event times of the conditional are not in the past. Thus the right

378
J. Mackay
generalization is not that the one-past form requires event times that are
non-past relative to the speech time, but rather that it requires event
times that are non-past relative to the contextually salient reference time,
which is often the speech time but need not be.
This phenomenon raises two questions. First, why is this reading avail-
able at all, rather than unavailable? Second, why is the reading available
only in rare cases, in which the discourse has made some past time
salient, instead of being generally available out of the blue?4
4
Explaining the Availability of These
Forms
Let us turn to the ﬁrst question: how can there be an available reading
where there is just one layer of past morphology even though the event
times are in the past?
Repeating the structure from above, we have:
PAST ([WOLL: if Hubert is here] [Stefﬁis happy])
Now, the modal WOLL requires the event time of the prejacent to be
either at or after the time of evaluation. WOLL is standardly given a
semantics along the following lines, allowing for various accounts of what
the relation R is:
WOLL φw,t,g = 1 iff ∀w′Rw : ∃t′ ≥t : φw′,t′,g = 1.
4 It is worth pointing out (as a reviewer suggests) a connection to the phenomenon of modal
subordination discussed by Roberts (1989). However, pointing to modal subordination does not,
on its own, explain the phenomenon. In Roberts’ canonical examples of modal subordination,
analogous distinctions in the levels of tense appear.
(i) A wolf might come in. It would eat you ﬁrst.
(ii) A wolf might have come in. It would have eaten you ﬁrst.
Ordinarily, we would use the ﬁrst of these where the hypothetical entry of the wolf is in the
future, while the second would be used where it is in the past, with exception analogous to
the conditionals we have been considering. But the relationship between the times involved
and the tense morphology here is a distinct topic from the resolution of anaphora in modal
subordination.

Should Past-as-Modal Theorists Also Be …
379
There are a number of different accounts along these general lines,
differing principally in which worlds are selected by what I call the rela-
tion R; these include Kaufmann (2005), Giannakidou and Mari (2018),
and Copley (2009). (See also Kaufmann [this volume], which contains
some independent discussion of some examples of the kind that interest
me in this paper.) This schematic view is neutral with respect to whether
the selected worlds always include the world of evaluation, and thus as
to whether will p entails p. It is also consistent with there being just
one world selected, as in the view of Cariani and Santorio (2017). But
regardless of the details of which worlds are selected, the event time for
the prejacent of WOLL cannot precede the time of evaluation for the
higher clause including WOLL.
In the past-as-modal semantics of Iatridou, Schulz, and Mackay, the
modal reading of the past does not manipulate the time of evaluation.
Rather, it expresses a presupposition about the either the modal base
or the worlds of evaluation. But without any effect on the time of the
prejacent of WOLL, it does not remove the requirement that the event
time be at or after the time of evaluation. Thus, this reading should be
unavailable if the wide-scope past tense receives a modal reading.
This suggests that the past tense is interpreted temporally in these
conditionals. The past tense therefore can receive a temporal interpreta-
tion even in the wide-scope position of the form of the conditional tradi-
tionally labelled subjunctive. This is inconsistent with the one-reading
past-as-modal view.
In the abstract, this phenomenon is neutral between one-reading past-
as-past theories and two-reading theories. However, some past-as-past
views do not predict the availability of these views. This is due to differ-
ences among these views, internal to the overall past-as-past approach. In
the view of Khoo (2015), the clauses under the scope of WOLL have a
null tense when they do not have an additional (narrow-scope) layer of
past tense. This gives (1) a structure like the following5:
5 In these representations, I am eliding some differences among the formal frameworks of Khoo,
Ippolito, and Romero, which are not directly relevant to the difference among the views of
interest here. Ippolito, for example, has separate morphemes HIST and SIM that govern the
selection of historically possible worlds.

380
J. Mackay
PAST ([WOLL: if Stefﬁis here] [Stefﬁis happy])
This will have truth conditions like the following:
PAST ([WOLL: if Hubert is here] [Stefﬁis happy])w,t,g = 1 iff
∃t′ < t : ∀w′Rw : ∃t′′ ≥t′ :  Hubert is here w′,t′′,g = 1 :  Stefﬁ
is happy w′,t′′,g = 1.
Here the event time of Hubert’s presence and Stefﬁ’s happiness must
be non-past with respect to the past time at which Hubert’s presence is
historically possible (assuming R involves a historical accessibility rela-
tion), but it is neutral with respect to whether they are before or after
the evaluation time of the whole sentence.
In the view of Ippolito (2013) and Romero (2014), by contrast, the
clauses have a present tense which appears morphologically as the past
due to the sequence of tense phenomenon.
PAST ([WOLL: if PRES (Stefﬁis here)] [PRES(Stefﬁis happy)])
This present tense is a non-past operator, anchored to the evaluation time
for the whole sentence, that requires an event time that does not precede
the evaluation time. This gives us truth conditions like the following:
PAST ([WOLL: if PRES (Hubert is here)] [PRES(Stefﬁis
happy)])w,t,g = 1 iff ∃t′ < t : ∀w′Rw : ∃t′′ ≥t′ : ∃t′′′ ≥t : 
Hubert is here w′,t′′′,g = 1 : ∃t′′′ ≥t :  Stefﬁis happy w′,t′′′,g = 1.
Here the event times of the antecedent and consequent cannot be before
the evaluation time for the whole conditional. Therefore, both Romero
and Ippolito predict that the one-past form should be unavailable when
the event times of the antecedent and consequent are in the past. The
one-past form is indeed usually unavailable, and these theorists cite this
prediction as an advantage of their view over certain others. But as we
have seen, the prediction is too strong. Thus, regardless of whether the
past tense has an additional modal reading, as in (iii) above, or not, as
in (i), the temporal interpretation should receive an account like Khoo’s,

Should Past-as-Modal Theorists Also Be …
381
which allows the event time in the one-past form to precede the speech
time so long as it does not precede the reference time.
5
The Difficulty in Accommodating
Reference Times
The second question is why this reading is only available inside certain
narratives. While the thesis that the two-past form is mandatory for past
events is too strong, the two-past form is still unavailable for past events
in many typical contexts. The claim that it is unavailable was motivated
by the fact that out of the blue, or otherwise outside a narrative of the
kind we have been considering, sentence (2) can pertain to a past event
but (1) cannot.
Given that the acceptability of the form under consideration depends
on the surrounding discourse, I suggest that the unavailability of the
reading in many contexts is due to the pragmatic difﬁculty of accom-
modating a past reference time. As observed by Partee (1973) and Enç
(1987), a tense needs to be anchored to a reference time, and when the
tense is widest in scope in a sentence, the reference time comes from
the context of utterance. This basic idea does not depend only on a
referential theory of tense; it can also be implemented within a quan-
tiﬁcational theory, as for example by Altshuler (2016). Of course, such a
reference time can often be accommodated even when it is not salient in
the discourse prior to the utterance of the past-tense sentence.
A general pattern is that it is easy to accommodate a past reference
time that matches the event time, while it is difﬁcult to accommodate a
past reference time that differs from the event time. Typically, the refer-
ence time matches the event time in a simple past sentence, but they
can differ when the tense interacts in certain ways with modality or with
aspect. Contrast the felicitous discourse in (6) with the problematic ones
in (7) and (8).
(6) Stefﬁis here. She came by car, and it took her ﬁfteen minutes to get
here.
(7) Stefﬁis here. She would arrive by car ﬁfteen minutes later.

382
J. Mackay
(8) Stefﬁis here. She had left ﬁfteen minutes earlier.
In (7) and (8), it is hard to interpret what times the second sentence in
the discourse is talking about. Now, in all three of (6)–(8), the utter-
ance of the initial present-tense sentence causes the time of utterance to
be the most salient candidate reference time. In each case, a past tense
sentence follows, meaning that a contextually salient past reference time
needs to be accommodated. However, in a typical context, this past time
can be accommodated in (6) but not in (7) or (8). In (6), where the
reference time and event time of the simple past “she came by car” are
the same, it is easy to accommodate the interval during which she came
as a reference time. The truth conditions of the second sentence in (7)
are roughly equivalent to those of (6) if the reference time for the past
tense that takes scope over WOLL is the time at which Stefﬁdeparted.
But (7) is infelicitous in the imagined context. It is not feasible for the
speakers to accommodate Stefﬁ’s departure time as a reference time in the
past when the past tense takes scope over a modal whose event time, her
arrival, is later. Similarly, (8) is infelicitous, because we cannot accommo-
date Stefﬁ’s arrival time as a reference time for the past that takes scope
over the perfect which involves an event time ﬁfteen minutes before
that.
By contrast, the second sentences of (7) and (8) can be made felicitous
by the insertion of an intervening simple past sentence that shifts the
reference time to the relevant earlier time.
(9) Stefﬁis here. She left half an hour ago. She would arrive by car
ﬁfteen minutes later.
(10) Stefﬁis here. She arrived ﬁfteen minutes ago. She had left ﬁfteen
minutes earlier.
In these cases, the interpretation of the second sentence involves the
accommodation of a past reference time, but it is now straightfor-
ward since it matches the event time for that sentence. Then after the

Should Past-as-Modal Theorists Also Be …
383
acceptance of the second sentence, the reference time for the ﬁnal
sentence is now the contextually salient reference time and does not need
to be accommodated.
The contrast between (7) and (9) is particularly relevant to our study
here, since both involve the past-tense taking scope over WOLL, like
the so-called subjunctive conditionals that have been considered in this
paper. We see that the same pattern appears with past tense taking scope
over WOLL whether or not the modal is restricted by an if-clause: it is
not easy to accommodate a past reference time for a past tense that takes
scope over a modal, and so such sentences are felicitous only when an
intervening simple past sentence has already shifted the reference time
for WOLL. This explains why even though the truth conditions of the
one-past subjunctive conditional allow it to be used for past event times,
it generally cannot be so used unless an intervening past sentence has
already made a past reference time salient. Thus, this reading is generally
not available out of the blue.
Since this rule has to do with pragmatic rules of accommodation
rather than the truth conditions of the sentence, it is not without excep-
tions. An example is the opening sentence of Gabriel Garcia Marquez’s
One Hundred Years of Solitude:
(11) Many years later, as he faced the ﬁring squad, Colonel Aureliano
Buendía was to remember that distant afternoon when his father
took him to discover ice.
The novel begins with a past-tense future-oriented claim out of the blue.
But here, it is surely in part due to Garcia Marquez’s ﬂouting of this
norm that the sentence is so celebrated. And even still, given our general
expectation that a novel begins in the past relative to the time of narra-
tion, this sentence arguably violates the norm in question less severely
than it would in the midst of a present-oriented discourse.

384
J. Mackay
6
Towards a Two-Readings Theory
Thus, we have an explanation as to why the one-past form usually cannot
be used for past events except where the discourse has already made a past
reference time salient. A past reference time that differs from the event
time is generally difﬁcult to accommodate and requires an intervening
expression to explicitly introduce the reference time.
However, this explanation poses a problem for one-reading past-
as-past theories. The problem is that this explanation overgeneralizes.
According to the past-as-past account, every subjunctive conditional, not
merely the one-past form as used for past events, involves an instance of
past tense, which requires a reference time, taking scope over WOLL.
Given a historical modal base and an antecedent that is counterfac-
tual, this reference time will need to be before the event time, at a
time at which the antecedent was still historically possible. The prag-
matic considerations discussed in the previous section suggest that this
past reference time should be difﬁcult to accommodate in contexts in
which the salient time prior to the utterance is in the present. This would
mean that these conditionals are unassertable in these contexts regardless
of whether the event times are in the past. But in fact, they are easily
assertable when the event times are in the present or future.
Consider again the one-past conditional (1). We have been exploring
its use in contexts in which the event under consideration precedes the
speech time; in those contexts, it is usually unacceptable but can be made
acceptable if a prior narrative has made salient a past reference time. But
now let us return to its more typical use, in a context in which the party
from which Hubert is absent is ongoing at the speech time. If Hubert is
absent from the party, there was some last time before which it was still
historically possible that he should come to the party. Suppose that this
time was an hour before the speech time, because it would have taken
him an hour to arrive by any means of transportation available to him.
The historical conditional “if Hubert is here, Stefﬁwill be happy” is true
relative to some times that extend up to that moment. In this context,
the candidate reference times for the past tense are at least an hour prior
to the event time. This suggests that interpreting the conditional should
involve the accommodation of a past reference time an hour prior to the

Should Past-as-Modal Theorists Also Be …
385
event time. As we saw in the previous section, this is generally difﬁcult
without any previous explicit reference to that time.
In fact, however, there is no difference in assertability between these
two discourses.
(12) This is a nice party, but Stefﬁis upset. If Hubert were here, Stefﬁ
would be happy.
(13) This is a nice party, but Stefﬁis upset. An hour ago, Hubert decided
not to come. If Hubert were here, Stefﬁwould be happy.
In (13), there is an intervening simple past sentence before the condi-
tional that shifts the contextually salient reference time to the past. In
(12), there is no such intervening sentence. What we saw above where
the party was in the past was that there was a difference in assertability
between the analogous cases; only the analogue of (13) was acceptable.
This was explained on the basis that we cannot accommodate a past refer-
ence time that differs from the event time of the sentence whose assertion
is requiring the accommodation. But this explanation would also predict
that only (13) is assertable while (12) is not.
We need an account of why the discourse in (12) is felicitous. I cannot
claim to prove conclusively that no such account is available in a one-
reading past-as-past framework, but I do not see one available. The
solution, I propose, is that in (12), the wide-scope past tense in the
conditional is interpreted modally rather than temporally. Given that
it is a one-past form, the conditional does not involve any temporally
interpreted instances of past tense at all. Thus, the interpretation of the
conditional does not involve the accommodation of a past reference time
that differs both from the event times of the conditional and from the
reference times that were previously salient in the discourse.
Thus, we are pushed towards a two-readings theory according to
which subjunctive conditionals have both the modal and the temporal
reading. With the temporal reading, the one-past form can be used for
any event time, even for events in the past. The bare truth conditions of
the form allow event times that are either before or after the speech time,
so long as they are not before the reference time for the past tense. But
general pragmatic considerations about the difﬁculty of accommodating

386
J. Mackay
reference times that differ from event times mean that this temporal
reading is generally available only where a past time already has been
made salient in the discourse. With the modal reading, the one-past
form is unavailable for past event times; with no temporally interpreted
past tense in the sentence at all, the sentence cannot pertain to a past
event. But the modal reading, unlike the temporal reading, is easily inter-
pretable in contexts where no past time is salient, because it does not
require any past reference time to be accommodated. These contexts
comprise the usual contexts in which we use subjunctive conditionals
for present or future events; thus, the modal reading is in a sense the
default one for these contexts. So the resulting view is still closer in spirit
to the overall past-as-modal framework than to the past-as-past one.
Given the methodological reasons not to multiply readings where
possible, it might be seen to be undesirable to conclude that subjunctive
conditionals have these two readings. But really the two-readings type of
view is no more problematic from the point of view of this principle,
and arguably less so, than a one-reading past-as-modal view. Given that
a morpheme has two readings, it should be the default hypothesis that
both readings are available in any given environment. A view in which
both modal and temporal readings of the past tense in subjunctive condi-
tionals are available is what one would expect to follow from the thesis
that the past tense has both a modal and a temporal reading.
7
Conclusion
We are pushed to this view by the following considerations. The one-
past form is unavailable for past events except where a past reference
time, at least as far in the past as the event in question, has already been
made salient. In that type of narrative context, the form is available. In
a one-reading past-as-modal view, the one-past form should be unavail-
able for past events altogether, since the form contains no instances of
temporally interpreted past tense. Thus, the availability of this reading
suggests that the past tense is read temporally in these contexts. But
the bare truth conditions of the past-as-past analysis would predict that
this reading should be widely available, regardless of whether a past

Should Past-as-Modal Theorists Also Be …
387
time is already salient in the context. To explain why it is only avail-
able when a past time has already been made salient in the discourse, we
use the pragmatic principle—independently motivated by other data—
that speakers generally do not accommodate new past reference times
that differ from event times. But this principle also means that in a one-
reading past-as-past theory, the same pattern of availability should apply
to subjunctive conditionals more generally, not just to one-past forms for
past events. This pattern, however, is not displayed: subjunctive condi-
tionals are widely felicitous when no past reference time is salient. This
suggests that subjunctive conditionals used when no past reference time
is salient involve a modal reading of the wide-scope past tense.6
References
Abusch, D. (1997). Sequence of tense and temporal de re. Linguistics and
Philosophy, 20(1):1–50.
Altshuler, D. (2016). Events, states and times: An essay on narrative discourse in
English. Walter de Gruyter GmbH.
Arregui, A. (2009). On similarity in counterfactuals. Linguistics and Philosophy,
32(3):245–278.
Cariani, F., and Santorio, P. (2017). Will done better: Selection semantics,
future credence, and indeterminacy. Mind, 127(505):129–165.
Copley, B. (2009). The semantics of the future. Routledge.
Enç, M. (1987). Anchoring conditions for tense. Linguistic Inquiry, 18(4):633–
657.
Giannakidou, A., and Mari, A. (2018). A uniﬁed analysis of the future as
epistemic modality. Natural Language & Linguistic Theory, 36(1):85–129.
Heim, I. (1994). Comments on Abusch’s theory of tense. In Kamp, H., editor,
Ellipsis, tense and questions, pages 143–170. University of Amsterdam.
Iatridou, S. (2000). The grammatical ingredients of counterfactuality. Linguistic
Inquiry, 31(2):231–270.
Ippolito, M. (2006). Semantic composition and presupposition projection in
subjunctive conditionals. Linguistics and Philosophy, 29(6):631–672.
6 Thanks to Fabrizio Cariani, Justin Khoo, and an anonymous reviewer for their helpful
comments.

388
J. Mackay
Ippolito, M. (2013). Subjunctive conditionals: A linguistic analysis. MIT Press.
Karawani, H., Kauf, C., and Zeijlstra, H. (2019). The asymmetry of past tense.
In Proceedings of the 22nd Amsterdam Colloquium.
Kaufmann, S. (2005). Conditional truth and future reference. Journal of
Semantics, 22(3):231–280.
Khoo, J. (2015). On indicative and subjunctive conditionals. Philosopher’s
Imprint, 15(32).
Kratzer, A. (1981). The notional category of modality. In Eikmeyer, H.-J., and
Rieser, H., editors, Worlds, words, and contexts, pages 38–74. Mouton De
Gruyter.
Mackay, J. (2017). Past tense and past times in subjunctive conditionals. Paciﬁc
Philosophical Quarterly, 98:520–535.
Mackay, J. (2019). Modal interpretation of tense in subjunctive conditionals.
Semantics and Pragmatics, 12:2.
Partee, B. H. (1973). Some structural analogies between tenses and pronouns
in English. The Journal of Philosophy, 70(18):601–609.
Reichenbach, H. (1947). The tenses of verbs. In Time: From concept to narrative
construct: A reader, pages 1–12. Walter de Gruyter.
Roberts, C. (1989). Modal subordination and pronominal anaphora in
discourse. Linguistics and Philosophy, 12(6):683–721.
Romero, M. (2014). ‘Fake tense’ in counterfactuals: A temporal remoteness
approach. The Art and Craft of Semantics: A Festschrift for Irene Heim, ed.
Luka Crnic and Uli Sauerland, 2:47–63.
Schulz, K. (2014). Fake tense in conditional sentences: A modal approach.
Natural Language Semantics, 22(2):117–144.
Schulz, K. (2017). Fake perfect in x-marked conditionals. Semantics and
Linguistic Theory, 27:547–570.
von Prince, K. (2019). Counterfactuality and past. Linguistics and Philosophy,
42(6):577–615.

How Fake Is Fake Past?
Stefan Kaufmann
1
Introduction
Conditionals have long been a topic of interest in the semantic litera-
ture. Kratzer’s treatment of ‘if’-clauses as restrictors of modal operators
is the dominant approach (Kratzer 1977, 1979, 1981a, b, 1986, 1991a,
b, 2012). It has its roots in philosophical logic (Goodman 1947; Stal-
naker 1968; Lewis 1973, 1975, among others), and for much of its
I am grateful to the audience at the 2019 Paris Summer School on Conditionals, Bridget
Copley, John Mackay, and David E. Over for helpful comments on earlier versions of this
chapter. All remaining errors, omissions, or misrepresentations are my own. This work was
supported in part by the National Science Foundation (#2116972, “Research on conditional
and modal language”) and a fellowship from the University of Connecticut Humanities
Institute.
S. Kaufmann (B)
University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, USA
e-mail: stefan.kaufmann@uconn.edu
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Switzerland AG 2023
S. Kaufmann et al. (eds.), Conditionals, Palgrave Studies in Pragmatics, Language
and Cognition, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-05682-6_13
389

390
S. Kaufmann
existence it shared with that tradition a view of modals and conditionals
as propositional operators, with at best a nodding acknowledgment of
the sub-clausal structure of their constituents—especially their temporal
and aspectual makeup—as a factor in determining and constraining
their interpretation. It was only around the turn of the millennium that
semanticists working on conditionals began in earnest to pay attention
to interactions between temporality and modality below the clause level.
Since then, many open questions in this area have been addressed, but
many still await conclusive answers.
This chapter addresses one such widely discussed but still unresolved
issue: the interpretation of “fake Past” in subjunctive conditionals, as
illustrated in (1).
(1)
a.
If the exam was tomorrow, Jill would be better prepared.
b.
If the exam had been tomorrow, Jill would have been
better prepared.
Both of (1a,b) are about future events but carry temporal morphology
that is normally used for past reference. Iatridou (2000) observed that
such a seemingly non-temporal use of Past or Perfect morphology for
irrealis or counterfactual marking is rather widespread across languages.
The term “fake Past” of “fake Tense” has since established itself for
this use. It suggests that this temporal morphology does not have its
usual temporal interpretation, but has been coopted as a mood marker
of sorts. But there are competing views on the relationship between
the ordinary meaning of Past and Perfect and their use in subjunctive
marking.
In this chapter I aim to address this issue with an eye toward the
ultimate goal of giving a uniﬁed account of indicative and subjunctive
conditionals. I start by (brieﬂy and selectively) reviewing my views on
non-conditional sentences in Sect. 2 and on indicative conditionals in
Sect. 3. I then turn to subjunctives and the question of how to extend
the analysis to them in Sect. 4.

How Fake Is Fake Past?
391
2
Preliminaries
I start by introducing some background about the interpretation of
English tenses and the interplay between time and modality. Both topics
are discussed more extensively elsewhere (Kaufmann, 2005b; Kaufmann
et al., 2006). I will keep the discussion informal, emphasizing the data
motivating the approach.
2.1
Time and Modality
Semantic interactions between temporality and modality often reﬂect
an underlying distinction between an open future and a ﬁxed past
and present. This asymmetry is a property of the external world, or
in any case of the way we think and talk about it (cf. Reichenbach’s
1956 “most obvious properties of time”), but it has epistemic conse-
quences. Although we may be ignorant about the past and present,
that ignorance could be resolved at least in principle: the truth is “out
there”. In contrast, most of the future—except for the outcomes of
(quasi-)deterministic processes like the movements of celestial bodies—is
shrouded in uncertainty of a kind that cannot be resolved beforehand.
There are two ways to encode this formally: branching-time models
and what I will call ﬁlter-funnel models (the “T × W” models of
Thomason 1984). I adopt the latter, schematically shown in Fig. 1.
The horizontal lines stand for possible worlds, represented as linearly
Time
Possible Worlds
historical alternatives at w, t
possible
likely
continuations at w, t
t
w
Fig. 1
The filter-funnel model of time

392
S. Kaufmann
ordered sets of fully speciﬁed “snapshots”. Each world is accompanied
on its trajectory by a dwindling set of historical alternatives—worlds that
share the same history up to a point but part ways thereafter. The idea
is that the historical alternatives of world w at time t are indistinguish-
able (by the object language) at all points up to and including t, but
may come apart at later times. In the ﬁgure, the white area encloses the
worlds that are indistinguishable from each other and w at all times up
to and including t. This indistinguishability is enforced in the semantics
by a condition on admissible valuations of atomic sentences at world-
time pairs. We say that a sentence is settled at ⟨w, t⟩iff it is true at

w′, t

for all historical alternatives w′ of w at t. Thus sentences whose
truth value is determined by facts no later than t, are true at ⟨w, t⟩if
and only if they are settled at ⟨w, t⟩. Not so for sentences whose truth
depends on facts later than t: for those, settledness at ⟨w, t⟩is a distinct
and stronger notion than truth at ⟨w, t⟩. Based on the course of history
up to t, some continuations beyond t may be more likely than others,
shown in the picture by the brighter beam into the future. The thick
vertical line at t marks a metaphysical modal background—the set of
world-time pairs at which a sentence must be true if it is to count as
settled at ⟨w, t⟩.
Fig. 1 shows a metaphysical picture. The model can be extended to also
represent the changing belief state of an agent by adding, for each point
in time, a set of doxastic alternatives—world-time pairs which, in view of
the agent’s beliefs at ⟨w, t⟩, may be the one she inhabits. The limitations
on our ability to foresee the future are then incorporated by requiring
that the set of doxastic alternatives must never “cut across” sets of histor-
ical alternatives.1 To model ignorance about the past and present, the set
of doxastic alternatives will typically comprise multiple sets of historical
ones.
1 Formally: if ⟨v, t⟩is a doxastic alternative of ⟨w, t⟩and ⟨u, t⟩is a historical alternative of
⟨v, t⟩, then ⟨u, t⟩is also a doxastic alternative of ⟨w, t⟩. I assume that the doxastic alternatives
of ⟨w, t⟩, like its historical ones, all share the same time coordinate t.

How Fake Is Fake Past?
393
2.2
Tense and the Modal ’woll’
English has two tenses, Past and Present, illustrated in (2) and (3). I
spell out the temporal interpretation informally using the framework
of Reichenbach (1947), in terms of the three parameters Speech time,
Reference time, and Event time. For simplicity, I take them to range
over instants rather than intervals. S is ﬁxed by the utterance situation,
whereas R can vary within a certain range that is subject to both prag-
matic factors (contextually inherited restrictions on the time the sentence
is about) and semantic ones (tense, aspectual properties, and adverbial
modiﬁers). The location of E relative to R is constrained by the aspec-
tual properties of the sentence as well as pragmatic factors. I will have
less to say about this relationship in this chapter, since my focus is on
the reference time. Unless otherwise indicated, I assume that E = R.
In (2) and (3), the semantic constraints on the location of R relative
to S are given on the right in terms of the earlier than-relation <.2 R and
E coincide because no aspectual operators are involved.
(2)
a.
Lisa was home yesterday.
R < S
b.
Lisa is home now.
S D R
c.
Lisa is home tomorrow.
S < R
(3)
a.
Joe cooked dinner yesterday.
R < S
b.
Joe cooks dinner now.
S < R
c.
Joe cooks dinner tomorrow.
S < R
The sentences in (2) and (3) are stative and non-stative, respectively.
This difference is behind the contrast between (2b) and (3b): only with
Present statives can R coincide with S; for Present non-statives, R must
lie in the (near) future of S. Now, whenever this is the case, the sentence
states not only that the eventuality in question occurs in the future, but
also that this occurrence is already determined at S by “some kind of
plan, schedule, control, or pattern of events” (Smith 1991, p. 246). This
2 Here and throughout, the examples are to be read with an episodic interpretation in mind—
that is, as referring to speciﬁc, singular instances of the eventualities in their denotation. This
does not remove the habitual reading of (3b) from the purview of the account: Habitual
sentences are statives, therefore on this reading (3b) lines up with (2b) in the relevant respects.

394
S. Kaufmann
Time
Possible Worlds
hist. alt. at ⟨w′′, S⟩
hist. alt. at ⟨w, S⟩
hist. alt. at ⟨w′, S⟩
S
w
w′
w′′
todayS
tomorrowS
R1
R2 R3
R4
R5
doxastic alternatives
at ⟨w, S⟩
Fig. 2
Interpretation of sentence (4): true at ⟨w, S⟩and

w′′, S

; false at

w′, S

special connotation has been called the scheduling reading; I call it the
Certainty Condition (CC). It is present in (2c) and in (3b,c), and absent
in (2a,b) and (3a).
Thus the presence or absence of the CC is directly correlated with
future vs. non-future reference. That difference in turn is not aligned
with the morphological distinction between the tenses;3 however, it does
line up directly with the asymmetry between an open future and a
ﬁxed non-future encoded in the ﬁlter-funnel model. Kaufmann (2005b);
Kaufmann et al. (2006) capitalized on this feature of the model in the
linguistic analysis: for a tensed clause to be true at ⟨w, t⟩, it must be
settled (not merely true) that there is an eventuality of the right kind in
the right temporal relation to t. Formally, this is achieved by assuming
the presence of a covert necessity operator accompanying the tense.4 To
illustrate, consider sentence (4) and the model shown in Fig. 2.
(4)
Joe cooks lunch tomorrow.
The existence of a cooking event in the interval ‘tomorrow’ is settled at
⟨w, S⟩and

w′′, S

, thus (4) (at speech time S) is true at those worlds
3 Some seek to account for the presence or absence of the CC by postulating a Future tense
homonymous with the Present (Dowty 1979; Steedman 2002). But whatever the other merits
of such a move may be, it would do nothing to explain the distribution of the CC: The choice
between Present and Future would depend solely on the relation between S and R, and we
will see that that relation alone is sufﬁcient to account for the facts.
4 See Kaufmann (2005b) for arguments that the Certainty Condition is part of semantics, not
pragmatics.

How Fake Is Fake Past?
395
as well as all of their historical alternatives. But (4) is false at

w′, S

and
all of its historical alternatives. Thus it is also not believed relative to the
doxastic modal background comprising those three classes of historical
alternatives. However, this doxastic background models an interesting
attitude between ignorance and (dis-)belief: the agent believes that the
question of (4)’s truth is settled, but does not know which way. Given the
way the modalities interact with each other and with time in the model,
this attitude is frequently implicated when tensed clauses are interpreted
at speech time.5
This explains why in English the bare Present with future reference
typically gives rise to peculiar connotations.6 What is not yet settled
cannot already be known, so speakers cannot felicitously present them-
selves as knowing it. Kaufmann derives from this the ready availability
of the “scheduling reading”. Under this reading, a sentence like (4), for
instance, makes an assertion about a plan at speech time, rather than
about the next day’s events. Formally, the content of such a plan is repre-
sented as a modal background which enters the interpretation of the
tensed sentence instead of the set of set historical alternatives. The plan
is settled at speech time, hence knowable, even if the events in question
are not. See Kaufmann (2005b) for details.7
5 This last claim rests on certain assumptions about the relative scope of negation and tense,
which may not be uniform across all sentences that entail (4)’s falsehood. This issue has not
received much attention; but as a tentative observation, it seems that (ia) does and (ib) does
not imply that the question of Joe’s cooking is settled.
(i)
a.
Joe does not cook lunch tomorrow.
b.
It is not the case that Joe cooks lunch tomorrow.
The attitude described in the text then is the belief that either (4) or (ia) is true. This is
not tautological because the logical negation of (4) is (ib) rather than (ia). Thanks to Bridget
Copley for raising this issue.
6 Not all languages have a similar constraint, even when their tense system is otherwise similar
to English. For instance, the bare Present can be used much more freely to talk about the future
in German or Japanese, although this use is not altogether unconstrained in either of them. In
the present framework, this can be accounted for by assuming that a modal (necessity) operator
is always present, but that its strength may be modulated by an ordering source, depending on
the language.
7 Later, and apparently independently, Copley (2008) argued that futurate eventives are derived
statives with no future orientation. This idea seems to me to be similar in spirit, if not in detail
of implementation, to the one recounted here.

396
S. Kaufmann
In English, the auxiliary ‘will’ can be used for future reference without
these connotations. I assume that ‘will’ is the Present-tense form of
an underlying modal stem ‘woll’ whose Past tense form is ‘would’
(Abusch 1988, 1997, 1998; Ogihara 1995a, b). The modal ‘woll’ does
not contribute any temporal meaning, but its tense does. The Present
imposes the same constraints on S and R as we saw above (the Perfect in
(5a) and (6a) adds the requirement that E precede R; elsewhere, E and
R coincide as before).
(5)
a.
Lisa will have been home yesterday.
S D R
b.
Lisa will be home now.
S D R
c.
Lisa will be home tomorrow.
S < R
(6)
a.
Joe will have cooked dinner yesterday.
S D R
b.
Joe will cook dinner now.
S < R
c.
Joe will cook dinner tomorrow.
S < R
In the modal dimension, ‘woll’ is an overt counterpart of the covert
necessity operator requiring settledness with bare tense. ‘Woll’ differs
from that operator in that it requires only weak necessity (Kratzer, 1981a;
Kaufmann et al., 2006; Portner, 2009). The difference is, simply put,
that for a sentence like (6c) to be true, ‘Joe cook dinner tomorrow’ need
be true only at the most normal or stereotypical alternatives. With this
attenuated modal force, statements about the future can more readily be
felicitous.8
8 Notice also that with reference to past and present and a metaphysical modal base, sentences
with ‘will’ are equivalent to their unmodalized counterparts, for in this case truth at the
stereotypical alternatives implies truth at all alternatives. Kaufmann (2005b) argues that it is
for this reason that (5a,b) and (6a) strongly favor a doxastic reading: Since the modalized form
is semantically weaker and morphologically more complex than its non-modalized counterpart,
its use is disfavored when both are true, therefore its use implicates that the non-modalized
form is false, which (with reference to past or present) can only be the case on a doxastic
interpretation.
Condoravdi (2002) previously discussed similar cases of modals for which a metaphysical
interpretation is only available with future reference. She accounts for this observation in terms
of a “diversity condition” on the modal background, requiring that it contain worlds at which
the prejacent is true as well as ones at which it is false. With past and present reference, this
can only happen with doxastic modal bases. Condoravdi writes this requirement into the truth
conditions, rather than treating it pragmatically as I do. The question of the status of the
condition is an open one.

How Fake Is Fake Past?
397
3
Indicative Conditionals
The standard assumption in linguistics is that the ‘if’-clause restricts
the modal background of an operator in the consequent (Lewis 1975;
Kratzer 1981a).9 Kratzer assumes that when no overt modal is present,
a covert one is inserted for the ‘if’-clause to restrict. Unlike Kratzer, I
assume that an operator is always present (either overtly, for instance
‘woll’, or covertly with bare tense). The characteristic semantic property
of “indicative” conditionals is that they presuppose that it is possible for
the antecedent to be true.10
None of this says anything about the temporal interpretation. Once
this dimension is brought into the picture, new subtleties come into
relief. Consider the following simpliﬁed paraphrase:
(7)      'If A,C' is true if and only if 'C' is true at all (relevant)
points in the modal background at which 'A' is true.
What exactly are ‘A’ and ‘C’, and how are they interpreted? In the interest
of compositionality it would be desirable to give them the same interpre-
tation in conditionals as in isolation. With this in mind, challenges arise
as soon as we apply the rule in (7) by interpreting ‘A’ and ‘C’ relative to
a modal base of the kind outlined above.
3.1
Temporal Perspective
In Sect. 2.1 I argued that the modal background at ⟨w, S⟩consists of
world-time pairs ⟨w′, S⟩, where w′ is a historical or doxastic alternative
of w at S. All of these points have the same temporal coordinate S (hence
9 Like most contemporary approaches to conditionals, this is inspired by the Ramsey Test
(Ramsey 1929): a conditional ‘if
A, C ’ is evaluated against a body of information by ﬁrst
updating with A, then evaluating C against the result of the update.
Since I am primarily concerned with temporal interpretation, I will have little to say on
what Kratzer’s account predicts about the logical properties of conditionals. See Kaufmann and
Kaufmann (2015) and references therein.
10 The label “indicative” is misleading as it stands, in that some conditionals with morpholog-
ically indicative antecedents are semantically counterfactual. One way to resolve this problem
might be to adjust the morphological terminology. See Schulz (2007) for such a proposal.

398
S. Kaufmann
it is a vertical line in the above ﬁgures). But if this is correct, then the
well-formedness of conditionals like (8a,b) is surprising:
(8)
a.
If Lisa stays at home the day after tomorrow, she met
                    her students tomorrow.
b.
If Joe cooks dinner tomorrow evening, Lisa bought 
        groceries tomorrow morning.
If the tenses are to have their ordinary temporal meaning, the Past-tensed
consequents in (8) cannot be interpreted relative to S. Doing so would
result in contradictory constraints on their reference time: The tense
would locate it earlier than S, while the adverb would place it later than
S. But the sentences are consistent.
Intuitively, the consequent is interpreted as “past in the future”, that is,
by looking back from the (hypothetical) vantage point of the antecedent’s
reference time. The sentences in (8) show that the shift into the future
does not require the auxiliary ‘will’ or any other special marking.
Instead, Kaufmann (2005b) argues, the shift is effected by the condi-
tional construction itself. In terms of the Reichenbachian framework,
we might say that the conditional introduces an additional parameter,
a “hypothetical speech time” which I will refer to as S′. It enters the
truth conditions not as a ﬁxed parameter, but as a bound variable
ranging over the modal background; see (12) below. The effect is that
the background is extended from the vertical line

w′, S

mentioned
earlier to the rectangular area

w′, S′
, where w′ is a historical or
doxastic alternative to w at S as before, and S ≤S′; see Fig. 3 for a
visual display. Thus the quantiﬁcation is no longer purely modal, but
modal-temporal.
A look at some more data shows that the introduction of S′ explains
not only the shift in temporal perspective for the interpretation of
the tenses, but also the presence or absence of the Certainty Condi-
tion.

How Fake Is Fake Past?
399
3.2
Scheduling Antecedents
A uniform analysis of tensed clauses inside and outside of conditionals
would have it that the antecedents of (9) and (10) are the sentences in
(2) and (3), repeated on the right.
(9)
a.
If Lisa was home yesterday, Joe cooked dinner.
[Lisa was home yesterday.]
b.
If Lisa is home now, Joe will cook dinner.
[Lisa is home now.]
c.
If Lisa is home tomorrow, Joe will cook dinner.
[Lisa is home tomorrow.]
(10)
a.
If Joe cooked dinner yesterday, Lisa ate it.
[Joe cooked dinner yesterday.]
b.
If Joe cooks dinner now, Lisa will eat it.
[Joe cooks dinner now.]
c.
If Joe cooks dinner tomorrow, Lisa will eat it.
[Joe cooks dinner tomorrow.]
But there is a difference between, say, ‘Joe cooks dinner tomorrow’ in its
standalone form and as the antecedent of (10c): on its most natural
reading the conditional does not mean “if it is settled (now) that Joe
cooks dinner tomorrow. . . ” but rather “if and when turns out that Joe
cooks dinner tomorrow. . . ”. The difference between “if. . . now” and
“if and when” is taken care of by the shift of the temporal perspective
into the future. But what about the additional change from “settled” to
“true”—that is, the fact that the conditional antecedent does not carry
the Certainty Condition, despite its future reference? In thinking about
this, it is also important to note that the CC is not always absent in
future-referring antecedents:
(11)
a.
If Lisa stays at home tomorrow, she will meet her students later today.
b.
If Joe cooks dinner tomorrow, Lisa will buy groceries later today.

400
S. Kaufmann
Two properties of (11a,b) conspire to force the CC. First, due to the
temporal adverbs the reference time of the consequent must precede that
of the antecedent: RC < RA; and since there is no additional aspectual
morphology involved, their event times must stand in the same relation.
Second, the consequent has Present tense, thus the temporal perspective
S′ cannot be later than RC. Thus S′ < RA by transitivity. This triggers
the CC, just as S < R would in standalone sentences.
In addition to cases like (11a,b), for many future-directed antecedents
a scheduling reading is available, though usually not the most promi-
nent one out of context. It can often be brought out by setting up
the context in such a way that S′ is restricted to the speech time. In
(10c), for instance, this reading becomes available if we assume that Joe
and Jim take turns with the dinner preparation according to a schedule
and, for plausibility, that Lisa likes Joe’s cuisine but detests Jim’s. A good
paraphrase for the intended interpretation in this case would be ‘If it is
Joe’s turn to cook dinner tomorrow. . .’. Kaufmann (2005b) calls indica-
tive conditionals with S = S′ “non-predictive” and those with S < S′
“predictive.”
While S′ behaves like a speech time with regard to the CC,
there are some differences. For instance, recall from Sect. 2.2 that in
standalone sentences the reference time of a non-stative cannot be equal
to S. This constraint seems to apply only to the actual speech time S, not
to S′: the reference time of conditional antecedents can coincide with
the temporal perspective. Also, not all temporal expressions are sensitive
to the shift in perspective. For instance, deictic temporal frame adver-
bials like ‘today’ and ‘tomorrow’ typically remain anchored to S even in
conditionals.
3.3
Truth Conditions
Kaufmann (2005b) leaves the interpretation of the tenses and the schema
for the truth conditions in (7) intact and implements the forward shift in
temporal perspective by allowing the conditional marker ‘if’ to expand
the modal base into the future before restricting it. Formally, at ⟨w, S⟩
the modal background becomes the set of points ⟨w′, S′⟩such that

How Fake Is Fake Past?
401
Time
Possible Worlds
S
w
Fig. 3
Forward-extended doxastic modal base at ⟨w, S⟩. The set of

w′, S′
that
forms the modal background in evaluating conditionals at ⟨w, S⟩is a subset
(subject to an ordering source and possibly further contextual parameters) of
the rectangle extending to the right
w′ is a (metaphysical or doxastic) alternative of w at S and S ≤S′.
In the above ﬁgures the modal background was a vertical line through
⟨w, S⟩; now it is “stretched” into a rectangle as in Fig. 3. The interpre-
tation proceeds as before, by restricting this area to points at which the
antecedent is true and evaluating the modal claim relative to those. In
this way, both constituents can be evaluated at points in the future of S.
To illustrate, consider (10c), repeated here as (12).
(12)
If Joe cooks dinner tomorrow, Lisa will eat it.
True at w, S iff for all stereotypical points
w
S
w , S
w,
w,
S
among the ones at which:
i.
is an alternative of w at S,
ii. S
, and
iii. it is settled at              that ‘Joe cook dinner ’ is true at
      RA for someR A such that S
RA and RA is
‘tomorrow’,
there is a time RC such that S
RC and ‘Lisa eat it ’is
true at
, RC .
≤
≤
≤
w
Table 1 shows how Kaufmann (2005b) classiﬁes the readings of indica-
tive conditionals. The major dividing line runs between non-predictive
and predictive conditionals, and the crucial criterion is whether or how

402
S. Kaufmann
Table 1
Available readings for some Present antecedents from the text. The
two middle columns labeled “scheduling” are where the Certainty Condition
induces a scheduling reading; these cases comprise both non-predictive and
predictive readings. Since ’now’ with non-statives locates the reference time in
the immediate future, it is hard to tell whether an intermediate reading with
S < S′ < RA is available for (10b), hence the ‘?’ in the corresponding cell
Nonpredictive
Predictive
S = S′
S < S′
S′ ̸= RA
Scheduling
(9b)
If Lisa is home now, Joe will
cook dinner.
✓
*
*
*
(9c)
If Lisa is home tomorrow, Joe
will cook dinner.
*
✓
✓
✓
(10b)
If Joe cooks dinner now, Lisa
will eat it.
*
✓
?
✓
(10c)
If Joe cooks dinner tomorrow,
Lisa will eat it.
*
✓
✓
✓
(8a)
If Lisa stays home tomorrow,
she met her students later
today.
*
*
✓
✓
(11a)
If Lisa stays home tomorrow,
she will meet her students
later today.
*
✓
✓
*
far the range of S′ extends into the future of S. This depends on contex-
tual restrictions in addition to constraints imposed by the tenses and/or
temporal adverbs.
3.4
Related Work
The observation that indicative conditionals fall into two classes
according to the interpretation of their antecedents is not new. Some
argue that the most important dividing line through the class of all
conditionals places counterfactuals together with predictive indicatives
on one side, and non-predictive indicatives on the other (Bennett 1988;
Dudman 1984a, b, 1986, 1989, 1991, 1994, 1998, 2000; Funk 1985;
Dancygier 1998). Others maintain that all indicatives are semantically
more or less homogeneous and distinct from counterfactuals (Bennett

How Fake Is Fake Past?
403
1995, 2003; Lewis 1973; Quirk et al. 1985). But there is little agreement
in the formal semantic literature on how to characterize the difference.
Crouch (1993) introduces a distinction between the time at which
a sentence is “asserted” and the time at which it is “veriﬁed”; the latter
may lie in the future. In the logical form, Crouch stipulates that in
non-predictive conditionals both constituents are tensed, whereas
in predictive conditionals the consequent tense scopes over the
antecedent, whose own tense is semantically vacuous. However, since the
predictive/non-predictive distinction is not really tied to a difference in
linguistic form, but rather to the largely pragmatically determined rela-
tionship between S and S′, there seems to be no empirical foundation
for postulating such a structural ambiguity. Garrett (2001) introduces
the “time of enlightenment” as a parameter similar to Crouch’s time of
veriﬁcation and my S′.
Schulz (2008) gives a temporal interpretation of predictive indica-
tives that involves a different allocation of labor between semantics and
model theory. A statement about the future has no truth value until its
truth value is settled. Thus Schulz’s notion of “truth” corresponds to
Kaufmann’s settledness; in this sense, her account is in effect a super-
valuationist variant of Kaufmann’s. This allows her to push one layer of
modal quantiﬁcation (the necessity operator Kaufmann assumes for all
tensed sentences) into the metalanguage. In the interpretation of condi-
tionals, antecedents shift the interpretation to the ﬁrst time at which their
truth value is deﬁned. In terms of empirical predictions, Schulz’s account
is similar to Kaufmann’s, but it has some shortcomings. For instance,
the shift into the future invariably stops at the ﬁrst time at which the
antecedent is true, which is too restrictive.11
11 Here is a case in point, due to Rumberg and Lauer (2018). Suppose Sue is considering
taking the train home from work tomorrow. The train runs every hour on the hour and takes
half an hour. Sue does not yet know whether, in the event that she does take the train, she
will catch the one at 5 p.m. or the one at 6 p.m. Then (i) is wrongly predicted to be true,
even if she is no more likely to take the earlier train than she is to take the later one.
(i)
If Sue takes the train, she will be home at 5:30.

404
S. Kaufmann
Romero (2014) postulates the following skeletal meaning of the condi-
tional construction, which contains future operators in both constituent
positions:12
(13)
MODAL [ if FUT p ] [ then FUT q ]
But this wrongly predicts that the reference times of the antecedent and
consequent are independent of each other, as long as both follow the
evaluation time of the modal operator. This is not right, as we saw in
cases like (11), in which a scheduling reading was forced on a (Present)
antecedent whose reference time was later than that of the (Present)
consequent.
4
“Fake” Past and “Subjunctive”
Conditionals
On their typical uses, subjunctive conditionals presuppose that their
antecedent is inconsistent with the modal base (i.e., metaphysically or
doxastically impossible).13 Grammatically, English subjunctives have a
Past or Past Perfect form on the modal in the consequent, which is
echoed in the temporal morphology of the antecedent. This was illus-
trated in (1) above, repeated here; the modal is ‘would’, the Past-tense
form of ‘woll’.
(1)
a.
If the exam was tomorrow, Jill would be better prepared.
b.
If the exam had been tomorrow, Jill would have been
better prepared.
The last couple of decades saw signiﬁcant advances in our understanding
of the compositional semantics of subjunctives, at least in English. But
12 Romero (2014) is mostly concerned with counterfactual conditionals, to which I turn below;
but she justiﬁes the future operators for the constituents explicitly with the forward shifting
observed in indicative conditionals (see her Footnote 3).
13 It is well-known that this does not hold in full generality, but for now I focus on these cases.
I brieﬂy turn to “Anderson conditionals,” the best-known class of exceptions, below.

How Fake Is Fake Past?
405
open questions remain, and a uniﬁed theory of all conditionals is still out
of reach. Building on the framework presented in the preceding sections,
I am going to sketch what such a uniﬁed theory might look like.
4.1
Expanding the Modal Background
If the antecedent is only true at worlds outside the modal background,
the modal background must be adjusted to make them accessible.14 The
Past or Perfect marking on subjunctives, in languages which employ
this device, presumably plays a role in this operation. There are two
major schools of thought on how this works and how to model it in
a framework of modal-temporal interaction such as the ﬁlter-funnel
model introduced above. On the Past-as-Modal (PaM) view, the Past is
“redirected” from the temporal dimension in which it normally enables
reference to different times, to the modal dimension, now enabling
reference to different possible worlds (James 1982; Fleischman 1989;
Dancygier 1998; Iatridou 2000; Schulz 2007, 2014; Mackay, 2015).
Thus it is non-temporal, hence “fake.” On the Past-as-Past (PaP) view,
antecedent worlds are accessed from an earlier time at which they were
still alternatives, in effect “re-running” history from that earlier time.
Thus the Past is temporal, in a sense, after all. Variants of this view have
supporters in philosophy (Dudman 1984a; Edgington 1995, and many
others), linguistics (Tedeschi 1981; Kaufmann 2005a; Ippolito 2006,
2013; Arregui, 2007), and psychology (Over et al., 2007).15
The two options are depicted schematically in Fig. 4. Two remarks are
in order before we move on. First, while the pictures in Fig. 4 resemble
the portrayal of historical alternatives in Fig. 1 more than that of doxastic
ones in Fig. 2, the PaM/PaP distinction concerns both. Doxastic states
have histories, too, and under the idealizing assumption that agents only
14 Notice that the adjustment at issue here is not the forward extension that was crucial in
the analysis of predictive indicatives in the last section. That forward extension was not tied to
subjunctive mood or counterfactuality. It is assumed to be operative in all conditionals.
15 This “re-running” of history does not undo all facts after the relevant time, but only those
that are causally affected by the antecedent (Kaufmann 2005a, see also Over and Cruz, this
volume). My description glosses over this important detail because I am mainly concerned with
temporal reference.

406
S. Kaufmann
Time
Possible Worlds
S
w
Time
Possible Worlds
S
w
Fig. 4
Past-as-Modal (left) and Past-as-Past (right) expansion of the modal
background
ever accumulate information without forgetting or revising any (a highly
simplistic assumption that is nonetheless commonly made in dynamic
semantics, for instance), the temporal changes in doxastic alternatives
resemble those in historical ones, the main difference being that infor-
mation about events and states is not necessarily acquired in the order in
which they occur. Moreover, subjunctive conditionals can have doxastic
interpretations,16 which I assume work quite similarly to the objective or
metaphysical ones more widely discussed.
Secondly, while an expansion of the modal background is necessary
when the antecedent is not true at any accessible worlds, there are uses of
fake Past in which this particular explanation is not (clearly) applicable.
Lewis (1973, p. 4) noted that “there are subjunctives pertaining to the
future, like [14] that appear to have the truth conditions of indicative
conditionals”.
(14)
If our ground troops entered Laos next year, there would be trouble.
Lewis did not elaborate on the claim that (14) has the truth condi-
tions of an indicative. Presumably he had in mind that its antecedent,
while unlikely at the time, could not be entirely ruled out. This would
be what has come to be called a Future-Less-Vivid (FLV) interpretation
(Iatridou 2000).17 Assuming that fake Past is generally associated with an
expansion of accessibility, it would seem that on this use the set that is
16 Although this has been disputed at times in the literature (Veltman 2005, i.a.), it has been
established repeatedly and conclusively (Veltman 1985; Rott 1999; Schulz 2007, among others).
17 Iatridou attributes the term to English-language grammars of Classical Greek (Fn. 5). She
also notes that the form can be used to (emphatically) express ignorance regarding the event in
question, a use which she argues is derived from the counterfactual meaning. I do not explore
this matter further in this chapter.

How Fake Is Fake Past?
407
being expanded does not include all (historical or doxastic) alternatives,
but perhaps only the most prominent (e.g., stereotypical or likely) ones.
This has in fact been proposed (Schulz 2014). The two options schema-
tized in Fig. 4 would then apply to the smaller set of prominent worlds.
This needs to be sorted out, but as far as the application of the formal
mechanism is concerned, examples like (14) do not seem to pose special
challenges.
Another case in which fake Past is not (obviously) justiﬁed by a lack of
antecedent worlds in the modal background is illustrated by (15) from
Anderson (1951).
(15)
If Jones had taken arsenic, he would have shown just exactly those
           symptoms which he does in fact show.
This conditional can naturally be used to argue for the truth of the
antecedent, thus it cannot be said to presuppose that its antecedent is
false. However, an expansion of the modal base is nonetheless involved
in its interpretation. Intuitively, (15) implies that the observed symptoms
would be explained by John’s having taken arsenic (if he did). Without
going too far into how exactly this idea might be ﬂeshed out, sufﬁce it to
say that theories of explanation generally assume that the explanandum is
a consequence of the explanans, in some (specialized and restricted) sense
of the term (Hempel and Oppenheim 1948; Gärdenfors 1988; Salmon
1989; Halpern and Pearl 2005; Halpern 2016, among many others). To
establish this relationship, the truth of the explanandum must, in some
way or other, be ignored. This seems to be (at least part of) what drives
the expansion of the modal background in cases like (15).
With these caveats in place, I turn to a question on which there is so
far no consensus: Which of the two expansion operations is involved in
the interpretation of subjunctives?
4.2
Two Types of Subjunctives
The literature on English recognizes two kinds of subjunctives, Simple
Past (SP) and Past Perfect (PP):

408
S. Kaufmann
(16)
a.
If Lisa were home {now/tomorrow}, Joe would
cook dinner.
b.
If Lisa had been home {now/tomorrow}, Joe would
have cooked dinner.
[SP]
[PP]
These terms are due to Ippolito (2003, 2006, 2013), who observed that
while both imply that Lisa is not home at the relevant time (‘now’ or
‘tomorrow’ ), (16a) also implies that her being home is nonetheless “pos-
sible” in a certain sense: that Lisa is alive and therefore could be home
tomorrow. If Lisa is (known to be) dead, (16a) is odd but (16b) is ﬁne.
Under Ippolito’s analysis, the contrast has to do with the antecedent’s
presuppositions and the time at which they must be or must have been
satisﬁed: at speech time in SP conditionals and at an earlier time in PP
conditionals. For examples like (16), Ippolito assumes that ’Lisa is home’
presupposes that Lisa is alive.
Ippolito’s observation shed new light on the ﬁner semantic details of
conditionals, but I believe her conclusions from contrasts like (16) are
not quite correct. The presuppositions of the antecedent surely play a
role, but they do not determine the judgments.
4.3
Time of Intervention
There are two kinds of counterexamples to Ippolito’s account, one of
which seems to me to pose a serious challenge. To see this, consider
one of her own examples. Her account correctly predicts that (17a) is
infelicitous in the given context, whereas (17b) is ﬁne.18
(17)
John was training for the Boston Marathon last summer when he
unexpectedly died.
a.
#If John ran the Boston Marathon next spring, he would win.
b.
If John had run the Boston Marathon next spring, he would have won.
18 The hash marks (‘#’) indicate infelicity. The sentences thus marked are neither grammatically
ill-formed nor semantically deviant in any way, and they may well be true in the given story
(when interpreted at an appropriate time). However, they are ill-ﬁtting within their immediate
linguistic context (given above).

How Fake Is Fake Past?
409
However, the same antecedent, in the same context, gives rise to different
judgments when paired with a different consequent:
(18)
a.
If John ran the Boston Marathon next spring, that would  be a
                   miracle.
b. #If John had run the Boston Marathon next spring, that would
have been a miracle.
Perhaps the felicity of (18a) could be explained away in terms of local
accommodation of the presupposition that John is alive, or some such
mechanism. However, no such story would sufﬁce to explain the oddness
of (18b), as far as I can see.
The explanation I would like to propose can be spelled out formally
in a couple of different ways, but the basic intuition is simple. John is
dead. His running the marathon next spring requires a departure from
reality. Exactly how this departure is to be made is not fully speciﬁed: the
antecedent can be true for different reasons, in different ways. There are
worlds at which John did not die last year, and there are others at which
he did die but returns to life miraculously in time to run the marathon.
The antecedent is true at all of these worlds (and more). Which ones are
more similar to ours? That question may be impossible to answer, but
fortunately progress does not depend on having the answer, as Stalnaker
(1968) and Lewis (1973, 1979) have long since argued. World similarity
is vague and context-dependent, yet there is no problem in pairing a
precise semantic theory with this murky parameter. Once the vagueness
is resolved (or sufﬁciently reduced), we can get clear judgments about
truth and entailment. Naturally, we would expect those judgments to
depend on how the vagueness is resolved.
What the above sentences show is that judgments about which form
is most suitable to express a counterfactual claim can also depend on
how the vagueness is resolved. All antecedent worlds differ from ours.
The more similar ones have a great deal of overlap with ours and depart
from it only in a minimal way, in some sense of “minimal”. One can
think of this departure as a miracle in the sense of Lewis (1979), or as
an intervention in the sense of Pearl (2000), and the details of the imple-
mentation will depend on this choice. Schulz (2017) made a proposal

410
S. Kaufmann
that bears some similarities to my own (but also differs in important
respects), and described it in terms of intervention. I am also partial
to the interventionist stance (Kaufmann 2001, 2005a, 2013, i.a.) and
will use that terminology in the following, although I will not introduce
more formal apparatus. The idea is simple. The truth or falsehood of the
antecedent is jointly determined by a set of causally relevant variables and
causal laws regulating the (in)dependencies between them. Reasoning
about what would be if the antecedent were true involves a disturbance
in this ensemble of relevant facts—suspending causal laws, changing or
un-setting the values of variables. In most cases the variables are tied to
the goings-on at speciﬁc times (exceptions are timeless truths like those
of mathematics); given the asymmetry of causal dependence, those times
generally precede the antecedent’s reference time.19 But their relation to
the speech time can vary freely, and different interventions before or after
the speech time may constitute alternative ways to make the required
change. The SP/PP distinction depends on the location of the time of
departure relative to the speech time.
As additional evidence for this view, consider again the same sentences,
this time in a slightly different context.
John was training for the Boston Marathon last summer when he suddenly
fell ill. His health deteriorated gradually, as did his prognosis. Finally no hope
was left, and he passed away.
(18)
a.
If John ran the Boston Marathon next spring, that would be
a miracle.
b.  If John had run the Boston Marathon next spring, that would
have been a miracle.
Now (18b) is much improved. The reason is, I submit, that the kind of
departure most naturally associated with this context would be a mirac-
ulous recovery before his (actual) death, rather than resurrection after
19 Pearl’s (2000) ‘do’ operator involves cutting a variable off from all its parents, then setting
it to the desired value. In linguistic and cognitive reality, counterfactual hypotheses often do
affect the values of the parents (Sloman and Lagnado 2005; Dehghani et al. 2012); cf. also the
notion of “causal ramp” in the philosophical literature (Lewis, 1979; Mårtensson 1999; Bennett
2003).

How Fake Is Fake Past?
411
death. The crucial difference from the above instance is that this hypo-
thetical recovery lies in the past. (18a), meanwhile, is also felicitous but
invokes a different type of departure, viz. resurrection after death and,
more pertinently, after the speech time.
Still further evidence for the proposal comes from “ahistorical” coun-
terfactuals whose antecedents are not clearly associated with any partic-
ular past time. Consider (19) from Mizuno and Kaufmann (2018).20
(19)
a.
If 9 were even, it would be divisible by 2.
b. #If 9 had been even, it would have been divisible by 2.
Under Ippolito’s account, it is not clear what the relevant presupposi-
tions of the antecedent would be, or why those presuppositions should
be satisﬁed at present but not in the past. Moreover, the infelicity of
(19b) is of a peculiar sort: the sentence strongly suggests that there is a
past time at which the number 9 became odd. The sentence feels odd
because such an assumption conﬂicts with what we believe about mathe-
matics. Note, however, that in the right context such a historical reading
becomes available and improves the felicity of (19b): just consider a
doxastic reading, speculating on what the speaker—a child, say—would
have believed if she had learned that Nine was even. Again, it is unclear
how these data could be explained in terms of presuppositions and when
they are satisﬁed.
The upshot is that the time of the intervention is the crucial factor in
choosing between the SP and PP forms of counterfactuals. Ippolito was
right in observing that PP subjunctives do and SP subjunctives do not
call for revisiting the past. But what drives this revisit is not the need to
check the antecedent’s presuppositions. Rather, it is the need to intervene
on the actual history at the right time to make room for the truth of the
antecedent. This is always in the past when the antecedent’s reference
time lies in the past, so it is not surprising that subjunctives about the
past always are PP. But future subjunctives may also require a PP form,
namely when the intended intervention lies in the past.
20 Mizuno and Kaufmann are mainly concerned with the Japanese counterparts of (19a,b).
Those data are beyond the scope of this paper; I claim without proof that the Japanese patterns
of Past marking on counterfactuals ﬁt into the overall framework proposed here.

412
S. Kaufmann
4.4
Time of Intervention and Temporal Perspective
Stepping back to look at the bigger picture, the next question is how the
time of intervention is related to the other temporal parameters. This
also requires getting clear on the location of S′. Consider the following
context.
Context. John is supposed to attend a conference this weekend. He has been
trying to decide on a travel plan. He likes long road trips, so driving across
the country is tempting. Today is Wednesday. The conference starts on Friday.
Recall that indicatives were subject to the constraint that S ≤S′—that
is, the temporal perspective must not precede the actual speech time.
We will see that this also holds for SP subjunctives. Notice ﬁrst that the
indicatives in (20) are both felicitous, with the (temporal) Past in (20b)
enabling reference to the past from the non-past perspective S′.
(20)
a.
If John leaves on Thursday, he will arrive on Sunday.
S ≤S' I S' ≤RAI S' ≤RC
b.
If John left on Tuesday, he will arrive on Friday.
S ≤S' I RA < S' I S' ≤RC
The SP counterpart of (20a) is (21a), formed by adding a layer of Past
morphology to both constituents. Under a fake-Past analysis of this
element, it marks an intervention. I assume that for SP subjunctives this
intervention occurs at speech time S.
(21)
a.
If John left on Thursday, he would arrive on Sunday.
S H SI ≤S' I S' ≤RAI S' ≤RC
b. #If John left on Tuesday, he would arrive on Friday.
c.
If John had left on Tuesday, he would arrive on Friday.
S H SI ≤S' I RA < S' I S' ≤RC

How Fake Is Fake Past?
413
The competing hypothesis that the Past is temporal could be spelled out
in two ways. One is that it scopes over the entire conditional construc-
tion, which then receives a forward-looking interpretation relative to
some past time, call it SC < S. This is, roughly, Ippolito’s (2013)
account (modulo the checking of presuppositions at speech time, which
in terms of its role in the theory corresponds to my intervention no
earlier than the speech time). Under this assumption, one could maintain
that the relevant constraint on temporal perspective was SC < S′ (the
SP counterpart to S ≤S′ for indicatives). The other way to implement a
temporal Past would embed it in the conditional construction, resulting
in a past-in-the-future reference to Thursday from a forward-shifted S′.
But both of these ideas face a challenge from (21b), which without
further stipulations would be expected to be felicitous. The stipulation
could, for instance, be that the reference time of the antecedent must not
precede the speech time. This is in fact spelled out in terms of “double
access” by Romero (2014). But that proposal has related difﬁculties with
PP subjunctives (see below).
In fact, the SP counterpart of (20b) is (21c), whose antecedent has two
layers of Past morphology: a temporal past in addition to (and embedded
under) its SP marking. This temporal past, just like the one in (20b),
is interpreted relative to S′, which in turn does not precede the speech
time. That such a temporal Past is needed to realize reference to the past
indicates that S′ cannot precede S.
Thus the SP subjunctives in (21a,c) are interpreted exactly like the
indicatives in (20a,b), modulo the Past marking an intervention at S′.
But this intervention-marking Past does not have any temporal import.
It is fake.
Incidentally, it is possible, though perhaps somewhat marginal, to
have a temporal Perfect in the consequent of a conditional like those
in (22).21 They are interpreted as indicated on the right. The relation-
ships between the speech and reference times are the same as those in
(20); the only difference is the additional constraint that the event time
21 It would be preferable in this case to change the temporal adverb to ‘by Sunday’ /‘by Friday’.
I refrain from making this change to keep minimal pairs.

414
S. Kaufmann
of the consequent must precede its reference time, yielding a result-state
interpretation for the consequent.
∧
∧
∧
(22)
a.
If John leaves on Thursday, he will have arrived on Sunday.
S ≤S' I S' ≤RAI S' ≤RCI EC
RC
b.
If John left on Tuesday, he will have arrived on Friday.
S ≤S' I RA
S' I S' ≤RCI EC
RC
These examples and their SP counterparts do not pose any special chal-
lenges. The conditionals in (23a,c) are the SP counterparts of (22a,b),
just as (21a,c) were to (20a,b); here as there, the difference is a layer of
fake Past.
(23)
a.
If John left on Thursday, he would have arrived on Sunday.
c.
If John had left on Tuesday, he would have arrived on Friday.
PP subjunctives differ from their SP counterparts in having one more
layer of Past/Perfect morphology. This raises anew the question of PaM
vs. PaP, for there is no reason to assume a priori that this question gets the
same answer for both layers of Past. We saw above that PP subjunctives
are felicitous whenever the relevant intervention targets eventualities in
the past; if there is no such construal, the PP form is infelicitous, as in
the “timeless” conditional in (19). This indicates that the second layer of
Past is not fake, calling for a Past-as-Past analysis.
So if the PP Past shifts a temporal parameter back, which parameter
is it? It could be S′, resulting in the condition that S′ < S. But this is
unlikely in view of the fact that PP subjunctives about the future do not
get a scheduling reading: the antecedent of (24a) is not correctly para-
phrased as ‘if it had been settled (in the past) that John leaves on Thursday,
...’. Rather, a better paraphrase is ‘if John’s leaving on Thursday had not
been prevented (by past events) and he had left on Thursday, ...’.
Following this intuition, I assume that what lies in the past is the time
of intervention, as shown in (24a). I also assume that (24b) is interpreted
in the same way. Thus unlike (20b) and (21c), (24b) does not have a
temporal Past in the antecedent.

How Fake Is Fake Past?
415
Time
Possible Worlds
S = SI
w
Time
Possible Worlds
S
SI
w
Fig. 5
SP (left) and PP (right) expansion of the modal background
≤
(24)
a.
If John had left on Thursday, he would have arrived on Sunday.
            
SI
S; SI
S' ; S' ≤RA; S' ≤RC
b.
If John had left on Tuesday, he would have arrived on Friday.
SI
S; SI ≤S' ; S' ≤RA; S' ≤RC
∧
∧
On this account, the second layer of Past is temporal, although it is
not interpreted like the other tenses in the sentence, for it regulates the
relationship between S and SI, not between either of those and the refer-
ence times of the constituents. This is in line with the commonly made
assumption that this Past takes scope above the conditional operator
(Ippolito 2013; Romero 2014).22
In the wider context of recent research on fake Past, the present
proposal is aligned with an overall view according to which the PaM/PaP
distinction does not distinguish between classes of sentences—that is,
neither are all subjunctives summarily PaM or PaP, nor does the distinc-
tion track the SP/PP distinction. Instead, the PaM/PaP distinction draws
the line between the different layers of Past morphology used to mark
English subjunctives: all subjunctives have a layer of fake Past, and PP
subjunctives have an additional layer of temporal Past. These layers lend
themselves to a PaM analysis and a PaP analysis, respectively. The ﬁrst
part of this view, a PaM analysis for the layer common to SP and PP
subjunctives, has been argued for by Schulz (2014) and Mackay (2019).
22 The assumption is that there is only one Past operator, even though in English it is expressed
on both constituents. This morphological reﬂex is ensured via feature-passing mechanisms in
the syntax. I am not going to go into the details here. In languages which do not mark tense
on the antecedent, such as Japanese, there is only one Past marking in PP subjunctives (Mizuno
and Kaufmann 2018).

416
S. Kaufmann
A PaP analysis for the second layer was tentatively suggested by Mackay
(2019).23
Singling out a Time of Intervention as an additional temporal param-
eter departs from earlier proposals about the SP/PP distinction. I already
discussed Ippolito’s in introducing my proposal. I should also mention
a reﬁnement of Ippolito’s account which seeks to correct some of its
problematic predictions. Romero (2014) argues, based on ideas found
in Iatridou (2000) and Arregui (2009), that both the future SP (21a)
and the past PP (21b) have essentially the same Past-as-Past interpreta-
tion, as forward-looking conditionals from the perspective of a past time
at which modal accessibility is determined. The difference between them
lies solely in the reference times of the constituents relative to the speech
time: PP and SP subjunctives are about past and non-past times, respec-
tively. One prediction of this approach is that PP is required when the
antecedent refers to the past. This is also predicted by my account, since
an antecedent in the past entails a departure in the (still earlier) past.
Another prediction of Romero’s account is that SP is required when the
antecedent does not refer to the past. We already saw in connection with
Ippolito’s examples that this is incorrect.
4.5
Temporal Past Without Intervention
I argued above that PP subjunctives involve a layer of temporal Past atop
a layer of fake Past; the latter is shared with SP subjunctives. One might
wonder whether the outer temporal Past is somehow dependent on there
being a modal Past in its scope, or whether it can embed indicatives as
well. Pursuing this question pushes against the page limit, but I do want
to at least mention one class of examples which suggest that embedding
indicatives is an option.
Consider the following series of sentences in the given context, which
is a slight modiﬁcation of the earlier one.
23 This view is also consistent with cross-linguistic evidence: for instance, Mizuno and Kauf-
mann (2018) show that the Japanese counterparts of PP subjunctives are marked with a Past
for which a PaP analysis is called for, whereas the Japanese counterparts of English subjunctives
have no Past marking.

How Fake Is Fake Past?
417
Context. John has been agonizing over his conference travel plans this week.
Today is Wednesday. On Monday he was pondering his options.
(25)
a.
If he left on Tuesday, he would arrive on Friday.
b. #If he had left on Tuesday, he would { arrive / have
arrived } on Friday.
This pattern does not seem to ﬁt well with the earlier discussion: (25a,b)
were listed as (21b,c) above but with the opposite felicity judgments.
(25a) has the form of an SP subjunctive, similar to (21a), but such
a reading cannot be straightforwardly attributed to it as uttered on
Wednesday. Moreover, in contrast to typical SPs, nothing is implied
about the truth or likelihood of the antecedent, on either Monday
or Wednesday. Instead, intuitively (25) relates John’s deliberations (on
Monday) from the perspective of his inner monologue. Linguistically,
this is known as Free Indirect Speech (FIS; Eckardt 2014). (26) lists simple
sentences for which an FIS interpretation is either the only option or
strongly preferred out of context, due to their peculiar combinations of
tenses and temporal adverbs.
(26)
a.
Tomorrow was Tuesday.
b.
He realized now that he would leave on Tuesday.
It is characteristic of FIS that it involves a “local” context whose temporal
perspective (also called origo) coincides with the time at which the
thought or speech in question occurred (here: Monday, the time of the
“pondering”). In FIS, certain indexical expressions (e.g., adverbs like
‘now’ and ‘tomorrow’ ) are shifted to the local context, while others remain
anchored to the actual context (e.g., the pronoun ‘I’ ). Crucially, tenses
are interpreted relative to the actual speech time, not the time of the
pondering. This makes (25a) a special kind of Past-tense indicative, true
(as FIS) on Wednesday if (27) was what John thought on Monday.24
24 It should be noted that speakers ﬁnd the variant in (ia), with Perfect in the conse-
quent, also acceptable. This looks like a “mixed” form in which an SP antecedent is paired
with a PP consequent. However, that is not necessarily the right analysis: the Perfect in
the consequent may simply have its ordinary temporal interpretation. On this analysis,

418
S. Kaufmann
(27)
If I leave on Tuesday, I will arrive on Friday.
The infelicity of the PP subjunctive (25b) is also peculiar. Speakers agree
that it is odd in the given context, but also that it would be the preferred
way to state the facts from the speaker’s perspective at the speech time
(Wednesday), as in (24b).
Usages like (25) have not been discussed widely in the literature
on conditionals (however, they are taken up by John Mackay in this
volume). I set them aside here because they are not directly relevant:
their tense marking is peculiar, but it is not fake Past. Still, discussing
it here was helpful, I hope, because it shows that non-SP conditionals
can be embedded under a temporal Past, and the result is not a PP
conditional.
5
Conclusions
Current work in the semantics of conditionals seeks to ground their
considerable interpretational versatility in their morphosyntactic makeup
in uniﬁed and compositional ways. This goal is still some ways off,
but much progress has been made toward a better understanding of
their temporal interpretation. This paper offered a uniﬁed account of
indicative and subjunctive conditionals which captures their semantic
variability in terms of a few simple parameters. Further work will
have to establish whether and to what extent this approach general-
izes to other uses of fake Past in English and to conditionals across
languages.
just as (25a) is the Past-tense counterpart of (27a), so too is (ia) the Past counterpart of
(ib).
(i)
a.
If he left on Tuesday, he would have arrived on Friday.
b.
If he leaves on Tuesday, he will have arrived on Friday.

How Fake Is Fake Past?
419
References
Abusch, D. (1988). Sequence of tense, intensionality and scope. In Borer, H.,
editor, Proceedings of WCCFL 7, pages 1–14. CSLI.
Abusch, D. (1997). Sequence of tense and temporal de re. Linguistics and
Philosophy, 20:1–50.
Abusch, D. (1998). Generalizing tense semantics for future contexts. In Roth-
stein, S., editor, Events and Grammar, volume 70 of Studies in Linguistics
and Philosophy, pages 13–33. Kluwer.
Anderson, A. R. (1951). A note on subjunctive and counterfactual condi-
tionals. Analysis, 12:35–38.
Arregui, A. (2007). When aspect matters: The case of would-conditionals.
Natural Language Semantics, 15:221–264.
Arregui, A. (2009). On similarity in counterfactuals. Linguistics and Philosophy,
32:245–293.
Bennett, J. (1988). Farewell to the Phlogiston theory of conditionals. Mind,
97(388):509–527.
Bennett, J. (1995). Classifying conditionals: The traditional way is right. Mind,
104(414):332–354.
Bennett, J. (2003). A philosophical guide to conditionals. Oxford University
Press.
Condoravdi, C. (2002). Temporal interpretation of modals: Modals for the
present and for the past. In Beaver, D. I., Casillas, L., Clark, B., and
Kaufmann, S., editors, The construction of meaning, pages 59–88. CSLI
Publications.
Copley, B. (2008). Temporal orientation in conditionals. In Guéron, J. and
Lecarme, J., editors, Time and modality, pages 59–77. Springer.
Crouch, R. (1993). The temporal properties of English conditionals and modals.
PhD thesis, University of Cambridge.
Dancygier, B. (1998). Conditionals and prediction. Cambridge University Press.
Dehghani, M., Iliev, R., and Kaufmann, S. (2012). Causal explanation and fact
mutability in counterfactual reasoning. Mind & Language, 27(1):55–85.
Dowty, D. (1979). Word meaning and Montague grammar, volume 7 of Studies
in linguistics and philosophy. Reidel.
Dudman, V. H. (1984a).
Conditional interpretations of
if -sentences.
Australian Journal of Linguistics, 4:143–204.
Dudman, V. H. (1984b). Parsing ‘if’-sentences. Analysis, 44(4):145–153.
Dudman, V. H. (1986). Antecedents and consequents. Theoria, 52:168–199.

420
S. Kaufmann
Dudman, V. H. (1989). Vive la Révolution! Mind, 98(392):591–603.
Dudman, V. H. (1991). Interpretations of ‘if’-sentences. In Jackson, F., editor,
Conditionals, chapter 10, pages 202–232. Oxford University Press.
Dudman, V. H. (1994). On conditionals. Journal of Philosophy, 91:113–128.
Dudman, V. H. (1998). On the grammar of conditionals: Reply to Barker.
Analysis, 58:277–285.
Dudman, V. H. (2000). Classifying ‘conditionals’: The traditional way is
wrong. Analysis, 60:147.
Eckardt, R. (2014). The semantics of Free Indirect Discourse: How texts allow
us to mind-read and eavesdrop. Number 31 in Current Research in the
Semantics/Pragmatics Interface. Brill.
Edgington, D. (1995). On conditionals. Mind, 104(414):235–329.
Fleischman, S. (1989). Temporal distance: A basic linguistic metaphor. Studies
in Language, 13(1):1–50.
Funk, W.-P. (1985). On a semantic typology of conditional sentences. Folia
Linguistica, 19(3/4):365–414.
Gabbay, D. and Guenthner, F., editors (1984). Extensions of classical logic,
volume 2 of Handbook of Philosophical Logic. D. Reidel.
Gärdenfors, P. (1988). Knowledge in ﬂux: Modeling the dynamics of epistemic
states. MIT Press.
Garrett, E. J. (2001). Evidentiality and assertion in Tibetan. PhD thesis,
University of California.
Goodman, N. (1947). The problem of counterfactual conditionals. The Journal
of Philosophy, 44:113–128.
Halpern, J. Y. (2016). Actual causality. MIT Press.
Halpern, J. Y. and Pearl, J. (2005). Causes and explanations: A structural-
model approach. Part II: Explanation. The British Journal for the Philosophy
of Science, 56(4):889–911.
Hempel, C. G. and Oppenheim, P. (1948). Studies in the logic of explanation.
Philosophy of Science, 15(2):135–175.
Iatridou, S. (2000). The grammatical ingredients of counterfactuality. Linguistic
Inquiry, 31(2):231–270.
Ippolito, M. (2003). Presuppositions and implicatures in counterfactuals.
Journal of Semantics, 11:145–186.
Ippolito, M. (2006). Semantic composition and presupposition projection in
subjunctive conditionals. Linguistics and Philosophy, 29(6):631–672.
Ippolito, M. (2013). Subjunctive conditionals: A linguistic analysis. The MIT
Press.

How Fake Is Fake Past?
421
James, D. (1982). Past tense and the hypothetical: A cross-linguistic study.
Studies in Language, 6(3):375–403.
Kaufmann, M. and Kaufmann, S. (2015). Conditionals and modality. In
Lappin, S. and Fox, C., editors, The handbook of contemporary semantic
theory, pages 237–270. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Kaufmann, S. (2001). Aspects of the meaning and use of conditionals. PhD thesis,
Stanford University.
Kaufmann, S. (2005a). Conditional predictions: A probabilistic account.
Linguistics and Philosophy, 28(2):181–231.
Kaufmann, S. (2005b). Conditional truth and future reference. Journal of
Semantics, 22:231–280.
Kaufmann, S. (2013). Causal premise semantics. Cognitive Science, 37:1136–
1170.
Kaufmann, S., Condoravdi, C., and Harizanov, V. (2006). Formal approaches
to modality. In Frawley, W., editor, The expression of modality, pages 71–106.
Mouton de Gruyter.
Kratzer, A. (1977). What ‘must’ and ‘can’ must and can mean. Linguistics and
Philosophy, 1:337–355.
Kratzer, A. (1979). Conditional necessity and possibility. In Egli, U., Bäuerle,
R., and von Stechow, A., editors, Semantics from different points of view,
pages 117–147. Springer.
Kratzer, A. (1981a). The notional category of modality. In Eikmeyer, H.-J. and
Riesner, H., editors, Words, worlds, and contexts, pages 38–74. Walter de
Gruyter.
Kratzer, A. (1981b). Partition and revision: The semantics of counterfactuals.
Journal of Philosophical Logic, 10:201–216.
Kratzer, A. (1986). Conditionals. In Farley, A. M., Farley, P. T., and McCul-
lough, K.-E., editors, Proceedings of CLS 22, Part 2: Papers from the
Parasession on Pragmatics and Grammatical Theory, pages 1–15.
Kratzer, A. (1991a). Conditionals. In von Stechow and Wunderlich (1991),
pages 651–656.
Kratzer, A. (1991b). Modality. In von Stechow and Wunderlich (1991),
pages 639–650.
Kratzer, A. (2012). Modality and conditionals. Oxford University Press.
Lewis, D. (1973). Counterfactuals. Harvard University Press.
Lewis, D. (1975). Adverbs of quantiﬁcation. In Keenan, E., editor, Formal
semantics of natural language, pages 3–15. Cambridge University Press.
Lewis, D. (1979). Counterfactual dependence and time’s arrow. Noûs, 13:455–
476.

422
S. Kaufmann
Mackay, J. (2015). Actuality and fake tense in conditionals. Semantics and
Pragmatics, 8(12):1–12.
Mackay, J. (2019). Modal interpretation of tense in subjunctive conditionals.
Semantics and Pragmatics, 12(2):1–29.
Mårtensson, J. (1999). Subjunctive conditionals and time: A defense of the clas-
sical approach. Number 10 in Acta Philosophica Gothoburgensia. Depart-
ment of Philosophy, University of Göteborg.
Mellor, D. H., editor (1990). Philosophical papers: F. P. Ramsey. Cambridge
University Press.
Mizuno, T. and Kaufmann, S. (2018). Past-as-past in Japanese counterfactuals.
In Ronai, E., Stigliano, L., and Sun, Y., editors, Proceedings of CLS 54,
pages 309–324.
Ogihara, T. (1995a). Double-access sentences and reference to states. Natural
Language Semantics, 3:177–210.
Ogihara, T. (1995b). The semantics of tense in embedded clauses. Linguistic
Inquiry, 26:663–679.
Over, D., Hadjichristidis, C., Evans, J., Handley, S., and Sloman, S. (2007).
The probability of causal conditionals. Cognitive Psychology, 54:62–97.
Pearl, J. (2000). Causality: Models, reasoning, and inference. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Portner, P. (2009). Modality. Oxford University Press.
Quirk, R., Greenbaum, S., Leech, G., and Svartvik, J. (1985). A comprehensive
grammar of the English language. Longman.
Ramsey, F. P. (1929). General propositions and causality. Printed in Mellor
(1990), pages 145-163.
Reichenbach, H. (1947). Elements of symbolic logic. Free Press, New York, NY.
Reichenbach, H. (1956). The direction of time. University of Berkeley Press.
Romero, M. (2014). ‘Fake tense’ in counterfactuals: A temporal remoteness
approach. In Crniˇc, L. and Sauerland, U., editors, The art the craft of
semantics: A Festschrift for Irene Heim, volume 71 of MIT Working Papers
in Linguistics, pages 47–63. MIT. https://semanticsarchive.net/Archive/jZi
NmM4N/.
Rott, H. (1999). Moody conditionals: Hamburgers, switches, and the tragic
death of an American president. In Gerbrandy, J., Marx, M., de Rijke, M.,
and Venema, Y., editors, JFAK. essays dedicated to Johan van Benthem on the
occasion of his 50th birthday. Vossiuspers AUP, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
http://www.illc.uva.nl/j50/contribs/rott.

How Fake Is Fake Past?
423
Rumberg, A. and Lauer, S. (2018). What if, and when? Conditionals, tense,
and branching time. Presentation at the Workshop “The Many What Ifs”,
University of Konstanz.
Salmon, W. C. (1989). Four decades of scientiﬁc explanation. University of
Minneapolis Press, Minneapolis.
Schulz, K. (2007). Minimal models in semantics and pragmatics: Free choice,
exhaustivity, and conditionals. PhD thesis, University of Amsterdam.
Schulz, K. (2008). Non-deictic tenses in conditionals. In Friedman, T. and
Ito, S., editors, Proceedings of SALT 18, pages 694–710, Ithaca, NY. Cornell
University.
Schulz, K. (2014). Fake tense in conditional sentences: A modal approach.
Natural Language Semantics, 22:117–144.
Schulz, K. (2017). Fake Perfect in X-marked conditionals. In Burgdorf, D.,
Collard, J., Maspong, S. and Stefánsdóttir, B., editors, Proceedings of SALT
27, pages 547–570.
Sloman, S. A. and Lagnado, D. A. (2005). Do we ‘do’? Cognitive Science, 29:5–
39.
Smith, C. S. (1991). The parameter of aspect, volume 43 of Studies in linguistics
and philosophy. Kluwer.
Stalnaker, R. (1968). A theory of conditionals. In Studies in logical theory,
American philosophical quarterly, Monograph: 2, pages 98–112. Blackwell.
von Stechow, A. and Wunderlich, D., editors (1991). Semantik: Ein interna-
tionales Handbuch der zeitgenössischen Forschung. [= Semantics]. Walter de
Gruyter.
Steedman, M. (2002). The productions of time. Unpublished ms., Version 4.1.
Tedeschi, P. (1981). Some evidence for a branching-futures semantic model. In
Tedeschi, P. and Zaenen, A., editors, Tense and aspect, volume 14 of Syntax
and Semantics, pages 239–270. Academic Press.
Thomason, R. H. (1984). Combinations of tense and modality. In Gabbay and
Guenthner (1984), pages 135–165.
Veltman, F. (1985). Logics for conditionals. PhD thesis, University of
Amsterdam.
Veltman, F. (2005). Making counterfactual assumptions. Journal of Semantics,
22:159–180.

Counterfactual Hypothetical vs. Biscuit
Conditionals: A Semantic/Pragmatic
Analysis of Their Morphological
Differences
Eva Csipak and Maribel Romero
1
Introduction
Hypothetical and biscuit conditionals differ intuitively in their meaning.
While intuitively hypothetical conditionals convey that the truth of the
consequent depends on the truth of the antecedent, as exempliﬁed in (1),
This research has been supported by the RU1614 “What if?” funded by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) (RO 4247-1/2). We thank the audiences of the General
Meeting of RU1614, the seminar Ling315 at the University of Konstanz (WiSe2019),
the workshop UniMod1 at Leiden University, the Linguistics Colloquium at the Institut
Jean-Nicod, and SALT 2019.
E. Csipak (B)
Department of Linguistics, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada
e-mail: eva.csipak@ubc.ca
M. Romero
Department of Linguistics, University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany
e-mail: maribel.romero@uni-konstanz.de
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Switzerland AG 2023
S. Kaufmann et al. (eds.), Conditionals, Palgrave Studies in Pragmatics, Language
and Cognition, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-05682-6_14
425

426
E. Csipak and M. Romero
biscuit conditionals are taken to convey the truth of the consequent in
the actual world w0, regardless of the truth or falsity of the antecedent,
as in (2):
(1)
If Peter went shopping, there are biscuits on the sideboard. Hyp
There are biscuits on the sideboard if you want them.
(Austin, 1956)
(2)
Biscuit
The above examples illustrate that indicative conditionals appear with
the same verbal morphology no matter whether they are interpreted
as hypothetical or as biscuit conditionals.1 More explicitly, in the case
of indicative conditionals, English and Spanish have ‘normal’, non-
fake tense morphology in both antecedent and consequent clause, and
Spanish additionally has indicative mood morphology, independently
of interpretation. This can be seen in (3)–(6): Both (3), a hypothetical
conditional, and (4), a biscuit conditional, show simple present tense
morphology; the Spanish versions (5) and (6) additionally have indicative
morphology.
(3)
(On whatsapp: I know you well...)
If you are hungry right now, your stomach is growling.
HypInd
(4)
If you are hungry right now, there is pizza in the fridge.
BiInd
BiInd
(5)
Si
If
(tú)
(you)
tienes
have.Ind
hambre,
hunger,
tu
your
estómago
stomach
está
is.Ind
gruñendo.
growling.
HypInd
(6)
Si
If
(tú)
(you)
tienes
have.Ind
hambre,
hunger,
hay
have.Ind
pizza
pizza
en
in
el
the
frigoríﬁco.
fridge
This parallel in appearance has led many authors to propose a uniﬁed
syntactic and semantic analysis for hypothetical and biscuit condi-
tionals (Franke 2009; Francez 2015; Lauer 2015; Csipak 2018; Biezma
and Goebel 2018; Goebel 2017, a.o.). In a nutshell, they propose that
the syntactic and semantic modal template is the same for hypothetical
and biscuit conditionals (contra e.g. Ebert et al. 2014). For this line of
1 This is also independent of whether they appear with overt or covert epistemic or metaphysical
modals.

Counterfactual Hypothetical vs. Biscuit Conditionals …
427
approach, the difference between hypothetical and biscuit conditionals
lies purely in the pragmatics: the ‘biscuit’ interpretation comes about
as a pragmatic inference arising from the notion of conditional indepen-
dence. This gives rise to the speaker intuition that the consequent is being
asserted of the actual world w0.
To see how this works in one such analysis, consider Franke (2009).
He assumes a standard semantics for an indicative conditional If A then
C: A ⊆C. For a hypothetical conditional, A and C are conditionally
dependent, i.e., upon learning that one of them is true, we may change
our belief about the other. For example, learning that Peter in fact went
shopping in (1) may cause us to believe that there are biscuits on the
sideboard. For a biscuit conditional, A and C are conditionally indepen-
dent, i.e., learning that one of them is true will not change our belief
about the other. Consider Franke’s example (7).
(7)
If you are hungry, there is pizza in the fridge.
Intuitively, learning whether the addressee is hungry or not will not
change our beliefs about whether or not there is pizza in the fridge (and
vice versa).
The following pragmatic reasoning then ensues for biscuit condi-
tionals, which by deﬁnition have conditionally independent antecedents
A and consequents C: A cannot possibly affect the truth of C (given
conditional independence), yet the speaker uttered both. Therefore the
speaker must wish to commit to C in the actual world w0 regardless of
the truth of falsity of A. This gives rise to the ‘biscuit’ interpretation.2
2 The more formal derivation of the pragmatic inference, following Franke (2009), proceeds as
follows:
(i) a. The Speaker’s epistemic state allows her to utter If A, C.
b. But A and C are conditionally independent from each other according to the Speaker’s
epistemic state.
c. The Speaker must either believe the falsity of A or the truth of C. Otherwise ♦(A∩C ),
which contradicts the Speaker’s belief that
If A, C because if A, C = A ⊆C.
d. Non-triviality: The Speaker believing the falsity of A would make the statement If A, C
0/(
laivirt
⊆C). Since non-triviality is assumed, the Speaker must believe C.

428
E. Csipak and M. Romero
However, the case is different for counterfactual conditionals. Here we
observe a difference in the consequent clause verbal morphology between
hypothetical and biscuit conditionals. In both English and Spanish, they
differ with respect to tense: For hypothetical counterfactuals, we must
use an ‘extra’ layer of past morphology (fake tense), giving rise to the
form would in (8a)/(10a), and crucially we cannot use ‘real’ tense, as
illustrated in (8b)/(10b). But for biscuit counterfactuals, this is (typically)
reversed: we have to use non-fake tense, as in (9b)/(11b), and cannot use
fake tense, witness (9a)/(11a) (Csipak 2015; pace Franke 2009).3 More-
over, Spanish biscuit counterfactuals must additionally have indicative
mood in the consequent clause, as in (11b).
(8)
a.
If you were hungry right now, your stomach would be growling. HypCF
b. # If you were hungry right now, your stomach is growling.
(9)
a. # If you were hungry right now, there would be pizza in the fridge.
b.
If you were hungry right now, there is pizza in the fridge.      BiCF
(10)
a.
Si
If (you) had.Subj hunger, your stomach   would.be growling.
(tú)
tuvieses hambre, tu    estómago estaría   gruñendo. HypCF
b. # Si
If
(tú)
(you)
tuvieses
had.Subj
hambre,
hunger,
tu
your
estómago
stomach
está
is.Ind
haciendo ruidos.
growling.
(11)
a. # Si
If
(tú)
(you)
tuvieses
had.Subj
hambre,
hunger,
habría
would.have
pizza
pizza
en
in
el    frigoríﬁco.
the fridge.
b.
Si
If
(tú)
(you)
tuvieses
had.Subj
hambre,
hunger,
hay
have.Ind
pizza
pizza
en
in
el   frigoríﬁco.   BiCF
the fridge.
Thus, the puzzle is as follows. We observe an interpretive difference
between hypothetical and biscuit conditionals that occurs in both indica-
tives and counterfactuals. If this difference is purely pragmatic (i.e., due
to the posited independence-based inferencing mechanism), why must
the two conditional types be expressed with different morphology—i.e.,
3 We note that the judgments reported here come from native speakers of English. Note
that languages like German and Italian allow the form parallel to (9a) to receive a biscuit
interpretation for independent reasons.

Counterfactual Hypothetical vs. Biscuit Conditionals …
429
with different tense and mood in the consequent—when they occur in
counterfactual form?
The goal of the present paper is to present a ﬁrst comprehensive anal-
ysis of tense and mood morphology in HypCFs and BiCFs that derives
the morphological pattern in (8)–(11) while maintaining the general
uniform approach to hypotheticals and biscuits.
To this end, we will follow the temporal remoteness analysis of coun-
terfactual morphology (Dudman 1983, 1984; Ippolito 2003; Grønn
and von Stechow 2009; Romero 2017) and extend mechanisms inde-
pendently needed for breaking Sequence of Tense in attitude reports
(Ogihara 1999), as in Romero and Csipak (2019). The main contribu-
tion of the present paper is to present pragmatic arguments for why we
see the forms that we do, and only those. In particular, we will focus on
why the unattested forms are ruled out by pragmatic mechanisms.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays
out some necessary background, including treatments of Sequence of
Tense, Subjunctive mood and so-called double-access readings where
Sequence of Tense is broken. The proposal, partially building on previous
work by the authors, follows in Sect. 3, in four parts. In Sect. 3.1,
we summarize the implementation of the temporal remoteness anal-
ysis of grammatical hypothetical counterfactuals in Romero (2017).
Section 3.2 presents Romero and Csipak (2019)’s analysis for breaking
Sequence of Tense and ‘Sequence of Mood’ in conditionals to account
for the grammatical biscuit counterfactuals we observe. In Sect. 3.3, we
rule out unattested biscuit counterfactuals by appealing to competition
between forms. Finally, in Sect. 3.4 we rule out unattested hypothet-
ical counterfactuals by appealing to the Maxim of Manner. Section 4
concludes.
2
Background on Tense and Mood
In order to account for counterfactual hypothetical and biscuit condi-
tionals that we observe, we need some formal background on the
interpretation of their constitutive morphological ingredients.

430
E. Csipak and M. Romero
First,
let
us
consider
the
counterfactual
hypothetical
condi-
tionals below: (12)–(13) are present counterfactuals and (14)–(15) are
past counterfactuals.4
(12)
If you were hungry right now, your stomach would be growling.
(13)
Si
If
(tú)
(you)
tuvieses
had.subj
hambre
hunger
ahora,
now,
tu
your
estómago
stomach
estaría
would.be
gruñendo.
growling
(14)
If you had been hungry yesterday, your stomach would have
been growling.
(15)
Si
If
(tú)
(you)
hubieses
had.subj
tenido
had
hambre
hunger
ayer,
yesterday,
tu
your
estómago
stomach
habría
would.have
estado
been
gruñendo.
growling
(At least) two pieces of verbal morphology are involved in these forms5:
(a) there is a layer of so-called ‘fake’ past tense in the antecedent and
consequent in English and Spanish; and (b) the antecedent clause appears
in the subjunctive mood in Spanish.
The layer of ‘fake’ tense has received two analyses in the literature:
It is interpreted modally in the modal remoteness approach (Iatridou
2000; Schulz 2014) and temporally in the temporal remoteness approach
(Dudman 1983; Grønn and von Stechow 2009; Romero 2017, a.o.). We
follow the temporal approach. The central idea, stemming from Dudman
(1983), is that a counterfactual with ‘fake’ tense involves a back shift
in time with a future (metaphysical) conditional interpreted under that
back shift, as schematized in (16). ‘Fake’ tense morphology then follows
from Sequence of Tense, independently needed for complement clauses
in English and Romance, as we will see in Sect. 2.1.
(16)
Past [ MODALmetaphy [if (Fut) A] [then Fut C] ]
4 Counterfactuality is a defeasible inference in the Spanish (13) and (15), just as in the English
(12) and (14) (Lewis 1973; Anderson 1951). We leave aside Severe Tense Mismatch cases
(Ippolito 2003).
5 See Anand and Hacquard (2009) and Ferreira (2016) on the role of aspectual morphology.

Counterfactual Hypothetical vs. Biscuit Conditionals …
431
For the subjunctive mood in the Spanish antecedent clauses, we follow
Schlenker (2005) and interpret mood as imposing a restriction on the
world pronoun, as independently argued for Romance complement
clauses. We will brieﬂy introduce the formalism in Sect. 2.2.
Second, let us consider the counterfactual biscuit conditionals in (17)–
(18):
(17)
If you were hungry right now, there is pizza in the fridge.
(18)
Si
If
(tú)
(you)
tuvieses
had.Subj
hambre,
hunger,
hay
have.Ind
pizza
pizza
en
in
el
the
frigoríﬁco.
fridge.
The most striking morphological features of these examples are the
following: (a) while there is a layer of ‘fake’ past tense in the antecedent
clause, there is no ‘fake’ past tense in the consequent clause; and (b),
in Spanish, while the antecedent clause is in the Subjunctive, Indica-
tive mood is found in the consequent clause. In other words, there
appears to be a disconnect in the time line and the modal sphere between
the antecedent clause and the consequent clause in counterfactual biscuit
conditionals. To properly analyse this disconnect, Sect. 2.3 will examine
so-called “double-access” readings in complement clauses, where a similar
temporal disconnect between the matrix and the complement clause has
been previously observed.
2.1
Tense and Sequence of Tense
Consider the attitude report in (19). This sentence is ambiguous between
a reading corresponding to the past-over-past direct report in (20a)
and a reading corresponding to the past-over-present direct report
in (20b). Under the latter reading, the past tense morphology on
the embedded verb was goes seemingly uninterpreted, a phenomenon
known as ‘Sequence of Tense’ (Abusch 1997; Kusumoto 2005; von
Stechow 2009).

432
E. Csipak and M. Romero
(19)
Annalea said (last week) that Lucía was sick.
(20)
a. Annalea said (last week): “Lucía was sick”.
Past-over-Past
b. Annalea said (last week): “Lucía is sick”.
Past-over-Present
Let us see how these two readings are derived. Syntactically, the following
ingredients have been proposed in the literature. First, (interpretable)
tense morphology is treated as a pronoun proi (Partee 1973, a.o.)
with a temporal feature relative to an anchor time pronoun pro j (von
Stechow 1995; Abusch 1997; Kusumoto 2005, a.o.). In our LFs, the
temporal feature and its anchor will appear superscripted after proi,
e.g. pro
[past pro j]
i
. Second, one layer of past temporal morphology may
optionally be left uninterpreted when licensed in a chain headed by
a temporal pronoun with an interpretable past feature (Ogihara 1995;
Kusumoto 1999; Grønn and von Stechow 2009). In our LFs, uninter-
preted morphology will appear crossed out, e.g. past, and replaced with
the default temporal feature [pres pro j]. This optionality in dealing
with embedded past morphology leads to the two potential LFs in
(21):
∃
∃
∃
∃
[PAST pro0]
[PAST pro2]
[PAST pro0]
[past][PRES pro2]
(21)
LFs of (19):
a. λ0
1[Annalea think at pro1
λ2
3[ Lucia be sick at pro3
]]
Past-over-Past
b. λ0
1[Annalea think at pro1
λ2
3[ Lucia be sick at pro3
]]Past-over-Present
Semantically, temporal features are interpreted as imposing presupposi-
tions on the value of the pronoun (Heim 1994; Kratzer 1998), as deﬁned
in (22)–(24). Furthermore, we treat the value of a temporal/mood proi
as a world-time pair, i.e., as an index, with temporal and accessibility
constraints understood as in (25):

Counterfactual Hypothetical vs. Biscuit Conditionals …
433
(22)
pro[PAST proj]
i
g is defined only if g(i) < g(j); if defined, pro[PAST proj]
i
 = g(i)
(23)
pro[PRES proj]
i
g is defined only if g(i) ◦g(j); if defined, pro[PRES proj]
i
 = g(i)
(24)
pro[FUT proj]
i
g is defined only if g(j) < g(i); if defined, pro[FUTproj]
i
 = g(i)
(25)
a. For any two indices <w,t> and <w′,t′>:
<w,t> < <w ′,t′> iff w=w ′ and t is prior to t′.
<w,t> ◦<w ′,t′>
iff w=w ′ and t and t′ overlap.
b. For any two indices <w,t> and <w ′,t′>:
<w,t> ∈MOD(<w ′,t′>)
iff
t=t ′ and w ′ is accessible from
w via MOD.
The two LFs above then lead to the two sets of truth conditions in
(26). In both formulas, ∃i3 ranges over indices i3 which share the world-
coordinate with i2 and whose time-coordinate is in a particular relation
to the temporal coordinate of i2: it precedes it in (26a), leading to the
past-over-past reading, and it overlaps with it in (26b), resulting in the
past-over-present reading.
(26)
Truth conditions of (19) :
a. λi0. ∃i1[ i1 < i0 ∧∀i2 ∈DoxAnnalea (i1)
∃i3 [i3 < i2 ∧Lucía be sick at i3] ]
Past-over-Past
b. λi0. ∃i1[ i1 < i0 ∧∀i2 ∈DoxAnnalea (i1)
∃i3 [i3◦i2 ∧Lucía be sick at i3] ]
Past-over-Present
2.2
Subjunctive Mood
Spanish and other Romance languages present a mood divide in the
complement clauses of attitude verbs: representational verbs like pensar
‘think’ select Indicative, as in (27), while non-representational verbs like
lamentar ‘regret’ select Subjunctive, as in (28):

434
E. Csipak and M. Romero
(27)
Bea
Bea
piensa
thinks
[que
[that
Juan
Juan
enseña
teaches.ind
/
/
*enseñe
*teaches.subj
semántica]
semantics]
‘Bea thinks that Juan teaches semantics.’
(28)
Bea
Bea
lamenta
regrets
[que
[that
Juan
Juan
*enseña
*teaches.ind
/
/
enseñe
teaches.subj
semántica]
semantics]
‘Bea regrets that Juan teaches semantics.’
We follow Schlenker (2005)’s analysis of mood morphology, featuring
the following ingredients. First, mood morphology introduces a mood
feature on the world pronoun, again represented as a superscript on the
pronoun in our LFs, e.g. pro[ind prok]
i
. Second, the features ind(icative)
and subj(unctive) are relative to a pronoun prok that picks up the so-
called “local context” (in the sense of Stalnaker 1975): For root clauses,
prok equals the Common Ground (CG); for embedded complement
clauses, prok (roughly) equals Doxx(w0) of the attitude holder x.
Finally, the feature ind imposes a presupposition on the value of the
world pronoun whereas the feature subj imposes no presupposition, as
deﬁned in (29)–(30):
(29)
pro[IND prok]
i



is defined only if g(i) ∈g(k);
if defined, pro[IND prok]
i
 = g(proi)
(30)
pro[SUBJ prok]
i
= g(proi)
When we combine these lexical entries with the rest of the complement
clause in (27)–(28), we obtain the partial function (31) for the Indicative
clause and the total function (32) for its Subjunctive counterpart (where
x is the attitude holder):
(31)
Juan teach semantics at pro[INDprok]=
λw′: w′ ∈Doxx(w0). J teaches sem in w ′
IND-proposition
(32)
Juan teach semantics at pro[SUBJ prok]
i
 =
λw′: w′ ∈Doxx(w0). J teaches sem in w ′
SUBJ-proposition

Counterfactual Hypothetical vs. Biscuit Conditionals …
435
Let us brieﬂy see how the inherent semantics of the relevant attitude
verbs leads to the observed selection pattern in (27)–(28).
In the case of think, the (standard) lexical entry in (33) simply asks
us to check the value of our proposition at the worlds w ∈Doxx(w0).
For that, the partial ind-proposition (31) sufﬁces. To that, we add Heim
(1991)’s principle Maximize Presupposition! in (34)6:
(33)
think(p)(x) =
λw0. ∀w ∈Doxx(w0): p(w)
(34)
Maximize Presupposition!: Make your contribution presuppose as
much as possible!
(Heim 1991)
Given this principle, the maximally presuppositional ind-proposition
not only can be used, but it also must be used. Hence, think can take
the ind-proposition and cannot take the subj-proposition, as we saw in
(27).
In the case of regret we have the lexical entry (35) (adapted from Heim
1992’s be glad ). The idea is that, for each world w ∈Doxx(w0), we
compare in terms of desirability the world w p most similar to w where p
is true—which is w itself—and the world w¬p most similar to w where
¬p is true—namely, Simw(revp(Doxx(w0))+¬p).
(35)
regret (p)(x) =
λw0:∀w ∈Doxx(w0) [p(w)].
∀w ∈Doxx(w0) [Simw(revp(Doxx(w0))+¬p)
>Bou x(w0)w]
6 To see a simple example illustrating Heim (1991)’s Maximize Presupposition! at work, consider
the choice between the indeﬁnite article a in (i) and the deﬁnite article the in (ii). The
indeﬁnite article expresses existence in the truth conditional content and carries no preposition,
whereas the deﬁnite article expresses existence truth-conditionally but, in addition, carries the
uniqueness presupposition that the set denoted by its syntactic sister is a singleton. Since, given
world knowledge, the uniqueness presupposition in (ii) is satisﬁed—there is only one (relevant)
sun—, the presuppositionally heavier the has to be used, the choice of the non-presuppositional
a in (i) leading to infelicity.
(i) # A sun is shining.
(ii)
The sun is shining.
.

436
E. Csipak and M. Romero
More concretely, Simw(ψ) ask us to ﬁnd the most similar world w′ to w
for which ψ(w′) yields true, where ψ is the result of revising Doxx(w0)
with respect to p and updating it with ¬p.
Now, if we take p to be total subj-proposition (32), the expres-
sion Simw(revp(Doxx(w0))+ ¬p) will be deﬁned.7 But, if we take p to
the partial ind-proposition (31) instead, the expression will be unde-
ﬁned.8 Hence, regret must combine with a subj-proposition and cannot
combine with an ind-proposition, as we saw in (28).
2.3
Breaking Sequence of Tense
When Sequence of Tense is broken in attitude reports by using an
absolute tense, e.g. English present tense in (36), we obtain a so-called
“double-access” temporal reading: The time of the embedded proposi-
tion must align both with the utterance time t0, as paraphrased in (36a),
7 The formal expression Simw(revp(Doxx(w0))+¬p) instructs us, ﬁrst, to temporarily revise
Doxx(w0) with respect to p, as deﬁned in (i). If we take subj-p, the (temporarily) revised
subj-psubj-p(Doxx(w0)) will contain worlds in which John teaches semantics and worlds in
which John does not teach semantics. Then, in a second step, (...)+¬p asks us to update the
result of this revision with ¬p, resulting in a set containing only worlds where John does not
teach semantics. In a ﬁnal step, Simw ask us to look at the worlds within this updated revised
doxastic state and to select the world w′ most similar to w. In general, since the revised and
updated doxastic state is not empty, it will be possible to ﬁnd a world w′ most similar to w0.
Hence, when using subj-p, the formal expression will be deﬁned and the semantic derivation
of sentence (28) can proceed.
(i)
For any context c and proposition p:
rev p(c) = ∪{X ⊆W: c⊆X and X+p is defined}
8 Consider again the formal expression Simw(revp(Doxx(w0))+¬p), this time using ind-p. First,
we need to temporarily revise Doxx(w0) with respect to ind-p. The (temporarily) revised ind-
pind-p(Doxx(w0)) will contain only worlds in which John teaches semantics, as the original
Doxx(w0) did. Second, we need to update the result of this revision with ¬p, which results in
an empty doxastic state (contradiction). Finally, Simw ask us to look at the worlds w′ within
this empty updated revised doxastic state and to select the world w′ most similar to w. But,
since there is no world in that epistemic state, it is impossible to select one. This means that,
when using ind-p, the formal expression is undeﬁned and, thus, the semantic derivation of
(28) cannot be carried out.

Counterfactual Hypothetical vs. Biscuit Conditionals …
437
and with the attitude holder’s subjective “now” t1, as in (36b) (Abusch
1997; Ogihara 1999). The same facts holds for Spanish.
(36)
John said Mary is pregnant.
a. John said at a past time t1 that Mary is pregnant at t0.
b. John said at a past time t1 that Mary is pregnant at t1.
However, using the lexical entry (37) for absolute present tense produces
the LF (38), which only gives us temporal alignment of t4 with t0, as in
(39a). To obtain the desired alignment with t1, Ogihara (1999) proposes
an analysis (very much simpliﬁed here!) where the temporal property is
duplicated and linked to t2 as well, as underlined in (39b):
(37)
pro [PRES pro 0]
i
g is deﬁned only if g(i) ◦g(0);
if defined, pro[PRES pro 0]
i
 = g(i)
(38)
LF: λ0. ∃1[John say at pro1[PAST pro0] λ3 ∃4
[Mary be pregn.
(39)
a. λt0.∃t1 [t1<i0 ∧∀t2 ∈SAY john(t1): ∃t4[t4◦t0 ∧
Mary be
4]]
b. λt0. ∃t1 [t1<i0 ∧∀t2 ∈SAY john(t1): ∃t4[t4◦t0 ∧
Mary be
4 ∧t4◦t2]]
4[PRES pro0]]]
at pro
pregnant at t
pregnant at t
We would like to take the time here to point out that breaking Sequence
of Tense only works when there is one continuous interval that is talked
about. That is, when reporting that John said that Mary is pregnant,
it must be the same pregnancy that John and the speaker are talking
about, even if John was talking about the pregnancy a month ago and
the speaker is talking about it now. (36) cannot be used in scenario where
ﬁve years ago, Mary was pregnant and John talked about this, and now
Mary is pregnant again, and the speaker wishes to convey both that John
talked about Mary’s pregnancy in the past, and that Mary is currently
pregnant again. Using Sequence of Tense in this way in order to sneak in
a ‘by the way’ observation is disallowed.

438
E. Csipak and M. Romero
3
Proposal
We are ready to go back to the contrast between hypothetical and biscuit
counterfactual conditionals. The crucial differences between the two
counterfactual types can be recapitulated as follows.
In hypothetical counterfactuals, the consequent clause must contain
‘fake’ tense, both in English and in Spanish. This is shown in (40)–(41):
While the (a)-versions with ‘fake’ tense are grammatical, the (b)-versions
with no ‘fake’ tense in the consequent clause are unacceptable under the
hypothetical reading:
(40)
a.
If you were hungry right now, your stomach would be growling.
HypCF
HypCF
b. # If you were hungry right now, your stomach is growling.
(41)
a.
Si
If
(tú)
(you)
tuvieses
had.Subj
hambre,
hunger,
tu
your
estómago
stomach
estaría      gruñendo.
would.be growling.
b. # Si
If
(tú)
(you)
tuvieses
had.Subj
hambre,
hunger,
tu
your
estómago
stomach
está(/esté)          gruñendo.
is.Ind(/is.Subj) growling.
In biscuit counterfactuals, by contrast, the consequent clause should
contain no ‘fake’ tense, both in English and in Spanish. This can be
seen in (42)–(43): While the (a)-versions with ‘fake’ tense are deviant as
biscuits, the (b)-versions without it are perfect. Furthermore, the conse-
quent clause must appear in indicative mood in Spanish, as shown in
(43b):
(42)
a. # If you were hungry right now, there would be pizza in the fridge.
b.
If you were hungry right now, there is pizza in the fridge.
BiCF
(43)
a. # Si
If
(tú)
(you)
tuvieses
had.Subj
hambre,
hunger,
habría
would.have
pizza
pizza
en
in
el   frigoríﬁco.
the fridge.
b.
Si
If
(tú)
(you)
tuvieses   hambre, hay(/*haya)          pizza en el        
frigo   BiCF
had.Subj hunger, have.Ind (/*Subj) pizza in  the fridge.
To cover the entire morphological pattern, the following four points need
to be accounted for.

Counterfactual Hypothetical vs. Biscuit Conditionals …
439
First, why does ‘fake’ tense in the consequent clause make good
hypothetical counterfactuals? Here we will adopt the concrete implemen-
tation of the temporal remoteness approach proposed in Romero (2017),
summarized in Sect. 3.1.
Second, why does the lack of ‘fake’ tense and the use of indicative
mood in the consequent make good biscuit counterfactuals? Following
Romero and Csipak (2019), we will propose in Sect. 3.2 that, in these
forms, we are breaking Sequence of Tense and, additionally for Spanish,
we are breaking what could be called ‘Sequence of Mood’; that is, we are
doing double access readings at the same time in the temporal and modal
domain. In lack of a fully worked-out analysis of double access read-
ings over indices (i.e., <time,world>-pairs), we will extend our simpliﬁed
version of Ogihara’s (1999) idea as a stop-gap solution.
Third, why does ‘fake’ tense in the consequent clause and, additionally
for Spanish, non-Indicative mood make biscuit counterfactuals deviant?
In other words, why does maintaining Sequence of Tense and Sequence
of Mood in (42a)/(43a) make bad biscuit counterfactuals? We will argue
in Sect. 3.3 that pragmatic competition between the relevant forms rules
out the unacceptable options.9
Fourth and ﬁnally, why does the lack of ‘fake’ tense and the use of
indicative in the consequent make hypothetical counterfactuals unac-
ceptable, as in (40b)/(41b)? We will sketch a potential solution in
Sect. 3.4 based on the Gricean Principle of Manner. In particular, we
will argue that when a speaker is in a position to break Sequence of
Tense/Mood when trying to utter a hypothetical counterfactual, the
Maxim Be Brief! demands that they not utter a conditional at all, but
rather plain q, the consequent.
3.1
Grammatical Hypothetical Counterfactuals
We start with the grammatical hypothetical conditionals in (44) and
(45), which, as we saw, carry a layer of ‘fake’ tense in English and Spanish
and appear in Subjunctive mood in Spanish:
9 This is true of the typical cases; we discuss exceptions in Sect. 3.3.

440
E. Csipak and M. Romero
(44)
If  you were hungry right now, your stomach would be growling.  (=(40a))
(45)
Si (tú)   tuvieses   hambre ahora, tu    estómago estaría        gruñendo.
If (you) had.subj hunger now,    your stomach   would.be  growling
‘If you were hungry now, your stomach would be growling.’  (=(41a))
We have now the necessary ingredients for an analysis of the tense and
mood morphology in these conditional forms. On the one hand, we have
the general LF structure (46) assumed for hypothetical counterfactuals
in the temporal remoteness approach (Dudman 1983; Grønn and von
Stechow 2009; cf. Ippolito 2003). This includes a back shift in time—
represented with Past in (46)—with a future indicative conditional
embedded under that shift. For the sake of concreteness, we assume that
the future indicative conditional is headed by a silent modal with a meta-
physical modal base METAPHY and a stereotypical ordering source L
(cf. Kaufmann 2005), represented as modalL
metaphy in (46):
(46)
PAST [MODALL
METAPHY [if (FUT) A] [then FUT C] ]
On the other hand, we have the lexical entries for the relevant pieces of
tense and mood morphology that we saw in Sects. 2.1 and 2.2:
(47)
pro [PAST proj]
i
g is defined only if g(i) < g(j);
if deﬁned, pro [PAST proj]
i
 = g(i)
(48)
pro [FUT proj]
i
g is defined only if g(j) < g(i);
if deﬁned,pro [FUTproj]
i
 = g(i)
(49)
pro [IND prok]
i

is defined only if g(i) ∈g(k);
if defined,pro [IND prok]
i
 = g(proi)
(50)
pro [SUBJ prok]
i
= g(proi)
Extending previous analyses, Romero (2017) combines these two sets of
ingredients to build the LF below for our examples. The back shift in
time is represented by pro[past pro0]
1
. This (covert) pronoun introduces

Counterfactual Hypothetical vs. Biscuit Conditionals …
441
an index i1 whose temporal coordinate precedes that of the utterance
index i0 and at which the future indicative conditional headed by the
modal modalL
metaphy is evaluated. At the same time, the pronoun
pro[past pro0]
1
, having an interpretable past feature, allows for the past
tense morphology in the antecedent and consequent clauses to be left
uninterpreted, hence behaving as ‘fake’ tense morphology in standard
Sequence of Tense constructions. This is represented in (51) by crossing
out the uninterpreted morphological feature in pro4, which leaves just
the future temporal features of the future conditional to be interpreted in
the antecedent and consequent clauses: pro[past][fut pro8]
4
.Additionally for
Spanish, the Subjunctive morphology in the antecedent clause is repre-
sented by the subjunctive feature on pro[subj CG]
4
.10 Adding ∃-closure to
bind pro1 and pro4, Romero (2017) delivers the (preliminary) LF (51)
for our examples (44) and (45)11:
(51)
LF: λ0 ∃1[ MODALL
METAPHY pro[PAST pro0]
1
λ8 ∃4[you be hungry at pro [SUBJ CG][past][FUT pro8]
4
]
λ8 ∃4[your stomach be growling at pro [past][FUT pro8]
4
] ]
This LF leads to the truth conditions (52). Note the temporal back shift
i1 < i0 above the modal and the lack thereof inside the antecedent
and consequent clauses, corresponding to the uninterpreted, ‘fake’ tense
morphology in these clauses. Additionally for Spanish, Subjunctive mood
in the antecedent clause imposes no modal presupposition on index i8:
i8 ∈CG. The resulting formula correctly matches the truth conditions of
hypothetical counterfactual conditionals under the temporal remoteness
view:
10 The Spanish verbal paradigm has only one mood version of ‘would+Verb’. Since there is no
mood choice for this form in the consequent clause, the mood distinction in the consequent
is neutralized.
11 See Romero (2017) for two adjustments to this LF and truth conditions, one concerning
temporal alignment between i4 and the actual index i0 and one restricting the methaphysical
possibilities quantiﬁed over (Morgenbesser cases).

442
E. Csipak and M. Romero
(52)
λi0. ∃i1 [i1 < i0 ∧∀i8 ∈MetaphL(i1):
∃i4 [i8 ∈CG ∧i8 < i4 ∧you be hungry at i4] →
∃i4 [i8 < i4 ∧your stomach be growling at i4]]
This accounts for the grammaticality of ‘fake’ tense in the antecedent and
consequent of hypothetical counterfactuals both in English and Spanish
and for the grammaticality of subjunctive mood in the antecedent of
hypothetical counterfactuals in Spanish.
3.2
Grammatical Biscuit Counterfactuals
We turn now to grammatical biscuit counterfactual forms like (53)–(54),
whose consequent clause has no ‘fake’ tense in English and Spanish and
bears Indicative mood in Spanish:
(53)
If you were hungry right now, there is pizza in the fridge.
(54)
Si
If
(tú)
(you)
tuvieses
had.Subj
hambre,
hunger,
hay
have.Ind
pizza
pizza
en
in
el
the
frigoríﬁco.
fridge.
=(42b)
=(43b)
Following Romero and Csipak (2019), we propose that these forms
involve broken Sequence of Tense and broken “Sequence of Mood”,
leading to a double access reading of the temporal and modal parameters
of the evaluation index.
To implement this idea, some formal apparatus will be needed. Next
to temporal intervals overlapping with two times à la Ogihara (1999), we
need modal ‘intervals’—i.e., stretches of logical space—overlapping with
two modal contexts.12 We construe an interval as a plural sum T of time
points and, following Schlenker (2004), as a plural sum W of possible
worlds. We put these pluralities into a pair to form an i(nternally)-plural
12 As noted by a reviewer, temporal intervals are convex: For any two time points t1 and
t2 belonging to an interval, all points temporally ordered between t1 and t2 also belong to
that interval. To have convex modal intervals, we would need an ordering of worlds, e.g. à la
Stalnaker (1968), Lewis (1973) or Kratzer (2012). We leave for future research what ordering
system would be best suited.

Counterfactual Hypothetical vs. Biscuit Conditionals …
443
index <W,T>. Temporal precedence < and overlap ◦between i-plural
indices are deﬁned in (55) and a parallel deﬁnition for modal overlap • is
given in (56). Note that the condition on the latent parameter has been
relaxed: While (25) required the equality w=w′ for atomic worlds, (55)
requires a non-empty intersection W∩W′ ̸= ∅between plural worlds
(and similarly for (56)):
(55)
For any two indices <W,T> and <W′,T′>:
<W,T> < <W′,T′> iff W∩W′̸=
d
n
a
0/
(the entire) T is prior to (the entire) T′.
<W,T> ◦<W′,T′>
iff W∩W′̸=
T
and
T
and
0/
′ overlap.
(56)
For any two indices <W,T> and <W′,T′>:
<W,T> • <W′,T′>
iff T∩T′̸=
W
d
n
a
W
d
n
a
0/
′ overlap.
The contribution of mood is redeﬁned in (57): pro[Ind prok]
i
presupposes
modal overlap • between index g(i) and the maximal i-plural index—
imax deﬁned in (58)—corresponding to the local context g(k). For
example, if our local context is {<w1,t7>, <w2,t7>, <w3,t7}>, its i-max is
<w1⊕w2⊕w3, t7 >.
(57)
pro [IND pro k]
i
 is defined only if g(i) • imax(g(k));
if defined, pro [IND pro k]
i
 = g(pro i)
(58)
For any set I of (atomic) indices:
imax(I) = < max({w′: ∃t′ [<w ′,t′> ∈I]}),
{t′: ∃w′ [<w ′,t′> ∈I]}) >
max(
Finally, we assume that, if a proposition is predicated of an i-plural index
<W,T>, that proposition must hold true throughout that entire modal-
temporal space, that is, through all the pairs <w,t> such that w∈W and
t∈T.
Let us apply the idea of temporal/modal double-access and this
formalization to our examples. The present and indicative morphology in
(53)/(54) leads to LF (59). This gives us the temporal and modal align-
ment of index i4 with the (atomic) utterance index i0 and with the CG

444
E. Csipak and M. Romero
in the last ∃-subformula in (60), but no temporal or modal alignment of
i4 with the (atomic) counterfactual index i8 and MetaphL(i1):
(59)
LF: λ0 ∃1[MODALL
METAPHY at pro1[PAST pro0]
λ8 ∃i4[you be hungry at pro4[S UBJ CG] past [F UT pro8]]
λ8 ∃i4[be pizza at pro 4[IND CG] [PRES pro0]]]
(60)
λi0. ∃i1 [i1<i0 ∧∀i8∈MetaphL(i1):
∃i4[i8•imax(CG) ∧i8<i4 ∧you be hungry at i4]→
∃i4[i4•imax(CG) ∧i0◦i4 ∧there be pizza at i4]]
To supply the desired alignment, we extend Ogihara’s idea and propose
to duplicate the temporal and modal relations as i8◦i4 and i4 •imax
(MetaphL(i1)) to allow for local binding, resulting in (61), with the
duplication underlined:
(61)
λi0. ∃i1 [i1<i0 ∧∀i8∈MetaphL(i1):
∃i4[i8∈CG ∧i8<i4 ∧you be hungry at i4] →
∃i4[i4•imax(CG) ∧i0◦i4 ∧there be pizza at i4 ∧
i4•imax(Metaph L(i1)) ∧i8◦i4]]
Crucially, i4 in the last ∃-subformula is an i-plural index over-
lapping temporally with the time parameters of i0 and i8 and
overlapping modally with the world parameters of imax(CG) and
imax(MetaphL(i1)). That is, for each atomic i0 of shape <w0,t0> and
each atomic i8 of shape <w8,t8>, there is an i4 of shape <w0 ⊕. . . ⊕w8,
t0 ⊕. . . ⊕t8> temporally and modally overlapping with them. For each
such combination of i0 and i8, there being pizza in the fridge is pred-
icated of the entire index i4. As a result, by breaking Sequence of
Tense and Sequence of Mood in BiCFs, the truth conditions (61) guar-
antee not only that there is pizza in each hypothetical hungry-index i8,
but also at each potential actual index i0. This hard-wires the ‘biscuit’
effect: the feeling that the consequent is being asserted (of i0) regardless
of the truth of the antecedent.

Counterfactual Hypothetical vs. Biscuit Conditionals …
445
In sum, conditionals that combine ‘fake’ tense and—for Spanish—
subjunctive mood in the antecedent clause with no ‘fake’ tense and—
for Spanish—indicative mood in the consequent clause lead to truth
conditions that explicitly deliver the ‘biscuit’ effect. This renders them
appropriate forms to express biscuit conditional meanings.
3.3
Unacceptable Biscuit Counterfactuals
After having presented an account of why counterfactual biscuits with a
mood mismatch, such as (53)/(54), are grammatical, we now turn to the
less acceptable variants:
(42a)
(43a)
(62)
# If you were hungry right now, there would be pizza in  the fridge.
(63)
# Si
If
(tú)
(you)
tuvieses
had.Subj
hambre,
hunger,
habría
would.have
pizza
pizza
en
in
el
the
frigoríﬁco.
fridge.
=
=
We observe that (62) and (63), which do not break Sequence of
Tense/Mood, are unacceptable. Notice that this is the case in English
and Spanish, respectively, pace Franke (2009), who claims both of the
following sentences are acceptable:
(64)
If you had needed some money, there was some in the bank.
(= Franke (2009)’s (113a), cited from Johnson-Laird (1986))
(65)
If you had been hungry, there would have been pizza in the fridge.
(= Franke (2009)’s (114e))
Our informants agree that (64) is in fact acceptable, but (65) is not. We
point out that language variation plays an important role here: Csipak
(2018) shows that while English is restricted in this way, German is not,
and Csipak (2015) argues that languages in which the subjunctive has a
‘politeness’ use in unembedded clauses typically allow it to appear in the
consequents of biscuit conditionals such as (65). We do not discuss these
languages further.

446
E. Csipak and M. Romero
Let us return to the unacceptable (62) and (63) and compare their
truth-conditions with those of the acceptable forms (53)–(54). Recall the
truth-conditions of the acceptable forms in (61), repeated here as (66):
(66)
λi0. ∃i1 [i1<i0 ∧∀i8∈MetaphL(i1):
(=(61))
∃i4[i8∈CG ∧i8<i4 ∧you be hungry at i4] →
∃i4[i4•imax(CG) ∧i0◦i4 ∧there be pizza at i4 ∧
i4•imax(Metaph L(i1)) ∧i8◦i4]]
The index i4 in (66) must stretch temporally and modally to include the
time and world parameters of (past hypothetical) i8 and (present actual)
i0. Recall that, under the double access reading, the relevant proposition
has to hold of all the points in the temporally and modally stretched
i4. This means that there is pizza in the fridge at all indices i’ of shape
<w’,t’> such that t8 ≤t’ ≤t0 and imax(MetaphL(i1)) ≤w’ ≤imax(CG).
Hence, (66) entails that there is pizza in the fridge at a hypothetical index
t’ that shares the world parameter with i8 but is temporally posterior to
i8.
Consider now the truth conditions of the unacceptable forms (62) and
(63), given in (67):
(67)
λi0. ∃i1 [i1 < i0 ∧∀i8 ∈MetaphL(i1):
∃i4 [i8 ∈CG ∧i8 < i4 ∧you be hungry at i4] →
∃i4 [i8 < i4 ∧there be pizza at i4]]
The index i4 in (67) is only speciﬁed to be temporally posterior to the
hypothetical index i8 (and, following deﬁnition (25a), to share its world
parameter with i8); no requirement that i4 stretches to overlap with i4 is
imposed by these truth-conditions. Thus, the acceptable (53)–(54) have
stronger truth conditions than the unacceptable (62)–(63).
Following Franke (2009), we predict that both sets of biscuit coun-
terfactuals, (53)/(54) and (62)/(63), are actually grammatical, and both
receive a biscuit interpretation. This is irrespective of tense and mood,
since conditional independence is deﬁned independently, and p and q are

Counterfactual Hypothetical vs. Biscuit Conditionals …
447
conditionally independent in both sets of conditionals. But this means
that (53)/(54) and (62)/(63) compete for signalling the same message,
namely the conditional if p, q as well as the speaker’s commitment to
q in i0. This latter message is signalled differently by the two sets of
conditionals: the semantically stronger form (53)/(54) breaks Sequence
of Tense/Mood to allow a double access reading, thus explicitly signalling
the overlap of i4 with i0. The semantically weaker form (62)/(63) on the
other hand relies purely on pragmatic inferencing (deriving the ‘biscuit’
reading from conditional independence of p an q).
In a context where the speaker wishes to signal a counterfactual biscuit
meaning, i.e., where she wants to signal both her commitment to the
counterfactual conditional and to the truth of the consequent in the
actual world, the stronger form should be chosen, and the weaker form
should be dispreferred.
To explain how this preference comes about, we appeal to two
recent works: the work on cessation implicatures by Altshuler and
Schwarzschild (2013) discusses similar effects in another domain, and we
use Lauer (2014)’s analysis of Need-a-Reason implicatures to explain why
the pragmatic inferencing that takes place in (62)/(63) is non-optional
and thus leads to contradictory messages.
Altshuler and Schwarzschild (2013) propose that competition between
tenses leads to cessation implicatures. This phenomenon is illustrated in
(68)–(69). Under certain conditions (with a stative predicate and when
no topical past time is salient), we observe a cessation implicature when
the past tense is used instead of the present tense: the implicature that
the stative property does not hold at the utterance time.
(68)
John is sick.
(69)
John was sick. ⇝John is no longer sick.
To derive this cessation implicature, Altshuler and Schwarzschild (2013)
argue that present tense stative predicates entail being true not just of
the utterance time but also of prior times, due to the Open Interval
Hypothesis.

448
E. Csipak and M. Romero
⊆
⊆
(70)
Open Interval Hypothesis (Altshuler & Schwarzschild 2013)
The run-time of a state is an open interval. That is, if e is a stative
eventuality and t
T(e), then there is a temporal instant t such
that t
< t and t
T(e).
This means that, by using present tense, the speaker of (68) conveys the
stronger message that the interval of John being sick includes both the
speech time and times prior to speech time. In contrast, using the past
tense in (69) only commits the speaker to John being sick at some times
prior to speech time, thus giving rise to the implicature that the speaker
does not want to commit to John being sick at speech time.13 We note
that this implicature is easily cancellable, as in (71).
(71)
John was sick last week. In fact, he still is.
A similar, but slightly different mechanism is at work in our examples.
We assume that a speaker has a choice between two forms, (72) and
(73). By uttering (72), the speaker breaks Sequence of Tense, whereas
(73) observes it.
=(42b)
=(42a)
(72)
If you were hungry now, there is pizza in the fridge.
(73)
# If you were hungry now, there would be pizza in the fridge.
We ﬁrst consider the semantics of the stronger form (72), seen above
in (66). By breaking Sequence of Tense, the speaker signals that she is
committed to there being pizza in the fridge both at the counterfactual
hungry-indices and at the actual index. Note that inclusion of the actual
index happens semantically.
Now turning to (73), we remember that the semantics only commit
the speaker to there being pizza at the counterfactual hungry-indices, not
at the actual index. This of course gives rise to the implicature that the
13 We note that the purpose of Altshuler and Schwarzchild’s proposal is to argue against
Sequence of Tense as presented in Ogihara (1999). This does not diminish its similarity to
our example.

Counterfactual Hypothetical vs. Biscuit Conditionals …
449
speaker does not want to commit to there being pizza at the actual index.
Let us call this the non-actuality implicature.
Given conditional independence and the reasoning resulting from
it (i.e., that the speaker must have some evidence for q in the actual
world), we would expect that the non-actuality implicature should be
cancelled. But we argue that this implicature is mandatory: it is a Need-
a-Reason implicature in the sense of Lauer (2013, 2014). Lauer argues
that when speakers choose an otherwise ‘dispreferred’ form (i.e., one that
is more complex and less informative than a competitor), their interlocu-
tors draw the inference that they must have a reason for choosing this
form. Such implicatures are not cancellable. Consider Lauer’s example
(7) below.
(74)
Somewhere in San Francisco, A and B are planning a dinner party,
talking about who they should invite.
A:
Is John in town?
B:
No, he is in Paris or in London.
B’s utterance gives rise to an ignorance implicature: B does not know
which of the two cities John is in. Lauer calls this a Need-a-Reason impli-
cature and observes that is almost impossible to cancel. For the purpose
of the conversation in (74) it is irrelevant whether John is in Paris or
in London. Furthermore, the form using or is also more complex than
its alternatives (John is in Paris and John is in London), as well as being
less informative than the alternatives. In sum, B has chosen a form that
is—seemingly needlessly—less informative and more complex than its
alternatives. The interlocutors therefore infer that B must have ‘had a
reason’ for choosing this form, namely to convey the content of the
implicature (that B doesn’t know whether John is in Paris or in London).
This makes the implicature very hard to cancel. And in fact it is very
difﬁcult to follow up B’s utterance with ‘In fact, he is in London.’
Returning to our example, we saw that maintaining Sequence of
Tense and choosing the subjunctive—i.e., leaving it open whether there
is pizza at the actual index—results in a less informative statement
than breaking Sequence of Tense and choosing the indicative—i.e.,

450
E. Csipak and M. Romero
committing oneself to there being pizza at the actual index.14 Thus the
implicature that is derived from using the weaker form (‘the speaker
does not want to commit whether there is pizza in the actual world’)
is a non-cancellable, Need-a-Reason implicature. But remember that
the hearer is also invited to follow a Franke-style reasoning about the
independence of p and q: since p and q are conditionally indepen-
dent, the speaker should have reason to assume that q does hold at the
actual index. Thus, the Need-a-Reason implicature and the reasoning
triggered by independence send conﬂicting messages: the speaker is
signalling both that she doesn’t want to commit to there being pizza
in the actual world (qua subjunctive) and that she does have reason to
believe that there is pizza in the actual world (qua conditional indepen-
dence). Compared to its competitor (72), (73) is thus not only weaker
semantically, but also gives rise to contradictory inferences. It is therefore
dispreferred.
Note that there are contexts where the dispreferred form becomes
available when the desired interpretation is conditional independence (a
‘biscuit’ reading), but no commitment of the speaker to q in i0. For
example, consider modal subordination contexts such as (75) due to
Swanson (2013). Here, the speaker is only committed to there being
biscuits at her desire indices (conditionally independently of p), but
crucially not at i0. Since the BiCF appears in a modal subordination
context, the grammar does not allow for a morphological choice and
the consequent clause must feature the Subjunctive. This means that
that there is no explicit morphological cue leading to the biscuit inter-
pretation. Hence, conditional independence alone derives the ‘biscuit’
interpretation.
(Swanson 2013)
(75)
I want to vacation at a posh hotel in London. We would have tea every
          afternoon, and there would be biscuits on the sideboard if one were so
          inclined.
14 We leave it open whether it is more complex to use the subjunctive or to break Sequence of
Tense/Mood.

Counterfactual Hypothetical vs. Biscuit Conditionals …
451
Importantly, the speaker of (75) has not committed to there being
biscuits on the sideboard of the posh London hotel at i0.15
3.4
Unacceptable Hypothetical Counterfactuals
We have now accounted for the acceptability of counterfactual biscuits
that break Sequence of Tense/Mood and the unacceptability of counter-
factual biscuits that do not break it (in the typical case). What remains
is to explain why hypothetical counterfactuals which break Sequence of
Tense/Mood are unacceptable:
=(40b)
=(41b)
(76)
# If you were hungry right now, your stomach is growling.
(77)
# Si
If
(tú)
(you)
tuvieses
had.Subj
hambre,
hunger,
tu
your
estómago
stomach
está
is.Ind
gruñendo.
growling.
To give forms like this a better chance, we consider a scenario where a
speaker might wish to convey both the hypothetical counterfactual and
the consequent proposition.
(78)
Context: A is a detective at a crime scene. Her partner, B, is stuck in trafﬁc
and can thus not see the crime scene yet. A is describing the scene.
A: #If the victim had gotten poisoned with arsenic, he is showing the following
symptoms: X, Y, and Z.
How come the utterance by A is not acceptable? It seems like this would
be a convenient way of communicating two things at once: both what
symptoms the victim would be showing in case of arsenic poisoning, and
the fact that the victim is actually showing these symptoms. Yet even in
15 We will have nothing to say on the status of (i), which seems to oscillate between the
speaker’s dream worlds and what she has read about the actual world.
(i) I want to vacation at the Waldorf-Astoria in New York. I read the brochure and know all
about their features. We would have tea every afternoon, and there is a sauna if we were
so inclined.

452
E. Csipak and M. Romero
the context where A is trying to convey exactly those two facts, (78) is
unacceptable.
To explain this, we appeal to a suggestion by DeRose and Grandy
(1999) about why speakers use conditionals. They propose that there are
two main reasons why speakers choose to utter a conditional of the form
if p, q rather than plain q, and that when neither of these conditions is
met, via the Gricean Principle of Manner (Grice 1975), plain q should be
uttered. We tentatively follow their argument, outlined below, but leave
open the possibility that there may be other reasons to utter if p, q.
The ﬁrst reason for which a speaker may utter if p, q rather than q
is that they are uncertain about the truth of q in the actual world w0,
but sufﬁciently certain about the truth of if p, q. In such cases, p and q
will be conditionally dependent, and the resulting conditional if p, q will
be interpreted as a hypothetical conditional. DeRose and Grandy argue
that there is a competition between q and if p, q such that if the speaker
is sufﬁciently certain that q is true at w0, then she should utter plain
q rather than if p, q. Conversely, if the speaker is only sufﬁciently sure
about if p, q but not about plain q, then she should utter the conditional.
The second reason for uttering if p, q is in cases where the speaker
is uncertain whether plain q is sufﬁciently relevant (to the conversation)
at w0. In that case, p and q will be conditionally independent and the
speaker will utter a biscuit conditional. And again there is competition
between plain q and if p, q such that if the speaker is sufﬁciently certain
that q is relevant to the interlocutors, she should simply utter plain q
instead of the conditional.
Taken together, the two reasons why one should not utter a condi-
tional when a simple q might sufﬁce falls under Grice’s Principle of
Manner: in particular, the submaxim to be brief —uttering plain q rather
than the longer if p, q is preferable when the conditions for uttering q
are given.
Since we are interested in deriving a hypothetical counterfactual
reading for (78), we would expect the ﬁrst line of argument to apply.
But we can see that the speaker of (78) is violating these rules: what she
wants to convey is, ﬁrst, a conditional dependence between p and q, and,
second, that q holds in the actual world. But by uttering if p, q instead

Counterfactual Hypothetical vs. Biscuit Conditionals …
453
of plain q, she is signalling that she is not in a position to utter plain q
(remember that q and if p, q are in competition such that if a speaker
is reasonably certain that q holds in w0, she should utter that instead
of the conditional). So on the one hand, by uttering the conditional,
the speaker signals that she is not trying to convey that q holds in w0.
But by breaking Sequence of Tense/Mood, she is explicitly trying to do
the opposite: breaking Sequence of Tense/Mood ensures that the speaker
communicates their belief that q does hold at w0. This contradiction is
what causes (78) to fail.
We now consider an interesting related case.
(79)
If Tom had come, Mary still would have come.
(80)
*If Tom had come, Mary (still) came.
The acceptable (79) conveys both that the counterfactual if p, q is true
and that q is true at w0, whereas (80), which attempts to break Sequence
of Tense/Mood, is unacceptable. The reason for (80) failing is parallel to
the one given above.
The crucial difference between the pair in (79)–(80) and (78) is that
for (79) it is already common ground that Mary did come in the actual
world (signalled by the presupposition trigger still ). So the speaker of
(79) is actually not trying to newly establish that q holds in w0, but is
only trying to convey the conditional link between p and q. The relation
between q and w0 is already settled.
4
Outlook
We have illustrated how to extend the uniﬁed, independence-based
approach for indicative hypothetical and biscuit conditionals to coun-
terfactual hypothetical and biscuit conditionals to derive (40)–(43). We
have done this by combining the temporal remoteness approach to coun-
terfactual conditionals with breaking Sequence of Tense/Mood in an
extension of Ogihara (1999). Then, we have shown how this exten-
sion derives the attested combinations of conditional interpretation and

454
E. Csipak and M. Romero
tense/mood and why pragmatic principles rule out the unattested combi-
nations. Competition between more informative and less informative
forms rules out biscuit counterfactuals that do not break Sequence of
Tense/Mood (except in cases of modal subordination), and the Gricean
principle of Manner rules out hypothetical counterfactuals that do, via
an insight by DeRose and Grandy (1999) of what the communicative
purpose of conditionals is.
There are a number of open issues that we leave for future research.
First, the analysis of double access readings as presented in Romero
and Csipak (2019) needs to be further reﬁned and uniﬁed across
constructions, possibly as a de re analysis. This includes purely temporal
double access like (36), index double access like our counterfactual
biscuits (42b)/(43b) and potentially other double-access-looking data.
For example, in (81), translated into Spanish from Schlenker (2004),
the (a)-version breaking Sequence of Tense/Mood can be used to convey
that, if Juan thought of the actual rainy weather pattern that it counts as
good weather, Juan would be crazy, while the (b)-version does not allow
for this interpretation.
(81)
Context: It is raining outside and the speaker sees that.
a.
Si Juan pensase que hace.Ind buen tiempo, estaría loco.
‘If John thought that the weather is.Ind nice, he would be crazy.’
b. # Si Juan pensase que hiciese.Subj buen tiempo, estaría loco.
# ‘If John thought that the weather was.Subj nice, he would be crazy.’
[Spanish]
Second, on the empirical front, we only consider counterfactual biscuit
conditionals in languages like English and Spanish, which both use verbal
morphology to convey counterfactuality and have attested double-access
readings on that morphology. How does this work in languages that use
other means to express counterfactuality, and do they allow a ‘biscuit’
interpretation of counterfactuals? If so, do they also permit a double-
access indexing option, or is the ‘biscuit’ interpretation derived from
pragmatic inference as in Swanson (2013)’s (75)?
Finally, a challenge is build into our analysis by virtue of using the
temporal remoteness approach to counterfactuality. Counterpossibles

Counterfactual Hypothetical vs. Biscuit Conditionals …
455
like (82) have been argued to posit a problem for the overall temporal
remoteness line:
(82)
If two plus two were ﬁve, this addition would be correct.
The temporal remoteness approach depends on being able to go back
to a point in time where it was possible for the antecedent to be true,
and it is not clear whether this is possible for the antecedent of (82).
One way to solve this might be to relativize indicative and counterfactual
conditionals to a given epistemic state (cf. Leahy 2018). We leave this
possibility for future research.
References
Abusch, Dorit. 1997. Sequence of tense and temporal de re. Linguistics and
Philosophy 20, 1–50.
Altshuler, Daniel & Roger Schwarzschild. 2013. Moment of change, cessa-
tion implicatures and simultaneous readings. In E. Chemla, V. Homer &
G. Winterstein (eds.), Sinn und Bedeutung 17, 45–62.
Anand, Pranav & Valentine Hacquard. 2009. The role of imperfect in romance
counterfactuals. In V. Schmitt, M. Prinzhorn & S. Zobel (eds.), Proceedings
of sinn und bedeutung 14, 37–50. University of Vienna.
Anderson, Alan Ross. 1951. A note on subjunctive and counterfactual condi-
tionals. Analysis 11, 35–38.
Austin, John L. 1956. Ifs and cans. In British Academy, vol. 42, 109–132.
Biezma, Maria & Arno Goebel. 2018. The pragmatic ingredients to get perfect
biscuits. In R. Truswell, C. Cummins, C. Heycock, B. Rabern & H. Rohde
(eds.), Sinn und Bedeutung 21, 179–198.
Csipak, Eva. 2015. Free factive subjunctives in German: University of Göttingen
PhD dissertation.
Csipak, Eva. 2018. Discourse-structuring conditionals and past tense. In
R. Truswell, C. Cummins, C. Heycock, B. Rabern & H. Rohde (eds.), Sinn
und Bedeutung 21, 301–315.
DeRose, K. & R.E. Grandy. 1999. Conditional assertions and ‘biscuit’ condi-
tionals. Nous 33, 405–420.

456
E. Csipak and M. Romero
Dudman, V. H. 1983. Tense and time in english verb clusters of the primary
pattern. Australian Journal of Linguistics 3, 25–44.
Dudman, V. H. 1984. Conditional interpretations of if-sentences. Australian
Journal of Linguistics 4, 143–204.
Ebert, Christian, Cornelia Ebert & Stefan Hinterwimmer. 2014. A uniﬁed
analysis of conditionals as topics. Linguistics and Philosophy 37, 353–408.
Ferreira, Marcelo. 2016. The semantic ingredients of imperfectivity in progres-
sives, habituals, and counterfactuals. Natural Language Semantics 24, 353–
397.
Francez, Itamar. 2015. Chimerical conditionals. Semantics & Pragmatics 8, 1–
35.
Franke, Michael. 2009. Signal to Act: Game Theory in Pragmatics: University of
Amsterdam PhD dissertation.
Goebel, Arno. 2017. Laws for biscuits: Independence and dependence in
conditionals. In D. Burgdorf, J. Collard, S. Maspong & B. Stefánsdóttir
(eds.), Semantics and Linguistic Theory 27, 377–396.
Grice, H. P. 1975. Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J. Morgan (eds.),
Syntax and semantics 3: Speech arts, 41–58. New York: Academic Press.
Grønn, Atle & Arnim von Stechow. 2009. Temporal interpretation and
organization of subjunctive conditionals. Ms. University Oslo.
Heim, Irene. 1991. Artikel und deﬁnitheit. In A. von Stechow & D. Wunder-
lich (eds.), Semantik: Ein internationales Handbuch der zeitgenössischen
Forschung, 487–535. Berlin: de Gruyter.
Heim, Irene. 1992. Presupposition projection and the semantics of attitude
verbs. Journal of Semantics 9, 183–221.
Heim, Irene. 1994. Comments on Abusch’s theory of tense. In H. Kamp (ed.),
Ellipsis, tense and questions, 143–170. U. Amsterdam.
Iatridou, Sabine. 2000. The grammatical ingredients of counterfactuality.
Linguistic Inquiry 31, 231–270.
Ippolito, Michela. 2003. Presuppositions and implicatures in counterfactuals.
Natural Language Semantics 11, 145–186.
Johnson-Laird, P. 1986. Conditionals and mental models. In Elizabeth Closs
Traugott (ed.), On conditionals. Cambridge University Press.
Kaufmann, Stefan. 2005. Conditional truth and future reference. Journal of
Semantics 22, 231–280.
Kratzer, Angelika. 1998. More structural analogies between pronouns and
tenses. In D. Strolovitch & A. Lawson (eds.), Semantics and Linguistic Theory
8, 92–109. Ithaca, N.Y.: CLC.

Counterfactual Hypothetical vs. Biscuit Conditionals …
457
Kratzer, Angelika. 2012. Modality and conditionals. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Kusumoto,
Kiyomi.
1999. Tense
in
embedded
contexts:
University
of
Massachusetts at Amherst PhD dissertation.
Kusumoto, Kiyomi. 2005. On the quantiﬁcation over times in natural
language. Natural Language Semantics 13, 317–357.
Lauer, Sven. 2013. Towards a dynamic pragmatics: Stanford University PhD
dissertation.
Lauer, Sven. 2014. Mandatory implicatures in Gricean pragmatics. In Judith
Degen, Michael Franke & Noah Goodman (eds.), Proceedings of formal and
experimental pragmatics 2014, 21 – 28.
Lauer, Sven. 2015. Biscuits and provisos. In E. Csipak & H. Zeijlstra (eds.),
Sinn und Bedeutung 19, 357–374.
Leahy, Brian. 2018. Counterfactual antecedent falsity and the epistemic sensi-
tivity of counterfactuals. Philosophical Studies 175, 45–69.
Lewis, David. 1973. Counterfactuals. Malden: Blackwell.
Ogihara, T. 1999. Double access sentences generalized. In T. Matthews &
D. Strolovitch (eds.), Semantics & Linguistic Theory 9, 224–236. Ithaca:
CLC.
Ogihara, Toshiyuki. 1995. The semantics of tense in embedded clauses.
Linguistic Inquiry 26, 663–679.
Partee, Barbara. 1973. Some structural analogies between tenses and pronouns
in English. Journal of Philosophy 7, 601–609.
Romero, Maribel. 2017. Tense and mood in counterfactual conditionals: The
view from Spanish. In T. van Gessel A. Cremers & F. Roelofsen (eds.),
Amsterdam Colloquium 21, University of Amsterdam.
Romero, Maribel & Eva Csipak. 2019. Counterfactual biscuit conditionals: A
temporal remoteness account. In K. Lamp K. Blake, F. Davis & J. Rhyne
(eds.), Proceedings of semantics and linguistic theory 29, 441–458. LSA
Journals.
Schlenker, Philippe. 2004. Sequence phenomena and double access readings
generalized. In J. Lecarme & J. Guéron (eds.), The syntax of time, 555–595.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Schlenker, Philippe. 2005. The lazy frenchman’s approach to the subjunctive.
In T. Geerts, I. van Ginneken & H. Jacobs (eds.), Romance languages and
linguistic theory 2003, 269–309. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Schulz, Katrin. 2014. Fake tense in conditional sentences: A modal approach.
Natural Language Semantics 22, 117–144.

458
E. Csipak and M. Romero
Stalnaker, R. 1968. A theory of conditionals. In W. L. Harper, R. Stalnaker &
G. Pearce (eds.), Ifs, 41–55. Dordrecht: Springer.
Stalnaker, R. 1975. Indicative conditionals. Philosophia 5, 269–286.
von Stechow, A. 1995. On the proper treatment of tense. In M. Simons &
T. Galloway (eds.), Semantics and Linguistic Theory 5, Ithaca, NY: CLC.
von Stechow, A. 2009. Tense in compositional semantics. In Wolfgang Klein &
Ping Li (eds.), The expression of time, 129–166. Berlin/New York: De
Gruyter.
Swanson, Eric. 2013. Subjunctive biscuit and stand-off conditionals. Philosoph-
ical Studies 163(3), 637–648.

Events Are the Source of Causal Readings
in the Simplest English Conditionals
Bridget Copley
1
A Causal Puzzle About Statives
and Eventives in Conditionals
Suppose that there is a country called Clavarel1 where the queen is
selected from among the eligible candidates by a series of coin tosses.
In the particular situation we are interested in, it so happens that if the
coin comes up heads, Yolanda becomes the queen; and if the coin comes
up tails, she does not. Suppose also that if someone becomes the queen,
any daughters she may have consequently become princesses; moreover,
1 Thanks to Rachel and Charlie Seymour for Clavarel (https://thedowntownmerrylegs.ban
dcamp.com/track/clavarel).
B. Copley (B)
SFL (CNRS/Université Paris 8/UPL), Paris, France
e-mail: bridget.copley@cnrs.fr
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Switzerland AG 2023
S. Kaufmann et al. (eds.), Conditionals, Palgrave Studies in Pragmatics, Language
and Cognition, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-05682-6_15
459

460
B. Copley
there is no other way to become a princess of Clavarel. Further suppose
that Yolanda has exactly one daughter, named Xanthippe.
In such a context, we can see that (1a) is true, while (1b) is false.
What’s wrong with (1b)? It certainly seems like it conveys a causal rela-
tion which is at odds with what we know—it’s backwards in fact. (1b)
seems to say that if Xanthippe becomes the princess, then by consequence
Yolanda becomes the queen. (1a), on the other hand, has no such ﬂavor.
(1)
a.
If Xanthippe is the princess, Yolanda is the queen.
b.
If Xanthippe becomes the princess, Yolanda becomes the
queen.
The puzzle here is, why? Taking seriously Bennett’s comment that “The
search for a deep understanding of conditionals would go better if
the taxonomy were got right ﬁrst” (Bennett 1988), I will make two
methodological choices in teasing out (merely) where to start with the
taxonomy.
1.1
Causation Rather Than Time
The ﬁrst choice has to do with time. In addition to feeling causally back-
ward, (1b) feels temporally backward; it seems to say that Xanthippe
becomes the princess of Clavarel ﬁrst, and only then does Yolanda
become the queen; contrary, again, to what we know about Claverelian
dynastic politics. Now, the distinction between stative predicates (e.g., be
the princess) and eventive predicates (e.g., become the princess) can be cast
in terms of times; see, for example, Hallman (2009). We might therefore
consider recruiting the concept of time to try and solve this puzzle. This
is certainly a plausible move.2
However, I am going to avoid making reference to time in explaining
the contrast in (1). There are two reasons for this. One reason to start
2 The fact that antecedents like If Xanthippe becomes princess are grammatically present but
conceptually future-oriented was noticed by Dudman (1983), if not earlier; see also Kauf-
mann (2004) and Kaufmann et al. (2006). The signiﬁcance of this fact is still controversial to
philosophers, see Edgington (1995, 2003), Bennett (2003: 15).

Events Are the Source of Causal Readings …
461
from causation is that temporality can be in part derived from causation
from the fact that causes don’t happen after their effects, so that taking
causation as primitive gets us some temporality for free as it were. On the
other hand, taking time as primitive gets us nothing in the way of causal
meaning. A second reason is that eventivity and stativity are phenomena
internal to the verb phrase; approaches to the verb phrase across various
frameworks have concluded that much, if not all, of eventive verbal
meaning is organized in terms of causal relations (e.g., Dowty 1979;
Pustejovsky 1995; Ramchand 2008; Croft 2012; Copley and Harley
2015). For these reasons, I will defer discussion of times and instead
start from causation, relying on a simple (structural equation) version of
causal models (Pearl 2000).3
A causal model is a directed acyclic graph used to represent causal
inﬂuences (Pearl 2000; Pearl and Mackenzie 2018). For example, our
causal knowledge about the situation in Clavarel can be represented as
the following, where C is whether the coin turns up heads, Q is whether
Yolanda is the queen, and P is whether Xanthippe is the princess.
(2)
C
Q
P
There can be different interpretations of causal models like the one
above (notably, the probabilities of the nodes are often used). In the
interpretation we will use, we will use simply the nodes’ truth values.
(3)
C := 1 if heads, 0 if tails
Q := 1 if Yolanda is the queen, 0 if Yolanda is not the queen
P := 1 if Xanthippe is the princess, 0 if Xanthippe is not the princess
Supposing that Yolanda becomes queen upon the coin’s landing one way
or another, regardless of whether the Clavarelian nobles have seen which
side the coin has landed on, the table in (4) shows the combinations of
truth values that are possible given the causal information in (3).
3 Linguists are beginning to make use of causal models; see Kaufmann (2002, 2005, 2013),
Baglini and Francez (2016), Nadathur (2016), Lauer and Nadathur (2018), Baglini and Bar-
Asher Siegal (2019), Bar-Asher Siegal and Boneh (2019).

462
B. Copley
(4)
C Q P
a. 1 1 1
b. 0 0 0
c. 1 0 0
d. 1 1 0
Each line of the table is a possible situation; I assume in this very limited
scenario that 1 and 0 are the only possible values and that each node has
a value in each situation. It should be uncontroversial that lines (a) and
(b) are possible in our Clavarel scenario, but those in (c) and (d) may
or may not be possible, depending on further details. The idea is that,
even though there is strictly speaking no time between the coin coming
up heads and, e.g., Yolanda becoming queen, it is still possible to be in
a state where one has had the thought that the coin has come up heads
but not yet concluded that Yolanda is now queen, as in line (c). However,
don’t get hung up on the issue of whether lines (c) and (d) belong in the
table or not. The puzzle, and our solution to the puzzle, are the same
regardless of whether they are there or not. In Sect. 4, we will look at
a more concise way to generate the lines of the table according to the
arrows in the causal model graph, which will hopefully shed light on this
issue.
1.2
Compositionality and the Stative–Eventive
Distinction
So, the ﬁrst methodological choice was to use causal models. The second
methodological choice is to take a compositional perspective. Semantic
composition allows us to theorize about unknown meanings of parts of
a sentence if we know the meaning of the whole. In this, it is a kind
of algebra. And, as in algebra, it is helpful to start with the simplest
expressions in order to solve for unknowns. This is why we are using the
morphologically simplest prejacents in (1) to understand how if works;
we will not even be looking at conditionals with will in the consequent.
Very quickly we see that the relevant distinction between (1a) and
(1b) is one of stativity (as in being) and eventivity (as in becoming). The
distinction between eventivity and stativity is perhaps the major division

Events Are the Source of Causal Readings …
463
in the lexical aspect (or “Aktionsart”) of verb phrases. We might think of
eventive predicates as processes going on in time, with phases succeeding
one another; states on the other hand, at least as far as we will talk about
them here, can be thought of as “a single, undifferentiated period” (Smith
1991: 19). Using stative predicates, as in (1a), there is no causal reading,
and using eventives, as in (1b), there is a causal reading. We would like
to know why this is so.
1.3
Do Will Not Do
Pearl and Mackenzie’s (2018) discussion around causal models suggests
a possible way to link event semantics to causal models. They make
a distinction between “seeing” and “doing”. For example, one should
distinguish If I see that Xanthippe is the princess, I see that Yolanda is the
queen and If I make Xanthippe the princess, I make Yolanda the queen.
Their point is that seeing or inferring correlations between values of
variables is not at all the same as changing or “wiggling” the value of
those variables. Only the latter gives us truly causal information, in the
way that turning a light switch on and off tells us which appliance it is
connected to.
This idea enjoys pride of place in “interventionist” theories of causa-
tion (e.g., Woodward 2006); for Pearl, it also marks the difference
between talking about correlations and talking about causation at all
(Pearl and Mackenzie 2018: Chap. 1). They note that in the ﬁeld of
statistics, there has been a real reluctance to use causal language for lack
of a formalized way to talk about it. And indeed it is illegitimate to talk
about causation using only tools that express correlation. However, as
they point out, once we have a formal way to talk about causation, it is
no longer illegitimate to do so.
Pearl’s (2000) formal tool for talking about causation is the “do-
operator”. The do-operator erases all causal inﬂuences on the node in
question and changes the value of the node to the speciﬁed value, as
shown in (5):
(5)
do(X D x): erase all incoming arrows into X and change the value
of X to x.

464
B. Copley
Looking at the difference between seeing and doing in this system, one
could wonder whether this distinction might correspond to the distinc-
tion in English between statives and eventives, respectively. After all,
seeing is stative and doing is eventive. It would be very nice if this system
developed for other uses could turn out to explain the stative/eventive
distinction and thereby explain the contrast in (1).
The causal model in (2), together with treating conditionals as strict,
works well enough for (1a). That is, given the model and the possible
values, it is true that all cases where Xanthippe is the princess of Claverel,
Yolanda is the queen. There is one situation where Xanthippe is the
princess, namely the ﬁrst line of the table in (4), and on that line, Yolanda
is queen.
But what we would like to know is whether the do-operator, “off the
shelf”, as it were, might help us understand the meaning of eventive
predicates become the princess or become the queen as in (1b). For suppose
it did. Then if the conditional is again treated as strict implication, the
meaning of (1b) would be expected4 to be as follows:
(6)
Allsituationswhere do(P(x) D 1)aresituationswhere do(Q(y) D 1)
That is, all cases where we erase the arrows into the P(x) node and set
the value of the P(x) node to 1 are cases where we erase the arrows into
the Q(y) node and set it to 1.
But even then, we do not explain our puzzle. We do get (1b) to be
false, but for the wrong reason. Making the reasonable assumption that
we have the freedom, as erasers of arrows and setters of values, to apply
the do-operator to whatever node we want, it is indeed false, as desired,
that any case where we do(P(x) = 1) is a case where we do(Q(y) = 1).
But although we get the right result, this reason for getting that result
is exactly wrong. The problem with (1b) is not that there is no arrow
4 To underline what we are doing here: (6) is merely our expected meaning if we are treating
each eventive verb as involving a do-operator, not Pearl’s expectation. For one, he does not
distinguish between eventive and stative verbs.

Events Are the Source of Causal Readings …
465
between Q(y) and P(x); it is that there is an arrow going into P(x) in
the causal model, but somehow the conditional seems to require an arrow
of causal inﬂuence to go the other way. In short, the do-operator cannot
help us understand here how eventive predicates relate to causal readings
in conditionals, because it erases one of the very things that we need to
use, namely that incoming arrow.
1.4
How We Will Solve the Puzzle
The do-operator is not the only possible way to model “doing”, i.e.,
intervention. We can retain something like the intuitive idea that seeing
and doing are to be distinguished, and that this distinction matters for
statives and eventives. I will rely on another tradition to make sense of
this idea, namely dynamic semantics (Heim 1982; Kamp 1981; Groe-
nendijk and Stokhof 1990). More closely hewing to our characterization
of the puzzle in (1), statives (as in being) and eventives (as in becoming),
will be treated as distinct modes of updating the world. Asserting a
proposition in dynamic semantic frameworks changes the context it is
uttered in; propositions are “context change potentials”. Statives, we will
see, behave like propositions. I will argue here that to account for the
behavior of eventive predicates, we need events to be, in effect, “world
change potentials”. Crucially, learning or accepting a proposition does
not require it to be false (or for that matter true) before the learning
or accepting, whereas an event’s happening does put a condition on the
initial state; for Xanthippe to become a princess, she has to not already
be a princess.
The analogy between propositions as context change potentials and
events as world change potentials suggests that we might want to model
eventives as predicates of ordered pairs of atoms, not predicates of atoms.
That is, although in the neo-Davidsonian tradition we typically think
of causal relations between subevents, here the events will actually be

466
B. Copley
themselves represented by an ordered pair between two situations. The
types5 we will be interested in are in (7)6:
(7)
a.
stative predicate: s, t
b.
eventive predicate: s×s, t
Accordingly, there will be two ways for the speaker to update the current
situation: learning, which is an update with a predicate of situations,
and happening, which is an update with a predicate of relations between
situations.
(8)
a.
learning = update with a predicate of situations
b.
happening = update with a predicate of a relation between
situations
These two kinds of updates, associated with the verb phrases themselves,
will be situated with a dynamic treatment of if ϕ, ψ.
Working from these components, I will argue that the event in the
consequent is, literally, the causal relation that yields the causal reading in
(1b). To argue this, ﬁrst we will set out to understand what eventives are,
both in terms of the tests we use to distinguish eventives and statives, and
in the sense of how they appear in conditionals. It turns out that not all
apparent eventives in conditional antecedents are really, truly, eventives.
5 As is usual in formal semantics, I will assume that the denotations of phrases are functions
from typed objects to other typed objects, where these typed objects are perhaps themselves
such functions. Type is a formal property, which allows us to compose meanings with each
other according to a small collection of compositional rules, including Functional Application
Heim and Kratzer (1998). In short, if two denotations are not of the right type to compose,
they will be unable to compose. The basic types used here are s, the type of situations, and t,
the type of truth values.
6 The type of the eventive predicate could also be written as ⟨⟨s, s⟩, t⟩, as in Copley and Harley
(2015, 2021). The (equivalent) cross notation used here underlines the fact that the relation
between situations, as far as type theory and semantic composition are concerned, is not treated
like a compound type.

Events Are the Source of Causal Readings …
467
The ones that are not get a stative reading, so they must be excluded
if we want to say something about the behavior of eventives. These can
be thought of as eventives with a stative component on top of them, so
they may not be truly semantically “bare” eventives even though they are
morphologically bare; or they can be thought of as stative themselves.
This point relates to our methodological decision to consider only the
simplest conditionals, namely those with no aspectual, modal, future,
tense, or counterfactual morphology on the prejacents. Recall that this
choice is an important one, as it allows us to see how event semantics
interacts with conditional semantics when there is nothing semantically
active (in the relevant sense) insulating the verb phrase (the locus of event
semantics) from if (the locus of conditional semantics).
Subsequently, we will see evidence from assertability facts to the effect
that “true” eventives (i.e., “truly” bare eventives in the sense we have
seen) have a type difference from statives and larger phrases with aspect,
modals, futures, and/or tense. I will use these to argue for the type differ-
ence in (7) above, where events take us from one situation to another
in much, but not entirely, the same way that utterances do in dynamic
semantics.
My proposal to solve the puzzle in (1) is given in Sect. 4, with three
components: (a) the causal model is used to create a causal sequence of
situations, (b) eventives update the situation using a relation between
situations instead of a situation, and (c) if ϕ, ψ provides sequential
updates. With this framework, we see that the combination of the even-
tive predicate in the consequent and the causal model itself ultimately
provides the causal reading of the conditional and thereby explains the
puzzle.
A last note before we dive in. This line of inquiry is nowhere near the
point of proposing a theory of all conditionals. It turns out to be quite
enough for now to argue that event semantics and causal models can be
linked to account for the puzzle.

468
B. Copley
2
True Eventives Are a Different Type Than
Statives
2.1
Tests for Eventivity vs. Stativity
To understand what statives and eventives are doing in the simplest
English conditionals, we have to have tests to distinguish statives from
eventives. Such tests are notoriously language-speciﬁc and can be difﬁ-
cult to interpret, but two of the most robust tests are shown in (9) and
(10). The ﬁrst test involves must. In (9a), which has a stative predicate,
the epistemic reading of the must sentence is available; with an eventive,
as in (9b), the epistemic reading is not available.
(9)
a.
Xanthippe must be sick.
epistemic reading possible ⇒stative
b.
Xanthippe must get sick.
no epistemic reading possible ⇒eventive
The second test is variously referred to as a biscuit conditional, an
Austinian conditional, or a relevance conditional (Austin 1961; DeRose
and Grandy 1999; Krifka 2014, and references therein). The idea behind
this test is that there can be no causal connection between the preja-
cents; rather, there is a kind of discourse relation (which one it is has
been argued rather closely but is not important to its use here as a test
for stativity). So, (10a) comes out something like “if you care to know,
then it is relevant to you/I assert that there is beer”. To get this reading
on a simple conditional it is required to have a stative in the consequent,
as in (10a). Using an eventive in the consequent, as in (10b), does not
permit this reading.7
(10)   a.  If you care to know, there’s beer.    relevance reading ⇒stative consequent
b. If you care to know, we get beer. no relevance reading ⇒eventive consequent
7 That is, it does not permit this reading as long as we are not dealing with a generic or
habitual reading; this is exactly the point to be discussed just below.

Events Are the Source of Causal Readings …
469
While there is agreement in formal semantics that a broad even-
tivity/stativity distinction is crucially visible to a number of grammatical
phenomena, mostly related to aspect and modality, there are various
ways to analyze the distinction. Common to many of them is Davidson’s
(1967) argument that the meanings of sentences such as Jones buttered
a piece of toast make reference to an abstract event argument. In further
“neo-Davidsonian” developments of this idea, beginning with Higgin-
botham (1983, 1985, 1986) and Parsons (1990), we can think of the
verb phrase “butter the toast” as predicating buttering the toast of an
event variable e. This idea can be extended to states; how far to extend
it is a live issue of contention (see, for instance Kratzer 1995; Maien-
born 2005, 2007). For now the assumption we will make is that the
verb phrases, whether intuitively eventive or stative, are to be treated as
predicates. The question at issue will be what they are predicates of. We
will see that while statives make sense as predicates of situations, it makes
sense for eventives to be predicates of relations between situations.
2.2
Some Apparent “Eventives” in English Are
Actually Stative
It turns out that very often in English, predicates that we expect
to be eventive actually behave like statives instead. These stative
readings of apparently eventive predicates fall into several categories:
generic/habitual readings, futurate readings (where there is a future-
oriented, “planned” or “settled”
reading but no future morphology
[Lakoff 1971; Vetter 1973; Dowty 1979; Kaufmann 2005; Copley 2008,
2018], and what I will call “storytelling readings”, where the reference is
to what happens in a story, play, etc. (cf. the “director’s reading” in Ritter
and Rosen [1997]). The fact that generic/habitual readings are stative is
well-known, while the behavior of futurate and storytelling readings has
not been much talked about (but see Copley [2018]).
So, for instance, an “eventive” predicate such as drink beer permits
a generic/habitual and epistemic reading for (11a) in a context where
one is looking around the throne room and one sees lots of empty beer
bottles. Likewise, (11b) gets a relevance reading.

470
B. Copley
(11)
Generic/habitual readings behave like statives
a.
Clavarelian nobles must drink beer.
b.
If you care to know, Clavarelian nobles drink beer.
Futurate readings behave exactly the same way. A context that favors
the futurate reading in (12a) is one where, for instance, we see on
Xanthippe’s calendar “Z: Green Linnet” for tomorrow, and we know that
her best friend is Zelinda and the Green Linnet serves only beer. In this
context an epistemic reading is possible, and we might also felicitously
use the relevance conditional in (12b).
(12)
Futurate readings behave like statives
a.
Xanthippe must drink beer with Zelinda tomorrow.
b.
If you care to know, Xanthippe drinks beer with Zelinda
tomorrow.
Finally, storytelling readings behave exactly the same way, permitting
epistemic must as in (13a) and (when in the consequent) relevance
conditionals as in (13b).
(13)
Storytelling readings behave like statives
a.
(I haven’t read to the end of the book, but from what I’ve
read,) Abelard must drink beer at the end of the book.
b.
If you care to know, Abelard drinks beer at the end of the
book.
We can ask whether stativity is really the property that makes futu-
rates and storytelling examples behave like statives—indeed, we will
return to this question. But it is incontrovertible that in (12) and (13),
respectively, futurate and storytelling readings do behave like statives.
So, several readings of “eventive” predicates behave like statives do
with respect to the stativity tests introduced above. Readings that are
not generic/habitual readings, not plannable (so do not license futurate
readings), and not set in a story (so do not have storytelling readings),
do not behave this way.

Events Are the Source of Causal Readings …
471
(14)
“None-of-the-above" readings do not behave like statives
a.
Yolanda must get sick tomorrow.
no epistemic reading
b. #If you care to know, Yolanda gets sick tomorrow.
(15)
a.
It must rain tomorrow.
no epistemic reading
b. #If you care to know, it rains tomorrow.
What follows from this is that habitual/generic readings, futurate read-
ings, and storytelling readings are just statives; or more precisely, that the
highest predication in their structure is stative. This could happen in one
of (at least) two ways. Either a “derived stative” method, where they have
an unpronounced stative operator that takes the eventive predicate as an
argument; or a sui generis method, where there never is truly an even-
tive predicate in the semantics and the root itself, or something about
the predication itself, is allowed to pick out a stative meaning, and there
is still morphological “bareness”, i.e., no extra operator. Both possibili-
ties have been suggested for generic/habitual readings: either there is a
Gen operator that takes the eventive predicate as an argument, or there
is simply a stative predication of something like a kind argument (see
Krifka et al. 1995; Carlson 2009). For futurates, many, including Copley
(2018), have proposed that futurate meaning is supplied with an unpro-
nounced operator; Kaufmann (2005) is unique as far as I know in leaving
the door open for the other possibility. There is a very interesting ques-
tion here about what exactly morphology tells us about the complexity
of denotations; it is immaterial, however, to the present paper.
Returning to the context where a fair coin toss determines whether or
not Yolanda becomes the queen, we see that become the queen behaves
like a (true) eventive, not a stative. This predicate is episodic, cannot be
planned so is not futurate,8 and it is not—to the people living it—in a
story.
8 Futurates require temporal adverbials; if (and only if) we drop the assumption that it is a
fair election and add a temporal adverbial, we do indeed get a futurate reading. In that case
Yolanda must become the queen tomorrow has a possible epistemic reading and If you care to
know, Yolanda becomes queen tomorrow is a good relevance conditional.

472
B. Copley
(16)
“None-of-the-above" readings do not behave like statives (to a
speaker within the story, so not a storytelling reading)
a.
Yolanda must become the queen.
b. #If you care to know, Yolanda becomes the queen.
Just to remember why the above facts are important: Recall that I am
arguing that the causal reading of (1b) depends on its consequent being
eventive. It is important to the argument therefore that we only consider
truly eventive readings.
2.3
True Eventives Are Not Assertable
Now that we can distinguish true eventives from merely apparent even-
tives, we can start to argue that statives and true eventives have a type
difference. The ﬁrst step is to see that true eventives in English are not
assertable.
(17)
True eventive
a.
If it rains tomorrow. . .
b. #It rains tomorrow.
(18)
True eventive
a.
If Yolanda gets sick tomorrow. . .
b. #Yolanda gets sick tomorrow.
This observation has been noted by Dudman (1983), Edgington (2003),
a.o. Of course, in contrast to (17) and (18), many of the simplest
antecedents are assertable on their own, as shown in (19) through
(22) below. These correspond, again, to statives and generic/habitual,
futurate, and storytelling readings, as in (19), (20), (21), and (22),
respectively:

Events Are the Source of Causal Readings …
473
(19)
a.
If Xanthippe is there. . .
b.
Xanthippe is there.
(20)
a.
If Zelinda drinks beer. . .
b.
Zelinda drinks beer.
(21)
a.
If Xanthippe drinks beer with Zelinda tomorrow. . .
b.
Xanthippe drinks beer with Zelinda tomorrow.
(22)
a.
If Abelard drinks beer at the end of the book. . .
b.
Abelard drinks beer at the end of the book.
Finally, although in antecedents, true eventives are possible, it seems
that in the consequents of the simplest conditionals (recall, these are
conditionals with no aspectual, modal, future, tense, or counterfactual
morphology on the prejacents), as long as we resist the temptation to
add will or similar, true eventives are not possible. Instead, we always
get a generic/habitual, a futurate or a storytelling reading. Adding will
is what makes the episodic reading possible. For example, there is no
reading of (23) below which means that if Zelinda should happen to
drink beer, Xanthippe will also happen to drink beer. Instead, we get
generic/habitual readings either low, in each prejacent, or high, scoping
over the whole conditional:
(23)
Generic/habitual reading
(If Zelinda drinks beer,) Xanthippe drinks beer.
a.
‘If Zelinda habitually drinks beer, Xanthippe habitually
drinks beer.’
b.
‘Generally, if Zelinda drinks beer, Xanthippe drinks beer.’
c.
#‘If Zelinda happens to drinks beer, Xanthippe will happen
to drink beer.’
The same is true for futurate readings; a low and a high scope for the
plan are both possible, but without will, there’s no merely episodic, non-
futurate reading.

474
B. Copley
(24)
Futurate reading
(If Zelinda drinks beer tomorrow), Xanthippe drinks beer
tomorrow.
a.
‘If there’s a plan for Zelinda to drink beer tomorrow, there’s
a plan for Xanthippe to drink beer tomorrow.’
b.
‘There’s a plan such that if Zelinda drinks beer tomorrow,
Xanthippe drinks beer tomorrow.’
c.
#‘If Zelinda happens to drink beer tomorrow, Xanthippe will
happen to drink beer tomorrow.’
(24a) and (24b) are possible, but what we emphatically do not get is
an episodic reading as in (24c) where Zelinda’s happening to drink beer
tomorrow has something to do with Xanthippe happening to drink beer
tomorrow.
2.4
Assertability Has to Do with Type
So, what is it that distinguishes unassertable antecedents from assertable
antecedents in English? I want to suggest that it is type, in line with the
proposal in (7), repeated here below as (25):
(25)
a.
stative predicate: s, t
b.
eventive predicate: s×s, t
That is, the reason that true eventives are unassertable in English is a
formal reason; speciﬁcally, they are unable to take a situation argument,
because they are of the wrong type to do so.
One argument for this is provided by the fact that only in the
simplest phrases does the unassertable–assertable distinction correlate
with a conceptual eventivity–stativity distinction. What I mean by this
is that it’s easy to say that (true) verb phrases about events in English are
unassertable, and verb phrases about states in English are assertable; yet
we see very similar behavior in larger phrases which we might be more
hesitant to say are about events or states. That is, these larger phrases—
aspectual, modal, or tensed—absolutely behave like “eventives” or like
“statives” on the eventive–stative tests and on assertability. Thus, we must

Events Are the Source of Causal Readings …
475
conclude that if these larger phrases are to be thought of as denoting
stative or eventive predicates, it is in a very abstract sense, at some
distance from any conceptual distinction between what states are and
what events are. The more abstract distinction seems well-accounted for
by a formal property, such as type, as I am proposing here.
Let’s take a brief look at some of these larger phrases. With either
progressive or perfect aspect added, we get stativity, and also assertability,
as in (26). Yet there has been some head-scratching over the nature of
the states introduced by aspects (e.g., Hallman 2009); they pass tests for
stativity, but what conceptual state do they represent?
(26)
a.
Xanthippe is writing a letter.
b.
Xanthippe must be writing a letter.
c.
If you care to know, Xanthippe is writing a letter.
(27)
a.
Xanthippe has been writing a letter.
b.
Xanthippe must have been writing a letter.
c.
If you care to know, Xanthippe must have been writing a
letter.
Futures provide another example of how larger phrases can have asserta-
bility distinctions.9
(28)
a.
#Oh look—it’ll rain.
b.
Oh look—it’s going to rain.
(29)
a.
#If you care to know, it’ll rain.
b.
If you care to know, it’s going to rain.
The similarity to aspect is such that Copley (2009) analyzed it in terms of
aspectualized and unaspectualized futures; as Klecha (2011) points out,
however, necessary vs. optional modal subordination is another way to
think about it. Either way, if there is a state involved at the highest level
of be going to, again, it is quite an abstract one.
9 The epistemic must test is not available with futures, presumably for morphological reasons,
and the oh look in (28) is required to rule out an assertable reading of will that relies on
evidence of long standing; see Copley (2009) for details.

476
B. Copley
Past tense poses an interesting case. With past tense in English we
only get assertability, and the “stativity” tests are passed handily (have
here expresses anteriority [Condoravdi 2002]).
(30)
a.
Xanthippe left.
b.
Xanthippe must have left.
epistemic reading possible
c.
If you care to know, Xanthippe must have left.
Yet, no one would say that past tense sentences are stative. And actually,
discourse facts indicate clearly that they are not, since they advance the
narrative time while statives do not (ter Meulen 1995: a.o.), as shown
in (31). In (31a), Xanthippe leaves after the time the speaker walks in,
while in (31b) Xanthippe is there when the speaker walks in.
(31)
a.
I walked in. Xanthippe left.
b.
I walked in. Xanthippe was there.
So we might say that past tense is transparent to the eventivity/stativity
distinction; it just passes up the eventivity/stativity of its complement.
The data for combinations of aspect, modals, futures, and tense are
of course complex; we have only scratched the surface. But to recap
what I want to take away from this, which we can see already in the
few examples above: Assertability and non-assertability correlate nicely
with eventivity and stativity with the simplest (verb) phrases, but as more
material is added, the assertability/non-assertability distinction remains,
while any relevant notion of “stative” or “eventive” gets more and more
abstract.
This general effect looks something like a grammatical bleaching effect
(Meillet 1912; Traugott 1980; Sweetser 1988). The way I would like to
think about it here is that the cognitive ontology and the grammatical
ontology do not always have to be the same (Borer 2005; Copley and
Harley 2015). One way to demonstrate this point is from mismatches
between the two. For instance, grammatical gender and conceptual
gender do not always match up (e.g., German das Mädchen “Detneuter
girl”), or grammatical mass/count vs. conceptual mass/count (e.g., There’s

Events Are the Source of Causal Readings …
477
dog all over the couch). Typically, the conceptual categories are rich, while
the grammatical categories are discrete and narrow.10
What I want to suggest here is such a split between grammatical and
conceptual categories, in the service of arguing that type is responsible for
the eventive–stative difference, in terms of the eventive–stative tests. The
grammatical types “state” (for us, s, a situation) and “event” (for us, s×s,
a relation between situations) are presumably what the tests diagnose.
These are indeed associated, in the verb phrase, with rich conceptual
“states” and “events”; but the farther we get from the verb, the less the
rich concepts of “state” and “event” matter to “stativity” and “eventivity”
in terms of the eventive–stative tests and assertability.
If we now consider, very brieﬂy, what assertion might be, we can
see that the notion of type is a good candidate for the kind of formal
property required by assertion.
Intuitively, asserting a proposition requires the speaker to present a
proposition in a certain way. The proposition itself is something that can
have a truth value, and depending on one’s ontology, this can be achieved
in a number of ways. A popular way to do this, especially in linguistic
semantics, is to treat propositions as sets of possibilia such as worlds or
situations. In this view, propositions are essentially cases of predication
(or equivalently, “description”): they partition a domain of possibilia into
a set and its complement, corresponding respectively to the truth values
true and false.
There is broad consensus, however, that assertability requires more
than a mere predication; it additionally requires an act of something
like endorsement or commitment from a mind. Conversely, it is quite
possible to have a predication without this act. This point can be seen
perhaps most clearly in work by Recanati (e.g., Recanati 2007), who
argues that assertion requires the speaker to apply the proposition—itself
a predicate of situations—to the current situation. We can call this act a
“Recanati reckoning”.
On this hypothesis, what goes wrong with our unassertable eventives is
that they are not predicates of situations, i.e., they are not type ⟨s, t⟩, so
assertion, which applies a predicate of situations to the current situation,
10 Both, however, can be explicated using formal techniques.

478
B. Copley
is not available. Consider the word ball, the denotation of which, let’s
assume, is a predicate of entities, type ⟨e, t⟩. The utterance of ball on
its own is not an assertion. It can certainly be uttered, and there are
certainly conditions under which its utterance is more or less pertinent,
such as when the speaker is urgently pointing at a ball—which suggests
that there are conditions on the utterance of the word ball by itself—but
these utterance conditions cannot be assertability conditions in the sense
of a Recanati reckoning. The idea is that ball is of the wrong type to be
asserted.
I want to suggest that English unassertable eventives run along the
same lines. This would require eventives to be predicates of something
other than situations, while statives would have to be predicates of situ-
ations (because they are assertable). The prime candidate for this other
kind of object is that they are “events”, and thus that these eventives are
indeed predicates of “events”, just as it says on the tin. But how do we
know what the type of events is?
3
True Eventives Are Relational
We have now seen evidence that English true eventives have a different
type from English statives. English true eventives cannot be asserted,
which, I argued above, suggests that they are not predicates of situations.
We must look at a different kind of argument to try to understand what
the type of eventives actually is.
The usual reason given in the aspectual literature (e.g., Comrie 1976;
Giorgi and Pianesi 1997; Smith 1991) for the unassertability of true
eventives in English is that there is a problem with having an eventive
non-aspectualized predicate occur at the present instant because even-
tive predicates represent change and it is not possible to represent change
at one instant. In other words, eventive predicates at some level at least,
whether the grammatical level, the conceptual level, or both, should
involve a relation, change, or comparison between two things; while
stative predicates should make reference to only one thing. Such a claim
is made succinctly by Hallman (2009), who gives a formal analysis of
this kind.

Events Are the Source of Causal Readings …
479
Many mainstream formal Davidsonian approaches adopt something
like this principle to explain the unassertability of English eventives, but
the principle is not itself formalized into what the grammatical system
sees. That is, there is nothing representing a relation, a comparison, or a
change in an expression of the form predicate(e), though there certainly
can be in the concept of “event” that e refers to. Telic predicates may have
subevents, but for atelic eventives, generally there aren’t two things but
only one thing, namely an event e, and thus the expression predicate(e)
is insufﬁcient on its own to explain why atelic eventives are also impos-
sible in English at the present moment, i.e., Xanthippe plays baseball can’t
mean that Xanthippe is playing baseball. If we want the principle to fall
out of English’s grammatical system—and we deﬁnitely do, since not
all languages are like English—it is necessary that our type difference
between eventives and statives make eventives involve two of something
and statives involve one of something.
Let’s call eventives that are predicates of a relation “relational even-
tives”. Despite the popularity of Davidsonian event arguments, where
the eventive is ultimately a predicate of an event argument, the idea
of relational eventives has been proposed a number of times, rather
independently each time. The (at least) two indices necessary for a
relational eventive are represented either as temporal variables (which
includes Hallman’s interval-based analysis of eventives) or as situations.
Theories where the indices are conceptually treated as times include,
for instance, Croft (2012) and Verkuyl (2019). Theories where the
two indices are treated more like situations include Fernando (2004,
2005), van Lambalgen and Hamm (2008), and Copley and Harley
(2015, 2021). (See also Krifka [2014] for similar indices used for certain
conditionals.)
For our event semantics, we will use a simpliﬁed version of what
is proposed in Copley and Harley (2015, 2021). In these, event argu-
ments are replaced with function terms—very dumb functions from one
situation to another. Again making use of the grammatical–conceptual
distinction, the (grammatical) function is associated with a (concep-
tual) input of energy that may or may not provoke a change from the
initial situation to the ﬁnal situation. Thus here the “two things” are two
situations related causally.

480
B. Copley
In this paper, we will not represent the input of energy itself. That
is, we will treat events as mere ordered pairs. The reason we can make
events in our toy semantics ordered pairs is because we are dealing with
perhaps the simplest eventive predicate of all, namely become P. While
many predicates place requirements on the manner in which we get from
one situation to another, become P is one of the ones that does not; in
particular, it only says that P does not hold in the ﬁrst situation and
holds in the second. Thus, an ordered pair is sufﬁcient to account for
this requirement in our toy semantics here.
With this framework in mind, we can return to the difference between
stative predicates (type ⟨s, t⟩) and eventive predicates (type ⟨s×s, t⟩, as
well as understanding how this ﬁts into what we know about assertion.
True eventives in English can’t be asserted, I have argued, because they
are the wrong type; while they are of type ⟨s×s, t⟩, assertion is looking
for something of type ⟨s, t⟩. But even though assertion is not possible
for eventives we can imagine a different way to use a type ⟨s×s, t⟩pred-
icate to update the situation—in effect, one is not adding a proposition,
as in assertion, but noting that an event occurs (or has occurred, or is
occurring). So, formally, assertion and this kind of noting (I will call
it “happening”) will share something even though they are different.
We will update in two ways—one way with type ⟨s, t⟩(i.e., adding a
proposition) and one way with ⟨s×s, t⟩.11
4
Solving the Puzzle
We are ready to solve the puzzle. The main idea is that the relation
inherent to true eventives is, literally, the causal relation from which
springs the causal readings of conditionals like that in (1b). The proposal
involves a mapping from a causal model to the event semantics of Copley
11 Usually a distinction is made, in theory as in language, between an entity’s information state
about the world, and the state of the world itself. The system I will be presenting here seems
to do its job without such a distinction; the situations here represent only the way the world is.
However, inferences about these situations can be made by using information from the causal
model, without reifying information states. I am not sure yet whether this setup amounts to
a feature or a bug; the question turns on whether it is necessary or otherwise helpful to reify
information states for these particular examples.

Events Are the Source of Causal Readings …
481
and Harley (2021). We will do this by indexing the nodes in the causal
model and similarly indexing a sequence of situations that will easily map
to a relational meaning for eventives. Finally, to show how this mapping
between linear causal models and event semantics resolves the puzzle in
(1), we will get by with a very simple (perhaps too simple?) dynamic
denotation for conditionals.
Incidentally, the indexing is why, in this paper, we can only use a “toy”,
non-branching (linear) causal model. We are greatly aided by the fact that
our causal model has causality going in a single direction (C →Q →
P); in other words, we don’t have to deal with the complications of a
branching network of causal relations with “colliders” (A →B ←C)
or “forks” (A ←B →C). It’s simple to inductively deﬁne a sequence
of situations from the sequence of nodes; harder to say how to index
situations from a network of nodes. Do we need to use differently deﬁned
situations? Times? And moreover, the answers to these questions may
only come, or may come most interestingly, from cross-linguistic data.
Thus, in this paper we will stick to a linear causal model. However, the
deﬁnitions below are in principle useable for branching models, if only
the indexing deﬁnition can be appropriately changed.
4.1
Causal Models with Indexed Situations
The next two deﬁnitions are simpliﬁed, sometimes radically, from Pearl
(2000: 44) and inspired by similar adaptations from Baglini and Francez
(2016), Baglini and Bar-Asher Siegal (2019).
Deﬁnition 1 A causal structure D of a set V of variables is a directed
acyclic graph (DAG) in which each node corresponds to a distinct
element of V. Links between the nodes are represented as ordered pairs
of elements of V. Each link represents a direct functional relationship
among the corresponding variables.
The usual kinship terms (notably “parent” and “child”) can be used on
these structures. We can also deﬁne (in a simpliﬁed fashion) endogenous
and exogenous variables:

482
B. Copley
Deﬁnition 2 In a causal structure of a set V of variables, a variable A is
endogenous if there is a variable X such that (X , A) is a link. Conversely,
A is exogenous if there is no variable X such that (X , A) is a link.
Causal models are to be deﬁned as follows12:
Deﬁnition 3 A causal model is a pair M = ⟨D, D⟩consisting of a
causal structure D and a set of parameters D compatible with D. The
parameters in D assign a function dA = f A(parentsA) to determine the
value of each node V , where parentsV is the set of parents of A in D.
The idea behind Deﬁnition 3 is simply that by deﬁnition, in a causal
model, the value of any node A depends on the value of its parent(s);
in the example we are dealing with, of course, Q and P each only have
one parent and C is endogenous, so has no parent. We will skip over
the question of what exactly the set D of parameters corresponds to. It
can be thought of as a placeholder for whatever it is that determines the
value of the child given the value of the parent.
The relations in the causal model behave as in Pearl (2000), where
a relation between nodes such as (A, B) conveys that the second node
“listens” to the ﬁrst node. That is, the second node’s value is sensitive
to ﬁrst node’s value. It is very important to remember that this relation
is not always paraphraseable by the main verb cause; better words are
inﬂuence or affect. The absence of such a relation between nodes conveys
that there is no inﬂuence from one node to another.
Now, for our toy model, we can further winnow down causal models
to those that are linear. The model represented graphically above in (2)
is a linear causal model.
12 Deﬁnition 3 is really very simpliﬁed indeed with respect to structural causal models. Usually
one would include two other factors: an “error” variable such that the child depends on both
the set of parents and the error variable, as well as a condition that when conditioned on the
parents, the child is independent of its non-descendants (the “causal Markov condition”). The
latter is a constraint on which models are useful for calculating causal inﬂuence; those that
do not obey this condition do not seem to be appropriate for causal reasoning. Because the
argumentation for this is involved, we will elide it here, but see Pearl (2000) for extensive
discussion.

Events Are the Source of Causal Readings …
483
Deﬁnition 4 A linear causal model is a causal model such that for all
its links with arbitrary A, B such that (A, B), and for arbitrary X : if
(X, B) ∈model, then A = X, and if (A, X) ∈the model, X = B.
Taking a step back, let’s remind ourselves what we need causal models
to do. Causal models need to constrain the set of possible situations that
we are considering, that can be the case. That is, they need to give us at
least the information in the table we saw above:
(32)
C Q P
a. 1 1 1
b. 0 0 0
c. 1 0 0
d. 1 1 0
Causal models have another job to do, however. They also need to
constrain possible transitions between situations in a causal sequence, i.e.,
possible (relational) events. This is going to be the key to linking causal
models to event semantics. In doing this, they will also give us the infor-
mation in (32)—that is, the information in the table in (32) above will
be generated by what we are about to do in (33) below. First we will
deﬁne our fundamental types and some expressions having to do with
predication.
Types. We will use several types: entities (type e, variables x, y, . . .);
situations (type s, variables s, s′, . . .); and type t which will represent
truth values. The situations are, intuitively, to be identiﬁed with lines
on the truth table, in other words, partial assignments of values to basic
predications. The degree type will correspond to truth values for our toy
semantics in this paper. We will use the type e to represent the complex
type s×s which represents events, with variables e, e′, . . ..
Basic predications. For the nodes of our causal model, we will ﬁrst
distinguish between what we will call basic predications (cf. measure func-
tions [cf. e.g., Hay et al. (1999)]), and relations. Basic predications are
of the form p(×)(s)), where p is a function from entities and situa-
tions to degrees (values). A basic predication equation gives the value of
this function evaluated at these arguments. The word “basic” emphasizes

484
B. Copley
that there is no predication more basic than that which is evaluated at a
situation; that is, we will not be writing anything like “p(x)”.
Deﬁnition 5 For any p, x, s where p is a function from entities and
situations to degrees, x is an entity, and s is a situation, an expression of
the form p(×)(s) is a basic predication expression.
Deﬁnition 6 An equation of the form p(x)(s) = d is a basic predication
equation.
Deﬁnition 7 An expression of the form λs.p(x)(s) is a basic predication
lambda expression; it names a function that takes a situation s and returns
the degree to which x is p in s.
Nodes map to basic predication lambda expressions. Here we get
into the crucial part that allows us to link causal models with event
semantics. The nodes in our causal model are going to be interpreted,
via an assignment function G, as basic predication lambda expressions,
as in Deﬁnition 7. So, where we are used to seeing a simple variable with
a value, i.e., something like X = x, we have now “replaced” the variable
with a basic predication lambda expression.
It may not be clear yet why we would want to put situation argu-
ments into the interpretations of nodes. The reason why stems from
our working assumption that eventives are predicates of relations from
situations to situations; these are the situations at which basic predica-
tions are evaluated. So, since we know that eventive verbs are in a sense
instances of the arrows in a causal model but with the values of the nodes
ﬁlled in, and in causal models the arrows are relations between nodes, it
makes sense that we need some way to get from nodes to situations. The
assignment function G will do this job for us. It assigns to every node a
corresponding expression of type ⟨s, t⟩.
(33)
G(A) D λs.p(x)(s)
Now our linear causal model needs to build a situation sequence for us.
We can use the directions of the arrows to construct by induction a set

Events Are the Source of Causal Readings …
485
of basic predication expressions, using the basic predication expressions
from each node but indexing situations in each equation. In particular,
indices n, n + 1, . . . are added along the direction of the arrows. Then
we will assign the same indices to the variables. The indices themselves
have no signiﬁcance except to provide a successor.
Deﬁnition 8 An indexing on a linear causal model M = ⟨D, D⟩is
deﬁned inductively as follows:
An exogenous variable is assigned the index n (write: An). For all B is
such that (A, B), B is assigned the index n + 1 (write: Bn+1). With such
an indexing, M is an indexed linear causal model.
Deﬁnition 9 To deﬁne a causal set of basic predication expressions for M,
let V be a set of variables; M be an indexed linear causal model for V;
and G be an interpretation function assigning each variable in P a basic
predication lambda expression. Then, for any node An such that An is
exogenous in the indexed linear causal model M, add [G(A)](sn) to the
set. For any node Bn+1 such that B is endogenous in the indexed linear
causal model M and add [G(B)](sn+1) to the set.
(34)
Causalsetofbasicpredicationexpressions
{
}
c(h)(sn), q(y)(sn+1), p(x)(
)
sn+2
Along with the few assumptions we made about Clavarelian dynastic
politics that gave us the model in the ﬁrst place, there are some further
common-sense assumptions to make.
(35)
a.
Persistence: Once a queen/princess, always a queen/princess
b.
Closed World: If not mentioned, then 0
(35a) is a fact about what it’s like to be a queen or a princess in Clavarel.
(35b) is a more general constraint. We will need to apply them in the
order given (ﬁrst Persistence, then Closed World) in our derivations to
get the right result.

486
B. Copley
Persistance gives us a different set of basic predications:
(36)
Entailed set of basic predications for persistence
{q(y)(snC2), p(x)(snC3)…}
4.2
Denotations of Verbal Predicates
Now we can turn to the language side of things, beginning with verbal
predicates.
We will assume that the meaning of a stative predicate such as be the
princess is essentially a basic predication.
(37)
[[be the princess]] = λxλs.[[the princess]](x)(s)
Such a predicate takes an entity as its argument to yield something of
type ⟨s, t⟩, i.e., a basic predication.13
Since events are ordered pairs of situations, eventive predicates are
predicates of ordered pairs of situations. Let us consider an arbitrary
ordered pair e = (1e, 2e) where 1e and 2e are both situations. Then
become the princess has the following denotation, keeping in mind that
this is interpreted as involving energetic causation, although we are only
reifying the change, not the energy:
(38)
[[become the princess]] = λxλe ∈Ds×s.¬[[ the princess]](x)(1e)
& [[the princess]](x)(2e)
13 For readers unfamiliar with compositional semantic notation (and see Heim and Kratzer
(1998) for an excellent introduction), the evaluation function [[ ]] relates linguistic expressions
to their meanings (or “denotations”). In lambda (λ) expressions as in the right half of the
equation in (38), the lambdas allow us to correctly compose meanings together according to
the syntactic structure they are in. So, in (38), the meaning of be the princess ﬁrst takes an
entity argument x (in our example, x refers to Xanthippe) and then takes a situation argument
s. This order of operations is also reﬂected in the syntactic structure, where compositional
operations are only possible between “sisters” in the tree. It is possible to leave the lambdas out
here and still understand the proposed solution to the puzzle, but semanticists very much wish
to see them there to understand how to compose the meanings.

Events Are the Source of Causal Readings …
487
Again, I stress that the relational argument of eventive predicates here
is not going to correspond to one of the arrows in a causal model, but
rather to a relation between situations chosen from a sequence of situ-
ations that is constrained by that causal model. Causal models provide
the structures that are further constrained by eventive predicates. Recall
too that the nodes in causal models do not need values in order for
that formal structure to be a causal model. To reiterate: events are not
to be identiﬁed with the arrows in causal models, even though they
are similarly represented as ordered pairs. While a causal model provides
information as to the possible situations and ordered pairs of situations
that are compatible with it, it does not pick out a single ordered pair of
those situations; this is what an event is. So rather than corresponding
to arrows in the causal diagram, events correspond rather to transi-
tions between situations, where the set of possible transitions between
situations at any point is constrained by the causal model.
The interpretation of eventive predicates as involving energy tells us
that we will be able to say that we can move between situations (update
them) through the input of energy. But this is not the only way to move
between situations.
Events and assertions thus both take us from one situation to another,
but with vastly different interpretations of how we get from one situation
to the other: either through energetic causation, which happens in the
world, and which puts a condition on the initial situation; or through a
mental process of concluding/learning a proposition, which does not put
such a condition on the initial situation.
4.3
If
For if , we need a meaning that will meet two conditions. First, it needs
to allow each prejacent to update in its own way (learning or happening).
This can be accomplished through compositionality. Second, it needs to
ensure that any possible “routes” where ϕ survives but φ does not are
removed.
Our toy causal model, however, is linear, and so is the situation
sequence associated with it. The situation sequence gives us a single name

488
B. Copley
for the immediately causally accessible situation from sn—there is only
one, namely sn+1. Where A →B is in the model, then provided that
we know whether A holds at sn, we know whether B holds at sn+1,
because that is what the causal model tells us. Effectively, the work that
might instead be done by a universal quantiﬁer is here done by the causal
model. Here, we don’t need to use a quantiﬁer to remove from s any
possibilities where ϕ survives but ϕ does not, because we already know
from the causal model that if ϕ survives, there is no possible outcome
where ψ does not survive. (If alternatively we were to indeed consider
outcomes where ϕ survives yet ψ does not, we would need to assume a
different causal model from the one we are assuming.)
Thus, all we need for the toy system is the conjunctive update in (39)
and this is the update I will use.
(39)
s[if ϕ, ψ]M VH s[ϕ]M[ψ]M
A situation is updated with ϕ and then the result of that is updated with
ψ to yield another situation. All of this takes place with respect to the
causal model M. As usual, a successful update is one where the update
results in a situation in the model and this yields truth (or if one prefers,
acceptability). Note that s must be in the domain of ϕ as we would
expect with indicative conditionals.
This move does however raise some questions.
First, it raises the question of whether even a non-linear causal
model would remove the routes where ϕ survives and ψ does not. The
answer here depends on whether knowing the value of an inﬂuencing
node A determines the value of the inﬂuenced node B, where A →B is
in the model. This in turn depends on whether the arrows correspond to
functions. Typically this is not taken to be the case; the value of a node
is a function of the values of all its inﬂuencing nodes. However, models
that do have this property have been explored (Copley and Kagan 2021).
Second, even if the conjunctive update were to be generally appro-
priate, it would immediately raise the question of how to express the
difference between conjunction and implication. I can point to the

Events Are the Source of Causal Readings …
489
limited use of conjunctive structures having conditional meaning as a
suggestive fact linking conjunctions to implications, but it is merely a
suggestive fact at this point. I do think that an answer to that ques-
tion could have something to do with if encoding reference to a causal
model and and not encoding it, but I will not try to make this thought
more precise here.
Moving
on,
we
can
further
deﬁne
a
relation
for
compati-
bility/accessibility. This will be used in the “learning” kind of update
below. This deﬁnition ensures that one can learn that P (I assume that
truth values do not change once learned).
(40)
Compatibility/accessibility relation R: for arbitrary situations s,s′,
sRs′ just in case all basic predications mentioning s of the form
p(x)(s) are such that the truth value of p(x)(s) is equal to the
truth value of p(x)(s′).
Our two ways to update, one way for statives and one way for eventives,
are in (41) below.14
(41)
Two kinds of update:
a.
learning: s[ϕ s,t ]M VH ιs′ V sRs′ and ϕ(s′)
b.
happening:s[ϕ s×s,t ]M VH ιs′ ∈SM V [ιe ∈SM×SM V
[2e H s′ and ϕ(e)]]
Thus, depending on whether ϕ is a stative (type ⟨s, t⟩, (41a)) or an
eventive (type ⟨s×s, t⟩, (41b)), different updates are used. Note that e,
which represents the event, is in a very real sense analogous to the acces-
sibility/compatibility relation in (41a). Another important point is that
both of these put a constraint on the starting situation s. In (41a), s has
to be in the domain of R, and in (41b), s has to be in the domain of
e. However, in practice, the accessibility/compatibility relation is more
14 There are in principle a couple of alternative ways to achieve the same effect; we could have
instead put it in a dedicated assertion operator, or in a verbalizing head.

490
B. Copley
permissive than become. What this corresponds to is the fact that with
being in s′, s′ must only be accessible to/compatible with s. So, in s the
value of ϕ is either true or its value is unknown. However, become the
princess, as in (38), requires that in the (causally) previous situation s, ϕ
is false. This point turns out to be crucial to solving the puzzle.
4.4
Putting It All Together
Recall that we want to explain (1a) and (1b), repeated here as (42a)
(which is true) and (42b) (which is false):
(42)
a.
If Xanthippe is the princess, Yolanda is the queen.
b.
If Xanthippe becomes the princess, Yolanda becomes the
queen.
Informally, in both, we want the antecedent to take us from the current
situation to another one, and the consequent takes us from that other
situation to yet another one; we update ﬁrst with the antecedent ϕ, then
with the consequent ψ.
The procedure for evaluation is to search the causal direction set of
basic predication expressions given by the causal model for the terms
needed. This set, whose elements we last saw populating the table in
(34), is represented again in (43):
(43)
Basic predication expressions, causal direction (M)
sn V c(h)(sn)
snC1 V q(y)(snC1)
snC2 V p(x)(snC2)
So, in (1a), to evaluate the antecedent we search for something in M that
tells us the value of p(x)(s) for any s. We have p(x)(sn+2), so we start at
sn+1. Updating that situation with the antecedent returns sn+2. Now we
check to see if we can update sn+2 with something that tells us the value

Events Are the Source of Causal Readings …
491
of q(y)(sn+2). In fact, because of our assumption of persistence (once
the queen always the queen), we can learn that q(y)(sn+2) is true.
Let ϕ = p(x) and ψ = q(y).
(44)
a.
s[if ϕ s,t , ψ s,t ]M
D s[ϕ s,t ]M[ψ s,t ]M
deﬁnition of if
b.
s[ϕ s,t ] = ιs′ ∈SM V sRs′
and ϕ s,t (s′)
deﬁnition of learning
c.
ιs′ ∈SM V [sRs′ and ϕ s,t (s′
H
)]
snC2
since ϕ s,t D p(x) and p(x)(snC2)
d.
s[if ϕ s,t , ψ s,t ]M D snC2[ψ s,t ]M
from (44a) and (44c)
e.
snC2[ψ s,t ] = ιs′ ∈SM V snC2Rs′
and ψ s,t (s′)
deﬁnition of learning
f.
ιs′′ ∈SM V [snC2Rs′′ and ψ s,t (s′′)
H
]
snC2
since q(y)(snC1) and persistence
The result of these two updates is sn+2, which is in SM, so this utterance
is judged true/acceptable, as desired.
For (1b), unlike (1a), we have to have it that Xanthippe is not princess
in the starting situation. So we ﬁnd ourselves starting in situation sn+1.
Then the antecedent takes us to sn+2. Can we say anything about
our consequent evaluated at that situation, namely q(y)(sn+2)? Due to
persistence, we can; it is true. This makes it true that Yolanda is the queen
in sn+2, but this is not what we were looking for. We were looking for
Yolanda to become the queen. For this to be true, we would need to know
that q(y)(sn+2) were false, and that q(y)(sn+3) were true. This is not
the case so (1a) is false. And since we know that q(y)(sn+1) is false and
q(y)(sn+2)—that is, that Yolanda becomes queen from sn+1 to sn+2—
we can see where the impression that (1b) is exactly causally backward
comes from.

492
B. Copley
(45)
a.
s[if ϕ s×s,t , ψ s×s,t ]M
D s[ϕ s×s,t ]M[ψ s×s,t ]M
deﬁnition of if
b.
s[ϕ s×s,t ]M VD
ιs ∈SM : [ιe ∈SM×SM V
V
1e D s & 2e D s & ϕ(e)]]
def. happening
c.
ιs ∈SM : [ιe ∈SM× SM
[1e D s &2e D s &ϕ(e)]]
snC2
d.
s[if ϕ s,t , ψ s×s,t ]M
D snC2[ψ s×s,t ]M
from (45a) and (45c)
e.
snC2[ψ s×s,t ]M D
ιs ∈SM : [ιe ∈SM× SM
[
:
1eD(snC2) & 2e D s
and ψ(e )]]
def. happening
f.
ιs ∈SM : [ιe ∈SM× SM
[
:
1e D (snC2) & 2e D s & ψ(e )]] D snC3
D
The result of these two updates is sn+3. But even if we accommodate the
existence of an sn+3 (we need to redeﬁne SM to allow for this but this
should not be problematic), we still have a problem. The problem is the
contradiction between (46a) and (46b):
(46)
a.
Yolanda is not queen in snC2
because snC2 must be in domain of f
b.
Yolanda is queen in snC2
because of persistence
So, since the consequent update we are trying to make results in contra-
dictory demands on sn+2, the conditional is judged false/unacceptable.
The toy semantics here thus explains both (1a) and (1b) and thereby
solves our puzzle.

Events Are the Source of Causal Readings …
493
4.5
Related Examples
There is not too much more we can do with the linearity restriction
on our causal models. Classic tests such as strengthening the antecedent
and Sobol sequences, for instance, will require non-linear causal models,
which we cannot yet link to event semantics. However, there are a few
related examples that we can more or less easily treat with a linear causal
model and which are likely to be questions in the mind of the reader at
this point.
One question is what happens if we mix and match the eventives and
statives as in (47a) and (47b).
(47)
a.
If  Xanthippe becomes the princess, Yolanda is the queen.       true
b.
If  Xanthippe is the princess, Yolanda becomes the queen.              false
The framework correctly accounts for these judgments. In (47a),
Xanthippe becomes the princess from sn+1 to sn+2, and by persistence,
Yolanda is indeed the queen in sn+2. For (47b), Xanthippe is the princess
in sn+2, but from sn+2 we can’t do a happening update with Yolanda’s
becoming the queen, for the same reasons as for (1b).
A second question picks up some loose ends from above. How does
this framework deal with the futurate, generic/habitual, and storytelling
readings, which I argued above are really stative? Given that they are
stative, they are predicates of situations and therefore they update via
learning. So, for instance, the example in (48), gets the reading that on
updating via learning that Xanthippe has a plan to leave tomorrow, we
update via learning that Zelinda calls her today.
(48)
If Xanthippe leaves tomorrow, Zelinda calls Yolanda today.
A third question that we can answer here has to do with past tense; what
happens if we slightly complicate our simplest conditionals by adding
past tense to one or more of the prejacents? We have avoided time until
now (and correctly, I think, for the examples we were dealing with) but
we cannot avoid it forever. So, without getting into questions of temporal

494
B. Copley
anaphora which might make some of the mixed and matched condi-
tionals with past tense feel infelicitous, here is a felicitous conditional
which is true relative to our causal model M.
(49)
If Xanthippe became princess, Yolanda became queen.
Recall that matrix sentences with past tense on them are generally
assertable. That means that both prejacents here are predicates of situ-
ations, in our toy semantics; the result in (50) is the same (using here
an existential quantiﬁer theory of tense, as in (50)). The assertability of
the past tense phrases tells us we need to look at a single situation, not
a relation between situations, to evaluate them. They are predicates of
situations, not predicates of ordered pairs.
(50)
Past(p) = λs.∃s before s V p(s )
Consequently, for (50), both prejacents must involve a learning update,
rather than a happening update. The conditional has us ﬁrst learning
that, in a past situation relative to s, Xanthippe became princess, so
we update s with that fact; consequently we learn that in a past situ-
ation relative to the updated situation, Yolanda became queen. This is
congruent with our model, so the sentence is judged true.
Likewise, the framework can also handle “backtracking” conditionals
such as (51). The antecedent, which has a true eventive prejacent, is
updated via happening, while the past tense consequent is updated via
learning.
(51)
If Xanthippe becomes princess, Yolanda became queen.
So, the predicted reading is that the antecedent takes us from s where
Xanthippe is not princess to s′ where she is (= sn+3) and then we learn,
as for (50), that in a past situation relative to the updated situation,
Yolanda became queen. This is the case, so (51) is judged true.

Events Are the Source of Causal Readings …
495
References
Austin, John Langshaw. 1961. Ifs and cans. In Philosophical papers, 153–180.
Oxford University Press.
Baglini, Rebekah & Elitzur A. Bar-Asher Siegal. 2019. Direct causation: A new
approach to an old question.
Baglini, Rebekah & Itamar Francez. 2016. The implications of managing.
Journal of Semantics 33. 541–560.
Bar-Asher Siegal, Elitzur & Nora Boneh. 2019. Sufﬁcient and necessary condi-
tions for a non-uniﬁed analysis of causation. In 36th West Coast Conference
on formal linguistics, 55–60. Cascadilla Proceedings Project.
Bennett, Jonathan. 1988. Farewell to the phlogiston theory of conditionals.
Mind 97(388). 509–527.
Bennett, Jonathan. 2003. A philosophical guide to conditionals. Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
Borer, Hagit. 2005. Structuring sense: Volume I: In name only (structuring sense).
Oxford University Press.
Carlson, Greg. 2009. Generics and concepts. In Francis Jeffry Pelletier (ed.),
Kinds, things, and stuff: Mass terms and generics, 16–35. Oxford University
Press.
Comrie, Bernard. 1976. Aspect. Cambridge University Press.
Condoravdi, Cleo. 2002. Temporal interpretation of modals. In David Beaver,
Stefan Kaufmann, Brady Clark, & Luis Casillas (eds.), Stanford papers on
semantics. Palo Alto: CSLI Publications.
Copley, Bridget. 2008. The plan’s the thing: Deconstructing futurate meaning.
Linguistic Inquiry 39(2). 261–274.
Copley, Bridget. 2009. The semantics of the future. Routledge. Outstanding
dissertations in linguistics. Routledge.
Copley, Bridget. 2018. Dispositional causation. Glossa: A Journal of General
Linguistics 3(1).
Copley, Bridget & Heidi Harley. 2015. A force-theoretic framework for event
structure. Linguistics and Philosophy 38. 103–158.
Copley, Bridget & Heidi Harley. 2021. What would it take to tame the verbal
Hydra? (under review). CNRS/Paris 8 and University of Arizona ms.
Copley, Bridget & Olga Kagan. 2021. The Russian perfective and maximality
of causal inﬂuences. Talk presented at the Converging On Causal Ontology
Analyses (COCOA) come-as-you-are online workshop, June 2021.

496
B. Copley
Croft, William. 2012. Verbs: Aspect and causal structure. Oxford University
Press.
Davidson, D. 1967. The logical form of action sentences. In N. Rescher (ed.),
The logic of decision and action. University of Pittsburgh Press.
DeRose, Keith & Richard E Grandy. 1999. Conditional assertions and
“biscuit” conditionals. Noûs 33(3). 405–420.
Dowty, David. 1979. Word meaning and Montague Grammar. Dordrecht:
Reidel.
Dudman, Victor H. 1983. Tense and time in English verb clusters of the
primary pattern. Australian Journal of Linguistics 3(1). 25–44.
Edgington, Dorothy. 1995. On conditionals. Mind 104(414). 235–329.
Edgington, Dorothy. 2003. What if? questions about conditionals. Mind &
Language 18(4). 380–401.
Fernando, T. 2004. A ﬁnite-state approach to events in natural language
semantics. Journal of Logic and Computation 14(1). 79–92.
Fernando, Tim. 2005. Comic relief for anankastic conditionals. In P. Dekker &
M. Franke (eds.), Proceedings of the 15th Amsterdam colloquium, 71–76.
Giorgi, Alessandra & Fabio Pianesi. 1997. Tense and aspect: From semantics to
morphosyntax. Oxford University Press on Demand.
Groenendijk, Jeroen & Martin Stokhof. 1990. Two theories of dynamic
semantics. In European workshop on logics in artiﬁcial intelligence, 55–64.
Springer.
Hallman, Peter. 2009. Instants and intervals in the event/state distinction.
Unpublished ms., UCLA.
Hay, J., C. Kennedy & B. Levin. 1999. Scalar structure underlies telicity in
degree achievements. In Proceedings of SALT , vol. 9, 127–144. Citeseer.
Heim, Irene. 1982. On the semantics of deﬁnite and indeﬁnite noun phrases.
UMass dissertation.
Heim, Irene & Angelika Kratzer. 1998. Semantics in generative grammar.
Blackwell.
Higginbotham, James. 1983. The logic of perceptual reports: An extensional
alternative to situation semantics. The Journal of Philosophy: 100–127.
Higginbotham, James. 1985. On semantics. Linguistic Inquiry 16(4). 547–593.
Higginbotham, James. 1986. Linguistic theory and Davidson’s program in
semantics. In E. Lepore (ed.), Inquiries into truth and interpretation, 29–48.
Oxford: Blackwell.

Events Are the Source of Causal Readings …
497
Kamp, H. 1981. A theory of truth and semantic representation. In J.A.G.
Groenendijk, T.M.V. Janssen & M.B.J. Stokhof (eds.), Formal methods
in the study of language, vol. 135, Mathematical Centre Tracts, 277–322.
Amsterdam.
Kaufmann, Stefan. 2004. Conditioning against the grain. Journal of Philosoph-
ical Logic 33(6). 583–606.
Kaufmann, Stefan. 2005. Conditional truth and future reference. Journal of
Semantics 22(3). 231–280.
Kaufmann, Stefan. 2013. Causal premise semantics. Cognitive Science 37(6).
1136–1170.
Kaufmann, Stefan, Cleo Condoravdi & Valentina Harizanov. 2006. Formal
approaches to modality. In The expression of modality, 71–106. De Gruyter
Mouton.
Kaufmann, Stefan Heinz. 2002. Aspects of the meaning and use of conditionals.
Stanford University dissertation.
Klecha, Peter. 2011. Optional and obligatory modal subordination. In Proceed-
ings of sinn und bedeutung 15. 365–379.
Kratzer, Angelika. 1995. Stage-level and individual-level predicates. The generic
book. 125–175.
Krifka, Manfred. 2014. Embedding illocutionary acts. In Recursion: Complexity
in cognition, 59–87. Springer.
Krifka, Manfred, Francis Jeffry Pelletier, Gregory Carlson, Alice Ter Meulen,
Gennaro Chierchia & Godehard Link. 1995. Genericity: An introduction.
In Gregory Carlson & Francis Jeffry Pelletier (eds.), The generic book, 1–124.
University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, George. 1971. Presupposition and relative well-formedness. In Leon
A. Jacobvits Danny D. Steinberg (ed.), Semantics: An interdisciplinary
reader in philosophy, linguistics, and psychology, 329–340. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
van Lambalgen, Michiel & Fritz Hamm. 2008. The proper treatment of events,
vol. 6. Wiley.
Lauer, Sven & Prerna Nadathur. 2018. Sufﬁciency causatives. Manuscript, in
revision.
Maienborn, C. 2005. On the limits of the Davidsonian approach: The case of
copula sentences. Theoretical Linguistics 31(3). 275–316.
Maienborn, C. 2007. On Davidsonian and Kimian states. In I. Comorovski &
K. Von Heusinger (eds.), Existence: Semantics and syntax, vol. 84. Springer
Science and Business Media, 107–130. Springer.

498
B. Copley
Meillet, Antoine. 1912. L’évolution des formes grammaticales. Z. Zanichelli.
ter Meulen, Alice. 1995. Representing time in natural language. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Nadathur, Prerna. 2016. Causal necessity and sufﬁciency in implicativity.
Semantics and Linguistic Theory 26. 1002–1021.
Parsons, Terence. 1990. Events in the semantics of English: A study in subatomic
semantics. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Pearl, Judea. 2000. Causality: Models, reasoning and inference. Cambridge
University Press.
Pearl, Judea & Dana Mackenzie. 2018. The book of why: The new science of
cause and effect. Basic Books.
Pustejovsky, James. 1995. The generative lexicon. MIT Press.
Ramchand, G. 2008. Verb meaning and the lexicon: A ﬁrst-phase syntax.
Cambridge University Press.
Recanati, François. 2007. Perspectival thought: A plea for (moderate) relativism.
Oxford University Press.
Ritter, Elizabeth & Sara Thomas Rosen. 1997. The function of have. Lingua
101(3). 295–321.
Smith, Carlota. 1991. The parameter of aspect. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Sweetser, Eve E. 1988. Grammaticalization and semantic bleaching. In Annual
meeting of the Berkeley linguistics society, vol. 14, 389–405.
Traugott, Elizabeth Closs. 1980. Meaning-change in the development of
grammatical markers. Language Sciences 2(1). 44–61.
Verkuyl, Henk J. 2019. Event structure without naïve physics. In Robert
Truswell (ed.), The Oxford handbook of event structure, 171–204. Oxford
University Press.
Vetter, David C. 1973. Someone solves this problem tomorrow. Linguistic
Inquiry 4(1). 104–108.
Woodward, James. 2006. Sensitive and insensitive causation. The Philosophical
Review 115(1). 1–50.

Index
A
Abductive 7, 95, 107, 108, 119,
129, 152, 154, 156, 184,
190, 192, 196, 198, 204,
209, 223
Acceptability of conditionals 104,
108, 110, 114, 124, 132,
340
Acyclic graphs 162, 164, 461, 481
Adams, Ernest 4, 16, 21, 33, 115,
140–142, 145, 146, 157,
158, 165, 166, 177–179,
203
Adams’ thesis 105, 107
Afﬁrming the consequent 8, 237,
243, 247–250, 252, 257,
260–262, 265, 268, 269
Aktionsart 463
Alternative-based strengthening 269
Antecedent competitors
approach in the psychology of
reasoning 241
Argument 5, 7, 8, 16, 17, 22, 28,
59, 60, 74, 77, 78, 80, 92,
111, 112, 114–116, 118,
121–124, 127, 129–131,
133, 154, 156, 157, 185,
190–198, 202, 207–215,
224, 226–230, 237, 241,
244, 322, 324, 329, 429,
452, 469, 471, 472, 474,
478, 483, 486, 487
compelling 223
Aspect 9, 155, 183, 187, 192, 226,
322, 328, 348, 351, 375,
381, 463, 467, 469, 475,
476
At-issue/not-at-issue 297, 298, 311
Austinian conditional 468
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive
license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
S. Kaufmann et al. (eds.), Conditionals, Palgrave Studies in Pragmatics, Language
and Cognition, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-05682-6
499

500
Index
B
Bacon, Andrew 25
Barnes, Elizabeth 23
Bayesian 4, 7, 104, 125, 145–147,
157, 161–165, 228
approach in the psychology of
reasoning 228
networks 161
paradigm in the psychology of
reasoning belief 145
Bayes’ theorem 229
Belief 5, 7, 9, 28, 75, 88, 91, 95,
96, 103, 105, 111, 112,
114, 117, 119–123, 141,
143, 145–147, 157, 160,
166, 176, 187, 192, 195,
198, 205, 211–213, 228,
245, 330, 346, 349, 364,
392, 395, 427
change 28, 141, 167, 427
revision 112, 161
updating 28, 103, 140, 141, 146,
160
Belnap, Nuel 18
Betting 76
Bias, Belief 7, 156, 195, 212, 213,
226, 227, 230
Biconditionals 8, 86, 87, 91, 236,
238, 253–255, 262, 269
Biscuit conditional(s) 9, 10, 207,
425–429, 431, 445,
452–454, 468
Blocking Fitelson Collapse Strongly
57
Blocking Fitelson Collapse Weakly
57
Bradley, Richard 14, 18, 24–27, 29,
30, 32–34, 207
Branching time 391
C
Cartographic approach 292
Causal models 10, 158, 461–465,
467, 480–485, 487–490,
493, 494
Causal relation 107, 150, 152,
161–163, 165, 166, 347,
460, 461, 465, 466, 480,
481
CC/TT 60
Centering inference 160, 161
Central Adverbial Clauses (CACs)
278, 285–287, 296, 299,
301, 303, 305, 308, 313
Certainty condition 394, 398, 399,
402
Clause-external constituent 293
Coherence 6, 75–77, 79–82, 85, 95,
96, 157, 159, 160, 181
Coherence interval 158–161
Coherent 76, 77, 79–81, 85, 91, 96,
157–159, 181
Collapse (Fitelson) 7
Collapse (Gibbard) 59, 60
collapses to an indicative 140
Compositionality 374, 397, 487
Compounds of conditionals 30, 34,
115
concessive 225
Concessive while 300, 303
Conditional 59, 60, 74, 76, 77, 79,
80, 83, 91, 92, 94, 95,
103–105, 107–109, 111,
113–123, 126, 127,
130–132, 177, 180, 191,
193, 196, 201, 205, 208,
214, 384, 418, 426
bet 6, 125, 148, 149
causal 107, 129, 231

Index
501
concessive 225
counterfactual 3, 139, 140, 144,
157, 158, 160, 161, 323,
351, 371
collapses to an indicative 7
counterfactual 9
epistemic 231
independence 7, 223, 232, 346,
447, 450
indicative 14, 21, 39, 40, 43, 52,
103, 140
expands to a counterfactual 7
material 45, 54, 323
missing-link 151, 177
non-standard 7, 207, 230
probabilistic account 226
probability 40, 85, 146
standard 7, 207, 224
void conditional event 39, 74
Conditional event 6, 74, 75, 81, 82,
91, 147
Conditional excluded middle 242
Conditional inversion 281, 282, 305
Conditional perfection 8, 236–238,
242, 244, 245, 263, 267,
269
Conditional probability 4, 5, 13–16,
74–76, 82, 85, 91, 92, 94,
107, 108, 113, 115, 116,
147, 149–151, 179, 197,
198, 200, 201, 209, 212,
226
Conditional probability hypothesis
7, 147, 148, 150, 151, 156,
212
Conditional promises 153, 206, 245
Conditional strengthening 255
Conditional threats 206
Conﬁrmation 92
Conjunction Elimination 59
Connexive logic 81
Converse (of a conditional) 239, 270
Cooper conditional 58
counterfactual 44
Coordination 284, 285, 303
Counterfactual conditionals 3, 7, 9,
139, 140, 144, 150, 157,
158, 160, 161, 165, 167,
205, 351, 360, 365, 404,
428, 438
D
(Davidsonian) event argument 479
Deductive 7, 77, 96, 107, 108, 152,
154, 156, 184, 188–190,
223, 227
De Finetti, Bruno 6, 30, 59, 75,
125–127, 144, 147, 149,
166, 203
De Finetti conditional 75
Delta-p 88, 89, 91, 95, 151–153,
155
Denying the antecedent 8, 237, 243,
247–250, 252, 257, 259,
260, 262, 268, 269
DF/TT 59, 60
Director’s reading 469
Disconﬁrm 111, 130, 178, 209, 230
Discourse syntax 308
Do-operator 463–465
Double access 413, 439, 442, 446,
447, 454
Doxastic alternatives 392, 397, 398,
406
Dynamic inference, reasoning 140
Dynamic semantics 406, 465, 467

502
Index
E
Ellis, Brian 28
Embeddability 305, 306
Epistemic 7, 9, 21, 28, 75, 141,
191, 231, 324, 326, 348,
360, 372, 391
Epistemic modal adverbials 278
Epistemic utility 147
Equation, the 104, 107–114, 117,
118, 120, 122, 123,
127–132, 486
Event/eventive/eventivity 10, 395,
460, 461, 463–472, 474,
476, 478, 494
Event conditional 275–277, 279,
281, 282, 284, 288, 289,
293, 299, 302, 304, 305,
308, 313
Exhaustivity 8, 237, 240, 246, 248,
251, 260, 262, 263
expands to a counterfactual 141,
143
Expected value 31, 147, 149, 165,
166
Experiment 82, 83, 91, 95,
105–110, 113, 117,
125–127, 129, 130, 181,
188, 193–196, 198, 200,
209, 211, 213
export principle 60, 127
Extra-sentential 298, 299, 306,
308–310
F
Factual conditional 276–278,
280–284, 287–291, 293,
294, 313
Fake Past 9, 390, 406, 407,
414–416, 418
Fake tense 390, 426, 428
Fallacy 212, 229
Falsiﬁability 156, 212, 226, 229,
230
Filter-funnel model of branching
time 391, 394
Free Indirect Speech 417
Futurates 470, 471
G
Generic/habitual readings 393, 468,
469, 471, 473
Gibbard, Allan 5, 24, 59, 121, 122
H
Halfway response strategies 91
Hypothetical conditionals 10, 349,
359, 426, 427, 430, 439,
452
import principle 60
I
Import-Export (law of) 60
export principle 5, 42
import principle 5, 42
Imprecise probability 75
Incomplete probabilistic knowledge
76, 83, 84, 88
Independence 3, 28, 117, 178, 427,
428, 446, 449, 450, 453
Independence of the conditional and
its antecedent 224
Indeterminacy. See Indeterminate
Indeterminacy of conditionals 18, 19

Index
503
Indeterminate 14, 18, 20, 22, 23,
29, 30, 34
Indicative 7, 10, 14, 21, 22, 28,
140, 141, 143, 397, 403,
431
Indicative and counterfactual
conditionals 139, 140, 144,
150, 158, 160, 161, 165,
167, 428
Indicative conditionals 14, 21, 59,
103, 110, 112, 113, 117,
130, 144, 146, 147, 149,
151, 152, 158–160, 175,
206, 208, 214, 225, 362,
365, 397, 402, 404, 406,
426, 427
Inductive 7, 107, 108, 111, 129,
152, 154, 156, 189, 190,
192, 204, 205, 210, 211,
223
Inference, logical 223
Inferential connection 91, 156, 181,
184, 189, 192, 193, 200,
210
Inferentialism 7, 95, 153–156, 176,
191–193, 195–200,
202–204, 206–209,
211–215, 224
truth condition 7, 153, 223
Interpretation of conditional 2, 9,
10, 78, 92, 201, 403
Intervention 3, 9, 164, 409–414,
416, 465
Irrealis mood 282
J
Jeffrey, Richard 144, 147, 149
Jeffrey semantics 147, 149, 165, 166
L
Lance, Mark 32
Left Logical Equivalence 58
Level of attachment/height of
attachment 294, 303, 308
Lewis, David 2, 5, 15, 18, 24, 144,
145, 147, 157, 158, 165
Lewis dialogue technique 144
Lewis’s triviality proof 26, 166
Linguistics 2, 4, 9, 10, 145, 322,
323, 346, 349, 397, 405
Logic 3, 6, 8, 59, 73, 82, 145–147,
156, 180, 203, 227, 322,
323
M
Markov condition 163, 482
material 163
Material conditional 3, 5, 6, 59, 60,
74, 77, 78, 82, 83, 87, 91,
94, 147, 158, 177, 178,
186, 196, 323, 346
Maxim of Manner 429
McGee, Vann 31, 210, 231
Mental probability logic 75, 95
Mention-all answers 268
Mention some answers 247, 251, 256
Mention-some reading 267
Metainference (vs inference) 41
Metaphysical alternatives 401
missing-link 151, 152, 154
Modal base 242, 372, 376, 379,
384, 396, 397, 400, 401,
404–407
Modality 2, 324, 345, 346, 374,
381, 390, 391, 469

504
Index
Modus ponens 7, 16, 60, 77, 140,
196, 198, 209, 230, 237,
243, 247–249, 252, 260
Modus tollens 16, 22, 237, 243,
249, 252, 260
Molina, Luis 30
Mood 10, 175, 348, 351, 359, 360,
390, 405, 428, 429, 431,
433, 434, 439, 442, 443
Moss, Sarah 24
Must 214
N
Need-a-reason implicature 447, 449,
450
Node 162
parent 163
Noise in experiments 198, 230
NonIC 308
Non-Integrated Adverbial Clauses
(NiCs) 278, 308, 309, 311
O
Obverse (of a conditional)
paradigm in the psychology of
reasoning 145
Orphan constituent 298, 299, 308
P
Paradox of the material conditional
77, 78, 80
Peripheral Adverbial Clauses (PACs)
277, 278, 286, 294–296,
298–303, 305, 308, 309,
311, 313
Potentialis mood 281
Pragmatic competition 425, 439
Pragmatic principle 387
Pragmatic reasoning 269, 427
Pragmatics 78
Predication 471, 477, 483–485
probabilistic account 146, 226
Preservation of truth 33, 114
Probabilistically non-informative 77,
79, 80
probability 77, 79
Probabilistic modus ponens 77
Probabilistic transitivity 80
Probabilistic truth table task 85, 86,
88, 95, 96
Probability
table 163
Probability of conditionals 105,
107–109, 115, 120,
124–126, 128, 129, 131,
133
Psychology of reasoning 73, 139,
145, 157
Putative should 281, 305
Q
QCC/TT 49, 51, 58
QDF/TT 56
quasi-conjunction 51
Quasi-connectives (Cooper’s) 40
quasi-conjunction 50, 51, 55
quasi-disjunction 50, 51
quasi-material conditional 50
R
Ramsey, Frank 4, 6, 14, 15, 80–82
Ramsey Test 111–113, 120, 129,
146, 156, 164, 397

Index
505
Rationality 74, 75, 77, 95
Reasoning 2, 8, 60, 73–78, 83, 88,
95–97, 114–116, 125, 139,
141, 146, 157, 161, 165,
176, 186, 190, 201, 204,
206, 209, 213, 214, 228,
230, 232, 236, 242, 269,
324, 346
Relevance conditional 224, 468,
470, 471
Rerunning History Hypothesis 141
S
Scheduling reading 394, 395, 400,
402, 404, 414
Schiffer, Stephen 23
Scope phenomena/scope effects 286,
302
Semantics 78
Sequence of mood 429, 439, 442,
444
Sequence of tense 10, 380,
429–431, 436, 437, 439,
441, 442, 444, 445,
447–449, 451, 453, 454
Settled 177, 392, 394, 395, 399,
403, 469
Situations 104, 126, 325, 328, 335,
466, 467, 469, 477–481,
483
Sorensen, Roy 20
Speech-event conditional 276–278,
302, 304, 305, 308, 313
Speech-event modiﬁer 299, 301–303
Stalnaker, Robert 2, 4, 16, 22, 118,
145–147, 166, 178, 196,
266, 409
standard 7, 223
State/stative/stativity 393
Storytelling contexts 469
Strict conditionals 17
Strict implication 464
Stronger-than-Material 42, 67
Strong Kleene (logic) 40, 44, 49
Subjective probability 4, 76, 141,
146, 147, 161, 165
Subjunctive 9, 10, 208, 350, 358,
371, 373, 374, 376, 384,
386, 387, 390, 404, 406,
407
Supraclassicality 59
Syllogism 227, 262
Syntactic integration 294, 306, 313
T
Temporal while 300, 303
Tense 4, 9, 151, 332, 351
Then resumption 304, 307
Times 23, 166, 341, 350
Tolerant 59
TP-internal/TP-external 292, 296,
311
Trivalent logics 6, 59, 60
Triviality results (Lewis) 26, 166
truth condition 5, 15
Truth
objective 5, 127, 149
pleonastic 166
pragmatic 166
truth conditions 123
truth table 153, 166, 483
Truth-functionality 3, 6, 15, 18, 30
U
Update 140, 143

506
Index
updating 28, 140, 141, 146, 160
V
V2 transgression 293, 295, 306, 309
Validity 33, 45
probabilistic 79, 115, 157
p-validity 115, 158
Variables 162
Verb (phrase) 330, 343
void 148
Verb Second (V2) 278, 292, 306
Veridicality/non-
veridicality/veridical/non-
veridical 281, 282,
305
W
Whole Truth theory 270
Will 242
Williams, Robert 23
Wright, Crispin 23
Z
Zero probability 6

