742
States in Quantum Mechanics
6. J. Stark: Elektrische Spektralanalyse chemischer Atome (Leipzig: Hirzel 1914)
7. J. Stark, P. Epstein: Der Starkeffekt (Stuttgart: Battenberg 1965, reprint of papers by both with
commentary by Armin Hermann)
Secondary Literature
8. K. Hentschel: An unwelcome discovery: The pole effect in the electric arc as a threat to pre-
cision spectrometry in the early 20th century. Archive for History of Exact Sciences 51/3,
199–271 (1997)
9. K. Hentschel: Zum Zusammenspiel von Instrument, Experiment und Theorie, Hamburg: Kovaˇc
1998, 334–358
10. R. Ladenburg: Einﬂuß elektrischer Felder auf Spektrallinien (Starkeffekt), in M¨uller-Pouillet:
Lehrbuch der Physik, Vol. 2.2, Chap. 40, 2231–2290 (1929)
11. M. Leone, A. Paoletti, N. Robotti: A simultaneous discovery: The case of Johannes Stark and
Antonino Lo Surdo. Physics in Perspective 6, 271–294 (2004)
States in Quantum Mechanics
Leslie E. Ballentine
The most general meaning of the term state is a manner of existing, a combination
of attributes belonging to a thing (paraphrased from the Oxford English Dictionary).
In physics the term state has various, more speciﬁc meanings in thermodynamics,
in classical mechanics, and in quantum mechanics, but all include the notion that a
knowledge of the state is sufﬁcient to make predictions about the future behavior of
the system.
A pure state ( states, pure and mixed) is one that is speciﬁed or controlled as
precisely as possible. In classical mechanics a pure state is speciﬁed by a point in
phase space, i.e. by the values of all position and momentum variables. In quan-
tum mechanics a pure state is speciﬁed by a  wave function or state vector in
 Hilbert space. In both classical and quantum mechanics the motion of the state
is deterministic, in the sense that the speciﬁcation of the initial state determines a
mathematically unique trajectory of future states.
However, the dissimilarities between the classical and quantum pure states are
even more signiﬁcant. The speciﬁcation of the classical state uniquely determines
all observable properties of the system, as functions of the position and momentum
variables. But the connection between the quantum state and observation is only
probabilistic; the state vector does not determine the values of the  observables,
but only the probabilities of the various possible values. The same classical state
leads necessarily to the same observable events, but a new preparation of the same
quantum state may lead to quite different observable outcomes. Thus, even though

States in Quantum Mechanics
743
S
the time evolution of the state vector is deterministic, the appearance of events is
not. It is the connection between the quantum state and the observable events that
is indeterministic, notwithstanding the deterministic nature of the  Schr¨odinger
equation. That the link between the state and the observable events is only statistical,
is the most signiﬁcant difference of quantum mechanics from classical mechanics.
But if we recognize that the prediction of future events must be probabilistic, then
the quantum state fulﬁlls the basic notion of state as being sufﬁcient for predictions
about the future behavior of the system. Indeed, the probabilities for all observable
properties are uniquely determined by the quantum state.  Probability in quantum
mechanics.
When we consider general states, comprising both pure and  mixed states,
then the analogy between classical and quantum states becomes closer. A general
classical statistical state is described by a probability distribution on phase space,
ρc(q, p), where q and p are the coordinates and momenta. A pure state is recov-
ered in the extreme limit in which all probability is concentrated on a single point;
all other probability distributions are mixed states. A general quantum state is de-
scribed by a  state operator (also called a  density matrix), ρ, which is a positive
Hermitian operator with unit trace. A pure state with state vector |ψ⟩is obtained
if ρ = |ψ⟩⟨ψ|. The use of general states makes the comparison between classical
and quantum mechanics easier because the results of both theories are expressed in
terms of probabilities and averages. The average value of an observable, represented
by the quantum operator A or the classical function A(q, p), is given by Tr(ρA) in
quantum mechanics, and by

ρc(q, p)A(q, p)dqdp in classical mechanics. The
equations of motion for the quantum and classical state functions are very similar.
The former involves the commutator with the Hamiltonian, ∂ρ/∂t = −(i/ℏ)[H, ρ],
and the latter involves the Poisson bracket, ∂ρc/∂t = {Hc, ρc}PB. By contrast,
Newton’s equation for a single classical orbit bears no similarity to Schr¨odinger’s
equation for a state vector.
But more important than these formal similarities and differences is a very sub-
stantial difference. Two classical orbits that begin close together in phase space can,
in time, become widely separated from each other, but two state vectors that are
initially close in Hilbert space will not separate at all because the unitarity of the
time-development operator implies that ⟨ψ1(t)|ψ2(t)⟩remains constant. This fact
was once considered to be a serious obstacle to the emergence of classical me-
chanics as a limiting case of quantum mechanics. But the obstacle disappears if the
proper analog of a quantum state is a classical statistical state, since the overlap
of two nearby classical probability distributions, 
 ρc1(q, p, t)ρc2(q, p, t)dq dp, is
independent of t, as is the overlap of two quantum state operators, Tr(ρ1(t)ρ2(t)).
Thus the classical limit of a quantum state should be regarded as an  ensemble of
classical trajectories, rather than a single trajectory [1].
The concept of a quantum state in the modern theory is very different from
that in the early quantum theory ( Quantum theory, early period). N. Bohr postu-
lated that, from the continuum of classical atomic orbits, a  quantization condition
selected a discrete subset of permitted states, between which discontinuous  quan-
tum jumps took place. The old Bohr-orbit theory proved to be inadequate, and was

744
States, Pure and Mixed, and Their Representations
replaced by Schr¨odinger’s wave equation ( wave mechanics; Schr¨odinger equa-
tion). But the notion of permitted states lingered on, with the stationary solutions
(energy eigenstates) of Schr¨odinger’s equation taking on the role of the “permit-
ted” orbits of the old theory. That notion is quite obsolete. There are now plenty of
experiments [2–4] that demonstrate the physical signiﬁcance of the nonstationary
solutions to Schr¨odinger’s equation, which are therefore every bit as “permitted” as
are the stationary solutions.
Literature
1. L. E. Ballentine: Quantum Mechanics – A Modern Development (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore
1998) – a general reference on quantum states
2. J. A. Yeazell, C. R. Stroud: Observation of spatially localized atomic electron wave packets.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 60, 1494 (1998)
3. L. Marmet, H. Held, G. Raithel, J. A. Yeazell, H. Walter: Observation of Quasi–Landau wave
packets. Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 3779 (1994)
4. J. Wals, H. H. Fielding, J. F. Christian, L. C. Snoek, W. J. van den Zande, H. B. van Linden van
den Heuvell: Observation of Rydberg wave packet dynamics in a Coulombic and magnetic ﬁeld.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 3783 (1994)
States, Pure and Mixed,
and Their Representations
Leslie E. Ballentine
The concept of state in quantum mechanics, considered abstractly, is a means of cal-
culating probabilities and averages for all  observables. States can be given many
different mathematical representations. The most familiar are the  wave function
(x) and the state vector |⟩in  Hilbert space, but these describe only pure
states. A general quantum state is represented by a  state operator, ρ, (also called a
 statistical operator, or  a density matrix), which is a positive Hermitian operator
with unit trace. That is to say, it must satisfy the three conditions,
Trρ = 1 , ρ = ρ† , ⟨u|ρ|u⟩⩾0 for all vectors |u⟩.
(1)
The average value of an observable, represented by the operator A, is given by ⟨A⟩=
Tr(ρA).  Gleason’s theorem shows that, under broad but non-trivial conditions,
this state operator provides the most general means of introducing a probability
measure in Hilbert space. The distinction between “pure case” (reiner Fall) and
“mixed case” (Gemenge) was introduced by Hermann Weyl (1885–1955) [1].
A pure state with state vector |ψ⟩is obtained if ρ is a one-dimensional projection
operator, ρ = |ψ⟩⟨ψ|, in which case the expression for the average reduces to

