502
Propensities in Quantum Mechanics
Propensities in Quantum Mechanics
Mauricio Su´arez
Propensities are probabilistic dispositions, and there is a long history of informal
appeals to dispositional terms in connection with quantum mechanics, going all the
way back to the founding of the discipline. A dispositional account of quantum prop-
erties is, for instance, arguably implicit in the early quantum theory in Bohr’s model
of the atom, since transitions between quantum orbitals can be described as stochas-
tic processes that bring about certain values of quantum properties with certain
probabilities. Similarly, on the orthodox Copenhagen interpretation, measurements
do not reveal pre-existent values of physical quantities, but bring about values with
some well-deﬁned probability. (See  Born rule; Consistent Histories; Metaphysics
in Quantum Mechanics; Nonlocality; Orthodox Interpretation; Schr¨odinger’s Cat;
Transactional Interpretation). Then, in addition, starting in the 1950s there has
been a succession of attempts to employ explicit dispositional notions, such as
propensities, in order to resolve the paradoxes of quantum mechanics ( errors and
paradoxes in quantum mechanics). Two stand out: Henry Margenau’s latency inter-
pretation, and Karl Popper’s propensity interpretation of quantum probability.
Margenau’s Latency Interpretation
Different interpretations of quantum mechanics can be in general fruitfully dis-
tinguished in terms of the answers they provide to the paradigmatic question
concerning the general interpretation of superposed states. Suppose that the state of
a quantum system is ψ, a  superposition of eigenstates of the Hermitian operator
that represents the observable Q. The standard interpretational rule within orthodox
quantum mechanics, the eigenstate/eigenvalue link (e/e link) states that a system in
state ψ can be said to have a value of a property Q if and only if ψ is an eigenstate
of the Hermitian operator that represents the property. The paradigmatic question
regarding these states is then the following: What does it mean – with respect to the
property represented by the observable Q – for a quantum system to be in state ψ
which is not an eigenstate of the Hermitian operator that represents Q? Propensity
views of quantum mechanics vary greatly in their details but they all coincide in
their answer to the paradigmatic interpretational question: It means that the system
possesses the propensity to exhibit a particular value of Q if Q is measured on this
system in state ψ.
In an excellent pioneering article Henry Margenau [1] argued in favour of la-
tent quantities, or latencies. Margenau’s key contribution was the basic template
for propensity views. Suppose that state ψ can be written as a linear combination
ψ = Σncn|νn⟩of the eigenstates νn of the latent observable represented by Q with

Propensities in Quantum Mechanics
503
P
spectral decomposition given by Q = Σnan|νn⟩⟨νn|. Margenau then answered the
paradigmatic interpretational question very precisely as follows: a system in state ψ
has a latent property Q if and only if it possesses a propensity to manifest eigenvalue
ai with probability |ci|2 in a measurement of Q.
(Spectral decomposition, see  Density operator; Ignorance interpretation; Mea-
surement theory; Objectiﬁcation; Operator; Probabilistic Interpretation; Self-adjoint
operator; Wave mechanics).
However, Margenau went beyond the basic template in some unhelpful ways.
For instance he conﬂated the possession of a property with the manifestation of a
value of the property – a distinction that makes no sense for categorical properties,
but is essential in order to understand dispositional property ascriptions in general.
A failure to draw this distinction led Margenau to inappropriately link the actuali-
sation of latent properties with their existence. So in the absence of a measurement
of position, for instance, an electron has no value of position, and as a consequence
it has no position at all. This conﬂation renders Margenau’s attempt to solve the
quantum paradoxes largely unsuccessful, and brings about additional difﬁcult issues
related to the  identity of quantum objects.
The conﬂation is unfortunately present also in Heisenberg’s well known appeal
to Aristotelian potentialities [2], but can be avoided by distinguishing carefully the
possession of a propensity from its manifestation. To be coherent a propensity view
must deny a common presupposition behind the (e/e link), namely that it is legit-
imate to ascribe a property to a system if and only if the system takes a value of
the property. It would then follow in accordance with the (e/e link) that a system
possesses a property if and only if the system’s state is an eigenstate of the oper-
ator that represents the property. But any coherent propensity (or more generally
dispositional) account must ascribe a property without manifestation.
Popper’s Propensity Interpretation of Quantum Probability
Karl Popper’s propensity interpretation of quantum mechanics is surely his most
important contribution to the philosophy of physics. Popper conceived the propen-
sity interpretation of quantum mechanics as both a milestone of his philosophical
career, and a key to his philosophical system. He defended it in a large number of
his writings, and over a very large period of time (for instance Popper [3, 4]). It
was a milestone since it was a consideration of the nature of quantum phenomena
that led him to abandon the frequency theory of probability, and adopt instead a
propensity interpretation for objective probabilities in general. And it was a key to
Popper’s philosophical system because the propensity interpretation of probability
i) resolved the paradoxes of quantum mechanics; ii) re-established the possibility of
a thoroughly realist interpretation of the quantum theory, of physics, and of science
in general; and iii) provided strong empirical conﬁrmation in favour of the propen-
sity interpretation of the calculus of probability.
However, Popper’s account is subject to three lethal objections that render it
untenable. The ﬁrst criticism was raised by Neal Grossman [5], and shows that

504
Propensities in Quantum Mechanics
Popper’s account confuses quantum mixtures and superpositions. In essence the
problem is that for any observable Q every superposed state ψ = 
n cn|νn⟩
can be shown to be statistically indistinguishable from an appropriate mixture
W∞
n=1 = Σn|cn|2|νn⟩⟨νn | over the eigenstates {|νn⟩} of the operator that corre-
sponds to Q. Since Popper identiﬁes propensities with probability distributions, he
has no option but to identify the propensities generated by both states. Yet both states
are different, as is shown in any experiment that measures any observable other than
Q on systems in these states.
The second difﬁculty was ﬁrst raised by Peter Milne [6], and is related to the
notion of interference of propensity waves invoked by Popper in order to account
for the  double-slit experiment. Popper’s identiﬁcation of propensities with whole
experimental set-ups entails that any small change in the experimental set-up, such
as the closing of a slit, essentially brings about a change in the propensity ascribed.
Milne employed this fact to refute Popper’s account of interference experiments,
such as the two slit experiment. Popper’s account entails that in each of the experi-
ments A and B with one or the other slit open a different propensity ascription “A”
and “B” is in order. The interference pattern that results in the experiment with both
slits open is then just the result of the interference of both propensities “A” and “B”.
But Milne shows that there is no reason on Popper’s account to expect propensities
“A” and “B” to be co-present in the interference experimental set-up, since this is
distinct from both A and B.
The ﬁnal objection to Popper’s propensity account is Humphrey’s notorious para-
dox [7], which shows that propensities are not in general probabilities, and vice
versa, since propensities are time-asymmetric but conditional probabilities are not.
Together these three objections essentially refute Popper’s propensity interpretation
of quantum probabilities.
New Prospects for Propensities
The failure of propensity accounts in the past sometimes gives all propensity inter-
pretations a bad name in the philosophy of physics. But this is essentially unfair
since, as we have seen, it is not propensities per se that have been shown to be
inapplicable to quantum mechanics, but rather particular uses of them. It remains
possible to apply propensities to quantum mechanics in more appropriate ways. In
particular propensity accounts could abandon the ideal of interpreting probabilities
in general. Instead propensities can be used to explain certain probabilities. Some of
the presuppositions underlying the (e/e link) will also need to be confronted. Finally,
it must be possible to ascribe propensities to quantum systems in the absence of any
experimental set-up. Three recent accounts that go some way towards meeting these
goals are Maxwell [8], Thompson [9] and Su´arez [10]. See also  Objective Quan-
tum Probabilities; Probability in Quantum Mechanics.

Protective Measurements
505
P
Primary Literature
1. H. Margenau: Advantages and disadvantages of various interpretations of the quantum theory.
Physics Today 7(10), 6–13 (1954)
2. W. Heisenberg: Physics and Philosophy (George Allen and Unwin, London 1958)
3. K. Popper: The Propensity interpretation of calculus of probability, and the quantum theory, in
S. K¨orner ed.: Observation and Interpretation: A Symposium of Philosophers and Physicists
(Butterworths, London 1957, 65–70)
4. K. Popper: Quantum Theory and the Schism in Physics. Volume III of the Postscript to the
Logic of Scientiﬁc Discovery (Hutchinson, London 1982)
Secondary Literature
5. N. Grossman: Quantum mechanics and interpretations of probability theory. Philosophy of
Science 39, 451–460 (1972)
6. P. Milne: A note on Popper, propensities and the two slit experiment. British Journal for the
Philosophy of Science 36, 66–70 (1985)
7. P. Humphreys: Why propensities can not be probabilities. Philosophical Review 94, 557–570
(1985)
8. N. Maxwell: Quantum propensiton theory: A testable resolution to the wave/particle dilemma.
British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 39, 1–50 (1988)
9. I. Thompson: Real dispositions in the physical world. British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science 39, 67–79 (1988)
10. M. Su´arez: Quantum selections, propensities and the problem of measurement. British Journal
for the Philosophy of Science 55, 219–255 (2004)
Protective Measurements
Lev Vaidman
Protective measurement [1] is a method for measuring an expectation value of an
observable on a single quantum system. The quantum state of the system can be
protected by a potential, when the state is a nondegenerate energy eigenstate with a
known gap to neighboring states, or via  quantum Zeno effect by frequent projec-
tion measurements.
Apart from protection, the procedure consists of a standard von Neumann mea-
surement with weak coupling which is switched on and, after a long time, switched
off, adiabatically. The interaction Hamiltonian for protective measurement of O is:
Hint = g(t)PO,
(1)
where P is a momentum conjugate to Q, the pointer variable of the measuring de-
vice. The interaction Hamiltonian is small as in weak measurements, [2, p. 845]. In

