L
Lambert of Lagny
LAURENT CESALLI
Department of Philosophy
University of Geneva
Geneva
Switzerland
Abstract
Lambert of Lagny (Lambertus de Latiniaco) (ﬂ. 1250) (not
to be confused with the Dominican Lambert of Auxerre) is
the author of one of the main logic textbooks of the
terminist logic (Logica or Summa Lamberti). He belongs
to the Parisian tradition as opposed to the Oxonian one.
The Summa is posterior to and independent from the
corresponding works of Peter of Spain, William of Sher-
wood, and Roger Bacon. Lambert’s semantic of terms is
characterized by the acceptation of natural supposition
(also in propositional context) and an original doctrine
of appellation as a syntactic limitation of personal
supposition.
Life and Work
Lambert of Lagny’s exact date of birth and death are not
known. On the basis of indications found in some of the
15 manuscripts preserving his only known work – the
Logica or Summa Lamberti–, one can locate his period of
main activity around the middle of the thirteenth century.
Lambert of Lagny was a scholar (clericus) in the Diocese of
Meaux. Between c. 1250 and 1255, he was the preceptor of
the young count Theobald V of Champagne (1238–1270,
King of Navarre under the name of Theobald II the youn-
ger since 1253). Later on (1263–1265), Lambert became
administrator of the Parisian possessions of the counts of
Champagne. Lambert of Lagny is not identical with Lam-
bert of Auxerre (Lambertus de Autissiodoro), the Domini-
can friar under whose name the Summa was transmitted.
The confusion can be explained by the fact that the
Summa played an important role as a logic textbook in
the studia of the Domincan Order (de Libera 1982:229–
232, correcting the previous view held by Alessio 1971:
XVI–XXXII as well as De Rijk 1969:160–162).
The Logica or Summa Lamberti (non-critical edition
by Alessio 1971; edition of part VIII of the Summa, De
appellatione, based on ﬁve manuscripts by de Libera 1982)
is likely to have been written between 1253–1257 probably
in Troyes, possibly in Pamplona (De Rijk 1969:161) or
between 1250 and 1265 (de Libera 1990:214). The work
seems to have been produced in several phases: a ﬁrst
redaction was completed in Navarre and the ﬁnal edition,
augmented by different treatises on the properties of
terms, was made later on in France. This hypothesis,
originally indicated by Alessio (1971:XLVI), was con-
ﬁrmed and speciﬁed by the study of the relation between
section 3 of the last part of the Summa (De appellatione)
and the Appellationes of the Parisian master Johannes
Pagus. As de Libera (1982:233) has argued, Lambert
must have known the Appellationes of Pagus before editing
the ﬁnal version of the Summa. Besides its utilization as
logical textbook within the studia of the Dominican
Order, the Summa might have exerted an inﬂuence on
subsequent
terminism
(traces
of
Lambert’s
logico-
grammatical doctrine of determinatio as a means to solve
paralogisms
involving
the
fallacia
compositionis
et
divisionis are present in tract VII of John Buridan’s
Summulae – de Libera 1990:222).
The Logica or Summa Lamberti
The Summa is one of the four main textbooks of the
so-called terminist logic of the thirteenth century.
It is both posterior to and independent from Peter of
Spain’s Tractatus, William of Sherwoods’ Introductiones
in logicam, and Roger Bacon’s Summulae dialectices. The
logical work of Lambert belongs to the Parisian tradition
(as opposed to the Oxonian one). Two main characteris-
tics of his semantics allow one to consider Lambert
as a continental logician: his acceptation of natural sup-
position (suppositio naturalis) and, as a consequence,
his conception of appellation (appellatio) as a restricted
supposition. Accordingly, the main sources of Lambert’s
Henrik Lagerlund (ed.), Encyclopedia of Medieval Philosophy, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9729-4,
# Springer Science+Business Media B.V., 2011

work are treatises pertaining to the Parisian tradition such
as Johannes Pagus’ Appellationes, but also the Summe
Metenses and the Syncategoremata of Nicolas of Paris.
The work is divided into eight parts. Alessio (1971)
provides the following division:
1. De propositionibus
2. De predicabilibus
3. De predicamentis
4. De postpredicamentis
5. De sillogismo
6. De locis
7. De fallaciis
8. De suppositionibus et de signiﬁcationibus
The tract De appellatione edited by A. de Libera in 1982
is the third section of part eight of the Summa, which is
divided as follows:
8.0. Prologus
8.1. De signiﬁcatione
8.2. De suppositionibus
8.3. De appellatione
8.4. De restrictionibus
8.5. De ampliationibus
8.6. De distributionibus
8.7. De relationibus
This structure shows that the tracts 1–7 reﬂect the content
of the Aristotelian Organon, whereas tract 8 consists of the
so-called parva logicalia or treatises on the properties of
terms (the last section on relations is not devoted to the
category of relation, but to relative pronouns).
Some Theoretical Issues of the Summa
Universals
On the background of the prologue of Porphyry’s Isagoge,
Lambert deﬁnes a universal as that which is naturally able
to be said of many (aptum natum dici de pluribus – Alessio
1971:51). He insists on the fact that not every universal is
effectively predicated of many, for some universal, like
phenix, is said of many but only successively (there is
always and only one phoenix at a time) and some other,
like sol is just said of one individual (there is only one sun,
but sol is not a proper name). Lambert seems to have
a realistic conception of the universal: it is a universal
form (forma universalis) multiplied in different substrates
(multiplicatur in plura supposita).
Parts and Wholes
In the tract on categories (De predicamentis), commenting
on Aristotle’s distinction between esse in and dici de,
Lambert identiﬁes nine modes for something to be in
something else (Alessio 1971:66–67), which comes down
to distinguish as many types of parts. Thus, we can have:
(a) integral parts (a ﬁnger as part of a hand); (b) a whole as
part of its constituents (a house as part of its walls);
(c) speciﬁc parts (the species man is part of the genus
animal); (d) generic parts (the genus as part of its species,
the deﬁniens of its difﬁnitum); (e) formal parts, subdivided
in formal substantial parts (the soul as part of the body);
(f) formal accidental parts (the accident white as part of its
substratum); (g) effective parts, that is, an effect as part
of its efﬁcient cause (the kingdom as part of the king);
(h) contained parts (something located as a part of space).
Thus, Lambert seems to have a physical and metaphysical
mereology, including several possibilities for wholes to be
parts of their constituents.
Signification
According to Lambert, signiﬁcatio is a semantic relation
resulting from the free imposition of a sound (vox)
on a concept (intellectus rei – Alessio 1971:205–206).
It corresponds to our contemporary notion of meaning.
As many of his colleagues logicians in the thirteenth
century, he understands Aristotle in the ﬁrst lines of the
De interpretatione (16a6–7) as saying that spoken words
are signs of concepts, which, in turn, are signs of things.
Thus, for Lambert, signiﬁcation is transitive: a spoken
word is a sign of a sign (i.e., of a concept); and a concept
is a sign of a signiﬁcate (i.e., of a thing). The signiﬁcation is
analyzed in four constituents: a thing, a concept of a
thing, a sound, and the union of the sound with the
concept of a thing (res, intellectus rei, vox et unio vocis
cum intellectu rei). The conjunction of the four results in
a term (terminus or vox signiﬁcativa). The conventional
component of signiﬁcation is only the union of the sound
with the concept; the three other components are natural.
Therefore, Lambert conceives of concepts as natural signs
of things.
Supposition
Supposition is a property of a term. It bears some afﬁnities
with our contemporary notion of reference and it differs
from signiﬁcation insofar as signiﬁcation is prior to sup-
position and only extends to the thing on which the sound
was imposed (i.e., the universal nature ‘‘man’’), while
supposition can also concern the supposita contained
under that universal nature (i.e., Socrates and Plato).
Lambert’s deﬁnition of supposition reads as follows: sup-
position is the understanding of a term for itself or for
its thing or for some suppositum (or suposita) contained
under its thing (suppositio dicitur acceptio termini per se
680 L
Lambert of Lagny

sive pro re sua vel pro aliquo supposito contempto sub re sua
vel pro aliquibus suppositis contemptis sub re sua – Alessio
1971:206). This deﬁnition pertains to supposition gener-
ally speaking (communiter dicta) which is itself divided in
supposition properly speaking (proprie dicta) and copula-
tion, the difference being that the former amounts to the
representation of an autonomous thing (res ﬁxa et per se
stans), whereas the latter amounts to the representation
of a dependent thing (res dependens), a difference linguis-
tically expressed by the opposition between substantive
and adjective terms (Alessio 1971:207). Lambert divides
supposition as follows (the next division divides the
second terms of the previous one): naturalis/accidentalis;
simplex/personalis; discreta/communis; determinata/confusa;
moblis/immobilis. The acceptance of natural supposition
is a clear mark of Lambert’s belonging to the Parisian
tradition (Peter of Spain, Johannes Pagus) as opposed to
the Oxonian one (William of Sherwood, Roger Bacon).
Natural supposition is the semantic property that a term
possesses per se and intrinsically to stand for all the things
present, past, and future participating in the form (or
universal nature) it signiﬁes. Natural supposition is not
necessarily a non-contextual property. Indeed, Lambert
also allows for a term to stand in natural supposition
within a proposition: it is the case, when it supposes for
the totality of its present, past, and future supposita. In that
sense, and since accidental supposition always amounts to
a limitation of the range of considered referents, the prop-
ositional use of natural supposition is a case of ampliatio
(de Libera 1981:64–66).
Appellation
Appellation is a supposition restricted to presently existing
things: appellatio est acceptio termini pro supposito vel pro
suppositis actu existentibus (de Libera 1982:252). It corre-
sponds to what we could call actual denotation. It is not an
intrinsic property of a term, but a syntactical limitation of
a certain type of accidental supposition, namely, of per-
sonal supposition: contrary to Peter of Spain, Lambert
does allow appellation only for common (and not for
discrete) terms. Appellation is itself divided according to
the divisions of personal supposition: we have determi-
nate appellation when a common term stands only for one
among its presently existing supposita (as in homo currit),
and distributive appellation when it stands for all of
them (as in omnis homo currit – de Libera 1982:255–
256). Furthermore, Lambert does not accept the rule of
the sufﬁcientia appellatorum stipulating that at least
three appellata are always required: according to him,
a single appellatum is sufﬁcient. And in case there are no
appellatum at all, Lambert allows for a term to stand
actually for a non existent entity (de Libera 1982:257, as
well as Goubier 2000:50 and 57).
See also: ▶Logic ▶Peter of Spain ▶Roger Bacon ▶Sup-
position Theory ▶Universals ▶William of Sherwood
Bibliography
Primary Sources
de Libera Alain (1982) Le traite´ De appellatione de Lambert de Lagny
(Lambert d’Auxerre). Archives d’histoire doctrinale et litte´raire du
Moyen Aˆ ge tome XLVIII:227–285
Lambert of Lagny (Lambert of Auxerre) (1971) Logica (Summa
Lamberti), ed. Alessio F. La Nuova Italia Editrice, Firenze
Secondary Sources
de Libera A (1981) Supposition naturelle et appellation: aspects de la
se´mantique parisienne au XIIIe sie`cle. Histoire, e´piste´mologie,
langage 3(1):63–77
de Libera A (1990) De la logique a` la grammaire: remarques sur la the´orie
de la de´termination chez Roger Bacon et Lambert d’Auxerre (Lam-
bert de Lagny). In: Bursill-Hall GL, Ebbesen S, Koerner K (eds)
De ortu grammaticae. John Benjamin, Amsterdam/Philadelphia,
pp 209–226
De Rijk LM (1969) On the genuine text of Peter of Spain’s Summule
logicales, IV: the Lectura tractatuum by Guillelmus Arnaldi, master
of arts at Toulouse (1235–1244). With a note on the date of Lambert
of Auxerre’s Summule. Vivarium 7:120–162
Goubier F (2000) Inﬂuences pre´dicatives et conse´quences re´fe´rentielles;
un aspect de l’approche terministe de la premie`re moitie´ du XIIIe
sie`cle. Cahiers de l’Institut du Moyen Age Grec et Latin 71:37–70
Landino, Cristoforo
▶Cristoforo Landino
Landulph Caracciolo
CHRISTOPHER SCHABEL
Department of History and Archaeology
University of Cyprus
Nicosia
Cyprus
Abstract
Landulph Caracciolo, the Doctor Collectivus (c. 1280/
1285–1351), a member of an aristocratic family from
Naples, entered the Franciscan Order and eventually lec-
tured on the Sentences at Paris in 1318–1319, from which
Landulph Caracciolo L
681
L

lectures stems his main philosophical writing, his com-
mentary on the four books of Peter Lombard’s Sentences,
although Landulph composed a second redaction of his
commentary on book III in the 1320s. After his academic
career, Landulph served in the administration of the Ange-
vin dynasty in Naples and rose in the ecclesiastical ranks,
ending his life as archbishop of Amalﬁ. Landulph was
a Scotist and spent most of his energy refuting the attacks
that his immediate Franciscan predecessor at Paris, Peter
Auriol, directed at the Subtle Doctor. Yet Landulph was no
slavish follower, departing from ‘‘the Doctor’’ in various
signiﬁcant contexts, such as freedom. Landulph placed
particular emphasis on the distinction between instants
of time and instants of nature, maintaining that contra-
dictories can be true in the same instant of time. For
years Landulph debated this point with his Franciscan
successors at Paris, Francis of Marchia and Francis of
Meyronnes, and with scholars outside the Franciscan
Order, such as John of Jandun. Aside from an incunabu-
lum edition of book II, little of Landulph’s Sentences
commentary has been published.
The
Franciscan
Landulph/f
Caracciolo,
the
Doctor
Collectivus, belonged to the Rossi branch of the famous
Neapolitan Caracciolo family, whose aristocratic roots go
back to the ﬁrst millennium. There are several prominent
ﬁgures with the name ‘‘Landolfo Caracciolo,’’ and the
assertion that our Landulph is identical to the one who
held an ofﬁce at the University of Naples from 1269 to
1284 and again in 1300–1301 is surely erroneous. Presum-
ably, after joining the Franciscan Order at San Lorenzo in
Naples, where he would have received his basic education,
Landulph was sent to study theology at Paris. According
to an undocumented tradition, Landulph was in the
Capetian capital around 1305–1307, hearing John Duns
Scotus’ lectures, then returned to the Minorite studium
generale at Naples, which with the patronage of King
Charles II Anjou of Naples had been functioning de facto
as part of the theology faculty of the University of Naples
since 1302. From 1310 to 1316, the story goes, Landulph
served as lector at San Lorenzo, after which he was sent to
Paris to lecture on the Sentences of Peter Lombard. Con-
temporary sources in fact demonstrate that Landulph did
perform this task at Paris in 1318–1319, quoting and
paraphrasing from the Reportatio version of Peter Auriol’s
commentary on book I of the Sentences, which suggests
that Landulph had been in Paris attending Auriol’s lec-
tures in 1316–1318, while preparing for his own. If the
above scenario is true, we can date Landulph’s birth to
around 1280–1285.
Although many of Landulph’s sermons and biblical
commentaries have come down to us, and he composed
Quaestiones in Metaphysicam and probably at least one
quodlibet that have not been identiﬁed, his Parisian com-
mentary on the Sentences is virtually his only surviving
philosophical work. Some 35 manuscripts preserve one or
more of the four books of this commentary, the most
popular being book IV, extant in roughly 20 witnesses.
There is an imperfect incunabulum edition of book II,
but otherwise only small sections have been published.
Landulph lectured in the traditional sequence, books I,
IV, II, and III, and probably ran short on time, because his
commentary on book III is very brief. Landulph therefore
began an ambitious second redaction of his commentary
on book III, leaving it incomplete at the end of the ﬁfth of
the 40 distinctions, although even in its truncated form it
is almost three times as long as the ﬁrst redaction. Doubts
have been expressed about the authenticity of the second
redaction, but Landulph’s idiosyncratic use of ‘‘conclu-
sions’’ as the equivalent of ‘‘articles’’ and his habit of
asking several questions at once are evident here, and
self-citations prove that the work is Landulph’s. Presum-
ably, he abandoned the project because of other duties,
since by 1325, as master of theology, he was Franciscan
provincial minister of Terra di Lavoro in southern Italy; in
1327, he became bishop of Castellammare di Stabia, 30 km
SE of Naples, and in 1331, he was transferred to Amalﬁ,
where he remained archbishop until his death, probably in
1351. All the while he maintained close ties to the Angevin
dynasty, for example serving King Robert the Wise on
a mission in 1326, and acting as logothete and pronotary
for Queen Joanna I as late as 1349.
Landulph is attributed with bringing Scotism to the
University of Naples and southern Italy in general, so it
is not surprising that, on his own admission, Landulph
followed Scotus plurimum, for example, on the Immacu-
late Conception. Peter Auriol, Landulph’s immediate pre-
decessor as Franciscan bachelor of the Sentences at Paris,
was an independent thinker who quite often disagreed
with the Subtle Doctor and frequently criticized him on
basic points. Landulph was left the task of refuting Auriol’s
attacks against the man whom Landulph and many other
Franciscans were already calling ‘‘the Doctor.’’ Time and
again we ﬁnd Landulph replying to an opinion that runs
contrary to Scotistic doctrine, an opinion identiﬁed in the
margins of the manuscripts as that of Auriol. This
Landulph did on a wide range of issues, from epistemol-
ogy to soteriology to physics. As the ﬁrst to oppose Auriol,
Landulph’s Sentences commentary often reads like one
long attack on his predecessor.
682 L
Landulph Caracciolo

Sometimes Landulph’s rebuttals were compelling, but
on occasion, he could not dissolve Auriol’s criticism of
Scotus. In these instances, Landulph might remark that
Auriol’s own position was no better, but there are times
when Landulph disagreed with Scotus. On the fundamen-
tal problem of the freedom of the will, for example, theo-
logical considerations forced Scotus and his followers
to admit that what is free, like the procession of the
Holy Spirit via divine willing, can also be necessary.
Peter Auriol found an awkward way around the problem,
maintaining that what is done ‘‘complacently’’ is done
freely. Although Landulph rejects Peter Auriol’s position,
he cannot follow Scotus and instead seeks a univocal def-
inition of freedom: ‘‘I hold the opposite conclusion, that
a power is free because it can do one act and the opposite,
and when this indifference has been removed, there will be
no freedom.’’ Turning to face the objection about the
procession of the Holy Spirit, Landulph tries to ﬁnd
another way out: ‘‘I respond that the will’s not being able
to do the opposite can be understood to stem from two
things: either from the formal ratio of the operating
will, or from the condition of nature in which it operates.
Then I maintain that, inasmuch as it is of the formal ratio
of the will in divine things, just as God loves Himself, He
could not love Himself, and just as He produces the Holy
Spirit, He could not produce [the Holy Spirit]. But this
determination comes from the condition of nature in
which He operates. This condition of nature is that all
things in Him must necessarily be.’’ Peter of Candia
would attack Landulph’s position at length, in part
because he found it ‘‘astonishing how this doctor –
whose avowed teaching as a whole is the teaching of the
Subtle Doctor with clearer words – deviated from his
master.’’
Landulph was cited at least into the sixteenth century,
and clearly his impact on the Neapolitan ecclesiastical
milieu has never faded from memory: when the Francis-
can theological school of San Lorenzo, suppressed in the
eighteenth century, was reestablished in central Naples in
1937, the library was named the Biblioteca Fra Landolfo
Caracciolo. Among historians of philosophy, Landulph is
best known for his view that instantaneous change
involves a contradiction: ‘‘In an instantaneous change
each terminus exists in the same instant; but in such
a change the termini are contradictory; therefore contra-
dictories are true in the same instant.’’ One could object
that ‘‘these termini are neither in the same instant nor in
different instants, but rather the entire preceding time
measures and corresponds to one contradictory, namely
the thing-to-be-generated’s non-being, while the last
instant of this time corresponds to the other contradic-
tory, namely the being of the thing-to-be-generated.’’
Landulph replies that, ‘‘when everything that is accidental
is removed, nothing is removed from what exists per se;
but the entire time preceding generation is accidental to
it; therefore, with this time removed, generation will
still be in the last instant; but generation will not be
without its termini; therefore in that last instant the
thing will be and not be, and these are the termini of
generation.’’ Landulph’s explanation for how these contra-
dictories can exist in the same instant of time relies on
‘‘signs’’ or ‘‘instants of nature,’’ a device that Landulph
employs quite frequently. Each instant of time can be
divided into conceptual instants of nature, which are
‘‘indivisible measures to which simultaneity and succes-
sion do not apply.’’
Landulph’s notoriety in this context is not a modern
anachronism, because a number of scholastics attacked his
position in the decade following his teaching. Landulph
himself placed great emphasis on his doctrine, since he
returned to it repeatedly. The academic context in which
he ﬁrst treated the problem at length is quite interesting.
Landulph’s Sentences commentary seems to be the ﬁrst to
preserve both the sermons or collationes on each of the
four books of the Sentences and the questions that con-
stitute part of the running debate held with the other
bachelors, together called principia. In the principium for
book II, after a collatio beginning with his standard
Fundamentum primum jaspis, Landulph asks ‘‘Utrum
contradictoria quae sunt termini creationis possint
competere eidem in eodem instanti temporis secundum
idem,’’ then in the principium to book III, the ﬁrst
redaction, he asks: ‘‘Utrum, si proprietas Verbi sit idem
quod essentia, ponere quod incarnatio terminetur ad
proprietatem et non ad essentiam ponit contradictionem.’’
He cites these principia elsewhere, notably in book IV,
and he came back to the issue after his Sentences lec-
tures, since a manuscript dated September 3, 1320 con-
tains a pertinent question by Landulph, employing earlier
arguments, followed by a refutation by John of Jandun.
Finally, in the second redaction of book III, Landulph
informs us that his famous Franciscan confreres Francis
of Marchia and Francis of Meyronnes, who succeeded
Landulph as Parisian bachelors of the Sentences, attacked
his opinion, which Landulph goes on to defend once
again.
See also: ▶Francis of Marchia ▶Francis of Meyronnes
▶John Duns Scotus ▶John of Jandun ▶Peter Auriol
▶Peter Lombard ▶Peter of Candia ▶Time ▶Will
Landulph Caracciolo L
683
L

Bibliography
Primary Sources
Caracciolo Landulphus (ca. 1445–1465) Super secundum Sententiarum
(Venice?)
Duba WO (2010) What is actually the matter with Scotus? Landulphus
Caracciolo on objective potency and hylomorphic unity. In:
Fiorentino F (ed) Lo scotismo nel Mezzogiorno d’Italia, Brepols,
Turnhout (edition of II Sentences, d. 12, part 1)
Grocholl W (1969) Der Mensch in seinem urspru¨nglichen Sein nach der
Lehre Landulfs von Neapel. Edition und dogmengeschichtliche
Untersuchung. Ferdinand Scho¨ningh, Munich
(edition
of II
Sentences, dd. 29–31)
Scaramuzzi D (1931) L’immaculato concepimento di Maria. Questione
inedita di Landolfo Caracciolo, OFM ({1351). Studi Francescani
28:33–69 (edition of III Sentences, redaction B, d. 3, q. 1)
Schabel C (1999) Landulphus Caracciolo and a Sequax on divine fore-
knowledge. Archives d’Histoire Doctrinale et Litte´raire du Moyen
Age 66:299–343 (edition of I Sentences, dd. 38–40)
Schabel C (2002) Landulph Caracciolo and Gerard Odonis on predesti-
nation: opposite attitudes toward Scotus and Auriol. Wissenschaft
und Weisheit: Franziskanische Studien zu Theologie, Philosophie
und Geschichte 65(1):62–81 (edition of I Sentences, d. 41)
Schabel C (2010) How Landulph Caracciolo, Mezzogiorno Scotist, devi-
ated from his master’s teaching on freedom. In: Fiorentino F (ed)
Lo scotismo nel Mezzogiorno d’Italia, Brepols, Turnhout (edition of
I Sentences, d. 1, part 3, q. 1)
Secondary Sources
Dettloff
W
(1963)
Die
Entwicklung
der
Akzeptations-
und
Verdienstlehre von Duns Scotus bis Luther, mit besonderer
Beru¨cksichtigung der Franziskanertheologen. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster
Ehrle F (1925) Der Sentenzenkommentar Peters von Candia, des Pisaner
Papstes Alexanders V. Ein Beitrag zur Scheidung der Schulen in der
Scholastik des vierzehnten Jahrhunderts und zur Geschichte des
Wegestreites. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster
Heynck
V
(1961)
Der
Skotist
Hugo
de
Novo
Castro,
OFM.
Franziskanische Studien 43:244–270
Knuuttila S, Lehtinen AI (1979) Change and contradiction: a fourteenth-
century controversy. Synthese 40:189–207
Palma M (1976) Caracciolo, Landolfo. Dizionario Biograﬁco Italiano
19:406–410
Scaramuzzi D (1927) Il pensiero di Giovanni Duns Scoto nel Mezzo-
giorno d’Italia. Collegio S. Antonio, Rome
Schabel C (2000) Theology at Paris, 1316–1345: Peter Auriol and the
problem of divine foreknowledge and future contingents. Ashgate,
Aldershot
Schabel (2009) The Sentences commentary of Landulphus Caracciolus,
OFM. Bulletin de Philosophie Medievale 51:145–219
Schwamm H (1934) Das go¨ttliche Vorherwissen bei Duns Scotus und
seinen ersten Anha¨ngern. Rauch, Innsbruck
Tachau KH (1988) Vision and certitude in the age of Ockham. Optics,
epistemology and the foundations of semantics 1250–1345. Brill,
Leiden
Langton, Stephen
▶Stephen Langton
Leo Magentenos
BO¨ RJE BYDE´N
Department of French, Italian and Classical Languages
Stockholm University
Stockholm
Sweden
Abstract
Leo Magentenos (Leo¯n Magente¯nos) was a Byzantine
commentator
on
Porphyry’s
Isagoge
and
Aristotle’s
Organon.
Biography
According to superscriptions in manuscripts containing
his works, Leo Magentenos was Metropolitan of Mytilene.
Some of these manuscripts were copied in the late thir-
teenth and early fourteenth century, the oldest one prob-
ably in 1272. Thus, Leo must have been active before this
date. Moreover, one of his commentaries has been shown
to be dependent on a collection of scholia that was
compiled between c. 1150 and c. 1250. This allows us to
place Leo with some certainty in the late twelfth or early to
mid-thirteenth century. We have no further information
about his life.
Works
Leo wrote commentaries on all of Aristotle’s logical works,
not only those normally included in the curriculum for
higher education in Middle and Late Byzantium (i.e., the
Categories, the De interpretatione, the ﬁrst seven chapters
of Prior Analytics 1, and the ﬁrst seven chapters of the
Sophistici elenchi). Only parts and fragments of his com-
mentaries have appeared in printed editions, and conse-
quently they have been little studied in modern times. In at
least one case, his commentary on the Sophistici elenchi, it
is clear that Leo did little more than rework older collec-
tions of scholia and compose a brief general introduction
to the work. In other cases, such as his commentary on the
Topics, he added much explanatory material that is not
known from other sources. His mode of exposition is
twofold: each new commentary starts with a general intro-
duction, which purports to discuss all or some of eight
preliminary issues inherited from the Alexandrian tradi-
tion of commentary, namely, the subject of the treatise, its
usefulness, its authenticity, the reason for its title, its
division into chapters, its method of teaching, its place
in the curriculum, and the part of philosophy to which it
belongs. After that follows a collection of notes on
684 L
Langton, Stephen

individual passages and words in Porphyry’s or Aristotle’s
text. The oldest manuscript containing Leo’s works
(Vat. gr. 244) also contains the texts on which they com-
ment; Leo’s notes are then keyed to the texts by reference
numbers, much like modern footnotes. They are more
philologically than philosophically orientated, offering lit-
tle in the way of in-depth discussion. Their value has been
harshly judged, and it is true that while Leo often fails to
make Aristotle’s meaning clearer, he sometimes happens
to make it signiﬁcantly more obscure as a result of ele-
mentary misunderstandings.
In the case of the De interpretatione, two commentaries
attributed to Leo survive. One (Commentary 1) is
a collection of notes preceded by a general introduction
in the manner just described; this has never appeared in
print. The other (Commentary 2) is a continuous text that
was edited by Aldus Manutius in 1503. The authenticity of
Commentary 2 has been contested (by Busse 1897), but on
weak grounds. On the other hand, there might be positive
reasons for thinking that it is after all authentic. In the ﬁrst
note of Commentary 1, Leo refers to another work in
which he has enumerated the senses of thesthai (Int.
16a1). It does not seem unlikely that the reference is to
another commentary on the same Aristotelian text;
looking in Commentary 2, one will ﬁnd that six senses of
thesthai are indeed enumerated, approximately the ones
given by Ammonius (In Int. 9.4–27). The styles of the two
commentaries exhibit many similarities; and even if it is
true that Commentary 2 is superior to Commentary 1, as
Busse thought, this may be due to the use of different
sources: Commentary 2 draws heavily on Ammonius on
the De interpretatione, whereas Commentary 1 does not
seem to make direct use of Ammonius. However, if
Commentary 2 is authentic, it seems that Leo must have
composed two series of commentaries on the Organon,
since the author of this commentary refers back to earlier
commentaries on the Isagoge and the Categories dealing
with the prolegomena to philosophy and logic respec-
tively, and the prolegomena to philosophy and logic are
not dealt with in the commentaries on these works
ascribed to Leo in the manuscripts.
See also: ▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac,
Arabic,
and
Hebrew
Traditions
▶Logic,
Byzantine
▶Philosophy, Byzantine
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Magentenos Leo (1503) Ammonii Hermei commentaria in librum Peri
hermenias.
Margentini archiepiscopi Mitylenensis in eundem
enarratio. Aldus Manutius, Venice
Magentenos Leo (1536) Ioannis Grammatici Philoponi comentaria in
Priora analytica Aristotelis. Magentini comentaria in eadem libellus
De syllogismis. J. F. Trincaveli in aedibus B. Zanetti Casterzagensis,
Venice
Magentenos Leo (1981a) Dilectus scholiorum Leonis Magentini in
Categorias, ed. Ebbesen S. Commentators and commentaries
on Aristotle’s
Sophistici Elenchi: a study of post-Aristotelian
ancient and medieval writings on fallacies, vol 2. Brill, Leiden, pp
278–279
Magentenos Leo (1981b) Dilectus scholiorum Leonis Magentini in
Aristotelis Sophisticos Elenchos, ed. Ebbesen S. Commentators and
commentaries on Aristotle’s
Sophistici Elenchi: a study of post-
Aristotelian ancient and medieval writings on fallacies, vol 2. Brill,
Leiden, pp 280–306
Magentenos Leo (1999) Leontis Magentini in Aristotelis Topicorum
prooemium et librum secundum commentaria, ed. Kotzabassi S.
Byzantinische Kommentatoren der aristotelischen Topik: Johannes
Italos
und
Leon
Magentinos.
Ekdoseis
Vanias,
Thessaloniki,
pp 109–152
Secondary Sources
Busse
A
(1887)
Porphyrii
Isagoge
et
in
Aristotelis
categorias
commentarium.
Supplementum
praefationis
IV:
Con-
spectus Commentatorum Graecorum, Leo Magentinus. CAG 4
(1):xliv–xlv
Busse
A
(1897)
Ammonius.
In:
Aristotelis
De
interpretatione
commentarius.
Supplementum
praefationis
III:
Conspectus
commentariorum post Ammonium scriptorum, Leo Magentinus.
CAG 4(5):xxxv–xliv
Ebbesen S (1981) Commentators and commentaries on Aristotle’s
Sophistici elenchi: a study of post-Aristotelian ancient and medieval
writings on fallacies, 3 vols. Brill, Leiden
Kotzabassi S (1999) Byzantinische Kommentatoren der aristotelischen
Topik: Johannes Italos und Leon Magentinos. Ekdoseis Vanias,
Thessaloniki
Levi ben Gerson
▶Gersonides
Liberal Arts
▶Universities and Philosophy
Llull, Ramon
▶Ramon Llull
Llull, Ramon L
685
L

Logic
▶Consequences, Theory of
▶Future Contigents
▶Insolubles
▶Logic, Arabic, in the Latin Middle Ages
▶Logic, Byzantine
▶Logic in the Arabic and Islamic World
▶Logic, Jewish
▶Modal Theories and Modal Logic
▶Obligations Logic
▶Posterior Analytics, Commentaries on Aristotle’s
▶Sophisms
▶Supposition Theory
▶Syllogism, Theories of
▶Syncategoremata
▶Terms, Properties of
▶Trinitarian Logic
▶Truth, Theories of
Logic in the Arabic and Islamic
World
KHALED EL-ROUAYHEB
Department of Near Eastern Languages and Civilizations
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA
USA
Abstract
The Arabic logical tradition emerged from the Graeco-
Arabic translation movement from the eighth to the tenth
centuries. In its initial stages it was closely linked to the
activity of translating and commenting upon Aristotle’s
Organon. By the early tenth century, a circle of Aristotelian
scholars had emerged in Baghdad who saw themselves
as a continuation of the Alexandrian tradition. Its most
prominent representative was undoubtedly al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯
(d. 950), who wrote esteemed commentaries on Aristotle’s
logical works, as well as a number of treatises introducing
logic (mant:iq) to an environment that often viewed the
Greek sciences with suspicion. The inﬂuence of the
Baghdad circle eventually reached Islamic Spain, where
Aristotelian philosophy and logic ﬂourished in the
eleventh and twelfth centuries, culminating in the
monumental commentaries on Aristotle by Averroes
(d. 1198). In other parts of the Islamic world, however,
the inﬂuence emanating from Avicenna (d. 1037) even-
tually superseded that of Aristotle. Avicenna was less
concerned with getting the interpretation of Aristotle
right, and more willing to make radical departures from
the Aristotelian tradition. By the thirteenth century, his
works had replaced those of Aristotle as the point
of reference for most logicians writing in Arabic. The
prominent theologian Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯ (d. 1210)
approached the Avicennian tradition with the same irrev-
erence with which Avicenna had himself approached the
Aristotelian tradition. He also decisively reoriented the
scope of logic toward a focused study of terms, proposi-
tions, and syllogisms, rather than the entirety of topics
covered in the Organon. A number of thirteenth-century
logicians working in the wake of Avicenna and Fakhr
al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯ produced sophisticated and original
summas of formal logic. They also produced a number
of condensed handbooks that formed the basis of logical
studies at Colleges throughout the Islamic world until
modern times.
Logic in the Arabic World
The origins of the logical tradition in Arabic can be traced
back to the Graeco-Arabic translation movement from the
late eighth to the early tenth centuries. Recent studies have
shown that this movement was more than just a matter-
of-course translation of the Greek intellectual heritage
into the new ruling language of the Middle East. It was
as much a process of active rediscovery of the Greek
scientiﬁc and philosophical tradition (Gutas 1998). To be
sure: parts of the Organon had already been translated into
Syriac and been the subject of commentaries by a number
of Syriac scholars before the eighth century. This meant
that basic Greek logical terminology was already available
in a Semitic language prior to the Arabic translation
movement. Arabic translations of philosophical works
were sometimes based on Syriac intermediary translations
rather than translated directly from Greek. The translators
were usually eastern Christians versed in the Greek and
Syriac intellectual tradition. Yet the Arabic logical tradi-
tion, as it emerged in the late ninth and early tenth cen-
turies, was much more than a continuation in Arabic of
a preexisting Syriac or Greek tradition. Works were trans-
lated into Arabic that appear not to have been regularly
studied for centuries. Of Aristotle’s Organon, only the
Categories, De interpretatione, and the ﬁrst seven chapters
of Book I of the Prior Analytics seem to have been regularly
studied in the early medieval Syriac and Byzantine
686 L
Logic

tradition (Brock 1993). By contrast, all the books of the
Organon, along with many of the Greek commentators, as
well as some of the logical works of Galen, were translated
into Arabic – often more than once – between the late
eighth century and the early tenth century. Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯
(d. 950), for example, was very conscious of the fact that
the scope of logical studies had been considerably expanded
in his time from what it had been in preceding centuries, to
incorporate the latter parts of the Prior Analytics (dealing
with modal syllogistic), the Posterior Analytics, the Topics,
and the other books of the Organon (Gutas 1999).
In its earliest period, reﬂections on logic in Arabic
were closely linked to the process of translating and
commenting upon the works of Aristotle. The ﬁrst
important center for this activity was the ‘Abba¯sid capital
Baghdad in the late ninth and early tenth centuries, during
which a circle of scholars emerged who saw themselves as
a continuation of the Alexandrian Aristotelian tradition
(Hasnawi 1985). The most important ﬁgure of this circle
was undoubtedly al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (d. 950), who wrote esteemed
long and short commentaries on the works of the Orga-
non, many of which are now lost (Zimmermann 1981;
Rescher 1963). He also wrote a number of popularizing
works designed in part to introduce and ﬁx logical termi-
nology in Arabic, and in part to advocate the advantages
of the study of logic (mant:iq) in an environment that
often viewed the ‘‘ancient sciences’’ with incomprehen-
sion or religiously motivated hostility (Lameer 1994;
Dunlop 1958).
Other prominent ﬁgures in the Baghdad Aristotelian
circle were al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s student Yah:ya¯ b. ‘Adı¯ (d. 974); the
latter’s student Ibn al-Suwa¯r (d. 1017), whose annotated
copy of the Organon underlies the earliest extant manu-
scripts in Arabic; and Ibn al-T˙ayyib (d. 1043), whose
commentaries on Aristotle’s Categories and on Porphyry’s
Isagoge are extant (Ferrari 2006; Gyekye 1979). In the late
tenth century, the inﬂuence of the Baghdad ‘‘school’’ was
extended to Islamic Spain, where it ﬂourished in the
following two centuries, with such prominent scholars as
Ibn Ba¯jja (Avempace, d. 1138), and – most famously – Ibn
Rushd (Averroes, d. 1198), whose monumental commen-
taries on Aristotle’s works were to have a good deal of
inﬂuence in the Latin West.
In the Islamic world, however, the approach of the
Baghdad circle was gradually superseded by the inﬂuence
emanating from Ibn Sı¯na¯ (Avicenna – d. 1037), who was
active in central Asia and Persia. With Avicenna, the
Arabic logical tradition started a process whereby it
became entirely divorced from the exegesis of Aristotle’s
logical works. Avicenna was less concerned with getting
the interpretation of Aristotle right, and more willing to
make radical departures from received views (Gutas 1988).
For example, the Arabic Aristotelian commentators had
inherited from the Greek commentators an acceptance of
the Stoic schemata of propositional logic (such as modus
ponens and modus tollens) alongside the term-logical cat-
egorical syllogisms of Aristotle. Avicenna – while retaining
this Stoic element – devoted a considerable part of
the book on Syllogism (qiya¯s) in his magnum opus al-
Shifa¯’ (The Cure) to developing purely hypothetical
syllogisms, that is, syllogisms in which both premises
are either conditionals or disjunctions. Avicenna also
took the apparently unprecedented step of ‘‘quantifying’’
conditionals, thus distinguishing between the universal-
afﬁrmative ‘‘Always: if P then Q’’ and the particular-
afﬁrmative ‘‘Once: if P then Q,’’ and their negations
(Shehaby 1973). Avicenna’s distinctive approach to the
Aristotelian corpus is also in evidence in his discussion
of modal logic. The Arabic Aristotelian commentators
had continued the efforts of their Greek predecessors to
arrive at a satisfying interpretation of Aristotle’s modal
logic (Elamrani-Jamal 1995). By contrast, Avicenna baldly
stated that Aristotle’s remarks on the topic were tests for
students, rather than considered opinions, and that what
Aristotle really meant to state as a considered opinion
was what he (Avicenna) would go on to expound at
some length. Central to Avicenna’s modal logic was the
distinction between a was:fı¯ (descriptional) and a dha¯tı¯
(substantial) reading of a modal proposition. On the
ﬁrst reading, the modality inheres in the description of
the subject: in this sense, for example, it is true that ‘‘Every
sleeper is necessarily asleep.’’ On the second reading, the
modality inheres in the essence or substance of the subject:
in this sense, for example, it is true that ‘‘Every sleeper is
possibly not asleep’’ (Street 2002).
Besides the monumental al-Shifa¯’, Avicenna wrote
a number of shorter works, including the highly con-
densed Pointers and Reminders (al-Isha¯ra¯t wa-l-tanbı¯ha¯t)
that was much commented upon in subsequent centuries.
The inﬂuence of these works was momentous. Within two
centuries of Avicenna’s death, they had replaced Aristotle’s
works as the point of departure for logicians writing in
Arabic. After the middle of the thirteenth century, it is
difﬁcult to ﬁnd a logician writing in Arabic who engaged
directly with the writings of any logician before Avicenna.
In the course of the eleventh and twelfth centuries, the
Arabic tradition of Neoplatonized Aristotelian philosophy
(falsafa) came head to head with Islamic rational theology
(kala¯m). A number of theologians attempted to refute – by
rational argument – those aspects of Neoplatonic and
Logic in the Arabic and Islamic World L
687
L

Aristotelian physics and metaphysics that they perceived
to be incompatible with the Islamic faith. Most prominent
among these theologians were al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ (d. 1111) and
Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯ (d. 1210). Both scholars had no
trouble with the discipline of logic, and in fact explicitly
defended its usefulness (Marmura 1975). Their endorse-
ment was important for getting logic accepted into
mainstream Islamic intellectual culture, though pious
opposition never died out entirely (see Hallaq 1993) and
has been strengthened in modern times by the rise of
the Sunni fundamentalist Salafı¯–Wahha¯bı¯ movement
(El-Rouayheb 2004).
Both al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ and Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯ wrote works
on logic. Al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ conﬁned himself to elementary and
noncontroversial expositions intended for budding jurists
and theologians, whereas al-Ra¯zı¯ wrote lengthy, sophisti-
cated, and inﬂuential logical works. He too took his
point of departure in the writings of Avicenna, but
approached them with a critical spirit similar to the way
in which Avicenna had himself approached the preceding
Aristotelian tradition. For example, al-Ra¯zı¯had no qualms
about accepting the fourth ﬁgure of the syllogism, and
that remained the mainstream view among Arabic logi-
cians down to modern times. He also distinguished –
more systematically than Avicenna did – between alethic
and temporal modalities and between one-sided and
two-sided modalities (e.g., between possibility and con-
tingency). These distinctions, along with Avicenna’s dis-
tinction between was:fı¯ and dha¯tı¯ readings, formed the
core of a developed system of more than a dozen modal
propositions that bore little resemblance to anything in
Aristotle. Al-Ra¯zı¯ was also a pivotal ﬁgure in what the
famous historian Ibn Khaldu¯n (d. 1406) noted was
a thoroughgoing revision of the scope of logic. From
al-Ra¯zı¯ onward, Ibn Khaldu¯n observed, logicians writing
in Arabic ceased to be interested in covering all the topics
of the Organon, and started focusing almost exclusively on
the ﬁve predicables, deﬁnition, propositions and their
immediate implications, and the formal syllogistic
(Rosenthal 1958:vol 1, pp 142–143). In the thirteenth
century, logicians working in the wake of Avicenna and
al-Ra¯zı¯ subjected these topics to lengthy, critical, and
sophisticated
treatment,
producing
comprehensive
summas of formal logic that have only recently started to
receive the attention they deserve from historians of logic.
Another logician mentioned as a pivotal ﬁgure by Ibn
Khaldu¯n was Afd˙aluddı¯n al-Khu¯najı¯ (d. 1248), a Persian-
born scholar and judge in Ayyu¯bid Egypt. His lengthy
Kashf al-asra¯r clearly exhibits the turn toward an extensive
and critical discussion of formal topics with little patience
for exegetical questions. Among the many innovations of
that rich work, which in many ways set the agenda for
most other thirteenth-century Arabic works on logic, the
following can be mentioned (see Khu¯najı¯ 2010):
(a) Avicenna’s discussion of purely hypothetical syllo-
gisms was expanded and modiﬁed. For example,
hypothetical syllogisms were discussed in which
the two conditional premises only share a term,
rather than an entire antecedent or consequent, for
example:
Always: If Every A is B then J is D
Always: If Every B is H then W is Z
Once: If (Always: If A is H then J is D) then (Always:
If A is H then W is Z).
(b) The logical relations between terms and proposi-
tions were explored systematically. Two terms
can be related in one of four ways: they can have
identical extensions (musa¯wa¯t); they can have par-
tially overlapping extensions (ʿumu¯m wa-khus:u¯s: min
wajh); they can have extensions that do not overlap
(muba¯yana); one can be more ‘‘general’’ (aʿamm)
and the other more ‘‘speciﬁc’’ (akhas:s:). Khu¯najı¯
went on to establish the relations between the con-
tradictories of terms related in one of the four ways:
For example, if A is more general in extension than
B, then not-A is more speciﬁc in extension than
not-B. Two propositions can be related in the same
four ways: they can be such that the truth of either
implies the truth of the other (musa¯wa¯t); or the truth
of one implies the truth of the other but not vice
versa (ʿumu¯m wa khus:u¯s: mut:laq); or they are com-
patible but either can be true without the other
(ʿumu¯m wa khus:u¯s: min wajh); or they are incompat-
ible (muba¯yana). Khu¯najı¯ discussed at length the
relations that obtained between the more than
dozen modal propositions presented by al-Ra¯zı¯. He
brought these relations to bear on the discussion
of conversion, contraposition, and the syllogistic,
explicitly recognizing for example that if a proposi-
tion p implies another proposition, then any prop-
osition more ‘‘speciﬁc’’ than p also implies that
proposition. Similarly, if it could be shown that
a proposition q does not imply another proposition,
then any proposition that is more ‘‘general’’ than
q also does not imply that proposition.
(c) The immediate implications (lawa¯zim) of condi-
tionals and disjunctions were discussed extensively.
For example, De Morgan’s laws were recognized:
an ‘‘exhaustive disjunction’’ (munfas:ila ma¯niʿat
khuluww) of the form ‘‘Either P or Q’’ implies an
688 L
Logic in the Arabic and Islamic World

‘‘exclusive disjunction’’ (munfas:ila ma¯niʿat jamʿ)
consisting of the negation of both disjuncts: ‘‘Not
both ~P and ~Q,’’ and vice versa. Also, the implica-
tions of conditionals and disjunctions with com-
plex antecedents, consequents, or disjuncts were
investigated. For example, the universal-afﬁrmative
conditional ‘‘Always: if P then (Q and R)’’ implies the
two universal-afﬁrmative conditionals ‘‘Always: if
P then Q’’ and ‘‘Always: if P then R.’’ By contrast,
the universal-afﬁrmative ‘‘Always: if (P and Q) then
R’’ only implies two particular-afﬁrmative condi-
tionals ‘‘Once: if P then R’’ and ‘‘Once: if Q then R.’’
(d) Avicenna had advanced the principle that the truth
of a conditional implies the falsity of a conditional
with the same antecedent and negated consequence
(i.e., ‘‘If P then Q’’ implies ‘‘Not: if P then not-Q’’).
This was questioned by Khu¯najı¯, who pointed out
that any valid argument consisting of two premises
and their conclusion could be turned into a complex
reductio syllogism in which the two original premises
and the negation of the conclusion imply both
a proposition (the original conclusion) and its con-
tradictory (the negation of the original conclusion).
This in turn meant that one could construct a true
conditional having the three inconsistent premises
as antecedent and both contradictories as conse-
quences. Related to this point, what has come to be
known as ‘‘Aristotle’s principle’’ that no proposition
is implied by its own negation was challenged.
Khu¯najı¯ pointed out that the apparently true uni-
versal-afﬁrmative conditionals ‘‘Always: if (P &
not-P) then P’’ and ‘‘Always: if (P & not-P) then
not-P’’ produce (by the ﬁrst mood of the third ﬁgure
of the hypothetical syllogism): ‘‘Once: if P then not-
P’’ (see El-Rouayheb 2009). Incidentally, the idea
that Aristotle’s principle is false and that two contra-
dictory propositions may follow from the same
impossible antecedent is the closest that Arabic logi-
cians came to formulating the principle that any
proposition follows from a contradiction (ex falso
quodlibet) that was widely accepted in medieval
Latin logic (and is widely accepted in modern logic).
(e) Avicenna had given a proof for the productivity of
ﬁrst-ﬁgure syllogisms with possibility minors, that
is, the following syllogisms of the form:
Every J is possibly B
Every B is necessarily A
Every J is necessarily A
He did so by supposing the possibility in the ﬁrst
premise actualized (i.e., that ‘‘Every J is actually B’’),
and then arguing that the mentioned conclusion evi-
dently follows in such a case. This in turn meant that the
conclusion also follows from the original ﬁrst premise
(‘‘Every J is possibly B’’), for it is not possible that
supposing a possibility actualized should lead to an
impossibility such as the conclusion becoming neces-
sary when it is not already so. It has recently been shown
that Avicenna’s proof assumes the principle (accepted in
modern modal system S5) that modal propositions
have the same modality in every possible world (Thom
2008): he in effect considers the possible world in
which every J is actually B, shows that in that world
the necessity conclusion follows, and hence that in this
world too the necessity conclusion is true. His proof
was rejected by Khu¯najı¯, who drew a distinction –
following
al-Ra¯zı¯ –
between
understanding
the
subject-term of a proposition such as ‘‘Every J is B’’
as applying to everything that is J in extramental
existence (the so-called kha¯rijı¯ reading of a proposi-
tion) and understanding the subject-term as applying
to anything that would be J if it existed (the h:aqı¯qı¯
reading). The ﬁrst reading, akin to the de re under-
standing of modality in the Latin tradition, interprets
the proposition as saying that it is true of everything
that is J that it is B with some kind of modality
(possibly, necessarily, always, etc.). On this reading,
the mentioned syllogism with a possibility minor is
sterile: donkeys are possibly ridden by Zayd, and
everything ridden by Zayd is necessarily a horse (if
he in fact only rides horses), and yet it is not true
that donkeys are possibly horses. The second reading
interprets the proposition as saying that everything
that is J if it exists is B (with some modality) if it exists.
This seems to add an element of de dicto necessity to
the previous de re reading: it is necessary that if some-
thing is J then it is B with some modality. On this
reading, the mentioned counterexample is not rele-
vant, for the major ‘‘Everything ridden by Zayd is
necessarily a horse’’ is false as a h:aqı¯qı¯ proposition.
Khu¯naji, while conceding that no counterexamples
were readily available when the premises are taken as
h:aqı¯qı¯propositions, nevertheless objected to Avicenna’s
proof, and he considered as illegitimate precisely the
moves in the proof that presuppose S5 and would be
impermissible from the perspective of other modern
modal systems such as T: in the possible world in
which every J is actually B one cannot assume that the
original major remains true.
Other prominent logicians of the thirteenth century
include Athı¯r al-Dı¯n al-Abharı¯ (d. 1265), Nas:ı¯r al-Dı¯n
Logic in the Arabic and Islamic World L
689
L

al-T˙u¯sı¯ (d. 1274), Najm al-Dı¯n al-Ka¯tibı¯ (d. 1277), Sira¯j
al-Dı¯n al-Urmawı¯ (d. 1283), and Shams al-Dı¯n al-
Samarqandı¯ (d. 1303). Besides writing lengthy summas,
these scholars also produced condensed and widely stud-
ied handbooks, such as Abharı¯’s I¯sa¯g˙u¯jı¯, Ka¯tibı¯’s al-Risa¯la
al-Shamsiyya, and Urmawı¯’s Mat:a¯liʿ al-anwa¯r. Abharı¯’s
I¯sa¯g˙u¯jı¯ is an elementary introduction to logic (and hence
of wider scope than Porphyry’s Isagoge). The latter two
handbooks are more advanced, and clearly indebted to
Khu¯najı¯’s Kashf al-asra¯r. Such condensed handbooks
formed the point of departure for writings on logic in
Arabic after the thirteenth century.
The notion of ‘‘the Middle Ages’’ has little application
in the case of Islamic history. There was no cultural or
intellectual upheaval in the ﬁfteenth and sixteenth centu-
ries comparable to the Renaissance and the Reformation
in Europe. This also meant that logical studies in the
Islamic world could be pursued until the modern period
without the shadow of the misgivings of humanists and
reformers. After the twelfth century, logic (mant:iq) became
an integral part of the education of Muslim scholars, and
continued to be studied at Colleges like al-Azhar in Cairo
until the twentieth century. Neoplatonic/Aristotelian
falsafa had fallen into disrepute in many parts of the
Islamic world, but logic was still considered useful as an
‘‘instrumental’’ science (like grammar, semantics-rhetoric,
and dialectic) without which one could not master juris-
prudence (us:u¯l al-ﬁqh) or theology (kala¯m). The latter
disciplines became increasingly suffused with logical ter-
minology and argument-forms after al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ (Hallaq
1990), and several inﬂuential handbooks on jurisprudence
and theology started with an exposition of logic.
A vast amount of commentaries, glosses, and super-
glosses on logical handbooks and treatises survive from
what Europeans would call the late-medieval and early
modern period (Wisnovsky 2004). Important centers for
logical studies included Persia and Central Asia, Ottoman
Turkey, Northwest Africa (modern Morocco, Algeria, and
Tunisia), and – from the seventeenth century – India.
Inﬂuential later logicians include the following:
(a) Qut:b al-Dı¯n al-Razı¯ al-Tah:ta¯nı¯ (d. 1365), a Persian
scholar who settled and died in Damascus. He wrote
widely used commentaries on Ka¯tibı¯’s Shamsiyya
and Urmawı¯’s Mat:a¯liʿ, and a number of shorter
treatises on logical topics, including a treatise on
the division of knowledge into conception and
assent (which was the typical starting point of hand-
books on logic).
(b) Saʿd al-Dı¯n al-Tafta¯za¯nı¯ (d. 1390), active in Timurid
Central Asia. He wrote a commentary on Ka¯tibı¯’s
Shamsiyya and his own epitome of logic entitled
Tahdhı¯b al-mant:iq.
(c) al-Sayyid al-Sharı¯f al-Jurja¯nı¯ (d. 1413), Tafta¯za¯nı¯’s
rival in Timurid Central Asia. He wrote widely stud-
ied glosses on Qut:b al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯ al-Tah:ta¯nı¯’s com-
mentaries on the Shamsiyya and the Mat:a¯liʿ.
(d) Meh:med Fena¯rı¯ (d. 1431), one of the ﬁrst prominent
Ottoman scholars. He wrote a demanding and
widely glossed commentary on Abharı¯’s I¯sa¯g˙u¯jı¯,
and prefaced his voluminous work on jurisprudence
Fus:u¯l al-bada¯’iʿ with a lengthy and sophisticated
exposition of logic.
(e) Muh:ammad b. Yu¯suf al-Sanu¯sı¯ (d. 1490), active in
the town of Tlemcen in what is today Algeria. He
wrote a commentary on an expanded version of
Abharı¯’s I¯sa¯g˙u¯jı¯; a commentary on an epitome on
logic by the Tunisian scholar Ibn ʿArafa (d. 1401),
and his own epitome of logic (known as Mukhtas:ar
al-Sanu¯sı¯) and a commentary on it that became
a standard handbook in North Africa.
(f) Jalal al-Dı¯n al-Dawanı¯ (d. 1502), active in western
Persia. He wrote an esteemed but incomplete com-
mentary on Tafta¯za¯nı¯’s Tahdhı¯b al-mant:iq, glosses
on Jurja¯nı¯’s glosses on Qut:b al-Dı¯n al-Tah:ta¯nı¯’s
commentaries on al-Shamsiyya and Mat:a¯liʿ al-
anwa¯r, and a treatise on the liar’s paradox.
(g) ʿIsa¯m al-dı¯n al-Isfara¯yinı¯ (d. 1537), active in eastern
Persia and Central Asia. He wrote extensive glosses
on Qut:b al-Dı¯n al-Tah:ta¯nı¯’s commentary on the
Shamsiyya.
(h) Mı¯r Abu¯ l-Fath: al-H˙ usaynı¯ (d. 1568), active in
Safavid Iran. He wrote esteemed glosses on Dawanı¯’s
commentary on Tahdhı¯b al-mant:iq.
(i) Mulla¯ ʿAbdulla¯h al-Yazdı¯ (d. 1581), active in Safavid
Iran. He wrote a commentary on Tafta¯za¯nı¯’s Tahdhı¯b
that was widely studied in Persia and India.
(j) Mulla¯ S˙adra¯ al-Shı¯ra¯zı¯ (d. 1635), active in Safavid
Iran. He wrote extensive glosses on the logic section
of H˙ ikmat al-ishra¯q by the philosopher Suhrawardı¯
(d. 1191), a handbook on logic entitled al-Tanqı¯h:,
and a treatise on the division of knowledge into
conception and assent (Lameer 2006).
(k) ʿAbd al-H˙ akı¯m al-Siya¯lku¯tı¯ (d. 1657), active in
Mughal India. He wrote extensive glosses on
Qut:b
al-Dı¯n
al-Tah:ta¯nı¯’s
commentary on
the
Shamsiyya.
(l) Mı¯r Za¯hid al-Harawı¯ (d. 1690), active in Mughal
India. He wrote esteemed glosses on Dawanı¯’s
commentary on Tahdhı¯b al-mant:iq, and on the
treatise on conception and assent by Qut:b al-Dı¯n
al-Tah:ta¯nı¯.
690 L
Logic in the Arabic and Islamic World

(m) al-H˙ asan al-Yu¯sı¯ (d. 1691), active in Morocco. He
wrote extensive glosses on Sanu¯sı¯’s Mukhtas:ar, and
a treatise on the difference between the differentia
(fas:l) and the unique property (kha¯s:s:a).
(n) Muh:ibbulla¯h al-Biha¯rı¯ (d. 1707), active in Mughal
India. He wrote a handbook on logic entitled Sullam
al-ʿulu¯m that was much commented upon by later
Indian scholars.
(o) Isma¯ʿı¯l Gelenbevı¯ (d. 1791), a Turkish Ottoman
scholar who wrote a commentary on Abharı¯’s
I¯sa¯g˙u¯jı¯, extensive glosses on Dawanı¯’s commentary
(and Mı¯r Abu¯-l-Fath:’s glosses) on Tahdhı¯b al-
mant:iq, a treatise on modality, and a handbook on
logic entitled al-Burha¯n that was much commented
upon by later Ottoman scholars.
For much of the twentieth century, it was assumed that
the mere fact that school handbooks, commentaries,
and glosses became the main form of logical writings
after the middle of the fourteenth century is an indica-
tion of ‘‘stagnation,’’ ‘‘decadence,’’ and ‘‘commentary-
mongering’’ (Madkour 1969; Rescher 1964; Inati 1996).
This view has recently been challenged by scholars who
sensibly argue that one should at least look at this material
before making such sweeping judgments (Street 2004;
Wisnovsky 2004). After all, the very same scholars who
have made such damning judgments would presumably
not want to say that al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ and Averroes do not deserve
the attention of historians of logic merely because they
wrote commentaries. Preliminary samplings of later liter-
ature indicate that the basics of modal and conditional
logic as outlined by the thirteenth-century handbooks
were taken as settled. However, extensive and often sophis-
ticated discussions continued on other topics: the division
of knowledge into conception and assent (Lameer 2006);
whether a proposition has three parts (subject, predicate,
and propositional connector) or four (plus assertion or
negation of the connector); the liar’s paradox (al-jadhr al-
as:amm); the general conditions of productivity in cate-
gorical syllogisms regardless of mood (akin to discussions
of distribution in syllogistic in the late-medieval and
early modern Latin tradition); the immediate implica-
tions of conditionals with complex antecedents or
consequents; and inferences involving relational propo-
sitions (El-Rouayheb 2010).
Nevertheless, the change of literary form that Arabic
writings on logic underwent in the course of the four-
teenth century is striking. After around 1350, extensive
summas of logic, such as had been written by a number of
thirteenth and early fourteenth-century scholars, become
exceedingly rare. Henceforth, almost all lengthy Arabic
writings on logic assumed the form of commentaries and
glosses (on condensed handbooks, didactic poems, or
short treatises on particular topics). In this respect, the
development of Arabic logic had come full circle. After the
mid-fourteenth century, writing on logic in Arabic again
became intimately linked to the exegesis of texts.
See also: ▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac,
Arabic,
and
Hebrew
Traditions
▶Aristotle,
Arabic
▶Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯ ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas˙r ▶al-G˙ aza¯lı¯,
Abu¯ H˙ a¯mid Muh:ammad ▶Ibn Ba¯jja, Abu¯ Bakr ibn al-
Sa¯’ig˙ (Avempace) ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad
al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶Ibn
Suwa¯r (Ibn al-Khamma¯r) ▶Ibn al-T˙ayyib ▶Nas:ı¯r al-Dı¯n
al-T˙u¯sı¯ ▶Philosophy, Arabic ▶Theology Versus Philoso-
phy in the Arab World ▶Yah:ya¯ ibn ʿAdı¯
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Editions
Abharı¯ Athı¯r al-Dı¯n (1877) I¯sa¯g˙u¯jı¯. Printed with the commentary of
Fena¯rı¯ and the glosses of K˙u¯l Ah:med Matbaʿat Akhtar, Istanbul
Biha¯rı¯ Muh:ibbulla¯h (1910–1911) Sullam al-ʿulu¯m. Lithographed with the
commentaries of Go¯pama¯wı¯ and Sandı¯lı¯. Matbaʿat al-Mujtabaʿi,
Delhi
Ferrari C (2006) Die Kategorienkommentar von Abu¯ l-Farag˘ ʿAbdalla¯h
ibn at:-T˙ayyib: Text und Untersuchungen. Brill, Leiden
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯(1985–1987) al-Mant:iq ʿinda l-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, 3 vols, ed. al-ʿAjam R. Dar
al-Mashriq, Beirut
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (1989) al-Mant:iqiyya¯t li-l-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, 3 vols, ed. Danishpazhuh MT.
Matbaʿat Ayatollah al-Mar’ashi al-Najaﬁ, Qum
Ibn Rushd (1978) Talkhı¯s: Kita¯b al-ʿIba¯ra, ed. Butterworth C, Harı¯dı¯ AA.
al-Hayʿa al-Misriyya al-ʿamma li-l-kitab, Cairo
Ibn Rushd (1979) Talkhı¯s: Kita¯b al-Jadal, ed. Butterworth C, Harı¯dı¯ AA.
al-Hayʿa al-Misriyya al-ʿamma li-l-kitab, Cairo
Ibn Rushd (1983) Talkı¯s: Kita¯b al-Qiya¯s, ed. Butterworth C, Harı¯dı¯ AA.
al-Hayʿa al-Misriyya al-ʿamma li-l-kitab, Cairo
Ibn Sı¯na¯ (1952ff.) al-Shifa¯’, Multi-volume ed. el-Khodeiri M, Anawati G,
Madkour I et al. Ministry of Culture, Cairo
Ibn Sı¯na¯ (1957–1958) al-Isha¯ra¯t wa-l-tanbı¯ha¯t. Printed in three volumes
(the ﬁrst on logic) with the commentary of T˙u¯s:ı¯ and the glosses of
Tah:ta¯nı¯. Matbaʿat al-Haydari, Qum
Ka¯tibı¯Najm al-Dı¯n (1905) al-Risa¯la al-Shamsiyya. Printed in two volumes
with the commentary of Tah:ta¯nı¯ and the glosses of Jurja¯nı¯, Siya¯lku¯tı¯,
and ʿAdawı¯. al-Matbaʿa al-Amiriyya, Cairo
Khu¯najı¯ Afd˙al al-Dı¯n (2010) Kashf al-asra¯r ʿan g˙awa¯mid˙ al-afka¯r, ed.
El-Rouayheb K. Institute for Islamic Studies & Iranian Institute of
Philosophy, Berlin/Tehran
al-Ra¯zı¯ Fakhr al-Dı¯n (2003) Mant:iq al-Mulakhkhas:, ed. Karamaleki AF,
Asgharinezhad A. ISU Press, Tehran
al-Ra¯zı¯ Fakhr al-Dı¯n (2005) Sharh: al-Isha¯ra¯t wa-l-tanbı¯ha¯t, vol 1 (logic),
ed. Najafzada A. Anjuman-i Asar ve Mafakhir-i Farhangi, Tehran
Sanu¯sı¯Muh:ammad b. Yu¯suf (1875) Sharh: al-Mukhtas:ar fı¯l-mant:iq. Cairo
Tafta¯za¯nı¯ Saʿd al-Dı¯n (1988) Tahdhı¯b al-mant:iq. Printed with the com-
mentary of Mulla¯ ʿAbdulla¯h al-Yazdı¯. Muʿassasat Ahl al-Bayt, Beirut
Urmawı¯ Sira¯j al-Dı¯n (1861) Mat:a¯liʿ al-anwa¯r. Printed with the commen-
tary of Tah:ta¯nı¯ and the glosses of Jurja¯nı¯. Matbaʿa-i Amire, Istanbul
Logic in the Arabic and Islamic World L
691
L

Translations
Ahmed A (2010) Avicenna: Deliverance: logic. Oxford University Press,
Karachi
Butterworth C (1998) Averroes’ Middle Commentary on Aristotle’s
Categories and De interpretatione. St. Augustine Press, South Bend
Calverley EE (1933) Abhari’s I¯sa¯g˙u¯jı¯ fı¯’l-mant:iq. In: The Macdonald
presentation volume. Princeton University Press, Princeton
Dunlop DM (1958) al-Farabi’s introductory Risala on logic. Islam Q 3:
224–235
Gyekye K (1979) Arabic logic: Ibn al-Tayyib’s commentary on Porphyry’s
Eisagoge. SUNY Press, Albany
Hallaq W (1993) Ibn Taymiyya against the Greek logicians. Clarendon,
Oxford
Inati S (1981) Avicenna: Remarks and admonitions: part one: logic.
Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, Toronto
Lameer J (2006) Conception and belief in S˙adr al-Dı¯n al-Shı¯ra¯zı¯. Iranian
Institute of Philosophy, Tehran
Rescher N (1963) al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s Short Commentary on Aristotle’s Prior
Analytics. University of Pittsburgh Press, Pittsburgh
Rosenthal F (1958) The Muqaddima of Ibn Khaldu¯n. Pantheon Books,
New York
Shehaby N (1973) The propositional logic of Avicenna. Reidel, Dordrecht
Zabeeh F (1971) Avicenna: treatise on logic. Nijhoff, The Hague
Zimmermann F (1981) al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯: commentary and short treatise on
Aristotle’s De interpretatione. British Academy & Oxford University
Press, London
Secondary Sources
Studies
Black D (1998) Logic in Islamic philosophy. In: Routledge encyclopedia of
philosophy, vol 5, Routledge, London, pp 706–713
Brock S (1993) The Syriac commentary tradition. In: Burnett C (ed)
Glosses and commentaries on Aristotelian logical texts. Warburg
Institute, London
Elamrani-Jamal A (1995) Ibn Rushd et les Premiers Analytiques
d’Aristote: aperc¸u sur un proble`me de syllogistique modale. Arabic
Sci Philos 5:51–74
El-Rouayheb K (2004) Sunni Islamic scholars on the status of logic, 1500–
1800. Islam Law Soc 11:213–232
El-Rouayheb K (2009) Impossible antecedents and their consequences:
some thirteenth-century Arabic discussions. Hist Philos Logic
30:209–225
El-Rouayheb K (2010) Relational syllogisms & the history of Arabic logic,
900-1900. Brill, Leiden
Gutas D (1988) Avicenna and the Aristotelian tradition. Brill, Leiden
Gutas D (1993) Aspects of literary form and genre in Arabic logical works.
In: Burnett C (ed) Glosses and commentaries on Aristotelian logical
texts. Warburg Institute, London
Gutas D (1998) Greek thought, Arabic culture. Routledge, London
Gutas D (1999) The ‘Alexandria to Baghdad’ complex of narratives.
Documenti e studi sulla tradizione ﬁlosoﬁca medievale 10:155–193
Hallaq W (1990) Logic, formal arguments and formalization of argu-
ments in Sunni Jurisprudence. Arabica 87:315–358
Hasnawi A (1985) Fa¯ra¯bı¯ et la practique de l’exe´ge`se philosophique. Rev
Synth 117:27–59
Hugonnard-Roche H (2004) La logique d’Aristote du grec au syriaque.
Vrin, Paris
Inati S. Logic. In: Nasr SH & Leaman O (eds) History of Islamic philos-
ophy, vol 2, Routledge, London, pp 802–823
Lameer J (1994) al-Farabi and Aristotelian syllogistic: Greek theory and
Islamic practice. Brill, Leiden
Madkour I (1969) L’Organon d’Aristote dans le monde arabe. Vrin, Paris
Marmura M (1975) Ghazali’s attitude to the secular sciences and logic. In:
Hourani G (eds) Essays in Islamic philosophy and science. SUNY
Press, Albany
Rescher N (1963) Studies in the history of Arabic logic. University of
Pittsburgh Press, Pittsburgh
Rescher N (1964) The development of Arabic logic. University of Pitts-
burgh Press, Pittsburgh
Sabra AI (1965) A twelfth-century defence of the fourth-ﬁgure of the
syllogism. J Warbg Courtauld Inst 28:14–28
Sabra AI (1980) Avicenna on the subject-matter of logic. J Philos
77:746–764
Sabra AI (1996) Situating Arabic science: locality versus essence. Isis
87:654–670
Street T (1995) T˙u¯s:ı¯ on Avicenna’s logical connectives. Hist Philos Logic
16:257–268
Street T (2002) An outline of Avicenna’s syllogistic. Arch Gesch Philos
84:129–160
Street T (2003) Logic. In: Adamson P, Taylor R (eds) Cambridge com-
panion
to
Arabic
philosophy.
Cambridge
University
Press,
Cambridge
Street T (2004) Arabic logic. In: Gabbay DM, Woods J (eds) Handbook of
the history of logic, vol I: Greek, Indian and Arabic logic. Elsevier,
Amsterdam
Street T (2005) Fah˘raddin ar-Razi’s critique of Avicennan logic. In:
Rudolph U, Perler D (eds) Logik und Theologie. Das Organon im
arabischen und im lateinischen Mittelalter. Brill, Leiden
Street T (2008) Arabic and Islamic philosophy of language and logic. In:
Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy. http://plato.stanford.edu/
entries/arabic-islamic-language/
Thom P (2008) Logic and metaphysics in Avicenna’s modal syllogistic. In:
Rahman S, Street T, Tahiri H (eds) The unity of science in the Arabic
tradition: metaphysics, logic and epistemology and their interac-
tions. Springer, Dordrecht
Wisnovsky R (2004) The nature and scope of Arabic philosophical com-
mentary in post-classical (ca.1100–1900) Islamic intellectual history:
some preliminary observations. In: Adamson P, Balthussen H, Stone
MWF (eds) Philosophy, science and exegesis in Greek, Arabic and
Latin commentaries, vol 2. Institute of Advanced Studies, London,
pp 149–191
Logic, Arabic, in the Latin Middle
Ages
HENRIK LAGERLUND
Department of Philosophy
The University of Western Ontario
London, ON
Canada
Abstract
C. Prantl argued in the mid-nineteenth century that the
part of western logic nowadays called logica modernorum,
692 L
Logic, Arabic, in the Latin Middle Ages

that is, the so called theories of the properties of terms,
entered into the Latin world from translations of Byzan-
tine and Arabic logical works. This was, as M.L. de Rijk
showed in the 1960s, completely wrong. He argued con-
vincingly that this part of medieval logic was partly due to
Aristotle’s Sophistici elenchi but foremost it was due to the
creative minds of late twelfth-century logicians. His judg-
ment of earlier views was so harsh, however, that Arabic
logic in the Latin tradition has hardly been studied at all.
Most scholars are of the opinion that Arabic logic had very
little, if any, inﬂuence on western logic, but although
Arabic logic did not revolutionize western logic as was
once thought, it certainly is part of the western logical
tradition and as such it had quite a signiﬁcant inﬂuence,
though not in the way previously thought.
The Latin logicians of the thirteenth century had quite
a good grasp of Arabic logic. The major source for this
knowledge was the Maqa¯s:id al-fala¯sifa (Intentions of the
Philosophers) by Abu¯
H˙ a¯mid Muh˙ammad al-G˙ aza¯lı¯
(1058–1111). It was supposed to be a preparatory work
for his later much more well known Taha¯fut al-fala¯sifa
(The Incoherence of the Philosophers). The whole of the
Maqa¯s:id contains a presentation of logic, physics, meta-
physics, and theology and has been claimed to be an
intelligent reworking of Avicenna’s Da¯nesh-name (Book
of Science), which is a compendium of his doctrines writ-
ten in Persian. Al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s work was translated in full into
Latin early in the second half of the twelfth century, which
is not more than 50 or 75 years after it was written. In one
of the manuscripts the title is Liber Algazelis de summa
theoricae philosophiae, but it was also printed in Venice in
1506 under the title Logica et philosophia Algazelis arabis.
The
twelfth-century
translation
was
by
Dominicus
Gundissalinus and was commissioned by John, the Arch-
bishop of Toledo (1151–1166).
The Latin translation of the Maqa¯s:id was very much
read and became, at least in the thirteenth century, the
basic text from which the Latin authors gained their
knowledge of Arabic philosophy. The reason it became
so much read was because it mentions some of the ‘‘hot’’
topics of the period, for example, the divisions of the
sciences, the distinction between essence and existence,
the eternity of the world, the number of souls, etc. It was
also a very controversial work. In his Tractatus de erroribus
philosophorum, Giles of Rome lists 18 errors of al-G˙ aza¯lı¯
taken from the Maqa¯s:id. They later found their way into
the Directorium inquisitorum from 1376 by Nicholas
Eymerich. The logic became very well known as well.
Albert the Great used it quite extensively and it was used
or copied by Ramo´n Llull.
Al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ begins the Maqa¯s:id with a distinction
between imagination (imaginatio) and belief (credulitas).
An imagination is an apprehension of a thing, he writes,
which is signiﬁed by a single mental utterance (dictio) in
the intellect. Names like ‘‘stone’’ or ‘‘tree,’’ etc. signify these
apprehensions or imaginations. A belief is on the other
hand a sentence or a complex utterance, that is, that which
says or expresses something, like ‘‘the world begins.’’
A belief is always a composition of at least two imagina-
tions. The kind of knowledge that is mediated by imagi-
nation is arrived at through deﬁnitions and descriptions
and the kind of knowledge that is mediated by belief is
arrived at through arguments. It is logic that gives the rules
by which we are able to give good and true deﬁnitions and
arguments. Hence, logic is the very foundation of knowl-
edge and all science, argues al-G˙ aza¯lı¯.
The division of logic is done to show the aim or
intention of logic. The aim is to deﬁne and prove. He
gives the following fourfold division:
1. On terms and how they signify understandings
(intellectiones).
2. On concepts (terms) and their divisions.
3. On propositions and their composition.
4. On proofs, which are subdivided into material and
formal syllogisms.
The main thing to note about this division is the close
connection between mind and logic. The view of logic as
being about intentions is derived from Avicenna and it was
very inﬂuential. It gave rise to a major controversy in
the thirteenth century between those who argued that
logic was a science of discourse (scientia sermocinalis)
and those who argued that it was a science of reason
(scientia rationalis). Albert the Great argues, for example,
that logic is a science of mental intentions.
The Arabic discussion of the matter of the syllogism
found in al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s logic is of particular interest. His
division of the matter had an inﬂuence on several Latin
logicians and among them on Thomas Aquinas. The mat-
ter of a syllogism consists in its premises. If they are
credible and true, then the conclusion will be credible
and true, but if the premises are false, then the conclusion
will not be credible. Al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ tries to explain what he
means by the distinction between the matter and form of
a syllogism by an analogy with a coin. The matter of the
coin is the gold it is made of and its form is its roundness.
If the form is destroyed or falsiﬁed in some way, we will
not call it a coin anymore. Sometimes the matter of the
coin is also changed, that is, a coin, he notes, might be
made from iron or silver. It is then not worth as much, but
it is still a coin. In the same way, the form and matter of
Logic, Arabic, in the Latin Middle Ages L
693
L

a syllogism can change. If the form changes so that it is not
in accordance with any of the ﬁgures, then it is no longer
a syllogism and presumably not an argument anymore,
but sometimes the form is the correct one, but the matter
is different and the premises are only opinions or even
sometimes false.
He gives the following division of the matter:
5. Demonstrative premises,
6. Topical premises,
7. Rhetorical and legal premises,
8. Sophistical premises, and
9. Poetical premises.
Logic is hence subdivided into these ﬁve kinds.
Although the Maqa¯s:id was a summary of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s
and Avicenna’s doctrine, the Latin medieval logicians also
had some knowledge of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s and Avicenna’s logic
directly. A twelfth-century translation of the beginning of
Avicenna’s encyclopedic work Kita¯b al-Shifa¯’ (The Book of
Healing), namely the part on Porphyry’s Isagoge, was cir-
culating, and also a fragment of the part on the Posterior
Analytics from the same book existed in Latin. Small
fragments of some of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s logical works have also
been discovered in Latin. Salman (1939), argues that there
was knowledge of a commentary of the Posterior Analytics
by al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ in the thirteenth century.
In the early thirteenth century, some of Averroes’
commentaries on the Organon were translated into
Latin. William of Luna translated the middle commentary
on Porphyry’s Isagoge and the middle commentaries on
Aristotle’s Categories, De interpretatione, Prior Analytics,
and Posterior Analytics between the 1220s and 1230s, but
Latin writers seem to have had knowledge of other logical
works by Averroes than these.
Averroes’ commentaries were important for a general
understanding of Aristotle’s very difﬁcult texts. They are
generally helpful in expounding the text and clearing up
mistakes otherwise easily made, but the middle commentar-
ies, unlike the major commentaries, do not really go beyond
Aristotle’s own text. In reading them carefully, however, an
interpretation is usually indicated, but what inﬂuence, if any,
they had in the subsequent thirteenth-century commentary
tradition has not been carefully studied.
In many commentaries on Aristotle’s logical works in
the thirteenth century, a heavily metaphysical interpreta-
tion of logic is defended. There has been some discussion
in the secondary literature about the source of this inter-
pretation and one suggestion is that it has its source in
Averroes’ commentaries. His view of differentia can be
found in Robert Kilwardby’s commentaries on the Isagoge
and the Categories. It can also be read into Aquinas’
De ente et essentia. Averroes’ treatment of modal syllogis-
tics is also very interesting and strengthens his general
metaphysical interpretation of Aristotle’s logic. It seems
also to have had some inﬂuence in the thirteenth century,
particularly on Kilwardby’s commentary on Aristotle’s
Prior Analytics. A detailed study of the logical theories in
Arabic logic works accessible to Latin logicians has not
been written yet. It is clear, however, that these doctrines
never were as inﬂuential as Prantl assumed, but neither
did they exert no inﬂuence whatsoever.
See also: ▶Albert the Great ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas˙r
▶al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, Abu¯ H˙ a¯mid Muh:ammad ▶Giles of Rome
▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes)
▶Logic ▶Logic in the Arabic and Islamic World
▶Robert Kilwardby ▶Thomas Aquinas
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Averroes (1562–1574) Aristotelis Opera cum Averrois Commentariis.
Venice (repr. Minerva, Frankfurt, 1962)
Avicenna (1508) Avicenne perypatetici philosophi ac medicorum facile
primi opera in lucem redacta. Venice (repr. Minerva, Frankfurt, 1961)
Avicenna (1971) Avicenna’s treatise on logic: part one of Danesh-Name
Alai, ed. and translated from Persian by Zabeeh F. Martinus Nijhoff,
The Hague
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ (1965) Tractatus de logica, ed. Lohr C. Logica Algazelis: intro-
duction and critical text. Traditio 21:223–290
Gundissalinus Dominicus (1903) De divisione philosophiae, ed. Baur L.
(Beitra¨ge zur Geschichte der Philosophie des Mittelalters 4:2–3).
Mu¨nster
Secondary Sources
Alonso MA (1958) Inﬂuencia de Algazel en el mundo latino. Al-Andalus
13:371–380
Black D (1990) Logic and Aristotle’s rethoric and poetics in medieval
Arabic philosophy. Brill, Leiden
Burnett C (2004) The translation of Arabic works on logic into Latin in
the Middle Ages and the Renaissance. In: Gabbay DM, Woods J (eds)
Handbook of the history of logic, vol 1. Elsevier, Amsterdam,
pp 597–606
Butterworth C (1981) Averroes’s middle commentary on Aristotle’s
Categories and its importance. In: Beckmann JP et al (eds) Sprache
und Erkenntnis im Mittelalters. Walter de Gruyter, Berlin, pp 368–375
de Rijk LM (1962) Logica modernorum. A contribution to the history of
early terminist logic, vol I: On the twelfth century theories of fallacy.
Wijsgerige teksten en studies 6. Van Gorcum, Assen
de Rijk LM (1967) Logica modernorum. A contribution to the history of
early terminist logic, vol II, 1–2: The origin and early development of
the theory of supposition. Wijsgerige teksten en studies 16. Van
Gorcum, Assen
Elamrani-Jamal A (1995) Ibn Rusˇd et les Premiers Analytiques d’Aristote:
Aperc¸u sur un proble`me de syllogistique modale. Arabic Sci Philos
5:51–74
Hissette R (1997) Les e´ditions anciennes de la traduction attribue´e a`
Guillaume de Luna du commentaire moyen d’Averroes sur les
Cate´gories. Bull Philos Me´die´v 39:163–173
694 L
Logic, Arabic, in the Latin Middle Ages

Johnston MD (1987) The spiritual logic of Ramond Llull. Clarendon,
Oxford
Lagerlund H (2000) Modal syllogistics in the Middle Ages. Brill, Leiden
Lagerlund H (2007) The assimilation of Aristotelian and Arabic logic up
to the later thirteenth century. In: Gabbay DM, Woods J (eds) Hand-
book of the history of logic, vol 2. Elsevier, Amsterdam
Prantl C (1855–1867) Geschichte der Logik im Abendlande, 3 vols.
S. Hirzl, Leipzig
Salman D (1939) The medieval Latin translations of al-Farabi’s works.
New Scholasticism 13:245–261
Salman D (1948) Fragments ine´dits de la logique d’Alfarabi. Rev Sci
Philos Theol 32:222–225
Street T (2004) Arabic logic. In: Gabbay DM, Woods J (eds) Handbook of
the history of logic, vol 1. Elsevier, Amsterdam
Wolfson H (1963) Revised plan for the publication of a Corpus
commentariorum Averrois in Aristotelem. Speculum 38:88–104
Logic, Byzantine
KATERINA IERODIAKONOU
Department of Philosophy and History of Science
University of Athens
Athens
Greece
Abstract
The Byzantine attitude toward the study and use of logic
was ambivalent. Although some Byzantine thinkers
argued that logic is of no value in the search for true
knowledge, and so logical studies should be dismissed,
some others treated logic as the preliminary stage of the
philosophical curriculum as well as an instrument in
defending Christian doctrines or in rejecting heretic and
pagan views. Thus, there were Byzantine philosophers
who wrote commentaries and paraphrases of the Aristo-
telian Organon, small essays on speciﬁc logical issues, and
brief introductions to logic. Their interpretations of
Aristotle’s texts are not always original, but they are
worth studying as important sources of ancient logic and
as stepping-stones in the history of logic.
The Byzantines’ engagement in logic focused mainly on
the explanation and interpretation of the different trea-
tises of the Aristotelian Organon. The Byzantine philoso-
phers wrote commentaries and paraphrases of Aristotle’s
logical writings, small essays on speciﬁc issues raised in
Aristotle’s logic, as well as brief introductions to logic
covering sketchily the whole of the Organon.
For instance, on the Categories we have Photios’
and Arethas’ comments from the second half of the
ninth century, and George Scholarios’ extensive commen-
tary from the ﬁfteenth century; on the De interpretatione
two paraphrases by Michael Psellos and Leo Magentenos,
from the eleventh and thirteenth century respectively
(only in their Renaissance editions), and again an exten-
sive commentary by George Scholarios; on the Prior Ana-
lytics Michael Psellos’ and Leo Magentenos’ paraphrases;
on the Posterior Analytics, and in particular on the second
book, the twelfth century commentaries by Eustratios of
Nicaea and by Theodore Prodromos; on parts of the Topics
the comments by John Italos from the eleventh century
and by Leo Magentenos; on the Sophistici elenchi the
twelfth century commentary by Michael of Ephesus,
wrongly attributed to Alexander of Aphrodisias, and by
Sophonias from the thirteenth century. Moreover, on the
margins of manuscripts in libraries all over the world there
are many Byzantine logical comments by anonymous
authors, which are unfortunately still unedited and need
to be carefully studied.
Among the numerous Byzantine essays on logical
issues we have, for instance, a small essay by Theodore
Prodromos which systematically argues against Aristotle’s
doctrine in the Categories that ‘great’ and ‘small’ are not
quantities but relatives; Michael Psellos’ opusculum no.6
on whether the two Basils or the two Gregories are hom-
onyms or synonyms; John Italos’ paragraph 38 of his De
arte dialectica which is devoted to an account of reductio
ad impossibile as a kind of hypothetical proof.
Finally, there are many Byzantine introductions to
logic. For instance, the short synopsis by the so-called
‘Anonymus Heiberg’ from the beginning of the eleventh
century, Nikephoros
Blemmydes’ thirteenth
century
Epitome logica, and George Pachymeres’ still unedited
compendium of the Organon from the late thirteenth
century. It is worth noticing that in their logical introduc-
tions the Byzantines often added short accounts of the
hypothetical syllogisms, in which Stoic elements can
sometimes be detected, although their Stoic origin is
hardly ever acknowledged.
The Byzantine philosophers were interested in the
study and interpretation of Aristotle’s logic as the prelim-
inary stage of the philosophical curriculum. During the
eleventh century the standard syllabus of a course at the
advanced level of the Byzantine educational system started
with Porphyry’s Isagoge, Aristotle’s Categories, the De
interpretatione, and Prior Analytics 1.1–7. Thus, we also
have Byzantine comments on Porphyry’s Isagoge, like
those by Arethas and by George Scholarios, but also
a
short
Plato-style
elenctic
dialogue
by
Theodore
Prodromos on topics from the Isagoge under the title
Xenedemus.
Logic, Byzantine L
695
L

The explanations and interpretations of Aristotle’s
logical texts suggested by the Byzantine scholars are not
always original. There is no doubt that the Byzantines
made ample use of the ancient logical commentaries,
especially of those by the Neoplatonic commentators
(e.g., Porphyry, Ammonius, Simplicius, Olympiodorus,
Philoponus). They also tried to incorporate into their
logical writings views expressed by the Christian Fathers
(e.g., John of Damascus, Gregory of Nazianzus), in order
to show that logical theories are in perfect agreement
with the Christian dogma. Finally, right at the end of
the Byzantine era, George Scholarios’ logical commen-
taries show a strong dependence on western scholasti-
cism both in terms of their content and in terms of their
structure.
It is not the case, however, that the Byzantine authors
slavishly follow their sources; for there are occasions on
which they explicitly criticize Aristotle’s logical theories or
proudly stress their own contribution to logic. Indeed,
sometimes they give a slightly different argument to sup-
port an established position, sometimes they make a small
but interesting addition to an ancient doctrine (for
instance, by supplying a logical diagram), sometimes
they considerably diverge from the generally accepted
view and introduce their own ideas which often aim at
reconciling the Christian tradition with ancient philoso-
phy. The Byzantine works on logic, therefore, are quarries
for information about ancient logical theories, and offer
explanations or modiﬁcations of Aristotle’s doctrines,
many of which are interesting and some of which are
surprisingly subtle.
But it was not only for teaching purposes that the
Byzantines read Aristotle’s logic and commented on it.
In their attempt to defend Christian doctrines and reject
the views both of the heretics and of the pagans, logic
seemed, at least to some of them, to be a helpful instru-
ment. For the Byzantine attitude toward the study and use
of logic was rather ambivalent. Although some Byzantine
thinkers praised and themselves made use of, to a lesser or
greater extent, Aristotle’s logic, there were others who
ﬁercely rejected the logical doctrines of pagan philoso-
phers and their use, especially in theology.
In particular, there are two periods in the history of
Byzantine thought that clearly attest to the centrality of
the debate concerning the value of logic. At the end of
the eleventh century, John Italos was put to trial and
condemned by the Orthodox Church for defending the
view that logical reasoning should be applied to theolog-
ical questions. His student Eustratios of Nicaea also tried
in his theological treatises to prove the truth of Christian
doctrines by using logical arguments, and even stated that
Christ himself had argued with the help of Aristotelian
syllogisms. On the other hand, during the ﬁrst half of the
fourteenth century, Nikephoros Gregoras argued that log-
ical studies should be altogether dismissed and logical
theory should be regarded as completely useless. His con-
temporaries, however, Barlaam of Calabria and George
Palamas, claimed that logic is indeed useful in defending
Christian belief, but they disagreed between them as to its
precise use; for although they both stressed that neither
demonstrative nor dialectical syllogisms yield any knowl-
edge of God’s essence, they debated over the question
whether God’s attributes can be the subject of demonstra-
tive syllogisms.
See also: ▶Barlaam of Calabria ▶Eustratios of Nicaea
▶George Pachymeres ▶George Scholarios (Gennadios II)
▶Gregory Palamas ▶John Italos ▶Leo Magentenos
▶Michael of Ephesus ▶Michael Psellos ▶Nikephoros
Blemmydes
▶Nikephoros
Gregoras
▶Sophonias
▶Theodore Prodromos
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Anonymus Heiberg (1929) Anonymi logica et quadrivium, ed. Heiberg
JL. Andr. Fred. Høst, Copenhagen
Arethas of Caesarea (1994) Arethas of Caesarea’s Scholia on Porphyry’s
Isagoge and Aristotle’s Categories (Codex Vaticanus Urbinas Graecus
35), ed. Share M. Corpus Philosophorum Medii Aevi: Commentaria
in Aristotelem Byzantina 1. The Academy of Athens, Athens
Blemmydes Nikephoros (1885) Nicephori Blemmidae Epitome logica, ed.
Wegelin J. In: Migne J-P (ed) Patrologia graeca, vol 142. Paris, pp
685–1004
Eustratios of Nicaea (1907) Eustratii in Analyticorum posteriorum
librum secundum commentarium, ed. Hayduck M. Commentaria
in Aristotelem Graeca 21.1. Reimer, Berlin
Italos John (1924/1926) Johannis Itali Opuscula selecta, vol I: De arte
dialectica & vol II: De syllogismis, De arte rhetorica, ed. Cereteli G.
Tbilisi
Italos John (1956) Ioannes Italos Quaestiones quodlibetales (ΑΠΟΡΙΑΙ
ΚΑΙ ΛΥΣΕΙΣ), ed. Joannou P. Studia Patristica et Byzantina 4. Buch-
Kunstverlag, Ettal
Italos John (1966) Ioannis Itali Opera, ed. Ketschakmadze N. Tbilisi
Italos John (1999) Byzantinische Kommentatoren der aristotelischen
Topik. Joannes Italos & Leon Magentinos, ed. Kotzabassi S. Vanias,
Thessaloniki
Michael of Ephesus (1898) Alexandri quod fertur in Aristotelis
Sophisticos elenchus commentarium, ed. Wallies M. Commentaria
in Aristotelem Graeca 2.3. Reimer, Berlin
Photios (1986) Photii Epistulae et Amphilochia, vol V, qu. 137–147, ed.
Westerink LG. Teubner, Leipzig
Prodromos Theodore (1836) Ξενέδημος Z᾽`φωναί, ed. Cramer JA. In:
Anecdota
graeca
e
codicibus
manuscriptis
Bibliothecarum
Oxoniensium, vol III. Oxford, pp 204–215 (repr Amsterdam, 1963)
Prodromos Theodore (1887) The´odore Prodrome sur le grand et le petit,
ed. Tannery P. Annuaire de l’Association pour l’encouragement des
e´tudes grecques en France 21:104–119
696 L
Logic, Byzantine

Psellos
Michael
(1992)
Michaelis
Pselli
Philosophica
minora, 1.
Opuscula logica, physica, allegorica, alia, ed. Duffy J. Teubner,
Stuttgart
Scholarios George (1936) Œuvres comple`tes de Gennade Scholarios,
vol VII, ed. Petit L, Sideride`s XA, Jugie M. Maison de la bonne
presse, Paris
Sophonias
(1884)
Anonymi
in
Aristotelis
Sophisticos
elenchos
paraphrasis, ed. Hayduck M. Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeca
23.4. Reimer, Berlin
Secondary Sources
Benakis L (1988) Commentaries and commentators on the logical works
of Aristotle in Byzantium. In: Clausen R, Daube-Schackat R (eds)
Gedankenzeichen. Festschrift Klaus Oehler. Stauffenburg, Tu¨bingen,
pp 3–12
Cacouros M (1994–1995) La tradition du commentaire de The´odore
Prodrome au deuxie`me livre de Seconds Analytiques d’Aristote:
quelques e´tapes dans l’enseignement de la logique a` Byzance.
Diptucha 6:329–354
Ebbesen S (1981) Commentators and commentaries on Aristotle’s
Sophistici elenchi: a study of post-Aristotelian ancient and medieval
writings on fallacies, 3 vols. Brill, Leiden
Ierodiakonou K (1996) The hypothetical syllogisms in the Greek and
Latin traditions. Cahiers de l’Istitut du Moyen-Age Grec et Latin
66:96–116
Ierodiakonou K (2002) The anti-logical movement in the fourteenth
century. In: Ierodiakonou K (ed) Byzantine philosophy and its
ancient sources. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 219–236
Ierodiakonou K (2005) The Byzantine reception of Aristotle’s Categories.
Synth Philos 39:7–31
Podskalsky G (1977) Theologie und Philosophie in Byzanz. Beck, Munich
Sinkewicz RE (1980) A new interpretation for the ﬁrst episode in the
controversy between Barlaam the Calabrian and Gregory Palamas.
J Theol Stud 31:489–500
Logic, Jewish
CHARLES H. MANEKIN
Department of Philosophy
University of Maryland
College Park, MD
USA
Abstract
The study of Aristotelian logic was widespread among
medieval Jews who studied even a rudimentary amount
of profane science. Jews in Islamic lands appear to have
learned logic mostly from the Arabic translations of
Aristotle and the works of the Muslim Peripatetics. In
southern Europe, especially Spain, southern France, and
Italy, the earliest logical texts translated from Arabic into
Hebrew were by al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, followed by Averroes, whose
paraphrases (Middle Commentaries) on the Aristotelian
Organon were the authoritative texts that spawned com-
mentaries. Beginning in the fourteenth century, Jews
became familiar with the works of Scholastic logic, espe-
cially the Tractatus of Peter of Spain, and in the ﬁfteenth
century, Scholastic writings were translated into Hebrew,
and one can speak of Hebrew Scholastic logic. Aside from
the elementary primers that covered most of the Organon,
the focus of the study was the logica antiqua (Isagoge,
Categories, De interpretatione); some authors were also
interested in the Posterior Analytics. With the exception
of Levi Gersonides (1288–1344), none embarked on an
independent analysis of syllogistic, including modal syllo-
gistic. Physicians, as well as rabbis engaged in religious
disputations, had practical motives for the study of Scho-
lastic logic, but some Jews simply were attracted to logic
for its own sake. Because of its ideological neutrality, logic
was studied not only by Aristotelian philosophers but by
kabbalists as well.
The study of Aristotelian logic was widespread among
medieval Jews who studied even a rudimentary amount
of profane science. Jews in Islamic lands appear to have
learned logic mostly from the Arabic translations of Aris-
totle and the works of the Muslim Peripatetics. In south-
ern Europe the earliest logical texts translated from Arabic
into Hebrew were al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s short treatises on the books
of the Organon. These texts can be divided into three
categories: (a) introductory works with sections on logic;
(b) introductory essays to the study of logic; and (c) short
treatises on individual books of the Organon. There is
evidence for Hebrew translations of the Long Commentar-
ies on the De interpretatione and the Topics; fragments of
the Long Commentary on the Prior Analytics are preserved
in Averroes’ Logical Questions and in the last chapter of
Maimonides’ Medical Aphorisms, and some fragments of
the Long Commentary on the Categories are preserved in
the commentary by Judah b. Isaac b. Moses Cohen on
Averroes’ Middle Commentary on the Categories. The
Hebrew translations of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s logical writings are
extant in a signiﬁcant number of copies, especially the
Enumeration of the Sciences, and the incomplete Hebrew
translation of the short treatise on the Topics, and the
Sophistics.
Two highly popular thirteenth-century Hebrew works
that that show clear inﬂuence of Farabian doctrine are
Samuel ibn Tibbon’s Glossary of Unusual Terms (from his
Hebrew translation of Maimonides’ Guide of the Per-
plexed) and the Logical Terms, a translation of a work
traditionally attributed to Maimonides. The Glossary
includes several extended deﬁnitions of terms in logic,
including the ﬁve predicables, the ten Categories, kinds
Logic, Jewish L
697
L

of statements, and terms. Entire paragraphs from al-
Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s Short Treatises on the Isagoge and Categories are
‘‘appropriated’’ without attribution, a practice that occurs
frequently in medieval and early modern Hebrew logical
texts. Samuel also shows familiarity with Averroes’ Epit-
ome of the Organon and his Middle Commentaries on
Aristotle’s books. The Logical Terms appears to have been
one of the most widely read works of Jewish logic: it is
extant in over 80 manuscripts and 30 printed editions, and
was translated into Hebrew from the Arabic three times.
The work was used mostly as a primer for students before
beginning the study of logic and is sometimes found in
manuscripts with more advanced works. There is no evi-
dence that the Logical Terms had any impact on Jewish
intellectuals until late in the thirteenth or early in the
fourteenth centuries, but since this work owes so much
to al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, ascertaining such impact would be difﬁcult.
Fourteenth-century savants Joseph ibn Kaspi and Moses
of Narbonne commented on it; the work is also mentioned
by their contemporary Gersonides. Other medieval com-
mentaries are attributed to Joseph Albo and Mordecai
Komtino in the ﬁfteenth, Abraham Farrisol and Moses b.
Shem Tov ibn Habib in the sixteenth, and Samuel b. Saadia
ibn Danan in the seventeenth centuries, in addition to
anonymous commentaries.
Between the Glossary of Unusual Terms and the Logical
Terms one ﬁnds a somewhat more ambitious exposition in
Judah ha-Cohen ibn Matqah’s encyclopedic work, the
Investigation of Wisdom. It is the ﬁrst Jewish compendium
of the books of the Organon, or more precisely, the ﬁrst
ﬁve books of the Organon. Judah was only interested in
that part of Aristotle’s logic that led up to and included the
theory of demonstration, since his work dealt with the
sciences. Although the section on logic is mostly an
abridgement of the Averroes’ Middle Commentaries on
the relevant books, it also contains many elements from
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s introductory works and commentaries, as well
as from Averroes’ Epitome of the Organon. Averroes’ Mid-
dle Commentaries on the ﬁrst ﬁve books of the Organon
were translated into Hebrew by Jacob Anatoli in 1232. The
remaining four books of the Organon were translated in
the next century by Qalonymos b. Qalonymos (Topics and
Sophistics) and Todros Todrosi (Rhetoric and Poetics).
By the mid thirteenth century, Jewish intellectuals
in Provence and Italy had at their disposal an array of
Hebrew logical texts of varying difﬁculty. The doctrines
to which they were exposed stemmed mainly from the
introductory works and short treatises by al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯,
although increasingly students were studying the texts of
Aristotle themselves in Hebrew translation ‘‘as understood
by the sage Averroes,’’ i.e., Averroes’ Middle Commentaries.
The second half of the thirteenth and early fourteenth
centuries saw translations of two other works that were
destined to become popular vehicles for the transmission
of Arabic Aristotelian logic into Hebrew: Averroes’ Epit-
ome of the Organon in 1288–1289 by Jacob b. Makhir in
Provence and al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s Intentions of the Philosophers by
Isaac Albalag (late thirteenth century). Both works differ
in order, structure, and occasionally content from
Aristotle’s logical writings as presented in Averroes’ para-
phrases. The Epitome is organized around the two types of
knowledge, conception and assent. Under the former are
subsumed the components of conception (signiﬁcation of
terms) and what leads to conception (the doctrine of the
predicables), as well as what is useful, though not neces-
sary, for conception (the doctrine of the Categories).
Under the latter are subsumed the structure of assent
(the doctrine of the proposition), and what leads to assent
(the doctrine of the syllogism), as well as the rules
according to which syllogisms are constructed (the doc-
trine of topical inferences). Having covered the broad
outlines of conception and assent, Averroes applies them
in the second half of the work to the ﬁve logical arts:
demonstrative, sophistic, dialectic, rhetorical, and poetic.
Jacob b. Makhir’s translation of the Epitome was criticized
by Samuel b. Judah of Marseilles, who retranslated it in
1329, but the sole extant manuscript of the latter’s trans-
lation shows few signiﬁcant divergences. Under the short-
ened and misleading title The Entire Art of Logic, a title
used for various texts, the work was printed in 1559, one of
the few works of Hebrew logic to be printed in the
premodern period.
Al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s Intentions of the Philosophers was translated
by Isaac Albalag in the late thirteenth or early fourteenth
century, by an anonymous writer around the same time,
and by the Provenc¸al physician Judah Nathan in the mid-
fourteenth century. The ﬁrst section of this tripartite
‘‘encyclopedia’’ deals with logic, and, because of the pop-
ularity of the work as a whole, it became one of the most
popular presentations of logic among the Jews in the
Middle Ages and Renaissance. The section on logic is
also constructed around conception and assent and is
divided into ﬁve parts: terms, concepts, propositions,
and syllogisms in their formal and material aspects.
There parts correspond roughly to the ﬁve subsections,
except that the material aspect of the syllogism, i.e., the
epistemic value of syllogistic premises, is treated in the
fourth subsection and the theory of demonstration in
the ﬁfth. The Intentions was appreciated by Jews both as
an introduction to philosophy, albeit a popular one that
698 L
Logic, Jewish

needed emending (Albalag), and as a convenient manual
that would obviate the need for further study (Nathan).
In the fourteenth century, especially in Provence, the
translation
of
Arabic
manuals,
encyclopedias,
and
commentaries gave way to the production of Hebrew
compendia and commentaries. Joseph Kaspi wrote his
own abridgment of logic, The Bundle of Silver, for his son
and his contemporaries. Kaspi only includes logical doc-
trines necessary for understanding Scripture drawn from
the ﬁrst ﬁve books of the Organon and the Sophistics, and
not the Topics, Rhetoric, or Poetics, which, he claims, are
for idle thinkers. While Kaspi follows Averroes’ Middle
Commentaries to a large extent in the early books, includ-
ing an abbreviated treatment of the modal syllogism, he
borrows from the Averroes’ Epitome and al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s short
treatises, adds examples, and comments on differences
with examples from Scripture and the sages. The part
corresponding to the Sophistics is an abbreviation of
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s short treatise and not Averroes’ Middle Com-
mentary, which had been translated shortly before in 1313.
Al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s
Intentions
of
the
Philosophers
was
commented upon twice in the late thirteenth and four-
teenth centuries, ﬁrst by the translator Isaac Albalag and
then by Moses of Narbonne, both Averroists. Albalag only
devotes a handful of his emendations to the section on
logic; some of the manuscripts, however, have two inter-
polated comments attributed to ‘‘Abner’’ that defend the
need to posit a fourth syllogistic ﬁgure, and criticize
the Christian practice of adding ﬁve ‘‘indirect moods’’ to
the ﬁrst ﬁgure. Vajda identiﬁed the author of the glosses
with the fourteenth-century Jewish philosopher and later
convert Abner of Burgos; whoever the author is, he seems
to be unaware that Galen had posited a fourth ﬁgure or
that Averroes had criticized it; both points are contained
in Averroes’ Middle Commentary and Epitome. Moses of
Narbonne comments sporadically on the text, occasionally
using examples from the Bible and Talmud. In addition to
Narboni’s commentary, there are commentaries by the
ﬁfteenth century Italian poet Moses da Rieti, the sixteenth
century Karaite scholar Abraham Bali (c. 1510, the com-
mentary is only on the ﬁrst section); his younger contem-
porary the Salonican philosopher Moses Almosnino
entitled The Tower of Strength, and two anonymous com-
mentaries, one of Provenc¸al origin.
The Intentions of the Philosophers presented to its
readers the doctrines of Avicenna, little of whose own
work was translated into Hebrew during the Middle
Ages, as far as we know. Selections from logical works of
Avicenna are preserved in a philosophical anthology of
texts translated by Todros Todrosi and preserved in
a single manuscript. In the section dedicated to logic,
Todrosi presents excerpts from Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯’s
Eastern Investigations, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s short treatises on Logic
and chapter eight of the long commentary on the Topics
(extant only in this Hebrew excerpt). Avicenna’s Cure,
Themistius’ Paraphrase of the Prior Analytics and the
Posterior Analytics (extant only in this Hebrew excerpt),
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s Criterion of Knowledge, and Averroes’ Middle
and Long Commentaries on the Posterior Analytics, and the
Middle Commentary on the Topics.
Advanced commentaries on Averroes’ Middle Com-
mentaries on the Organon were composed on the ﬁrst
seven books between c. 1321 and c. 1323 by Gersonides,
who apparently assumed that his readers would have
access to Anatoli’s translation of the ﬁrst ﬁve books, but
not necessarily to Qalonymos’ translations of the Topics
and Sophistics. So for the former he presented just his own
commentary; for the latter, he weaved his commentary
together with the translation.
Gersonides was unquestionably the most original and
signiﬁcant Jewish logician of the premodern period. His
commentary on the ﬁrst three books of Averroes’ Middle
Commentary takes the form of notes, explanatory and
critical; only in the commentary on the De interpretatione
does one encounter longer quotations from Aristotle, with
brief explanations inserted within the text. In the com-
mentary on the Prior Analytics and the Posterior Analytics,
the commentary is expanded because of the purported
‘‘difﬁculties’’ of the former and the ‘‘great usefulness’’ of
the latter. His commentary on the Posterior Analytics was
initially planned to be even more extensive. Gersonides’
sources are mostly Averroes’ commentaries, both Middle
Commentaries and the Epitome, although he mentions al-
Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s commentaries and refers to the Logical Terms
obliquely. There is no indication that he was familiar
with Scholastic logic, but, like other philosophers in
Provence, he makes occasional remarks about the ‘‘lan-
guage of the Christians.’’
Gersonides’ commentaries on the Organon ‘‘as under-
stood by Averroes’’ were much studied by subsequent
Jewish students, if we may judge from the large number
of extant manuscripts and references to it in other works
This is especially true of the commentaries on the Isagoge,
Categories, and De interpretatione, which formed the core
of logical studies for Jewish intellectuals; Gersonides’ com-
mentaries were translated into Latin during the Renais-
sance and printed in the Venice Juntine edition of Averroes
(1562–1574). His independent positions in his logic com-
mentaries earned him more censure than praise. Fifteenth
century critics include Judah b. Isaac b. Moses Cohen,
Logic, Jewish L
699
L

probably in northern Italy (according to Zonta), Judah b.
Jehiel Messer Leon, one of the central ﬁgures of Italian
Jewry during the Renaissance and, as we shall see below,
the chief representative of what may be termed, ‘‘Hebrew
scholastic logic,’’ and ‘‘the sage Eli,’’ whom Steinschneider
identiﬁed with the ﬁfteenth-century Spanish Jewish trans-
lator and philosopher, Eli Habillo, although this identiﬁ-
cation has recently been questioned. Other anonymous
commentaries cite Gersonides’ commentary, one occa-
sionally defending him against the criticisms of ‘‘Eli,
known as Geronimo.’’ Abraham Bibago, an older contem-
porary of Eli Habillo, wrote a commentary on Averroes’
Middle Commentary on the Posterior Analytics in which he
criticizes Gersonides. More than any other commentator,
he remarks, Gersonides had been led by confusions and
mistakes to disagree with Averroes on several points and
‘‘to spout nonsense upon nonsense’’ in his commentary.
Gersonides’ most interesting work from the stand-
point of the history of logic is The Book of the Correct
Syllogism, or perhaps, The Correct Book of the Syllogism,
which contains his treatment of syllogistic and non-
syllogistic inference. Gersonides took it upon himself to
‘‘correct the errors’’ of Aristotle’s modal logic, notably in
the validity of the conversion of modal premises and
modal syllogisms, and the assessed modality of their con-
clusions. But to do this, he broadened the scope of the
book to deal with all inference: immediate and mediate
(i.e., syllogistic). The treatment of inference is by far
the most formalized among the Jews, and arguably the
most formalized in premodern logic. First positing and
defending a set of rules that yield ‘‘consequences by virtue
of the whole and the part,’’ he deduces through them the
laws of conversion and subalternation, justiﬁes the various
conditions of the syllogism, investigates the concludent
premise-pairs, and constructs the rules of inference for
arguments with modal premises. Along the way he pro-
vides a spirited defense of the fourth syllogistic ﬁgure
against the criticisms of Averroes, considers inferences
with quantiﬁed predicates, as well as relational terms and
prepositions, and two different interpretations of modal
operators in the two editions of the book. Unlike
Gersonides’ commentaries on the Organon, the Correct
Syllogism made little impact upon subsequent Jewish
intellectuals. The work was translated into Latin during
the Renaissance.
The study of Arabic-Hebrew logic continued in Pro-
vence well into the ﬁfteenth century, even after the general
decline of philosophy among the Jews there. Two works
testify to the enduring interest of this material: The Royal
Treasure, a compendium of logic, metaphysics, and
physics, in verse form, by Abraham Abigdor, and
a lengthy commentary on Averroes’ Epitome on the Orga-
non by Mordecai Nathan.
In the latter work the inﬂuence of Scholastic logic is
felt, especially in the section on the syllogism, where Mor-
decai cites the Tractatus of Peter of Spain. By the ﬁfteenth
century in Provence, a classic like Averroes’ Epitome had
been supplemented with a commentary that takes the
Scholastic tradition of logic for granted.
Beginning in the fourteenth century in Provence and
Italy, and the ﬁfteenth century in Spain, one ﬁnds
a growing acquaintance with Scholastic logic among the
Jews, and then Hebrew Scholastic logic, itself. Much of this
logic was familiar, since both Arabic and Latin logic
derived in large part from the Aristotelian canon. Yet
there were whole areas of Latin logic that had no counter-
part in the Arabic tradition, such as supposition and
syncategorematic theory, or the theory of consequences
and insolubles.
The earliest dated work that draws on Scholastic logic
is a translation and adaptation of a Latin gloss commen-
tary on the Tractatus of Peter of Spain, by Hezeqiah bar
Halafta in 1320. In the introduction Hezeqiah writes that
he had come across a Latin gloss commentary on that
popular work. Hezeqiah translated the commentary
because of its usefulness in disputations with Christians,
its value for sharpening the mind, and its brevity and
comprehensiveness. As is the practice of other Hebrew
translators of this period, Hezeqiah does not translate
word-for-word; rather, he introduces glosses that cite
freely from the Jewish and the Arabic philosophical tradi-
tions and ‘‘Judaizes’’ the material when possible.
A more telling example of literary appropriation
through adaptation is found in Abraham Abigdor’s trans-
lation of the Tractatus in the late fourteenth century.
Abraham replaces Peter’s deﬁnitions with others taken
from the Arab Aristotelian tradition, and waves into the
text long passages of Averroes’ Middle Commentary,
substituting them for the Latin text where possible. In
the work’s only gloss, Abraham informs his audience of
the Christian practice of listing the major premise ﬁrst; he
needs to mention the divergence from the Arab tradition
in order to explain the Scholastic ‘‘Barbara, Celarent’’
mnemonic, which assumes the priority of the major pre-
mise. The fourteenth century scriptural exegete Shemariah
the Cretan translated the Tractatus and passed it off as his
own work, saying that he would write a book containing
‘‘all that is necessary for the readers of my books and
commentaries to know.’’ The ‘‘author’’ tries as best as he
can to disguise the book’s foreign origin by writing in the
700 L
Logic, Jewish

ﬁrst person and substituting Hebrew linguistic phenom-
ena for Latin. Shemariah may have translated this book in
his youth at the court of Robert d’Anjou.
Jewish treatments of logic written in Byzantium in
the late fourteenth and early ﬁfteenth centuries, such as
Elijah b. Eliezer’s Book of Logic, the relevant chapters of
Aaron b. Elijah of Nicomedia’s Tree of Life, and Joseph b.
Moses Kilti ‘‘the Greek’s’’ Offering of Judah, show no
evidence of Scholastic logic. Only later, in the commentary
on the Logical Terms by Mordecai Comtino (Khomatiano)
do we ﬁnd some familiarity with Latin logic manuals of
the Renaissance, perhaps because of the ties between Ven-
ice and Constantinople. Comtino is one of the ﬁrst Jewish
logicians who mentions the so-called ‘‘false’’ fourth ﬁgure
of the Renaissance logicians, which is really nothing other
than a ﬁrst-ﬁgure syllogism with transposed premises. He
allows for their being four possible ﬁgures, but he holds
that only the ﬁrst three are signiﬁcant. Comtino wrote
a philosophical commentary on the Torah ‘‘containing
Logic and Grammar, whereby the Torah is elucidated.’’
Like Shemaria, if less enthusiastically, Comtino believed
in the importance of logic for the study of Scripture.
The study of medicine provided one impetus for Jews
to study manuals of Scholastic logic; another was to
engage in religious disputations with Christians, especially
in Spain and in Italy. Moses da Rieti lists the Latin names
of the 14 direct syllogistic moods, with examples, in order
to aid Jewish religious disputants, ‘‘so that their syllogisms
not be rejected [by the Christians] as ill-formed, although
their opinions are correct.’’ He makes the important
remark that the order of the premises in the syllogism
does not matter, provided that the syllogistic rules are
observed, a logical point that was disputed as late as
the nineteenth century. But rather than provide a more
detailed explanation of the information contained in the
mnemonic, da Rieti refers his reader to the Tractatus,
presumably in one of its Hebrew versions.
While these practical motivations for the study of logic
from Latin sources were of importance, some Jews were
simply attracted to the new kind of logic, though not to all
aspects of Scholastic logic. Jewish readers were interested
mainly in the logica antiqua, the standard material of the
Aristotelian Organon (less the Posterior Analytics) because
it corresponded by and large to the subject matter of logic
as reﬂected in the popular works of the Arabic-Hebrew
logical tradition, and it was not bound to the peculiarities
of Latin. In contrast, the logica modernorum developed by
the Scholastic logicians in the twelfth and thirteenth cen-
turies was of considerably less interest. The exception was
the ‘‘Barbara, Celarent’’ mnemonic, which seems to have
been quite important, considering the number of attempts
to render it in Hebrew.
More advanced works of Scholastic logic were trans-
lated into and composed in Hebrew in the ﬁfteenth cen-
tury. In Spain, Abraham Shalom translated a series of
disputed quaestiones on the Isagoge, the Categories, and
the De interpretatione, which he attributed to ‘‘the sage
Marsilio.’’ Abraham Shalom’s acquaintance and philo-
sophical correspondent, Eli Habillo, translated several
Scholastic tracts of logic concerning the problem of uni-
versals. One of these has been shown by Zonta to be
identical with the version of the De unitate universalis of
Vincent Ferrer used by Petrus Niger. Two others are the
four chapters on universals from Ockham’s Summa logicae
(I:14–17) and the De universalibus mistakenly attributed
to Aquinas. The four chapters from the Summa logicae are
the only known Hebrew translation of Ockham’s popular
textbook.
The full impact of Scholastic inﬂuence on Hebrew
logic was felt in Italy, ﬁrst in the writings of isolated
individuals, then in the education of Italian Jewish
youth. We noted above Shemariah the Cretan’s ties to the
court of Robert d’Anjou; another translator who had been
associated with the court was Judah Romano, whose
anthology of philosophical questions includes excerpts
from the commentaries on the Posterior Analytics and the
Rhetoric by Giles of Rome and commentaries and writings
on the De interpretatione and the Categories by Angelus de
Camerino. Another of Romano’s anthologies includes
a translation of an excerpt from the De fallaciis ad
quosdam nobiles mistakenly attributed to Aquinas.
With Judah Messer Leon we encounter something
new: a Jewish Scholastic logician writing in Hebrew.
Messer Leon’s works include an introductory textbook
on logic, The Perfection of Beauty (based to some extent
on Paul of Venice’s Logica parva), commentaries on the
Isagoge, Categories, and De interpretatione according to
Averroes (dependent, according to Husik, on Burley’s
Super artem veterem expositio), and commentaries on the
Prior Analytics and the Posterior Analytics according to
Averroes. His student, David the Sefaradi, calls the latter
a translation of Paul of Venice. Thus in the introduction to
the Perfection of Beauty, Messer Leon adds to the conven-
tional motives for writing a new logical textbook the
need to combat the ‘‘sophistries and deceits’’ of the
‘‘pseudo-philosophers among our co-religionists,’’ namely,
Gersonides. It should be emphasized that Messer Leon’s use
of Scholastic logic was not directed against the older logical
tradition of the Arab Peripatetics. On the contrary, he saw
himself as a defender of Averroes and Aristotle against the
Logic, Jewish L
701
L

bold and audacious attacks of the heterodox Gersonides.
The Perfection of Beauty encompasses almost the entire
range of elementary Scholastic logic, including obligations
and insolubles. It is extant in around 13 manuscripts,
and an abridgment was made of it by the translator-
philosopher Abraham Farissol, who had studied at Messer
Leon’s academy. Messer Leon, or one of his students, may
have written a Compendium and Questions on Porphyry’s
Isagoge, followed by a Compendium on the Categories.
Some of the questions and discussions show a marked
similarity to the Quaestiones in veterem artem of
Radulphus Brito.
Finally, we should note a treatise on logic by the mid-
sixteenth century physician-philosopher, Moses b. Judah
Galiano, a translator from both Arabic and Latin, which
covers the material from the Isagoge and the Categories,
and in which the author wishes to defend Aristotle
and Averroes against the objections of some of the
‘‘recent’’ authors; he cites Boethius, Albert the Great,
Thomas, Scotus, and Burleigh ‘‘the sophist’’ among
others. By this period, logical works by Jews have become
increasingly rare.
See also: ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas˙r ▶al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, Abu¯ H˙ a¯mid
Muh:ammad ▶Gersonides ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn
Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) ▶Logic, Byzantine ▶Logic in
the Arab and Islamic World ▶Moses Maimonides ▶Peter
of Spain
Bibliography
Primary Sources
In English Translation
Gersonides Levi (1984) The book of the correct syllogism. In: Manekin
C (ed) The logic of Gersonides. Kluwer, Dordrecht/Boston/London
Maimonides Moses (1937–1938) Maimonides’ treatise on logic (ed and
trans: Efros I). Proc Am Acad Jew Res 8:3–65
Secondary Sources
Manekin C (1999) Scholastic logic and the Jews. Bulletin de l’e´tude de la
philosophie me´dievale 41:123–147
Manekin C (forthcoming) Aristotelian logic in medieval Jewish culture.
In: Freudenthal G (ed) Science in medieval Jewish cultures. Brill,
Leiden
Steinschneider M (1983) Die hebraeische U¨ bersetzungen des Mittelalters.
Kommissionsverlag des Bibliographischen Bureaus, Berlin
Zonta M (2006) Medieval Hebrew scholasticism in the ﬁfteenth century.
A history and sourcebook. Springer, Dordrecht
Lombard, Peter
▶Peter Lombard
Lorenzo Valla
LODI NAUTA
Department of Philosophy
University of Groningen
Groningen
The Netherlands
Abstract
Valla was one of the most important and interesting
humanists of ﬁfteenth-century Italy. Not only did he give
the humanist program some of its most trenchant and
combative formulations, but also made numerous positive
contributions to scholarship. He translated Herodotus
and Homer, commented on Livy and Quintilian, and
exposed the famous Donation of Constantine as being
a forgery. He approached critically for the ﬁrst time the
Greek text of the New Testament, an approach that had an
immense inﬂuence on Erasmus. He also wrote a highly
inﬂuential textbook on the Fine Points of the Latin Lan-
guage (Elegantiae linguae Latinae), in which he discussed
a host of semantical, syntactical, and morphological fea-
tures of classical Latin. Philosophically the most interest-
ing work is his Repastinatio dialectice et philosophie,
a heavy critique of some basic tenets of scholastic-
Aristotelian philosophy and dialectic. What connects all
these contributions is his central idea that language lies at
the basis of our intellectual endeavors. Rejecting the scho-
lastic, scientiﬁc approach toward language, he argued that
the study of language – from the meaning of singular words
to the analysis of extended forms of argumentation – should
be thoroughly based on a close empirical study of language.
For Valla it was important that words andarguments should
not be taken out of context, for this invariably brings
with it a change in meaning, and consequently gives rise
to philosophical problems where none existed. He
insisted that we should follow the linguistic custom of
the ancients rather than
construct abstract theories
about language and argumentation in general. But he
was no slavish follower of one particular brand of clas-
sical Latin, for example, Ciceronian Latin, and often
treated classical Latin as a common language in opposi-
tion to the technical vocabulary of the scholastics.
Life
Lorenzo Valla (1406–1457) did not have an easy life.
Equipped with a sharp and polemical mind, an even
sharper pen, and a sense of self-importance verging on
the pathological, he made many enemies not only among
702 L
Lombard, Peter

his scholastic contemporaries but also among his human-
ist colleagues. Born in Rome in a family with ties to the
papal curia, Valla hoped to succeed his uncle as papal
secretary, but he had already aroused the anger of some
major humanists at the court. In 1431, he moved to Pavia
where he taught rhetoric and wrote the ﬁrst version of his
controversial dialogue on pleasure. He also started to work
on his attack on scholastic philosophy and on his hand-
book of the Latin language. After having attacked the
jurists for their mediocre learning and lack of the linguistic
skills necessary to study law, he had to ﬂee Pavia. He then
worked in the court of King Alfonso of Aragon who was
campaigning against Pope Eugenius IV. As court human-
ist, Valla wrote a series of anticlerical treatises, the most
famous of which was On the Donation of Constantine, in
which he exposed that document to be a forgery, thereby
exploding one of the pillars of the papal claims to worldly
power. In 1447, Valla returned to Rome to work at the
Papal curia, ﬁrst as apostolic scriptor and later as a papal
secretary. He taught rhetoric and translated Thucydides
and Herodotus. His last years were marred by further
unedifying polemics with other humanists. He died in
1457 and was buried in the Lateran, somewhat surpris-
ingly for a man who had spent so much time ﬁghting the
clerical establishment.
Valla’s Thought: Some Basic Convictions
Valla’s thought is shaped by the following basic convic-
tions; most of them are typical for a humanist but Valla
was much more conscious about them. They shaped his
critical review of scholastic-Aristotelian philosophy.
1. Valla’s world is the world of things we see and experi-
ence. It is pretty much a world of things with their
qualities that do or undergo things. In order to explain
or analyze this common sense picture of the world we
do not need theoretical constructs, metaphysical
notions, elaborate theories, or technical vocabulary.
2. This world – including human beings with their men-
tal and spiritual inner life – naturally ﬁnds expression
in language. But language is not just a piece of garment
or a neutral medium that leaves the contents of what is
being said unaffected. Language shapes the way we
think about the world and how we categorize it. Who-
ever does not understand the workings of language
falls prey to muddled thinking.
3. For a humanist such as Valla, this language could only
be the Latin as used in Antiquity, especially that of the
great authors. Valla was not wedded to one particular
brand of classical Latin – for example, Ciceronian
Latin – but considered postclassical developments to
be detrimental to a common sense expression and
explanation of the world. He was not against the
introduction of new words as new things were being
discovered unknown to Antiquity (e.g., ‘‘bombarda’’),
but the language of the scholastics was something
wholly different.
4. Valla’s aversion against scholastic Latin was thus not
solely aesthetic. The study of language as pursued by
the scholastics and speculative grammarians was mis-
guided in a fundamental way. Of course, the scholas-
tics had a wholly different program of study: they
wanted to lay bare the logical forms inherent in lan-
guage, being interested, for example, in the properties
of terms and how terms were related to things in the
world. They tried to formalize patterns of reasoning in
order to establish truth conditions and rules of infer-
ence. But they had to do this in Latin, even though
in a particular brand that was only vaguely related
to its classical form. Their Latin was not only a
metalanguage, a technical device, but was also used
as an object-language, as an object of study. According
to the humanists, the scholastics imposed artiﬁcial
rules on Latin rather than examined the linguistic
practice of the great Latin writers in order to deter-
mine the meaning of terms and rules of grammar and
syntax. In this, they often erred in their judgments and
opinions. They analyzed, for example, the behavior
of words such as ‘‘all,’’ ‘‘some,’’ ‘‘not,’’ ‘‘possible,’’ and
‘‘necessary’’ without ﬁrst making a proper study of
how these words were actually used by Latin authors.
Indeed, it was not simply a matter of making a mistake
here or there. The scholastic language fundamentally
distorted our view of reality, and confounded people.
5. Moreover, it had confounded people in a very essential
way. According to Valla, the scholastics tried to explain
Christian dogma’s by superimposing their theories
and technical vocabulary on religious faith. Scholastic
terminology had functioned as a kind of Trojan horse,
bringing within the citadel of Christian faith pagan
elements that had spoiled, deﬁled, and needlessly
complicated its purity. As part of Valla’s program to
return to the sources of Christianity he inaugurated
a program of study of the New Testament and patristic
sources that had a great impact on biblical studies by
later humanists. The explication of Christian faith
had to appeal to the hearts of men. It had to turn to
rhetoric and grammar rather than to logic and
metaphysics.
6. Closely related to the previous point was Valla’s cri-
tique of what he saw as the stiﬂing atmosphere of the
scholastic establishment. The scholastics recognized
Lorenzo Valla L
703
L

only one master whom they followed not only in
philosophy but also in theology. Valla attacked this
ipse dixit attitude: if Aristotle has said so, it is true.
This is a gross distortion of scholastic practices, but it
is of course true that Aristotle was often regarded as
‘‘the master who knows.’’ Safeguarding his authority
was a major task of scholastic exegesis. Valla however
held that the true philosopher does not follow any one
master. The true philosopher does not belong to a sect
or a school but sees it as his task to critically examine
even the greatest authorities. That is why in Antiquity,
Pythagoras modestly claimed not to be a wise man but
a lover of wisdom. What the scholastics had forgotten
was that there were many alternatives in Antiquity to
‘‘The Philosopher,’’ many sects and many other types
of philosophers.
These basic convictions found expression in many of
Valla’s works. In what follows, his Repastinatio dialectice
et philosophie will be singled out because it is widely
considered to be the most philosophical of his works.
But his other works too, such as his advanced handbook
of Latin, his dialogue on the highest good, and his critical
work on the New Testament, proceed from the same
convictions. Obviously, the notion of ‘‘philosophy’’ in
a humanist thinker such as Valla should be taken in
a wide, ﬂexible sense.
The Critique of Aristotelian-Scholastic
Thought
In his Repastinatio, Valla tries to shaken the foundations of
the Aristotelian ediﬁce. The term ‘‘repastinatio’’ not only
means ‘‘re-ploughing’’ or ‘‘re-tilling’’ but also ‘‘cutting
back’’ and ‘‘weeding out.’’ Valla wants to weed out all
that he thinks is barren and infertile and to recultivate
the ground by sprinkling it with the fertile waters of
rhetoric and grammar. The term repastinatio is therefore
an indication that Valla considers his program one of
reform rather than one of destruction in spite of his
often aggressive and polemical tone. The ten categories
of Aristotle, for instance, are reduced to three (substance,
quality, and action) rather than abolished entirely. At the
back of his mind was the grammatical triad: noun, adjec-
tive, and verb, even though Valla realized that there was no
simple one-to-one correspondence between nouns and
substances or between verbs and actions. (A verb, for
example, can also signify a quality.) From a grammatical
point of view, words like ‘‘father,’’ ‘‘tall,’’ ‘‘at home,’’ and
‘‘grey-haired’’ all describe a quality of someone: hence,
there is no need to keep separate categories for place,
time, relation, etc. Valla went on to apply his analysis of
things in terms of substances qualiﬁed by qualities and
actions to the soul and God. The result of his reduction of
the ten Aristotelian categories to his triad is a very lean
ontology that has reminded scholars of William of
Ockham’s nominalism. But while Ockham wants to keep
the categories as long as we realize that they categorize
terms rather than things, Valla wants to reduce them to
substance, quality, and action because only this triad
points to really existing aspects of things. Valla’s grammat-
ical analysis has hardly anything in common with
Ockham’s terminist-logical approach. On a similar note,
Valla reduces the six transcendental terms – ‘‘being,’’
‘‘thing,’’ ‘‘something,’’ ‘‘one,’’ ‘‘true,’’ and ‘‘good’’ – to
‘‘thing’’ (Latin res).
Another well-known example of his grammatical
approach is his rejection of scholastic terms such as
‘‘entity’’ (entitas), ‘‘this-hood’’ (hecceitas), and ‘‘quidity’’
(quidditas) because they do not conform to the rules of
word formation, rules that can be gleaned from a detailed
study of classical texts. Related to this analysis is Valla’s
repudiation of what he presents as the scholastic view of
the distinction between abstract and concrete terms, that
is, the view that abstract terms (‘‘whiteness,’’ ‘‘father-
hood’’) always refer to quality only, while concrete terms
(‘‘white,’’ ‘‘father’’) refer to substance and quality. In
a careful discussion of this distinction, taking into account
the grammatical categories of case, number, and gender,
Valla rejects the ontological commitments, which such
a view seems to imply, and shows, on the basis of a host
of examples drawn from classical Latin usage, that the
abstract term often has the same meaning as its concrete
counterpart (useful/utility, true/truth, honest/honesty). In
other words, there is no need to posit abstract entities as
referents of these terms; they refer to the concrete thing
itself, that is, to the substance, its quality, or action (or
a combination of these three components into which
a thing can be analyzed). Hence, one of his main concerns
throughout the ﬁrst book is to determine to which cate-
gory a word refers.
Valla further criticizes the Tree of Porphyry for putting
not thing on top but substance, a notion that is barely
intelligible: bare substance does not exist as a thing is
always already a qualiﬁed substance. Moreover, it is difﬁ-
cult to place a human being, which consists of soul and
body, in a Tree that divides substance into something
corporeal and spiritual. In the rest of Book I of the
Repastinatio, Valla criticizes distinctions such as matter
and form and potency and act, using as weapons gram-
matical analysis and common sense.
In a long chapter in the same book, Valla takes up
themes he had developed in an earlier work, On Pleasure
704 L
Lorenzo Valla

(c. 1431). This was a dialogue between three interlocutors,
a ‘‘Stoic,’’ an ‘‘Epicurean,’’ and a ‘‘Christian.’’ The result of
this confrontation between pagan and Christian moral
thought is a combination of Pauline ﬁdeism and Epicu-
rean hedonism, in which the Christian concepts of
charity and beatitude are identiﬁed with hedonist plea-
sure, and the philosopher’s concept of virtue is rejected. In
taking ‘‘Epicureanism’’ (used in a rhetorical rather than
a historical sense) as a stepping stone for the development
of a Christian morality based on the concept of pleasure,
Valla repudiated the traditional synthesis between Stoi-
cism and Christianity, popular among scholastics and
humanists alike. He found the Stoic notion of virtue as
something to be aimed for its own sake abstract and
unrealistic. He also criticized in a lengthy passage the
Aristotelian notion of virtue as a mean between two
vices as unduly dogmatic and inreﬂexible. A similar atti-
tude informs his critique of Aristotelian natural philoso-
phy. While his interests are clearly not those of a natural
philosopher, he insists on common observation and expe-
rience as criteria for testing ideas and hypotheses. Hence,
many of Aristotle’s contentions, so Valla argues, are not
true to the facts. In arguing, for instance, for the existence
of a ﬁery sphere below the moon, Aristotle had claimed
that leaden missiles shot out by force melt in the air. Valla
rejects this claim by appealing to common experience: we
never see balls – whether leaden, iron, or stone shot out of
a sling or cannon – heat up in the air. A similar argument
was used later by Galileo.
The attack on Aristotelian-scholastic metaphysics,
natural and moral philosophy is often couched in a
highly polemical tone, but it carries a serious message.
Valla is in effect sounding a serious warning against
abstraction and theory: philosophers purport to analyze
the world, but as soon as they start philosophizing they
often leave that world far behind and play a game of their
own making, with their own rules. This conviction recurs
in books II and III of the Repastinatio when Valla turns to
dialectics. This is the more constructive part of Valla’s
attempt to reform what he considers to be the scholastic-
Aristotelian paradigm. In these books he discusses prop-
ositions and their indicators of quality and quantity
(‘‘every,’’ ‘‘any,’’ ‘‘not,’’ ‘‘no one,’’ etc.), the square of con-
traries, proof and argument, and various forms of argu-
mentation. His approach is oratorical rather than logical.
What counts is whether an argumentation works, which
means whether it convinces one’s adversary or public.
Formal validity is only one way of looking at argumenta-
tion, and a rather narrow way of looking at that. Rejecting
the formal approach of the scholastics, Valla wants to base
dialectic on real language by studying arguments in
context, and what counts as context is much broader than
the single sentence structure of the scholastic example. He
thus rhetoricizes dialectic by stating that it is no more than
a species of conﬁrmation and refutation, and as such merely
a part of one of the ﬁve parts of rhetoric: invention. Com-
pared to rhetoric, dialectic is said to be an easy subject,
which requires not much time to master, since it considers
and uses the syllogism only in abstracto; its sole aim is to
teach. The rhetorician, on the other hand, uses not only
syllogisms, but also enthymeme (incomplete syllogism),
epicheireme (a kind of extended reasoning), and example.
The orator has to clothe everything in persuasive arguments,
since his task is not only to teach but also to please and to
move. This leads Valla to downplay the importance of the
Aristotelian syllogism and to consider forms of argumenta-
tion that are not easily pressed into its straightjacket. Among
these are captious forms of reasoning such as dilemma,
paradox, and sorites (‘‘heap argument’’). Valla offers a highly
interesting analysis of these types of arguments, which
betrays his common sense approach and close attention to
the common meaning of words and their context.
He regards the syllogism as an artiﬁcial type of reason-
ing, unﬁt to be employed by orators as it is does not reﬂect
the natural way of speaking and arguing. What is for exam-
ple the use of concluding that Socrates is an animal if one
has already stated that every man is an animal and that
Socrates is a man, thus that he is one of them? Valla rejects
the additional moods of the ﬁrst ﬁgure of the syllogism as
wholly artiﬁcial. For the same reason the third ﬁgure should
be utterly rejected. The ﬁrst and second ﬁgure, however, can
be accepted within limits, but Valla refuses to grant the ﬁrst
ﬁgure priority as Aristotle had done. Valla’s oratorical point
of view leads him to reject the logical rules for transposing
premises and converting terms as useless. Logicians used
these rules in order to prove the validity of moods. When
a syllogism can be reduced to one of the four of the ﬁrst
ﬁgure the syllogism is valid. But Valla thinks this technique
absurd as it legitimizes syllogistic forms that lack any prac-
tical utility. Moreover, the traditional account unjustly
ignores other syllogistic forms that might be accepted as
valid, for example: God is in every place; Tartarus is a place;
therefore God is in Tartarus. Here the ‘‘all’’ or ‘‘every’’sign is
added to the predicate in the major proposition. An all
singular syllogism can also be valid: Homer is the greatest
of poets; this is the greatest of poets; therefore this man is
Homer. Valla gives many other examples of such deviant
schemes, thus deliberately ignoring the criteria employed
by Aristotle and his commentators. In his view, they unnec-
essarily restrict the number of possible valid ﬁgures.
Valla’s insistence on studying and assessing arguments
in terms of persuasion and usefulness leads him to criticize
Lorenzo Valla L
705
L

not only the syllogism but also other less formal modes of
argumentation. These arguments usually involve interro-
gation, leading to an unexpected or unwanted conclusion,
or to an aporetic situation. Valla was one of the ﬁrst to
study and analyze types of arguments such as the heap
argument (sorites) and dilemma. The heap argument is
supposed to induce doubts about the possibility of deter-
mining precise limits especially to quantities. If I subtract
one grain from a heap, is it still a heap? Of course. What if
I subtract two grains? And so forth, until the heap consists
of just one grain, which of course is an unacceptable
conclusion. It seems impossible to determine the moment
when the heap ceases to be a heap, and any determination
of such a moment seems to be an ad hoc decision, for the
difference between heap and no-longer-a-heap cannot be
caused by the subtraction of just one single grain. Valla
discusses a number of similar cases. He recognizes the
fallacious nature of this sort of arguments, even though
he does not clearly state what the solution would be or
what a respondent should answer during such an
interrogation.
Another type of argument is dilemma. Dilemmatic
arguments had been widely studied in Antiquity. The
basic structure is a disjunction of propositions, usually in
the form of a double question in an interrogation, which
sets a trap for the respondent, since whichever horn of
the dilemma he chooses he seems to be caught up in
a contradiction and will loose the debate (‘‘If he is modest,
why should you accuse him who is a good man? If he is bad,
why should you accuse him who is unconcerned by such
a charge?’’). It was also recognized that the respondent
could often counter the dilemma by duplicating the original
argument and ‘‘turn it back’’ (convertere) to the interroga-
tor, using it as a kind of boomerang (‘‘if he is modest, you
should accuse him because he will be concerned of such
a charge; if he is bad, you should also accuse him because he
is not a good man’’). Alternatively, he could escape the
dilemma by questioning the disjunction and showing that
there is a third possibility. There were many variations of
this simple scheme. Based on Cicero, Quintilian, the Greek
text of Aristotle’s Rhetoric, Aulus Gellius and George of
Trebizond’s Rhetoric (c. 1433), Valla analyzes a series of
such dilemma’s and the maneuver to counter a dilemma
by converting it, called antistrephon in Greek and conversio
in Latin. In all these cases he thinks, for various reasons, that
the conversion is not a rebuttal at all but at best a correction
of the initial argument (but a correction is not a refutation),
at worst a simple repetition or illegitimate shift of that
initial position. Valla’s reasonable suggestion then is that it
was a product of the schools of rhetoricians, when the study
of arguments could easily lead to an examination of their
structure and strength without taking into account their
wider context and the normal meaning of words. It had no
real place in the oratorical practice.
Philosophical Relevance
Valla’s attempt to transform or reform the scholastic study
of language and argumentation, and indeed an entire mode
of doing philosophy, will likely be met with hostility by the
historian of medieval philosophy who is dedicated to the
scholastic enterprise and argumentative rigor and concep-
tual analysis. It is not difﬁcult to point to howlers in Valla’s
argumentation, to superﬁcial and unfair criticisms, to straw
men types of arguments. For the logician, for example, who
deﬁnes the rules of the game ﬁrst and then – so to speak –
starts to play, it is unfair or illegitimate to ignore the rules
while playing (one is then no longer playing the same game
as one’s opponent) or change the rules while playing and
then accuses the others of cheating. This is what Valla often
seems to do. He takes an Aristotelian doctrine in a way it
was not designed for, for example, the syllogism, hypothet-
ical syllogism, modal propositions, and the square of con-
traries. In all these cases we can see Valla starting, as it were,
from the inside of the Aristotelian paradigm, from some
basic assumptions and ideas of his opponents, in order to
refute them by using a kind of reductio ad absurdum or
submitting them to his own criteria that are external to the
opponents’ paradigm. It makes his critique often seem
unfair and inconsistent but such an interpretation only
tells half of the story. It would miss a fundamental point,
namely that in order to criticize a piece of established
Aristotelian doctrine, Valla has to move in and out of the
Aristotelian paradigm, so to speak. This moving inside and
outside the Aristotelian paradigm can also explain (and
perhaps excuse) Valla’s inconsistency, for it is an inconsis-
tency that is closely tied to his tactics and agenda. Valla did
not want to be consistent if this notion means only to
comply with the rules of the scholastics, which in his view
amounted to rigorously deﬁning one’s terms and pressing
these into the straightjacket of a syllogistic argument no
matter what common sense and linguistic custom teach us.
Behind this inconsistency thus lies a consistent program
of replacing philosophical speculation and theorizing by
an approach based on common linguistic practice and
common sense. Its historical importance in the develop-
ment of humanism is beyond doubt. But arguably it has
also philosophical relevance. For throughout the history of
philosophy a cautionary warning can be heard against
abstraction, speculation, and formalization. One need not
endorse this cautionary note in order to see that philosophy
thrives on the creative tension between these two basic
views on philosophical analysis – a tension between, on
706 L
Lorenzo Valla

the one hand, abstraction and speculation and, on the other
hand, a salubrious warning that the object of philosophical
analysis should not be lost from sight.
See also: ▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac,
Arabic, and Hebrew Traditions ▶Categories ▶Syllogism,
Theories of
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Valla Lorenzo. Repastinatio dialectice et philosophie, ed. Zippel G.
Antenore, Padua
Valla Lorenzo (1962; 1540). Elegantiae linguae Latinae. Opera omnia,
2 vols, ed. Valla L. Bottega d’Erasmo, Turin, vol 1, pp 1–235
Valla Lorenzo (1977) De voluptate, ed. and trans. Hieatt AK, Lorch M.
Abaris Books, New York
Valla Lorenzo (2007) On the donation of Constantine, trans. Bowersock
GW. Harvard University Press, Cambridge
Valla Lorenzo (2011) Dialectical disputations, ed. and trans. Copenhaver
P, Nauta L. Harvard University Press, Cambridge
Secondary Sources
Camporeale S (1972) Lorenzo Valla: Umanesimo e teologia. Nella sede
dell’Istituto, Florence
Copenhaver B, Schmitt CB (1992) Renaissance philosophy. Oxford Uni-
versity Press, Oxford
Fois M (1969) Il pensiero cristiano di Lorenzo Valla nel quadro storico-
culturale
del
suo
ambiente.
Libreria
Editrice
dell’Universita
Gregoriana, Rome
Laffranchi M (1999) Dialettica e ﬁlosoﬁa in Lorenzo Valla. Vita e Pensiero,
Milan
Mack P (1993) Renaissance argument: Valla and Agricola in the traditions
of rhetoric and dialectic. Brill, Leiden
Monfasani J (1989) Was Lorenzo Valla an ordinary language philosopher?
J Hist Philos 50:309–323
Monfasani J (1990) Lorenzo Valla and Rudolph Agricola. J Hist Philos
28:181–200
Nauta L (2003a) William of Ockham and Lorenzo Valla: false
friends. Semantics and ontological reduction. Renaiss Quart
56:613–651
Nauta L (2003b) Lorenzo Valla’s critique of Aristotelian psychology.
Vivarium 41:120–143
Nauta L (2006) Lorenzo Valla and Quattrocento scepticism. Vivarium
44:375–395
Nauta L (2007) Lorenzo Valla and the rise of humanist dialectic. In:
Hankins J (ed) The Cambridge companion to renaissance philoso-
phy. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 193–210
Nauta L (2009) In defense of common sense. Lorenzo Valla’s humanist
critique
of
scholastic
philosophy.
Harvard
University
Press,
Cambridge
Vasoli C (1968) La dialettica e la retorica dell’Umanesimo. Invenzione
e metodo nella cultura del XVe XVI secolo. Feltrinelli, Milan
Luther, Martin, Political Thought
▶Martin Luther, Political Thought
Luther, Martin, Political Thought L
707
L


