I
Ibn ʿArabı¯, Abu¯ Bakr Muh:ammad
Muh:yiddı¯n
RAFAEL RAMO´ N GUERRERO
Facultad de Filosoﬁa
Universidad Complutense de Madrid
Madrid
Spain
Abstract
Ibn ‘Arabı¯ belongs to a kind of mysticism or Suﬁsm that
can be considered esoteric: he seeks mystical experiences
and is strongly inﬂuenced by Neoplatonism. He claimed
that the experiential and intuitive knowledge he possessed
came directly from God. The use of philosophical doc-
trines and terminology makes his work of great interest to
philosophers. Among his doctrines, the most important
are the transcendental unicity of being and the perfect
man, who plays a central role in creation.
Born in Murcia (Spain) in 1165, Abu¯ Bakr Muh:ammad
ibn ‘Arabı¯ is also known by his various epithets: ‘‘The
Master of Masters,’’ ‘‘Sultan of the Gnostics,’’ and ‘‘Reviver
of Religion.’’ He lived in Seville, where he received his
education and was inﬂuenced by two great women mys-
tics. In Cordoba, he met Ibn Rushd, an encounter that
represents the meeting of two great ﬁgures in Islam that
personiﬁed different paths to the Truth: the Gnosis and
reason. He traveled throughout North Africa and the Near
East: Cairo, Mecca, Konya, Baghdad, Aleppo, and Damas-
cus, where he died in 1240. He wrote about 350 works,
which range from brief treatises to his great book The
Meccan Illuminations, containing 560 chapters dealing
with different sacred sciences and his own spiritual expe-
riences. Another of his most widely read works is The
Bezels of Wisdom, in which, over 26 chapters, he expounds
the fundamental doctrines of Islamic esoterism. The Inter-
preter of Desires is also famous, a poetic text centered on
love and desire. All of his work is difﬁcult to read and hard
to understand, as it is written in his own style of language
using very technical vocabulary, based on that used in the
earliest Suﬁtexts. The reader must learn not only the exact
meaning of his words but also the related nuances and
images. This is a complex symbolic language that requires
deciphering.
His constant evocation of the meeting with the proph-
ets, his continual afﬁrmation that he is conversing with the
saints of the past, his claim to a special divine inspiration
through an angel or the prophet Muh:ammad, and his
incessant recourse to the so-called evidence for the invis-
ible earned him charges of unorthodoxy and, even, of
being a satanic spirit. Seen as a pantheist by some, others
have emphasized the eminently spiritual character of his
thought. Through him, Islamic esoterism provided the
only doctrines that could guarantee the survival of the
spiritual tradition among those who ran the risk of going
astray due to incorrect reasoning.
He has been considered as a ‘‘philosopher’’ like any
other, precisely because he formulated a complete meta-
physical and cosmological, psychological and anthropo-
logical doctrine, which in principle seems to signal a break
with the Suﬁtradition existing up until that point. How-
ever, he adopted a clear position against philosophy of
Greek origin and even stated that the science of the phi-
losophers is totally vain. He rejected reﬂection because it
causes confusion and lack of truthfulness. He also
maintained that reﬂection is a veil, debated by some, but
that is not negated by any of those who follow the Path;
only those who practice speculative reﬂection and reason-
ing by induction claim otherwise. It is very rare that
philosophers experience spiritual states; if and when
these do occur, they are similar to the introspection and
contemplation of the mystics. The only true philosopher,
the one worthy of the name ‘‘wise,’’ a term, which for him
is synonymous with Gnostic, is the one who seeks to
perfect his knowledge through contemplation and spiri-
tual experience. The rest, who use only their intellects, will
never even perceive more than a tiny part of the truth. The
truth has two aspects, the manifest and the concealed.
There is a truth that is reached by following a new path;
not that of human reason, but that of the heart, the true
organ of mystical perception.
Ibn ʿArabı¯ expounded the doctrine of Being and its
manifestations more gnostically than philosophically in
Henrik Lagerlund (ed.), Encyclopedia of Medieval Philosophy, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-9729-4,
# Springer Science+Business Media B.V., 2011

the usual sense of the term. He talked about Divine
Essence, the Names and Qualities, theophany, and other
issues of this kind, but he did not use the language of the
Islamic philosophers. His metaphysics transcends ontol-
ogy: he starts at the Beginning, which is above Being, of
which Being is the ﬁrst ‘‘decision.’’ His doctrine of neces-
sity included an exposition of the meaning of the term
‘‘existence’’ understood as Being, although he approached
the problem from a different angle with respect to that of
the philosophers. He was the ﬁrst to formulate the doc-
trine of the unicity of existence or transcendental unicity
of being. This means that as God is totally transcendent in
relation to the universe, then the universe is not totally
separate from Him. Reality cannot be radically different
from Absolute Reality; if this was so, it would imply the
association of other beings with God, meaning polytheism
and the negation of divine unity. The Essence of God
forms a unicity that spans complementary and opposite
terms. He is the center in which all oppositions meet, and
it transcends all the contradictions involved in multiplic-
ity. In Him, there is a kind of ‘‘coincidence of opposites,’’
which cannot be reduced to the categories of reason. God
is at once exterior and interior, One and multiple, ﬁrst and
last, Creator and creature, eternal and temporary, neces-
sary and contingent, lover and beloved, intelligent and
intelligible. All of these conﬂicting divine attributes form
a single reality. This thesis has led some to view it as
pantheistic. However, Ibn ‘Arabı¯ does not maintain that
God should be known in His essential reality, but only
through his divine names, which are reﬂected in creation,
but not included in it. He therefore denies that the divine
essence can be assimilated to the essence of creation and
that the divine transcendence is preserved in this way.
The perfect man, the reason for the world’s existence, is
the full image of divine reality and contains within him all
the possibilities of the universe: he is a microcosm, and, on
knowing himself, he knows God. This man is the prototype
of creation, because human perfection is linked to the
divine image. He is a being which does not need adornment
or special characteristics to be honored and respected,
because he is God’s representative on earth. No other iden-
tity is needed for men to consider each other as brothers.
One loves all creatures because one loves God. If He is the
creator, everything created by him is worthy of love.
The human soul is part of the universal soul,
represented as matter, and residing in the human body.
Understanding the unity of the soul and body is only
possible through mysticism, which is the path created by
God for humans to approach Him. For this reason, the
mystic’s purpose is to unite with the divine, an act, which is
the result of the love that divine beauty stirs within humans.
This union does not imply an end or annihilation of exis-
tence, rather an understanding of human existence as a ray
of divine Being not possessed by other things. Most of those
who have experienced the divine pressure maintained that
the end of existence was a precondition for attaining knowl-
edge of God, which is incorrect. Knowledge of God does not
presuppose the end of existence, because things do not exist
properly speaking, and that which does not exist cannot
cease to exist: an end of existence implies a defense of
existence, which equals polytheism. So if one knows that
one lacks existence and end, one knows God; if one does not
know this, one cannot know Him. This state of union is the
supreme goal of the Gnostic or Suﬁ, the result of spiritual
practice culminating in prayer from the heart.
Ibn ‘Arabı¯’s inﬂuence on Islamic spirituality has been
great, reaching many Suﬁbrotherhoods. Thanks to him,
there was a reconciliation between Suﬁsm and the doctrine
of Imami Shı¯ʿism, which was against Suﬁpractice because
of the conviction that Suﬁsm usurped the privilege of
union with God and the knowledge of divine secrets,
privileges that were reserved for the Imam. However, his
inﬂuence in the European Latin West was negligible.
See also: ▶Being ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad
al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) ▶Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯ Philosophical Tradition
▶Philosophy, Arabic
Bibliography
Primary Sources
AfﬁﬁAbu¯ l-‘Ala¯ (ed) (1946) Fus:u¯s: al-h:ikam. Dar al-Kitab al-Arabi, Beirut.
Cairo, Austin Ralph WJ trans (1980) The bezels of wisdom. Paulist
Press, New York
Austin Ralph WJ (trans) (1971) Suﬁs of Andalucı´a: the Ruh: al-quds and
al-Durrat al-fa¯khirah. Beshara, London
al-Futu¯h:at
al-makkiyya
(1911)
Cairo;
partial
trans.
Chodkiewicz
Michel et al (1988) Les Illuminations de la Mecque: the Meccan
illuminations. Textes choisis/Selected texts. Sindbad, Paris
Nicholson Reynold A (ed and trans) (1911) The Tarjuma¯n al-ashwa¯q:
a collection of mystical odes of Muh:y’ddin ibn al-‘Arabı¯, Royal
Asiatic Society, London
Secondary Sources
Addas C (1989) Ibn ‘Arabi ou La queˆte du Soufre Rouge. Gallimard, Paris
AfﬁﬁAE (1938) The mystical philosophy of Muhyid Din-Ibnul Arabi.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Chittick WC (1989) The Suﬁpath of knowledge: Ibn al-‘Arabi’s meta-
physics of imagination. State University of New York Press, Albany
Chittick WC (1996) Ibn ‘Arabi. In: Nasr SH, Leaman O (eds) History of
Islamic philosophy. Routledge, London, chap. 30, pp 497–509
Chodkiewicz M (1992) Un oce´an sans rivage: Ibn al-‘Arabi’ le livre et la loi.
Seuil, Paris
Corbin H (1958) L’Imagination cre´atrice dans le souﬁsme d’Ibn ʿArabıˆ.
Flammarion, Paris
Hirstenstein S (1999) The unlimited merciﬁer: the spiritual life and
thought of Ibn ‘Arabıˆ. Anqa Publishers/White Cloud Press, Oxford
482 I
Ibn ʿArabı¯, Abu¯ Bakr Muh:ammad Muh:yiddı¯n

Ibn Ba¯jja, Abu¯ Bakr ibn al-Sa¯ʾig˙
(Avempace)
MARC GEOFFROY
Laboratoire d’E´tudes sur les Monothe´ismes
Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque
Villejuif
France
Abstract
Ibn Ba¯jja was one of the main representatives of the falsafa
in the Muslim West between the eleventh and the twelfth
centuries. He was the precursor of Averroes, on whom he
had a decisive, if indirect inﬂuence. Known in the Latin
world under the name of Avempace, he wrote several
commentaries on Aristotelian writings of logic and natural
philosophy, although his knowledge of them does not rest
on a direct study of the works of Aristotle, but rather on
Graeco-Arabic abbreviations or comments by Alexander
of Aphrodisias, Themistius, Philoponus, etc. Toward the
end of his life he focused on ethics and political philoso-
phy: in the Regimen of the Solitary, he maintained that the
philosopher should isolate himself intellectually from the
corrupted community, in order to attain the ultimate
happiness of theoretical life; in another short writing,
The Conjunction of Intellect with Man, he maintained
that this ultimate happiness consists in the highest perfec-
tion of the human intellect.
Life
Abu¯ Bakr Muh:ammad ibn Yah:ya¯ ibn al-S˙a¯’ig˙ ibn Ba¯jja was
born in Zaragoza, in all likelihood from a family of crafts-
men; the most authoritative biographers place his birth
between 1077 and 1082. His teachers in philosophy are
unknown, but one can safely assume that his studies were
inﬂuenced by the intense philosophical activity that was
then conducted in the Jewish communities of Zaragoza.
Before 1109, when the Banu¯ Hu¯d dynasty ruling Zaragoza
was defeated by the Almoravids, it was reported by Ibn
al-Sı¯d al-Bat:alyu¯sı¯, with whom he was involved in
a dispute, that Ibn Ba¯jja was a young and extremely tal-
ented teacher of logic with a devoted group of disciples.
From 1110 to 1117 (?), he held the ofﬁce of vizier to the
new Almoravid governor of Zaragoza, Ibn Tafalwı¯t. Dur-
ing this period, he was sent as an ambassador to the former
ruler of Zaragoza deposed by the Almoravids. He was
there imprisoned as a traitor, and only narrowly escaped
execution. After the conquest of his native city by the
Christians in 1118, Ibn Ba¯jja lived in different cities in
southern Spain and North Africa, for example, Almeria,
Granada, Oran, and Fes. We know from one of his letters
that he was imprisoned a second time during this period.
He wrote several musical poems, and has therefore been
regarded as the inventor of a poetic genre that became
considerably widespread, namely the muwashshah:. He
traveled to Seville in 1135, where he revised the transcrip-
tion of his works made by his compatriot and disciple, ‘Alı¯
ibn al-Ima¯m, who became lieutenant of the city of Seville
and vizier to the Almoravid’s governor of Granada. This
very close friendship inspired Ibn Ba¯jja to dedicate several
of his later works to ‘Alı¯ ibn al-Ima¯m. After the latter’s
departure to Egypt, Ibn Ba¯jja intended to join him, but he
was assassinated in Fes in 1139, possibly poisoned by his
rival, the famous physician Ibn Zuhr (Avenzoar).
The Earlier Works
In a letter to his friend Abu¯ Ja‘far Yu¯suf ibn H˙ asda¯y,
studied by J. al-‘Alawı¯, Avempace describes his scientiﬁc
career. He ﬁrst studied mathematics, music, and astron-
omy. He then became interested in logic, and later, again
in the physical sciences. In the last period of his life, not yet
begun at the time of writing the letter, he wrote a series of
works, culminating with The Regimen of the Solitary
(Tadbı¯r al-mutawah:h:id), which had an enormous impact
on posterity. Most of the works from the ﬁrst period of his
life have not survived, but we do know that he wrote
a commentary on al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s The Major Book of Music.
We also know of a short writing on the relations between
the humors of the body, the strings of the lute, and the
melodies of the spheres. The letter to Ibn H˙ asda¯y alludes
to criticism of the astronomer al-Zarqalı¯ (Arzachel, d.
1087) about the calculation of the apogee of Mercury.
Other texts allude to research on the Conics of Apollonius
of Perga.
Later on, he focused on the study of logic, which was
studied in al-Andalus on the basis of the logical works by
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯. Several writings from this period of Ibn Ba¯jja’s
lifetime have been preserved: some notes on the Five
Chapters (al-Fus:ul al-khamsa) by al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (a small pro-
paedeutic treatise), as well as on the Farabian summary of
Porphyry’s Isagoge, and on the Farabian commentaries on
the Categories, De interpretatione, Prior Analytics, and
Posterior Analytics. Although these notes appear more
like a collection of glosses than as a full-ﬂedged treatise
on logic, elements of systematicity emerge, however,
highlighted by a series of successive divisions that deﬁne
the status of the various branches of logic with respect to
other philosophical disciplines. The ﬁrst of these is the
division, within the ﬁeld of language, between lafz˙ (mean-
ing) and ma‘na¯ (concept, ‘‘intention,’’ pl. ma‘a¯nı¯), which
Ibn Ba¯jja, Abu¯ Bakr ibn al-Sa¯ʾig˙ (Avempace) I
483
I

alone is the proper subject of logic. The ma‘a¯nı¯can in turn
be divided into singulars and universals, which allows the
setting apart of disciplines such as rhetoric and poetic –
which attribute a universal predicate to a singular subject –
from philosophy, dialectics, and sophistry, which, not-
withstanding the diversity of the nature of their premises,
predicate the universal of the universal. The latter is itself
either simple or compound, such as the deﬁnitions, which
consist of genera and differences. The science of deﬁni-
tions is thus an understanding of a compound universal,
while the science of simple universals is introduced by the
Categories (Maqu¯la¯t). To reassemble universals (or singu-
lars) into complex predications, and further into syllo-
gisms, gives rise to the various sciences, depending on the
status of the syllogisms used therein.
Just as with logic, most of Ibn Ba¯jja’s writings of
physics do not rest on a direct study of the works of
Aristotle, but rather on Graeco-Arabic abbreviations or
commentaries of Alexander of Aphrodisias, Themistius,
Philoponus, etc.; he uses paraphrases of the Physics and
the Meteorology as well as of the De generatione et
corruptione. The writings of Ibn Ba¯jja on the physical
sciences did become important sources for the early writ-
ings of Averroes and his Compendia of natural philosophy.
The commentary on the Physics presents some corrections
and moderated critiques of Aristotle’s dynamics. He for
example considers it necessary to posit a cause for unnat-
ural motion, in addition to the movement imparted by the
originator of the motion: this cause must be an immaterial
kinetic force inherent in the moved object. The theory of
falling bodies that Ibn Ba¯jja formulates is based on his
reading of the Arabic Philoponus, and allows for the
explanation of how a motion having a ﬁnite speed can
take place in an environment offering no resistance, as in
the case of the celestial bodies, thus leading the way to
a dynamic model applicable to both the sublunary and the
celestial world. These developments, endorsed by Averroes
in his Great Commentary on the Physics, might have
inﬂuenced John Buridan, whose model was the starting
point of Galileo’s discoveries.
Ibn Ba¯jja’s commentary on the De generatione et
corruptione follows roughly the order of the exposition of
Aristotle’s text, but some conceptual innovations are note-
worthy, for example, the fact that the commentary pivots
around the distinction – not explicitly mentioned by
Aristotle – between the generation of the four simple
bodies (kawn al-basa¯’it:) from each other, and the genera-
tion of composite bodies (kawn al-murakkaba¯t). This
distinction elicits the foundation of the hierarchy of nat-
ural beings (i.e., simple body, homeomer composites,
anhomeomer organs, animal, and human) which is the
foundation and guiding principle of Ibn Ba¯jja’s physics,
linking together the latter and the science of the soul.
Ibn Ba¯jja frequently cites the Arabic version of the
Nicomachean Ethics and a commentary on it by Porphyry
(in twelve instead of ten books, as in Aristotle’s original
work) that is mentioned in the Arabic sources. A small
epistle, possibly spurious, also undertakes to defend al-
Fa¯ra¯bı¯ against the accusation of having, in his own lost
commentary on Ethics, denied the possibility of the union
of humans with the separated Intellect. Ibn Ba¯jja also
composed
a commentary on
Pseudo-Aristotle’s
De
plantis. An important role is attributed to the Book of
Animals (Kita¯b al-H˙ ayawa¯n), the Arabic summary of the
three main zoological treatises of Aristotle, of which only
the De generatione animalium and the De partibus
animalium are commented upon in Ibn Ba¯jja’s own
Kita¯b al-H˙ ayawa¯n. Zoology is not a peripheral science of
lesser importance, but a higher part of physics, which
serves as an introduction to the science of the human
soul and intellect. It is particularly Aristotle’s account of
De gen. an. II, 3 (736a35-b15), on the successive appear-
ance in humans of the faculties imprinted in the living
soul, which for Ibn Ba¯jja provides a model for hierarchi-
cally arranging the natural forms realized on lower sub-
strates, that then organize themselves in a continuous way,
from the simple elementary forms to the forms of the
living beings and eventually to the intellect. Of particular
importance in the commentary on De animalibus is the
comparison between natural and artifactual forms, by
which Ibn Ba¯jja shows how the formative power (vis
formativa), which gives form to living beings, cumulates
the qualities of the artifactual forms – that depend upon
an intelligence extrinsic to the created object – and those
of the substantial and intrinsic natural form. The design of
the hierarchy of forms implemented in Ibn Ba¯jja’s Kita¯b
al-H˙ ayawa¯n also serves as a guide to his Book on the Soul
(unﬁnished), which, beginning from the cognition of the
forms of simple bodies, studies their composition in com-
plex bodies and the successive combinations that lead to
the existence of living beings with a soul. He borrows this
from the De anima by Alexander of Aphrodisias, rather
than from the work of Aristotle, to which Ibn Ba¯jja does
not refer directly.
The Works on Ethics, Politics, and Noetics
In addition to several short works, many of which were
published by J. al-‘Alawı¯ (Rasa¯’il falsaﬁyya li-Abı¯ Bakr ibn
Ba¯jja: see the Bibliography), three major texts (all edited
by M. Fakhry and more recently by Ch. Genequand: see
the Bibliography) can be placed in the last period of Ibn
Ba¯jja’s life. At this time, some interconnected ethical,
484 I
Ibn Ba¯jja, Abu¯ Bakr ibn al-Sa¯ʾig˙ (Avempace)

political, and intellectual concerns surpassed the study of
physics. The order of the composition of these works are
The Regimen of the Solitary (Tadbı¯r al-mutawah:h:id), The
Letter of Farewell (Risalat al-Wada¯‘), a spiritual guide for
his friend ‘Alı¯ ibn al-Ima¯m on his departure for Egypt, and
an epistle entitled Conjunction of the Intellect with Man
(Ittis:a¯l al-‘aql bi-l-insa¯n).
The Regimen of the Solitary is subdivided into two
parts, respectively devoted to human actions and to ‘‘spir-
itual forms.’’ This is preceded by a discussion of clearly
political import about the place of the philosopher in the
state. Ibn Ba¯jja uses the same analogy throughout the work
between the political governance or ‘‘regimen,’’ the per-
sonal governance, and ‘‘medicine,’’ corresponding to the
health of the political body, the health of the soul, and that
of the body. Just as there is only one perfect balance
between the humors of the body, subject to any number
of undetermined disorders, there can be only one model of
a perfect state, and many deviations from this standard.
The imperfection of the societies causes almost necessarily
the imperfections of its members, which are determined
by their environment, except for a small number of supe-
rior humans, who can acquire their perfection indepen-
dently of any society. The duty of these individuals, also in
the interest of the imperfect society they inhabit, is to
maintain their impermeability to the vicious standards
of the society, and to restrict their dealings with these
societies to the maximum, by taking advantage of
resources offered to them when necessary: something
which would not be the case, if the philosopher lived in
a virtuous society. It is in this way that he develops the
conditions of the perfection of philosophy, and possibly
the improvement of the state, since only the philosopher is
capable of reforming the vicious state and he is only able to
guard himself against the corruption by taking himself
away. Scholars differ on what this ‘‘aloneness’’ advocated
by Ibn Ba¯jja actually means, that is, strict individualism or
political activism.
The regimen followed by the philosopher is obviously
a spiritual one: Ibn Ba¯jja hence establishes a typology of
human actions related to the ‘‘spiritual forms’’ (s:uwar
ru¯h:a¯niyya), because all acts accomplished by a human
being are necessarily related to some form perceived by
the soul. The actions are sorted hierarchically according to
their relation to the body: to the hierarchy of acts corre-
sponds that of the spiritual forms. This notion encompasses
for Ibn Ba¯jja forms of individual beings that are produced
by sense perception and imagination, and are placed in the
pneuma surrounding the heart and located in the brain
(individual spiritual forms), abstract universal concepts
realized in the human intellect, and the extramental forms
that are incorporeal, intelligible, universal, and separated
(universal spiritual forms).
All human actions are accompanied by the apprehen-
sion of a form by a faculty. Hence ‘‘eating,’’ ‘‘drinking,’’ and
‘‘getting dressed’’ involve the existence of bodily forms. An
act of desire involves forms perceived and imagined, and
an act of thinking involves forms enhanced to the level of
intellect. Since acts are as good as the ‘‘spiritual forms’’
that accompany them, the noblest acts of a human being
are his thoughts, and they culminate in the apprehension
of an intelligible reality entirely separate from matter: such
an apprehension constitutes the ultimate happiness
(sa‘a¯da qus:wa¯) of a human being.
In The Conjunction of the Intellect with Man, Ibn Ba¯jja
undertakes to prove apodictically the possibility of such
a union of the human being with the separated Intellect.
Having stated that the intellect can be either potential
or actual, and that the forms imagined by the human
being – that are individual entities – constitute the
potential intellect of an individual human being, Ibn
Ba¯jja proceeds to claim that ‘‘intellect’’ means in fact
two things: the potentiality to become intelligible that
belongs to the various imagined forms, and the intelli-
gence that is the true essence of the human being. The
latter is a necessarily universal form; hence, it is separate,
and by the same token unique. As a consequence, the
human being who has reached union (ittis:a¯l) with this
separate form becomes necessarily ‘‘one.’’ The essence of
a human being is, however, distributed across a plurality
of individuals, in which the intellect, which is the essence
of the human being, spreads itself and particularizes itself,
giving rise to instantiations where the intelligible reality is
present in various degrees of particularity and materiality.
This is why the human souls conceive in themselves spir-
itual forms that are particular. The form of a given
extramental reality is individual, and it is as an individual
reality that is ﬁrst perceived, and then imagined. Thus, the
particularization concerns the intelligible forms of the
material beings received in the intellect: even though
they are not themselves material, they are nevertheless
related to the imagined individual forms of which they
are the intelligible counterparts. In the process of produc-
tion of the intelligible form out of the imagination of
a given material object, the thinking intellect does not
already coincide with the intelligible form. The intellec-
tion of a thing in an individual human intellect is distinct
from the intellection of the same thing in another indi-
vidual, because these two intelligible forms are related to
two imagined forms different from one another, located as
they are in the imaginative faculty of different human
individuals. However, the relative individuality of the
Ibn Ba¯jja, Abu¯ Bakr ibn al-Sa¯ʾig˙ (Avempace) I
485
I

intelligibles merges in the intellection of the intelligible
form, which is one for all humans, totally separate, and
counts as the foundation for the intelligibility of all things.
The actual perfection of the human being consists of this
ultimate act of intellection by which he reaches his true
essence.
See also: ▶Alexander of Aphrodisias and Arabic Aristote-
lianism
▶Aristotle,
Arabic
▶al-Bat:alyu¯sı¯,
Abu¯
Muh:ammad ibn al-Sı¯d ▶Ethics, Arabic ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯
Nas˙r ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d
(Averroes) ▶Ibn T˙ufayl, Abu¯ Bakr (Abubacer) ▶Philos-
ophy, Arabic
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Ası´n Palacios Miguel (1942) Tratado de Avempace sobre la unio´n del
intelecto con el hombre. Al-Andalus 7:1–47 (Spanish translation of
the Letter on the conjunction of the Intellect with Man)
Ası´n Palacios Miguel (1943) La ‘Carta de adio´s’ de Avempace. Al-Andalus
8:1–87 (Spanish translation of the Letter of Farwell)
Avempace (1995) Libro de la generacio´n y corrupcio´n, ed. and trans. into
Spanish: Puig Montada J. Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Cientı´ﬁcas, Madrid
Avempace (2002) Il Regime del solitario, intro. and trans. into Italian:
Campanini M, Illuminati A. Biblioteca Universale Rizzoli, Milan
Druart The´re`se-Anne (1980) Le traite´ d’Avempace sur les choses au
moyen desquelles on peut connaıˆtre l’intellect agent. Bull Philos
Me´die´v 22:73–77
Druart The´re`se-Anne (1981) La ﬁn humaine selon Avempace. Bull Philos
Me´die´v 23:59–64
Ibn Ba¯jja (1961) Ibn Bajjah’s ‘Ilm al-nafs (Book on the soul), trans. into
English: Ma´su¯mı¯ MS˙H˙ . Pakistan Historical Society, Karachi
Ibn Ba¯jja (1991) Opera Metaphysica/Rasa¯’il Ibn Ba¯jja al-ila¯hiyya. Philosoph-
ical texts and studies, 1. Beyrouth (2nd edn) (ed. of (a) Regimen of the
Solitary, (b) On the End of Man, (c) Cognitions of the Agent Intellect,
(d) Letter of Farewell, (e) The Conjunction of the Intellect with Man)
Ibn Ba¯jja (1991) Sharh: al-sama¯‘ al-t:abı¯‘ı¯ li-Aristu¯t:a¯lı¯s (Commentary on
the Physics of Aristotle). Beyrouth
Ibn Ba¯jja (1992) Kita¯b al-nafs li-Ibn Ba¯jja al-Andalusı¯ (The book on the
soul), ed. al-Ma‘s:u¯mı¯ MS˙H˙ . Da¯r S˙a¯dir, Beyrouth
Ibn Ba¯jja (1994) Ta ‘a¯lı¯q Ibn Ba¯jja ‘ala¯ Mant:iq al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (Commentary on
the logic of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯), ed. Ma¯jid F. Da¯r al-Naha¯r, Beyrouth
Ibn Ba¯jja (1999a) Kita¯b al-nafs li-Ibn Ba¯jja, ed. Ra¯shiq J; al-Qawl fı¯l-quwwa
al-na¯t:iqa li-bni Ba¯jja, ed. Alu¯za¯d M et al. In: Alozade M (ed) Les
Cahiers du Groupe de Recherche sur la Philosophie Islamique, II.
Publications de la faculte´ des Lettres et Sciences Humaines Dhar el
Mehraz, Fes (another edition of the Book on the Soul)
Ibn Ba¯jja (1999b) Sharh: al-Atha¯r (Commentary on the Meteorology). In:
Lettinck Paul (ed) Aristotle’s Meteorology and its reception in the
Arabic world. Leiden, pp 364–481
Ibn Ba¯jja (2002) Kita¯b al-h:ayawa¯n li-Abı¯ Bakr ibn Ba¯jja (Commentary on
De animalibus), ed. al-‘Imara¯tı¯ J. Casablanca
Ibn Ba¯jja (Avempace) (1997) El Re´gimen del solitario, trans. into Spanish:
Lomba J. Trotta, Madrid
Ibn Ba¯jja (Avempace) (2007) Libro Sobre el alma, trans. into Spanish:
Lomba J. Trotta, Madrid
Ibn Ba¯jja (Avempace) (2010) La conduite de l’isole´ et deux autres e´pıˆtres,
intro. and trans. into French Genequand Ch. Vrin, Paris (main
edition of The Governance of the Solitary, The Letter of Farewell
and the Conjunction of the Intellect with Man)
Ibn Ba¯jja (s. d.) Rasa¯’il falsaﬁyya li-Abı¯ Bakr ibn Ba¯jja. Nus:u¯s: falsaﬁyya
g˙ayr manshu¯ra. Philosophical letters of Avempace. Unpublished
philosophical texts, ed. al-‘Alawı¯ Jama¯l al-Dı¯n. Da¯r al-thaqa¯fa-Da¯r
al-nashr al-maghribiyya, Beirut/Casablanca
Lagarde`re Vincent (1981) L’e´pıˆtre d’Ibn Baˆjja sur la conjonction
de l’intellect avec l’esprit humain. Rev E´tudes Islam 49:175–196
Secondary Sources
Abbe`s M (2005) Gouvernement de soi et des autres chez Avempace. Stud
Islam 100/101:113–160
al-‘Alawı¯ J (1983) Mu’allafa¯t Ibn Ba¯jja (The Writings of Ibn
Ba¯jja).
Da¯r
al-thaqa¯fa/Da¯r
al-nashr
al-maghribiyya,
Beirut/
Casablanca
Alu¯za¯d M (1994) al-Qawl al-insı¯ ‘inda bni Ba¯jja/L’Humanus Avempace.
Da¯r al-ﬁkr, Casablanca
Ası´n Palacios M (1900) El ﬁlo´sofo zaragozano Avempace. Rev Arago´n
7:193–197, 234–281, 300–302, 338–350
Campanini M, Illuminati A (2002) Introduzione. In: Avempace. Il Regime
del solitario, intro. and trans. into Italian: Campanini M, Illuminati A.
BUR, Milan, pp 5–80
Dunlop DM (1955) Philosophical predecessors and contemporaries of
Ibn Ba¯jjah. Islam Q 2:100–116
Dunlop DM (1957) Remarks on the life and works of Ibn Ba¯jjah. In:
Togan ZV (ed) Proceedings of the 22nd congress of orientalists held
in Istanbul September 15th to 22nd, vol II: Communications. Brill,
Leiden, pp 188–196
Franco AB (2003) Avempace, projectile motion and impetus theory. J Hist
Ideas 64(4):521–546
Genequand Ch (2010) Introduction. In: Ibn Ba¯gˇgˇa (Avempace), La
conduite de l’isole´ et deux autres e´pıˆtres, intro. and trad. into French
Genequand Ch. Vrin, Paris, pp 1–87
Harvey S (1992) The place of the philosopher in the city according to Ibn
Ba¯jjah. In: Butterworth Ch (ed) Political aspects of Islamic philoso-
phy. Essays in honour of M. Mahdi. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pp 199–233
Leaman O (1980) Ibn Ba¯jjah on society and philosophy. Der Islam
57:187–211
Lomba J (1987) La Filosofı´a isla´mica en Zaragoza. Diputacio´n General de
Arago´n, Zaragoza, pp 193–239
Lomba J (1989) Avempace. Los Aragoneses, 2. Diputacio´n General de
Arago´n, Zaragoza
Lomba J (1997) Introduccio´n. In: Ibn Ba¯jja (Avempace) El Re´gimen del
solitario, trad. esp. Lomba J. Trotta: Madrid, pp 11–89
Ma´su¯mı¯ MS˙H˙ (1966) Avempace – the great philosopher of al-Andalus.
Islam Culture (Hyderabad): 36(2):35–53
Moody EA (1951) Galileo and Avempace. The dynamics of the leaning
tower experiment. J Hist Ideas 12:163–193, 375–422
Pines S (2000) La dynamique d’Ibn Ba¯jja. In: Stroumsa P (ed) The
collected works of Shlomo Pines, vol II. Magnes Brill, Jerusalem/
Leiden, pp 440–466
Rosenthal EIJ (1951) The place of politics in the philosophy of Ibn Bajja.
Islam Culture (Hyderabad) 25:187–211
Rosenthal EIJ (1962) Ibn Ba¯jja: individualist deviation. In: Rosenthal EIJ
(ed) Politic thought of medieval Islam, 2nd edn. Cambridge,
pp 158–174
Zainaty G (1979) La Morale d’Avempace. Paris
486 I
Ibn Ba¯jja, Abu¯ Bakr ibn al-Sa¯ʾig˙ (Avempace)

Ibn Ezra, Abraham
▶Abraham ibn Ezra
Ibn Farı¯g˙u¯n
HANS HINRICH BIESTERFELDT
Seminar fu¨r Orientalistik
Bochum University
Bochum
Germany
Abstract
Ibn Farı¯g˙u¯n, a little-known author of a conspectus of the
ﬁelds of knowledge, was a pupil of Abu¯ Zayd al-Balkhı¯
(d. 934) and dedicated his work to the local ruler of
a province in north-eastern Iran who died in 955. These
scanty data situate the author in the tradition of the
‘‘Eastern’’school of al-Kindı¯ to which belong Ibn Farı¯g˙u¯n’s
teacher al-Balkhı¯, al-Sarakhsı¯ (d. 899), and al-‘A¯mirı¯
(d. 992). Ibn Farı¯g˙u¯n’s ‘‘encyclopedia,’’ called Jawa¯miʿ al-
ʿulu¯m, appears to be a handbook for the ka¯tib, the state
secretary, meant to furnish him with the catchwords and
the internal structure of all kinds of theoretical disciplines
and professional skills. The ﬁelds of knowledge are, in the
order of their appearance, the following: Arabic grammar
(mainly parts of speech and morphology), various depart-
ments of state ofﬁcials, statecraft and warfare, Islamic
theology and religious duties, knowledge as such (ʿilm)
and its forms of transmission, and the occult sciences.
Almost all these subjects are presented in the peculiar
form of the so-called tashjı¯r, that is, ‘‘trees,’’ which resem-
ble the arbor porphyriana and aim at visualizing the rela-
tion between a given category, or general term, and its
various species, or aspects. The section on the parts of
philosophy (contained in the chapter on ʿilm) clearly
reﬂect the order developed by the Alexandrian commen-
tators on Aristotle’s works and mediated by al-Kindı¯’s
ideas,
to
be
traced
also
in
Ibn
Farı¯g˙u¯n’s
quasi-
identiﬁcation of the object of, and the logical method of
inquiry into, metaphysics and Islamic theology.
The three known facts about Ibn Farı¯g˙u¯n’s life and work
are that he was a student of the polyhistor Abu¯ Zayd
al-Balkhı¯ (d. 934) and that he is the author of
a conspectus of the ﬁelds of knowledge, called Jawa¯mi‘
al-‘ulu¯m, which he dedicated to the ruler of Chagha¯niya¯n
(a region north of the river Oxus), the Muh:ta¯jid Abu¯ ‘Alı¯
Ah:mad b. Muh:ammad b. al-Muz˙affar (d. 955). These
scanty data locate Ibn Farı¯g˙u¯n in the fertile tradition of
the ‘‘Eastern’’ pupils of al-Kindı¯, along with his teacher
Abu¯ Zayd, Ah:mad b. al-T˙ayyib al-Sarakhsı¯, and Abu¯
l-H˙ asan al-‘A¯mirı¯, whose common feature is an effort in
combining (a) Arabic-Islamic disciplines, (b) certain traits
of Iranian statecraft and ethics, and (c) the Hellenistic
philosophical and scientiﬁc tradition, not least its models
of the classiﬁcations of knowledge, initiated by Aristotle,
developed by his commentators, and reﬁned to an unprec-
edented degree by Islamic scholarship.
As for Ibn Farı¯g˙u¯n’s identity, there is no trace of him in
the rich Arabic bio-bibliographical literature; even his
given name which appears on the three known manu-
scripts of his Jawa¯mi‘ remains unclear. It has been
suggested that he was a scion of the A¯l-i Farı¯g˙u¯n, rulers
of the district of Ju¯zja¯n in northern Afghanistan and
tributaries of the Sa¯ma¯nids, and that he may be identical
with the anonymous author of the geographical work
H˙ udu¯d al-‘a¯lam, written in Persian. Real evidence, how-
ever, can only be gleaned from his unus liber itself, but then
this contains no explicit quotations from earlier authors,
nor is it quoted in later works. This is due, to some degree,
to its quite idiosyncratic arrangement, the so-called tashjı¯r,
‘‘arborization, ramiﬁcation’’: almost all the material, the
ﬁelds of knowledge, the various crafts and professional
functions, etc., is arranged in tree diagrams, the ‘‘trunk’’
representing the primary term, and the branches and
twigs, done in black or red ink, leading to secondary and
tertiary terms. Thus, we ﬁnd in the top right corner of
p. 144 of the facsimile edition (= p. 255–257 ed. Jana¯bı¯)
a sketch, classifying philosophy as follows (for practical
reasons the tashjı¯r visualization is tentatively changed to
numerical notation):
Philosophy [is divided into]
1.
Praxis
1.1.
Politics
1.2.
Economics
1.3.
Ethics
2.
Theory
2.1.
Metaphysics (ila¯hı¯) investigating the intelligibilia
2.2.1.
Mathematics (ta‘lı¯mı¯) concerned with imaginary
things (ashya¯’ wahmiyya)
2.2.2.
Mathematics (riya¯d˙ı¯) investigating imaginary
things [a doublet of 2.2.1.?] as to their quantity
and quality [. . .]
2.2.2.1. Arithmetic, a simple science [. . .]
2.2.2.2. Geometry, composed in the ﬁrst order, since
2.2.2.1. is employed in it
Ibn Farı¯g˙u¯n I
487
I

2.2.2.3. Astronomy, composed in the second order, since
2.2.2.1. and 2.2.2.2. are employed in it
2.2.2.4. Music, composed in the third order, since
2.2.2.1.–3. are employed in it
2.3.
Natural Sciences
2.3.1.
Medicine [. . .]
2.3.2.
Animals
2.3.3.
Plants
2.3.4.
Mechanics (?) [. . .]
This outline of the philosophical sciences is clearly that
of the Alexandrian commentaries on Aristotle’s writings;
the interesting idea of the growing complexity of the
mathematical sciences may well have its roots in al-Kindı¯’s
system as presented in his Letter on the Number of Aristotle’s
Books, perhaps transmitted by al-Balkhı¯ who is credited
with a work on the classiﬁcation of the sciences; the
extensive subdivisions of Medicine may again be due to
al-Balkhı¯ who composed a monograph on the subject, or
to Ibn Farı¯g˙u¯n’s own predilection whose system of the
natural sciences as such seems quite sui generis. On the
following page (145 of the facsimile edition = p 258f. ed.
Jana¯bı¯), the author classiﬁes and discusses at length the
contents and purpose of metaphysics (cf. above, 2.1.),
which he sees as a culmination of all philosophical sciences,
because (a) it investigates the cause of things (and not the
caused things), (b) its object is the ultimate goal of all
knowledge, God’s Lordship, and (c) only the faculty of the
intellect is employed (and not faculties concerned with
material or imaginary objects). An investigation of this
kind will lead to the understanding of the Creator’s wisdom
which, from His Oneness, generates the intellect, the soul,
and nature. This Neoplatonic order of emanation and the
implicit complementarity, if not identity, of the object and
the logical method of metaphysics and Islamic theology
(s:ina¯‘at al-kala¯m, classiﬁed on p. 136 of the facsimile
edition = p. 242 ed. Jana¯bı¯) are central elements of the
tradition of al-Kindı¯ and show ‘‘a trend in the earliest phil-
osophical school in Islam, perhaps existing already in the last
phase of antiquity, to emphasize the theological aspect of
Aristotle’s Metaphysics at the expense of that dealing with
the ﬁrst philosophy, being-as-such’’ (Gutas 1998: 249).
The general sequence of the Jawa¯mi‘ is not easy to
establish. Two substantial blocks seem to frame the
whole work: the introductory chapter treats Arabic gram-
mar, particularly in the form of morphological tables,
implicitly stating the key character of language for all
information to follow, and the ﬁnal chapter classiﬁes – in
remarkable detail – the occult sciences, that is, ‘‘those
ﬁelds of knowledge that are subject to controversy on
whether they are really that, or rather fraud, trickery, and
means to make a proﬁt.’’ Between these two blocks the
order of disciplines is roughly as follows: (1) the profes-
sional skills and virtues of the various types of secretary at
court (ka¯tib), (2) ethics and virtues, particularly of the
good ruler, (3) statecraft and warfare, (4) Islamic theology
(kala¯m) and religious duties, and, as a kind of climax,
(5) sources of knowledge and forms and methods of its
transmission, from which the above excerpts are taken.
Passages such as those discussed above and the frequent
use of technical, or epistemological, catchwords such as
‘‘form’’ and ‘‘matter,’’ ‘‘genus’’ and ‘‘species,’’ ‘‘idea’’ and
‘‘expression,’’ and ‘‘quality’’ and ‘‘quantity’’ should not
divert from the fact that the Jawa¯mi‘ do not aim to be
a philosophical system of the sciences. They share with al-
Khwa¯razmı¯’s Mafa¯tı¯h: al-‘ulu¯m the focus on technical
terms, they show isolated parallels with concepts of al-
Kindı¯, Abu¯ Zayd al-Balkhı¯ (in statecraft), and al-‘A¯mirı¯
(in the classiﬁcation of genres of communication), but
they lack the systematic distinction between indigenous
Islamic and foreign, Hellenistic, sciences. This distinction
governs the Mafa¯tı¯h: and al-‘A¯mirı¯’s improvised classiﬁca-
tion in his I‘la¯m, and above all, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s Ih:s:a¯’ al-‘ulu¯m,
which ﬁnally – before the epochal advent of Avicenna’s
encyclopedic designs – constitutes a truly systematic
attempt at integrating the Aristotelian and the Islamic tra-
ditions. To all appearances, Ibn Farı¯g˙u¯n’s Jawa¯mi‘ are
a handbook for the state secretary interested in the catch-
words of all kinds of disciplines and professional skills, with
a penchant for philosophical categories and a – in a sense
both practical and philosophical – quest for systematization.
See also: ▶al-ʿA¯mirı¯, Abu¯ l-H˙ asan ▶Aristotle, Arabic
▶al-Balkhı¯, Abu¯ Zayd ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas˙r ▶al-Kindı¯,
Abu¯ Yu¯suf Yaʿqu¯b ibn Ish:a¯q ▶al-Sarakhsı¯, Ah˙mad ibn
al-T˙ayyib
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Ibn Farı¯g˙u¯n (1985) Compendium of sciences. Jawa¯mı¯‘ al-‘ulu¯m by Ibn
Farı¯g˙u¯n (tenth century A.D.). Publications of the institute for the
history of Arabic–Islamic science, ed. Sezgin F. Series C: Facsimile
editions, vol 14. Reproduced from MS 2768, Ahmet III collection,
Topkapı Sarayı Library, Istanbul. Institute for the History of Arabic–
Islamic Science at the Johann Wolfgang Goethe University, Frankfurt
am Main
Mutag˙abbı¯ b. Farı¯g˙u¯n (1428/2007) K. Jawa¯mı¯‘ al-‘ulu¯m. Taqdı¯m wa-tah˙qı¯q
Qays Ka¯z˙im al-Jana¯bı¯. Maktabat al-thaqa¯fa wa-l-dı¯niyya, Cairo
Secondary Sources
Reference Works
Bosworth CE (1985) A¯l-e Farı¯g¯u¯n. In: Encyclopaedia Iranica, vol 1, ed.
Yarshater E. Routledge & Kegan Paul, London/Boston/Henley,
pp 756–758
488 I
Ibn Farı¯g˙u¯n

Bosworth CE (2004) Ibn Farı¯g˙u¯n. In: The Encyclopaedia of Islam, new
edn. Supplement. Brill, Leiden, p 386f
Brockelmann C (1937) Geschichte der arabischen Litteratur. Erster
Supplementband. Brill, Leiden, p 384, 388
Sezgin F (1967) Geschichte des arabischen Schrifttums. Band 1. Brill,
Leiden, pp 384, 388
Articles and Sections in Journals, Monographs and Collective Volumes
Biesterfeldt HH (1990) Ibn Farı¯g˙u¯n’s chapter on Arabic grammar in his
Compendium of the Sciences. In: Studies in the history of Arabic
grammar II, ed. Versteegh K, Carter MG. Studies in the history of the
language sciences, 56. John Benjamins, Amsterdam/Philadelphia,
pp 49–56
Biesterfeldt HH (2008) Ibn Farı¯ghu¯n on communication. In: In the age of
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯. Arabic philosophy in the fourth/tenth century, ed.
Adamson P. Warburg Institute Colloquia, 12. Nino Aragno Editore,
London/Turin, pp 265–276
Dunlop DM (1950–1955) The G˘ awa¯mi‘ al-‘ulu¯m of Ibn Farı¯g˙u¯n. In: […]
Zeki Velidi Togan’a armag˘an. Maarif Basımevi, Istanbul, pp 348–353
Gutas D (1988) Avicenna and the Aristotelian tradition. Introduction to
reading Avicenna’s philosophical works. Islamic philosophy, theol-
ogy and science, texts and studies, 4. Brill, Leiden, pp 245–249 (on
metaphysics in the Jawa¯mi‘)
Minorsky V (1962) Ibn Farı¯ghu¯n and the H˙ udu¯d al-‘a¯lam. In: A locust’s
leg. Studies in honour of S. H. Taqizadeh. Percy Lund, Humphries,
London, pp 189–196 (repr. Minorsky V (1964) Iranica. Twenty
articles. Publications of the University of Tehran, 775. University of
Tehran, Tehran, pp 327–332)
Rebstock U (1992) Rechnen im islamischen Orient. Die literarischen
Spuren
der
praktischen
Rechenkunst.
Wissenschaftliche
Buchgesellschaft, Darmstadt, pp 15–19 (on mathematics in the
Jawa¯mi‘)
Ritter H (1950) Philologika XIII: Arabische Handschriften in Anatolien
und I˙stanbul. Oriens 3:83–85
Rosenthal F (1968) A history of Muslim historiography, 2nd edn. Brill,
Leiden, pp 34–36, 539f (on a section on historiography in the
Jawa¯mi‘)
Ibn H˙ indu¯, Abu¯ l-Faraj
CECILIA MARTINI BONADEO
Dipartimento di Filosoﬁa
Universita` di Padova
Padova
Italy
Abstract
Abu¯ l-Faraj ibn Hindu¯ was a medical scholar and poet who
studied philosophy under Abu¯ l-H˙ asan al-‘A¯mirı¯.
Abu¯ l-Faraj ibn Hindu¯ was a native of Rayy. He studied
medicine under the guidance of Ibn Suwa¯r ibn al-Khamma¯r
and was a disciple of Abu¯ l-H˙ asan al-‘A¯mirı¯ in philosophy.
He died in c. 1029/32. He became well-known as a medical
scholar, and a poet. He wrote an introduction to the study
of philosophy entitled Treatise Encouraging the Study of
Philosophy (al-Risa¯la al-mushawwiqa fı¯ l-madkhal ila¯
l-falsafa) and was then invited by a reader of his ﬁrst
work to write a second introduction to the study of
medicine, entitled The Key to Medicine and the Students’
Guide (Mifta¯h: al-t:ibb wa minha¯j al-t:ulla¯b).
See also: ▶al-ʿA¯mirı¯, Abu¯ l-H˙ asan ▶Ibn Suwa¯r (Ibn
al-Khamma¯r)
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Ibn Hindu¯ Abu¯ l-Faraj (1989) In: Mohaghegh Mehdı¯, Da¯nishpazu¯h
Moh˙ammad Taqı¯ (eds) Mifta¯h: al-t:ibb wa-Iminha¯j al-t:ulla¯b. Institute
of Islamic Studies, McGill University, Tehran Branch, Tehran
Ibn Hindu¯ Abu¯ l-Faraj ‘Alı¯ ibn al-H˙ usayn (forthcoming) The key to
medicine and a guide for students, trans. Tibi A. Ithaca Press
Secondary Sources
Endress G (1987) Die wissenschaftliche Literatur. In: Ga¨tje H (hrsg.)
Grundriß der Arabischen Philologie, Band II (Literatur). Reichert,
Wiesbaden, p 450
Ibn Hindu¯ Abu¯ l-Faraj (s. n.) (1971) In: Lewis B, Menage VL, Pellat Ch,
Schacht J (eds) Encyclopaedia of Islam, new edition, vol III. Brill,
Leiden/London
Ibn Kammu¯na, ʿIzz al-Dawla
CECILIA MARTINI BONADEO
Dipartimento di Filosoﬁa
Universita` di Padova
Padova
Italy
Abstract
Ibn Kammu¯na (d. 1284 c.) was a polymath of Jewish origin,
whose main works are devoted to philosophy and compar-
ative religion. A commentator of Avicenna and Suhrawardı¯,
he also compiled the doctrines of Nas:ı¯r al-Dı¯n al-T˙u¯sı¯, with
whom he had a scientiﬁc and philosophical correspondence.
‘Izz al-Dawla Sa‘d b. Mans:u¯r b. Sa‘d al-H˙ asan b. Hibat
Alla¯h ibn Kammu¯na presumably originated from Baghdad
where he spent most of his life. He was born into a Jewish
learned family and he must have received an early educa-
tion in both Hebrew and Jewish literature and Islamic
letters. He states that he was self-taught in philosophy.
Ibn Kammu¯na, ʿIzz al-Dawla I
489
I

He probably spent some time in Aleppo. According to Ibn
al-Fuwat:ı¯, who met him in 1280–1281 in the Niz˙a¯miyya
madrasa of Baghdad, he was well versed not only in
philosophy, but also in astronomy, mathematics, and lit-
erature, and wrote poetry in Arabic and Persian. There is
no evidence that he was a regular teacher in one of
the madrasa-s of Baghdad, but probably gave informal
philosophical lectures. He also corresponded with many
scholars of his time such as Nas:ı¯r al-Dı¯n al-T˙u¯sı¯and Ka¯tibı¯.
He seems to have been patronized by the family of the
s:a¯h:ib al-dı¯wa¯n, Shams al-Dı¯n al-Juwaynı¯. After the latter’s
execution in 1284, Ibn Kammu¯na moved from Baghdad to
the nearby town of H˙ illa. He refuged there because his son
was serving as an ofﬁcial in that town, and Ibn Kammu¯na
was in contact with some of the local Shı¯ʿite scholars. It is
assumed in modern scholarship that this move was caused
by hostile reaction to Ibn Kammu¯na’s comparison
between Judaism, Christianity, and Islam in the Tanqı¯h:
al-abh:a¯th li-l-milal al-thala¯th (Examination of the Three
Faiths), completed in 1280, but it is more likely to be
connected to the execution of his patron. Ibn Kammu¯na
died in H˙ illa short after 1284.
It has been argued that Ibn Kammu¯na converted to
Islam at some stage of his life. However, Pourjavady and
Schmidtke (2006) remark that in the Tanqı¯h: al-abh:a¯th li-l-
milal al-thala¯th Ibn Kammu¯na’s loyalty to Judaism is
beyond doubt, and that it cannot be decided whether
Ibn Kammu¯na did or did not convert to Islam after
the composition of the Tanqı¯h: (1280) for opportunistic
reasons, i.e., to avoid persecution.
As a philosopher, Ibn Kammu¯na’s favorite topic of
inquiry was the nature of human soul; he formulated on
this issue his main doctrines, such as that of the pre-eter-
nity, immortality, and simplicity of the soul. He wrote
several treatises on this topic, three of which are extant:
the Maqa¯la fı¯ l-tas:dı¯q bi-anna nafs al-insa¯n ba¯qiya abadan
(Treatise on the Pre-eternity of the Human Soul), the
Maqa¯la fı¯ anna wuju¯d al-nafs abadı¯ wa-baqa¯’aha¯ sarmadı¯
(Treatise on the Immortality of the Soul), and the Maqa¯la fı¯
anna l-nafs laysat bi-miza¯j al-badan wa la¯ ka¯’ina ‘an miza¯j
al-badan (Treatise on the Simplicity of the Soul). Ibn
Kammu¯na followed Ibn Sı¯na¯ in cosmology and metaphys-
ics, and commented the Isha¯ra¯t wa-l-tanbı¯ha¯t (Pointers and
Reminders); he was also inﬂuenced by Shiha¯b al-Dı¯n al-
Suhrawardı¯, the founder of the philosophy of illumination,
and commented on the latter’s Talwı¯h:at (Intimations). In
addition, Ibn Kammu¯na was familiar with the writings of
Abu¯ H˙ a¯mid al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ and Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯.
The list of Ibn Kammu¯na’s philosophical works, for
which the principal source is H˙ a¯jjı¯ Khalı¯fa, includes
excerpts from Nas:ı¯r al-Dı¯n al-T˙u¯sı¯’s Talkhı¯s: al-Muh:as:s:al
(Summary of [al-Razi’s] Harvest [of the Thought of the
Ancients and Moderns]); a comprehensive exposition of
thirteenth-century science and philosophy entitled al-
H˙ ikma al-jadı¯da (The New Wisdom); a short work on
philosophy entitled al-Mat:a¯lib al-muhimma min ‘ilm al-
h:ikma (Key Issues in the Science of Wisdom); the short
treatise Talkhı¯s al-h:ikma (Summary of Wisdom); and the
Kalima¯t wajı¯za mushtamila ‘ala¯ nukat lat:ı¯fa fı¯ l-‘ilm wa-l-
‘amal (Brief Words Encompassing Some Fine Points of
Knowledge and Praxis), a compilation of ethical and
moral advices for a ruler, dedicated to one of the sons of
the s:a¯h:ib al-dı¯wa¯n al-Juwaynı¯.
Ibn Kammu¯na also wrote on comparative religion: the
above-mentioned Tanqı¯h: al-abh:a¯th li-l-milal al-thala¯th,
an overview of the polemical arguments for and against
Judaism, Christianity, and Islam, and a treatise on the
differences between the Rabbanites and Karaites.
See also: ▶Fakhr al-Dı¯n al-Ra¯zı¯ ▶al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, Abu¯ H˙ a¯mid
Muh:ammad ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶Nas:ı¯r al-
Dı¯n al-Tu¯s:ı¯ ▶al-Suhrawardı¯, Shiha¯b al-Dı¯n Yah:ya¯ al-
Maqtu¯l
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Langermann Tzvi Y (2005) Ibn Kammu¯na and the ‘‘New Wisdom’’ of the
thirteenth century. Arabic Sci Philos 15:277–327
Nemoy Leon (1958) Ibn Kammu¯na’s treatise on the immortality of the Soul.
Ignace Goldziher memorial volume, vol 2, ed. Loewinger S, Scheiber A,
Somogyi J. Rubin Mass, Jerusalem, pp 83–99
Nemoy Leon (1968) Ibn Kammu¯na’s treatise on the differences between
the Rabbanites and the Karaites. Proc Am Acad Jew Res 36:107–165
Nemoy Leon (1972–1973) Ibn Kammu¯nah’s treatise on the differences
between the Rabbanites and the Karaites. JewQ Rev13:97–135, 222–246
Perlmann Mosheh (1971) Ibn Kammu¯na’s examination of the three faiths.
A thirteenth century essay in comparative study of religion.
University of California, Berkeley/Los Angeles
Ziai H, Alwishah A (2003) Ibn Kammu¯na: al-Tanqı¯ha¯t fı¯ Sharh˙
al-Talwı¯ha¯t. Mazda, Costa Mesa
Biographers
‘Abd al-Razza¯q ibn Ah˙mad (1962) Talkhı¯s: majma‘ al-a¯da¯b fı¯ mu‘jam al-
alqa¯b, ed. Jawa¯d M. Wizara¯t al-Taqa¯fa Damascus, pp 159–161
Anonymous (1934) al-H˙ awa¯dith al-ja¯mi‘a wa-l-taja¯rib al-na¯ﬁ‘a, ed.
Jawa¯d M (as a work by Ibn al-Fuwat:ı¯). Baghdad (reprt Beirut, Da¯r
al-Gharb al-Isla¯mı¯ 1997)
H˙ a¯jjı¯ Khalı¯fa (1835–1858) Kashf al-z˙unu¯n ‘an asa¯mı¯ al-kutub wa-l-funu¯n,
ed. Flu¨gel G. Leipzig Vogel (various reprints: Beirut, Dar Sader, no
date; Johnson Reprint Corporation, New York 1964)
Secondary Sources
Goldziher I (1896) Sa‘d b. Mans:u¯r ibn Kammu¯na’s Abhandlung u¨ber die
Unverga¨nglichkeit derSeele. In: Festschriftzum achstigstenGeburtstage
Moritz Steinschneider. O. Harrassowitz, Leipzig, pp 110–114
Langermann TY (2007) Ibn Kammu¯na at Aleppo. J R Asiat Soc (3rd ser)
17:1–19
490 I
Ibn Kammu¯na, ʿIzz al-Dawla

Nemoy L (1968) New data for the biography of Sa‘d ibn Kammunah.
Revue des e´tudes juives 123:507–510
Pourjavady R, Schmidtke S (2006) A Jewish philosopher of Baghdad. ‘Izz
al-Dawla Ibn Kammu¯na (d. 683/1284) and his writings. E.J. Brill,
Leiden/Boston
Ibn Khaldu¯n, Abu¯ Zayd
ʿAbdarrah˙ma¯n
ABDESSELAM CHEDDADI
Faculty of Educational Sciences
University Mohammed V
Rabat
Morocco
Abstract
A historian as well as a sociologist and anthropologist avant
la lettre, Ibn Khaldu¯n was one of the most original ﬁgures of
the medieval Arab culture. His political experience in vari-
ous courts of the Maghreb and Muslim Spain during the
ﬁrst half of his life, as well as his many travels to the Middle
East, provided him with a concrete understanding of the
social and political realities of his time. His education was
ﬁrst and foremost religious, legal, and literary, but he also
had strong foundations in the Graeco-Arabic philosophical
tradition. In his works he raises a new question, namely, how
does one write true history exceeding the limits of formal
critique of historical information as it was practiced in the
Arabic historiographical tradition. The answer he developed
involves knowledge of society as well as taking into account
all available knowledge as a condition for historical knowl-
edge. He thus felt obliged to invent a ‘‘science of the society’’
in the narrow sense of the word, in which the social and
political realities of the Maghreb and the Arab world in
medieval times obviously occupy an important place.
From this point of view, he deserves the title of ‘‘sociologist.’’
However, his global approach to the civilizations of his time,
despite the limited information he had at his disposal,
equally makes him a careful ‘‘anthropologist,’’ whose ideas
even to this day retain attention. He was foremost
a historian, however, and as such he contributed more
than an innovative approach. He had a vision of history
based on the internal dynamics of societies and on their
universal struggles for dominance, on the scale of the great
empires of his time.
Abu¯ Zayd ‘Abdarrah:ma¯n ibn Khaldu¯n was born in Tunis in
1332. According to the information in his Autobiography,
his family, of Arab Yemeni origin, settled in Spain in the
eighth century and emigrated in the thirteenth century to
Tunis after a short stay in the Moroccan city, Ceuta. Des-
tined by his aristocratic origins to occupy a high position in
state administration, Ibn Khaldu¯n felt torn, until the age of
36, between his political ambitions and his profound attrac-
tion to science. After an eventful ﬁrst half of his life when he
was called to hold high political positions in various courts
of the Maghreb and in Muslim Spain, he made a crucial
decision to withdraw into the castle of Qal‘at ibn Sala¯ma
(near Frenda, in Algeria) to write. During the four years he
spent in this deserted place, away from the bustle of cities,
he wrote the ﬁrst draft of the most important work of his
life, The Book of Examples, which includes the famous
Muqaddima (Introduction) as the ﬁrst volume. Finally,
having fallen seriously ill, and being obliged to leave his
retreat to ﬁnd the documentation he needed for his
research, he returned for a few years to his native city,
Tunis, before ﬁnally leaving for Alexandria, and thereafter
for Cairo, where he spent the last 24 years of his life.
Shortly before leaving Tunis, he had offered the ﬁrst ver-
sion of The Book of Examples to the library of the H˙ afs:id
Sultan Abu¯ l-‘Abba¯s. Once in Cairo, the support of the
Mamluk king Z˙ a¯hir al-Barqu¯q enabled him to obtain
a position as a teacher and judge. But he kept these
positions a relatively short time, because of jealousy and
hatred that aroused against him due to his severity as
a judge, his haughty attitude, and commitment to his
country of origin, the Maghreb. Also, he led a precarious
existence almost entirely dependent on his royal patron,
but he could nevertheless dedicate himself to completing
his work, of which he presented a near-ﬁnal version
to his benefactor in 1397. Toward the end of his life, he
met the famous conqueror Tamerlane at the gates of
Damascus and had many conversations with him that
he recounts in his Autobiography. He died in Cairo on
March 17, 1406.
Ibn Khaldu¯n proposes two conceptions of history, one
focused on society, social activities, and laws determining
its evolution, which is the subject of the ﬁrst volume of The
Book of Examples, and another, the subject of two other
volumes, that covers world history from creation to the time
of the author. However, the ﬁrst, while constituting an
autonomous part, is considered a prerequisite for the second
to the extent that, in explaining the work and the various
mechanisms of society, it allows the reader to better judge
the veracity of the historical accounts described therein. This
is why Ibn Khaldu¯n presents this as an introduction – in
Arabic, Muqaddima. This distinction is important, and by
insisting upon a global knowledge of society, it reveals
a methodological concern very close to that of the modern
social sciences, as well as a philosophy of history, which
Ibn Khaldu¯n, Abu¯ Zayd ʿAbdarrah˙ma¯n I
491
I

places the social functioning itself at the core of the his-
torical movements and historical developments.
Ibn Khaldu¯n’s Science of Society though presupposing
creation, has a materialistic basis. On the one hand, it relies
on the examination of the physical environment, namely
the geography and climate in which humans live; on the
other, it attempts to explain the social functions through
purely human and material factors. The research and anal-
ysis it proposes revolve around four main axes, namely
(1) the forms of sociability and the social relationships
they give rise to; (2) the political life including its forces of
domination, and formation of power and state; (3) the
economic life including livelihoods, the acquisition of
wealth and production; and ﬁnally (4) the intellectual and
spiritual life, the formation and history of sciences, educa-
tion and its methods, language and literary creations. At
least in their content, these axes cover largely those found in
what is known today as cultural anthropology.
Ibn Khaldu¯n shows that society is divided between two
poles, the bada¯wa, or rural lifestyle, which includes that
which is necessary for life, and hada¯ra, or urban lifestyle,
which seeks the superﬂuous and luxury. These two poles
are both opposed and complementary, and society con-
stantly oscillates from one to the other following a cyclical
evolution. The formation of political power pivoting on
the ‘as:abiyya, the social solidarity based on either blood
ties or on the links of patronage, is largely responsible for
this oscillation that causes great social, political, eco-
nomic, and cultural upheavals. History is therefore
designed as the study of the appearance, development,
and disappearance of states and empires that have been
able to capture and instrumentalize to their advantage the
‘as:abiyya in order to establish their power.
See also: ▶Ethics, Arabic ▶Political Philosophy, Arabic
Bibliography
Primary Sources
(1851) Kita¯b Ta¯rı¯kh al-duwal al-isla¯miyya bi-l-Mag˙rib, ed. de Slane. Alger
(1858) Al-Muqaddima (vol I of the Kita¯b al-‘Iba¯r), 3 vols, ed. Quatreme`re
E-M. Paris
(1867) Kita¯b al-‘Iba¯r wa-dı¯wa¯n al-mubtada‘ wa-l-khabar fı¯ayya¯m al-‘arab
wa-l-‘ajam wa-l-barbar wa-man ‘a¯s:arahum min dhawı¯ al-s:ulta¯n al-
akbar, 7 vols, ed. al-H˙ u¯rı¯nı¯ ND. Bu¯la¯q
(1951) Al-Ta‘rıˆf bi-Ibn Khaldu¯n wa rih:latuhu g˙arban wa-sharqan, ed. Ibn
Taˆwıˆt al-Tanjıˆ M. Cairo
(2005) Al-Muqaddima, 5 vols, ed. Cheddadi A. Maison des Arts, des
Sciences et des Lettres, Te´mara (Maroc)
Translations
Cheddadi
A
(2002)
Le
Livre
des
Exemples,
I,
Autobiographie,
Muqaddima. Gallimard/Bibliothe`que de la Ple´iade, Paris
Cheddadi A (2006) L’Autobiographie, a bilingual edition Arabic/French.
Maison des Arts, des Sciences et des Lettres, Te´mara
de Slane WM (1852/19252) Histoire des Berbe`res et des dynasties
musulmanes de l’Afrique septentrionale. Paris (repr Geuthner, 4
vols, 1969 and 1999)
de Slane WM (1863) Les Prole´gome`nes d’Ibn Khaldoun (trans. of the
Muqaddima). Paris
Monteil V (1968) Discours sur l’histoire universelle (French trans. of the
Muqaddima). Unesco/Sindbad, Paris/Beyrouth (repr Actes Sud,
Arles, 1999)
Pe´rez R (1991) La Voie et la Loi, ou le Maıˆtre et le Juriste (trans. of Shifa¯’
al-sa¯’il). Sindbad, Paris
Rosenthal F (1958/19672) The Muqaddimah, an introduction to history.
Princeton University Press, Princeton
Secondary Sources
Azmeh A (1981) Ibn Khaldu¯n in modern scholarship. A study in Orien-
talism. Third World Center, London
Azmeh A (1990) Ibn Khaldu¯n, an essay in reinterpretation. Routledge,
London
Brett M (1999) Ibn Khaldu¯n and the medieval Maghreb. Ashgate, Aldershot
Cheddadi A (1980) Le syste`me du pouvoir en Islam. Annales, ESC May–
August
Cheddadi A (1986) Ibn Khalduˆn. Peuples et nations du monde. Extraits
des ‘Ibar. Sindbad, Paris
Cheddadi A (1999) Ibn Khalduˆn revisite´. Toubkal, Casablanca
Cheddadi A (2006a) Actualite´ d’Ibn Khalduˆn. Confe´rences et entretiens.
Maison des Arts, des Sciences et des Lettres, Te´mara
Cheddadi A (2006b) Ibn Khalduˆn. L’homme et le the´oricien de la civili-
sation. Gallimard, Paris
Fischel W (1967) Ibn Khaldu¯n in Egypt: his public functions and his
historical research, 1382–1406. University of California Press, Berkeley
Gellner E (1984) Muslim society. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Honigmann JJ (1976) The development of anthropological ideas. The
Dorsey Press, Homewood
‘Ina¯n MA (1932) Ibn Khaldu¯n, h:ayu¯tuhu wa-tura¯thuhu al-ﬁkrı¯. Le Caire
Mahdi M (1957) Ibn Khalduˆn’s Philosophy of History: a study in the
philosophical foundation of the science of culture. London
Martinez-Gros G (2006) Ibn Khalduˆn et les sept vies de l’Islam. Sindbad/
Actes Sud, Arles
Ibn Masarra, Muh˙ammad ibn
ʿAbdalla¯h
RAFAEL RAMO´ N GUERRERO
Facultad de Filosoﬁa
Universidad Complutense de Madrid
Madrid
Spain
Abstract
Despite having been regarded for a long time as the ﬁrst
Andalusian philosopher, it can now be seen, thanks to the
492 I
Ibn Masarra, Muh˙ammad ibn ʿAbdalla¯h

ideas contributed by some of his works, that Ibn Masarra’s
thought tends more toward mysticism and Gnosticism
than pure philosophy. Although he does expound philo-
sophical ideas, these owe more to his cultural context than
to a rigorous understanding of the implications of Greek
philosophy. In fact, in his two surviving works he attacks
the philosophers, pointing out that the path of philosophy
strays from that leading to the truth.
Little is known of the life of Muh˙ammad ibn ‘Abd Alla¯h ibn
Masarra. He was born in Cordoba (Spain) in 883. His father
introduced him to Muʿtazilite and Ba¯t:inı¯ teachings and
initiated him into the ascetic life. He received mystic ideas
from some of his teachers, which were reinforced after his
pilgrimage to Mecca. On his return to Cordoba he lived as
a hermit in the mountains near the city, surrounded by
disciples, whom he instructed in secret doctrines. He died
in 931 and his teachings soon aroused the suspicion of
jurists who obtained a sentence from caliph ‘Abd al-
Rah:ma¯n III against his followers. Of the many works attrib-
uted to him, only two are known: Characteristics of Letters
and On Reﬂection. These works reveal a more Gnostic than
philosophical Ibn Masarra, with absolutely no dependence
on the Pseudo-Empedocles assumptions ascribed to him
for many years as the origin of his thought.
The Characteristics of Letters can be classed within the
tradition of Gnostic texts aimed at the attainment of
knowledge of reality and the highest truths through the
interpretation of letters. The divine Word is expressed in
the Book and uniﬁes the multiplicity of letters and words.
Ibn Masarra aims to decipher the mysterious letters that
feature in some of the suras in the Qurʾa¯n, because ‘‘the
learned differ in their interpretations, although the dis-
agreement between them is not because they are unaware
of them, nor is it proof that they are unable to understand
them.’’ Humankind has been given two means of knowl-
edge: on one hand, thought, involving reﬂection about
the created world, through which humans can infer and
contemplate the unity of God, his power, nobility, and
gloriﬁcation through his names and attributes; and on
the other hand, revelation, which God has given to his
Prophet and is collected in the Book, which is the expla-
nation of all things and the sum of both ancient and
modern science. Ibn Masarra seems to have been familiar
with some philosophical teachings, but he unambigu-
ously expresses the superiority of Muh˙ammad’s proph-
ecy. His interest is in the Qurʾa¯nic letters and he points to
the fact that those who study the occult sciences maintain
that these letters are the foundation and origin of all
things.
In this work there are no explicit references to philo-
sophical positions. It does not contain any doctrine which
refers to ideas expounded by philosophers; only some
philosophical principles and terms used by them. This is
not a philosophical book, rather its contents are closer to
Islamic Gnosticism. The divine Essence, the Universal
Intellect, the Great Soul, and Nature are the terms used
to show the hierarchy of beings. However, these are simply
ideas that were circulating around the Islamic world at the
time, not the principles of an original philosophical
system.
The other work, On Reﬂection, could be seen as phil-
osophical, not merely because of its title, which makes use
of a term of the philosophical vocabulary (i‘tiba¯r), but also
because of its initial approach: it appeals to the intellect, to
humankind’s reason as the highest faculty for discovery
which, when used, gives rise to reﬂection. But Ibn Masarra
also clearly points out that the human intellect has its
origin in the divine light, indicating a very unusual slant
in his thought. He also states that in addition to reﬂection,
revelation also counts as a path to truth. Careful reading of
his work shows that the author’s intention is far from that
of the philosophers: he simply aims to explain the
Qurʾa¯nic idea that advises and exhorts humankind to use
reason to think about the signs placed in the world by God,
to ﬁnd in them that which is hidden, and to recognize the
supreme ruler of the universe and his absolute oneness. He
afﬁrms that the universe is a book, whose letters are words
read by those who see through the eyes of intellect. This
book, which conﬁrms that which has been made known in
the revealed Book, must be read and studied. Ibn Masarra
refers to knowledge reached by seeing from inside the
heart: he mentions the heart’s perception, which reveals
hidden truths. This is a different kind of wisdom with
respect to the purely philosophical knowledge, a wisdom
that is characteristic of those who are close to God: the
‘‘saints or friends of God.’’ All of this seems to indicate that
the term ‘‘reﬂection’’ is a different activity from that car-
ried out by philosophers, as can be inferred from the
following text: ‘‘By this path mentioned in the Book and
pointed out by the Messengers is acquired the light that is
never extinguished and true inner visions are achieved by
which one can approach those who are closest to the Lord,
who reach in this world and the next the place worthy of
praise, who see through their hearts with their own eyes
that which is hidden and who know the science of the
Book, whose hearts testify to that which is Truth.’’ He
points to another kind of knowledge, that of an inner
vision which reveals hidden realities. Humankind should
apply its faculties to the study of the universe, because
Ibn Masarra, Muh˙ammad ibn ʿAbdalla¯h I
493
I

from the lowest to the highest levels, the truth can be
discovered through reﬂection that brings humans’ inner
life into play. Man conﬁrms revealed testimony, in an
action which implies the meeting of the descending path
of revelation with the ascending path of thought.
Thinking about the signs of the universe leads to
knowledge of divine unity, which ‘‘is the ultimate Truth.’’
Philosophers have not reached the Creator through his
signs because they have ignored and deviated from this
straight path, made arrogant by lies in which there is no
light. Prophets, however, have afﬁrmed all of this. Proph-
ecy comes ﬁrst, descending from the Throne to earth;
thought, an activity common to all humans and not the
sole preserve of philosophers, ascends from earth to the
Throne: there is no difference between them.
Ibn Masarra simply wishes to abide by the Qurʾa¯nic
recommendation to make use of the intellect to under-
stand the signs that God has placed in the universe. No
(pseudo-)Empedoclean doctrines are to be found, as it
was contended in past scholarship, apart from the afﬁr-
mation of the Soul, the Intellect, and the Creator, which
are not solely pseudo-Empedoclean topics, rather com-
mon Neoplatonic concepts that had been disseminated
throughout the Islamic world. As a result, Ibn Masarra
should be considered more as an exponent of esoteric
thought, a Gnostic with philosophical elements, than as
a philosopher in the strict sense of the term as it is usually
understood.
See
also:
▶Doxographies,
Graeco-Arabic
▶Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯
Philosophical Tradition ▶Philosophy, Arabic
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Garrido Clemente P (2007) Edicio´n crı´tica del Kita¯b jawa¯s:s: al-h˙uru¯f de
Ibn Masarra. Al-Andalus Magreb: Estudios a´rabes e isla´micos
14:51–89
Ibn Masarra (1978) Kita¯b khawa¯s:s: al-h˙uru¯f wa-h˙aqa¯’iqi-ha wa-us:u¯li-ha
and Risa¯lat al-i‘tiba¯r. In: Ja‘far MKI (ed) Min qad:a¯ya¯ l-ﬁkr al-isla¯mı¯.
Dira¯sa wa-nus:u¯s:. Da¯r al-‘ulu¯m, Cairo, pp 311–344 (new edn: Ibn
Masarra (1982) In: Jafar MKI (ed) Min al-tura¯th al-falsaﬁli-ibn
Masarra: 1. Risa¯lat al-i‘tiba¯r, 2. Khawa¯s:s: al-h˙uru¯f. Dar al-‘ulu¯m,
Cairo)
Ramo´n Guerrero R (2007) Presentacio´n de un texto de Ibn Masarra de
Co´rdoba: Su Epı´stola de la reﬂexio´n (Risaˆlat al-i‘tiba¯r). In: Canto´n JL
(ed) Maimo´nides y el pensamiento medieval. Actas del IV Congreso
Nacional de Filosofı´a Medieval. Servicio de Publicaciones de la
Universidad de Co´rdoba, Co´rdoba, pp 415–430
Secondary Sources
Ası´n Palacios M (1914) Abenmasarra y su escuela. Estudio sobre los
orı´genes de la ﬁlosofı´a hispano-musulmana. Imprenta Ibe´rica,
Madrid; Douglas EH, Yoder HW (trans) (1972) The mystical philos-
ophy of Ibn Masarra and his followers. Brill, Leiden
Cruz Herna´ndez M (1981) La persecucio´n anti-masarri durante el
reinado de ‘Abd Al-Rahma¯n al-Na¯s˙ir li-Dı¯n Alla¯h, segu´n Ibn H˙ ayya¯n.
Al-Qant:ara 2:51–67
Fierro MI (1989) Una refutacio´n contra Ibn Masarra. Al-Qant:ara
10:273–276
Goodman L (1996) Ibn Masarra. In: Nasr SH, Leaman O (eds) History of
Islamic philosophy. Routledge, London, pp 277–293
Ramo´n Guerrero R (2004) Ibn Masarra, mı´stico y gno´stico andalusı´. In:
Solana Dueso J, Burgos Dı´az E, Blaco Aznar P (eds) Las raı´ces de la
cultura europea. Ensayos en homenaje al profesor Joaquı´n Lomba.
Prensas Universitarias de Zaragoza – Institucio´n Fernando El
Cato´lico, Zaragoza, pp 223–239
Ramo´n Guerrero R (2006) Ibn Masarra al-Qurt:ubı¯, Abu¯ ‘Abd Alla¯h. In:
Enciclopedia de la cultura andalusı´. Biblioteca de al-Andalus, vol IV.
Fundacio´n Ibn Tufayl de Estudios A´ rabes, Almerı´a, pp 144–154
Stern SM (1971) Ibn Masarra, follower of Pseudo-Empedocles – an
illusion. Actas 4 Congresso de Estudos Arabes e Islaˆmicos, Coimbra-
Lisboa 1968. J. Brill, Leiden, pp 325–337
Tornero Poveda E (1993) Noticia sobre la publicacio´n de obras ine´ditas de
Ibn Masarra. Al-Qant:ara 14:47–64
Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn
Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes)
TANELI KUKKONEN
Department of History
University of Jyva¨skyla¨
Jyva¨skyla¨
Finland
Abstract
Averroes (1126–1198 CE) was the most famous and pro-
liﬁc commentator on Aristotle in all of medieval philoso-
phy: 38 works are extant, at all levels of instruction. This
concentration on Aristotle was not happenstance, instead,
it reﬂects Averroes’ maturing philosophical outlook. For
Averroes, Aristotle’s teaching came to represent the pin-
nacle of philosophical wisdom, and answers to all the most
pressing problems in philosophy were to be found in
a thorough and careful exploration of what that teaching
truly implied. In the course of Averroes’ deepening inves-
tigations into Aristotelian lore, alternative interpretations
were advanced and different traditions of thinking care-
fully laid side by side, producing a ﬁeld guide to the
Peripatetic tradition, as it was known to an Arabic scholar
of the classical period. The resulting body of texts repre-
sents a high watermark in Aristotelian synthesis and sys-
tematization, even if Averroes failed in the end to resolve
satisfactorily all the problems that had accumulated over
the centuries.
494 I
Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes)

In addition to his Aristotelian Commentaries, Explica-
tions,
and
Compendia
(which,
besides
Aristotle,
encompassed works by Plato, Galen, Ptolemy, and al-
G˙ aza¯lı¯), Averroes wrote smaller, independent essays and
questions that explored contested issues in Aristotelian
teaching; polemical works that argued the religious inno-
cence and intellectual respectability of Peripatetic philos-
ophy, correctly understood; and medical and legal treatises
of solid but unspectacular standing. Averroes’ reputation
was made in Latin Scholasticism and in Jewish circles of
learning, while in the Arabic world his works fell mostly
by the wayside. Today, his name is evoked in the Arabic
world as a rallying-point for a rationalist Islam – a ﬁtting
legacy, if not always especially well grounded (modern-day
Averroists displaying at best a cursory knowledge of the
Commentator’s philosophy).
Life
Averroes, whose full Arabic name was Abu¯ l-Walı¯d
Muh˙ammad ibn Muh˙ammad ibn Rushd al-H˙ afı¯d, came
from a distinguished family of Andalusian jurists working
in the Ma¯liki school of Islamic law. Averroes studied
Islamic jurisprudence and medicine, as well as presumably
philosophy, at a time when the Almoravid rulers of the
region were being overthrown in a series of violent
upheavals, a development that will have had worrying
implications for the Rushd family as well. The new ruling
dynasty, the Almohads (from al-muwah˙h˙idu¯n, those who
profess divine unity), pledged allegiance to the revival
movement spearheaded by the Berber Ibn Tu¯mart, who
advocated a ﬁerce religiosity fueled by a minimalist, ratio-
nalizing interpretation of Sunni belief. Averroes appears to
have drawn inspiration from the rationalist precepts of the
Almohad movement, and to have navigated successfully
the treacherous ideological and political waters (Urvoy
1991). He was introduced to the Almohad court sometime
in the 1150s by Ibn T˙ufayl (1116–1185), the most distin-
guished Andalusian philosopher of his day as well as court
physician to the ruling family, and eventually rose to
a position of trust within the court himself.
Averroes was ﬁrst appointed as qa¯d˙ı¯ (judge) to Seville
in 1169, then Cordoba’s chief judge in 1172. It was around
these dates that he moved from the composition of scien-
tiﬁc compendia (mukhtas:ar/jam‘) to the more demanding
task of summarizing Aristotle in a form that approximates
the order of presentation in the original works (talkhı¯s:).
Perhaps emboldened by his success in this venture,
Averroes next turned to religious polemics, producing
a series of works for which he is most famous in the
Islamic world: a Decisive Treatise (al-Fas:l al-maqa¯l)
outlining his considered opinion on the relation between
Law and Wisdom (i.e., the commandments of religion and
philosophical endeavor); a Supplement (Damı¯ma) to the
same, further skirting around the question of divine
knowledge; an Exposition of the Sorts of Arguments Found
in Religious Creeds (al-Kashf ‘an mana¯hij al-adilla fı¯‘aqa¯’id
al-milla), which purports to disclose the logical status of
the arguments commonly advanced in theology; and the
Incoherence of the Incoherence, a blow-by-blow refutation
of al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s famous Incoherence of the Philosophers.
Averroes was inﬂuenced by al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ from an early
date (see Frank 2002). In light of his later criticisms, it is
important to emphasize the positive impact al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s
project had on the formation of Averroes’ own. It was in
response to al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s critique of the philosophers that
Averroes became convinced that a return to the letter of
Aristotle was necessary, and as an extension of al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s
stated aim of sorting out the logical status of the Muslim
philosophers’ arguments that Averroes could subject al-
G˙ aza¯lı¯ to a similar analysis (and ﬁnd him coming up
short). Averroes agreed with al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ on the importance
of the demonstrative ideal to the philosophers’ claims to
possessing not only the truth, but the necessary truth.
Where he differed was in his assessment that demonstra-
tive certainty was indeed to be found in Aristotle, if not in
his later followers.
In Averroes’ eyes, al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s most grievous error was
the way in which he had pitched his arguments to the
masses, who in Averroes’ opinion could never appreciate
fully the subtleties of philosophical reasoning. It is reveal-
ing that once his own polemical work was complete with
the publication of the Incoherence of the Incoherence,
Averroes for the remainder of his career turned to address
a select, scientiﬁcally trained audience. The period post-
1180, when Averroes again served as qa¯d˙ı¯ in Seville, saw
the publication of ﬁve great Commentaries on Aristotle,
plus two sets of disputed questions. It is in these works that
Averroes most fully realizes his program of setting out
Aristotelian teaching in demonstrative form, simulta-
neously taking on all comers and pointing out the numer-
ous ways in which aspects of Aristotle’s system rely on
others so as to form a tightly interlocking whole.
Through his years of public service, Averroes had
gained his share of enemies, especially among the
Almoravid traditionalists who still enjoyed a signiﬁcant
presence in Andalusia. In 1194, charges of unbelief were
brought against Averroes: for the purposes of the struggle
against the northern invaders the Sultan needed the sup-
port of the traditionalists, and in an effort to placate them
saw ﬁt to sacriﬁce his personal physician and old friend.
Averroes was exiled to the small town of Lucena for a spell,
and although he was reinstated shortly before his death, the
Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) I
495
I

experience will have proved dispiriting as well as humiliat-
ing. Perhaps the oppressive atmosphere contributed to
Averroes’ last commentary work, a Compendium of Plato’s
Republic, teeming with barely concealed contempt for the
present political age (see Butterworth 1992). Averroes died
in Marrakesh in December 1198: a mule carried his
remains back to his native Cordoba, the burden according
to a story balanced by the weight of his philosophical
writings.
Cycles of Knowledge
Though his writings included contributions to medicine
and legal theory, Averroes is principally remembered for
his efforts in two directions: Aristotelian commentary and
the public defense of philosophy. As already indicated, the
two projects were intertwined. It is because of al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s
religiously motivated critique that Averroes sought refuge
in a return to Aristotle, and because of his faith in the
Aristotelian corpus as the repository of all knowledge and
scientiﬁc methodology that Averroes could feel conﬁdent
that theological controversies, too, would ﬁnd their proper
resolution in a thorough investigation of the same. This
high opinion of the Peripatetic curriculum Averroes took
over from the earlier tradition of falsafa. Still, it took
several decades for Averroes to come to the view that
what was needed was a strict adherence to Aristotle’s
very words. Even then, a literal understanding of the
master was no simple matter (see al-‘Alawı¯ 1986).
Averroes’ writings on the philosophical curriculum
divide into three principal categories, commonly if mis-
leadingly known as the short, middle, and long commen-
taries. It has sometimes been thought that the three are
enumerated in a story related by al-Marra¯kushı¯ in which
the Sultan (very likely Abu¯ Ya‘qu¯b Yu¯suf), frustrated by
the obliqueness of Aristotle’s expression, expressed a wish
to Ibn T˙ufayl that somebody should ‘‘summarize them and
expound their aims, after understanding them thor-
oughly.’’ Being otherwise occupied himself, Ibn T˙ufayl
would then have delegated the task to Averroes. The
overliteral
interpretation
is
fanciful
–
if
anything,
Averroes’ own comments on the story peg the govern-
ment-mandated activity to the middle phase of crafting
tala¯khı¯s: – but the basics of the story ring true. Without
institutional backing or encouragement, it is unlikely that
Averroes would have set upon or completed such
a comprehensive program on top of his other duties. The
reasons, however, for the three different layers of exposi-
tion are to be sought in internal factors and in Averroes’
philosophical development rather than any external remit.
The Compendia (mukhtas:ar or [pl.] jawa¯mi‘), written
at a youthful age, concisely recapitulate the philosophers’
teachings in dogmatic form. In stating their aim, Averroes
speaks interchangeably about the Peripatetics’ ‘‘scientiﬁc,’’
‘‘demonstrative,’’ or ‘‘universal’’ statements (al-aqa¯wı¯l
al-‘ilmiyya/burha¯niyya/kulliyya). In practice, the doctrines
expounded often reﬂect the Peripatetic tradition more
than they do any text of Aristotle’s: in the case of De
anima, the depth of Averroes’ acquaintance with Aristotle’
treatise at this stage has been questioned (Druart
1993:193), while in the case of the Organon Averroes
explicitly epitomizes al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ rather than Aristotle (see
Compendium
of
the
Physics,
8.9–10).
Because
the
Compendia aim solely at providing the reader with what
is necessary (al-d˙aru¯rı¯) to know about the fundamentals
(us:u¯l) of a given discipline – there is a cycle of this descrip-
tion on the Organon, another on natural philosophy, indi-
vidual treatises on the soul and on metaphysics, and to
these we may add Averroes’ summary of al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s legal
treatise al-Mustasfa¯ as well – these synopses are short on
dialectic, detail, and controversy.
The Explications (talkhı¯s:) form the largest body of
texts. Besides Aristotle’ logical, natural, and metaphysical
works (the triptych of theoretical philosophy) Averroes
wrote on the Nicomachean Ethics and on Galen and Ptol-
emy in this genre. To call the tala¯khı¯s: paraphrases in the
strict sense would be a misnomer (Gutas 1993:38–42):
much
more
than
rephrasing
individual
sentences,
Averroes in these works sets out to rework the contents
of Aristotle’ corresponding treatises in systematized form.
Still, these works, in Averroes’ own words, explicate
the texts in question according to their meaning (‘ala¯
l-ma‘na¯), and in that regard at least the traditional title
of Paraphrase is descriptive of the work done.
The Commentaries (tafsı¯r or sharh:), the crowning
achievement of Averroes’ career, follow the lemma-by-
lemma model established in late antiquity. Averroes com-
pleted ﬁve of these commentaries, tackling those works he
considered most crucial for the imposing Aristotelian
ediﬁce of theoretical knowledge: the Posterior Analytics,
for scientiﬁc methodology, followed by the Physics, On the
Heavens, On the Soul, and ﬁnally the Metaphysics. The
quoted Aristotelian texts form an important witness to
the Arabic textual tradition: so do the commentaries
themselves, which take onboard the bifurcation of theoria
from lexis. Here the full weight of the foregone tradition
as it was known to Averroes makes itself felt, as Averroes
ﬁnds it necessary to grapple not only with those philos-
ophers with whom Aristotle himself wrestled but also
with subsequent Peripatetics, chief among them Alexan-
der of Aphrodisias, Themistius, Philoponus, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯,
Avicenna, and Ibn Ba¯jja. When commenting on the
Presocratics, Averroes even ﬁnds occasion to censure
496 I
Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes)

the speculative theologians (mutakallimu¯n) of his day,
whose methodology and thought he ﬁnds faulty in much
the same way Aristotle had found, for example, the Atom-
ists and the Megarians to be lacking in subtlety and com-
mon sense.
Characteristic of Averroes’ mature approach is his deter-
mination to treat any apparent discrepancy in Aristotelian
teaching as resulting either from (a) a misunderstanding
concerning the meaning of Aristotle’s text or (b) an intrusive
and unwelcome piece of innovation on behalf of a later
commentator. This not only affords Averroes a measure of
distance toward the Peripatetic tradition but also offers him
the rudiments of what would later become known as inter-
nal criticism (Urvoy 1991:58–59). Averroes conﬁdently
pronounces his judgment on what Aristotle would say,
should say, or must have said, sometimes in manifest
opposition to what Aristotle actually did say, either in
the Arabic text in front of him or the Greek in front of
us. Averroes always has his reasons for such emendations.
For him, Aristotle’s intentions form a tightly interwoven
whole in which nothing remains ungrounded, few things
prove superﬂuous, and nothing whatsoever can be allowed
to stand in contradiction to anything stated elsewhere. For
all that these commentaries assume a unity of thought in
Aristotle, which modern scholars ﬁnd hard to counte-
nance, they nevertheless bring forth into actuality
a compelling systematic Aristotelianism where one only
exists in Aristotle’s own writings in potentia (the phrase is
Jonathan Barnes’).
To this ﬁnal phase belong also Averroes’ independent
treatises and two sets of questions, composed on the
model of Alexander of Aphrodisias in order to address
apparent inconsistencies and doctrinal lacunae. These
treatises commence with the Sermo de substantia orbis in
1178 (as in many cases, the original Arabic is lost, but we
have Hebrew and Latin versions), and continue right up to
a collection of short treatises on Aristotle’s syllogistic
compiled in 1195. They show that Averroes, for all his
protestations
concerning
Aristotle’s
infallibility
as
a guide to the workings of reality, remained intellectually
curious to the end of his career, still searching for answers
to pressing questions of fundamental importance (see
Endress 2004). Also reﬂecting this, all three types of writ-
ing – Compendium, Explication, and Commentary –
remained subject to revision by the author. Averroes
edited his youthful Compendia to include criticisms of
Avicennian positions he himself had held earlier: mean-
while, Ivry (1997:511–519) has plausibly suggested that
work on the long-form Commentaries was an ongoing
process spanning several decades, inﬂuencing the phras-
ings adopted in the Explications along the way.
Argument and Assent
Central to Averroes’ views regarding the pursuit and trans-
mission of knowledge are the notions of conception
(tas:awwur) and assent (tas:dı¯q), two concepts that early
became part of Arabic Peripatetic teaching. Conception
and assent, which typically were introduced as preliminar-
ies to logic, tie in psychological with logical consider-
ations,
thereby
effecting
a
much-needed
(from
a naturalist point of view) link between ontology, episte-
mology, and reasoned argument. Brieﬂy, it was thought
that every act of assent requires prior conception, but that
both conception and assent can be arrived at through
various means. Besides apprehending a thing as it is in
itself, one may conceive of a thing through its likeness
(matha¯l); similarly, and more importantly from the
point of view of logic, besides the demonstrative syllogism
one may be moved to assent to a proposition through
dialectical or sophistic argumentation, or indeed through
rhetorical or poetic persuasion.
This so-called context theory of argument and persua-
sion, which the Arabic philosophers took over from Alex-
andrian teaching, served to counterbalance the great
weight placed on demonstration (found in science) with
a recognition that scientiﬁc discourse is after all only one
form of communication and may prove inappropriate in
some situations, for instance in dealing with people with
inadequate scientiﬁc training. Under such circumstances,
the responsible interlocutor will take into account his or
her social context and the intended audience and choose
the means of persuasion most likely to have a salutary
effect (see Black 1990).
It is the context theory that accounts for Averroes’
approach to the public defense of philosophy. Thanks to
the context theory, Averroes can regard himself as
a faithful follower of the Prophet at the same time that
he operates unapologetically as a scientiﬁcally minded
philosopher. In the Decisive Treatise, Averroes puts for-
ward his case in terms of Islamic law (see Mahdi 1984),
arguing ﬁrst that the Qurʾa¯n and the Prophetic traditions
obligate the pursuit of knowledge, which in turn is best
accomplished according to the method of the philoso-
phers, that is, through scientiﬁc investigation (from effects
to causes) and demonstrative argument (from causes to
effects). However, because not all people are capable of
attaining such a demanding ideal, the divine Law has also
made provisions for the dialectically minded (i.e., the
theologians) and the rhetorically persuaded. The latter
comprise the greater majority of the populace, who come
to rest securely in a viewpoint through an unreﬂective
acceptance of striking and compelling imagery. In his
Messenger, Muh:ammad, God has provided humanity
Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) I
497
I

with the ultimate rhetorician, someone who has been
handed images of such rare power that they bring forth
immediate recognition of their essential correctness. These
religious images reveal the exact same truths, which the
demonstrative sciences uncover: after all, ‘‘truth does not
oppose truth; rather, it agrees and bears witness to it’’
(Decisive Treatise, 9.1–2 Butterworth; see Taylor 2000).
Averroes neatly sidesteps the issue of whether the Prophet
himself should be regarded as a philosopher, something
over which al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ and Avicenna had notably disagreed.
For Averroes, it is enough that the Prophet has at his
disposal resources for persuasion, which the philosopher
qua philosopher is unable to access.
For Averroes, the claims of religion should be taken at
face value whenever possible. The likenesses of philosoph-
ical conceptions, which these claims encapsulate, are rich
enough to stand on their own; besides, the argumentative
procedures necessarily involved in any unpacking of alle-
gory or metaphor quickly become so convoluted that
untrained people run the risk of losing their way. For
this reason, Averroes apologizes for engaging in polemics
with al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ in the ﬁrst place; it would have been better
for all concerned had he not had to embark on this path
(Incoherence, 409, 427–429). However, because al-G˙ aza¯lı¯
and the Muslim speculative theologians in general had
made such a bad hash of attempting to reason dialectically
(and also of interpreting the religious metaphors handed
down by the prophets: see Averroes’ Exposition, passim), it
had become imperative for a genuine philosopher to come
forward, set the record straight, and show at the very least
that the charges brought by al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ against the philoso-
phers did not stick.
Averroes’ views on human nature and interaction are
undeniably elitist, insofar as he judges the majority of peo-
ple to be incapable of handling properly philosophical and
scientiﬁc argumentation. Averroes himself stresses the pos-
itive message that all people are called to the truth through
the three means of assent (Decisive Treatise, 8.2–17
Butterworth), whereas a stricter method would leave
happiness entirely out of reach of some people and put
others at mortal risk of losing their way. His approach,
essentially Fa¯ra¯bı¯an, sanctions a degree of dissimulation in
matters where the philosophical doctrine is on the surface
level very far from the popular understanding of the
matter – personal immortality provides a suitably infa-
mous example – but it is nevertheless a far cry from the
doctrine of double truth for which the Latin Averroists of
the thirteenth and sixteenth centuries were notorious.
As might be expected, in his philosophical commen-
taries, Averroes greatly favors the demonstrative approach,
to the point of repeatedly recasting Aristotle’s dialectical
arguments in natural philosophy as demonstrative proofs.
Another indication of the hold the demonstrative ideal
had on Averroes is the way he conceives of medicine in the
Kulliya¯t (Lat. Colliget). Insofar as medicine aspires to be
a science, it, too, has to set about the business of discov-
ering essential causes for essential effects and ignore the
contingent circumstances that sometimes prevent such
regularities from obtaining. Consequently, Averroes, like
Avicenna, conceives of medicine both as a science and as
an art; although the latter predominates in the practice of
the discipline, as well it should, medicine must for its
advancement ultimately rely on the soundness of the
former.
Notably, Averroes did not rest easy with the received
notion of demonstration as a scientiﬁc tool perfectly
aligned with Aristotelian syllogistic (proving that he did
not take it lightly either, or use it as a smokescreen to mask
private doubts about the philosophers’ claims to certi-
tude). All the way up to the very late Questions on Logic,
Averroes pursued the meaning especially of essential pred-
ication, a crucial aspect of Aristotelian philosophy of sci-
ence that proved surprisingly difﬁcult to pin down. In his
questions, Averroes introduces a distinction between acci-
dental and essential necessity which ended up inﬂuencing
Latin discussions. What is noteworthy about Averroes’
own treatment of the issue is that while the discussion is
of a technical character, its aims are markedly ontological,
having to do with how the syllogistic moods can be
deployed in sorting out corporeal reality.
Psychology
Averroes’ contributions to natural philosophy are many, as
he distilled much of the anterior tradition into his com-
mentaries and produced critical assessments of several key
issues. For the purposes of this survey, it is sufﬁcient to
concentrate on a single aspect of one key area of study –
Averroes’ views on psychology and speciﬁcally the
intellect – as long as it is understood that similarly intri-
cate stories could be told concerning his explorations of
many of the contested issues of Aristotelian physics (see
now Glasner 2009).
In keeping with Averroes’ Aristotelian project, the
Commentator’s cognitive psychology builds on the notion
of abstraction (tajrı¯d), taking on form without the matter.
Instead of the higher cognitive functions opening up to
a more exalted supernal realm, as al-Kindı¯’s school had
intimated, what Averroes envisions is an unfolding of the
essential and formal properties of the corporeal reality all
about us. This distaste for mystical leanings of any kind
marks Averroes out in the post-Avicennian phase of
Arabic
philosophy.
At
the
same
time,
Averroes’
498 I
Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes)

commitment to the abstractionist view makes acute for
him all the associated problems. For instance, Averroes
considered the vexed question (since antiquity) of how the
sensible form of a thing carries in a medium. Averroes’
answer was to evoke the notion of ‘‘spiritual intentions,’’
a mechanism that seems to have involved some kind of
subtle matter on the lines of either Galenic spirits or the
ru¯h: of Islamic speculative theology.
Averroes’ greatest efforts were expended in clarifying
the ontological status and epistemological role of the
material intellect, a topic on which Averroes changed his
mind several times during his career (Davidson 1992;
Ivry 1997; Taylor 2009). In the early Compendium, the
material intellect is tied to the imaginative faculty, making
of it a truly individual phenomenon, but also a perishable
one. In the Explication, and in a separate small treatise
discussing the nature of human conjunction (ittis:a¯l) with
the separate Agent Intellect, Averroes comes closest to
hitting upon a formulation that would guarantee personal
immortality:
here,
the
individual
material
intellect
develops through its contact with the active (still separate,
still impersonal) intellectual principle. Yet it is the position
spelled out in the Commentary, extant only in the Latin
except for some fragments, for which Averroes became
notorious. Now, both the Agent and the Material Intellects
are separate and eternal principles in which humans come
to share temporarily but which enjoy a life of their own;
individual immortality no longer ﬁgures in any philo-
sophical conception of human life; while the cogitative
faculty is entrusted with the task of providing the link
between individual intentions and the intellectual acts
that are of a truly universal character. Averroes seems to
have been moved to this uniquely austere view of intellec-
tion through a hard-nosed decision to follow through on
some general epistemological and ontological commit-
ments. He acknowledges that the whole question is
exceedingly difﬁcult, and indicates that without Aristotle
it might never have found its resolution (Commentary on
De anima, bk. 3, comm. 14).
Cosmology and Metaphysics
Based on the early Compendium of the Metaphysics
(155–156 Amı¯n), Averroes originally subscribed to an
emanationist cosmology and metaphysics, complete with
a Giver of Forms and a staggered procession of the many
from the One. al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s trenchant criticism seems to
have forced a rethink and, beginning with the Incoherence
of the Incoherence, Averroes rejects one by one several key
Avicennian doctrines. Among these are emanation as an
explanatory model (see Kogan 1981); Avicenna’s meta-
physical proof for God’s existence; the attendant modal
framework of contingency; the way that Avicenna con-
ceives of the relation between the heavens and the imma-
terial domain; and the way that providence is supposed to
ﬂow from this arrangement. As in psychology, Averroes
took his project to be that of uncovering the original
Aristotelian teaching, which he believed would happily
coincide both with the philosophical truth and with the
demands of revealed religion. The results, again similarly
to psychology, look more satisfying seen from a Hellenic
philosophical point of view than from the standpoint of
traditional Islamic orthodoxy.
Already in the Compendium (8–11 Amı¯n), Averroes
rejects the notion that existence could be treated as an
accident. Mirroring al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s criticism of al-Kindı¯ (see
Menn 2008), Averroes says that to take existence for a real
accident is to mistake a secondary intelligible for
a primary one. To speak of being univocally is to talk of
‘‘being as truth’’ (Aristotle, Met. 5.7.1017a31–35): but this
is a second-order term. Being in the primary sense, mean-
while, falls directly under one of the ten categories and is
thus subject to pros hen equivocity, just as Aristotle had
outlined. Accordingly, the being of beings is in reality
indistinguishable
from
their
essence,
meaning
that
Avicenna’s essence–existence distinction fails as well.
(Later on in the Commentary Averroes develops his own
interpretation of Metaphysics Zeta, arguing that essence is
to be equated with form).
These critical remarks give Averroes the necessary
tools to address anew coming-to-be in the sublunary
realm. Starting with the Incoherence (179ff. Bouyges)
Averroes sees the doctrine of emanation for the later
accretion it is, essentially Platonic in spirit (407 Bouyges),
and jettisons it in favor of a theory that sticks to the
established four Aristotelian causes and a fully immanent
model of sublunary causation. This leads to a rejection of
Avicenna’s
attempts
at
equating
efﬁcient
causality
(agency) with granting existence, for the reason that this
comes too close to the unacceptably arbitrary theology of
creation ex nihilo. In a famous passage in the Commentary
(bk. 12, comm. 18, 3:1497–1505 Bouyges) Averroes sets
forth his own mature theory of generation, which is the
same as Aristotle’s, namely that coming-to-be is nothing
other than the eduction into actuality of what potentially
exists in the subject, and this either through efﬁcient or
ﬁnal causality or (as is the rule in nature) through both.
Placing a great deal of weight on Aristotle’s words to the
effect that ‘‘man and the sun together generate man’’
(Phys. 2.2.194b13), Averroes traces the lines of generation
in natural processes to the chains of parents and offspring,
on the one hand (these he nominates accidental causes),
and to the push and pull exerted by the various heavenly
Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) I
499
I

bodies on the elements, on the other (these he calls essen-
tial, seeing as how they ﬁx the occurrence of a given
sublunary form within the larger cosmic system: see the
Commentary on the Physics, bk. 8, comms. 15 and 47;
Incoherence, 20–23 Bouyges). These two are the only agen-
cies needed to explain coming-to-be and passing-away,
meaning that the emanationist framework is superﬂuous
in addition to being open to the charges brought up by al-
G˙ aza¯lı¯ (cf. Incoherence, 184ff. Bouyges).
The celestial rotations, with their need for a mover
with inﬁnite power, are sufﬁcient to bridge corporeal
reality with what lies beyond it. Thus, Aristotle’s promise
of nature pointing beyond itself is fulﬁlled, and the threat
of physics becoming ﬁrst philosophy is deﬂected (see Phys.
2.7.198a26–31 together with Averroes’ comments ad loc.;
also Met. 6.1 and comments). Avicenna was therefore
mistaken in initiating his supposedly metaphysical proof
for God’s existence. Since no science is able to demonstrate
its own ﬁrst principles, it is only as an Unmoved Mover
that God is scientiﬁcally proved to exist. Metaphysics then
takes over this notion and further clariﬁes the immaterial
substances’ mode of being and causality.
As regards modal metaphysics, Averroes heaps scorn
on Avicenna’s notion of something possible in itself, nec-
essary through another. For Avicenna’s who subscribed to
a temporal and statistical interpretation of the modal
terms, this is simply a contradiction in terms: the neces-
sary just denotes the eternal, and vice versa (see Kukkonen
2000). Because Averroes takes Avicenna’s concept to refer
to the celestial bodies – an interpretation shared by key
post-Avicennian thinkers in the East – he perceives it also
as doing irrevocable damage to Aristotle’s cosmological
proof for an immaterial mover. In an effort to rectify the
situation, he goes through the option of treating the heav-
enly motions as being contingent in themselves, yet nec-
essary through another (Commentary on the Metaphysics,
bk. 12, comm. 41, 3:1632–1636 Bouyges), before settling
on the view that the whole cosmic system is unequivocally
necessary in and of itself (Questions in Physics, q. 9).
This is a truly radical view, yet Averroes does not shy
away from the implications. The reason the world needs
an Unmoved Mover is that every motion requires a mover,
and in the case of an eternal motion only an immaterial
mover will ﬁt the description. This does not imply any
contingency in the world order: to the contrary, it assures
its necessary character through and through. Averroes
seems to have grasped the fundamentally nonnegotiable
nature of Aristotelian essentialism for the functioning of
a robust Aristotelian science and to have accepted the
consequence that worldly processes of generation and
corruption are of a piece in their unassailable character,
leaving no space, for example, for miracles. In Averroes’
estimation, Avicenna went several steps too far in accom-
modating the Ashʿarite theologians’ insistence on divine
voluntarism and direct creation (Kogan 1985; Leaman
1988:42–81). Conventional or sentimental notions of
how divinity must relate to the world have no place in
a scientiﬁc worldview such as the one Averroes is after.
A similar sense of detachment informs Averroes’
understanding of divine knowledge and providence. The
Commentator contends that the First Mover knows other
things not as universal or particular, but through being the
cause of their being (Commentary on the Metaphysics, bk.
12, comm. 51; Decisive Treatise, 13.8–14.9 Butterworth). It
is unclear whether this amounts to anything more than the
knowledge a perfectly actual principle potentially has of
the varying degrees of potentiality and actuality. Like
Alexander before him, Averroes contends that providence
can only extend so far as the perpetuation of the species:
unlike Alexander, Averroes has a detailed story to show
how this occurs, and why it speaks in favor of monothe-
ism. According to the Peripatetic doctrine transmitted
through Alexander and al-Kindı¯’s school, the rotations of
the heavenly spheres are responsible for sublunary cycles
of generation and corruption. Averroes seizes the question
of how these motions are coordinated and why. Because
the higher cannot as a matter of principle care for the
lower – all of nature is teleologically oriented and strives
for individual perfection – it is inconceivable that the
heavenly spheres should actually wish to beneﬁt what lies
beneath them. So why do the providential effects none-
theless accrue? Averroes’ answer is that the inner hierarchy
of the heavenly movers, whose possibility has been
established in philosophical psychology (see Taylor
1998), is arranged according to a hierarchy of knowing,
and that each of the heavenly intellects has an incomplete
share of the full intellectual perfection enjoyed by the First
Mover. It is because all of these intellections (in some
hard-to-describe fashion) coincide in the First that the
motions
they
produce
likewise
come
together
in
a harmonious whole. This is the gloss Averroes puts on
the Aristotelian dictum that the order of the universe, like
the order of the army, is found both in the arrangement of
the whole and in its leader, but primarily in the latter
(Commentary on the Metaphysics, bk. 12, comms. 52 and
58; Incoherence, 185–193; see Kukkonen 2002).
See also: ▶Arabic Texts: Natural Philosophy, Latin Trans-
lations of ▶Arabic Texts: Philosophy, Latin Translations
of ▶Aristotle, Arabic ▶Ibn Rushd (Averroes), Latin
Translations of ▶al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, Abu¯ H˙ a¯mid Muh:ammad
▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶Philosophy, Arabic
500 I
Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes)

Bibliography
Primary Sources
Averroes (1562–1574) Aristotelis opera cum Averrois commentariis, 14
vols. Iunctas, Venice (repr Minerva GmbH, Frankfurt a.M., 1962)
Averroes (1859) Kita¯b al-kashf ‘an mana¯hij al-adilla fı¯ ‘aqa¯’id al-milla
(Exposition of the sorts of arguments [found] in religious creeds),
ed. Mu¨ller MJ. Philosophie und Theologie von Averroes. G. Franz,
Mu¨nchen
Averroes (1911) Bida¯yat al-mujtahid wa-niha¯ya al-muqtas:id (The begin-
ning for one who strives and the end for one who is satisﬁed).
Maktabat al-Ha¯njı¯, Cairo
Averroes (1930) Tahaˆfut al-tahaˆfut (The incoherence of the incoherence),
ed. Bouyges M. Imprimerie Catholique, Beirut
Averroes (1938–1952) Tafsı¯r ma¯ ba‘d al-tabı¯‘a (Commentary on the
Metaphysics), 4 vols, ed. Bouyges M. Imprimerie Catholique, Beirut
Averroes (1953) Averrois Cordubensis commentarium magnum in
Aristotelis De anima libros, ed. Crawford FS. The Mediaeval Acad-
emy of America, Cambridge
Averroes (1958) Talkhı¯s: [sic] ma¯ ba‘d al-tabı¯‘a (Compendium of the
Metaphysics), ed. Amı¯n ‘U. Mustafa al-Baˆbıˆ al-Halabıˆ, Cairo
Averroes (1982) Talkhı¯s: mant:iq Arist:u¯ (Explication of Aristotle’s Logic),
3 vols, ed. Jehamy G. al-Maktabat al-sharqiyya, Beirut
Averroes (1983) Jawa¯mi‘. . .al-sama¯‘al-t:abı¯‘ı¯ (Compendium of the Phys-
ics), ed. Puig J. Instituto Hispano-Arabe de Cultura, Madrid
Averroes (1986) De Substantia Orbis, ed. and trans. Hyman A. The
Mediaeval Academy of America, Cambridge
Averroes (1987) Kita¯b al-kulliyya¯t fı¯al-t:ibb (On the general [principles] of
medicine), ed. Fo´rneas JM. Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Cientı¯ﬁcas, Madrid
Averroes (1991) Questions in Physics, trans. Goldstein HT. Kluwer,
Dordrecht
Averroes (1994) Rasa¯’il Ibn Rushd, 6 vols. Da¯r al-ﬁkr al-lubna¯nı¯, Beirut
(contains editions, none of them critical, of all of Averroes’s Aristo-
telian compendia)
Averroes (2002) Middle commentary on Aristotle’s De anima, ed. and
trans. Ivry AL. Brigham Young University Press, Provo
Averroes (2003) Averrois Commentaria Magna in Aristotelem De celo et
mundo, 2 vols, ed. Carmody FJ. Peeters, Leuven
Averroes (2005) Averroes’ Mittlerer Kommentar zu Aristoteles’ De
generatione et corruptione. ed. Eichner H. Scho¨ningh, Paderborn
Secondary Sources
al-‘Alawı¯, JD (1986) Al-Matn al-rushdı¯. Madkhal li-qira¯’a jadı¯da (The
Rushdian Corpus. An introduction to a new reading). Daˆr Tu¯bqa¯l
li-l-nashr, Casablanca
Black DL (1990) Logic and Aristotle’s rhetoric and poetics in medieval
Arabic philosophy. Brill, Leiden
Butterworth C (1992) The political teaching of Averroes. Arabic Sci Philos
2(2):187–202
Davidson HA (1992) Alfarabi, Avicenna, and Averroes, on intellect.
Oxford University Press, Oxford
Druart T-A (1993) Averroes: the commentator and the commentators. In:
Schrenk LP (ed) Aristotle in late antiquity. The Catholic University of
America Press, Washington, pp 184–202
Endress G (2004) ‘If God Will Grant Me Life’. Averroes the philosopher:
studies on the history of his development. Documenti e studi sulla
tradizione ﬁlosoﬁca medievale 15:227–253
Endress G, Aertsen JA (eds) (1999) Averroes and the Aristotelian tradi-
tion. Brill, Leiden
Genequand C (1984) Ibn Rushd’s Metaphysics. A translation with intro-
duction of Ibn Rushd’s Commentary on Aristotle’s Metaphysics,
book Laˆm. Brill, Leiden
Geoffroy M (1999) L’almohadisme the´ologique d’Averroe`s (Ibn Rushd).
Arch Hist Doctrin Litt M-Age 66:9–47
Glasner R (2009) Averroes’ Physics: a turning point in medieval natural
philosophy. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Griffel F (2002) The relationship between Averroes and al-Ghazaˆlıˆ: as it
presents itself in Averroes’ early writings, especially in his Commen-
tary on al-Ghazaˆlıˆ’s al-Mustasfaˆ. In: Inglis J (ed) Medieval philosophy
and the classical tradition. Curzon Press, Richmond, pp 51–63
Gutas D (1993) Aspects of literary form and genre in Arabic logical works.
In: Burnett C (ed) Glosses and commentaries on Aristotelian logical
texts. The Warburg Institute, London, pp 29–76
Ivry AL (1997) Averroes’ Short Commentary on Aristotle’s De Anima.
Documenti e studi sulla tradizione ﬁlosoﬁca medievale 8:511–549
Kogan BS (1981) Averroes and the theory of emanation. Mediev Stud
54:384–404
Kogan BS (1985) Averroes and the metaphysics of causation. State
University of New York Press, Albany
Kugelgen A von (1994) Averroes und die arabische Moderne. E. J. Brill,
Leiden
Kukkonen T (2000) Possible worlds in the Taha¯fut al-taha¯fut. Averroes on
plenitude and possibility. J Hist Philos 38(3):329–347
Kukkonen T (2002) Averroes and the teleological argument. Relig Stud
38:405–428
Leaman O (1988) Averroes and his philosophy. Clarendon Press, Oxford
Mahdi M (1984) Remarks on Averroes’ Decisive Treatise. In: Marmura
ME (ed) Islamic theology and philosophy. State University of
New York Press, Albany, pp 188–202
Menn S (2008) Al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s Kitaˆb al-h:uru¯f and his analysis of the senses of
being. Arabic Sci Philos 18(1):59–97
Taylor RC (1998) Averroes on psychology and the principles of metaphys-
ics. J Hist Philos 36(4):507–523
Taylor RC (2000) ‘Truth does not contradict truth’: Averroes and the unity
of truth. Topoi 19:3–16
Taylor RC (2009) Averroes (Ibn Rushd) of Cordoba. Long Commentary
on the De anima of Aristotle. Yale University Press, New Haven
Urvoy D (1991) Ibn Rushd. Routledge, London
Ibn Rushd (Averroes), Latin
Translations of
MARC GEOFFROY
Laboratoire d’E´tudes sur les Monothe´ismes
Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque
Villejuif
France
Abstract
Some of the most important philosophical works by
Averroes, or the Commentator, as he was called in the
Middle Ages, were translated into Latin. Beginning in the
thirteenth century, this ﬂow of translations made available
Ibn Rushd (Averroes), Latin Translations of I
501
I

to the Latin scholarship a great amount of Averroes’
commentaries on Aristotle. In the fourteenth century,
Latin translation were done of the main personal philo-
sophical work by Averroes, the Taha¯fut al-Taha¯fut against
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s critique of philosophy. Later on, in Renaissance
Italy, new translations were done of Averroes’ commen-
taries, on the basis of the Hebrew versions, that
made available several texts previously ignored. An
uninterrupted chain of translations from the Middle
Ages to the early modern times, most of them gathered
in the epoch-making ‘‘Giuntine’’ editions, show the never-
ceasing interest of western scholarship in Averroes’ inter-
pretation of Aristotle.
The Thirteenth Century: The Aristotelian
Commentaries
During the Middle Ages, most Latin translations of
Averroes’ works were done between the years 1220 and
1260 by a few scholars in command of Arabic, who were
active either in the milieu of the translators of Toledo, or in
Sicily at the court of Frederick II. The most proliﬁc of these
translators was Michael Scot, who was born in Scotland in
the second half of the twelfth century and died in Sicily
between 1234 and 1236. He probably studied at Oxford
and Paris; in 1215, he participated in the fourth Lateran
Council in the retinue of the Archbishop of Toledo. He
stayed in this city, and in 1217 he completed the Latin
version of al-Kita¯b fı¯ l-hay’a (lit. On Cosmology, trans. as
De motibus celorum) by al-Bit:ru¯jı¯ (Alpetragius). His trans-
lation of the Arabic version of the three zoological
treatises of Aristotle (History of Animals, On Generation
of Animals, The Parts of Animals), under the common title
De animalibus (Kita¯b al-H˙ ayawa¯n), perhaps also dates
from this period. He stayed in Bologna from 1220, and
then became the court astrologer of Frederick II in 1227.
Probably before this period, but in any case after 1217, he
ﬁnished the Latin version of Averroes’ Great Commentary
on Aristotle’s De caelo. His translations of the other com-
mentaries of Averroes, which were available in Paris
already in 1231, might have been done at the court of
Frederick II. The translations stemming from this period
are those of Averroes’ Great Commentaries on the Physics,
De anima, and Metaphysics, of the Middle Commentaries
on On Generation and Corruption and the Meteorology, of
which Michael translated only the fourth book, as well as
of the paraphrase of the Arabic version of the Parva
naturalia (all of the short treatises included in the Parva
nat. bear in the Arabic version the title Kita¯b al-h:iss wa-l-
mah:su¯s, De sensu et sensato). The Latin translation done by
Michael Scot circulated in two versions: the second one,
preserved in a single manuscript in Paris (versio Parisina)
was probably a quite unfaithful adaptation of Michael’s
translation. He also translated a collection of ﬁve treaties
and short writings of Averroes on cosmology, the De
Substantia orbis. With the sole exception of the commen-
tary on the De caelo, the attribution of these versions to
Michael Scot is not explicit in the manuscripts, although
their circulation – grouped as they are into the same
manuscripts – as well as their style and vocabulary render
Michael’s authorship most likely.
Another Latin translation of Averroes’ Great Com-
mentary on the Physics is known, but only partially pre-
served. It has been attributed with good reasons to
Hermann the German. His life is even less known than
that of Michael Scot, but he seems to have been associated,
at a somewhat later time, to the same circles as his prede-
cessor. Since Roger Bacon calls him translator Manfredi,
one can assume that he was also appointed at the court of
the Hohenstaufens. He became Bishop of Astorga in 1266
and died in 1272. It was in Toledo that he did the trans-
lations we credit him with, and in particular that of
Averroes’ Middle Commentary on the Nicomachean
Ethics, dating from 1240. According to his own testimony,
his Arabic was far from good, and it is assumed that he
beneﬁted from the assistance of some Muslim interpreters
who explained the texts to him. Hermann was interested
in the Graeco-Arabic tradition of Aristotle’s Rhetoric, and
did a partial translation of Averroes’ Middle Commentary
on it, perhaps in 1256. He also used it for his translation of
Aristotle’s Rhetoric, in which Aristotle’s text is alternated
with commentaries by al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯(Didascalia in rhetoricam),
Avicenna, and in which also Averroes’ Middle Commen-
tary is cited. On the other hand, the date of 1256 for his
translation of Averroes’ Middle Commentary on the
Poetics is sure.
The remaining works of Averroes about logic were
translated by a scholar known as William of Luna, who
probably originated in the town of Luna in Spain. After
having been in touch with the group of translators in
Toledo in the ﬁrst half of the thirteenth century, he was
active at the court of King Manfred between 1258 and
1266. During this period, he did several translations
from Arabic, namely ﬁve Middle commentaries and para-
phrases of Averroes’ logical works that had previously and
independently been translated from Arabic into Hebrew
by Jacob Anatoli in Naples, around 1232. The translations
by William of Luna are the following: (a) Averroes’ Middle
Commentary on Porphyry’s Isagoge, lost in Arabic; the
date of the original work is unknown; (b) the Middle
Commentary on the Categories; (c) the Middle Commen-
tary on the De interpretatione (edited by Roland Hissette:
see the Bibliography); (d) the Middle Commentary on the
502 I
Ibn Rushd (Averroes), Latin Translations of

Prior Analytics; and (e) the Middle Commentary on the
Posterior Analytics. These works might have been sent by
King Manfred to the University of Paris near 1263; be this
as it may, their circulation was limited.
A
dozen
medieval
manuscripts
(see
Lacombe,
Aristoteles Latinus, vol I, pp 107–110) transmit isolated
chapters or fragments from Averroes’ epitome (Talkhı¯s:) of
the De animalibus (containing The Parts of Animals and
On Generation of Animals). One of these manuscripts
explicitly attributes the translation to Pedro Gallego
(Petrus Gallegus, d. 1267), who was a Franciscan in com-
mand of Arabic and counselor to the King of Castile,
Alfonso X the Wise. Pedro Gallego also translated
Pseudo-Aristotle’s Œconomica and had a genuine interest
in Aristotle’s zoological works, as shown by his own para-
phrase of the Historia animalium (not commented upon
by Averroes). The Latin translation is in fact a selection of
chapters of Averroes’ Epitome of the De animalibus wisely
chosen by Pedro, because it contains many important
passages from Averroes’ Epitome: for example, his discus-
sions of the inﬂuence of sperms (corresponding to On the
Generation of Animals II, 1–4), on male and female fea-
tures (On the Generations of Animals IV, 1), on the brain
(On the Parts of Animals II, 7), and on the heart (On the
Parts of Animals III, 4).
In 1278, the Catalan Dominican Raimondo Martı´
completed his famous work of religious–philosophical
polemic entitled Pugio ﬁdei adversus mauros et judaeos.
This work contains many long quotations from Averroes,
and among them the whole epistle entitled Qualiter possit
Deus singula scire, known in Arabic as D˙ amı¯ma (Appen-
dix) on divine knowledge (al-‘ilm al-ila¯hı¯); this Latin
translation also circulated separately. Finally, a Latin ver-
sion of the medical encyclopedia al-Kulliya¯t fı¯ l-t:ibb (The
General Rules of Medicine) was made in 1255 in Padua by
the Jewish scholar Bonacosa.
The Fourteenth Century: The Destructio
destructionis and Other Personal Works
In the fourteenth century, a version was done (with an
incomplete end) of the famous refutation of al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ by
Averroes, the Taha¯fut al-Taha¯fut (Destructio destructionis).
It was translated in 1328 by the Jew Calonymos ben
Calonymos ben Meir of Arles at the request of King
Robert the Wise of Naples, but it had at the time a very
limited circulation. Other texts translated in the Middle
Ages had so a limited spread, that only recently their
existence has been discovered. This is the case of
a treatise entitled De separatione primi principii, which
discusses issues relating to the exegesis of Physics VIII,
10, on the movement of the celestial bodies. The Latin
version was done in 1334 by Alfonso Dinis in Valladolid
(d. 1352), an alleged bastard of the Portuguese royal
family. A bishop, a doctor, and a master of theology,
Alfonso Dinis was assisted in the translation by Abner
of Burgos, a well-known polemicist, a converted Jew, and
Sacristan of the cathedral of Burgos. This text is pre-
served only in the manuscript Oxford, Bodleian Library,
Digby 236, which also contains a compilation of two
treatises by Averroes on the union of the human being
with the Agent Intellect, reworked and enlarged with pas-
sages taken from al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯. This compilation bears the title
De perfectione naturali intellectus, and was anonymously
translated into Latin in the fourteenth century, on the
basis of a Hebrew text concocted in all likelihood by the
Jewish
philosopher
Maimonides
Hillel
of
Verona
(d. 1295). This text, also known under the alternate title
De animae beatitudine, did not emerge from the shadows
until the commentary that the Paduan Averroist Agostino
Nifo wrote on it; the commentary, completed in 1492, was
published in 1503.
The Renaissance and the Hebrew-to-Latin
Translations
The Latin Middle Ages did not know the complete works
of Averroes. The Jewish communities, heirs to a scholarly
tradition in which Averroism played a pivotal role, had
a more complete corpus at their disposal. Thanks to the
new cultural climate of the Renaissance Italy, this heritage
gave rise to a second wide movement of translations, that
made available to readers several texts previously ignored.
With few rare exceptions, the translators were Jews,
coming either from various eastern countries or from
southern Italy, or again ﬂed to Italy from Spain after the
expulsion of their community in 1492. These scholars
began to play a leading role in the intellectual life of Italy
in the late ﬁfteenth century. The most important of these
were (a) Elia del Medigo, a Cretian from Chania (d. 1497):
a physician and a philosopher, he taught in Padua and in
Florence and did numerous translations on behalf of Pico
della Mirandola and Cardinal Domenico Grimani (d.
1523); (b) Calonymos ben David (also known as Maestro
Calo Calonymo), a doctor who lived in Naples and Venice
in the ﬁrst half of the sixteenth century; (c) Abraham de
Balmes (d. 1523), the most proliﬁc of all these translators:
he was from Lecce, Puglia; after having been awarded his
doctorate in Arts and Medicine in Naples, he moved to
Padua and Venice; he was the physician to Cardinal
Grimani, and most of his work was dedicated to him;
(d) Jacob Mantino, son of a Jewish family exiled from
Tortosa in 1492, and doctor of medicine from the Univer-
sity of Padua; he became the personal physician to Pope
Ibn Rushd (Averroes), Latin Translations of I
503
I

Paul III (d. 1549), and taught medicine at the University of
Rome between 1539 and 1541. Having accompanied the
Ambassador of the Republic of Venice on a mission to
Damascus, he died in this city in 1549; (e) Paolo Ricci, or
Paulus Israelita (d. 1541), was a converted Jew, and
a professor of philosophy and medicine at Pavia; (f) Vitale
Nisso, known only by a few translations: this name is
mentioned in some editions of the Renaissance and early
modern times; (g) Giovanni Francesco Burana (d. after
1523 in Venice), a Christian and professor of logic at
Padua. He published several translations of Averroes’ log-
ical works. His linguistic skills have been questioned, how-
ever, making one suspect that his translations were based
on earlier anonymous translations.
The work of these scholars is inseparable from the
academic activity at the time. Averroism ﬂourished at
the universities of Bologna and Padua. The patronage of
humanists of the time, clergy or laity, also played a big role.
We must also recall the important role played by the
development of printing in making the works of Averroes
widely circulate together with the editions of the complete
works of Aristotle, that were often printed along with the
commentaries by the master of Cordoba. The period saw
the mass distribution, by printing, of most of the works
translated from the Middle Ages onward, the publishing of
new translations, most of them from Hebrew, which were
often considered difﬁcult and corrupt, and, ﬁnally, the
production of new translations, from Hebrew, of works
previously unknown in Latin.
The ﬁrst editing enterprise took place between 1472
and 1475. During this period, the Paduan publisher
Laurentius Canozius edited in order Aristotle’s Physics
with Averroes’ Great Commentary (translated by Michael
Scot), the De anima with the Great Commentary (in
Michael Scot’s translation), On Generation and Corruption
and the De caelo together with the Great Commentary
(translated by Michael Scot), the Metaphysics together
with the Great Commentary (in Michael’s translation),
the Meteorology and the Parva naturalia with the Middle
Commentary (in Michael’s translation), and the De
substantia orbis, also in Michael’s translation.
A little later, the edition of the works of Aristotle with
Averroes’ commentaries published in Venice (Andreas
Torresanus de Asula and Bartholomaeus de Blavis, or de
Alexandria, 1483) by Nicoletto Vernia (d. 1499), the
teacher of Nifo and of Pomponazzi, adds to the corpus
of the ‘‘natural’’ works also Averroes’ commentaries on the
Organon, in the translation of William of Luna. The Mid-
dle Commentary on the Poetics, in the translation of
Hermann the German, had previously been published
together with Aristotle’s Rhetoric and the corresponding
compendium by al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (Venice, Philippus Petri, 1481).
The partial version of Averroes’ Middle Commentary on
the Rhetoric, still in Hermann’s translation, was published
later, in Rhetorica Aristotelis [. . .] (Venice, per Georgium
Arrivabenum, imp. Octaviani Scoti, 1515).
Many reprints of this corpus, with little or no change,
followed in the decades after. In the same period, some
new Hebrew–Latin
translations
appeared separately.
Aldus
Manutius
published
in
1497,
in
Venice,
a collection of seven logical questions of Averroes (on the
De interpretatione, Prior Analytics, and Posterior Analytics)
translated by Elia del Medigo from Hebrew at the request
of Pico della Mirandola. These logical questions circulated
in Italy in the fourteenth century Hebrew versions by
Samuel b. Yehuda b. Meshullam (1320) and Calonymos
ben Calonymos. Elia had also published the ﬁrst transla-
tion of the Summary (i.e., the small commentary) of
Aristotle’s Meteorology, and Book I–III of the Middle
Commentary on the same work (In meteorologica
Aristotelis [. . .], Venice, Andreas Torresanus, 1488). Both
of these works would be included in the Giunta editions
of 1550–1552 and 1562 (vol V, f. 487r-400r). The same
volume from 1488 also contains the ﬁrst Latin version,
made by Elia del Medigo himself, of the prologue to Book
Lambda of the Metaphysics, which was absent from the
medieval
Latin
translation.
In
1489,
he
produced
a translation of Averroes’ commentary on Plato’s Republic,
which was later followed by another version, a paraphrase
by Jacob Mantino, printed in the Giunta editions of 1550
and 1562 (vol III, f. 334v-372v).
In 1511, an edition appeared in Milan, presenting
a translation from Hebrew of Averroes’ Middle Commen-
tary on the De caelo, by Paolo Ricci (reprinted in the
Giunta editions of 1550–1552 and 1562, vol V, f. 272r-
336v), together with Ricci’s version of the Hebrew–Latin
prologue to the Great Commentary on the Physics (differ-
ent from the one which was published after 1472 in
Michael Scot’s version), and the version of the prologue
to the commentary on Book Lambda of the Metaphysics.
The latter was reprinted in the Giunta edition of 1550–
1552, which includes a third version of the prologue to
Lambda by Mantino.
In 1521, Jacob Mantino presented for the ﬁrst time, in
Rome, a complete translation based on a Hebrew model,
of the paraphrase of Averroes’ commentary on De
animalibus. This is reprinted in the Giunta edition of
1550–1552 and 1562 (vol VI, part 2, f. 43v-144r).
The Middle Commentary on the Physics exists in two
unedited Hebrew–Latin versions. One of these (MS Paris,
Bibliothe`que
Nationale
de
France,
lat.
6507)
was
conducted in 1500 by a certain Vitalis Dactylomelos,
504 I
Ibn Rushd (Averroes), Latin Translations of

whom some have thought they could identify as the
famous
Jewish
Platonist
who
inspired
Pico
della
Mirandola, Johanan Alemanno (d. 1504). The other uned-
ited version was due to Abraham de Balmes (MS Vat. lat.
4548). Jacob Mantino undertook to translate the para-
phrase of Physics, but he was interrupted by death in
1549. The Giunta edition of 1550–1552, reprinted in
1562 (vol IV, f. 434r-456v), includes this translation until
the third book, where the work of Mantino was
interrupted.
The 11 sections of the summary (Mukhtas:ar) of
Averroes’ logic were translated for the ﬁrst time into
Latin from the Hebrew version by Jacob ben Makhir,
completed in 1289. This translation (ed. Giunta, 1562,
vol I, part 2b, f. 75r-36r) ﬁrst published in 1523 (Venice,
typ. Ant. De Sabio) was done by Abraham de Balmes (d.
1523). In the same volume of 1523, Abraham also offers
a new collection, much more complete, of the logical
questions mentioned above; as we have seen, seven ques-
tions had been translated by Elia del Medigo, whereas this
version includes 18 questions (reprinted in 1550–1552 and
then again in the Giunta edition of 1562 [vol I, part 2B, f.
75v-120v pars 2B]). In the same volume Abraham
included, also for the ﬁrst time, the Great Commentary
on the Posterior Analytics unknown to the Latin Middle
Ages, but which had been translated into Hebrew by
Calonymos ben Calonymos in 1314. Another version, by
Giovanni Francesco Burana, was published for the ﬁrst
time in the Giunta edition of 1550–1552. Finally, a third
version, by Jacob Mantino, is found in the Giunta edition
of 1562 (partial: Book I, until comm. 149). The synoptic
edition of these three versions is contained in the Giunta
edition of 1562 (vol I, part 2A, f. 1r-568v). In the 1523
volume mentioned above, Abraham includes also the ﬁrst
translation of the Middle Commentary on the Topics,
which had not been available in the Middle Ages. Another
partial version (Books I–IV) was made by Mantino and
published in 1550 next to Abraham’s version in the Giunta
edition (reprinted in the Giunta edition of 1562, vol I, part
3, f. 3r-138r). This applies to the Middle Commentary on
the Sophistical Refutations as well, which Abraham
published in 1523 and which was reprinted in the Giunta
editions of 1550 and 1662 (vol I, part 3, f. 139r-176v).
Abraham also published in the volume of 1523 his trans-
lation of the Middle Commentary on the Poetics, which
was already known in its medieval version. It is accompa-
nied by another version by Mantino in the Giunta editions
of 1550 and 1562 (vol II, f. 217v-228v). The complete
translation by Abraham of the Middle Commentary on
the Rhetoric superseded the partial version of Hermann
the German. This complete version was also published in
1523 and reprinted in the Giunta editions of 1550 and
1562 (vol II, f. 69r-156v).
Giovanni Francesco Burana took over the retransla-
tion of two of the Middle Commentaries on the Organon,
i.e., that on the Prior Analytics, published in Venice a year
after the death of the translator in 1524 and incorporated
in the Giunta editions of 1550–1552 and 1562 (vol I, part
1, f. 1r-168v) and that on the Posterior Analytics, which is
ﬁrst found in the Giunta edition of 1550–1552, and then in
the one of 1562 (vol I, part 2b, f. 1r-35v). Based on the
Arabic–Hebrew version of Jacob Anatoli, Jacob Mantino
retranslated the Middle Commentaries on the Isagoge and
De interpretatione. This version, originally published in
1550, was then included in the Giunta edition of 1562
(vol I, part 1, f. 1r-22r).
In 1527, David ben Calonymos makes a new transla-
tion, more complete, of Averroes’ Taha¯fut al-Taha¯fut
under
the
title
Destructio
destructionis
philosophiae
Algazelis, as well as a version of one of Averroes’ Epistles
on the union of the Agent Intellect with the human being
(Libellus seu epistola Averrois de connexione intellectus
agentis cum homine), which had already been incorpo-
rated, with adaptations, in the treatise De animae
beatitudine. Finally, the Renaissance translations of the
Colliget must be mentioned: the partial translation by
Symphorien Champier (done within 1537) was super-
seded by the complete translation by Jacob Mantino
(done within 1549).
The work of the Renaissance translators also enriches
the corpus of the whole series of summaries or ‘‘short
commentaries’’ that the medieval Latins had ignored.
The one on the Physics was not known in the Middle
Ages. In addition to the summaries on logic mentioned
above, and to that on the Meteorology translated by Elia del
Medigo, the short commentary on the De gen. corr. was
translated and edited by Abraham de Balmes. The version
edited in the Giunta edition (vol V, f. 389v-398v) is attrib-
uted to Vitale Nisso. The short commentary on the Meta-
physics was translated by Jacob Mantino in 1524, the one
on the De anima by Abraham de Balmes. The latter also
translated in 1521, for Cardinal Grimani, a theological
treatise by Averroes, the Kita¯b al-Kashf ‘an mana¯hij al-
adilla (The Clariﬁcation of the Methods of the Proofs), but
the translation remained unpublished.
The whole of the collective work represented by the
translations of the Renaissance, a work that covers nearly
a century, was printed in the editions mentioned above,
the so-called Giuntine, created at the instigation of the
Tommaso Giunta, one of the Florentine editors Giunta,
who settled in Venice. The ﬁrst edition was published
between 1550 and 1552, and a second, further increased,
Ibn Rushd (Averroes), Latin Translations of I
505
I

in 1562 (reprint Frankfurt am Main, 1962). It was the
largest and most systematic publication that emerged in
this period. It gathered the works of Aristotle, including
those not commented on by Averroes, as well as some of the
personal works of Averroes. In particular, it includes the
Taha¯fut al-Taha¯fut (Destructio destructionis) in the 1328
translation by Calonymos ben Calonymos (the 1550 edi-
tion forms the basis of the modern edition of the Latin text
provided by Beatrice Zedler: see the bibliography), as well
as Jacob Mantino’s Latin version of the Kulliya¯t fı¯ l-t:ibb
(Colliget).
See also: ▶Arabic Texts: Philosophy, Latin Translations of
▶Arabic Texts: Natural Philosophy, Latin Translations
of ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d
(Averroes) ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Latin Translations of ▶al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s
Maqa¯s:id al-Fala¯sifa, Latin Translation of
Bibliography
Primary Sources
An extremely useful survey of manuscripts, critical editions, translations
and literature is available at: http://www.thomasinstitut.uni-koeln.
de/averroes_db/
Averroe` (1992) Parafrasi della Repubblica nella traduzione di Elia del
Medigo, ed. Coviello A, Fornaciari PE. Olschki, Florence
Averroes (1961) Destructio destructionum philosophiae Algazelis in the
Latin version of Calo Calonymos, ed. with an intro. Zedler BH.
Marquette University Press, Milwaukee
Averroe`s (1986) Averroes’ De substantia orbis. Critical edition of the
Hebrew text with English translation and commentary by Hyman
A. The Medieval Academy of America and the Israel Academy of
Sciences and Humanities, Cambridge/Jerusalem
Averroe`s (2001) La Be´atitude de l’aˆme, ed. and trans. Geoffroy M, Steel C.
Vrin, Paris (coll. Sic et Non)
Averroe`s (2009) Averroes (Ibn Rushd) of Cordoba. Long commentary on
the De anima of Aristotle (trans. with intro. and notes: Taylor RC;
Druart T-A, subeditor). Yale library of medieval philosophy. Yale
University Press, New Haven/London
Hissette
Roland
(1996)
Commentum
medium
super
libro
Peri
Hermeneias Aristotelis. Translatio Wilhelmo Luna attributa, ed.
Hissette R. Averrois opera, Series B: Averroes Latinus 12. Peeters,
Leuven
Steel Carlos, Guldentops Guy (1997) An unknown treatise of Averroes
against the Avicennians on the ﬁrst cause. Rech The´ol Philos Me´die´v
64:86–135
Secondary Sources
Studies
Burnett Ch (1994) Michael Scot and the transmission of scientiﬁc culture
from Toledo to Bologna via the Court of Frederick II Hohenstaufen.
Micrologus 2:101–126
Burnett Ch (1999) The sons of Averroes with the emperor Frederick and
the transmission of the philosophical works by Ibn Rushd. In:
Endress G, Aertsen JA, Braun K (eds) Averroes and the Aristotelian
tradition. Sources, constitution and reception of the philosophy of
Ibn Rushd (1126–1198). Proceedings of the fourth symposium
Averroicum, 1996, Cologne, pp 259–299
Butterworth ChE, Kessel BA (eds) (1994) The introduction of Arabic
philosophy into Europe. Studien und Texte zur Geistesgeschichte
des Mittelalters 39. Leiden
.01w?>Campanini M (2003) Edizioni e traduzioni di Averroe` tra XIV
e XVI secolo. In: Hamesse J, Fattori M (eds) Lexiques et glossaires
philosophiques de la Renaissance. Brepols, Louvain-la-Neuve, pp
21–42
Cranz FE (1976) Editions of the Latin Aristotle accompanied by the
commentaries of Averroes. In: Mahoney P (ed) Philosophy and
humanism. Essays for P. Kristeller. Columbia University Press,
New York, pp 116–128
Cranz FE (1984) A bibliography of Aristotle’s Editions 1501–1600,
2nd edn with additions and revisions: Schmitt ChB. Koerner,
Baden-Baden
Daiber H (1990) Lateinischen U¨ bersetzungen arabischer Texte zur
Philosophie und ihre Bedeutung fu¨r die Scholastik des Mittelalters.
Stand und Aufgaben der Forschung. In: Hamesse J, Fattori M (eds)
Rencontres de cultures dans la philosophie me´die´vale. Traductions et
traducteurs de l’Antiquite´ tardive au XIVe sie`cle. Publications de
l’Institut d’Etudes Me´die´vales/Universita` di Cassino, Louvain-la-
Neuve/Cassino, pp 203–250
De Vaux R (1933) La premie`re entre´e d’Averroe`s chez les Latins. Rev Sci
Philos The´ol 22:193–245
Dod B (1982) Aristoteles Latinus. In: Kretzmann N, Kenny A, Pinborg
J (eds) The Cambridge history of later medieval philosophy. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 45–79
Endress G (1999) Averrois opera. A bibliography of editions and contri-
butions to the text. In: Endress G, Aertsen JA, Braun K (eds) Averroes
and the Aristotelian tradition. Sources, constitution and reception of
the philosophy of Ibn Rushd (1126–1198). Proceedings of the
fourth symposium Averroicum, 1996, Cologne. Brill, Leiden,
pp 339–381
Gauthier R-A (1982) Notes sur les de´buts (1225–1240) du premier
‘‘averroı¨sme’’. Rev Sci Philos The´ol 66:321–373
Grabmann M (1916) Forschungen u¨ber die lateinischen Aristotelesu¨ber-
setzungen des XIII. Jahrhunderts. Beitra¨ge zur Geschichte der
Philosophie des Mittelalters XVII(5–6). Mu¨nster
Grabmann M (1966) Kaiser Friedrich II. und sein Verha¨ltnis zur
aristotelischen und arabischen Philosophie. In: Wolf G (ed) Stupor
Mundi.
Zur
Geschichte
Friedrichs
II.
von
Hohenstaufen.
Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, Darmstadt, pp 134–177
Hayoun M-R (2005) L’averroı¨sme dans les milieux intellectuels du
judaı¨sme: Moı¨se de Narbonne (1300–1362) et Eliya Delme´digo
(v. 1460–1493). In: Bazzana A, Be´riou N, Guichard P (eds) Averroe`s
et l’averroı¨sme (XIIe-XVe sie`cle). Un itine´raire historique du Haut
Atlas a` Paris et a` Padue. Actes du colloque international organise´ a`
Lyon, les 4 et 5 octobre 1999 dans le cadre du "Temps du Maroc".
Presses Universitaires de Lyon, Lyon, pp 275–305
Hissette R (1986) Les e´ditions anciennes de la traduction par Guillaume
de Luna du Commentaire Moyen d’Averroe`s au De Interpretatione.
In:
Zimmermann
A
(ed)
Aristotelisches
Erbe
im
arabisch-
lateinischen Mittelalter. U¨ bersetzungen, Kommentare, Interpre-
tationen. de Gruyter, Berlin/New York, pp 161–174
Hissette R (1997) Les e´ditions anciennes de la traduction attribue´e a`
Guillaume de Luna du Commentaire Moyen d’Averroe`s sur les
Cate´gories. Bull Philos Me´die´v 39:163–173
Ivry AL (1988) Averroes and the West: the ﬁrst encounter/nonencounter.
In: Link-Salinger R (ed) A straight path. Studies in medieval
506 I
Ibn Rushd (Averroes), Latin Translations of

philosophy and culture. Essays in honor of Arthur Hyman. Catholic
University of America Press, Washington, pp 142–158
Ivry AL (1990) Philosophical translations from the Arabic in Hebrew
during the Middle Ages. In: Hamesse J, Fattori M (ed) Rencontres
de cultures dans la philosophie me´die´vale. Traductions et traducteurs
de l’Antiquite´ tardive au XIVe sie`cle. Publications de l’Institut
d’E´tudes Me´die´vales/Universita` di Cassino, Louvain-la-Neuve/Cas-
sino, pp 167–186
Kishlat H (2000) Studien zur Verbreitung von U¨ bersetzungen arabischer
philosophischer Werke in Westeuropa 1150–1400. Das Zeugnis der
Bibliotheken. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster
Salman D (1937) Note sur la premie`re inﬂuence d’Averroe`s. Revue
Ne´oscolast Philos 40:203–212
Schmieja H (1999) «Secundum aliam translationem» – Ein Beitrag zur
arabisch-lateinischen U¨ bersetzung des grossen Physikkommentars
von Averroes. In: Endress G, Aertsen JA, Braun K (eds) Averroes and
the Aristotelian tradition. Brill, Boston, Leiden/Ko¨ln, pp 316–336
Thorndyke L (1965) Michael Scot. Nelson, London
Ibn Sabʿı¯n, ʿAbd al-H˙ aqq
PATRIZIA SPALLINO
Facolta` di Scienze della Formazione
Universita` di Palermo
Palermo
Italy
Abstract
‘Abd al-H˙ aqq ibn Sab‘ı¯n was born in the Ricote Valley, near
Cieza, in the Kingdom of Murcia sometimes between the
year 613 and 614 of the Hegira (1216 or 1217 CE). He
studied Arabic, Andalusi literature, logic and philosophy,
medicine, alchemy, white magic, and the ‘‘Science of
Names and Letters.’’ At that time Ibn Khala¯s: was the qa¯d˙ı¯
of Ceuta. He chose Ibn Sab‘ı¯n to answer the philosophical
questions sent by the emperor Frederick II of Hohenstau-
fen. It has been contended that Ibn Sab‘ı¯n was forced to
leave his new hometown after answering the emperor’s
arguments. What seems more likely, however, is that his
Suﬁideas were not very popular with the political chief
of the town. The time spent in Maghreb was, nonetheless,
lively and productive: Ibn Sab‘ı¯n wrote his most important
works and many people shared his ideas. Ibn Sab‘ı¯n was
instead rejected in Egypt: his mystical thoughts, based only
on some obscure philosophical arguments, were difﬁcult
for the Egyptian audience to master. Ibn Sab‘ı¯n ﬂed to
Mecca and his settlement in this town lasted several
years: in that place he ﬁnally found peace and rest. The
majority of his biographers believe that Ibn Sab‘ı¯n died in
669 h. (1270 CE).
‘Abd al-H˙ aqq b. Ibra¯hı¯m b. Muh:ammad b. Nas:r al-‘Akkı¯
al-Mursı¯, Abu¯ Muh:ammad Qut:b al-Dı¯n ibn Sab‘ı¯n was
born in the Ricote Valley, near Cieza, in the Kingdom of
Murcia sometimes between the year 613 and 614 of the
Hegira (1216 or 1217 CE.). There is no clear evidence
about his birth, because biographers disagree on Ibn Sab‘ı¯n’s
date of birth and death. Ibn Sha¯kir, for example, asserts that
Ibn Sab‘ı¯n died the 20 shawwa¯l of the year 668 of the
Hegira, at the age of 55. Therefore, he must have been
born in the year 613. Among modern scholars, this theory
is embraced by E. Lator, C. M. Herna´ndez, and
D. Cabanellas. However, al-Maqqarı¯ was of a different
opinion, afﬁrming that Ibn Sab‘ı¯n died in Mecca in the
year 669 h., at the age of nearly 50. If so, it may be
concluded that Ibn Sab‘ı¯n was born around the year
619 h. Al-Maqrı¯zı¯ also agreed with al-Maqqarı¯’s theory.
A third bit of evidence is found in al-Sha‘ra¯nı¯, who wrote
that Ibn Sab‘ı¯n died in 667 h. at the age of 55; consequently
he would have been born in the year 612 of the Hegira.
Finally, other biographers, such as al-Dhahabı¯, Ibn Kathı¯r,
al-Fa¯sı¯ – championed more recently by Amari and
Tafta¯za¯nı¯ – believe that Ibn Sab‘ı¯n was born in 614 h.
There is, however, general agreement about Ibn Sab‘ı¯n
birth’s place. He was known as al-Andalusı¯, al-Mursı¯, or
al-Riqu¯tı¯ (i.e., the town of Riqu¯ta in the Mursia region).
People referred to him also as al-Ishbilı¯ or al-Qas:talla¯nı¯,
after another location in the Andalusian region known as
al-Qas:tallata; in the East he was known as Qut:b al-Dı¯n.
However, his biographers used to refer to him as Ibn Sab‘ı¯n
(‘‘son’’ or ‘‘who belongs’’ to the 70). Some sources refer to
the fact that Ibn Sab‘ı¯n used to draw a circle next to his
own name. In the culture of some religious groups of the
Maghreb, the circle (al-da¯ra) was indeed a symbol for the
number 70, in Arabic sab‘ı¯n. It is believed that the same
was done by his followers. For this reason, Ibn Sab‘ı¯n was
also known as Ibn Da¯ra. Moreover, the ﬁrst letter of Ibn
Sab‘ı¯n’s name (that is ‘Abd) is the ‘ayn, which in the Kabala
coincides with number 70.
Ibn Sab‘ı¯n was also known as shaykh al-sab‘ı¯niyya, the
name given to the Suﬁt:arı¯qa that grew up around him.
For others he was al-‘Akkı¯, after the tribes of ‘Akk
al-G˙aﬁqiyyu¯n al-Andalusiyyu¯n that lived in the area
north of Cordoba and in the surroundings of Seville.
Finally, his followers called him ‘‘qurshı¯’’ out of the great
consideration that they had for their master. However, Ibn
Sab‘ı¯n did not belong to the Quraysh family (i.e., the family
of the Prophet Muh:ammad) as someone has asserted. Al-
Fa¯sı¯, one of his biographers, on this matter wrote: ‘‘[Ibn
Sab‘ı¯n’s] companions brought discredit to him when they
stupidly maintained in front of the wise men that he [Ibn
Ibn Sabʿı¯n, ʿAbd al-H˙ aqq I
507
I

Sabʿı¯n] belonged to the ‘‘qurshı¯’’. They made fools of them-
selves, because it was not as they believed.’’
Very little is known about Ibn Sabʿı¯n’s family. We know
that his father’s name was Ibra¯hı¯m b. Muh:ammad b. Nas:r
b. Muh:ammad. He was the local administrator of his
town, and he belonged to one of the most prestigious
Moroccan families. Also Ibn Sabʿı¯n’s grandfather was an
inﬂuential person and member of the upper class of his
time. Ibn Sabʿı¯n’s brother, Abu¯ T˙a¯lib, was for a while the
ambassador of the prince ‘Abd Alla¯h b. Hu¯d to the Pope in
Rome, and was sent to resolve a broken agreement
between ‘‘the king of the Christians’’ and the Muslims.
Ibn Sabʿı¯n grew up spoiled in a wealthy environment.
He was good looking, of royal aspect and with a noble soul.
In his youth, he received the usual literary and scholastic
education of the theologians. He studied Arabic, Andalusi
literature, logic and philosophy. In religious matters he
chose the sharı¯‘a and Suﬁsm. He also studied medicine,
alchemy, white magic, and the ‘‘Science of Names and
Letters’’ (‘ilm al-asma¯’ wa-l-h:uru¯f). A tradition holds
that Ibn Sabʿı¯n had three teachers while he was still
a young man: Ibn Dahha¯q, al-Bu¯nı¯, and al-H˙ ura¯nı¯. How-
ever, according to their biographical notes none of them
could have known Ibn Sab‘ı¯n in life, because he was born
after the three masters’ deaths. Ibn Dahha¯q, also known as
Ibn al-Mar’a, lived in Malaga for a long period. He was
expert in the Science of kala¯m (apologetic theology), and
also a scholar of history, law, and tafsı¯r (Qurʾa¯nic exegesis).
He died in 611 h. (1214–1215 CE), exiled in Murcia.
Al-Bu¯nı¯, who taught the ‘‘Science of Names and Letters,’’
was born in Bunia, in Algeria, and died in 622 h.
(1225 CE). Finally, al-H˙ ura¯nı¯, who was also al-Bu¯nı¯’s
teacher, died in 538 h. (1143 CE).
It seems that Ibn Sabʿı¯n spent the years of his youth in
Andalusia away from entertainments and distractions,
being seriously focused on his scientiﬁc education. Ibn
Sabʿı¯n’s pupil, Yah:ya¯ b. Ah:mad, said that his master
wrote the Budd al-‘a¯rif at the age of 15. In 640 h. (1242
CE) Ibn Sab‘ı¯n left Murcia together with a number of
pupils. He was probably forced to move after disagree-
ments with the local fuqaha¯’ (judges, qa¯d˙ı¯), who had
started to persecute him for his Suﬁtheories that were
considered to be clearly heretical and not in line with the
orthodoxy of Islam. Ibn al-Khat:ı¯b tells that Ibn Sabʿı¯n
passed through Granada with a group of mendicant dis-
ciples and ended his journey in the city of Ceuta. There he
lived with his followers, teaching them his Suﬁt:arı¯qa. He
also married a wealthy woman, who looked after all his
needs. She also built a house for him that included
a za¯wiya (a religious and spiritual building erected next
to the tomb of a saint) where the philosopher stayed.
At that time Ibn Khala¯s: was the qa¯d˙ı¯ of Ceuta. He
chose Ibn Sabʿı¯n to answer the philosophical questions
sent by the emperor Frederick II of Hohenstaufen. It has
been contended that Ibn Sab‘ı¯n was forced to leave his new
hometown after answering the emperor’s arguments.
What seems more likely, however, is that his Suﬁideas
were not very popular with the political chief of the town.
From Ceuta he went to ‘Adwa, and from there to Ba¯jja
(Bugı´a), where he stayed for a while. The time spent in
Maghreb was, nonetheless, lively and productive: Ibn
Sabʿı¯n wrote his most important works, and his ideas
were shared by a large number of people. However, his
stop in Ba¯jja did not last long because Abu¯ Bakr b. Khalı¯l
al-Saku¯nı¯, head of the fuqaha¯’ of Tunis, organized
a campaign against him. Khalı¯l al-Saku¯nı¯ had accused
the Suﬁphilosopher of impiety, and in 652 h. (1254 d.
C.) Ibn Sabʿı¯n was forced to escape toward the East. He
stopped in Cairo, but the North-African fuqaha¯’ sent
a messenger to Egypt to alert the population there against
his impiety. This is what Ibn Sha¯kir wrote:
"
When Ibn Sabʿı¯n left his country he was thirty, and a group
of fellows – which included some elderly people – was with
him. After ten days he entered a public bath to clean
himself. His fellows went along to look after him.
A worker in the bath started washing Ibn Sabʿı¯n’s feet
and, realizing that he was a foreigner, the man asked the
country of origin of the traveler. Ibn Sabʿı¯n replied that he
was from Murcia, and then the workman said: ‘So you
come from the same country as the heretic Ibn Abı¯
Sabʿı¯n!’ Ibn Sabʿı¯n indicated to his friends to be silent and
answered positively to the man’s question. Then the bath
attendant started to insult the philosopher, and to curse
him. Although Ibn Sabʿı¯n had asked the attendant to con-
centrate on his job [hoping to] distract [him from] his
diatribe, the attendant did not stop insulting the Andalusi
philosopher. After a while one of Ibn Sabʿı¯n’s companions
could not stop himself from speaking to the man saying:
‘Heaven help you! God had chosen to make you a servant
of the very man whose feet you are washing. You will be at
his service like a boy.’ The attendant turning scarlet with
shame said: ‘I beg God’s pardon.’
The sources only vaguely refer to the period spent by
Ibn Sabʿı¯n in Egypt. However, it is certain that the friendly
Egyptian environment allowed a ﬂourishing of Suﬁ
schools at the time in which Ibn Sabʿı¯n visited the country.
The Andalusian Suﬁwas accepted, thanks to the devotion
that the Suﬁexpressed toward the Qurʾa¯n and the Sunna.
Nevertheless, Ibn Sabʿı¯n was rejected even in Egypt: his
mystic thoughts, based only on some obscure philosoph-
ical arguments, were difﬁcult for the Egyptian people to
508 I
Ibn Sabʿı¯n, ʿAbd al-H˙ aqq

master. The shaykh Qut:b al-Dı¯n Qast:alla¯nı¯ was among his
rivals, and it is believed that he also forced Ibn Sabʿı¯n’s
departure from Egypt toward Mecca (652 h.–1254 CE).
Ibn Sabʿı¯n ﬂed to Mecca not only because of the persistent
hate that the fuqaha¯’ showed against him, but also for
political reasons. He was in fact accused of being
a Shı¯ʿite, a follower of the Fatimids and of the Alids.
The presence of the Shı¯ʿite group in Egypt had been
strongly opposed since the time of the sultan S˙ala¯h: al-
Dı¯n Ayyubı¯, and all evidence of Shı¯ʿite doctrine had been
persecuted.
Ibn Sabʿı¯n asked for protection from Abu¯ Numayy
Muh:ammad I (652–701 h./1254–1301 CE), the Fatimid
governor of Mecca. Also the king of Yemen, al-Malik
al-Muz˙affar Shams al-Dı¯n Yu¯suf I (642 h./1249 CE–
694 h./1294 CE), offered his support. On the other hand,
the king of Egypt, al-Z˙ a¯hir Baybars, who ruled from 658 to
676 h. (1259–1277 CE) detested Ibn Sabʿı¯n, according to
what the biographer al-Fa¯sı¯ reveals. He described in his
chronicle that once Baybars, the king of Egypt, had
decided to arrest Ibn Sabʿı¯n’s son after hearing some of
the father’s speeches. Later, when Baybars went to Mecca
in 667 h. (1268 CE) for the pilgrimage, he had tried to
meet Ibn Sabʿı¯n, who however avoided the Egyptian king.
Ibn Sabʿı¯n’s settlement in Mecca lasted several years: in
that place he had ﬁnally found peace and rest. The local
governor had a high opinion of him, particularly after Ibn
Sabʿı¯n had treated his wounded head by making a special
hat. The Meccan years passed safely, and Ibn Sabʿı¯n
enjoyed all comforts. The Suﬁphilosopher spent this
time writing some important works, and practicing
Suﬁsm. Many scholars asked to meet him during their
pilgrimage to Mecca. The biographer Ibn Sha¯kir tells
that the shaykh S˙afı¯ al-Dı¯n al-Hindı¯ was among the
‘ulama¯’ that had met Ibn Sabʿı¯n:
"
In the year 666 h. I participated in the pilgrimage [to
Mecca] and while there I spoke about philosophy to Ibn
Sabʿı¯n. He asked me: ‘Should you not live in Mecca?’ And
I replied: ‘Why do you live here?’ He answered: ‘I have been
destined to stay. The king demands that I stay here
because of my lineage from the noble Meccans. The king
of Yemen follows my teachings, but his vizı¯r is a h:ashwiyy,
and he hates me.’
However, the chronicles also portray negative images
of Ibn Sabʿı¯n relating peculiar stories of his time in Mecca.
Ibn Kathı¯r, in one story, tells that once Ibn Sabʿı¯n referring
to some pilgrims going around the ka‘ba said: ‘‘They are
like donkeys that go around a pit’’. He continued saying
that the pilgrims would have done better service if they
had circled around him instead of going around that holy
place. The same biographer related also that the Suﬁ
philosopher had a great inﬂuence on Abu¯ Numayy. From
the same source it is known that Ibn Sabʿı¯n spent some
time in the cave of the Hira Mountain while he was waiting
for revelation (a similar experience happened to the
prophet Muh:ammad). Ibn Sabʿı¯n, in fact, believed that
the prophecy could be obtained by those who had a pure
intellect. It was probably Ibn Sabʿı¯n’s ego that made Ibn
Kathı¯r conclude his account saying that ‘‘Ibn Sabʿı¯n had
collected only ignominy both in this world and in the next
world.’’ Other stories tell that Ibn Sabʿı¯n avoided going to
Medina for fear of the emir of the city; or that when the
philosopher visited the tomb of the Prophet ‘‘blood
ﬂowed from him like menstruation.’’ Al-Fa¯sı¯ wrote about
Ibn Sabʿı¯n practicing white magic saying that when Ibn
Sabʿı¯n and his friend Abu¯ Numayy used to go out during
the night far from the city, men and horses appeared in the
valley. Abu¯ Numayy was always frightened by this vision,
but this made Ibn Sabʿı¯n even greater in his eyes. Finally,
some other biographers describe Ibn Sabʿı¯n as a forger. It is
told that he used to forge banknotes to supply all his
needs. Once he bought a sheep using forged banknotes.
When the shepherd realized these were paper and not
dinars, he came back to him. He found Ibn Sabʿı¯n asleep
in his tent, but when the shepherd tried to wake him up by
shaking his arm, it came off in the shepherd’s hand. The
man ran away in terror.
In the year 667 h. (1268 CE), Ibn Sabʿı¯n, forced by the
continuous persecutions by the Meccan fuqaha¯’, had even
planned to migrate to India. But, this idea was never
realized. During his last days, Ibn Sabʿı¯n tried to return
to Maghreb using diplomatic efforts. He tried to inﬂuence
the governor of Mecca, through the sultan Muh:ammad
al-Mustans:ir bi-lla¯h of h:afs:ide linage. He hoped that the
sultan of Maghreb would have invited him to return to his
homeland. Unfortunately, Ibn Sabʿı¯n did not succeed in
his attempt, and the philosopher remained in Mecca until
his death.
As is the case with Ibn Sabʿı¯n’s birth, different dates are
proposed also for his death. Al-Sha‘ra¯nı¯, for example,
claimed that Ibn Sabʿı¯n died in 667 h. (1268 CE). Ibn
Sha¯kir wrote instead that he died on the 28th of shawwa¯l
of 668 h. (1269 CE); Lator and Cruz Herna´ndez
also agreed with him. However, the majority of his biog-
raphers – and among those al-Dhaha¯bı¯, Al-Maqqarı¯,
Amari, Massignon, Tafta¯za¯nı¯, and Brockelmann – believe
that Ibn Sabʿı¯n died in 669 h. (1270 CE). Ibn al-Khat:ı¯b and
al-G˙ ubrı¯nı¯ had identiﬁed the exact day as the 9th of
shawwa¯l of the year 669. Al-Fa¯sı¯ has quoted other biogra-
phers – of which he does not refer the names – who have
identiﬁed Ibn Sabʿı¯n’s death on the 18th of shawwa¯l of 669.
Ibn Sabʿı¯n, ʿAbd al-H˙ aqq I
509
I

More generally, others simply report that Ibn Sab‘ı¯n died
at the age of 55.
As for the cause of his death, al-Dhaha¯bı¯ and Ibn
Sha¯kir wrote that he committed suicide cutting his wrists.
Some of his enemies have commented that if he really had
committed suicide, this would be another proof of his
impiety, which has already taken him to the Gehenna.
According to another version, Ibn Sab‘ı¯n was poisoned
by the king of Yemen al-Muz˙affar, who did not approve of
his conduct of living. However, the majority of his biog-
raphers, with few exceptions, say that Ibn Sab‘ı¯n died
by natural death. The theory of his suicide has no foun-
dation, because it is based on the sort of reports (qı¯la)
often used by his enemies to bring discredit upon him. In
conclusion, the historical sources describe a conﬂicting
image of Ibn Sab‘ı¯n. He has been loved and exalted or,
on the contrary, despised and viliﬁed. Ibn al-Khat:ı¯b, one
of his biographers, wrote: ‘‘This man aroused different
opinions in people, far from any form of moderation.
Some people believed he was impious, some others
thought he was an excellent man. Ibn Sab‘ı¯n was able to
ﬁnd the extreme in each faction’’. Ibn Sab‘ı¯n remains one of
the most controversial personalities of Andalusian Islam.
The Cultural Environment and Intellectual
Development of Ibn Sab‘ı¯n
As can be seen from his biography, the fuqaha¯’ environ-
ment was quite hostile toward Suﬁsm. In general, the
history of Islamic spirituality is characterized by a great
debate between the Suﬁand the fuqara¯’ (the poors of God).
Preserving Islamic law from contamination, and
supervising spiritual practices were two fundamental
aims of the fuqara¯’. They were the ofﬁcial representatives
of the t:arı¯qa, and to them can be credited a number of
persecutions against Suﬁand rationalist thinkers. The
censure was soon turned into action. The Suﬁs experi-
enced a kind of inquisition, and a number of anathemas
were hurled against them because of their beliefs. Several
t:uruq reacted with great caution, practicing their spiritu-
ality in secret. Although the Suﬁs were acknowledged by
Muslim communities, they experienced the hostility of
some schools of thought, which were based on more
rationalistic views (Muʿtazilites and fala¯sifa). The political
authorities were another source of pressure. Even if ofﬁ-
cially the existence of the Suﬁt:uruq was allowed, the
extremism of the Suﬁdoctrine kept the Palace alerted. It
is in this social and cultural environment that the life and
works of Ibn Sab‘ı¯n should be seen. On the one hand, the
philosopher experienced the rigidity of certain orthodox
views; on the other hand, his way of life was hostile even to
some representatives of Suﬁsm.
Ibn Sab‘ı¯n’s philosophical studies were based on the
works of scholars such as Ibn Ba¯jja, Ibn T˙ufayl, Ibn Rushd,
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Ibn Sı¯na¯. However, he also criticized those
authors deeply. In his opinion, his fellow Muslim philos-
ophers had accepted Aristotle’s thought, and in particular
the theory on soul and intellect, without criticism. Ibn
Sab‘ı¯n was himself inﬂuenced by the Neoplatonist school
of thought and by the Letters of the Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’. From
reading Ibn Sab‘ı¯n’s works, it can be argued that he knew
Ibn Masarra, Ibn Qası¯, Ibn Barraja¯n, as well as H˙ alla¯j and
Suhrawardı¯ al-maqtu¯l. However, he believed that the the-
ories of these scholars were not sufﬁciently well supported
to reach spiritual enlightenment. Ibn Sab‘ı¯n was keen on
the new arguments that had grown up within Islamic Law,
and in his works he was very critical against the Ashʿarites.
He was always well informed on the religious schools, both
Islamic and not. From his Risa¯la al-nu¯riyya (Letter on the
Illumination), we deduce that Ibn Sab‘ı¯n had read the
Gospel, that he had some information about the Pope,
that he had a certain notion of the Jewish doctrine, Indi,
Brahmanic and Persian religious schools. Ibn al-Khat:ı¯b
and Ibn Taymiyya report that Ibn Sab‘ı¯n had acquired
tah:qı¯q (his spiritual accomplishment) from Ibn Dahha¯q,
and that he distinguished himself in the t:arı¯qa shu¯dhiyya.
This doctrine was quite peculiar, because it brought
together Hellenistic philosophy and Suﬁsm, however sev-
eral examples lead us to believe that the teaching of
al-Shu¯dhı¯ was not easy to understand. A proof is the fact
that in the silsila (the initiation chain) of the t:arı¯qa
sab‘ı¯niyya – traditionally referred to as comprised of
Hermes Trismegistus, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Alexander
the Great, Ibn Sı¯na¯, Ibn Rushd, Suhrawardı¯ – al-Shu¯dhı¯ is
placed among the ‘‘slaves of love’’. Unfortunately, very few
sources are available to recreate the basic elements that
represent the core of Ibn Sab‘ı¯n’s mystic work up to now.
As it already has been said, many of his contemporaries
did not even bother to refer to his doctrine. What
is
certain is that his doctrine was known as al-shu¯dhiyya or
al-sab‘ı¯niyya. According to Ibn al-Khat:ı¯b, those thinkers,
unlike other Suﬁs, did not afﬁrm that everything comes
from the One, but they believed that there is nothing else
but God: the Creator is the totality of what is shown and of
what is hidden. What is characterized by plurality or
diversity is nothing else but illusion coming from the
knowledge of conscience, because actually there is nothing
outside of that. When these illusions will vanish – and
therefore the entire world – everything will be the One and
the One is God. The expression that summarizes the
doctrine of Ibn Sab‘ı¯n’s al-wah:dat al-mut:laqa (Absolute
Unicity) is certainly Alla¯hu faqat:, ‘‘Only God’’ or ‘‘There is
nothing else than the Being, and He is He’’.
510 I
Ibn Sabʿı¯n, ʿAbd al-H˙ aqq

In the concept of Absolute Unicity, there is no space
for the difference of multiplicity, as well for any kind of
concept that divides: everything that is divided in parts is
the consequence of wahm, illusion or imagination; what it
is real, al-H˙ aqq, is the One. According to the theory of the
Absolute Unicity, men are human beings that exist
through the emanation of God: an entity that is made of
body and spirit and which assembles what is found in the
Creation. Human beings are, however, distinct in mass
and elite. The mass ignores the reality of the being, it is
subject to illusion; the elite, on the contrary, is formed by
those who look at the Truth and ﬁrmly believe in it.
As it is easy to imagine, these theories were quite far
from the orthodox view that divides the essence of the
Creator from that of the created. Many mistakes and mis-
understandings, in fact, were generated by these theories.
Those who followed al-wah:da al-mut:laqa were accused of
departing from the sharı¯‘a and of invalidating the duties of
the Muslims. However, it seems true that this accusation is
not in line with the recommendations that Ibn Sab‘ı¯n
himself made to his followers. In one of his letters, he
asked them to regret their sins, and to perform Good
through noble deeds. He also asked them to follow the
sunna, and to be in agreement with their campaigns. He
even wrote that sharı¯‘a (The Law) and h:aqı¯qa (Spiritual
Accomplishment) are synonymous.
The destiny of the t:arı¯qa al-sab‘ı¯niyya was no happier.
Among Ibn Sab‘ı¯n’s successors there is al-Shushtarı¯ (born
in 610 h.–1212 CE), one of his disciples known for his
mystic poems, which he used to sing in the su¯q playing
a small drum (bendı¯r).
L. Massignon refers of a group of mystic authors, that
he named ‘‘the Sab‘ins of Damascus’’, among which three of
them are better known. The ﬁrst is the emir Badr al-Dı¯n
H˙ asan Ibn Hu¯d (633–699 h./1236–1300 CE), belonging to
an important Andalusi family; he was the ‘‘chief of the
Sab‘ins of Damascus’’, and a friend of Ibn ‘Arabı¯. The
second is the shaykh al-Ka¯sha¯nı¯ al-Farg˙a¯nı¯, who died in
Damascus in 1300 CE; he also was a pupil of S˙adr al-Dı¯n
al-Qu¯nawı¯ (606–672 h./1209 to 1210–1274 CE), and com-
mentator of the famous Ta¯’iyya written by the Egyptian
mystic writer ‘Umar Ibn al-Fa¯rid˙ (576–632 h./1181–1235
CE). The last one is the mystic poet ‘Afı¯f al-Dı¯n Sulayma¯n
al-Tilimsa¯nı¯, who arrived in Damascus from the extreme
corner of the western world, and met Ibn Sab‘ı¯n in Cairo.
The Works and Style of Ibn Sab‘ı¯n
The style used by Ibn Sab‘ı¯n in his works is quite obscure:
the author used symbols and allusions to introduce eso-
teric meanings behind his arguments. Reading Ibn Sab‘ı¯n,
it is easy to ﬁnd Qur’a¯nic, mystical, or historical
references, as well as quotations referring to the Cabala
or to metaphysical science. The language is full of expres-
sions that are not easy to translate. Ibn Sab‘ı¯n’s passion for
science and white magic prompted him to use extremely
peculiar sentences. Often the logic of his arguments is
interrupted by Suﬁconcepts that were not always under-
stood by his contemporaries.
In order to fully understand the complexity of Ibn
Sab‘ı¯n’s writings, the reader is forced to acquire informa-
tion not only from the classical texts of Islamic culture, but
also from the fundamental texts of Jewish, Christian, Per-
sian, and Hellenic thought. On the one hand, the difﬁcul-
ties in understanding Ibn Sab‘ı¯n’s style as well as the
several accusations of heresies explain the reason why
Ibn Sab‘ı¯n’s works were not very popular among scholars.
On the other hand, Ibn Sab‘ı¯n’s aim was not to write
popular philosophical works, rather the contrary.
According to his biographers, Ibn Sab‘ı¯n’s written pro-
duction was quite substantial, and it was probably the fruit
of his Maghrebian stay. Unfortunately, many of the man-
uscripts attributed to him have not yet been the object of
investigation. However, thanks to the information reported
it is possible to list the titles of Ibn Sab‘ı¯n’s main works:
1. Mystical and philosophical works
Budd al-ʿarif; Rasa¯’il; Al-masa¯’il al-s:iqilliyya ms.
Hunt. 534; Risa¯la al-fath: al-mushtarik or Mifta¯h: budd
al-‘a¯rif; Risa¯la al-ih:a¯t:a; Fı¯ l-jawhar, Kita¯b al-kadd;
Risa¯la al-‘ahad; Risa¯la al-nu¯riyya, Risa¯la al-faqiriyya;
Kita¯b al-safar; Du‘a¯’ h:arf al-qa¯f.
2. Works on ‘ilm al-h:uru¯f
Kita¯b al-daraj; Al-durra al-mud˙ı¯’a wa-l-khaﬁya
al-shamsiyya; Lisa¯n al-falak al-na¯t:iq ‘an wajh al-
h:aqa¯’iq; Risa¯la fı¯ asra¯r al-kawa¯kib; Kita¯b Idrı¯s, Lamh:a
al-h:uru¯f.
See also: ▶Alexandrian Tradition into Arabic: Philosophy
▶Aristotle, Arabic ▶Categories ▶Ibn ʿArabı¯, Abu¯ Bakr
Muh:ammad Muh:yiddı¯n ▶Ibn Ba¯jja, Abu¯ Bakr ibn al-
Sa¯ʾig˙
(Avempace)
▶Ibn
Masarra,
Muh˙ammad
ibn
ʿAbdalla¯h ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-
H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) ▶Ibn T˙ufayl, Abu¯ Bakr (Abubacer)
Bibliography
Primary Sources
al-Dhahabı¯ Muh:ammad Shams al-Dı¯n (n.d.) Ta¯rı¯kh al-isla¯m, n. 42,
sez. 30. ms. Da¯r al-Kutub
al-Fa¯sı¯ Muh:ammad b. Ah:mad (1966) al-‘Iqd al-thamı¯n fı¯ ta¯rı¯kh al-balad
al-amı¯n. al-Qa¯hira
al-Fa¯sı¯ Muh:ammad ibn Ah:mad (1980) Al-‘iqd al-thamı¯n fı¯ ta¯’rı¯kh
al-balad al-amı¯n. Maktaba al-risa¯lah, Bayru¯t
Ibn Sabʿı¯n, ʿAbd al-H˙ aqq I
511
I

al-G˙ ubrı¯nı¯ Ah:mad b. ‘Abd Alla¯h (1328 h.) ‘Unwa¯n al-Dira¯ya. al-Qa¯hira
al-G˙ ubrı¯nı¯ Ah:mad ibn ‘Abd Alla¯h (1369 h.) ‘Unwa¯n al-dira¯ya, ed.
Nuwayhid ‘A. Bayru¯t
al-H˙ anbalı¯ b. al-‘Ima¯d (n.d.) Shadara¯t al-dhahab fı¯ akhba¯r man dhahab.
Da¯r al-massı¯ra, Bayru¯th
al-H˙ anbalı¯ Ibn al-‘Ima¯d (1351 h.) Shadara¯t al-dhahab fı¯ akhba¯r man
dhahab. al-Qa¯hira
al-Maqqarı¯ Ah:mad b. Muh:ammad (1968) Nafh: al-t:ibb. Ih:sa¯n ‘Abba¯s,
Bayru¯t s.d.
al-Maqrı¯zı¯ Ah:mad b. ‘Alı¯ (1934, 1936) Kita¯b al-sulu¯k li-ma‘rifa duwal al-
mulu¯k. al-Qa¯hira
al-Muna¯wı¯ ‘Abd al-Ra’uf (1993) al-Kawa¯kib al-duriyya fı¯ tara¯jim al-sa¯da
al-s:uﬁyya. ms. Da¯r al-Kutub, al-Qa¯hira, n. 260, Ta¯rı¯kh; Tag˙rı¯birdı¯
Yu¯suf. al-Manhal al-s:a¯fı¯. al-Qa¯hira
al-Tunbaktı¯ Ah:mad Ba¯ba¯
(1989) Nayl al-ibtiha¯j bi-tat:rı¯z al-dı¯ba¯
Manshura¯t kulliyyat al-da‘wa’l-islamiyya, Tripoli s.d.
al-Ya¯fı¯ al-Yama¯nı¯ (1338 h./1920) Mir‘a¯t al-jina¯n wa ‘ibra al-yaqz˙a¯n fı¯ ma¯
yu‘tabar min h:awa¯dith al-zama¯n. Mat:ba‘at da¯’ira¯t al-ma‘arif
al-niz˙a¯miyya, Hayderabad
al-Ya¯f‘ı¯ al-Yama¯nı¯ (1339 h.) Mir‘a¯t al-jina¯n wa-ibra al-yaqz˙a¯n fı¯ ma¯
yu‘tabar min h:awa¯dith al-zama¯n. al-Qa¯hira
Ibn al-Khat:ı¯b Lisa¯n al-Dı¯n (1368/1966) Rawd˙a al-ta‘rı¯f bi l-h:ubb al-sharı¯f.
‘A. al-Qa¯dir Ah:mad ‘At:a¯’, al-Qa¯hira
Ibn al-Khat:ı¯b Lisa¯n al-Dı¯n (1973) al-Ih:a¯ta fı¯ akhba¯r G˙ rana¯t:a, ed. ‘Ina¯n
M‘A. al-Qa¯hira
Ibn al-Khat:ı¯b Lisa¯n al-Dı¯n (1977) al-Ih:a¯t:a fı¯ akhba¯r g˙rana¯t:a. al-Qa¯hira
Ibn Kathı¯r Isma¯‘ı¯l b. ‘Umar (1947) al-Bida¯ya wa-l-niha¯ya. al-Qa¯hira
Ibn Kathı¯r Isma¯‘ı¯l ibn ‘Umar (2008) al-Bida¯ya wa’l-niha¯ya. Da¯r al-ﬁkr,
Bayru¯t
Ibn Mulaqqin Sharf al-Dı¯n (1975) T˙abaqa¯t al-awliya¯’. Maktaba al-kha¯njı¯,
al-Qa¯hira
Ibn Sab‘ı¯n ‘Abd al-H˙ aqq (1941) al-Kala¯m ‘ala¯ al-masa¯’il al-s:iqilliyya, ed.
Yaltkaya S. E´tudes Orientales, Bayru¯t
Ibn Sab‘ı¯n ‘Abd al-H˙ aqq (1966) Rasa¯’il Ibn Sab‘ı¯n. al-Da¯r al-mis:riyya, al-
Qa¯hira
Ibn Sab‘ı¯n ‘Abd al-H˙ aqq (1979) Budd al-‘a¯rif, ed. Kattura G. Da¯r
al-andalus, Bayru¯t
Ibn Sab‘ı¯n ‘Abd al-H˙ aqq (2005) Die Sizilianischen Fragen, Arabisch-
Deutsch, u¨bersetzt und eingeleitet von Akasoy A. Herder, Freiburg
Ibn Sha¯kir al-Kutubı¯ Muh:ammad (1970) Fawa¯t al-wafaya¯t wa-l-d˙ayl
‘alayha¯ Bayru¯t
Ibn Taymiyya Abu¯’l-‘Abba¯s (1957) Majmu¯‘ al-rasa¯’il wa-l-masa¯’il, com-
piled by Rid˙a¯ R. al-Qa¯hira
Ibn Taymiyya Abu¯ l-‘Abba¯s (1329 h.) al-Risa¯la al-sab‘ı¯niyya. al-Qa¯hira
Tag˙rı¯birdı¯ Yu¯suf (1938) al-Nuju¯m fı¯ mulu¯k mis:r wa-l-qa¯hira. Wiza¯rat
al-thaqa¯fah, al-Qa¯hira
Tag˙rı¯birdı¯Yu¯suf (1956) al-Manhal al-s:a¯fı¯. Mat:ba‘a da¯r al-kutub, al-Qa¯hira
Secondary Sources
Abu¯ Rı¯da (1994) Bayna al-imbirat:u¯r Frı¯drı¯k al-tha¯nı¯ wa-Ibn Sab‘ı¯n. Tah:lı¯l
li-ajwı¯ba al-faylasu¯f al-muslim ‘ala¯ as’ila al-imbira¯t:u¯r al-mustanı¯r.
Ra’y Arist:u¯ ﬁqidam al-‘a¯lam. Alifba¯ 16:1–17
Akasoy Anna (2008) Ibn Sab‘ı¯n’s Sicilian Questions: the text, its sources,
and their historical context. Al-Qant:ara 29, 1:115–146
Akasoy Anne (2003) Las respuestas de Ibn Sab’ı¯n a las ‘Cuestiones
Sicilianas’ de Federico II y el Oeste del Mediterraneo en la primera
mitad del siglo XIII. Aljamı´a 15:72–76
Akasoy Anne (2005) Las Cuestiones Sicilianas de Ibn Sab‘ı¯n. Filosofı´a y
mı´stica en la e´poca Almohade (resumen de la tesis doctoral). Aljamı´a
17:92–95
Akasoy
Anne
(2006)
Philosophie
und
Mystik
in
der
spa¨ten
Almohadenzeit. Die Sizilianischen Fragen des Ibn Sab‘ı¯n. Brill,
Leiden/Boston
Akasoy Anne (2007a) The Muhaqqiq as Mahdi? Ibn Sab’ı¯n and Mahdism
among Andalusian mystics in the 12th/13th centuries. In: Brandes W,
Schmieder F (eds) Endzeiten. Millenium studies. De Gruyter, Berlin/
New York
Akasoy Anne (2007b) Reading the prologue of Ibn Sab’ı¯n’s Sicilian Ques-
tions. In: Schede Medievali 45. Ofﬁcina di Studi Medievali, Palermo,
pp 15–24
Amari M (1853) Questions philosophiques addresse´es aux savants
musulmans par l’Empereur Fre´de´ric II. J Asiat V serie (Paris). 1–35;
Amari M (1939) Storia dei musulmani di Sicilia. Catania
Arvide Luisa (2007) Las Cuestiones Sicilianas. Introduccio´n, edicio´n,
traduccio´n y notas, Universidad de Almerı´a (traduccio´n completa
al espan˜ol)
al-Tafta¯za¯nı¯ Abu¯ ’l-Wafa¯ al-G˙ anı¯mı¯ (1973) Ibn Sab‘ı¯n wa-falsafatuhu
al-s:u¯ﬁyya. Da¯r al-kita¯b al-lubna¯nı¯, Bayru¯t
Badawı¯ ‘Abd al-Rah:ma¯n (1956a) Ibn Sab‘ı¯n y la oracion mental. Rev Inst
Egip Estud Islam. 131–135
Badawı¯ ‘Abd al-Rah:ma¯n (1956b) Testamento de Ibn Sab‘ı¯n a sus
discipulos. Rev Inst Egip Estud Islam 6, fasc. 1–2, 249–253
Badawı¯ ‘Abd al-Rah:ma¯n (1958) El panteismo integral de Ibn Sab‘ı¯n. Rev
Inst Egip Estud Islam. 103–108
Badawı¯ ‘Abd Rah:ma¯n (1949) Shat:ah:a¯t al-s:u¯ﬁyya. Maktaba al-nah:da
al-mis:riyya, al-Qa¯hira
Badawı¯ ‘Abd Rah:ma¯n (1974) Aﬂa¯t:u¯n fı¯’l-isla¯m. Silsila-i Da¯nish-i Isla¯mı¯
13. Tihra¯n
Burnett Charles (1995) Master Theodore, Frederick II’s Philosopher. In:
Federico II e le nuove culture, Atti del XXXI convegno storico
internazionale, Todi, 9–12 ottobre 1994. Spoleto, pp 225–285
Cabanellas Darı´o (1955) Fre´de´rico II de Sicilia e Ibn Sab‘ı¯n de Murcia. Las
‘‘Cuestiones Sicilianas’’. Miscelanea de Estudios Arabes y Hebraicos;
Granada, pp 31–64
Cornell Vincent J. The worship of a Muslim Hermetist: the prayers of Ibn
Sab’in. In: Avoda and Ibada. Liturgy and ritual in Islamic and Judaic
traditions. Institute for Islamic–Judaic Studies, Center for Judaic
Studies, University of Denver. www.du.edu/ ~ sward / iijs 98. Html.
Accessed 8–10 March 1998
Cornell Vincent J (1997) The way of the Axial Intellect: the Islamic
Hermeticism of Ibn Sab’in. Journal of the Muhyddin Ibn ‘Arabı¯
Society 22:41–79
Grignaschi Mario (1956) AL-Kala¯mu ‘ala¯-l-masa¯’ili–c¸-c¸iqiliyyati. Trattato
sulle domande siciliane. Domanda II. Traduzione e Commento.
Estratto dell’Archivio Storico Siciliano (Series VII) 3:7–91
H˙ anafı¯ H˙ asan (1992) Ru¯h: al-andalus wa nah:da al-g˙arb al-h:adı¯th, qira¯’a fı¯
l-masa¯’il al-s:iqilliyya li-Ibn Sab‘ı¯n. In: Humum al ﬁkr wa’l-wat:an, vol
I. al-Andalus, al-Qa¯hira, pp 145–163
Kattu¯ra George (1977) Das mystische und philosophische System des
Ibn Sab‘ı¯n: ein mysticher aus Murcia. Unpublished thesis,
Tubingen
Lator Estaban (1942) Die Logik des Ibn Sab‘ı¯n aus Murcia. Doctoral
thesis, University of Munich. Printed in Rome
Lator Estaban (1944) Ibn Sab‘ı¯n de Murcia y su ‘‘Budd al-‘a¯rif’’.
Al-Andalus. 373–417
Mandala` Giuseppe (2007) Il Prologo delle Risposte alle questioni siciliane
di Ibn Sab‘ı¯n come fonte storica. Politica mediterranea e cultura
arabo-islamica nell’eta` di Federico II. Schede Medievali 45:5–94
Massignon Louis (1928) Ibn Sab‘ı¯n et la critique psychologique. In:
Me´morial Henry Basset.
Nouvelles e´tudes
nord-africaines et
512 I
Ibn Sabʿı¯n, ʿAbd al-H˙ aqq

orientales, tome XVIII. Institut des Hautes E´tudes marocaines, Paris,
pp 125–127
Massignon Louis (1962) Ibn Sab‘ı¯n et la ‘‘conspiration h:alla¯gienne’’
en Andalousie, et en orient au XIIIe sie`cle de´die´es a` la memoire
de Le´vi Provenc¸al, tome II. Maisonneuve et Larose, Paris, pp
661–670
Mehren August Ferdinand (1879) Correspondance du philosophe
souﬁIbn Sab‘ı¯n Abd Oul Haqq avec l’empereur Fre´de´ric II de
Hohenstaufen. J Asiat (Paris). 341–454
Sharaf Muh:ammad Ya¯sir (1981) Al-wah:da al-mut:laqa ‘ind Ibn Sab‘ı¯n.
Bayru¯t
Sharaf Muh:ammad Ya¯sir (1990) Falsafa al-tas:awwuf al-sab‘ı¯nı¯. Dimasˇq
Sirg˙inı¯ Muh:ammad (1992) Le Monoreligionisme et sa signiﬁcation
unitaire divine chez les deux mystiques murciens, Ibn ‘Arabı¯ et Ibn
Sab‘ı¯n. In: Los dos horizontes. Murcia, pp 383–396 (in Spanish),
pp 397–406 (in French)
Spallino Patrizia (1994) Nota sulla nisbah di Ibn Sab‘ı¯n. Alifba¯ 16:83–94
Spallino Patrizia (1996) Al-Masa¯’il al-s:iqilliyya. Ann Ist Orient Napoli
56:52–62
Spallino Patrizia (1997) Il problema del ﬁne della metaﬁsica nelle
Questioni Siciliane di Ibn Sab‘ı¯n. In: La diffusione dell’eredita` classica
nell’eta` tardoantica e medievale. Forme e modi di trasmissione, a cura
di Valvo A. Edizioni dell’Orso, Alessandria, pp 211–220
Spallino Patrizia (2000) Le Categorie aristoteliche nella problematica
dell’unita`
secondo Ibn Sab‘ı¯n. In: La diffusione dell’eredita`
classica nell’eta` tardoantica e medievale. Filologia, storia, dottrina.
Atti del Seminario nazionale di studi, Napoli-Sorrento, 29–31
ottobre 1998, a cura di Baffoni C. Edizioni dell’Orso, Alessandria,
pp 167–177
Spallino Patrizia (2007) Les questions siciliennes de Ibn Sab‘ı¯n, nouvelles
perspectives de recherche. Schede Medievali 45:95–102
Spallino Patrizia (2009) Le langage philosophique de l’empereur Fre´de´ric
II dans les Questions siciliennes de Ibn Sab‘ı¯n et L’Aguillon des
disciples de Ja’aqov Anatoli. In: Le Plurilinguisme au Moyen Aˆ ge.
Orient- Occident. De Babel a` la langue une, textes e´dite´s par Kappler
C, Thiolier-Me´jean S. L’Harmattan, Paris, pp 133–145
Urvoy Dominique, Urvoy Marie The´re`se (1976) Les the`mes chre´tiens chez
Ibn Sab‘ı¯n et la question de la spe´ciﬁcite´ de sa pense´e. Stud Islam
44:99–121
Urvoy Dominique, Urvoy Marie The´re`se (1980) Penser l’Islam. Les pre´-
suppose´s islamiques de l’art de Lull. Vrin, Paris
Urvoy Dominique, Urvoy Marie The´re`se (1997) Un ‘‘penseur de
frontie`re’’ en Islam: Ibn Sab‘ı¯n. Bull Litt Eccle´s 98. Toulouse
Yaltkaya Serefettin (1934) Sicilya cavaplari Ibni Sabinin sicilykarli ikinci
Frederikn felseﬁsorgularina verdigi cevaplartercemesder. Istanbul
Yaltkaya
Serefettin
(1941)
Correspondance
philosophique
avec
l’empereur Fre´de´ric II de Hoenstaufen. E´tudes Orientales, Paris
al-Zain Samı¯h ‘Atif (1988/1410 h) Ibn Sab‘ı¯n, al-t:uruq al-s:u¯ﬁyya. Da¯r
al-kita¯b al-lubna¯nı¯, Bayru¯t
Other Relevant Works
Addas C (1989) Ibn ‘Arabı¯ ou la queˆte du soufre rouge. Gallimard, Paris
Addas C (1994) Andalusı¯ mysticism and the rise of Ibn ‘Arabı¯. In: The
legacy of Muslim Spain. Brill, Leiden
Alon I (1991) Socrates in medieval Arabic literature. Brill, Leiden/
Jerusalem
Anawati G (1956) Prolegome`nes a` une nouvelle e´dition du De Causis
arabe. In: Me´langes Massignon I. Institut Franc¸ais de Damas, Damas,
pp 73–110
Anawati G (1969) Un aspect de la lutte contre l’he´re´sie au XVe`me sie`cle
d’apre`s un ine´dit attribue´ a Maqrı¯zı¯, Al-kita¯b al-baya¯n al-mufı¯d bayn
al-tawh:ı¯d wa al-talh:ı¯d. In: Colloque internationale sur l’histoire du
Caire, Le Caire, pp 23–36
Badawı¯ ‘A (1947) Aristu¯ ‘ind al-‘arab. Maktabat al-nah:da al-mis:riyya,
al-Qa¯hira
Badawı¯ ‘A (1948–1952) Mant:iq Arist:u¯. Da¯r al-kutub al-mis:riyya,
al-Qa¯hira
Badawı¯ ‘A (1955) Al-aﬂa¯t:u¯nı¯yya al-muh:datha ‘ind al-‘arab. Maktabat
al-nah:da al-mis:riyya, al-Qa¯hira
Badawı¯ ‘A (1978) Shat:ah:a¯t al-s:uﬁyya. Kuwait
Badawı¯ ‘A (1984) Aﬂa¯tu¯n fı¯’l-isla¯m – Platon en pays d’islam. Teheran
Badawı¯ ‘A (1986) Commentaires sur Aristote perdus en grec et autres
e´pıˆtres. Da¯r al-mashriq, Beyrouth
Badawı¯ ‘A (1987) La transmission de la philosophie greque au monde
arabe. Vrin, Paris
Bafﬁoni C (1981) Il IV libro dei ‘‘Meteorologica’’di Aristotele. Bibliopolis,
Napoli
Bafﬁoni C (1990) Sulle tracce di Soﬁa. Tre ‘‘divini’’ nella Grecia classica.
Bibliopolis, Napoli
Bafﬁoni C (1994) ‘Detti aurei’ di Pitagora in trasmissione araba. In:
I moderni ausili all’ecdotica, a cura di Placella V, Martelli S. Edizioni
Scientiﬁche Italiane, Napoli
Balya¯nı¯ AD (1982) E´pıˆtre sur l’unicite´ absolue, pre´sentation et traduction
de l’arabe par Chodkiewicz M. Les Deux Oce´ans, Paris
Bardenhewer O (1882) Die pseudo-aristotelische Schrift u¨ber das
reine
Gute
bekannt
unter
dem
Namen
Liber
de
Causis.
Freiburg i. B.
Chodkiewicz M (1986) Le sceau des saints. Gallimard, Paris
Chodkiewicz M (1992) Un oce´an sans rivage. Le Seuil, Paris
Davidson HA (1992) Alfarabi, Avicenna, and Averroes, On Intellect.
Oxford University Press, New York/Oxford
De Stefano A (1938) La cultura in Sicilia alla corte di Federico II
imperatore. Ciuni, Palermo
Elamrani-Jamal A (1983) Logique aristote´licienne et grammaire arabe.
E´tude et documents. Vrin, Paris
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ Abu¯ Nas:r (2001) L’E´pıˆtre sur l’intellect, traduit de l’arabe,
annote´ et presente´ par Hamzah D. L’Harmattan, Paris
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ Abu¯ Nas:r (2008) L’armonia delle opinioni dei due sapienti, il
divino Platone e Aristotele, introduzione testo arabo, traduzione e
commento di Martini Bonadeo C. Prefazione di Endress G. ed. PLUS,
Pisa
Furlani G (1935) Il primo libro degli Analitici di Aristotele nella versione
siriaca di Giorgio delle Nazioni. In: Mem. Morali Storiche
e Filologiche Ser VI – vol 5 – fasc 3. Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei,
Roma
Gardet L (1965) La langue arabe et l’analyse des e´tats spirituels. In:
Me´langes L. Massignon, II. Institut Franc¸ais d’Etudes Arabes de
Damas, Damas, pp 215–243
Geoffroy E´
(1995) Le souﬁsme en Egypte et en Syrie sous les
derniers Mamelouks et les premiers Ottomans. Orientations
spirituelles et enjeux culturels. Institut Franc¸ais d’E´tudes Arabes,
Damas
Georr K (1948) Les Cate´gories d’Aristote dans leurs versions syro-arabes.
Institut Franc¸ais de Damas, Beyrouth
Hamelin H (1953) La the´orie de l’intellect d’apre`s Aristote et ses
commentateurs. Vrin, Paris
Ibn ‘Abba¯d de Ronda (1956) Un mystique pre´dicateur qarawı¯yı¯n de Fe´s.
Imprimerie Catholique, Beyrouth
Ibn ‘Ajı¯ba (1998) Deux traite´s sue l’Unite´ de l’existence, texte arabe e´tabli,
traduit, presente´ par Michon J-L. Imprimerie Najah el Jadida,
Casablanca
Ibn Sabʿı¯n, ʿAbd al-H˙ aqq I
513
I

Ibn al-‘Arı¯f Abu¯ al ‘Abba¯s Ah:mad (1995) Sedute mistiche. Mah:a¯sin
al-maja¯lis, trad. di Urizzi P. L’Ottava, Milano
Ibn ‘Arabı¯ Muh:ammad Muh:yı¯ al-Dı¯n (1996) Il libro dell’estinzione nella
contemplazione, trad. di Tawﬁk Y, Rossi Testa R, postfazione e note di
Vaˆlsan M. ed. SE, Milano
Ibn H˘ aldu¯n ‘Abd al-Rah:ma¯n (1959) Shifa¯’ al-sa¯’il. Beyrouth
Ibn H˘ aldu¯n ‘Abd al-Rah:ma¯n (1968) Muqaddima. Discours sur l’histoire
universelle, traduit par Monteil V. Commission Libanaise pour la
Traduction des Chefs-d’œuvre, Beyrouth
Ibn Sı¯na¯ Abu¯ ‘Alı¯ al-H˙ usayn (1951) Livre des directives et remarques,
traduction avec introduction et notes par Goichon AM. Vrin,
Beyrouth/Paris
al-Jı¯la¯nı¯ ‘Abd al-Qa¯dir (1994) Il segreto dei segreti, versione italiana di
Urizzi P. L’Ottava, Catania
Jolivet J (1971) L’intellect selon Kindı¯. Brill, Leiden
Ka¯la¯badhı¯ Abu¯ Bakr (1981) Traite´ de souﬁsme. Les maıˆtres et les e´tapes,
traduit par Deladrie`re R. Sindbad, Paris
Kantarowicz E (1976) Federico II imperatore. Garzanti, Milano
Langhade J (1994) Du Coran a` la philosophie. Institut Franc¸ais d’E´tudes
Arabes, Damas
Lory P (1989) Alchimie et mystique en terre d’islam. Lagrasse, Verdier,
Paris
Manselli R (1986) Volonta` politica e ansia di sapere in Federico II. In:
Gensini S (a cura di) Politica e cultura nell’Italia di Federico II.
Pacini, Pisa
Massignon L (1929) Recueil de textes ine´dits concernant l’histoire de la
mystique en pays d’Islam. Geuthner, Paris
Massignon L (1950) Recherches sur Shushtari, poe`te andalou enterre´ a
Damiette. In: Extrait des Me´langes William Marc¸ais. Maisonneuve et
Larose, Paris
Nicholson RA (1911) Kashf al-mah:ju¯b, by ‘Alı¯ b. Uthma¯n al-Julla¯b
al-Hujwı¯rı¯. E. J. Brill/Luzac, Leiden/London
Nwyia P (1986) Exe´ge`se coranique et langage mystique. Dar el-Mashreq,
Beyrouth
Peters FE (1968) Aristoteles Arabus. The oriental translations and com-
mentaries on the Aristotelian Corpus. Brill, Leiden
Popovic A, Veinstein G (1996) Les Voies d’Allah. Fayard, Paris
al-Shahrasta¯nı¯ Muh:ammad Ibn ‘Abd al-Karı¯m (1986) Livre des religions
et des sectes. Peeters/UNESCO, Leuven/Paris
Ibn al-Samh:
CECILIA MARTINI BONADEO
Dipartimento di Filosoﬁa
Universita` di Padova
Padova
Italy
Abstract
Ibn al-Samh: was the Christian disciple of Yah:ya¯ b. ‘Adı¯
who transmitted the lecture-course of the Baghdad circle
on Aristotle’s Rhetoric and Physics.
Abu¯ ‘Alı¯ l-H˙ asan ibn al-Samh: (d.1027) was a Christian
disciple of Yah:ya¯ b. ‘Adı¯. He had a bookseller’s shop at Ba¯b
al-T˙a¯q in Baghdad. Ibn al-Samh: transmitted the lecture-
course of the so-called the Baghdad circle on Aristotle’s
Rhetoric and Physics.
In the MS Paris, Bibliothe`que Nationale, ar. 2346 the
Rethoric is copied from Ibn al-Samh:’s autograph. As we
can see from the MS Leiden, Universiteitsbiblioteek, or.
583, the text of Aristotle’s Physics was redacted by Abu¯
l-H˙ usayn al-Bas:rı¯, a student of Ibn al-Samh:, on the basis of
Yah:ya¯ b. ‘Adı¯’s autograph copy of Ish:a¯q b. H˙ unayn’s trans-
lation. Yah:ya¯ b. ‘Adı¯himself said he had checked the text of
Ish:a¯q b. H˙ unayn’s translation three times and once more
against the Syriac text. The lemmas of the text are com-
pleted with a commentary in the form of glosses in the
margins, giving a written record of the lecture-course
given in the Baghdad circle in the year 1004. In these
notes one can ﬁnd the commentaries of Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯
ibn Yu¯nus, Yah:ya¯ b. ‘Adı¯, Ibn al-Samh:, and Abu¯ l-Faraj
‘Abdalla¯h ibn al-T˙ayyib. John Philoponus’Commentary on
the Physics is one of the sources of Yah:ya¯ b. ‘Adı¯’s notes.
In addition to his ‘‘editorial’’ work, Ibn al-Samh: is the
author of a treatise on the scope of philosophy which has
come down to us.
See also: ▶Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ ibn Yu¯nus ▶Ibn al-T˙ayyib
▶Translations from Greek into Arabic ▶Yah:ya¯ ibn ʿAdı¯
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Arist˙u¯t˙a¯lis (1964–1965) al-T˙abı¯‘a. Tarjamat Ish:a¯q ibn H˙ unayn ma‘a
shuru¯h: ibn al-Samh: wa-Ibn ‘Adı¯ wa-Matta¯ ibn Yu¯nus wa-Abı¯
l-Faraj ibn al-T˙ayyib, G˘ uz’ 1. 2, ed. Badawı¯ ‘A. al-Da¯r al-qawmiyya
li-l-t:iba¯‘a wa-l-nashr, Cairo
Ibn al-Samh: (1977) Jawa¯b ‘an al-su’a¯l [. . .] Ma¯ l-g˙a¯ya allatı¯ yanh:u l-insa¯n
nah:waha¯ bi-l-tafalsuf, ed. Muh:aqqiq M. Jashna¯ma-i Henry Corbin.
Muassasa-i mutalaat-i islami-i danisgah-i Makgil, Tehran, pp 127–140
Kutsch Wilhelm, Georr Khalil (1963) Texte arabe du Grand Commentare
de la Physique d’Aristote par Abu¯ ‘Alı¯ b. al-Samh:, 1er livre. Me´langes
de l’Universite´ Saint Joseph 39:266–310
Biographers
Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ (1989) Al-Muqa¯basa¯t, ed. T Husayn Da¯r al-a¯dab,
Beirut
Ibn al-Qift˙ı¯ (1903) Ta’rı¯kh al-h:ukama¯’, ed. Lippert J. Dieterich’sche
Verlagsbuchhandlung, Leipzig
Secondary Sources
Endress G (1977) The works of Yah:ya¯ ibn ‘Adı¯. An analytical inventory.
Dr. L. Reichert Verlag, Wiesbaden
Kraemer JL (1986) Humanism in the renaissance of Islam. The cultural
revival during the Buyid Age. Brill, Leiden
Stern SM (1956) Ibn al-Samh:. J R Asiat Soc G B Irel, pp 31–44
514 I
Ibn al-Samh:

Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna)
NADJA GERMANN
Department of Philosophy
Loyola University Maryland
Baltimore, MD
USA
Abstract
One of the most signiﬁcant philosophers of the Arabic and
Persian East, Avicenna (c. 980–1037) also had an enor-
mous inﬂuence upon the Latin West. He combined the
various philosophical traditions of his time – ranging
from Aristotle and his commentators, through Neopla-
tonic writings deriving from Plotinus and Proclus, to his
immediate Arabic predecessors (particularly al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯) –
and developed his own philosophy. His writings stand out
for their originality and comprehensiveness, covering
nearly all scientiﬁc ﬁelds, including logic, natural philos-
ophy, metaphysics, and medicine. In current research,
Avicenna is primarily appreciated for a number of theo-
ries, which were speciﬁcally inﬂuential upon later intellec-
tual history. In the ﬁeld of logic, they include his
considerations regarding the subject matter of logic (sec-
ond intentions) and his distinction between ‘‘conception’’
(tas˙awwur) and ‘‘assent’’ (tas˙dı¯q), which brings logic con-
siderably closer to epistemology. In the ﬁeld of psychology,
he is renowned for his theories of abstraction and intel-
lectual intuition, as well as for his doctrine of the ﬁve
internal senses. And lastly, in the ﬁeld of metaphysics, he
is known both for his cosmology, which (by means of
his theory of separate intellects) bridges the gap between
ontology and noetics, and his famous distinction of
essence and existence, which underlies many of his argu-
ments and theories, such as his proof of the existence of
God, and theory of universals.
Biographical Information
Abu¯ ‘Alı¯ l-H˙ usayn ibn ‘Abdalla¯h ibn Sı¯na¯, known as
Avicenna in the Latin West, was born c. 980 CE or earlier
in Afshana, in the vicinity of Bukha¯ra¯ (today: Uzbekistan).
Some years later, the family moved to Bukha¯ra¯, where he
received his education, ﬁrst in the religious sciences of
Islam, the Qurʾa¯n, Arabic literature (adab) and Islamic
jurisprudence, and then in philosophy. Whereas several
teachers are mentioned in connection with his Islamic
studies, the situation is different with regard to his study
of the philosophical disciplines. Although his father went
to the trouble of hiring his son a teacher, Avicenna himself
insists that he acquired his knowledge in these ﬁelds more
or less autodidactically.
At this point a remark concerning the biographical
information available on Avicenna is in order. Although
at ﬁrst glance we seem to be well-equipped in this regard,
as we possess an autobiography recorded by his disciple
al-Ju¯zja¯nı¯ under his supervision (and later expanded into a
biography by the latter), we are faced with the problem that
especially the part concerning his education is styled in a
programmatic manner, and is designed to defend a certain
curriculum and particular theory of knowledge rather than
to depict his upbringing with historical accuracy (Gutas
1988:149–159). However this may be, according to
Avicenna’s account, he studied logic and mathematics
partly on his own and partly under the instruction of his
teacher, whereas natural philosophy and metaphysics he
studied entirely by himself. To these sciences, which cor-
respond neatly with the Peripatetic curriculum, he added
medicine, which ranks as an applied science within such
an Aristotelian framework.
By the age of eighteen his education was complete
and he was already working as a physician for his father’s
employer, Nu¯h˙ ibn Mans˙u¯r. Some years later he also
attained a position as a political administrator, and he
continued to practice these two professions for the rest
of his life. In this respect his biography is typical of eastern
philosophers, who were customarily employed at prin-
cely courts. Although this granted them a relative inde-
pendence from the religious sphere, it also made them
much more dependent upon the goodwill of their emp-
loyer and subject to the contingencies of political circum-
stance. It is most likely for this reason that Avicenna
changed his employer several times. In 1024 however,
he ﬁnally settled in Is˙faha¯n under the employ of ‘Ala¯’
al-Dawla, whom he accompanied on trips and military
campaigns. He died in 1037 during a trip to Hamadha¯n,
where he was buried.
Philosophy
General Remarks
Despite his restless lifestyle, Avicenna produced an enor-
mous philosophical œuvre, of which about 130 titles are
today considered authentic. His writings cover all ﬁelds of
philosophy; however, they particularly excel in the areas
of logic, natural philosophy (including psychology), and
metaphysics. Apart from numerous short treatises focusing
on individual topics, his œuvre consists of comprehensive
summas, such as the Book of the Healing (Kita¯b al-Shifa¯’),
Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) I
515
I

Eastern
Philosophy
(al-H˙ ikma
al-mashriqiyya),
and
Pointers
and
Reminders
(al-Isha¯ra¯t
wa-l-tanbı¯ha¯t).
In addition to philosophy, he is also renowned for his
achievements in the ﬁeld of medicine, and several of
his medical writings have survived (cf. in particular his
Qa¯nu¯n, Lat. Canon medicinae). Regarding philosophical
orientation, Avicenna belongs primarily to the Aristote-
lian tradition, as is already apparent from his autobiogra-
phy. Apart from Aristotle himself, his commentators, such
as Alexander of Aphrodisias, had a great inﬂuence upon
Avicenna’s thought. His philosophy is however also marked
by a strong Neoplatonic strain, as well as by the thoughts
of his Arabic predecessors, the ﬁrst and foremost being
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯.
His debt to Aristotle ﬁnds expression not only in doc-
trinal features, but also in his division of philosophy and in
the structure of his works. In addition to his autobiography
we might refer to Avicenna’s On the Division of the Intel-
lectual Sciences (Risa¯la fı¯ aqsa¯m al-‘ulu¯m al-‘aqliyya),
where he develops a classiﬁcation of the sciences that
corresponds to the curriculum created by the Alexan-
drian scholars of late Antiquity. A further piece of evi-
dence is provided by the arrangement of his major
philosophical works, particularly his Book of the Healing,
which is divided into treatises according to the Alexan-
drian grouping of Aristotle’s writings, i.e., it is introduced
by an organon (embracing reworkings of Porphyry’s
Isagoge and Aristotle’s logical writings, Rhetoric and Poet-
ics), followed by three treatises dedicated to the main parts
of theoretical philosophy, namely, natural philosophy,
mathematics, and metaphysics. Ethics, by contrast, is
entirely absent from his œuvre, and political philosophy
treated only in scattered chapters.
With respect to the continuity of Avicenna’s thought,
there are certainly changes in several of his positions, so
that it is impossible to speak of the philosophical system of
our author. However, there is no complete rupture which
would justify the distinction between an ‘‘Aristotelian’’
and a ‘‘mystical’’ Avicenna, or an ‘‘exoteric’’ and an ‘‘eso-
teric’’ Avicenna, as has repeatedly been defended by some
scholars, such as A.F. Mehren, H. Corbin, or S.H. Nasr.
Rather, these changes must be characterized as gradual
developments, often provoked by systematic problems
detected by Avicenna’s students and necessitating his
reworking of the concerned issues, as is the case, e.g.,
with his theory of intuition and thinking (see Gutas
2001). Furthermore, the differences between his allegedly
exoteric Aristotelian works and supposedly esoteric, which
is to say, mystical thought, particularly ascribed to his
Eastern Philosophy, have been shown to be stylistic, and
not with regard to content. Those parts of the Eastern
Philosophy which are extant are in fact in neat doctrinal
accordance with Avicenna’s most ‘‘Aristotelian’’ work, the
Book of the Healing (see Gutas 2000).
Since it is impossible in the space of a short article to
adequately discuss the intellectual developments of this
philosopher, we will instead focus upon Avicenna’s Book
of the Healing, and this for three reasons: ﬁrst, it is his
most comprehensive and detailed summa, covering all
branches of philosophy (including logic). Second, it is
probably the most accessible of Avicenna’s works, both
with respect to availability of editions and translations,
and with regard to the amount of research done upon it,
thereby facilitating its study considerably. Third, of his
philosophical works, this is the one that earned the
broadest reception, spreading not only throughout the
Arabic East, but also through the Latin West, owing to
the great impact of its twelfth century translation on
medieval thinkers. In this book, we will furthermore
concentrate upon certain issues which – in the light of
current research – must be considered Avicenna’s major
achievements. These belong to the ﬁelds of (1) logic,
(2) psychology, and (3) metaphysics.
Logic
There are several aspects in which logic plays a central
role in the thought of Avicenna. According to him, logic
is the method necessary for man to proceed from the
known to the unknown. Since the attainment of knowl-
edge is, in turn, identiﬁed as man’s ultimate goal, logic is
indispensable for the achievement of perfection. Hence, it
functions quite naturally as an instrument in all the phil-
osophical sciences. These general considerations – devel-
oped in the introductory chapters of Avicenna’s Isagoge
(Madkhal) to the Healing – are echoed in his own proce-
dure: he consistently applies logic in his writings, and
particularly falls back upon the demonstrative method
derived from Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics (cf. for exam-
ple, his Metaphysics; Bertolacci 2006:213–263). In addi-
tion, he contributed considerably to the development of
logic at a more technical level, most notably in the ﬁeld of
modal logic (Street 2004, 2005).
Apart from these programmatic and technical points,
Avicenna also elaborated certain key conceptual consider-
ations within the ﬁeld of logic. One of these concerns
its subject matter, which he identiﬁes as second intentions
(al-ma‘a¯nı¯ l-ma‘qu¯la al-tha¯niya, intentiones secundae).
Without yet using this term (which he only introduces in
his Metaphysics, I ii:10.17; Lat.:10.73–74), he nonetheless
develops the concept in the Isagoge (Isagoge, II:15.9–16.12;
Lat.:2rB–2vA). The concept, as it is explained there,
refers to states and accidents of things in conception
516 I
Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna)

(fı¯ l-tas˙awwur). As an explanation for his claim that the
things concerned are ‘‘in conception,’’ he points out that
things are either known or unknown in relation to our
mind. Consequently, in order to attain knowledge about
them, it is necessary for us to have knowledge of these
states and accidents. ‘‘This kind of reﬂection,’’ concludes
Avicenna, ‘‘is called the science of logic,’’ and its task
consists in the examination of the respective states and
accidents ‘‘inasmuch as they lead to making the unknown
known’’ (Isagoge, II:16.10–12; Lat.:2vA; trans. Marmura
1980:250). Examples of these states and accidents are
‘‘being a subject, predication, [...] universality and partic-
ularity in predication, essentiality and accidentality in
predication’’ (Isagoge, II:15.5–6; Lat.:2rB; trans. Marmura
1980:247). In sum, second intentions embrace a particu-
lar kind of entity, namely states and accidents, both
occurring to things in conception and suitable for leading
one from the known to the unknown.
In this connection, a further distinction is worth not-
ing. Whereas the subject matter of logic is, as just said,
second intentions, the discipline itself is divided into
two parts, dealing with tas˙awwur (intellectus) and tas˙dı¯q
(credulitas) respectively (Isagoge, III:17.7–17; Lat.:2vA). In
accordance with Avicenna’s notion of science, these must
be the goals of logic. Nevertheless, tas˙awwur, according to
the explanations of our author, can be best described
as a simple conception in one’s mind, which is neither
true nor false. Tas˙dı¯q, by contrast, should be translated as
assent, or belief, since it designates an attitude toward a
piece of knowledge (and hence presupposes the presence
of at least one simple tas˙awwur). Tas˙dı¯q, accordingly,
‘‘occurs when there takes place in the mind a relating
(nisba) of this form (s˙u¯ra) to the things themselves as
being in accordance with them’’ (Isagoge, III:17.16–17;
Lat.:2vA; trans. Sabra 1980:760). This relating and the
resulting attitude can then be expressed in propositions,
including simple assertions. Accordingly, only at this stage
does the question of truth or falsehood, and hence the
question of knowledge in the strict sense of the term (cog-
nition of the causes), come into play. With these character-
istics, however, tas˙awwur and tas˙dı¯q are primarily kinds of
knowledge in the human mind; in short, they are episte-
mological notions. Every piece of human knowledge, says
Avicenna, is either tas˙awwur or tas˙dı¯q (Isagoge, III:17.7–8
and 10–12; Lat.:2vA). Against this background, his con-
viction that logic must embrace corresponding parts
throws a revealing light on his notion of logic: according
to him, logic is not just a useful ‘‘external’’ tool we can
apply in our attempt to attain knowledge. Rather, it must
be identiﬁed with thinking or grasping itself, i.e., with
what is going on in man’s mind when he is actually in
the process of acquiring knowledge. In this case, logic as a
science, i.e., as the science dealing with tas˙awwur and
tas˙dı¯q, is in fact epistemology.
Psychology
These considerations lead us to the question of what
precisely cognition is, and hence into the realm of psy-
chology or rather, the theory of the rational soul. The
fullest account of this topic can be found in Avicenna’s
On the Soul (Fı¯ l-nafs). It involves two aspects, namely
his concept of intuition, and his notion of abstraction, the
crucial relationship of which remains a matter of contro-
versy. To discuss these two aspects, some general remarks
on Avicenna’s concept of the soul are required. First, there
is his distinction of supra-lunar and sub-lunar souls, where
the former belong to the spheres of the planets and stars
and are therefore discussed in the context of cosmology (in
particular, Metaphysics, IX). It is the latter, however, which
are at issue here. Sub-lunar souls are of three different
kinds, corresponding to the hierarchy of animate beings:
plants possess vegetative souls, animals, sensible souls, and
humans, rational souls. These kinds of sub-lunar souls are
nevertheless related, insofar as the ‘‘higher’’ kind possesses
all the faculties of the ‘‘lower.’’ As a result an animal, e.g., is
not only gifted with senses such as smell, hearing and
vision, but also with vegetative functions, namely, growing,
nutrition, and aging. Consequently, any ‘‘higher’’ soul,
although it will simply be called a ‘‘sensible soul’’ or ‘‘ratio-
nal soul,’’ enfolds not only its ‘‘own’’ faculties but also the
‘‘lower’’ ones. The highest faculty obtainable in the sub-
lunar world is the human intellect, and this is precisely the
entity which is able to acquire knowledge.
In the ﬁfth book of his On the Soul, Avicenna addresses
the question of how man can attain knowledge. As
mentioned above, he interprets cognition as a movement
from the known to the unknown, which however pres-
upposes something known as the starting point of the
whole enterprise. This problem is resolved by Avicenna’s
theory of the four stages of the human intellect, which
he introduces in the ﬁrst book (On the Soul, I v:48–50;
Lat.:96.37–99.78; cf. Hasse 1999:28–40). There he distin-
guishes between (1) the material intellect (‘aql hayu¯la¯nı¯;
intellectus materialis), (2) the intellect in habit (‘aql bi-l-
malaka; intellectus in habitu), (3) the intellect in effect (‘aql
bi-l-ﬁʿl; intellectus in effectu), and (4) the acquired intellect
(‘aql mustafa¯d; intellectus accomodatus). Accordingly, at a
very early stage of life, man’s intellect (which is at that time
the material intellect) is endowed with the so-called pri-
mary concepts and primary principles (it remains
unclear from where these primary intelligibles derive;
usually their origin is assumed to be the external active
Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) I
517
I

intellect; for this latter, see below). Whereas primary con-
cepts are notions such as the existent, the one, the thing,
etc. (i.e., transcendentalia), primary principles are ﬁrst
axioms such as ‘‘the whole is bigger than its part,’’ or ‘‘¬
(p ∧¬p).’’ Both these concepts and principles are
required to obtain further concepts, the so-called second-
ary intelligibles, and to draw conclusions. Once the human
intellect has acquired these ﬁrst concepts and principles, it
can begin the process of learning. At this stage, the human
intellect is called ‘‘intellect in habit,’’ which merely desig-
nates its capacity to acquire further knowledge. The
remaining stages – the intellect in effect and the acquired
intellect – do not strictly refer to evolutionary phases,
but rather to the intellect’s actual state: whether it has
already acquired secondary intelligibles (intellect in effect),
and whether it actually intelligizes, as well as to what extent
it still requires support from the lower faculties of the
soul in order to get in contact with the active intellect
(acquired intellect).
For man to cognize (i.e., cognition of the causes),
he must be able to ﬁnd syllogisms to verify newly obtai-
ned pieces of knowledge. Since the latter, according to
Avicenna, form the conclusions of such syllogisms, man’s
primary task consists in ﬁnding the appropriate mid-
dle terms. On the one hand, this model clearly reveals
the strong connection between logic and the process of
acquiring knowledge mentioned above; it also explains the
abundance of logical procedures in Avicenna’s writings. On
the other hand it leads us to the core of his theories of
intuition and abstraction. To detect the middle terms of
syllogisms, our intellects, according to Avicenna, must
come into contact with the active intellect mentioned ear-
lier, which is the lowest of the cosmological intellects. This
cosmological entity in turn bestows the human intellect
with the secondary intelligibles it seeks, a process also
described in terms of emanation and inﬂux. It is precisely
this form of knowledge acquisition to which Avicenna
refers when he speaks of intuition (particularly, On the
Soul, V vi; Gutas 1988:159–176).
However this is only one side of the schema intro-
duced above. For since Avicenna interprets the acquisition
of knowledge as the detection of the causes of a piece of
knowledge, this process must in fact take the conclusion
(of a syllogism) as its starting-point and then proceed with
the search for a middle term. It is at this point that
Avicenna’s theory of abstraction comes into play (partic-
ularly, On the Soul, I v:44–45; Lat.:87.19–90.60). In con-
trast to intuition, this is a bottom-up procedure, which
typically begins with sense-data and is accomplished in
concert with the ﬁve internal senses, which belong to the
sensible faculty of the soul. In the human soul, these
internal senses (a doctrine that clearly originates with
Avicenna) differ from those of animals in that one of
them possesses additional capacities. More precisely,
whereas both animals and humans share common sense,
estimation, imagination (which is, rather different from
what the term implies, a mere storage place for ‘‘images’’
of perceived things), and memory, they differ in that
the imaginative faculty (the faculty for producing new
‘‘images’’) in human souls is further endowed with a cogi-
tative function. By virtue of this sense, man is able to com-
pose and divide individual forms or intentions perceived by
either the external senses or the estimation, as well as reveal
similarities and differences or, more generally, detect the
relationships between these forms. In so doing, the cogitative
faculty transforms individually perceived forms or inten-
tions into particular forms (i.e., forms abstracted from cer-
tain material accidents adhering to individual forms), which
must however be sharply distinguished from universal con-
cepts (i.e., completely abstract forms, or universals). Mean-
while, these particular forms are precisely that missing link
which man requires at the outset to produce syllogisms and
thus attain knowledge.
Hence, despite the ongoing debate regarding the exact
nature of the relationship between this ‘‘emanative’’ intui-
tion and ‘‘empirical’’ abstraction, we may read Avicenna as
follows: knowledge has as its starting point the sensory
perceptible world. From this world are abstracted parti-
cular forms or intentions, which in the ﬁrst instance are
simple conceptions. To attain knowledge in the strict
sense, we must now ﬁnd a syllogism. As we already possess
the primary concepts and principles, our task thus consists
in revealing the necessary middle terms. However, these
middle terms, according to Avicenna’s description, are
received from the active intellect through inﬂux. Mean-
while, for such an inﬂux to occur, man, by virtue of his
cogitative faculty, must present the particular form men-
tioned earlier to the active intellect. If the particular form
is ‘‘exposed in the right way’’ (i.e., muqa¯bil; recte opposito;
On the Soul, V v:235; Lat.:128.61) to the active intellect,
then the latter is like a source of light shining upon it, such
that the human intellect is able to grasp the corresponding
universal form. Hence, taken as a whole, the acquisition
of knowledge appears to be the result of the collaboration
of two processes. It is characterized by a bottom-up
abstraction of particular forms by the human soul, and
the top-down emanation of universal concepts by the
active intellect, at the interface of which cogitation is
located and performs its activity, i.e., abstracting particular
forms and exposing them in the correct way. Only at a
later stage of human life, when one has already acquired a
sufﬁcient number of intelligibles, can one dispense with
518 I
Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna)

abstraction and concentrate upon construing syllogisms
that consist exclusively of universal concepts (i.e., with
the conclusion included).
Metaphysics
Having already broached the subject of the active intellect
and supra-lunar souls, some remarks on cosmology are
now in order. Whereas the majority of issues discussed
so far are clearly indebted to the Aristotelian tradition,
this aspect of Avicenna’s philosophy is heavily inﬂuenced
by his Neoplatonic predecessors as well as by al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯.
Although from a modern point of view this type of spe-
culation might seem strange, it is nevertheless a cor-
nerstone of his thought, as it connects ontology with
epistemology and provides the basis from which to argue
for the cognizability of the world. It furthermore explains
the traditional claim that man strives for knowledge for
his speciﬁc good, and develops a philosophical standpoint
with respect to the afterlife.
Highest in the cosmological hierarchy, according to
Avicenna, is the necessary existent (wa¯jib al-wuju¯d), or
God, who is unique and simple. This necessary existent,
moreover, must be the ﬁrst cause of all other existing
things. However, because the ﬁrst thing proceeding from
the ﬁrst cause must be one in number (owing to the ﬁrst
principle’s simplicity), it is impossible to conceive of an
act of causation according to which the necessary existent
would have immediately created a multiplicitous reality
such as we have: ‘‘For you have known that from the one
inasmuch as it is one, only one proceeds’’ (Metaphysics, IX
iv:405; Lat.:481.51–52; trans. Avicenna 2005:330.2–3).
Consequently, its coming into being must be otherwise
explained. In this connection, Avicenna falls back upon
the cosmological schema al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ developed in his Perfect
State (Maba¯di’ a¯ra¯’ ahl al-madı¯na al-fa¯d˙ila). Accordingly,
he interprets the necessary existent as a purely intellec-
tual being, possessing no material attributes. As a result,
that which is brought into existence from it is itself a pure
intellect, which emerges as the ﬁrst separate intellect in a
whole sequence of separate intellects. For this intellect
performs, as it were, three activities: ﬁrst, it contemplates
that necessary being – an action marking the inception of a
second separate intellect. Second, it contemplates itself as
potential and, third, as necessary, thus effecting the emer-
gence of the outermost celestial sphere (sphere of day and
night) and its perfection, which is the ﬁrst celestial soul.
This process is then repeated: the second separate
intellect contemplates both the necessary being and itself
(both as potential and necessary), thereby producing a
further separate intellect and another celestial sphere (sphere
of the ﬁxed stars) with a second celestial soul. The third
intellect, in its turn, reﬂects upon the ﬁrst cause and itself,
and so forth, until we reach the level of the tenth separate
intellect ‘‘that governs our selves’’ (Metaphysics, IX iv:407;
Lat.:484.99; trans. Avicenna 2005:331.22). There is no
essential reason why this process should stop here; how-
ever, because to Avicenna and his contemporaries, there
are no more than nine celestial spheres (the ninth coming
into being parallel to the tenth separate intellect), it evi-
dently does end here. Nevertheless, the tenth separate int-
ellect and the sphere of the moon along with its soul, also
have their activities: it is this intellect which is the bestower
of the forms of reality (the so-called wa¯jib al-s˙uwar, dator
formarum) and is also the active intellect, and hence the
source of the inﬂux of universal concepts (which neatly
correspond to the forms of reality) into the human intellect.
Furthermore, it is by virtue of the activities of the cosmo-
logical intellects and souls that some men have foreknowl-
edge of future contingents (infused into their imaginative
faculty, e.g., through dreams), or an extraordinary capacity
for coming into contact with the active intellect and
intelligizing (i.e., ﬁnding the middle-terms of syllogisms,
cf. Avicenna’s theory of prophecy).
Despite its comprehensiveness, Avicenna’s cosmology
has certain implications which bring it into conﬂict with
Islamic doctrine, and which were consequently rejected
by the majority of his successors. First, there is the prob-
lem that, according to his theory, God, i.e., the necessary
existent, does not create reality all at once, but only brings
forth the ﬁrst intellect by means of which all further
coming into being is realized. Moreover, this process of
coming into being is something which evolves of necessity
and is eternal. This however conﬂicts with the Islamic
conviction that God can arbitrarily intervene in his crea-
tion, and contradicts the Islamic rejection of the eternity
of the world. A further point concerns the relation of
body and soul, and the afterlife of man. For, according to
Avicenna, the human soul comes into being precisely at
the same time as the body to which it corresponds, and
remains connected throughout one’s lifetime. In contrast
to the body, however, the soul does not perish with bodily
death but continues to exist. Not so for the body: in
Avicenna’s theory there is no place for bodily resurrection
in the hereafter, which is instead populated exclusively by
souls, enduring either pain or happiness, depending upon
their former life.
At this point, however, it might be in order to return to
an aspect touched upon previously and examine it more
closely. This is Avicenna’s famous distinction between
essence and existence, which underlies the concept of
the necessary existent. Although, according to Avicenna,
metaphysics culminates in theology and, hence, in an
Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) I
519
I

inquiry into the nature of God as ﬁrst principle, it must be
addressed as an ontology. For, according to him, the sub-
ject matter of metaphysics is the existent insofar as it is
existent (al-mawju¯d min h˙aithu huwa mawju¯d), whereas
its species (the categories), properties (the universal–
particular, oneness–multiplicity, the necessary–the possi-
ble–the impossible), and ultimate principles and causes
(the four Aristotelian causes and God) are the things
which are sought (Bertolacci 2006:111–211). In this con-
nection, the ﬁrst book of his Metaphysics is of particular
interest, as it programmatically introduces the subject
matter, and discusses its relation to extensionally cognate
notions such as the thing, or the necessary – all of which,
according to him, are primary concepts. It is in this part
of the work that he introduces the distinction between
essence and existence, which gained notoriety in the
Middle Ages (Metaphysics, I v).
The starting point of his considerations is the concept of
the existent, which he had already singled out as the subject
matter of metaphysics in previous chapters (particularly
Metaphysics, I ii). Existence (wuju¯d), says Avicenna, may
be divided into afﬁrmative existence and proper existence.
The latter can be identiﬁed with the true nature (h˙aqı¯qa)
of things, or their essence (ma¯hiyya). Afﬁrmative existence,
by contrast, refers to the fact that a thing exists. On this basis
he turns toward the distinction between thing and existent.
Although these notions turn out to be co-extensive, they
have different intentions: for if we speak of a thing, explains
our author, we wish to emphasize what it is; if we speak of an
existent, however, we wish to emphasize that it is. Though
he does not specify the term, from the way in which he uses
‘‘existent’’ here, it becomes clear that he is referring to
afﬁrmative existence and not to proper existence. Proper
existence, or essence, is by contrast involved in his attempt
to clarify the proper meaning of ‘‘thing.’’ According to the
above, the linguistic expression ‘‘thing’’ emphasizes the
‘‘what-ness’’ (ma¯hiyya) of an existent. However, this does
not mean that a thing is an essence. Rather it means that it
is an existent which has an essence, or put otherwise:
every thing has both an essence and exists: ‘‘... each thing
has a reality (h˙aqı¯qa) proper to it – namely, its quid-
dity (ma¯hiyya). [...]. The necessary concomitance of the
meaning of existence (ma‘na¯ l-wuju¯d) never separates
from it at all [...]. If (this) were not the case, it would not
be a thing’’ (Metaphysics, I v:31–32; Lat.:35.63–64 and
36.79–80; trans. Avicenna 2005:24.25–26 and 25.10–14).
What might appear as a word-game, in reality reﬂects a
peculiarity present in most of Avicenna’s writings, namely
his careful distinction of an ontological and epistemolog-
ical perspective of the same phenomena. Accordingly, he
sharply distinguishes between the ways in which things can
exist and the manner in which these things can be consid-
ered (e.g., in the sciences). For things can exist either in
extra-mental reality (fı¯ a‘ya¯n al-ashya¯’) or intra-mentally
as concepts (fı¯ l-tas˙awwur). However they may be consid-
ered as particular things partaking of accidents (physics),
conceptions of things under abstraction of certain accidents
(mathematics), or as things in themselves, that is to say,
essences (ma¯hiyya), regarded independently of their mode
of existence or accidents (metaphysics). These distinctions
are crucial not only because of the subtle connection that
Avicenna thus establishes between ontology and noetics,
but also because they underlie his theory of universals (see
particularly Metaphysics, V i–ii). For on these grounds he
is able to claim that, e.g., ‘‘horseness inasmuch as it is
horseness’’ (and therefore as an object of metaphysics) is
neither particular nor universal, but one single (and simple)
meaning (ma‘na¯, intentio). Hence, it is something to which
universality or particularity may attach extrinsically: ‘‘For
‘horseness’ has a deﬁnition that is in no need of the deﬁni-
tion of universality, but is (something) to which universality
accidentally occurs’’ (Metaphysics, V i:196; Lat.:228.31–32;
trans. Avicenna 2005:149.19–21). In this connection he
leaves no doubt whatsoever that, ontologically speaking,
universals such as ‘‘horseness’’ do not exist at all, except
along with accidents (e.g., existence, oneness). As such,
however, they belong properly to the realm of noetics and
hence to the sphere of consideration.
Let us however return to Avicenna’s notion of ‘‘thing’’
and his distinction between the ontological and episte-
mological perspectives. Although the distinctions between
thing–existent, and essence–existence are related, they
do not precisely correspond (for a different view see
Wisnovsky 2005:105–113): whereas the linguistic expres-
sions ‘‘essence’’ and ‘‘existence’’ are epistemological notions
referring to conceptions that we as ‘‘scientists’’ use to ana-
lyze things; ‘‘thing’’ and ‘‘existent’’ are ontological notions
referring to things. Both things and existents have an
essence and exist; however, as introduced above, we use
the linguistic expressions ‘‘thing’’ and ‘‘existent’’ in order
to evoke different aspects, namely, the essence of the respec-
tive entity in the ﬁrst instance, and its existence in the
second. These fundamental distinctions are at the basis of
some of Avicenna’s central concepts, to which we may only
allude here: e.g., the distinction between the necessary exis-
tent in itself, the necessary existent through another, and the
possible existent in itself (which is at the basis of his meta-
physical proof of the existence of God); and his determina-
tion of the respective subject matters of logic and the
theoretical sciences of philosophy.
520 I
Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna)

Concluding Remarks
Considered
as
a whole,
Avicenna’s
philosophy
is
extraordinarily rich and has only begun to be compre-
hensively explored. The broad synthesis he provided,
which brought together all the various philosophical
trends of his day, and the new shape he gave to philos-
ophy as a whole, contributed decisively to the central
role he was to play henceforth. In the Arabic and Per-
sian world, he inherited a position comparable to that
which in the Latin West was held by Aristotle. Though
overshadowed by the latter in the Latin world, his
inﬂuence upon Thomas Aquinas, Henry of Ghent, and
Duns Scotus, to name but a few, was substantial. These
trends, however, are only some indications of his
impact – owing not only to the inherent limitations of
a brief article, but also, and perhaps even more so, to
the fact that the exploration of Arabic philosophy, and
its concrete legacy in both the East and West, is still in
its infancy.
See also: ▶Alexander of Aphrodisias and Arabic Aristo-
telianism ▶Alexandrian Tradition into Arabic: Philoso-
phy ▶Arabic Texts: Philosophy, Latin Translations of
▶Aristotle, Arabic ▶Being ▶Epistemology ▶Essence
and Existence ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas˙r ▶Henry of Ghent
▶Ibn Sı¯na¯ (Avicenna), Latin Translations of ▶Intention,
Primary and Secondary ▶Internal Senses ▶Intuitive and
Abstractive Cognition ▶John Duns Scotus ▶Knowledge
▶Logic, Arabic, in the Latin Middle Ages ▶Logic in the
Arabic and Islamic World ▶Medicine in the Arab World
▶Metaphysics ▶Modal Theories and Modal Logic
▶Natural Philosophy, Arabic ▶Philosophical Psychology
▶Philosophy, Arabic ▶Plotinus, Arabic ▶Proclus, Ara-
bic ▶Proofs of the Existence of God ▶Syllogism, Theo-
ries of ▶Theology Versus Philosophy in the Arab World
▶Thomas Aquinas ▶Universals
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Arabic
Ibn Sı¯na¯ (1908) Risa¯la fı¯ aqsa¯m al-‘ulu¯m al-‘aqliyya. In: Tis’ rasa¯’il fı¯
al-h˙ikma wa-l-t˙abı¯‘iyya¯t. Mat˙ba‘a hindiyya, Cairo, pp 104–118
Ibn Sı¯na¯ (1952) In: al-Khud˙ayrı¯ M et al (eds) Al-Shifa¯’. Al-Mant˙iq.
Al-Madkhal. Al-Mat˙ba‘a al-amı¯riyya, Cairo
Ibn Sı¯na¯ (1957–1960) In: Dunya¯ S (ed) Al-Isha¯ra¯t wa-l-tanbı¯ha¯t ma‘a
sharh˙ Nas˙ı¯r al-Dı¯n al-T˙u¯sı¯, 4 vols. Da¯r al-ma‘a¯rif, Cairo
Ibn Sı¯na¯ (1959) In: Rahman F (ed) Avicenna’s De anima [Arabic text],
being the psychological part of the Kita¯b al-Shifa¯’. Oxford University
Press, London/New York/Toronto
Ibn Sı¯na¯ (1960a) In: [Q]anawa¯tı¯ J et al (eds) Al-Shifa¯’. Al-Ila¯hiyya¯t
(1). Al-Hay’a al-‘a¯mma li-shu‘u¯n al-mat˙a¯bi‘ al-amı¯riyya, Cairo
Ibn Sı¯na¯ (1960b) In: Mu¯sa¯ MY et al (eds) Al-Shifa¯’. Al-Ila¯hiyya¯t
(2). Al-Hay’a al-‘a¯mma li-shu‘u¯n al-mat˙a¯bi‘ al-amı¯riyya, Cairo
Latin
Avicenna (1508) Isagoge (s.n. Logyca). In: Auicenne perhypatetici
philosophi ac medicorum facile primi opera, Caecilius Fabrianensis,
Venice. (Reprinted Frankfurt a.M. 1961, fol. 2r–12v)
Avicenna (Avicenna latinus) (1968) Liber de anima seu sextus
de naturalibus, iv–v, ed. Van Riet S. Peeters/Brill, Louvain/Leiden
Avicenna (Avicenna latinus) (1972) Liber de anima seu sextus de
naturalibus, i–iii, ed. Van Riet S. Peeters/Brill, Louvain/Leiden
Avicenna (Avicenna latinus) (1977) Liber de philosophia prima sive scientia
divina, i–iv, ed. Van Riet S. Peeters/Brill, Louvain/Leiden
Avicenna (Avicenna latinus) (1980) Liber de philosophia prima sive
scientia divina, v–x, ed. Van Riet S. Peeters/Brill, Louvain/Leiden
Translations into Western Languages
Avicenna (1963) On the divisions of the rational sciences, trans.
Mahdi M. In: Lerner R et al (eds) Medieval political philosophy. A
source-book. Free Press of Glencoe, New York, pp 95–97
Avicenna (2005) In: Marmura ME (ed and trans) The metaphysics of the
Healing. A parallel English-Arabic text. Brigham Young University
Press, Provo
Avicenne (1956) Psychologie d’Ibn Sı¯na¯ (Avicenne) d’apre`s son œuvre
al-Shifa¯’, trans. Bakosˇ J, vol 2. Editions de l’Acade´mie Tche´coslovaque
des sciences, Prague (for Avicenna’s psychology, see also the respective
section of the closely related Kita¯b al-Naja¯t – the salvation: Avicenna’s
psychology. An English translation of Kita¯b al-Naja¯t, trans. Rahman F,
Book ii, Chapter vi. Oxford University Press, London, 1952)
Avicenne (1999) Livre des directives et remarques (Kita¯b al-Isha¯ra¯t
wa-l-tanbı¯ha¯t), trans. Goichon A-M, 2nd edn. Commission
internationale
pour
la
traduction
des
chefs-d’œuvre/Vrin,
Beyrout/Paris
Secondary Sources
Literature Prior to 1995
Janssens J (1991) An annotated bibliography on Ibn Sı¯na¯ (1970–1989).
Leuven University Press, Leuven
Janssens J (1999) An annotated bibliography on Ibn Sı¯na¯. First supple-
ment (1990–1994). FIDEM, Louvain-la-Neuve
Recent Studies and Titles Quoted
Bertolacci A (2005) Il pensiero ﬁlosoﬁco di Avicenna. In: D’Ancona C (ed)
Storia della ﬁlosoﬁa nell’Islam medievale, vol 2. Einaudi, Turin,
pp 522–626
Bertolacci A (2006) The reception of Aristotle’s metaphysics in Avicenna’s
Kita¯b al-Shifa¯’: a milestone of western metaphysical thought. Brill,
Leiden/Boston
Druart T-A (2000) The human soul’s individuation and its survival after
the body’s death. Avicenna on the causal relation between body and
soul. Arab Sci Philos 10(2):259–273
Germann N (2008) Logik zwischen ‘Kunst’ und ‘Wissenschaft’. Avicenna
zum Status der Logik in seiner Isagoge. Rech The´ol Philos Me´die´v
75(1):25–56
Gutas D (1988) Avicenna and the Aristotelian tradition. Introduction to
reading Avicenna’s philosophical works. Brill, Leiden
Gutas D (2000) Avicenna’s eastern (‘Oriental’) philosophy. Nature, con-
tents, transmission. Arab Sci Philos 10(2):159–180
Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) I
521
I

Gutas D (2001) Intuition and thinking. The evolving structure of
Avicenna’s epistemology. In: Wisnovsky R (ed) Aspects of Avicenna.
Wiener, Princeton, pp 1–38
Hasse D (1999) Das Lehrstu¨ck von den vier Intellekten in der Scholastik.
Von den arabischen Quellen bis zu Albertus Magnus. Rech The´ol
Philos Me´die´v 66(1):21–77
Hasse D (2000) Avicenna’s De anima in the Latin West. The formation of
a Peripatetic philosophy of the soul 1160–1300. The Warburg Institute/
Nino Aragno, London/Turin
Hasse D (2001) Avicenna on abstraction. In: Wisnovsky R (ed) Aspects of
Avicenna. Wiener, Princeton, pp 39–72
Janssens J, De Smet D (eds) (2002) Avicenna and his heritage. Acts of the
international colloquium, Louvain-la-Neuve, Leuven, 8–11 September
1999. Leuven University Press, Leuven
Marmura ME (1980) Avicenna on the division of the sciences in the
Isagoge of his Shifa¯’. J Hist Arab Sci 4:239–251
McGinnis J (ed) (2004) Interpreting Avicenna. Science and philosophy
in medieval Islam. In: Proceedings of the second conference of the
Avicenna study group. Brill, Leiden/Boston
McGinnis J (2006) Making abstraction less abstract. The logical, psycho-
logical, and metaphysical dimensions of Avicenna’s theory of abstrac-
tion. Proc Am Cathol Phil Assoc (Intelligence and the philosophy of
mind) 80:169–183
Reisman DC (ed) (2003) Before and after Avicenna. In: Proceedings
of the ﬁrst conference of the Avicenna study group. Brill, Leiden/
Boston
Sabra AI (1980) Avicenna on the subject matter of logic. J Philos 77:746–764
Street T (2004) Arabic logic. In: Gabbay DM et al (eds) Handbook of
the history of logic, vol 1: Greek, Indian and Arabic logic. Elsevier,
Amsterdam, pp 523–596
Street T (2005) Logic. In: Adamson Pet al (eds) The Cambridge companion
to Arabic philosophy. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
pp 247–265
Wisnovsky R (2003) Avicenna’s metaphysics in context. Cornell Univer-
sity Press, Ithaca
Wisnovsky R (2005) Avicenna and the Avicennian tradition. In: Adamson
P et al (eds) The Cambridge companion to Arabic philosophy.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 92–136
Ibn Sı¯na¯ (Avicenna), Latin
Translations of
JULES JANSSENS
De Wulf-Mansion Centre
KU Leuven
Leuven
Belgium
Abstract
Several parts of Avicenna’s major philosophical encyclo-
pedia al-Shifa¯’ were translated into Latin, mainly in Toledo
at the end of the twelfth century and in Burgos at the end
of the thirteenth century. In addition, a partial translation
of his medical treatise On Cardiac Drugs was incorporated
into the translation of the De anima. Not without philo-
sophical signiﬁcance was also the translation by Gerard of
Cremona of Avicenna’s major medical encyclopedia, that
is, Canon of Medicine. Finally, Michael Scot offered the
translation of an abbreviated version of the On Animals. It
was only in the Renaissance that the physician Andreas
Alpago elaborated the translation of a few minor philo-
sophical treatises. A major event in the Renaissance was
the Venice 1508 edition of Avicenna’s Opera philosophica.
The Avicenna Latinus includes also several pseudepi-
graphical writings, the attribution of which to Avicenna
had sometimes originated in the Latin tradition, but not
always. The spread of the Toledan translations had a major
impact on the Scholastic thought of the thirteenth century
and later on. First the De anima, later also the Metaphysics,
received great attention and inﬂuenced in several respects
a wide range of thinkers. Although one cannot speak in the
proper sense of any real current of Avicennism, one could
say that in some sense William of Auvergne incorporates
a Latin Avicennism, while different Scholastics adhere
to an Avicennized Augustinianism. Gundissalinus and
Denys of Ryckel (Dionysius Cartusiensis), in their turn,
propose a kind of respectively Avicennized Boethianism
and Avicennized Dionysianism. But whatever the case,
Avicenna constituted undoubtedly for all Scholastics an
important ‘‘auctoritas’’ and through them had an everlast-
ing effect on the history of western thought.
Translations and Editions of Authentic Works
(Medieval and Renaissance)
In the second half of the twelfth century, several parts of
Avicenna’s major philosophical work al-Shifa¯’, known in
the Latin world as Sufﬁcientia, that is, the Preface, the
almost complete Isagoge (mostly quoted as Logica
Avicennae), a chapter of the Posterior Analytics, the Physics
proper (more precisely books 1 and 2, as well as a small
part of book 3 – generally referred to as Sufﬁcientia, the
title of the whole work), the Psychology (Liber de anima seu
sextus de naturalibus, generally referred to in the later
tradition as Sextus de Naturalibus), and the Metaphysics
(Liber de philosophia prima sive scientia divina, most of the
time evoked as Metaphysica) were translated in Toledo
into Latin. According to the majority of available man-
uscripts Avendeuth, which is almost certainly the Latin-
ized form of the name of the Jewish scholar Ibn Da’u¯d,
made the translation of the Preface, the De anima and one
chapter of the Isagoge, that is, Chap. 11, entitled De
universalibus, which corresponds to Chap. 12 of part
522 I
Ibn Sı¯na¯ (Avicenna), Latin Translations of

one of the Arabic text. Avendeuth always worked with
the assistance of a Latin scholar. In the dedicatory letter,
which precedes the translation of the De anima, the
name of the Latin scholar is speciﬁed as Dominicus,
who is usually identiﬁed with Dominicus Gundissalinus.
This latter may have been involved in the translations of
the other parts of the Shifa¯’ as well, but there is no totally
compelling external evidence in this respect. The trans-
lation of Chap. 7 of part two of the Posterior Analytics is
certainly the work of Gundissalinus, once again in col-
laboration with someone else. It was only conserved in
the former’s De divisione philosophiae as Summa Avicenne
de convenientia et de differentia scientiarum. Thus far there
is no evidence that a complete translation of Avicenna’s
Posterior Analytics existed, as suggested by Grignaschi
(Janssens 1999:8). A partial translation of Avicenna’s med-
ical work al-Adwiya al-qalbiyya, De medicinis cordialibus,
also called De viribus cordis, ﬁgures in all manuscripts of
the De anima, between Chaps. 4 and 5. Notwithstanding
an apparent difference in style, it was almost certainly the
work of Gundissalinus and Avendeuth. Of all these trans-
lations, the only one that can be precisely dated is that of
the De anima. Based on the name of the archbishop that is
present in the dedicatory formula, that is, Iohannes, it can
be ﬁxed between 1152 and 1166.
Once again in Toledo, during approximately the same
period, somewhere between 1170 and 1180, Avicenna’s
major medical encyclopedia al-Qa¯nu¯n fı¯ l-t˙ibb, Canon
Medicinae, was rendered into Latin. This translation is
due to Gerard of Cremona.
Together with these translations of genuine Avicennian
texts, the translation of al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s Maqa¯s:id needs to be
mentioned, since this latter work turns out to be a slightly
reworked version of Avicenna’s Persian work Da¯nesh-
Na¯meh (Janssens 2006, VII). This translation also belongs
to the Toledo milieu and it resulted from a collaboration,
namely, between Gundissalinus and John of Spain.
Either in Spain or in England, Alfred of Shareshill
translated near the end of the twelfth or in the beginning
of the thirteenth century two chapters of the Meteorology,
that is, I, 1 (partially) and 5, of al-Shifa¯’. The translation is
paraphrastic and is known as Liber de mineralibus. It is also
designated with the title De congelatione et conglutatione
lapidum. It comprises three parts, since it subdivides the
ﬁrst chapter of the Arabic text into two sections. It was
believed to be part of Aristotle’s text, although Alfred
himself was almost certainly aware of its Avicennian ori-
gin. Albert the Great rediscovered its authentic origin
(Mandosio and Di Martino 2006:416). Another chapter
of Avicenna’s Meteorology, that is, II, 6 was anonymously
translated into Latin, in all likelihood at approximately the
same period. It circulated as the independent treatise De
diluviis.
Around 1230, Michael Scot translated another part of
Avicenna’s philosophical encyclopedia al-Shifa¯’, that is,
De animalibus. Scot’s translation is mostly designated as
Abbrevatio Avicennae. Compared to the original Arabic
text, the translation shows both minor and major omis-
sions without offering any explicit indication thereof.
Hence, Scot based his translation, dedicated to the
Emperor Frederick II, probably on an anonymous Arabic
compendium of Avicenna’s work (Van Oppenraay 1999).
About 1240 Hermannus Alemannus, in his turn,
translated two passages of the Rhetoric of al-Shifa¯’, that
is, the ﬁnal part of II, 2 (pp. 73,7–75 of the Arabic edition)
and the second half of IV, 1 (pp. 206,8–212 of the Arabic
edition). He inserted them in his Latin translation of the
Arabic version of Aristotle’s Rhetoric.
During the late 1270s, the translation of the Physics
was continued at Burgos by Johannes Gunsalvus, in col-
laboration with a certain Salomon: it started where the
old translation had abruptly stopped. But also this time,
the text was not completely translated: the translators
omitted the last four chapters of book 3 as well as the entire
book 4. The same scholars also provided the translation of
other natural parts of the Shifa¯’, that is, De caelo, De
generatione et corruptione, De actionibus et passionibus,
and Meteorologica. The inventory catalogue of the
Sorbonne of 1338 mentions an anonymous Latin transla-
tion of the seventh natural part, that is, De vegetabilibus
(The Plants), but up to now no trace of it has been found.
Very small fragments of Avicenna’s al-Isha¯ra¯t wa-l-
tanbı¯ha¯t, Pointers and Reminders, and al-Naja¯t, Salvation,
are present in Latin translation in Raimundus Marti’s
Pugio ﬁdei, a work he wrote in 1278.
In 1306, Arnold of Villanova made in Barcelona
a complete translation of Avicenna’s Treatise on Cardiac
Drugs, De viribus cordis.
The ﬁrst printed editions of Avicennian works are to
be dated at the end of the ﬁfteenth century. Regarding
philosophical texts, the oldest concerns the De anima,
published at Venice, c. 1485. Ten years later, once more
at Venice, the Metaphysics followed, and some 5 years later
the De animalibus was published. The famous Opera
Philosophica, including the translations of Isagoge, Physics
(old translation), De anima, De animalibus, and Meta-
physics (besides that of two pseudo-Avicennian treatises,
that is, De caelo and De substantiis primis et secundis, and
the treatise De intellectu attributed explicitly to al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯)
were edited by the Augustinian monks at Venice in 1508.
Ibn Sı¯na¯ (Avicenna), Latin Translations of I
523
I

Finally, Andreas Alpago (d. 1522) translated for the
ﬁrst time into Latin several philosophical treatises of Avi-
cenna, that is, Compendium de anima, Libellus de Almahad
(on resurrection), De deﬁnitionibus and De divisione
scientiarum, and, moreover, fragments of the Notes
(Ta‘lı¯qa¯t), entitled Aphorismi de anima and of an Answer
to Ten Questions Posed by al-Bı¯ru¯nı¯, entitled Quaesita
accepta ex libello Avicenneae de quaesitis. These transla-
tions inﬂuenced later authors, as for example John Dee
(Burnett 2008:50), but more research is needed to deter-
mine the precise nature of this inﬂunce.
Pseudo-Avicenna
Probably in the twelfth or early in the thirteenth century an
alchemical treatise, entitled De anima in arte alchemiae,
was translated, in all likelihood directly from Arabic into
Latin (Ruska 1934:23–24). The work did not remain
unnoticed, maybe because of its (false) attribution to
Avicenna: both Vincent of Beauvais and Roger Bacon
quoted it. In the Renaissance, it was published at Basel
in 1572, although under a different title, that is, Artis
chemicae
principes,
Avicenna
atque
Geber.
Another
alchemical treatise, entitled Epistola ad Hasen Regem de
re recta, certainly constitutes a direct translation from an
Arabic source. However, the attribution to Avicenna is
extremely doubtful (Strohmaier 2002:45). The translation
dates to before the middle of the thirteenth century, since
it is quoted by Vincent of Beauvais. It must be emphasized
that alchemy, just as medicine, was considered in the Latin
Middle Ages as a conveyer of philosophical ideas (Burnett
2005:384).
To Gundissalinus, in collaboration with John of Spain,
is attributed the translation of the Liber celi et mundi,
which turns out to be a paraphrase on Aristotle’s De
caelo. The style of the translation conforms to that of
other Toledan translations of the second half of the twelfth
century. Initially transmitted as anonymous, it was later
believed to be a genuine Aristotelian work and ﬁnally, in
all likelihood after 1240, it was attributed to Avicenna
(Gutman 2003, XVII–XXI). Under the latter’s name it
was included in the Renaissance edition of his Opera
philosophica. Also included in this edition is the treatise
De causis primis et secundis et de ﬂuxu qui consequitur eas,
a Latin work written in the ﬁrst half of the thirteenth
century.
Doctrinal Influences
Concerning the translated parts of the Shifa¯’, it is obvious
that the psychological and the metaphysical parts had
a major inﬂuence. They already play a signiﬁcant role in
the personal works of Gundissalinus, who, as stated, was
involved in some of the translations. In these works the
doctrines of Boethius and Avicenna are combined in such
a way that one may speak of an Avicennized Boethianism
(Fidora 2009:120). But in the ﬁrst period of its reception,
Avicenna’s De anima was of particular importance (Hasse
2000). It was used by John Blund and Michael Scot.
Alexander Nequam and Alfred of Shareshill were also
familiar with the work, although the former of the two
maybe indirectly. Therefore, it may reasonably be stated
that Avicenna’s De anima circulated outside Toledo, that
is, in Paris and in Oxford, at the very beginning of the
thirteenth century. Robert Grosseteste also quotes it,
although only once. He refers, moreover, to Avicenna’s
Metaphysics, Physics, and Canon, although in a limited
way. A similar remark is valid with respect to Roland of
Cremona, but he takes into account the Isagoge while
omitting the Physics. Moreover, Roland several times men-
tions ‘‘Algazel’’ together with Avicenna, so that it is obvi-
ous that already at his time al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ was considered to be
a scholar whose thought followed a line similar to
Avicenna’s. William of Auvergne appears to be the ﬁrst
thinker who not only referred to both Avicenna’s De
anima and Metaphysics, but also elaborated a synthesis
inspired by Avicennian ideas. He may be considered as a
representative of a Latin Avicennism, although this latter
designation has to be understood rather vaguely, and
certainly not as the expression of a very precise current
of thought (Teske 2006:217–237). John of La Rochelle,
in his turn, presented a different kind of synthesis. He
dealt with both the Canon and the De anima. However,
he is, above all, the ﬁrst exponent of an Avicennized
Augustinianism, which identiﬁes the agent intellect with
God. After 1260, Roger Bacon (in his later works), John
Pecham, Roger Marston, and Vital du Four adhered
to this kind of Avicennized Augustinianism (Hasse
2000:203–223).
Around the middle of the thirteenth century, we have
to deal with three of the major ﬁgures of Scholastic
thought: Roger Bacon, Albert the Great, and Thomas
Aquinas. Bacon held Avicenna in high esteem, since he
qualiﬁes him as praecipuus imitator et expositor Aristotelis,
notwithstanding his clear rejection of some of Avicenna’s
ideas. It is a well-known fact that he was familiar with the
Preface to the Shifa¯’ as well as with Scot’s translation of
the De animalibus. Moreover, it is remarkable that in his
Moralis philosophia he pays special attention to the tenth
book of Avicenna’s Metaphysics to which he attributes an
independent title, that is, Radices moralium. Albert the
Great deals with all Avicennian texts, sometimes accepting
the views of Avicenna and other times rejecting them. As
one might expect, he uses both the De anima and the
524 I
Ibn Sı¯na¯ (Avicenna), Latin Translations of

Metaphysics extensively. However, in addition to these
works, he appears to be the only Scholastic author who
refers in a systematic manner to the translations of the
Isagoge, the Physics, and the Animals. His commentaries
on these works exhibit a wide range of more or less
literal quotations derived from the different chapters.
He also refers to the Canon, book 1. Generally speaking,
Albert cannot be considered as an Avicennizing thinker,
but he is critically dealing with Avicenna’s writings in
a most exemplary way. With respect to Thomas Aquinas,
things become more complicated. He is not very systematic
in quoting names, hence there can always be much greater
inﬂuence of Avicenna than appears at ﬁrst glance. Tradi-
tionally, scholars put an excessive emphasis on the essence–
existence distinction, as if Avicenna only inﬂuenced Thomas
on this particular, although important, point. In fact, an
Avicennian inspiration comes to the fore in other of
Thomas’ doctrines, as for instance, his conception of evil
(Steel 2002).
Two late thirteenth century authors who deserve special
attention concerning the reception of Avicenna’s thought,
are Henry of Ghent and Duns Scotus. Henry, in his two
major works, that is, the Quodlibets and the Summa,
quotes Avicenna’s Metaphysics, and no other works. He
does this even in relation to typically psychological prob-
lems, as for example, the unity of the soul (Janssens 2006,
XVI). More speciﬁcally, the number of quotations is not
great, but they always have a major impact on Henry’s
thought. Insofar as his major objective consists in offering
a real integration of genuine Avicennian ideas within
a profound Augustinian framework, he may be character-
ized as a follower of an Avicennized Augustinianism,
although in a way clearly different from that of John of
La Rochelle. As to Duns Scotus, Avicenna’s conception
of metaphysics as being primarily an ontology, not
a theology, formed an important source for his own view
on metaphysics (Counet 2002). He also paid great atten-
tion to other elements of Avicenna’s thought, especially in
the ﬁeld of metaphysics, as for instance, Avicenna’s notion
of the indifference of essences with respect to existence.
But he is clearly not representing any kind of Avicennism.
Avicenna’s Metaphysics has eclipsed in this period his De
anima, although John Pecham, in his Tractatus de anima,
and Witelo, in his treatise De natura daemonum, still make
extensive use of the latter work.
From the fourteenth century on, a direct and system-
atic examination of Avicenna’s philosophical writings is at
ﬁrst glance missing. In this respect, one may note that the
translations realized at the end of the thirteenth century
only reached us in one single manuscript, that is, Vat.
Urb. 186. Nevertheless, Avicenna’s thought undoubtedly
remained inﬂuential, but now in a indirect way, that is,
through the mediation of the works of the major Scholas-
tics. Their interpretations of Avicenna’s doctrines were,
however, not always unconditionally accepted. This is
well illustrated by an author like Nicholas of Lyra, who
rejected Duns Scotus’ understanding of Avicenna’s theory
of the univocity of being (Brown 1991). Of special signif-
icance is Francis Exeimenis’ use of elements taken from
Avicenna’s Metaphysics, X, in the elaboration of his own
political theory (Lindgren 1980). In the ﬁfteenth century,
Avicenna constituted a major source of inspiration for
Denys of Ryckel. Although Denys does not agree with all
of Avicenna’s ideas, his system can be qualiﬁed as an
Avicennized Dionysianism (Emery 1988). In Italy, there
was still interest in Avicenna’s philosophical writings,
especially in circles of physicians, as is demonstrated by
a number of most valuable manuscripts of Italian origin
and dated between the fourteenth century and the six-
teenth century (Siraisi 1987; d’Alverny 1993, XVI). This
tradition seems to have started already with Pietro
d’Abano (d. c. 1316). As a physician, he wrote also
a work on astronomy and astrology, that is, Lucidator
dubitabilium astronomiae-astrologiae, which was largely
inspired by several ideas derived from Avicenna’s Meta-
physics. But, above all, Ugo Benzi (ﬁfteenth century), who
explicitly presented Avicenna’s doctrine of the internal
senses as articulated in the De anima, and Andrea Cattani
(sixteenth century), who many times, even in magical
matters, evoked Avicenna’s authority, are major examples
of this attitude (Zambelli 1985:203–204). To these names,
one has undoubtedly to add that of Andreas Alpago, who
translated both medical and philosophical treatises of
Avicenna. However, also pure philosophers continued to
study Avicenna’s works in sixteenth century Italy. In this
respect, one may mention the names of Marsilio Ficino
(especially on imagination) and Thomas of Vio (Cajetan)
(especially on metaphysics).
The inﬂuence of the Avicenna Latinus on western
philosophy has been extraordinary. Several of Avicenna’s
ideas received major attention in western thought. Cer-
tainly, in the ﬁeld of ethics, his thought had almost no
impact, whereas in physics its inﬂuence was limited to few
aspects, that is, a realist conception of time and the idea
that the elements keep their substantial form when being
part of a mixture. As to Avicenna’s logic, it played an
important role in Albert the Great’s elaboration of the
doctrine of the three states of the universal, that is, ante
rem, in re, and post rem (De Libera 1996:253), which was
extremely signiﬁcant for the later discussions on the
speciﬁc status of the universal. However, a major direct
inﬂuence comes to the fore in the disciplines of
Ibn Sı¯na¯ (Avicenna), Latin Translations of I
525
I

psychology and metaphysics. With regard to psychology,
this was the case with Avicenna’s conception of the inner
senses, especially those of estimation and imagination,
and with his theory of the intellect. Moreover, his treat-
ment of the outer senses, and between them most emi-
nently touch and vision, was highly inﬂuential. Finally,
the famous Flying Man argument, by which he primarily
wanted to demonstrate the existence of soul indepen-
dently of the body, constituted an important object of
critical
examination.
With
regard
to
metaphysics,
Avicenna’s famous essence–existence distinction, and,
related to it, the idea of the indifference of the quiddity
with respect to existence had a profound impact on
Scholastic thought, and through it all later western meta-
physical thought. Moreover, his conception of metaphys-
ics as being essentially an ontology, but integrating at
once a theology and an archeology, that is, the study of
the principles of the sciences, had a deep impact.
Nevetheless, other of his metaphysical ideas were
strongly rejected. Following Averroes’ criticisms, many
Scholastics considered that Avicenna had formulated the
problematic idea of the accidentality of existence, and
accused him also of having confused the numerical and
the ontological ‘‘one.’’ Probably only Henry of Ghent
among the Scholastics seriously questioned the validity
of these criticisms. In his view, they result from a mis-
taken interpretation of Avicenna’s genuine thought. Of
course, for all aspects of Avicenna’s thought one ﬁnds
divergent interpretations among Latin thinkers. In any
case, it is obvious that the Latin Scholasticism cannot be
fully understood without the input of the Avicenna
Latinus, and that Avicenna had an enduring inﬂuence
on late medieval and Renaissance thought.
As shown above, the Latin translations of Avicenna’s
philosophical treatises received not only the attention of
professional philosophers, but also of physicians. More-
over, they were largely quoted by encyclopedists as, for
example, Vincent of Beauvais and Henricus Bate, and, in
at least one case, one also ﬁnds an inﬂuence in poetry.
Indeed, in Piers Plowman’s famous B-text, his idea of the
ymaginatif can be traced back to Avicenna’s De anima
(Kaulbach 1993).
Finally, it is obvious that the Latin translations of
Avicenna (and al-G˙ aza¯lı¯) gave rise to the creation of
a new vocabulary. In some cases, for instance with
regard to the notion of intentio, this even opened up
an entirely new problematic in the history of western
philosophy.
See also: ▶Albert the Great ▶Alchemy in the Latin World
▶Arabic Texts: Natural Philosophy, Latin Translations of
▶Arabic
Texts:
Philosophy,
Latin
Translations
of
▶Arnaldus
de
Villanova
▶Denys
the
Carthusian
▶Dominicus Gundissalinus ▶Essence and Existence
▶al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ʾs Maqa¯s:id al-Fala¯sifa, Latin Translation of
▶Henry of Ghent ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad
al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna)
▶Intentionality ▶John Duns Scotus ▶John of La
Rochelle ▶John Pecham ▶Medicine and Philosophy
▶Metaphysics ▶Michael Scot ▶Robert Grosseteste
▶Roger Bacon ▶Thomas Aquinas ▶Thomas of Vio
(Cajetan) ▶William of Auvergne
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Avicenna (1495) Metaphysica sive prima philosophia. Bernardinus
Venetus, Venice (repr. Minerva, Frankfurt/Main, 1966)
Avicenna (1507) Canon medicinae (trans. Cremona G). Paganino de
Paganini, Venice (repr. Olms Verlag, Hildesheim, 2003)
Avicenna (1508) Opera philosophica. Bonetus Locatellus Borgamensis,
Venice (repr. E´dition de la bibliothe`que S.J., Louvain, 1961)
Avicenna (1546) Avicennae philosophi praeclarissimi ac medicorum
principis Compendium de anima, . . ., ab Andrea Alpago Belunensi
. . . aedita. Junctas, Venice (repr. Gregg Int., Farnborough, 1969)
Avicenna (1927) Avicennae de Congelatione et conglutatione lapidum
being sections of the Kita¯b al-Shifa¯’. The Latin and Arabic texts, ed.
Holmyard EJ, Mandeville DC. Geuthner, Paris (repr. AMS Press, New
York, 1982)
Avicenne (1956) Poe`me de la me´dicine. Texte arabe, traduction franc¸aise,
traduction latine du XIIIe sie`cle, ed. Jahier H, Noureddine A. Les
Belles Lettres, Paris
Avicenna (1973) Le De celo et mundo d’Avicenne, ed. Renaud M. Bull
Philos Me´die´v 15:93–130
Avicenna Latinus (1968–1992) Liber de anima seu sextus de naturalibus,
2 vols; Liber de philosophia prima sive scientia divina, 3 vols; Liber
tertius naturalium. De generatione et corruptione; Liber quartus
naturalium.
De
actionibus
et
passionibus;
Liber
primus
naturalium. Tractatus primus. De causis et principiis naturalium,
ed. Van Riet S. Peeters/Brill, Louvain/Leiden; Avicenna Latinus
(2006) Liber primus naturalium. Tractatus secundus. De motu et
de consimilibus, ed. Van Riet S, Janssens J, Allard A. Acade´mie
Royale de Belgique, Bruxelles
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ (1506) Logica et philosophia. P. Liechtenstein, Venice (repr.
Minerva, Frankfurt, 1969)
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ (1933) Algazel’s Metaphysics. A mediaeval translation, ed.
Muckle JT. St. Michael’s College, Toronto (includes in fact the trans-
lation of both parts of the metaphysics and the physics)
al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ (1965) Logica Algazelis, ed. Lohr CH. Traditio 21:223–290
Gundissalinus (1903) De divisione philosophiae, ed. Baur L. Beitra¨ge zur
Geschichte der Philosophie des Mittelalters IV:2–3. Aschendorff,
Mu¨nster
Pseudo-Avicenna (1572) Artis chemicae principes Avicenne atque Geber.
Pietro Perna, Basel (repr. Manucius, Paris, 2003)
Pseudo-Avicenna (1934) De causis primis et secundis et de ﬂuxu qui
consequitur eas, ed. De Vaux R. Notes et textes sur l’avicennisme
latin des XIIe-XIIIe sie`cles. Vrin, Paris, pp 83–140
Pseudo-Avicenna (1971) Avicennae ad Hasen regem epistula de re recta,
ed. Anawati GC. Avicenne et l’alchimie. Oriente e occidente nel
526 I
Ibn Sı¯na¯ (Avicenna), Latin Translations of

Medioevo: ﬁlosoﬁa e scienze. Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei, Roma,
pp 327–339
Pseudo-Avicenna (2003) Liber celi et mundi, ed. Gutman O. Brill,
Leiden/Boston
Secondary Sources
Monographs
d’Alverny M-Th (1993) Avicenne en Occident. Recueil d’articles. Vrin, Paris
De Libera A (1996) La querelle des universaux. De Platon a` la ﬁn du
Moyen Age. E´ditions du Seuil, Paris
Fidora A (2009) Dominico Gundisalvi y la teoria de la ciencia ara´bigo-
aristote´lica. Ediciones Universidad de Navarra, Pamplona
Hasse DN (2000) Avicenna’s De anima in the Latin West. The Warburg
Institute/Nino Aragno Editore, London/Turin
Janssens J (1991) An annotated bibliography on Ibn Sı¯na¯ (1970–1989).
Leuven University Press, Leuven
Janssens J (1999) An annotated bibliography on Ibn Sı¯na¯. First supple-
ment (1990–1994). FIDEM, Louvain-la-Neuve
Janssens J (2006) Ibn Sı¯na¯ and his inﬂuence on the Arabic and Latin
World. Ashgate/Variorum, Aldershot
Kaulbach E (1993) Imaginative prophecy in the B-text of Piers Plowman.
Brewer, Cambridge
Siraisi NG (1987) Avicenna in Renaissance Italy. The Canon and medical
teaching in Italian universities after 1500. Princeton University Press,
Princeton
Teske W (2006) Studies in the philosophy of William of Auvergne.
Marquette University Press, Milwaukee
Collections
Brown St F (1991) Nicholas of Lyra’s critique of Scotus’ univocity. In:
Mojsisch B, Pluta O (eds) Historia philosophiae medii aevi. Studien
zur Geschichte der Philosophie des Mittelalters. B.R. Gru¨ner,
Philadelphia, pp 115–127
Burnett Ch (2005) Arabic into Latin: The reception of Arabic philosophy
into western Europe. In: Adamson P, Taylor RC (eds) The Cambridge
companion to Arabic philosophy. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pp 370–404
Burnett Ch (2008) Nı¯ranj: A category of magic (almost) forgotten in the
West. In: Leonardi Cl, Santi F (eds) Natura, scienza e societa`
medievali. Studi in onore di Agostino Paravicini Bagliani. SISMEL,
Firenze, pp 37–66
Counet J-M (2002) Avicenne et son inﬂuence sur la pense´e de Jean Duns
Scot. In: Janssens J, De Smet D (eds) Avicenna and his heritage.
Leuven University Press, Leuven, pp 225–252
Lindgren U (1980) Avicenna und die Grundprinzipien des Gemeinwesens
in
Franciscus
Exeimenis’
Regimen
de
la
cosa
publica.
In:
Zimmermann A (ed) Soziale Ordnungen in Selbstversta¨ndnis des
Mittelalters. W. de Gruyter, Berlin/New York, vol II, pp 449–459
Mandosio J-M, Di Martino C (2006) La Me´te´orologie d’Avicenne (Kita¯b al-
Shifa¯’ V) et sa diffusion dans le monde latin. In: Speer A, Wagner
L (eds) Wissen u¨ber Grenzen. Arabisches Wissen und lateinisches
Mittelalter. W. de Gruyter, Berlin/New York, pp 406–424
Steel C (2002) Avicenna and Thomas Aquinas on evil. In: Janssens J,
De Smet D (eds) Avicenna and his heritage. Leuven University
Press, Leuven, pp 171–196
Strohmaier G (2002) Avicenne et le phe´nome`ne des e´crits pseude´pi-
graphiques. In: Janssens J, De Smet D (eds) Avicenna and his heri-
tage. Leuven University Press, Leuven, pp 37–46
Van Oppenraay A.M.I. (1999) Michael Scot’s Latin translation of
Avicenna’s treatise on animals. Some preliminary remarks on the
future edition. In: Beyers R, Brams J, Sacre´ D, Verrycken K (eds)
Tradition et traduction. Les textes philosophiques et scientiﬁques au
moyen aˆge latin. Leuven University Press, Leuven, pp 107–114
Zambelli P (1985) L’immaginazione e il suo potere. Da al-Kindı¯, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯
e Avicenna al Medioevo latino e al Rinascimento. In: Zimmermann A,
Craemer-Ruegenberg I (eds) Orientalische Kultur und Europa¨isches
Mittelalters. W. de Gruyter, Berlin/New York, pp 188–206, 406–424
Journal Articles
Emery K Jr (1988) Twofold wisdom and contemplation in Denys of
Ryckel (Dionysius Cartusiensis, 1402–1471). J Mediev Renaiss Stud
88:99–134
Ruska J (1934) Die Alchemie des Avicenna. Isis 21:14–51
Ibn Suwa¯r (Ibn al-Khamma¯r)
CECILIA MARTINI BONADEO
Dipartimento di Filosoﬁa
Universita` di Padova
Padova
Italy
Abstract
Ibn Suwa¯r was a Nestorian Christian of the tenth century
Baghdad circle, proﬁcient translator from Syriac into
Arabic and physician.
Abu¯ l-Khayr al-H˙ asan ibn Suwa¯r ibn Ba¯ba¯ ibn Bahra¯m ibn
al-Khamma¯r was a Nestorian Christian. He was born in
Baghdad in 942 and died in 1017. In the MS Paris,
Bibliothe`que Nationale, ar. 2346, which reproduces Ibn
Suwa¯r ibn al-Khamma¯r’s copy of Yah:ya¯ b. ‘Adı¯’s autograph
of the Organon, we ﬁnd the text of Aristotle’s logical works
together with the exegesis of the Baghdad teachers in form
of scholia. These include Ibn Suwa¯r ibn al-Khamma¯r’s
ones. He was a proﬁcient translator from Syriac into
Arabic and translated Theophrastus’ Meteorologica and
Questions, On Ethics, the Book of Allı¯nu¯s, On the Four
Books
of
Logic
(including
Isagoge,
Categories,
De
interpretatione,
and
Prior
Analytics),
and
partially
Porphyry’s History of Philosophy. He wrote many original
works on philosophy and philosophical life, Christian
theology, ethics, medicine, and meteorology.
He was respected also as a physician: according to
‘Alı¯ b. Rid˙wa¯n, a well-known physician from Cairo, Ibn
Suwa¯r ibn al-Khamma¯r was so respected in this ﬁeld of
knowledge that sultan Mah:mu¯d of Ghazna kissed the
ground before him to show him his respect. Ibn Abı¯
Us:aybi‘a counts him among the surgeons of the ‘Ad˙udı¯
hospital in Baghdad. He was the teacher of the Chris-
tian Abu¯ l-Faraj ibn al-T˙ayyib and of the Muslim Abu¯
Ibn Suwa¯r (Ibn al-Khamma¯r) I
527
I

l-Faraj ibn Hindu¯. In one of his treatises Ibn Sı¯na¯ men-
tions his intention to meet him, but apparently he never
realized it. In his old age, Ibn Suwa¯r left Baghdad to
Khawa¯rizm and then to Ghazna, where, according to al-
Bayhaqı¯, he converted to Islam after having seen the
Prophet in a dream (Kraemer 1986:124–125).
See also: ▶Ibn Hindu¯, Abu¯ l-Faraj ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯
(Avicenna) ▶Ibn al-T˙ayyib ▶al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯, Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n
▶Yah:ya¯ ibn ʿAdı¯
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Badawı¯ ‘Abd al-Rah˙ma¯n (1955) Neoplatonici apud Arabes. Maktabat
al-nah˙dat al-mis˙riyya, Cairo, pp 243–248
Bergstra¨sser Gotthelf (1918) Neue meteorologische Fragmente des
Theophrast. SitzB. Heidelberg, phil.-hist. Kl. n. 9
Georr Khalil (1948) Les Cate´gories d’Aristote dans leurs versions Syro-
Arabes. Institut Franc¸ais de Damas, Beirut
Lewin Bernhard (1954) La notion de muh:dat¯ dans le kala¯m et dans la
philosophie. Un petit traite´ du philosophe chre´tien Ibn Suwar. Ori-
entalia Suecana 3:84–93
Lewin Bernhard (1955) L’ide´al antique du philosophe dans la tradition
arabe. Un traite´ d’e´thique du philosophe Bagdadien Ibn Suwar.
Lychnos, pp. 267–284
Biographers
al-Bayhaqı¯ Z˙ ahı¯r al-Dı¯n (1994) Tatimmat s:iwa¯n al-h:ikma, ed. Rafı¯q
al-‘Ajam D. Da¯r al-Fikr al-Lubna¯nı¯, Beirut
Ibn Abı¯ Us:aybi‘a (1882) ‘Uyu¯n al-anba¯’ fı¯ t:abaqa¯t al-at:ibba¯’, ed. Mu¨ller A.
al-Mat:ba‘a¯t al-wahbiyya, Cairo/Ko¨nigsberg
Ibn al-Nadı¯m (1871–1872) Kita¯b al-Fihrist, ed. Flu¨gel G, Roediger J,
Mu¨ller A. Vogel, Leipzig
Ibn al-Qift:ı¯ (1903) Ta’rı¯h˘ al-h:ukama¯’, ed. Lippert J. Dieterich’sche
Verlagsbuchhandlung, Leipzig
Sijista¯nı¯ Abu¯ Sulayma¯n (1974) Muntah˘ab s:iwa¯n al-h:ikma, ed. Badawı¯ ‘A,
Bunyad Farhang, Tehran
al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n (1939–1944) Kita¯b al-Imta¯‘ wa-l-mu’a¯nasa, ed.
Amı¯n A, al-Zayn A. Cairo
al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n (1989) Al-Muqa¯basa¯t, ed. Tawfı¯q Husayn M, Da¯r
al-a¯da¯b, Beirut
Secondary Sources
Graf G (1944–1953) Geschichte der christlichen arabischen Literatur.
Citta` del Vaticano
Kraemer JL (1986) Humanism in the renaissance of Islam. The cultural
revival during the Buyid Age. Brill, Leiden
Meyerhof M (1930) Von Alexandrien nach Bagdad. Ein Beitrag zur
Geschichte des philosophischen und medizinischen Unterrichts bei
den
Arabern.
Sitzungsberichte
der
Berliner
Akademie
der
Wissenschaften. Philologisch-historische Klasse 23:389–429
Walzer R (1953) New light on the Arabic translations of Aristotle. Oriens
6:60–113
Watt JW (2005) The strategy of the Baghdad philosophers. The Aristote-
lian tradition as a common Motif in Christian and Islamic thought.
Redeﬁning Christian identity: cultural interaction in the Middle East
since the Rise of Islam, ed. van Ginkel JJ, Murre-van den Berg HL, van
Lint TM. Peeters, Louvain/Paris/Dudley
Ibn al-T˙ayyib
CLEOPHEA FERRARI
Institut fu¨r Philosophie
Friedrich-Alexander-Universita¨t
Erlangen
Germany
Abstract
Abu¯ l-Faraj ʿAbdalla¯h ibn al-T˙ayyib’s life in Baghdad
marked the end of an era in which he and his fellow
scholars cultivated the heritage of ancient Greek philoso-
phy, notably Aristotle’s philosophy. Thanks to Matta¯ b.
Yu¯nus and Yah:ya¯ b. ‘Adı¯, there had arisen a scholarly
tradition that ﬂourished over several generations, and
whose last representative was Ibn al-T˙ayyib himself.
These scholars wrote commentaries on Aristotle’s works
by studying the Greek commentaries of late classical
antiquity, by translating them, and also by writing some
based in form and content on ancient Greek models. Ibn
al-T˙ayyib was the author of numerous commentaries on
philosophy, theology, and medicine, and taught at the
hospital (al-Ma¯rista¯n al-‘Ad˙udı¯) that had been founded
by the Buyid ʿAd˙uddawla. That his writings were intended
for teaching purposes is evident from their form and
content. The study of philosophy was an integral part of
the training of medical doctors. Indeed, medical students
were expected to be thoroughly grounded in Aristotle, in
addition to having a sound knowledge and understanding
of Plato. Accordingly, their studies began with the Orga-
non, which at that time also included rhetoric and poetics.
They also studied elementary logic, which was especially
important in so far as it was held that only through the
instrument of logic could a doctor, let alone an ordinary
human being, distinguish between the true and the false
and thus make correct judgments.
Biographical Information
The Christian Abu¯ l-Faraj ʿAbdalla¯h ibn al-T˙ayyib al-‘Ira¯qı¯
held various high positions in the Nestorian Church of
Mesopotamia, one of them as Patriarchal Secretary (ka¯tib
al-Ja¯thalı¯q) to the Nestorian Catholic Bishop Yu¯h:anna¯ b.
Na¯zu¯k (1012–1022). He was also a doctor at the
hospital (al-Ma¯rista¯n al-‘Ad˙udı¯) founded by the Buyid
ʿAd˙uddawla. Owing to his numerous commentaries on
philosophy, theology, and medicine, his inﬂuence was
varied and extensive. He died in 1043 CE, and was buried
528 I
Ibn al-T˙ayyib

in the chapel of the ancient monastery, Dair Durta¯, on the
river Tigris.
Ibn al-T˙ayyib’s Thought and Philosophy
In his commentaries on the works of Aristotle, Hippocra-
tes and Galen, as well as on Porphyry’s Isagoge, Ibn al-
T˙ayyib adheres closely to ancient Greek models. Judging
by their form and content, those of his writings that have
been handed down were intended for teaching purposes,
whereby the author undertook to combine them into an
encyclopedic body of knowledge, usefully broken down
into speciﬁc themes and topics. He is concerned with
four main areas of scholarship: Aristotle’s philosophy,
the natural sciences, medicine, and Christian theology.
He also wrote short treatises on ethics and a paraphrase
of
Plato’s
Leges.
The
curriculum
began
with
the
Categories and with Porphyry’s introduction to it, entitled
the Isagoge. According to biobibliographical sources,
Ibn al-T˙ayyib seems to have written a commentary on
the entire Organon, although only the commentary on
the Categories, a summary of the commentary on the
Posterior Analytics, and a commentary on the Isagoge
have been handed down. Through his commentary on
the Categories, we can get a clear idea of his scholarly
methods and of his relationship to his ancient Greek
models. Indeed, his text is remarkable for the fact that it
sticks closely in form and content to the structures of the
commentaries written by the school of Olympiodorus. Yet,
not only does he adhere to the ancient Greek commentaries
with respect to form, but there are parallels to be noted with
respect to content also. It is in these ways that most of the
questions raised by the ancient Greek commentators are to
be found in our Arab author. And though his writings were
not altogether new or original, there are new and original
ideas to be found in them here and there. Ibn al-T˙ayyib’s
works should not be classiﬁed as mere pale imitations of
these models. Certainly in the systematization of content,
he goes further than his models, attempting as he does to
solve every problem that arises within a text. For example,
he explains Aristotle exclusively through Aristotle himself.
His interpretation of the text he is commenting on is,
therefore, always very faithful to its author. It was never
his intention to criticize the content. Rather, his aim was
to create an Aristotelian system whereby all the contexts
of a logical and natural tenet could be explained. His
interpretation of Aristotle’s texts is stamped by the Neopla-
tonic tradition of the Aristotelian commentators of late
classical antiquity (Porphyry, Ammonius, Olympiodorus,
Simplicius, Philoponus, and Elias), all of whom, as far as we
can judge from those of his works that have been handed
down, he adheres to closely. In his numerous commentaries
on theology and medicine, too, he endeavours to bring his
entire scholarship to bear on a particular subject at the same
time as he is elucidating it. Only part of Ibn al-T˙ayyib’s
commentaries on Aristotle’s philosophy mentioned in
the biobibliographical sources has been preserved. Some
important commentaries, including the long commentary
on Aristotle’s Metaphysics mentioned by Ibn al-T˙ayyib’s
pupil, Ibn But:la¯n (Ibn Abı¯ Us:aybi‘a 1882–1884:240–243),
have not been handed down (Ferrari 2006:20–27). Since
Aristotelian logic was fundamental to medical studies in
Ibn al-T˙ayyib’s day, it is easy to understand why it should
have played a prominent role in his commentaries. Still,
only a small part of his commentaries on the Organon has
been preserved. In addition to this, however, his commen-
tary on Porphyry’s Isagoge, which is based on the same
pattern as the commentary on the Categories is extant. But
whereas the Isagoge is meant to serve as a kind of spring-
board to Aristotelian logic, the detailed commentary on
the Categories, on the other hand, is to be seen as an
appropriate basis for further study of Aristotle’s philoso-
phy. Although no other commentaries on Aristotle’s
logic have been preserved, we nevertheless ﬁnd that an
epitome of the commentary on the Posterior Analytics,
corresponding in structure and content to the commen-
taries on the Categories, has been handed down, as well as
an epitome of the commentary on the Categories. During
his studies on Aristotle’s entire work, Ibn al-T˙ayyib also
wrote a commentary on Aristotle’s Physics, which exists
in the form of lecture notes taken down by Abu¯ l-H˙ usayn
al-Bas:rı¯ (d. 436/1044), who, from a lecture given by Ibn as-
Samh:, compiled the notes of various commentators (espe-
cially those of John Philoponus). Thus, from Book VI 5
onward, Abu¯ l-H˙ usayn al-Bas:rı¯ falls back on Ibn al-T˙ayyib’s
statements (Lettinck 1994:459–472, 514, 527, 564–593). But
here, we usually have to do with summaries of Aristotelian
arguments, and only seldom with discursive writing. This is
especially true when Ibn al-T˙ayyib deals with the First
Mover, since he maintains, in contrast with Aristotle, that
movement must have begun through an act of creation
(Lettinck 1994:564). This view of Ibn al-T˙ayyib is doubtless
to be traced to his Christian background. He also wrote
a commentary on Aristotle’s writings about animals. This
commentary is, however, known not in Arabic, but in
Hebrew, and exerted a considerable inﬂuence, especially in
medieval Spain. For this extensive commentary (tafsı¯r), Ibn
al-T˙ayyib evidently made use of H˙ unayn b. Ish:a¯q’s revised
version of the Historia animalium (Zonta 1991:243). Only
an eclectic compilation of questions on Aristotle’s Historia
animalium has been handed down in Arabic. Also
Ibn al-T˙ayyib I
529
I

attributed to Ibn al-T˙ayyib is a short lecture on Aristotle’s
economic theories, though its authorship is just as uncer-
tain as is the writing on Plato’s Leges. There has also been
a dispute as to whether this text is in fact based not on
Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s paraphrase of the Leges, but rather on a common
third source, possibly Galen’s Synopsis of Plato’s Dialogues.
Ibn al-T˙ayyib also made translations of works such as the
pseudo-Aristotelian De virtutibus, which he rendered
from Syriac into Arabic. Indeed, from this translation we
may infer that he had a good command of Syriac. Whether
his knowledge of ancient Greek was comparable cannot be
said for certain, even though some competence in this
language has deﬁnitely been ascribed to him. He left his
most visible traces in medieval medicine. His most famous
pupil was, in fact, the medical doctor, al-Mukhta¯r ibn al-
H˙ asan ibn ʿAbdu¯n ibn But:la¯n, who was especially well
known for his work on hygiene, dietetics, and medical
ethics. Noteworthy in this connection is the polemics
that took place in Cairo between him and ʿAlı¯ ibn Rid˙wa¯n
(d. 453/1061 or 460/1068) as to whether a medical student
should be trained only by means of books or whether he
should also have a teacher. It was a polemics in which Ibn
But:la¯n prudently and sensibly defended the role of the
teacher. Ibn al-T˙ayyib also wrote commentaries on Hip-
pocrates’ many writings, though he is especially important
for the reception of Galen’s works. Thus, he wrote com-
mentaries on the entire Summaria Alexandrinorum,
namely, the entire output of Galen’s œuvre in 16 volumes,
which had been compiled by various Alexandrian medical
doctors. One of his treatises of relevance to medical theory
that has been handed down is the one on natural forces
(Risa¯la fı¯l-Quwa¯ al-t:abı¯ʿı¯ya), which is also concerned with
Galen’s theory of natural forces. Ibn Sı¯na¯ wrote a rebuttal
of this work, and it is noteworthy that this text and Ibn al-
T˙ayyib’s treatise have often been handed down together. As
a Christian theologian and church dignitary, he produced
a number of theological works. Among them is to be
included probably the greatest exegetical collections of
Christian Arabic literature, namely a commentary on the
entire Bible entitled The Paradise of Christianity (Firdaws
al-nas:ra¯nı¯ya). He also wrote commentaries on the Psalms
and the Gospels as well as various treatises on dogmatic and
ethical topics. Through his inﬂuence on philosophy and
medicine, Ibn al-T˙ayyib was one of the last proponents of
an academic tradition whose banner stood for the cultiva-
tion and maintenance of the ancient Greek heritage. It is
particularly with respect to Galen’s reception that he
occupies an important place in Islamic as well as Chris-
tian medieval medicine (Ullmann 1970:157). He enjoyed
a great reputation among his contemporaries and in
biobibliographical literature as an erudite commentator,
though, thanks to Ibn Sı¯na¯, he also got caught in the cross
ﬁre of criticism.
See also: ▶Abu¯ Bishr Matta¯ ibn Yu¯nus ▶Alexander of
Aphrodisias and Arabic Aristotelianism ▶Alexandrian
Tradition into Arabic: Medicine ▶Alexandrian Tradition
into Arabic: Philosophy ▶Aristotle, Arabic ▶Logic in the
Arabic and Islamic World ▶Medicine in the Arab World
▶Yah:ya¯ ibn ʿAdı¯
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Ibn Abı¯ Us:aybi‘a, ibn al-Qa¯sim (1882–1884) Abu¯ l-ʿAbba¯s Ah:mad, Kita¯b
ʿUyu¯n al-anba¯’ fı¯ t:abaqa¯t al-at:ibba¯, ed. August Mu¨ller, Cairo/
Ko¨nigsberg
Abu¯ l-Faragˇ ʿAbdalla¯h Ibn al-T˙aiyib
(1953) Risa¯lat al-Quwa¯ at˙-t˙abı¯ʿı¯ya, ed. Hilmi Ziya U¨ lken. In: Ibn Sıˆnaˆ
risaˆleleri = Les opuscules d’Ibn Sina, e´d. et annote´ par Hilmi Ziya
U¨ lken. 1. Les opuscules d’Ibn Sina. Uyun al-hikma et l’opuscule d’
Abu’l Faraj et la re´futation d’Ibn Sina. Tu¨rk Tarih Kurumu Basımevi,
Ankara (Nachdr.: Publications of the Institute for the History of Ara-
bic-Islamic Science, Frankfurt am Main, 1999). Islam Philos 43:57–65
(1956) Firdaus an-nas˙ra¯nı¯ya, ed. Hoenerbach W et al. Louvain
(1965) Ein pseudo-aristotelischer Traktat u¨ber die Tugend. Edtion
und U¨ bersetzung der arabischen Fassungen des Abu Qurra und
des Ibn at-Tayyib, ed. Kellermann M. Dissertation. Erlangen
(1975) Ibn al-Tayyib’s Commentary on Porphyry’s Eisagoge. Arabic text
edited with introduction and a glossary of greek-arabic logical terms,
ed. Gyekye K. Recherches publie´es sous la direction de l’institut de
lettres orientales de Beyrouth. Nouvelle Se´rie. B: Orient chre´tien.
Bd 2. Beirut
(1984) Istit¯ma¯r maqa¯lat Fı¯t¯a¯g˙u¯ras al-maʿru¯fa bi-d¯ahabı¯ya, ed. Linley N.
Ibn at˙-T˙aiyib, Proclus’ Commentary on the Pythagorean Golden
Verses, Arabic text and translation. Arethusa monographs 10. Buffalo
(2006)
Tafsı¯r
kita¯b
al-Qa¯t˙ı¯g˙u¯riya¯s
li-Arist˙u¯t˙a¯lı¯s
fı¯
l-mant˙iq,
ed.
Ferrari C. Der Kategorienkommentar von Abu¯ l-Faragˇ ʿAbdalla¯h
Ibn at˙-T˙aiyib, Text und Untersuchungen. Aristoteles Semitico-
Latinus 19. Leiden
Gyekye Kwame (1979) Arabic logic: Ibn al-Tayyib’s Commentary on
Porphyry’s Eisagoge. Albany
Secondary Sources
Daiber H (1996) Abu¯ l-Faragˇ ibn at˙-T˙ayyib on plants: an inquiry into his
sources. Erdem 9(26):629–642. Ankara
Daiber H (1999) Bibliography of Islamic philosophy, I: alphabetical
list of publications, II: index of names, terms and topics.
Handbuch der Orientalistik. Der Nahe und der Mittlere Osten 43.
Brill, Leiden
Graf G (1944–1953) Geschichte der christlichen arabischen Literatur
(Citta` del Vaticano). Studi e testi. 118. 133. 146. 172. II, 160–176
Lettinck P (1994) Aristotle’s Physics and its reception in the Arabic
world. With an edition of the unpublished parts of Ibn Ba¯jja’s
commentary on the Physics. Aristoteles Semitico-Latinus 7. Brill,
Leiden
530 I
Ibn al-T˙ayyib

Ullmann M (1970) Die Medizin im Islam. Handbuch der Orientalistik.
Erste Abteilung Bd VI, 1. Ko¨ln
Ferrari C (2004) Der Duft des Apfels. Abu¯ l-Faragˇ Ibn at˙-T˙ayyib und sein
Kommentar zu den Kategorien des Aristoteles. In: Celluprica V,
D’Ancona C (eds) Aristotele e i suoi esegeti neoplatonici. Logica e
ontologia nelle interpretazioni greche e arabe. Atti del convegno
internazionale Roma, 19–20 ottobre 2001. Elenchos 40:85–106
Ullmann M (1972) Die Natur- und Geheimwissenschaften. Handbuch
der Orientalistik. Erste Abteilung Bd VI/2. Ko¨ln
Ibn T˙ufayl, Abu¯ Bakr (Abubacer)
DOMINIQUE MALLET
De´partement d’Etudes Arabes
Universite´ de Bordeaux
Bordeaux
France
Abstract
Abu¯ Bakr ibn T˙ufayl al-Qaysı¯ (c. 504/1109–581/1185) was
born in Guadix, near Grenada, and died in Marrakesh. He
was a physician and belonged to the inner circle of the
Almohad prince Abu¯ Y‘aqu¯b Yu¯suf (r. 1163–1184). The
only complete work still extant by him is a qis:s:a, i.e., a tale,
entitled Risa¯la H˙ ayy b. Yaqz˙a¯n.
The tale is introduced by few allusive pages in which
the author places his work within the philosophical and
literary traditions of Suﬁsm and Arab philosophy.
The story itself is divided into two main parts. In
the ﬁrst one, the author describes how an infant named
‘‘Alive, Son of Awake’’, grows up in a desert island and
progresses solitarly into the knowledge, without any help
of revelation, starting from the comprehension of the
simplest things until he reaches the degree of the absorp-
tion into the pure intuition of real being, passing through
the discovery of practical arts, physics, astronomy, and
theology. The second part is devoted to the encounter
between H˙ ayy and a wise man, named Asa¯l, who arrives
in the island seeking the inner truth of the Qurʾa¯n. Asa¯l
understands that H˙ ayy has discovered what he was himself
hoping to learn. Both men decide to emigrate to Asa¯l’s
country and to teach its inhabitants the secrets of the true
wisdom, but they fail and return to the desert island to
spend the rest of their lives in mystical happiness.
What does Ibn T˙ufayl’s aim to teach exactly by narrat-
ing such a tale? The question is controversial. From the
point of view of this article’s author, Ibn T˙ufayl’s does not
want to show that the only possible choice for the wise
is solitude, but, on the contrary, that the accomplish-
ment of philosophy is necessarily political. Indeed, Ibn
T˙ufayl’s treatise could provide e contrario evidence of
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s theses in political philosophy: Ibn T˙ufayl’s
plot and its outcome could be read as an illustration of
the analysis included in the second part of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s Book
of Letters.
Very little is known of the life of Ibn T˙ufayl (Abu¯ Bakr
Muh:ammad
b.
‘Abd
al-Malik
b.
Muh:ammad
b.
Muh:ammad b. T˙ufayl al-Qaysı¯, c. 504/1109–581/1185).
He was born in Guadix, near Grenada, and died in
Marrakesh. According to Averroes, whose account was
recorded by al-Marra¯kushı¯, Ibn T˙ufayl was a physician
and belonged to the inner circle of the Almohad prince
Abu¯ Y‘aqu¯b Yu¯suf (1163–1184) whom he served as a
counsellor. Averroes says that Ibn T˙ufayl, who had been
charged with the task of writing a commentary on Aris-
totle, transferred the responsibility to him. The only com-
plete work still extant by Ibn T˙ufayl is a qis:s:a, a tale
embedded within an epistolary frame narrative entitled
Risa¯la H˙ ayy b. Yaqz˙a¯n. Le´on Gauthier’s critical edition of
the work was published in Algiers in 1900, and remains the
authoritative edition. A second edition was published in
Beyrouth in 1936 with an accurate, even elegant, French
translation, under the title H˙ ayy Ben Yaqdhaˆn, roman
philosophique d’Ibn Thofayl. The subtitle reveals the inﬂu-
ence of the European rationalists and empiricists who
welcomed ﬁrst the Latin translation by Edward Pocock
in 1671, and then the English translation from the Arabic
by Simon Ockley in 1711. The name given by Ibn T˙ufayl to
the main character in his story is H˙ ayy b. Yaqz˙a¯n, ‘‘Alive,
Son of Awake’’ – borrowed from Avicenna, who had given
the name to the allegorical incarnation of the Active Intel-
lect, the last emanating Intellect in charge of the sublunar
world. In fact, the characters imagined by Avicenna and
Ibn T˙ufayl have nothing in common, apart from their
name. Ibn T˙ufayl paid allegiance to Avicenna, as is appar-
ent in the letter that introduces the story, a few subtle
and allusive pages in which the author places his work
squarely within the philosophical and literary traditions of
Suﬁsm and Arabic philosophy and draws up a detailed
inventory of his debts to Avicenna, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Ibn Ba¯jja,
and al-G˙ aza¯lı¯.
The tale itself is well constructed and the style is ﬂuent.
There are two parts, each carefully subdivided. An infant
named H˙ ayy arrives in a desert island. Whether he has
been abandoned by his mother – a secretly married
Ibn T˙ufayl, Abu¯ Bakr (Abubacer) I
531
I

princess who places her baby in a basket that she then sets
aﬂoat – and has been carried to the shores of the island by
strong currents and winds, or he was born by spontaneous
generation, is a matter of some dispute. The author never
provides an answer. When the infant calls for help,
a gazelle that has lost her fawn takes care of him until
she dies, by which time the child is seven years old and
already knows the meaning of both shame and modesty.
He dissects his mother’s dead body and understands that
she once had a soul and that the soul has departed from
her body. He then uses the next 14 years to become a great
naturalist and to acquire the practical arts. He spends yet
another seven years becoming an expert in the physical
sciences. His knowledge progresses till he reaches the
frontiers of the intelligible world and then, between
the ages of 28 and 35, still progressing, he ﬁnally arrives
at the conclusion that a cause of causes, an author of all
things, necessarily exists. H˙ ayy now aspires to the intuitive
vision of the incommensurable perfection of this being
and turns away from the physical world and speculative
knowledge in order to devote all of his time to spiritual
exercises that lead him in the end to the ‘‘disappearance of
self awareness, to absorption into the pure intuition of the
real being’’ (al-fana¯’ ‘an nafsihi wa-l-ikhla¯s: fı¯ musha¯hadat
al-h:aqq) and real oneness (h:aqı¯qat al-wus:u¯l). The second
(much shorter) part of the narrative tells the story of
a man called Asa¯l who lives on a neighboring island,
where the prince, called Sala¯ma¯n, professes a literal and
political understanding of religion. Suspecting that there is
a secret meaning to be discovered in the Revelation, Asa¯l,
in his hope to ﬁnd a desert place to meditate the Qurʾa¯n
comes to H˙ ayy’s island. Asa¯l soon runs into H˙ ayy and
learns how to speak to him. H˙ ayy then shares with Asa¯l
all his knowledge and explains how did he reach it on his
own, until he reached Oneness. Thanks to H˙ ayy’s teaching,
Asa¯l at last ﬁnds what he had been hoping to discover – the
inner truth of the Qurʾa¯n. H˙ ayy, for his part, can see
nothing in Asa¯l’s religion that contradicts his own discov-
eries. Thus, in the lessons they teach each other, reason
and revelation are united. However, in spite of his wisdom,
H˙ ayy cannot understand why the truths that are so famil-
iar to him are hidden, or why, according to Asa¯l’s religion,
they are presented in allegorical form or, ﬁnally, why the
perishable and unsubstantial things of earthly life are so
present in Asa¯l’s religion. He wants to leave for Sala¯ma¯n’s
island immediately to instruct its wise men and show
them the true meaning of their virtuous religion. A vessel
suddenly appears on the horizon and carries the two men
to the island of Sala¯ma¯n. As soon as he lands, H˙ ayy begins
to teach the best inhabitants the secrets of true wisdom.
Although they aspire to goodness and truth, the wise men
turn away from their new teacher, preferring ‘‘the way of
authority’’ (t:arı¯q al-rija¯l) to the unveiling of the truth.
H˙ ayy realizes that he will not convince them, sees that
his efforts are in vain, and understands that the revealed
law suits the animal natures of the great majority of those –
unencumbered by reason – for whom it is destined. He
retracts, apologizes to Sala¯ma¯n and his companions, rec-
ommends that they follow the revealed truth literally,
and goes back with Asa¯l to worship God on the island
where he grew up.
What is ‘‘the Principal Subject of Ibn T˙ufayl’s H˙ ayy ibn
Yaqz˙a¯n’’? – such is the title of a major article by George
F. Hourani. Is it an attempt to demonstrate that reason is
all-powerful? or to demonstrate the importance of expe-
rience in the acquisition of knowledge? or perhaps the
scope of natural theology? or the superﬂuity of Revelation?
Is it an attempt to demonstrate the continuity between
rational speculation and mystical ecstasy? or the unity of
philosophy and revealed law? Is it a praise of the solitary
life? or, ﬁnally, could it be a dismissal of political philos-
ophy? All these interpretations and other less obvious ones
have had their proponents. The fact that H˙ ayy needs
no one’s help to learn so much and that in the end he
chooses exile over political life, appears to show that the
only possible choice for the wise is solitude! Yet this
interpretation leaves a number of aspects of the narrative
unexplained. Why, for example, does it not end with
H˙ ayy’s accession to mystical beatitude? Why does H˙ ayy
insist on teaching the wisdom he has acquired? Why does
Asa¯l fail to persuade him not to? Why do they both have to
experience the vanity of their efforts? And what have they
learned in the end, when they return to their point of
departure? Paradoxically, it is impossible to answer these
questions without placing the treatise within the ﬁeld of
political philosophy. H˙ ayy is political by nature: ‘‘full of
compassion for his fellow men and ardently wishing to
save them, he decided to go to them . . .’’. Asa¯l too is
naturally political: ‘‘He hoped that through [H˙ ayy ibn
Yaqz˙a¯n], God would direct a few men he knew who were
willing to let themselves be guided and who were closer to
salvation than others.’’ The ﬁrst lesson of this puzzling
treatise is that both men make the mistake which al-
Fa¯ra¯bı¯ had warned against: they wish to replace religion
with philosophy – a mistake that Socrates had already
made, or so his accusers insinuated. The second lesson of
the treatise is the cause of the mistake. Because of his
solitude, H˙ ayy knows nothing of rhetoric, dialectics, or
poetics, all of which regulate the relations between the
wise and the ignorant in the city, since they are the
means by which the wise may address the ignorant, protect
themselves from their anger, attempt to alter their
532 I
Ibn T˙ufayl, Abu¯ Bakr (Abubacer)

opinions and reform their behavior. The accomplishment
of philosophy is necessarily political and the exercise of
politics is religious. H˙ ayy fails twice because he believes his
knowledge is complete, whereas, in fact, it is his alone, and
he expects it to replace religion. From this point of view,
there is a close relation between Ibn T˙ufayl’s letter and al-
Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s political philosophy. Indeed, Ibn T˙ufayl’s treatise
provides e contrario evidence for al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s theses. The
analyses included in the second part of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s Book of
Letters are illustrated by Ibn T˙ufayl’s plot and its outcome.
See also: ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas˙r ▶Ibn Ba¯jja, Abu¯ Bakr ibn
al-Sa¯ʾig˙
(Avempace) ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn
Ah˙mad
al-H˙ afı¯d
(Averroes)
▶Ibn
Sı¯na¯,
Abu¯
ʿAlı¯
(Avicenna)
Bibliography
Primary Sources
al-Marra¯kushı¯ ʿAbd
al-Wa¯hid
(1963)
Kita¯b
al-Mu’jib
fı¯
Talkhı¯s
Akhba¯r
al-Maghrib.
Cairo,
al
jumhuriyya
al-ʿarabiyya
al-
muttah:ida; al-majlis al-aʿla¯ li-shu’un al-islamiyya lajna ih:ya’ al-turath
al-islamı¯
Ibn Tufayl (1936) Hayy Ben Yaqdhaˆn, roman philosophique d’Ibn
Thofaı¨l, texte arabe et traduction franc¸aise, 2nd edn, ed. Gauthier
PL. Imprimerie Catholique, Beinut
Ibn Tufayl (1972) Ibn Tufayl’s H˙ ayy Ibn Yaqz˙a¯n: a Philosophical Tale
(translated with introduction and notes by Goodman LE). Twayne,
New York
Secondary Sources
Encyclopædia Britannica (2008) Islam. Encyclopædia Britannica online, 6
June 2008. http://www.britannica.com/eb/article-69199
Fradkin H (1992) The political thought of Ibn Tufayl. In: Butterworth
ChE (ed) The political aspects of Islamic philosophy, essays in
honor of Muhsin S. Mahdi. Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
pp 234–261
Gauthier L (1983) Ibn Thofaı¨l, sa vie, ses œuvres. Vrin, Paris (Reprise)
Goichon A-M (1959) Le Re´cit de Hayy ibn Yaqzaˆn commente´ par des
textes d’Avicenne. Descle´e de Brouwer, Paris
Gutas D (1994) Ibn T˙ufayl on Ibn Sı¯na¯’s Eastern Philosophy. Oriens
34:222–241
Hawi SS (1974) Islamic naturalism and mysticism: a philosophic study of
Ibn T˙ufayl’s H˙ ayy Bin Yaqz˙a¯n. Brill, Leiden
Hawıˆ SS (1976) Ibn Tufayl’s appraisal of his predecessors and their
inﬂuence on his thought. Int J Middle East Stud 7(1):89–121
Hourani GF (1956) The principal subject of Ibn T˙ufayl’s H˙ ayy Ibn Yaqz˙a¯n.
J Near East Stud 15(1):40–46
Mahdi M (1990) Philosophical literature. In: Young MJL et al
(eds) Religion, learning and science in the ‘Abbasid period, The
Cambridge history of Arabic literature. University Press, Cambridge,
pp 76–105
Mallet D (1997) Les livres de Hayy. Arabica, 44:2–34
Mallet D (1998) Qui enseigne qui? Lectures du Hayy b. Yaqzaˆn d’Ibn
Tufayl. Arabic Sci Philos 8:195–211
Mallet D (1999) A(b)saˆl et Joseph, symboles et naration dans les Hayy b.
Yaqzaˆn. In: Sanagustin F (ed) Les Intellectuels en Orient musulman.
IFAO, Cairo
Ibn T˙umlu¯s
ANNA AKASOY
Oriental Institute
Oxford
UK
Abstract
The Andalusian logician and physician Ibn T˙umlu¯s
(c. 1150–1156 until 1223 or 1224), about whose biography
very little is known, is a rare testimony to the afterlife of Ibn
Rushd’s philosophy in the Islamic world. His only known
substantial philosophical work, the Introduction to the Art
of Logic, offers a brief account of the intellectual history of
al-Andalus. He highlights the importance of logic, which
is required for any systematic presentation of ideas. There
is nothing in logic, which is opposed to religion. While Ibn
T˙umlu¯s dismisses al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s logic, which harmonizes the
Greek
tradition
with
Islamic
scholarship,
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯
receives only moderate praise, but remains inferior com-
pared to Aristotle. Ibn T˙umlu¯s read his works with the
help of commentaries, presumably by Ibn Rushd. Ibn
T˙umlu¯s’ failure to mention the name of Ibn Rushd, who
was his teacher, has attracted attention as possible evi-
dence for an anti-philosophical Zeitgeist in Almohad
Spain. The general structure of the Introduction follows
the model of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, in particular his Enumeration of the
Sciences. The ten books of the Organon according to the
Arabic tradition are all represented. While the Categories
are based on al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Ibn Rushd’s Middle Commentaries
inﬂuenced the Rhetoric and Poetics. Ibn T˙umlu¯s detaches
rhetoric from its traditional political context and empha-
sizes its use in medicine and for discussing Islamic ideas.
The only medical work of Ibn T˙umlu¯s, which is preserved,
is a commentary on Avicenna’s didactic poem.
Biographical Information
Little is known about the biography of Abu¯ l-H˙ ajja¯j Yu¯suf
ibn Muh:ammad Ibn T˙umlu¯s. Born in c. 1150–1156 in Alcira
near Valencia, he became a disciple of Ibn Rushd and prob-
ably also studied Islamic sciences and Arabic grammar. He
served the Almohad caliph al-Na¯s:ir (r. 1199–1213) as
a physician and died in 1223 or 1224 in Alcira.
Ibn T˙umlu¯s’ Thought and Philosophy
Ibn T˙umlu¯s’ only known substantial philosophical work
is the Introduction to the Art of Logic (Madkhal li-s:ina¯‘at
al-mant:iq), beginning with a prologue inwhich Ibn T˙umlu¯s
presents a brief account of the intellectual history of al-
Ibn T˙umlu¯s I
533
I

Andalus. While numerous books have been written about
the Islamic and ancient sciences, it is only logic which –
according to Ibn T˙umlu¯s – has not received the attention it
deserves. Even though they have no knowledge of it, the
‘‘people of his time,’’ that is, the traditional Muslim scholars,
associate logic with heresy, thereby violating their own
principles of investigation. Ibn T˙umlu¯s traces this phenom-
enon back to the establishment of Islam in al-Andalus when
the legal scholars monopolized the very concept of science
and rejected any form of scholarship, which reached them
from the main lands of the Islamic world, only to accept it
later. The same happened with al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s books, which
became allowed and popular only under Almohad rule.
Ibn T˙umlu¯s dismisses al-G˙ aza¯lı¯’s logic, which adapts the
technical terms to an Islamic environment, as inferior to
that of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯. The works of the latter, however, among
which he mentions The Great Abridgement (al-Mukhtas:ar
al-kabı¯r; see Elamrani-Jamal 1997:476–481 for this text)
are inferior to those of Aristotle. Ibn T˙umlu¯s explains that
he studied both al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ and Aristotle with the help of
commentaries, presumably those by Ibn Rushd, although
he does not mention his name.
Ibn T˙umlu¯s proceeds in his preface by saying that
nothing in logic is opposed to religion. Following
al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s Enumeration of the Sciences (Kita¯b Ih:s:a¯’ al-
‘ulu¯m), Ibn T˙umlu¯s compares logic to language and gram-
mar and points out that it is indispensable for reaching
sound judgments instead of mere opinions about any
subject and for presenting conclusions in a systematic
way. It allows us to test potential authorities for their
veracity. Ibn T˙umlu¯s distinguishes with al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ eight
parts of the logic associated with the individual books of
the Organon. The three syllogisms include the simple
intelligibles (Categories), simple statements (On Interpre-
tation), and syllogisms (Prior Analytics). In addition to
these, we ﬁnd the ﬁve disciplines in which the ﬁve types
of syllogisms are used: demonstrative (Posterior Analytics),
dialectical (Topics), sophistic (On Sophistical Refutations),
rhetorical (Rhetoric), and poetic (Poetics).
The preface to the Introduction is a rare witness to the
intellectual landscape in late Almohad Spain, although
none of the philosophical authors hailing from this region
is mentioned. In particular, Ibn T˙umlu¯s’ failure to mention
his teacher Ibn Rushd by name has attracted attention. It
has been interpreted as reﬂecting an intellectual climate in
late Almohad Spain, which may have turned hostile to
philosophy as became obvious in the banning of philosoph-
ical books in 1196. Ibn Rushd himself had been exposed to
an inquisitional prosecution (mih:na) and banished for
a brief period from the Almohad court in 1197. The
description of earlier opposition against ‘‘foreign’’ sciences
put up by the traditional scholars of al-Andalus may be
simply an account of Ibn T˙umlu¯s’ own time. However, in
his medical work, Ibn T˙umlu¯s uses Ibn Rushd’s Colliget and
praises its author as ‘‘the most eminent sage and most
virtuous scholar’’ (Ibn Sharı¯fa 1999:308). It has been
suggested that Ibn T˙umlu¯s expected the Andalusians to
react to Ibn Rushd in the same way as they had done with
previous new tendencies, that is, to reject them ﬁrst and
endorse them later. The interpretation of Ibn T˙umlu¯s’ atti-
tude to his teacher also affects the dating of the Introduction.
If the absence of Ibn Rushd’s name is considered a reﬂection
of the persecution, it is likely to have been written in the late
1190s. If not, an earlier date is just as plausible.
The main part of Ibn T˙umlu¯s’ Introduction follows the
order of the ten books of the Organon, adding – in har-
mony with the Arabic tradition – two to the list above:
Isagoge, Categories, On Interpretation, Prior Analytics,
Analysis, Posterior Analytics, On Sophistical Refutations,
Topics, Rhetoric, and Poetics. The Analysis (Kita¯b al-Tah:lı¯l),
an innovation of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, comprises parts of Prior
Analytics and Topics. In terms of length of treatment,
particular attention is granted to the Rhetoric, which may
reﬂect Ibn T˙umlu¯s’ personal interest in the subject.
Even though a thorough analysis of the whole text of
the Introduction and its sources remains a desideratum,
preliminary studies have identiﬁed al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ as the main
source of the ﬁrst part. His Enumeration of the Sciences
was used in the prologue to the Introduction (the end,
use, object, name, and parts of logic), and in his discussion
of the Categories, Ibn T˙umlu¯s follows closely al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s
Book on the Categories (presumably a part of the text Ibn
T˙umlu¯s refers to as al-Mukhtas:ar al-kabı¯r). This reﬂects
the high prestige of al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s logical works in al-Andalus.
Aouad’s analysis of the Rhetoric has shown that Ibn
T˙umlu¯s does not use the Arabic translation of Aristotle’s
text, but paraphrases Ibn Rushd’s corresponding Middle
Commentary and supplements it with passages from Ibn
Rushd’s Short Commentary, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s Book on Rhetoric,
and the Rhetoric from Avicenna’s Kita¯b al-Shifa¯’ (Aouad
2006:ix). Rather than merely compiling excerpts from
these sources, Ibn T˙umlu¯s presents his own approach to
the Rhetoric. The nature of the text is propedeutic, its aim
to introduce the reader to the oratorical art and prepare
him for the study of further, more detailed texts. While Ibn
T˙umlu¯s follows by and large the structure of Ibn Rushd’s
Middle Commentary, he sometimes imposes his own prin-
ciple, namely to proceed from the general to the particular,
and introduces further changes in structure (such as the
creation of thematic units), which lead to an exposition
that is more systematic than previous approaches to the
topic (Aouad 2006:xiii). Compared with Ibn Rushd, Ibn
534 I
Ibn T˙umlu¯s

T˙umlu¯s emphasizes the universal applicability of rhetoric,
an art that enables the communication of the results of all
practical arts to a general audience. Unlike other texts
belonging to the same Arabic tradition of the Rhetoric,
Ibn T˙umlu¯s’ Introduction does not include a discussion of
its political utility, which he regards as beyond the purpose
of an introduction. Examples from the political realm,
which appear in Ibn Rushd’s Middle Commentary are
omitted by Ibn T˙umlu¯s or substituted for medical ones,
and in the rare examples he displays a negative view of
political life. According to Aouad’s analysis, the author
thus detached rhetoric from its political context and
rather outlines its beneﬁts in medicine when talking to
patients or for discussing metaphysical ideas. The Islamic
religion, in particular its law and ethics, are also promi-
nent, and Ibn T˙umlu¯s identiﬁes various philosophical
concepts with parallels in an Islamic context.
A similar relationship to Ibn Rushd’s corresponding
Middle Commentary characterizes the part on the Poetics
of the Introduction in which Ibn T˙umlu¯s borrows terms and
examples from his teacher, but contributes his own elements.
Possibly inspired by the model of Avicenna, Ibn T˙umlu¯s gives
the example of a poetic syllogism in the second ﬁgure, which
is formally invalid – being a second-ﬁgure syllogismwith two
afﬁrmative premises and an afﬁrmative conclusion – which
depends on the invalid conversion of a universal afﬁrmative
proposition as a universal afﬁrmative. This is a theory
not mentioned by al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ and rejected by Ibn Rushd
(Aouad 2004). In this part of the Introduction too, Ibn
T˙umlu¯s expresses a certain reservation regarding human
nature, highlighting the pitfalls resulting from an intuitive
grasping of apparent meanings.
In a short quaesitum preserved only in a Latin trans-
lation based on a now lost Hebrew version, Ibn T˙umlu¯s
addresses a problem of modal syllogistic, which ﬁgures in
the Prior Analytics of his Introduction under the heading
Qawl fı¯ l-maqa¯yı¯s al-mukhtalit:a min al-d˙aru¯riyya wa-l-
wuju¯diyya (About the Syllogisms Which Combine a Neces-
sary and Extential Premise). He follows Ibn Rushd in his
discussion of the third ﬁgure with a necessary and an
existential (de inesse) premise. Both authors suggest that
the syllogism can be reduced to the ﬁrst ﬁgure. In the Prior
Analytics of the Introduction Ibn T˙umlu¯s mentions another
short treatise in which he refutes Avicenna’s view that the
universal negative de inesse proposition does not convert.
This treatise has not been preserved.
In addition to his logical works, Ibn T˙umlu¯s wrote
a commentary on Avicenna’s didactic medical poem al-
Urju¯za fı¯ l-t:ibb (for a list of manuscripts see Puig 2007).
He dedicated the commentary to a certain Abu¯ Yah:ya¯ ibn
Abı¯ Ya‘qu¯b Yu¯suf ibn Sulayma¯n, a son of the Almohad
Mahdi Ibn Tu¯mart’s companions who – according to Ibn
T˙umlu¯s – was also held in high esteem by Ibn Rushd. The
dedication suggests that the commentary was written
between 1179 and 1185 (Elamrani-Jamal 1997:468–469).
Biographies of Ibn T˙umlu¯s include fragments of classical
love poetry and attribute a book on the Arabic language to
him, which is not preserved.
See also: ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas˙r ▶al-G˙ aza¯lı¯, Abu¯ H˙ a¯mid
Muh:ammad ▶Ibn Rushd, Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-
H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯
ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna)
▶Logic in the Arabic and Islamic World ▶Medicine in
the Arab World
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Alhagiag
Bin
Thalmus
(1562–1574)
Quaesitum.
De
mistione
propositionis de inesse et necessariae. In: Aristotelis Opera cum
Averrois Comentariis. apud Junctas, Venetiis (repr. Frankfurt, 1962,
vol I, Part 2b u. 3, fol. 124r B-E)
Ibn Abı¯ Us:aybi‘a (1882/1884) ‘Uyu¯n al-anba¯’ fı¯ t:abaqa¯t al-at:ibba¯’, 3 vols,
ed. Mu¨ller A. Cairo, vol II, p 81
Ibn al-‘Abba¯r (1889) Kita¯b al-Takmila, n. 2093, ed. Codera F. Imprenta
Rojas, Madrid, pp 738–739
Ibn T˙umlu¯s (1916) Introduccio´n al arte de la lo´gica, ed. Ası´n Palacios M.
Centro de Estudios Histo´ricos, Madrid
Ibn T˙umlu¯s (1988) Extracts of the Urjuza commentary in al-Khattabi MA.
Al-T˙ ibb wa-l-at:ibba¯’ fı¯ l-Andalus al-isla¯miyya, vol I. Beirut, pp 427–
441; Ibn Sharı¯fa, Ibn Rushd al-h:afı¯d, p 308
Ibn T˙umlu¯s (2006a) Al-Madkhal li-s:ina¯‘at al-mant:iq, vol i, Kita¯b al-
maqu¯la¯t wa-kita¯b al-‘iba¯ra, ed. al-‘Adlu¯nı¯ al-Idrı¯sı¯ M. Da¯r al-
Thaqa¯fa, Casablanca [same text as in the Ası´n Palacios edn]
Ibn T˙umlu¯s (2006b) Le Livre de la Rhe´torique du philosophe et me´decin
Ibn T˙umlu¯s (Alhagiag bin Thalmus), ed. Aouad M. Vrin, Paris
Secondary Sources
Aouad M (1999–2003) Les sources du Livre de la Rhe´torique d’Ibn T˙umlu¯s,
disciple d’Averroe`s. Me´langes de l’Universite´ Saint-Joseph 56:57–106
Aouad M (2004) Le syllogisme poe´tique selon le Livre de la Poe´tique d’Ibn
T˙umlu¯s. In: Arnzen R, Thielmann J (eds) Words, texts and concepts
cruising the Mediterranean Sea [=Festschrift Gerhard Endress].
Peeters, Louvain, pp 259–270
Aouad M (in press) Re´ﬂexions sur le Commentaire au Poe`me de la
me´decine d’Ibn Sı¯na¯ par Ibn T˙umlu¯s. In: Hasnawi A (ed) Sciences
et philosophies arabes. Me´thodes, proble`mes et cas. Carthago
Ası´n Palacios M (1908) La logique d’Ibn Toumlous d’Alcira. Rev Tunis
67:474–479
Elamrani-Jamal A (1997) E´le´ments nouveaux pour l’e´tude de l’Introduc-
tion a` l’Art de la Logique d’Ibn T˙umlu¯s (m. 620/1223). In Hasnawi A,
Elamrani-Jamal A, Aouad M (eds) Perspectives arabes et me´die´vales
sur la tradition scientiﬁque et philosophique grecque. Peeters, Lou-
vain, pp 465–483
Griffel F (2002) The relationship between Averroes and al-Ghaza¯lı¯ as it
presents itself in Averroes’ early writings, especially in his commen-
tary on al-Ghaza¯lı¯’s al-Mustas:fa¯. In: Inglis J (ed) Medieval philosophy
and the classical tradition in Islam, Judaism and Christianity.
Curzon, Richmond, Surrey, pp 51–63
Ibn T˙umlu¯s I
535
I

Hourani GF (1970) The early growth of the secular sciences in Andalusia.
Stud Islam 32:143–156
Ibn Sharı¯fa M (1999) Ibn Rushd al-h:afı¯d. Sı¯ra watha¯’iqiyya. Mat:ba‘at al-
Naja¯h: al-Jadı¯da, Casablanca
Puig J (1992) Materials on Averroes’s circle. J Near Eastern Stud
51:241–260
Puig J (2007) Ibn T˙umlu¯s. In Delgado JL, Puerto JM (eds) Biblioteca de al-
Andalus, vol V. Fundacio´n Ibn Tufayl, Almerı´a, pp 504–507
al-S˙ag˙ı¯r ‘A (1996) Ishka¯liyyat istimra¯r al-dars al-falsafı¯ al-Rushdı¯. H˙ awla
athar al-G˙ aza¯lı¯ fı¯ l-madrasa al-Rushdiyya. Alif: J Comparative Poetics
16:77–88
Ibn Zurʿa, ʿI¯sa¯ ibn Ish:a¯q
CECILIA MARTINI BONADEO
Dipartimento di Filosoﬁa
Universita` di Padova
Padova
Italy
Abstract
‘I¯sa¯ ibn Zur‘a was a Jacobite Christian of the tenth century
Baghdad. He was a famous physician and translator from
Syriac into Arabic of several Aristotelian works of zoology
and logic.
Abu¯ ‘Alı¯ ‘I¯sa¯ ibn Ish:a¯q ibn Zur‘a was born in Baghdad in
943. He was a Jacobite Christian and studied philosophy
and Christian theology with Yah:ya¯ b. ‘Adı¯. He also studied
medicine: Ibn Abı¯ Us:aybi‘a records him as a renowned
physician. From Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ we know that he
was in trade with Byzantium; for this reason he was
suspected of treason, he was judged faulty, and lost his
properties. He died in Baghdad in1008.
Ibn Zurʿa was a good translator from Syriac into
Arabic of several Aristotelian works of zoology – as
Aristotle’s History of Animals – and logic – as the Sophistici
elenchi.
He
also
translated
a
work
of
Nicolaus
Damascenus on the Aristotelian philosophy. Ibn al-
Nadı¯m credits him also with the translation of a small
part of the commentary by Proclus on Plato’s Phaedo
(Fihrist, 252.22-23 Flu¨gel). He was also the author of
a compendium of the Organon. The list of Ibn Zur‘a’s
works reported in the Fihrist counts several original
works: an abridgment of an allegedly Aristotelian treatise
on the inhabited parts of the earth; a treatise on the aims of
Aristotle’s logic; another one on Porphyry’s Isagoge, an
interpretation of a part of Aristotle’s De caelo, and a
treatise on intellect.
See also: ▶Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ ▶Translations from
Greek into Arabic ▶Yah:ya¯ ibn ʿAdı¯
Bibliography
Primary Sources
‘I¯sa¯ ibn Ish:a¯q ibn Zur‘a (1994) Mant:iq ibn Zur‘a (al–‘Iba¯ra, al-Qiya¯s, al-
Burha¯n), ed. Jiha¯mı¯ Jı¯ra¯r - al-‘Ajam Rafı¯q. Da¯r al-Mashriq, Beirut
Rescher Nicholas (1963) A tenth-century Arab-Christian apologia for
logic. Islamic Stud 2:1–16
Sbath Paul (1929) Vingt traite´s philosophiques et apologe´tiques d’auteurs
arabes chre´tiens du IXe au XIVe sie`cle. H. Friedrich et Co., Cairo
Thomson Herbert Fergus (1962) Four treatises by ‘I¯sa¯ ibn Zur‘a,
a Jacobite of the tenth century. Thesis, Columbia University
Biographers
al-Bayhaqı¯ Z˙ ahı¯r al-Dı¯n (1994) Tatimmat s:iwa¯n al-h:ikma, ed. Rafı¯q al-
‘Ajam D. Da¯r al-Fikr al-Lubna¯nı¯, Beirut
Ibn Abı¯ Us:aybi‘a (1882) ‘Uyu¯n al-anba¯’ fı¯ t:abaqa¯t al-at:ibba¯’, ed. Mu¨ller
August. al-Mat:ba‘a¯t al-wahbiyya, Il Cairo/Ko¨nigsberg
Ibn al-Nadı¯m (1871–1872) Kita¯b al-Fihrist, ed. Flu¨gel Gustav, Roediger
Johannes, Mu¨ller August. Vogel, Leipzig
Ibn al-Qift:ı¯ (1903) Ta’rı¯kh al-h:ukama¯’, ed. Lippert Julius. Dieterich’sche
Verlagsbuchhandlung, Leipzig
al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯ Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n (1939–1944) Kita¯b al-Imta¯‘ wa-l-mu’a¯nasa, ed.
Amı¯n Ah:mad and al-Zayn Ah:mad. Cairo
Secondary Sources
Haddad C (1971) ‘I¯sa¯ ibn Zur‘a philosophe et apologiste chre´tien. Da¯r al-
Kalima, Beirut
Kraemer JL (1986) Humanism in the renaissance of Islam. The cultural
revival during the Buyid Age. Brill, Leiden
Pines S (1961) La loi naturelle et la socie´te´: la doctrine politico-
the´ologique d’Ibn Zur‘a, philosophe chre´tien de Bagdad. Scripta
Hierosolymitana 9:154–190
Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯ʾ, Encyclopedia of
CARMELA BAFFIONI
Dipartimento di Studi e Ricerche su Africa e Paesi Arabi
Facolta` di Studi Arabo-Islamici e del Mediterraneo
Universita` degli Studi di Napoli L‘Orientale
Napoli
Italy
Abstract
‘‘Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’’’ – the ‘‘Brethren of Purity’’ – is the name
of a philosophical brotherhood that produced in the tenth
century the most complete medieval encyclopedia of
sciences, at least two centuries before the best-known
encyclopedias in the Latin world. It is a collection of 52
treatises or epistles in Arabic, divided into four sections –
introduction, and the natural, psycho-rational, and meta-
physical-theological sciences; two additional Epistles, the
536 I
Ibn Zurʿa, ʿI¯sa¯ ibn Ish:a¯q

‘‘Comprehensive’’ and the ‘‘Supercomprehensive’’ com-
plete the work, which assembles all the available knowl-
edge of the sciences, philosophy of Greek origin, and
religious and gnostic Muslim doctrines. The Ikhwa¯n al-
S˙afa¯’ are linked to Shı¯ʿism and often associated with an
Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯ milieu. The treatises are based on a wide variety of
materials, but focus on Greek philosophy and science. The
Epistles, which are addressed to disciples at an early stage
of their apprenticeship, contain a core of technical teach-
ings and a conclusion regarding their inner meaning. The
ﬁrst topics addressed are arithmetic, geometry, astronomy,
geography, music, and logic. The overall epistemological
framework is sketched in a special treatise; utilitarian
activities are addressed in a complementary epistle. As
a consequence of the eclectic character of the whole
work, the ﬁrst seven treatises of the second section,
which are devoted to the natural sciences, follow
Aristotle’s works on physics; but the treatise on nature
introduces a Neoplatonic conception to explain the reli-
gious tenets of creationism from the philosophical point
of view. The encyclopedia deals with the major Muslim
religious issues, and Qurʾa¯nic quotations often support
ancient doctrines. Overall, the work represents a solution
to the problem of reconciling reason and faith. The polit-
ical vision developed in it may identify the authors as
supporters of a strictly ‘Alid conception of the imamate.
Biographical Information on the Authors
The Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’ – the ‘‘Brethren of Purity’’ – are the
authors of the most complete medieval encyclopedia of
sciences, at least two centuries before the best-known ency-
clopedias in the Latin world by Alexander Neckham,
Thomas
de
Cantimpre´,
Vincent
de
Beauvais,
and
Bartholomaeus Anglicus. It is a collection of 52 treatises or
epistles
in
Arabic,
divided
into
four
sections
–
propaedeutical, natural, psycho-rational and metaphysical-
theological sciences; two additional Epistles, the ‘‘Compre-
hensive’’ and the ‘‘Supercomprehensive’’ complete the work.
The literary scholar Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n al-Tawh˙ı¯dı¯ (d. 1023),
following his master Abu¯ Sulayma¯n al-Sijista¯nı¯ al-Mant˙iqı¯
(d. 985 c.), and the Muʿtazilite theologian ‘Abd al-Jabba¯r
al-Hamadha¯nı¯ (d. 1025) identify as the authors of the
encyclopedia the qa¯d˙ı¯ (‘‘judge’’) Abu¯ l-H˙ asan al-Zanja¯nı¯
and his friends Abu¯ Sulayma¯n al-Bustı¯, called al-Maqdı¯sı¯,
Abu¯ Ah˙mad al-Nahraju¯rı¯ and al-‘Awfı¯, all from Bas˙ra and
linked to the Chancellery secretary Zayd b. Rifa¯‘a.
According to Ignaz Goldziher, their common denomina-
tion as Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’ could have been borrowed from the
famous Indo-Persian collection of fables Kalila wa-Dimna
to indicate a group of loyal friends. The most convincing
hypothesis, however, relates it to the contents and goals of
the encyclopedia – knowledge as a means of puriﬁcation
and salvation.
It is now assumed that the encyclopedia was assembled
between CE 840 and about CE 980. But the questions of
the identity and ideology of the Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’still remain
unsolved. Their link with the Shı¯‘a is widely recognized –
the history of early Islam and politics are also approached
from a Shı¯ʿite perspective – and the scholars Corbin,
Marquet, and Bafﬁoni have related them to Isma¯ʿı¯lism,
the radical branch of Shı¯ʿism. The tradition ascribes the
Comprehensive
and
Supercomprehensive
Epistles
to
Ah˙mad, the second of the three ‘‘veiled’’ Imams who
came between Muh˙ammad b. Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯, the appointed suc-
cessor of Ja‘far al-S˙a¯diq according to the Shı¯‘a, and
‘Abdalla¯h/‘Ubaydalla¯h al-Mahdı¯ (d. 934), the founder of
the Fatimid dynasty in 909. In spite of scattered negative
references to the ‘‘hidden’’ Imam (at different periods of
its history, the Shı¯‘a introduced the idea of an Imam in
concealment who, though withdrawn by God from the
eyes of men, continues to live miraculously on earth to
fulﬁl the essential functions of the Imamate), several
Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯ elements can be found, for example the hierarchi-
cal structure of the universe and of ‘‘teaching,’’ references
to septenary cycles and the distinction between the elect
and the masses. But some non-Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯ ideas such as the
invitation to celibacy proper to Suﬁsm and the mention of
feasts linked to S˙a¯bian rituals are also recognizable in the
encyclopedia.
In 1150, the Sunni caliph al-Mustanjid sent the work to
be burnt. Yet it survived and was translated into Persian and
Turkish. Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯s have quoted extensively from the encyclo-
pedia since the twelfth century, but testimonies from the
eleventh century such as that of the Persian philosopher and
writer Na¯s˙ir-i Khusraw, who copied large parts of the ency-
clopedia, have recently been identiﬁed as proof of much
earlier diffusion of the work in Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯ circles and hence of
the Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯ commitment of the authors.
Thought
The encyclopedia of the Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’ in the form we
have now opens the mature stage of Muslim philosophy,
the tenth and eleventh centuries. Foreign sciences are no
longer a collection of subjects valuable in themselves –
though modiﬁed according to the needs of the new faith,
as in the scientiﬁc writings of the ‘‘ﬁrst Arabic philoso-
pher,’’ Abu¯ Ya‘qu¯b al-Kindı¯ (d. 870 c.) – but an organic
whole that constitutes a unitary introduction to supreme
knowledge, that of God.
The treatises are based on very heterogeneous mate-
rials: Babylonian, Indian, and Iranian astrology, Indian
and Persian narrative, biblical quotations and cabbalistic
Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯ʾ, Encyclopedia of I
537
I

inﬂuences, references to the New Testament, and Christian
gnosis. Most attention is paid to Greek philosophy and
science. In some cases, the Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’ have preserved
the only Arabic fragments of Greek authors known to us,
such as the story of Giges from Plato’s Republic in Epistle
52 On Magic.
The ultimate goal of knowledge – the attainment of
happiness that coincides with divine knowledge – is never
forgotten. Puriﬁcation following the abandonment of
worldly pleasures cannot be attained only through esoteric
religious experience but also through reason. Qurʾa¯nic
quotations often support ancient doctrines, and the ency-
clopedia deals with the major religious issues of Muslim
faith: the unity, uniqueness, and attributes of God, the
origin of the world, angels, human destiny, good and evil,
theodicy, and resurrection. The Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’ seem to
consider prophetical messages, both esoteric and exoteric,
as the second necessary means of human salvation and
happiness. Hence, the science of the esoteric interpretation
of the Qurʾa¯n is emphasized as the highest divine gift.
Each Epistle states its aim; all contain a core of tech-
nical teachings and a conclusion regarding their inner
meaning. Doctrines are clearly expounded, with repeti-
tions as required by the didactic function of the treatises,
which frequently urge the ‘‘beginners’’ to research knowl-
edge in order to be awakened ‘‘from the sleep of matter
and the negligence of ignorance’’ and to pray for ‘‘the
assistance (ta’yyid) of a spirit coming by God.’’
The ﬁrst topics addressed are arithmetic, geometry,
astronomy, geography, and music. The main sources are
Euclid,
Nicomachus,
Archimedes,
Ptolemy,
and
the
Pythagoreans. In the ﬁrst section, the Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’ also
deal with the ‘‘universal’’ form of language – logic – on the
basis of the contents of the ﬁrst ﬁve books of the Organon
according to the Hellenistic asset (Porphyry’s Isagoge and
Aristotle’s Categories, De interpretatione, Prior and Poste-
rior Analytics). Their epistemological vision is sketched in
a treatise devoted to the theoretical arts. In the comple-
mentary treatise on the practical arts, utilitarian activities
are approached: these were held in high esteem in
Isma¯ʿı¯lism, which reinforces the hypothesis of the Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯
commitment of the Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’. Epistle 9 describes the
ideal of the wise man, with Suﬁpositions emphasized:
moral behavior – a ‘‘pure heart’’ – is the conditio sine qua
non of perfect attainment of knowledge.
The eclectic character of the whole is even more evi-
dent in the other three sections. In the second section,
Epistles 15–22 follow the Hellenistic arrangement of
Aristotle’s physical works from Physics to Meteorology.
The treatises also reﬂect the inﬂuence of works on miner-
alogy, botany, and agriculture. Although the Aristotelian
zoological corpus reached Islam, Epistle 22 On Animals
places the subject in a metaphysical dispute on the supe-
riority of man over animals. Epistle 20 On Nature, on the
other hand, deviates from Aristotelianism by introducing
a Neoplatonic conception of nature and an angelology.
The Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’ never mention Plotinus explicitly,
but the ‘‘conceptual’’ reading of creationism is Neopla-
tonic emanationism merged with Neopythagorism. The
third section opens with two treatises representing the
whole of reality from a numerological perspective, which
demonstrates that the ‘‘Pure Brethren’’ are true Muslim
Pythagoreans, to prove that the cosmos is organized
according to quantitative models. The world is at the
same time wholly dependent on God, Who is the principle
of everything as the number one is the root of each
number and not a number itself. The world is considered
as emanated from God through the intermediary of the
two ﬁrst emanated entities, the Active Intellect and the
Universal Soul. The knowledge of the whole encyclopedia
leads step by step to the knowledge of God.
Another important feature of the encyclopedia is the
conception of man as a microcosm and as the most perfect
of the beings in the sublunar world, the link between earth
and heaven.
The twofold approach to the issue of the attainment of
human salvation and happiness fully legitimizes the
ancient sciences, considered by orthodox theologians to
be vehicles of heresy and even atheism. So the encyclope-
dia represents a possible solution to the problem of rec-
onciling reason and faith, philosophy and religion.
The political vision of the Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’ could clarify
their ideological commitment. They consider the debate
on the identity of the Messenger’s deputy as the main
cause of division in the umma (the Muslim community)
until their time. The Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’ do not state clearly
their idea as to who the deputy should be, but a political
target of one of the authors might have been the ninth-
century ʿAbba¯sid caliph al-Ma’mu¯n. Hence the Ikhwa¯n al-
S˙afa¯’ could be identiﬁed with the supporters of a ‘Alid
conception of the imamate, according to which the family
of the Prophet in the strict sense only are the guarantors of
the true tradition concerning succession in the caliphate.
A ‘‘perfect city’’ (al-madı¯na al-fa¯d˙ila) is featured by the
Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’, less known but not less worthy than that
proposed by their contemporary al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, in which
mutual love is the basis and the ultimate goal of the
community. The authors often foreshadow the defeat of
‘‘evil dynasties’’: even though their presentation of such
a city does not help us to ascertain whether they had in
mind a spiritual rule or a true government such as that of
the Fatimid caliph (Hamdani 1999:81), scholars have
538 I
Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯ʾ, Encyclopedia of

supposed that the Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’ foretold the fall of the
‘Abba¯sids (Tibawi 1955:37), or were opponents of
the Buyid regime (Farhan 1999:30–31). Their political
vision also explains their sharp words against wars of
religion.
See also: ▶Abu¯ Sulayma¯n al-Sijista¯nı¯ al-Mant:iqı¯ ▶al-
Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯
Nas˙r ▶Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯ Philosophical Tradition
▶al-Kindı¯, Abu¯ Yu¯suf Yaʿqu¯b ibn Ish:a¯q ▶Natural Philos-
ophy, Arabic ▶Plotinus, Arabic ▶Political Philosophy,
Arabic ▶Porphyry, Arabic ▶al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯, Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n
▶Theology Versus Philosophy in the Arab World
▶Translations from Greek into Arabic
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Bafﬁoni Carmela (ed and transl) (2010) Epistles of the Brethren of Purity
on logic, An Arabic critical edition and English translation of Epistles
10–14, foreword by N El-Bizri. Oxford University Press in association
with the Institute of Ismaili Studies, New York
Busta¯nı¯ But˙rus (ed) (1957) Rasa¯’il Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’ wa-Khulla¯n al-Wafa¯’,
4 vols. Da¯r al-S˙a¯dir, Beirut (other edn: Bombay, 1887–1889, 4 vols;
Khayr al-Dı¯n al-Ziriklı¯, Cairo 1928, 4 vols; ‘A¯rif Ta¯mir, Beirut/Paris,
1995, 4 vols)
Gha¯lib Mus˙t˙afa¯ (ed) (19842) Al-Risa¯la al-Ja¯mi‘a, Ta¯j Rasa¯’il Ikhwa¯n
al-S˙afa¯’ wa-Khulla¯n al-Wafa¯’. Da¯r al-Andalus, Beirut (other edn:
‘A¯rif Ta¯mir, Beirut/Paris, 1995)
Goodman Lenn E, McGregor Richard (ed and transl) (2009) The case of
the animals versus man before the king of the jinn, An Arabic critical
edition and English translation of Epistle 22, foreword by N El-Bizri.
Oxford University Press in association with the Institute of Ismaili
Studies, New York
S˙alı¯ba¯ Jamı¯l (ed) (1949–1951) Al-Risa¯la al-Ja¯mi‘a, Ta¯j Rasa¯’il Ikhwa¯n
al-S˙afa¯’ wa-Khulla¯n al-Wafa¯’. al-Majma‘ al- ‘Ilmı¯al- ‘Arabı¯, Damascus
Ta¯mir ‘A¯rif (ed) (19702) Risa¯lat Ja¯mi’a al-Ja¯mi‘a li-Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’
wa-Khulla¯n al-Wafa¯’. Da¯r Maktabat al-H˙ aya¯t, Beirut (other edn:
‘A¯rif Ta¯mir, Beirut/Paris, 1995)
Translations
Bafﬁoni C (1989) L’Epistola degli Ih˘wa¯n al-S˙afa¯’ Sulle opinioni e le
religioni. Istituto Universitario Orientale, Napoli
Bafﬁoni C (1994) Frammenti e testimonianze di autori antichi nelle Rasa¯’il
degli Ih˘wa¯n al-S˙afa¯’. Istituto Nazionale per la Storia antica, Roma
Bafﬁoni C (2006) Appunti per un’epistemologia profetica. L’Epistola degli
Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’ Sulle cause e gli effetti. Universita` degli Studi di
Napoli ‘‘L’Orientale’’ – Guida, Napoli
de Callatay¨ Godefroid (1996) Les re´volutions et les cycles (E´pıˆtres des
Fre`res de la Purete´, XXXVI). Al-Bouraq/Academia-Bruylant, Beirut/
Louvain-la-Neuve
de Callatay¨Godefroid (2003) Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’: des arts scientiﬁques et de
leur objectif. Le Muse´on 116:231–258
Dieterici Friedrich (1969) Die Philosophie bei den Arabern im X.
Jahrhundert n. Chr., Gesamtdarstellung und Quellenwerke. Olms,
Hildesheim (repr. Hinrich, Leipzig, 1868, 1876, 1871, 1872)
Diwald Susanne (1975) Arabische Philosophie und Wissenschaft in der
Enzyklopa¨die. Kita¯b Ih˘wa¯n as˙-s˙afa¯’ (III). Die Lehre von Seele und
Intellekt. Harrassowitz, Wiesbaden
Giese Alma (1990) Ih˘wa¯n as-Safa¯’, Mensch und Tier vor dem Ko¨nig der
Dschinnen. Meiner, Hamburg
Goldstein BR (1964) A treatise on the number theory from a tenth-
century Arabic source. Centaurus 10:129–160
Goodman Lenn E (1978) The case of animals versus man before the king
of the Jinn: a tenth-century ecological fable of the Pure Brethren of
Basra. Twayne, Boston
Michot Jean (1974–1975) L’e´pıˆtre de la re´surrection des Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’.
Bull Philos Me´die´v 16–17:114–148
Ricardo-Felipe Alberto (1995) La Risa¯la fı¯ ma¯hiyyat al-‘isq de las Rasa¯’il
Ijwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’. Anaquel Estud Arabes 6:185–207
Shiloah Amnon (1964; 1966) L’e´pıˆtre sur la musique des Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’.
Rev E´tudes Islam 32:125–162; 34:159–193
van Reijn Eric (1995) The epistles of the Sincere Brethren (Rasa¯’il Ikhwa¯n
al-S˙afa¯’): an annotated translation of epistles 43 to 47. Minerva Press,
Montreux
Yusufji DH (1943) The forty-third treatise of the Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’. Muslim
World 33:39–49
Secondary Sources
Bafﬁoni C (2001) Frammenti e testimonianze platoniche nelle Rasa¯’il
degli Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’. In: Fiaccadori G (ed) Autori classici in lingue
del Vicino e Medio Oriente. Istituto Poligraﬁco e Zecca dello Stato,
Roma, pp 163–178
Bafﬁoni C (2002) Al-madı¯nah al-fa¯d˙ilah in al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯and in the Ikhwa¯n al-
S˙afa¯’: a comparison. In: Leder S et al (eds) Studies in Arabic and
Islam. Peeters, Leuven, pp 3–12
Bafﬁoni C (2003a) The angelology system in the Ih˘wa¯n al-S˙afa¯’. In: Evstatiev
S et al (eds) Arabistika i isljamoznanie. Studii po clucˇaj 60-
godisˇcˇninata na doc. d.f.n. Penka Samsareva, 2 vols. Universitetsko
izdatelstvo ‘‘S. Kliment Ohridski’’, Soﬁja, vol II, pp 435–442
Bafﬁoni C (2003b) Ideological debate and political encounter in the
Ih˘wa¯n Al-S˙afa¯’. In: Pellitteri A (ed) Mag˘a¯z. Culture e contatti nell’area
del Mediterraneo. Il ruolo dell’Islam. Universita` di Palermo, Palermo,
pp 33–41
Bafﬁoni C (2004) Temporal and religious connotations of the ‘Regal
Policy’ in the Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’. In: Gannage´ E et al (eds) The
Greek strand in Islamic political thought. Proceedings of the
conference held at the Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton,
16–27 June 2003. Me´langes de l’Universite´ Saint-Joseph, vol 57,
pp 337–365
Bafﬁoni C (2006) The ‘History of the Prophet’ in the Ikhwa¯n al-s˙afa¯’. In:
Abrahamov B (ed) Studies in Arabic and Islamic culture II. Bar-Ilan
University Press, Ramat-Gan, pp 7–31
Bafﬁoni (2008a) The Ikhwan al-S˙afa’. Available at: http://plato.stanford.
edu/entries/ikhwan-al-safa
Bafﬁoni C (2008b) The scope of the Rasa¯’il Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’. In: El-Bizri N
(ed) The Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’ and their Rasa¯’il. Oxford University Press in
Association with the Institute of Ismaili Studies, New York, pp 101–122
Bafﬁoni C (2008c) Nasir-i Khosrow, translator of the Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’?
Paper presented at the 24th UEAI congress, Leipzig, 24–28
September 2008 (in print)
Bausani A (1978) L’enciclopedia dei Fratelli della Purita`. Riassunto, con
Introduzione e breve commento, dei 52 Trattati o Epistole degli
Ikhwa¯n as˙-S˙afa’. Istituto Universitario Orientale, Napoli
Corbin H (1950) Rituel sabe´en et exe´ge`se du rituel. Eranos Jahrbuch
19:181–246
Daftary F (20072) The Isma‘ilis. Their history and doctrines. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge
de Callatay¨ G (2005) Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’. A brotherhood of idealists on the
fringe of Orthodox Islam. Oneworld, Oxford
Farhan MJ (1999) Philosophy of mathematics of Ikhwan al-Safa [sic].
J Islamic Sci [Aligarh] 15:1–2, 25–53
Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯ʾ, Encyclopedia of I
539
I

Hamdani A (1999) Brethren of Purity, a secret society for the establish-
ment of the Fatimid Caliphate: new evidence for the early dating of
their encyclopædia. In: Barrucand M (ed) L’E´gypte fatimide, son
art et son histoire. Presses de l’Universite´ Paris-Sorbonne, Paris,
pp 73–82
Lewis B (1943) An epistle on manual crafts. Islamic Cult 17:141–151
Marquet Y (1961) La place du travail dans la hie´rarchie isma¯‘ı¯lienne
d’apre`s l’encyclope´die des Fre`res de la Purete´. Arabica 8:225–237
Marquet Y (1968) Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’. In: Encyclopedia of Islam, new edn,
vol 3. Brill, Leiden, pp 1071–1076
Marquet Y (1999) La philosophie des Ihwan as-Safa¯’. S.E´.H.A./Arche`,
Paris/Milan (repr. Algiers 1975)
Marquet Y (2006) Les ‘‘Fre`res de la Purete´’’ Pythagoriciens de l’Islam.
Textes et travaux de Chrysopoeia (Arche`), Milan/Paris
Netton IR (1991) Muslim Neoplatonists. An introduction to the
thought of the Brethren of Purity. Edinburgh University Press,
Edinburgh
Stern SM (1946) The authorship of the epistles of the Ikhwan-as˙-S˙afa¯’.
Islamic Cult 20:367–372
Stern SM (1964) New information about the authors of the ‘Epistles of the
Sincere Brethren’. Islamic Stud 3:405–428
Tibawi AL (1955) Ikhwa¯n as˙-S˙afa¯’ and their Rasa¯’il. A critical review of
a century and a half of research. Islamic Quart 2:28–46
Impetus
ELZBIETA JUNG
Department of Philosophy
University of Ło´dz´
Ło´dz´
Poland
Abstract
In the Latin West, the concept of impetus was fully devel-
oped in the fourteenth century. John Buridan was the ﬁrst
to use this term in order to describe the projectile motion,
the free fall, and the motion of the heavenly spheres. The
discussion started with Aristotelian theory of projectile
motion presented in his Physics. Aristotle claims that
each violent motion, such as projectile one and freely
falling body, need a constant presence of a mover, and
therefore when a mobile is no more in touch with its
mover, a medium takes its role. Later, Greek and Arabic
commentators of Aristotle noticed that a medium resists
rather than promotes motion. Thus, they offer an alterna-
tive theory, that a mobile is moved thanks to a force
impressed by the mover. This theory was developed in
the Middle Ages, and ﬁnally it became a kind of an ‘‘ofﬁ-
cial’’ technical concept of medieval mechanics. The medi-
eval different concepts of impetus ﬁnally lead to formulate
proper deﬁnitions of violent and natural motions and to
replace the whole Aristotelian system. Although ontolog-
ically different, impetus is analogous to Galileo’s early use
of impeto and Newton’s ‘‘quantity of motion.’’
From antiquity, the motion of projectile was one of the
main points of criticism of Aristotelian theory of motion.
On the ground of Aristotle’s theory, such motion was
difﬁcult to explain, for a projectile motion, as a violent
one, demanded a distinct mover which continuously has
to be in contact with the thing moved. In Book Seven of
the Physics, Aristotle (384–322 BCE) formulated two prin-
ciples concerning the cause of violent motion: ﬁrst, that
‘‘anything which is moved is moved by something,’’ and,
second, that ‘‘a ‘proximate’ mover . . . is correlative to what
it moves.’’ To explain a continuity of projectile motion,
Aristotle supposed that the original force transmitted the
power of motion to the air. In his Book Eight of the
Physics, he described two theories. The ﬁrst, so-called
theory of antiperistasis (in the sixth century CE developed
by Simplicius), which he probably took from Plato
(Timaeus, 79–80), that is, of mutual replacement of the
air by the projectile so that the air comes around behind to
push the mobile, is rejected by Aristotle. The second theory
is his own solution and states that the air is not only moved
by the original mover but it also receives a power or force to
act as a mover; this power is transmitted to the next air,
which acts as a mover. Thus, a projectile is successively
pushed in the direction, which the original motor intended.
When the transmission ceases, the projectile falls down.In
antiquity, Hipparchus (second century BCE) rejected Aris-
totelian assertion that it was the air that provided the
motive force responsible for violent motion of a body.
The next step was taken by John Philoponus (sixth century
CE), who, on the grounds of both reason and experiment,
was looking for an alternative explanation. He concluded
that there must be an incorporeal motive force that is
absorbed by the projectile and causes its motion until it is
spent by resistance. The concept of incorporeal force
explains also natural motion such as free fall of a body
and the motion of the heavens. In Philoponus’ opinion,
gravity and levity are forces impressed by the Creator; God
also impressed an incorporeal force in the spheres of the
heavens moving them ever since. Philoponus, however,
never fully developed the reason why it should be as he
thought; it seamed to him an elementary fact.
Philoponus’ commentary on the Physics survived only
in parts and was probably translated into Latin in the
sixteenth century. But his views seem to be of considerable
inﬂuence among the Arabic commentators of Aristotle,
who probably knew at least some of Philoponus’ remarks
in Book Four. They used the theory in critiques of
540 I
Impetus

Aristotle’s account of motion. To describe the violent
motion, al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯ (c. 870–950) uses the term mail qasrı¯
as a substitute for impressed force. The famous physician
and philosopher Avicenna (980–1037) discussed the prob-
lem of motion in his Kita¯b-al-Shifa¯’ (Book of the Healing of
the Soul, which is his commentary on the works of
Aristotle). He rejected both ancient Greek theories and
also that of Philoponus. Avicenna supported a theory of
a mail - an inclination, which is transferred by the original
projector to the projectile. This inclination, however, is
not a force itself but rather an instrument of the force of
the mover to communicate its action to the thing moved.
The mail is something permanent but destructible.
Avicenna distinguished a ‘‘natural mail’’ (mail tabı¯‛ı¯),
which is the cause of natural motion of falling bodies
and a ‘‘violent mail’’ (mail qasrı¯), the cause of projectile
motion. If there were no resistance to the mail, for exam-
ple, in a void, it would persist inﬁnitely like the motion it
generates. Abu’l-Baraka¯t (d. c. 1164) modiﬁed Avicenna’s
theory and stated that the mail qasrı¯ is self-expending, so
there could be a violent motion in a void, which would
come to an end without external resistance.
Although none of the aforementioned ideas appeared
in translation in Latin West, thirteenth century authors
considered the impetus theory and they either rejected it
as contrary to Aristotle’s learning or supported it as much
more satisfactory solution of the problem of projectile
motion. Roger Bacon (c. 1214–1292) rejected the inﬂu-
ence of the power of the projector in projectile, since there
would be no contact of the mover and the moved, which is
necessary for motion. On the other hand, Richard Rufus
of Cornwall (d. c. 1260) suggested that the projector
makes an ‘‘impression’’ on the projectile proportional to
the weight of the object. Thomas Aquinas presented
both solutions of the problem: in his Physics and De
caelo he supported Aristotelian explanation, while in his
Quaestiones disputatae he seriously considered the inﬂu-
ence of an agent by means of an instrument.
In the fourteenth century, thinkers developed two
theories of impetus explaining the projectile motions,
acceleration of falling bodies, and the uniform motions
of celestial bodies. The ﬁrst theory suggests that impetus
is a self-expending force; the second one states that it
is permanent. In his commentary on the Sentences,
Franciscus de Marchia (d. c. 1344) used the ﬁrst concept
of impetus as an illustration for the continued action of
the sacraments. In his opinion the motion of a projectile is
continued by an exhaustible ‘‘force left behind’’ (a virtus
derelicta) in the projectile. The same kind of force is
impressed by intelligences in the heavens, which would
continue their motion for some time. Also Nicholas
Oresme, (c. 1320–1382), who used the concept of impetus
mostly in a context of free fall, asserted that it does not
have a permanent nature and it arises from initial acceler-
ation and then acts further to accelerate the speed. The
theory of permanent impetus was elaborated by John
Buridan (d. 1361) and accepted by other Parisian masters
like Albert of Saxony (c. 1316–1390) and Marsilius of
Inghen (c. 1340–1396). In their opinion impetus is a not
self-expending quality, and it can be only diminished by
resistance. In the case of projectile motion impetus is the
same as the force impressed by the mover, and its quantity
depends on a primary matter. If there is more matter,
a greater force can be impressed. In a case of free fall,
impetus is a cause of acceleration of a heavy body. In the
case of motion of celestial bodies, impetus is the force
impressed by God, which causes their everlasting circular
motion. This concept of impetus helps to describe all types
of motion: terrestrial, violent, and natural motion of
heavy bodies as well as motion of celestial, nonmaterial
bodies. The two Aristotelian principles of motion,
however, remain untouched: a thing moved demands
a constant action of the mover.
In the sixteenth century, many authors, especially the
Italians, accepted an impressed force as a cause of the
continuation of projectile motion. In the discussions
the concept of impetus was clariﬁed and led Giovanni
Battista Benedetti (1530–1590) to assert that a body
moved by an impressed force would move on a rectilinear,
not a curved line. Benedetti accepted that the increase of
speed in motion is the result of a continual action of the
force, although he concluded that impetus decreases con-
tinuously. Galileo Galilei (1564–1642) in his Two New
Sciences (1638) ﬁnally approached the modern conception
of momentum. He characterized impetus as an effect and
measure of motion and treated as a function of weight and
speed. Also Rene´ Descartes (1596–1650) deﬁned ‘‘quantity
of motion’’ or momentum as the product of quantity
of matter and speed. The ﬁnal step was taken by Isaac
Newton (1642–1727), who in his Principia (1687) formu-
lated the modern conception of impetus understood as
kinetic energy, that is, as the energy of an inertial mass in
motion and of momentum as the product of inertia mass
and velocity leaving medieval theories behind.
See also: ▶Abu¯ l-Baraka¯t al-Bag˙da¯dı¯ ▶Albert of Saxony
▶Aristotelianism in the Greek, Latin, Syriac, Arabic, and
Hebrew Traditions ▶Francis of Marchia ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯
Nas˙r ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶John Philoponus
▶Marsilius of Inghen ▶Natural Philosophy, Arabic
▶Nicholas
Oresme
▶Richard
Rufus
of
Cornwall
▶Roger Bacon ▶Thomas Aquinas
Impetus I
541
I

Bibliography
Secondary Sources
Clagett M (1959) The science of mechanics in the Middle Ages. University
of Wisconsin Press, Madison
Drake S, Drabkin IE (1969) Mechanics in sixteenth-century Italy. Univer-
sity of Wisconsin Press, Madison
Maier A (1958) Zwischen Philosophie und Mechanik (Studien zur
Naturphilosophie der Spa¨tscholastik V- Storia e letteratura 69).
Edizioni di storia e letteratura, Roma
Maier A (1968) Zwei Grundprobleme der scholastischen Naturphi-
losophie. Das Problem der intensiven Gro¨sse. Die Impetustheorie.
(Studien
zur
Naturphilosophie
der
Spa¨tscholastik
II-
Storia
e letteratura 37), 3rd edn. Edizioni di storia e letteratura, Roma
Sarnowsky J (2008) Concepts of impetus and the history of mechanics. In:
Laird WR, Roux S (eds) Mechanics and natural philosophy before
the scientiﬁc revolution. Springer, Dordrecht, pp 121–149
Induction
CHRISTOPHE GRELLARD
Philosophy
University of Paris 1 Panthe´on-Sorbonne
Paris
France
Abstract
Induction is a form of non-demonstrative reasoning
which proceeds by enumerations of singular cases in
order to form a universal proposition which subsumes
all of these cases. The problem of induction as a scientiﬁc
method lies in the jump from the particular to the uni-
versal. The problem can be distinguished threefold.
(1) What is the logical form of such an argument? (How
many observations are needed? If the enumeration is not
complete, how is this incompleteness supplemented?)
(2) Upon what does the nomological regularity rest that
is the basis of the inductive approach? (3) What type of
certainty can provide a rationale for induction if it cannot
claim to be necessary?
The medieval reﬂection on the status of induction inherits
the Aristotelian deﬁnition of induction as a progression
from the individual to the universal (Topics I, 12; Prior
Analytics, II, 21–22; Posterior Analytics, II, 19). Induction
is a reasoning that goes from what is most known, the most
known for us, to what is more known in itself, by
uncovering the properties of things. Aristotle does not
directly raise the issue of justiﬁcation of induction,
but he makes it possible indirectly by distinguishing
a complete induction from an incomplete induction. The
complete induction described in the Prior Analytics pro-
ceeds from an exhaustive enumeration of the particular
cases and allows a reduction of induction to a syllogistic
form. This will be constantly reafﬁrmed in the Middle
Ages: to make an evident induction, it must be reduced
to a syllogism. However, such a reduction is not possible
when the complete count of cases exceeds our capacity, as
in the enumeration of individuals in the sublunary world.
A ﬁrst medieval solution to this problem, a solution
greatly inﬂuenced by Neoplatonism, is found in Robert
Grosseteste’s commentary on the Posterior Analytics. The
conjunction of repeated observations, and of the work of
memory on these observations enables reason to form
a universal proposition from the singulars to the extent
that such a process is backed by a theory of divine illumi-
nation (inspired by St. Augustine) – what is known in
potency, wrapped in the sensible is unveiled and known
in actuality (see his Commentary on the Posterior Analytics,
II, 6, p. 403ss). All sensible knowledge is tentative and
fallible as long as it has not been guaranteed and
transformed by the inner light (see De veritate, p. 142).
Induction is therefore an important element of science
insofar as it can awaken the soul.
The second solution incorporates the distinction
between power and act, but freed from its Platonic bag-
gage. Hence, Thomas Aquinas places the theory of the
universal potency in individual things, at the basis of
induction (see Exposition of the Posterior Analytics, I, lect.
62 & II, lect. 20). Induction is extended to a form of
intellective abstraction. This process of observing the uni-
versal in the particulars is a grasping of a universal content
in the particulars. There is thus in the individual a set of
properties that are tendencies or inclinations and that tend
to produce certain effects.
Duns Scotus is critical of this type of solution that
defends the apodictic dimension of the inductive general-
ization with its foundation in the universality of natural
species and genera in that induction only uncovers
a nature common to all experienced singulars. To base
induction on the presence of a common nature which
inheres in the singulars largely begs the question insofar
as such a nature can be known by induction on these
singulars. Therefore, this solution does not solve one of
the main difﬁculties linked to induction, namely to guar-
antee that the singulars that have not been experienced
behave the same way as those who already have
(see Questions on the Metaphysics, I, q. 4).
Duns Scotus considers the case of experimental
knowledge and induction as part of a broader debate
about the certainty of knowledge (see Commentary on
542 I
Induction

the Sentences, I, d. 3, p. 1, q. 4). Inductive knowledge is
clearly based on two parameters: (a) the frequency of an
event and (b) the addition of a causal principle. The
challenge of these two parameters is to ensure that if
a repeated experience reveals a constant reaction on the
part of the natural agents, then one can conclude with
infallible certainty that the effect is speciﬁc to this agent
and that it will always produce the same effect. The prob-
lem is to immediately supplement the incompleteness of
observation, and thus preserve the dual conditions of
science that are subjective certainty (the ﬁrmness) and
evidentness (the exclusion of error). The transition from
the simple frequency of something empirically conﬁrmed
to the universality and the necessity required by science
depends on a causal principle, known per se according to
Duns Scotus, and which states that the effect that follows
from a non-free cause often is the natural effect of this
cause. The strategy of justiﬁcation of induction is based on
a conception of epistemic justiﬁcation whereby the prin-
ciples known by the intellect itself provide the foundation
and guarantee for the whole system of our knowledge,
including the sensitive. Indeed, what matters in this new
version of the theory of induction is that the causal prin-
ciple is presented as an analytic principle known to be
evident by the intellect when it grasps the nominal deﬁni-
tions of the concepts of cause and effect. Induction is thus
based on a set of observational premises, to which it adds
a necessary premise, known per se, namely the causal
principle. Duns Scotus nevertheless insists on the necessity
to repeat the observations and to vary the circumstances in
order to identify the concomitance between a nature and
an accident. However, what permits the jump from the
concomitance to the natural causal law is that the causal
principle is a principle known per se. By deﬁnition,
a natural cause produces a single effect and will always
do so. The frequency hence allows the application of the
principle of causality. The certainty of the intellect thus
stems, on the one hand, from the consideration of a part of
a non-free cause, and, on the other, from a consideration
of a part of the effect. The concept of frequency permits
the exclusion of any cases of hazardous causalities. An
induction that concludes from the start of several effects
passed from the repetition of these effects to the future
draws its certainty from the causal principle which guar-
antees the uniformity of nature. Reduced to its skeleton,
the approach to induction proposed by Duns Scotus is:
(1) let p be the report of the observation O at time t, then
‘‘x is with y at t’’; (2) let p1, p2, and pn be the report of O at
t + 1, t + 2, t + n, then ‘‘x is with y at t + 1,’’ ‘‘x is with y at
t + 2,’’ and ‘‘x is with y at t + n’’; (3) the conjunction of p1,
p2, and pn permits of a deduction in a uniform manner of
x and y at all times; (4) the application of the causal
principle to ‘‘x with y is at t + n’’ permits of a deduction
in a necessary manner to ‘‘x is always with y,’’ therefore;
(5) ‘‘it is necessary that x is always with y’’ is a law of
nature. Duns Scotus stresses that induction provides the
lowest degree of scientiﬁc knowledge, even if it is evident
and infallible. Indeed, induction rests on a necessary pre-
mise (the principle of causality) and one contingent prin-
ciple (the repeated observation of similar events). Only
a syllogistic reduction would necessitate induction, that is
to say, the transition from knowledge quia to knowledge
propter quid. Since it is impossible to demonstrate a priori
that such a property belongs to such a subject, induction
does not give us knowledge of the fact, but only its
possibility.
Scotus’ position gives rise to a larger question about
the concept of causality, and is object to two types of
criticism. One can distinguish a critique on the level of
logic, about the status of causal inferences, and another on
the level of epistemology about the justiﬁcation of scien-
tiﬁc statements. This double critique is put forward by
Nicholas of Autrecourt. In fact, Nicholas ascertains the
impossibility of inductive reasoning to establish the
evidentness. For sensible knowledge to be evident it
should be based on a complete appearance of the thing.
However, since an immediate experience does not provide
us with a complete appearance about the singulars, an
induction seeking to grasp a universal, a whole, which is
necessarily not known, is only known partially due to the
limits of our senses and cannot meet the criteria of an
evident perception. Nicholas of Autrecourt strengthens
this dimension of probability of induction by showing
that the principle of causality does not compensate for
the incompleteness of the enumeration. It addresses on
this occasion the question of prediction. Nicholas criti-
cizes the idea that repetition of an event is sufﬁcient for us
to ensure its evidence in the future (see Exigit ordo, p. 119).
If I have repeatedly observed that the administration of
rhubarb can purge bile, then may I conclude that the
proposition ‘‘rhubarb treats bile’’ is a scientiﬁcally valid
principle at any time and any place? From an empirical
point of view, we, ﬁrst of all, have no evident perception of
the causes nor, secondly, about the fact of causation. In
fact, enumeration of the causes is impossible, so we do not
avail ourselves of a complete appearance. It is theoretically
impossible, then, to ensure that no unknown cause has not
acted upon the phenomenon observed. Most importantly,
we have no clear perception of a necessary connection
between cause and effect, we perceive a rapport of spatio-
temporal contiguity between two things, but nothing
entitles us to say it will always happen in any situation.
Induction I
543
I

We therefore perceive no causal necessity, but only con-
junctions of events that repeat themselves. From this the
critique follows logically by showing that the necessity is
not deductive. Indeed, for Nicholas A and B are two
absolute things, different, and in no way does one signify
the inclusion in the other, which is a necessary condition
of the validity of an inference. We can, if we want to add
a premise for this reason that ‘‘the course of nature is
uniform or not suspended,’’ or that ‘‘the cause is not
prevented.’’ These are premises, which guarantee induc-
tion against extraordinary situations as a divine decep-
tion and Nicholas accepts them as probable, but they do
nothing to solve the problem of induction. All we can
claim to have is a habitus conjecturativus, a disposition to
speculate on the future based upon the observation of
several similar past events: the repetition of the same
event produces a habit and expectations of the future.
What is meant by the concept of habitus conjecturativus?
Without a doubt we have a natural tendency to engage in
inductive generalizations. The habitus conjecturativus then
combines the result to an idea. This is the principle of
induction.
See also: ▶Causality ▶Epistemology ▶John Buridan
▶John Duns Scotus ▶Nicholas of Autrecourt ▶Posterior
Analytics,
Commentaries
on
Aristotle’s
▶Robert
Grosseteste ▶Skepticism ▶Syllogism, Theories of
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Aquinas Thomas (1964) In Aristotelis libros Posteriorum analyticorum.
Expositio cum textu ex recensione Leonina, ed. Spiazzi R. Marietti,
Roma
Bacon Roger (1928) The opus majus of Roger Bacon, ed. and trans. Belle
Burke R. University of Pensylvania Press, H. Milford, Oxford Uni-
versity Press, London, Oxford
Buridan John (1518) Questiones in metaphysicam Aristotelis. Paris
Duns Scot John (1954) Ordinatio. In: Opera omnia, vol 3. Typis
Polyglottis Vaticanis, Civitas Vaticana, pp 123–172 (L. I, d. 3, q. 4:
Utrum aliqua veritas certa et sincera possit naturaliter cognosci ab
intellectu viatoris absque lucis increati speciali illustratione)
Duns Scot John (1997) Quaestiones in metaphysicam. In: Opera
philosophica III, vol 1. The Franciscan Institute, St Bonaventure
Grosseteste Robert (1981) Commentarium in posteriorum analyticorum
libros, ed. Rossi P., L. S. Olschki, Firenze
John of Salisbury (1929) Metalogicon libri III, ed. Webb CCJ. Clarendon,
Oxford
Nicholas of Autrecourt. Exigit ordo executionis et Quaestio Utrum visio
creature
rationalis
beatiﬁcabilis
per
Verbum
possit
intendi
naturaliter: O’Donnell JR (1939) Nicholas of Autrecourt. Mediaev
Stud 1:179–280; Kennedy LA, Arnold RE, Millward AE (1971) The
universal
treatise.
Marquette
University
Press,
Milwaukee
(traduction anglaise de Exigit ordo executionis)
Secondary Sources
Bos EP (1993) A contribution to the history of theories of induction in the
middle ages. In: Jacobi K (ed) Argumentationstheorie: scholastische
Forschungen zu den logischen und semantischen Regeln korrekten
Folgerns. Brill, Leiden/New York, pp 553–576
Byrne E (1968) Probability and opinion. A study in the medieval
presuppositions of post-medieval theories of probability. M. Nijhoff,
The Hague
Carton R (1981) L’expe´rience physique chez Roger Bacon. Contribution a`
l’e´tude de la me´thode la science expe´rimentale au xiiie sie`cle. Vrin,
Paris
Franklin J (2001) The science of conjecture. Evidence and probability
before Pascal. John Hopkins University Press, Baltimore/London
Grellard C (2006) Evideˆncia ou probabilidade? Os debates acerca da
justiﬁcac¸a˜o da induc¸a˜o no se´culo XIV. Cadernos de Historia
e Filosoﬁa da Cieˆncia 16:411–434
Hacking I (1975) The emergence of probability. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge
Oliver S (2004) Robert Grosseteste on light, truth and experimentum.
Vivarium 42(2):151–180
Sereene EF (1979) Robert Grosseteste on induction and demonstrative
science. Synthese 40:97–115
Weinberg JR (1965) Abstraction, relation and induction. Three essays in
the history of thought. The University of Wisconsin Press, Madison
Inquisition
EDWARD M. PETERS
Department of History
School of Arts and Sciences
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA
USA
Abstract
The article begins with a consideration of the different
general and particular meanings of the term ‘‘inquisition,’’
focusing on its sense as a term of legal procedure around
1200 and its later specialized meaning in the criminal
prosecution of heresy. It continues with a brief history of
the juridical procedure in comparison to other forms of
procedure: accusatio and denuntiatio. The article then
describes the use of the procedure in episcopal law
courts that tried clerics, its use in overcoming formidable
rules favoring defendants, and its prominence in the
Fourth Lateran Council of 1215. It then moves to the
history of the criminal prosecution of heresy, the emer-
gence of the Mendicant Orders, and the papal commis-
sioning of Dominicans as inquisitors of heretical depravity
in the 1230s.
544 I
Inquisition

The earliest inquisitors followed the ordo iudiciarius,
the formal legal procedure of canon law, but they also
added variations when special circumstances warranted
them. There is a description of an inquisitorial trial
for heresy and a consideration of the emergence of
a technology and instructional guidebooks for inquisitors.
The article concludes with a discussion of the relatively
limited use of inquisitors of heretical depravity in matters
touching professionally privileged corporate groups like
faculties of theology and universities.
Inquisition,
from
the
Latin
substantive
inquisitio
(‘‘search,’’ and by extension ‘‘inquiry,’’ ‘‘investigation’’ –
in a legal sense, ‘‘a search for proofs’’), functioned in
medieval Latin in one general and several particular
senses. It might mean a general inquiry commanded by
someone in power in response to information, complaint,
‘‘clamor,’’ or appeal; for example, Charlemagne’s charges
to clerical and lay investigators, missi dominici, to investi-
gate regional irregularities in his empire or to bishops
charged with searching out residual pagan practices.
William the Conqueror designated the investigations that
resulted in Domesday Book as inquisitiones. Several
twelfth-century popes instructed bishops to carry out an
inquisitio veritatis, ‘‘inquiry as to the truth,’’ of various
disputed legal matters, including doctrinal dissent, within
their dioceses. Bishops had always been responsible for the
spiritual life of their dioceses, and they were judges ordi-
nary for serious ecclesiastical offenses. Their visitations
and formal inquiries were two vehicles for obtaining infor-
mation and initiating further hearings. Such episcopal
inquiries were later justiﬁed by citing God’s response to
the outcry against Sodom and Gomorrah in Genesis 18:21
and the parable of the rich man who sought an accounting
from his steward in Luke 16:1–7. God’s inquest in Eden
(Genesis 3:8–13) was frequently cited by jurists in the
same context.
The most widely known particular sense of the word
designates a form of legal procedure of a kind followed in
some instances in classical and later Roman law in which
a single magistrate handled an entire case from initial
investigation to ﬁnal judgment. But the practice largely
ceased after the ﬁfth century, surviving only in occasional
ecclesiastical circumstances and in matters touching the
ruler’s person, obligations, and property. The procedure
was reestablished initially by papal decision in canon law
in episcopal courts around the turn of the thirteenth
century, primarily for the trials of clerics charged with
serious offenses. The decretal Licet Heli issued by Pope
Innocent III (1198–1216) in December, 1199, is, with
several other decretals of the period 1199–1207, consid-
ered the starting point for the extensive adoption of
inquisitio procedure in ecclesiastical courts. It was greatly
elaborated upon by the same pope in canon 8 of the
Fourth Lateran Council of 1215, Qualiter et quando.
Inquisitio procedure gradually replaced two earlier forms,
one of which was that known as accusatio, according to
which a party claiming injury or damage had to accuse the
person responsible before a court, prosecute his own case,
and, if he failed, to suffer the same penalties that the
defendant would have received. A second form of proce-
dure, based on Matthew 18:15, entailed a denunciatio
canonica, a denunciation by local laymen of good reputa-
tion – synodal witnesses – that was intended to lead the
person denounced to penance and what canonists called
‘‘a charitable correction’’ of his spiritual life. The inquisitio
procedure, on the other hand, was in the hands of a judge
(a bishop or someone appointed by episcopal authority)
from the beginning of a case until the end. From the
bishop’s responsibility to determine whether or not
a crime had been committed to the ﬁnal sentencing of
a convicted offender, the judge governed the course of the
search for evidence and the trial. The notoriety of the
offense (clamosa insinuatio) or the ill-fame of the accused
(mala fama) was said to act in place of the accuser. In
addition, the importance of witnesses, written documents,
and more frequent auricular confession had grown con-
siderably during the twelfth century. The trial of a cleric by
inquisitorial procedure could now be more deliberate,
better organized, and unequivocally decided according to
the recently formulated ordo iudiciarius, descriptions of
proper judicial procedure from the beginning of a trial to
the ﬁnal disposition of a case. The ordo itself had already
been insisted on in ecclesiastical proceedings by Alexander
III (1159–1181) and later twelfth-century canonists. Inno-
cent III emphasized the importance of the inquisitio pro-
cedure and the responsibilities of episcopal visitation in
the eighth canon of the Fourth Lateran Council of 1215,
Qualiter et quando. He also supported canon 8 by two
other canons: canon 18 prohibited clerics from partici-
pating in the judicial ritual of ordeal, and canon 38
required the ecclesiastical judge to retain a scribe whose
written record of every trial could be accurately reviewed
upon appeal. The council also required all baptized
Christians to make annual confession of their sins
(canon 21). By reintroducing and then standardizing
inquisitorial procedure in criminal cases involving
clerics, Innocent III contributed a new component to
criminal legal procedure that eventually went far beyond
the disciplining of erring clergy. The legal reforms of
Inquisition I
545
I

Innocent III reﬂect both the emergence of the legal the-
ory of papal plenitudo potestatis and the doctrine that
disobedience to papal authority was itself a serious
crime, indeed, heresy.
From the ninth century, especially in the inﬂuential
canon law collection known as pseudo-Isidore, elaborate
processes for the defense of an accused cleric tended to
predominate in canon law. But the judicial complexities of
the eleventh-century reform movement known as the
Investiture Conﬂict, which included the enhanced status
of secular clergy and its sharp distinction from lay status,
also intensiﬁed the need to punish criminous clerics.
Innocent III’s institution of the inquisitio procedure was
intended to facilitate such prosecutions when other forms
proved inadequate. The inquisitio procedure became stan-
dard in both spiritual and secular criminal procedure by
the fourteenth century.
A second particular term, derived from and often
confused with the ﬁrst, inquisitio haereticae pravitatis,
‘‘the inquiry into heretical depravity,’’ and its agent, the
‘‘inquisitor of heretical depravity,’’ came into existence by
papal command during the second quarter of the thir-
teenth century during the pontiﬁcate of Gregory IX
(1227–1241) to regulate the criminal prosecution of her-
esy by appointing papal judges delegate or sub-delegate
using the inquisito legal procedure to seek out heretics in
particular regions for particular periods, thus adding
a papally commissioned ofﬁcial to the existing cadre of
episcopal ofﬁcials and sometimes to the staffs of papal
legates to whom they might be attached. Such specialized
judicial ofﬁcials had no greater power than the bishop or
legate they served, but their speciﬁc focus and, eventually,
their greater experience in their specialty meant that they
often took the matter of heresy out of the hands of epis-
copal ofﬁcials.
The inquisitio hereticae pravitatis is most usefully con-
sidered both in terms of the history of ecclesiastical legal
procedure and in those of the history of the criminal
prosecution of heresy, since focusing exclusively on the
latter has often led scholars to neglect its original rooted-
ness in the former.
The extensive literature on heresy in the early church
and in the criminal laws of the later Roman Empire was
revived in the disputes of the Investiture Conﬂict, and the
term haeresis was applied to the most prominent instances
of clerical misconduct, Simony and Nicolaitism – respec-
tively the buying and selling of ecclesiastical ofﬁce or
property and clerical marriage. The term ‘‘heresy’’ then
began to be applied to various movements among the
clergy and laity that appeared to dissent from increasingly
articulated theological doctrines. In the cases of such
thinkers as Berengar of Tours, Peter Abelard, or Gilbert
of Poitiers, such dissent, which usually reached only small
and learned publics and was often highly technical, was
handled by local or general church councils, papal appeals,
local ecclesiastical superiors, or voluntary self-censorship.
But in the case of movements of any wider diffusion
conventional methods of ecclesiastical prosecution proved
cumbersome and often encountered widespread opposi-
tion. Individual bishops themselves adopted varying atti-
tudes and policies toward such dissent, never consistently
and often inefﬁciently or indifferently. Although several
church councils in the early twelfth century (Second
Lateran, 1139; Reims, 1157, and Tours, 1163) identiﬁed
and denounced different devotional movements as here-
sies and declared their adherents excommunicated and
their property conﬁscated, the popes’ chief response was
to launch preaching missions into areas thought to con-
tain heretics and to urge secular authorities to aid in their
discovery and prosecution. Even the most widely used
collection of systematic canon law, the two recensions of
the Decretum of Gratian (1139–1140 and 1140–1150) said
much about heresy, but little about the criminal prosecu-
tion of heretics.
Only during the pontiﬁcate of Alexander III (1159–
1181) did popes begin to urge regular episcopal visitations
to inquire after heretics and employ the ordo iudiciarius,
and the Third Lateran Council of 1179 (c. 27) laid out stiff
penalties for heretics and their supporters as well as urging
the secular powers to prosecute them to the fullest. In
1184 Pope Lucius III (1181–1185) issued the decretal Ad
abolendam, legally deﬁning heretics, specifying penalties
for clerics and laity convicted of heresy, condemning neg-
ligent prelates, repeating Alexander III’s call for regular
episcopal visitations to places where heresy had been
reported, and spelling out the necessity of lay rulers to
assist in the extirpation of heresy. The widened scope of
concern for heresy led in 1199 to another decretal of
Innocent III, Vergentis in senium, which identiﬁed heresy
as treason to God, and therefore a public crime. In his
decretal Cum ex ofﬁcii nostri of 1207 Innocent III precisely
speciﬁed the criminal punishments for convicted heretics.
The appearance of Vergentis in the same year as Innocent’s
Licet Heli indicates that methods of legal procedure and
the criminal characterization of heresy were moving on
tracks that could soon converge. The treatment of both
topics in the canons of the Fourth Lateran Council of 1215
(cc. 3, 8, 18, 21, 38) drew them even closer.
The Council was held during the course of the Albi-
gensian Crusade (1208–1229), a military enterprise in
Languedoc commissioned by Innocent III, directed
against Christians, and furnished with all the privileges
546 I
Inquisition

that had been given for crusades in the east. The Crusade
was followed by the triumphalist Council of Toulouse in
1229, whose canons ordered that in certain places one
priest and three laymen were to inquire diligently
concerning heretics in hiding, that secular lords do the
same, that repentant heretics wear distinguishing crosses,
that no layperson possess any text of Scripture except for
the Psalter, the Holy Ofﬁce, and the Hours of the Virgin, as
well as other disciplinary measures. The measures of this
and later councils and popes were taken to conserve a now
articulated system of belief and behavior across Latin
Christian Europe. Conciliar legislation of this kind was
paralleled by the legislation of secular rulers, notably the
king-emperor Frederick II, whose legislation between
1220 and 1239 was the ﬁrst substantial secular legislation
of its kind since the later Roman Empire. It was quickly
followed by the statute of Annibaldo, the Senator of
Rome, in 1231.
The pastoral and disciplinary functions of councils
were signiﬁcantly strengthened by the establishment of
the mendicant orders – the Order of Preachers (founded
by St. Dominic) and the Order of Friars Minor (founded
by St. Francis of Assisi) – in the years just after the Fourth
Lateran Council, their approval by popes Innocent III and
Honorius III (1216–1227), and their direct and loyal sub-
jection to the popes and the curia by means of Cardinal-
Protectors. The Order of Preachers in particular devoted
itself to enthusiastic preaching in Languedeoc, insisting
that its preachers be well trained (as they were also in
hearing confessions, since most of them entered the
Order from university circles) and eventually organized
under an elected Master who governed the order with an
annual General Chapter, consisting of the priors of the
provinces into which the Order divided. The articulated
organization and intellectual discipline of the Order of
Preachers, as well as their humble material way of life,
their effective preaching techniques, their mobility, and
their lack of local ties or sympathies made them far more
effective preachers against heresy than their twelfth-
century monastic (usually Cistercian) predecessors. In
the wake of the Fourth Lateran Council, the Albigensian
Crusade, and the heightened ecclesiastical concerns about
heresy in the Languedoc and elsewhere, Pope Gregory IX
found yet another use for the new Orders.
In 1227 he commissioned a Dominican of Cologne,
Conrad of Marburg, with two colleagues to investigate
heretics in the Middle Rhine region. In 1231 he did the
same with the prior and brothers of the Dominican con-
vents in Regensburg, Friesach, and Strasburg, and in 1233
he commissioned Robert le Bougre to act in the kingdom
of France. In the same year Gregory IX wrote to the
provincial priors of the Dominican Order commanding
them to select appropriate brothers to be sent to Langue-
doc in order to assist episcopal inquisitions. He simulta-
neously wrote to the bishops of Bourges, Bordeaux,
Narbonne, and Auch that he was sending friars preachers
to assist them in discovering and extirpating heresy from
their dioceses. This territorial mandate was continued by
assignments of later inquisitors that centered their activi-
ties on dioceses, provinces, cities, and kingdoms. The
ﬁrst inquisitors of heretical depravity entered Languedoc
in 1234.
Because their brief was narrow and speciﬁc, and their
training largely theological, the early inquisitors were
constrained by the legal procedures used in episcopal
courts, that is, the standard procedural rules of the ordo
iudiciarius, often obtaining professional advice from
jurists. Local bishops and papal legates also pressed secular
magistrates to cooperate with the inquisitors. But the
inquisitors’ special mandate and the seriousness of the
offences with which they dealt led to several variations
on conventional procedure.
When inquisitors and their assistants entered an area,
they summoned the population to an assembly at which
they read aloud their ofﬁcial credentials, preached
a sermon on the dangers of heresy and the obligation of
all Christians to discover it, and announced a period of
grace (a legal innovation by the inquisitors), usually two to
four weeks, during which any heretic or sympathizer
might confess voluntarily and receive a light penance.
Others were urged to identify those they suspected of
heresy. At the same time, the inquisitors received reports
of concealed heretics, searched for witnesses, and began
gathering evidence against those accused. This part of the
procedure later came to be called the inquisitio generalis.
At the end of the period of grace, those accused of heresy
were arrested and the charges against them read and
explained. They were imprisoned, and their interrogations
begun on the basis of evidence collected so far. The
accused were also forced to enter a plea and to swear an
oath to testify truthfully concerning themselves and
others, thus risking a charge of perjury if they were
found to have lied under oath. The accused were required
to be present during the proceedings. If they were not,
their absence was either permitted or contumacious. All
proceedings were recorded in writing – in Latin, although
the local vernacular was used in the hearings. Since the use
of torture had come to be a legal instrument of the
inquisitio procedure, torture could also be employed in
certain instances in cases of heresy. Torture was ﬁrst
permitted in trials for heresy (although not by clerics) by
the decretal Ad extirpanda issued by Pope Innocent IV
Inquisition I
547
I

(1243–1254) in 1252. Inquisitors who participated in tor-
ture sessions were permitted to dispense each other in the
decretal Ut negotium of Pope Alexander IV (1254–1261) in
1256. This part of the procedure was later termed the
inquisitio specialis.
At the end of their stay, the inquisitors pronounced
sentences at a public meeting with a sermon, and saw to
the administration of punishments – most frequently the
wearing of yellow crosses, expiatory pilgrimages, ﬁnes, or
some form of imprisonment (inquisitorial prisons were
the earliest form of punitive imprisonment in Europe),
but occasionally death for relapsed heretics, which
entailed their being ‘‘relaxed’’ to the ‘‘secular arm,’’ since
clerics were prohibited from shedding blood. Throughout
the entire process, it is clear that the success or failure of
a particular mission depended greatly on the degree of
local cooperation it received, from that of the local bishop
to that of the secular authorities. Local resistance often
proved extremely effective when such cooperation was not
forthcoming. Individual inquisitors might be insulted,
assaulted, murdered, or dismissed. A well-known instance
of such resistance is that associated with the Franciscan
Bernard De´licieux in Languedoc between 1299 and 1306,
but there were also many others. Unwary inquisitors
might also be manipulated by local interests against local
enemies.
At the end of a visitation, an inquisitor might be sent
to another place to do the same thing, or he might be
relieved of the role of inquisitor entirely, since his original
commission had been speciﬁc to a time and place and
dependent on the charge of a living pope and expiring on
the death of that pope. In the decretal Turbato corde of
1267, however, Pope Clement IV (1265–1268) created
permanent inquisitor status.
In the decades following 1234, the work of the inquis-
itors of heretical depravity became increasingly specialized
and, with considerable regional variations, standardized.
In some instances – for example, the period of grace cited
above – their procedures began to diverge from those of
the ordo iudiciarius. Juristic thought had always allowed
for exceptions to the ordo iudiciarius in cases of particu-
larly heinous or notorious offenses. If an inquisitor
thought that witnesses were in danger, for example, he
withheld the witnesses’ names from the accused. In some
instances, testimony from tainted witnesses was accepted.
Because the accused were required to testify ‘‘concerning
themselves and others,’’ they were bound by oath to
denounce fellow heretics. In the case of the conviction of
relapsed heretics, legal counsel was routinely denied. Not
only the seriousness of the offense of heresy, but also the
mandate to correct it where possible, drove many of these
variations. The pastoral role of the inquisitors of heretical
depravity was essentially one of conversion: ideally, the
heretic should be identiﬁed, instructed as to his or her
error, experience contrition, make confession, abjure
error, and perform suitable penance – that is, return to
the church. Those who refused outright to be instructed
or, having abjured, relapsed into heresy, were to be
abruptly cut off from the community, lest divine wrath
descended upon the earth.
Besides variations on conventional legal procedure,
the inquisitors also developed distinctive and effective
means of recording and controlling information. Records
of testimony and trials were carefully preserved, recopied,
and centralized, permitting later analysis and comparing
names encountered in other contexts – creating, in short,
a regional data-bank of information in conveniently
retrievable form, including alphabetization that could be
consulted and employed in later investigations. Special-
ized forms of citation, sample interrogatories of witnesses
and accused, forms of oath, methods of summons, and
forms of reconciliation and penance soon developed. In
1248 or 1249 Pope Innocent IV (1243–1254) ordered the
inquisitors of Narbonne, Bernard de Caux and Jean de
St. Pierre, to prepare a guidebook of inquisitorial proce-
dure and models of standard forms for the assistance of
other inquisitors. Their work, the Processus inquisitionis,
was the ﬁrst of many manuals of inquisitorial procedure,
the most notable of which are those of Bernard Gui,
the Practica inquisitionis heretice pravitatis of c. 1323
and the immense manual of Nicolau Eymeric of 1376,
the Directorium Inquisitorum, the ﬁrst such work to be
printed.
Regardless of the emergence and deﬁnition of the
inquisitio
hereticae
pravitatis
and
the
inquisitor
as
a specialized ofﬁce and professional career, there was
never a central administrative or supervisory institution
in Rome or anywhere else – there was no ‘‘medieval Inqui-
sition’’ in the sense that institutional inquisitions appeared
in Spain in 1478 and Rome in 1542. There were only
inquisitors whose area of responsibility might be an entire
kingdom like France or an immense metropolitan prov-
ince like Mainz, in which there were two inquisitorial
provinces. There were inquisitors who were enormously
conscientious like Bernard Gui and Eymeric, and there
were inquisitors who also had distinguished careers out-
side of their ofﬁce of inquisitor proper – also like Gui.
Groups of inquisitors came out of a common Dominican
or Franciscan educational cohort and worked within
a Dominican or Franciscan network, although eventually
548 I
Inquisition

even within the mendicant orders inquisitors of heretical
depravity were often regarded as specialists and not
always in accord with the other pastoral functions of
the orders.
The surviving records of the early inquisitors of heret-
ical depravity are relatively slender and local – sometimes
then or later deliberately destroyed by inquisitors or their
enemies, sometimes simply lost or thrown out. The largest
single record of the early period is that of the inquisition
carried out at Narbonne by Bernard de Caux and Jean de
St. Pierre, later the basis for their primitive manual for
inquisitors. The best known records are those conducted
in the diocese of Pamiers, particularly in the village of
Montaillou, between 1318 and 1325 by its bishop, Jacques
Fournier, or the two trials of Joan of Arc in 1429–1431.
Thus, a comprehensive history of medieval inquisitions of
heretical depravity must always be partial and localized.
Jacques Fournier was also consulted by Pope John
XXII (1316–1334) in the cases of suspect teaching by
Meister Eckhart, William of Ockham, and Peter John
Olivi and went on to become Pope Benedict XII (1334–
1342). His role in these affairs at the papal court reveals
another feature of thirteenth- and fourteenth-century
ecclesiastical discipline: the emergence of self-policing,
semi-autonomous institutions that were capable of deal-
ing with dissent internally, because of the specialized char-
acter of their work. Such were faculties within universities
(particularly theology faculties) and universities as corpo-
rate entities. Such also were the mendicant orders. Since
the later twelfth century, faculties of theology had become
professionalized and corporatized. Initially, they were not
the publics for which inquisitors of heretical depravity had
ﬁrst been constituted.
On occasion, however, disputed positions within the
schools might be preached outside them. Such was the
case with a group of scholar-preachers around Paris, fol-
lowers of Master Amalric of Be`ne, who were condemned at
a council in Paris in 1210 and burned at the stake in the
same year. Later interventions in intra-university disputes
usually took place on the authority of the bishop (as at
Paris in 1277) or his chancellor, or in the cases of individ-
ual thinkers like Ockham or Olivi a special papal commis-
sion. The professional self-awareness of thirteenth- and
fourteenth-century academics was often scornful of the
qualiﬁcations of inquisitors to deal with highly technical
and philosophical matters. Until the ﬁfteenth century,
internal university discipline, episcopal commissions,
and papal authority were used more frequently in the
affairs of the learned than inquisitors of heretical
depravity.
See also: ▶Canon Law ▶Censorship and Academic Free-
dom ▶Civil (Roman) Law ▶Heresy ▶Parisian Condem-
nation of 1277 ▶Universities and Philosophy
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Selge Kurt-Viktor (ed) (1967) Texte zur Inquisition. Gerd Mohn,
Gu¨tersloh
Secondary Sources
Monographs
Arnold JH (2001) Inquisition and power: Catharism and the confessing
subject in medieval Languedoc. University of Pennsylvania Press,
Philadelphia
Brambilla E (2000) Alle origini del Sant’Ufﬁzio: Penitenza, confessione
e giustizia spirituale dal medioevo al XVI secolo. Il Mulino, Bologna
Elliott D (2004) Proving woman: female spirituality and inquisitional
culture in later medieval Europe. Princeton University Press,
Princeton
Friedlander A (2000) The hammer of the inquisitors: Brother Bernard
De´licieux and the struggle against the inquisition in fourteenth-
century France. Brill, Leiden/Boston
Given JB (1997) Inquisition and medieval society: power, discipline, and
resistance in Languedoc. Cornell University Press, Ithaca
Ke´ry L (2006) Gottesfurcht und irdische Strafe: der Beitrag des mittelal-
terlichen Kirchenrechts zur Entstehung des o¨ffentlichen Strafrechts.
Bo¨hlau, Cologne
Lea HC (1887) A history of the inquisition of the Middle Ages, 3 vols.
Harper, New York
Maisonneuve H (1960) E´tudes sur les origines de l’inquisition, 2nd edn.
Vrin, Paris
Pegg MG (2001) The corruption of angels: the great inquisition of
1245–1246. Princeton University Press, Princeton
Peters E (1988) Inquisition. Free Press, New York
Thyssen JMMH (1998) Censure and heresy at the university of Paris,
1200–1400. University of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia
van der Vekene´ E (1982–1992) Bibliotheca bibliographica historiae sanctae
inquisitionis/Bibliographisches Verzeichnis des gedruckten Schrifttums
zur Geschichte und Literatur der Inquisition, 3 vols. Topos, Vaduz
Collections
Asztalos M (1992) The faculty of theology. In: Ru¨egg W (General ed)
A history of the university in Europe, vol I. De Ridder-Symoens
H (ed) Universities in the middle ages. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pp 409–441
Borromeo A (ed) (2003) L’inquizione: atti del simposio internazionale.
Studi e Testi 417. Biblioteca apostolica vaticana, Vatican City
Bruschi C, Biller P (eds) (2003) Texts and the repression of medieval
heresy. York Medieval Press, Woodbridge/Rochester
Kelly HA (2001) Inquisitions and other trial procedures in the medieval
West. Ashgate, Aldershot/Burlington
Praedicatores Inquisitores I (2004) The Dominicans and the medieval
inquisition. In: Acts of the 1st international seminar on the Domin-
icans and the inquisition. Istituto Storico Domenicano, Rome
Segl P (ed) (1993) Die Anfa¨nge der Inquisition im Mittelalter. Bo¨hlau,
Cologne/Weimar/Vienna
Journal Articles
Ames CC (2005) Does inquisition belong to religious history? Am Hist
Rev 110(1):11–37
Inquisition I
549
I

Kieckhefer R (1995) The ofﬁce of inquisition and medieval heresy: the
transition from personal to institutional jurisdiction. J Ecclesiast Hist
46(1):36–61
Thijssen JMMH (1996) Master Amalric and the Amalricians: inquisitorial
procedure and the suppression of heresy at the University of Paris.
Speculum 71(1):43–65
Insolubles
MIKKO YRJO¨ NSUURI
Department of Social Sciences and Philosophy
University of Jyva¨skyla¨
Jyva¨skyla¨
Finland
Abstract
Medieval discussions of insolubles, or the Liar’s paradox
and its cognates were put in a practical context. The
paradigm case was thus Socrates saying ‘‘Socrates says
something false.’’ A plurality of different versions of
the self-referential paradoxes where developed and
discussed. Medieval authors presented many different
solutions, and many of them seem to have been discussed
with an implicit or even explicit recognition that the
solution is not satisfactory. Thomas Bradwardine com-
posed the best worked out medieval solution in the early
1320s, and John Buridan’s solution, which develops
Bradwardine’s idea further had the most lasting inﬂuence
into the Renaissance. In both of these solutions, the basic
idea is that when Socrates says ‘‘Socrates says something
false,’’ the sentence signiﬁes its own truth in addition to
signifying its own falsehood. Thus, what Socrates says is
inconsistent and can be judged to be unambiguously
false, while other people around can truthfully assert
their own tokens of the sentence ‘‘Socrates says some-
thing false.’’
Early Solutions
In the Middle Ages, the Liar paradox (e.g., ‘‘this sentence is
false’’) and its cognates were known as the insolubles
(insolubilia), with some authors explicitly admitting that
no solution is forthcoming. It is not known how the
discussion entered Latin medieval thought, but occa-
sional late ancient and Arabic analysis of the problems
involved
in
self-referential
paradoxes
are
known,
although they are not at very high level of sophistica-
tion. Aristotle mentions in his Sophistical Refutations
(180a27–180b7) a person who swears that he will break
his oath, but it seems very improbable that this text would
have been the historical origin of the medieval discussion
of the paradox. It was, nevertheless, often mentioned in
the discussions.
Insolubles were usually presented as sentences uttered
in some supposed context, calling for an evaluation.
The paradigmatic example was ‘‘Socrates says something
false’’ assumed to be uttered by Socrates in a situation
where he utters nothing else. Other versions were also
produced, and often in ways that differ in interesting
logical ways. For example, imagine a situation where
A says that ‘‘What B says is false,’’ while B says ‘‘What
A says is true.’’
One early solution to the basic paradox was to claim
that Socrates somehow fails to formulate a proposition
carrying a truth value. In the version of the solution,
given in the anonymous Insolubilia monacensia, it is
simply claimed that despite uttering something, Socrates
says nothing. The idea relies somehow on making
a distinction between asserting and uttering, which are
to be conceived as two elements of making a claim suc-
cessfully. In the insoluble case, the two elements do not
work properly together. One should thus respond ‘‘you are
not saying anything.’’ The solution was called cancellation
(cassatio).
According to the solution known as the theory of
‘‘transcasus,’’ the insoluble sentence fails to refer to itself,
and instead refers to something else. For example, the
claim ‘‘Socrates says something false’’ as said by Socrates
turns out to refer to something he said immediately before
the sentence. An associated theory makes a distinction
between exercised act and signiﬁed act, thus making it
possible to undo the self-referential relation. John Duns
Scotus gave this solution to the paradox.
A more general kind of solution was to prohibit
self-reference from language, claiming either that no
expression in a language is able to refer to itself, or
more speciﬁcally that the semantic predicates ‘‘true’’
and ‘‘false’’ cannot refer to the wholes they are parts of.
As an obvious objection, medieval logicians considered
the above-mentioned case where A says that B speaks the
truth while B says that A lies. The reference here is not
self-reﬂexive, but circular, and it seems completely
arbitrary to simply prohibit such structures. William
Ockham resorts to a version of this solution in his
Summa logicae.
The Sentence Signifying Its Own Truth
Thomas Bradwardine formulated the most ingenious and
inﬂuential medieval solution of the paradox. He applied
550 I
Insolubles

token-based semantics, claiming that what Socrates says
(when he says ‘‘Socrates says something false’’) is false, but
an outsider uttering the same sentence would speak the
truth. The controversial part of Bradwardine’s solution
was his claim that when put forward by Socrates, the
insoluble sentence signiﬁes and asserts its own truth –
and is false for that reason.
After Bradwardine, logicians closely scrutinized the
relation of a proposition with the claim that the proposi-
tion is true. Do propositions signify their own truth? Is
truth a thing such that it can be signiﬁed, as Richard
Kilvington asks? Bradwardine’s claim was that the truth
of the sentence is signiﬁed only in special cases like in the
insolubles, and Heytesbury developed the solution with
the idea that one should never specify what the rejected
insoluble sentence exactly signiﬁes. As Heytesbury admits
this really amounts only to advice how to deal with the
paradox in an actual disputation; it is not a genuine solu-
tion. According to Heytesbury, no genuine solution has
been found nor is any forthcoming. Interestingly enough,
he did not seem to think that this would amount to
a major problem to any logical system.
John Buridan extended Bradwardine’s theory by
claiming that all propositions assert their own truth,
and offered a logically very elaborate solution to the
insolubles without some of Bradwardine’ problems,
although it remains obscure how exactly the claim that
all sentences assert their own truth should be under-
stood. Given the later fame of Buridan’s logic, it is natural
that his high-quality solution was well-known later in the
Renaissance, ﬁnding its way even to Miguel Cervantes’
Don Quijote.
See
also:
▶John
Buridan
▶John
Duns
Scotus
▶Richard Kilvington ▶Thomas Bradwardine ▶William
Heytesbury ▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
De Rijk LM (1966) Some notes on the mediaeval tract De insolubilibus,
with the edition of a tract dating from the end of the twelfth century.
Vivarium 4:83–115
Heytesbury W (1979) On insoluble sentences. Chapter one of his rules for
solving sophisms, translated with an introduction and study by
Spade P. Medieval sources in translation, 21. Pontiﬁcal Institute of
Medieval Studies, Toronto
Roure ML (1970) La proble´matique des propositions insolubles au XIIIe
sie`cle et au de´but du XIVe, suivie de l’e´dition des traite´s de W.
Shyreswood, W. Burleigh et Th. Bradwardine. Arch Hist Doct Litt
M-Aˆ ge 37:205–326
Spade PV (1980) Roger Swyneshed’s Insolubilia: edition and comments.
Arch Hist Doct Litt M-Aˆ ge 46:177–220
Secondary Sources
Read S (2002) The liar paradox from John Buridan back to Thomas
Bradwardine. Vivarium 40:189–218
Spade PV (1973) The origins of the mediaeval insolubilia-literature.
Francisc Stud 33:292–309
Spade PV (1975) The mediaeval liar: a catalogue of the insolubilia-
literature. Subsidia Mediaevalia, 5. Pontiﬁcal Institute of Medieval
Studies, Toronto
Spade PV (1981) Insolubilia and Bradwardine’s theory of signiﬁcation.
Medioev: Riv Stor Filos Mediev 7:115–134
Spade PV (1983) Roger Swyneshed’s theory of insolubilia: a study of some
of his preliminary semantic notions. In: History of semiotics, ed.
Eschbach A, Trabant J. Foundations of semiotics, 7. John Benjamins,
Amsterdam, pp 105–113
Spade PV (1987) Five early theories in the mediaeval insolubilia-litera-
ture. Vivarium 25:24–46
Yrjo¨nsuuri M (ed) (2001) Medieval formal logic., The new synthese
historical library, 49. Kluwer, Dordrecht, pp 117–145
Yrjo¨nsuuri M (2008) Treatments of the paradoxes of self-reference.
In: Handbook of the History of Logic, vol. 2, Medieval and Renais-
sance Logic, ed. DM Gabbay & J Woods, Elsevier, Amsterdam,
pp 579–608
Intension and Remission of Forms
ELZ˙ BIETA JUNG
Department of Philosophy
University of Ło´dz´
Ło´dz´
Poland
Abstract
From the time of Aristotle until the time of the Enlight-
enment, intension and remission of forms was mostly
considered as a problem of change of a speciﬁc type of
accidental forms (qualities). The problem appeared in var-
ious disciplines such as theology (the infusion of charity),
philosophy of nature (changes in qualities), medicine (the
problem of proportion of elements in the body and the
compounding of drug effects), optics (the intensiﬁcation of
light), and methodology and mathematics (the representa-
tion of change). During the fourteenth century, the inten-
sion and remission of forms became one of the central
issues of philosophical debate. Various theories offered by
a group of Oxonian thinkers, the so-called Oxford Calcu-
lators, contributed to the development of mathematical
physics. The most elaborate and inﬂuential theory of geo-
metrical representation of the conﬁgurations of qualities
and motion, however, was presented, by the French natural
philosopher – Nicholas Oresme.
Intension and Remission of Forms I
551
I

Like many other issues pondered over in the Middle Ages,
the question of intension and remission of forms may also
be traced back to Aristotle. Although he himself did not
pay much attention to the problem, he raised the question
whether such a virtue as justice or such a condition as
health admits of more and less. In Categories (8.10b26–
30), Aristotle says, ‘‘qualiﬁcation admits more and less; for
one thing is called more pale or less pale than another, and
more just than another. Moreover, it itself sustains
increase (for what is pale can still become paler) – not in
all cases though, but in most.’’ He does not specify whether
one justice is justice more than another or whether one
person is more just than another, that is, has more justice
than another one. In other words, Aristotle does not
decide whether a form (quality) increases or decreases in
intensity or whether the subject, in which qualities inhere,
is more or less qualiﬁed by different forms existing in it
successively. On the other hand, in his Physics (5.2.226b)
Aristotle deﬁnes alteration as a change or motion, which
occurs between two extremes, that is, between two differ-
ent intensities of the same quality. This particular para-
graph from Aristotle’s Physics was a starting point for
intense discussions in the fourteenth century, when
such terms as ‘‘latitude’’ and ‘‘degree’’ of forms played
the main role.
The topic of intension and remission of forms ﬁrst
appeared in Latin West thanks to commentaries on Cate-
gories written by Neoplatonists – Porphyry and Boethius.
In the thirteenth century, a commentary by another
Neoplatonist – Simplicius, was introduced to the Latin
speakers (Thomas Aquinas made a broad use of the Latin
translation of Simplicius’ commentary). The Neoplato-
nists were of the opinion that it was the subject and not
the quality that admits of more or less and that qualities do
not differ with respect to more or less.
An additional problem, which was raised later,
concerned the possible changes of elementary forms of
simple bodies: earth, water, air, and ﬁre. While substantial
forms such as the rational soul of a human being cannot
admit more and less, because one human being cannot be
more human than another, primary qualities of elements,
that is, heat and cold and humidity and dryness can admit
more and less. The adherents of this opinion were Arabic
philosophers – al-Kindı¯ and Avicenna. While Aristotle
believed that an elementary form (a quality) of a simple
body is always in its maximum degree, that is, ﬁre is the
hottest and earth is the coldest, Avicenna thought that an
element’s qualities can vary within a latitude, so they do
not have to be in a maximum degree of a quality.
Avicenna’s conception is closely linked to Galen’s medical
theory. Galen, in his Microtegni Book II, was the ﬁrst to
introduce the term ‘‘latitude’’ to explain the states of
health and illness. The latitude of health can be divided
into three parts: the latitude of health, the latitude of
neither health nor sickness, and the latitude of sickness.
Thus, as Edith Sylla claims (Sylla 1973:227–228), the lat-
itude of health can be represented by a line divided into
three parts, with two extremes, one of the optimal state of
health and the other of a serious illness, the middle part
being neutral. Avicenna used the concept of ‘‘latitude’’ to
introduce an idea of the human complexio, which is not
a result of a proportion of elements in a body, but the
result of intensities of variable qualities of elements.
Averroes was in accord with Avicenna with regard to the
theory of complexio, but rejected the idea that elementary
bodies can have varying degrees of qualities. Averroes was
convinced that whenever water is heated part of it is
changed into air, because opposing qualities can coexist
in the same subject (admixture theory).
In the twelfth century, the predominant view was
based on the Aristotelian deﬁnition of substantial forms
and held that the form is a simple and invariable essence of
a substance. This view was represented, for instance, by the
anonymous author of the Liber de sex principiis and by
Peter Abelard. What admits more or less are qualities,
which should be described as more or less ‘‘pure,’’ for
example, more or less white. Abelard claims that only
habits and dispositions treated as accidents can admit
more or less and can be compared. The essential parts of
substances like, for example, human rationality or risibil-
ity, are not comparable and they cannot undergo intension
or remission. The only motion which can be described as
intense or remiss is the motion of alteration, since it occurs
between two extremes, for example, between more and less
white or between white and black. Peter Lombard intro-
duced the problem of intension and remission of forms
into the theological context. In his Sentences (lib. I, dist. 17,
cap. 5), he raised the question whether charity of man
increases or decreases. Lombard limits himself to a short
statement that the Holy Spirit, that is, charity as such (in
se), is immutable and does not admit of more or less, but
in an individual human being (in homine) a charity can
increase or decrease. Hence intension and remission
depends on varying dispositions of a subject.
The thirteenth century saw a signiﬁcant growth of
interest in the problem of intension and remission. For
Thomas Aquinas charity is a quality or an accident, and
"
its being has to be in something. So that an essential
increase of charity means nothing else but that it is yet
more in its subject (. . .) Hence charity increases essentially,
not by beginning anew, or ceasing to be in its subject, (. . .)
552 I
Intension and Remission of Forms

but by beginning to be more and more in its subject. . .
(Summa theologiae II-II, q. 24, art. 4).
In Thomas’ opinion, intension and remission can be
examined from a point of view either of a speciﬁc form or
the subject in which qualities inhere. Only corporal qual-
ities, which are divisible in their essence, like health or
motion can undergo intension and remission in their
forms. Those qualities increase by the addition of parts.
The indivisible qualities, like color or heat can undergo
intension and remission only with respect to their subject.
They do not increase by addition of parts, but by ‘‘the
varying participation of a subject in a given, unchanged
quality’’ (Summa theologiae I-II, q. 52, art. 1, 2). Therefore,
intensive increase in quality results from the disposition of
a subject for a species of a quality. This theory was also
held by Giles of Rome.
Henry of Ghent presents a contrary opinion. He
claims that intensive increase of a qualitative form takes
place in its speciﬁc form (with no reference to its subject),
which is not simple but a divisible extension (latitude).
The quality has different intensive parts (degrees). Since
any lesser degree contains potentially all greater degrees
(except a maximum degree), the actual intension of qual-
ity is caused by an extraction of a new part from potenti-
ality to act. Henry asserts that a quality has a potentiality
for change ‘‘in virtue of its nature and essence,’’ and not in
the subject it belongs to.
The third opinion is associated with Godfrey of
Fontaines. His theory is labeled as the ‘‘succession of
forms theory’’ or recently as the ‘‘replacement theory’’
(Dumont 2009:41). Godfrey believes, against Aquinas
and Ghent, that all speciﬁc forms are indivisible and
invariable, and as such they cannot change in degree.
Consequently, they cannot admit more or less in them-
selves. Since individual forms are numerically distinct,
they are successively replaced in the subject.
The fourth theory was an addition theory, usually
connected with the name of John Duns Scotus. In the
opinion of M. Clagett (Clagett 1950:136) it was Richard
Middleton who inﬂuenced Scotus’ addition theory. Mid-
dleton claims that intensity or quantity of force (which he
calls a virtual quantity of power) can be increased by
addition in a manner similar to increase in quantity of
mass (which he calls corporal quantity). Thus Middleton
is convinced that the addition of one degree of a quantity
of force to a preexisting one produces something greater in
force. Scotus holds that any degree of a quality contains, as
its homogeneous parts, lower degrees. Therefore, a change
in degree can be explained by addition or subtraction of
homogeneous parts of a quality. For example, if something
gets hotter without gaining any additional extended
parts, then the increase in heat is caused by addition of
degrees of heat. The unquestionable value of Scotus’
theory is its quantitative account of qualities, since
some sort of numerical value can be assigned to qualita-
tive intensities.
In the fourteenth century there were three dominant
theories explaining the problem: admixture, succession,
and addition ones. The last of them had many adherents,
such as William of Ockham, Joannes de Bassolis, Henry of
Harclay, Peter Auriol, John Baconthorpe, Thomas Wylton,
and Gregory of Rimini.
The main admirer of the succession theory was Walter
Burley. According to Burley, there are two types of forms:
indivisible (e.g., the maximum degree of hot, 3 ft in
length), and divisible ones, which have latitude of degrees
(e.g., heat and cold, whiteness and blackness). The former
are destroyed by any change of degree, while the latter
remain in the same species even if their degrees change.
Burley’s succession theory is founded on an analogy
between motion of alteration and local motion. In local
motion – says Burley – the moved body occupies
a different place in any instant of time; in motion of
alteration, a totally new and indivisible degree of form is
induced in each moment and the whole preceding form is
destroyed. Thus the whole process of intension or remis-
sion can be described as replacement of successive forms.
In such a process, a whole series of new, distinct forms is
involved. Since any change of degree causes a change in
an individual existing quality, latitude of degrees is
relevant only to species of forms and not to an individual
form. ‘‘The latitude itself’’ – as Sylla points out
(Sylla 1973:234) – ‘‘while it describes the range within
which the degrees of the species may fall, has no separate
existence aside from the individuals of the species.’’
The succession theory has much in common with the
addition theory; both, like Aquinas’ theory, accept the
notion that it is not an individual quality that increases
or decreases intensively, but a subject in which qualities
inhere is qualiﬁed more or less thanks to the latitude of
a speciﬁc qualitative form. Both theories also take a Scotist
view that a change of the degree of a quality leads to
a change of an individual quality. The addition theory
has also something in common with the admixture theory,
namely, they both accept the notion that qualitative forms
are intensively divisible.
In the fourteenth century, the admixture theory was
held by Michael of Massa, Walter Charlton, John Buridan,
and Roger Swineshead, one of the Oxford Calculators,
among others. Swineshead maintains that two contrary
qualities of the same pair, like coldness and heat, can exist
Intension and Remission of Forms I
553
I

simultaneously with various intensity in the same subject.
The sum of degrees of intensity of both qualities, however,
must be constant. Thus in the qualitative change such as
heating, when heat increases, coldness simultaneously
decreases in the same degree. A qualitative change is then
a process of ‘‘freeing from admixture’’ of the opposite
quality. While explaining his theory, Roger makes
a broad use of the concept of abstract latitudes for mea-
suring alteration and local motion. He talks about latitude
of quality and latitudes of motion of alteration of different
types which, in modern terms, correspond to latitude of
acceleration and deceleration.
Most of the Oxford Calculators, such as Thomas
Bradwardine, William Heytesbury, John Dumbleton, and
Richard Swineshead were enthusiasts of the addition the-
ory. John Dumbleton and Richard Swineshead broadly
discussed issues of possible ‘‘measurement’’ of such
a quality as speed in different types of motion by using
a conception of latitudes and degrees signiﬁcantly differ-
ent from those employed by earlier Oxford Calculators. In
the addition theory, qualities may be treated quantita-
tively, so the fundamental question was how to measure
the alteration in the intensity of qualitative forms or the
alteration of speed in local motion. Dumbleton and
Swineshead believe that latitude and degree are identical
and that they are both divisible. In their opinion, any
degree of a quality contains all the more remiss degrees.
For both philosophers, a latitude is a homogenous con-
tinuum, which can be presented as a line, on which the
only differences are differences in length. This theory pro-
vides – as Sylla points out – ‘‘a better physical basis for
quantiﬁcation of qualities because the latitude corre-
sponds to the intensity or degree of a quality at a point
of the body or in an instant of time and not only to some
variation of the quality over its extension or over time.
(. . .) The latitude of velocity is imagined as a line (. . .).
Equal parts of the latitude of velocity correspond to equal
differences of velocity’’ (Sylla 1973:263).
The theory of latitude of forms was fully developed by
Nicholas Oresme, for whom latitudes are an intensive
measure of particular qualities. Oresme’s conﬁguration
theory allows him to build a representation of different
types of qualitative changes by geometrical ﬁgures. He
distinguishes between the longitudo which represents
time, and latitudo which represents speed of motion.
When units measuring the longitudo and latitudo vary,
they form ﬁgures of different shapes. He shows that
geometrical properties of such ﬁgures correspond to
a property of the form itself when the property remains
constant, while the units measuring the longitudo and
latitudo vary.
Although Oresme’s achievement in quantiﬁcation of
qualitative changes is undeniable, it is not the result of his
acceptance of the addition theory. Oresme develops his
own theory of intension and remission of forms, which
Kirschner calls the ‘‘succession-of-conditiones-theory’’
(Kirschner 2000:274). According to this theory, in every
moment of intension or remission there is a new tale esse,
that is, a new condition or mode of a substance, which is
called a quality. The quantity of the substance is its tantum
esse, that is, a mode of being so and so large. In the process
of intension or remission, a substance has a new tale esse in
every moment, but not a new accidental form, as Burley
held. Oresme claims that since a substance has a different
mode in every moment, it cannot be properly said that the
quality is intensiﬁed. Such an expression is used only for
the sake of brevity of speech.
Recent research shows that contrary to the claims of
many earlier historians of science, many different theories,
besides the addition theory, led to the development of
a system for measuring and quantifying qualities and
motions of alteration and local motion in the fourteenth
century. There is no doubt that Oxford Calculators’ and
Oresme’s theories of quantitative approach to qualities,
such as the Mean Speed Theorem, gave an impulse for the
proper theories of motion, which were the signiﬁcant
accomplishments of seventeenth-century natural philoso-
phers, such as Descartes or Galileo. The Mean Speed
Theorem states that a uniformly accelerated motion cor-
responds to its mean degree of speed, which means that
a given latitude of motion uniformly gained in a given
time always makes a mobile traverse a space equal to that
which would be traversed if the body moved with the
middle degree of the latitude for the whole time. The
ﬁrst, arithmetical, proof of this theorem was presented
by William Heytesbury. The most original geometrical
proof and elaborated application of the mean-degree mea-
sure of speed in motion was formulated by Oresme. The
theorem was later used by Galileo in his proof of the
theory of accelerate motion. The problem of intension
and remission of forms was extensively debated in the
ﬁfteenth and sixteenth centuries in many ﬁelds of scien-
tiﬁc inquiry. Funkenstein sees also an inﬂuence of latitudo
formarum notion on Leibniz and Kant (Funkenstein
1986:352).
See also: ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Abu¯ Nas˙r ▶Giles of Rome ▶Godfrey
of Fontaines ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶John,
Duns Scotus ▶Michael of Massa ▶Nicholas Oresme
▶Oxford Calculators ▶Peter Abelard ▶Peter Lombard
▶Thomas Aquinas ▶Walter Burley ▶Walter Chatton
▶William Heytesbury ▶William of Ockham
554 I
Intension and Remission of Forms

Bibliography
Secondary Sources
Adams McCord M (1989) William Ockham, 2 vols. University of Notre
Dame Press, Notre Dame, pp 713–723, 729–731
Celeyerette J, Sole´re J-L (2002) Godefroid de Fontaines et la theorie
de la succession dans l’intensiﬁcation des formes. Chemis de la
pense´e me´die´vale, ed. Bakker P et al. Brepols Publisher, Brepols, pp
79–112
Clagett M (1950) Richard Swineshead and late medieval physics. The
intension and remission of qualities. Osiris 9:131–161
Cleyerette J, Mazet E (1998) La hie´rarchie de degree d’eˆtre chez Nicole
Oresme. Arabic Sci Philos 8:45–65
Combes A (1970) L’intensite´ des formes d’apre`s Jean de Ripa. Archives
d’histoire doctrinale et litte´raire du Moyen Age 37:45–56
Cross R (1998) The physics of Duns Scotus. The scientiﬁc context of
a theological vision. Clarendon Press, Oxford, pp 171–186
Duhem P (1955) Etudes sur Leonardo de Vinci, III. F. De Nobele, Paris,
pp 314–350
Dumont S (2009) Godfrey of Fontaines and the succession theory of
forms at Paris in the early fourteenth century. Philosophical debates
at the University of Paris in the early fourteenth century, ed.
Brown St, Dewender Th, Kobusch T. Philosophical debates at Paris
in the early fourteenth century, Brill, Leiden, pp 39–125
Funkenstein A (1986) Theology and the scientiﬁc imagination from the
Middle Ages to the seventeenth century. Princeton University Press,
Princeton
Kirschner S (2000) Oresme on intension and remission of qualities in his
commentary on Aristotle’s Physics. Vivarium 38(2):255–274
Maier A (1968) Zwei Grundprobleme der Scholastischen Naturphi-
losophie: Das Problem der intensiven Gro¨sse, 3rd edn. Edizioni di
Storia e Letteratura, Rome
Shapiro H (1959) Walter Burley and the intension and remission of forms.
Speculum 34:413–427
Sylla E (1973) Medieval concepts of the latitude of forms. The Oxford
Calculators. Archives d’histoire doctrinale et litte`raire du Moyen Age
40:223–283
Sylla E (1991) The Oxford Calculators and the mathematics of motion
1320–1350. Physics and measurement by latitudes. Garland Publish-
ing Inc., New York/London
Wippel JF (1979) Godfrey of Fontaines on intension and remission of
accidental forms. Francisc Stud 39:316–355
Intention, Primary and Secondary
FABRIZIO AMERINI
Department of Philosophy
University of Parma
Parma
Italy
Abstract
The term ‘‘intention’’ was introduced into the philosoph-
ical vocabulary, with the meaning we nowadays attribute
to it, during the twelfth century as the term used to
translate each of two Arabic words. In most cases, medi-
eval philosophers use ‘‘intention’’ as synonymous with
‘‘concept,’’ so that the answer that a philosopher gives to
the question of an intention’s ontological status follows
from his resolution of the nature of a concept. Some
philosophers take intentions as distinct from the acts of
cognition that originate them, while some others prefer to
equate intentions to those acts. The distinction between
ﬁrst and second intentions traces back to Avicenna, who
speaks of logic as a science dealing with second intentions
as applied to ﬁrst intentions. Roughly speaking, ﬁrst
intentions are concepts of extramental things (for exam-
ple, man), while second intentions are concepts of
concepts (for example, species). During the thirteenth
century, such a distinction is paired up with the grammat-
ical distinction between names of ﬁrst and second impo-
sition (such as ‘‘man’’ and ‘‘name,’’ respectively), which
has its roots in Priscian, while later on the distinction
between ﬁrst and second intentions overlaps with that
between abstract and concrete intentions. By ‘‘concrete
intentions’’ most medieval philosophers refer to things
qua cognized, while by ‘‘abstract intentions’’ they either
refer to the mind’s cognitive acts of cognizing things or to
the cognitive relation things bear to the mind. Thus, at
the beginning of fourteenth century the picture is more
complicated and raises different questions according to
whether ﬁrst or second intentions are discussed. High
medieval philosophers focus on these different kinds of
intentions and deal with two major issues: ﬁrst, the foun-
dation of ﬁrst and second intentions and second, the order
of causality and predication holding between ﬁrst and
second intentions.
The concrete term ‘‘intention’’ (intentio) makes its appear-
ance in the western philosophy, with the philosophical
meaning we nowadays attribute to it, during the twelfth
century, as translating each of two Arabic words (ma‘na,
ma‘qul). The abstract term ‘‘intentionality,’’ instead, is
employed only at the end of thirteenth century. At the
beginning of fourteenth century, we encounter the ﬁrst
treatises expressly devoted to intentions (Treatises on First
and Second Intentions), such as those of the Dominican
Theologian Hervaeus Natalis (c. 1315) and the Franciscan
Theologian Gerard Odonis (c. 1320).
Most medieval philosophers use the term ‘‘intention’’
simply as synonymous with the term ‘‘concept,’’ while they
use ‘‘intentionality’’ to indicate the symmetrical or asym-
metrical relationship that the mind, immediately or
through an intention, bears to the external world. Gener-
ally speaking, an intention is seen as the conceptual
Intention, Primary and Secondary I
555
I

content that can be associated with a thing. Two intentions
can be derived from two things or even from one and the
same thing, just like from Socrates we can extract the
speciﬁc intention of ‘‘man’’ and the generic intention of
‘‘animal.’’ In this latter case, many philosophers, following
in particular a suggestion of Henry of Ghent, speak of
intentions as items that are intentionally distinct from
each other.
Every intention exhibits a special mode of being called
intentional being (esse intentionale) and such being indi-
cates the mode of existence in the mind of an intention.
Expressions synonymous with ‘‘intentional being’’ are
‘‘incorporeal, immaterial, apparent, objective, or spiritual
being.’’ The relationship that the mind bears to an external
thing is seen as that in virtue of which that thing may be
characterized as an intention and therefore be endowed
with intentional being in the mind. This means that inten-
tional being expresses an accidental mode of being of the
thing, since a thing, such as a man, becomes an intention
only when it relates to the mind, and to be related to the
mind obviously is accidental to a man’s essence. Primarily,
by ‘‘intentional being’’ some medieval philosophers there-
fore want to indicate the mode of being of a thing, which
exists as a concept in the mind. But, secondarily, ‘‘inten-
tional being’’ is also used to indicate a mode of being,
which is of intentional kind. In this sense, a thing’s inten-
tional being is the being of a thing that is able to refer to
something else (i.e., ‘‘being intentional’’). According to
this second meaning, not only mental items such as con-
cepts, but also extramental items such as pictures, images,
natural signs, and any other thing that can refer to some-
thing else can be said to have intentional being. Conﬁning
our attention to mental cases alone, though, the identiﬁ-
cation between intentions and concepts entails that the
answer that a philosopher gives to the ontological status of
intentions follows from his response to the ontological
status of concepts.
Until now we have spoken of things that become
intentions, but not all medieval philosophers agree on
that a concept is a thing qua cognized, that is, a thing
qua related to the mind. Since medieval philosophers
elaborated fundamentally three ways of accounting for
a concept, that is, (i) as something identical to the act of
cognition, (ii) as something different from the act of
cognition and existing ‘subjectively’ in the mind, and
(iii) as something different from the act of cognition but
existing ‘objectively’ in the mind – it follows that we
would encounter fundamentally three ways of accounting
for an intention. Thus, some medieval philosophers prefer
to describe an intention as the act of cognizing rather than
as a cognized thing or as a concept representing a thing.
After Aquinas, intentions are usually divided into ﬁrst
and second intentions. This distinction can be traced back
to Avicenna, who speaks of logic as a science dealing with
second intentions as applied to ﬁrst intentions. Roughly
speaking, a ﬁrst intention is the concept of an extramental
thing, event, or state of affairs, while a second intention is
the concept of a concept. The concept of ‘‘man’’ is a typical
example of a ﬁrst intention, while the concept of ‘‘species’’
an example of a second intention. This distinction is
usually associated with the grammatical distinction of
names into names of ﬁrst and second imposition, which
harkens back to Priscian. A name of ﬁrst imposition is
a name that designates an extralinguistic item, while
a name of second imposition is a name that designates
another linguistic item. The term ‘‘man,’’ for instance, is
a name of ﬁrst imposition, while the term ‘‘name’’ is
a name of second imposition. These distinctions, between
ﬁrst and second intentions, on the one hand, and between
names of ﬁrst and second impositions, on the other, do
not perfectly overlap, and when medieval philosophers
approach directly the problem of the epistemic value of
intentions, they tend to abandon the grammatical distinc-
tion. The ﬁrst/second intention distinction does not occur
explicitly before Aquinas nor even in Aquinas, who simply
speaks of things cognized in the ﬁrst instance (prima
intellecta) and things cognized in the second instance
(secunda
intellecta).
Things
primarily
cognized
are
extramental things, such as a man, while things secondar-
ily cognized are mental things, such as the concept of
‘‘man.’’ When the mind reﬂects on its cognition and the
elements involved in it, the mind discovers some inten-
tional properties such as being universal, being a species,
and so on – which result from the acts by means of which
the mind compares a cognized thing to other cognized
things or to the things outside the mind – and then the
mind attaches such intentional properties to the ﬁrstly
cognized things. Intentional properties are therefore acci-
dental to the essence of cognized things (Questions on
God’s Potency, 7.9; De ente et essentia, 3). Later philoso-
phers inherit Aquinas’ explanation, although it is vari-
ously modiﬁed according to whether a philosopher is
more inclined to refer the ﬁrst/second intention distinc-
tion (A) to things ﬁrstly and secondly cognized or (B) to
acts of cognition, and, in this latter case, (B1) to acts
of cognition of the same kind or (B2) to different
kinds of acts of cognition. John Duns Scotus, Hervaeus
Natalis, and Peter Auriol, for instance, endorse (A), while
Durand of St. Pourc¸ain and William Ockham opt for
(B2) by interpreting the ﬁrst/second intention distinc-
tion in terms of the distinction between a direct and
a reﬂexive act of cognition (actus rectus/reﬂexus). Simon
556 I
Intention, Primary and Secondary

of Faversham and Radulphus Brito, who ﬂourished at
the end of thirteenth century, ﬁnally opt for (B1) by
relating such a distinction to that between an absolute
and a relative direct act of cognition (actus absolutus/
respectivus). In the later Middle Ages one may encounter
many sophisticated variants of this schema (particularly
signiﬁcant is that of John Buridan), but all of them follow
the basic choice that a philosopher makes concerning the
ontological status of an intention. Two points nonethe-
less stay unchanged across time. First, philosophers agree
that ﬁrst intentions have a mind-independent founda-
tion to a certain degree, while second intentions (regard-
less of how they are explained) have a mind-dependent
foundation. Second, they also agree that second inten-
tions can be predicated of ﬁrst intentions (for instance,
when stating ‘‘man is a species’’) and such a predication
gives rise, for most philosophers, to a denominative
proposition.
Toward the end of thirteenth century the distinction
between ﬁrst and second intentions is combined with
another distinction, that is, that between concrete (or
material) and abstract (or formal) intentions. Their inter-
section generates four classes of intentions:
1. Concrete ﬁrst intentions
2. Abstract ﬁrst intentions
3. Concrete second intentions
4. Abstract second intentions
Not all philosophers think of such a classiﬁcation as pos-
sible or needed. Some of them argue that no abstract
intention must be introduced. Philosophers who allow
for such a classiﬁcation explain it in different ways.
Hervaeus Natalis, for example, in his extensive treatise
on second intentions records that the dominant philo-
sophical position at the beginning of fourteenth century
identiﬁes every concrete intention with the thing cog-
nized, abstract ﬁrst intentions with the acts of absolute
cognition of a thing and abstract second intentions with
the acts of relative or comparative cognition of things.
Hervaeus, however, prefers a different explanation.
According to him, a concrete ﬁrst intention is the thing
primarily cognized, for example an external individual
man. An abstract ﬁrst intention is the symmetrical relation
of intentionality that an individual man bears to the mind
and the mind to that man. In virtue of such a relation, an
external man can be called a ﬁrst intention. Such a relation
coincides with a mind’s speciﬁc mode of cognizing and
a man’s speciﬁc mode of being cognized, namely, that
expressed by the term ‘‘universality.’’ A concrete second
intention is the same thing as secondarily cognized, for
example, the cognized man. An abstract second intention
is in turn the symmetrical relation of intentionality that
the cognized man bears to the mind and the mind to the
cognized man. In virtue of such a relation, a cognized man
can be called a second intention. Such a relation again
coincides with a mind’s speciﬁc mode of cognizing and
a cognized man’s speciﬁc mode of being further cognized,
namely, that expressed by the term ‘‘species.’’ This machin-
ery can be extended on indeﬁnitely. In short, for Hervaeus,
both an abstract ﬁrst and second intention designates
a mind–world bidirectional relation which is formally
expressed by the general term ‘‘intentionality.’’ Concrete
ﬁrst and second intentions instead designate things qua
primarily or secondarily cognized; or, with respect to the
cognizing mind, degrees of increasingly abstract conceiv-
ability of an external thing.
Such machinery raised considerable criticism. Peter
Auriol and Gerard Odonis, among others, cast many
doubts about the need for postulating a world-to-mind
direction of intentionality in order to account for the
thing’s property of being an intention. Moreover, they
disputed the possibility of distinguishing the property of
being an intention or of being universal from the cognized
thing itself. Discussions about ﬁrst and second intentions
do not end with Auriol’s and Odonis’ criticism of Hervaeus’
explanation of intentionality, but continue throughout all
the later Middle Ages, becoming more and more elaborate.
Scotus, Hervaeus, Ockham, and Auriol are the main sources
for understanding the ﬁfteenth- and seventeenth-century
treatments of ﬁrst and second intentions.
See also: ▶Durand of St. Pourcain ▶Gerard Odonis
▶Henry of Ghent ▶Hervaeus Natalis ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯
ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶Intentionality ▶John Buridan ▶John
Duns Scotus ▶Knowledge ▶Mental Word/Concepts
▶Peter Auriol ▶Radulphus Brito ▶Thomas Aquinas
▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Aquinas Thomas (1964) Quaestiones de potentia, ed. Pession PM.
Marietti, Turin/Rome
Aquinas Thomas (1984) Sentencia libri De anima, ed. Gauthier RA.
Commissio Leonina/Vrin, Rome/Paris
Auriol Peter (2005) Scriptum super I Sententiarum, d. 23; Gerard Odonis.
Tractatus de secundis intentionibus, ed. de Rijk LM. Brill, Leiden, pp
695–747, Appendix F (partially edited by Pinborg J (1980) Cahiers de
l’Institut du Moyen Age Grec et Latin 35:133–137, and by Perler
D (1994) Archives d’Histoire Doctrinale et Litte´raire du Moyen Age
61:242–262)
Brito Radulphus (1975) Sophisma ‘Aliquis homo est species’, ed. Pinborg
J. Vivarium 13:119–152
Durand of Saint-Pourc¸ain (1572) Scriptum super IV libros Sententiarum.
Ex typographia Guerrae, Venice (repr. The Gregg, Ridgewood, 1964)
Intention, Primary and Secondary I
557
I

Duns Scotus John (2006) Quaestiones super secundum et tertium De
anima, ed. Ba´zan BC et al. The Catholic University of America Press/
The Franciscan Institute, Washington/St. Bonaventure
Francis of Prato (2000) Tractatus de prima et secunda intentione, ed.
Mojsisch B. Bochumer Philosophisches, Jahrbuch fu¨r Antike und
Mittelalter 5:147–174
Francis of Prato (2005) Tractatus de ente rationis. Gerard Odonis
Tractatus de secundis intentionibus, ed. de Rijk LM. Brill, Leiden,
pp 745–775, Appendix G
Henry of Ghent (1518) Quodlibeta, ed. Badius. Paris (rep. Louvain, 1961)
Kilwardby Robert (1976) De ortu scientiarum, ed. Judy AG. Oxford
University Press, Oxford
Matthew of Gubbio (1989) Resurgant entia rationis, ed. Lambertini R.
Cahiers de l’Institut du Moyen Age Grec et Latin 59:37–60
Natalis Hervaeus (1489) Tractatus de secundis intentionibus. (Doyle JP
(ed and English trans), Marquette University Press, Milwaukee 2008)
Paris
Ockham William (1974) Summa logicae. Opera philosophica, vol 1, ed.
Ga´l G. The Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure
Odonis Gerald (2005) Tractatus de secundis intentionibus, ed. de Rijk
LM. Brill, Leiden
Simon of Faversham (1934) Quaestiones super tertium de anima, ed.
Sharp D. Archives d’Histoire Doctrinale et Litte´raire du Moyen Age
9:307–368
Simon of Faversham (1969) Sophisma: Universale est intentio, ed.
Yokoyama T. Mediev Stud 31:1–14
Stephan of Rieti (1967) Tractatus de secundis intentionibus, ed.
Domanski J. Medievalia Philosophica Polonorum 12:67–106; Odonis
Gerard (2005) Tractatus de secundis intentionibus, 2nd edn, ed. de
Rijk LM. Brill, Leiden, pp 777–821, Appendix H
William of Alnwick (1937) Quaestiones de esse intelligibili, ed. Ledoux A.
Bibliotheca Franciscana, Florence
Wodeham Adam (1991) Lectura secunda in I Sententiarum, eds. Ga´l G,
Wood R. The Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure
Secondary Sources
Amerini F (2009) Realism and intentionality: Hervaeus Natalis, Peter
Aureoli, and William Ockham in discussion. In: Kobusch T et al
(eds) Philosophical debates at Paris in the early fourteenth century.
Brill, Leiden/Boston, pp 239–260
Boh I (1988) Metalanguage and the concept of ‘ens secundae intentionis’.
In: Zimmermann A (ed) Thomas Aquinas: Werk und Wirkung im
Licht neuerer Forschungen. De Gruyter, Berlin, pp 53–70
Conti AD (1999) Second intentions in the late Middle Ages. In: Ebbesen S,
Friedman RL (eds) Medieval analyses in language and cognition.
Reitzels, Copenhagen, pp 453–472
de Rijk LM (2005a) A study on the medieval intentionality debate up to
ca. 1350. In: Odonis G OFM (ed) Opera philosophica, vol II: De
intentionibus. Brill, Leiden/Boston, pp 19–357
de Rijk LM (2005b) Girald Odonis on the real status of some second
intentions. Documenti e Studi sulla Tradizione Filosoﬁca Medievale
16:515–551
Gyekye K (1971) The terms ‘Prima intentio’ and ‘Secunda intentio’ in
Arabic logic. Speculum 46:32–38
Knudsen C (1982) Intentions and impositions. In: Kretzmann N et al
(eds) The Cambridge history of later medieval philosophy. From the
rediscovery of Aristotle to the disintegration of Scholasticism:
1100–1600. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge/New York,
pp 479–495
Perler D (2002) Theorien der Intentionalita¨t im Mittelalter. Klostermann,
Frankfurt am Main
Pinborg J (1974) Zum Begriff der ‘Intentio secunda’: Radulphus Brito,
Hervaeus Natalis und Petrus Aureoli in Diskussion. Cahiers de
l’Institute du Moyean Age Grec et Latin 13:49–59
Pini G (2001) Categories and logic in Duns Scotus. Brill, Leiden
Spade PV (1981) Ockham on terms of ﬁrst and second imposition
and intention, with remarks on the Liar Paradox. Vivarium
19:47–55
Swiezawsky S (1934) Les intentions premie`res et les intentions secondes
chez Jean Duns Scot. Archives d’Histoire Doctrinale et Litte´raire du
Moyen Age 9:205–260
Tachau KH (1980) Adam Wodeham on ﬁrst and second intentions.
Cahiers de l’Institut du Moyen Age Grec et Latin 35:29–55
Verhulst C (1975) A` propos des intentions premie`res et des intentions
secondes chez Jean Duns Scot. Annales de l’Institut de Philosophie
Libre de Bruxelles 75:7–32
Intentionality
FABRIZIO AMERINI
Department of Philosophy
University of Parma
Parma
Italy
Abstract
Only during the thirteenth century, were the word ‘‘inten-
tionality’’ and its cognates employed with the philosophical
meaning that we nowadays attribute to them. At the begin-
ning of the fourteenth century, moreover, we encounter the
ﬁrst treatises expresslydevoted to intentionality. As the Latin
etymology of the word indicates (in-tendere), by ‘‘inten-
tionality’’ medieval philosophers mean to express the idea
of a directedness or tendency of our mind toward a target.
During the Middle Ages, the term was used to characterize
the directness of both the mind and the will, although,
across time, the term has taken on different meanings and
its use has been restricted to the epistemic side alone. In
the Middle Ages, intentionality is strictly connected to the
explanation of the process of intellectual cognition and
concept formation. Since medieval philosophers distin-
guish between ﬁrst and second intentions (roughly, con-
cepts of things and concepts of concepts), two major
topics have been associated with intentionality: ﬁrst, the
explanation of the nature, the formation, and the founda-
tion of natural-kind concepts, from which the question
of the existence of intentional or intra-mental objects
stems, and second, the predication of intentional or sec-
ond-order properties with respect to ﬁrst-order concepts.
Generally speaking, the different medieval treatments of
intentionality depend on whether a philosopher is more
558 I
Intentionality

inclined to regard the mind’s intentionality as a special
kind of action or rather as a kind of relation from which
issue different accounts of the mode of intentional inexis-
tence. In the late Middle Ages, the theory of intentionality
is seen as the clue to solve the question of universals.
In an often-quoted text of his Psychology from an Empirical
Standpoint, Franz Brentano summarizes the features that
are traditionally associated with intentionality as follows:
"
every mental phenomenon is characterized by what the
Scholastics of the Middle Ages called the intentional (or
mental) inexistence of an object, and what we might call,
though not wholly unambiguously, reference to a content,
direction toward an object (which is not to be understood
here as meaning a thing), or immanent objectivity. Every
mental phenomenon includes something as object within
itself, although they do not do so in the same way. . . This
intentional inexistence is characteristic exclusively of men-
tal phenomena. No physical phenomenon exhibits any-
thing like it. We can, therefore, define mental phenomena
by saying that they are those phenomena which contain
an object intentionally within themselves (Brentano
1973:88–89).
Brentano’s words correctly pick out some major fea-
tures of medieval accounts of intentionality. On the one
hand, although most medieval philosophers endorse the
Aristotelian way of explaining knowledge as a process of
‘‘passive reception’’ of an external thing’s form, they con-
sider nonetheless intentionality as the distinctive mark of
the mental. In fact, as the Latin etymology of the word
shows (in-tendere, or intus-tendere, according to the ety-
mology proposed by Henry of Ghent in his Quodlibet 5.6),
they use the terms ‘‘intention’’ (intentio) and ‘‘intention-
ality’’ (intentionalitas) to characterize a particular ‘‘activ-
ity’’ of both the mind and the will; since cognitive and
volitional operations are usually regarded as the only two
operations properly pertaining to the human soul, inten-
tionality turns to be seen as a fundamental and primitively
active capacity of our soul. On the other hand, the term
across time took on different meanings and, as Brentano
opportunely pointed out, was employed to refer to at least
three items: (i) ﬁrst, to the mind’s or will’s act of attending
or pointing towards a thing; (ii) to the thing toward which
the mind or the will is actually turned; (iii) to the mode of
being (i.e., intentional, spiritual, or objective being) that
the thing acquires when it actually relates to the mind or
the will actually pointing to it; such a mode of being
coincides with the thing’s acquired capacity to represent
or to refer to something else. Leaving aside the use of
the word ‘‘intention’’ in ethical or pragmatic contexts,
medieval discussions of intentionality mainly focus
on these three aspects with respect to knowledge.
Nonconceptual mental states usually are not taken into
account (for the reasons illustrated in King 2007). Nor can
one ﬁnd some extensive discussion of intentionality as
applied to conventional language, natural signs, physical
information devices, or nonhuman contexts, in which
contemporary
philosophers
instead
show
to
have
a particular theoretical interest. Since medieval discus-
sions of intentionality focus especially on the explanation
of the nature of intellectual cognition, the preferred way
of approaching intentionality is metaphysical and episte-
mic rather than logic or linguistic, for intentionality inves-
tigations are made by way of an accurate analysis of the
elements involved in the phenomenon of knowledge. This
can be regarded as a fundamental difference from contem-
porary discussions of intentionality in analytic philoso-
phy, where instead there is a certain tendency to approach
intentionality in terms of philosophy of language. In
general, medieval discussions are more sympathetic with
discussions as developed in the phenomenological tradi-
tion. Nonetheless, in the Middle Ages as well, discussions
of intentionality can emerge from logical or linguistic
contexts, especially from those dealing with the practice
of sophisms.
The story of intentionality in Latin medieval philoso-
phy begins with Augustine. In Book XI and XV of On the
Trinity, an often-quoted text, Augustine qualiﬁes the
meaning of ‘‘intention’’ by connecting the ordinary notion
of intention to the analysis of knowledge. On the one
hand, Augustine equates intentions to the inner words
that are uttered by the mind at the end of the process of
cognition; such inner words are said not to belong to any
historical language but to be natural and common to all
men. On the other hand, Augustine takes ‘‘intention’’ as
indicating the active capacity of every faculty of the soul to
direct itself towards a thing. Augustine compares such
a capacity to the role played by the Holy Spirit in mediat-
ing between the Father and the Son, while the inner
word is compared to the Divine Word. Three points of
Augustine’s account have inﬂuenced medieval discussions.
First, medieval philosophers maintain the tendency to
describe the process of human cognition as mirroring
the divine process of cognition or emanation, and this
parallelism plays a decisive role when they explain the
ontological status of the mental word and the structure
of human thought. Second, Augustine connects intentions
to concepts and such a connection is pivotal for the
accounts of intentionality that follow. In order to under-
stand what an intention is and how it works, it is necessary
to understand what a concept is and how it works. Third,
Intentionality I
559
I

Augustine requires that both perception and cognition be
a certain type of activity, and such an activity appears to be
the hallmark of any cognitive state of the human soul:
when we see or cognize, for instance, we always see or
cognize something, and when we think, we always think
about something.
The identiﬁcation between intention and conception
enables medieval philosophers to attempt a reconciliation
of Augustine’s views with some other sources. Three
sources in particular are worth mentioning here. The
ﬁrst source is given by the starting lines of Aristotle’s On
Interpretation, transmitted to medieval philosophers by
Boethius’ translation and commentaries. Aristotle states
that written and uttered words are a symbol (in Boethius’
translation, a note) of soul’s affections and these latter are
said to be likeness of external things and common to all
men. According to the standard interpretation of this text,
while mental items (affections, i.e., concepts) are endowed
naturally with an intentional value and hence turn out to
be able to refer directly and immediately (or primarily) to
external things, written and uttered words are endowed
with an intentional value only in consequence of the
relation they bear to their mental supports, therefore
they can refer to external things only in an indirect and
mediate (or secondary) way. The second source is
Aristotle’s On the Soul, which began to circulate in the
Latin West in the second half of the twelfth century. Of
particular signiﬁcance for the topic of intentionality, is the
treatment of the machinery of abstraction that Aristotle
gives in the third book. Medieval philosophers usually
condense this source by citing Aristotle’s dictum that it is
not the stone but the species of stone that is present to the
mind. Such a dictum seems to relate the explanation of the
nature of intentionality to representationalism in episte-
mology. Finally, the third source is the account of essence
that Avicenna elaborated in the metaphysical section of his
Book of Healing. According to Avicenna, the essence of any
object of ordinary experience is ‘‘indifferent’’ to the prop-
erty of being singular and being universal. Such an essence
becomes singular once it is realized outside the mind,
while it becomes universal once it is realized in the mind.
What is relevant for the topic of intentionality is the idea
that it is one and the same essence that passes from outside
to inside the mind through the process of abstraction.
Avicenna’s account of essence seems to make the nature
of intentionality more compatible with direct realism in
epistemology.
Besides Aristotle and Augustine, Avicenna plays
a decisive role in shaping the medievals’ understanding
of intentionality. Avicenna takes two fundamental steps.
First, he more strongly relates the term ‘‘intention’’ to the
conceptual content that can be associated with a thing and
characterizes as intentionally distinct those intentions that
express two conceptual contents that can be associated
with one and the same thing. Second, Avicenna introduces
the crucial distinction between ﬁrst and second intentions.
Roughly speaking, ﬁrst intentions are concepts of external
things, while second intentions are concepts of concepts.
The concept of ‘‘man’’ is a typical example of ﬁrst inten-
tion, the concept of ‘‘species,’’ an example of second inten-
tion. From such a distinction, medieval discussions of
intentionality follow different paths according to whether
philosophers deal with ﬁrst or second intentions. In
the ﬁrst case, to account for intentionality amounts to
accounting for the formation, the foundation, and the
function of natural-kind concepts. In the second case,
two other points of speculation are introduced, namely,
that of the foundation of second-order concepts and that
of the explanation of the mechanisms of intentional pred-
ication, which occurs when second intentions are predi-
cated of ﬁrst intentions. Viewed in a different light, such
a distinction leads Avicenna to change the standard way of
looking at logic. Avicenna deﬁnes logic as the science
dealing with second intentions as applied to ﬁrst inten-
tions. In this way, he stresses the conceptual and properly
mental-focused nature of logic. On Avicenna’s doctrine,
the object of logic is no longer the syllogism but the being
of reason (ens rationis), that is, the class of the concepts
of concepts, such as ‘‘species’’ or ‘‘universal,’’ and of
second-order or intentional predications, such as ‘‘man
is a species’’ or ‘‘man is universal.’’
Given such presuppositions, it turns out to be partic-
ularly difﬁcult to isolate in the Middle Ages, before the
appearance of specialized treatises, a distinct area of dis-
cussion expressly reserved to intentionality. On the one
hand, intuitions and considerations about intentionality
mainly emerge from the analysis of the mechanisms of
cognition, as we said. Thus, Commentaries On the Soul are
the privileged sources. But on the other hand, in other,
disparate contexts one can ﬁnd interesting developments
of the notion of (mental) existence: for example, in those
discussions concerning the Anselmian ‘ontological’ argu-
ment for proving the existence of God (on which see King
1984); in the logical and sophistical discussions of nonex-
istent objects (like the chimera), negative properties and
states-of-affairs; in the theological discussions about
God’s omnipotence or in those concerning the meaning
of ‘‘person’’ or the metaphysical status of the light. The
treatises on ﬁrst and second intentions of the fourteenth
century try to bring together such scattered consider-
ations, by giving a uniﬁed and all-inclusive explanation
of the phenomenon of intentionality. In many respects,
560 I
Intentionality

medieval discussions of intentionality are indistinguish-
able from discussions concerning knowledge. But the dis-
tinction between ﬁrst and second intentions permits the
identiﬁcation of the hallmark of the medieval discussions
of intentionality. It relies upon second intentions and
consists in a double understanding: ﬁrst, that of the mech-
anisms by way of which our mind arrives at attaching to an
external thing some philosophically signiﬁcant intentional
properties (such as being an intention, being universal,
being a species, and the like) and second, that of the
mechanisms of intentional predication. At the end of the
day, the main question raised by medieval discussions of
intentionality seems to be as follows: how can the mech-
anisms of predication that Aristotle describes in the
Categories be applied to the sphere of the mental in order
to account for both intentional properties and mental
predication?
Medieval philosophers’ answers to this question can be
distributed into two general groups according to whether
a philosopher is more willing to think that the operation
of cognition belongs to the category of Action or to the
category of Relation. Take for instance the concrete case of
the cognition of a table.
(A) If one classiﬁes the cognition of an external table
among actions, she can regard the intention of table as
the same as the act of cognizing that table or as different
from such an act and posterior to it. (A1) In the ﬁrst case,
the intention of table is reduced to the act of cognizing
that table and cognition is seen as a special case of
immanent or intransitive action, since it completely
achieves itself in cognizing that table without producing
anything else. (A2) In the second case, instead, cognition
can be seen as a sort of transitive action, consequently the
intention of table is open to be treated in a twofold way:
either (A2.1) as something produced by the act of cog-
nizing and existing ‘‘subjectively’’ in the mind, that is,
according to a psychological mode of being, such as that
of a trace or a modiﬁcation (which usually is classiﬁed
into the category of Quality) left on the mind by the act
of cognizing, or (A2.2) as an item existing ‘‘objectively’’
in the mind, that is, according to a special kind of
intramental existence or mental inexistence (this item is
normally called ‘‘object’’, obiectum, and is understood as
the mental correlate or the immanent content of a con-
cept, conceptus). In this ﬁnal case, she can further regard
the table provided with an objective existence either
(A2.2.1) as a mental replacement of the external table or
(A2.2.2) as the external table itself endowed with a new
mode of existence.
By contrast, if one opts for counting the cognition of
a table among relations, she has two possibilities: either
(B1) she can describe cognition as an asymmetrical rela-
tion, only involving what contemporary philosophers of
mind call a mind-to-world direction of ﬁt, or (B2) she can
describe it as a symmetrical relation, involving both mind-
to-world and world-to-mind directions of ﬁt. In the ﬁrst
case, she does not depart too much from those who
advocate the action theory. But the second case seems to
ﬁt much better with the standard medieval theory of
relations, since according to such a theory every relation
must be explained as the conjunction of a relation and its
converse relation. Thus, if we cognitively relate to a table,
there must be a relation that goes from us to the table and
a converse relation that goes from the table to us. In virtue
of the ﬁrst relation, we can be said to be cognizing that
table, while in virtue of the second relation, the table can
be said to be cognized by us. With respect to this twofold
direction, supporters of B2 hold that the mind-to-world
direction of ﬁt is a real relation, while the world-to-mind
direction of ﬁt is a relation of reason (which sounds as very
close to what Brentano called a ‘‘quasi-relation’’). On this
proposal, a table can be said to be an intention or to be
intended in virtue of the relation of intentionality (or
being passively cognized) that it bears to our mind, while
our mind can be said to be intending that table in virtue of
the relation of cognition (or being actively cognizing) that
it bears to the table.
These different proposals entail different degrees of
metaphysical involvement. Who adopts B2 or A2.2 usually
is more tolerant with internalism and hence more dis-
posed to postulating the existence of a third type of
objects, such as the universal table or the table qua cog-
nized (called res intellecta or res ut intellecta). A supporter
of B2 thinks that it is necessary to do so in order to
preserve both the generality and the continuity of cogni-
tion across time. Nonetheless she is careful in avoiding any
ontological commitment of a Platonic kind, for she denies
that the table qua cognized is something essentially uni-
versal and hence essentially different from the external
singular table (which is labeled as res extra or res ut
existens). The table in the mind is exactly the same nature
of table exhibited by the extramental singular table; but
now the table is in such a condition (i.e., abstracted from
singularity and depurated of matter) as the mind can
attach to it the properties of being universal, being an
intention, being a species, and the like, all of which remain
therefore accidental to a table’s essence. This postulation
permits accounting for universal predication in a proper
way and reconciling strong epistemological realism with
a certain metaphysical parsimony. The domain of what
can be thought is normally more extended than the
domain of what can exist; nonetheless whatever can be
Intentionality I
561
I

thought can be said to be real insofar as it meets two
conditions: (i) ﬁrst, it is able to end an act of cognizing
or thinking and (ii) second, it can be considered as distinct
from the psychological act of its cognition or thought,
since the act goes out of existence once it is over, while
the cognized or thought thing gets maintained. Accord-
ingly, not only extramental real objects, but also negations
and ﬁctions can be said to be epistemologically real.
The advocates of B1 or A1-A2.1, by contrast, consider
such an explanation metaphysically too heavy and inca-
pable of avoiding any duplication of the objects of
thought, especially when acts of cognizing bear on singular
extramental things. At the same time, they think that it is
possible to preserve equally well all the conditions
required for universal cognition and predication by refer-
ring to items only existing subjectively in the mind, items
such as acts of cognition, the mind’s qualitative modiﬁca-
tions, and habits tasked with storing knowledge. In gen-
eral, supporters of this line are more willing to endorse an
externalist account of intentionality.
In the Middle Ages the majority of philosophers seem
to be oriented towards externalist explanations of inten-
tionality. Thomas Aquinas, for instance, although he does
not pay much attention to intentionality, in an often-
quoted passage of his Questions on Potency (7.9) connects
acts of ﬁrst and second intention to direct and reﬂexive
acts of cognition. By an act of cognition of ﬁrst intention,
the mind gets acquainted with the external world, while by
an act of cognition of second intention, the mind reﬂects
on its own cognition. Aquinas’ position is nuanced, for he
does not go into any detail concerning the machinery of
intentionality. This is the reason why scholars still disagree
on Aquinas’ ﬁnal word, if any, on the nature of intention-
ality (see Brower-Toland 2008). In any case, the connec-
tion established by Aquinas between kinds of intentions
and kinds of acts of knowledge becomes standard in the
generation after Aquinas, and it is stressed in different
ways. Peter of Auvergne, Simon of Faversham and
Radulphus Brito, for example, clearly endorse the expla-
nation of intentionality as a mind-to-world direction of
ﬁt, although the philosophers of the generation after
Aquinas tend to complicate the picture insofar as they
cross the ﬁrst/second intention distinction with the con-
crete/abstract intention distinction. (For details on this,
see the entry Intention, Primary and Secondary in this
volume.). During the fourteenth century some thinkers
such as Durand of Saint-Pourc¸ain, Walter Chatton, and
William Ockham once more stress the reduction of inten-
tionality to the mind’s active attending towards an
extramental thing while rejecting the idea that there can
exist in the mind things endowed with objective or
intentional existence. Ockham, in a special way, puts par-
ticular emphasis on accounting for intentions as natural
signs of the mind, that is, as natural acts that the mind,
causally stimulated by the external singular thing with
which it is faced, spontaneously emits in order to variously
refer back to that thing, and explicitly calls intentions to
serve the function of atomic or molecular components of
mental language. But some other thinkers, following the
general systematization given to this matter by Henry of
Ghent and John Duns Scotus, and expanding on
a suggestion of Aquinas (Summa theologiae, 1.85.2.ad 2),
opt for a more internalist interpretation of intentionality.
The most signiﬁcant example of this attitude is given by
Hervaeus Natalis. Hervaeus’main idea is that whenwe are to
explain a complex mental state (for instance, the knowledge
that a table exists) or a simple mental concept (for instance,
the concept of a table), we must distinguish two things: (i)
ﬁrst, the propositional or simple content of an act from the
act itself and (ii) second, the underlying subject of the
intentional properties from the intentional properties them-
selves. Since by ‘‘intentionality’’ Hervaeus means the rela-
tionship that an extramental thing bears to the mind actually
cognizing that thing, it is such a relation that enables the
mind to attach to the thing the passive property of being
cognized, that is, of being objectively existing in the mind or
being an intention. The relationship that the mind bears to
the table is not sufﬁcient for attaching such a property to the
thing. Predications such as ‘‘table is an intention’’, therefore,
are assessed as cases of denominative predication. According
to Hervaeus, no duplication of objects is entailed at all by the
ordinary process of intellectual cognition of extramental
things. When the mind turns to a singular table, the external
table is the primary target of its act of pointing to, but it is
only the starting point of the intentional process. Every
intentional process ends with a universal concept, which
primarily refers to a universal object and such a universal
object, which can exist only in the mind, is what is primarily
correlated to an act of cognition stemming from an external
thing. Thus, it is not unreasonable for Hervaeus to say that
when we cognize or think of a table, we are actually cogniz-
ing or thinking of something mind-dependent about some-
thing mind-independent, that is, we are thinking of a table
about a singular table or we are knowing that the singular
table is a table.
Things are obviously more complicated in the case of
complex mental states such as beliefs, false cognitions, and
thoughts of ﬁctitious, abstract, or nonexistent beings.
Hervaeus’ theory of intentionality does not seem to work
in such cases and this is the reason why this and similar
explanations were strongly attacked by many philoso-
phers, such as Peter Auriol, Gerard Odonis, and William
562 I
Intentionality

Alnwick. They tried to mitigate the strong internalism
entailed by proposals such as that of Hervaeus by proving
ﬁrst, that in the case of singular thoughts, considered by
Hervaeus simply as mental objects obtained by reasoning
from universal objects, the mind gets directly in touch
with the world; second that, following Scotus’ doctrine,
in the case of universal thoughts there is no ground for
distinguishing in a sharp way the underlying nature
(e.g., table) from the intentional properties (e.g., being
universal); third, that the relation of active cognizing is
a sufﬁcient condition for attaching the property of being
an intention to a cognized thing.
Medieval discussions of intentionality do not end here,
but continue during all the fourteenth century by assum-
ing many other forms. John Buridan, for instance, tends to
modify the understanding of what a second intention is
according to a more linguistic pattern. But the basic issues
and the vocabulary stay unchanged. The medieval legacy
to contemporary discussions is the threefold intentional-
ity thesis re-launched by Brentano toward the end of
eighteenth century.
See also: ▶Augustine ▶Boethius ▶Durand of St.
Pourcain ▶Gerard Odonis ▶Henry of Ghent ▶Hervaeus
Natalis ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶Intention, Pri-
mary and Secondary ▶John Buridan ▶John Duns Scotus
▶Knowledge ▶Mental Language ▶Mental Representa-
tion ▶Mental Word/Concepts ▶Peter Auriol ▶Peter of
Auvergne ▶Radulphus Brito ▶Thomas Aquinas ▶Uni-
versals ▶Walter Chatton ▶William of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Albert the Great (1968) De anima, ed. Stroick C. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster
Aquinas Thomas (1964) Quaestiones de potentia, ed. Pession PM.
Marietti, Turin/Rome
Aquinas Thomas (1984) Sentencia libri De anima, ed. Gauthier RA.
Commissio Leonina/Vrin, Rome/Paris
Armand of Bellovisu (1491) De declaratione difﬁcilium terminorum tam
theologiae quam philosophiae ac logicae. Michael Wenssler, Basel
Augustin (1968) De trinitate libri XV, ed. Mountain WJ. Brepols, Turnhout
Auriol Peter (2005) Scriptum super I Sententiarum, d. 23; Gerard Odonis.
Tractatus de secundis intentionibus, ed. de Rijk LM. Brill, Leiden, pp
695–747, Appendix F (partially edited by Pinborg J (1980) Cahiers de
l’Institut du Moyen Age Grec et Latin 35:133–137, and by Perler D
(1994) Archives d’Histoire Doctrinale et Litte´raire du Moyen Age
61:242–262)
Brentano Franz (1973) Psychology from an empirical standpoint (trans:
Rancurello AC et al). Routledge, London
Brito Radulphus (1975) Sophisma ‘Aliquis homo est species’, ed.
Pinborg J. Vivarium 13:119–152
Duns Scotus John (2006) Quaestiones super secundum et tertium De
anima, ed. Ba´zan BC et al. The Catholic University of America Press/
The Franciscan Institute, Washington/St. Bonaventure
Durand
of
Saint-Pourc¸ain
(1572)
Scriptum
super
IV
libros
Sententiarum. Ex typographia Guerrae, Venice (repr. The Gregg,
Ridgewood, 1964)
Francis of Prato (2000) Tractatus de prima et secunda intentione, ed.
Mojsisch B. Bochumer Philosophisches Jahrbuch fu¨r Antike und
Mittelalter, vol 5, pp 147–174
Francis of Prato (2005) Tractatus de ente rationis. Gerard Odonis
Tractatus de secundis intentionibus, ed. de Rijk LM. Brill, Leiden,
pp 745–775, Appendix G
Henry of Ghent (1518) Quodlibeta. ed. Badius, Paris
Kilwardby Robert (1976) De ortu scientiarum, ed. Judy AG. Oxford
University Press, Oxford
Magister Conrad (1981) De intentionibus, ed. Stroick C. Misc
Mediaevalia 13(1):517–546
Matthew of Gubbio (1989) Resurgant entia rationis, ed. Lambertini R.
Cahiers de l’Institut du Moyen Age Grec et Latin 59:37–60
Natalis Hervaeus (1489) Tractatus de secundis intentionibus. Georg
Mitelhus, Paris; Doyle JP (ed and English transl) (2008), Marquette
University Press, Milwaukee
Ockham William (1974) Summa logicae. Opera philosophica, vol 1, ed.
Ga´l G. The Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure
Odonis Gerard (2005) Tractatus de secundis intentionibus, ed. de Rijk
LM. Brill, Leiden
Simon of Faversham (1934) Quaestiones super tertium de anima, ed.
Sharp D. Archives d’Histoire Doctrinale et Litte´raire du Moyen Age
9:307–368
Simon of Faversham (1969) Sophisma: Universale est intentio, ed.
Yokoyama T. Mediev Stud 31:1–14
Stephan of Rieti (1967) Tractatus de secundis intentionibus, ed.
Domanski J. Medievalia Philosophica Polonorum 12:67–106; Odonis
Gerard (2005) Tractatus de secundis intentionibus, 2nd edn, ed. de
Rijk LM. Brill, Leiden, pp 777–821, Appendix H
William of Alnwick (1937) Quaestiones de esse intelligibili, ed. Ledoux A.
Bibliotheca Franciscana, Florence
Wodeham Adam (1991) Lectura secundum in I Sententiarum, ed. Ga´l G,
Wood R. The Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure
Secondary Sources
Amerini F (2005) La logica di Francesco da Prato. Edizioni del Galluzzo,
Firenze
Amerini F (2008) Realism and intentionality: Hervaeus Natalis, Peter
Auriol, and William Ockham in discussion. In: Kobusch T et al
(eds) Philosophical debates at Paris in the early fourteenth century.
Brill, Leiden/Boston, pp 239–260
Amerini F (ed) (2010) Later medieval perspectives on intentionality.
Quaestio 10
Biard J (1997) Intention et signiﬁcation chez Guillaume d’Ockham. La
critique de l’eˆtre intentionnnel. In: de Libera A, Elemrani-Jamal A,
Galonnier A (eds) Langages et philosophie. Hommage a` Jean Jolivet.
Vrin, Paris, pp 201–220
Black DL (1999) Mental existence in Thomas Aquinas and Avicenna.
Mediev Stud 61:45–79
Brower-Toland S (2008) Aquinas on mental representation: Concepts and
Intentionality. Mediev Rev 117(2):193–243
de Libera A (1999) De´nomination et intentions: sur quelques doctrines
me´die´vales (XIIIe–XIVe sie`cle) de la paronymie et de la connotation.
In: Ebbesen S, Friedman RL (eds) Medieval analyses in language and
cognition. Reitzels, Copenhagen, pp 355–375
de Rijk LM (2005) A study on the medieval intentionality debate up to ca.
1350. In: Giraldus Odonis OFM (ed) Opera philosophica, vol II: De
intentionibus. Brill, Leiden/Boston, pp 19–357
Intentionality I
563
I

Doyle J (2006) Hervaeus Natalis, O.P., (d. 1323) on intentionality: its
direction, context, and some aftermath. Mod Schoolman 83:85–124
Friedman RL (1999) Peter Aureol on intentions and essential predication.
In: Ebbesen S, Friedman RL (eds) Medieval analyses in language and
cognition. Reitzels, Copenhagen, pp 415–430
Geach P (1965) A medieval discussion of intentionality. In: Bar-Hillel
Y (ed) Logic, methodology, and philosophy of science, vol 4. North-
Holland, Amsterdam, pp 425–433
Hayen A (1942) L’intentionnel dans la philosophie de Saint Thomas.
Edition Universelle, Bruxelles
Kenny A (1984) Intentionality: Aquinas and Wittgenstein. In: The legacy
of Wittgenstein. Blackwell, Oxford, pp 61–76
King P (1984) Anselm’s intentional argument. Hist Philos Quart 1:147–166
King P (2007) Why isn’t the mind–body problem mediaeval? In:
Lagerlund H (ed) Forming the mind: essays on the internal senses
and the mind/body problem from Avicenna to the medical enlight-
enment. Springer, Heidelberg
Klima G (2010) (ed) Intentionality, cognition, and representation in the
Middle Ages. Fordham University Press, Fordham
Knudsen C (1982) Intentions and impositions. In: Kretzmann N,
Kenny A, Pinborg J (eds) The Cambridge history of later medieval
philosophy. From the rediscovery of Aristotle to the disintegration of
Scholasticism: 1100–1600. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge/
New York, pp 479–495
Koridze G (2006) Intentionale Grundlegung der philosophischen Logik:
Studien zur Intentionalita¨t des Denkens bei Hervaeus Natalis im
Traktat ‘De secundis intentionibus. PhD Dissertation, University of
Tubingen, at URL: http://w210.ub.uni-tuebingen.de/dbt/volltexte/
2006/2264/pdf/Dissertation_Koridze.pdf
Lagerlund H (ed) (2007) Representation and objects of thought in medi-
eval philosophy. Ashgate, Aldershot
Lambertini R (1992) La teoria delle intentiones da Gentile da Cingoli
a Matteo da Gubbio. Fonti e linee di tendenza. In: Buzzetti D,
Ferriani M, Tabarroni A (eds) L’insegnamento della logica a
Bologna nel XIV secolo. Istituto per la Storia dell’Universita`,
Bologna, pp 277–351
Panaccio C (1999) Le Discours inte´rieur. De Platon a` Guillaume d’Ock-
ham. Seuil, Paris
Panaccio C (2004) Ockham on concepts. Ashgate, Aldershot
Pasnau R (1997) Theories of cognition in the later Middle Ages.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Perler D (1994) What am I thinking about? Duns Scotus and Peter Aureol
on intentional objects. Vivarium 32:72–89
Perler D (1995) Intentionale und reale existenz: eine spa¨tmittelalterliche
Kontroverse. Philosophisches Jahrb 102:261–278
Perler D (ed) (2001) Ancient and medieval theories of intentionality. Brill,
Leiden
Perler D (2002) Theorien der Intentionalita¨t im Mittelalter. Klostermann,
Frankfurt am Main
Perler D (2006) Intentionality and actions. Medieval discussions on the
cognitive capacities of animals. In: Pacheco MC, Meirinhos JF (eds)
Intellect
and
imagination
in
medieval
philosophy.
Brepols,
Turnhout, pp 72–98
Pini G (2002) Categories and logic in Duns Scotus. Brill, Leiden
Tachau KH (1988) Vision and certitude in the age of Ockham: optics,
epistemology, and the foundations of semantics: 1250–1345. Brill,
Leiden/Ko¨ln/Kobenhavn/New York
Tachau KH (1999) Some aspects of the notion of intentional existence
at Paris, 1250–1320. In: Ebbesen S, Friedman RL (eds) Medieval
analyses in language and cognition. Reitzels, Copenhagen, pp
331–353
Internal Senses
PEKKA KA¨RKKA¨INEN
Faculty of Theology
University of Helsinki
Helsinki
Finland
Abstract
The internal senses are a class of cognitive faculties that
were posited to exist between external sense perception and
the intellectual soul. The notion of internal senses was
developed in the Arabic philosophy of the Middle Ages on
the basis of certain ancient philosophical ideas. The classical
list of ﬁve internal senses was provided by Avicenna: com-
mon sense, retentive imagination, compositive imagina-
tion, estimative power, and memory. He also localized
these faculties in the three ventricles of the brain. According
to Avicenna, the function of common sense is to receive and
relate the perceptions of the external senses. The retentive
imagination stores the forms of these perceptions and the
compositive imagination processes these forms. Further-
more, estimative power grasps the ‘‘intentions’’ of the per-
ceived objects, such as hostility or pleasantness, which the
external senses do not perceive. The intentions are ﬁnally
stored in memory. Averroes’ position was critical of
Avicenna’s view, and both accounts had a remarkable inﬂu-
ence in medieval Latin philosophy. Avicenna’s view domi-
nated throughout the Middle Ages, although it was
challenged and modiﬁed with help of other authorities.
Albert the Great adhered to Avicenna in general outline,
but incorporated some of the views of Averroes, John
Damascene, and Qust˙a ibn Lu¯qa¯. Thomas Aquinas followed
the same lines, but further modiﬁed the view. There were
also constantly differing positions concerning whether the
brain or the heart is the primary organ of the internal senses.
Peter John Olivi and John Duns Scotus presented a novel
reading of the estimative function, which gave up the
Avicennian notion of intentions as the objects of the esti-
mative faculty. John Buridan reduced the number of internal
senses to two: common sense and memory. His view was
adopted by some later authors but rejected by others.
The notion of internal senses emerged in medieval philos-
ophy to describe a class of cognitive functions that did not
belong to the realm of external perception in the strict
sense, but at the same time could not be attributed to the
intellectual soul. These included functions that were
thought to be closely connected to corporeal organs,
564 I
Internal Senses

such as imagination and dreaming, and some post-
sensory cognitive capacities, which are found in animals,
such as instinctual responses and rudimentary capabilities
of reasoning.
In ancient philosophy, there were some precursors of
the notion of the internal senses. In the late fourth century,
Nemesius of Emesa located the organs of some mental
faculties in distinct ventricles of the brain. During the ﬁfth
century, Augustine used the expression ‘‘internal sense’’
and also noted that some contemporary medical writers
located cognitive functions to the ventricles of the brain.
Augustine did not, however, mention the internal senses in
connection with the brain. Augustine’s localization of the
different faculties does not resemble later localizations. To
the contrary, Nemesius’ account persisted in medieval
discussions: partly because the work was falsely attributed
to church father Gregory of Nyssa and partly through long
citations in John Damascene’s De ﬁde orthodoxa. Both
Augustine and Nemesius seem to be inﬂuenced by the
Galenist medical tradition.
The concept of internal senses appears in a developed
form in medieval Arabic philosophy. The classical formu-
lation of the theory is found in Avicenna’s De anima,
where the author divides the cognitive faculties of the
sensory soul into ﬁve external and ﬁve internal senses.
Each internal sense has its own organ in different parts
of the cerebral ventricles.
Avicenna’s account remained inﬂuential until early
modern times, as his De anima and Canon of Medicine
were continuously read but also criticized and modiﬁed by
later authors. Avicenna posited two faculties in the fore-
most ventricle: common sense and retentive imagination.
The function of common sense is to unify the sensations,
which it receives from the external senses. Later Latin
authors also added the perception that one perceives to
the functions of the common sense. Retentive or forma-
tive imagination retains the sensory forms that common
sense receives.
The middle ventricle hosts two faculties. The ﬁrst of
these, compositive imagination, also deals with imagina-
tion, but its function is not to store the forms but rather
actively process them by combining and dividing. This
faculty is, according to Avicenna, different in humans
than in other animals. Another faculty in the middle
ventricle is estimative power. It grasps qualities that are
not perceived by the external senses, such as hostility or
pleasantness. Avicenna calls these qualities ‘‘intentions.’’
Furthermore, estimation is responsible for incidental per-
ception, as in the case when an animal recognizes that
a yellow thing is also sweet. There are also other functions,
which Avicenna seems to attribute to estimation, some of
which are unique to human beings, who also possess this
faculty. Estimation seems to be for Avicenna the highest
faculty of the sensory soul with a capability of judgment,
which in human beings leads to a potential conﬂict with
the judgment of reason. The intentions apprehended by
estimation are stored in the rear ventricle of the brain,
which is the seat of the ﬁfth internal sense, sensory
memory.
Avicenna’s classiﬁcation of these ﬁve post-sensory fac-
ulties rests on three principles: ﬁrstly, there are speciﬁc
faculties devoted to sensible forms (common sense and
imagination) and intentions (estimation and memory);
secondly, there are different faculties for receiving (com-
mon sense and estimation) and for storing (imagination
and memory) both kinds of objects; and ﬁnally there must
be a distinct faculty for active processing of the objects,
which is for sensible forms the compositive imagination.
The ﬁrst major revision of the Avicennian system
of the internal senses was carried out by Averroes. In
particular, Averroes considered the faculty of estimation
as superﬂuous. According to him, animal behavior can be
explained by the Aristotelian notion of imagination, and
he attributed human estimative functions to the faculty he
called cogitation. He also fused the two Avicennian facul-
ties of imagination into one. The result was a reduction of
human internal senses to four: common sense, imagina-
tion, cogitative faculty, and memory.
The cogitative faculty differs from Avicenna’s faculty of
estimation in that it does not grasp the intentions, but
rather actively abstracts them from the sensible forms and
presents them to the memory. Moreover, Averroe¨s does
not describe intentions as bearing affectual connotations
as Avicenna did, but rather they represent the individual
objects as individuals. The abstraction of intentions pre-
supposes for Averroes a close relationship of cogitation
to the intellect. Memory is then the faculty responsible
for both reception as well as the storage of intentions
abstracted by cogitation.
It is not clear whether Averroes considered common
sense an internal sense at all, or rather as one of the
external senses. Unlike Avicenna, he considered the Aris-
totelian common sensibles as its proper objects.
Before the breakthrough of Avicennian ideas, many
Latin authors discussed imagination and other cognitive
faculties distinct from but closely related to sense percep-
tion. In addition to Augustine, Nemesius, and John
Damascene, they were inﬂuenced by Boethius, the medical
compendium Pantegni and by Qust˙a ibn Lu¯qa¯’s On the
Difference Between Spirit and the Soul.
After becoming available, Avicenna’s classiﬁcation of
the internal senses was consequently repeated by several
Internal Senses I
565
I

authors such as Dominicus Gundissalinus (the translator
of Avicenna), John Blund, John of La Rochelle, and Peter
of Spain. There are also several early thirteenth century
authors who provided different kinds of accounts of the
number and functions of the internal senses.
Albert the Great included a thorough discussion on
the internal senses in his works on natural philosophy,
which are based on Avicenna but also incorporated
other views such as those of Averroes. In particular, his
view of the objects of the estimative faculty combines
Avicennian conception with Averroes’ notion of incidental
perception and individuality. Albert also tries to harmo-
nize Avicenna’s localizations of the internal senses with
John Damascene and Qust˙a ibn Lu¯qa¯, unlike his contem-
porary John of La Rochelle, who clearly distinguishes
different views. A similar harmonizing tendency appears
later in the tradition of the Augustinian Hermits
represented by Giles of Rome and Alfonso Vargas, who
discussed the problem of the conﬂicting localizations of
Avicenna and Augustine.
Although Albert changed some of his views between
the earlier Summa de creaturis and later De anima, he
developed certain insights that persisted through both
works. One was the view of compositive imagination and
estimation as animal counterparts of speculative and prac-
tical intellects. Albert’s inﬂuence on later natural philoso-
phers was strong and also his views on internal senses were
more or less endorsed by numerous writers.
Another inﬂuential ﬁgure in the later discussion was
Thomas Aquinas. Aquinas adopted the general Avicennian
framework as his teacher Albert had done, but he further
modiﬁed it by incorporating some additional elements
from Averroes. Aquinas considers the system of the inter-
nal senses from the viewpoint of the teleology of nature, so
that their speciﬁc functions in the whole are derived from
the need of animal to maintain its life. Aquinas does not
reject the Avicennian estimative faculty, but attributes it
only to animals. Like Averroes, he posits a cogitative power
in humans and rejects a separate faculty of compositive
imagination. For Aquinas, estimation is a faculty respon-
sible for the self-preservation of animals. Estimative judg-
ment is more than a mere apprehension of the agreeable or
repulsive features of the objects: sheep do not ﬂee from
wolves because they are repulsive, but since they are their
natural predators. Aquinas ﬁnds it particularly important
that animal estimations are based on instinctual reactions,
whereas human cogitation judges intentions by collation,
inquiry, and deliberation, analogous to the operations of
the intellect. Cogitation, which Aquinas calls ratio
particularis, differs from the intellect mainly in its ability
to handle only individual intentions, while the intellect
operates with universal concepts.
As soon as the form of disputed questions became
established in the De anima commentaries, the discus-
sion on internal senses usually concerned a couple of
questions of the second book. The theme was occasionally
dealt with also in the Sentences commentaries. In the late
thirteenth century and early fourteenth century, Peter
John Olivi and John Duns Scotus brought new insights
into the discussion on estimative power in their Sentences
commentaries. Their view was that no intentions exist as
separate objects of estimative power, but that estimative
judgments are activated by certain combinations of per-
ceptual properties, which are in a particular relation (e.g.,
offensive or convenient) to the perceiver. Furthermore,
Olivi did not consider estimation as a separate faculty,
since according to him there is only one internal sense,
the common sense, and the acts traditionally attributed
to other internal senses can be explained as functions of
that faculty.
John of Jandun, who was active in early fourteenth
century, developed his understanding of the internal
senses based on Avicenna, Averroes, and Albert the
Great. Unlike many earlier writers, Averroes was particu-
larly important for his thought, which in many respects,
however, was based on Albert’s mostly Avicennian frame-
work. During the same period, Walter Burley was focusing
on the principles of various traditional classiﬁcations. This
led Burley to incorporate a fourfold division (with only
one faculty of imagination) of the internal senses into the
traditional Avicennian ﬁvefold division and to combine
this with the Avicennian–Averroistic idea of abstraction.
John Buridan, however, preferred a classiﬁcation
where there are only two faculties: common sense and
memory. The former is responsible for processing and
the latter for storing both forms and intentions. The rest
of the internal senses are merely names for certain func-
tions of these two senses. According to Buridan, they have
two corresponding organs in the brain: the organ of com-
mon sense in the forebrain and the organ of memory
between the last two cerebral ventricles in the hindbrain.
Moreover, Buridan stressed that the primary organ of
common sense is the heart (which he understood to be
Aristotle’s position) and consequently explained the
apparent contradiction with the idea of cerebral organs
by suggesting that there are special nerves connecting the
two cerebral organs with the heart. He thought that his
explanation was able to incorporate the various traditional
views and sufﬁciently explain the diverse phenomena
connected to these faculties.
566 I
Internal Senses

Many late fourteenth century De anima commentaries
were in their general outline heavily inﬂuenced by
Buridan. This did not, however, always show up in their
discussions of internal senses. Several authors did not
share Buridan’s heart-centered view, but located the inter-
nal senses in the brain. Neither did they all share Buridan’s
reduction of the internal senses into common sense and
memory. For example, Nicholas Oresme spoke about four
or ﬁve internal senses, attributing cogitative power to
humans and estimation only to animals. He based the
fourfold division on the argument that there must be
different faculties for forms and intentions and explicitly
rejects the twofold classiﬁcation with reference to the
traditional Galenic observation that injuries to the rear
part of the brain affect only memory, not imagination.
Peter of Ailly discusses the internal senses in his
Tractatus de anima using both Buridan and a compen-
dium called Summa naturalium written by Albert of
Orlamu¨nde as his sources. Peter distinguishes ﬁve internal
senses, but no longer follows the Avicennian scheme,
which sharply distinguishes between the faculties that
deal with forms and those that handle intentions. Conse-
quently he agrees with Buridan that memory stores both
forms and intentions. Furthermore, as regards the problem
of heart versus brain he agrees with Buridan, but localizes
the cerebral organs of the individual internal senses in the
ventricles of the brain. Still later, at the end of the fourteenth
century, Henry Totting of Oyta presents the internal senses
in a manner that closely follows Buridan.
During the ﬁfteenth century, new interest was aroused
in Aquinas’ philosophy and consequently even in his view of
the internal senses. In his commentary on De anima, for
example, Henry of Gorkum presents the same fourfold
division and same principles as Aquinas in the Summa
theologiae. Similar to Aquinas, Henry shows only minor
interest in the problem of the physiological location of the
internal senses, but thinks that their organs are situated
primarily in the brain. He explains the role of the heart
using the expressions of the Avicennian–Averroistic medical
tradition, and describes the heart as the origin of sensory
functions,withperceptionsactually taking placeinthebrain.
See also: ▶Albert the Great ▶Augustine ▶Ibn Rushd,
Muh˙ammad ibn Ah˙mad al-H˙ afı¯d (Averroes) ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯,
Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna) ▶John Buridan ▶John Duns Scotus
▶John of La Rochelle ▶Medicine and Philosophy
▶Parva naturalia, Commentaries on Aristotle’s ▶Peter
John Olivi ▶Sense Perception, Theories of ▶Species,
Sensible and Intelligible ▶Thomas Aquinas ▶Walter
Burley
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Albert the Great (1968) De anima, ed. Stroick C. Alberti Magni Opera
omnia VII.1. Aschendorff, Mu¨nster
Albert the Great (1986) Summae de creaturis secunda pars, quae est de
homine, ed. Borgnet A. Opera omnia, vol 35. Vive`s, Paris
Aquinas Thomas (1948–1950) Summa theologiae, ed. Caramello P.
Marietti, Turin
Avicenna (1968/1972) Liber de anima seu Sextus de naturalibus, ed. van
Riet S. Avicenna Latinus, vol I–III. Peeters/Brill, Louvain/Leiden;
vol IV–V. E´ditions Orientalistes/Brill, Louvain/Leiden
Buridan John (1984) Quaestiones in Aristotelis De anima liber secundus
de tertia lectura, ed. Sobol PG. In: John Buridan on the soul and
sensation. PhD dissertation, Indiana University
John of Jandun (1587) Super libros De anima subtilissimae quaestiones.
Hieronymus Scotus, Venice
Olivi Peter John (1922–1926) Quaestiones in secundum librum
Sententiarum, vol. 3, ed. Jansen B. Collegium S. Bonaventurae,
Florence-Quaracchi
Peter of Ailly (1987) Tractatus de anima, ed. Pluta O. In: Die
philosophishe Psychologie des Peter von Ailly: Ein Beitrag zur
Geschichte der Philosophie des spa¨ten Mittelalters. Bochumer
Studien zur Philosophie, vol 6. Gru¨ner, Amsterdam
Secondary Sources
Black D (1993) Estimation (Wahm) in Avicenna: the logical and psycho-
logical dimensions. Dialogue 32:219–258
Blaustein M (1984) Averroes on the imagination and the intellect. PhD
dissertation, Harvard University Press
Ga¨tje H (1965) Die ‘inneren Sinne’ bei Averroes. Zeitschrift der deutschen
morgenla¨ndischen Gesellschaft 115:255–293
Harvey RE (1975) The inward wits. Psychological theory in the Middle
Ages and the Renaissance. The Warburg Institute, University of
London, London
Klubertanz G (1952) The discursive power: sources and doctrine of
the ‘‘Vis Cogitativa’’ according to St. Thomas Aquinas. Modern
Schoolman, St. Louis
Sobol PG (2001) Sensations, intentions, memories, and dreams. In:
Thijssen JMMH, Zupko J (eds) The metaphysics and natural philos-
ophy of John Buridan. Brill, Leiden, pp 184–198
Steneck N (1970) The problem of the internal senses in the fourteenth
century. PhD dissertation, University of Wisconsin
Taylor R (1999) Remarks on Cogitatio in Averroes’ Commentarium
Magnum in Aristotelis De anima Libros. In: Endress G, Aertsen JA
(eds)
Averroes
and
the
Aristotelian
tradition.
Brill,
Leiden,
pp 217–255
Toivanen J (2007) Peter Olivi on internal senses. Br J Hist Phil 15(3):
427–454
Wolfson HA (1973) The internal senses in Latin, Arabic and Hebrew
philosophic texts. In: Twersky I, Williams GH (eds) Studies in the
history and philosophy of religion, vol 1 (originally published
in Harv Theol Rev (1935) 28:69–133). Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, pp 250–314
Wood R (2007) Imagination and experience in the sensory soul and
beyond: Richard Rufus, Roger Bacon and their contemporaries. In:
Lagerlund H (ed) Forming the mind. Essays on the internal senses
and the mind/body problem from Avicenna to the medical enlight-
enment. Springer, Dordrecht, pp 27–57
Internal Senses I
567
I

Intuitive and Abstractive
Cognition
JOE¨L BIARD
Centre d’Etudes Supe´rieures de la Renaissance
Universite´ Franc¸ois-Rabelais de Tours
Tours
France
Abstract
The theory of intuitive and abstractive cognition was
developed by John Duns Scotus in the late thirteenth
century, and it dominated the discussion about cognition
from the fourteenth to the sixteenth century. The theory
was changed and debated by the major philosophers of the
time including William of Ockham, Peter Auriol, Gregory
of Rimini, and Peter of Ailly.
The theory of intuitive and abstractive cognition is not
simply a rehashing of the problem of abstraction, as it
developed in the Middle Ages from Boethius. In line with
the texts of Aristotle and Alexander of Aphrodisias,
abstraction was the process of separation of a form. It
was either the gathering of similarities to constitute
a universal concept or the extraction, the stripping off of
the material and singular conditions of the form. In these
cases, abstraction was based on the act of the intellect,
which is the only faculty able to grasp the abstracted or
universal form, whereas the senses grasp the singular
together with all its concrete and material conditions.
The Peripatetic saying that only the intellect knows the
universal does not necessarily mean that it has no access
to the singular, since the form could be present in
a certain mode of being in the individual substance
itself. But it was difﬁcult to hold that the intellect
knows directly the singular as such. Faith certainly
implies that the divine intellect knows the singulars
directly, at least in the case of humans since some are to
be saved while others damned. But it was generally
thought that this capacity is restricted to the divine
intellect. In the thirteenth century, as far as human cog-
nition is concerned, there were conﬂicting views between
those that supported the view that intellection is exclu-
sively of universals such as Robert Grosseteste, Alexander
of Hales and Albert the Great, and those, notably Thomas
Aquinas, that supported the view that intellection is
indirectly of singulars, in a dematerialized form, but
proper to the singular.
The theory of intuitive and abstractive cognition, on
the other hand, is linked to the emergence of the idea that
a singular can be grasped directly by the intellect itself. It
was in the Franciscan, anti-Thomist, tradition that this
theory was developed. In the Correctorium fratris Thome
of William de la Mare, which was adopted in 1282 as an
ofﬁcial position of the Franciscan order, Aquinas was
criticized for having maintained that the intellect does
not cognize singulars. Without a doubt, this is a sim-
pliﬁcation. But what is at stake is the possibility of
a direct cognition of the singular. And it is from
such a direct cognition that the idea of intuition or intu-
itive cognition is formed. In this sense, the theory is not
truly formed until the last quarter of the thirteenth cen-
tury, and ﬁnds its canonical expression in Duns Scotus
before becoming a central component of theories of cog-
nition from the fourteenth until the sixteenth century.
The idea of intuition refers to vision. Since Augustine,
the idea of vision has been applied not only to sensible
vision, and not only to the inner vision of an image, but
also to thought. Augustine generally used the term visio in
this sense, but he introduces the verb intueri to describe
the act of grasping the eternal reasons, and calls intuitus
this immediate act of the mind (De trinitate, IX, vi, 9–11).
The verb intueri and the adverb intuitive were ﬁrst used
in conjunction with singular cognition by Matthew of
Aquasparta. We ﬁnd them again used by Vital du Four,
John Duns Scotus, and William of Ockham. The Augus-
tinian origin is reinforced by the theory of vision, as it was
received from the optics of Alhazen, where certain and
direct vision by a straight ray, is named intuitio.
As is well known, it was Duns Scotus that develops the
standard theory of intuitive and abstractive cognition. The
most explicit text is the Quodlibetal Questions. In question
6, Scotus is led to examine the beatiﬁc vision. He then
examines the capacities of the human intellect itself. It is
hence in his treatment of the intellect in relation to the
beatiﬁc vision that he distinguishes two simple acts of
apprehension (Questiones quodlibetales, VI, }}. 18–20).
The essential distinguishing criterion takes into account
the existence or nonexistence of the object. The ﬁrst type
of act is, in fact, indifferent to the object’s existence or
nonexistence, or rather the presence or absence of the
object. Scotus justiﬁes the acceptance of such an act by
our internal experience. He evokes the intellection of
a universal, which is indifferent to its existence in
a suppositum, and what happens in science, in which we
know the conclusion of a demonstration, whether the
signiﬁed objects either exist or not. This act is called
‘‘abstractive.’’ One might ask why? The answer is because
568 I
Intuitive and Abstractive Cognition

it abstracts from something, namely primarily from the
existence or nonexistence of the thing. Scotus, however,
immediately changes this characterization by highlighting
the indifference with respect to the presence or absence of
the thing, since one thing can exist while being absent. The
context of this description of the acts of cognition, namely
the question of the beatiﬁc vision, is important, since it
implies a ‘‘face-to-face’’ vision. But it is here extended to
a mode of cognition, generally characterized.
To this ﬁrst type of simple act of the intellect, Scotus
contrasts another one that relies uniquely on the object
as present and existing. He admits that we do not experi-
ence this with much certainty, but he justiﬁes it with
reasoning. We can draw an analogy with sense, since it
grasps a present object, and that act is implicitly consid-
ered a greater perfection. Hence, the intellect would be
less perfect than the sense if it did not grasp the object in
itself, but only in a derived image.
There are several other expositions of this theory in
Scotus’ works, but none of them changes this pattern.
Certain passages emphasizes more than others the fact
that an intuitive cognition grasps the thing as it is in
itself, in se, while abstractive cognition captures only
a similitudo, or a species (Reportata parisiensa). This way
of presenting the contrast will ﬁnd its way into many texts
of the fourteenth century, as we shall see.
One issue raised by some of Scotus’ texts is whether or
not we truly have an intuitive cognition in this life, or if it
is a capacity of our intellect that is only realized after
death. A text from the Questions on the Metaphysics
(Book II, q. 3) seems to exclude it from this life. However,
a text of the Quodlibetal Questions does not deny this
possibility. Scotus says only that we do not experience it
with certainty, and in the Opus oxoniense (dist. 3, q. IX) he
says that we do have an intuitive cognition pro statu isto.
An objection that will be dealt with by Scotus’ succes-
sors is caused by the fact that on his view, two distinct acts
can have the same object. But on Scotus’ theory of cogni-
tion, we can say that the same object is known by different
formal reasons.
On the model of an intuitive cognition as a vision face
to face, it is necessary that its object exists and is present.
Yet from another point of view, it is important for Scotus
to differentiate what actually exists, on one hand, from
what is simply possible (and therefore may not even exist),
or what is necessary and what can perhaps be thought
independently of its actuality. Scotus, therefore, intro-
duces a surprising distinction, which was taken over by
his successors, between a perfect intuitive cognition,
which presents something real and given to the intellect,
and an imperfect intuitive cognition. The latter type
accounts for memory as well as for vision of the future
in the case of prophetic vision.
The theory of intuitive and abstractive cognition is
found in most theologians of the fourteenth century.
Peter Auriol begins with the deﬁnition of intuitive cogni-
tion as the cognition of a thing as present, whereas abstrac-
tive cognition is of the thing as absent. But he inserts this
distinction in his analysis of experience and optical illu-
sions. I can not only judge but also see something other
than this. Hence, we must distinguish what he calls esse
apparens from real being. Esse apparens is not as an inter-
mediary entity, as William of Ockham believed or pre-
tended to read into Auriol, but the very appearance of the
thing to my intellect. The difference that arises in some
cases (illusions) between this apparent or intentional
being and real or subjective being leads one to think that
my intellective act terminates at this esse apparens. Conse-
quently, an intuitive cognition terminates at the being as it
appears. The difference is reformulated by highlighting the
direct character of an intuitive cognition that makes the
object appear as present in its presentialitas.
However, it was mainly Ockham’s theory that stimu-
lated discussion due to the modiﬁcations it introduces
into Scotus’ theory. William of Ockham is concerned
with ensuring the realism of his theory of cognition, crit-
icizing Auriol’s theory, which he perceives as a skeptical
threat. Intuitive cognition is the starting point for all
intellectual activities, not by a process of drawing out
a form, but through a series of acts, which, ultimately,
depend on direct contact with the thing itself. This – at
least in the mature theory where the concept is viewed as
an act of intellection – causes the rise of the concept in the
intellect, which in turn is viewed as a natural sign. Such
a concept is at ﬁrst singular but it may be followed by
a concept that abstracts either from the existence of the
thing or from a particular feature, in order to form
a universal concept, through a confused apprehension
of a plurality of things bearing a certain resemblance.
Ockham often insists on the fact that intuitive and
abstractive cognitions do not differ in their objects and
that both terminate in the same thing. Furthermore,
things do not have different formalities (formalitates)
within them that could be objects of different intellections,
since Ockham only admits of real distinctions. These two
acts are independent of one another, although in our
actual state one presupposes the other.
It is clear that in Scotus, these cognitions are simple
acts prior to any judgment. In a way this is still the case
with Ockham, but the Ockhamist deﬁnition shifts to
Intuitive and Abstractive Cognition I
569
I

a characterization that bases this distinction on the types
of judgments that these different acts allow.
Abstractive cognition has several meanings. In one
sense, it means a cognition, which, given that it abstracts
from certain traits of the thing, may be suitable for many
singulars. In this sense, therefore, cognition allows for the
formation of universal concepts through a joint apprehen-
sion of a plurality of singular things. But it is not this sense
that identiﬁes the abstraction to the universal, which is the
most important here. In another sense, ‘‘we understand an
abstractive cognition in the way in which it abstracts from
existence or non-existence, and from other conditions
that, in a contingent manner, happen to a thing or are
predicated of it.’’ Up to this point, we are close to Scotus.
But the main thing is that, on that basis, two relations to
the thing are characterized, and these descriptions are
immediately connected with the types of judgments pos-
sible. These are Ockham’s proper deﬁnition of intuitive
and abstractive cognition. An intuitive cognition of
a thing is a cognition such that, by it, I can know if the
thing exists or not. In other words, the intellect, which
perfectly captures these terms or signs, and also what they
signify, is forced to assent to a proposition stating that the
thing exists, if it exists. Consequently, such a cognition will
also allow with certainty the formulation of judgments
about contingent truths. Conversely, abstractive cognition
is that by which I cannot judge whether an object exists or
not, and that does not permit me to have knowledge about
contingent truths.
Ockham’s theory thus departs from Scotus’ position,
although it depends on it, since the presence or absence of
the thing is not the primary criterion for the deﬁnition of
these two kinds of cognitions. Ockham pushes to the
breaking point the idea that the very nature of the act
alone should be the criterion, and these acts then are the
basis of these two different types of judgments.
Ockham’s theory serves as a point of reference
throughout the fourteenth century. However, it encoun-
tered resistance. Thus, in his Lectures on the Sentences
(Book I, dist. 3, q. 3, art. 1), Gregory of Rimini stays
close to the Scotist view but develops it in several direc-
tions. First, he applies the distinction between intuitive
and abstractive cognition as well to sensitive as to intel-
lective cognition. Although Scotus used the comparison
with the senses, the problem was raised by him in the
context of the beatiﬁc vision, which concerns the intellect
alone. Gregory of Rimini deﬁnes an intuitive cognition as
that by which ‘‘something is formally known in itself,’’ and
an abstractive cognition as that by which ‘‘something is
formally known through some representation.’’ But he
goes on to explicitly distinguish the real existence from
the type of presence required here. An intuitive cognition
does not have as a criterion that the object actually exists in
reality or not; the difference is between the immediate
presence of the thing and the presence of a representative
intermediary. Consequently, an abstractive cognition does
not abstract from real existence, but from what is named
‘‘the objective presence of the known thing.’’ In an intui-
tive cognition, it is the thing that is present ‘‘objectively’’
(obiective), that is, as something in front of the intellect
and facing it directly – whether it exists, or that our
cognition, by a natural or divine power, ends at an object
that does not exist at all. Abstractive cognition, on the
other hand, abstracts from such an ‘‘objective presence’’
and ends immediately at a ‘‘representation.’’
These ideas are reﬂected in Peter of Ailly. In his Com-
mentary on the Sentences, he begins by literally following
Ockham’s presentation, claiming that an abstractive cog-
nition does not allow me to judge whether something
exists when it exists or does not exist, when it does not
exist. But further, he insists on the fact that abstractive
cognition gives us the object ‘‘in a representation’’ thereby
restating, via Gregory of Rimini, certain Scotistic formu-
lations. In the Commentary on the Sentences as well as in
the Treatise on the Soul, the most appropriate formulation
seems to be that ‘‘an intuitive cognition is a simple cogni-
tion by which some thing is formally known in itself in an
immediate way, while an abstractive cognition is a simple
cognition by which something is formally known by
means of a representation.’’ Hence, abstractive cognition
does not, properly speaking, set aside the existence of the
thing, but its praesentialitas obiectiva. The thing is not
facing it as an object (i.e., what is placed in front of the
intellect), but as ‘‘means’’ that is representative of this
thing (either an image or another type of sign). Con-
versely, in the intuitive cognition, ‘‘the thing itself is the
object for the cognizer, as immediately present to him.’’
The modiﬁcation that William of Ockham made to the
deﬁnition of an intuitive cognition led him to formulate
the hypothesis of an intuitive cognition of a nonexistent
thing. This thesis has perplexed contemporaries, but it has
also been overestimated and overly interpreted by many
commentators. Ockham’s concern is mainly about the
separation of the act, analyzed in itself and in its relations
to other acts, from the thing at which it terminates. This
real distinction implies that, perhaps not in the course of
nature, at least according to the absolute power of God, we
can conceive of one without the other, as is the case with
all truly distinct things. This argument does not ruin in
any way the fact that, in the ordained power of God,
intuitive cognition supposes the presence of the thing.
Moreover, his own deﬁnition has the consequence that
570 I
Intuitive and Abstractive Cognition

has not always been emphasized (see Quodlibet V, q. 5)
that if an intuitive cognition enables me to judge that
something exists when it exists, or does not exist when it
does not exist, then in the supernatural case of an intuitive
cognition of the nonexistent, I should judge that this thing
does not exist! Of course, this is hardly conceivable in the
normal course of events, but in any case, there would be no
deception here, certainly not divine deception.
This hypothesis of an intuitive cognition of nonexis-
tence de potentia absoluta was widely accepted after
Ockham, though differently used. It demonstrates the
widespread inﬂuence of the Ockhamist theses. Gregory
of Rimini and Peter of Ailly both repeat it, without open-
ing the door to skepticism. However, it is true that the idea
would supply some of Ockham’s successors (like Walter
Chatton, Adam Wodeham, Richard Fitzralph, John
Rodington in Oxford, and Peter of Ailly in Paris) with
the hypothesis of Divine deception. This hypothesis had
not been developed by itself, nor as a simple radicalization
of demonic deceptions, but as part of a broader debate on
the discussion of the relation of divine power to the
course of nature, including what the natural process of
cognition is concerned with. It does not in any way led to
a renouncement of epistemological realism. It was part of
a development of certain conceptual tools and arguments
allowing for a new way to think about the status of
a concept and its object, as well as about the concept of
evidence. In less than a century, the theory of intuitive and
abstractive cognition became one of the major elements in
the transformation of the medieval theory of cognition.
See also: ▶Adam Wodeham ▶Albert the Great ▶Alexan-
der of Hales ▶Certainty ▶Epistemology ▶Gregory of
Rimini ▶John Duns Scotus ▶Peter Auriol ▶Peter of
Ailly ▶Robert Grosseteste ▶Thomas Aquinas ▶William
of Ockham
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Ariminensis Gregorii (1979–1984) Lectura super primum et secundum
Sententiarum, 6 vols, e´d. Trapp D, Marcolino V et al. Walter De
Gruyter, Berlin/New York
Aureoli Petri (1952–1956) Scriptum super primum Sententiarum, 2 vols,
ed. Buytaert EM. The Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure
de Allyaco Petri (1490) Questiones super libros Sententiarum. Jordanus
de Quedlinburg, Strasbourg
de Aillyaco Petri (1987) Tractatus de anima. In: Pluta O. Die
philosophische
Psychologie
des
Peter
von
Ailly.
B.
Gru¨ner,
Amsterdam
de Ockham Guillelmus (1967) Scriptum in primum librum Sententiarum
ordinatio, Prol. and dist. 1. In: Opera theologica, I. The Franciscan
Institute, St. Bonaventure
Duns Scotus Ioannes (1893) Opus oxoniense, II, dist. 3–14, vol XII.
Vive`s, Paris
Duns Scotus Ioannes (1894) Reportata parisiensa, Prol., dist. 1 et 2, vol
XXII. Vive`s, Paris
Duns Scotus Ioannes (1950–2001) Ordinatio, I and II. In: Doctoris
subtilis et mariani b. Ioannis Duns Scoti Opera omnia, vol I–VIII.
Typis polyglottis Vaticanis, Civitas vaticana
Duns Scotus John (1968) Cuestiones Cuodlibetales. In: Alluntis F (ed and
trans) Obras del Doctor Sutil Juan Duns Escoto. Biblioteca de autores
cristianos, Madrid
Duns Scotus John (1975) God and the creatures: the Quodlibetal ques-
tions, Alluntis F, Wolter AB. Princeton University Press, London/
Princeton
Secondary Sources
Alluntis F, Wolter AB (1975) God and the creatures: the Quodlibetal
questions. Princeton University Press, London/Princeton
Biard J (2008) La position d’objet dans la the´orie de la connaissance de
Pierre d’Ailly. In: Federici Vescovini G, Rignani O (eds) Oggetto
e spazio. Fenomenologia dell’oggetto, forma e cosa dai secoli XIII-
XIV ai post-cartesiani. Atti del Convegno, Perugia, 8–10 settembre
2005. Micrologus’ Library 24. SISMEL-Edizioni del Galluzzo,
Firenze, pp 19–36
Biard J (2008) Pierre d’Ailly: langage, concept et representation. In:
Biard J (ed) Le Langage mental du Moyen Aˆ ge a` l’Aˆ ge classique.
Peeters, Leuven/Paris
Boler JF (1982) Intuitive and abstractive cognition. In: Kretzmann N,
Kenny A, Pinborg J (eds) The Cambridge history of later medieval
philosophy. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Day SJ (1947) Intuitive cognition, a key to the signiﬁcance of the later
scholastics. The Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure
Panaccio C (1992) Intuition, abstraction et langage mental dans la the´orie
occamiste de la connaissance. Revue de Me´taphysique et de morale,
vol 97 (for an English version see Panaccio C (2004) Ockham on
concepts. Ashgate)
Pluta O (1987) Die philosophische Psychologie des Peter von Ailly. B.
Gru¨ner, Amsterdam
Reina ME (1995) Tommaso di Strasburgo nella controversia sulla
distinzione scotiana tra conoscenza intuitiva e conoscenza astrattiva.
Archives d’histoire litte´raire et doctrinale du Moyen Aˆ ge 62:37–70
Sondag G (2005) Duns Scot. La me´taphysique de la singularite´. Vrin, Paris
Isaac Israeli
MARIENZA BENEDETTO
Dipartimento di Scienze Filosoﬁche
Universita` degli Studi di Bari
Bari
Italy
Abstract
With Ish˙a¯q ibn Sulayma¯n al-Israeli, generally known as
Isaac Israeli, the philosophical season of the Jewish Middle
Ages begins. Integrating, in Jewish thought, philosophical
Isaac Israeli I
571
I

ideas drawn from Greek and Arabic sources, Isaac Israeli
gives us the ﬁrst, albeit not very original, testimony of
Jewish Neoplatonism.
Biographical Information
We have only indirect information about Isaac Israeli’s life.
The main sources are an Arab Andalusian biographer
active in the second half of the tenth century, Abu¯
Da¯wu¯d ibn Giulgiul, in his Generations of the Physicians,
and, in the mid-eleventh century, S˙a¯‘id of Toledo, in his
Generations of the Nations. Although the exact dates of his
life remain unclear, we tend to assume that Isaac Israeli
lived between 850 and 950 CE c. (‘‘an age of over
a hundred’’, as we read in the biography by Giulgiul). He
was a Jewish eye doctor born in Egypt, who emigrated to
Qayrawa¯n (in Tunisia) and entered the service of the local
emir, Ziya¯dat Alla¯h, and then his successor, ‘Ubayd Alla¯h
(founder of the Fatimid Ishmaelite dynasty), as their
doctor.
Likewise, we still know little of how Israeli’s philo-
sophical formation came about. However, the inﬂuence
of al-Kindı¯’s original writings, as well as those of his circle,
especially a Neoplatonic Arabic source of The Theology of
Aristotle (the so-called ‘‘Ibn H˙ asda¯y’s Neoplatonist’’), is
undoubted: in Israeli there is basically the same synthesis
as found earlier in al-Kindı¯’s school between Platonic,
Aristotelian, and strictly theological elements.
Originally written in Arabic, Israeli’s treatises can be
divided into two categories, which had different impacts.
The medical treatises – of which are extant the Book of
Foodstuffs and Drugs, the Book of Fevers, and the Book of
Urine – were very popular throughout the Middle Ages in
the Jewish world, as well as in Islamic and Christian circles.
Recognizing their value, Israeli himself is supposed to have
said that his memory would survive better through these
books than through his progeny.
Israeli’s reputation as a philosopher, on the other
hand, was less widespread: Jewish philosophers made lim-
ited use of his philosophical writings, perhaps because in a
well-known letter to Samuel ibn Tibbon (in which a
veritable ‘‘canon’’ of the auctoritates of Jewish thought was
established), Maimonides held that he was ‘‘only a doctor.’’
Nevertheless, Israeli probably redacted his philosophical
treatises just in order to divulge Graeco-Arab doctrines
amongst the Jewish public. The following treatises are
conserved:
●
The Kita¯b al-Hudu¯d, the Book of Deﬁnitions, extant
both in an incomplete copy of the original Arabic text,
and, in a complete version, in medieval Latin and
Hebrew
translations
(transcribed,
respectively,
by
Gerard of Cremona and Nissim ben Shelomoh), is
a kind of philosophical dictionary
that collects
57 terms from epistemology, logic, metaphysics, psy-
chology and theology. What is striking at this regard is
that the work circulated in the Latin West as the ulti-
mate source of the famous veritas est adaequatio rei et
intellectus, of which Israeli did not make any mention.
●
The Kita¯b al-Giawa¯hir, the Book of Substances, of
which large fragments of the Arabic text are extant, is
a
cosmological-metaphysical
treatise
inspired
by
Aristotle’s Theology.
●
Sefer ha-ruah˙ we ha-nefesh, the Book on the Spirit
and the Soul, preserved in two Hebrew versions
and only in a fragment of the Arabic original, is full of
biblical references, as it combines philosophical doc-
trines of the soulwith Jewish scriptural proof (regarding
the belief in rewards and punishments of the soul).
●
Kita¯b al-Ust˙uqsa¯t, the Book on the Elements, which like
most of the other philosophical works exists in
Hebrew and Latin translations, is a treatise on the
quality and quantity of the elements, evidently based
on Aristotle.
●
Pereq ha-yesodot, the Chapter on the Elements, of which
a single Hebrew manuscript exists (at the Biblioteca
Comunale of Mantua) was once erroneously ascribed
to Aristotle.
Thought
Following a practice characteristic of medieval Arab, and
later Jewish, Neoplatonists, in the best known of all his
philosophical works, the Book of Deﬁnitions, Isaac Israeli
proposes a reading of philosophy that combines Platonic
and Aristotelian themes. The starting point is represented
by the four philosophical questions introduced by Aris-
totle in his Posterior Analytics to deﬁne things: whether,
what, which, and why; i.e., existence, quiddity, quality, and
quantity. Philosophy – Israeli explains – is not included in
a genus from which its deﬁnition could be composed:
having no answer to the question ‘‘what,’’ we are only in
the condition to describe philosophy through its name,
property and effect. The result is that philosophy is respec-
tively the love of wisdom, the assimilation to the works of
the Creator (i.e., to acquire the true knowledge of things
and to do what corresponds to the truth) and man’s
knowledge of himself (by knowing himself in both his
spirituality and corporeality, man knows the macrocosm
in its spiritual and corporeal substances).
Yet apart from this aspect, which represents only
a general introduction to Israeli’s work, what actually
characterizes his thought? There follows the deﬁnitions
of the substances that are arranged between God (or God’s
572 I
Isaac Israeli

perfection) and the imperfect lower world according to
less and less pure ranks. In Israeli’s hierarchically ordered
universe – later reproposed with the same structure and
the same terms in the Fountain of Life by Avicebron, who
undoubtedly knew Israeli’s work – God creates ex nihilo
two simple substances, matter and form; and if primary
matter is described as the substratum of diversity or as the
truly ﬁrst genus, the ﬁrst form is what, imprinting itself on
this matter, establishes the nature of the intellect. From the
intellect, which Israeli deﬁnes as the totality of forms,
emanates the world of souls (the rational soul, the animal
soul, and the vegetative soul); and so, in descending order,
the world of the spheres and the sublunary world, with the
four elements and their compounds. The reason for the
differences between the various substances is that the light
originating in the supernal world gradually diminishes, as
it passes downward through the degrees of the emanation.
In short, the further this light is from its source, the more
it darkens and thickens, but without disappearing (if this
were not so, the substantial unity and continuity of the
universe would be compromised); and the more the sub-
stances are imperfect. As it is not difﬁcult to see, what
changes is not only the quality of the light, and conse-
quently the nature of the substances, but also the manner
in which the cosmological process occurs. The distinction
is, succinctly, between
●
Creatio ex nihilo, or innovation: the action with which
God makes existent the ﬁrst two simple substances
from the nonexistent
●
Emanation, which concerns the hypostases in the spir-
itual world (every substance ﬂows from ‘‘the splendor
and the brilliance’’ of the one that comes before)
●
Natural causality: the passing of corporeal substances
from privation to existence.
The theological motive behind this threefold distinction is
quite obvious: introducing the concept of creation into
the framework of an emanationist metaphysics, and the
necessary procession that it implies, Isaac Israeli preserves
God’s Power, Will, and Wisdom.
See also: ▶Avicebron ▶Form and Matter ▶al-Kindı¯, Abu¯
Yu¯suf Yaʿqu¯b ibn Ish:a¯q ▶Philosophy, Jewish ▶Plotinus,
Arabic
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Altmann A (1956–1957) Isaac Israeli’s chapter on the elements. J Jewish
Stud 7:31–57
Altmann A, Stern SM (eds) (1958) The book of deﬁnitions; The book of
substances; The book on spirit and soul; The book on the elements
(an excerpt). In: Isaac Israeli. A Neoplatonic philosopher of the early
tenth century. Oxford University Press, London, pp 3–145
Muckle JT (1937–1938) Isaac Israeli, Liber de deﬁnicionibus. AHDLMA
12:299–340
Secondary Sources
Monographs
Altmann A, Stern SM (1958) Isaac Israeli. A Neoplatonic philosopher of
the early tenth century. Oxford University Press, London
Guttmann J (1911) Die philosophischen Lehren des Isaak ben Salomon
Israeli. Aschendorffsche Verlagsbuchhandlung, Mu¨nster
Collections
Altmann A (ed) (1981) Creation and emanation in Isaac Israeli:
a reappraisal. In: Essays in Jewish intellectual history. University
Press of New England, Hanover, pp 17–34
Pessin S (2003) Jewish Neoplatonism: being above being and
divine emanation in Solomon ibn Gabirol and Isaac Israeli. In:
Frank DH, Leaman O (eds) The Cambridge companion to medieval
Jewish philosophy. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp
91–110
Wolfson HA (1973a) Isaac Israeli on the internal senses. In: Twersky I,
Williams GH (eds) Studies in the history of philosophy and religion,
vol 1. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, pp 315–343
Wolfson HA (1973b) The meaning of ex nihilo in Isaac Israeli. In:
Twersky I, Williams GH (eds) Studies in the history of philosophy
and religion, vol 1. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, pp
222–233
Journal Articles
Muckle JT (1933) Isaac Israeli’s deﬁnition of truth. AHDLMA 8:5–8
Stern SM (1956–1957) Isaac Israeli and Moses Ibn Ezra. J Jewish Stud
7:83–89
Stern SM (1961) Ibn Hasday’s Neoplatonist: a Neoplatonic treatise and its
inﬂuence on Isaac Israeli and the longer version of the theology of
Aristotle. Oriens 13–14:58–120
Isidore of Seville
SANDRO D’ONOFRIO
Modern Romance Languages and Literatures
SUNYat Buffalo
Amherst, NY
USA
Abstract
Isidore of Seville was a teacher of liberal arts at the begin-
ning of the Dark Ages, who was primarily known by his
encyclopedic knowledge and his famous scholarly texts.
Isidore tried fervently to ﬁt all the secular knowledge
available in his time into a Christian worldview, often
with a great dose of eclecticism and hardly any criticism.
Nevertheless, he provided the system educational of his
day with classic and scientiﬁc knowledge and preserved
this information for future medieval authors.
Isidore of Seville I
573
I

Isidore (c. 560–636), bishop of Seville, currently Patron
Saint of the Internet, and primarily known as the author of
The Etymologies, was an isolated thinker at the beginning
of the Dark Ages. This historical setting bestowed upon
Isidore the title of ‘‘the last candle’’ of classical wisdom.
However, he can be evaluated in two different ways: as an
erudite among the intellectual poverty where he lived, or as
part of a decadent tradition in philosophy. The encyclopedic
knowledge embodied in his works, such as The Etymologies
or De natura rerum, cannot be denied. Yet, as a member of
a ruined academic system, his job consisted here and there
of restating, recapitulating, and sometimes simply trans-
literating both data and theories that lacked research and
originality; further, there are no proper sources, explicit
quotes, or clear references of the cited authors.
It would be unfair to judge this brilliant intellect out-
side the historical circumstances which led him to produce
this kind of work, because Isidore also represents the
survival of classical culture among the unreceptive and
strict Christian civilization which destroyed the School
of Alexandria and also the Athenian Academy. In this
respect, his work is actually remarkable, especially if we
take into account the fact that there was no scientiﬁc
community or current study of nature. Despite the lack
of originality and the abundant eclecticism, his work was
invaluable for forthcoming generations, because it pre-
served the classical impetus of Greek science and philoso-
phy for later innovative times.
But Isidore did more than that. He was a Christian
thinker, and his main objective was to conciliate Catholic
theology with secular science. The issue, however, was not
that secular knowledge had to be Christianized: it was that
secular knowledge had to be understood within the frame-
work of the revealed ‘‘Christian knowledge,’’ and thus
ﬁtted into the true scheme of the cosmos; the ‘‘pursuit of
knowledge in itself’’ was abandoned in deference to this
authoritative knowledge, which was sincerely believed to
be true knowledge. Hence, his The Differences and The
Synonyms were not only devoted to clarifying the meaning
of the words, but also to elucidating many theological
issues. All in all, the idea was to describe not an objective
world, but the Christian world.
Because he never made explicit his own theory about
language, Isidore is considered to be a compiler and trans-
mitter as compared with original thinkers around his era,
such as Boethius or Erigena. But, for Isidore, science
consisted of recollection, discussion, and explanation of
the given knowledge. Just like the last encyclopedists of the
Roman Empire, Varro and the elder Piny, he only
attempted to expose thoroughly all current knowledge,
in order to offer scholars a manual for instruction.
Hence, as was customary at the time, Isidore’s production
is devoted to portraying ancient wisdom and, thus, says
little about his own period. In The Etymologies, for
instance, he deals ﬁrst with the liberal arts and then goes
on to expose everything that was considered to be science
or knowledge in his time, from medicine and law, through
natural history and human geography. Understandably, it
was in his own time that The Etymologies was really appre-
ciated as an instrument of instruction for monastic and
ecclesiastic education, as the thousands of copies that
existed throughout Europe give evidence.
Despite the fact that The Etymologies lacks the critical
commentaries and theoretical innovation that character-
ize the later Middle Ages, the general idea that guided it
can be found in the Summae: a comprehensive account of
secular knowledge enlightened by a Christian understand-
ing. Thus, philosophical activity remained imbibed, to a
certain extent, in dialectics, grammar, and rhetoric. The
main subject of Isidore’s research was the ﬁeld of gram-
mar: he was a grammaticus, in the sense of the Trivium’s
teachers. With the apparent purpose of deﬁning words
correctly, Isidore followed the grammarian tradition
developed from the Hellenic period as to Donatus and
Priscian; but his linguistic analysis and the peculiar deﬁni-
tions do not correspond to what we would expect in rela-
tion to our modern understanding of linguistics and
etymology. He did not intend to give historical and accurate
meanings of the words; instead, he prescribed what they
should mean. In a world in which philosophical problems
were reduced to dialectics, in which peace or war, death or
life, relied on the rhetoric of ambassadors and diplomats,
the grammarian played a central role. Yet, a grammarian’s
activity takes place on a different ﬁeld, namely, theology
and natural science. The grammarian, as Isidore proved,
was the ‘‘science man,’’ the teacher, and the arbiter: he could
explain what the words stand for. Provided that an errone-
ous interpretation of the world implied wrong terminology,
heresies and wars followed from the words. The task of the
grammarian consists in giving the true meaning of a word.
In this fashion, Isidore began the tradition of rooting the
meaning of words in reality, the signiﬁcatio, as can be later
appreciated in the terminist logicians and speculative
grammarians of the high Middle Ages.
The frame of mind behind Isidore’s production por-
trays the medieval condition of Philosophia anchilla
theologiae, which opened the scholastic outlines of the
later Middle Ages. There is no doubt that for him all
secular knowledge could be explained inside the frame-
work of Christian theology; indeed, this knowledge helped
to construct the Catholic understanding of the world. As a
consequence, by accepting secular science, Isidore’s
574 I
Isidore of Seville

scholastic point of view is actually closer to Anselm’s
rather than to Augustine’s, even though his activity was
more theological than dialectical. Along with his gram-
matical accounts of religious thought, we ﬁnd the Liber
numerorum, the Allegorie, and the Sententiae, in which he
also used the tools of language for Biblical exegesis. In the
enormous desolation of ideas that reigned in the seventh
century, Isidore of Seville was deﬁnitely more than
a candle: rather he was a torch.
See also: ▶Boethius ▶John Scottus Eriugena
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Are´valo Faustino s.j. (ed) (1797–1803) S. Isidori Hispalensis episcopi
opera omnia, 7 vols. Roma
Lindsay WM (ed) (1911) The ethymologies (electronic resource). Oxford
University Press, Oxford. Internet edition by Bill Thayer. Web page:
http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Isidore/home.
html. Accessed 14 Jun 2008
Secondary Sources
Brehaut E (1912) An encyclopedist of the dark ages: Isidore of Seville
[electronic resource]. Columbia University, New York (Internet edi-
tion by Internet Archive. Web page: http://www.archive.org/details/
encyclopedistofd00brehrich)
Brehaut E (1964) An encyclopedist of the dark ages: Isidore of Seville. B.
Franklin, New York, 274 pp
Fontaine J (1959) Isidore de Seville et la culture classique dans L’espagne
wisigothique, 2 vols. Etudes Augustiniennes, Paris
Madoz J s.j. (1960) In: Garcia Goldaraz C (ed) San Isidoro de Sevilla;
semblanza de su personalidad literaria. Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Cientiﬁcas, Centro de Estudios e Investigaciones S.
Isidoro, Leon, 199 pp
O’Connor JB (1910) St. Isidore of Seville. In: The catholic encyclopedia
[electronic resource], vol 8. Robert Appleton Company, New York.
http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/08186a.htm. Accessed 14 Jun 2008
Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯ Philosophical Tradition
DANIEL DE SMET
Laboratoire d’Etudes sur les Monothe´ismes (CERL)
CNRS
Villejuif
France
Abstract
Neoplatonic philosophy was introduced into Isma¯ʿı¯lism,
a major branch of Shı¯ʿite Islam, as early as the beginning of
the tenth century. Relying not only on the Arabic para-
phrases of Plotinus (the so-called Theology of Aristotle)
and Proclus (the Liber de causis), but also on Arabic
philosophers such as al-Kindı¯ and al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯ Neo-
platonism has as its main concern the understanding of
revelation through philosophical reﬂection and to estab-
lish religious doctrines on a rational basis. Although Abu¯
Ya’qu¯b al-Sijista¯nı¯, the main representative of the so-called
‘‘Persian School’’ (tenth century), and al-Kirma¯nı¯, the
most important Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯philosopher of the Fatimid period
in Egypt (eleventh century), have developed quite differ-
ent systems, based, respectively, on the Neoplatonica Arab-
ica and on al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, they both try to harmonize the
teachings of the Prophets and the Imams with an inter-
pretation of Plato and Aristotle going back to late Antiq-
uity. They established a close link between cosmology and
noetics, in order to provide a rational foundation for the
soteriological function of the Imam. As a part of the
Universal Soul fallen into the material world, human
soul has to be delivered from the body in which she is
kept captive by the actualization of her intellectual faculty.
To this end, she needs the instruction of the Prophets
and the Imams, the incorporations of the cosmic Agent
Intellect.
From the tenth century onward, Isma¯ʿı¯lism, a major
branch of Shı¯ʿite Islam, developed a speciﬁc form of Neo-
platonic philosophy (known as ‘‘Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯ Neoplatonism’’)
in order to harmonize the teachings of the Prophets and
the Imams – as they are reﬂected for instance in the
Qurʾa¯n – with an interpretation of Plato and Aristotle
going back to late Antiquity. Moreover, out of the same
concern to understand revelation through rational reﬂec-
tion and to establish religious doctrines on a rational basis,
Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯s also adopted and assimilated a set of notions and
concepts from falsafa, the philosophical tradition in the
Muslim world. After the foundation of Cairo in 969, the
Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯dynasty of the Fatimids, competing with the Sunni
‘Abba¯sids of Baghdad, attracted to their new capital
philosophers, theologians, and scientists; libraries, hospi-
tals, and observatories were founded, for instance the
‘‘House of Wisdom’’ (Da¯r al-‘ilm) devoted to the study
of sciences and philosophy.
The main sources of Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯ philosophy are the Arabic
paraphrases of Plotinus (the so-called Theology of
Aristotle) and Proclus (the Liber de causis), several Neo-
platonic works written in Arabic (such as the Doxography
of Pseudo-Ammonius), and texts attributed by the Arabic
tradition to Empedocles (the Pseudo-Empedocles). Also,
Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯ philosophers living in Iran and Transoxiana in the
tenth century belonged to the same intellectual milieu as
certain disciples of al-Kindı¯, such as Abu¯ Zayd al-Balkhı¯,
Ibn Farı¯g˙u¯n, Abu¯ l-H˙ asan al-‘A¯mirı¯, Abu¯ Sulayma¯n
Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯ Philosophical Tradition I
575
I

al-Sijista¯nı¯, and Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯. In the eleventh
century, Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯thought was inﬂuenced by the ‘‘Epistles of
the Pure Brethren’’ (Rasa¯’il Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯’) and by
fala¯sifa such as al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯. Moreover, Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯ Neoplato-
nism shows many similarities with contemporary Jewish
Neoplatonism, in particular with Isaac Israeli, both tradi-
tions using the same philosophical sources.
Neoplatonic philosophy was probably introduced into
Isma¯ʿı¯lism by Muh:ammad al-Nasafı¯ (d. c. 943), who
formed with Abu¯ Tamma¯m, Abu¯ H˙ a¯tim al-Ra¯zı¯ (d. 934),
and Abu¯ Ya‘qu¯b al-Sijista¯nı¯ (d. c. 971), the so-called ‘‘Per-
sian School.’’ These Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯ thinkers worked in Iran and
Transoxiana.
The best-known member of this ‘‘Persian School’’ is
Abu¯ Ya‘qu¯b al-Sijista¯nı¯, whose main philosophical works
are the Book of the Wellsprings (Kita¯b al-Yana¯bı¯‘), the
Unveiling of the Hidden (Kashf al-mah:ju¯b), and the Book
of the Keys (Kita¯b al-Maqa¯lı¯d, still unpublished). Each of
these works is built upon a triadic scheme, consisting of
the three Plotinian hypostases of Intellect, Soul, and
Nature. Plotinus’ ﬁrst hypostasis, the One, is situated
outside the system of the universe, and al-Sijista¯nı¯
stresses its absolute transcendence: it is not a being, nor
a substance, nor a cause, nor an essence; but at the same
time it is not a non-being, nor a non-substance, nor a non-
cause, nor a non-essence. Therefore, every attribute and its
negation must be denied from the One (negative theol-
ogy): only by means of a double negation the Ultimate
Reality can be referred to. By his Word (kalima) or Com-
mand (amr), the transcendent One creates (abda‘a) the
Intellect; out of the Intellect emanates (inba‘atha) the
Soul, which generates (kawwana) the sensible world. Al-
Sijista¯nı¯ distinguishes, indeed, three modes of production:
ibda¯‘, which occurs out of any time; inbi‘a¯th, which pro-
duces time by the movement of the Soul; takwı¯n, which
takes place in time. While Intellect, as the ﬁrst created
being, is eternal, perfect in act, and free of any movement,
the Soul is perfect only in potency. This imperfection
generates a double movement in the Soul: she aspires to
attain the Intellect, the grasping of which enables her to
become perfect in act; but at the same time, due to her
imperfection, she is attracted downward to the physical
world. Al-Sijista¯nı¯’s ample reﬂections on the Plotinian
concept of the two sides of the Soul inﬂuenced fala¯sifa
such as Avicenna (Ibn Sı¯na¯). The Soul’s inclination toward
matter causes the generation of the physical world and
the fragmentation of the Soul into a multitude of parts
mixed up with matter. These are the human souls: parts of
the Universal Soul fallen into the corporeal world. The way
down is paralleled with an upward one, leading human
souls back to their celestial origin, along with the reversal
of the entire creation toward its source, in accordance with
the Neoplatonic cycle of processio and reditus. This way
back necessitates the mediation of the Prophets and
the Imams, as earthly manifestations of the Intellect,
whose instruction (ta‘lı¯m) actualizes the human potential
intellect, a necessary condition for the survival of the
soul outside the body and her ﬁnal return to the intelligi-
ble world.
The most important Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯ philosopher of the
Fatimid period, H˙ amı¯d al-Dı¯n al-Kirma¯nı¯, spent part of
his life in Cairo, in the entourage of caliph al-H˙ a¯kim. He
ﬁnished his main work, the Book of the Repose of the
Intellect (Kita¯b Ra¯h:at al-‘Aql) in 1021, probably shortly
before his death.
Conceived as a spiritual city, divided into seven
‘‘walls’’ (aswa¯r) surrounding 56 ‘‘crossroads’’ (masha¯ri‘),
the Ra¯h:at al-‘Aql develops a system of the universe based
on the number ten. A perfect harmony reigns between the
three ‘‘worlds’’ of which the universe is composed: the ten
separated Intellects of the intelligible world, the ten celes-
tial spheres governing the physical world, and the ten
ranks of the da‘wa – the organization of the Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯
community – which form the world of religion. The tran-
scendent and unknown Creator (Mubdi‘) remains outside
the universe. Al-Kirma¯nı¯ describes him in the same terms
as al-Sijista¯nı¯, stressing even more his transcendence. For
al-Kirma¯nı¯, even the Intellect, the ﬁrst created being, has
no direct contact with its Creator, who remains outside the
reach of his creatures for ever. Although he describes the
Intellect in terms very close to the Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯ Neoplatonism
of his predecessors, al-Kirma¯nı¯ introduces a lot of con-
cepts that he borrowed from al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s Principles of the
Opinions of the Inhabitants of the Perfect State (Maba¯di’
a¯ra¯’ ahl al-madı¯na al-fa¯d˙ila). So he takes over al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s
conception of the First Being as a self-thinking intellect,
but he applies it to the Intellect, the ﬁrst created being,
thus introducing an ontological shift with respect to the
First Principle of the fala¯sifa. Al-Kirma¯nı¯’s Intellect,
although a created being, is to be identiﬁed with the God
of the Qurʾa¯n, of which it even bears the name: Alla¯h.
Containing in its essence all the ‘‘forms’’ and being the
‘‘cause of causes’’ (‘illat al-‘ilal), the Intellect is the princi-
ple of emanation (inbi‘a¯th) of all subsequent beings. How-
ever, this emanation does not produce the Plotinian
entities (Soul and Nature), as was the case in tenth-century
Isma¯ʿı¯lism, but rather al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s separated Intellects. In
fact, al-Kirma¯nı¯ introduced the Fa¯ra¯bian cosmology into
Isma¯ʿı¯lism; at the same moment, Avicenna gave it its
classical form in his Kita¯b al-Shifa¯’. Although relying
directly on al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, the scheme of emanation described
by al-Kirma¯nı¯ conserves some traces of the former
576 I
Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯ Philosophical Tradition

Plotinian triad. The Intellect, as far as it is a thinking
intellect (‘aql ‘a¯qil), produces an Intellect in act (the ﬁrst
emanated being, al-munba‘ath al-awwal), the source of
the emanation of seven other Intellects in act; but as far as
it is an intellect thought by itself (‘aql ma‘qu¯l), it produces
an Intellect in potency, composed of matter and form.
This is the tenth and last Intellect: the demiurge, who
forms the sublunary world in accordance with the patterns
it receives from the ﬁrst Intellect, through the eight Intel-
lects in act. The ﬁrst Intellect (or ﬁrst created being), the
second Intellect in act (or ﬁrst emanated being), and the
tenth Intellect in potency correspond, respectively, to the
three hypostases of earlier Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯Neoplatonism: Intellect,
Soul, and Nature. Al-Kirma¯nı¯’s theory of knowledge seems
also very close to al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯’s, as he borrows from him the
main technical terms: the potential intellect (al-‘aql bi-
l-qu¯wa), the material intellect (al-‘aql al-hayu¯la¯nı¯), the
intellect in act (al-‘aql bi-l-ﬁ‘l), the acquired intellect (al-
‘aql al-mustafa¯d), and the active intellect (al-‘aql al-fa‘‘a¯l).
Following al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, al-Kirma¯nı¯ identiﬁes the Agent Intel-
lect with the tenth Intellect and assigns it, along with its
main role in the creation of the physical world, both
a noetical and a soteriological function, as far as it is
the principle of the actualization of the rational faculty
in man and, in consequence, the principle of his eternal
happiness and survival. However, concerning the nature
and activity of the Agent Intellect, al-Kirma¯nı¯, as an
Isma¯ʿı¯lı¯, departs widely from the faylasu¯f al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯, by
claiming that it exercises its action only through the
instruction (ta‘lı¯m) of the Prophets and the Imams. At
difference with the rational faculty of ordinary men,
the Intellect of the Prophets and the Imams is perfect
and always in act, without needing to pass from
potency to actuality. They might therefore be consid-
ered
as
incorporations
of
the
Agent
Intellect,
a dangerous heterodox statement; hence, al-Kirma¯nı¯
cautiously only hints at in his Ra¯h:at al-‘Aql.
See also: ▶Abu¯ Sulayma¯n al-Sijista¯nı¯ al-Mant:iqı¯ ▶al-
ʿA¯mirı¯, Abu¯ l-H˙ asan ▶al-Balkhı¯, Abu¯ Zayd ▶al-Fa¯ra¯bı¯,
Abu¯ Nas˙r ▶Ibn Farı¯g˙u¯n ▶Ibn Sı¯na¯, Abu¯ ʿAlı¯ (Avicenna)
▶Ikhwa¯n al-S˙afa¯ʾ, Encyclopedia of ▶Isaac Israeli ▶al-
Kindı¯, Abu¯ Yu¯suf Yaʿqu¯b ibn Ish:a¯q ▶Philosophy, Arabic
▶Plotinus, Arabic ▶Presocratics in the Arab World
▶Proclus, Arabic ▶al-Tawh:ı¯dı¯, Abu¯ H˙ ayya¯n
Bibliography
Primary Sources
al-Sijista¯nı¯ Abu¯ Ya‘qu¯b (1988) Kashf al-mah:ju¯b, French trans. Corbin H.
Abuˆ Ya‘quˆb Sejestaˆnıˆ. Le de´voilement des choses cache´es. Recherches
de philosophie ismae´lienne (Islam Spirituel). Verdier, Lagrasse
al-Sijista¯nı¯
Abu¯
Ya‘qu¯b
(1994a)
Kita¯b
al-Yana¯bı¯‘,
French
trans.
Corbin H. Trilogie ismae´lienne (Islam Spirituel). Verdier, Lagrasse,
pp 9–164
al-Sijista¯nı¯ Abu¯ Ya‘qu¯b (1994b) Kita¯b al-Yana¯bı¯‘, English trans. Walker P.
The wellsprings of wisdom. A study of Abuˆ Ya‘quˆb al-Sijistaˆnıˆ’s Kitaˆb
al-Yanaˆbıˆ‘ including a complete English translation with commen-
tary and notes on the Arabic text. The University of Utah Press, Salt
Lake City
al-Sijista¯nı¯ Abu¯ Ya‘qu¯b (2001) Kashf al-mah:ju¯b, English trans. Landolt H.
Abuˆ Ya‘quˆb Sijistaˆnıˆ. Kashf al-mahjuˆb. Unveiling of the hidden. In:
Nasr Seyyed H, Aminrazavi M (eds) An anthology of philosophy in
Persia, II: Ismaˆ‘ıˆlıˆ and Hermetico-Pythagorean philosophy. Univer-
sity Press, Oxford, pp 71–124
Secondary Sources
De Smet D (1995) La Quie´tude de l’Intellect. Ne´oplatonisme et gnose
ismae´lienne dans l’œuvre de H˙ amı¯d ad-Dı¯n al-Kirma¯nı¯. Orientalia
Lovaniensia Analecta 67. Peeters, Louvain
De Smet D (1998) Empedocles Arabus. Une lecture ne´oplatonicienne
tardive.
Verhandelingen
van
de
Koninklijke
Academie
voor
Wetenschappen, Letteren en Schone Kunsten van Belgie¨. Klasse der
Letteren. Jaargang 60, 1998, Nr. 165. Palais des Acade´mies, Bruxelles
Halm H (1997) The Fatimids and their traditions of learning. Ismaili
Heritage Series 2. I. B. Tauris and the Institute of Ismaili Studies,
London
Walker P (1993) Early philosophical Shiism. The Ismaili Neoplatonism of
Abuˆ Ya‘quˆb al-Sijistaˆnıˆ. University Press, Cambridge
Walker P (1996) Abuˆ
Ya‘quˆb al-Sijistaˆnıˆ. Intellectual missionary.
I. B. Tauris and the Institute of Ismaili Studies, London/New York
Walker P (1999) Hamıˆd al-Dıˆn al-Kirmaˆnıˆ. Ismaili thought in the age of
al-Haˆkim. Ismaili Heritage Series 3. I. B. Tauris and the Institute of
Ismaili Studies, London/New York
Italos, Johannes
▶John Italos
Italos, Johannes I
577
I


