Synthese Library
Studies in Epistemology, Logic, Methodology,
and Philosophy of Science
460
Valia Allori   Editor
Quantum 
Mechanics and 
Fundamentality
Naturalizing Quantum Theory between 
Scientific Realism and Ontological  
Indeterminacy

Synthese Library
Studies in Epistemology, Logic, Methodology,
and Philosophy of Science
Volume 460
Editor-in-Chief
Otávio Bueno, Department of Philosophy, University of Miami, Coral Gables, USA
Editorial Board Members
Berit Brogaard, University of Miami, Coral Gables, USA
Anjan Chakravartty, Department of Philosophy, University of Miami, Coral Gables,
USA
Steven French, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK
Catarina Dutilh Novaes, VU Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Darrell P. Rowbottom, Department of Philosophy, Lingnan University, Tuen Mun,
Hong Kong
Emma Ruttkamp, Department of Philosophy, University of South Africa, Pretoria,
South Africa
Kristie Miller, Department of Philosophy, Centre for Time, University of Sydney,
Sydney, Australia

The aim of Synthese Library is to provide a forum for the best current work in
the methodology and philosophy of science and in epistemology, all broadly under-
stood. A wide variety of different approaches have traditionally been represented in
the Library, and every effort is made to maintain this variety, not for its own sake,
but because we believe that there are many fruitful and illuminating approaches to
the philosophy of science and related disciplines.
Special attention is paid to methodological studies which illustrate the interplay
of empirical and philosophical viewpoints and to contributions to the formal
(logical, set-theoretical, mathematical, information-theoretical,decision-theoretical,
etc.) methodology of empirical sciences. Likewise, the applications of logical
methods to epistemology as well as philosophically and methodologically relevant
studies in logic are strongly encouraged. The emphasis on logic will be tempered
by interest in the psychological, historical, and sociological aspects of science. In
addition to monographs Synthese Library publishes thematically uniﬁed anthologies
and edited volumes with a well-deﬁned topical focus inside the aim and scope of
the book series. The contributions in the volumes are expected to be focused and
structurally organized in accordance with the central theme(s), and should be tied
together by an extensive editorial introduction or set of introductions if the volume
is divided into parts. An extensive bibliography and index are mandatory.

Valia Allori
Editor
Quantum Mechanics
and Fundamentality
Naturalizing Quantum Theory between
Scientiﬁc Realism and Ontological
Indeterminacy

Editor
Valia Allori
Philosophy Department
Northern Illinois University
Naperville, IL, USA
ISSN 0166-6991
ISSN 2542-8292
(electronic)
Synthese Library
ISBN 978-3-030-99641-3
ISBN 978-3-030-99642-0
(eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-99642-0
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland
AG 2022
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether
the whole or part of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse
of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and
transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar
or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication
does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book
are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or
the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any
errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional
claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Switzerland AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland

Introduction
This book is a collection of essays devoted to exploring different aspects in the
foundations and the philosophy of quantum theory. They range from issues about
its compatibility of scientiﬁc realism to questions about the ontology of the theory;
from questions about what is fundamental to questions about the nature of the wave
function and of quantum objects. Accordingly, the book is divided into four parts,
which however share some overlap in topics.
Part I: Realism
The ﬁrst part deals with issues regarding scientiﬁc realism and quantum theories.
Quantum mechanics is a fundamental physical theory. In virtue of this, scientiﬁc
realists would think that it can inform us about the nature of the world. Nonetheless,
for a very long time, many thought that quantum mechanics forced to anti-realism.
Against the classical view that macroscopic objects and their properties can be
understood as composed by microscopic objects governed by clear and precise laws,
the Copenhagen school, championed by many of the founding fathers of quantum
theory, promoted the idea that the quantum world is intrinsically incomprehensible
and unknowable. All physics can do is predict experimental results, being unable to
provide a satisfactory description of reality. That is, we should abandon the naïve
idea behind scientiﬁc realism that theories can help us understand the world.
It is commonly accepted that the problem to solve to make quantum theory
compatible with realism is the measurement problem. Quantum theory is a theory
about an object, the wave function, which evolves in time according to an equation
called the Schrödinger equation. It is a mathematical fact that, given that this
equation is linear, sums of solutions are also solutions. That is, they also represent
physically possible states of affairs. If quantum theory is complete, it describes
both macroscopic and macroscopic bodies, and if microscopically one has a sum
of solutions (a superposition), then this may propagate macroscopically. This is the
typical case of the Schrödinger cat. Assume a cat is in a box where a radioactive
v

vi
Introduction
atom is hooked up to a vial of poison so that if the atom decays the vial breaks and
the cat dies. If the initial wave function is a superposition of the states “decayed”
and “undecayed,” then the ﬁnal state will be a superposition of “dead” and “alive”
cat. However, we never observe such macroscopic superpositions: the cat is either
dead or alive. In other words, if the wave function evolves according to the
Schrödinger equation, and the theory is complete, there are unobserved macroscopic
superpositions. If we want to think of quantum theory as compatible with realism,
we have to ﬁx this problem. This is traditionally taken care of in the standard
formulation of quantum theory by the collapse rule: it is postulated that whenever
there is a measurement (like us opening the box and observing the state of the
cat), the wave function no longer evolves according to the Schrödinger equation
but randomly collapses into one of the terms of the superpositions. However, this is
unsatisfactory: what physical processes are to be considered measurements? While
some have searched for a solution of this problem and connected others outside of
quantum theory, others have argued that decoherence, roughly the interaction of a
system with its environment, can help us solve them from within the theory: the
system is effectively “measured” by its interaction with the environment, so that
the superpositions effectively collapse into one of its terms. Davide Romano in
Chap. 1 criticizes this perspective. One of the challenges is that quantum theory
needs to provide a wave function for the original system after the interaction
with the environment, starting from the wave function of the system composed
of the original system and its environment. Some have argued that decoherence
can provide us with such a wave function. Romano instead shows that this is not
the case. Moreover, standard quantum theory has the problem of explaining why
the wave function can be written as a function of different variables (position,
momentum, etc.), but everyday objects seem to be located in space. It has been
maintained that decoherence can explain why the position basis is privileged, but
Romano maintains that the argument is circular, if applied to the standard theory:
positions are introduced as a privileged in the system-environment interaction.
If we leave standard quantum mechanics aside, other solutions of the measure-
ment problem are fully compatible with a realist interpretation: the pilot-wave
theory (also known as de Broglie-Bohm theory, or Bohmian mechanics), the
spontaneous collapse or spontaneous localization theory (which also goes under the
name of dynamical reduction theory, or GRW theory), and the many-worlds theory
(also popular under the name of Everettian mechanics). Roughly put, Bohmian
mechanics is a theory in which the description of the system is provided by the
wave function that is supplemented by particles’ positions; in the GRW theory, the
wave function no longer evolves according to the Schrödinger equation to allow for
the collapse to be built in the dynamics rather than postulated; Everettian mechanics
instead takes seriously the idea that all possible terms of the superpositions are actual
and realized in different “words” which no longer interact with one another.
Granting that our belief in scientiﬁc realism is justiﬁed, one natural question
is how these theories connect the physics with the metaphysics. This is a matter
of controversy. Physical theories use mathematics in their formulations; therefore,
if these theories describe the world, one needs to identify a correspondence rule

Introduction
vii
to identify which mathematical entities represent physical objects, their properties,
and their laws of evolution. Within the classical domain, this correspondence was
straightforward, because it was clear to Newton what his theory was supposed to
be about (particles), and there was an obvious mathematical way of representing
their nature (points). That is, Newton went from his metaphysical hypothesis to
the mathematical formalism. Instead, in quantum mechanics the opposite is true:
we have a mathematical formalism that works very well in predicting experimental
results, that is, there is a correspondence between the formalism and the world at the
macroscopic level, but we need to physically interpret it in the microscopic domain:
what do the various variables mean, from the point of view of describing the nature
of the world? Some variables that appear in the quantum formalism are the same
as in the classical case, and thus they seem to have an obvious correspondence:
t is time, m is mass, V or F represents the interaction. But interaction between
what? There is an evolution equation for the wave function, so presumably this
is the object representing what physical objects are made of. It would be nice if
the wave function could be represented as an oscillation in three-dimensional space,
just like electromagnetic ﬁelds. However, this is not possible, as the wave function,
at best, can be interpreted as oscillating in a space with much higher dimension,
the so-called conﬁguration space. The view according to which the wave function
in this high-dimensional space is the fundamental ontology has been dubbed in
the literature as “wave function realism.” If we take this route, then we have the
problem of making sense of this connection given that the wave function lives in
some abstract space, rather than three-dimensional space. Motivated in part from
this problem, some have contended that the wave function is not the right kind
of mathematical object to represent matter, only some kind of “local beables”
can suitably do that. Roughly, a mathematical object is a be-able, as opposed to
observable, in the sense that it represents something; the locality condition refers
to the fact that it is in three-dimensional space rather than in a space of higher
dimensions.
A particular way of implementing this view is the so-called “primitive ontology”
framework. The idea is that the wave function should not be seen as representational
but rather it should be thought as having another role in the theory. In particular,
some have argued that the wave function is more similar to a law of nature or a
property than to an object, but it is not straightforward to spell out what this is
supposed to mean. On this basis, in Chap. 2, Matthias Egg critically engages with
the primitive ontology approach, which he dubs “quantum fundamentalism.” He
argues that it is in tension with the basic idea of scientiﬁc realism if one pushes
the view to the conclusion that the wavefunction is not real. In fact, while quantum
fundamentalism seems to entail that we are more justiﬁed in believing in the entities
which belong to the fundamental ontology rather than those which are not in it,
scientiﬁc realism instead pushes in the opposite direction. That is, given we have
stronger evidence from them, it encourages us to think that we are more justiﬁed in
believing in nonfundamental objects than in fundamental ones.
As an alternative to the primitive ontology approach, we have seen, one ﬁnds
wave function realism. A natural question is whether there are some principles we

viii
Introduction
can use to determine which ontology should we choose for quantum theory. This is
discussed by Vera Matarese in Chap. 3. She presents and critically analyzes two
of the principles that have been presented in the literature: the dynamical matching
principle and the minimal divergence norm. The former asserts that the fundamental
structure of the world should match the structure of the dynamical laws of the
theory and has been used to support wave function realism; the latter asserts that
one should choose the theory that minimizes the difference between what the theory
says the world is like and how the world appears, and it has been taken to support
the primitive ontology approach. Matarese argues that this is not straightforward
and that both principles can be used to support either view. Thus, she concludes,
ultimately these principles cannot guide our choice of ontology but rather they are
best regarded as useful tools to restrict the space of plausible ontologies.
In addition to the three theories discussed above, there are other proposals. For
instance, the information-theoretic account maintains that quantum theory should
be understood as providing constraints over possible experimental outcomes. It has
been argued that this approach is compatible with realism because it provides a
mind-independent, objective description of reality. Laura Felline critically engages
with this approach in Chap. 4, by comparing it with Bohmian mechanics and the
GRW theory. While the proponents of each approach argue that their framework is
to be preferred, Felline instead maintains that, in a Kuhnian way, there is no common
standard to which one could compare them with one another: they ask different
questions, and provide different answers; they have different aims, and they provide
different solutions. In this way, they both can provide us with different but equally
important insights.
Within the information-theoretic framework, the wave function is taken to be
epistemic, that is, it represents out knowledge of the system rather than the system
itself: for instance, when we make a measurement on a system, the wave function
changes because we acquire new information. It has been argued that there are
strong reasons, such as the PBR theorem, which disqualify epistemic views of
the wave function. Under this assumption that the wave function has to represent
something real (it is ontic), in Chap. 5 Travis Norsen explores the question
regarding the best way of thinking about the wave function. He ﬁrst criticizes the
various proposals, from wave function realism to the approach that it is a law of
nature or a property, and he proposes to take more seriously the possibility of
constructing a theory in which the information contained in the wave function is
captured by some sort of orchestrated ﬁeld, like it is (imperfectly) done in his theory
of exclusively local beables.
One may think that all these controversies about the compatibility between
realism and quantum theory is a waste of time because realism is doomed after all. If
so, why should we care about the theories discussed, which take realism for granted?
Darrell P. Rowbottom argues that even if one is not convinced that scientiﬁc
realism is true, theories with a clear ontology may be useful regardless. In Chap. 6 he
shows that also an instrumentalist should prefer a theory with a clear ontology, like
Bohmian mechanics. In fact, even if the theory were to fail to be approximately true
(for instance because the notion of approximate truth is not well deﬁned, or because

Introduction
ix
the theory is nonrelativistic), Bohmian mechanics possesses signiﬁcant theoretical
virtues. Rowbottom argues that they can be valuable, among other things, in the
understanding of how phenomena are connected with one another. In this way, even
if one does not endorse scientiﬁc realism, one can get the next best thing, namely
understanding, by endorsing Bohmian mechanics.
Part II: Ontology
Setting the worries about realism aside or granting that there is value in having a
clear model also from the point of view of the anti-realist, one can move to more
speciﬁc questions about ontology. We already mentioned wave function realism,
which regards the wave function as the fundamental ontology of the worlds, as
well as the primitive ontology approach, which views quantum theories to be about
a three-dimensional microscopic ontology rather than the wave function. Then
we have space-time state realism, according to which the fundamental ontology
of a quantum mechanical world consists of a state-valued ﬁeld evolving in four-
dimensional space-time. There are also many other approaches based on the notion
of local beables, and the one dubbed “minimalist ontology,” which seem to come
from similar perspectives: the former maintains that the ontology of a theory
needs to be local, and the latter argues for an ontology of point particles. Given
these similarities, all these proposals have been grouped under the same category.
However, they are different. Andrea Oldofredi, in Chap. 7, compares and contrasts
them. Oldofredi underlies how some local beables, such as electromagnetic ﬁelds,
may not be suitable primitive ontologies. This is so because the primitive ontology
framework, in addition to having the requirement of a local (i.e., three-dimensional)
ontology, also gives importance to symmetry properties, which would be violated
if electromagnetic ﬁelds were included in the primitive ontology. In addition, it
is noted how the primitive ontology program is more ﬂexible than the minimalist
ontology framework as the latter postulates a fundamental ontology of matter points,
while the former leaves open the possibility for other types of ontologies such as
matter ﬁelds or spatiotemporal events (“dubbed ﬂashes”).
This is evident in the framework of the various GRW theories. In fact, while
Bohmian mechanics is easy to interpret as a theory of particles, in the primitive
ontology framework one cannot really talk about “the” GRW theory, because in
this theory there is only the wave function, and the wave function, not being a
three-dimensional object, is not a suitable primitive ontology. Rather, different
possible primitive ontologies for the same GRW wave function evolution have
been proposed: a continuous matter density ﬁeld, ﬂashes, or even particles. To each
primitive ontology corresponds a distinctive GRW-type theory: GRWm, GRWf, and
GRWp, respectively. In Chap. 8, Elizabeth Miller challenges the viability of the
matter ﬁeld and the ﬂash ontology. As Egg criticized the primitive ontology program
from a scientiﬁc realist perspective, Miller argues that these ontological choices for
the GRW theory undermine the motivation to endorse the primitive ontology view

x
Introduction
to start with. The argument is that if one resists a wave-function-only-GRW-theory
because there are superpositions, these superpositions still remain in GRWm and
GRWf, albeit in a subtle form which is worth investigating.
In the literature, the proponents of the primitive ontology program have always
taken for granted that the primitive ontology had determinate values. Instead,
Cristian Mariani, in Chap. 9, argues that in the context of GRWm it would be
more appropriate to think of the primitive ontology as indeterminate in the sense of
lacking deﬁnite properties. In fact, it is argued, this would allow us to make sense of
the so-called “inaccessible mass” problem. In GRWm, the matter density function is
many-to-one: two different wave functions describing physically different situations
can generate the same matter density. In the literature, the locutions “accessible”
and “inaccessible” have been introduced to describe the different physical situations
represented by the same matter density. However, if the inaccessible matter density
is to be taken ontologically seriously, Mariani argues that it then remains unclear
what characterizes the two physically distinct situations. He therefore proposes that
by thinking of the primitive ontology as indeterminate, one could still retain the
proper reductive explanatory schema of the primitive approach.
Be that as it may, traditionally, the way in which scientiﬁc theories give us a
picture of the world is spelled out in terms of specifying what the fundamental
objects are, what their fundamental properties are, and what laws applies to them.
However, there are departures from this general trend, some of which come as
ways of responding to the so-called pessimistic meta induction argument against
scientiﬁc realism. One of the strongest arguments for realism claims that if the
theory is successfully reproducing the data, then we have grounds of believing it
to be true. However, the pessimistic meta induction objection roughly states that
empirical success cannot be an indication of truth since all past theories which have
been successful turned out to be false. One of the responses to this challenge is
structural realism, which urges us to rethink of our understanding about ontology.
In fact, in this approach structure is all we are justiﬁed to believe, since structure has
been preserved through theory change, and it is responsible of the theories’ success.
There are various forms of structuralism, some of which have been motivated by
features of quantum theory, such as entanglement: the fact that composite systems
have no individual wave function suggests that they have no individuality. This
elminativism is a radical form of structuralism in which there are relations without
relata: objects are not fundamental, relations are. All there is, is structure. Given the
necessity of explaining how relations can exist without relata, some have proposed
more moderate structuralist perspectives which relax this constraint and generally
maintain that structure and objects are both fundamental components of the world.
Valia Allori, in Chap. 10, proposes a structuralist understanding of the properties
of fundamental objects. The proposal is that these objects have no other fundamental
property than the one needed to specify their nature. The basic idea is that properties
are in the laws, rather than in the objects, and laws may be understood as suitable
structural relations between these objects. This account is then compared and
contrasted with various types of structuralism, and it is argued that it is superior
in various respects: it shares the main motivations of more traditional structuralist

Introduction
xi
views, but it does not have the corresponding problems. In the quantum domain,
this approach is compatible with both the primitive ontology approach and the wave
function realism. In fact, according to wave function realism, the wave function is
fundamental while everything else, including objects and their properties suitably,
emerges from it, while in the primitive ontology framework all properties are in the
law, including the wave function.
Another perspective on quantum mechanics with a strong structuralism com-
ponent is relational mechanics. In this view, defended by Carlo Rovelli in Chap.
11, the wave function does not describe objects nor properties, but it is merely a
calculational device. The fundamental ontology is relational, discrete, and relative.
The world is a collection of facts interrelated with one another. Facts are identiﬁed as
relations by interactions between other facts. There are no fundamental objects and
no fundamental properties, and all our talk about them emerges from the relational
ontology. The properties described by these facts are determinate only when systems
interact, and they are relative, as they can always be thought of as relations between
two entities.
In Chap. 12, Francesca Vidotto builds up on this and argues that relational
mechanics is supported by the most promising proposals for fundamental physical
theories, from classical mechanics to gauge theories, and from general relativity
to quantum ﬁeld theories. Vidotto argues that all these theories, from the past to
the present one, suggest an ontology of relations, constructing an argument which
seems akin to the structuralist response to the pessimistic meta induction problem:
A relational ontology has been preserved through theory change from past to current
theories; therefore, we are justiﬁed in believing in the existence of such relations.
Even if she does not explore this in detail, Vidotto remarks that this relational
ontology helps in dissipating the worries connected with quantum nonlocality. It
has been extensively argued, but it still remains controversial, that Bell has proven
that nonlocality is a fact of nature. Brieﬂy, his argument is the following: Bell,
starting from the reasoning of Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen (EPR), considered a
particle source which emits pairs of spin-correlated particles in opposite directions.
Experimental results of spin measurements on the two sides display perfect anti-
correlations of outcomes. Since in quantum theory each particle acquires a deﬁnite
spin-property only upon measurement, when the experimenter on one side ﬁnds
spin up, say, along one direction, her act of measurement makes the particle on the
other side acquire the opposite property, and this violates locality of interaction.
To avoid nonlocality, Bell, following EPR, concluded that the spin properties have
to exist before any measurement. He then proposed an inequality which would
be satisﬁed by a such a theory but violated in quantum mechanics. Subsequent
experiments established convincingly that the quantum mechanical predictions
are correct, showing, in the eyes of many, that the world is nonlocal. Relational
mechanics, it is proposed by Vidotto, avoids this conclusion in virtue of its relational
ontology: quantum theory is nonlocal only because we think of single particles as
existing independently, while this is not the case in this framework.
In Bell’s proof there is also the so-called hypothesis of statistical independence,
which is usually taken for granted. It states that the experimental settings do

xii
Introduction
not depend on the distribution of the additional variables. One way to make this
assumption false (and thus invalidate the nonlocality conclusion) is allowing for
superdeterministic theories. Bell regarded them as conspiratorial, but this is the route
that Gerard t’Hooft considers in Chap. 13. He proposes a local, determinist theory,
which he dubs the “cellular automaton interpretation” of quantum theory. However,
this is not an interpretation of a theory but rather a new theory itself. The quantum
formalism is shown to be derivable within this theory, and it is argued that quantum
mechanics is best seen as a useful tool, rather than a theory with some ontological
import. Also, it is shown that this theory is local because it violates the hypothesis of
statistical independence. Nonetheless, t’Hooft argues that denying this assumption
is less troublesome than many have thought.
Part III: The Wave Function
The third part of this collection is devoted to the wave function: should we think
of it as a possible ontology of the theory, or does it have some other role in the
theoretical framework? We have already seen that some approaches, such as wave
function realism, take it to represent the fundamental ontology of the world. Other
perspectives instead regard, in their own ways, the wave function very differently
than wave function realism.
Some quantum theories seem to go better with some of these approaches than
other. For instance, the primitive ontology approach is the straightforward way of
interpreting Bohmian mechanics, while wave function realism seems to be better
suited for the GRW theory or Everettian mechanics. The reason is rather obvious: in
the original formulation of these two theories there is no object other than the wave
function, and adding another entity as the ontology of the theory, as the primitive
ontologist suggests, makes them less simple. Nonetheless, wave function realism
has been resisted by proponents of Everettian mechanics for some of the reasons
we have mentioned but also for others. Lev Vaidman, who is a defender of the
many-worlds theory, in Chap. 14 proposes an approach in which the wave function
is objective real, like in the case of wave function realism, but not fundamental.
He argues that the reason for which we have to admit that the wave function is
in conﬁguration space is to account for the nonlocal properties of the physical
objects. He, however, maintains that our experience of life in three-dimensional
space supervenes on the portion of the wave function deﬁned in three dimensions.
He then concludes that the many-world picture is forced upon us if we wish to avoid
nonlocality in such a deterministic picture.
Another possible way of defending the many-world picture is given by Sean
Carroll, in Chap. 15. His approach follows wave function realism in considering the
wave function as fundamental but differs in regard of which type of mathematical
object one should think the wave function is. Carroll defends the view that the
fundamental ontology of the world is given by the wave function, which is best
understood as a vector in Hilbert space evolving according to the Schrödinger

Introduction
xiii
equation. Carroll argues that everything else suitably emerges from this: from the
laws of physics, which are determined by the Hamiltonian, to three-dimensional
space itself.
At the opposite side of the spectrum of possibilities is Jacob Barandes. If Carroll
argues that the Hibert space picture is the essence of quantum theory, in Chap. 16,
Barandes instead maintains that the Hilbert formalism, including the wave function,
is just a tool which has been useful. It is merely the shadow that we, prisoners
in Plato’s cave, are led to believe is real. He therefore proposes what he dubs the
“Platonic interpretation” of quantum theory in which systems are represented by sets
of properties (as for instance, positions and momentum) whose motion is described
in terms of the Gelfand-Naimark-Segal construction, which Barandes regards as
equivalent to the ﬁre in Plato’s cave allegory.
Whether one can satisfactorily recover our three-dimensional picture of the world
from a fundamental ontology has been extensively discussed in the literature. In this
collection, Jean Bricmont contributes to this debate with Chap. 17, emphasizing
how the wave function is fundamentally unlikely a physical ﬁeld, which prevents
them to be considered suitable ontologies. Furthermore, he argues against Everettian
mechanics by providing an argument of how this theory is unable to recover the
statistics of the results: Bricmont argues that the measure required to give rise to
the correct predictions is unjustiﬁed and thus needs to be postulated in an ad hoc
manner.
The question which however remains open is about the nature of the wave
function: if we think that the wave function does not represent physical systems,
then what does it represent, if anything? As anticipated, some of the approaches
discussed above share the attitude of considering the wave function as not repre-
senting anything material. However, they disagree in how exactly we are supposed
to think of the wave function. A part of them, like relational mechanics, the cellular
automaton interpretation, and the Platonic approach, maintain that the wave function
does not represent anything in the world, neither matter, nor something else. It
is merely a useful tool to formulate the theory. Others, like the proponents of
the information theoretic approach, consider the wave function as representing
something, but not representing something about the world. Rather, they think that
it represents something about our knowledge of it. In other words, in their view,
the wave function is epistemic, rather than ontic. Some others, like the primitive
ontologists and the proponents of the minimalist ontology program, lean towards
considering the wave function as nomological. That is, they think that the wave
function is ontic, rather than epistemic. However, instead of representing matter,
it represents something to describe the way in which matter moves. This idea can
be spelled out in different ways: some regard the wave function as exemplifying a
dispositional property of matter, some others instead think more generally in terms
of the wave function akin to a potential or the Hamiltonian. Naturally, approaches
may overlap: for instance, two approaches may agree in considering the wave
function akin to a potential, but disagree about whether potentials are real or not
(see, e.g., the primitive ontology approach and the Platonic interpretation).

xiv
Introduction
There are several open questions when considering each of these perspectives.
As noted already, the primitive ontology program is particularly suited to discuss
Bohmian mechanics. Dispositionalism is the view according to which, within this
framework, the wave function represents a dispositional property of the Bohmian
particles. In Chap. 18, William Simpson and John Pemberton propose an argu-
ment against the dispositional account of the wave function. They show that the
dispositions fail to determine the particles’ trajectories, and they propose instead
“powers with Aristotelian timing,” that is, powers that persists through time. They
then argue that this cosmic hylomorphism, or a teleological process, is preferrable
to dispositionalism on a variety of grounds, ﬁrst of all its simplicity.
More generally, Nina Emery, in Chap. 19, explores the consequences of thinking
of the wave function as part of the law, proposing what she dubs “the governing
conception” of the wave function, which she links to the idea that the wave function
is whatever explains the behavior of physical objects. She observes that depending
on what is meant by explanation, one is led to different types of questions: either
questions about the reasons why something has happened, or reasons about why
we should expect to observe a given phenomenon. Emery argues that we should
understand the governing conception of the wavefunction as providing an answer
to the former type of questions. She argues that this perspective puts constraints on
wave function realism, in addition to ruling out pragmatic approaches.
Often pragmatic perspectives on the wave function are characterized as main-
taining that the wave function does not represent anything. Rather, it is a useful
tool to describe what an experimenter should expect to observe on their lab. In
contrast with this characterization, in Chap. 20, Richard Healey discusses the
various understandings of thinking of the wave function as representational. Then he
defends the view that the wave function represents an objective relational property
of a given physical system that describes neither its intrinsic physical properties nor
anyone’s epistemic state. Rather it represents the objective probabilities to certain
physical events involving the system.
Part IV: Indeterminacy
Apart from question about ontology, another mysterious aspect of quantum theory
is its probabilistic character. In the original theory, the wave function evolved
according to two evolution equations: the deterministic Schrodinger equation when
the system was unperturbed, while it would randomly collapse into one of the
possible solutions during experimental circumstances. This indeterminism of the
law is lost in deterministic theories such as the pilot-wave theory and the many-
worlds theory, but nonetheless remains in spontaneous collapse theories.
Other questions are about the status of probabilities in deterministic theories,
and whether they can be accounted for. This aspect has already been mentioned
in Bricmont’s paper, who was arguing against Everettian mechanics being able to
reproduce the quantum probabilities.

Introduction
xv
More metaphysical questions have to do with the origin of the indeterminacy we
see at the level of observation. Is it epistemic or ontological?
As we have seen, Mariani’s paper put forward the possibility of having an
indeterminate ontology for GRWm to account for the meaning of the indeterminate
portion of the matter density ﬁeld. On a more general note, in the framework of
standard quantum mechanics, it is often argued that there is genuine metaphysical
indeterminacy regarding the properties we associate to quantum objects. In other
words, observables fail to have deﬁnite properties. In fact, in standard quantum
mechanics, there is just the wave function evolving according to the Schrödinger
equation, and physical objects get ascribed properties by the so-called “eigenvalue-
eigenstate” link: the properties of a given system are given by the eigenvalues
of a suitable self-adjoint operator. When the system is not an eigenstate of the
operator corresponding to the property which is being measured, then the property
is indeterminate. That is, it does not have any determinate value.
There are various accounts to characterize metaphysical indeterminacy. One is
the so-called the “determinable-based” approach according to which a state of
affairs is metaphysically indeterminate if it involves determinable properties without
having a unique determinate. In a less precise language, the idea is roughly that
the property in question could have a value, but it does not have a unique one:
there could be many (“glutty”) or none at all (“gappy”). Consider for instance the
property of having the spin “up” or “down” in a given direction. A singlet state,
which is a superposition of spin “up” and “down” in the same direction, would be
an example of metaphysical indeterminacy, as the system has no deﬁnite spin-in-
that-direction property. However, as advocated by the so-called “sparce view,” the
eigenvalue-eigenstate link is compatible with there being no such properties. People
have objected to this view as being unreasonable, as it seems to imply that particles
have no locations. In Chap. 21, David Glick, the proponent of this approach,
defends it against this charge, arguing that the sparse view eliminates quantum
metaphysical indeterminacy without the alleged radical implications. If one moves
outside of standard quantum theory, it has been argued that there is genuine
metaphysical indeterminacy in the GRW theory. The GRW theory, understood as a
theory about the wave function, suffers from the so-called problem of the tails. The
wave function, evolving according to a nonlinear stochastic equation, spontaneously
localizes. This is the way the theory solves the measurement problem. However,
after the spontaneous collapse, the wave function will not localize into a precise
point but will have tails extending to inﬁnity. That is, the wave function will not
be in an eigenstate of the position operator, so the eigenvalue-eigenstate link will
fail to provide any location to the system described by the wave function. To solve
this problem, people have proposed to substitute the eigenvalue-eigenstate link with
something else. Among the proposals, one ﬁnd the so-called “vague” link, according
to which a system can acquire properties in degrees, depending on how close they
are from the eigenvalue of the relevant operator. This seems an instance of genuine
metaphysical indeterminacy. Glick however argues that this is not the only way to
interpret this situation. He instead shows that this indeterminacy can be instead seen
as an instance of vagueness, and that it can be understood not as metaphysical but

xvi
Introduction
rather as representational, namely as having to do with the way we represent the
world.
Alessandro Torza reconstructs Glick’s argument that standard quantum theory
does not entail metaphysical indeterminacy: since quantum theory shows no evi-
dence of metaphysical indeterminacy, then there is not any. However, Torza argues
that this implicitly assumes that there is no derivative metaphysical indeterminacy.
In Chap. 22, Torza proposes an alternative way of deﬁning the meaning of
metaphysical indeterminacy: a system is indeterminate if and only if there is at
least a property that the system neither has nor lacks. He ﬁrst shows that his
approach is suitable for quantum theory, and then he argues that there are good
reasons to believe that quantum metaphysical indeterminacy is indeed derivative:
the quantum formalism can be embedded in different logical spaces, namely spaces
of possibilities, a (fundamental) classical logical space, and a (nonfundamental)
nonclassical, or quantum, logical space; since metaphysical indeterminacy arises
in the latter but not in the former, it is argued that it is derivative.
Peter Lewis, in Chap. 23, suggests thinking about metaphysical indeterminacy
starting from physics itself. Lewis argues that if one starts from the usual Hilbert
space formalism, one can understand indeterminacy as being similar to the one
deﬁned by Torza. Also, he notices that there are two distinctive ways of ascribing
properties to systems, starting from the eigenvalue-eigenstate link: a classical and
a non-classical one. For instance, a classical attribution would be to say that a
non-eigenstate of z-spin lacks both z-spin up and z-spin down properties, while a
nonclassical one would be to say that the system has indeterminate z-spin. While
the former has been employed by the determinate-based approach, the latter is
found in Torza’s framework. They both lead to indeterminacy; nonetheless, Lewis
remarks, they are not the only possible combinations: one in fact may ascribe
properties classically in Torza’s account, or non-classically in the determinable-
based account, and in both cases, we would not have any indeterminacy. It is an
open question which combination one should adopt, and Lewis argues it should be
settled analyzing whether it is fruitful within physics.
Another approach rival to the one we have seen so far is the supervaluationist
account, according to which a system is metaphysically indeterminate whenever
there are multiple possibly admissible, exhaustive, and exclusive states of affairs,
and it is indeterminate which of these obtains. George Darby and Martin Pickup,
in Chap. 24, argue for an approach which is inspired by this. Their account
suitably modiﬁes supervaluationism in terms of situations which partially (rather
than totally) describe the actual world. Their approach has been recently criticized
in the literature, and in this paper, they provide a reply.
So far, we have seen examples of metaphysical indeterminacy from standard
quantum mechanics and the GRW theory, both of which had to do with properties
having indeterminate values. In Everettian mechanics, superpositions states are
interpreted differently than in the other quantum theories: they do not ascribe
indeterminate properties to the same system, rather they represent many systems
each with a different determinate property. So, one may be tempted to conclude
that there is no room form indeterminacy in Everettian mechanics. Nonetheless,

Introduction
xvii
for the theory to be successful, one needs to ensure that the various systems do
not longer interact (they decohere), and therefore can be considered independent
“Everettian worlds.” Everettians have advocated that decoherence can ensure that
the interference between these systems is negligible. However, this allows for
indeterminacy to come back in: interference is not completely absent, just so small
to allow, for all practical purposes, ascribing deﬁnite properties to each world.
Claudio Calosi and Jessica Wilson, in Chap. 25, provide new arguments for the
existence of genuinely metaphysical indeterminacy in Everettian mechanics adding
to the literature on the subject. They also argue that this metaphysical indeterminacy
is best accounted for by determinable-based approach when compared to their
competitor, namely supervaluationism.
Al Wilson, who has ﬁrst argued for the existence of genuine metaphysical
indeterminacy in Everettian mechanics and from which Calosi and Wilson start their
paper, in Chap. 26, instead, wishes to explore the notion of levels in the many-worlds
theory in terms of various notions of fundamentality. He argues that metaphysical
ground and concept fundamentality are suitable framework to understand how
to combine a deterministic fundamental reality (described by the universal wave
function) with an independent emergent reality (the multiple decoherent worlds).
Obviously, many other questions are left to be asked (and to be answered) about
the topics the articles in this collection have discussed. Some issues are closely
related to the ones covered here, and some less so. For instance, some have argued
that even if a theory solves the measurement problem it still possible that it is
not compatible with scientiﬁc realism. Is that correct, and if so, what are the
consequences? It has been argued that the emergence of the there-dimensional world
in Everettian quantum theory can be accounted in terms of grounding or concept
fundamentality. How does this extend to the other approaches? Is there a notion
of fundamentality which would ﬁt best within relational or pragmatic approaches?
What is the right notion of fundamentality in the primitive ontology framework? It
has been suggested that the primitive ontology can be indeterminate. How would
that play out? What is the relationship between relational quantum mechanics,
pragmatic approaches, and structuralism? Even if these questions have been touched
upon in some of the papers, a deeper discussion seems to be necessary, even if not
here.
I could list many more questions and open problems. In any case, it would
have been foolish to even think of trying to provide anything remotely close to
a comprehensive set of contributions on topics such as these, which are currently
hotly debated. In the literature, one can already ﬁnd some impressive collections
addressing similar issues, and there is certainly room for many more volumes to
be written on them. In any case, I am conﬁdent that this collection will be of
interest for physicists, philosophers of physics, and metaphysicians interested on
quantum theories, their different formulations and modiﬁcations, their implications
for philosophy, and the various ways to provide a naturalized ontology for them.
Valia Allori

Contents
Part I
Realism
1
The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Decoherence .......................
3
Davide Romano
2
Quantum Fundamentalism vs. Scientiﬁc Realism ......................
19
Matthias Egg
3
On the Principles That Serve as Guides to the Ontology
of Quantum Mechanics ....................................................
33
Vera Matarese
4
The Quantum World as a Resource. A Case for
the Cohabitation of Two Paradigms ......................................
49
Laura Felline
5
Quantum Ontology: Out of This World? ................................
63
Travis Norsen
6
Why Might an Instrumentalist Endorse Bohmian Mechanics? .......
81
Darrell P. Rowbottom
Part II
Ontology
7
Beables, Primitive Ontology and Beyond: How Theories
Meet the World .............................................................
97
Andrea Oldofredi
8
All Flash, No Substance? .................................................. 113
Elizabeth Miller
9
Does the Primitive Ontology of GRW Rest on Shaky Ground? ....... 127
Cristian Mariani
10
Towards a Structuralist Elimination of Properties ..................... 141
Valia Allori
xix

xx
Contents
11
Quantum Ontology Without Wave Function ............................ 157
Carlo Rovelli
12
The Relational Ontology of Contemporary Physics .................... 163
Francesca Vidotto
13
Explicit Construction of Local Hidden Variables for Any
Quantum Theory Up to Any Desired Accuracy ......................... 175
Gerard ’t Hooft
Part III
The Wave Function
14
Wave Function Realism and Three Dimensions......................... 195
Lev Vaidman
15
Reality as a Vector in Hilbert Space ...................................... 211
Sean M. Carroll
16
Platonic Quantum Theory ................................................. 225
Jacob A. Barandes
17
cat alive and cat dead Are not Cats! Ontology and
Statistics in “Realist” Versions of Quantum Mechanics................ 255
Jean Bricmont
18
Cosmic Hylomorphism vs Bohmian Dispositionalism .................. 269
William M. R. Simpson and John M. Pemberton
19
The Governing Conception of the Wavefunction ....................... 283
Nina Emery
20
Representation and the Quantum State.................................. 303
Richard Healey
Part IV
Indeterminacy
21
Quantum Mechanics Without Indeterminacy........................... 319
David Glick
22
Derivative Metaphysical Indeterminacy and Quantum Physics....... 337
Alessandro Torza
23
Explicating Quantum Indeterminacy .................................... 351
Peter J. Lewis
24
Defending the Situations-Based Approach to Deep Worldly
Indeterminacy............................................................... 365
George Darby and Martin Pickup

Contents
xxi
25
Metaphysical Indeterminacy in the Multiverse ......................... 375
Claudio Calosi and Jessica M. Wilson
26
Fundamentality and Levels in Everettian Quantum Mechanics ...... 397
Alastair Wilson

Part I
Realism

Chapter 1
The Unreasonable Effectiveness
of Decoherence
Davide Romano
Abstract This paper aims to clarify some conceptual aspects of decoherence that
seem largely overlooked in the recent literature. In particular, I want to stress that
decoherence theory, in the standard framework, is rather silent with respect to the
description of (sub)systems and associated dynamics. Also, the selection of position
basis for classical objects is more problematic than usually thought: while, on the
one hand, decoherence offers a pragmatic-oriented solution to this problem, on the
other hand, this can hardly be seen as a genuine ontological explanation of why the
classical world is position-based. This is not to say that decoherence is not useful to
the foundations of quantum mechanics; on the contrary, it is a formidable weapon, as
it accounts for a realistic description of quantum systems. That powerful description,
however, becomes manifest when decoherence theory itself is interpreted in a realist
framework of quantum mechanics.
1.1
Introduction: Decoherence Theory
Decoherence theory is the best answer to the classical limit problem, i.e. the problem
of deriving the classical world (classical systems obeying Newtonian mechanics) at
the macroscopic regime from the microscopic quantum world (quantum systems
obeying the Schrödinger equation). However, there is no consensus in the literature
on what has been really achieved by the results of decoherence. On the one hand,
Schlosshauer (2007) and Crull (2015, 2019) argue that decoherence explains the
emergence of classical objects by providing a robust description of emergent well-
localized systems in the position basis. On the other hand, Ballentine (2008) and
Okon and Sudarsky (2016) argue (even if for different reasons) that the program of
decoherence is essentially ﬂawed and does not help in the job to connect quantum
with classical mechanics. In this paper I will not take position for one of the two
D. Romano ()
Centre of Philosophy, University of Lisbon, Alameda da Universidade, Lisbon, Portugal
e-mail: dromano@letras.ulisboa.pt
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
V. Allori (ed.), Quantum Mechanics and Fundamentality, Synthese Library 460,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-99642-0_1
3

4
D. Romano
sides; instead, I will focus on three conceptual problems that have been largely
overlooked in the debate so far and that emerge every time we attempt to interpret (or
un-interpret) decoherence in standard quantum mechanics: (i) the lack of a precise
characterization for the status of subsystems (Sect. 1.2); (ii) the lack of an objective
dynamics for classical objects from decoherence (Sect. 1.3) and (iii) the selection of
position basis as the privileged basis of classical systems (Sect. 1.4).
In the following, I will brieﬂy introduce the formalism of decoherence theory.1
Decoherence theory starts when a system | S⟩interacts with a second system
| E⟩, generally called “the environment”.2 Assuming, for simplicity, that S is a
superposition of two states: | S⟩= c1| S1⟩+ c2| S2⟩and that S- relative states get
correlated with E-relative states in the S-E interaction:
|S1⟩|E⟩
ˆHint
→|S1⟩|E1⟩
|S2⟩|E⟩
ˆHint
→|S2⟩|E2⟩
then the interaction eventually leads to the system-environment entangled state:3
|S⟩|E⟩= (c1 |S1⟩+ c2 |S2⟩) |E⟩
ˆHint
→c1 |S1⟩|E1⟩+ c2 |S2⟩|E2⟩= |S, E⟩.
However, what we are really interested in decoherence theory is the description
and behavior of the (initial) systems S, now subsystem of the larger entangled state
| S, E⟩, under the action of the “external” environment. We can think of a table
(S) scattered by surrounding air molecules (E) or the famous Schrödinger’s cat (S)
interacting with an unfortunate chain of events (radioactive atom, Geiger counter,
relais, hammer, poison vial: all collectively described by E). Since in quantum
mechanics we cannot assign a state vector (or a wave function) to subsystems, we
represent the subsystem S by the reduced density matrix:4
ˆρS = T rE

ˆρSE

,
1 For a comprehensive presentation of the philosophical and formal aspects of decoherence theory,
see e.g. Joos et al. (2003), Schlosshauer (2007, 2019), Zurek (2003) and references therein.
2 The “environment” can be generally thought of as external or internal degrees of freedom with
respect to the degrees of freedom representing our system of interest. Spatial degrees of freedom
(position coordinates) may be, for example, “the environment” for spinor degrees of freedom of a
spin ½ particle (spin-up, spin-down).
3 Technical note: the coefﬁcients of the entangled state superposition will generally be different
from those of the initial S state superposition. However, this difference will not be relevant for the
present discussion.
4 Strictly speaking, this is a density operator, while the density matrix is the density operator
expressed in a particular basis (generally the position basis). However, as this difference will not
be relevant, I will just use the term density matrix in both cases.

1
The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Decoherence
5
which is connected to the usual quantum distribution of eigenvalues by the trace
rule:
T r

ˆρS ˆOS

=

ˆOS

.
where ˆρS is the S-subsystem density matrix, ˆOS an observable acting “locally”
on the Hilbert space of the subsystem S (we can think of a property belonging
only to S, such as the position of electrons on the ﬁnal screen of a double-slit
experiment interacting with light photons between the silts and the screen).The
dynamics of ˆρS

x, x′, t

will make the reduced density matrix diagonal in a
very short time (this process is quasi-instantaneous for decoherence models at
macroscopic scale), which, in turn, will make quantum interference between
different components impossible to detect in a measurement. For example, when
decoherence is induced by scattering of environmental particles on a system S, the
evolution of the S-subsystem reduced density matrix (in the long wavelength limit)
will be:
ρS
x, x′, t = ρS
x, x′, 0 e−(x−x′)2t
where ρS(x, x
′, 0) is the reduced density matrix at the initial time (t = 0),  a
constant of the model (the scattering constant) and (x −x′) the spatial separation
between two points of the subsystem S. The term (x −x′)2 plays thus the role
of an exponential rate, and τ =
1
(x−x′)2 is the characteristic decoherence time
of the model. As a result, the S-subsystem reduced density matrix is progressively
diagonalized at a quadratic exponential rate. After very short time, ρS will become
(approximately) diagonal, and only relative components that describe well-deﬁned
states will “survive” the dynamical process (for example: only a well-deﬁned alive
cat and a well-deﬁned dead cat):5
ˆρS =

|c1|2
ε
ε
|c2|2

(1.1)
where ε on the off-diagonal components represents a “negligible quantity” and
|c1|2 and |c2|2 are the probabilities to obtain, respectively, the observables’ eigen-
values associated to the eigenstates | S1⟩and | S2⟩when a measurement is per-
5 The term ε in the off-diagonal components of the matrix stands for “negligible quantity”: as the
diagonalization process is mathematically described by a decreasing (quadratic) exponential, it will
reach the zero value only asymptotically.

6
D. Romano
formed on the subsystem S of the total entangled state | S, E⟩.6 We ﬁnally arrived
at the central result of decoherence: open systems, i.e. systems in interaction
with the environment, will be effectively described by diagonal reduced density
matrices, generally interpreted as improper mixtures of well-localized states. I
will analyze and (critically) discuss this important conclusion in the next sec-
tion.
1.2
The (Lack of) Description for Subsystems
1.2.1
Decoherence Does Not Transform “Pure States into
Mixtures of Well-Localized States”
Equation (1.1) represents a diagonal reduced density matrix and it is generally called
an “improper mixture”: even though the resulting matrix looks like a mixed-state
density matrix (a density matrix computed for a mixed state, i.e. a classical sum of
pure states), it does not actually represent a genuine mixed state, as in this case all
the diagonal components of the matrix are equally real.7 instead, in the case of a
mixed-state density matrix, the diagonal components represent classical epistemic
probabilities over the real state of the system, and therefore only one component
represents the “real state” (a pure state) of the system. One of the principal results
of decoherence is thus expressed as follows:
Claim decoherence transforms pure states into improper mixtures of well-localized
states
However: while the deﬁnition of an improper mixture is pretty clear, i.e. it is a
shorthand to say that a given superposition state looks like a real mixture (a mixed-
state) when represented in a density matrix, we may ask: why does the subsystem S
should be described by (an improper mixture of) well-localized states? What is it in
the formalism of decoherence that justiﬁes this claim?
Usually, this claim follows from the consideration that, as the reduced density
matrix becomes diagonal, the coherence length (the distance over which quantum
interference between different components of the superposition can be detected)
shrinks, approaching negligible values in a very short time. As we cannot detect
quantum interference between appreciably distant regions in space, it follows that
the reduced density matrix represents the system being a (improper) mixture of
well-localized states. However, the problem with this argument is that, in the
6 While this is a natural interpretation of the reduced density matrix, it could be interesting to
ask whether a reduced density matrix may have a more general signiﬁcance independently from
measurement interactions.
7 As the dynamics of ρS(x, x′,t) is linear, it cannot eliminate any state of the superposition (see,
e.g., Adler (2003)).

1
The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Decoherence
7
standard context, it is not possible to assign wave functions to subsystems of an
entangled state. That is: in decoherence theory, it is not possible to assign a wave
function to the system interacting with the environment, as this is a subsystem of
the total system-environment entangled state. This is indeed the very ﬁrst reason
why we describe subsystems via reduced density matrix in decoherence. So, the
question is: how can we claim that the subsystem S is a well-localized state (or
an improper mixture thereof) if we cannot even assign to S a state vector or a
wave function? This seems to be physically illegitimate at best, and conceptually
wrong.
Consider, for example, the Brownian model discussed by Zurek et al. (1993):
a system represented by a quantum harmonic oscillator in interaction with a
thermal bath of harmonic oscillators at a constant temperature T. After having
analyzed the dynamics of ρS (in particular, the evolution of the linear entropy), the
authors argue that the pointer state of the model (the speciﬁc state that remains
stable in the interaction with the environment) is characterized by position and
momentum uncertainties identical to the ground state of a quantum harmonic
oscillator. From this mathematical result, it is suggested that the subsystem pointer
state is the ground state of the quantum harmonic oscillator, i.e. a Gaussian wave
packet. However, while the results concerning the subsystem linear entropy and the
position-momentum uncertainties are physically relevant, the conclusion that the
subsystem is described by a Gaussian wave packet is deﬁnitely an illegitimate step,
as it involves a physical representation (assigning a state vector to the subsystem)
that goes beyond standard quantum mechanics.
To sum up:
•
the so-called improper mixtures are not mixtures at all: they represent coherent
superpositions of non-interfering relative components of the subsystem of a
larger entangled state;
•
the well-localized wave packets resulting from the decoherence are not “wave
packets” at all, as in quantum mechanics we cannot assign wave functions (so,
wave packets) to subsystems.
Concretely: we cannot think of the decoherence process in standard quantum
mechanics as a mechanism that separates the initial entangled state into different
non-overlapping components and that re-assigns a wave function to these compo-
nents. This operation cannot be done in the standard context until a measurement
is performed: only a measurement interaction with a macroscopic device8 makes
the initial (system-environment-measurement device) entangled state collapse into
one of the decohered components (eigenstates of the measured observable), with
8 Note that the system-environment interactions in decoherence theory are measurement-like
interactions, as there is a coupling between the system’s and environment’s degrees of freedom
and the environment relative states get correlated with the system relative states. However, these
interactions do not produce collapse of the wave function, as the master equations are linear and
do not select one particular component. In order to have collapse of the wave function, the system
has to interact—by deﬁnition–with a macroscopic measurement device.

8
D. Romano
probability given by the usual Born rule. The unique eigenstate of the measured
observable selected in the measurement will be eventually assigned a wave function.
We are thus led to the following:
Counterclaim Decoherence in standard quantum mechanics does not transform
pure states into mixtures (of any sort) of well-localized states but makes it
impossible to detect quantum interference between distant spatial components
of the subsystem if we perform a local measurement on the subsystem. The
subsystem is a superposition of non-overlapping components in conﬁguration
space.
1.2.2
Undesired Consequences: The Status of Classical Objects
in Decoherence Theory
The fact that subsystems cannot be generally described by a state vector/wave
function is an ontological problem often overlooked in the philosophy of decoher-
ence. This poses a problem not only for the ontology of any realistic microscopic
system but also (and, maybe, most importantly, insofar as we are looking for a clear
account of the quantum to classical transition) for the status of classical objects.
It is standardly accepted that classical objects emerge in decoherence theory as
macroscopic systems (systems composed of many degrees of freedom) in a strong
interaction with an external (or internal) environment,i.e. when Hint ≫HS + HE. By
deﬁnition, classical objects are subsystems maximally entangled with the environ-
ment and mathematically described by perfect diagonalized reduced density matrix.
Furthermore, they must provide classical numerical values for observables such as
position, energy and momentum when “locally” measured via ⟨OS⟩= TrE(OSρS)
[more on this in Sect. 1.3]. The problem is that, from the ontological point of view, a
classical object is difﬁcult to characterize if on the one hand, the subsystem reduced
density matrix is the only tool we have at our disposal and, on the other hand, the
ontology of a quantum system usually refers to the wave function and not to the
density matrix or, even worse, to the reduced density matrix. It is worth noting
indeed that, in this context, the usual debate on the nature of the wave function
becomes completely irrelevant for the characterization of the emergent classical
objects as the latter are, by deﬁnition, macroscopic quantum systems (subsystems)
entangled with the environment.
Does it mean that classical objects cannot be clearly deﬁned within quantum
mechanics? Certainly not. To my view, this is only a sign that the standard
interpretation of quantum mechanics cannot conceptually explain what decoherence
achieves from the pragmatic/empirical point of view. The empirical predictions
of decoherence clearly indicate that subsystems after having interacted with the
environment do become independent/autonomous systems. But quantum mechan-
ics, in the standard framework, is unable to provide such an account. And this
is not a speciﬁc problem taking place at the macroscopic regime, examples can

1
The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Decoherence
9
be given also at the microscopic one. Think, for example, at the description
of atomic orbitals: the explanation of why we do not see a superposition of
orbitals but only deﬁnite orbitals is again provided by decoherence theory:9
interaction between different orbitals leads to decoherence in the energy basis
(in the microscopic regime HS ≫HE + Hint). This process selects well-deﬁned
separate components in the energy basis: atomic orbitals. Strictly speaking, atomic
orbitals should not be described by wave functions, but only by reduced density
matrices. However, in practice we do assign a wave function to each atomic
orbital and the fact that we are able to assign such a wave function to a state
resulting from decoherence is not a sign that decoherence does not work (it works
perfectly); instead it is a sign that the standard interpretation cannot do all the
job in the interpretation of decoherence. Subsystems selected by decoherence are,
practically speaking, systems that become independent from the total entangled
state. And so are classical objects. But this fact is simply not accounted for in
standard quantum mechanics, where subsystems are described by density matrices
even after the decoherence process. Indeed, the idea to assign wave functions to
subsystems of entangled states goes beyond standard quantum mechanics, and can
be described more precisely by non-standard interpretations of quantum mechanics:
the Everett/Many Worlds Interpretation (MWI), the de Broglie—Bohm theory
(dBB) and the spontaneous collapse models (e.g. GRW, CSL). This point will be
brieﬂy analyzed in the next subsection (while a complete analysis would require a
separate work).
1.2.3
Interpreting Decoherence
The problem of the characterization of subsystems, which is not solved and in
principle unsolvable in the standard interpretation of quantum mechanics,10 is
actually solved when decoherence theory is embedded in a realist interpretation of
quantum mechanics: MWI, GRW or Bohm’s theory.11
9 See e.g. Crull (2015).
10 It is worth noting, however, that in some recent (more reﬁned) interpretations of the quantum
formalism this problem does not arise or could not arise, for example: Rovelli’s account of
decoherence in relational quantum mechanics (Di Biagio & Rovelli, 2021); Myrvold’s ontology of
quantum states in terms of distribution of values of dynamical variables (Myrvold, 2018); Chen’s
density matrix realism (Chen, 2018). In all of these interpretations, the problem discussed above
requires a careful and distinct analysis, which will be developed in an extended version of the
present paper.
11 For a presentation of the different role of decoherence in the realist interpretations of quantum
mechanics (MWI, GRW and Bohm’s theory) see also Bacciagaluppi (2020).

10
D. Romano
1.2.3.1
Decoherence and the Realist Interpretations of Quantum
Mechanics
In GRW theory, the spontaneous collapse process is represented through the
multiplication of the ordinary wave function (solution of the Schrödinger equation)
by a Gaussian wave packet whose center is random and |ψ|2- distributed. An
important feature of this theory is that the spontaneous collapse rate is ampliﬁed
for an N-particle system. That is: while the standard collapse frequency for a 1-
particle system is λ = 10−16s, the collapse frequency for an N-particle system will
be 	 = Nλ. For a macroscopic system, i.e. a system composed of a number of
particles of the order of the Avogadro’s number (1023), the collapse rate will be
very effective and the system will be “always” well-localized (as far as we can
reasonably detect at the macroscopic scale and for classical relevant timescales).
The signiﬁcance of decoherence is thus clear in this context: the interaction with
the environment is the physical mechanism which largely increases the number
of degrees of freedom of a GRW system, making the spontaneous collapse very
effective via the ampliﬁcation mechanism.12 A 1-particle microscopic system S(x)
in interaction with the environment E(y) will be part of an entangled state: SE(x, y).
As the number of interactions with the surrounding environment will increase
(at least) linearly in time (for collisional models and quantum Brownian motion
models), the system will undergo a spontaneous collapse after short time (the precise
time depending on the interaction and environment model, but it is reasonable to
expect the GRW spontaneous collapse rate to approach the standard decoherence
time very quickly). This eventually explains why, in the GRW theory, microscopic
“decohered” subsystems (such as atomic orbitals) and ordinary classical systems
are well-deﬁned states to which a wave function can be unproblematically assigned.
The signiﬁcance of decoherence theory in GRW is therefore not related to the
decoherence effect, i.e. the separation of components in conﬁguration space. Strictly
speaking, there is no decoherence process in GRW theory, as the dynamics of the
theory is non-linear. Nevertheless, the interaction with the environment supplements
the GRW system with additional degrees of freedom, which trigger the ampliﬁcation
mechanism of the collapse rate and make open quantum systems (so, by deﬁnition,
classical systems) (quasi-)instantaneously and (quasi-)perfectly well-localized.13
In MWI and dBB theory, decoherence effect is the result of the separation of the
initial system-environment entangled state into effectively separate components14
in conﬁguration space. As, in the case of GRW theory, the collapse is more likely
to happen for systems with a high number of degrees of freedom, analogously, in
12 For a numerical estimate of the increase of the GRW collapse rate due to decoherence see, for
example, M. Toroš, S. Donadi and A. Bassi (2016, pp. 10–11).
13 But instantaneously well-localized for relevant timescales at the macroscopic regime and
perfectly well-localized with respect to macroscopic localization.
14 Separate components stand here for “components whose overlap is negligible in conﬁguration
space”, since the condition of no-overlap is not realistic: tails of Gaussian environmental particles
will overlap in any region of space.

1
The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Decoherence
11
MWI e DBB theory, the separation between components in conﬁguration space is
more likely to happen when the conﬁguration space becomes “large enough”.
That is: when the number of degrees of freedom of the entangled state increases,
it also increases the possibility that different relative environmental states have
negligible overlap with each other.15
The separation of different components in conﬁguration space is the well-known
branching process in MWI (Wallace, 2012, ch. 3) and the less well-known but
equally important process of effective factorization in dBB theory (Bohm & Hiley,
1987, 1993; Dürr et al. 1992; Holland, 1993), i.e. the physical process that permits
to assign an effective wave function16 to subsystems.
1.2.3.2
Relation with the Measurement Problem
The problem of the subsystem’s description from a larger entangled state (Sect.
1.2.1) is closely related with the measurement problem,17 i.e. the problem of
selecting one particular component (the measurement outcome) out of a coherent
superposition of macroscopic different states. It is worth noting indeed that in
Bohm’s theory and Everett/MWI there is no difference between a measurement
process and the decoherence process. In both cases, the description is that of a
system interacting with an external system (environment or measurement apparatus)
via a suitable interaction Hamiltonian. This process describes an effective factoriza-
tion and thus the selection of a unique component (effective wave function) in the
dBB theory and a branching process of non-overlapping components in the Everett
theory. In other words: the measurement process is basically a decoherence process
in Bohm’s theory and Everett theory. As decoherence selects speciﬁc subsystems
in these two theories, a measurement process will select speciﬁc measurement
outcomes. Instead, as decoherence does not select speciﬁc subsystems in standard
quantum mechanics, the measurement process (without introducing the collapse of
the wave function) will not select speciﬁc outcome(s). This can be viewed as a
different angle to understand (i) why QM is affected by the measurement problem
and (ii) why decoherence does not solve or help solving the measurement problem
in standard QM.
15 Even though there is no rigorous formulation, this is not so different from the standard
decoherence condition of “orthogonality” of states, that in most cases is reached approximately and
asymptotically. For an analysis of the decoherence condition in dBB theory, see Romano (2016a).
For a comparative analysis of the decoherence condition in dBB theory and MWI, see Rosaler
(2015, 2016).
16 The notion of effective wave function is originally introduced and deﬁned in Bohm and Hiley
(1987). Building on Bohm and Hiley’s historical work, I have recently analyzed the connection
between the process of effective factorization and the emergence of classical systems in Romano
(2016b).
17 Thanks to Craig Callender and one anonymous referee for helping me elaborating this remark.

12
D. Romano
1.3
No Dynamics for the Subsystem S – Ehrenfest Theorem
A second aspect which is generally overlooked in the presentation of the classical
limit via decoherence is the relation between quantum and classical dynamics.
A classical object is not only a system with a well-deﬁned position in three-
dimensional space; it also moves in space according to Newtonian dynamics.18 That
is: when a classical system with position x is affected by a classical (gravitational19)
potential V(x), it will accelerate according to Newton’s second law of dynamics:
F = m ¨x
Newton’s 2nd law : an object with position × accelerates due to the force F
where F = −∇xV(x) is a classical gravitational force generated by the potential
V(x), generated (in turn) by the existence of a physical gravitational ﬁeld ﬁlling
up three-dimensional space (at least, the ﬁnite region of space over which the
gravitational ﬁeld is non-negligible and well-deﬁned).
Newtonian dynamics, i.e. the fact that a classical object evolves in time according
to a Newtonian trajectory when affected by classical potentials, is not a secondary
feature but a central one for the correct representation of a classical object. So,
the question is: how does decoherence theory account for this important feature of
classical mechanics? Stating the obvious: without a precise account of Newtonian
dynamics in the macroscopic regime, all we have achieved from the quantum to
classical transition via decoherence is a (quantum) object well-localized in space
mathematically represented in the position basis. This is an excellent starting point,
of course, but not the whole story: for an object to be classical, it has to evolve in
time according to (approximate)20 Newtonian trajectories. The connection between
decoherence theory and the subsystems’ dynamics is given by a generalized form of
the Ehrenfest theorem. This can be easily shown in two steps:
18 Or Lagrangian mechanics, or Hamiltonian mechanics. However, as the ontology of classical
systems (system dynamics and interaction between systems) is generally built on Newtonian
mechanics, I will consider the quantum to classical dynamics transition as the transition from
quantum dynamics to Newtonian mechanics.
19 I consider here only the gravitational potential since, strictly speaking, there is no electromag-
netic ﬁeld in non-relativistic quantum mechanics. Classical electrodynamics should emerge from
quantum electrodynamics, i.e. a different mathematical and physical framework. It is true that
electromagnetic interactions are described also in non-relativistic quantum mechanics, e.g. the
textbook presentation of the proton-electron interaction in a Hydrogen atom. However, this kind of
analysis is rather phenomenological and relies on semi-classical assumption (particles described by
wave functions interacting through classical electromagnetic forces). On the other hand, there is no
gravitational interaction either in non-relativistic quantum mechanics, as a real quantization of the
gravitational ﬁeld is only done in quantum gravity. Yes, any realistic description in non-relativistic
quantum mechanics is trickier than usually thought.
20 We want to derive Newtonian trajectories approximately and not exactly, as any deviation of the
order e.g. of the atomic scale cannot be detected at the macroscopic scale.

1
The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Decoherence
13
1. Trace rule: we can compute the mean value of any observable acting on the
subsystem of a larger entangled state using the reduced density matrix ρS through
the trace rule:
T r

ˆρS ˆOS

=

ˆOS

where ˆρS is the subsystem reduced density matrix and ˆOS a Hermitian operator
acting “locally” on the subsystem’s Hilbert space.
2. Ehrenfest theorem for open systems: we can use the trace rule deﬁned in step
(1) to compute the mean value of the momentum, the acceleration and the “force”
operators:
Ehrenfest theorem :
m d
dt
	
ˆx

=
	
ˆp

d
dt
	
ˆp

= −
	
∇V

ˆx

where
	
ˆx

= T r

ˆρS ˆx

and
	
ˆp

= T r

ˆρS ˆp

, respectively. When the mean value of
the potential can be reasonably approximated with the potential of the mean value
of the position operator,21 the second equation above becomes:
“Newtonian" dynamics
d
dt
	
ˆp

= −
	
∇V

ˆx

 ∼= −∇V
	
ˆx

which is generally taken to describe a quantum system moving along a Newtonian
trajectory.
From an instrumentalist/pragmatic point of view, this is correct: the mean
value of the acceleration operator will be Newtonian-like distributed. However,
this formula is not a description of an object moving in space according to a
speciﬁc Newtonian trajectory. The mean value of an operator is a statistical quantity
(e.g. Ballentine (1998, Ch. 2); Bowman (2008, Ch. 5))–a quantity computed after
a (reasonably) long sequence of separate measurements on identically prepared
systems22–which is ontologically meaningless for the description of the dynamics
of an individual system.
The fact that the subsystem of interest does not have a state vector does not
help in this situation either, as we can represent the classical system only by means
21 This approximation turns out to be exact for linear and quadratic potentials (Shankar, 1994)
insofar the wave function is well-localized (Wallace, 2012).
22 As these are notions we are already familiar from the basic course in quantum mechanics, I will
not enter here in the detail of the difference between a statistical quantity and a quantity describing
an individual system. For the interested reader, however, I have analyzed this issue more carefully
in another paper (Sakurai, sect. 3).

14
D. Romano
of the reduced density matrix. The problem of ﬁnding or recovering Newtonian
dynamics in the macroscopic regime combines together two conceptual problems
already present in standard quantum mechanics:
•
the deﬁnition of the physical state for the subsystem of a larger entangled state;
•
the deﬁnition of the subsystem’s dynamics independently from observables
(which implicitly involve the use of ensembles, statistical distributions and
measurement operations).
To conclude: the Ehrenfest theorem (in the standard or generalized form) does not
describe individual systems moving on Newtonian trajectories: it provides, instead,
a statistical description which can be consistently applied only to ensembles. No
account is provided for trajectories of individual systems. What we obtain from
the Ehrenfest theorem is not a classical object moving according to Newtonian
mechanics, but a discrete sequence in time of position and momentum eigenvalues
which are formally compatible with a Newtonian trajectory. Ontologically speaking,
though, Newtonian trajectories are not there: they simply cannot be described (nei-
ther exactly nor approximately) in the standard framework of quantum mechanics,
even introducing decoherence.
1.4
The Basis Problem: Does Decoherence Really Help?
A further important problem of the quantum to classical transition is to explain
why the familiar classical world is position-based, i.e. why position is a privileged
variable for classical objects, starting from the relative freedom we have in the basis
representation of quantum systems. The fact that position is a privileged variable in
the classical world comes from the evidence that all classical objects have a well-
deﬁned position in space and they are described by continuous trajectories. On the
contrary, a quantum system can be generally be described in different bases (e.g.
position, momentum, energy), the speciﬁc choice being usually taken for pragmatic
reasons, such as the eigenbasis of the observable we want to measure in a designed
experiment or the energy basis for the particle in a box. Thus, we can frame the
problem of the basis as follows:
Basis Problem why is position basis a privileged basis in the classical world,
starting from the physical equivalence of the basis representation in quantum
mechanics?
The standard answer given by decoherence is that, when the interaction between
the system and the environment is very strong, the only states that remain stable
under the action of decoherence are position eigenstates.23 In turn, this leads to
23 Following Zurek’s terminology, they are generally called pointer states.

1
The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Decoherence
15
diagonalization of the reduced density matrix in that particular basis, and, therefore,
decoherence will select subsystem’s states well-localized in position.
Decoherence Claim The classical world is position-based because of decoher-
ence. In particular, the continuous interaction between a system with its surrounding
environment selects position as the privileged basis for the representation of that
system in the macroscopic regime.
This explanation, however, does not consider one particular fact: all decoherence
models of the quantum to classical transition describe the interaction between the
system and the environment as a function of the position coordinates. That is,
if we consider a system S(x) and an external environment E(y), the interaction
Hamiltonian (which describes the physical coupling between the two) will be of
the form: ˆHint (x, y). Now:
•
as the basis “selected by decoherence” is the basis of eigenstates of those
operators ( ˆO) that commute with the total Hamiltonian:

ˆH, ˆO

= ˆH ˆO−ˆO ˆH =
0,
•
given that in the macroscopic regime the total Hamiltonian can be approximated
with the interaction Hamiltonian ˆHtot ∼= ˆHint, since ˆHint ≫ˆHS + ˆHE
•
and since ˆHint (x, y) already describes interactions between the system and its
surrounding environment in position basis,
•
then position basis is selected:

ˆHint, ˆX

= 0
This looks like a consistent physical description, but not really as an ontological
argument that explains why the classical world is position-based. In this procedure,
we are implicitly assuming that in the classical world “things happen” in position,
as we describe the interactions between system and environment already in that
particular basis. There is no cogent or speciﬁc reason to describe those interactions
in position basis if not a very important one: we know how to describe interactions in
position basis, we are familiar with this kind of interaction from classical mechanics
and we expect classical objects to emerge in position basis.
1.4.1
Example: Quantum Brownian Motion
Consider, for example, the quantum Brownian motion model.24 In this model,
the system is linearly coupled in position with a collection of quantum harmonic
oscillators at constant temperature T (thermal bath). Each environmental particle
(harmonic oscillator) interacts independently and only with the system and is
24 I take this speciﬁc example as the Brownian model is one of the principal models for the quantum
to classical transition. Other important models, such as the collisional model, would be perfectly
equivalent for the example.

16
D. Romano
mathematically represented by the position-basis Hamiltonian:
ˆHE =
ˆp
2m + 1
2mω2 ˆq2
The interaction between the system and the generic (i-th) harmonic oscillator is
represented by a bilinear coupling in the position variable:
ˆHint = ˆx ⊗

i
ci ˆqi
where ˆx is the system position operator, ci the coupling strength between the
system and the environmental particle and ˆqithe environmental particle position
operator. As the interaction Hamiltonian ˆHint (x, q) is a function of the system
and “environment” position, in the approximation ˆHtot ∼= ˆHint the master equation
will lead to decoherence in position. Furthermore, as states with different momenta
will form macroscopic superpositions in position in a short time, these will be
also decohered by the model (though at a slower rate with respect to macroscopic
superpositions in the position basis). As a consequence, the pointer states of
this model will be states well-localized in position and momentum. In particular:
minimum-uncertainty Gaussian wave packets.25
In this example, we see in what sense position is already a privileged variable
in the model: the environment is described in the position basis, and the interaction
with the system is described by a coupling of the position coordinates. One could
equivalently describe the same model in energy or momentum eigenstates, probably
obtaining different results concerning the selected pointer states. Nevertheless, we
do want to express the system-environment interaction in the position basis because
what we are looking for in this model is an emergent description of classical objects.
Position In-Position Out if we introduce position in the model from the start via
ˆHint (x, y), then it is no surprise that we get position out for the subsystem preferred
basis. As it is no surprise that in different regimes (when the condition ˆHint ≫ˆHS +
ˆHE does not hold), other bases will be selected. For example, in the microscopic
regime, where the self-Hamiltonian of the system dominates the dynamics: ˆHS ≫
ˆHint + ˆHE, the energy basis will be generally selected, leading to decoherence in
that particular basis and the formation of separate energy eigenstates, the atomic
orbitals.
We thus reach the following:
Counterclaim decoherence theory consistently describes/accounts for the selec-
tion of position basis in the macroscopic regime, but it does not provide a
genuine explanation of why the classical world is position-based. Decoherence
selects position basis in the macroscopic regime since the system-environment
25 See e.g. Schlosshauer (2019, Sect. 4.2).

1
The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Decoherence
17
interactions are already expressed in position basis. This introduces a position-
basis representation, which becomes particularly relevant in all cases in which:
ˆHint ≫ˆHS + ˆHE.
While this scheme/procedure is perfectly ﬁne for pragmatic purposes, this cannot
be taken as a genuine ontological explanation of the selection of position basis at
the macroscopic regime. In doing this, we would mix up the (sometimes hidden)
phenomenological assumptions that physicists put in concrete models to make
them work with the genuine ontological explanations coming from the theory.
Decoherence theory does not explain why position basis emerges in the classical
world, as this is only “explained” by introducing position as a privileged variable
for the system-environment interaction.
1.5
Conclusion
The way in which decoherence theory describes the emergence of the classical
world from quantum mechanics is trickier than usually thought. In particular, I have
shown that a precise characterization of the emergent classical objects is lacking
in the standard context, as well as the description of Newtonian trajectories for
individual systems. The basis problem—the problem to understand why the classical
world is position-based—is solved pragmatically, but not ontologically: this leaves
the debate open for future research. Finally, I have suggested that decoherence
theory itself proves to be philosophically very helpful when interpreted in a realist
framework of quantum mechanics.
Acknowledgments I want to thank Valia Allori, Mario Hubert, Vera Matarese and Antonio
Vassallo for helpful comments on earlier drafts on this paper and Craig Callender, Eddy Chen,
Barry Lower and Kerry McKenzie for a nice and useful discussion of the paper in the San Diego
philosophy of physics reading group. This work has been supported by the Fundação para a
Ciência e a Tecnologia through the fellowship FCT Junior Researcher, hosted by the Centre of
Philosophy at the University of Lisbon.
References
Adler, S. L. (2003). Why decoherence has not solved the measurement problem: A reply to P. W.
Anderson. Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 34(1), 135–142.
Bacciagaluppi, G. (2020). The role of decoherence in quantum mechanics, Stanford Encyclopedia
of Philosophy, substantive revision 2020. https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/qm-decoherence/
Ballentine, L. (1998). Quantum mechanics: A modern development. World Scientiﬁc.
Ballentine, L. (2008). Classicality without decoherence: a reply to Schlosshauer. Foundations of
Physics, 38, 916–922.
Bohm, D., & Hiley, B. (1987). An ontological basis for the quantum theory: Non-relativistic
particle systems. Physics Report, 144(6), 321–375.

18
D. Romano
Bohm, D., & Hiley, B. (1993). The undivided universe: An ontological interpretation of quantum
theory. Routledge.
Bowman, G. E. (2008). Essential quantum mechanics. Oxford University Press.
Chen, E. (2018). Quantum mechanics in a time-asymmetric universe: On the nature of the initial
quantum state. The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 72, 1155–1183.
Crull, E. (2015). Less interpretation and more decoherence in quantum gravity and inﬂationary
cosmology. Foundations of Physics, 45, 1019–1045.
Crull, E. (2019). Quantum decoherence. In E. Knox & A. Wilson (Eds.), The Routledge companion
to philosophy of physics (1st ed., 2021). Routledge.
Di Biagio, A., & Rovelli, C. (2021). Stable facts, relative facts. Foundations of Physics, 51(30).
Dürr, D., Goldstein, S., & Zanghì, N. (1992). Quantum equilibrium and the origin of absolute
uncertainty. Journal of Statistical Physics, 67, 843–890.
Holland, P. R. (1993). The quantum theory of motion: An account of the de Broglie-Bohm causal
interpretation of quantum mechanics. Cambridge University Press.
Joos, E., Zeh, D., Kiefer, C., Giulini, D., Kupsch, J., & Stamatescu, I. O. (2003). Decoherence and
the appearance of a classical world in quantum theory (2nd ed.). Springer.
Myrvold, W. (2018). Ontology for collapse theories. In S. Gao (Ed.), The collapse of the wave
function (pp. 97–123). Cambridge University Press.
Okon, E., & Sudarsky, D. (2016). Less decoherence and more coherence in quantum gravity,
inﬂationary cosmology and elsewhere. Foundations of Physics, 46(7), 852–879.
Romano, D. (2016a). Bohmian classical limit in bounded regions. In L. Felline, A. Ledda, F. Paoli,
& E. Rossanese (Eds.), New directions in logic and the philosophy of science (SILFS series:
303–317). College Publications.
Romano, D. (2016b). The emergence of the classical world from a Bohmian Universe, PhD thesis,
University of Lausanne.
Rosaler, J. (2015). Is de Broglie–Bohm theory specially equipped to recover classical behavior?
Philosophy of Science, 82(5), 1175–1187.
Rosaler, J. (2016). Interpretation neutrality in the classical domain of quantum theory. Studies in
History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 53, 54–72.
Schlosshauer, M. (2007). Decoherence and the quantum-to-classical transition. Springer.
Schlosshauer, M. (2019). Quantum decoherence. Physics Report, 831, 1–57.
Shankar, R. (1994). Principles of quantum mechanics. Springer.
Toroš, M., Donadi, S., & Bassi, A. (2016). Bohmian mechanics, collapse models and the
emergence of classicality. Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical, 49(35),
355302.
Wallace, D. (2012). The emergent multiverse: Quantum theory according to the Everett Interpre-
tation. Oxford University Press.
Zurek, W. (2003). Decoherence, einselection, and the quantum origins of the classical. Reviews of
Modern Physics, 75, 715–775.
Zurek, W. H., Habib, S., Paz, J. P. (1993). Coherent states via decoherence, Physical Review
Letters, 70(9): 1187–1190.

Chapter 2
Quantum Fundamentalism vs. Scientiﬁc
Realism
Matthias Egg
‘As for myself,’ said Éomer, ‘I have little knowledge of these
deep matters; but I need it not. This I know, and it is enough,
that as my friend Aragorn succoured me and my people, so I will
aid him when he calls.’
The Return of the King
J.R.R. Tolkien
Abstract Quantum fundamentalism is the view that quantum mechanics (QM)
should inform us about fundamental ontology. It is adopted by many who seek to
defend scientiﬁc realism with respect to QM, and it prompts them to opt for one
of the versions (or interpretations) of QM that were developed in response to the
measurement problem. I argue that this is a mistake. Not only is realism about QM
compatible with neutrality concerning these different versions, but the commitment
to any particular one of them is actually in tension with basic tenets of scientiﬁc
realism. This is demonstrated by a critical assessment of Michael Esfeld’s and Valia
Allori’s recently developed versions of quantum fundamentalism.
2.1
Introduction
Scientiﬁc realism is concerned with empirically successful scientiﬁc theories and
with what they tell us about reality. No one denies that quantum mechanics (QM)
is empirically successful, but there is little agreement as to what it tells us about
reality. If we refer to “standard QM” as the kind of predictive apparatus (going back
to Dirac and von Neumann) that is employed to generate this empirical success, then
it is difﬁcult to pin down what it would even mean to be a realist about standard QM.
M. Egg ()
University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland
e-mail: matthias.egg@philo.unibe.ch
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
V. Allori (ed.), Quantum Mechanics and Fundamentality, Synthese Library 460,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-99642-0_2
19

20
M. Egg
It is therefore widely assumed that the only way to be a realist about QM is to go
beyond the standard account and to opt for one of the versions (or interpretations) of
it that were developed in response to the measurement problem (e.g., many-worlds
accounts, spontaneous collapse models or pilot-wave theories). This assumption has
recently come under attack by authors who suggest that realism about QM can
remain neutral with respect to these options by lowering its ambitions concerning
the ontological content associated with the realist attitude (Healey, 2020; Saatsi,
2020). While I share these critics’ reluctance to go beyond standard QM, I do not
think that the problem lies with the ontological ambitions of scientiﬁc realism. In my
view, realism should be concerned with ontology,1 but it is a mistake to think of QM
as informing us about fundamental ontology. This mistake is what I call quantum
fundamentalism. In previous work (Egg, 2021), I have argued that the rejection of
quantum fundamentalism allows us to formulate an ontologically robust version of
realism about standard QM, which can avoid being committed to any one of the
speciﬁc ways to go beyond the standard approach. I now want to take a step further
and claim that realism about QM is not only compatible with neutrality concerning
the non-standard versions of QM, but that a commitment to one of these versions
actually contradicts the spirit of scientiﬁc realism. Insofar as such a commitment
is motivated by quantum fundamentalism, my central thesis can be expressed by
saying that the scientiﬁc realist should reject quantum fundamentalism.
The aim of the present paper is to provide support for this thesis by critically
discussing the arguments of those who think that scientiﬁc realism in the quantum
domain requires (or at least encourages) some form of quantum fundamentalism.
Such arguments have rarely been made explicit, because the above-mentioned
conjunction of scientiﬁc realism with particular responses to the measurement
problem has often been taken for granted. Besides, debates on the interpretation
of QM have for a long time had little interaction with the debate on scientiﬁc
realism. However, thanks to recent contributions by Michael Esfeld (2020) and
Valia Allori (2018, 2020a,b), we now have two explicitly formulated views on how
the foundations of QM might relate to scientiﬁc realism. The two views are quite
similar to each other in that both Esfeld and Allori endorse a Bohmian version of
QM and a view of physical theories that requires them to be formulated in terms of
what is known as a primitive ontology (PO). A consequence of this similarity is that
my investigation in this paper is not as general as it could be. I suspect that at least a
part of my criticism could also apply to other instances of quantum fundamentalism,
but I chose to focus on these two authors because they make the connection to
scientiﬁc realism explicit. My critique of quantum fundamentalism will therefore
largely come in the guise of a critique of the PO approach from a scientiﬁc realist’s
point of view.
1 I admit that there are many formulations of scientiﬁc realism (see Chakravartty (2017) for an
overview) and not all of them include the ontological component I am concerned with here.
However, the authors discussed in the rest of this paper clearly share an ontological understanding
of scientiﬁc realism in the sense that the realist should take some parts of our best scientiﬁc theories
to accurately describe elements of reality.

2
Quantum Fundamentalism vs. Scientiﬁc Realism
21
The investigation will proceed as follows: in Sect. 2.2, I will introduce and
critically discuss the distinction between ontology and dynamics, which is a central
ingredient of the PO approach. I will then (in Sect. 2.3) work towards the connection
with scientiﬁc realism by asking what exactly Esfeld means by ‘ontology’ and the
related notions of ‘existence’ or ‘being (there)’. Section 2.4 takes a closer look
at how his view plays out in the context of QM. Section 2.5 does the same for
Allori’s view, including critical assessments of her claim that the PO approach
helps scientiﬁc realism to deal with familiar antirealist challenges stemming from
underdetermination and theory change. A conclusion is drawn in Sect. 2.6.
2.2
Ontology and Dynamics
One of the basic ideas of the PO approach is the following piece of methodology:
A physical theory should clearly and forthrightly address two fundamental questions: what
there is, and what it does. The answer to the ﬁrst question is provided by the ontology of the
theory, and the answer to the second by its dynamics. (Maudlin, 2019, p. xi)
So far, few scientiﬁc realists would disagree. Indeed, one might even think that this
applies to any theory of empirical science, not just to physical theories. But as I
will argue in what follows, a tension with scientiﬁc realism arises as soon as PO
supporters not only insist that these two questions be addressed, but insist that they
be addressed separately. The problem, in other words, is that some PO approaches
presuppose a strict separation of (primitive) ontology from dynamics. For example,
when Esfeld (2020, p. 90) lists different aspects that are central to the argument of
his book, the ﬁrst item on the list is “the distinction between primitive ontology and
dynamical structure”.2 Similarly, Allori (2013, p. 64) postulates that fundamental
physical theories “have a dual structure: the primitive variables that specify what
matter is, and some other variables that determine its temporal development (its
dynamics)”.3
A ﬁrst thing to note about this separation is that it can hardly be upheld for non-
fundamental branches of science. To give a simple example, ﬂuids and solid bodies
are arguably part of the ontology of continuum mechanics, but any speciﬁcation of
what differentiates a ﬂuid from a solid depends on how they behave, that is, on the
dynamics. Allori acknowledges this by explicitly restricting her considerations to
2 The metaphysical background for this view is a position called “Super-Humeanism” (Esfeld and
Deckert, 2018, Section 2.3). In a similar spirit as the present paper, Vera Matarese (2020) has
recently questioned Super-Humeanism’s conformity with scientiﬁc realism.
3 Another important ingredient of the PO approach is the requirement that the PO is constituted by
“entities living in three-dimensional space or in space-time” (Allori, 2013, 60). This will become
important in Sects. 2.4 and 2.5, because it excludes the quantum mechanical wave function (which
is in general not deﬁned on three-dimensional space, but on some higher dimensional conﬁguration
space) from the PO.

22
M. Egg
fundamental physical theories. Esfeld, by contrast, also wants to speak about non-
fundamental (even non-physical) theories, but maintains that these do not, strictly
speaking, have a primitive ontology. What they are ultimately about, according to
Esfeld (2020, 72) are speciﬁc features of how the PO of fundamental physics (in his
view, particles) behaves:
for the scientist in the special sciences, it makes handling the theories much easier to pretend
that there are intrinsic chemical elements, intrinsic biological species, etc. That this is not
so, that these elements or species do not have to be accepted as something primitive, but
are functionally deﬁned in terms of the roles of their characteristic features for in the last
resort particle motion becomes relevant only when it comes to the relationship between the
special sciences and physics.
Thus Allori and Esfeld agree that the strict separation of ontology from dynamics
is only applicable in the context of fundamental physical theories. But how is this
compatible with the fact that they (along with many other contributors to the PO
literature) primarily discuss the PO approach in the context of an obviously non-
fundamental theory, namely nonrelativistic quantum particle mechanics? In other
words, what is the justiﬁcation for adopting quantum fundamentalism (as deﬁned in
Sect. 2.1)? The most plausible reply seems to be that the ontological lessons learnt in
the nonrelativistic case are expected to carry over to more fundamental theories and
ultimately to the ﬁnal, uniﬁed theory of physics. However, David Wallace (2020b,a)
gives some good reasons to be skeptical about that expectation. In particular, the
conceptual differences encountered in the transition from nonrelativistic QM to
relativistic quantum ﬁeld theory are too profound to simply assume ontological
continuity between the two theories (not to mention even more fundamental
theories, such as quantum gravity). Admittedly, Esfeld and Deckert (2018, chap. 4)
argue that a PO of particles can successfully be transferred from QM to quantum
ﬁeld theory, but their model (just like any other PO approach to quantum ﬁeld
theory) has not yet passed the stage of a hopeful research program.
While I share Wallace’s misgivings about quantum fundamentalism, I disagree
with his conclusion that the scientiﬁc realist who rejects quantum fundamentalism
should end up endorsing the Everett interpretation. I will discuss my alternative
conclusion in Sect. 2.5 below. It is based on my own way of rejecting quantum
fundamentalism on realist grounds, which I have developed and defended in a recent
paper (Egg, 2021). In the same paper, I have also directly questioned the separation
of ontology from dynamics, endorsing Myrvold’s (2018, p. 105) claim that “until
we have said something about how the purported ontology acts, we haven’t yet
given sense to the claim that it is there at all”. I should add, however, that this
claim is somewhat overstated, because the PO framework (and in particular, Esfeld’s
rigorous treatment of point particles individuated by changing distance relations)
indeed gives sense to the notion of spatiotemporal presence, although that sense
differs quite starkly from our ordinary (dynamically infected) notion of “being
there”. Be that as it may, what matters for the present discussion is not so much
whether a non-dynamical notion of ontology makes sense, but to what extent it
aligns with scientiﬁc realism. I will now turn to this question.

2
Quantum Fundamentalism vs. Scientiﬁc Realism
23
2.3
Is Primitive Ontology All There Is?
The qualiﬁer ‘primitive’ suggests that the realm of ontology is not exhausted by the
PO but also contains a non-primitivepart. Yet some formulations of the PO approach
seem to imply that the PO is all there is to ontology, for example when Esfeld
(2020, p. 61) writes that the dynamical structure (which, as we saw in Sect. 2.2,
contains everything that a theory introduces in addition to the PO) “does not call for
additional ontological commitments”. In other places, he is more generous, granting
that dynamical parameters such as mass and charge are “admitted to the ontology,
albeit not as primitive, but as derived notions” (Esfeld, 2020, p. 68). He further
elaborates on this kind of derivation by explaining how dynamical properties are
not eliminated but located (in the sense of Jackson (1998)) in conﬁgurations of the
point particles that make up the PO.
Scientiﬁc realism usually operates with the more generous notion of ontology,
because many of the non-primitive parameters are indispensable for the empirical
success of science and are therefore the proper targets of a realist’s commitment,
which can be expressed by saying that they refer to something real, something
that exists or something that is there (to on in ancient Greek, from which the term
ontology derives). The more restrictive notion of ontology, according to which only
the PO is really there (or in the words of Esfeld (2020, p. 70) “simply exists in
the world”), by contrast, has little to do with scientiﬁc realism. For a scientiﬁc
realist, singling out the PO as that which really (or simply) exists would have to
be justiﬁed by scientiﬁc evidence supporting the PO to a larger degree than other
theoretical posits, such as the dynamical structure. As we will see in Sect. 2.5, the
actual evidential situation is just the opposite: if we have uncontroversial evidence
for anything, it is for dynamical (or more generally: non-fundamental) structures,
not for any fundamental ontology. And even if we neglect this evidential difference
for the sake of the argument, it is hard to see how scientiﬁc realism could incorporate
a principled restriction of existence claims to an elite class of fundamental entities.
After all, when antirealists dispute the existence of electrons and other unobservable
entities, a central part of the realist’s response has always been the rejection of any
principled restriction of existence claims to an elite class of entities (observable ones
in this case). And many of the entities on whose existence scientiﬁc realists have
insisted in such disputes (molecules, genes, bacteria, for example) are undoubtedly
non-fundamental (as, by the way, are the observable entities whose existence is not
disputed by either party in the debate). Therefore, scientiﬁc realism has no room for
the restriction of existence to supposedly fundamental entities.4
4 One might think that this problem can be circumvented by formulating scientiﬁc realism in terms
of truth rather than existence, but this only works insofar as one disregards the question of what it
is in the world that makes some statement true (see Asay (2018) for different realist options in that
respect). Now Esfeld is clearly not among those who disregard this question, and his response to
it brings us back to the original claim that the only real truth-makers are the elements of the PO.
About propositions containing predicates such as ‘mass’ or ‘charge’, he writes:

24
M. Egg
2.4
Primitive Ontology with Wave Function Realism
Let us now investigate the tension between the PO approach and scientiﬁc realism
more concretely by focusing on the most important element of non-primitive
ontology in QM, the wave function. Here is a beautifully concise statement of why
one should want to be a realist about the wave function:
Which features of a theory should a scientiﬁc realist take to represent the world? Answer:
those that are responsible for the theory’s explanatory success. When the theory is quantum
mechanics, the wave function is surely one of those features. (French, 2013, p. 76)
This provides anyone who, like Esfeld, seeks to combine scientiﬁc realism with
the PO approach, with a strong motivation to adopt the more generous of the two
notions of existence discussed above. In this way, he can take the wave function
to represent something in the world, although it is not part of the PO, but only
a dynamical parameter (as Esfeld (2020, p. 81) puts it, “the central dynamical
parameter in quantum physics”). Indeed, Esfeld explicitly subscribes to a kind of
realism about the wave function, but simultaneously emphasizes the sense in which
the wave function does not exist:
This view is a realism about the wave-function by contrast to an instrumentalism. The wave-
function is not a sui generis entity that exists in addition to the primitive ontology; but it
exists, namely as being located in the particle conﬁguration of the universe and its evolution.
(Esfeld, 2020, p. 82)
One might view Esfeld here as trying to work with two rather different notions of
existence at the same time. This would conﬁrm a suspicion raised in the previous
section, and it was actually my own ﬁrst response to this passage, but I have in the
meantime been convinced (by Michael Esfeld and an anonymous referee) that this
is not what he has in mind. He insists that there is only one notion of existence, it
is just that some of what exists (e.g., the wave function) depends on other things
that exist. If that was the whole story, Esfeld could uphold a robust version of wave
function realism, and no conﬂict with scientiﬁc realism would arise.
Unfortunately, however, the more restrictive notion of existence (which does not
ﬁt well with scientiﬁc realism) crops up again in one of the central arguments
in Esfeld’s book, which purports to establish that “determinism in science is
not opposed to free will” (Esfeld, 2020, Section 2.4). He approaches this issue
by critically discussing Peter van Inwagen’s consequence argument, which, in a
nutshell, says that if determinism is true, then our present acts are not up to us,
because they are consequences of laws of nature and events in the remote past.
Esfeld’s rather ingenious response to that argument is to attack the (seemingly
These predicates—as well as all the other ones appearing in the propositions that are true
about the world—really apply, and the propositions really are true; there is nothing ﬁctitious
about them. But what there is—and hence what makes them true—is nothing over and above
the distribution of primitive stuff throughout space and time. (Esfeld, 2014a, 465)

2
Quantum Fundamentalism vs. Scientiﬁc Realism
25
indubitable) premise that what went on in the remote past is not up to us. Since in
his view, dynamical parameters are located in particle movements, there is indeed
a sense in which something in the remote past (namely, the values of dynamical
parameters pertaining to an early stage of the universe) depends on our choices:
“These values depend on what happens later in the universe, including the particle
motions that are expressions of free will” (p. 102). What matters for our discussion
is how Esfeld defends this proposal against the immediate objection that it involves a
kind of backwards causation. It does not, he claims, because “the particle positions
and motions before we were born are what they are, independently of what we
do” (ibid.). This is compatible with a change in the initial values of dynamical
parameters (such as the wave function) due to later particle motions.5 Why does
such a change not amount to backwards causation? One possible response would
be to adopt the restrictive notion of existence discussed above, according to which
the dynamical parameters are not considered as real features of the world at any
particular time. The only real features in this sense would be the particle positions,
and these are not affected by inﬂuences from the future. As already mentioned, this
is not what Esfeld has in mind, because he wants to work with only one notion of
existence (the one that is in line with scientiﬁc realism). Another option (suggested
to me by an anonymous referee) is to hold that the wave function does exist as
a higher-level entity, but that higher-level causation is not genuine causation. The
problem with this response is that causation in all sciences except fundamental
physics is higher-level causation and that therefore, to say that higher-level causation
is not genuine causation is just as much in tension with scientiﬁc realism as to say
that higher-order existence is not genuine existence. Relatedly, Esfeld (in personal
communication) suggests to view the wave function as just the kind of thing that
(unlike the positions and motions of particles) can be inﬂuenced by future events.
In that case, however, I no longer see what “distinguishes the present proposal from
proposals in terms of backwards causation” (Esfeld, 2020, p. 102).
At the end of the day, Esfeld’s response to the charge of backwards causation
must depend, in some way or other, on the idea that a change of the wave function
due to future events is somehow less problematic than a change of particle motions
due to future events, and this is hard to square with the scientiﬁc realist’s conviction
that the wave function is just as much part of objective reality as the particles and
their motion. Of course, Esfeld can still pay lip service to realism by saying that
the wave function—as located in the complete history of the PO until the end of
the universe—is real. But this is a far cry from what the scientiﬁc realist means
when she says that the wave function—as responsible for successful explanations
and predictions at a certain time—is real.
5 As far as I see, justiﬁcation for this assumption comes from non-relativistic Bohmian mechanics,
where a history of particle conﬁgurations can be compatible with many different wave functions
describing the system’s quantum state at a certain time during that history. It is not clear to me
whether this still holds in Esfeld and Deckert’s (2018, chap. 4) Dirac sea model for quantum ﬁeld
theory, where the number of particles is massively increased and the requirement of being able to
change the quantum state without changing any particle movements seems much harder to satisfy.

26
M. Egg
2.5
Primitive Ontology Without Wave Function Realism
In light of the difﬁculties engendered by working with two distinct notions of
existence, it is natural for the PO supporter to abandon the more generous notion
and to deny reality to everything that is not part of the PO. In a sense, this is the path
chosen by Allori (2018, 2020a,b), who, in particular, rejects wave function realism.
Since it was wave function realism and the corresponding generous notion of reality
that kept Esfeld’s position in touch with scientiﬁc realism, one might expect that
Allori’s position is even harder to square with scientiﬁc realism. I will argue that
this indeed what we ﬁnd, although Allori is much more outspoken about what she
views as an excellent ﬁt between the PO approach and scientiﬁc realism.
Before we dive into this discussion, it is important to address an ambiguity in
the term ‘wave function realism’. Up to now, I have used it in a sense that would
more precisely be denoted by ‘scientiﬁc realism about the wave function’, motivated
by the kind of explanatory success mentioned in the opening quote of Sect. 2.4.
The other sense, which is actually more widespread in contemporary philosophy
of physics, would better be called ‘wave function ontology’ or ‘wave function
fundamentalism’. It is the view, defended most notably by Albert (1996) and Ney
(2021), that the wave function is not only a real physical object, but is also part of
the fundamental structure of the world (possibly even its only part). In this sense,
wave function realism is just as much an instance of quantum fundamentalism as
the PO approach, and some of the points of criticism I have raised so far could also
be directed against it. Furthermore, much of what Allori has to say against wave
function realism is actually a critique of wave function fundamentalism. Since this
type of critique belongs to the internal dispute among quantum fundamentalists, I
will not address it here (see Egg (2017) for my own take on that dispute).
Let us therefore focus on what Allori has to say about wave function realism in
the ﬁrst (non-fundamentalist) sense. Although she ends up arguing against it, it is
noteworthy that (just as in the case of Esfeld discussed above) some aspects of wave
function realism are still present in her position. For one thing, she acknowledges
that the so-called ψ-epistemic views are hard to square with scientiﬁc realism
and that her own view, which she calls ‘ψ-non-material’ is actually a subtype of
a ψ-ontic view (Allori, 2020b, pp. 35–39). Additionally, and again similarly to
Esfeld, she seeks to reduce the wave function to its functional role, embracing the
slogan “the wavefunction is as the wavefunction does” (Allori, 2020b, p. 40). I am
entirely sympathetic to this appeal to functionalism, but would like to put a realistic
emphasis onto the ﬁrst part of the slogan: the wavefunction is. As I have argued
elsewhere, functionalism is precisely what enables us to be realists about QM,
including (in some instances at least) realism about the wave function (Egg, 2021).
I therefore do not think that functionalism by itself supports Allori’s claim that “the
wavefunction does not represent matter” (Allori, 2020b, p. 41). Consider the parallel
case she uses to introduce functionalism: few of us who readily acknowledge that “a
table is as a table does” would thereby be tempted to deny realism about tables, or
to say that the term ‘table’ does not refer to a material object. This does not imply,

2
Quantum Fundamentalism vs. Scientiﬁc Realism
27
of course, that the wave function is a material object (for its function may be quite
different from the function of a table). My claim is merely that functionalism about
any X is entirely compatible with realism about X and with the view that X is a
material object.
Moving closer to the traditional debate on scientiﬁc realism, Allori (2020a)
reminds us that in the face of antirealist criticism, realism was forced to become
selective, restricting its commitment to what Kitcher (1993) has called the working
posits of a successful theory, while remaining agnostic about its presuppositional
posits. This kind of selective realism obviously also constitutes the background for
French’s dictum quoted at the beginning of Sect. 2.4. Allori’s account shares the
background, but differs radically in the assessment of what belongs to the working
posits of QM. Unlike French, she attributes the explanatory and predictive success
of QM to the PO, not to the wave function:
Quantum theory’s predictions, being encoded in pointer positions, are determined by the
PO, not by the wave function. Similarly, the explanations of the phenomena are in terms
of the PO, and only indirectly involve the wave function. That is, the PO is reminiscent of
the working posits and the wave function is reminiscent of a presuppositional posit. (Allori,
2020a, p. 221)
Given that most standard presentations of QM (in physics textbooks, for exam-
ple) do not speak about ontology (let alone PO), it is not immediately clear what
to make of the claim that QM’s predictions and explanations of phenomena “are in
terms of the PO”. One might interpret it as claiming that most QM textbooks—
except for the few cases which actually do speak about ontology (e.g., Norsen,
2017)—do not contain any actual successful predictions and explanations. This
would be hard to swallow for any scientiﬁc realist who seeks to take physics (as
it is actually taught and practiced in schools and laboratories around the world)
seriously. A more plausible interpretation (suggested by (Allori, 2020a, fn. 2) and
(Allori et al., 2008, p. 363)) is that even the standard presentations of QM, when they
speak about measurement outcomes, do (at least implicitly) specify a PO, if only a
PO consisting of pointer positions and other (macroscopic) means of displaying
experimental results. Interpreted in this way, Allori’s claim is more palatable, but
still faces two serious problems. First, by attaching the label ‘PO’ to whatever
constitutes the physical events that serve to conﬁrm a theory, it guarantees a priori
that the PO will be among its working posits. But the resulting version of selective
realism would no longer differ in any interesting way from instrumentalism or other
antirealist positions, as long as they accept the reality of macroscopic objects.6
Second, by adding macroscopic objects to the list of possible candidates for a PO
(alongside point particles, matter ﬁelds and ﬂashes, cf. Allori, 2020a, pp. 218–219),
6 It might seem that the PO of standard QM also encompasses microscopic entities, since QM
textbooks often talk about elementary particles and their properties, for example. However,
standard QM describes such entities by a wave function, whose role, according to the proposal
under consideration, is “to determine the probability relations between the successive states of
[macroscopic] objects” (Allori et al., 2008, 363).

28
M. Egg
it leaves us with radically different possibilities of what realism about PO amounts
to. This is related to another problem familiar from the scientiﬁc realism debate,
which we must now investigate in more detail: the underdetermination of theory by
evidence.
When different theoretical accounts with mutually incompatible ontological
commitments are equally well conﬁrmed by the empirical evidence, it gets difﬁcult
to justify realism about any particular one of them. Many realists then appeal to
non-empirical criteria of theory evaluation in order to arrive at a unique verdict
on what to be a realist about. This is what Allori (2020a, sect. 11.8) does as well
(see also Esfeld, 2014b), concluding that a pilot-wave theory with a PO of particles
is the best option. She admits, however, that the issue remains controversial, as
some of the criteria pull in opposite directions. But even if we set this problem
aside, her conclusion lacks support, due to her neglect of the ontological option
just discussed, which builds on the massive amount of empirical success that
(standard) QM achieves without postulating any microscopic PO. Allori (2020a, fn.
2) dismisses this option, because macroscopic entities cannot plausibly be regarded
as fundamental. However, to suppose that they need to be so regarded is just
quantum fundamentalism at work again. Recall that macroscopic objects such as
pointers were (somewhat idiosyncratically) labeled as the PO of standard QM, in
order to uphold the claim that the theory predicts and explains phenomena in terms
of the PO. As a scientiﬁc realist, I agree that some PO (in this minimal sense)
must be postulated, but I do not see any justiﬁcation for the additional requirement
that the PO ought to be fundamental. If scientiﬁc realism were only applicable to
predictions and explanations given in terms of fundamental ontology, no science
(except perhaps some future fundamental physics) could claim to teach us much
about reality.
This is not to say that all is well for realism about QM as soon as a (non-
fundamental) ontology of macroscopic objects along with a wave function is
postulated. The measurement problem needs to be addressed, because the realist
cannot accept the anthropocentric notion of ‘measurement’ to enter into the dynam-
ical description as an unanalyzable primitive (Egg, 2019). Now it is well known
that the measurement problem generates a serious case of underdetermination, since
there is no consensus as to which one of the proposed solutions is to be preferred
(Egg and Saatsi, 2021). However, it can be shown that if one abandons quantum
fundamentalism and looks at concrete paradigmatic cases of QM’s explanatory and
predictive success, the underdetermination problem disappears, because there turns
out to be a striking convergence in the (non-fundamental) ontology postulated by
the different proposals, in spite of their radical disagreement about fundamental
ontology. In particular, I have argued (Egg, 2021) that in some key experiments of
QM (the Stern-Gerlach experiment, quantum tunneling and two-path interference),
some aspects of the wave function play an indispensable explanatory role according

2
Quantum Fundamentalism vs. Scientiﬁc Realism
29
to all proposals (including the PO approaches advocated by Esfeld and Allori).7
These aspects are therefore properly regarded as the working posits of QM, in
contrast to any kind of microscopic PO, which is only present in some particular
proposals.
Allori (2018, p. 72) seeks to deny the wave function its status as a working posit
by citing attempts to eliminate the wave function completely (Dowker and Herbauts,
2005; Norsen, 2010). If these attempts were successful, a parallel argument to the
one I gave with respect to microscopic PO could be made: since the success of
QM can also be achieved without the wave function, it cannot be a working posit.
However, the cited proposals are merely demonstrations of the wave function’s
eliminability in principle, with no pretension of being applicable in practice to
any real-life example like the ones discussed in Egg (2021). Such demonstrations
are of interest to the quantum fundamentalist, but not to the scientiﬁc realist, who
(reminiscent of Éomer in the epigraph of this chapter) is committed to the (non-
fundamental) working posits that account for his experiences, and does (for the time
being) not care about what may ultimately turn out to be their fundamental nature.
I have not yet mentioned what is probably the main motivation to develop
selective realism and its distinction between working and presuppositional posits:
according to a prominent antirealist argument known as the pessimistic meta-
induction, many posits of once successful scientiﬁc theories later turned out not
to represent anything in reality. In response, the selective realist wants to show that
this is only the case for presuppositional posits, not for working ones. Allori (2018)
claims that a PO of point particles is particularly well suited to ground a selective
realist response to the pessimistic meta-induction. Let me conclude this section
by raising some doubts about this claim. First, selective realists have traditionally
viewed their task as involving an important empirical element: one tries to identify
the working posits of any given theory and then looks at the history of science
to check whether these posits actually survived when one theory was replaced by
another. By contrast, Allori identiﬁes the working posits with the PO, which in turn
follows from speciﬁc constraints on how physical theories should be formulated
(‘theory architecture’, as she calls it). If a theory is successful without respecting
these constraints (as is arguably the case for standard QM), it has to be reformulated
(as a pilot-wave theory in this case) before one can identify its working posits. To
the extent that this determines what the working posits of any physical theory are
going to be (namely point particles), ontological continuity between different such
theories is guaranteed a priori. Furthermore, it is doubtful whether the statement
that “the wave function arguably does not have any classical analog and therefore
we have radical discontinuity in the classical-to-quantum theory change” (Allori,
7 There are other aspects of the wave function which do not play such a role, an important example
being superpositions of macroscopically discernible states of affairs (Everettian “worlds”). That
these are not acknowledged in all the proposed solutions of the measurement problem is the reason
why (as mentioned in Sect. 2.2) my proposal differs from the Everett interpretation, and is, from
the realist point of view, preferable to it.

30
M. Egg
2018, p. 71) is really an accurate way of describing the challenge posed by the
pessimistic meta-induction. QM (like any other novel theory) taught us surprising
things we did not previously know, and it is no embarrassment for the realist that this
novelty is reﬂected in ontological posits that do not have any analog in the preceding
theory. A problem for realism would only arise if the novel ontology were supposed
to replace the working posits of the preceding theory. If one properly distinguishes
wave function realism from wave function fundamentalism (as suggested above), it
is clear that the former involves no such supposition. Again, it turns out that many
of Allori’s arguments in this context are actually arguments against wave function
fundamentalism, not against wave function realism. Finally, Allori’s proposal of
ontologically streamlining the classical-to-quantum transition by viewing point
particles as the working posits of QM is premised on the claim that point particles
were the working posits of classical physics. This is far from obvious. For example,
point particles do not play any explanatory role in the paradigmatic applications of
Newtonian mechanics (explaining planetary motions, movements of falling bodies,
the tides etc.), and even in Allori’s (2018, p. 72) own example (“the transparency of
a pair of glasses is explained in terms of the electromagnetic forces acting between
the particles composing the glasses, which are such that incoming light rays will
pass through them”), one would have to look at the details to judge whether it is
really the point particles themselves (rather than their energy levels or some other
dynamical parameters) that are doing the explanatory work.
2.6
Conclusion
I have argued that the marriage of the PO approach with scientiﬁc realism is an
unhappy one. Part of the reason for this is the former’s liaison with quantum
fundamentalism, which engenders a tendency to regard everything that is not part of
the fundamental ontology as somehow less real. Scientiﬁc realism advocates exactly
the opposite ranking of ontological commitment: since we have much stronger
evidence for non-fundamental entities than for fundamental ones, we should be
more strongly committed to the former.
When it comes to QM, the wave function is the crucial element for achieving
the kind of explanatory and predictive success that motivates scientiﬁc realism.
We saw that even a PO advocate like Esfeld feels the pull of this and accepts
a kind of wave function realism. But in the end his commitment to quantum
fundamentalism prevails and weakens his realism, pushing his position towards
Allori’s explicit antirealism about the wave function. Her arguments reveal another
harmful effect of quantum fundamentalism: it prompts its adherents to lose sight
of the difference between claims about reality and claims about fundamentality.
As a consequence, Allori throws out the (wave function realist) baby with the
(wave function fundamentalist) bathwater. This puts pressure on the compatibility
of quantum fundamentalism with scientiﬁc realism. I conclude that insofar as we
are unwilling to give up the latter, we should let go of quantum fundamentalism.

2
Quantum Fundamentalism vs. Scientiﬁc Realism
31
References
Albert, D. Z. (1996). Elementary quantum metaphysics. In J. T. Cushing, A. Fine, & S.
Goldstein (Eds.), Bohmian mechanics and quantum theory: An appraisal. Boston studies in
the philosophy of science (Vol. 184, pp. 277–284). Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Allori, V. (2013). Primitive ontology and the structure of fundamental physical theories. In A. Ney
& D. Z. Albert (Eds.), The wave function: Essays in the metaphysics of quantum mechanics
(pp. 58–75). Oxford University Press.
Allori, V. (2018). Scientiﬁc realism and primitive ontology or: The pessimistic induction and the
nature of the wave function. Lato Sensu: Revue de la Société de Philosophie des Sciences, 5,
69–76.
Allori, V. (2020a). Scientiﬁc realism without the wave function. In S. French & J. Saatsi (Eds.),
Scientiﬁc realism and the quantum (pp. 212–228). Oxford University Press.
Allori, V. (2020b). Why scientiﬁc realists should reject the second dogma of quantum mechanics.
In M. Hemmo & O. Shenker (Eds.), Quantum, probability, logic: The work and inﬂuence of
Itamar Pitowsky (pp. 19–48). Springer.
Allori, V., et al. (2008). On the common structure of bohmian mechanics and the Ghirardi-Rimini-
Weber theory. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 59, 353–389.
Asay, J. (2018). Realism and theories of truth. In J. Saatsi (Ed.), The Routledge handbook of
scientiﬁc realism (pp. 383–393). Routledge.
Chakravartty, A. (2017). Scientiﬁc realism. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The stanford encyclopedia of phi-
losophy. Summer 2017. http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2017/entries/scientiﬁc-realism/
Dowker, F., & Herbauts, I. (2005). The status of the wave function in dynamical collapse models.
Foundations of Physics Letters, 18(6), 499–518.
Egg, M. (2017). The physical salience of non-fundamental local beables. Studies in History and
Philosophy of Modern Physics, 57, 104–110.
Egg, M. (2019). Dissolving the measurement problem is not an option for the realist. Studies in
History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 66, 62–68.
Egg, M. (2020b). Quantum theory as a framework and its implications on the measurement
problem. In S. French & J. Saatsi (Eds.), Scientiﬁc realism and the quantum (pp. 78–102).
Oxford University Press.
Egg, M. (2021). Quantum ontology without speculation. European Journal for Philosophy of
Science, 11, 32, 1–26.
Egg, M., & Saatsi, J. (2021). Scientiﬁc realism and underdetermination in quantum theory.
Philosophy Compass. https://doi.org/10.1111/phc3.12773
Esfeld, M. (2014a). Quantum humeanism, or: physicalism without properties. The Philosophical
Quarterly, 64, 453–470.
Esfeld, M. (2014b). The primitive ontology of quantum physics: Guidelines for an assessment of
the proposals. Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 47, 99–106.
Esfeld, M. (2020). Science and human freedom. Palgrave Macmillan.
Esfeld, M., & D. A. Deckert (2018). A minimalist ontology of the natural world. Routledge.
French, S. (2013). Whither wave function realism? In A. Ney & D. Z. Albert (Eds.), The wave
function: Essays in the metaphysics of quantum mechanics (pp. 76–90). Oxford University
Press.
Healey, R. (2020). Pragmatist quantum realism. In S. French & J. Saatsi (Eds.), Scientiﬁc realism
and the quantum (pp. 123–146). Oxford University Press.
Jackson, F. (1998). From metaphysics to ethics: A defence of conceptual analysis. Oxford
University Press.
Kitcher, P. (1993). The advancement of science. Oxford University Press.
Matarese, V. (2020). Super-humeanism and physics: A merry relationship? Synthese. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11229-020-02717-w
Maudlin, T. (2019). Philosophy of physics: Quantum theory. Princeton University Press.

32
M. Egg
Myrvold, W. (2018). Ontology for collapse theories. In S. Gao (Ed.), Collapse of the wave function
(pp. 97–123). Cambridge University Press.
Ney, A. (2021). The world in the wave function: A metaphysics for quantum physics. Oxford
University Press.
Norsen, T. (2010). The theory of (exclusively) local beables. Foundations of Physics, 40(12), 1858–
1884.
Norsen, T. (2017). Foundations of quantum mechanics. Springer.
Saatsi, J. (2020). Truth vs. progress realism about spin. In S. French & J. Saatsi (Eds.), Scientiﬁc
realism and the quantum (pp. 35–54). Oxford University Press.
Wallace, D. (2020a). Lessons from realistic physics for the metaphysics of quantum theory.
Synthese, 197, 4303–4318. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-018-1706-y

Chapter 3
On the Principles That Serve as Guides
to the Ontology of Quantum Mechanics
Vera Matarese
Abstract Is the ontology of non-relativistic quantum mechanics three dimensional
(3N) or high dimensional (3ND)? This paper discusses two principles, proposed in
North (The structure of a quantum world. The wave function: essays on the meta-
physics of quantum mechanics, pp 184–202, 2013) and Emery (Phil Phenomenol
Res 95(3):564–591, 2017), that are usually employed to answer this question. The
ﬁrst, the dynamical matching principle (DMP), states that the fundamental structure
of the world should match the structure of the dynamical laws of the theory, in this
case, the Schrödinger equation. The second, the minimal divergence norm (MDN),
states that insofar as we have multiple empirically adequate theories, we ought to
choose the one that minimises the difference between what the theory says the world
is like and how the world appears. While the former is used to argue in favour of a
quantum 3ND ontology and the latter to argue in favour of a quantum 3D ontology,
I show that both principles can in fact be used to support either view. This casts
doubt on their role and legitimacy as meta-ontological principles that can guide us
in the decision between a commitment to a 3ND ontology or 3D ontology. I suggest
instead that they are best regarded as useful principles to construct and ‘regiment’
the space of plausible quantum ontologies.
3.1
Introduction
Quantum mechanics faces a severe problem of underdetermination, as its onto-
logical interpretations differ vastly, ranging from three-dimensional ontologies to
high-dimensional ones. Although several interpretations exist, they can be lumped
into two main rival groups: the quantum 3ND ontologies, on the one hand, which
regard the wavefunction as a physical 3N-dimensional entity living in a physical
V. Matarese ()
Institute of Philosophy and Center for Space and Habitability, University of Bern, Bern,
Switzerland
e-mail: vera.matarese@unibe.ch
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
V. Allori (ed.), Quantum Mechanics and Fundamentality, Synthese Library 460,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-99642-0_3
33

34
V. Matarese
3N-dimensional space,1 and, on the other hand, the quantum 3D ontologies.2,3 This
paper discusses two meta-ontological principles that have been advocated in this
debate, the dynamical matching principle (DMP) and the minimal divergence norm
(MDN). These two principles are usually meant to support and justify, respectively,
a quantum high-dimensional ontology and a quantum three-dimensional ontology.
Depending on whether we emphasise the view that the fundamental reality of the
world should match the structure of our dynamical laws (DMP) or the view that
our fundamental ontology should diverge as little as possible from our world of
experience (MDN), only one of the two above-mentioned ontologies remains. This
is, at least, how the debate is usually characterised:
This brings us to a basic disagreement between wave function space and ordinary space
views: how much to emphasize the dynamics in ﬁguring out the fundamental nature of
the world. Three-space views prioritize our evidence from ordinary experience, claiming
that the world appears three-dimensional because it is fundamentally three-dimensional.
Wave function space views prioritize inference from the dynamics, claiming that the world
is fundamentally high dimensional because the dynamical laws indicate that it is. (North,
2013, p. 196)
Prima facie, this seems to be a problem of priority: which principle should be
prioritised? This, I take it, would create a difﬁcult dilemma, as both principles seem
to be promising guides for any naturalistic and empirically oriented metaphysics.
Yet, it might be a mistake to think that the principles themselves are truly mutually
exclusive. One reason to suspect this is found in Chen (2017), where it is argued that
the DMP does not uncontroversially favour 3ND ontology. In this paper, I argue
for the stronger thesis that each principle could be applied to support either the
3ND quantum ontologies group or the three-dimensional quantum ontologies group
(Sects. 3.3 and 3.4).
At this point, questions on the validity of these meta-ontological principles
naturally arise. What is their signiﬁcance if they allow opposite conclusions and
can be used to justify opposite ontological interpretations? What is their role, and
what should it be? My paper warns against invoking such principles to justify a
commitment to a 3D or 3ND ontology. To be clear, I am not arguing against the
1 Ontologies of this ﬁrst group include, for instance, wavefunction monism (the view that all that
exists is a wavefunction or waveﬁeld living in a high-dimensional space, while our 3D world is only
an illusion; see Emery (2017) and Allori (2010) for a discussion of such a view) and wavefunction
fundamentalism (the view that the wavefunction is all that fundamentally exists, while our 3D
world exists non-fundamentally; see Emery (2017) for a discussion of this view).
2 Ontologies of the second group include particle ontology, ﬂash ontology, and mass-density
ontology. If an ontology is hybrid (for instance, for Bohmian mechanics, Valentini (2009, 2010)
postulates a particle ontology in three-dimensional space and a wave-function ontology in a high-
dimensional space), it counts as a 3N-dimensional ontology.
3 Note that the same quantum theory could feature a 3N-dimensional or three-dimensional ontology
depending on its ontological interpretation. For instance, Bohmian mechanics can be interpreted
as featuring a high-dimensional (Albert, 1996; Loewer, 1996; Valentini, 2009, 2010) or a three-
dimensional ontology (Allori, 2013a, 2017; Esfeld, 2014). This means that both groups contain a
‘Bohmian ontology’.

3
On the Principles That Serve as Guides to the Ontology of Quantum Mechanics
35
legitimacy of these principles per se, but against the legitimacy of using these
principles to justify a 3D or 3ND ontology. I devote the bulk of this paper to
explaining why.
The plan of the paper is as follows. First, I brieﬂy review the problem of quan-
tum underdetermination and identify ‘meta-ontological eliminative principles’—
principles that support and justify a quantum ontology by ‘ruling out’ other
ontologies—as a solution to the problem (Sect. 3.2). Next, I offer an examination
of DMP and MDN by focussing on their legitimacy and application as meta-
ontological eliminative principles that can decide between a commitment to the 3ND
ontology group or to the 3D ontology group (Sects. 3.3 and 3.4). My conclusion is
that neither principle can serve as a meta-ontological eliminative principle that can
rule out one group in favour of the other because both can be used to support either
group. I suggest instead that they should be used to construct and regiment the space
of plausible quantum ontologies.
3.2
Setting Up the Debate: Meta-ontological Principles
and Quantum Mechanics
Within the philosophy of physics, ontology is normally understood as an inquiry
concerned with cataloguing all that physically exists. It addresses questions such
as, “Are electromagnetic ﬁelds or quantum wave-functions physically real? Are
there three-dimensional objects like tables and tigers, or just microscopic particles
arranged in table-like or tiger-like patterns?” In this paper, I focus on meta-ontology,
which, within the philosophy of physics, usually concerns how we should form
ontological commitments. Indeed, a central task of meta-ontology in the philosophy
of physics is to deﬁne norms that dictate how to establish or identify the ontological
commitments of physical theories.4
Some meta-ontological principles are eliminative and function as follows. First,
we posit a space of possible ontologies. We then apply such eliminative principles
to that space to rule out different ontologies until we arrive at the ultimate, non-
eliminable one, which conforms to all the principles we used to rule out the
alternatives. Such meta-ontological, eliminative principles are essential in cases of
underdetermination, such as the one afﬂicting quantum mechanics, where different
ontologies are equally plausible alternatives, and a decision about which is the true
one must be made. Since this paper targets the debate contraposing quantum 3ND
ontologies and 3D ontologies, these eliminative principles should decide which
group is the right one and thus whether the quantum ontology is high-dimensionalor
4 There are many similar principles. Here, I consider only two, those that are normally employed
to decide between 3D and 3ND. Other meta-ontological principle include the principle according
to which we should opt for those ontologies that preserve the ontology from previous theories. For
an implementation of this principle, see Allori (2013a).

36
V. Matarese
three-dimensional. The principles I consider in this case are not supposed to lead to
one particular, speciﬁc, ontological interpretation, as many different ontologies are
available within the 3ND ontology and 3D ontology groups. Instead, they should
lead to one group of ontologies by eliminating the other.5 This way, at least, the
most threatening underdetermination afﬂicting quantum metaphysics debates would
be resolved. In this regard, the DMP and the MDN appear to be good candidates to
serve as such eliminative, meta-ontological principles, for while the former is used
in the literature to identify and support a 3ND ontology as the ‘true’ ontology for
quantum mechanics, the latter is used to reject it and to justify a commitment to a
3D ontology.
Since the task of the eliminative principles in this context is to eliminate one of
the two groups, once one principle eliminates one group, the other becomes idle. In
this respect, North’s discussion of whether DMP or MDN should have priority is
relevant, especially given that it is normally thought that each principle leads to the
selection of a different group of ontologies.
The desiderata of these eliminative principles can be easily set. The ﬁrst is that
they should be able to eliminate one of the two groups, no more and no fewer. It
would be problematic if the principles could not eliminate either view or could not
eliminate both. Second, they should not presuppose what they are meant to establish,
that is, they should not assume the truth or preferability of either wavefunction
ontology or a three dimensional one.
Since the DMP and the MDN are used in the literature as meta-ontological
eliminative principles that can eliminate either the 3ND or the 3D ontology group,
and therefore to ground the legitimacy of an ontological commitment to either 3ND
or a 3D quantum ontology, it is important to examine whether they can actually play
such a role.
3.3
The Dynamical Matching Principle
The ﬁrst principle I consider, called the ‘dynamical matching principle’ (Chen,
2017), was ﬁrst spelled out by North (2013) as an inference principle that rules
how the ontological commitments of a theory should be drawn:
This brings me to a very general principle that guides our physical theorizing, from which
the other principles I use all extend: the dynamical laws are about what’s fundamental to a
world. [ . . . ] We do not directly observe the fundamental level of reality: we infer it from
the dynamics. We posit, at the fundamental level, whatever the dynamical laws presuppose.
(North, 2013, p. 186)
5 Before proceeding, let me clarify that, in this paper, I do not deal with the problem of
whether these principles in conjunction with other principles can eliminate all the ontological
interpretations except for one. I examine only whether these principles can be used to eliminate
one of the two groups, as they are normally supposed to do.

3
On the Principles That Serve as Guides to the Ontology of Quantum Mechanics
37
However, it has also been treated as an eliminative principle that eliminates 3D
ontologies in favour of 3ND ontologies.6 Indeed, according to the DMP, the
structure of the true quantum ontology should be determined by the Schrödinger
equation, which governs the temporal development of the quantum wavefunction:
DMP: The fundamental structure of the world should match the dynamical structure of
quantum mechanics.
According to supporters of quantum 3ND-ontology,since the dynamical law posits a
high-dimensionalwavefunction living in a 3ND space, three-dimensional ontologies
are ruled out.
In order to check how this principle should actually be implemented and to
proceed on ﬁrm grounds, it would be desirable to have a deﬁnition of ‘structure’.
Neither North (2013) nor Chen (2017) provides a deﬁnition; what they seem to
mean, however, is that an ontological structure should include both ontological
entities and spacetime structure. Moreover, the dynamical structure of a theory is
independent of any arbitrary or conventional representational means. I include this
requirement as a minimum desideratum for the ontological structure that the DMP
aims to select. Second, a deﬁnition of ‘matching’ would be desirable. In this regard,
one well-known option would be to claim that the structure of our ontologies needs
to be isomorphic to our mathematical ‘models’ thereof7:
Ever since Newton, physicists have been in the business of constructing mathematical
models of aspects of the world, ‘models’ in the sense that they are – or intended to be –
isomorphic to the features of the world being studied. (Wallace, 2012, p. 12)
In this respect, the application of the DMP in quantum mechanics is, according to
North and the supporters of 3ND ontologies, straightforward. Remember that the
Schrödinger equation dictates the temporal evolution of the quantum wavefunction,
which is a mapping
Ψ : R3N →C
such that
(x1, x2, x3, . . . , x3N) 
→c
From this deﬁnition of the wavefunction, it seems clear that it is a high-dimensional
entity, speciﬁed on a high-dimensional space, and thus we should postulate a high-
dimensional entity and space in the quantum fundamental ontology. It is important
to note that the wave-function high-dimensional space and our three-dimensional
6 For instance, Chen (2017) uses it hoping to ﬁnd an ultimate conclusion on the debate between
3D-fundamentalism and 3ND-fundamentalism. North (2013) presents it as an inference principle
but also uses it to argue for 3ND ontology and against 3D ontologies. Albert (1996) and Ney (2015)
implicitly adopt DMP as an indisputable principle to support and justify their view.
7 For a discussion on isomorphism and wavefunction realism, see Halvorson (2018).

38
V. Matarese
space are related, as each of the coordinates of the former corresponds to a particular
degree of freedom of the latter.8
The problem is that there is another entity, the so-called ‘multi-ﬁeld’,9 which is
isomorphic to the structure of the wavefunction and is three dimensional:
Ψ : R3x . . .x R3 →C
where R3x . . . x R3is an N-fold product.10 In this case, the wavefunction maps each
N-tuple of points in three-dimensional space to a complex number:

x1, y1, z1

,

x2, y2, z2

, . . .

xN, yN, zN,
 

→c
Now, for the sake of our argument, it is important to stress that, by deﬁnition, R3N is
R3x . . . x R3. R3N is simply a symbol which refers to the N-fold product R3x . . .x R3,
nothing more, as R3N and R3x . . .x R3(N-times) are symbols that indicate the
very same representation. In other words, the space of the wavefunction expressed
in 3ND coordinates (x1, x2, x3, . . . , x3N) is isomorphic, if not identical,11 to the
space expressed in 3D coordinates ((x1, y1, z1), (x2, y2, z2), . . . (xN, yN, zN, )). The
only difference is the use of some superﬂuous parentheses and different symbols.
Since the wavefunction and the multi-ﬁeld are isomorphic, the DMP could well
8 To be fair, supporters of quantum 3ND ontology are reluctant to claim that the space where the
wavefunction lives is a representational space, a ‘conﬁguration’ space of our three-dimensional
space. Moreover, they insist that, strictly speaking, the conﬁguration space is 3M, that is, it does
not contain any obvious connection with the 3D world. However, when pushed to solve the
problem of the existence of multiple mappings between the two spaces (Monton, 2002) and of
the empirical adequacy of their own theory (Maudlin, 2007), not only do they accept that the
‘N’-factored dimensions of the 3ND-space correspond to the degrees of freedom of our three-
dimensional space, but also that each coordinate of the 3ND space represents a particular particle’s
coordinate in our three-dimensional space. Indeed, if the 3ND ontologies did not include a ﬁxed
connection between 3ND-space and 3D-space, the wavefunction space could be mapped to our
space with different mappings, all equally possible (Maudlin, 2007; Monton, 2002), making the
3ND ontologies empirically unsupported and even empirically unsupportable in principle (Chen,
2017; Maudlin, 2007). Moreover, in order to solve the problem of the connection between the
two spaces, they claim that the Hamiltonian potential features degrees of freedom grouped into
triples, such that each triple should be ‘naturally’ interpreted as the coordinates of a particle in
three-dimensional space (Albert, 1996; Ney, 2015). See Monton (2006) and Allori (2013b) for a
discussion of this claim. Notice that this strategy is usually employed to deal with the problem of
the connection of the 3ND space with the 3D space within Bohmian mechanics, and that it is not
applicable within multi-world interpretations, which demand a separate treatment.
9 For the multi-ﬁeld view, see Belot (2012), Hubert and Romano (2018), Romano (2020), and Chen
(2017).
10 A similar remark can be found in Chen (2017).
11 Given that the multi-mapping problem can be overcome by admitting a natural identiﬁcation
of points in 3ND-space and an N-tuples of points in three-dimensional space (see footnote 8), it
could even be claimed that the two spaces are identical. See Chen (2017) for an identity mapping
between the two spaces.

3
On the Principles That Serve as Guides to the Ontology of Quantum Mechanics
39
support not only the wavefunction ontology, which is 3ND, but also the multi-
ﬁeld ontology, which is three-dimensional. This means that we still have the same
problem of underdetermination and that the DMP fails as an eliminative principle,
as it fails to eliminate one of the two groups of ontologies.
Let me brieﬂy dispel one possible objection to this argument and discuss
a possible strategy to overcome the problem of lingering underdetermination.
First, the objection: A wavefunction realist may insist that the dimensions of the
wavefunction are M, and M just happens to be 3N and that there is no explanation
relating to our 3D world for why M is 3N. Maybe, there is no explanation at all.12
This is a fair point. However, even if the dimensions of the space only happen
to be 3ND, this is enough to establish the isomorphism between the space of the
wavefunction and the space of the multiﬁeld. No matter whether the dimensions of
the space of the wavefunction are necessarily or contingently 3N, it is a fact, albeit
brute and unexplainable, that the wavefunction lives in R3N and that this space is
isomorphic to the space where the multi-ﬁeld is deﬁned.
Second, one strategy could in principle break the underdetermination, but it
would violate the minimal desiderata discussed above. First, one would have to
commit to a strong form of term objectivism,13 according to which there is a fact
of the matter regarding which formalism and symbols one should use. Secondly,
one would have to choose one of the two deﬁnitions of  and its space and
ontologically commit to it. The problem is that either we choose the formalism
randomly, and so the ontological structure would be the result of a random choice, or
we choose it on the basis of whether we prefer a 3ND or a 3D ontology.14 The ﬁrst
option would violate the requirement that the structure of our ontology should be
independent of conventional or arbitrary representational choices, while the second
option would violate the minimal desideratum that the principle should be applied
without presupposing the truth of preferability of the ontological interpretation it
aims to justify. Therefore, my conclusion is that the DMP cannot serve as a meta-
ontological eliminative principle to select the 3ND ontologies group and eliminate
the 3D ontologies group.
3.4
The Minimal Divergence Norm
The minimal divergence norm was ﬁrst introduced in Emery (2017) and captures
the longstanding idea that our perception of reality should play a decisive role in
12 For a discussion of this objection, see also Allori (2013b).
13 Term objectivism is discussed in Hicks and Schaffer (2017).
14 Some may suggest that a third option is to choose the ‘simplest’ symbols and infer our ontology
from those. However, appealing to simplicity in this case would be groundless, since the difference
in symbols does not indicate any difference in their representation.

40
V. Matarese
choosing the kind of ontology to which we should be committed.15 It states that we
should choose the ontology that diverges the least from how the world appears. This
means that it does not rule out ontologies that diverge signiﬁcantly, as long as their
divergence is the minimum we can choose.
MDN: Insofar as we have two or more empirically adequate scientiﬁc theories – two
theories that both accurately predict the phenomena that we observe – we ought to choose
the one that minimizes the difference between the way the theory says the world is and the
way the world appears to be.
The MDN has been applied (Emery, 2017) in a way that accords well with the
role of meta-ontological eliminative principles. Indeed, the MDN can be applied to
eliminate one of the two competing groups – the 3ND ontology group – exactly as
we expect it to do qua eliminative principle. Ostensibly, Emery’s application of the
MDN, however, is different, as it appears more restrictive. First, her aim is to rule
out not the whole 3ND ontology group, but only ‘wavefunction ontology’; second,
she does so by comparing it with a particular ontology taken from the 3D ontologies
group, namely, mass-density ontology. The ontological debate that I target on the
contrary, compares the entire 3ND ontologies group with the entire 3D ontologies
group. However, this difference is not signiﬁcant. First, the wavefunction ontology
encompasses all the interpretations belonging to the 3ND ontologies group: all
ontologies of this group have a wavefunction ontology. Second, the reason the
mass-density ontology is judged to diverge less than the wavefunction ontology
encompasses all the interpretations that belong to the 3D ontologies group. Indeed,
the debate is settled by taking into consideration the two following related reasons:
(1) wavefunction ontology implies a new kind of relation with which we are not
familiar, which is the relation between the conﬁguration space and our three-
dimensional space; (2) mass-density ontology includes three-dimensional objects,
which are common in our experience.16 While condition (1) applies to every 3ND
ontology, condition (2) applies to every three-dimensional ontology. This means that
MDN can be considered a meta-ontological eliminative principle that could serve
well in our case, and given (1) and (2), the principle should lead, a fortiori, to the
conclusion that 3ND ontologies should be eliminated in favour of 3D ontologies.
The problem with the MDN is that it is quite difﬁcult to judge whether it actually
leads to this conclusion, given that it does not specify how to quantify the degree of
divergence of a theory from how the world appears. Emery anticipates this objection
in her paper and proposes that, while this may be a genuine, legitimate worry in
15 This idea has been developed in different forms; for instance, it is behind the principle that
whatever is physical must be three-dimensional (Hale, 1988) or that we should reject any theory
that cannot locate the ‘manifest image’ of reality (Chen, 2017). Emery attributes some form of
MDN to Allori et al. (2008) and to Allori (2013a). Ney also adopts some sort of MDN in her
book (Ney, 2021, p. 129), where she uses arguments from intuitions. According to her, a quantum
ontology that matches our intuition of what the world is like is desirable.
16 (1) and (2) are intrinsically related. If our ontology is in 3D space, we do not need any ‘new’
relation to connect different dimensional ontologies. Thus, both (1) and (2) concern the dimensions
of the space of the ontology.

3
On the Principles That Serve as Guides to the Ontology of Quantum Mechanics
41
some cases, it does not touch on this particular debate. After all, she claims, the
application of the principle is straightforward in choosing between 3ND ontologies
and 3D ontologies, as it is clear which ones diverge the least: 3D ontologies. On the
contrary, I argue that this objection does constitute a problem, especially in cases
like this one, in which one must compare ontologies that diverge from reality in more
than one salient respect. In these cases, gauging the divergence is not as intuitive as
Emery suggests, as we lack a common measure that would be applicable to both
criteria.
Indeed, one of the ways that supporters of 3ND ontologies justify their view is
by applying a sort of MDN, as well, by arguing that 3ND ontologies are the only
viable ones that can avoid non-locality (understood here as including both action
at a distance and non-separability) in the fundamental ontology.17 Their reasoning
can be summarised as follows: we opt for a high-dimensional ontology because we
do not want non-locality in the fundamental space, and we do not want non-locality
because non-locality would be at odds with how we perceive our three-dimensional
macroscopic space.18,19 In light of this reasoning, we would expect them to argue
that, given two different ontologies, one with non-locality and three-dimensional
space and the other with locality and high-dimensional space, they would prefer the
latter, as, overall, it diverges less from how the world appears to us. It is particularly
interesting that, on the one hand, non-locality is an undesirable consequence for
rejecting wavefunction ontology, and, on the other, wavefunction ontology is an
undesirable consequence for rejecting non-locality.20 Which of the two ontological
features diverges the least from what the world looks like? I think that it is highly
controversial, and so that the MDN does not uncontroversially favour 3D over 3ND.
Here, I do not want to argue against the MDN per se. Indeed, Emery gives
compelling reasons it should be applied, regardless of its success in the quantum
17 This is, at least, what Albert claimed during a seminar at Rutgers in 2016. Such claims about
the undesirability of non-locality in the fundamental ontology can also be found in Ney (2015),
Wallace (2012), and Loewer (1996). Ney also motivates her support for a 3ND ontology by
appealing to the fact that non-locality is against our intuitions of what the world is like (Ney,
2021).
18 Wallace, for instance, argues that action at a distance correlations ﬂatly contradict our common-
sense understanding of how physical objects should interact and our perception of reality. In our
daily experience, macroscopic objects do not inﬂuence each other instantaneously if they are in
different spacetime regions (Wallace, 2012, p. 292). In her recent book, Ney (2021) argues that
both action at a distance and non-separability are at odds with our intuitions of what the world is
like.
19 It is, of course, controversial that locality matches how the world appears to us and our intuitions
of what the world is like, as there are many phenomena that at ﬁrst appear non-local (for instance,
when I switch on the lightbulb of my ofﬁce from the corridor or when I use the remote control
to turn off my TV). However, it is true that we usually know that the true explanation of such
seemingly non-local phenomena is local.
20 Like Ney (2021) and Wallace and Timpson (2010), I also endorse the view that wavefunction
realism does not imply any form of non-separability. However, this is a controversial issue. See
Myrvold (2015) for the opposite view.

42
V. Matarese
ontology debate. Rather, the issue raised in this paper speciﬁcally targets the ques-
tion of whether the MDN can be properly used as a meta-ontological eliminative
principle that rules out the 3ND ontology group and identiﬁes three-dimensional
ontology as the true ontology for quantum mechanics. My conclusion on this point
is negative. The fact that the two alternative kinds of ontology diverge from our
perception of the world with respect to different yet salient criteria makes the MDN
inapplicable.21
One option would be to restrict the application of this principle to situations
where the ontologies are equal in all respects except for one. All else being equal,
if one ontology differs from another, and this difference leads this ontology to
feature a more serious divergence from how the world appears, then we ought to
discard it.22 However, the MDN would then be inapplicable as a meta-ontological
eliminative principle that can decide between the 3ND ontologies and the 3D
ontologies groups, as the two groups are heterogenous as they include different
ontological interpretations.
3.5
Conclusion: Eliminative Reasoning and the Role
of the DMP and the MDN in the Quantum Ontology
Debate
Meta-ontological principles are crucial in order to specify the ontological com-
mitments of quantum mechanics. As mentioned above, the ontologies that are
possible candidates for quantum mechanics vary signiﬁcantly, as they include both
high-dimensional and three-dimensional ontologies. Given this serious underdeter-
mination, one natural strategy is to ﬁnd meta-ontological eliminative principles
which could at least guide us in deciding whether the true quantum ontology is
three dimensional or high dimensional. Here, I have examined two important and
promising candidates that might serve this function, the DMP and the MDN; indeed,
each is usually used to support and justify a commitment to one of the two kinds of
ontology.
However, I found that both DMP and MDN are ineligible for this role. The DMP,
by relying on the notion of isomorphism, leads to unsatisfactory alternatives. The
ﬁrst is lingering underdetermination, which means that the DMP is idle and that
it does not fulﬁl its role as an eliminative principle, since it violates the minimal
21 This is the case at least in the absence of some proposal for how to apply a common measure to
both criteria. Some options might be available, such as reﬂective equilibrium, but this suggestion
would need a separate treatment.
22 Emery considers but rejects the possibility that MDN should be applicable only for cases in
which the ontologies are equal in all theoretical virtues (simplicity, explanatory power) except for
the degree to which they diverge from what the world looks like. Here, I consider the option that
the MDN should be applied only in cases where all but one of their ontological features of the
ontologies are identical.

3
On the Principles That Serve as Guides to the Ontology of Quantum Mechanics
43
requirement of ruling out at least one of the two kinds of ontologies (3ND or 3D).
The second alternative would be to break the underdetermination by adopting a
strong form of term objectivism and deciding which set of symbols one should read
off the ontology. However, this choice would be either arbitrary (since there is no
apparent reason to prefer one use of symbols over the other), or ontologically laden
if the choice were made on the basis of the kind of ontological interpretation one
preferentially supports. In the case where the set of symbols is chosen arbitrarily,
the resulting structure would violate the requirement that it must be independent
of any arbitrary representational choice. If it is done on the basis of a preferred
ontology, it would violate one of the desiderata of the principles, for one would
have to presuppose what the principle aims to prove (whether the wavefunction is
a high-dimensional entity or a multi-ﬁeld). For this reason, I do not think that the
DMP can play the role of a meta-ontological eliminative principle that can eliminate
the group of 3D ontologies and identify the 3ND ontology as the ‘true’ one for non-
relativistic quantum mechanics.
The examination of the MDN was more brief but hopefully no less convincing.
The fundamental problem is its vagueness in formulation, more precisely, the lack
of speciﬁcation regarding how we should gauge the divergence between an ontology
and how the world appears. I suggested that the MDN cannot be successfully
applied in cases where ontologies differ in more than one respect. Both 3ND and
3D ontologies diverge from our perception of the world with respect to two different
and ontologically signiﬁcant aspects: while the former diverge because of the space
of the ontology, the latter diverge because they feature non-locality.
In both cases, DMP and MDN, it is illegitimate to appeal to these principles to
break the underdetermination and justify commitments to a quantum 3ND or 3D
ontology. Should we then designate these principles illegitimate? The conclusion
I have defended is that they cannot play the role of epistemic guides qua meta-
ontological eliminative principles to decide between the two groups of 3ND
ontologies and 3D ontologies. However, I am open to the idea that they may play
other roles. For instance, I remained silent on whether they can be used legitimately
to rule out some particular ontologies instead of others. Indeed, I suppose that they
would, at least in some circumstances.23 Moreover, if used in conjunction with
other meta-ontological eliminative principles, they might even help eliminate all
but one particular ontology. This is, however, a separate issue which would require
a discussion of what these other principles are and how exactly they should be
implemented.
Rather than examining how the DMP and the MDN could work with regard
to particular quantum ontologies and in conjunction with other principles, let me
conclude by sketching a meta-ontological role for DMP and MDN that I particularly
favour. Returning to the way I described eliminative principles and their role in the
23 For instance, the DMP could rule out a Humean primitive ontology of only particle positions in
favour of a multi-ﬁeld view, as only the latter includes an entity isomorphic to the wave function
in its ontology.

44
V. Matarese
selection of the true ontology, I said that eliminative reasoning normally consists
of setting up the space of possible ontologies and then, via eliminative principles,
selecting the correct one. The DNM and the MDN cannot play the role I expected
them to play in the second step, but what about the ﬁrst one?
We surely need some principles that can guide the construction of the space of
possible quantum ontologies. How would one go about constructing this space? On
the one hand, there is the thought that the larger the space, the better: the larger the
space is, the more likely it would contain the ‘true’ ontology. However, it would
be a mistake to think that the size is all that matters.24 Indeed, the space could be
large simply because it contains highly implausible, bizarre ontologies or because
it contains many slightly different versions of an ontology. If so, its size would not
inform us about whether it is likely to contain the true ontology within it. Moreover,
if we have a space which is too large, especially if it has many slightly different
or bizarre alternatives, we would potentially need many more eliminative principles
to identify the right ontology. Lastly, if the size were all that mattered, it would
never be possible to consider the space ‘ready’ for an application of eliminative
principles, for it would always be possible to ﬁnd new (and even more bizarre)
alternatives. Thus, we need some principles that govern the construction of a large
space which contains reasonable, promising, ontologically signiﬁcant alternatives:
a space including not all possible, but plausible, naturalistic ontologies.
In this regard, I suggest that the DMP and the MDN can play the role of such
principles, since the construction of this space would beneﬁt from considerations on
the dynamical laws of quantum mechanics and our perception of the world we live
in, among other aspects.
First, the MDN can play an important role in regimenting the space of plau-
sible quantum ontologies. In particular, the quantum underdetermination problem
consists in the proliferation of too many slightly different ontologies, which not
only differ from other ontologies with regard to one ontological aspect but which
also are clearly worse off, as they diverge from how the world appears more than
similar ontologies. For instance, in addition to wavefunction ontology and a three-
dimensional ontology, there is a hybrid view (Valentini, 2009, 2010), mentioned in
footnote 2, which postulates the fundamental existence of both the wavefunction—
as a high-dimensional entity in a 3ND ﬁeld—and particles in our 3D world. This
view differs from the wavefunction ontology by admitting a fundamental non-local
three-dimensional ontology in addition to the wavefunction, and it differs from mere
three-dimensional ontologies by admitting an unusual, high-dimensional space that
involves an unnatural relation to our 3D space in addition to the particle ontology.
This view, by keeping a high-dimensional space as well as non-locality, clearly
diverges from our perception of the world more than both wavefunction ontology
and particle ontology. In light of this, I can safely say that it fares worse than both
wavefunction and particle ontologies. Thus, in virtue of the MDN, it should not
24 See Norton (1994) and McCoy (2021) for a discussion of this point in the context of the use of
eliminative reasoning in science.

3
On the Principles That Serve as Guides to the Ontology of Quantum Mechanics
45
be part of the space of plausible ontologies. It would merely add an ontology to
the space without making it ‘stronger’ and without increasing the probability that it
contains the ‘true’ ontology.
The DMP plays an important role in regimenting the space of plausible ontolo-
gies by justifying the insertion of 3ND wavefunction ontology into that space.
Wavefunction ontology certainly invites the ‘incredulous stare argument’ (Emery,
2017) and could be easily labelled ‘impossible’, ‘too bizarre’, or ‘a metaphysical
speculation’. The reason it is and should be received as a naturalistically plausible
and promising ontology for quantum mechanics is that it conforms to the DMP,
which, in this case is used as an inference principle to draw out the possible
ontological commitments of quantum mechanics. Not only does the DMP lend
credibility and strength to wavefunction ontology, but it also justiﬁes its inclusion in
the space of plausible quantum ontologies. Here, I do not want to claim that the DMP
is a necessary condition for an ontology to be included in the space of possibilities;
I rather suggest that it can justify its inclusion.25 Moreover, given that, as argued
before, the notion of isomorphism can allow different ontologies, the application of
the DMP as an inference principle generates not one but many different naturalistic
ontologies that deserve to be part of the space of plausible quantum ontologies. In
these respects, the DMP plays the role of regimenting, constructing and justifying
the space of plausible ontologies.
In conclusion, while I have argued that it is illegitimate to justify commitments
to 3ND ontology or to 3D ontology by appealing to these principles, since they can
be used to support either view, I believe that they may still play an important role
in governing the construction, regimentation, and justiﬁcation of the space of all
plausible quantum ontologies.
Acknowledgments I am grateful to Valia Allori for inviting me to submit a paper for this volume
and for her editorial assistance. I am also thankful to Casey McCoy, Davide Romano and two
anonymous reviewers for insightful comments on different parts of this manuscript, and to Jill
North for checking my argument regarding her view. Finally, I would like to thank the members of
the Theoretical Philosophy Research Colloquium at the Institute of Philosophy of the University of
Bern for their feedback. Among them, I owe special thanks to Claus Beisbart, Matthias Egg, and
Vincent Lam for sending me written comments.
References
Allori, V., Goldstein, S., Tumulka, R., & Zanghì, N. (2008). On the common structure of bohmian
mechanics and the Ghirardi–Rimini–Weber theory: Dedicated to Giancarlo Ghirardi on the
25 One might even regard the DMP as playing the role of preventing ontologies that do not include
entities isomorphic to the wavefunction from being part of the space of plausible ontologies.
However, I do not endorse this role for the DMP, as, to my mind, it would eliminate too many
plausible ontologies.

46
V. Matarese
occasion of his 70th birthday. The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 59(3), 353–
389.
Allori, V. (2010). Some remarks on wave function monism. Boulder Conference on the His-
tory and Philosophy of Science. http://commons.lib.niu.edu/bitstream/handle/10843/16043/
remarks-wave-function-monism.pdf?sequence=3. Accessed 16 Aug 2021.
Allori, V. (2013a). Primitive ontology and the structure of fundamental physical theories. In Ney
& Albert (Eds.), The wave function: Essays on the metaphysics of quantum mechanics (pp.
58–75). Oxford University Press.
Allori, V. (2013b). On the metaphysics of quantum mechanics. In S. Lebihan (Ed.), Precis de la
Philosophie de la Physique: 116–151. Vuibert.
Allori, V. (2017). A new argument for the nomological interpretation of the wave function: The
galilean group and the classical limit of nonrelativistic quantum mechanics. International
Studies in the Philosophy of Science, 31(2), 177–188.
Albert, D. Z. (1996). Elementary quantum metaphysics. In Bohmian mechanics and quantum
theory: An appraisal (pp. 277–284). Springer.
Belot, G. (2012). Quantum states for primitive ontologists. European Journal for Philosophy of
Science, 2(1), 67–83.
Chen, E. K. (2017). Our fundamental physical space: An essay on the metaphysics of the wave
function. The Journal of Philosophy, 114(7), 333–365.
Emery, N. (2017). Against radical quantum ontologies. Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research, 95(3), 564–591.
Esfeld, M. (2014). The primitive ontology of quantum physics: Guidelines for an assessment of
the proposals. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part B: Studies in History and
Philosophy of Modern Physics, 47, 99–106.
Hale, S. C. (1988). Spacetime and the abstract/concrete distinction. Philosophical Studies, 53(1),
85–102.
Halvorson, H. (2018). To be a realist about quantum theory. http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/14310/
Hicks, M. T., & Schaffer, J. (2017). Derivative properties in fundamental laws. The British Journal
for the Philosophy of Science, 68(2), 411–450.
Hubert, M., & Romano, D. (2018). The wave-function as a multi-ﬁeld. European Journal for
Philosophy of Science, 8(3), 521–537.
Loewer, B. (1996). Humean supervenience. Philosophical Topics, 24(1), 101–127.
Maudlin, T. W. (2007). Completeness, supervenience and ontology. Journal of Physics A:
Mathematical and Theoretical, 40(12), 3151.
McCoy, C. D. (2021). Meta-empirical support for eliminative reasoning. Studies in History and
Philosophy of Science Part A, 90, 15–29.
Monton, B. (2002). Wave function ontology. Synthese, 130(2), 265–277.
Monton, B. (2006). Quantum mechanics and 3 N-dimensional space. Philosophy of Science, 73(5),
778–789.
Myrvold, W. C. (2015). What is a Wavefunction? Synthese, 192(10), 3247–3274.
Ney, A. (2015). Fundamental physical ontologies and the constraint of empirical coherence: A
defense of wave function realism. Synthese, 192(10), 3105–3124.
Ney, A. (2021). The world in the wave function: A metaphysics for quantum physics. Oxford
University Press.
North, J. (2013). The structure of a quantum world. The wave function: essays on the metaphysics
of quantum mechanics, 184–202.
Norton, J. D. (1994). Science and certainty. Synthese, 99, 3–22.
Romano, D. (2020). Multi-ﬁeld and Bohm’s theory. Synthese. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-020-
02737-6
Valentini, A. (2009). The nature of the wave function in de Broglie’s pilot-wave theory. PIAF 09’
New Perspectives on the Quantum State, Perimeter Institute. PIRSA Number: 09090094. https:/
/www.perimeterinstitute.ca/videos/nature-wave-function-de-broglies-pilot-wave-theory
Valentini, A. (2010). De Broglie–Bohm pilot-wave theory: Many worlds in denial. Many worlds,
476–509.

3
On the Principles That Serve as Guides to the Ontology of Quantum Mechanics
47
Wallace, D. (2012). The emergent multiverse: Quantum theory according to the Everett interpre-
tation. Oxford University Press.
Wallace, D., & Timpson, C. G. (2010). Quantum mechanics on spacetime I: Spacetime state
realism. The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 61(4), 697–727.

Chapter 4
The Quantum World as a Resource. A
Case for the Cohabitation of Two
Paradigms
Laura Felline
Abstract In this paper I analyse the contraposition between two families of
interpretations of QT. On the one hand, Information-TheoreticInterpretations of QT,
the family of interpretations that understand QT to be a theory about information.
On the other hand, those interpretations (e.g. Bohmian mechanics or GRW) that
provide an analysis of measurement interactions and ‘open the black box’. The
main aim of this paper is to undermine the basic assumption that one of the two
approaches should prevail over the other and to outline the background for a viable
alternative to this assumption. In the ﬁrst part of the argument I use the three
main features of a Kuhnian paradigm-shift (World-change, Kuhn-loss, Conceptual
change) to dissect and invalidate the reasons behind the expectation that a solution
of the quarrel will determine the ‘victory’ of one position to the other. In the second
part of the argument I argue that Evandro Agazzi’s account of scientiﬁc objectivity
might harmonize the ontologies of the two interpretations in a realist framework.
4.1
Introduction
In the last decades, the notion of information has gained a prominent role in quantum
physics. The conceptual, formal and methodological tools provided by Information
Theory invaded not only the practice, but also the foundations of Quantum Theory
(QT). However, while the pragmatic success of Information Theory is hardly
debatable, the question of its foundational signiﬁcance is controversial.
In this paper we analyse the contraposition between two groups of interpretations
of QT.
On the one hand Information-TheoreticInterpretations of QT (IT-QT), the family
of interpretations that understand QT to be a theory about information. Speciﬁcally,
we take into account interpretations where information is intended as a physically
deﬁned quantity cashed out in terms of the resources required to transmit messages –
L. Felline ()
Independent Researcher, Seneghe, Italy
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
V. Allori (ed.), Quantum Mechanics and Fundamentality, Synthese Library 460,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-99642-0_4
49

50
L. Felline
measured classically by Shannon entropy or in QT by Von Neumann entropy. As a
concrete representative of this view, in this paper we take Jeff Bub’s IT-QT, where
information is a new kind of physical primitive, whose structure “imposes objective
pre-dynamic probabilistic constraints on correlations between events, analogous to
the way in which Minkowski space-time imposes kinematic constraints on events.”
(Bub, 2018, p. 5).
On the other hand (what we call for simplicity) ‘traditional’ interpretations, i.e.
those interpretations, like Bohmian mechanics or GRW, that take QT as a theory
about the elementary constituents of the physical world and how these elements
evolve dynamically over time. In line with the analysis provided in (Felline,
forthcoming), we take such interpretations ‘opening the black box’ as providing
a mechanistic account of measurement interactions.
These two characterizations of the object of QT come with extremely different
attitudes towards the main issues in the foundations of QT.
The most boasted virtue of IT-QT is that they explain away the conundrums
of QT, namely the measurement problem and non-locality; the response from the
other side is that they really don’t. Advocates of IT-QT often complain about the
dogmatism of the traditional interpretational program and about its obsession over
obsolete problems; the others answer that the internal coherence of IT-QT can only
be maintained under a plain instrumentalist stance, which makes it useless for the
issue of the ontological interpretation of QT. The former charge the latter with
dogmatism, viceversa the latter claims that the former’s solutions beg the question.
A widely shared implicit assumption in the debate is that a solution of the quarrel
will determine the rightness of one position and the wrongness of the other. Such
a ‘victory’ is supposed to be grounded on the superior virtues of one approach
over the other – for instance, the winning theory is expected to surpass the other
in explanatory power.
This expectation seems quite natural since the two positions are typically treated
as mutually exclusive: if IT-QT are right, and QT is a theory about information, then
it is not only useless, but also unscientiﬁc to keep trying to account for quantum
phenomena in terms of the behaviour of elementary constituents of the physical
world. Vice versa, if QT is about elementary entities and processes, then information
is ontologically determined by such elementary constituents of the physical world,
therefore it is not fundamental, therefore it does not have place in the foundations
of QT.
The main aim of this paper is to undermine the basic assumption that one of
the two approaches ‘wins’ over the other, and to outline a viable alternative to this
assumption.
The path towards the construction of my proposal starts by an analysis of the
foundational debate through analytic tools provided by elements of the Kuhnian
doctrine of competing paradigm. More speciﬁcally, the three main features of a
Kuhnian paradigm-shift (World-change, Kuhn-loss, Conceptual change) will be
used to dissect and invalidate the reasons behind the expectation that a solution
of the quarrel will determine the ‘victory’ of one position to the other.

4
The Quantum World as a Resource. A Case for the Cohabitation of Two Paradigms
51
Once this case has been made, then some work will be necessary to make
understandable and plausible the claim that both approaches can be truthful and
should therefore cohabit as interpretations of QT. In the last part of my proposal,
therefore, I will suggest a way to accommodate the coexistence of both approaches
to QT: ﬁst I will adopt Kuhn’s late (2000) account of scientiﬁc progress as
speciation, secondly I will argue that Evandro Agazzi’s account of scientiﬁc realism
and objectivity and its perspectival character of science might harmonize the two
ontologies in a realist framework.
One may wonder about the motivation for taking such a path in the interpretation
of QT. I think that, if successful, this proposal would provide a key to the under-
standing of (what I take as) two recent important achievements in the foundations
of QT. First of all, after decades of failed attempts in providing a genuinely causal
explanation of non-local quantum correlations, IT-QT (and especially Bub’s (2016)
interpretation) managed to provide a non-causal explanation of such phenomena
that has the great virtue of mirroring actual cutting edge scientiﬁc practice (Felline,
2016, 2019). Secondly, without an analysis of measurement interactions as provided
by interpretations that ‘open the black box’, QT can’t provide coherent predictions
in Winger’s Friend scenarios (Hagar & Hemmo, 2006; Frauchiger & Renner, 2018;
Felline, forthcoming).
Before we start, few caveats are in order.
First of all, the last part of the proposal will not be developed in detail: it is
not an aim of this paper to provide a full-ﬂedged account of scientiﬁc progress and
realism in QT – but the arguments provided will hopefully sufﬁce to show that there
are viable alternatives to the realism implicitly assumed in the debate, requiring a
monolithic approach to the interpretation of QT.
Secondly, the reference to Kuhn’s work is probably going to raise many
eyebrows.1 Due to the high evocative power of the Kuhnian terminology, I must
clarify that by using such terminology (and in particular the term ‘paradigm’, with
which I will refer to both traditional and information-theoretic approaches) I am not
subscribing to the whole Kuhnian philosophy of science, but I am rather adopting
what Kerry McKenzie and Steven French call the ‘Viking approach’: I take what I
need and leave the rest. The reader, therefore, is invited to refrain from thinking of
well-known features of Kuhn’s famous 1970’s Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions,
at least if they are not explicitly used here or directly implied by the elements here
adopted.
1 I think that part of such mistrust comes from the rejection of the so-called context of inquiry
within the ‘Order of Discourse’ of the foundations of physics, and to that extent I consider this
possible reaction unjust. Philosophy of science puts at our disposal a rich variety of approaches
to epistemology, ontology, methodology etc.., and this variety of approaches contributes to more
sophisticated and rich understanding of the practice and of the foundations of science. In this
sense, the philosophy of physics tradition is a sort of anomaly, since only a very limited number of
approaches is taken seriously.

52
L. Felline
4.2
Information Theory as a Resource Theory
and the Information-Theoretic Interpretation of QT
Information theory and its sub-discipline Quantum Information Theory, study how
physical systems can be exploited for communication processing tasks. They are
therefore resource theories, i.e. theories that study how something “can be used
or consumed, either in order to produce some desirable commodity, or in order
to produce other resources for producing desirable commodities, such as machine
equipment” (Fritz, 2017, p. 1).
Resource theories’ ‘pragmatic’ approach to science is displayed by the questions
that drive their investigation:
(a) Under which conditions can a resource object x be converted into a resource object y?
(b) Can the use of a third resource object z as a catalyst help in achieving the conversion of
x in to y?
(c) If one tries to convert many copies of x into many copies of y, then how many copies of
x does one need on average in order to produce one copy of y? (ibid.)
Resource theories, however, contribute to physics in ways that exceed the straight-
forward pragmatic interests listed above. As an example, take the line of research
originated by Popescu’s and Rorlich’s PR-boxes. The latter are models of ‘fantasy
quantum theories’ that replicate some aspects of QT (i.e. that maintain some
principles in common with QT), while changing some others. The consequences
of these modiﬁcations are then studied by manipulation of such toy models.
PR-boxes are built from two axioms: relativistic causality, corresponding to no-
signalling, and non-locality, neutrally deﬁned in terms of non-local correlations
in the sense of Bell’s theorem. Popescu and Rorlich carry an investigation based
on the manipulation of toy models deﬁned by these two principles and show that
quantum correlations are not the sole non-local correlations that are consistent with
such a setup: other, so-called ‘post-quantum’, correlations exist that can be more
non-local than quantum correlations, where non-locality is measured as the amount
of violation of Bell’s inequalities.
This discovery has opened the door to a series of questions about non-locality: if
post-quantum correlations don’t violate the ‘no signalling’ principle, why doesn’t
our world instantiate them? Why is our world only this much non-local, when
it seems that it could be more? Building on Popescu’s and Rohrlich’s result,
later works (Brassard et al., 2006; Brunner & Skrzypczyk, 2009) suggest that the
explanation of why our world only instantiates quantum non-locality, and no more
non-locality than that, lies in another information-processing principle.
In order to see how, think that the availability of stronger correlations makes
communication tasks easier, i.e. such correlations allow one to solve communication
problems with the use of less resources. For instance, let’s say that Alice and
Bob have the task of calculating a Boolean function f(x, y), where x is known
only by Alice, and y only by Bob. Obviously, in order to solve the problem they
must exchange some information. However, such information could be reduced
depending on the availability of correlated systems shared by the two. It is, for

4
The Quantum World as a Resource. A Case for the Cohabitation of Two Paradigms
53
instance, known that, in the calculation of some functions, sharing a pair of
entangled systems could reduce the amount of information to be sent from one wing
of the experiment to the other (Buhrman et al., 1988); however, for the calculation
of some other functions (e.g. the inner product between two numbers) Alice will
have to send to Bob the same number of bits as her input, whether or not the
experimenters share a quantum entangled pair.
Brassard et al. (2006) have therefore shown that correlations that are more non-
local than quantum correlations would make any communication complexity trivial,
i.e. with them, any Boolean function could be calculated by Alice and Bob with
the exchange of only one bit of information. Finally, Brunner and Skrzypczyk
(2009) have shown that the same happens with post-quantum correlations that are
arbitrarily close to classical correlations (i.e. arbitrarily close to the limit imposed
by Bell’s inequalities). In short, Brunner and Skrzypczyk show that from such post-
quantum correlations it is possible to distil2 correlations that are strong enough to
make communication complexity trivial. This suggests a possible reason why we
have only so much non-locality in the world, as “most computer scientists would
consider a world in which communication complexity is trivial to be as surprising
as a modern physicist would ﬁnd the violation of causality.” (Brassard et al., 2006,
p. 2) They therefore put forward the conjecture that the explanation of the existent
limit in the non-locality of our world lies in a new information-theoreticaxiom about
the impossibility of trivial communication complexity.
Such interwinement between the resource approach and the theoretical aims
of fundamental physics is brought to extreme consequences in IT-QT. Such inter-
pretations of QT do not share the pragmatic interests of information theory as a
resource theory, but claim that the concepts, properties and laws that are relevant
to information-processing tasks should take the place of mechanical concepts,
properties and laws in the interpretation of quantum theory as a fundamental
physical theory. As a consequence, notwithstanding the partial rejection of the
purely pragmatic aims of resource theories, IT-QT inherit a great part of the
features that characterize resource theories: methodologies, concepts, styles of
representation, but also desiderata and criteria of scientiﬁcity.
Our case study, Bub’s (2016) Information-Theoretic interpretation of QT can
help illustrate this point. Bub articulates his version of the IT-QT approach with the
formal background provided by PR-boxes. According to Bub, QT is a theory about
information ‘in the physical sense’: a structure of correlations between intrinsically
random events which is not Shannon-like, as the classical structure of correlations,
but von Neumann-like. Here, information is a new kind of physical primitive, whose
structure “imposes objective pre-dynamic probabilistic constraints on correlations
between events, analogous to the way in which Minkowski space-time imposes
kinematic constraints on events.” (Bub, 2018, p. 5).
2 Distillation is a procedure that begins with a large number of weakly correlated systems and ends
up with a smaller number of strongly correlated systems, ‘distilling’ in this way non-locality.

54
L. Felline
According to Bub, in the same way as special relativity explains length contrac-
tion as a manifestation of the Minkowskian geometry of space-time, QT explains
non-local correlations as the manifestation of the structure of information.
The explanation of quantum correlations as the manifestation of the fundamental
physical structure of information is one of the most impressive results of Bub’s
interpretation. However, the issue of the explanatory power of this account is much
more convoluted than suggested by the above quote.
In Bub’s Information-Theoretic interpretation, not only information is a physical
primitive, but its structure is the true and only object of QT. However, this last claim,
i.e. that QT is only about information, has been disputed on various grounds. In
particular, several arguments based on Wigner’s Friend scenarios (see for instance
Hagar & Hemmo, 2006, but also Frauchiger & Renner, 2018) have challenged the
claim that black box approaches like IT-QT always provide coherent predictions.3
IT-QT take the determinateness of our experience as a primitive fact, that can’t
and should not be explained. This is not only a limitation in itself, but it also has
important consequences for Bub’s explanation of non-locality. In order to see why,4
it is useful to take again the analogy with the geometrical explanations of special
relativity. In the orthodox interpretation (to which Bub refers) of this theory, length
contraction is explained as a manifestation of the geometry of spacetime and as
independent of the speciﬁc dynamical details of the concerned objects and their
properties (Felline, 2011). Yet, if we have to explain the individual occurrence of
length contraction of a speciﬁc rod within two speciﬁc inertial frames, we need to
ﬁll the explanation with initial conditions, e.g. the proper length of the rod. This fact,
i.e. the rod’s length, can’t be explained within special relativity itself, but it must
appeal to the dynamical history that produced an object of such length. This clearly
does not undermine the geometrical explanation provided by special relativity, since
the latter is not supposed to explain the proper length of the rod, but uniquely the
contraction in the switch to different inertial frames. Moreover, the existence of a
theory of matter that explains the proper length of a rod in no way undermines the
fundamentality of the structure of spacetime.
A similar situation applies in the case of Bub’s interpretation and the relative
explanation of correlations. Bub’s explanation of non-local correlations makes
reference to the noncommutative algebraic structure of information and to the
fact that measurement results are determinate. Information Theory (and IT-QT),
however, takes such results and their determinateness as a primitive, so it can’t
explain them. As the geometrical explanation of length contraction rests on a prior
explanation of the proper length of the rod, in the same way Bub’s explanation
of non-local correlations rests on a prior explanation of the determinateness of
measurement results. Now: on the one hand, this explanation should be provided
by QT itself; on the other such an explanation requires an account of what happens
3 We are not going to discuss the details of this debate here, however, for a counterargument see
Bub (2018) and (Felline, 2020) for a reaction to Bub.
4 For a more detailed illustration of the argument, see Felline (2019, 2020).

4
The Quantum World as a Resource. A Case for the Cohabitation of Two Paradigms
55
when you ‘open the box’, i.e. and an analysis of measurement interactions. Since
the latter can’t be provided in by a theory only about information, then QT can’t
only be about information.
4.3
World Change, Conceptual Change and Kuhn Loss
In this section I am going to analyse the relationship between IT-QT (especially
Bub’s interpretation) and traditional, mechanistic interpretations of QT, through the
lens of the three main features of a Kuhnian paradigm-shift: World-change, Kuhn-
loss and Conceptual change.
To pay tribute to Kuhn I will maintain the term ‘paradigm’ to denote the two
approaches. However, as already pointed out in the introduction, the reader should
refrain from ascribing to this evocative terminology the whole of 1970’s Kuhnian
doctrine about, for instance, scientiﬁc revolutions and incommensurability.
World-Change Let’s start by noticing that scientists that work in the context of
different paradigms experience different worlds.
In a sense I am unable to explicate further, the proponents of competing paradigms practice
their trades in different worlds. One contains constrained bodies that fall slowly, the other
pendulums that repeat their motions again and again. In one, solutions are compounds, in the
other mixtures. One is embedded in a ﬂat, the other in a curved, matrix of space. Practicing
in different worlds, the two groups of scientists see different things when they look from
the same point in the same direction (Kuhn, 1970, 150).
We have already seen that scientists working in resource theories investigate the
world not as a reality to be unveiled, nor with the aim of explaining phenomena – but
rather as a resource that can be used or consumed. Take for instance, the procedure
called superdense coding. In it, Pauli sees two singlet state particles ﬁrst developing
unitarily according to Schrödinger equation, and then undergoing an instantaneous
and non-unitary process of collapse resulting into two pure correlated states. In the
same procedure, Shannon sees the transmission of two bits of classical information
through the delivery of only one single qubit, achieved by the exploitation of a
communication channel.
In the literature about QIT, world change terminology is ubiquitous. Especially
when it comes to the study of entanglement, more often than not introductions to
this discipline begin with the invitation to look at entanglement as “a resource for
teleporting quantum states and constructing unbreakable codes, a resource that we
can extract, purify, distribute and consume” (Popescu & Rorlich, 1998, p. 1).
This kind of invitations might be understood as a mere ‘ﬁgure of speech’, but
a more careful look at the context in which they are made suggests that they are
more than that. Technical, formal and methodological training, but also direction of
focus, condition pupil scientists to a novel gaze towards the world which is crucial
for the establishment of the paradigm. An illustration of the perceived role of world
change is the way in which this novel gaze is typically depicted as a cornerstone, a

56
L. Felline
crucial breakthrough that allowed the impressive development and success of QIT
and entanglement theory. For instance, in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
about quantum entanglement, Jeff Bub closes his historical review of the birth of
entanglement theory exactly with such a cornerstone:
But it was not until the 1980s that physicists, computer scientists, and cryptologists began to
regard the non-local correlations of entangled quantum states as a new kind of non-classical
physical resource that could be exploited, rather than an embarrassment for quantum
mechanics to be explained away (Bub, 2020).
IT-QT is the completion of the process of world change, in that it translates the
features of quantum states as a resource from its primal pragmatic context of
inquiry, aimed at the production of commodities, to a different context, aimed at
the explanation of phenomena. Skrzypczyk et al. (2009) investigate ‘what makes
quantum mechanics so special’ by studying generalized non-signalling theories,
and, more in general, axiomatic reconstructions of QT in terms of information-
theoretic principles are meant to show that the ‘essence’ of quantum theory is to
be found in information-processing principles (Felline, 2016).
Our elected case study, Bub’s IT-QT, according to which QT as a fundamental
theory is about quantum information, and only about information – is a particularly
suggestive example of world change.
Conceptual Change As a result of perceiving the same reality in different ways, in
the passage from one paradigm to another it also happens that some terms change
their meaning and their reference.
For instance, the distinction between proper and improper mixture originally
formulated by Bernard d’Espagnat is a central theoretical element in the foundations
of QT. However, at least when it comes to measurements actually performable
given the limits of our technology, proper and improper mixtures are operationally
indistinguishable, since they yield exactly the same probabilities for measurement
results. Due to this (current) operational indistinguishability, proper and improper
mixtures are indiscernible with respect to their role in information-processing
protocols and, as a result, the distinction vanishes in IT-QT. The distinction is in
fact so irrelevant to the practice of QIT that, to the surprise of philosophers and
physicists trained in the foundations of physics, more often than not information-
theory working physicists plainly ignore it, even when they apply their work to
foundational issues.
It is hard to overestimate the consequences of such a conceptual change. For one
thing, the distinction between proper and improper mixture is instrumental in the
determination of the non-local nature of quantum correlations, which leads to our
next point.
Kuhn-Loss As we have already said before, one of the most boasted virtues of IT-
QT is that it explain away the problem of non-locality. The non-pernicious character
of non-locality in IT-QT can be formally understood through the operational
deﬁnition of concepts in this theory, exempliﬁed by the above-illustrated case of
the notion of mixture. More concretely, the purported solution to the problem of

4
The Quantum World as a Resource. A Case for the Cohabitation of Two Paradigms
57
non-locality consists in the fact that that merely performing a local (non-selective)5
operation on a system S cannot convey any information to a physically distinct
system. In an EPR experiment, for instance, there is no local measurement (nor
series of measurements) that Bob can perform, that allows him to infer the state of
Alice and her particle.
Since IT-QT interpret QT as a theory only about information, then the impossibil-
ity of superluminal information transfer automatically solves the possible problems
with Special Relativity (much in the same spirit as the instrumentalist/operational
approach to non-locality in standard QT). This result is so fundamental in QIT that
it constitutes one of the basic principles of information-theoretic reconstructions of
QT, the so-called ‘no superluminal information transfer’ principle.
And yet, if one examines such solution from the point of view of the traditional
paradigm, she can hardly be impressed. For, ﬁrst, the impossibility of superluminal
signalling has been well-known even before QIT came to play. Secondly, if we
investigate the world, as physicists developing traditional interpretations of QT do,
as inhabited by entities and processes that yield non-local quantum correlations,
then there must be a more fundamental story that explains non-local correlations.
But then, we are back to square one: if there is such a story, then we should have an
answer to the question ‘is there a local causal account of how quantum correlations
come about?’
The other main quantum conundrum that IT-QT claim to explain away is the
measurement problem: if QT as a fundamental theory is only about information,
then the determinateness of our experiences is a primitive fact of our world,
something that must be taken at face value and can’t be explained. The measurement
problem therefore, i.e. the problem of explaining the determinateness of our
experiences, fades away in this perspective.
And yet, again, for an exponent of the traditional paradigm this purported
solution of the problem begs the question: from her point of view, interactions
between entities and measurement apparatuses yield determinate measurement
results, and if QT as a fundamental theory can’t account for such interaction, then
this is a problem! Moreover, although there is no consensus yet on any of them, it
should be said that the traditional approach displays various still valid accounts (e.g.
Bohmian a non-collapse and GRW a collapse) of measurement interactions, which
makes even less clear why one should renounce to the whole enterprise from the
start.
This state of art is described by the phenomenon now called ‘Kuhn loss’:
in the translation to a new paradigm it happens that some explanations and
achievements of the old paradigm get lost and possibly not even replaced with new
explanations and achievements, because the new paradigm lacks the resources of
even formulating the problem. These problems might be crucial in the context of
5 Selective measurements operations are obviously not considered here, given that selection
changes the ensemble under study and therefore its statistics.

58
L. Felline
the old paradigm, and yet, although not really ‘solved’, are perceived in the new
paradigm as obsolete and forgettable.
The way in which advocates of traditional and IT interpretations of QT seem
to talk past each other in the debate about the measurement problem and non-
locality (one side perceived as dogmatic, while the other as begging the question)
exempliﬁes this element of the Kuhnian analysis.
Moving on, the passage to a new successful paradigm can’t obviously only
bring to an epistemic loss. A successful new paradigm, in fact, contributes to
provide explanations outside the reach of the old paradigm. This is for instance
the case of Bub’s explanation of non-locality. As we have seen at the end of the
previous section, Bub’s interpretation provides a powerful account of the IT-QT
explanation of non-local correlations as a manifestation of the fundamental structure
of information, tracing the explanation of length contraction in Special Relativity as
a manifestation of the fundamental structure of spacetime.6
A successful new paradigm also and most importantly suggests new questions,
which leads to novel directions of inquiry. The advocates of QT-IT rightfully claim
for their approach the capacity to open new ways of discovery, neglected by older
interpretations. This is for instance the case of the impressive results in the study
of entanglement and the discovery of post-quantum correlations illustrated in the
previous section in the context of PR-boxes.
4.4
Progress, Objectivity and Scientiﬁc Realism
The analysis above suggests considerations about what constitute progress in the
development of QT and about a more pluralistic view of scientiﬁc objectivity
and realism. Such considerations might prepare the ground for a philosophical
framework more in line with the actual state of art in the foundations of QT.
4.4.1
Progress
Advocates of IT-QT or of traditional interpretations of QT often argue for the
superiority of their approach by appealing to a supposed higher explanatory power
of their approach. The analysis provided in the previous section, however, shows
that, due to the phenomenon of Kuhn loss, we should, at the least, be very suspicious
of such oversimpliﬁcations. It provides another reason to reject the idea that the
6 We have seen in the previous section that that, according to (Felline, 2019) Bub’s explanation
of correlations must rely on a prior explanation of the determinateness of each correlated
measurement result, that can’t be provided by IT-QT. It might be useful to remind at this point
that this argument does not go to the detriment of the analysed explanation; it only shows that QT
cannot be only about information.

4
The Quantum World as a Resource. A Case for the Cohabitation of Two Paradigms
59
explanatory capacity of a scientiﬁc theory can be measured and scientiﬁc theories
ordered by score. More believably, the two paradigms address different question and
achieve different aims.
This conclusion, in turn, undermines the idea that the prevalence of one approach
over the other constitute ‘progress’ in the foundations of QT.
In his late work (Kuhn, 2000), Kuhn tried to provide both a more reﬁned view of
the relationship between paradigms – able to overcome the criticalities of his 1960
notion of incommensurability – and a more articulated view of scientiﬁc change, to
accommodate an idea of scientiﬁc progress with his rejection of a development of
science moving towards the cumulation of truth.
Accordingly, the main carrier of scientiﬁc progress is described as akin to the
process of speciation in biological evolutions, where one ﬁeld develops by splitting
in two more specialized subﬁelds. In the context of the present paper, Kuhn’s late
view of progress as speciation seems especially promising. Translated in the debate
about QT and information theory, one might see the new IT-QT as contributing to
the progress of science in a synchronic development of two interpretations of QT,
where the new paradigm does not force the old one out, but rather both develop in
parallel.
This ‘splitting’ process does not guarantee a conceptual, methodological or
perspectival homogeneity: world change, conceptual change and Kuhn loss make
such that interpretations might not always be completely integrated. However,
conceptual work in the foundations of QT can and should aim at explicating
apparent idiosyncrasies.7
4.4.2
Objectivity and Scientiﬁc Realism
So far, the idea of a cohabitation of two interpretations of QT (one that ‘opens
the black box’ and provide a mechanistic analysis of measurement interactions,
the other, a IT-QT as a resource theory), both with the dignity of ‘fundamental’
interpretations, has not received much attention.8 One reason for this is that a
minimal realist stance seems to require that a truthful interpretation individuate
the object of quantum theory, as a thing in the world ‘captured’ by the description
provided by the theory.
However, this assumption is far from being necessary, as we have at our disposal
a variety of realist views of science that are less monolithic and might allow a
reconciliation of the ontology of traditional interpretations of QT with the ontology
of IT-QT.
7 As an example of how conceptual analysis is crucial for the achievement of such a goal, take
Timpson (2013) and especially chapter 4.
8 (Koberinski & Muller, 2018) is a notable exception.

60
L. Felline
As an example, we take Evandro Agazzi’s account of scientiﬁc realism and
knowledge (Agazzi, 2014). According to Agazzi, scientiﬁc objects (i.e. objects
studied and described in scientiﬁc theories) are not ultimate primitive entities,
‘things’ in the world, but rather bundles of attributes that we investigate from
speciﬁc point of views. The elected point of view of an investigation determines the
attributes on which to focus and such attributes constitute the object of the theory.
In such a perspectival view of science,9 each theory comes with “criteria of
protocollarity” permitting “the determination of which propositions are immediately
true, that is, the determination of the science’s protocol propositions” (Agazzi, 2014,
87). For instance, protocol propositions in mechanics are about matter, motion
and force; while protocol propositions in information theory are about degree of
correlations between variables.
It does not make sense, in this context, to question which is the quid that
possess the properties investigated by different scientiﬁc perspectives, because
scientiﬁc objects do not possess such properties, but are exhausted by them. This
reference to objects as constituted of bundles of attributes and selected by criteria of
protocollarity, explicates, according to Agazzi, scientiﬁc objectivity.
If we translate Agazzi’s notion of scientiﬁc objectivity to the quantum world,
traditional interpretations of QT and IT-QT might share the same quantum ‘thing’,
but look at it from two different perspectives. Each perspective, therefore, selects
attributes that constitute their objects: traditional interpretations investigate objects
constituted of mass, force, spin and their dynamics, while IT-QT investigate objects
constituted of properties that are directly relevant to communication protocols (for
instance quantum entanglement). In the same procedure of superdense coding,
Shannon and Pauli select different attributes of the systems observed to constitute
the scientiﬁc object of study, and elaborate their accounting theory accordingly.
Given Agazzi’s characterization of scientiﬁc object, the fact that the two
approaches describe different objects does not necessarily imply ontological incom-
patibility. Particles and waves on the one hand and informational structure on the
other are just bundles of different properties belonging to the same domain, selected
by different interests.
Bibliography
Agazzi, E. (2014). Scientiﬁc objectivity and its contexts. Springer.
Brassard, G., Buhrman, H., Linden, N., Méthot, A. A., Tapp, A., & Unger, F. (2006). Limit on
nonlocality in any world in which communication complexity is not trivial. Physical Review
Letters, 96(25), 250401.
Brunner, N., & Skrzypczyk, P. (2009). Nonlocality distillation and postquantum theories with
trivial communication complexity. Physical Review Letters, 102, 160403.
Bub, J. (2016). Bananaworld: Quantum mechanics for primates. Oxford University Press.
9 Cf. Buzzoni (2015), chap. I, § 3.

4
The Quantum World as a Resource. A Case for the Cohabitation of Two Paradigms
61
Bub, J. (2018). In defense of a “single-world” interpretation of quantum mechanics. Studies in
History and Philosophy of Science Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern
Physics.
Bub, J. Quantum entanglement and information. In Edward N. Zalta (Ed.), The Stanford encyclo-
pedia of philosophy (Summer 2020 ed.). https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2020/entries/
qt-entangle/
Buhrman, H., Cleve, R., & Wigderson, A. (1988). Proceedings of the 30th annual ACM symposium
on theory of computing (p. 63). ACM.
Buzzoni, M. (2015). Science and operationality. In M. Alai, M. Buzzoni, & G. Tarozzi (Eds.),
Science between truth and ethical responsability (pp. 27–44). Springer.
Felline, L. (2011). Scientiﬁc explanation between principle and constructive theories. Philosophy
of Science, 78(5), 989–1000.
Felline L. (2018). It’s a matter of principle: Scientiﬁc explanation in information-theoretic
reconstructions of quantum theory. Dialectica, 70, 549–575 (2016).
Felline, L. (2019). Quantum theory is not only about information. Studies in History and Philoso-
phy of Science Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics. ISSN:1355–2198.
Felline, L. (2020). The measurement problem and two dogmas about quantum mechanics. In
Hemmo, Meir, Shenker, Orly (a cura di) Quantum, probability, logic: Itamar Pitowsky’s work
and inﬂuence. Springer.
Felline, L. (forthcoming). Mechanistic explanation in physics. In E. Knox & A. Wilson (Eds.),
Companion to the philosophy of physics. Routledge. Preprint: http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/
16162/
Frauchiger, D., & Renner, R. (2018). Quantum theory cannot consistently describe the use of itself.
Nature Communications, 9(1), 1–10.
Fritz, T. (2017). Resource convertibility and ordered commutative monoids. Mathematical Struc-
tures in Computer Science, 27(6), 850–938.
Hagar, A., & Hemmo, M. (2006). Explaining the unobserved—Why quantum mechanics Ain’t
only about information. Foundations of Physics, 36(9), 1295–1324.
Koberinski, A., & Müller, M. P. (2018). Quantum theory as a principle theory: Insights from an
information-theoretic reconstruction. In Physical perspectives on computation, computational
perspectives on physics (pp. 257–280). Cambridge University Press.
Kuhn, T. (1970). The structure of scientiﬁc revolutions (2nd ed.). University of Chicago Press.
Kuhn, T. (2000). The road since structure (J. Conant & J. Haugeland, Eds.). University of Chicago
Press.
Popescu, S., & Rohrlich, D. (1998). The joy of entanglement. In Introduction to quantum
computation and information (pp. 29–48).
Skrzypczyk, P., Brunner, N., & Popescu, S. (2009). Emergence of quantum correlations from
nonlocality swapping. Physical Review Letters, 102(11), 110402.
Timpson, C. G. (2013). Quantum information theory and the foundations of quantum mechanics.
OUP Oxford.

Chapter 5
Quantum Ontology: Out of This World?
Travis Norsen
Abstract Many commentators agree (based on the PBR theorem or other less-
rigorous but still-compelling arguments) that the quantum mechanical wave func-
tion must represent some physically real thing/things/stuff. Existing proposals
for the nature of this thing/things/stuff have tended to reﬂect the mathematically
abstract character of the wave function: it has been suggested that the wave
function represents, for example, a physical ﬁeld of a mysterious and indeed rather
incomprehensible character; or maybe a more comprehensibly-physical ﬁeld that
(incomprehensibly) lives not in ordinary physical space but instead in an abstract
high-dimensional space; or maybe a non-local beable of a genuinely novel and
ineffable sort; or maybe a kind of reiﬁed Law of Nature. None of these proposals
is fully satisfying, physically and/or philosophically. The goal of the present
paper is to advocate, by developing an analogy to two equivalent formulations
of classical mechanics, for an under-appreciated alternative possibility—namely
that the quantum wave function could represent some thing/things/stuff of a more
mundane and more easily comprehensible character.
5.1
A Different World?
Imagine a parallel world which, like ours, appears (at least at some sufﬁciently
macroscopic scale) to be populated by massive particles which move on continuous
trajectories through the three-dimensional space that the inhabitants of this world
ordinarily take themselves to inhabit.
The physicists of this world have discovered a theory which successfully
accounts for the observed motions of the particles. The theory, however, has a
character that most people in our world would regard as unusual, unfamiliar, and
indeed downright strange. In particular, the theory seems to suggest that the motion
T. Norsen ()
Smith College, Northampton, MA, USA
e-mail: tnorsen@smith.edu
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
V. Allori (ed.), Quantum Mechanics and Fundamentality, Synthese Library 460,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-99642-0_5
63

64
T. Norsen
of particles is in some sense orchestrated by an object S which does not appear to
live in the same three-dimensional space that the particles move in.
For the case of a single particle of mass m moving in one dimension, this
orchestrating ﬁeld obeys the non-linear partial differential equation
−∂S
∂t = E

x,
∂S
∂x

(5.1)
where E[x, p] is the expression for the total energy of the particle in terms of its
position x and momentum p = m˙x. The trajectory X(t) of the particle is then
determined by the orchestrating ﬁeld according to the guidance formula
dX(t)
dt
= 1
m
∂S(x, t)
∂x

x=X(t)
.
(5.2)
Note that for a one-particle system, S is just a function of position (in ordinary
physical space) and time and hence can be straightforwardly and unproblematically
understood as a physical ﬁeld.
But for a system of N particles, the orchestrating ﬁeld S = S(x1, x2, . . . , xN, t)
is a function on the N- (or, in three dimensions, 3N-) dimensional conﬁguration
space of the system and evolves in time according to
−∂S
∂t = E

x1, . . . , xN,
 ∂S
∂x1

, . . . ,
 ∂S
∂xN

(5.3)
where E = E[x1, . . . , xN, p1, . . . , pN] is again the expression for the total energy
of the system in terms of the positions and momenta of its constituent particles.
The trajectory of the ith particle is then determined by the obvious generalization of
Eq. (5.2):
dXi(t)
dt
= 1
mi
∂S
∂xi

xn=Xn(t) ∀n
.
(5.4)
It will be helpful to develop a bit of intuition for this strange theory, which seems to
correctly describe the “classical” physics of the parallel world, so let us consider a
few simple examples to see how it works and what it predicts.
5.1.1
A Free Particle Moving in One Dimension
Consider to begin with the simplest imaginable situation: an isolated single particle
of mass m which is free to move only along the x-direction. The total energy of
the particle is given by E[x, p] = p2/2m, so the orchestrating ﬁeld S(x, t) in this

5
Quantum Ontology: Out of This World?
65
situation satisﬁes
−∂S
∂t = 1
2m
∂S
∂x
2
.
(5.5)
If we guess an (additively) separable solution of the form S(x, t) = α(x)+β(t), it is
easy to show that solutions take (up to an additional uninteresting additive constant
which we henceforth ignore) the form
S(x, t) = mvx −1
2mv2t
(5.6)
where v is an arbitrary constant.
The guidance formula, Eq. (5.2), then tells us how the particle will move under
the inﬂuence of the orchestrating ﬁeld:
dX(t)
dt
= v.
(5.7)
Thus, v can simply be understood as the constant velocity of the particle, whose
position as a function of time will be given by
X(t) = X0 + vt
(5.8)
where X0 = X(0) is the particle’s initial position.
This is, of course, just the same “inertial” motion we would expect for a similarly
isolated particle in our own world.
5.1.2
Simple Harmonic Oscillator
As a second example, let’s consider a particle of mass m which is again constrained
to move only along the x-axis, but which is now connected to the origin by a
(massless) spring of stiffness k and negligible rest length. Its total energy will be
given by
E[x, p] = p2
2m + 1
2kx2
(5.9)
so evidently the orchestrating ﬁeld for this particle will obey the following partial
differential equation:
−∂S
∂t = 1
2m
∂S
∂x
2
+ 1
2kx2.
(5.10)

66
T. Norsen
We can again search for additively separable solutions of the form S(x, t) = α(x)+
β(t). We ﬁnd, as before, that β(t) = −Et (for some constant E). The differential
equation satisﬁed by α(x),
2mE =

α′(x)
2 + mkx2,
(5.11)
is a little more complicated, but is only ﬁrst-order, so it can be solved by separation
of variables with the result
α(x) = ±
√
2mE · F k
2E (x)
(5.12)
(plus an uninteresting additive constant which we again ignore). Here
Fγ (x) =
 
1 −γ x2dx
= 1
2x

1 −γ x2 + arcsin
√γ x

2√γ
.
(5.13)
Putting the pieces together, we have that the orchestrating ﬁeld is given by
S(x, t) = −Et ±
√
2mE · F k
2E (x).
(5.14)
How does the particle actually move under the inﬂuence of this orchestrating ﬁeld?
Plugging into Eq.(5.2) yields the following ﬁrst-order differential equation for X(t):
dX
dt = ±

2E
m

1 −k
2E X2.
(5.15)
This can again be solved by separation of variables with the result
X(t) = A sin

k
mt + c

(5.16)
which describes a sinusoidal oscillation with amplitude A =

2E
k , angular
frequency √k/m, and an arbitrary phase c.
It is interesting to observe that, again, the motion of the particle is the same as
what we would expect in our world.

5
Quantum Ontology: Out of This World?
67
5.1.3
Projectile
Just like our world, the imaginary parallel world we are considering here contains
planets with approximately uniform, downward gravitational ﬁelds near their
surfaces. In the presence of such a ﬁeld, a mass-m particle that is launched or
thrown, with negligible atmospheric drag, will therefore move under the inﬂuence
of an orchestrating ﬁeld S(x, y, t) satisfying
−∂S
∂t = 1
2m
∂S
∂x
2
+ 1
2m
∂S
∂y
2
+ mgy
(5.17)
since, for such a particle, E[x, y, px, py] = p2
x
2m +
p2
y
2m +mgy. Here g is the (constant)
magnitude of the downward gravitational ﬁeld.
Using the same mathematical techniques as above, it is straightforward to solve
this partial differential equation and show that the orchestrating ﬁeld will take the
form
S(x, y, t) = −Et + vxx ± 2m√2g
3
(Y0 −y)3/2 .
(5.18)
where E, vx, and Y0 are constants. (Interested readers will beneﬁt from plugging
this expression into the differential equation and ﬁnding the relationship between
the constants that makes it work!)
Having found the orchestrating ﬁeld, we can now determine the particle trajec-
tory that it produces. The x-component of the velocity is given by
dX
dt = 1
m
∂S
∂x = vx.
(5.19)
So the particle just moves with constant velocity vx in the horizontal direction. The
vertical motion is a little more interesting:
dY
dt = 1
m
∂S
∂y = ∓

2g

Y0 −Y(t).
(5.20)
The solution,
Y(t) = Y0 −g
2 (t −t0)2,
(5.21)
corresponds to motion with constant downward acceleration of magnitude g. So—
again!—the actual motion of particles, predicted by the strange theory in the parallel
world, is the same as the motion we are accustomed to seeing in our own world.

68
T. Norsen
5.1.4
Two Particles in 1D
So far we have considered only situations involving a single particle moving in one
or two spatial dimensions. In these cases, the orchestrating ﬁeld S lives in a space of
the same dimensionality as the space the particles move in. That is, the orchestrating
ﬁeld appears to be a genuine physical ﬁeld that has, at each moment, a well-deﬁned
value at each point in physical space.
But the really strange thing about this theory is that, in situations involving
several particles, the orchestrating ﬁeld does not seem genuinely physical in this
same sense.
To see this, we might consider the simple example of two particles, both
constrained to move along a single, one-dimensional axis. Suppose particle 1 has
a mass m and is electrically neutral, while particle 2 has mass m but has an electric
charge q. Then, if there is a uniform electric ﬁeld of magnitude E parallel to the
axis, the total energy will be given by
E[x1, x2, p1, p2] = p2
1
2m + p2
2
2m + qEx2
(5.22)
where x1/2 is the position of particle 1/2 and p1/2 is its momentum.
Note that this situation is mathematically identical to the previous example of a
single particle—the projectile—moving in 2D. So we can immediately infer that the
orchestrating ﬁeld S(x1, x2, t) for our two particle system here will take the form
S(x1, x2, t) = −Et + v1x1 ± C

X0
2 −x2
3/2
.
(5.23)
where E, v1, C, and X0
2 are constants. And we can immediately infer that particle
1 will move with constant velocity (v1) while particle 2 will move with constant
acceleration.
The unusual feature here is that the orchestrating ﬁeld S is a time-dependent
function on the so-called “conﬁguration space” of our system. It takes values, that is,
not at locations in the (one-dimensional) physical space in which the particles both
move, but instead at locations in the abstract (two-dimensional) space each point of
which represents a speciﬁc possible conﬁguration of the two-particle system, i.e.,
each point of which represents a pair of locations in physical space.
The ﬁeld S—if it is proper to think of it as a ﬁeld—is thus very unusual compared
to the gravitational and electric ﬁelds that we have also mentioned. Unlike the
gravitational and electric ﬁelds, which unambiguously and unproblematically live in
physical space and can hence be understood unambiguously and unproblematically
as physical objects, S lives in an abstract, higher-dimensional space and thus seems,
somehow, unphysical. One might even say that it seems “out of this world” (and not
in the good way usually implied by that phrase).
But arguably things are less weird here than they seem, for this unusual theory
in our imaginary parallel universe. After all, the orchestrating ﬁeld S is additively

5
Quantum Ontology: Out of This World?
69
separable in its dependence on x1 and x2. So instead of demanding that there is
a single (“out of this world”) ﬁeld on the abstract conﬁguration space, we could
simply break the ﬁeld into two parts: S = S1 + S2. In particular,
S1(x1, t) = −E1t + v1x1
(5.24)
could be understood as an unproblematically physical orchestrating ﬁeld for particle
1, while
S2(x2, t) = −E2t ± C

X0
2 −x2
3/2
(5.25)
could be understood as an unproblematically physical orchestrating ﬁeld for particle
2. With E1 + E2 = E, this is mathematically equivalent to what we said originally.
In this picture, each particle’s motion would be determined by that particle’s own
associated orchestrating ﬁeld according to
dXi
dt
= 1
mi
∂Si
∂xi
.
(5.26)
And so, after all, there is nothing particularly weird about the physical picture
suggested by the theory, at least in this particular situation.
But it turns out that this kind of situation is very special: the (additive)
separability of our original S is a consequence of the fact that the two particles do not
in any way affect one another in this scenario. Instead they each just independently
respond to the external electric ﬁeld in the same way that they would if the other
particle weren’t present.
But in a more general kind of case, in which the particles mutually inﬂuence one
another, the two-particle orchestrating ﬁeld S(x1, x2, t) will not be (additively) sep-
arable. It will, instead, be an irreducible function on the (abstract, two-dimensional)
conﬁguration space, by which I just mean that the function cannot be broken apart
into a function of x1 plus another function of x2, as in the example we’ve just been
discussing.
Physicists in the parallel universe describe the multi-particle system, in this kind
of situation, as being “intertwined”. It will be helpful, as always, to consider a
concrete example.
So, suppose again we have two mass-m particles constrained to move in one
dimension, but with the two particles connected by a (massless) spring (of negligible
rest length). The energy of this system, in terms of the positions and momenta of the
two particles, is E[x1, x2, p1, p2] = p2
x
2m +
p2y
2m + 1
2k(x1−x2)2. And so the differential
equation governing the time-evolution of the orchestrating ﬁeld S(x1, x2, t) is:
−∂S
∂t =
1
2m
 ∂S
∂x1
2
+ 1
2m
 ∂S
∂x2
2
+1
2k(x1 −x2)2.
(5.27)

70
T. Norsen
It is easy enough to show that the orchestrating ﬁeld which satisﬁes this partial
differential equation takes the form
S(x1, x2, t) = −Et ±

mE −c
2 (x1 + x2)
±
c
2F mk
c (x1 −x2)
(5.28)
where c and E are constants (E representing the total energy of the two-particle
system) and where F is the same function deﬁned above in our discussion of the
simple harmonic oscillator.
It will no longer be surprising to learn that the trajectories, for the individual
particles, implied by Eq. (5.2) with an orchestrating ﬁeld of this form, correspond
exactly to the trajectories we would expect for this same system in our own world.
In particular, the two particles oscillate sinusoidally about their average (or “center
of mass”) position, which in turn moves inertially.
The surprising and interesting thing is rather the additively non-separable
character of the orchestrating ﬁeld in Eq. (5.28). Unlike the earlier example of the
two particles which don’t mutually affect one another, the fact that the two particles
in this example are connected by a spring results in this non-separable orchestrating
ﬁeld. It results, that is, in what the physicists of our imagined parallel world describe
as the “intertwinement” of the two particles in this kind of system.
To be clear, though, the troubling and puzzling thing, for the physicists of our
parallel universe, about systems exhibiting this sort of intertwinement, is not the
motion of the particles. The particles just move the way they move, and the theory’s
predictions for that motion perfectly match the motions that are in fact observed.
The troubling and puzzling thing has instead to do with understanding the causality
of, and the underlying ontology involved in, the motion of the particles. In particular,
the theory makes perfectly clear that the motion of the particles is orchestrated
by the ﬁeld S. (The physicists don’t call it the “orchestrating ﬁeld” for nothing!)
But, as we have noted, the orchestrating ﬁeld simply cannot be understood as an
ordinary, physically real ﬁeld (akin to the familiar and ontologically-unproblematic
electric and gravitational ﬁelds). It is just not the right kind of mathematical object,
depending, as it does, in the general case of N particles moving in the full 3-
dimensional space, on (time and) 3N spatial coordinates. It is, in short, a ﬁeld on
conﬁguration space (-time) rather than physical space (-time).
5.1.5
Controversy
This situation, in which a central mathematical object in a seemingly-correct physi-
cal theory does not appear to afford any straightforward physical interpretation, has

5
Quantum Ontology: Out of This World?
71
generated a sprawling controversy among the physicists and philosophers of our
parallel world.
Those of a more scientiﬁcally “realist” bent, who agree that our ontological
commitments should follow the best established science, have splintered into several
opposing camps.
One camp contends that the orchestrating ﬁeld S can be understood as a ﬁeld
in physical space, but a new kind of ﬁeld (which they call a “many-ﬁeld”) which
assigns values not to individual points in physical space, but rather to N-tuples of
points. None of the physicists, however, have found this perspective helpful, and
the rest of the philosophers quite reasonably suggest that it sounds more like a
description of the original problem (in fancy new terminology) than anything like a
solution of the problem.
Another camp recommends biting the proverbial bullet: if, they argue, the
(seemingly correct) theory involves what looks, mathematically, like a ﬁeld in a
3N-dimensional space, and if we want to interpret (seemingly correct) theories
realistically, then we should accept that the true physical space, on which the
fundamental dynamics of the orchestrating ﬁeld S plays out, is this 3N-dimensional
one. One sub-group within this camp takes the 3N-dimensional space (where
the physically real orchestrating ﬁeld lives) to exist in addition to the more
familiar 3-dimensional space where the particles (and, presumably, the physicists
and philosophers themselves) live. They tend to have a difﬁcult time providing a
coherent account of the causality involved in a physically real object (which lives in
one space) physically orchestrating the motion of different physically real objects
(which live in an entirely different space).
Perhaps to avoid such difﬁcult questions, another sub-group claims that every-
thing (including the particles and the physicists and philosophers who study them)
is in the 3N-dimensional space. On this view, the true physical reality for (what we
ordinarily describe as) an N-particle system involves a single so-called “spectacular
particle” moving around in the 3N-dimensional space under the inﬂuence of the
orchestrating ﬁeld that lives in that same space. While this sub-camp’s view has
an undeniably tidy ontological character, and avoids the troubling questions raised
in the previous paragraph about how an object in one space can causally inﬂuence
objects in an entirely distinct space, it has not made a lot of progress in explaining
coherently how a physically-real 3-dimensional world (and/or the illusion thereof)
could emerge from the posited fundamental physics. Many philosophers thus quite
reasonably note that, despite the clear connection between this interpretation and
a seemingly empirically adequate theory, this particular interpretation really cannot
be said to account successfully for the observations (which are, in our parallel world,
still of an ordinary, three-dimensional world not unlike our own).
Another realist camp, recognizing the difﬁculties involved in interpreting S
as a physical ﬁeld, suggests retaining the particles (in regular physical space) as
physically real, but interpreting the orchestrating ﬁeld S in some other way. What
sort of thing is S, exactly, on this view? Often this is left vague, and sometimes
this vagueness is characterized as a virtue (on the grounds that only backwards
simpletons would demand that novel physical objects, discovered by cutting-edge

72
T. Norsen
science, should ﬁt neatly into a set of boxes laid out by ancient philosophers).
Sometimes it is suggested that we could interpret S not as a physical thing at
all, but instead as something like a law. This has some plausibility, especially for
those people in the parallel world who have a more Platonist understanding of the
nature of laws. But most people have not found this very convincing. After all, the
orchestrating ﬁeld S (at least for most systems within the parallel universe) has a
non-trivial time-evolution (already a highly unusual feature for laws), and this time-
evolution is governed by a partial differential equation (just like the more familiar
and ontologically unproblematic electric, magnetic, and gravitational ﬁelds). And it
also seems to perform the same fundamental job as those other more familiar ﬁelds,
namely: making the particles move a certain way. So at the end of the day it is just
difﬁcult to make a compelling case that something which (aside from living in the
wrong space) looks like a ﬁeld and acts like a ﬁeld, is not a ﬁeld, but is instead a
law.
And then, of course, in addition to the various realist camps, there exist a number
of more-or-less reputable anti-realist camps. One of these, for example, suggests
that S could be understood subjectively (i.e., as a description of somebody’s beliefs
about how the particles will move, rather than as something physically real that
makes them move in a certain way). Another suggests that it’s pointless or indeed
meaningless to worry about the ontological status of all these things; the theory
seems to work, say the proponents of this view, and that is all that matters.
And there are other viewpoints as well. But most sensible physicists feel that all
these anti-realist viewpoints fail to provide (and somewhat ridiculously attempt to
make a virtue out of failing to provide) any genuine physical explanation of the
observations.
And so, for quite some time, no real progress has been made. The theory
continues to work well and everyone agrees that, in some sense, it must be correct.
But nobody in this parallel world can agree about how, exactly, to take the theory
seriously.
5.2
Relation to Our World
I’m sure it will not surprise anyone to learn that the imaginary parallel world I
described in the previous section is not substantially different from our world. In
particular, the physics of the imaginary parallel world is identical to the physics of
our world. The two worlds, as it turns out, only differ historically and sociologically.
Let me explain.
The theory that I described in the previous section is just the version of
classical mechanics that is known, in our world, as the Hamilton-Jacobi (H-J)
formulation. I have presented it in an admittedly simpliﬁed way, for the sake of
clarity and accessibility. A fuller presentation would ﬂesh out the connections to the
more-widely-understood Hamiltonian, Lagrangian, and Newtonian formulations of
classical mechanics and would develop a number of technical points that I have

5
Quantum Ontology: Out of This World?
73
ignored or breezed past. Interested readers can of course ﬁnd such details in any
Classical Mechanics textbook.
For our purposes, though, the important point is just that the H-J theory can be
understood as a reformulation of the physical principles articulated (in our actual
world) by Newton. One nice way to see the equivalence is to take the time derivative
of Eq. (5.2) to see what the H-J theory implies about the acceleration of particles.
Recognizing that the right hand side of Eq. (5.2) depends on t two ways, we have
that
a = d2X
dt2 = 1
m
 ∂
∂t
∂S
∂x

+ dX
dt
∂
∂x
∂S
∂x

x=X(t)
.
(5.29)
It is then just a few lines of simple algebra to show that, if dX/dt is given by
Eq. (5.2) and if S obeys Eq.(5.1)—which, in our world, is of course called the
Hamilton-Jacobi equation—the above simpliﬁes to
a = 1
m

−dV
dx

x=X(t)
(5.30)
where V (x) is the potential energy: E(x, p) = p2
2m + V (x). Thus, the H-J theory
generates the same particle trajectories as the more intuitive and familiar Newtonian
second law, F = ma.
What, then, is different about the imaginary parallel world and ours? The point
of the parable was to contemplate how things might have developed if, somehow,
scientists in that world stumbled onto the Hamilton-Jacobi theory ﬁrst, without
yet appreciating (what, in our world, is known as) Newton’s second law and, in
particular, without yet grasping the concept of “force” and the Newtonian principle
that applied forces cause particles to accelerate.
In our world, with these Newtonian concepts and principles being familiar
and well-understood prior to the advent of the Hamilton-Jacobi re-formulation of
classical mechanics, there are no deep controversies about how to understand the
“orchestrating ﬁeld” S. It is, somehow, just clear that S need not and should not be
taken seriously, as a direct and literal description of some physically real object.
Instead, it is somehow just clear that S describes some aspect of physical reality, but
in an indirect and abstract way: in particular, S captures something about the way
that energy transforms for different possible dynamical evolutions of the system, and
energy, in turn, provides a kind of abstract perspective on the forces that particles
exert on one another.
So, in our world, anybody who suggested that S should be understood as
describing a physically-real ﬁeld living in a (therefore evidently equally real) 3N-
dimensional space, and somehow orchestrating the motion of particles in ordinary
3-dimensional physical space from there, or any of the various other things like
that, would be laughed off the stage. And quite rightly. The suggestion is patently
absurd. It represents an obvious failure to recognize the abstract character of the H-

74
T. Norsen
J formulation and the function S in particular. We can be realist about classical
mechanics, without the need to posit any “out of this world” ontology, by just
saying that there are particles, which move around in 3-dimensional space, under
the inﬂuence of the forces they exert on one another.
Of course, even in our world, philosophers argue about things like the ontological
status of forces. I am certainly no expert in this area of metaphysics, although I
did ﬁnd much of value in the several papers I read recently (Bigelow et al., 1988;
Massin, 2009, 2017; Wilson, 2007). That said, at the end of the day, at least when I
am wearing my physicist hat, I think we need to acknowledge that whatever puzzles
there might be about how to reconcile Newtonian physics with metaphysics, they are
trivial and uninteresting compared to the puzzle that the physicists in our imaginary
parallel world took themselves to face.
If, to make sense of what we observe, a theory requires us to postulate physically-
real things which are, in some sense, “out of this world”, it is appropriate for
metaphysical alarm bells to go off. That would be a really troubling situation,
basically unprecedented in the history of science (at least in our actual world).
But Newtonian mechanics just says there are (massive) things, which push and
pull on one another in various ways. Some sophistication is of course required
to precisely deﬁne concepts like “acceleration” and “mass”, and to distinguish
them from other related ideas. But we can literally just see and feel that there
are things, and we can directly experience the forces that things exert on one
another (when one of the things is us). So I think it’s reasonable to say that if
metaphysical alarms are sounding in response to this—in response to what amounts
to a mere precisiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation of phenomena that are amenable to direct
perceptual experience (which is how I think Newtonian mechanics can and should
be understood)—the problem is with us and our metaphysical expectations. In short,
if our metaphysical expectations cannot be reconciled with Newtonian mechanics,
it is our metaphysical expectations that should be replaced, not our understanding
of Newtonian mechanics.
And so, in so far as we correctly recognize the Hamilton-Jacobi theory as an
abstract reformulation of Newtonian mechanics, and in particular in so far as we
correctly recognize S as simply a highly-indirect way of talking about forces, there
should be no metaphysical worries about the H-J theory either. Which, thankfully,
in our world, there aren’t.
Why, then, was there an irreconcilable controversy about the ontological status
of the H-J orchestrating ﬁeld S in our imagined parallel world? Because, by
construction, the people in that world did not have the Newtonian ontology (of
particles interacting via forces) to fall back on. So, out of sheer ignorance (or
a lack of creativity), they believed that the only way to take their empirically
successful theory seriously was to take S as a direct and literal description of some
thing/things/stuff. Their various attempts to understand the meaning of the theory
thus all involved inappropriately reifying what, from the comfort of our world, is
obviously, in fact, a kind of abstraction.
To us that looks silly. But perhaps we can and should learn something from their
plight.

5
Quantum Ontology: Out of This World?
75
5.3
Relation to Quantum Mechanics
So far everything I’ve been saying has been intended in the context of classical
physics where, at least if you’ve got the Newtonian conceptual foundations in place,
there is nothing particularly problematic or controversial. But the discussion so far
does relate to quantum mechanics (QM), in several ways.
At least in our world, the H-J formulation of classical mechanics is relatively
unfamiliar to most people. But it is closely related to quantum mechanics (especially
the de Broglie–Bohm “pilot-wave” theory) and drawing out some of the connections
may help readers, for whom the H-J theory is currently less familiar than QM,
understand how the H-J formulation works.
First, the wave function ψ for an N-particle system in QM (for simplicity here,
let’s ignore spin) is, just like the “orchestrating ﬁeld” S in the H-J theory, a function
on the 3N-dimensional conﬁguration space. The wave function ψ is, of course,
complex, but the complex ﬁeld ψ can be decomposed into two real ﬁelds, R and S,
as follows: ψ = ReiS/¯h. (Thus, R is the modulus, and S the complex phase, of ψ.)
If we plug this ansatz into the Schrödinger equation (for, say, a particle of mass m
moving, for simplicity, in just one dimension)
i ¯h∂ψ
∂t = −¯h2
2m
∂2ψ
∂x2 + V (x)ψ
(5.31)
and demand that the real and imaginary parts match on both sides, we arrive at two
new equations that are jointly equivalent to the Schrödinger equation. The ﬁrst can
be understood as relating to the conservation of probability and is not particularly
relevant for our purposes. But the second—
−∂S
∂t = 1
2m
∂S
∂x
2
+ V (x) + Q
(5.32)
—just is the Hamilton-Jacobi equation, but with a new term, the so-called “quantum
potential”,
Q = −¯h2
2m
∂2R
∂x2
R .
(5.33)
So already in standard quantum mechanics there is a close connection between the
Schrödinger equation and the H-J equation, with a slightly-modiﬁed (“quantum”)
Hamilton-Jacobi equation describing the time-evolution of the phase of the wave
function ψ.
And there is an even closer connection in the de Broglie–Bohm pilot-wave
theory, in which the role of the wave function is to guide (or “pilot”) the motion of
actual particles. Indeed, the Bohmian “guidance formula” is nothing but Eq. (5.2),

76
T. Norsen
but with, of course, S being a solution of the quantum H-J equation (with the
additional term, Q).
There is also a sense in which the H-J formulation of classical mechanics captures
the classical limit of quantum mechanics. This is, again, particularly clear in the de
Broglie–Bohm pilot-wave theory where what has been said above implies that, if the
“quantum potential” Q is negligible (which occurs, for example, when a particle’s
guiding wave has a local plane-wave structure) the quantum H-J equation becomes
identical to the (classical) H-J equation and the Bohmian particle will move along a
classical trajectory.
Finally, note that thinking of the orchestrating ﬁeld S (in the context of the
classical H-J theory) as being closely associated with the complex phase of the QM
wave function perhaps clariﬁes a few technical details from our earlier examples.
For instance, the additively-separable character of S corresponds to the more
standard multiplicative-separability of stationary, energy-eigenstate solutions of
the time-dependent Schrödinger equation. And, of course, the failure of S to be
(additively) separable in the spatial coordinates for our example of two particles
connected by a spring—the situation that I said the physicists in the parallel
world described as “intertwinement”—is of course analogous to the failure of
(multiplicative) separability of the wave function in the situations that physicists
in our world describe as involving “entanglement”.
So, perhaps, those brief comments will help connect some of the technical details
of our earlier discussion to some more-familiar ideas from QM.
But there is also a second—more important and undoubtedly already-
anticipated—relation between quantum mechanics and the H-J formulation of
classical mechanics that I want to raise for discussion. Namely: the (imaginary,
parallel world) metaphysical controversies that I described in Sect. 5.1 bear an
amazing similarity to the real controversies, in our actual world, about how to
understand quantum mechanics generally and the wave function speciﬁcally.
5.4
Proposal
All of the different viewpoints I described previously, for understanding the role and
ontological status of the orchestrating ﬁeld S in the context of the classical physics
of our imaginary parallel world, correspond exactly to viewpoints that have been put
forward (in our actual world) as possible ways to understand the role and ontological
status of the QM wave function (Albert, 1996; Bohr, 1928; Caves et al., 2002;
Dürr et al., 1997; Hubert and Romano, 2018; Maudlin, 2019; Ney, 2021). I think it
should be admitted that the corresponding viewpoints in the two worlds are equally
problematic. That is, none of the standard, extant proposals for understanding the
role and ontological status of the QM wave function, ψ, in our actual world, have
the kind of compelling, convincing character that generates consensus. That is why,
in our actual world just like in the imaginary parallel world, the debates have raged,
without any apparent progress, across decades.

5
Quantum Ontology: Out of This World?
77
So I have a simple proposal. Let’s learn a lesson from the imaginary parallel
world. In particular, let’s recognize the possibility that—especially when there are
some unusual historical/sociological circumstances involving anti-realist philoso-
phies of science, as has indeed been the case in our world (Beller, 2001; Cushing,
1994; Freire, 2015)—physicists may stumble into what should be regarded as
an abstract re-formulation of some other, more straightforward and ontologically
unproblematic theory, prematurely...and hence fail to recognize their theory for
what it really is...and hence make the mistake of trying to understand, as a
direct and literal description of something exotic, something that should instead
be understood as an indirect and abstract description of something more mundane.
Speciﬁcally, let’s leave room in our thinking for the possibility—just the mere
possibility!—that Schrödinger’s equation captures something fundamental and true
about physical reality, but that it has a status like the status of the Hamilton-Jacobi
equation in classical mechanics. Let’s leave room, that is, for the possibility that
the quantum mechanical wave function ψ might not describe, in a literal and direct
way, something weird and exotic and “out of this world”, but may instead indirectly
describe something more mundane, just as the orchestrating ﬁeld S in H-J theory
can be understood as indirectly describing forces that particles exert on one another.
To be clear, I am not suggesting that there is a perfect parallel between QM and
H-J theory. In particular, I do not mean to suggest that we can or should re-interpret
the QM wave function in terms of forces that particles exert on one another. It is, of
course, controversial whether particles even exist in the context of QM. (They do,
according to the pilot-wave theory, and, as discussed above, the connection between
QM and H-J is especially close if we adopt the pilot-wave theory of QM, but it
certainly wouldn’t be appropriate here to presuppose the truth of the pilot-wave
picture.) And even if the correct ontology for QM does involve particles (as in the
pilot-wave picture), there are several reasons why I don’t think it is likely that the
right way to round out the ontology will involve “forces”.
(What are these reasons? One is that even in the pilot-wave picture, the dynamics
for the particles is fundamentally very non-Newtonian. In particular, the dynamics
is ﬁrst-order in time rather than second-order (Goldstein and Struyve, 2015).
Another is just the qualitative evidence, for example from the 2-slit experiment
with individual electrons, for something like “guiding waves.” Bell summarized
this evidence perfectly when he wrote: “Is it not clear from the smallness of the
scintillation on the screen that we have to do with a particle? And is it not clear, from
the diffraction and interference patterns, that the motion of the particle is directed by
a wave? De Broglie showed in detail how the motion of a particle, passing through
just one of two holes in a screen, could be inﬂuenced by waves propagating through
both holes. And so inﬂuenced that the particle does not go where the waves cancel
out, but is attracted to where they cooperate. This idea seems to me so natural and so
simple, to resolve the wave-particle dilemma in such a clear and ordinary way, that
it is a great mystery to me that it was so generally ignored” (Bell, 2004). Indeed. But
note that for such guiding waves to, e.g., “propagat[e] through both holes” of a 2-
slit screen, the waves in question must propagate in ordinary 3-dimensional physical
space, not an abstract high-dimensionalconﬁguration space. To me this suggests that

78
T. Norsen
the QM wave function might be an abstract/indirect description of, say, a number of
guiding-waves in 3-space...which is of course very different from the forces I am
suggesting are the ontological referent of S in H-J classical mechanics.)
So, again, my proposal is not that ψ in QM should be understood in precisely the
same way that I think S in H-J should be understood. The proposal is much more
general—and hence, unfortunately, much more vague. It is simply that we not forget
the logical possibility that quantum mechanical wave functions could be indirect,
abstract descriptions of something metaphysically unproblematic (compared to, for
example, ﬁelds on high-dimensional spaces, Platonic laws, etc.)—something as
simple and mundane and ontologically unproblematic as forces are in the context
of Newtonian mechanics, but whose exact nature, unfortunately, I cannot at present
claim to know.
The only concrete possible example I can provide is my own TELB (“Theory
of Exclusively Local Beables”) (Norsen, 2010). In this theory, the QM wave
function should be understood as an indirect description of a set of interacting
ﬁelds that live in ordinary physical space. The theory thus raises exactly as
many difﬁcult metaphysical questions (about the status of the wave function) as
classical mechanics does (about the status of the H-J function S)—namely, none.
Unfortunately, though, TELB is so ugly, complicated, and contrived that I don’t
think it can be taken too seriously, as anything but a proof of concept for the general
proposal I’m making here.
But still, that is something. We know it is possible, in principle, to understand
quantum mechanics in a way that doesn’t require relinquishing the proper, realist
attitude toward scientiﬁc theories, but in a way that also doesn’t require postulating
any weird, “out of this world” ontology. But to ﬁnd a genuinely compelling quantum
theory of this sort—to ﬁnd a theory that would allow the community to move
beyond its seemingly endless philosophical debates between partisans of different,
but equally problematic, viewpoints—we need more people to start looking for the
right kind of thing. Maybe the parable about the parallel world can provide the
needed motivation?
References
Albert, D. Z. (1996). Elementary quantum metaphysics. In J. T. Cushing, A. Fine, & S. Goldstein
(Eds.), Bohmian mechanics and quantum theory: An appraisal (pp. 277–84). Springer Nether-
lands.
Bell, J. S. Speakable and unspeakable in quantum theory (2nd ed., p. 191). Cambridge.
Beller, M. (2001). Quantum dialogue: The making of a revolution. University of Chicago Press.
Bigelow, J., Ellis, B., & Pargetter, R. (1988). Forces. Philosophy of Science, 55(4), 614–630.
Bohr, N. (1928). The quantum postulate and the recent development of atomic theory. Nature,
121(Supplement), 580.
Caves, C. M., Fuchs, C. A., & Schack, R. (2002). Quantum probabilities as bayesian probabilities.
Physical Review A, 65, 022305.
Cushing, J. T. (1994). Quantum mechanics: Historical contingency and the Copenhagen hege-
mony. University of Chicago Press.

5
Quantum Ontology: Out of This World?
79
Dürr, D., Goldstein, S., & Zanghì, N. (1997). Bohmian mechanics and the meaning of the wave
function. In R. S. Cohen, M. Horne, & J. Stachel (Eds.), Experimental metaphysics – Quantum
mechanical studies for Abner Shimony, Volume One. Boston studies in the philosophy of science
(Vol. 193, pp. 25–38). Kluwer.
Freire, O. (2015). The quantum dissidents: Rebuilding the foundations of quantum mechanics.
Springer.
Goldstein, S., & Struyve, W. (2015). On quantum potential dynamics. Journal of Physics A:
Mathematical and Theoretical, 48, 025303.
Hubert, M., & Romano, D. (2018). The wave-function as a multi-ﬁeld. European Journal for
Philosophy of Science, 8, 521–537.
Massin, O. (2009). The metaphysics of forces. Dialectica, 63(4), 555–589.
Massin, O. (2017). The composition of forces. British Journal of Philosophical Science, 68, 805–
846.
Maudlin, T. (2019). Philosophy of physics: Quantum theory. Princeton foundations of contempo-
rary philosophy (Vol. 33). Princeton University Press.
Ney, A. (2021). The world in the wave function: A metaphysics for quantum physics. Oxford
University Press.
Norsen, T. (2010). The theory of (exclusively) local beables. Foundations of Physics, 40, 1858.
Wilson, J. (2007). Newtonian forces. British Journal of Philosophical Science, 58, 173–205.

Chapter 6
Why Might an Instrumentalist Endorse
Bohmian Mechanics?
Darrell P. Rowbottom
A Briton wants emotion in his science, something to raise
enthusiasm, something with human interest. He is not content
with dry catalogues.
—George F. Fitzgerald (1896: 441)
Abstract I show that Bohmian mechanics may be highly valued by anti-realists,
such as cognitive instrumentalists, although it is typically understood to be a realist
interpretation of quantum mechanics. I argue that it possesses signiﬁcant theoretical
virtues – and is a vehicle for fostering non-factive understanding concerning how
many phenomena interrelate – even if it fails to be approximately true (or true to
any signiﬁcant degree in what it says about unobservable entities). I employ several
examples from the history of science to illuminate and support this view.
6.1
Introduction
When I ﬁrst encountered quantum mechanics, I was alarmed. The picture I’d built
up as a secondary school student was of a clockwork world where positions and
momenta were continuously well-deﬁned and where future states were uniquely
determined by past states. But now I was being taught a manifestly incompatible
view, where probabilities were needed not merely due to our ignorance or the
consideration of ensembles, where entities sometimes behaved like waves and
other times behaved like particles, where the act of observation could cause
striking changes, and so on. Quantum mechanics lacked external consistency – or
D. P. Rowbottom ()
Lingnan University, Tuen Mun, N.T, Hong Kong
e-mail: darrellrowbottom@ln.edu.hk
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
V. Allori (ed.), Quantum Mechanics and Fundamentality, Synthese Library 460,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-99642-0_6
81

82
D. P. Rowbottom
consistency with the other physical theories I knew – as Kuhn (1977, ch. 13) might
have put it.1
Why did I care about this? I was a (naïve) scientiﬁc realist. I believed the physics
I’d learned previously was largely true. Hence my concern wasn’t directly with
inconsistency, but with what this showed; two inconsistent stories often can’t both be
approximately true (or are strongly contradictory).2 In short, what I took myself to
know about the way the world worked was in jeopardy. And that was extraordinarily
intellectually uncomfortable.
I didn’t realise it at the time, but my reaction heralded that I was destined
for a career in philosophy, rather than science, perhaps because I was not ready
to be indoctrinated – in Kuhn’s (1963) sense – any further.3 My peers found
quantum mechanics harder than many other areas of physics but were typically
happy to ‘shut up and calculate’; and when I raised my worries with lecturers, they
were somewhat dismissive because they had similar leanings. I became a dissident
student, appalled by what I presumptuously, in my callow state, took to be a refusal
to do physics properly and to consider various possible interpretations.4 I began
to read exclusively about the interpretation of quantum mechanics. I started with
D’Espagnat (1989). And subsequently encountering Bohm’s ontological interpre-
tation of quantum theory, in Squires (1994), was a revelation. Dissident student
discovered dissident scientist, wrote an angry dissertation about how he’d been
taught false things, stormed off into philosophy, and resolved to argue for scientiﬁc
realism (with a methodological component).
All didn’t go to plan, however, because I gradually became convinced that the
arguments against scientiﬁc realism are stronger than those for it (and was spurred
on by my vain attempts to determine how conﬁrmation values could be absolute
and objective); and by the time I reached Oxford as a postdoc, I had strong anti-
realist leanings. While extemporising in a lecture there, I came up with the idea
1 I mean quantum mechanics as I was taught it, which included an incoherent mixture of
elements of Bohr’s and Heisenberg’s interpretations of quantum theory. As Wallace (2019: 306)
notes: ‘philosophers’ version of “orthodoxy” does physicists too much credit in providing a self-
consistent realist account of QM that just lacks a satisfactory account of exactly when collapse
happens, even as it does them too little credit in failing to recognise the unsuitability of the orthodox
version of orthodoxy to physical practice.’
2 I introduce the notions of weak and strong contradiction, which are useful in discussing several
aspects of scientiﬁc realism, in Rowbottom (2021). In summary: (1) p strongly contradicts q
precisely when ≈p contradicts ≈q; (2) p weakly contradicts q when p contradicts q but ≈p does
not contradict ≈q.
3 The following passage from Popper (1970: 52) resonates with me as a result: ‘In my view the
“normal” scientist, as Kuhn describes him, is a person one ought to be sorry for ... [is one who] has
learned a technique which can be applied without asking for the reason why (especially in quantum
mechanics)’. I do, however, think that using indoctrination to some extent may be good for science
from a social epistemological perspective; see Rowbottom (2011a).
4 As I earlier intimated, what passed for ‘the Copenhagen interpretation’ didn’t correspond to the
views of Bohr or Heisenberg, either in isolation or in any reasonable combination. It wasn’t the
Bohr-Heisenberg view accurately presented by Faye (2019).

6
Why Might an Instrumentalist Endorse Bohmian Mechanics?
83
for a position inspired by logical positivism, which I ﬂeshed out and outlined
in Rowbottom (2011b); and this led to my recent monograph, proposing a novel
instrumentalism of a ‘cognitive’ variety (Rowbottom, 2019). I’ll say a little more
about that later.
I recount this story because I believe many would be surprised, in the light of
it, that Bohmian mechanics remains my preferred approach to quantum theory (or
non-relativistic QM). Physicists of an anti-realist persuasion might be particularly
surprised. For example, Leggett (2005: 871) opines that Bohmian mechanics
involves ‘little more than verbal window dressing of the basic [measurement]
paradox’ and echoes earlier thoughts of Heisenberg (1955: 18), that: ‘[Because]
Bohm’s interpretation cannot be refuted by experiment . . . From the fundamentally
“positivistic” (it would perhaps be better to say “purely physical”) standpoint . . .
[It is not a counter-proposal to] the Copenhagen interpretation but . . . its exact
repetition in a different language.’ It is especially pertinent that this attitude among
physicists may originate from Bohr’s work on quantum theory. As Allori (2015:
316) notes: ‘a good portion of physicists ended up with some sort of anti-realist
position because they took Bohr’s proposal as a reductio ad absurdum for scientiﬁc
realism in the quantum framework.’5
Some philosophers of physics might also be somewhat surprised by my story
because, as Wallace (2020b) points out, Bohmian mechanics is normally labelled a
‘realist’ interpretative strategy. Wallace (2020b: 79) continues by noting that:
The debate over realist-vs-non-realist strategies has been fairly cursory in recent discussions
and has largely turned on general disagreements about the legitimate aims of science . . . In
the bulk of philosophy of physics (in particular in its more metaphysically inclined corners),
indeed, the non-realist strategies are set aside almost without comment. Meanwhile,
comparative assessment of the realist strategies has tended to turn on relatively detailed,
and fairly metaphysical, concerns with those strategies.
This state of affairs is intellectually unsatisfactory on several counts. First, being
an anti-realist about quantum theory doesn’t entail preferring one of the ‘non-
realist strategies’ normally identiﬁed; in short, those strategies aren’t exhaustive.
Second, on a related note, one may prefer one of the interpretations labelled ‘realist’,
on principled grounds, without believing it to be approximately true. Third, and
ﬁnally, comparative assessments of theories might involve epistemological and
practical concerns, rather than metaphysical ones (at least in any realist, especially
revisionary, sense of ‘metaphysics’).6
I will expand on all these points in this paper. I will begin, in the next section, by
showing how and why an instrumentalist (or an anti-realist of another variety) might
prefer an ontologically rich theory (or interpretation), involving extensive claims
5 There are exceptions. For example, Bowman (2002: 313) holds that Bohmian mechanics
‘possesses intrinsic heuristic value, arising from calculational tools and physical insights that
are unavailable in “standard” quantum mechanics’. I agree in spirit, but don’t think any value
is intrinsic.
6 I might also have again taken issue with the very idea that science has aims, but I will just point
to Resnik (1983) and Rowbottom (2014, Forthcoming) on this issue.

84
D. P. Rowbottom
about unobservable entities, to a sparser or more austere counterpart. In doing so, I
will point to pertinent work in the history of philosophy of science and in the history
of physics.
Before I continue, however, I’d like to address two issues to prepare the stage.
The ﬁrst concerns what, exactly, I intend to consider Bohmian mechanics to be
an interpretation of. This is a pressing consideration of in light of Wallace’s
argument that quantum mechanics is ‘a framework theory covering a huge number
of particular theories’ (2020a: 4303), and his resultant position that what we should
expect from an interpretation thereof is ‘a set of instructions which tells us, for any
given quantum theory, how to understand that theory.’ (2020b: 85). Wallace may
be right about what quantum mechanics is (although, as I will explain shortly, this
depends on what one takes a theory to be). However, having an interpretation of such
broad scope is of questionable import, except from the point of view of economy
(and other things that follow from that, ceteris paribus, such as memorability).
A patchwork of interpretations could do the trick and might be superior to any
all-encompassing alternative. Moreover, more than one interpretation might be
adequate in any given context. (Strictly speaking, one could have a set of instructions
of the form: in contexts of type C1, employ interpretations I1 or I2; in contexts of
type C2, employ interpretation I3; and so forth. But this is not what Wallace wants,
as far as I can discern, and he contends that a many-worlds view may be employed
in all pertinent contexts.) This said, I will restrict my attention, as is typical in such
discussions, to the interpretation of the part of quantum mechanics governing what
Wallace (2020a: 4303) calls ‘nonrelativistically moving point particles interacting
by long-range forces’. This element is signiﬁcant in physics education because it
stands in direct contrast to Newtonian mechanics, which is invariably taught long
beforehand.
This brings me to my second point, which concerns what counts as a theory
rather than an interpretation thereof. I shall not be able to say much about this,
beyond noting that philosophers often talk past one another due to having different
implicit views on the matter. As I alluded to above, even what counts as theory
is unsettled; ‘theory’ is used with gay abandon by most philosophers of science,
although there is no agreed referent thereof; see, for example, French (2020).
Indeed, I hesitate to agree with Wallace (2020a) about quantum mechanics being
a ‘framework theory’ because I think of some of the things he calls ‘theories’ as
‘models’, and others as ‘reformulations’; and Wallace (2020a) doesn’t spell out
exactly what it takes for something to be a theory, by his lights. What he does
say is highly controversial, against the background of the history of philosophy
of science.7 But this essay cannot adequately deal with this issue, so sufﬁce it to
7 Wallace (2020b: 81) suggests that something is not a theory (although it might be a theoretical
framework) if ‘by itself it makes no predictions and explains no phenomena; [if] by itself it
cannot be tested or falsiﬁed’. However, there is a long-standing (conﬁrmational holist) view in the
philosophy of science that most theories are like this. Duhem (1954), for instance, is best known
for his proclamation that there are no crucial experiments in physics because physical theories
can’t be tested in isolation.

6
Why Might an Instrumentalist Endorse Bohmian Mechanics?
85
say that I will take an interpretation, for present purposes, to be an account of
happenings on the (currently) unobservable ‘level’ which is explicitly associated
with a speciﬁc set of putative relations between observable entities. This is a rough
and inadequate deﬁnition, partly for reasons I allude to in the previous footnote,
but it serves to point, at least, to what I have in mind. Many other accounts of
interpretations are compatible with what I argue below being true.
6.2
Instrumentalism and Representations
of the Unobservable
Wallace (2020b) hits the nail on the head when he notes that the interpretations
of quantum mechanics which are typically labelled ‘realist’ are simply representa-
tional. Thus, put concisely, the questions I will address are as follows. Why would
an anti-realist (such as an instrumentalist) prefer a representational theory to a non-
representational alternative with equal predictive power, when the representations
in question concern unobservable entities? Why, that’s to say, would someone
advocate a representational theory concerning a domain that they thought we could
only have highly limited knowledge about?
Let me begin by giving a direct but condensed answer. Representations of
unobservable entities – things, systems, processes, and states of affairs – can
play important epistemic roles even when they aren’t accurate (and even when
there is nothing there to represent). First, they may make it easy for us to spot
connections between phenomena, and thereby enable us to predict more readily
how said phenomena interrelate. Second, they may also serve as vehicles for
understanding how phenomena interrelate, or for giving us an orientation and a
sense of familiarity, when employing a theory in a class of contexts. Third and
ﬁnally, such representations may serve as heuristics for the development of new
theories and models. Or so some philosophers of science and physicists have, as I
will shortly show, argued.
In particular, the notion that ‘understanding why’ is non-factive is explored in
several recent monographs,including Elgin (2017), De Regt (2017), and Rowbottom
(2019). And many pertinent papers have appeared in recent years. For instance,
Reutlinger et al. (2018) provide an account of how toy (or extremely idealized)
models can provide understanding, and Rancourt (2017) argues that introducing
more falsehoods (or making models less representationally accurate) often promotes
understanding. There is not an entirely united front among those who are inclined
towards such views; for example, Elgin thinks understanding why is quasi-factive,
whereas I do not. There is also some opposition to the very idea that understanding
why is not factive.8 Yet the view is respectable, and I will summarise the case I make
8 See, for instance, Hills (2016) and Bird (Forthcoming).

86
D. P. Rowbottom
for it in Rowbottom (2019), while showing how it bears on Bohm’s interpretation,
in the ﬁnal section of this piece.
Before I get to that, however, I should like to emphasise that some instrumental-
ists have advocated avoiding unobservable posits in science to some extent. Mach
is a notable example, and his opposition to atomic theory is well known. But Mach
allowed that sometimes it is useful to posit such unobservable entities. Consider the
following passage:
Even when the sound has reached so high a pitch and the vibrations have become so small
that the previous means of observation are not of avail, we still advantageously imagine the
sounding rod to perform vibrations . . . . [T]his is exactly what we do when we imagine a
moving body which has just disappeared behind a pillar, or a comet at the moment invisible,
as continuing its motion and retaining its previously observed properties . . . . We ﬁll out the
gaps in experience by the ideas that experience suggests. (Mach, 1893: 588)
In brief, Mach’s (1911: 49) view was that ‘[w]hat we represent to ourselves behind
the appearances exists only in our understanding, and has for us only the value
of a memoria technica or formula’. But one can disagree on two counts without
renouncing instrumentalism, as I argue in detail in Rowbottom (2019). First, one
may think that unobservable things probably do exist and that some of what we
represent ‘behind the appearances’ may be correct, but just that it’s extremely
difﬁcult to know when we are right (because, for example, there are considerable
limits to what we’ve conceived of at any point in time).9 Second, one may hold
that achieving a sense of understanding is important, above and beyond saving
the phenomena in an economical way, in science. Mach might even have been
convinced of this with a little argument, in so far as he held that a signiﬁcant task of
science is to give us an ‘orientation’; see Rowbottom (2019: 113–116).
It is also worth remembering the heated controversy, around the turn of the
twentieth century, about how physics should be done. Duhem is especially notable
for his critique of ‘English’ science – which is better dubbed ‘wrangler science’
(after the Cambridge wranglers who held so much inﬂuence in British science of the
time) – and for his criticisms of the way these British scientists employed (typically
abstract, but occasionally concrete) representational models. Poincaré had similar
thoughts. Yet this wasn’t a battle concerning scientiﬁc realism because wrangler
scientists didn’t take their models to accurately represent anything. In the words of
Heilbron (1977: 41–43):
[T]he representations were not meant or taken literally . . . . The same physicist might on
different occasions use different and even conﬂicting pictures of the same phenomena . . .
piecemeal analogies or provisional illustrative models.
These models weren’t considered to be optional extras. They were thought to be
necessary for the reasons I mentioned above. So the kind of anti-realist view I’m
bringing into focus in this paper – a view akin to cognitive instrumentalism – was
exempliﬁed in a key period of historic science. As Heilbron (1977: 42) puts it:
9 I have in mind here the argument from unconceived alternatives, presented by Stanford (2006)
and extended by Rowbottom (2019: ch.3).

6
Why Might an Instrumentalist Endorse Bohmian Mechanics?
87
[T]he principal English pedagogues of physics considered a theory incomplete without an
accompanying model or analogy, ideally elaborated to the last detail. Such pictures, they
believed, ﬁxed ideas, trained the imagination, and suggested further applications of the
theory . . . . This pedagogical bias was built into the training of British physicists.
I cannot recount the pertinent history covered in Rowbottom (2019: ch. 4) here.
But I would emphasise that several leading physicists of the day discussed how
models aid understanding. Kelvin (1884: 270), for instance, wrote: ‘If I can make
a mechanical model, I understand it. As long as I cannot make a model all the way
through I cannot understand . . .. I want to understand light as well as I can without
introducing things that we understand even less of.’
Some physicists also wrote about the signiﬁcance of analogies with mundane
observable scenarios in discussing unobservable things or processes. Consider this
charming passage from Fitzgerald (1888: 168–169):
All reasoning about nature is . . . in part necessarily reasoning from analogy . . . . Notwith-
standing the danger of our mistaking analogies for likenesses there is a great advantage in
studying analogies . . . . [I]f the forms of energy were as familiar a conception as eggs and
money, people would ﬁnd it as easy to reason about its [sic] transformation as they are [sic]
about the number of eggs the old woman brought to the market and sold at one dozen at 3 a
penny and so forth.
This view was far from new. For example, Kepler wrote explicitly of his love for
analogies – even suggesting that they hold all the secrets of nature – and used them
extensively in his work.10 And even in modern psychology, one ﬁnds Dunbar (2002:
159) concluding, on the basis of his observations of scientists, that ‘[M]undane
analogies are the workhorse of the scientiﬁc mind’.
In summary, the (instrumentalist) view of representations that I hold has a
signiﬁcant precedent in the history of physics (and, as I will hint at below,
of chemistry). In closing this piece, I will illustrate some of the functions of
representational models from this perspective, with the aid of scientiﬁc examples. I
will also show how Bohm’s interpretation performs some of those functions.
6.3
Functions of Representations of the Unobservable
In this ﬁnal section, I will show how representational models can be valuable
in four distinct respects despite failing to be accurate: (1) in highlighting or
revealing connections between phenomena; (2) in promoting understanding of how
phenomena interrelate; (3) as heuristics for theory (or model) construction; and (4)
in illustrating or revealing connections between theories (or laws or models). I will
argue that Bohm’s interpretation is valuable in each respect only after providing less
controversial examples of models performing these tasks.
10 For more detail, see Gentner et al. (1997).

88
D. P. Rowbottom
6.3.1
Highlighting or Revealing Connections Between
Phenomena
Representational models can be particularly important in emphasising connections
between phenomena. In Rowbottom (2019: 8–14), I provide an extended discussion
of how the simple pendulum – which involves numerous idealizations, including
that the motion is only two-dimensional, that no frictional forces are acting, that
the gravitational ﬁeld is uniform, and that the angle of swing is very small (such
that the angle is approximately equal to the sine thereof) – is useful in this regard.
(The simple pendulum is an impossible entity. It would swing perpetually.) For
example, the model makes it evident how changes in pendulum length and changes
in gravitational ﬁeld strength tend to affect swing frequency; it’s clear that in
summer a pendulum clock might run slower due to expansion in the rod bearing
the bob (in the absence of some compensatory mechanism like a mercury-ﬁlled
bob), and that it would also run slower on the moon than it would on Earth, ceteris
paribus, for example.
So how does Bohmian mechanics perform a similar function? As a precursor,
note that I will follow Bohm (1952) in construing this in a ‘second order’ (Goldstein,
2021) fashion. So construed, Bohmian mechanics is similar to ‘Newtonian’ classical
mechanics in its focus on forces acting on particles with deﬁnite positions. It merely
introduces a new quantum variety of force, which is normally discussed in terms
of ‘a quantum potential’; the associated guiding equation concerns how particles
react to such forces. This has several striking consequences when it comes to
making it evident how phenomena interrelate in ways not anticipated in classical
mechanics (or indeed in special or general relativity). Most obviously, the picture
is explicitly non-local, such that occurrences (like ‘measurements’) in one part of
the universe might instantaneously affect states of affairs in other distant parts. For
instance, getting a pointer reading of +1/2 after measuring the spin of one of an
entangled pair of photons entails getting a pointer reading of −1/2 in a subsequent
measurement of the spin of the other photon on the same axis. (Measurement breaks
the entanglement.) Moreover, on a related note, the Bohmian view makes it clear
how changing experimental setups can be expected to alter outcomes (in virtue, so
the story goes, of changing the quantum potential). It is evident, for example, that
placing a detector behind one slit, in a two slits experimental scenario, will prevent
an interference pattern of the kind expected without the presence of such a detector.
6.3.2
Promoting Understanding of How Phenomena
Interrelate
Rather more controversially, representational models may also serve as vehicles
for providing understanding of how phenomena interrelate even when they are
highly inaccurate. It will be difﬁcult for me to detail my account of understanding –

6
Why Might an Instrumentalist Endorse Bohmian Mechanics?
89
developed in Rowbottom (2019: ch. 5) – in the present context. But I will give the
briefest of outlines. Imagine you have identiﬁed several potential explanantia for
some known explanandum. They are potential in the sense that none are known to
be true or approximately so; and let’s also imagine, for simplicity’s sake, that all fail
to be approximately true to the same extent. Isn’t there nonetheless a sense in which
some of those explanantia may be better than others? I answer in the afﬁrmative
and propose that each might provide different degrees of understanding why. (Of
course, thinking we could infer to the best explanation also involves answering in
the afﬁrmative. You might think of my position as being that we should prefer,
but not infer to, the best available explanation in any given context.11) As we saw
above, this view ﬁts well with what the wrangler scientists thought. But what kind
of understanding is at play here? Poincaré (1905: 182) saw it as follows:
[Some hypotheses have] only a metaphorical sense. The scientist should no more banish
them than a poet banishes metaphor; but he ought to know what they are worth. They may
be useful to give satisfaction to the mind, and they will do no harm as long as they are only
indifferent hypotheses. (Poincaré, 1905: 182)
Poincaré (1905: 171) also wrote that such hypotheses/models may help ‘by concrete
images, to ﬁx the ideas.’ And to cut a long story short, I believe that there is
a connection between giving ‘satisfaction to the mind’, which is indicative of
strongly mentally grasping, and ﬁxing the ideas. ‘Concrete images’ – or visualizable
models – often help with such grasping. So I think an important aspect of science
is ‘empirical understanding’ (Rowbottom, 2019: ch.5), which involves subjective
understanding of a neat (and normally not even approximately true) story that saves
the phenomena (or more precisely, saves some speciﬁc class of phenomena to a
desirable extent). Empirical understanding is useful above and beyond being able to
predict successfully for the following reasons. First, it makes it easier for a subject
to remember a model. Second, perhaps most importantly, it makes it easier for a
subject to use said model. Third – in a more double-edged fashion – it bolsters the
user’s conﬁdence in the model as a means towards desired ends.
Consider again the example of the simple pendulum and the factors that affect
its period of swing. Due to its simplicity, the model provides a pellucid means by
which to grasp some aspects of how many real pendulums behave. For instance, it
makes it clear why changing the mass of the bob shouldn’t be expected to have any
signiﬁcant effect on swing period. Relatedly, it can also be mentally manipulated
easily – in line with Wilkenfeld’s (2013) view of understanding – such that it’s easy
to appreciate why increasing (or decreasing) the gravitational force would (tend to)
decrease (or increase) the period, and so forth.
Bohmian mechanics is excellent in this regard because it gives a visualizable or
imaginable picture of some microprocesses, such as the two slits experiment (and
similar scenarios). It also provides a sense of familiarity in so far as it connects
well with the pictures in Newtonian mechanics and statistical mechanics; the system
11 I also accept that understanding can sometimes be achieved without anything resembling an
explanation being present, e.g., following Lipton (2009), via a model such as an orrery.

90
D. P. Rowbottom
is deterministic, and the probabilities (and hence uncertainty relations) are present
ultimately due to ignorance about the positions of particles. Measurement involves
disrupting the system, such that one doesn’t always measure the way things were
beforehand. And the path to the classical limit is conceptually easy to navigate;
when the quantum potential ceases to be, then so does any non-locality, and the
classical force laws just fall out. As Cushing (1994: 52) puts it: ‘Conceptually, a
continuous passage from the microdomain to the macroworld is possible.’ Bowman
(2002: 317) concurs, in his Bohmian treatment of the role that wave packets play in
the simple harmonic oscillator: ‘By providing a valuable link with familiar classical
physics, the Bohmian approach arguably can provide a better understanding of why
quantum systems behave as they do.’
There is one other aspect of Bohmian mechanics that is preferable to the normal
story one ﬁnds in physics textbooks yet is rarely commented on; spin is construed
to be a feature of the way that the wavefunction acts on particles, rather than a
rather mysterious ‘intrinsic angular momentum’.12 As Norsen (2014: 346) puts it:
‘so-called “contextual properties” (like the individual spin components in the pilot-
wave theory) are not [intrinsic categorical] properties at all.’ Naturally, however,
some other parts of the Bohmian picture are less than ideal. For instance, as
Cushing (1994: 47) notes, ‘we have no understanding of the physical origin of the
highly nonlocal quantum potential’. A mitigating factor, he goes on to note, is that
mysterious (instant) action at a distance is familiar from the Newtonian account
of gravitational attraction. In any event, I am not arguing that Bohmian mechanics
should be preferred for thinking about all, rather than many, aspects of quantum
mechanics. And if one isn’t committed to the Bohmian picture being accurate, it is
easy to use a different picture in some quantum mechanical applications.
6.3.3
As Heuristics for Theory (or Model) Construction
Models may also serve as important heuristics. An especially interesting historical
example concerns Hofmann’s introduction of concrete/material ‘ball and stick’
models of molecules in 1865, which came to be known as glyptic formulae. The
short story – see Rowbottom (2019: 43–48) for a more detailed discussion – is that
the spatial relationships and connections (‘bonds’) in the model were not intended
to be taken literally. As Meinel (2004: 246–247) explains:
Convinced as he was that symbolic notations in chemistry were purely formal tools that did
not immediately correspond to reality, this approach explicitly avoided the question of truth
. . . [Hofmann’s glyptic formulae] were not meant to represent the physical arrangement
of the atoms. They rather supplied a pattern according to which the chemical operations of
elimination and substitution could be classiﬁed and analogies found.
12 See Rowbottom (2019) for an argument that discourse concerning this cannot be taken literally.
What would the distance involved in the moment be?

6
Why Might an Instrumentalist Endorse Bohmian Mechanics?
91
To cut a long story short, however, it is plausible that these models and others
developed subsequently – where, for instance, carbon bonds were instead arranged
tetrahedrally to make the models easier to handle – affected the direction of
chemistry. Most strikingly, the fact that double bonds did not allow rotation inspired
Paternò (1869) to posit isomers of halogenated ethanes.13 Overall, the change
was remarkably rapid. In 1866, Kolbe wrote that ‘graphic representations are
. . . dangerous because they leave too much scope for the imagination . . .. It is
impossible, and will ever remain so, to arrive at a notion of the spatial arrangement
of atoms’ (Rocke, 1993: 314). But by 1874, when Le Bel and van’t Hoff both
presented theories involving spatial relations playing active roles, ‘[s]tereochemists
. . . believed they had access to the physical appearance of the molecule’ (Ramberg,
2003: 328).
Similarly but less dramatically, Bohm’s theory has inspired further theoretical
work, mainly focused on preserving a pilot-wave type picture in relativistic contexts;
see Struyve (2011) for a summary of several attempts to employ it in quantum ﬁeld
theory. It is important to note that many of these approaches depart from the non-
relativistic Bohmian view in signiﬁcant ways; for instance, some take ﬁelds rather
than particles as fundamental in their ontology, and some of those that take particles
as fundamental are not deterministic.
6.3.4
Illustrating or Revealing Connections Between Theories
(or Laws or Models)
A ﬁnal way in which models may be valuable is in illustrating connections between
theories or laws (and thereby promoting understanding of how these interrelate and
might be conjoined or simultaneously applied). Take the planetary model of the
solar system normally associated with Rutherford – although he was not the ﬁrst to
propose it14 – as a simple case in point. This not only highlights the similarities in
the force laws governing gravitational and electrostatic attraction, but also makes it
apparent how both kinds of force could be present simultaneously in a ‘solar system’
type arrangement. Some such highlighting isn’t of much import in this case. For
example, the similarity between the force laws may be self-evident, especially if
Coulomb’s law is thought of in terms of the Coulomb constant. Yet even then, the
model might cause a user to reﬂect on why 4π is present when Coulomb’s law is
13 In fact, Crum Brown presented the familiar graphical way of depicting molecules just 1 year
before Hofmann ﬁrst used a glyptic formula. But the glyptic model more obviously suggests the
idea that carbon-carbon double bonds (or connections) might restrict motion in a way that single
bonds do not.
14 Forerunners include Colding, Fecher, and Weber. See Kragh (2012: 3–5) and Rowbottom (2019:
90).

92
D. P. Rowbottom
expressed in terms of the permittivity of free space, and thereby come to consider
why the formula for the surface area of a sphere is present.15
Bohm’s theory also isn’t especially remarkable in this regard, although it does,
for reasons I’ve already covered, ﬁt nicely with Newtonian classical mechanics (in
so far as classical behaviour falls out in the absence of quantum forces). Thus, it
shows how quantum mechanics and classical mechanics may connect. Inter alia,
as I have previously hinted at, it also provides an interesting means by which to
reﬂect on the role of probabilities in statistical mechanics. As Callender (2007) puts
it: ‘quantum mechanics is to Bohmian mechanics roughly as statistical mechanics
is to classical mechanics’.
6.4
Conclusion
I have shown why an anti-realist, such as a cognitive instrumentalist, might prefer
Bohmian mechanics to alternatives in several contexts. It may be construed as a
pleasing ﬁction, which provides an excellent way to think about, and anticipate,
many phenomena falling under the remit of quantum mechanics. It is also fertile, in
so far as it prompts further representational model/theory construction.
Acknowledgements My work on this paper was supported by a GRF Grant from Hong Kong’s
RGC (‘Scientiﬁc Progress: Foundational Issues’) and the Center for Foundations of Science,
University of Pittsburgh (via a Visiting Fellowship). I am also grateful to David Wallace and two
anonymous referees for comments on an earlier version.
References
Allori, V. (2015). Quantum mechanics and paradigm shifts. Topoi, 34, 313–323.
Bird, A. (Forthcoming). Knowing science. Oxford University Press.
Bohm, D. (1952). A suggested interpretation of the quantum theory in terms of ‘hidden’ variables.
Physical Review, 85, 166–193.
Bowman, G. E. (2002). Bohmian mechanics as a heuristic device: Wave packets in the harmonic
oscillator. American Journal of Physics, 70, 313–318.
Callender, C. (2007). The emergence and interpretation of probability in Bohmian mechanics.
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part B, 38, 351–370.
Cushing, J. T. (1994). Quantum mechanics: Historical contingency and the Copenhagen hege-
mony. University of Chicago Press.
15 The absence of 4πr2 in the gravitational case is a matter of convention stemming from the
way ﬂux is deﬁned. But the recognition that this might be ‘on the bottom’ in each case prompts
thinking of concentric spheres around a point source, and about how ﬁeld strength will drop off
as a result. An analogy with the intensity of light from a point source may become apparent. And
this may assist in making (classical) gravitational and electrostatic ﬁelds more visualisable and
comprehensible.

6
Why Might an Instrumentalist Endorse Bohmian Mechanics?
93
De Regt, H. W. (2017). Understanding scientiﬁc understanding. Oxford University Press.
D’Espagnat, B. (1989). Reality and the physicist: Knowledge, duration and the quantum world.
Cambridge University Press.
Duhem, P. M. M. (1954). The aim and structure of physical theory (P. P. Wiener, Trans.). Princeton
University Press.
Elgin, C. Z. (2017). True enough. MIT Press.
Faye, J. (2019). The Copenhagen interpretation. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The Stanford encyclopedia of
philosophy. URL: https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/qm-copenhagen/
Fitzgerald, G. F. (1888). Foundations of physical theory: Function of models. In J. Larmor (Ed.),
The scientiﬁc writings of the late George Francis Fitzgerald, 163–169. Longmann, Green &
Co.
Fitzgerald, G. F. (1896). Ostwald’s energetics’. Nature, 53, 441–442.
French, S. (2020). There are no such things as theories. Oxford University Press.
Dunbar, K. N. (2002). Understanding the role of cognition in science: The science as category
framework. In P. Carruthers, S. Stich, & M. Siegal (Eds.), The cognitive basis of science (pp.
154–170). Cambridge University Press.
Gentner, D., Brem, S., Ferguson, R. W., Wolff, P., Markman, A. B., & Forbus, K. D. (1997).
Analogy and creativity in the works of Johannes Kepler. In T. B. Ward, S. M. Smith, & J.
Vaid (Eds.), Creative thought: An investigation of conceptual structures and processes (pp.
403–459). American Psychological Association.
Goldstein, S. (2021). Bohmian mechanics. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Heisenberg, W. (1955). The development of the interpretation of the quantum theory. In W. Pauli
(Ed.), Niels Bohr and the development of physics (pp. 12–29). McGraw-Hill.
Heilbron, J. L. (1977). Lectures on the history of atomic physics 1900–1922. In C. Weiner (Ed.),
History of twentieth century physics (pp. 40–108). Academic.
Hills, A. (2016). Understanding why. Noûs, 50, 661–688.
Kelvin, Lord. [Thomson, W.]. (1884). Lectures on molecular dynamics, and the wave theory of
light. Johns Hopkins University Press.
Kragh, H. (2012). Niels Bohr and the quantum atom: The Bohr model of atomic structure 1913–
1925. Oxford University Press.
Kuhn, T. S. (1963). The function of dogma in scientiﬁc research. In A. C. Crombie (Ed.), Scientiﬁc
change (pp. 347–369). Basic Books.
Kuhn, T. S. (1977). The essential tension: Selected studies in scientiﬁc tradition and change.
University of Chicago Press.
Leggett, A. J. (2005). The quantum measurement problem. Science, 307, 871–872.
Lipton, P. (2009). Understanding without explanation. In H. W. de Regt, S. Leonelli, & K.
Eigner (Eds.), Scientiﬁc understanding: Philosophical perspectives (pp. 43–63). University of
Pittsburgh Press.
Mach, E. (1893). The science of mechanics: A critical and historical account of its development
(6th ed., p. 1960). Open Court.
Mach, E. (1911). The history and root of the principle of conservation of energy. Open Court.
Meinel, C. (2004). Molecules and croquet balls. In S. de Chadarevian & N. Hopwood (Eds.),
Models: The third dimension of science (pp. 242–275). Stanford University Press.
Norsen, T. (2014). The pilot-wave perspective on spin. American Journal of Physics, 82, 337–348.
Paternò, E. (1869). Intorno all’azione del percloruro di fosforo sul clorale. Giornale di Scienze
Naturali ed Economiche di Palermo, 5, 117–122.
Poincaré, H. (1905). Science and hypothesis. Walter Scott.
Popper, K. R. (1970). Normal science and its dangers. In I. Lakatos & A. Musgrave (Eds.),
Criticism and the growth of knowledge (pp. 51–58). Cambridge University Press.
Ramberg, P. J. (2003). Chemical structure, spatial arrangement: The early history of stereochem-
istry, 1874–1914. Ashgate.
Rancourt, B. T. (2017). Better understanding through falsehood. Paciﬁc Philosophical Quarterly,
98, 382–405.
Resnik, D. B. (1983). Do scientiﬁc aims justify methodological rules? Erkenntnis, 38, 223–232.

94
D. P. Rowbottom
Reutlinger, A., Hangleiter, D., & Hartmann, S. (2018). Understanding (with) toy models. British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 69, 1069–1099.
Rocke, A. J. (1993). The quiet revolution: Hermann Kolbe and the science of organic chemistry.
University of California Press.
Rowbottom, D. P. (2011a). Kuhn vs. Popper on criticism and dogmatism in science: A resolution
at the group level. Studies in history and philosophy of science (Part A), 42, 117–124.
Rowbottom, D. P. (2011b). The instrumentalist’s new clothes. Philosophy of Science, 78, 1200–
1211.
Rowbottom, D. P. (2014). Aimless science. Synthese, 191, 1211–1221.
Rowbottom, D. P. (2019). The instrument of science: Scientiﬁc anti-realism revitalised. Routledge.
Rowbottom, D. P. (2021). A methodological argument against scientiﬁc realism. Synthese, 198,
2153–2167.
Rowbottom, D. P. (Forthcoming). Scientiﬁc progress. Cambridge University Press.
Squires, E. J. (1994). The mystery of the quantum world (2nd ed.). CRC Press.
Stanford, P. K. (2006). Exceeding our grasp: Science, history, and the problem of unconceived
alternatives. Oxford University Press.
Struyve, W. (2011). Pilot-wave approaches to quantum ﬁeld theory. Journal of Physics: Conference
Series, 306, 012047.
Wallace, D. (2019). What is orthodox quantum mechanics? In A. Cordero (Ed.), Philosophers look
at quantum mechanics (pp. 285–312). Springer.
Wallace, D. (2020a). Lessons from realistic physics for the metaphysics of quantum theory.
Synthese, 197, 4303–4318.
Wallace, D. (2020b). On the plurality of quantum theories: Quantum theory as a framework, and its
implications for the quantum measurement problem. In S. French & J. Saatsi (Eds.), Scientiﬁc
realism and the quantum (pp. 78–102). Oxford University Press.
Wilkenfeld, D. A. (2013). Understanding as representation manipulability. Synthese, 190, 997–
1016.

Part II
Ontology

Chapter 7
Beables, Primitive Ontology and Beyond:
How Theories Meet the World
Andrea Oldofredi
Abstract Bohm and Bell’s approaches to the foundations of quantum mechanics
share notable features with the contemporary Primitive Ontology perspective and
Esfeld & Deckert minimalist ontology. For instance, all these programs consider
ontological clarity a necessary condition to be met by every theoretical framework,
promote scientiﬁc realism also in the quantum domain and strengthen the explana-
tory power of quantum theory. However, these approaches remarkably diverge
from one another, since they employ different metaphysical principles leading to
conﬂicting Weltanschaaungen. The principal aim of this essay is to spell out the
relations as well as the main differences existing among such perspectives, which
unfortunately remain often unnoticed in literature. Indeed, it is not uncommon to
see Bell’s views conﬂated with the PO programme, and the latter with Esfeld and
Deckert’s proposal. It will be our task to clear up this confusion.
Keywords Quantum mechanics · David Bohm · John Bell · Local beables ·
Primitive ontology
7.1
Introduction
Quantum Mechanics (QM) is one of the most efﬁcient descriptions of the inherent
structure of matter and its behavior. As is known, however, this theory represents
elementary objects in a way that drastically changed our conception of reality,
speaking about intrinsically indeterminate systems, non-local interactions, wave-
particle dualities, etc.. Indeed, it is still a pivotal philosophical challenge to
understand what scientiﬁc image of the world it provides—i.e. to comprehend its
ontology, and how the macroscopic realm can be explained from it. Referring to
this, it is worth noting that quantum theory is affected by several conceptual and
technical conundra; hence, we cannot consider it the ﬁnal word about ontological
A. Oldofredi ()
Section de Philosophie, Université de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
V. Allori (ed.), Quantum Mechanics and Fundamentality, Synthese Library 460,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-99642-0_7
97

98
A. Oldofredi
matters, notwithstanding its empirical success. In particular, scholars agree that QM
contains physically ill-deﬁned notions within its axioms, and inconsistencies among
its dynamical laws—resulting in the (in)famous quantum measurement problem.
Against this background, the Primitive Ontology (PO) approach has been
advanced to overcome these issues. Today, in fact, we have several PO theories
that resolve the quantum puzzles and that can be considered serious alternatives
to the standard formulation of QM, as for instance Bohmian Mechanics (BM),
dynamical reduction models as the Ghirardi-Rimini-Weber (GRW) theories, etc..
Although the expression “primitive ontology” has been introduced in Dürr et al.
(1992), the roots of this programme can be found in Bohm and Bell’s foundational
works. Following their steps, the modern formulation of the PO perspective requires
that well-deﬁned physical theories explain the macroscopic regime through a
more fundamental, microscopic picture, postulating a clear primitive ontology—i.e.
specifying a set of theoretical entities representing real objects moving in physical
space—and a consistent dynamics. Moreover, elaborating on the notion of primitive
ontology, Esfeld and Deckert (2017) extended and modiﬁed this concept proposing
an atomistic ontology that is taken to be valid at every energy/length scale between
the classical regime and the quantum ﬁeld theoretical level.
Bohm and Bell’s approaches share notable features with the modern PO per-
spectives; for instance, they consider ontological clarity a necessary condition to be
met by every theoretical framework, promote scientiﬁc realism also in the quantum
domain and strengthen the explanatory power of quantum theory.1 However,
these positions remarkably diverge from one another, since they employ different
metaphysical principles leading to conﬂicting Weltanschaaungen. The principal aim
of this essay is to spell out the relations and the main differences existing among
such perspectives, which unfortunately remain often unnoticed in literature. Indeed,
it is not uncommon to see Bell’s methodological approach conﬂated with the PO
programme, and the latter with Esfeld and Deckert’s views. It will be our task to
clear up this confusion.
The paper is organized as follows: Sect. 7.2 analyzes Bohm’s reﬂections on
the nature of theoretical entities and physical laws, taking into account also his
metaphysical inﬁnitism. Section 7.3 focuses on Bell’s theory of local beables. In
Sect. 7.4 the modern formulation of the PO programme is presented underlying
the main metaphysical and methodological differences w.r.t. Bohm and Bell’s
approaches. Section 7.5 introduces Esfeld and Deckert’s minimalist ontology and
illustrates how this perspective diverges under important respects with all the
previous proposals. Finally, Sect. 7.6 concludes the paper.
1 I assume that the reader has some familiarity with this literature.

7
Beables, Primitive Ontology and Beyond: How Theories Meet the World
99
7.2
David Bohm, Pluralism and Inﬁnitism
Ontological clarity is an essential feature of physical theories according to Bohm.
On his view the problems of the standard interpretation of QM come from
its obscure metaphysical content. Bohm was deeply unsatisﬁed by the lack of
explanation of measurement results, since quantum theory excludes a precise
characterization of individual systems as well as an accurate description of their
dynamical evolution “without proving that such a renunciation is necessary” (Bohm
1952, 168). Furthermore, he argued that the empirical robustness of QM and
its contingent mathematical structure are not sufﬁcient to exclude a priori other
ontologically clearer formulations.
To tame these issues, Bohm joined the foundational debate proposing an
alternative interpretation of QM where quantum particles have deﬁnite positions
and velocities, and are dynamically guided by a real ψ-ﬁeld, challenging the
metaphysical indeterminacy of the standard formulation. Hence, postulating a dual
ontology of particles and ﬁelds, he showed that an individual description of quantum
systems following continuous trajectories in space was not only mathematically
possible, but also physically consistent. Moreover, this theory is able to explain
measurement outcomes without invoking mysterious collapses of ψ, strengthening
the explanatory power of quantum theory. In addition, Bohm extended his approach
to electromagnetism employing ﬁelds—different from ψ—as fundamental entities,
showing that he was open to implement various ontologies in different theories (cf.
Appendix A of Bohm (1952)). The common trait between such theories is their
metaphysical clarity, since Bohm always speciﬁed which variables represent matter
and how they dynamically behave.
In addition, he claimed that QM—as any other theory—has a limited validity
and that “at distances of the order of 10−13cm or smaller and for times of the order
of this distance divided by the velocity of light or smaller, present theories become
so inadequate that it is generally believed that they are probably not applicable”
(Bohm 1952, footnote 6). At these regimes he expected that new ontologies and new
theories will be discovered. More generally, Bohm thought that physical theories
have limited domains of application at precise length/energy scales, and remarked
that what is measured at a particular level—thereby what exists at that scale—
depends on the theory at hand:
our epistemology is determined to a large extent by the existing theory. It is therefore not
wise to specify the possible forms of future theories in terms of purely epistemological
limitations deduced from existing theories (Bohm 1952, 188).
In his view this is a direct objection against the empiricist basis of QM, which
follows the positivistic principle of not accepting entities that cannot be currently
observed. According to Bohm, this is a poor working hypothesis, since the history
of physics showed the fruitfulness to assume the existence of certain items before
their empirical discovery, and the atomic theory is a pivotal example. On the other
hand, he rejected another perspective, later called “mechanistic philosophy”, for
which reality can be fully explained starting from a ﬁxed set of entities, and a

100
A. Oldofredi
restricted set of laws—something close to what philosophers call foundationalism.2
He warns us not to expect such a knowledge “because there are almost certainly
more elements in existence than we possibly can be aware of at any particular
stage of scientiﬁc development. Any speciﬁed element, however, can in principle
ultimately be discovered, but never all of them” (Bohm 1952, 189). This is an hint
of the metaphysical inﬁnitism endorsed in Causality and Chance in Modern Physics
to which we now turn.
In Bohm (1957) we ﬁnd detailed objections against mechanistic philosophy.
Firstly, history of physics disconﬁrms the basic tenets of this view, since the
revolutions that occurred from Newton to this day radically changed the entities
and the laws of our theories. Moreover, future frameworks will be as revolutionary
as QM was w.r.t. classical physics. Secondly, the assumptions concerning the ﬁnal
character of any particular ontology are neither necessary, nor provable, because
future theories may demonstrate its limited validity.3 Finally, foundationalism
contravenes the scientiﬁc method, since the latter imposes that every object and law
must be continuously subjected to veriﬁcation. This process of testing may end up
in contradiction with new discoveries or new domains of science. Looking at how
physics evolved, says Bohm, such contradictions not only systematically appeared,
but also led to a deeper comprehension of the world.
Contrary to such a view, he proposes a form of inﬁnitism. In essence, Bohm
stated that physical sciences and experimental data push us to a conception of nature
composed by an inﬁnity of different entities, which do not depend ontologically on a
ﬁxed set of absolutely fundamental objects (Bohm 1957, 91). According to this view
of science, physical theories do not always lead us closer to a fundamental ground,
but instead show the inﬁnite complexity of nature. Furthermore, he believes that
empirical data cannot a priori provide any justiﬁcation to metaphysical restrictions
concerning a particular set of entities to be chosen as absolutely ontologically
independent. On the contrary, conforming to Bohm’s inﬁnitism, scientiﬁc practice
always discloses new entities, laws and phenomena which contribute to our
continuous, never-ending process of understanding the structure of reality.
However, although Bohm denied the existence of a fundamental level, he ﬁrmly
believed that every theory must be ontologically unambiguous in its domain of
application. Therefore, theoretical frameworks must provide a clear ontology to be
applied at the relevant energy/length scale, meaning that the entities forming the
basic ontology of a given theory can be considered relatively fundamental. Referring
2 In Sect. 7.5 we will see that Esfeld and Deckert (2017) proposed a view similar to the mechanistic
philosophy described by Bohm. It should be noted, however, that according to these authors
physical laws can change in time in order to accommodate the discovery of new phenomena.
3 Referring to this Bohm writes: “Newton’s laws of motion, regarded as absolute and ﬁnal for over
two hundred years, were eventually found to have a limited domain of validity, these limits having
ﬁnally been expressed with the aid of the quantum theory and the theory of relativity” (Bohm 1957,
90).

7
Beables, Primitive Ontology and Beyond: How Theories Meet the World
101
to this, he stated that
[a]ny given set of qualities and properties of matter and categories of laws that are expressed
in terms of these qualities and properties is in general applicable only within limited
contexts, over limited ranges of conditions and to limited degrees of approximation, these
limits being subject to better and better determination with the aid of further scientiﬁc
research (Bohm 1957, 91).
Thus, Bohm claimed that a well-deﬁned physical theory should provide a
clear ontological picture for the domain in which it is a reliable description of
physical phenomena. Nonetheless, its ontology can be substantially modiﬁed with
the progress of scientiﬁc research. This certainly exempliﬁes Bohm’s scientiﬁc
pluralism and his heterodox metaphysical views w.r.t. to the dominant paradigm
towards the interpretation of QM (cf. van Strien 2019).
As we can see, the seeds of the PO programme—i.e. the requirements of onto-
logical clarity and explanatory robustness—have been sowed. They will germinate
in Bell’s theory of local beables which we are going to discuss.
7.3
Local and Non-local Beables
It is well-known that Bell was disappointed by the lack of ontological clarity in
QM, which in his opinion was the source of its inconsistency and redundancy.
Inconsistency because the dynamical laws of the theory contradict each other;4
redundancy because some central notions contained in its axioms, e.g. observation
and observable, should be derived from more fundamental concepts, the beables of
the theory:
[t]he concept of ‘observable’ lends itself to very precise mathematics when identiﬁed with
‘self-adjoint operator’. But physically, it is a rather woolly concept. It is not easy to identify
precisely which physical processes are to be given the status of ‘observations’ and which
are to be relegated to the limbo between one observation and another. So it could be hoped
that some increase in precision might be possible by concentration on the beables, which
can be described in ‘classical terms’, because they are there (Bell 1987, 52).
According to Bell, a well-deﬁned physical theory T must postulate a clear
ontology, or in his jargon, a set of local beables. These are the theoretical entities
of T referring to real objects ascribed to bounded regions of space-time, i.e. they
correspond to the elements of reality that the theory postulates to exist independently
on any observation. It is worth noting that the beables cannot be derived from other
more fundamental notions of T ; hence, they establish what is fundamental in the
context of T.
4 These laws are the Schrödinger equation and the collapse postulate.

102
A. Oldofredi
Moreover, together with dynamical laws,5 the beables explain the physical phe-
nomena lying within the domain of application of the theory under consideration,
connecting its formal structure to the macroscopic world accessible to us:
[t]he beables must include the settings of switches and knobs on experimental equipment,
the currents in coils, and the reading of instruments. ‘Observables’ must be made, somehow,
out of beables. The theory of local beables should contain, and give precise physical
meaning to, the algebra of local observables (ibid.).
But how do we select a particular set of beables for a theory? In answering
this question Bell’s pluralist attitude becomes manifest, since he claimed that
the only necessary requirements for an ontology is to state explicitly which
variables represent matter, and to provide unambiguous explanation of macroscopic
observations.6
These liberal requirements do not impose any strict limitation to the selection
of a certain ontology. Such a freedom of choice is justiﬁed because (1) there are
always several adequate options to account for the macroscopic data that a certain
theory must explain, (2) physical theories have a provisional character. Therefore,
according to Bell, there is no one-to-one relation between the beables of a theory and
the physical world, meaning that we cannot deﬁnitively establish whether a certain
ontology is the correct, ultimate description of reality. To this regard, Bell used “the
term ‘beable’ rather than some more committed term like ‘being’ or ‘beer’ to recall
the essentially tentative nature of any physical theory. Such a theory is at best a
candidate for the description of nature. Terms like ‘being’, ‘beer’, ‘existent’, etc.,
would seem to me lacking in humility. In fact ‘beable’ is short for ‘maybe-able’ ”
(Bell 1987, 174).
Indeed, there are various examples of beables implemented in different classical
and quantum theories, as for instance electromagnetic ﬁelds, point particles, matter
density ﬁelds, strings etc..7 Bell himself, although he was a supporter of the pilot-
wave theory (Bell 1987, Chapter 17), proposed a rival picture for non-relativistic
QM, namely a GRW theory with a ﬂash ontology (ibid., Chapter 22). Moreover,
he extended Bohm’s approach to Quantum Field Theory (QFT) implementing an
ontology of fermion number density (ibid., Chapter 19). Such beables have no
classical analogues, implying an ontological discontinuity between the classical and
the quantum regime; however, such a discontinuity was tolerated by him. Similarly,
Bell’s approach allows that a single theory can postulate the existence of different
5 Remarkably, according to Bell in the context of a given theory T there is a distinction between
physical and non-physical entities: the former denote the beables of the theory, the latter are the
mathematical structures needed to formulate dynamical laws for the variables representing matter
in space; cf. (Bell, 1987, Chapter 7).
6 To this regard Bell writes that “what is essential is to be able to deﬁne the positions of things,
including the positions of pointers or (the modern equivalent) of ink of computer output” (Bell
1987, 175). Cf. also (Bell, 1987, Chapter 5).
7 Maudlin (2016) underlines that a similar choice is available also for the speciﬁcation of the space-
time structure of a given theory.

7
Beables, Primitive Ontology and Beyond: How Theories Meet the World
103
kinds of objects, i.e. it can provide a multi-category ontology, as for instance in
classical electromagnetism, where we ﬁnd both point particles and ﬁelds. Thus, the
theory of local beables does not require that reality must be reduced to a unique
category of physical entities. These facts certainly denote his liberal views about the
ontology of physical theories, in close analogy with Bohm’s pluralist perspective.
Finally, it is interesting to note the Bell admitted the existence of non-local beables.8
This fact shows that according to him, the general category of what exists is divided
into two subsets: local and non-local beables. The former must be deﬁned in 3-
dimensional space and associated with bounded portion of spacetime; while the
latter can be either deﬁned in high-dimensional spaces or in the usual 3D space. For
instance, he considered the state vector deﬁned in conﬁguration space as a proper
beable in his essay Beables for quantum ﬁeld theory. Another important example is
given by the multi-ﬁeld interpretation of the ψ ﬁeld in Bohm’s theory. According
to this approach, given a N-particle system one projects the ψ values deﬁned
on conﬁguration space into multi-ﬁeld values in 3-dimensional space, i.e. one
associates a particular ﬁeld value not with individual points (as one would do with
usual ﬁelds), but with N-tuples of points. In this manner, the multi ﬁeld determines
the motion of a conﬁguration of particles in physical space. This new object is a
beable because it is considered a real physical item living in 3-dimensional space,
and it is non-local since its value is speciﬁed for a conﬁguration of N points and not
for a single point.9
In sum, from our discussion we can say that Bohm and Bell’s10 reﬂections
concerning the ontology of physical theories led to the following ideas:
•
the beables of a theory T are fundamental in the context of the framework under
consideration, i.e. they may be non-fundamental in another, deeper theory;
•
the beables must explain all the physical phenomena lying within the domain of
application of T ;
•
several ontologies can be proposed to explain the same set of physical phenom-
ena;
•
it is possible to implement different beables within the same theoretical frame-
work postulating a multi-category ontology;
•
beables can be non-local and deﬁned either in 3D space or in higher-dimensional
spaces;
•
ﬁnally, it is possible to implement different beables at different energy/length
scales (scientiﬁc pluralism).
8 Cf. Bell (1987, 53).
9 For details on this particular perspective cf. Hubert and Romano (2018). Clearly, such type of
beables have been admitted also by Bohm himself since he explicitly considered the wave function
a real physical ﬁeld, as said in the previous section. Another recent example of non-local beables
can be found in Smolin (2015).
10 It is worth stressing that Bell did not explicitly endorsed a metaphysical inﬁnitism as Bohm did.
Nonetheless, the similarities between their views are evident.

104
A. Oldofredi
Since the PO programme evolved from the work of these physicists, let us then
see what has been kept and what has been left behind.
7.4
The Primitive Ontology Approach
The PO approach is a normative perspective about the construction of physical
theories since it provides a set of requirements that any theoretical framework should
met to be considered empirically and metaphysically consistent. Indeed, according
to the proponents of this view, well-deﬁned theories share a common architecture
deriving from these constraints.11
Following Bell,12 also in this programme the mathematical structure of a
theory T is divided into two subcategories. Firstly, there are “primitive” variables
provided with a physical meaning; they represent matter and refer to real objects
precisely localized and moving in 3-dimensional space (or in space-time), which
is generally considered a real substance as well. These are the PO of the theory,
the fundamental entities postulated by T which constitute the building blocks of
macroscopic reality. Remarkably, the PO deﬁnes the observable quantities of T —
i.e. the properties of physical systems—and its symmetries, since it establishes
which entities remain invariant under symmetry transformations.13 On the other
hand, T contains mathematical structures that are responsible for the dynamical
evolution of the primitive ontology, without representing material objects—the non-
primitive (or nomological) variables (cf. footnote 5). An example is given by the
wave function in QM: in every PO theory ψ is not considered a physical substance,
but rather an essential mathematical tool useful to formulate empirically adequate
laws for the dynamical history of the primitive ontology, similarly to the parameters
of mass and charge.14
Furthermore, the PO has explanatory power since the macroscopic reality is
metaphysically dependent on the primitive ontology of a particular theory and
11 Here I follow the modern presentation of this perspective contained in Allori (2013) and Allori
(2015). NB: other proponents of the PO approach as for instance R. Tumulka, S. Goldstein or N.
Zanghì may have different opinions concerning this programme and its main goals. For details
about the common structure of PO theories see Allori et al. (2008).
12 For the sake of conceptual accuracy, it should be stressed that the PO approach not only
is rooted in Bohm and Bell’s works, but it is also inspired by Einstein, de Broglie and
Schrödinger’s reﬂections on and critiques to the ontology of QM. These physicists, indeed,
explicitly rejected the instrumental philosophy of standard quantum theory and tried to provide
an unambiguous metaphysical picture for this theoretical framework. Given the space limit, here
I cannot elaborate of their inﬂuence on the PO approach. However, proponents of this perspective
in several occasions—as for instance Nino Zanghì in many conversations and Valia Allori (private
communication)—emphasized their inﬂuence.
13 For technical details see Allori et al. (2008). More on this later.
14 Arguments against wave function realism can be found in Allori (2013), Allori (2015), and
Allori (2021).

7
Beables, Primitive Ontology and Beyond: How Theories Meet the World
105
its dynamical laws. This dependence relation can be intuitively characterized as
mereological composition: the entities of a PO interact and form nuclei and atoms,
which in turn aggregate into molecules and more complex biological organisms,
arriving eventually to the macroscopic realm.15 For instance, according to BM,
GRWm or GRWf, the macroscopic regime is literally composed by particles,
matter density ﬁelds or ﬂashes respectively, meaning that such PO theories explain
the existence of macroscopic objects in terms of the motion and interaction in
space of their different mereological primitives. Thus, the properties and the
behavior of macroscopic objects depend on—i.e. are reduced to—the properties and
interactions of their fundamental constituents. Clear examples of these explanations
are macroscopic measurement outcomes. For instance, in BM measurements of
spin are explained via—and reduced to—particles’ positions and their dynamical
evolution as shown in Bell (1987, Chapter 17) and Dürr et al. (2004b). This example
is generalizable (1) to every other PO theory and (2) to every observable, since
these frameworks provide rigorous descriptions of the physical processes taking
place in measurements situations, and then also detailed explanations of the obtained
results.16 All these are remarkable virtues, because observation constitutes the only
connection between theory and experience.
To conclude this brief presentation, it is worth stressing that the PO approach
puts very few constraints on the selection of the primitive variables: the latter must
be microscopic, since they must explain the macroscopic regime, and located in
3-dimensional space.17 Referring to this, indeed, Allori states that
there is no rule to determine the primitive ontology of a theory. Rather, it is just a matter
of understanding how the theory was introduced, it has developed, and how its explanatory
scheme works (Allori 2013, 65).
The deﬁnition of the primitive variables of a given theoretical framework depends
on the metaphysical assumptions used to construct it, and may vary from a theory to
another, as witnessed by the several PO theories available. However, the primitive
ontology is never chosen a posteriori, i.e. it is not read off from the mathematics
of a theory. Rather, the PO itself provides an interpretation of the formalism: in the
process of theory construction, a scientist selects a particular PO and will use the
appropriate mathematical structures to implement her choice.
Let us now turn to the differences between the PO programme w.r.t. the previous
approaches. To this regard, Allori (2013, 2015, 2021) stress two related crucial
15 The exact rules of mereological composition as well as the dependence relation based on them
have not yet been investigated in detail in the context of PO. This will be the subject for future
research.
16 For technical details cf. Dürr et al. (2004b) and Goldstein et al. (2012).
17 The reader may refer to Allori (2015, Sections 4 and 5) for arguments in favor of the requirement
of “microscopicality” and 3-dimensionality.

106
A. Oldofredi
points:18 ﬁrstly, not every local beable is necessarily a PO. For instance, elec-
tromagnetic ﬁelds in classical electrodynamics can be interpreted as nomological
variables instead of primitive ones given their role in the theory: not only there is
asymmetry between particles and ﬁelds—i.e. the particles can generate ﬁelds, but
not vice versa—but also the latter act as mediators of particles’ interactions. These
facts provide indications that ﬁelds are not fundamental entities. Consequently, E
and H are not part of the PO, i.e. they do not represent matter in space, but describe
how particles move. Thus, they are part of the explanatory machinery of the theory.
Hence, some local beables can be nomological, while PO must be exclusively
material.
Secondly, if every local beable of a given theory T is considered part of the
PO, then T may lose symmetry properties. A simple example is provided by the
symmetry of time reversal in electromagnetism: if E and H would be real physical
entities, one would expect that, under time-reversal, they would still represent
possible ways in which ﬁelds may be. However, the transformations E(t) →E(−t)
and H(t) →H(−t) are not solutions of the Maxwell’s equations. On the contrary,
particles’ trajectories are invariant under time reversal. Thus, if E and H are
considered part of the PO, then classical electromagnetism would lose the symmetry
of time-reversal. Hence, Allori concludes the PO preserves the symmetries of the
theory, while sometimes local beables do not.19
In addition, one can also ﬁnd other important differences between these perspec-
tives. Firstly, a given PO theory T deﬁnes a set of entities which are considered
fundamental tout court, since they are considered the building blocks of nature.
According to the PO perspective, indeed, our macroscopic realm is completely
ontologically reduced to the primitive variables of T and its dynamical laws, which
are considered the fundamental elements of reality.20 On the contrary, Bohm stated
that a particular ontology should be valid and reliable only within the domain of
application of a given theory. Similarly, Bell stressed that we may have two different
sets of local beables at different energy/length scales, implying that a certain theory
T postulate an ontology which is theory dependent and only relatively fundamental.
Secondly, the PO approach does not admit different ontologies at diverse
scales.21 Indeed, if either GRWm or GRWf were the correct description of the
18 To my knowledge Allori is the ﬁrst that pointed clearly out the differences between the PO and
local beables. In literature, however, such differences are often neglected and these approaches are
frequently conﬂated. See for instance Esfeld (2014) or Tumulka (2016).
19 This is another elegant argument against the reality of ﬁelds. More details are given in Allori
(2021, Sections 4.2 and 4.3).
20 To this regard, Allori writes that in the PO approach “macroscopic objects are thought to be
fundamentally composed of the microscopic entities the PO speciﬁes. As such, the PO approach
is (ontologically) reductionist, at least to the extent that it allows to make sense of claims like the
PO being “the building blocks of everything else”, and of the idea that macroscopic regularities are
obtained entirely from the microscopic trajectories of the PO” (Allori 2018, 71–72).
21 If BM would be the correct description of reality at a fundamental level, we would have
ontological continuity between the classical and the quantum scale. Referring to this, not only

7
Beables, Primitive Ontology and Beyond: How Theories Meet the World
107
world, the non-fundamental particle-like character of classical mechanics would
emerge and explained in terms of the fundamental GRW PO. However, since we do
not have direct access to the ﬁne-grained nature of the primitive variables, we can
consider the ﬂashes/matter ﬁelds as if they were particles for explanatory purposes,
recovering the appearance of classical corpuscles:
[a]t the level of microphysics we may have ﬂashes or a continuous ﬁeld, but at some
mesoscopic level they produce trajectories as if they are produced by particles. So, even if
the microscopic PO is not one of particles, there is a mesoscopic scale in which they behave
as if they are in the sense that from that level up to the macroscopic level the explanation is
the same as if they were particles (Allori 2018, 73).
In this case, then, we would know that at the fundamental level the PO is
not corpuscular, even though we would keep talking of particles for explanatory
aims. Clearly, Bohm and Bell pluralist attitude seems to be lost in favor of a
foundationalist perspective. Consequently, inﬁnitism is abandoned as well.
Thirdly, contrary to the multiple-category ontologies endorsed by Bohm and
Bell, PO theories explain our manifest image of the world postulating exclusively
a one-category ontology, i.e. the macroscopic regime is reduced to a single type
of physical objects and their evolution. However, this reduction may be non-
eliminative: for instance, as state above, in the case a GWR-type theory would
postulate the correct PO, particles would be still considered an effective description
of reality from a mesoscopic to a macroscopic scale. Thus, for all explanatory
purposes a classical particle ontology can be maintained.
Finally, as we have seen in the previous sections, Bohm and Bell conceived
the existence of non-local beables, whereas in the PO perspective these cannot be
considered material entities. Thus, they cannot be part of the primitive ontology of
a theory, and must be included within its nomological variables. In sum, if for Bell
and Bohm what physically exists can be deﬁned in terms of local and/or non-local
beables, the PO can only be a subset of the local beables. Thus, the PO programme
imposes stricter criteria to determine the fundamental elements of a theory w.r.t. the
preceding approaches.
In this section we saw that the PO approach diverges from the views of its
pioneers, since it employs different metaphysical assumptions and methodological
principles that lead to diverse pictures of reality. Thus, we should be aware of these
dissimilarities not to conﬂate these approaches. To conclude the essay, let us now
consider the most recent development of the PO programme.
Allori is inclined to postulate particles as the fundamental PO, but also she argues that the
ontological discontinuity between classical mechanics and GRW theories is an argument against
the latter (cf. Allori 2018). Clearly, I cannot speak for other proponents of this programme.

108
A. Oldofredi
7.5
Beyond the PO: Minimalism and Fundamental Ontology
Starting from the modern formulation of the PO programme, Esfeld and Deckert
radicalized the notion of primitive ontology eliminating the theoretical dependence
of the PO: “to our mind, it is inappropriate to speak of the ontology of this or that
physical theory. Ontology is about what there is” (Esfeld and Deckert 2017, 12–13).
Hence, they move from the notion of “primitive ontology of a theory T ” to ontology
tout court, developing their metaphysical proposal independently of any particular
theoretical framework.
To achieve this result, the authors introduce a background independent atomistic
ontology which seeks to recover the predictions of classical mechanics, QM and
QFT via the deﬁnition of (1) different dynamical laws to be applied at the relevant
energy/length scales, and (2) appropriate typicality measures.22 More speciﬁcally,
they formulate a relationalist ontology of propertyless, ﬁnite and permanent matter
points uniquely individuated by their mutual distance relations—the only property
of these points is position. The change of these relations, which is taken as a
primitive fact, constitutes the dynamical aspect of the proposal. Referring to this, the
authors suggest a general dynamics of matter points in terms of the ﬁrst derivative
of a given conﬁguration  with respect to time t:
vt(t) = d
dt t, ∀t ∈R.
Clearly, to describe actual modiﬁcations of distance relations at various length
scales, one has to provide the correct laws of motion. Here parameters as masses,
charges, ﬁelds, potentials etc. enter into the scene: they are useful mathematical
tools used to implement the evolution of matter points, consequently they are not
part of the PO but have an essential explanatory function. An explicit example is
provided by the velocity ﬁeld appearing in the guidance equation of BM (cf. Esfeld
and Deckert 2017, equation 3.6), as well as those of classical mechanics and QFT
(cf. equations 3.3 and 4.4 respectively).
Indeed, following this metaphysical project, it is always the dynamics that
changes, while the ontology of matter points remains unaltered in every theory
change from the classical regime to QFT—and possibly beyond it in more fun-
damental theories as e.g. quantum gravity. Such an ontology, thus, is primitive in
a new sense: it is the fundamental ontology of our physical world. These matter
points are (1) ontologically independent from any other entity, and (2) constitute the
mereological basis of every object in the universe at every scale. Hence, contrary
to Bohm and Bell approaches, Esfeld and Deckert’s project excludes the possibility
to have different ontologies at different energy/length scales. Here the PO is chosen
a priori in virtue of the guiding metaphysical principle of ontological parsimony.
This ontology, in fact, is the simplest possibility to explain our macroscopic reality
22 For technical and metaphysical details of this proposal see Esfeld and Deckert (2017, Chapter 2).

7
Beables, Primitive Ontology and Beyond: How Theories Meet the World
109
providing the minimal ingredients to recover spacetime and matter in motion (once
the correct dynamical equations are given).23
This proposal captures the idea of fundamentality expressed in terms of well-
foundedness (cf. Tahko 2018): a dependence chain is said to be well-founded
if and only if it terminates with entities which do not ontologically depend on
other items. In the case of Esfeld and Deckert’s project, matter points close the
ontological dependence chain, and constitute the ultimate ingredients of reality.
Well-foundedness, in turn, is closely related to metaphysical foundationalism, which
can be deﬁned in full generality by saying that every non-fundamental entity
is dependent on some fundamental item—in this case matter points—that fully
account for its being and reality. Hence, Esfeld and Deckert’s project expresses the
idea that reality has an ultimate foundation of matter points to which everything
else is ontologically reduced—the notion of a relative fundamentality as conceived
by Bohm and Bell’s is no longer maintained.24
Let me conclude this section underlying other important differences w.r.t. the PO
programme. Firstly, according to Esfeld and Deckert, space-time and its geometry
emerge from the conﬁguration of matter points, contrary to the substantivalist
perspective of the PO approach, where the primitive ontology of a theory is
interpreted as a decoration of space.25 Secondly, while the PO perspective allows
the postulation of several primitive ontologies, these authors accept the existence
only of particles since in their opinion (1) almost all the evidence coming from the
most advanced experimental research is given in corpuscular terms, and (2) atomism
can be retained not only at the classical level, but also in QM and QFT in virtue of
the existence of BM and Bohmian QFTs. Thus, they exclude every non-particle
primitive ontology. Interestingly, if the PO is a subset of the local beables, then such
an atomistic ontology is a subset of the possible POs; hence, Esfeld and Deckert’s
project imposes stricter criteria to determine what is real w.r.t. the PO approach.
Thirdly, these authors postulate that the number of matter points remain constant
in time. This is an important difference w.r.t. the PO programme where theories
with a variable number of entities have been given. For instance, the number of
particles may not be constant in time, as we can see in particular Bohmian QFTs.
This fact leads to signiﬁcant differences when QFT and its phenomenology is taken
into account.26
23 Esfeld and Deckert argue that parsimony has been a guiding principle in both philosophy and
physics in their historical evolution. Indeed, given a class of theories explaining the very same
set of physical phenomena, we prefer the one(s) able to explain them with the lowest number of
entities and laws.
24 It is obvious that this project rejects Bohm’s inﬁnitism and his objections against a foundational
metaphysics.
25 This expression is used explicitly in Allori et al. (2008).
26 In Dürr et al. (2004a) it is postulated an ontology with a variable particle number. For a
discussion of the various Bohmian QFTs with a particle ontology cf. Oldofredi (2018).

110
A. Oldofredi
7.6
Conclusion
Starting from Bohm’s inﬁnitism and Bell’s theory of local beables, we arrived to the
PO programme and its most recent development, i.e. Esfeld and Deckert’s minimal-
ist ontology. Although the initial steps of this journey are in open contradiction w.r.t.
the latest works proposed within the PO community, there is still some confusion
in literature, where it is not uncommon to conﬂate Bell’s methodological approach
with the PO programme, and the latter with Esfeld and Deckert’s views. Thus, in
this essay I underlined the main differences among these projects.
In particular, we saw that Bell’s methodological approach shows important
similarities with Bohm’s ideas, sharing the belief about the provisional character
of physical theories and a pluralist attitude towards their ontology. Then the PO
programme has been presented emphasizing some important differences w.r.t.
Bell’s and Bohm’s views. Elaborating on Allori’s works, I have pointed out new
divergences between these two schools of thought. Finally, I considered Esfeld and
Deckert’s minimalist ontology, showing (1) the radical difference of this project
w.r.t. Bohm and Bell’s views, and (2) its subtle dissimilarities with the tenets of
the PO programme. In conclusion, I hope to have clariﬁed at least some of the
differences existing among such views, and to have shown to the reader that these
approaches employ divergent metaphysical and methodological principles leading
to contrasting pictures of reality.
Acknowledgments I warmly thank the Editor of this volume, Valia Allori, for her kind invitation
to contribute to this book. I would like to thank Olga Sarno for helpful comments on previous
versions of this manuscript and the reviewers for their positive and constructive feedback. This
work is ﬁnancially supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation (Grant No. 105212-
175971).
References
Allori, V. (2013). Primitive ontology and the structure of fundamental physical theories. In D. Z.
Albert & A. Ney (Eds.), The wave function: Essays on the metaphysics of quantum mechanics
(Chapter 2, pp. 58–75). Oxford University Press.
Allori, V. (2015). Primitive ontology in a nutshell. International Journal of Quantum Foundations,
1, 107–122.
Allori, V. (2018). Scientiﬁc realism and primitive ontology or: The pessimistic meta-induction and
the nature of the wave function. Latosensu, 5(1), 69–76.
Allori, V. (2021). Primitive beable is not local ontology: On the relation between primitive ontology
and local beables. In E. Okon & C. Romero (Eds.), Special issue of Critica: The meptaphysical
foundations of physics. Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México.
Allori, V., Goldstein, S., Tumulka, R., & Zanghì, N. (2008). On the common structure of Bohmian
mechanics and the Ghirardi-Rimini-Weber theory.
British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science, 59(3), 353–389.
Bell, J. S. (1987). Speakable and unspeakable in quantum mechanics. Cambridge University Press.
Bohm, D. (1952). A suggested interpretation of the quantum theory in terms of “hidden” variables.
I, II. Physical Review, 85(2), 166–193.

7
Beables, Primitive Ontology and Beyond: How Theories Meet the World
111
Bohm, D. (1957). Causality and chance in modern physics. Routledge.
Dürr, D., Goldstein, S., Tumulka, R., & Zanghì, N. (2004a). Bohmian mechanics and quantum
ﬁeld theory. Physical Review Letters, 93, 090402.
Dürr, D., Goldstein, S., & Zanghì, N. (1992). Quantum equilibrium and the origin of absolute
uncertainty. Journal of Statistical Physics, 67, 843–907.
Dürr, D., Goldstein, S., & Zanghì, N. (2004b). Quantum equilibrium and the role of operators as
observables in quantum theory. Journal of Statistical Physics, 116, 959–1055.
Esfeld, M. (2014). The primitive ontology of quantum physics: guidelines for an assessment of the
proposals. Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 47, 99–106.
Esfeld, M., & Deckert, D. A. (2017). A minimalist ontology of the natural world. Routledge.
Goldstein, S., Tumulka, R., & Zanghì, N. (2012). The quantum formalism and the GRW formalism.
Journal of Statistical Physics, 149(1), 142–201.
Hubert, M., & Romano, D. (2018). The wave function as a multi-ﬁeld. European Journal for
Philosophy of Science, 8(3), 521–537.
Maudlin, T. (2016).
Local beables and the foundations of physics.
In M. Bell & S. Gao
(Eds.), Quantum nonlocality and reality. 50 years of Bell’s theorem (Chapter 19, pp. 317–330).
Cambridge University Press.
Oldofredi, A. (2018). Particles creation and annihilation: Two Bohmian approaches. Latosensu,
5(1), 77–85.
Smolin, L. (2015). Non-local beables. International Journal of Quantum Foundations, 1, 100–106.
Tahko, T. E. (2018). Fundamentality. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Tumulka, R. (2016). Paradoxes and primitive ontology in collapse theories of quantum mechanics.
In S. Gao (Ed.), Collapse of the wave function: Models, ontology, origin, and implications (pp.
134–153). Cambridge University Press.
van Strien, M. (2019). Pluralism and anarchism in quantum physics: Paul Feyerabend’s writings
on quantum physics in relation to his general philosophy of science. Studies in History and
Philosophy of Science Part A, 80, 72–81.

Chapter 8
All Flash, No Substance?
Elizabeth Miller
Abstract The GRW dynamics propose a novel, relevantly “observer”-independent
replacement for orthodox “measurement”-induced collapse. Yet the tails problem
shows that this dynamical innovation is not enough: a principled alternative to the
orthodox account demands some corresponding ontological advancement as well.
In fact, there are three rival fundamental ontologies on offer for the GRW dynamics.
Debate about the relative merits of these candidates is a microcosm of broader
disagreement about the role of ontology in our physical theorizing. According
to imprimitivists, the GRW dynamics directly describe (only) some (element’s)
undulation in an unfamiliar high-dimensional physical ﬁeld. Primitivists resist this
GRW0 proposal on the grounds that it fails to secure comprehensible contact with
our data about macroscopic objects in ordinary low-dimensional space-time. They
expect an adequate fundamental ontology to include at least some spatiotemporally
localized entities—intuitively, concrete constituents of our familiar macroscopic
landscape. The most compelling case goes by way of distributional basing: min-
imally, primitivists expect a theory’s predictions immediately about spatiotemporal
distributions of fundamental entities to provide a supervenience base for data
about conﬁgurations of macroscopic objects. But while the background intuition
is familiar, the distributional model is surprisingly subtle. Lack of clarity about its
details generates serious confusion for both sides of our debate.
While textbook quantum theory provides a remarkably successful recipe for predict-
ing the outcomes of experiments, its standard interpretation rests on gerrymandered
dynamics in which “observers” making “measurements” play a starring role. This is
the price orthodox quantum mechanics pays to solve—or, more accurately, evade—
E. Miller ()
Brown University, Providence, RI, USA
e-mail: elizabeth_miller@brown.edu
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
V. Allori (ed.), Quantum Mechanics and Fundamentality, Synthese Library 460,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-99642-0_8
113

114
E. Miller
the measurement problem (§1).1 GRW’s dynamical innovation promises a more
principled solution, but a reincarnation of the measurement problem persists for
GRW (§2). On one view, the tails problem proves that our initial innovation is
not enough: we need some ontology to go along with our new dynamics.2 In fact,
there are three candidates on offer: GRW0, GRWm, and GRWf propose three rival
fundamental ontologies for the GRW dynamics. Debate about their relative merits
is a microcosm of broader disagreement about the role of ontology in our physical
theorizing.
One point of dispute is whether an adequate fundamental ontology must or
should include some “local beables”—physical entities localized “at deﬁnite places
and times in the real world” (§3).3 Local beables play a starring role in our data.
Since our antecedent vision of the world features familiar macroscopic objects in
space-time, any comprehensible theory about our world will be at least indirectly
about these. Minimally, predictions directly about the features and behaviors of
its fundamental ontology will provide a supervenience base for facts about “the
arrangement of things in ordinary 3-dimensional space”.4 But Bell imposes a further
continuity constraint: we must recognize, implicit in these predictions, a familiar
“image of our physical world”. Since this image features objects in space-time,
primitivists expect our base itself to include at least some fundamental local beables
(or ﬂobs)—intuitively, concrete constituents of our macroscopic landscape. On the
other side are imprimitivists, who maintain that a theory can do just as well, if not
better, without any ﬂobs at all.
In our microcosm, imprimitivists champion GRW0, which takes the GRW
dynamics to directly describe (only) some (element’s) undulation in a high-
dimensional physical ﬁeld. Primitivists resist GRW0 on the grounds that it fails
1 I am deeply grateful to Ned Hall for encouraging me to develop these ideas and for sharing
many invaluable insights in conversation about them. For further discussion, I am grateful to
David Albert and Nina Emery, as well as to the editor of and referees for this volume. My thanks
also to David Baker, Michael Della Rocca, Heather Demarest, Barry Loewer, Tim Maudlin, Mark
Maxwell, Michaela McSweeney, Alyssa Ney, Jill North, Zeynep Soysal, Scott Sturgeon, Elanor
Taylor, and Alastair Wilson; to members of my philosophy of physics seminars at Brown and Yale;
and to audiences at the Metro Area Philosophy of Science Association (at NYU), the University of
Vermont, and USC.
2 For Maudlin, an ontology is “a collection of items taken to be physically real” by a theory, which
can include familiar macroscopic objects featuring explicitly in our data but only implicitly in
the theory’s own predictions (2013, 143). A theory is stated “in terms of” some subset of its
ontology so understood. I follow, among others, Allori (2013) and Emery (2017) in describing
this subset as the theory’s fundamental ontology; for simplicity, though, I drop the ‘fundamental’
where possible. Some instead use the label ‘primitive ontology’ for this subset, but since others
reserve that for fundamental elements that also meet some further condition, I avoid this term here;
cf. Dürr et al. (1992), Maudlin (2013). Still my own label ‘primitivism’ alludes to discussions of
primitive ontology—as well as to discussions of “spatial primitivism” elsewhere in metaphysics;
cf. Chalmers (2012) 325ff.
3 Bell (1987) 45.
4 Bell (1987) 44.

8
All Flash, No Substance?
115
to secure adequate contact with our data (§4). The most compelling resistance goes
by way of prior commitment to distributional basing, which—in Bell’s words—
links a “piece of matter” from our data to some “galaxy” of constituents within our
theory.5 Interestingly, though, recent arguments for imprimitivism begin from the
premise that distributional basing is a non-starter: even for primitivists, (i) a minimal
supervenience base must include something besides an occurrent distribution of
ﬂobs. Imprimitivists focus on showing that (ii) once we add requisite functional
or dynamical factors to the base, distributional inputs are superﬂuous: GRW0 can
do just as well without any ﬂobs.
Such a focus obscures two concerns. One is that imprimitivists may prove too
much: if (i) and (ii) are true, we risk undermining some motivation (reviewed in
§§1–2) for turning to ontology in the ﬁrst place. The other, and my primary, concern
is that imprimitivists lack an adequate defense of (i). In advancing (i), they conﬂate
distributional supervenience with an implausible claim of geometric sufﬁciency. But
imprimitivists are not alone in their mistake. A lack of clarity about the details
of distributional basing generates serious confusion on both sides of our dispute
(§5). When it comes to recovering Bell’s “image” of our data, it is not enough for
primitivists to know it when they see it: before we can hope for any further progress,
we need careful investigation into their—familiar yet surprisingly subtle—model
of contact between macroscopic objects and “galaxies” of localized constituents.
My aim is to highlight the distributional model’s subtlety—and, in light of that, to
suggest a path forward in disagreement about quantum ontology.
8.1
The GRW Dynamics
Start with Schrödinger’s hapless cat, “penned up in a steel chamber”:
[I]n a Geiger counter there is a tiny bit of radioactive substance, so small, that perhaps in the
course of one hour one of the atoms decays . . . ; if it happens, the counter tube discharges
and through a relay releases a hammer which shatters a small ﬂask of hydrocyanic acid. If
one has left this entire system to itself for an hour, one would say that the cat still lives if
meanwhile no atom has decayed.6
Schrödinger seals the chamber at t0, expecting one of two outcomes after a
tense hour. The textbook recipe promises a cat-ﬂask system with one of two
wavefunctions, |ψdead⟩or |ψalive⟩, when he opens the door at t. In the interim,
it predicts something even more “diabolical”. Between t0 and t, the theory ascribes
neither |ψdead⟩nor |ψalive⟩to Schrödinger’s system; instead, it evolves the system’s
initial state to
1
√
2 |ψdead⟩+
1
√
2 |ψalive⟩just before t. On one hand, it is not clear
what
1
√
2 |ψdead⟩+
1
√
2 |ψalive⟩amounts to physically. On the other, it seems clear
5 Bell (1987) 45.
6 Trimmer (1980) 328, translating Schrödinger (1935).

116
E. Miller
enough what it does not: anything we actually ﬁnd in our world. Schrödinger himself
suggests “the living and the dead cat (pardon the expression) mixed or smeared out
in equal parts”, and, in essence, the orthodox interpretation agrees: Schrödinger’s
mathematical evolution indicates a physical “indeterminacy” only “resolved” by
observation.
More generally, since the textbook recipe frequently yields pre-measurement
functions in superpositions of relevant eigenstates, its standard interpretation says
that systems themselves frequently evolve away from familiar physical states.
Nevertheless, it does not follow that we should expect to observe any unfamiliar
happenings. Given pre-measurement state
1
√
2 |ψdead⟩+
1
√
2 |ψalive⟩, the recipe
promises one of two familiar eigenstates, each with prior probability
 1
√
2

2
= 1
2,
at t. Orthodox quantum mechanics tailors its physical dynamics to underwrite this
guarantee: when Schrödinger opens the chamber, his system’s character transforms
into either a dead state or a live one. By design, systems evolve away from familiar
states only when, and indeed because, we are not looking—luckily, though, our data
only concerns what the world is like when we are.
An alternative from Ghirardi, Rimini, and Weber targets this “measurement”-
induced collapse, proposing a novel stochastic mechanism in its stead.7 The
resulting uniﬁed GRW dynamics yield, as a theorem, something close to the
orthodox story, thereby cohering with the same empirical data. Crucially, though,
there is nothing special about observers or measurements per se. Instead, the GRW
proposal starts with a division of the world into units (particles), each assigned some
probability per unit time of undergoing a hit event. A hit on a particle transforms
the wavefunction representing its position: roughly, we can think of a hit centered
around some point in space-time as prompting our particle to jump there. A larger
system’s probability of undergoing a hit-induced transformation is then a function
of the number of particles interacting within it: a hit on one particle transforms the
wavefunction of the whole.
Schrödinger’s possible outcomes differ with respect to the positions of macro-
scopically many particles: a system in state |ψdead⟩has ﬂask particles strewn
across region Rdead of the chamber ﬂoor, rather than arranged in Ralive. While
any single particle will undergo a hit, on average, only once every 108 years, we
can expect a hit somewhere in our ﬂask—on the order of 1023 particles—every
10−8 seconds.8 The matched coefﬁcients in
1
√
2 |ψdead⟩+
1
√
2 |ψalive⟩indicate that
the next hit is just as likely to be centered in Rdead as in Ralive, amplifying one of two
components. Wavefunctions still spread out between hits, but Schrödinger’s system
is large enough—and so hits frequent enough—that its spreadings are imperceptibly
brief. Thanks to our ﬁrst hit, one of |ψdead⟩and |ψalive⟩stands ampliﬁed at t, and
subsequent hits are highly likely to reiterate that choice.
7 Girardhi et al. (1986); cf. Albert (1992) 80–116, Albert and Loewer (1996), and Lewis (2006).
8 Maudlin (2011) 226–8.

8
All Flash, No Substance?
117
8.2
The Tails Problem and Fundamental Ontology
GRW’s insight is that anything recognizable as an orthodox “measurement” shares
key physical characteristics with Schrödinger’s case. Whenever these characteristics
are present, stochastic hits naturally rein in smeared-out wavefunctions. Importantly,
though, these hits do not transform such wavefunctions into strict eigenstates. Math-
ematically, a hit on a particle multiplies its wavefunction by a Gaussian, amplifying
some component over the rest. But thanks to non-zero “tails” on our multiplying
curve, such ampliﬁcation does not eliminate the others. In Schrödinger’s case, a hit
takes
1
√
2 |ψdead⟩+
1
√
2 |ψalive⟩to some function retaining multiple components,
say
√
0.999|ψdead⟩+
√
0.001 |ψalive⟩, at t. If our pre-hit function was troubling
because it was not a plain eigenstate, this tailed post-hit function should be just
as bad. The natural ﬁx, curtailing the tails, is not a live option: our measurement
problem is back with a vengeance, just reincarnated in a subtler form.9
Strictly, the tails problem proves only that GRW’s initial innovation is not
enough. We ﬁnd our tailed function troubling because we think it amounts to
neither a deﬁnitely dead nor deﬁnitely live cat. Yet this conclusion rests on a further
assumption about the relationship between representation and reality: a system has
a deﬁnite “value” for some given “observable” only if its wavefunction is in a
strict eigenstate of the mathematical operator associated with that observable. We
might avert the tails problem by revising this link, providing a more sophisticated
way of extracting physical outcomes from formal representations. Speciﬁcally, we
need a sort of sophistication that counts
√
0.999|ψdead⟩+
√
0.001 |ψalive⟩as close
enough to |ψdead⟩. One option is stipulation: we could propose a mapping between
almost eigenstates and physical outcomes.10 To provide a principled alternative to
the orthodox account, however, GRW needs to motivate our close enough verdict.
A different approach starts by getting serious about quantum ontology.11 Maybe,
as Schrödinger suggests, mathematical evolution to
1
√
2 |ψdead⟩+
1
√
2 |ψalive⟩
represents some worldly spreading out or other, but what are the entities doing this
spreading, what sort of physical processes are involved, and how does any of this
bear on our data? The eigenstate-eigenvalue link—like any stipulative revision to
it—attempts to map directly from mathematical representations to the recognizable
macroscopic outcomes at issue in our data. In doing so, it allegedly skips a crucial
step, obscuring the mediating role of ontology in our theorizing. Compare a classical
case: a candidate theory assigns formal state C to the current contents of my ofﬁce. It
also issues predictions about those contents later, assigning mathematically distinct
9 In brief, “tailless” collapses threaten the conservation of energy, since they reduce uncertainty
about position without any compensatory increase in uncertainty about (velocity and so) energy;
cf. Albert (1992) 78.
10 Albert and Loewer (1996) and Lewis (2006) discuss this strategy.
11 I learned the term ‘serious ontology’ from John Heil; cf. Heil (2012).

118
E. Miller
C* to them at t. I leave my ofﬁce, planning to return at t. Should I expect to ﬁnd the
furniture rearranged when I do?
To answer, it is not enough to know that our theory’s predictions have some
bearing on the contents of my ofﬁce. We need to know what its mathematical
states directly represent, and how these underwriting physical happenings relate
to our observable outcomes. In fact, C depicts an arrangement of particles in my
ofﬁce. C* depicts another, differing with respect to, say, the relative positions of
three constituents. Equipped with this ontological insight, we can opine: I should
not expect anything new when I return. Our distinct mathematical states represent
different physical happenings, but so slight a difference at the level of particles will
not show up in our macroscopic data. In this sense, C* is close enough to C: we
can recognize Bell’s image of my desk in both. To dissolve the tails problem, we
need to issue the same sort of verdict:
√
0.999 |ψdead⟩+
√
0.001 |ψalive⟩is close
enough to |ψdead⟩, since they depict happenings with the same (unfortunate) import
for our data. For this, we need some new and improved—orat least some, reasonably
clear—ontology for the GRW dynamics.
8.3
GRW0 and Primitivism
According to Bell, orthodox disregard for ontology proves especially troubling
once we note that the wavefunction for my desk, Schrödinger’s ﬂask, or any other
macroscopic system “lives in a much bigger space” than the one we ordinarily
take ourselves to inhabit.12 Perhaps, then, any complete interpretive backstory for
the textbook recipe will include some physically high-dimensional ingredient(s).
Regardless, Bell and likeminded primitivists expect it to include at least some
ﬂobs in “ordinary 3-dimensional space” as well. Since science promises us deeper,
even revisionary, insight into our world, characters in the scientiﬁc story may be
antecedently unfamiliar to us. Still, they cannot be so unfamiliar that we fail to
recognize the story as about our world—Bell’s familiar “arrangement of things”—
at all.
GRW0 proposes a thoroughly non-local fundamental ontology for the GRW
dynamics. On the GRW0 proposal, these dynamics depict (only) some (element’s)
undulation in a high-dimensional ﬁeld, a physical counterpart to the mathematical
space in which the universal wavefunction resides. Ordinary space-time is not
a straightforward subspace of this realm: concrete happenings are aspects of,
projections from, or patterns in some fundamental affairs “outside” of our familiar
milieu. GRW0 furnishes a complete supervenience basis for our data: we can ﬁnd
some mapping between various high-dimensional affairs and familiar macroscopic
outcomes.13 According to primitivists, however, this is not enough: GRW0 does
12 Bell (1987) 44.
13 It is “informationally” complete in the sense of Maudlin (2007a).

8
All Flash, No Substance?
119
not afford the right sort of contact with our data: at the very least, some alternative
including ﬂobs can—and in fact does—do better.
Before we ask whether
√
0.999 |ψdead⟩+
√
0.001 |ψalive⟩and |ψdead⟩amount
to the same outcome, we need to recognize both as concerning fundamental
happenings that bear, somehow or other, on outcomes here in the lab. But why
should these particular undulations tell us about the contents of Schrödinger’s
chamber here, rather than about, say, the furniture in my ofﬁce, or some distant
conﬁguration of elm trees? Not because the undulations are here too: GRW0 has no
fundamental happenings here—or, indeed, anywhere in space-time. Minimally, we
need to say which high-dimensional happenings bear on which pieces of data, but
we started down the road of ontology looking for something better than stipulation.
Rather than turning back, primitivists urge us to keep going. GRW0 shows that
not just any ontological ingredients will do: we need at least some ﬂobs in the mix.
But not just any localized additions will do either. Consider (ﬁctional) GRW0+,
which supplements GRW0’s high-dimensional happenings with arbitrary ﬂob o.
Like GRW0, GRW0+ furnishes at least one supervenience basis for our data. Unlike
GRW0, it furnishes at least one basis also comprising a localized ingredient(s). Yet
o’s addition does not secure any relevant advantage over GRW0. Intuitively, o is
a mere dangler: while all relevant facts supervene on a base including it, they do
so only because they already supervene on GRW0’s high-dimensional happenings
alone. Primitivists expect their ﬂobs to play a more essential, distinctive role in
securing contact with our data.
Whatever else it may comprise, that data includes facts about the gross conﬁg-
uration of macroscopic objects within, or the gross distribution of matter across,
space-time. Primitivists expect such facts to be ﬁxed entirely by their theory’s
predictions just about some underwriting ﬂobs. Our theory may bring other—
perhaps non-local, even non-spatiotemporal—ingredients along for the ride. Still,
these play a comparatively indirect role in “determining” our data: in Maudlin’s
terms, their effects are “screened off” by our “[p]rimary” mediating ﬂobs.14
Intuitively, other fundamental ingredients can causally or physically inﬂuence these
ﬂobs, but they alone directly ground our data.
For this intuitive distinction to have any bite, primitivists must circumscribe
those predictions relevantly about their candidate ﬂobs. Otherwise, GRW0+ could
count as screening off all our data by ascribing some complicated but nominally
“local” state—merely represented, in our theory, by the universal wavefunction—to
o alone. A “Democritean” ﬁx blocks this move: the relevant theoretical predictions
about primary local beables ascribe (only) spatiotemporal positions to otherwise
qualitatively indistinguishable elements.15 To make contact with familiar facts
14 According to Maudlin, “if we imagine keeping the behavior of the Primary Ontology ﬁxed but
altering the behavior of the Secondary Ontology, the data would remain the same” (2013, 144).
15 Oppenheim and Putnam (1958) 16 n. 18; cf. Ney (2013). Alternatively, we can think of these
predictions as ascribing fundamental states of “occupation” to points or small regions of space-time
itself.

120
E. Miller
about my ofﬁce, our theory need not explicitly mention desks. Still, it should
describe at least something here in Rofﬁce, where we antecedently take my desk
to be. Whatever features this something may or may not turn out to have on our
scientiﬁc story, it at least should be distinguishable from what the theory describes
over there in Rempty, where we ﬁnd no macroscopic objects at all.
Minimally, then, our theory should depict some elements in Rofﬁce without
corresponding counterparts in Rempty. We can extend this reasoning to smaller
scales. Consider the edge of my desk here: some materially occupied subregions
of Rofﬁce abut comparatively vacant neighbors. This contrast at the macroscopic
level should show up, somehow or other, as some difference in corresponding
contents at the level of fundamental ontology. What results is a primitivist paradigm
of distributional basing. Rather than stipulating some link between data about the
macroscopic conﬁguration of my ofﬁce and discontinuous fundamental happenings
in GRW0, primitivists hope to draw on antecedently familiar continuity between
conﬁgurations of macroscopic objects and underwriting distributions of concrete
constituents. Primitivists can disagree amongst themselves about the nature of this
continuity, and so about further metaphysical or epistemological constraints on the
base.16 Minimally, though, they expect data about macroscopic conﬁgurations to
supervene on the theory’s distribution of ﬂobs in space-time.
8.4
GRWm and GRWf
Primitivists are spoiled for choice. There are two alternatives to GRW0, each
proposing some ﬂobs for the GRW dynamics. But this choice also generates
controversy, since even for primitivists, not just any localized additions guarantee
a relevant advantage over GRW0. Maudlin argues that GRWm does not secure the
right sort of contact with our data: it does not provide even a minimal distributional
supervenience base for “the arrangement of things in ordinary 3-dimensional
space”. Behind both Maudlin’s original argument and Albert’s criticism of it is
common confusion about what exactly the distributional model demands.
According to GWRm, reality is not ultimately particulate. Instead, each “par-
ticle” from our initial presentation of the dynamics gets associated with some
portion of continuous mass density. Our dynamics now depict evolving distributions
of mass density in ordinary space over time: smooth temporal evolution of a
particle’s wave function corresponds to a spreading out of mass density. What
we originally described as a particle undergoing a hit centered within a region
involves consolidation of associated mass density there. As before, a hit on one part
of the systems transforms the wavefunction for the whole: Schrödinger’s system
in state
√
0.999 |ψdead⟩+
√
0.001|ψalive⟩has much more of its mass density in
Rdead than in Ralive. Given our transformed coefﬁcients, subsequent hits are likely to
16 For discussion of candidate constraints, Allori (2013), Ney (2013), and Emery (2017).

8
All Flash, No Substance?
121
consolidate mass density in Rdead, leaving Ralive’s shadow to spread and thin. What
about the lingering |ψalive⟩? Our Gaussian tails guarantee some thin smear of mass
density in Ralive, but, allegedly, that smear does not show up at the level of our data:
our tailed function is close enough to |ψdead⟩to yield a familiar outcome.
Maudlin illustrates his doubts about this last step with the case of a pointer
on a dial. If we like, we can imagine the pointer’s possible orientations, A and
B, representing dead and alive states of Schrödinger’s system, but for now just
consider the pointer itself: its wavefunction spreads from an initial ready state,
splitting brieﬂy into
1
√
2 |in RA⟩+
1
√
2 |in RB⟩, before yielding
√
0.999 |in RA⟩+
√
0.001 |in RB⟩at t. Then:
On the assumption that . . . [RB’s] small (and ever shrinking) mass density can be safely
neglected, the post-hit state [
√
0.999 |in RA⟩+
√
0.001 |in RB⟩] would be as satisfactory
in accounting for our beliefs about the outcome as it is in the case of predictive certainty
[|in RA⟩].
But on what basis, exactly, can the small mass density be neglected? After all, that mass
density is something, and it has the same shape and . . . behavior and dispositions to behave
as it would have had if the hit had left it with the lion’s share of mass density.17
Our data includes one pointer at A, with no macroscopic counterpart at B, but
GRWm depicts two portions of mass density.
According to Maudlin, these portions match in all relevant respects, even at t.
Indeed, the actual distribution of mass density across both RA and RB matches, in all
such respects, what we would ﬁnd in the case of
√
0.001 |in RA⟩+
√
0.999 |in RB⟩.
Of course, RB’s actual mass density is supposed to be too thin to amount to
a macroscopic object, but on what “basis” can we discount it? In principle, we
might introduce some concentration threshold: only RA contains any recognizable
distribution of portions with thickness greater than ρ at t. If we stipulate some value
for ρ, however, we risk undermining our motivation for introducing ﬂobs in the ﬁrst
place: GRW0 can just as well stipulate some mapping between its discontinuous
fundamental happenings and macroscopic outcomes.
Albert and likeminded imprimitivists share Maudlin’s risk assessment, but they
embrace this consequence for GRW0. They take Maudlin’s case to point to a
deeper problem with primitivism itself. According to Albert, familiar objects are
distinguished, in part, by characteristic behaviors and dispositions. As a result,
everyone, even primitivists, must accept: (i) an adequate basis for our data will
specify more than the occurrent distribution of fundamental ontology. Albert takes
Maudlin’s reference to “behavior and dispositions to behave” to mark his own
explicit acceptance of (i). On Albert’s diagnosis, a confused ﬁxation with distri-
butional factors gets in the way: Maudlin implicitly expects “whatever is shaped
like” a pointer to be a pointer, and so mistakenly assumes that his similarly shaped
portions of mass density have the same dispositions at t.18 Thanks to the GRW
17 Maudlin (2010) 135; his emphasis.
18 Albert (2015) 151.

122
E. Miller
dynamics, only Maudlin’s thicker portion is actually disposed to consolidate—its
thinner counterpart is likely to spread and fade.
According to Albert, the same sort of confusion lying behind Maudlin’s error
in this case is also what motivates primitivists’ attachment to fundamental local
beables in the ﬁrst place. Primitivists fail to appreciate (i) because they overempha-
size distributional considerations. If we take (i) to heart, though, we ﬁnd that GRW0
can do just as well as its rivals. That is: (ii) once we have functional information
in the base, distributional facts are, at best, superﬂuous.19 It is precisely because of
(ii), however, that primitivists should not, and Maudlin plausibly does not, grant (i)
to begin with: primitivists hope to secure an advantage over GRW0 by providing a
distributional basis.
As Maudlin observes, even if we need further factors to distinguish those
distributions that amount to genuine pointers from mere pointer-like objects, such
functionalism is beside the point in his case: pointer or not, GRWm depicts
“something” macroscopic in RB. Muddying the waters throughout Albert and
Maudlin’s exchange are their differing uses of the term ‘disposition’. Albert and
his fellow imprimitivists are concerned with causal or functional dispositions. Yet
Maudlin instead seems to have in mind the “arrangement, order; [or] relative
position of the parts or elements of a whole”.20 In comparing “dispositions” in his
sense, then, Maudlin is quite plausibly afﬁrming his commitment to distributional
basing. After all, he rejects GRWm because he thinks it fails to mark any requisite
difference in the arrangements of ﬂobs across RA and RB.
Maudlin’s own response is to swap GRWm’s continuous mass density for
GRWf’s discrete event ontology. The physical correlate of a hit centered around
some point in space-time is now a “ﬂash” there. Our matched weights in
1
√
2 |in RA⟩+
1
√
2 |in RB⟩signify that RA and RB are equally likely to host the
next ﬂash. In fact, a hit in RA takes us to
√
0.999|in RA⟩+
√
0.001 |in RB⟩
at t. Our transformed coefﬁcients indicate that the next ﬂash is highly likely
(probability .999) to be in RA as well. The GRW dynamics ensure that further
hits are likely to reiterate this choice. Crucially, no shadows haunt GRWf: where
GRWm looks at
√
0.999 |in RA⟩+
√
0.001 |in RB⟩and posits a thin but sure smear
of mass density in RB, GRWf posits only some probability of a ﬂash—and then
a cascade of ﬂashes—there. But probabilities of ﬂashes are neither ﬂashes nor
pointers nor shadows of these. Our tailed function is close enough to an eigenstate:
√
0.999 |in RA⟩+
√
0.001 |in RB⟩depicts a galaxy in RA—and none in RB.
19 Cf. Rubenstein (forthcoming).
20 OED online (2020); thanks to Maudlin (p.c.) for conﬁrming. Compare Maudlin’s characteriza-
tion of the Humean mosaic as “determined by nothing more than the values of the individual pixels
plus their spatial disposition relative to one another . . . ” (2007b, 51), and his claim that (for our
primitivists) “the disposition of the local ontology screens off the quantum state from the data”
(2013, 148).

8
All Flash, No Substance?
123
8.5
Massy Gluts and Flashy Gaps
Since GRWf has “no ‘low density’ or ‘low intensity’ ﬂash-sequences to be ignored
or discounted or argued away”, Maudlin takes it to avoid the “interpretive problems”
that stymie GRWm.21 Yet GRWf’s comparative sparseness also ensures that,
sometimes, GRWf has mere probabilities where GRWm has sure non-shadowy
mass. On the GRWf account, wavefunctions underdetermine occurrent distributions
of ﬂashes. Given
√
0.999|in RA⟩+
√
0.001 |in RB⟩at t, we can expect another
ﬂash in RA very shortly. Still, its actual occurrence is determined by GRW’s
stochastic dynamics. In the interim, however brief, we have no ﬂashes at all in RA.
Indeed, if ﬂashes are truly instantaneous, then GRWf promises many entirely empty
moments, amid some barely ﬂashy accompaniment. GRWf virtually guarantees
some unfolding cascade in RA, but it does not promise a multi-ﬂash galaxy at any
moment. Where GRWm has some sure, thick mass density in RA, GRWf offers—if
we are lucky—a single ﬂash.
Flashy gaps generate a challenge for GRWf analogous to the challenge shadowy
mass density generates for GRWm. One potential objection to GRWm starts from
1
√
2 |in RA⟩+
1
√
2 |in RB⟩, before our initial hit in Maudlin’s case: we have two
exactly matched portions of mass density at time t-. But this cannot be a basis on
which to prefer GRWf, because it is in the same boat:
1
√
2 |in RA⟩+
1
√
2 |in RB⟩
depicts two equally vacant distributions of ﬂashes at t-. In fact, the situation for
GRWf is worse:
√
0.999|in RA⟩+
√
0.001 |in RB⟩at t likely depicts two vacant
distributions after our hit as well.
Since Maudlin takes GRWf to avoid the “interpretive problems” that plague
GRWm, the image of our data need not comprise some single pointer-shaped
distribution of ﬂobs at t. Our data concerns humanly detectable happenings, so
perhaps what we need is a recognizable distribution across some suitably extended
temporal interval. One option is to link RA’s momentary state to some broader
distribution of ﬂobs. Another is to deny that there are any momentary macroscopic
states at all: our data concerns conﬁgurations spread over space and time. Either
way, once we shift our attention to an extended interval, we can ﬁnd a difference in
the decorations of RA and RB. But we also ﬁnd at least some difference between
GRWm’s portions of mass density: though
1
√
2 |in RA⟩+
1
√
2 |in RB⟩depicts a
momentary match, the contents of RB soon spread and fade.
For Maudlin, of course, this is not the right sort of difference to underwrite
our macroscopic data: thick or thin, GRWm still predicts “something” in RB,
even after our hit. His remark might seem to suggest that GRWf, unlike GRWm,
satisﬁes the following condition: a region of space is macroscopically vacant only
if there are no ﬂobs in it during some relevant interval. Even in the classical case,
though, we learn that “empty” space is not devoid of occupants. In a large enough
region, a single ﬂash, or even some sparse scattering of ﬂashes, does not sufﬁce
21 Maudlin (2010) 138–9.

124
E. Miller
for anything macroscopic at all. Instead, perhaps the claim is that for any relevant
region of space-time R, R is macroscopically vacant only if there is no recognizably
shaped distribution of ﬂobs there. Even after our ﬁrst hit, GRWm retains two
recognizably pointer-shaped distributions, only one of which is thick enough to
be a genuine macroscopic object. According to Maudlin, GRWm needs some basis
on which to discount some recognizably shaped distributions as macroscopically
inconsequential. In contrast, perhaps any recognizably pointer-shaped galaxy of
ﬂashes amounts to something macroscopic for GRWf.
While our choice between continuous and discrete ontologies can obscure this
point, GRWf’s appearance of an advantage arises from ambiguity in such talk of
shape. Trace the outline of Maudlin’s distribution of mass density in RA over some
interval. Now imagine ﬁlling in this outline with ﬂashes. How many ﬂashes does it
take to yield a recognizably pointer-shaped distribution? Perhaps any distribution
“consistent” with our outline—even just one ﬂash within this boundary—counts
as pointer-shaped in some minimal sense. But not every distribution that counts as
pointer-shaped in this sense does—or should—amount to a genuine macroscopic
object. Perhaps Maudlin has some more robust notion in mind: a relevantly pointer-
shaped distribution of ﬂashes is not only minimally consistent with our outline but
also sufﬁciently clustered to show up in our data. But then GRWf and GRWm
are in the same boat: both must distinguish some special, sufﬁciently concentrated
candidates from among all minimally pointer-shaped ones.
Perhaps this result offers Albert a way of shoring up his case for (i): GRWf
and GRWm are in the same boat, because neither has any advantage over GRW0.
On Albert’s diagnosis, implicit commitment to geometric sufﬁciency motivates
primitivists’ attachment to local beables. As Maudlin himself points out, however,
GRWm violates this condition. Since GRWf is in the same boat, it does too: On what
basis can either one discount insufﬁciently concentrated distributions? According to
Albert, the right response is to give up on the expectation of distributional basing:
even primitivists must agree that we need more than the occurrent distribution of
fundamental ontology in the base. But then GRW0 can do just as well without any
localized fundamental ontology at all.
Alternatively, maybe GRWf and GRWm are in the same boat because both
offer a relevant advantage over GRW0. According to Maudlin, GRWf does better
than GRW0. If GRWm is in the same boat, then—despite his own suspicions to
the contrary—it does too. To defend this alternative, primitivists must separate
distributional basing from any implausible claim of geometric sufﬁciency. Recall
our primitivists’ motivation for introducing fundamental local beables in the ﬁrst
place: roughly, they hope to link macroscopic conﬁgurations to arrangements of
localized constituents (§3). Our data includes a single macroscopic pointer, at A,
over some relevant interval. The tip of our pointer extends through small region RA1,
while some neighbor R is (comparatively) empty. Primitivists expect our theory to
predict at least some ﬂobs in RA1 without any counterparts in R. Still, more ﬂobs in
RA1 is consistent with some—sparser—ﬂobs in R.
In Maudlin’s case, though, GRWm does mark this sort of distributional differ-
ence, even between his similarly shaped portions of mass density. To make the

8
All Flash, No Substance?
125
parallel with GRWf vivid, imagine GRWm’s mass density packaged in thin layers:
mass density gets “painted on” a region in a series of discrete strokes. We can
have some difference in distributions—whether massy “strokes” or ﬂashes—across
RA and RB, without any difference in “shape” per se. Neither GRWf nor GRWm
counts every minimally pointer-shaped distribution as a macroscopic object—but
nor should they. The key question for primitivists is whether this result demotes
both to the level of stipulation or, alternatively, whether both preserve continuity
that secures their alleged advantage over GRW0. Primitivists expect at least minimal
(“global”) supervenience between our data and spatiotemporal distributions of
ﬂobs.22 Intuitively, they expect a special link between our data about one part of
the world and some distribution in that part. To make progress, though, primitivists
need to clarify what exactly, beyond minimal supervenience, their model demands.
GRWf’s sparseness underscores this need. For whatever exactly distributional
continuity comes to, the distribution of ﬂobs just within a region does not, in
general, metaphysically sufﬁce for its macroscopic state on the GRWf account.
For small regions, this result is unsurprising: it is just the spatial analogue of our
earlier point about temporal sparseness. While there is a pointer in RA through
some interval, subregion RA* may well contain no ﬂashes at all. So, if RA* counts as
macroscopically occupied at all, it is because of some distribution extending beyond
its bounds. But now consider larger RA: this hosts the broader distribution D that,
intuitively, makes up our pointer at A. Perhaps within our actual world, any ﬂashy
duplicate of D amounts to something macroscopic. Yet consider another (near)
world w, which hosts some duplicate of D in much ﬂashier surroundings. Does
this—indeed, should this—duplicate amount to any macroscopic object? Surely, it
depends: not if even “empty” space is densely decorated in w. In that case, after
all, D is not even recognizably pointer-shaped in anything but our minimal sense.
Plausibly, in fact, any relevant further sense is essentially contrastive: what it takes
to be sufﬁciently dense, in any given case, may itself depend on some more global
distribution of ﬂobs.
References
Albert, D. (1992). Quantum mechanics and experience. Harvard UP.
Albert, D. (2015). After physics. Harvard UP.
Albert, D., & Loewer, B. (1996). Tails of Schrödinger’s cat. In R. Clifton (Ed.), Perspectives on
quantum reality: Non-relativistic, relativistic, and ﬁeld-theoretic (pp. 81–92). Kluwer.
Albert, D., & Ney, A. (2013). The wave function: Essays on the metaphysics of quantum mechanics.
Oxford UP.
22 Cf. Kim (1987). A referee asks how distributional supervenience relates to Humean superve-
nience (HS). There is much more to say, but prima facie, primitivists can remain neutral on HS,
which claims supervenience for all facts about the world, including causal and nomological facts,
not just facts about macroscopic conﬁgurations. Cf. Maudlin (2007b), Maudlin (2015), Miller
(2018).

126
E. Miller
Allori, V. (2013). Primitive ontologies and the structure of fundamental physical theories. In Albert
& Ney (eds.) pp. 58–75.
Bell, J. (1987). Are there quantum jumps? In C. Kilmster (Ed.), Schrödinger: Centenary
celebration of a polymath (pp. 41–52). Cambridge UP.
Chalmers, D. (2012). Constructing the world. Oxford UP.
Dürr, D., Goldstein, S., & Zanghì, N. (1992). Quantum equilibrium and the origin of absolute
uncertainty. Journal of Statistical Physics, 67, 843–907.
Emery, N. (2017). Against radical quantum ontologies. Philosophical and Phenomenological
Research, 95(3), 564–591.
Ghirardi, D., Rimini, A., & Weber, T. (1986). Uniﬁed dynamics for microscopic and macroscopic
systems. Physical Review D, 34, 470–491.
Heil, J. (2012). The universe as we ﬁnd it. Oxford UP.
Kim, J. (1987). ‘Strong’ and ‘global’ supervenience revisited. Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research, 48, 315–326.
Lewis, P. (2006). GRW: A case study in quantum ontology. Philosophy Compass, 1(2), 224–244.
Maudlin, T. (2007a). Completeness, supervenience and ontology. Journal of Physics A: Mathemat-
ical and Theoretical, 40, 3151–3171.
Maudlin, T. (2007b). Why be humean? In The metaphysics within physics (pp. 51–77). Oxford UP.
Maudlin, T. (2010). Can the world be only Wavefunction? In S. Saunders et al. (Eds.), Many
worlds?: Everett, quantum theory, and reality (pp. 121–143). Oxford UP.
Maudlin, T. (2011). Quantum non-locality and relativity (3rd ed.). Wiley-Blackwell.
Maudlin, T. (2013). The nature of the quantum state. In Albert & Ney (eds.), pp. 126–53.
Maudlin, T. (2015). The universal and the local in quantum theory. Topoi, 34, 349–358.
Miller, E. (2018). Local qualities. Oxford Studies in Metaphysics, 11, 224–242.
Ney, A. (2013). Ontological reduction and the wave function ontology. In Albert & Ney (eds.), pp.
168–83.
OED online. (2020). Disposition, n. https://www.oed.com/view/Entry/55123?redirectedFrom=
disposition. Accessed 19 Sept.
Oppenheim, P., & Putnam, H. (1958). Unity of science as a working hypothesis. In H. Feigl et al.
(Eds.), Minnesota studies in the philosophy of science (Vol. 2, pp. 3–36). Minnesota UP.
Rubenstein, E. (forthcoming). Grounded shadows, groundless ghosts. The British Journal for the
Philosophy of Science.
Schrödinger, E. (1935). Die gegenwärtige Situation in der Quantenmechanik. Naturwissenschaften,
23, 807–812.
Trimmer, J. (1980). The present situation in quantum mechanics: A translation of Schrödinger’s
“cat paradox” paper. Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, 124, 323–338.

Chapter 9
Does the Primitive Ontology of GRW
Rest on Shaky Ground?
Cristian Mariani
It’s all about gelatin. An electron can be here and there and
that’s it.
Angelo Bassi, 2020, Interview for the NY Times
Abstract The notion of Primitive Ontology (PO) has recently received a great
deal of attention in the quantum foundations literature. The PO is the fundamental
ontology posited by a certain theory, what is out there in the world which makes
the predictions of theory true. Can we make sense of the idea that the PO is
indeterminate? And if we do, would this idea be explanatory useful in some way, or
would it simply lead us too far from the very reasons we had to posit a PO in the
ﬁrst place? As I will show in this paper, these issues become of crucial importance
when it comes to understanding what the ontology of the Mass Density approach
to GRW (GRWM) ultimately looks like. Proponents of the PO are never explicit
in claiming that the determinacy is a requirement for the notion, yet arguably this
is entailed by one of the criteria for a suitable PO, namely its being always well
deﬁned in every point in 3D space. I will argue that this requirement is however not
satisﬁed in GRWM. The conclusion I will draw is that the notion of indeterminate
PO should be taken seriously, for it is suggested by one the major interpretations of
quantum mechanics.
Keywords GRW · Mass density · Primitive ontology · Quantum mechanics ·
Quantum indeterminacy
C. Mariani ()
Institut Néel (CNRS), Grenoble, France
Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
e-mail: cristianmariani@ub.edu
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
V. Allori (ed.), Quantum Mechanics and Fundamentality, Synthese Library 460,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-99642-0_9
127

128
C. Mariani
9.1
Introduction
Some of the major issues in both contemporary philosophy of science and naturalis-
tic metaphysics come from the conceptual puzzles arising from quantum mechanics
(QM). And in particular, they come from the fact that this theory seems to challenge
many of our classical intuitions, thus making it hard to be reconciled with the
everyday picture of the world. Experiments have revealed that microscopic particles
sometimes behave as if they can be located in two places at the same time, that the
precise values of certain pairs of quantities cannot jointly be assigned, that certain
properties are not possessed independently of observation, or that instantaneous
interactions at a distance are allowed. A long standing, still lively tradition has taken
all of this to suggest, if not entail, that the standard reductionist program should be
abandoned, and even that novel forms of realism have to be developed if we wish to
understand the quantum world.
It is against this background that we can understand the reasons why the notion
of Primitive Ontology (PO) has been advocated (Allori et al., 2008), and why it is
recently gaining more and more attention. The inspiration for this approach comes
from Bell’s (1987) reﬂection on the idea of be-ables, a term coined to be clearly
distinguished from the notion of observ-ables (p. 52).
‘Observables’ must be made, somehow, out of beables. The theory of local beables should
contain, and give precise physical meaning to, the algebra of local observables. (p. 52)
As the term itself indicates, the be-ables of a theory should represent what exists
in the world, the ontology:
The beables of the theory are those entities in it which are, at least tentatively, to be taken
seriously, as corresponding to something real. (p. 234)
While introducing this notion, Bell expresses full agreement with Bohr’s idea that
every experience and physical evidence must be accounted for in classical terms,
and claims that “it is the ambition of the theory of local beables to bring these
‘classical terms’ into the equations” (p. 52). So it is quite natural to suppose that
according to Bell whatever beables a certain theory has, these must be described
in classical terms. The PO program aims at developing Bell’s insights into a full-
ﬂedged approach to the ontology of physical theories, be them quantum or not.
Here is Allori (2016), summing up nicely the guiding ideas behind the view:
According to this approach, any satisfactory fundamental physical theory, if taken from a
realist point of view, contains a metaphysical hypothesis about what constitutes physical
objects, the PO, which lives in three-dimensional space or space-time and constitutes the
building blocks of everything else. In the formalism of the theory, the variables representing
the PO are called the primitive variables. In addition, there are other variables necessary to
implement the dynamics for the primitive variables: these non-primitive variables could be
interpreted as law-like in character. Once the primitive and the non-primitive variables are
speciﬁed, one can construct an explanatory scheme based on the one that is already in use
in the classical framework. (p. 177)

9
Does the Primitive Ontology of GRW Rest on Shaky Ground?
129
According to Allori, a suitable PO has to be (i) microscopic, (ii) well localized
in 3D space, and (iii) appropriately distinguished from the dynamical variables of
the theory. The criterion (ii) plays a crucial role, for it is meant to avoid problematic
states of superposition at the level of the fundamental ontology. Once again, this
idea traces back to Bell’s claim (Bell, 1987) that the “beables are those which are
deﬁnitely associated with particular space-time regions” (p. 234, emphasis mine). If
met, the requirements (i)–(iii) would ground a classical reductive explanation of the
behaviour of the macroscopic ontology as determined by the behaviour of the PO.
The overall goal of this approach is then to show that such a classical explanatory
scheme, which is not dissimilar from the one we can ﬁnd in classical physics, can be
obtained in most of the live interpretations of QM (Allori, 2013; Allori et al., 2008).
And if this is true, as proponents of this approach claim, then arguably we would
have little reasons to completely revise the way we think about physics and its place
in our understanding of nature.
How far this program can go, and especially how classical, in Bell’s sense, can
the PO be, is highly debated. The two major lines of criticisms seem to point in
opposite directions. On the one hand, it has been argued that the notion of PO is
too general and empty to be useful when applied to concrete cases, especially if we
consider that every theory that has been proposed as an example of the PO scheme
is not a fundamental theory (e.g. Wallace 2018, p. 20). On the other hand, it has
been stressed that some of the criteria for a suitable PO are too strict, and may not
be satisﬁed in QM (e.g. Myrvold 2018, p. 115).1 In this paper I will be focusing
on this latter line of criticism, and especially on whether the criteria according to
which the PO is “deﬁnitely associated with particular space-time regions”, to use
Bell words, is indeed satisﬁed within the context of the Mass Density approach to
GRW (Ghirardi et al. 1995, GRWM). Proponents of the PO approach have argued
that GRWM provides a good exempliﬁcation of their view, and yet, as I will show,
the PO in this theory cannot always be ascribed a deﬁnite localisation in 3D space.
Once the desiderata of deﬁniteness for the PO is put into question, it becomes
legitimate to ask whether the notion we are left with does indeed serve the purposes
for which it was developed. The very idea of an indeterminate PO, as I will be
calling it, may seem to contradict our intuitions. The reason is probably that the
PO is the fundamental ontology according to a given theory, and while we may be
tempted to accept indeterminacy at some derivative level of reality (Mariani, 2021),
it is hard to entertain the thought that the world is indeterminate at its fundamental
level. However, I will suggest that if this idea is supported by one of the major
interpretations of QM, and if it proves to be both consistent and explanatory useful,
then a good naturalistic attitude should prevent us from ruling it out just based on
our intuitions.
1 I note that in this context quantum non-locality also poses a very serious threat since, as Bell
himself claimed, “it may well be that there just are no local beables in the most serious theories”
(Bell 1987, p. 235). Here I will not be concerned with this issue.

130
C. Mariani
Roadmap In Sect. 9.2 I analyse how the Mass Density ontology of GRWM has been
interpreted within the PO framework. In Sect. 9.3 I argue that a crucial feature of the
Mass Density is that the PO is not always well localised in 3D space. In Sect. 9.4
I suggest the notion of indeterminate PO as a way to understand the ontology of
GRWM.
9.2
The PO Approach to GRW
The guiding idea behind the spontaneous collapse models such as GRW (Ghirardi
et al., 1986), is to modify the Schrödinger’s dynamical equation of standard QM by
adding a stochastic and non-linear element to it. This allows for an explanation of
the wave function collapse within the dynamics itself, and provides what Ghirardi
Rimini and Weber called a “uniﬁed dynamics for microscopic and macroscopic
phenomena” (Ghirardi et al., 1986). In theories like GRW, the collapse is an
objective, physical mechanics, and contrary to standard QM, we need no obscure
reference to observers, measurements, or experimental apparata in order to explain
it. Given the dynamics of the theory, collapses happen spontaneously and randomly
with a certain probability rate per unit time.2 The rate is such that for microscopic
systems (like nucleons) the collapse of the wave function is incredibly rare, whereas
for macroscopic objects made of a large number of mutually entangled particles, the
collapse is practically certain to occur in a very short time. In this way, the theory
allows to explain why microscopic objects can show quantum behaviour (such as
interference pattern in a double slit experiment), and at the same time why at the
macroscopic scale this behaviour has no effect.
A major problem with any spontaneous collapse model is that the dynamical
evolution never evolves into eigenstates of the relevant operators, but only very
close to them. When a GRW collapse occurs, the wave function gets multiplied by
a Gaussian that localizes the system with a certain accuracy. And although a large
part of the post-collapse state is localized in a small portion of space, the system
is also spread inﬁnitely in both sides of the tails of the Gaussian. This is known as
tails problem, and it is among the most discussed issues in the literature on GRW
(for an overview, see Lewis (2003), and McQueen (2015)). The main strategy to
solve this problem is to change the standard way of ascribing properties to physical
systems starting from the quantum state, namely the Eigenstate-Eigenvalue Link
(EEL). Several revisions to the EEL have been proposed in order to explain the
deﬁniteness of experimental outcome in GRW (Albert and Loewer 1996; Monton
2004; Lewis 2016, inter alia), and despite the differences between them, the general
2 This is achieved by introducing two constants for the spontaneous localization, one for its
accuracy in space (α = 10−5cm), and one for its frequency in time (λ = 10−16s−1). These values
for α and λ were proposed in Ghirardi et al. (1986), but I report that during the years different
values have been proposed (e.g. Adler 2003), some of which have been empirically falsiﬁed. For a
recent discussion, see Toroš and Bassi (2018).

9
Does the Primitive Ontology of GRW Rest on Shaky Ground?
131
idea is to allow for property ascription even when the relevant observable is not in
an eigenstate, but appropriately close to it. The major drawback of this strategy
is that it seems to introduce a certain degree of vagueness and arbitrariness at
the level of the ontology (Lewis 2016; Tumulka 2018). An alternative option to
solve the tails problem, proposed in the context of the PO approach, consists in
postulating additional ontology over and above the wave function.3 Moreover, this
strategy looks especially motivated when we consider in more details one of the
most developed versions of the theory, namely the one proposed in Ghirardi et al.
(1995) and Bassi and Ghirardi (2004), and later called Mass Density GRW (GRWM
for short).4
In every GRW-type of theory, the collapse is deﬁned by picking a preferred basis
on the Hilbert space on which it occurs. The crucial conceptual amendment of
GRWM with respect to previous versions of the theory concerns the introduction
of a new operator M(r) for the Mass Density, which serves as the preferred basis of
collapse, and which is deﬁned in Ghirardi et al. (1995) as follows:
M(r) =

k
mkNk(r)
(9.1)
Where k are the particles of a given type, r stands for a given spacetime point, and
N is the operator describing the number of particles, which is in turn deﬁned as:
N(r) = a†(r)a(r)
(9.2)
In Ghirardi et al. (1986), the eigenbasis of N(r) was the preferred basis in the
Hilbert space on which collapses occur, whereas in GRWM the selected basis is
M(r). An important consequence of this amendment is that it provides a way to
indicate unambiguously what the theory is about, its be-ables, by deﬁning a Mass
Density Function M(r, t) in 3D space.5 Consider a physical system S of N particles
with corresponding Hilbert space H(S) of 3N dimensions. We then deﬁne M(r, t)
as follows:
M(r, t) = ⟨ψ(t)|M(r)|ψ(t)⟩
(9.3)
3 See Tumulka (2018) for an extensive review of the reasons why a PO helps solving the conceptual
problems of GRW, tails problem included.
4 Proponents of the PO have also individuated another version of GRW as a good exempliﬁcation
of their view, namely the theory developed by Tumulka (2006) and known as GRW Flash. Since
my focus in this paper is on GRWM only, I will not discuss this other option any further.
5 I note en passant that the reasons behind the choice made in Ghirardi et al. (1995) of a Mass
Density operator also have to do with certain technical issues (see Ghirardi (2011) for a review)
which are largely independent from the philosophical problem I am discussing here. This is
important insofar as it reminds us that whatever inclination one has towards the PO approach,
it is still a fact that in the most developed version of GRW mass is going to play a crucial role.

132
C. Mariani
|ψ(t)⟩is the normalized vector6 describing S at time t, and M(r) is the mass density
operator deﬁned in Eq. (1) above. The mass density function deﬁned in (3) provides
a way to map H(S) onto the space of 3D functions r, at a given time t. If we now
suppose that the physical system S is the whole universe (and therefore that H(S)
is its corresponding Hilbert space), it follows that (3) gives the average, continuous
distribution of mass throughout the 3D space.
The conceptual move made by proponents of the PO approach is to posit an
ontology, the Mass Density, that always has deﬁnite values in every point in 3D
space, and which is fully represented by the Mass Density function M(r, t).7 This
view was ﬁrst suggested in Goldstein (1998), and then discussed in more details in
Allori et al. (2008), Egg and Esfeld (2015), and Tumulka (2018). Ghirardi himself
has expressed sympathy towards this approach in many of his writings (e.g. Ghirardi
2007; Ghirardi 2011).
It is important to note that, on this view, although the ontology is determinate
in every point in 3D space, the location of microscopic objects is not deﬁnite (Egg
and Esfeld 2015, p. 2), since their mass is literally smeared out in physical space
(again due the tails of the Gaussian). This is however not problematic as far as the
large portion of the mass of a certain object is located within a small region (Egg and
Esfeld, 2015). Microscopic objects are derivative entities which are grounded on the
mass density distribution. And if there is any indeterminacy to them, this does not
affect the PO itself. What really matters is that the fundamental ontology, which is
given by the distribution of mass throughout space, is not itself indeterminate. And
indeed, the idea that the mass density distribution is, to use Glick’s words, “perfectly
determinate” (Glick 2017, p. 205) has been advocated many times in the literature
(Allori, 2013; Chen, 2020; Egg and Esfeld, 2015; Glick, 2017; Tumulka, 2018).
In the next section I argue that this supposition is however unmotivated, and that
we have good reasons to believe that the mass density (so the PO) may not be always
well localised in 3D space, and may therefore be indeterminate.
9.3
Accessible and Non-accessible Mass
The Mass Density function M(r, t) is a many to one mapping, as Ghirardi et al.
(1995) immediately notice. To see this, consider a large number of particles N and
two regions A and B both of spherical shape and of the same size, and then compare
the following two states |ψ⊕⟩and |ψ⊗⟩:
|ψ⊕⟩=
1
√
2

|ψA
N⟩+ |ψB
N⟩

(9.4)
6 Notice that the Stratonovich equation of any GRW-type of theory does not actually generate
normalized vectors. I am going to set this complication aside here.
7 This also means that there no hidden variables here.

9
Does the Primitive Ontology of GRW Rest on Shaky Ground?
133
|ψ⊗⟩= |φA
N/2⟩⊗|φB
N/2⟩
(9.5)
Eq. (9.4) expresses a linear superposition of equal amplitudes of the states |ψA
N⟩and
|ψB
N⟩. Eq. (5), on the other hand, expresses the tensor product of the states |φA
N/2⟩
and |φB
N/2⟩describing the physical situation of N/2 particles in region A and N/2
particles in region B.
Now notice that the states |ψ⊕⟩and |ψ⊗⟩give rise to the same mass density
function M(r, t) for each region A and B. Consider for example region A:
M⊕
(r,t) = ⟨ψ⊕
t |M(r)|ψ⊕
t ⟩≈1
2⟨ψA
N|M(r)|ψA
N⟩≈Nm
2
(9.6)
M⊗
(r,t) = ⟨φ⊗
t |M(r)|φ⊗
t ⟩≈⟨φA
N/2|M(r)|φA
N/2⟩≈Nm
2
(9.7)
The same goes for region B. Although the functions generated by (9.6) and (9.7) are
the same, it is important to discriminate between the states that originate them. For
instance, Monton (2004, pp. 14–15) imagines a particle traveling between regions
A and B, and ask what we should expect to happen in both cases. In the case of
|ψ⊕⟩, the particle would become entangled with the mass in both regions, and would
therefore be deﬂected upwards or downwards with equal probability. In the case of
|ψ⊗⟩instead, since both regions have the same mass density, the particle would
proceed its trajectory undeﬂected.
To explain the difference between the two states, Ghirardi et al. (1995) deﬁne
a criterion for individuating what are the states that give rise to accessible mass
distributions (like |ψ⊗⟩), and what are the states that do not (|ψ⊕⟩). Their method is
simply to deﬁne the ratio between the mean expectation value for a given outcome
and the variance. We ﬁrst deﬁne the variance V(r, t) for the mass density operator
M(r) as follows:
V(r, t) = ⟨ψ(t)| [M(r) −⟨ψ(t)|M(r)|ψ(t)⟩]2 |ψ(t)⟩
(9.8)
Given V(r, t), we can deﬁne the ratio:
R2(r, t) = V(r, t)/M2(r, t)
(9.9)
Now, if R turns out to be much smaller than 1, this suggests that the corresponding
mass density can be considered accessible. If instead R is close to 1, the corre-
sponding mass is deﬁned as non-accessible. Thus, we can now state the following
Criterion of Accessibility (CAM) for any Mass Density state:
CAM — M(r, t) is accessible iff R(r, t) ≪1.

134
C. Mariani
Given CAM, it can be shown that in the above example the mass corresponding to
the state |ψ⊗⟩is accessible because the value of R is much smaller than 1:
R⊗(r, t) ≪1
(9.10)
Contrariwise, for |ψ⊕⟩the value of R is close to 1, and therefore the corresponding
mass is non-accessible.
R⊕(r, t) ≈1
(9.11)
According to Bassi and Ghirardi (2004), the Criterion of Accessibility, along with
the distinction between accessible and non-accessible mass, is what explains why,
as we should have expected all along, macroscopic superposition states like |ψ⊕⟩
are not empirically accessible.
Now let us ask: what is the ontological status of the non-accessible portion of
mass? Recall that, on the PO approach, the ontology of GRWM is fully represented
by the Mass Density function M(r, t). However, as I have just shown, there can be
different states corresponding to the same M(r, t), not all of which describe well
localised mass density conﬁgurations. We seem to have two options here: either we
reject states like |ψ⊕⟩as representing something real, or we provide an explanation
of the difference between the states |ψ⊕⟩and |ψ⊗⟩in terms of the PO.8
The ﬁrst option is to simply stipulate that there is no ontology corresponding to
non-accessible Mass. As a matter of fact, this option is suggested by Ghirardi and
collaborators in the very same paper where the argument I gave above is presented
(Ghirardi et al., 1995), where instead of “not accessible” it is used the adjective
“not objective” to refer to the mass corresponding to states like |ψ⊕⟩. This option
looks however highly problematic. Given that the Criterion of Accessibility is purely
operational (recall that it is given by the variance), by claiming that states like |ψ⊕⟩
are not objective or real it would follow that what exists according to the theory, its
ontology, depends on what observers can and cannot do.9 And in effect Tumulka—
one of the major defenders of the PO approach for GRWM—is explicit in rejecting
this option:
[. . . ] the PO does provide a picture of reality that conforms with our everyday intuition.
All this is independent of whether the PO is observable (accessible) or not. Bassi and
Ghirardi sometimes sound as if they did not take the matter density seriously when it is
8 There is actually a third option, which is to accept that there is more to the quantum state than
just the PO. The reason why I do not consider this view is because it would entail that the PO
is redundant, since we would still need the quantum state to play an ontological role (beyond just
determining the dynamics). But since the whole point of positing the PO is to avoid that, this option
should not be adopted.
9 A similar argument can be found in McQueen (2015), Tumulka (2018), Monton (2004), inter
alia. See Mariani (2022) for a more extensive critique of this approach to non-accessible mass, and
for a review of the various options.

9
Does the Primitive Ontology of GRW Rest on Shaky Ground?
135
not accessible; I submit that the PO should always be taken seriously. (Tumulka 2018, p.
142, italics mine)
Tumulka suggests that the second option is preferable, and so we have to accept
the existence of non-accessible mass and give an ontological explanation of the
difference between |ψ⊕⟩and |ψ⊗⟩in terms of the PO. The most immediate way
to do so would be to simply assume that, even if not accessible, in the state |ψ⊕⟩
the mass is spread evenly over the two regions, half in A and half in B (precisely
as it happens for the state |ψ⊗⟩). But then the natural worry is that we are left with
no explanation whatsoever as to why, in the case of |ψ⊕⟩, the test particle we send
through regions A and B is deﬂected, whereas in the case of |ψ⊗⟩it is not. As
Myrvold (2018) nicely puts it: “[s]omething that you might be inclined to call a
“mass”, if it doesn’t act like a mass, is not a mass” (p. 114). And even if we were
to call it “mass”, the problem is still that if there is PO corresponding to states like
|ψ⊕⟩, and if we want to explain the physical difference with respect to the state
|ψ⊗⟩, we simply have to accept that in the former case the “mass” is not associated
to a deﬁnite region of 3D space.10 We cannot simply stipulate that it is, for if the
conﬁguration of the PO is the same, we would have no explanation whatsoever for
the difference between the two states. The explanation has to be based in the PO
itself.11
Thus, the question before us is this: is there a plausible way to take non-
accessible mass states seriously, and give an ontological explanation to them, while
still endorsing the PO approach?
9.4
The Indeterminate Primitive Ontology
I suspect that at this point the reader may be inclined to wonder why not simply
take the arguments in the previous section as a straightforward objection to the PO
approach. The thought would go something like this: if the ontology of GRWM
allows for states of non-accessible mass, and if these states are not well localised in
3D space (as the view requires them to be), then the PO approach fails to apply to
GRWM. This is a fair point, and yet I believe it generates from a confusion on the
10 Also note that, for this reason, the ontology of GRWM is crucially different from the case of a
classical ﬁeld in which, despite not being well localised, the ontology is deﬁnitely associated to
any spacetime point. I thank two anonymous reviewers of this journals for inviting me to elaborate
on this point.
11 As Tumulka claims in the very same context:
[The problem] concerns whether GRW theories provide a picture of reality that conforms
with our everyday intuition. Such a worry cannot be answered by pointing out what an
observer can or cannot measure. Instead, I think, the answer can only lie in what the
ontology is like, not in what observers see of it. (Tumulka 2018, 142)

136
C. Mariani
very role that the PO is supposed to play as something we need to postulate over
and above the wave function.
In a somewhat general way, the need to posit a PO comes from the simple
thought that any physical theory should describe something in the world, the stuff
in 3D space, and that everything else should be reduced to, and explained by the
behaviour of the PO. Moreover, this approach is motivated by the idea that the
quantum state or the wave function are not the right candidates for a satisfactory
ontology. If both these goals are achieved in GRWM, then why bother if the PO turns
out to be indeterminate in the sense of lacking deﬁnite properties? Perhaps, once we
realise that the general reductive explanatory scheme proposed by the PO approach
is indeed satisﬁed, and that an ontology beyond the wave function is provided, a
more interesting question to address is what motivated in the ﬁrst place the claim
that the PO must be deﬁnite and well localised in every point in 3D space.
As I anticipated in the introduction to this paper, I think that the justiﬁcation
for this claim goes something like this: (i) the PO of a theory is, by deﬁnition,
its fundamental ontology; (ii) the fundamental ontology cannot be indeterminate;
therefore, the PO cannot be indeterminate. This very simple two-premise argument
not only explains why proponents of the PO assume that the determinacy is a
requirement, but also suggests why, for instance, Myrvold (2018) takes the existence
of non-accessible mass as a good reason to reject the PO and endorse realism
towards the quantum state in the context of GRWM. As it should be clear enough
by now, the point I am trying to make is that premise (ii) of the above argument is
unwarranted, for we have no reasons to believe that fundamental indeterminacy is
incoherent. I will shortly come to this. First though, since I think it is very instructive
to realise that the truth of this premise is assumed by both defenders and detractors
of the PO approach, let me spend a few words on Myrvold’s view.
Some of the attempts to provide an understanding of the ontology of GRW refer,
sometimes explicitly, to the notions of indeﬁniteness, vagueness, or fuzzyness. In
most of the cases, these notions are meant to indicate that the fundamental entities
described by this theory may objectively lack deﬁnite values for their properties.12
Myrvold’s Distributional Ontology (Myrvold, 2018) is a clear example:
In classical physics, dynamical quantities always possess precise values. In quantum theory,
there is always some imprecision [. . . ] But the full reality is that associated with each
dynamical variable is a distribution of values. This distribution, though formally like a
probability distribution, is to be thought of not as a probability distribution over a precise
but unknown possessed value but as reﬂecting a physical, ontological, lack of determinacy
about what the value is. (p. 118)
Myrvold argues for this view mainly based on Ghirardi’s argument about non-
accessible mass which I also gave in Sect. 9.3. However, he also explicitly takes this
argument as an objection to the PO program, and then defends a view according
12 For reasons of space, I cannot discuss other views in this vicinity. A notable example is Monton’s
Mass Density Simpliciter view, which, as discussed in McQueen (2015) and Mariani (2022), also
seems to allow for indeterminacy in the ontology.

9
Does the Primitive Ontology of GRW Rest on Shaky Ground?
137
to which ultimately the mass density (along with every other physical property)
is grounded on the quantum state. So in this case too, any indeterminacy appears
at some derivative level (the mass density, for instance), but does not affect the
fundamental level (the quantum state). However, if one were convinced that the
quantum state is not the right kind of entity to be a candidate for the PO, and
that we need to posit additional ontology beyond it, then presumably Myrvold’s
conclusion would hardly be taken to follow from the premises.13 Once again, for
such conclusion to be justiﬁed, we also need the assumption that the PO must be
determinate, if it exists at all. If instead, as I am suggesting in this paper, we give up
on this idea, there is no need to reject the PO approach and endorse the view that
the quantum state is more fundamental than the mass density distribution.
I have shown that there are good naturalistic reasons for taking seriously the
idea that the PO may be indeterminate in GRW. Moreover, I have individuated
what seems to be the cause of the scepticism towards this idea, and which is
also probably why it has not been developed so far, namely the thought according
to which the fundamental ontology cannot be indeterminate. As a matter of fact
though, some fairly recent developments in the metaphysics of physics seem to go
in the very opposite direction, suggesting that we can indeed make sense of this
very idea. In particular, many authors (Darby 2014; Calosi and Wilson 2018; Torza
2017; for an overview see Calosi and Mariani 2021) have suggested that QM, by
violating the supposition that objects always have deﬁnite values for their properties,
may provide an instance of what philosophers call ontological indeterminacy. For
several decades this notion was not even considered to be consistent (notably, Lewis
1986). Quite recently however, it has been shown that we can indeed provide clear
accounts of what it means for something to be objectively indeterminate (Barnes
and Williams 2011; Wilson 2013, inter alia), along with well deﬁned criteria
for distinguishing determinate from indeterminate states of affairs. As it happens
sometimes, a good conceptual analysis may be useful in providing a more reﬁned
picture of what physics tells us, even though this might entail a departure from our
classical presuppositions about the world. For all these reasons, I take it that the
main lesson we learn from GRW is that we should start to seriously entertain the
possibility that the world is fundamentally indeterminate.14
13 Myrvold himself recognizes this, and goes on to defend the viability of quantum state realism.
14 I cannot develop this idea further here. However, a good working hypothesis seems to me that the
approach to indeterminacy developed in Calosi and Wilson (2018) may be used in the context of
GRWM, for it would allow to distinguish between indeterminate and determinate states of affairs,
thus providing an explanation to the distinction between accessible and non-accessible mass that
is based on the PO itself rather than on the quantum state.

138
C. Mariani
9.5
Conclusions
The core motivation for adopting the Primitive Ontology approach is to provide
a classical reductive explanation of the behaviour of macroscopic objects as
determined by the behaviour of the microscopic, fundamental ontology. Contrary
to what proponents of this approach seem to suggest, however, all of this is
independent from whether the PO is indeterminate or not. To make this point, in
this paper I have been focusing on GRWM, which has been taken by proponents of
the PO approach as one of the best exempliﬁcations of their view. The main claim
of this paper is that, since it is suggested by one of the major interpretations of QM,
the notion of indeterminate PO should be taken seriously from a naturalistic point
of view.
Acknowledgments For useful comments on previous versions of this paper, I thank Valia Allori,
Claudio Calosi, Vincent Lam, Maria Maffei, Giuliano Torrengo, and an anonymous reviewer for
this journal. I acknowledge the generous support of the Foundational Questions Institute Fund
(Grant number FQXi-IAF19-05 and FQXi-IAF19-01).
References
Adler, S. L. (2003). Why decoherence has not solved the measurement problem: A response to
P.W. Anderson. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part B: Studies in History and
Philosophy of Modern Physics, 34(1), 135–142.
Albert, D., & Loewer, B. (1996). Tails of Schrödinger’s cat. In R. Clifton (Ed.), Perspectives on
quantum reality (pp. 81–91). Kluwer.
Allori, V. (2013). On the metaphysics of quantum mechanics. In S. Le Bihan (Ed.), Precis de la
Philosophie de la Physique: d’aujourd’hui ‘a demain. Vuibert.
Allori, V. (2016). Primitive ontology and the classical world. In R. Kastner, J. Jeknic-Dugic, & G.
Jaroszkiewicz (Eds.), Quantum structural studies: Classical emergence from the quantum level
(pp. 175–199). World Scientiﬁc.
Allori, V., Goldstein, S., Tumulka, R., & Zanghì, N. (2008). On the common structure of
Bohmian mechanics and the Ghirardi-Rimini-Weber theory. British Journal for the Philosophy
of Science, 59, 353–389.
Barnes, E., & Williams, R. (2011). A theory of metaphysical indeterminacy. In K. Bennett & D.
Zimmerman (Eds.), Oxford studies in metaphysics (Vol. 6). Oxford University Press.
Bassi, A. & Ghirardi G. C. (2004). Dynamical reduction models. Physics Reports, 379, 257.
Bell, J. S. (1987). Speakable and unspeakable in quantum mechanics (2nd ed., 2004). Cambridge
University Press.
Calosi, C. & Mariani, C. (2021). Quantum Indeterminacy. Philosophy Compass, 16(4), e12731.
Calosi, C. & Wilson, J. (2018). Quantum metaphysical indeterminacy. Philosophical Studies, 176,
1–29.
Chen, E. K. (2020). Fundamental Nomic Vagueness. arXiv:2006.05298 [physics.hist-ph]. https://
arxiv.org/abs/2006.05298
Darby, G. (2014). Vague objects in quantum mechanics? In K. Akiba & A. Abasnezhad (Eds.),
Vague objects and vague identity. New essays on ontic vagueness (pp. 69–108). Springer.
Egg, M., & Esfeld, M. (2015). Primitive ontology and quantum state in the GRW matter density
theory. Synthese, 192, 3229–3245.

9
Does the Primitive Ontology of GRW Rest on Shaky Ground?
139
Ghirardi, G. C. (2007). Some reﬂections inspired by my research activity in quantum mechanics.
Journal of Physics A, 40, 2891.
Ghirardi, G. C. (2011). Collapse theories. Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy. Published online
by Stanford University at http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/qm-collapse/
Ghirardi, G. C., Grassi, R., & Benatti F. (1995). Describing the macroscopic world: Closing the
circle within the dynamical reduction program. Foundations of Physics, 25, 5–38.
Ghirardi, G. C., Rimini, A., & Weber, T. (1986). Uniﬁed dynamics for microscopic and macro-
scopic physics. Physical Review, D34, 470–491.
Glick, D. (2017). Against quantum indeterminacy. Thought, 6(3), 204–213.
Goldstein, S. (1998). Quantum theory without observers. Physics Today, Part I, (3), 42–46; Part II,
(4), 38–42.
Lewis, D. (1986). On the plurality of worlds. Blackwell.
Lewis, P. J. (2003). Quantum mechanics and ordinary language: The fuzzy-link. Philosophy of
Science, 70, 1437–1446.
Lewis, P. J. (2016). Quantum ontology. A guide to the metaphysics of quantum mechanics. Oxford
University Press.
Mariani, C. (2022). Non-Accessible Mass and the Ontology of GRW. Studies in History and
Philosophy of Science, 91, 270–279.
Mariani, C. (2021). Emergent Quantum Indeterminacy. Ratio, 34(3), 183–192.
McQueen, K. J. (2015). Four tails problems for dynamical collapse theories. Studies in History
and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 49, 10–18.
Monton, B. (2004). The problem of ontology for spontaneous collapse theories. Studies in History
and Philosophy Modern Physics, 35, 407–421.
Myrvold, W. C. (2018). Ontology for collapse theories. In S. Gao (Ed.), Collapse of the wave
function. Models, ontology, origin, and implications (pp. 97–123). Cambridge University Press.
Toroš, M., & Bassi, A. (2018). Bounds on quantum collapse models from matter-wave interfer-
ometry: Calculational details. Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical, 51(11),
115302.
Torza, A. (2017). Quantum metaphysical indeterminacy and worldly incompleteness. Synthese,
197(10), 4251.
Tumulka, R. (2006). A relativistic version of the Ghirardi–Rimini–Weber model. Journal of
Statistical Physics, 125(4), 821–840.
Tumulka, R. (2018). Paradoxes and primitive ontology in collapse theories of quantum mechanics.
In S. Gao (Ed.), Collapse of the wave function. Models, ontology, origin, and implications (pp.
134–153). Cambridge University Press.
Wallace, D. (2018). On the plurality of quantum theories: Quantum theory as a framework, and its
implications for the quantum measurement problem. Phil.Sci Archive. [Preprint].
Wilson, J. (2013). A determinable-based account of metaphysical indeterminacy. Inquiry, 56(4),
359–385.

Chapter 10
Towards a Structuralist Elimination
of Properties
Valia Allori
Abstract Scientiﬁc realists investigate the ontology of the world and explain
the observed phenomena by using our best fundamental physical theories. These
theories describe the behavior of fundamental objects in terms of their fundamental
properties, which determine their behavior. This paper is the natural companion
of another paper in which I propose an alternative to this traditional account of
metaphysics, according to which fundamental objects have no other fundamental
property than the one needed to specify their nature. In that paper I argue that my
view fares better than the traditional metaphysics both in the classical and in the
quantum domain. In this paper I compare my view to structuralism. After discussing
that my proposal shares many motivations with structuralism, I argue in which ways
I think mine is superior.
10.1
Introduction
In discussions about ontology, traditionally one talks about objects and their
properties: objects live in three-dimensional space and change in time according
to suitable laws of nature. In naturalized metaphysics, following the tradition
of scientiﬁc realism, the nature of these objects and laws is given by our best
fundamental physical theories. In a classical world one has point-like particles
(or particles and ﬁelds, if we include electromagnetic phenomena). Their temporal
evolution is determined by laws of nature like the Newtonian law of gravitation
or Maxwell’s electromagnetic equations. Particles come into families: electrons,
protons, and so on, identiﬁed by their intrinsic properties of mass and charge. A
distinctive feature of this understanding is that different families move differently
under the same circumstances because their properties are different. This traditional
approach is therefore an object-oriented metaphysics grounded on properties. In
V. Allori ()
Department of Philosophy, Northern Illinois University, Dekalb, IL, USA
e-mail: vallori@niu.edu
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
V. Allori (ed.), Quantum Mechanics and Fundamentality, Synthese Library 460,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-99642-0_10
141

142
V. Allori
a previous article, I have proposed instead a thin object-oriented metaphysics
grounded on structure based on the idea that fundamental objects have no intrinsic
properties other than the ones necessary to identify their nature. That is, assuming
the world is made of particles, they merely have the property of being localized in
space, but they have no additional properties such as mass or charge. Conversely,
laws are effectively instantiated multiple times. Therefore, an electron in a magnetic
ﬁeld turning the opposite way of a proton is not explained in term of their opposite
charges but in terms of them following distinct ‘effective’ laws. In my previous
paper I have argued that this approach is better than the traditional view. In this
article, which is a continuation of my previous work, I ﬁrst review my approach in
Sect. 10.2, then I compare it with (ontic) structuralism. In this approach structure is
fundamental, and symmetries play a crucial role. As such, it constitutes a structure-
oriented metaphysics based on symmetries. In Sect. 10.3, I argue that my approach
and structuralism share many motivations. However, I conclude that my view is to
be preferred as it is less problematical in several respects.
10.2
A New Take on Naturalized Metaphysics
Scientiﬁc realists assume that scientiﬁc theories are approximately true and use them
to investigate questions about the nature of reality. Thus, they engage in naturalized
metaphysics: they look at scientiﬁc theories to individuate the nature of fundamental
entities, their properties, and the laws governing their motion.
10.2.1
The Traditional View: Thick Object-Oriented
Metaphysics Grounded on Properties
Metaphysicians disagree about the nature of the objects that exist in the world
(particles, ﬁelds, or else). They also disagree about the nature of laws governing their
behavior (supervenient over the objects, or not), about the nature of their properties
(dispositional or categorical properties), as well as the nature of space (fundamental
or emergent). However, most share the common understanding that objects behave
differently due to their properties. I have called this the traditional view.1 It can be
tracked back to Aristotle, and one of its modern proponents is David Lewis: at the
fundamental level, the world is a ‘mosaic’ of “local, particular matters of fact.”2
For instance, he would say that in a world governed by classical electromagnetism
there are point-particles obeying Newton’s law, and electromagnetic ﬁelds, whose
intensity changes from point to point as dictated by Maxwell’s laws. Fundamental
1 Allori (forthcoming).
2 Lewis (1986).

10
Towards a Structuralist Elimination of Properties
143
properties are introduced to account for the objects’ different behavior under the
same circumstances: two particles accelerate differently in an electromagnetic ﬁeld
because they have different charges. In this sense objects are thick: they are ‘dressed
up’ with properties. Consequently, there are families of objects: ‘electrons’ are
particles with negative charge, ‘protons’ are particles with positive charge, and so
on. There is one fundamental law, and many fundamental properties: there are many
families (electrons, protons, and so on) of the same kind of fundamental entities
(particles).
10.2.2
Objections
The traditional approach seems the natural approach at least until one considers
the quantum domain. What are the quantum objects, and what are their properties?
As for the ﬁrst question, it is not clear what the ontology of the theory is. One
possibility, dubbed wavefunction realism,3 is to think of quantum mechanics as
a theory about the wavefunction, as it is the main mathematical object on the
theory. However, the wavefunction, unlike electromagnetic ﬁelds which are in
three-dimensional space, represents a wave in conﬁguration space, which is a
high-dimensional space. Accordingly, wavefunction realists argue that the three-
dimensional objects of our experience are emergent or derivative.4 An alternative to
wavefunction realism is the primitive ontology approach,5 according to which the
ontology is some three-dimensional entity instead. In contrast with wavefunction
realism, this approach preserves most of the classical explanatory schema in terms
of compositionality and reductionism: macroscopic objects are composed of the
three-dimensional microscopic entities represented by the primitive ontology. The
main challenge to this approach is that it is unclear what wavefunction is. There
are various proposals,6 the best of which is, I think, to understand the wavefunction
structurally.7
3 See Albert and Ney (2013), and then most notably Albert (1996, 2015), Lewis (2004, 2005, 2006,
2013), Ney (2012, 2013, 2015, 2017, 2021), North (2013).
4 In one approach, macroscopic objects can be functionally deﬁned in terms of their role (Albert,
2015). In another approach three-dimensional objects exists as derivative when considering
symmetry properties as fundamental facts about the world (Ney, 2021).
5 Dürr et al. (1992), Allori et al. (2008), Allori (2013a, b, 2015a, b, 2019a, b) and references therein.
6 Some have argued it is a property of matter (Monton, 2002; Lewis, 2013; Solé, 2013; Esfeld et
al., 2014; Suàrez, 2015). Another approach is to take the wavefunction as a law (see Goldstein &
Zanghì, 2013; Allori, 2018a, b, and references therein for a discussion), which seems particularly
ﬁtting to the Humean account of laws (Esfeld, 2014; Callender, 2015; Miller, 2014; Bhogal &
Perry, 2017). For antirealism about the wavefunction see Healey (2012).
7 This view has been defended in Allori (2021b). Another structuralist perspective has also been
defended by Lewis (2020), who writes: “the wave function describes the structure instantiated by
whatever fundamental entities there may be in ordinary three-dimensional space: particles, ﬁelds,

144
V. Allori
Moreover, new intrinsic properties such as spin have been introduced in quantum
theory to account for new experimental results. However, they are very different
from classical properties, as they are contextual: their value depends on the
experiment performed to measure them.
How does the traditional view fare in the quantum domain? As I have previously
argued,8 the traditional account is not a good ﬁt for wavefunction realism. In fact,
this view requires a substantial revision of the traditional view’s explanation based
on properties, even without considering spin. Property talk is ﬁctional: useful,
but not fundamental. In contrast, being based on a three-dimensional reductionist
explanatory schema, the traditional view may still be viable for the primitive
ontology approach. However, there are other, more general, reasons to prefer an
alternative view, which I brieﬂy summarize in the next subsection.
10.2.3
Fundamental Entities Without Fundamental
Properties: Thin Objects-Oriented Metaphysics
Grounded on Structure
The basic idea is that there are fundamental objects, but they have no property
other than the one uniquely characterizing their nature. Thus, objects are ‘thin.’
For instance, the only property possessed by particles is their location. The only
property possessed by ﬁelds is the set of their intensity values. In contrast with
the traditional account, therefore, there are no different families of the fundamental
entity that constitute matter, and all fundamental entities are identical, as far as (non-
spatiotemporal) properties are concerned. In this framework the observed different
behavior of particles appearing to belong to different families is accounted for
in terms of laws of nature: fundamental entities behave differently in the same
situation because they are governed by different effective laws. There is one effective
law for what appears to be a different family in the traditional approach. In their
mathematical formulation, laws include constants, like the gravitational constant,
and parameters describing properties, like masses and chargers. In the traditional
approach the constants are part of the deﬁnition of the law, while the parameters
are part of the deﬁnition of matter: constants remain identical independently of the
object the law applies to, while masses do not. In my view instead, the parameters
are part of the deﬁnition of the law too. Thus, a single law ‘splits’ into a number
of effective laws, characterized by the relevant parameters, one for each particle
family of the traditional view.9 Thus, the main idea is the opposite of the traditional
ﬂashes, mass density, or something else entirely. A structure is not in itself an object, but rather a
way that objects relate to each other.”
8 Allori (forthcoming).
9 For example, in case of a gravitational ﬁeld, there is one effective law for the ‘electron,’
Eff law1 =
H1
r2 , where H1 = GmeM, one for the ‘proton,’ Eff law2 =
H2
r2
, where

10
Towards a Structuralist Elimination of Properties
145
view: there one would minimize the number of laws to maximize the number of
properties while here we minimize the number of properties, allowing for as many
effective laws of nature as needed to make the theory empirically adequate. The
laws and the effective laws are naturally seen as a structure, a network of relations,
grounded on thin objects.
The nature of the objects and the form laws have an interesting connection with
symmetry properties of the theory, which in my approach are symmetries of the
objects, not the structure. First, if one cares about theories having symmetries, one
should not allow certain entities to be though as fundamental. For instance, the
wavefunction thought of as a fundamental object makes nonrelativistic quantum
mechanics no longer Galilei invariant.10 Moreover, the form of the law of nature is
constrained by symmetry considerations: for instance, in the pilot-wave theory, the
law for the particles is chosen as the simplest equation which allows for the theory
to be Galilei and time-reversal invariant.11
To summarize, in my view we have thin objects, individuated by their only
natural property, namely by the property that uniquely characterizes their nature.
Then the law of nature determines how they evolve in time. For the theory to be
empirically adequate, the law has to break down into a set of effective laws, each
of which applies to a subset of the set of fundamental objects. The laws and the
effective laws are naturally seen as a structure, a network of relations, grounded on
thin objects. Moreover, symmetries constrain the possible nature of the fundamental
objects, and the form of the laws.
10.2.4
Advantages and Replies to Objections
As I argued in my companion paper, this view extends nicely to the quantum
domain, regardless of whether one endorses the primitive ontology approach or
wavefunction realism. In fact, in the primitive ontology approach the primitive
ontology represents objects, while the wavefunction relates the location of the
objects at different times. Moreover, since in wavefunction realism property talk
is completely ﬁctional, the derived three-dimensional objects are thin: they have
no fundamental property. Wavefunction realism is doubly structural: the structure
of the wavefunction allows for the derivation of three-dimensional objects, and it
explains the objects’ behavior by connecting their locations at different times.
H2 = GmpM, and one for the ‘neutron,’ Eff law3 =
H3
r2 , where H3 = GmnM (where G is
the gravitational constant, me, mp, and mn are respectively the mass of the electron, proton and
neutron as traditionally intended, while M is the reference mass, and r is the distance between the
reference particle and the one under examination). See Allori (forthcoming) for more details.
10 Allori (2018a, b). See also Allori (2015c, 2019b, 2021a) for an argument that electromagnetic
ﬁelds cannot be thought as fundamental objects otherwise they either would transform at odds with
their nature, or we should stop thinking of classical electrodynamics as time-reversal invariant..
11 Dürr et al. (1992).

146
V. Allori
Aside from extending to the quantum domain, my approach also by-passes the
debate over the nature of properties, as it focuses on laws.
Also, it is more parsimonious than the traditional view, given that it has an
ontology of objects and laws, rather than objects, laws and properties. In this sense,
even if it is compatible with other views, my approach may be seen as a natural
extension of Humeanism, since it provides the best combination of simplicity and
strength.12
Moreover, it is more explanatory than the traditional view, as it has less things to
account for, like for example the values of the masses of the fundamental particles.
In addition, in the framework of classical electrodynamics, my account makes sense
of certain asymmetries between particles and ﬁelds, like the fact that particles have
properties and ﬁelds do not.
Another consideration is that we observe objects that move, not their properties:
we see positions that change; we do not see masses, charges, or spin. Furthermore,
the problematic contextuality of spin in quantum mechanics goes away, because
there is no spin property.
Here are some possible objections.13 First, this view seems unnecessarily radical,
as properties are essential to explanation. However, this is not so: properties add a
mysterious ontological category, while their explanatory role can be taken over by
the laws. In addition, one may think that the way in which an object ‘pairs up’
with its effective law is mysterious. Nonetheless, this is merely using a different
primitive: while in the traditional view it is a primitive fact that positive charge will
result in ‘going left’ in a given magnetic ﬁeld, here it is a primitive fact that that
effective laws act as they do on the various objects.
10.3
Structuralism
I have used the word ‘structure’ to describe my view. However, the dominant
metaphysical approach invoking the notion of structure is structural realism (struc-
turalism). In this section I compare these two frameworks. Structuralism is a realist
approach partly motivated by the development of quantum theory. Nonetheless, an
early version of structuralism was proposed in response to the pessimistic meta-
induction argument. This goes after the ‘no-miracle’ argument for realism: the best
explanation for the success of our best theories is their truth, otherwise their success
would be a miracle. The pessimistic meta-induction argument states that success
is no indication of truth, as some past false theory were successful. In response,
if one can show that the entities that are retained in moving from one theory to
the next are the ones that are responsible for the empirical success of the theory,
then the previous argument is blocked. Structuralists notice that what carries over in
12 See Esfeld (2014) for a similar argument for his super Humeanism. See also Hall (2015).
13 For more details of this view, its objections and motivations, see Allori (forthcoming).

10
Towards a Structuralist Elimination of Properties
147
theory change is the mathematical structure of the theory.14 Arguably, one could
limit structuralism to epistemology: there are objects and structure, but we can
only know about structure. However, other types of structuralism are ontic: they
maintain that there is only structure. In this paper I focus on ontic approaches.15 In
particular, I discuss two such views. One is radical structuralism, or eliminativism16
which claims that there are no objects, only relational structures. Another is the so-
called moderate structuralism according to which, contrary to eliminativism, both
objects and relations among them exist but, contrary to the traditional view, objects
cannot exist independently on the structure they are related by.17 Objects are only
characterized by the relations in which they stand, and these relational properties
constitute the way the objects can be.18 While initially the view stated that objects
do not possess any intrinsic property, in reply to criticisms it was later amended to
include them.19
10.3.1
Arguments from Quantum Mechanics and Other
Motivations
One underlying principle that supports structuralism is that we are not justiﬁed
in postulating the existence of something whose existence cannot be known. This
coherence between epistemology and metaphysics leads the structuralist to consider
all cases of underdetermination as evidence for their views. This type of argument
has been put forward ﬁrst in quantum theory, but later applied to relativity as
well. The idea is that quantum statistics suggest that it is underdetermined whether
quantum objects are individuals (i.e., have intrinsic properties) or not, from which
eliminativists conclude there is only structure.20 Similar arguments are based on
symmetries and the corresponding invariances,21 and on the existence of multiple
empirically equivalent mathematical formulations of the same theory.22
14 Worrall (1989).
15 Therefore, whenever I write ‘structuralism’ in the rest of the paper, I mean ‘ontic structuralism.’
16 See Ladyman (1998), French and Ladyman (2003), Ladyman and Ross (2007), French (2010,
2014) and references therein.
17 This view is defended most notably defended by Esfeld (2004) and reﬁned in Esfeld and Lam
(2008, 2010, 2012).
18 This view is inspired by Heil (2003) and Strawson (2008), who argue that the intrinsic properties
of an object are the ways that object can be. See also Armstrong (1989).
19 Esfeld and Lam (2010).
20 French (2014) and references therein. See Saunders (2006), French and Krause (2006), Muller
and Saunders (2008), Ladyman and Bigaj (2010) for further discussion.
21 Permutation invariance in many-particle quantum mechanics (Muller, 2009), gauge diffeomor-
phism invariance in general theory of relativity (Rickles, 2006, Esfeld & Lam, 2008).
22 See Bain (2006, 2009) in the context of the general theory of relativity; however, see Cao (2003),
Pooley (2006).

148
V. Allori
Another argument for structuralism focuses on entanglement. In quantum
mechanics, the sub-systems composing an entangled system have no individual
wavefunction, and thus they have no intrinsic properties. Therefore, structuralists
think they are best understood as relata of a common, entanglement structure.23
Another argument from quantum mechanics comes from the failure of Humean
supervenience, given that the wavefunction is nonlocal, being in conﬁguration
space.24 Structuralists argue that the nonlocal relations being instantiated by
individuals has to be abandoned toward an ontology of structural relations.25
Structuralism is also motivated by ontological parsimony and simplicity of
description: why postulate two categories (objects and relations), if one (relations) is
enough? This is connected to another important aspect of structuralism: the relation
between laws and properties.26 Part of the traditional debate is between the defend-
ers of categorical properties and the defenders of dispositional properties, without
any consensus. Structuralists avoid this dilemma by assuming that laws supervene
on the fundamental relations, and fundamental properties are emergent. French calls
it ‘reverse engineering:’ while the Humeans take properties as fundamental and laws
as emergent, the structuralist takes laws as primary and recovers properties from
them.
10.3.2
Objections
The strongest charge against eliminativism is that it is unintelligible: relations
cannot exist without relata.27 However, one could reply assuming these relations
are abstract universals, and we are wrong when we think that they need relata
because they do when they are physically instantiated.28 Alternatively, moderate
structuralism has been proposed to respond to this charge, as the relata exist.29
In addition, many have complained that the relationship between structure
and laws is insufﬁciently detailed.30 Nonetheless, I believe the structuralist can
23 For instance, a singlet state of two entangled spin ½ sub-systems is in a deﬁnite spin state,
namely 0, but neither of the sub-systems has a deﬁnite spin state on its own. As such, it is argued
that these sub-systems are best understood as relata of the fundamental entanglement relation they
stand in, in this case: ‘has opposite spin to.’ For more on this argument, see Esfeld (2004).
24 See Teller (1986) for this argument. For discussion, see for instance Maudlin (2007), Ladyman
and Ross (2007), Esfeld (2009), French (2014).
25 Ladyman (1998), French and Ladyman (2003), Esfeld (2004).
26 French (2014), and Esfeld (2014).
27 See for instance Busch (2003), Cao (2003), Chakravartty (2003), Morganti (2004), Psillos
(2006).
28 Esfeld and Lam (2008).
29 Esfeld (2004).
30 Chakravartty (2007).

10
Towards a Structuralist Elimination of Properties
149
overcome this objection taking structure as primitive, and then deﬁne laws as
‘whatever determines the behavior of such structure.’
Moreover, structuralism seems to be unable to account for intrinsic properties
like masses and charges.31 This charge is address by using symmetries, to recover
properties using suitable group representations.32
Then, people have objected that the structuralism is unable to account for
causation.33 However, one could simply maintain that in physics there is no room
for causation,34 or propose an account of causal structure.35
Finally, it has been maintained that structuralism does not defeat the pessimistic
meta-induction argument.36 In particular, it was argued that structuralism fails in
the classical-to-quantum theory change: structuralists think that the wavefunction
is the structure, but there is no classical analog for it, so how can structure be
preserved?37 This problem is not mitigated in moderate structuralism, given that
objects and structure are ontologically at the same level.
10.3.3
Comparison between the Thin Objects View
and Structuralism
The ﬁrst similarity between my view and structuralism is that they both rely on
the notion of structure, which is a network of relations: without relata, in the case
of eliminativism, deﬁnitive of objects, in the case of moderate structuralism, and
between thin objects in my case.
Both approaches also work well in the quantum domain, in contrast with the
traditional view. At least partially, structuralism was motivated from the desire of
understanding quantum theory. My account less so, but if we can make sense of
the view that there are no genuine quantum properties like spin, then it also seems
natural to extend this attitude into the classical framework and assume that what we
called intrinsic properties (mass, charge) are part of the law.
Moreover, both approaches tend to consider the wavefunction as playing a
secondary, perhaps instrumentalist role, even in different ways. French (2013)
has argued that since it is underdetermined what the wavefunction is. However,
this underdetermination can be broken by conceiving the wavefunction as being
“constituted by the laws and the associated symmetry principles.” Thus, since
31 Ainsworth (2010).
32 See Castellani (1998) and references therein; see also Muller (2009). See Esfeld and Lam (2010)
for criticisms.
33 Psillos (2006).
34 Russell (1912), Ladyman (2008).
35 Esfeld (2009), Esfeld and Sachse (2011), chapter 2.
36 Chakravartty (2004).
37 Allori (2019b).

150
V. Allori
the wavefunction ‘comes out’ from the symmetries, it is deﬁned in terms of the
fundamental structure. In my view, instead, the wavefunction is part of the deﬁnition
of the law. As such, in both approaches not only the wavefunction is not a material
object but also it may not even be real. That is, unless one has a realist conception
of laws, which however is not necessary in this approach. Indeed, both views
do not have to commit to a particular account on the nature of laws. They are
compatible with Humeanism: laws can still be imagined as the axioms and posits
of our best theories. But primitivism or necessitarianism are also not a priori
excluded.
Also, they both use simplicity as a guide to metaphysics. Structuralism eliminates
objects in favor of structure, while I eliminate properties. However, these attitudes
come to the same suspicion for properties, and the corresponding desire to have laws
and symmetries do the modal, explanatory work. Different is the case of moderate
structuralism that does not get rid of properties: the structure is constituted by the
relational properties and by the intrinsic properties.38
A ﬁnal point in common is the importance both approaches give to symmetries,
even if in different ways. In my framework, the symmetries of the theory help
identify the physical objects and constrain the form of the laws. In this way, thin
objects together with symmetries generate the structure, namely the laws and the
properties. In structuralism, however, symmetries are ontological prior to objects,
so that the structure together with the symmetries generate the laws, the objects and
the properties.
This leads directly to the main difference between the two views: my approach is
still object-oriented, even if in my case objects are thin. So, in eliminativism we have
structure, which through symmetries grounds thick-objects and their properties,
while in my view we have thin objects which through symmetries ground the
structural relations between thick-objects and their properties. In this sense, my
approach is more in line with the traditional object-oriented metaphysics than
eliminativism. Instead, both my view and moderate structuralism may be thought
of as object-oriented. However, they are very different. In moderate structuralism,
objects and structure are ontologically on the same footing: structure is a network
of relational properties between objects, which are deﬁned in terms of them.
Objects may have intrinsic properties like mass or charge, but mainly they are
deﬁned in terms of the relations, which are the ways the object could be. In
my view this is not so: there are spatiotemporal relations, but intrinsic properties
and relational properties which account for the motion of objects (nomological
relations) do not exist. In my view thin objects are ‘interconnected’ with one another
by laws, not properties. Laws do not deﬁne objects and objects do not deﬁne
laws.
38 Esfeld and Lam (2010).

10
Towards a Structuralist Elimination of Properties
151
10.3.4
Advantages of the Thin Objects View Over
Structuralism
To summarize, my view is structuralist: we have thin objects without intrinsic
properties, and we have structures, intended as the nomological network needed
for the objects to move. It is not an eliminativist view, given that there are objects.
It is not a variety of moderate structuralism, as object and structure (in this case,
the laws) are not ontologically on the same level: objects constitute matter, and
laws either supervene (if Humeanism is true) or not on them, but do not deﬁne the
objects.
Nonetheless, my approach can account for underdetermination and entangle-
ment. In fact, in the example of quantum mechanics, the way the wavefunction
evolves in time is irrelevant, as long as the law such wavefunction deﬁnes for
matter remains the same. Since different wavefunctions may give rise to the
same behavior for the objects, the wavefunction evolution is underdetermined.
Nonetheless, in this context it does not pose a problem, since the wavefunction is
not material. Rather, the underdetermination regarding objects is naturally broken,
since the nature of the fundamental objects is postulated as the ontology that
provides the simplest and most unifying explanation, constrained by symmetries.
This understanding of the wavefunction is also helpful in accounting for entan-
glement. While the sub-systems of an entangled system do not possess their own
wavefunction, in this framework this does not entail individuals described by
the subsystems do not exist: the wavefunction does not describe matter, the thin
objects do, and the dependence captured by entanglement is understood in terms of
laws.
As discussed, eliminativism suffers from the problem of intelligibility: it makes
no sense to say that relations exist without relata. Moderate structuralism postulates
relata to avoid this problem, but immediately runs into another problem, namely
properties. Indeed, this seems to go against one of the original motivations for struc-
turalism against the traditional view, namely getting rid of properties. Instead, by
adopting my approach one avoids the intelligibility objection against eliminativism
because there are relata, the thin objects. Moreover, one avoids the mystery charge
against properties in moderate structuralism, as instead of having properties and
laws, one merely has laws.
As far as the pessimistic meta induction argument goes, in my approach if the
nature of the object is preserved, then the problem is solved, otherwise it is not, but
at least the wavefunction with its non-classical nature is not involved.
To conclude, I have argued that both my approach and structuralism share many
motivations but overall, mine has less objections. So, if one is already convinced by
the arguments put forward by the structuralists and that radical changes are needed,
then one should endorse my view because it is less problematical.

152
V. Allori
10.4
Conclusion
In this paper, I have brieﬂy described a view that provides an object-oriented
structuralist alternative to the traditional object-oriented metaphysics. In my account
there is only one kind of fundamental entity, it has no other fundamental property
over and above its spatio-temporal ones. Then, there are structural relations between
the fundamental objects, which can be seen as ‘effective laws’ and which are able
to account for what we usually regard as different families of fundamental entities
(like protons and electrons). I have argued that this account, in contrast with the
traditional view, nicely extends to quantum physics, and captures the main ideas
and motivations of structuralism, without falling pray of many of its objections.
References
Ainsworth, P. M. (2010). What is ontic structural realism? Studies in History and Philosophy of
Modern Physics, 41, 50–57.
Albert, D. Z. (1996). Elementary quantum metaphysics. In J. Cushing, A. Fine, & S. Goldstein
(Eds.), Bohmian mechanics and quantum theory: An appraisal (pp. 277–284). Kluwer.
Albert, D. Z. (2015). After physics. Harvard University Press.
Albert, D. Z., & Ney, A. (Eds.). (2013). The wave-function: Essays in the metaphysics of quantum
mechanics. Oxford University Press.
Allori, V. (2013a). On the metaphysics of quantum mechanics. In S. Lebihan (Ed.), Precis de la
Philosophie de la Physique. Vuibert.
Allori, V. (2013b). Primitive ontology and the structure of fundamental physical theories. In D.
Albert & A. Ney (Eds.), The wave-function: Essays in the metaphysics of quantum mechanics
(pp. 58–75). Oxford University Press.
Allori, V. (2015a). Primitive ontology in a nutshell. International Journal of Quantum Foundations,
1(3), 107–122.
Allori, V. (2015b). Quantum mechanics and paradigm shifts. Topoi, 32(2), 313–323.
Allori, V. (2015c). Maxwell’s paradox: Classical electrodynamics and its time reversal invariance.
Analytica, 1, 1–19.
Allori, V. (2018a). A new argument for the nomological interpretation of the wave function:
The galilean group and the classical limit of nonrelativistic quantum mechanics. International
Studies in the Philosophy of Science, 31(2), 177–188.
Allori, V. (2018b). Primitive ontology and scientiﬁc realism. Or: The pessimistic meta-induction
and the nature of the wave function. Lato Sensu: Revue de la Société de Philosophie des
Sciences, 5(1), 69–76.
Allori, V. (2019a). Scientiﬁc realism without the wave-function: An example of naturalized
quantum metaphysics. In J. Saatsi & S. French (Eds.), Scientiﬁc realism and the quantum.
Oxford University Press.
Allori, V. (2019b). Quantum mechanics, time and ontology. Studies in History and Philosophy of
Modern Physics, 66, 145–154.
Allori, V. (2021a). Primitive Beable is not Local Ontology: On the Relation between Primitive
Ontology and Local Beables. Crítica5, 3(159), x–xx.
Allori, V. (2021b). Wave-functionalism. Synthese (2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-021-
03332-z

10
Towards a Structuralist Elimination of Properties
153
Allori, V. (forthcoming). Fundamental objects without fundamental properties: A thin-object-
orientated metaphysics grounded on structure. In D. Aerts, J. Arenhart, C. De Ronde, & G.
Sergioli (Eds.), Probing the meaning and structure of quantum mechanics. World Scientiﬁc.
Allori, V., Goldstein, S., Tumulka, R., & Zanghi, N. (2008). On the common structure of Bohmian
mechanics and the Ghirardi-Rimini-Weber theory. The British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science, 59(3), 353–389.
Armstrong, D. M. (1989). Universals. An opinionated introduction. Westview Press.
Bain, J. (2006). Spacetime structuralism. In D. Dieks (Ed.), The ontology of spacetime (pp. 37–66).
Elsevier.
Bain, J. (2009). Motivating structural realist interpretations of spacetime. Manuscript.
Bhogal, H., & Perry, Z. (2017). What the Humean should say about entanglement. Noûs, 1, 74–94.
Busch, J. (2003). What structures could not be. International Studies in the Philosophy of Science,
17, 211–223.
Callender, C. (2015). One world, one beable. Synthese, 192, 3153–3177.
Cao, T. Y. (2003). Can we dissolve physical entities into mathematical structure? Synthese, 136,
57–71.
Castellani, E. (1998). Galilean particles: An example of constitution of objects. In E. Castellani
(Ed.), Interpreting bodies: Classical and quantum objects in modern physics (pp. 181–194).
Princeton.
Chakravartty, A. (2003). The structuralist conception of objects. Philosophy of Science, 70, 867–
878.
Chakravartty, A. (2004). Structuralism as a form of scientiﬁc realism. International Studies in
Philosophy of Science, 18, 151–171.
Chakravartty, A. (2007). A metaphysics for scientiﬁc realism. Cambridge University Press.
Dürr, D., Goldstein, S., & Zanghí, N. (1992). Quantum equilibrium and the origin of absolute
uncertainty. Journal of Statistical Physics, 67, 843–907.
Esfeld, M. A. (2004). Quantum entanglement and a metaphysics of relations. Studies in History
and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 35, 601–617.
Esfeld, M. A. (2009). The Modal nature of structures in ontic structural realism. International
Studies in the Philosophy of Science, 23, 179–194.
Esfeld, M. A. (2014). Quantum humeanism, or: Physicalism without properties. The Philosophical
Quarterly, 64, 453–470.
Esfeld, M. A., & Lam, V. (2008). Moderate structural realism about space-time. Synthese, 160,
27–46.
Esfeld, M. A., & Lam, V. (2010). Ontic structural realism as a metaphysics of objects. In A.
Bokulich & P. Bokulich (Eds.), Scientiﬁc Structuralism. Springer.
Esfeld, M. A., & Lam, V. (2012). The structural metaphysics of quantum theory and general
relativity. Journal for General Philosophy of Science, 43(2), 243–258.
Esfeld, M. A., & Sachse, C. (2011). Conservative reductionism. Routledge.
Esfeld, M. A., Lazarovici, D., Huber, M., & Dürr, D. (2014). The ontology of Bohmian mechanics.
The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 65, 773–796.
French, S. (2010). The interdependence of objects, structure, and dependence. Synthese, 175, 89–
109.
French, S. (2013). Whither wave function realism? In D. Albert & A. Ney (Eds.), The wave-
function: Essays in the metaphysics of quantum mechanics (pp. 76–90). Oxford University
Press.
French, S. (2014). The structure of the world: Metaphysics and representation. Oxford University
Press.
French, S., & Krause, D. (2006). Identity in physics: A historical, philosophical and formal
analysis. Oxford University Press.
French, S., & Ladyman, J. (2003). Remodelling structural realism: Quantum physics and the
metaphysics of structure. Synthese, 136, 31–56.

154
V. Allori
Goldstein, S., & Zanghì, N. (2013). Reality and the role of the wave-function in quantum theory.
In D. Albert & A. Ney (Eds.), The wave-function: Essays in the metaphysics of quantum
mechanics (pp. 91–109). Oxford University Press.
Hall, N. (2015). Humean reductionism about laws of nature. In B. Loewer & J. Schaffer (Eds.), A
companion to David Lewis (pp. 262–277). Wiley.
Healey, R. (2012). Quantum theory: A pragmatist approach. British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science, 63(4), 729–771.
Heil, J. (2003). From an ontological point of view. Oxford University Press.
Ladyman, J. (1998). What is structural realism? Studies in History and Philosophy of Science, 29,
409–424.
Ladyman, J. (2008). Structural realism and the relationship between the special sciences and
physics. Philosophy of Science, 75, 744–755.
Ladyman, J., & Bigaj, T. F. (2010). The principle of the identity of Indiscernibles and quantum
mechanics. Philosophy of Science, 77, 117–136.
Ladyman, J., & Ross, D. (2007). Everything must go: Metaphysics naturalized. Oxford University
Press.
Lewis, D. (1986). Philosophical Papers (Vol. II). Oxford University Press.
Lewis, P. J. (2004). Life in conﬁguration space. The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science,
55, 713–729.
Lewis, P. J. (2005). Interpreting spontaneous collapse theories. Studies in History and Philosophy
of Modern Physics, 36, 165–180.
Lewis, P. J. (2006). GRW: A case study in quantum ontology. Philosophy Compass, 1, 224–244.
Lewis, P. J. (2013). Dimension and Illusion. In D. Albert & A. Ney (Eds.), The Wave-function:
Essays in the Metaphysics of Quantum Mechanics (pp. 110–125). Oxford University Press.
Lewis, P. J. (2020). On closing the circle. In V. Allori, A. Bassi, D. Dürr, N. Zanghì, & N. (Eds.), Do
wave functions jump? Perspectives on the work of GianCarlo Ghirardi (pp. 121–132). Springer.
Maudlin, T. (2007). The metaphysics within physics. Oxford University Press.
Miller, E. (2014). Quantum entanglement, Bohmian mechanics, and Humean supervenience.
Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 92, 567–583.
Monton, B. (2002). Wave function ontology. Synthese, 130, 265–277.
Morganti, M. (2004). On the Preferability of epistemic structural realism. Synthese, 142, 81–107.
Muller, F. A. (2009). Withering away, weakly. Synthese, 180(2), 223–233.
Muller, F. A., & Saunders, S. (2008). Discerning fermions. British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science, 59, 499–548.
Ney, A. (2012). The status of our ordinary three-dimensions in a quantum universe. Noûs, 46,
525–560.
Ney, A. (2013). Ontological reduction and the wave-function ontology. In D. Albert & A. Ney
(Eds.), The wave-function (pp. 168–183). Oxford University Press.
Ney, A. (2015). Fundamental physical ontologies and the constraint of empirical coherence.
Synthese, 192(10), 3105–3124.
Ney, A. (2017). Finding the world in the wave-function: Some strategies for solving the macro-
object problem. Synthese, 1–23.
Ney, A. (2021). Finding the world in the wave function. Oxford University Press.
North, J. (2013). The structure of the quantum world. In D. Z. Albert & A. Ney (Eds.), The wave-
function: Essays in the metaphysics of quantum mechanics (pp. 184–202). Oxford University
Press.
Pooley, O. (2006). Points, particles, and structural realism. In D. Rickles, S. French, & J. Saatsi
(Eds.), The structural foundations of quantum gravity (pp. 83–120). Oxford University Press.
Psillos, S. (2006). The structure, the whole structure and nothing but the structure. Philosophy of
Science, 73, 560–570.
Rickles, D. (2006). Time and structure in canonical gravity. In D. Rickles, S. French, & J. Saatsi
(Eds.), The structural foundations of quantum gravity (pp. 152–195). Oxford University Press.
Russell, B. (1912). On the notion of cause. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 13, 1–26.
Saunders, S. (2006). Are quantum particles objects? Analysis, 66, 52–63.

10
Towards a Structuralist Elimination of Properties
155
Solé, A. (2013). Bohmian mechanics without wave function ontology. Studies in History and
Philosophy of Modern Physics, 44, 365–378.
Strawson, G. (2008). The identity of the categorical and the dispositional. Analysis, 68, 271–282.
Suarez, M. (2015). Bohmian dispositions. Synthese, 192(10), 3203–3228.
Teller, P. (1986). Relational holism and quantum mechanics. British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science, 37, 71–81.
Worrall, J. (1989). Structural realism: The best of both worlds? Dialectica, 43, 99–124.

Chapter 11
Quantum Ontology Without Wave
Function
Carlo Rovelli
Abstract The relational interpretation offers an understanding of the theory rooted
in realism (as opposed to instrumentalism) where agents or knowledge play no role,
while at the same not interpreting realistically the quantum state ψ.
11.1
Realism Without Wave Function
The discussion on how to make sense of quantum theory is plagued by a widespread
confusion generated by mixing up two distinct questions:
1. Do we get more clarity by interpreting quantum theory “realistically” namely as
an account of what happens in the world; or do we get more clarity by interpreting
it as the account of the knowledge of a subject?
2. What precisely is the wave function, or more in general, the quantum state ψ?
Do we get clarity by interpreting ψ “realistically” as the best picture of the way
a system is, the “beable” of the theory? Or do we get more clarity by interpreting
ψ as a calculation devise, an account of past interactions, a bookkeeping of the
probability for something to happen?
These are two distinct questions. I think that mixing them up is the source of
much of the confusion about quantum theory. In fact, we can get clarity about
quantum theory by interpreting the theory realistically, without interpreting the wave
function realistically.
C. Rovelli ()
Aix Marseille University, Université de Toulon, CNRS, CPT, Marseille, France
Perimeter Institute, Waterloo, ON, Canada
The Rotman Institute of Philosophy and the Department of Philosophy of Western Ontario
University, London, ON, Canada
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
V. Allori (ed.), Quantum Mechanics and Fundamentality, Synthese Library 460,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-99642-0_11
157

158
C. Rovelli
This is not an artiﬁcial option, it is the natural one: the one we adopt for classical
mechanics. The classical mechanics of—say—a non-relativistic particle admits a
realistic interpretation based on a simple ontology: there is a particle with a certain
mass somewhere in space, that moves in a way described by the values of its physical
variables. In the semi-classical limit, the wave function ψ(x, t) ∼e
i
¯h S(x,t) of a
particle is (the exponential of) the Hamilton-Jacobi function S(x, t). The Hamilton-
Jacobi function is a solution of the Hamilton-Jacobi equation, which is the classical
limit of the Schrödinger equation, conﬁrming the fact that the wave function and
the Hamilton-Jacobi function refer to the same quantity. Now, nobody in their
right mind would interpret the Hamilton-Jacobi function S(x, t) realistically. The
Hamilton-Jacobi function is a calculation devise, certainly not a “realistic” picture
of the particle.
The same natural option is available for quantum theory: interpreting the theory
realistically, without interpreting the wave function realistically. How?
11.2
Ontology
In order to be a realist, without being a realist about the wave function, we have to
be realist about something else. In other words we have to adopt an ontology which
is not based on the wave function.
In both classical and quantum mechanics the ontology can be taken to be deﬁned
by systems and properties, where properties are described by the values of the
physical variables associated to a system. The difference between the classical and
the quantum case is the following:
In classical mechanics: (a) physical systems have properties at any time t, and (b)
these properties pertain to the systems itself.
In quantum mechanics: (a) physical systems have properties only when they interact
with other physical systems and (b) these properties are relative to the systems in
interaction.
This is the realistic ontology of the relational interpretation of quantum theory
(Laudisa and Rovelli, 2021; Rovelli, 1996).
The wave function is taken only to be a calculation devise to compute the
probability distribution of the values taken by the relative properties of a system
at interactions.
The main idea is that the very meaning of the (contingent, variable) properties of
a system, which are described by values of its physical variables, is not something
attached to a single system at any time, but rather a description of the way in which
the system affects other systems, or manifest itself to other physical systems, at
(discrete) interactions.
Not only this reading of quantum theory is possible, but it is in fact how quantum
theory originated (Rovelli, 2017). Quantum theory was completed in Göttingen in

11
Quantum Ontology Without Wave Function
159
1925—including the calculation of the spectrum of hydrogen (Pauli, 1926)—by
Max Born and his young collaborators (Born and Jordan, 1925; Born et al., 1926),
and independently by Dirac (1925), before 1926s Schrödinger introduction of ψ.
Hence quantum mechanics can be formulated without ψ, like the dynamics of a non
relativistic classical particle can be formulated without Hamilton-Jacobi function S.
The original Göttingen formulation of quantum mechanics is still philosophically
the clearest. The breakthrough was of course Heisenberg’s (1925), but I think that
the theory was mostly the brainchild of Max Born. It is extremely elegant. In a sense,
it can be condensed by simply saying that a quantum theory has the same variables
as a classical theory, with the same physical interpretation, and obeying the same
equations, plus one: xp −px = i ¯h. The theory is not about wave functions or
quantum states: it is about physical variables taking values at interactions, precisely
as the classical theory. Its equations describe (probabilistic) regularities that these
values happen to satisfy.
The technical step that makes this interpretation possible is the realisation that
the fact that a variable takes a value relative to one system has no bearing on the
probabilities for values taken with respect to other systems.
This resolves the apparent contradiction between wave function collapse and
unitary evolution. Both are relative to physical systems. The ﬁrst pertains to the
interaction, the second connects separated interactions.
Schrödinger’s cat sees the poison’s bottle open, or not. But this has no bearing
on the fact that, in an actual interaction with her, an observer outside the box can
still observe quantum interference effects that would not exists if the poison’s bottle
was open, nor if it was closed. Wigner’s friend can measure a single given value
of the spin, and nevertheless Wigner can measure a quantum interference effect
between the two values. No contradiction emerges, if we avoid postulating absolute,
nonrelational facts between events.
This is a way of interpreting quantum theory that avoids many worlds, hidden
variables, physical collapses and other similar hypostases, and at the same time
avoids radical instrumentalism.
Of course there is a price to pay for interpreting quantum physics in this way,
like there is a price to pay in any interpretation of quantum mechanics.
The price is accepting the idea that variables take value only at interactions and
the value they take is relative to the systems involved in the interaction.
Accepting to pay this price and interpreting quantum theory as a realistic account
of the relative value that physical variables take in physical interactions between
system is the relational interpretation of quantum mechanics (Laudisa and Rovelli,
2021; Rovelli, 1996). Below I detail what are the reasons, the implications and the
advantages of this perspective.

160
C. Rovelli
11.3
Contextuality
Niels Bohr identiﬁed the core novelty of quantum physics –contextuality– when he
wrote (Bohr, 1998)
The description of a system cannot be separated from the measuring instruments that
interact with it.
But this formulation is misleading because it seems to make “measuring
instruments”, or special “observers” necessary. A century of successes of quantum
theory later, we are conﬁdent that quantum theory applies to everything in the
universe, whether or not there is a measuring apparatus or a scientist observing.
Bohr’s contextuality observation needs therefore to be generalised and the measurer
removed.
This can be done by reformulating it as follows:
The description of a system cannot be separated from the other physical systems that
interact with it.
Abandon the notion of a real wave function that mirrors reality and take this
statement seriously, and we have a way to making sense of quantum theory.
The variables of a quantum system do not denote how the system “is”. They
denote how the system “affects” another system.
The consequences of this shift are two. First, variables have in general no value
outside interactions (because they only have meaning at interactions). Second, the
value that a variable takes are labeled by the systems involved in the interaction.
They are not properties of one single system.
To put it bluntly: whether Schrödinger’s cat’s life is on or off has a value for
the cat, but not a value for the world external to the box, which is not interacting
with the cat. This means that in spite of the fact that there is a value of this variable
relative to the cat, quantum interference between its two values can still show up in
future interactions with systems outside the box.
The apparent contradiction between the two postulates of quantum theory
(unitary evolution and state projection) is resolved because they apply to different
quantities. The second is only relevant for quantities relative to the systems in
interaction. The ﬁrst is relevant for the other systems.
This relativity of value attribution becomes invisible in the macroscopic world,
because decoherence suppresses quantum interference, which is the only hint we
have that betrays the relativity of value attribution (Di Biagio and Rovelli, 2021).
11.4
Relations
What is then the ontology of quantum mechanics, at the light of the relational
interpretation?

11
Quantum Ontology Without Wave Function
161
In a naturalistic perspective, we want our ontology to be compatible with our
current best science. From the perspective of the relational interpretation, quantum
mechanics allows us to maintain an ontology in which the world can be organised in
distinct physical systems, but blocks us from assuming that the contingent (variable)
properties of these systems are independent. All contingent (variable) properties are
relational, namely they are relations: they refer to two systems, not one.
We already use relational thinking widely in many sciences (biology, psychology,
economics, for instance, are more about relations than about autonomous entities)
as well in physics (velocity, position, potentials, are relational notions). Quantum
mechanics indicates that fundamental physics does not provide a substratum of
substance with properties: for properties, it is relations all the way down. The world
is woven by relationships that go all the way down to the smallest physical entities.
The word can be described as a collection of facts (the particle is here, the particle
is there, the cat is alive, the cat is dead). A fact is accounted for by a variable of a
physical system having a value with respect to another system. For instance, a fact is
a particle having a certain position in the moment in which it hits a screen. Facts are
relative (Bong et al., 2019; Brukner, 2018; Frauchiger and Renner, 2018), because
they always can be thought as the interaction between two entities (the particle,
the screen). Facts happen at interactions. More precisely, properties described by
facts are relative. Fact appear to be stable when decoherence allows us to forget
their labeling (a macroscopic stone has a position by itself, because no practically
detectable quantum interference betrays the relativity its position).
The happening of the world is the happening of discrete quantum events: discrete
interactions where the variables of individual systems take value. This is a discrete
relational ontology.
References
Bohr, N. (1998). The philosophical writings of Niels Bohr (Vol. IV, p. 111). Oxbow Press.
Bong, K. W., Utreras-Alarcón, A., Ghafari, F., Liang, Y. C., Tischler, N., Cavalcanti, E. G.,
Pryde, G. J., & Wiseman, H. M. (2019). Testing the reality of Wigner’s friend’s observations.
arXiv:1907.05607.
Born, M., & Jordan, P. (1925). Zur Quantenmechanik. Zeitschrift für Physik, 34, 854–888.
Born, M., Jordan, P., & Heisenberg, W. (1926). Zur Quantenmechanik II. Zeitschrift für Physik,
35, 557–615.
Brukner, ˇC. (2018). A No-Go theorem for observer independent facts. Entropy, 20, 350.
Di Biagio, A., & Rovelli, C. (2021). Stable facts, relative facts. Foundations of Physics, 51, 30,
arXiv:2006.15543.
Dirac, P. A. M. (1925). The fundamental equations of quantum mechanics. Proceedings of the
Royal Society of London, 109, 645–653.
Frauchiger, D., & Renner, R. (2018). Quantum theory cannot consistently describe the use of itself.
Nature Communications, 9, arXiv:1604.07422.
Heisenberg, W. (1925). Uber quantentheoretische Umdeutung kinematischer und mechanischer
Beziehungen. Zeitschrift für Physik, 33, 879–893.
Laudisa, F., & Rovelli, C. (2021). Relational quantum mechanics. In The Stanford encyclopedia of
philosophy.

162
C. Rovelli
Pauli, W. (1926). Uber das Wasserstospektrum vom Standpunkt der neuen Quantenmechanik [On
the hydrogen spectrum from the standpoint of the new quantum mechanics]. Zeitschrift für
Physik, 36, 336–363.
Rovelli, C. (1996). Relational quantum mechanics. International Journal of Theoretical Physics,
35, 1637 (1996), arXiv:9609002 [quant-ph].
Rovelli, C. (2017). Space is blue and birds ﬂy through it. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 376, arXiv:1712.02894.

Chapter 12
The Relational Ontology
of Contemporary Physics
Francesca Vidotto
Abstract Quantum theory can be understood as pointing to an ontology of
relations. I observe that this reading of quantum mechanics is supported by the
ubiquity of relationality in contemporary fundamental physics, including in classical
mechanics, gauge theories, general relativity, quantum ﬁeld theory, and the tentative
theories of quantum gravity.
12.1
Introduction
The image of the world offered by quantum mechanics leaves us with a dizziness.
It is hard to make sense of the discreteness and the indetermination revealed by the
theory. Different reactions to this vertigo lead to different ways of understanding
what the theory tells us about reality, namely different ‘interpretations’ of the theory.
Two opposite attitudes are possible. One is to try to bend discreteness and
indetermination into an underlying hypothetical continuous and determined reality.
For instance, the Many-Worlds interpretation assigns ontological value to the
quantum states, which are continuous and always determined; while the DeBroglie-
Bohm, or pilot-wave, interpretation assigns ontological value to a commuting
algebra of preferred variables such as positions of particles, which are also assumed
to be continuous and always determined. All these are interpretations based on an
ontology of objects, or entities, with properties.
The other possible attitude is to take discreteness and indetermination at their
face value, and study their consequences. The relational interpretation of quantum
mechanics (Rovelli, 1996) starts from this second position. It does not make use
of an ontology of entities that have always properties, but rather an ontology of
F. Vidotto ()
Department of Physics and Astronomy, Department of Philosophy, Rotman Institute
of Philosophy, The University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada
e-mail: fvidotto@uwo.ca
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
V. Allori (ed.), Quantum Mechanics and Fundamentality, Synthese Library 460,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-99642-0_12
163

164
F. Vidotto
relations, where the properties (of relata) are only determined at discrete interaction
times and are always relative to both interacting systems.1
This is a rather radical metaphysical position: it places relations, rather than
objects, or substances, at the center of the metaphysical conception. Articulating
such a position has its difﬁculties: How to think of relations before relata? How
to preserve the objectivity of our representations, if properties turn out to be
so relative? What grants the commensurability between perspectives? There are
answers to these questions (French & Krause, 2006; Ladyman & Ross, 2007;
Rovelli, 2018), but they involve a radical rethinking of the conceptual basis of all
our representations of reality. So, why should we venture into this arduous journey,
when more pacifying readings of quantum theory, compatible with a more naive
realism, are available?
After all, different interpretations offer coherent frameworks for understanding
the content of quantum mechanics and interpreting reality around us. Internal coher-
ence is a necessary condition for a consistent interpretation of quantum mechanics,
but is insufﬁcient in helping us choosing between different interpretations.
One possibility to settle this problem is to delegate the answer to the future: some
interpretations may turn out to more fruitful. This is for instance how the debate on
wether or not it is better to consider the Earth to be the center of the Universe (a non
empirical question!) was settled: one option turned out to be deﬁnitely more fruitful.
It has been argued that quantum gravity might be easier within one interpretation. Or
perhaps a future theory superseding quantum mechanics will require one particular
interpretation (Smolin, 2019; Valentini, 2021). In all these cases, however, the new
results against which to evaluate current interpretations are not yet available.
Here I want, instead, to investigate a different strategy for evaluating inter-
pretations of quantum theory: their coherence with the conceptual frameworks of
other physical theories that best capture our recent advances in understanding the
physical world. I argue below that the relationality that characterizes the relational
interpretation of quantum mechanics is in fact not so unconventional after all.
Rather, it characterizes modern physics. My aim is to provide in this way a more
solid foundations to the idea that relationality is central to quantum mechanics:
through the analysis of how relationality is present, perhaps in a transversal way,
in virtually all aspects of contemporary physics.
In fact, I shall argue that the relationality at the base of quantum mechanics
is already present in classical mechanics: by putting this classical relationality in
evidence, we better situate the emergence of the more subtle relationality of the
quantum case. To this end, we need to look at classical theory from a modern
perspective, in particular using the language of symmetries and gauge theories.
This allows us to create a natural bridge with quantum mechanics in its relativistic
1 The relationality of relational quantum mechanics has been compared with ontic structuralism
by Candiotto (2017) and Dorato (2020). The metaphysical implications of relational quantum
mechanics, and the association with the more general structuralist framework, are still requiring an
in-depth investigation. In this respect, of particular interest are the positions developed by Esfeld
(2004) and French and Ladyman (2003).

12
The Relational Ontology of Contemporary Physics
165
version. When we talk about interpretations of quantum mechanics, it is misleading
to restrict us to the non relativistic domain: we must consider the compatibility with
quantum ﬁeld theory, with Yang Mills theories and with gravity. Relationality offers
a key to do so.
I also discuss the speciﬁc connection between quantum theory and the relativistic
theory of the gravitational ﬁeld. The problematic nature of this connection can be
solved by using a common language: that of totally constrained systems. This can
serve as common ground for understanding the foundational problems of quantum
mechanics, gravity, and the role of symmetries/gauge, within a common conceptual
framework.
If these steps are carried out carefully, then the image of a fundamental
conceptual structure for understanding reality at our present level of knowledge
opens up: that of covariant quantum ﬁelds. This is what quantum gravity is about:
a quantum description of the gravitational ﬁeld must follow from a covariant
description of quantum ﬁelds in full generality. Physics forces us towards engaging
metaphysically in a speciﬁc direction: everything that exists is quantum, everything
that exists is covariant. I argue below that this is clariﬁed by seeing that everything
quantum is relational, and everything covariant is relational.
12.2
Relationality in Quantum Mechanics
Taking relations as fundamental in quantum mechanics implies a change in the
ontology that does not prevent to be realist. The relational interpretation is a realistic
one: when a self-adjoint operator, which codes the physical properties of a system,
assumes a certain eigenvalue, this corresponds to an element of reality. Rovelli refers
to these elements of reality of relational quantum mechanics as facts (see Rovelli’s
article in this volume), or events. Like the events in relativity, quantum events are
about physical systems in interaction. We may label these systems as observer or
“observed”, but subjectivity, agents, mind, idealism, phenomenology, etcetera, play
no role in this interpretation.

166
F. Vidotto
These facts actually have a clear correspondence with the ontology of classical
mechanics. In the quantum formalism, the observables correspond by deﬁnition to
the measurable quantities of classical physics. On the other hand, the relational
interpretation is characterized by the fact that these facts are understood as
intrinsically relational: they are real, but their actualization as real is always related
to both systems interacting when the value of a measurable quantity is determined.
A fact can be true or actualized with respect to a system (which acts with the abstract
role of observer or measuring apparatus) and also not be true with respect to another.
Reality and relationality are therefore inextricably linked. We attribute existence
to a system from its possessing certain properties: location, speed, energy, angular
momentum, area, volume...In quantum mechanics, we realize that it is not It is
possible to speak of any of these properties except in a relational manner. Each
property is determined by a relationship between systems. When this relationship
does not materialize, the property is not determined.
In a Galilean system, in order to deﬁne the speed of an object we must have a
reference system with respect to which the speed is measured; different reference
systems associate a different speed to the same object. If no reference system is
deﬁned, the object does not have any “speed” property. There can not be a notion of
“speed”, for instance, associated to the universe as a whole.
In relational quantum mechanics this principle is the foundation of the ontology
of the theory: the elements of reality, the facts are aspects of a relationship, and take
place in interactions. The ontological priority of the interactions invests the whole
structure of what we call real.2
In particular, interactions determine our notion of locality. In contemporary
physics we emphasize the fact that interactions are local. But the notion of
interaction is more primitive than that of localization. Nonetheless, as we shall
see, it is precisely the locality of the interactions that saves us from some apparent
paradoxes of quantum mechanics.
The prototype of these paradoxes is the EPR one (Martin-Dussaud et al., 2019;
Smerlak & Rovelli, 2007). Two spatially separated systems (observers) A and B
interact with (measure) two entangled particles, one each. This determines a fact
relative to A and a fact relative to B. A paradox arises only from the assumption that
what is an element of reality for A is also an element of reality for B, and vice versa.
A and B may have an element of reality in common only when a local interaction
occurs between them. We cannot consider a fact for A, or a fact for B, as absolute.
We can eventually introduce a third observer C, with respect to which there will be
some element that regards the comparison of the two, but only provided that this is
interacting (hence locally interacting) with both A and B.
2 Notice that in an ontology of relations it is still possible to refer to relata in a meaningful way. For
instance here we have used the notion of systems and we will talk about objects such as particles
and ﬁelds. All of them, it is argued, have a relational nature. But, as a structuralist would say, it
does not follow from logical principles that they cannot be objects of predication (Saunders, 2003).

12
The Relational Ontology of Contemporary Physics
167
12.3
The Relationality of Symmetries
In modern physics, interactions are largely encoded in symmetries. The symmetries
of a system determine the possible interactions such system can have with another
system. Symmetries therefore capture the potential of interactions among systems.
The apparent arbitrariness that often appear in the deﬁnition of the symmetries of
a system reﬂect different possibilities for the system to couple to another system.
For instance, general relativity formulated in a tetrad formalism has an additional
local symmetry with respect to Einstein’s metric formulation, which captures the
possibility of coupling the theory to oriented local objects such as fermions.
In particular, from this perspective, gauge symmetries do not represent redundant
superstructures. They do not just express an indeterminism that needs to be
eliminated to get a deterministic theory, or a redundancy in any other sense.
The apparent arbitrariness has its origin in the relationship between gauge and
relationality. A gauge transformation is s mathematical redundancy only when we
consider systems in isolation. The coupling of the system with other systems can
well be given by (gauge invariant) interactions that couple gauge degrees of freedom
of one system with gauge degrees of freedom of the other. Together, new physical
degrees of freedom are born in this coupling. For instance, the Maxwell potential
is redundant in the dynamics of the electromagnetic ﬁeld alone, but is needed in
coupling the ﬁeld to some charged ﬁelds such as an electron. The Maxwell potential
is not a just a redundant mathematical addition to reality: it is the handle through
which the electromagnetic ﬁeld couples to electrons.
Notice that what is relevant, what captures the essence of physical reality, is
the coupling between systems, not what we identify as the system. Two systems
coupled to each other cancel their respective gauge redundancies: by coupling a
gauge-dependent quantity of one system to a gauge-dependent quantity of the other
system, we give rise to a give-independent physical interaction.
This observation leads to an important distinction regarding observable quan-
tities. We refer to gauge-dependent quantities as partial observables (Rovelli,
2002), and gauge-independent quantities as complete observables in the sense of
Dirac. Both kinds of quantities are associated with operators whose eigenvalues
corresponds to elements of reality. Both are associated to relative facts. In this
sense, partial observables and complete observables have the same ontological
status. The difference, on the other hand, is clear cut: partial observables can
be measured, but cannot be predicted by dynamic equations alone, while gauge-
independent observables can be measured and also predicted (Rovelli, 2013). In
this sense, as Dirac noted, only the latter lead to a determinism in the theory. The
indeterminacy of the evolution of the former simply reﬂects the fact that their value
depends on the dynamical evolution of another system whose equations of motion
are not considered. For instance, the Einstein equations do not determine uniquely
the evolution of the metric tensor because a measurement of this tensor is always
relative to a speciﬁc (say, material) reference frame, whose equations of motion are
in general not included in the Einstein’s equations alone.

168
F. Vidotto
12.4
Relationality in Quantum Field Theory
A striking example of relationality is provided by the notion of particle in quantum
ﬁeld theory. While some presentation of quantum ﬁeld theory rely heavily of the
notion of particle taken as fundamental (Weinberg, 1995), it is also very well known
that the number of particles present in a given quantum ﬁeld theory state depends on
the reference system. On a generic curved spacetime, in particular, there is no unique
notion of number of particles. Physically, different particle detectors count different
numbers of particles. Mathematically, in the absence of global Poincaré invariance
there is no natural Fock structure in the (nevertheless well deﬁned) Hilbert space of
states.
The existence of particle can be true with respect to one system but not with
respect to another. Different detectors probe different bases in the same Hilbert
space. When a detector measure a certain number of particles, we say that the
existence of these particles is an element of reality. But the point above makes
clear that this is a relational reality: it is the number of particles with respect to
the interaction with that detector.
12.5
Relationality in General Relativity
The relational nature of space and time has been longly debated. General relativity,
while deﬁning space and time as manifestation of the gravitational ﬁeld, has
a structure that is deeply relational (Vidotto, 2016). Dynamical objects are not
localized with respect to a ﬁxed background but only with respect to one another.
Notice how the collection of dynamical objects includes the gravitational ﬁeld
itself. The very structure of spacetime is built upon contiguity relations, namely
the fact of spacetime regions to be “next to one another”. But in the case of the
gravitational ﬁeld, saying that different regions are contiguous one another through
their boundaries means exactly that these regions are interacting.
Alternatively, when we couple general relativity to the matter of a material
reference system, the components of the gravitational ﬁeld with respect to the
directions deﬁned by this system are gauge-invariant quantities of the coupled
system; but they are gauge-dependent quantities of the gravitational ﬁeld, measured
with respect to a given external frame. In this case, a prototypical example of a
partial observable is time: a quantity that we routinely determine (looking at a clock)
but we can not predict from the dynamics of the system.

12
The Relational Ontology of Contemporary Physics
169
12.6
Relationality in Quantum Gravity
The relational aspect of spatio-temporal localization that characterizes general
relativity and the relational aspect of quantum mechanics that is emphasized by
its relational interpretation combine surprisingly well precisely thanks to the fact
that interactions are local. This combination provides a solid conceptual structure
for quantum gravity (Vidotto, 2016).
In fact, locality is a main discovery of in XX century modern physics: interactions
at distance of the Newton’s kind don’t seem to be part of our world. They are only
approximate descriptions of reality. In the particles’ standard model, as well as in
general relativity, things can interact only when they “touch”: all interactions are
local. This means that objects in interactions should be in the same place: interaction
require localization and localization requires interaction. To be in interaction
correspond to be adjacent in spacetime and vice versa: the two reduce to one another.
In other words, the fact that interaction are local means that they require
spacetime contiguity. But the contrary is also true: the only way to ascertain that
two objects are contiguous is by means of having them interact.
Therefore we can identify the Heisenberg cut that deﬁnes the separation with
respect to which (relative) facts are realized in quantum theory, with the boundary
of spacetime regions that deﬁne the (relative) localization in general relativity.
By bringing the two perspectives together, we obtain the boundary formulation
of quantum gravity (Oeckl, 2003, 2008): the theory describes processes and their
interactions. The manner a process affects another is described by the Hilbert state
associated to its boundary. The probabilities of one or another outcome are given
by the transition amplitudes associated to the bulk, and obtained from the matrix
elements of the projector on the solutions of the Wheeler-DeWitt equation.
Let us make this more concrete. Consider a process such as the scattering of
some particles at CERN. If we want to take into account the gravitational ﬁled, we
need to include it as part of the system. In doing quantum gravity, the gravitational
ﬁeld (or spacetime) is part of the system. Distance and time measurements are ﬁeld
measurements like the others in general relativity: they are part of the boundary data
of the problem.
Thinking in terms of functional integrals, we have to sum over all possible
histories, but also all possible geometries associated to a given ﬁnite spacetime
region.
In the computation of a transition amplitude, we need to give the boundary data of
the process that are for instance the position of a particle at an initial and a ﬁnal time.
We use rods and clocks to deﬁne them. But those measure geometrical informations
that are just value of the gravitational ﬁeld. Everything we have to give is the value
of the ﬁelds on the boundary. This includes the gravitational ﬁelds from which we

170
F. Vidotto
can say how much time have passed and the distance between the initial and the ﬁnal
point. Geometrical and temporal data are encoded in the boundary state, because this
is also the state of the gravitational ﬁeld, which is the state of spacetime.
This structural identiﬁcation is in fact much deeper. As noticed, the most
remarkable aspect of quantum theory is that the boundary between processes can be
moved at wish. Final total amplitudes are not affected by displacing the boundary
between “observed system” and “observing system”. The same is true for spacetime:
boundaries are arbitrarily drawn in spacetime. The physical theory is therefore a
description of how arbitrary partitions of nature affect one another. Because of
locality and because of gravity, these partitions are at the same time subsystems
split and partitions of spacetime. A spacetime is a process, a state is what happens
at its boundary (Rovelli & Vidotto, 2014).
This clariﬁes that in quantum gravity a process is a spacetime region. Relational
quantum mechanics describes systems in interaction. What deﬁnes the system and
when is it interacting? For spacetime, a process is simply a region of spacetime.
Spacetime is a quantum mechanical process once we do quantum gravity. Vice
versa, this now helps us to understand how to do quantum gravity.
Notice that from this perspective quantum gravitational processes are deﬁned
locally, without any need to invoke asymptotic regions. Summarizing:

12
The Relational Ontology of Contemporary Physics
171
12.7
Conclusion: The Relational Nature of Contemporary
Physics
The debate on the interpretation of quantum mechanics is far from having reached
a consensus. Addressing it is unavoidable in order to answer the question of “what
does exist?” as far as current physics tells us.
But considering this a question related to Quantum Mechanics alone deprives
ourselves of some fundamental conceptual inputs, that come from the core of the
picture of the world revealed to contemporary physics.
I have described the lesson of quantum mechanics from the perspective of
relational quantum mechanics. General relativity, quantum ﬁeld theory and quantum
gravity, are compatible and they support such point of view.
Gauge theories and quantum ﬁelds theories have a deep relational core: gauge
degrees of freedom are handle for interactions to other systems. Even the particles
of quantum ﬁeld theory, that in an ontology of objects we would be tempted to call
fundamental objects, are in fact relative, not absolute, entities.
Locality reveals a deep structural analogy between the relations on which
quantum mechanics is based and those on which spacetime is based. Quantum
gravity makes this connection completely explicit. In quantum gravity a process
is not in a spacetime region: a process is a spacetime region. Analogously, a state
is not somewhere in space: it is the description of the way two processes interact,
or two spacetime regions pass information to one another. Viceversa, a spacetime
region is a process: it is like a Feynman sum of everything can happen between its
boundaries.
The resulting relational ontology, compatible with quantum mechanics as well
as with the rest of our current physical theories, is a minimalistic one. There is
no necessity to attribute an ontological role to states nor some mysterious hidden
variables: only facts, or events, are part of the ontology. It is also a “lighter”
ontology: facts are sparse and relative.
This means for instance that particles only exists in interactions, not in between,
and exists only with respect to the system they are in relation with, not with respect
to the rest of the universe. One may ask: what happens between two interactions? In
between, there are other interactions of the ﬁeld: these interactions are what gives
sense to the expression “in between”. We can distinguish a particle that appears
here and then there, being some interaction made by the ﬁeld: what does deﬁne the
identity of the particle and its story? Only regularities in the interactions. In fact we
may think, if we wish, that there is no particle, only correlated interactions (Hume,
1896). These correlations are such that I measure the ﬁeld here now and later on
there, I obtain correlated values. This is what we mean by saying that there is the
same particle. There are just manifestations of a ﬁeld. A ﬁeld exists through its
interactions.
This stance weakens usual realism, but makes it compatible with our current
empirical knowledge and spare us pernicious paradoxes. The relational realism, it
should be stresses, is not in any form relativist: going relational does not weaken

172
F. Vidotto
the reality of the world. If there are only interactions that are intrinsically relational,
there is no absolute reality with respect to which the relational events are “less real”.
Relationalism should not be confused here with a form of subjectivism, which
can lead to solipsism. The relations we considered are among any physical systems
in interactions, not subjects or agents that require conscious agency. Conscious
agents are a peculiar case among the different systems. Systems can acquire and
store information about one another: here information should be understood as
physical correlations, without a necessary epistemic connotation.
This leads us to think of relations in a completely physical way, discarding a
possible reading of the restriction to the relations as only epistemically motivated
(as, for instance, in epistemic structural realism). An interpretation of relations that
restricts them to be only epistemic would require the assumption of a hypothetical
non-relational underlying substance, not accessible to our knowledge: such a move
seems circular and redundant, not adding any clarity to our understanding of the
world. In particular, for the sake of philosophy of science, it appears as a useless
epicycle.
On the other hand, embracing a relational perspective, we may be able to leave
a monolithic reality for a richer kaleidoscopic one. One in which it is required an
epistemology where the notion of objectivity is pluralistic and perspectival (Barad,
2007; Massimi, 2022).
References
Barad, K. (2007). Meeting the universe halfway. Duke University Press.
Candiotto, L. (2017). The reality of relations, Giornale di Metaﬁsica, 2017(2), 537–551.
Dorato, M. (2020).
Bohr meets Rovelli: a dispositionalist account of the quantum limits of
knowledge. Quantum Studies: Mathematics and Foundations, 7, 233–245.
Esfeld, M. (2004). Quantum entanglement and a metaphysics of relations. Studies in History and
Philosophy of Modern Physics, 35, 601–617.
French, S., & Ladyman, J. (2003).
Remodelling structural realism: Quantum physics and the
metaphysics of structure. Synthese, 136, 31–56.
French, S., & Krause, D. (2006).
Identity in physics: A historical, philosophical and formal
analysis. Oxford University Press.
Hume, D. (1896). A treatise of human nature.
Ladyman, J., & Ross, D. (2007). Every thing must go: Metaphysics naturalised. Oxford University
Press.
Martin-Dussaud, P., Rovelli, C., & Zalamea, F. (2019). The notion of locality in relational quantum
mechanics. Foundations of Physics, 49(2), 96–106.
Massimi, M. (2022). Perspectival realism. Oxford University Press.
Oeckl, R. (2003). A ‘General boundary’ formulation for quantum mechanics and quantum gravity.
Physics Letters B, 575, 318–324.
Oeckl, R. (2008). General boundary quantum ﬁeld theory: Foundations and probability interpreta-
tion Advances in Theoretical and Mathematical Physics, 12(2), 319–352.
Rovelli, C. (1996). Relational quantum mechanics. International Journal of Theoretical Physics,
35, 1637.
Rovelli, C. (2002). Partial observables. Physical Review, D65:124013.
Rovelli, C. (2013). Why gauge? Foundations of Physics, 44(2014):91–104.

12
The Relational Ontology of Contemporary Physics
173
Rovelli, C. (2018). Space is blue and birds ﬂy through it. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 376, 20170312.
Rovelli, C., & Vidotto, F. (2014). Covariant loop quantum gravity: An elementary introduction to
quantum gravity and Spinfoam theory. Cambridge University Press.
Saunders, S. (2003). Structural realism, again. Synthese, 136(1), 127–133. Springer.
Smerlak, M., & Rovelli, C. (2007). Relational EPR. Foundations of Physics, 37, 427–445.
Smolin, L. (2019). The search for what lies beyond the quantum. In
Einstein’s unﬁnished
revolution. Penguin Press.
Valentini, A. (2021). Quantum gravity and quantum probability Preprint arXiv: 2104.07966.
Vidotto, F. (2016). Atomism and relationalism as guiding principles for quantum gravity. PoS,
FFP14, 222
Weinberg, S. (1995). The quantum theory of ﬁelds. Cambridge University Press

Chapter 13
Explicit Construction of Local Hidden
Variables for Any Quantum Theory Up
to Any Desired Accuracy
Version 4
Gerard ’t Hooft
Abstract The machinery of quantum mechanics is fully capable of describing a
single realistic world. Here we discuss the converse: in spite of appearances, and
indeed numerous claims to the contrary, any quantum mechanical model can be
mimicked, up to any ﬁnite accuracy, by a completely classical system of equations.
An implication of this observation is that Bell’s theorem is not applicable in the
cases considered. This is explained by scrutinising Bell’s assumptions concerning
causality, retrocausality, statistical (in-)dependence, and his fear of ‘conspiracy’
(there is no conspiracy in the language used to describe the deterministic models).
The most crucial mechanism for the counter intuitive Bell/CHSH violation is the
fact that, regardless the settings chosen by Alice and Bob, the initial state of the
system should be a realistic one. The potential importance of our construction in
model building is discussed.
13.1
Introduction
Quantum mechanics is usually perceived as being a revolutionary new theory
for the interactions and dynamics of tiny particles and the forces between them.
Here we expand on our earlier proposal (’t Hooft, 2016) to look at quantum
mechanics in a somewhat different way. The fundamental interactions could be
entirely deterministic, taking place in a world where all laws are absolute, without
requiring statistics to understand what happens. The inﬁnite linear vector space
called Hilbert space, is then nothing more than a mathematical utensil, allowing
us to perform unitary transformations. The set of all possible states is re-arranged
G. ’t Hooft ()
Faculty of Science, Department of Physics, Institute for Theoretical Physics, Utrecht, The
Netherlands
e-mail: g.thooft@uu.nl
http://www.staff.science.uu.nl/~hooft101
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
V. Allori (ed.), Quantum Mechanics and Fundamentality, Synthese Library 460,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-99642-0_13
175

176
G. ’t Hooft
into states that look like superpositions of the original ontological, or realist,1 states.
As soon as we loose control of these original realist states, we can, instead, interpret
the absolute values squared of the superposition coefﬁcients as Born probabilities.
Quantum mechanics as we are familiar with today, is then arrived at.
This paper is about regaining control. The ‘original, realist states’ then are what
is referred to as ‘hidden variables’. Let there be given some quantum model, for
instance the Standard Model of the fundamental particles and their interactions. Can
we then identify these hidden variables? Often, hidden variables are looked upon as
rather ugly attempts to regain a dated interpretation of quantum theory. In contrast,
this theory can be far more beautiful and elegant than the original theory of quantum
mechanics as displayed in the Copenhagen frame of axioms. This is what we intend
to show in this paper. We start with a generic ontological theory. This may seem to
be hard to visualise, until we realise that demanding locality severely restricts the
possibilities, see Sect. 13.6. One can almost derive what the hidden variables are:
Local Hidden Variables (LHV).
It was thought that local hidden variables should be easy to refute, but this, we
now claim, is a mistake. The use of quantum mechanics as a procedure for vector
analysis of a classical system, is merely a mathematical trick, which does not change
the equations; therefore it does not introduce ‘conspiracy’ either in the classical or
in the quantum description.
In this paper, we ﬁrst explain the use of quantum mechanics to describe determin-
istic systems in their full generality (Sect. 13.2). Basically, a system is deterministic
if its evolution law can be regarded as an element of a large permutation group.
We explain how it can be mapped on the set of unitary transformation matrices in
Hilbert space. There are various advantages of using such representations in pure
mathematics. The Schrödinger equation appears naturally, reﬂecting what happens
if one uses the fact that unitary matrices form a continuum while permutations are
discrete. In short: any deterministic theory can be written as a quantum theory, in
the sense that one may use the concept of Hilbert space for doing statistics, and a
Schrödinger equation describes the evolution law.
Next, in Sect. 13.3, we show the converse of that: how any quantum system can
be linked to a deterministic model. The observation we use is that, in any classical or
quantum system, one may add physical degrees of freedom that move periodically
in a compact space. This adds new energy levels to the system that we assume to be
invisible, in particular if the detection devices used have a limited time resolution.
We call these ‘fast ﬂuctuating variables’. Our new twist is that this compact space
may be assumed to be sufﬁciently tiny, so that these variables return to their previous
values with very high frequencies. Consequently, in our artiﬁcial vector spaces, their
energy spectrum is discrete with wide separations between the energy levels. These
separations are so large that, under normal physical conditions, only the very lowest
energy state will be occupied. This state is a single wave function, which happens
1 Everywhere in this paper, the words ‘ontological’ and ‘realist’ are used interchangeably. They
emphasise that we avoid ‘statistical’ or ‘uncertain’ expressions.

13
Explicit Construction of Local Hidden Variables for Any Quantum Theory...
177
to be a constant: Our fast variables are all in uniform probabilistic distributions.
This makes them invisible in practice, just as the fast vacuum ﬂuctuations due to the
ﬁelds of extremely heavy virtual particles.
Nevertheless, we now have quantum states that may interact with the slow
particles non-trivially. If now we construct the vector space representation of such a
model, we shall ﬁnd that any quantum model one wishes to investigate can emerge
from this.
Some readers noted that our model is non-local. This was due to an error in
the notation that could easily be corrected. In Sect. 13.4, we explain the situation.
Locality is not a problem, but special relativity is. This is due to the fact that we need
to restrict ourselves to ﬁnite models, forcing us to work with lattice theories. Making
such theories relativistically invariant is notoriously difﬁcult. It will presumably
involve general relativity, and this is far beyond what we can handle presently.
Of course, the reader may wonder how it can happen in such a model that Bell’s
theorem (Bell, 1964, 1982, 1987; Bell & Gao, 2016) is disobeyed. How could
this happen? This we describe in Sect. 13.5. Actually, we have to deal with two
questions: one, what was wrong or misunderstood in Bell’s classical argument, and
two, what is the origin of the apparent clash between totally natural intuitions on
the one hand, and the actual quantum calculation—as well as the real experiment—
on the other. We think both questions can be answered, but we keep the answers
brief. Thus we summarise what, according to this author, the principal weaknesses
are in Bell’s argument, which is not the mathematical calculations but the general
assumptions, in particular those connected with causality and ‘free will’. The
question why our intuition does not agree with the result of the experiments is
actually more interesting. It all comes from an important footnote in our theory:
the realistic degrees of freedom depend on the basis chosen; one can constrain the
choice chosen by nature by imposing more demands. Of our various options for the
cause of our discrepancy with Bell, the last explanation given in Sect. 13.5, ‘option
# 4’, appears to be the salient one. It explains why and how the ‘free will’ of Alice
and Bob to change their settings, enters into the argument: they do not have the free
will to choose their settings in some quantum superimposed state, since the initial
state of the universe is a realistic one.
There are numerous examples of quite counter intuitive consequences of the
original Copenhagen interpretation. All these can be traced to the same features.
We mention a few in Sect. 13.6: the reason why quantum mechanics is weird, arises
from the fact that deterministic underlying theories do not work in the way expected.
The deterministic variables do randomise when generating their ‘quantum effects’,
but this goes along mathematical paths that differ from our intuitive ideas. Their
behavior looks as if ‘conspiracies’ take place, while these variables do nothing else
than obeying physical laws.
We claim that this paper is not just a philosophical one, but to the contrary, it may
well show novel guidelines towards building models, see Sect. 13.7. Our conclusions
are in Sect. 13.8.

178
G. ’t Hooft
13.2
The Generic Realistic System
Let us brieﬂy review the precedure described in Ref. ’t Hooft (2016). In a deter-
ministic theory, we identify the set of states that can be realised. In general, the
number of different possible states, N, will be gigantically large, but the principle
will always be the same. The dynamics is deﬁned by the evolution law over a smal
lapse of time, δt. This is nothing but a single element of the permutation group SN:
|k(t + δt)⟩= U(δt)|k(t)⟩;
U(δt) ∈SN .
(13.2.1)
It maps the set of states onto itself. This set should be regarded as discrete, although
it will often be useful to consider one of several possible continuum limits, so as to
simplify notations and calculations.
It will be useful to regard our system as bounded, by imagining it to be
surrounded by a wall. Later, the wall will be removed, enabling us, for instance,
to set up plane wave expansions. We start with choosing the time variable as being
discrete, t = k δt, where k is integer and 0 ≤k < N.
N is ﬁnite. This implies that there is a number T ≤N such that
|k(t + T )⟩= |k(t)⟩;
|k(t + t1)⟩̸= |k(t)⟩if 0 < t1 < T .
(13.2.2)
Thus, our system is periodic in time (though the period T rapidly tends to inﬁnity as
we choose our wall to be further away). In general T ≪N, so that, consequently,
there will be many states |k⟩that are not in the periodic set (13.2.2) at all. Starting
with such a state gives us another periodic set with period T ′. Continuing this way,
we ﬁnd that the completely generic ﬁnite deterministic system consists of a large
number of periodic sets.
Each periodic set (r) can now be subject to a discrete Fourier transform, to write
its elements as superpositions of energy eigenstates |n, r⟩, n = 0, · · · Tr −1 ,
|k(t), r⟩=
1
√
T r
Tr−1

n=0
e−iEn,rt|n, r⟩,
En,r = 2πn
Tr δt + δEr , (13.2.3)
where δEr is, as yet, an arbitrary normalisation of the energy that may well be
different for different sets r. Its physical interpretation is that the energy may depend
in an arbitrary way on the quantum number r, which obeys a conservation law.
Note, that the concept of energy E used here is the quantum mechanical one, not
necessarily the classical Hamiltonian.
The above describes the formal, complete solution of all deterministic systems.
In a given set r, the energy spectrum (13.2.3) forms an equidistant sequence. If
we take the limit where δt vanishes while Trδt is kept ﬁxed, this spectrum ranges
to inﬁnity. At given r, the distance between adjacent energy eigenvalues, E =
En,r −En−1,r , is determined by the period, E = 2π/(Tr δt). They are strictly
equidistant, regardless how complicated the interactions may be.

13
Explicit Construction of Local Hidden Variables for Any Quantum Theory...
179
Since the energy eigenvalues do not depend on the basis chosen, the equidistant
energy level sequences make one wonder how well such a theory can represent the
real world, where such exactly equidistant sequences seem not to be observed. The
answer to this will be that there are equidistant sequences, but the energy separations
are too wide to be noticeable in physics. We’ll see how this can happen.
13.3
A Deterministic Theory for Every Quantum Model
In Ref. ’t Hooft (2021), it is found how a deterministic model can be constructed that
mimics any given quantum system. Here we brieﬂy repeat the derivation, by ﬁrst
formulating the deterministic model, and then showing how to link its dynamical
evolution law to the given Schrödinger equation. We shall then explain why the
result is counter intuitive.
For simplicity our quantum system will be described as a one-particle theory, but
generalisation to more complex structures such as quantum ﬁeld theories will be
straightforward.
The classical model contains N primary states, |i⟩, i = 1, · · · , N, which we
declare all to be realistic. These will later be declared to correspond to the basis
elements of the quantum model, but we’ll come to that. In addition to these primary
states, there will be a number,2 M, of fast ﬂuctuating, periodic variables ϕi(t) , 0 ≤
ϕi < 2π, where i = 1, · · · , M.
Anticipating demands that will be needed later (in arguments concerning locality,
see Sect. 13.4), we shall choose M to be the number of points in 3-space, regardless
the other properties of the system under investigation:
M = #(⃗x ) .
(13.3.1)
What these fast variables actually are, is to a large extent immaterial, as long as they
move so fast that all positions are taken more frequently than the largest quantum
frequencies in the system we wish to describe. For instance, we may suggest that the
variables might represent excessively heavy virtual particles, situated at the space
points i ∈M.
In view of the above, the evolution law of ϕi is written as
ϕi(t) = ϕi(0) + ωit mod 2π ,
t = k δt ,
(13.3.2)
where k is integer while δt is very small (though not inﬁnitesimally small). The
periods Ti are given by integers Li, such that Ti = Li δt , and ωi = 2π/Ti =
2π/(δt Li). This means that the variables ϕi are arranged to sit on an M-dimensional
lattice with M
i=1 Li points, and periodic boundary conditions in all M directions.
2 Our notation often changes in different publications.

180
G. ’t Hooft
The values for the ωi are large compared to the physical time parameters, so δt and
Li δt are all small, but L2
i δt will be assumed to be relatively large.
We choose the Li large but not exactly equal. It will make things easier if we
assume them to be relative primes (so that the ϕi will mix properly).
The primary states |i⟩, also called ‘slow variables’ in Ref. ’t Hooft (2021),
undergo deterministic transitions whenever the variables ϕi reach some given points
in their lattice. These transitions are all elements of the permutation group SN.
For simplicity, we limit ourselves to pairwise permutations between two states
at the time. In general, we assume for each pair (i, j) a number ni,j of given, ﬁxed
points in the 2 dimensional sub-lattice spanned by ϕi and ϕj, such that, if ϕi and ϕj
arrive simultaneously at one of the points ni,j, the transition |i⟩↔|j⟩takes place.
The ϕ variables just continue obeying (13.3.2). Let us call these special points on
the ⃗ϕ-lattice crossing points.
When locality is considered, we choose i and j to be neighbors in 3-space.
So-far, our model is just like any other realistic, deterministic model. But now
comes the most important constraint: the ϕi variables go so fast that we cannot
detect their values directly. Therefore, we assume them to be in a totally even prob-
abilistic distribution in the entire space spanned by them all. In contrast, the primary
variable hops from one state to others at a slow pace, since it happens relatively
infrequently that the ϕ variables arrive simultaneously at one of the crossing pints.
When we compute what happens classically, we see that the distribution of the fast
variables stays even, but how do the slow states |i⟩behave? This is most easily found
out by using the quantum mechanical notation, as described in the previous section.
It was also discussed in Ref. ’t Hooft (2021). Simply re-write the time evolution
described above as an equation for a deterministic, real wave function ψi(⃗ϕ, t).
The dominant part of the Hamiltonian takes care of Eq. (13.3.2). Then, we have
perturbation parts for each pair (i, j), taking the form
H int
ij =

i,j,s
π
2 σ [i,j]
y
δ(ki = k(s)
i ) δ(kj = k(s)
j ) ,
(13.3.3)
where k(s)
i
and k(s)
j
indicate the crossing point(s) on the (i, j) sub-lattice. Here, the
number δt was set equal to one for simplicity, and ‘int’ stands for ‘interaction’.
The pairwise permutation between the states |i⟩and |j⟩is written as a Pauli
matrix,
−iσ [i,j]
y
=
0 −1
1 0

,
(13.3.4)
We regard the total Hamiltonian describing the transitions between the fast and
the slow variables, over small time steps δt or L δt, as small perturbations. We have
to assume that the fast variables are in their lowest energy state. Since their excited
energy levels are far separated form the lowest value (zero) and energy is exactly
conserved, this situation is stable and therefore persists in time. Keeping them in the

13
Explicit Construction of Local Hidden Variables for Any Quantum Theory...
181
lowest energy state guarantees that the statistical distribution on the ϕ lattice stays
perfectly even as time proceeds.3
Since we consider small steps in time, perturbation theory tells us that this is
controlled by the expectation value of the Hamiltonian H int
ij
for the zero energy
states of the ⃗ϕ variables. This replaces the Kronecker deltas in Eq. (13.3.3) by the
factor
1
LiLj
.
(13.3.5)
This is very important. The expression in Eq. (13.3.3), with the factor π/2
included, describes a completely deterministic exchange of states, as it was designed
to do. But the factor (13.3.5) turns this into a Hamiltonian that generates superposi-
tions. Thus, from here on, we are dealing with real quantum mechanics.
The outcome of our calculation in perturbation theory is, that the probability
distribution of the primary state, can be written as
Pi(⃗ϕ, t) = Pi(t) = ψi(t)2 ,
(13.3.6)
where ψi(t) form a real-valued wave function. This wave function slowly varies in
time, as we already explained. The ϕi run along their respective circles so quickly
that the even distribution of the probabilities, given by the norm N
i=1 |ψi|2, does
not show any signiﬁcant dependence on the variables ϕi or on time itself. This takes
care of unitarity in the space of the slow variables.
The Hamiltonian we obtain is
Hslow =

i,j
π ni,j
2LiLj
σ [i,j]
y
,
(13.3.7)
where ni,j is the number of crossing points on the (2-dimensional) lattice spanned
by the values for ϕi and ϕj.4
This is a purely imaginary, antisymmetric matrix. Such Hamiltonians keep
the wave function real, and have no diagonal parts. By choosing the numbers
ni,j , Li , and Lj we can generate almost any such antisymmetric, imaginary-valued
Hamiltonian. If the desired Hamiltonian has terms with irrational ratios in them, the
limits n, L →∞have to be taken.
So-far, the wave function here came out to be real. Usually, in quantum
mechanics, we have complex valued wave functions. This is easy to arrange here.
Complex numbers are pairs of real numbers, so having complex numbers means
that there is an extra, somewhat hidden, binary degree of freedom, called ‘c-bit’ in
3 The matrix elements ⟨⃗φ |Er⟩may be assumed to have exactly the same amplitude everywhere on
the hypertorus of the φ lattice.
4 It is here that we prefer to assume Li and Lj to be relative primes, so as to ensure that any
crossing point will be passed equally often.

182
G. ’t Hooft
Ref. ’t Hooft (2021), such that this c-bit takes the value 0 for the real part of the
wave function, and 1 for the imaginary part. It was easier for us to start with the real
numbers only. The c-bit doubles the total number of slow states.
Comparing the quantum calculation with what happens classically, we can see
what exactly is happening. Quantum mechanically, a wave function ψi(t) obeys a
Schrödinger equation. Classically, the system undergoes transitions from the states
|i⟩to all other states |j⟩in fairly rapid successions. Our classical theory now tells us
what is causing these transitions: they depend on the exact values of the ϕ variables,
which however are difﬁcult to follow since they go fast. Only if measurements are
done so fast that we know exactly where the ϕ variables are, the evolution will turn
out to be deterministic. But as long as we cannot follow the fast variables, we have
to deal with the quantum expressions.
The calculation of the effective Hamiltonian for the slow states may require
higher order corrections if the numbers n, L, . . . are not very large. This has not
been done yet, partly because it is the principle that counts here. In higher order
corrections, one may have to deal with some of the higher energy states of the ϕ
variables as virtual states; the emergence of virtual ⃗ϕ states at higher energy levels
then betrays deviations from the strictly even distribution of probabilities for ⃗ϕ.
Much like the effects of heavy, virtual particles, these higher order effects may
represent virtual particles that cause non-local interactions and other complications.
This would not lead to any violation of quantum mechanics itself, in spite of the
deterministic underlying theory.
13.4
Special Features. Locality
There may seem to be some arbitrariness in the above construction. Why do
transitions between the states |i⟩and |j⟩only involve the fast variables ϕi and ϕj?
Why not the others? Also, the question may arise: where do we have to choose the
crossing points, and how does the theory depend on this choice? And then: why do
we not unfold the M-dimensional lattice of all ϕ-variables to form just one line of
consecutive states, with length Ltot = 
i Li?
All these questions have to do with locality. We may wish to avoid theories where
the properties of a particle at site ⃗x depend on things happening at site ⃗y far away
from ⃗x. In particular, in second-quantised theories this may be important. Signals
should not go faster than light. Classically, such conditions are easily seen to be
obeyed if the crossing points (i, j) can be associated with one single position in
real space (or space-time). Opening up the ⃗ϕ lattice would generate difﬁculties. It
would force us to re-arrange the energy levels of the ϕ variables to form much larger
sequences with much smaller energy gaps; we would not be able anymore to keep
the higher energy levels out of the discussion on how real quantum mechanics can
be obtained.
Thus we see that demanding locality narrows down much of the arbitrariness
of our models, though some arbitrariness may seem to remain, such as the choice

13
Explicit Construction of Local Hidden Variables for Any Quantum Theory...
183
of the locations of the crossing points on the lattices. However, for these points,
another remark may be made. We can handle the effects of the crossing points by re-
arranging the ﬁeld components in terms of eigenstates of the permutation operator
considered. We could consider the wave functions ψi and ψj and decompose them
along the lines of the eigenstates,
ψ± =
1
√
2(ψi ± ψj) ,
(13.4.1)
We then ﬁnd that, at a crossing point, ψ+ is not affected at all, while ψ−gets a
minus sign. but this minus sign could be chosen differently, which would amount to
displacing the crossing point. Thus we obtain a symmetry of the system, implying
that the exact location of the crossing point is, to some extent, physically immaterial.
Thus, we do emphasise that this theory is local, provided that the original
quantum Hamiltonian is local:
H int
tot =

i,j
H int
ij ,
(13.4.2)
where the points x associated with i and j must be neighbours only.
A reader thought to have found a counter example in the two-particle system. If
the interaction Hamiltonian is written as a potential function V (xi, xj), of course
both the quantum and the classical theory are non-local. If states with indeﬁnite
particle numbers are considered, the only known local theory is quantum ﬁeld theory
(QFT), where the Hamiltonian contains kinetic parts exactly of the form (13.4.2).
Indeed, the Standard Model is a QFT with all desired locality properties.
Since we frequently use a lattice formulation, we do have to indicate more
precisely what we mean by locality in a lattice theory. There, the best approximation
to locality for the Hamiltonian is a Hamiltonian that is the sum over the entire lattice
of a Hamiltonian density, H = 
⃗x H(⃗x), where H(⃗x) must obey
[H(⃗x), H(⃗y)] = 0
if
|⃗x −⃗y| > a ,
(13.4.3)
where a is the lattice mesh size. The limit a ↓0 then reproduces locality (and
causality) as it usually is formulated in QFT. Our classical formalism will be local
in the same sense. It implies that all of the fast variables ϕi are only allowed to
affect the Hamiltonian density component(s) that sense the same operators at the
coordinate ⃗xi.
Thus, contradicting some claims to the contrary, we have no problem with
locality. In contrast, we do have a problem with special relativity. The Hamiltonian
that we start from may easily be chosen to be the one of the Standard Model,
which is Lorentz covariant. However, its lattice version is in general not Lorentz
covariant. Although this disease does not seem to be serious, as Lorentz invariance

184
G. ’t Hooft
will naturally be recovered in the continuum limit, it will have to be a topic for
discussion for the time being.5
13.5
About Bell’s Theorem
Bell (1964, 1982, 1987) explicitly emphasised that hidden variables in general,
and local hidden variables in particular, should be incompatible with quantum
mechanics. To start with, there seem to be just three options. First, there may
be fatal ﬂaws in the present paper. I am sure that quite a few readers will be
quite comfortable with this possibility and not look further. The author would be
eager to know where they disagree with our approach; there is no fatal ﬂaw. Small
inaccuracies in the formalism would not invalidate the fundamental principle stating
that the quantum formalism can be applied just as much in deterministic theories
as in wave mechanics with uncertainty relations. All that was done here is turn
this observation around: there is no reason to draw a sharp dividing line between
quantum theories that have a deterministic foundation, such as here, and theories
where this should be fundamentally impossible: we claim that deterministic theories
are a dense subset of all quantum mechanical theories.
Secondly, there could be a ﬂaw in Bell’s arguments. Now his derivations are clear,
and it is generally agreed that, given his assumptions, his derivations are correct.
The technical part of his arguments seems to be ﬂawless. It has been argued that
different number tsystems, non-commuting numbers, or other concoctions should
be used, but that would be hard to defend since, whether a calculation is correct or
not, should not depend on mathematical procedures and number systems employed.
There is a third explanation, which seems to be somewhat more plausible than
the other two: Bell did make assumptions, both concerning the nature of the
hidden variables, and the nature of physical law. Bell’s assumptions are notoriously
controversial. For a discussion, see the papers contained in Bell and Gao (2016).
An important assumption made by Bell is “statistical independence”: the idea that
due to irreproducible changes in the background, any unwanted correlation between
the photons and the settings chosen should disappear. In our models, scrambling the
data would require changes in the basis elements of the cellular automaton, such
that the entangled photons cannot stay in the same entangled state. The Schrödinger
equation derived here remains the same, but not its realistic basis elements.
Did Bell think of fast ﬂuctuating hidden variables? It appears that he would
have answered this himself with yes, but his assumptions seem not to include
this possibility in-depth. Usually, authors discussing Bell’s theorem seem to have
extremely conventional classical systems in mind, but most of them would have
argued that having local hidden variables move very fast would not affect their
results.
5 Lattice theory is a known and accepted method for regularising and renormalising a QFT.

13
Explicit Construction of Local Hidden Variables for Any Quantum Theory...
185
Bell did make other assumptions that this author views as suspect, see for
instance (Vervoort, 2013). He discusses at length the notions of causality and “retro-
causality”: the settings chosen by Alice and Bob cannot affect the polarisations of
the photons they observe, since “these photons were there earlier”. Can’t they? In
any case, this is not enough to argue that the settings chosen by Alice and Bob
must be statistically independent of the polarisations of the photons. It is a standard
calculation to ﬁnd out that quantum theory does generate statistical correlations (’t
Hooft, 2016). Classical theories can do the same thing. Bell derives his theorem by
assuming the absence of such correlations.
It is well-known that there are statistical correlations everywhere. For instance, if
there is a laptop somewhere to be found in the universe, then the odds are very high
that there are more laptops in its vicinity, even space-like separated ones. In other
parts of the universe there are no laptops around at all. This is an example of a non-
local correlation function. The correct way to distinguish forward from backward
causality is not about statistics but about effects that would be connected by laws of
nature. In QFT, a sound deﬁnition of causality can only take one form, where we
cannot distinguish forward from backward:
Observable operators must commute when space-like separated
(see Eq. (13.4.3) for the Hamoltonian density). In quantum ﬁeld theory, statistical
correlations are expressed in the propagators connecting space-time points. They
are non-vanishing all over space and time. The commutator of two operators
vanishes completely outside the light cone.6
Bell knew about this formulation of causality (“No Bell telephone”) but found it
to be not enough. Indeed, if only this form of causality would be allowed he would
not have been able to prove his theorem. It is important to realise that the equations
of motion are needed if one desires to distinguish forward from backward causality.
Cause and effect are statistically correlated. Thus, our option #3 is that, by way
of the ‘butterﬂy effect’, even minor ﬂuctuations in a photon wave function in the
past could generate a correlation with settings Bob and Alice decide about much
later as well as much earlier.
Do Alice and Bob have no ‘free will’ then? Not in a deterministic world, it seems.
Many experienced scientists have difﬁculties with that (Conway and Kochen, 2009).
Physicists desire more solid arguments for the emergence of statistical correlations
between the settings chosen by Alice and Bob, and the ﬂuctuations of photons that
existed at earlier times, in such a way that every hint of conspiracy can be avoided.
The notion of causality, and the demand that there should be no ‘retro-causality’,
may seem to be quite plausible intuitively. It is intuitively false to allow for theories
where photons in different parts of the universe ‘conspire’ with one another. Let us
6 As stated earlier, special relativity is notoriously hard to obtain on a ﬁnite lattice, and at ﬁrst sight,
there may not be a lightcone at all. However, the cellular automaton usually does have a speed limit
for signals, even if nearest neighbors can communicate directly.

186
G. ’t Hooft
now announce that there exists a much more powerful explanation for the apparent
‘conspiracy’ in Bell’s set-up. This, option #4, goes as follows:
Our classical description of any quantum system comes at a price: we ﬁrst
must choose for an orthonormal basis (for the slow states |i⟩). Then we add
the fast variables, in such a way that the entire system evolves with probability
distributions as described by the given Schrödinger equation. But how does this
compare with the system we get if all states would have been transformed to a
different basis? This happens when Alice or Bob change their settings. In that
case, the Schrödinger equation looks different, and the probability distributions
are calculated in a different way. It is inevitable that the realistic states, including
the initial states, in both cases are chosen different. In Bell’s set-up, it has been
tacitly assumed that only one set of realistic states is accepted to be the ‘physically
correct one’. No, the physically correct realistic states inevitably depend on the basis
chosen. The automaton allows to choose the basis, but it will have to be modiﬁed.
This produces precisely the ‘loophole’ needed to avoid Bell’s conclusions.
If we now work with superpositions, such as states |a⟩= α1|i⟩+ α2|j⟩and
|b⟩= β1|i⟩+ β2|j⟩, then the Born probabilities do not apply to the inner products
⟨a|b⟩.7 In the new basis, the realistic states differ from what they were before. It is
here that we are not allowed to assume the photons to stay in the same entangled
state. This is because the ontological theory eventually predicts only ones and zeros
as outcomes.
If we start with realistic photons in our initial states (photons that can only be in states either
with probability one or with probability zero) then a change in Alice’s and Bob’s settings
later in time, will force us to perform a basis transformation ﬁrst.
We are then forced to choose how to change our realistic photons in the initial
state. What is nice about this explanation is that we only have to reformulate our
basis of states, which looks as a ‘conspiracy’, but it isn’t that. If Alice and Bob’s
actions also ﬁt in the deterministic equations, then there is no further need to change
the basis. The deterministic model is a totally natural one. This implies that indeed
Alice and Bob have no free will, but they do not have to fear a ‘conspiracy plot’.
Our ‘change of basis’ will be typically the basis transition caused by a symmetry
such as a rotation. But this means that:
Symmetry transformations such as rotations may transform realistic states into superposi-
tions!
This would actually be an argument against our construction. However, there are
ways to avoid the need for such symmetry structures: we may postulate that basis
elements are chosen as realistic states, only if these among themselves obey the same
symmetry principles as the quantum system we are attempting to describe. In the
case of photons, the obvious choice is to take the vector potential ﬁelds located at
well-deﬁned space-time points. Rotating the polarisation of a photon then requires
7 This is because, if only the states |i⟩and |j⟩have an ontological meaning, then the probabilities
for having a state |a⟩or a state |b⟩are meaningless.

13
Explicit Construction of Local Hidden Variables for Any Quantum Theory...
187
rotating the vector potential ﬁeld, and this will now be an ontological transformation
(the equal-time commutators for vector potential ﬁelds vanish). However, in this
case the photon states themselves are not realistic: photons are energy packets of
these vector ﬁelds and these do not commute.
Following this line of argument, Bell was not allowed to assume the presence of
a photon with a given polarisation anywhere. Only the ﬁelds are real. Taking this
new constraint into consideration, it is possible to construct a model that exactly
reproduces the standard quantum mechanical predictions for Bell’s experiment. Bell
would not have accepted such models because every setting chosen by Alice and
Bob would require different microscopic conﬁgurations everywhere, leading to the
absence of ‘free will’ for Alice and Bob.
In this special case, there would still be an other issue: due to lack of gauge
invariance, not the vector potential but the electric and magnetic ﬁelds are well-
deﬁned, see Sect. 13.7.
13.6
Note Added: Quantum Weirdness
It may seem odd that quantum mechanics, with all its remarkable and paradoxical
properties, can be explained at all using fairly mundane classical, deterministic
degrees of freedom. Many investigators were conﬁdent that such simple explana-
tions should be impossible. And yet, here we are: our model has two kinds of
dynamical variables, the slow ones, |i⟩, which we proclaim to be ontologically
observable, and in addition fast moving variables that vaguely resemble heat baths
(which they are not). The reason why, nevertheless, this system can accurately
mimic quantum mechanics is that it only does so after we choose a preferred basis:
the set of basis states represented by the |i⟩.
All we did is to ﬁnd extra variables that force the probabilities Pi = ⟨i|i⟩to be
such that the states |i⟩accurately obey a Schrödinger equation. What is not allowed
is to change the basis for these states |i⟩half-way an experiment. We should keep in
mind that Born’s rule for the probabilities does not apply when one superposition is
compared with another superposition; it only applies if a superposition is compared
to realistic states.
Practically all examples of counter intuitive quantum features such as the
EPR-Bell experiments, the GHZ state (Greenberger et al., 2007), and similar
constructions, require as a crucial step the freedom of one or more of the observers,
be it Alice, Bob, Cecile, Dave, ..., to change their basis of states, for instance
by rotating their polarisation devices. In our set-up, the fast variables change
completely after any such change, regardless how small. The original state that these
set-ups start from is entangled some way, and any change of basis states gives the
initial particles a completely different probabilistic distribution—as if some signal
went back to the past to instruct this initial state. Of course, the actual conﬁguration
of classical variables in our set-up does not allow for such a signal, which means
that, in our models, the observers do not have the ‘free will’ to rotate their detectors
without any modiﬁcations of the (quantum or classical) states in the past.

188
G. ’t Hooft
13.7
Model Building
One reader suggested that our theory can be compared with Bohm’s pilot theory
(Bohm, 1952). A big difference is that Bohm’s theory appears to hinge on an
essential statistical component: the pilot wave generates a distribution of particle
positions. We claim that our approach also applies to particles that do not spread
at all into statistical wave forms. Most notably, if it is our fast variable ϕi that one
would be tempted to compare with pilot waves, the contrast is that our ϕ variables
might be interpreted as representing the most massive virtual particles in some
construction of uniﬁed theory of elementary particles.
So-far, neither special relativity, nor general relativity entered in the discussion.
We also ignored theories with global or local gauge symmetries. Taking these
various very special symmetries of nature into account may however be tremen-
dously important. Special relativity requires the replacement of simple-minded
quantum mechanics by quantum ﬁeld theory, QFT. Keeping QFT discrete would be
tantamount to putting the theory on a lattice. In the classical case one then obtains
a cellular automaton (Fredkin, 2003; ’t Hooft, 2016; Wolfram, 2002, 2020; Zuse,
1969). Turning this in a quantum theory requires procedures as described in this
paper (’t Hooft, 2019, 2020; Wetterich, 2020). Now QFT is a quantum theory just
as any other one, except that it may possess Lorentz invariance as a symmetry. Can
we take Lorentz invariance into account?
Lorentz invariance requires locality in quantum ﬁelds, but locality does not
impose any difﬁculty at all. Our fast ﬂuctuating variables, ϕi, may very well be
strictly localised in points of space and time.8 The problem with the Lorentz group,
however, is that it is not compact. By applying Lorentz transformations successively,
one can reach ever stronger Lorentz boosts. Where is the end? Is there an end?
We may attempt to construct a theory with Lorentz invariance containing fast
ﬂuctuating variables: when strongly boosted, any particle system may then be
transformed into a highly energetic one. These can also play the role of fast
variables. Our problem may be the converse: our variables ϕi may move very fast but
they were postulated only to come in a ﬁnite number of states. A Lorentz invariant
theory will necessarily have an inﬁnite number of states, as dictated by the inﬁnite
Lorentz group. Is there a way to ‘compactify’ the Lorentz group?
There is a mathematical trick that is very useful in QFT: the Wick rotation
(Symanzik, 1969). This transforms real time into imaginary time, and, miraculously,
turns the Lorentz group into the group of rotations in a 4 dimensional, Euclidean
space. This group is compact, so that our problem disappears. But now we have no
unitary evolution law anymore. Instead, our system now describes interactions in a
stochastic system at equilibrium.
8 In a previous version of this paper, the fast variables ϕi were associated directly to the states
|ψi⟩of the slow variable. This would work for a one-particle case, but should not be done in more
complex quantum systems, particularly if we wish to recover locality. The index i for the variables
ϕi must be associated to coordinates ⃗x. I thank the referee for spotting this inaccuracy.

13
Explicit Construction of Local Hidden Variables for Any Quantum Theory...
189
There is a physical argument telling us that there will be a limit to the Lorentz
boosts: gravity. In ordinary physical circumstances, there is only one state with
vanishing energy: the vacuum. All other states contain a positive amount of energy.
If we Lorentz-boost such a state, we get particles with a large amount of energy
as well as momentum. These energies and momenta generate gravitational ﬁelds,
and with those, curvature in space and time. Consequently, The Lorentz boosts,
which lie at the center of special relativity theory, can be terminated by the theory
of general relativity. This is caused by the fact that there will be limits to the amount
of space-time curvature that we may be able to handle in our system.
The present paper suggests that we should not worry too much about quantum
mechanics when this problem arises, but we should try to formulate classical
evolution laws where these features are taken into account. This is also very difﬁcult,
but at least it may seem to be a more manageable problem.
Physics is about making accurate models of the real world around us. This paper
encourages us to continue doing this. The most advanced model we have today is
the Standard Model. It consists of a small set of fundamental ﬁelds, which interact
in ways where we need a few dozen of freely adjustable parameters, the constants
of nature. A fundamental problem today is to speculate what the physical origin
of these numbers might be. What one can notice from the results of this paper is,
that we cannot have just any set of real numbers for these interaction parameters.
Finiteness of the lattice of fast ﬂuctuating parameters would suggest that, if only we
could guess exactly what the fast moving variables are, we should be able to derive
all interactions in terms of simple, rational coefﬁcients. Thus, a prudent prediction
might be made:
All interaction parameters for the fundamental particles should become calculable in terms
of simple, rational coefﬁcients.
Needless to say that we are unable to pin down more precisely how to
predict these values today, but we can say, for instance, that a smooth space-time
dependence of the interaction parameters, as is being speculated about by some
investigators, is not possible in the framework of this paper.
13.8
Concluding Remarks
Every cellular automaton allows for a description in terms of a quantum Hamilto-
nian, which reproduces the evolution of all cells with inﬁnite perfection. Conversely,
every quantum system can be approximated by an Hamiltonian derived from a
cellular automaton. Since there appears to be a continuum of distinct quantum
ﬁeld theories but only a denumerable number of cellular autumaton rules, this latter
mapping cannot always be perfect, but, if a limit on the time resolution is allowed,
the deviations (in terms of energy eigenvalues) can be made arbitrarily small. In
particular, we showed how, in principle, to construct a cellular automaton to match
the Standard Model of the elementary particles.

190
G. ’t Hooft
This inspires us to formulate our physical theory for the interpretation of quantum
mechanics:
Our universe is a cellular automaton.
A special future of this hypothesis is that it can be phrased with inﬁnite perfec-
tion, and this entails that the universe may have begun with a single, fundamental
state, and will continue to be in realistic states forever. This actually allows one to
counter the persistent critical objection that the cellular automaton does not seem to
describe the evolution of superimposed states correctly:
This does not matter; the universe never is in a quantum superposition of CA states!
This sounds like a fundamental departure from Copenhagen, but it is easy
to defend. The reason why nevertheless, interference patterns and superposition
phenomena are observed, is that such phenomena are only observed if an experiment
is repeated many times. What happens when an experiment is repeated many times
is described correctly by our Hamiltonian.
This now leaves a lot to be done: Now do the calculation and ﬁnd the rules
for the world’s automaton! Of course, this is extremely difﬁcult. We still haven’t
quite understood symmertries such as Lorentz invariance, and, certainly, gravity has
not been understood. A good feature of our theory is that, now, we only need to
investigate realistic theories for gravity, which may be conceptually much easier to
do than keeping everything ‘quantum’. Why not try?
The author thanks A. Schwarz and C. Wetterich for interesting discussions. We
also had constructive, though sometimes ﬁerce, discussions in weblogs with Ron
Maimon, Mitchell Porter, Alan Rominger, Manuel Morales, Lubo˘s Motl, and others.
Among them were, and no doubt still are, pertinacious nay-sayers.
References
Bell J. S. (1964). On the Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen Paradox. Physics, 1, 195.
Bell J. S. (1982). On the impossible pilot wave. Foundations of Physics, 12, 989.
Bell, J. S. (1987). Speakable and unspeakable in quantum mechanics. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Bell, M., & Gao, S. (Eds.) (2016). Quantum nonlocality and reality: 50 years of Bell’s theorem.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bohm, D. (1952). A suggested interpretation of the Quantum theory in terms of “Hidden Variables,
I”. Physical Review, 85, 166–179; id., II. Physical Review, 85, 180–193.
Conway, J., & Kochen, S. (2009). The strong free Will theorem. Notices of the AMS, 56(2), 226.
arXiv:0807.3286 [quant-ph].
Fredkin, E. (2003). An introduction to digital philosophy. International Journal of Theoretical
Physics, 42(2), 189–247.
Greenberger, D. M., Horne, M. A., & Zeilinger, A. (2007). Going beyond Bell’s theorem.
arXiv:0712.0921, Bibcode:2007arXiv0712.0921G.
Symanzik, K. (1969). Euclidean quantum ﬁeld theory, Conf.Proc.C 680812 (1968) 152–226,
Varenna 1968, Proceedings Of The Physics School On Local Quantum Theory, New York
1969, 152–226, Contribution to: 45th International School of Physics ‘Enrico Fermi’: Local
Quantum Theory [Scuola Internazionale di Fisica ‘Enrico Fermi’: Teoria Quantistica Locale].

13
Explicit Construction of Local Hidden Variables for Any Quantum Theory...
191
’t Hooft G. (2016). The cellular automaton interpretation of quantum mechanics. Fundamental
Theories of Physics (vol. 185). Springer International Publishing. eBook ISBN: 978-3-319-
41285-6. Hardcover ISBN: 978-3-319-41284-9, Series ISSN: 0168-1222, Edition Number 1.
’t Hooft, G. (2019). the ontology conservation law as an alternative to the many world interpretation
of quantum mechanics. In Presented at the Conference PAFT2019, on ‘Current Problems in
Theoretical Physics’, Session on ‘Foundations of Quantum Theory’, Vietri sul Mare, Salerno,
April 13–17. Arxiv:1904.12364.
’t Hooft, G. (2020). Deterministic quantum mechanics: The mathematical equations. Submit to
the Article Collection: “Towards a Local Realist View of the Quantum Phenomenon”. Frontiers
Research Topic, A. Casado et al. (Eds.). Arxiv:2005.06374.
’t Hooft, G. (2021). Fast vacuum ﬂuctuations and the emergence of quantum mechanics.
arxiv:2010.02019.
Wetterich, C. (2020). Probabilistic cellular automata for interacting fermionic quantum ﬁeld
theories, e-Print: 2007.06366 [quant-ph].
Wolfram, S. (2002). A new kind of science, Champaign, IL: Wolfram Media. ISBN 1-57955-008-8.
OCLC 47831356.
Wolfram, S. (2020). A project to ﬁnd the fundamental theory of physics. Wolfram Media (2020).
ISBN 978-1-57955-035-6 (hardback) 031-8 (ebook).
Vervoort, L. (2013). Bell’s theorem: Two neglected solutions. Foundations of Physics, 43, 769–
791. ArXiv 1203.6587v2.
Zuse K. (1969). Rechnender Raum. Braunschweig: Friedrich Vieweg & Sohn; Transl: Calculating
space, MIT Technical Translation AZT-70-164-GEMIT, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
(Project MAC), Cambridge, Mass. 02139 (1969). A. German & H. Zenil (eds).

Part III
The Wave Function

Chapter 14
Wave Function Realism and Three
Dimensions
Lev Vaidman
Abstract It is argued that our experience of life in three-dimensional space can
be explained by an ontological picture of quantum mechanics consisting solely of
the wave function of the universe formally deﬁned in the conﬁguration space. Our
experience supervenes on a part of the universal wave function which is deﬁned
in three dimensions, while the other parts (deﬁned in conﬁguration space) explain
physical properties of objects. A deterministic universe without action at a distance
requires the acceptance of the existence of parallel worlds similar to our world.
14.1
Introduction
The foundations of quantum mechanics are still far from consensus and the meaning
of its basic concept, the wave function, continues to be under heated debate. I
consider the quantum state, the wave function of the universe, to be the only
ontology of quantum theory (Vaidman, 2016, 2019): “All is Ψ ”. In parallel, we
witness an extensive discussion of the term wave function realism (Ney & Albert,
2013). In this paper I want to clarify my approach and put it in the context of the
current discussion.
There are many different meanings of realism. My experiences are real, but the
word “real” does not have the same meaning as in the expression “wave function
realism”. Our “real” experiences supervene on the physical ontological reality. In
my semantics, ontology describes substance, matter. I separate it from nomological
entities (like the Hamiltonian) which specify how the ontological description of the
universe changes in time.
In physics, realism is frequently considered as local realism, which has two
aspects: separability and local causality. Separability: the combined complete local
descriptions of all space points provide the complete description of reality. Local
L. Vaidman ()
Raymond and Beverly Sackler School of Physics and Astronomy, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv,
Israel
e-mail: vaidman@tauex.tau.ac.il
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
V. Allori (ed.), Quantum Mechanics and Fundamentality, Synthese Library 460,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-99642-0_14
195

196
L. Vaidman
causality: objects can inﬂuence other objects only when they are physically close
together. The locality (or nonlocality) of quantum physics is the main question to be
discussed here.
Once, the realistic picture of the world was the following: There is a three-
dimensional space (3D). In this space there are local macroscopic objects: people,
animals, stones, trees, etc. interacting locally among themselves. These interactions
explain the time evolution: changes in the form and position of the objects in space.
A cat has to reach a mouse to eat it.
Although the development of classical physics, in an attempt to reach a deeper
understanding, encountered difﬁculties - Newton worried that the gravitational
interaction between objects is apparently nonlocal - at the end of the nineteenth
century classical physics seemed to be very close to reaching a satisfactory
picture: particle-ﬁeld realism. The fundamental ontology consists of point particles
moving in space affected locally by ﬁelds. All objects are made of atoms (stable
conﬁgurations of nuclei and electrons) which have fundamental interactions among
themselves by local creation of ﬁelds which propagate in space and then locally
affect other particles. Not only familiar macroscopic objects move and interact in
3D, but also the microscopic objects move and interact in the same space.
However, the success of classical physics was illusory. The stability of atoms
and other objects, together with many other phenomena, had no explanation by
classical physics and it was replaced by quantum physics. Quantum mechanics
explains the stability of atoms, existence of rigid bodies and (apart from gravity) all
our observations. It has an extraordinary success: there is no discrepancy between
what can be calculated and what is measured. In some cases the agreement is up to
ten decimal numbers.
The quantum solution was achieved by introducing ontology which is very
different from the ontology of classical physics: there are no particles moving
on trajectories in 3D. The particle realism of classical physics is replaced by the
wave function realism. The wave function is deﬁned in the conﬁguration space
of N particles (in a simple case of nonrelativistic quantum mechanics). The route
to explain our experience based on this ontology (Albert 2013, Ney 2021) is not
simple and this is apparently the reason why the approach encounters skepticism
(Maudlin 2010, Wallace 2020): how one can see in an abstract quantum state, a
complex valued wave function in the conﬁguration space, the familiar objects in 3D?
I suggest accepting the fundamental role of 3D from the beginning. Macroscopic
objects, as well as microscopic objects, interact in 3D. The role of 3D was not
questioned in classical physics since there was no need for the conﬁguration
space to provide complete ontological description. Quantum mechanics needs the
conﬁguration space, but only for quantum effects rarely seen in everyday life.
Macroscopic objects reside and interact in the familiar three dimensional space.

14
Wave Function Realism and Three Dimensions
197
14.2
The Single World Universe
Consider a naive understanding of the textbook (von Neumann) view (Von Neu-
mann, 2018). Everything, including measuring devices, is described by the wave
function. The wave function evolves locally and unitarily, until it evolves toward a
superposition of macroscopically different states of a macroscopic object, when it
collapses non-locally to a wave in which all macroscopic objects are well localised.
A similar picture is given by the Pearle-Ghirardi-Rimini-Weber collapse theory
(commonly known as GRW) Pearle (1976), Ghirardi et al. (1986) in which a
concrete physical (but ad hoc) proposal replaces a vague postulate of “well localised
macroscopic objects”. In this (frequently collapsing) wave function we can see a
realistic picture of the world. Local macroscopic objects: people, animals, stones,
trees, etc. interact among themselves locally in 3D, changing their form and position
in space.
We do not know the precise expressions for wave functions of macroscopic
objects, they consist of too many (>1020) particles. In classical physics we would
have a similar difﬁculty, but we can gain understanding by considering simpler,
smaller systems because there is no conceptual difference in the behaviour of
microscopic and macroscopic systems: particles, as macroscopic objects, move in
3D and interact locally (directly, or through the creation of and interaction with
local ﬁelds) between themselves. This move, however, is not available in quantum
physics. The wave function of a microscopic system does not collapse to a well
localised state, so analysis of behaviour of microscopic systems does not provide
proper understanding of the behaviour of macroscopic systems.
Macroscopic objects, due to their large mass and moment of inertia, can have a
well deﬁned position, orientation, and other variables describing their macroscopic
properties changing slowly enough to explain the time evolution of our perceived
world. The way to express this is to describe the world wave function as a product of
quantum states of all macroscopic objects |Ψobject j⟩times the state of the remaining
particles |Φrest⟩which do not belong to any macroscopic object.
|Ψworld⟩=

j
|Ψobject j⟩|Φrest⟩.
(14.1)
The wave function of every object is a product of wave functions of collective
variables describing the macroscopic properties of the object, times entangled wave
functions of its microscopic constituents:
|Ψobject⟩=

n
|ψ(An)⟩|ψ(b1, b2, . . . , bNb)⟩|ψ(c1, c2, . . . , cNc)⟩. . . |ψ(o1,2 , . . . , oNo)⟩.
(14.2)
Examples of macroscopic variables An are: the center of mass of the object, center
of charge of the object, variables describing orientation of the object, electric and

198
L. Vaidman
magnetic dipoles, quadrupoles, etc. These are the variables which appear in the
Hamiltonian of the interaction with other macroscopic objects, so these are the
variables describing how we perceive the object. These variables describe the object
in 3D.
Entanglement appears in the wave function of microscopic constituents of
macroscopic objects described by variables bj, cj, ...oj. Start with an atom. It
is a composite system of a nucleus and electrons. A stable atom, say, an atom in
its ground state, exhibits a highly entangled state of its electrons. A piece of a
solid body consists of ions and electrons (at this level ions can be considered as
elementary units). The electrons are in a complex entangled state which explains
rigidity and other properties of the object. Ions (depending on the temperature)
might be (or might not be) in a product state.
We might have entangled states of microscopic systems even if they are not
responsible for the rigidity of a macroscopic object. A sealed can with a gas def-
initely has entangled states of gas molecules due to collisions between them. What
we observe is the total action (pressure) of a large number of molecules together,
which is essentially independent of the entanglement. Possible decoherence with
external systems does not result in measurable differences.
Another way to see the 3D reality in the wave function of a world is to draw
a “cloud” of expectation value of mass density in 3D, or cloud of atom density,
etc. The geometric structures of places where these densities are signiﬁcantly larger
than the background (say, due to air) provide the familiar 3D pictures of objects. The
mass (or matter) density is sometimes considered as the “primitive ontology” (Allori
et al., 2014). I do not see an advantage in deﬁning this new ontology: the 3D cloud is
the property of the already deﬁned ontology, the wave function. Moreover, in some
cases mass density might not be useful. If I only observe the 3D distribution of mass
density, I will not be able to distinguish my body from the water in a swimming
pool. The 3D picture of the density of organic molecules will distinguish me from
the surrounding water. Thus, the wave function ontology describes our observed
reality also in cases when the mass density ontology does not.
The true complete story of the world must include ﬁelds: this is how Newtonian
nonlocal gravitational interaction becomes local: a massive object creates a grav-
itational ﬁeld, the ﬁeld propagates in space and affects the motion of other local
objects. Moreover, the complete picture must also include creation and annihilation
of particles. Modern research (especially the deadlock of quantum gravity) suggests
that we should go even further. It seems that Wallace (2020) considers this as
the main reason why wave function realism is not the correct picture. However,
I feel that the road to an exact precise and complete story will not bring new
conceptual philosophical difﬁculties and, on the other hand, it also will not provide
the solution to the quantum foundations controversies. Moreover, it seems that we
can simplify our consideration by neglecting relativistic effects and approximate
the interaction between particles by forces described by potentials depending on
the relative distances. This simpliﬁes tremendously the analysis of the interaction
between particles by removing the necessity of the separate treatment of ﬁelds
created by the particles. Thus, I can follow Albert (1996) by modeling the world as a

14
Wave Function Realism and Three Dimensions
199
(large and constant) number N of quantum particles. For simplicity, I do not discuss
the important issues related to the wave function of identical particles (fermions,
bosons).
The state of the world of N classical particles is fully speciﬁed by the position and
velocity of each particle in 3D. Mathematically, we can represent it as the position
and velocity of a single point in the conﬁguration space of 3N dimensions. Moving
to this representation seems very strange and not useful. Motion of this point fully
represents evolution of all objects made out of classical particles, but in a very
indirect way: the conﬁguration space does not look like “space” as it is deﬁned
in Wikipedia or Britannica:
Space, a boundless, three-dimensional extent in which objects and events occur and have
relative position and direction.
Albert does not suggest using conﬁguration space in case of classical particles,
however, he argues that we have to do it for the case of quantum particles.
A quantum particle is not described by a point moving in 3D, but by a wave
function changing in time in 3D. N noninteracting particles can be described by
N wave functions in 3D, but the interaction between particles invariably leads to
entanglement between the particles and thus N 3D spaces are not enough to describe
the state of N quantum particles. The wave function in the conﬁguration space is.
This is the reason why Albert considers the conﬁguration space of N particles as the
fundamental space.
Ney (2021) ﬁnds support for this picture because it avoids the non-separability
following from entanglement if we consider the particles separately. However,
avoiding separability by moving to another space does not seem helpful. It is
the non-separability between objects, the non-separability between spatial regions
of 3D, which is problematic. Even if the nonseparability persists in the high-
dimensional conﬁguration space, it does not represent a serious weakness. We do
not expect properties of familiar 3D space to be present in an abstract conﬁguration
space.
Albert (2013) argues that the connection to the perceived 3D comes from the
dynamics deﬁned by the Hamiltonian of our world. This program is similar to the
approach which starts with an abstract Hilbert space of the universe and attempts to
derive the emergence of the three dimensional picture we observe. The key element
of the programs of deriving 3D is locality of interactions in 3D. In my view, this
fundamental feature justiﬁes the postulate of 3D. Familiar macroscopic objects are
certainly present in 3D and we should try to ﬁnd their ontological three-dimensional
representation. Entanglement is invariably present among particles, and it prevents
their description in a set of 3D spaces, but macroscopic objects we perceive are not
entangled, so they do “have relative position and direction” in 3D.
Every set of entangled constituents of a macroscopic object does require a
description in the conﬁguration space, but the sets of constituents of different
macroscopic objects are separate, and there is no entanglement with other objects.
Macroscopic objects consist of sets of entangled microscopic objects. There can
be a hierarchy of sets. Sets of entangled quarks make protons and neutrons. Sets

200
L. Vaidman
of entangled nucleons make atomic nuclei. Sets of entangled nuclei and electrons
make atoms...At some level, we get sets of systems which are not entangled with
anything else. The collective variables of every such set of systems have well deﬁned
positions and directions in 3D. These positions are not exact, as they are described
by well localised wave functions which cannot be localised too well to allow well
localized conjugate momenta of these variables, necessary for avoiding fast changes
of the positions and orientations. For everyday macroscopic objects, this constraint
is not expected to be seen. The Heisenberg uncertainty for position and momentum
of a person allows his localization to be smaller than 10−10 meter during all his life.
Our perception of macroscopic objects supervenes on the wave functions of the
collective variables of microscopic constituents of these objects, the wave functions
in 3D. The complete description of a macroscopic object involves entangled states
of its constituents deﬁned in their conﬁguration space. A more detailed description
involves entangled states of even smaller systems, the set of which makes the
microscopic systems described above. And so on. At the top of the hierarchy are
the wave functions of macroscopic objects in 3D. Thus, it seems legitimate to view
this picture as a wave function realism in 3D. Albert’s wave function realism in 3N
dimensional conﬁguration space is a more fundamental description, but clearly it is
also not the fundamental description, there are several levels of more fundamental
theories.
There is a long-winded way of recognising the familiar three dimensional objects
from the wave function in the conﬁguration space. This process heavily relies on the
Hamiltonian of the world. By contrast, the role of the Hamiltonian in my picture is
to explain changes in our experience, but not the experience itself. Imagine that
Mephistopheles changes the Hamiltonian of the world when Dr. Faust says to the
Moment ﬂying: “Linger a while - thou art so fair!” such that the current wave
function of the world becomes an eigenstate of the Hamiltonian. A minute later,
Mephistopheles switches the Hamiltonian to be as it was before. I postulate that
we all will have one minute of unchanging (beautiful) experience. We will not
remember it, so it is not clear what is the operational meaning of this statement,
but it provides a consistent deﬁnition which is apparently absent in Albert’s picture.
This demonstrates that there is no contradiction between the two approaches, the
two pictures are similar, but built up in a different way. Three dimensional reality
is a derived property of Albert’s approach while it is a fundamental basis of my
approach.
14.3
The Many-Worlds Universe
Although I asserted above that the wave function realism describing N quantum
particles can be upgraded to a more precise and complete quantum theory of
relativistic ﬁelds without conceptual changes, I did not mean that this is true for
a collapsing wave function. The collapse of the wave function includes genuine

14
Wave Function Realism and Three Dimensions
201
randomness and action at a distance, and because of this it does not ﬁt with the
standard picture of physical science.
Consider a particle in an equal amplitude superposition of two spatially separated
wave packets. Our decision to measure or not to measure the presence of the particle
in one location affects the wave function at another location immediately (for von
Neumann collapse) or in a very short time (in the GRW model) irrespective of the
distance between the two wave packets. Indeed, if we decide not to measure the
particle in one location, the wave function at another location does not change. The
probability of the GRW jump of the wave function of an isolated single particle is
very small. If however, we perform a measurement which entangles the presence
(absence) of the particle in one location with two macroscopically distinct positions
of a pointer consisting of a macroscopic number of particles, in a very short time
the GRW hit of one of the particles of the pointer will cause a random change of the
amplitude of the second wave packet from
1
√
2 to a number close to 0 or 1.
Even if the wave function is not the ontology (contrary to the approach taken
here), this example demonstrates an action at a distance. Measurement in one
location changes the situation in another location: without the ﬁrst measurement,
there is a genuine uncertainty about the result of the measurement in this location.
Immediately after the ﬁrst measurement, the result of the measurement in the remote
location is deterministic.
Removing collapse makes quantum theory sensible from the physics point of
view. The theory becomes deterministic (Vaidman, 2014) as a default required from
a scientiﬁc theory (Earman, 1986), and it avoids an action at a distance. Why
then was the collapse invented to be a part of quantum theory? Quantum theory
without collapse apparently contradicts our empirical evidence that a quantum
measurement ends up with a single outcome. There is no contradiction here, and
it seems that Schrödinger (Allori et al., 2011) and maybe other fathers of quantum
theory understood this, but the inescapable consequence of quantum theory without
collapse - the existence of parallel worlds - was and still is difﬁcult to accept.
The wave function of the universe is not given by (14.1). It is a superposition of
the wave functions of the form (14.1):
|Ψuniverse⟩=

i
αi|Ψworldi⟩.
(14.3)
Since a world i, and thus the quantum state of the world |Ψworldi⟩is not rigorously
deﬁned, the decomposition (14.3) is not rigorously deﬁned too. One property of
the decomposition is speciﬁed. The worlds are macroscopically different ensuring
the mutual orthogonality of various terms. Note that one of the terms in (14.3)
might correspond to an unstructured microscopic systems, i.e. it might have no
macroscopic objects. Even this world, at least formally, fulﬁlls the deﬁnition: there
are no macroscopic objects in a superposition of macroscopically different states.
You, the reader of this paper, live in a particular world corresponding to one
of the terms, |Ψworldj⟩of the decomposition (14.3). If you adopt the Copenhagen
or a physical collapse interpretation, you assume that this term is all that there is,

202
L. Vaidman
|Ψuniverse⟩= |Ψworldj⟩. This assumption clearly simpliﬁes the task of ﬁnding the
correspondence between our experience and the formalism of the physical theory
on which our experience supervenes, but such a physical theory is hard to accept. A
much nicer physical theory tells us that the ontology of the universe is described by
the superposition (14.3).
The many-worlds interpretation (MWI) restores the 3D picture of the world with
the single outcomes of quantum measurements we experience by postulating that
we and other macroscopic objects exist only within a single world. Our experience
supervenes on the wave function of one of the worlds Ψworldi exactly in the same
way as it was described in the section about the single-world universe. The (only)
ontology in quantum theory is the universal wave function (14.3), but what is
relevant for our experience is one term of the universal wave function |Ψworldi⟩
corresponding to the world we live in. Both Ψuniverse and Ψworldi are deﬁned in
conﬁguration space, but Ψworldi can also be written in the form of the product of
wave functions of sets of particles corresponding to macroscopic objects and the
wave function of the set of remaining particles, see (14.1). Each wave function
of the set of particles corresponding to a macroscopic object can be written as
a product of wave functions of various variables of the set, including collective
variables deﬁned in 3D, see (14.2). These wave functions are well localized and they
describe familiar macroscopic objects. The interaction of macroscopic objects one
with the other is fully speciﬁed by their descriptions in 3D. This is the way to answer
Maudlin’s worry (Maudlin, 2010) that the wave function of the universe deﬁned in
3N conﬁguration space is not appropriate for describing our familiar objects in 3D.
The explanations of properties of macroscopic objects like conductivity, rigidity
etc. are based on the analysis of their microscopic ingredients, including entan-
glement of microscopic systems, which requires the conﬁguration space. We also
need the conﬁguration space for the description of microscopic systems in quantum
information tasks like teleportation, secure communication, etc. However, the
conﬁguration space is not needed for the explanation of the macroscopic behavior
of macroscopic objects.
A popular view is that we need decoherence with the environment (Baccia-
galuppi, 2020) to explain why the existence of parallel worlds does not alter
our experience in a particular world. I, however, fail to see the relevance of the
environment. An observer living in world j has the same experience with or without
the presence of parallel worlds i ̸= j. The quantum states of other worlds are
macroscopically different and, therefore, it is not feasible to expect interference
between the worlds. In principle, such interference can happen when world j splits
into several worlds and at least two of them will appear from the splitting of some
other world i, but due to macroscopic differences between worlds i and j we have
no technological means to arrange such an experiment and the probability that this
happens without our intervention is negligible.
Let us analyze an example. A Geiger counter is placed near a weak radioactive
source such that it clicks on average once in ten seconds. A runner waits for the ﬁrst
click after 12 AM to start running on a 100 meter circle. There will be numerous
worlds differing by the observationally distinguishable times the runner starts

14
Wave Function Realism and Three Dimensions
203
running. There is no precise deﬁnition for observationally distinguishable, although
we do have a bound: the worlds should correspond to orthogonal states. Until now
we introduced only one splitting, so the terms in the superposition will not interfere
due to unitarity. The runners will have an overlap in space, since there will be time
differences of the take off between the worlds, but even if the centers of mass of the
runners will be exactly in the same place, corresponding quantum states will be very
different. To observe an interference, we need a very special situation which splits
these states into pairs of identical states. The decoherence due to the environment
is irrelevant for the suppression of the interference, because macroscopic objects
cannot (without unrealistic super-technology) exhibit the interference anyway.
The program of deriving the emergent classical world from the universal
wave function (Wallace, 2012), i.e. the derivation of the decomposition (14.3), is
conceptually close to Albert’s approach: start with fundamental 3N conﬁguration
space and argue that the Hamiltonian describing fundamental interactions leads
to the 3D structure. The emergence program might be difﬁcult: it is hard to start
with the wave function of the universe and recognize the world we see around.
Try to ﬁnd the superposition of the runner from the complex entangled states of
particles smeared around the running circle. It is also not clear how helpful the
emergence program is. We do not know much about the wave function of the
universe which includes all the worlds. But a more modest task is not problematic.
We can reconstruct the relevant parts of the universal wave function to explain our
world. We need to accept the existence of other parts (corresponding to parallel
worlds) for having a good (simple, deterministic and without action at a distance)
physical theory.
I presented here my preferred concept of a world Vaidman (2002) in which
all macroscopic objects are well localized in 3D and thus the wave function of
macroscopic variables of these objects is deﬁned in 3D. Note that there is a
legitimate alternative to the concept of a world in the MWI, closer to the original
proposal of Everett III (1957) which can be understood as a subjective world of an
observer. Only he, and all objects he is in contact with, are well localized. Measuring
devices (e.g. Schrödinger’s cat) which are not in contact with the observer are
in a superposition of macroscopically different states after remote measurements
(the meaning of this is clear, even if the semantics is forbidden according to
my approach). In this alternative, the conﬁguration space is needed not only for
constituents of macroscopic objects, but also for macroscopic objects which are
not in contact with the observer. The same argument for the necessity of the
conﬁguration space is even stronger if we consider the wave function of the universe
which includes all the worlds. Still, the 3D space is important as it is the space of
the fundamental interactions.

204
L. Vaidman
14.4
Our World
We see a single world. It is not difﬁcult to imagine that there are other worlds like
ours in remote galaxies, but that there are parallel worlds here, in the same place,
is counter-intuitive. We see our one world and, naturally, are looking for a theory
which will tell us how our world evolves. The MWI tells that our world evolves into
multiple worlds, it deﬁnitely happens at every quantum measurement, but maybe it
happens much more often (Albrecht & Phillips, 2014). We experience only a single
world at any moment of time, so it is understandable that we are reluctant to accept
existence of our copies. What is even harder to accept is that the natural question:
“What will be my world in the future?” makes no sense.
Understanding that our world often splits should change the paradigm of a world.
We should accept that the picture of an evolving world is incorrect: there is no
concept of our world line evolving towards the future: the world line becomes a tree
which does not correspond to our (single) experience.
There is nothing in the MWI which points to the connection of a world in the past
to a particular world in the future. However, we can follow our world line backwards
in time. Every world has a history as a single world at every moment in the past. (We
disregard here in principle possible, but not feasible, situations of merging worlds
in experiments of super technology such as Wigner’s friend experiment (Wigner,
1995). This past world line is what we have in our memories now and this is what
led to the paradigm of the world evolving forward in time.
This provides the possibility to consider a forward evolving world. We can
consider the time reversal of the well deﬁned backward evolving world as the time
evolution of our world. This world does not follow the laws of physics which are
relevant to all worlds together. This “evolution” is not unitary and it includes an
action at a distance. It is identical to the evolution of the textbook (collapsing wave
function) world. This is the world which allows description of essential features
of macroscopic variables (in particular their interaction with other macroscopic
objects) by wave functions in 3D in product with entangled states of microscopic
constituents of these macroscopic objects required for explanation of the rigidity,
the conductivity and other properties of the objects, see (14.2).
Let us look more carefully at the wave function of our world. Apart from the
wave functions of collective variables of macroscopic objects ψ(An) represented
by wave functions in 3D, the entangled wave functions in conﬁguration space
ψ(b1, b2, . . . , bNb) of the constituents of macroscopic objects described in (14.2),
there is an (in general entangled) wave function of microscopic systems which
are not entangled with macroscopic objects, signiﬁed by Φrest in (14.1). We
do not experience directly these microscopic systems and usually there is no
need to discuss their state. We do not directly experience also details of states
of many microscopic constituents of macroscopic objects. Thus, it is natural to
describe our world, as humans did a long time ago, by specifying only states
of macroscopic objects. However, today, at the time of the quantum information
technology revolution, it is sometimes important to describe quantum entangled

14
Wave Function Realism and Three Dimensions
205
states of microscopic systems in various experiments: single particle interferometry,
teleportation, quantum key distribution. These particles are not well localized in 3D
and, moreover, we need at least small parts of conﬁguration space to describe their
entanglement.
I argued above that decoherence is not important in the MWI, but the lack of
decoherence of microscopic particles is important. Then, between preparation and
measurements, microscopic systems are described by the coherent superposition
of macroscopically different states, including wave packets at remote locations.
Between measurements, these superpositions either remain approximately constant
or evolve in a known unitary way. The results of all measurements specify
completely these states. So, one can choose to consider these results as an ontology.
This does not seem to be an attractive option for ontology. Anyway, here we discuss
the wave function as an ontology. The world wave function is not a complete
ontology (the wave function of the universe is), but to explain our experience in
our world, the world wave function is the relevant one. Our world is the world
in the past which for every moment includes both preparation before this moment
and postselection to our particular world after this moment. So, the complete
description at every moment has, in addition to the standard forward evolving wave
function, the backward evolving wave function speciﬁed by the measurement after
this moment, see Aharonov and Vaidman (1990). This description with two wave
functions evolving forward and backward in time is relevant only for microscopic
systems, because only for microscopic systems can these wave functions be
macroscopically different. Within a world, by deﬁnition, there are no superpositions
of macroscopically different wave functions of macroscopic objects.
Usually, we do not experience directly microscopic objects, so the two wave
function description is important only for understanding quantum experiments.
I ﬁnd it useful because it provides a new consistent (and surprising) picture of
the reality of pre and post-selected quantum systems. Microscopic objects can be
assigned positions in 3D, but in contrast to the classical behavior of macroscopic
objects, they might not necessarily follow classical continuous trajectories: they can
leave (weak) traces simultaneously in several places (McQueen & Vaidman, 2020)
and these traces have a complex structure (Dziewior et al., 2019).
In a single world universe, the connection between experience and the wave
function is very natural: there is one experience and one wave function. In the many-
worlds universe, the situation is more subtle. If the wave functions of worlds are
different only in their distant locations, such that we have only one wave function of
particles corresponding to the observer, we have only one observer with a particular
experience. But consider a situation in which I performed a quantum measurement
and it is arranged that I am moved slowly in a closed chamber to different locations
according to the results of the experiment (Vaidman, 1998). After the experiment,
there are several Levs, each aware of parts of the wave function corresponding to
all Levs and each having the experience of being in a chamber. My wave function
corresponds to my experience, but in which chamber am I? Another postulate about
the probability of self-location (that it is proportional to the measure of existence

206
L. Vaidman
of the world with the corresponding result of the experiment) is needed (see more
details in Vaidman 2020).
14.5
Summary: Three Dimensional Aspects of Universal and
World Wave Functions
Wave function realism is a thesis that the only ontology of Nature is a pure quantum
state without additional or alternative primitive ontology (Allori, 2017) (e.g. beables
Bell 1995) in 3D. The wave function of the universe by itself has an intimate
connection to the 3D space, although formally it is not deﬁned in 3D. The source of
the connection is that the fundamental interaction takes place in 3D which leads to
the following explanation why we experience life in 3D.
Our experience supervenes only on one of the terms of the superposition (14.3),
our world wave function. In my semantics, in every world all macroscopic objects
are well localised in 3D and every world wave function describes full 3D space
including remote galaxies. (I do not enter cosmological issues of the size of the
universe.) In a world wave function every macroscopic object is described by a well
localised wave function in 3D in a product state with a (usually entangled) state
of their constituents, states of other macroscopic objects, and (possibly entangled)
states of microscopic systems which do not form what we might describe as a
macroscopic object.
Our experience supervenes only on the part of the world wave function in 3D
near us, so the same “we” live in multiple worlds which differ by locations of
remote macroscopic objects. We can split our worlds locally by performing quantum
experiments. Do it right now with the help of the Tel Aviv WorldSplitter (2012)!
There is no meaning to ask in which world will we be after the splitting, but we can
ask what was our world in the past. During the whole history of our world (at least
not too close to the Big Bang) our world had macroscopic objects well localised in
3D.
In our world it might be of interest to assign locations in 3D to some microscopic
objects, e.g. a single photon passing through an interferometer. Note, that when its
forward and backward evolving wave functions are different, the evolution of these
locations might not behave in a classical way (McQueen & Vaidman, 2020).
I suggest a direct connection between our experience and our world wave
function, recognising our three-dimensional picture in the world wave function by,
for example, drawing a three-dimensional map of the density of the wave function
of human tissue cells. This is instead of arriving at our experience through operators,
e.g., awareness operators (Page, 2003).
Although the universal wave function is not deﬁned in 3D, it has a very important
property in 3D: there is no action at a distance. Disturbances cannot propagate
with superluminal velocity. If we consider the time evolution of two universal wave
functions which differ at a particular time only in a localised 3D region, they might

14
Wave Function Realism and Three Dimensions
207
differ in the future only in the regions that the light starting at that time from the
localised region can reach. The universal wave function is nonlocal in 3D in the
sense that it is nonseparable, so I have to explain exactly what is the meaning of
local differences. If a system C in a remote location is entangled with a system A
near me, I can, by a local swap operation, change the entanglement of the remote
system C to another system in my location. However, the complete local description
(given by local density matrix) in remote locations (the locations the light cannot
reach) cannot be changed.
The wave function of a particular world has different 3D properties. Remember
the way we consider the time evolution of a world. At a particular time, based on our
records of events (results of quantum measurements in the past), we reconstruct the
forward evolving (collapsing) wave function. To formulate action at a distance we
consider two situations in which we reconstruct world wave functions in a particular
time in the past which are different only in a localised 3D region. Since world wave
functions evolve in a non-deterministic way, there (most probably) will be local
differences in remote locations. But if the difference is a change of a setup which
speciﬁes the measurement in the local region on a particle entangled with a system
in a remote location, we can be certain that there will be differences between the
two world wave functions in the regions the light cannot reach. Within a particular
world, there is an action at a distance in 3D. On the other hand, in the world wave
function we have separability in the 3D of the part of the wave function describing
macroscopic properties of macroscopic objects. There is no entanglement between
macroscopic objects. They all are described by the product of localised wave packets
in 3D (times the quantum states of their constituents).
The majority of physicists view quantum theory as a great success. They all say
that the wave function collapsing at measurements explains in an excellent way all
that we see around. They accept the postulate that our experience supervenes on
this wave function. It is the Collapse with its action at a distance and randomness
that goes against the spirit of physics. What I tried to explain here is that we do not
need Collapse. The wave function, instead of collapsing, splits into macroscopically
different world wave functions. Every one of these world wave functions explains
well the experience of life in 3D.
Acknowledgments I thank Michael Ridley for useful discussions. This work has been supported
in part by the Israel Science Foundation Grant No. 2064/19.
References
Aharonov, Y., & Vaidman, L. (1990). Properties of a quantum system during the time interval
between two measurements. Physical Review A, 41, 11–20.
Albert, D. Z. (1996). Elementary quantum metaphysics. In S. G. J. T. Cushing, & A. Fine (Eds.),
Bohmian mechanics and quantum theory: An appraisal (pp. 277–284). Springer.

208
L. Vaidman
Albert, D. Z. (2013). Wave function realism. In: A. Ney, & D. Z. Albert (Eds.), The wave function:
Essays on the metaphysics of quantum mechanics (pp. 52–57). Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Albrecht, A., Phillips, D. (2014). Origin of probabilities and their application to the multiverse.
Physical Review D, 90(12), 123,514.
Allori, V. (2017). Primitive ontology and the classical world.
In Quantum structural studies:
Classical emergence from the quantum level (pp. 175–199). World Scientiﬁc.
Allori, V., Goldstein, S., Tumulka, R., Zanghì, N. (2011). Many worlds and Schrödinger’s ﬁrst
quantum theory. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 62(1), 1–27.
Allori, V., Goldstein, S., Tumulka, R., Zanghì, N. (2014). Predictions and primitive ontology in
quantum foundations: a study of examples.
British Journal for the Philosophy of Science,
65(2), 323–352.
Bacciagaluppi, G. (2020). The role of decoherence in quantum mechanics. In: E. N. Zalta (Ed.),
The stanford encyclopedia of philosophy, fall, 2020 edn. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford
University.
Bell, J. S. (1995). The theory of local beables. In Quantum mechanics, high energy physics and
accelerators. Selected papers of John S. Bell (with commentary). Singapore: World Scientiﬁc,
(1976).
Dziewior, J., Knips, L., Farfurnik, D., Senkalla, K., Benshalom, N., Efroni, J., Meinecke, J., Bar-
Ad, S., Weinfurter, H., & Vaidman, L. (2019). Universality of local weak interactions and its
application for interferometric alignment. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
116(8), 2881–2890.
Earman, J. (1986). A primer on determinism, Reidel, Boston.
Everett III, H. (1957) “Relative state” formulation of quantum mechanics. Reviews of Modern
Physics, 29, 454–462.
Ghirardi, G. C., Rimini, A., & Weber, T. (1986). Uniﬁed dynamics for microscopic and macro-
scopic systems. Physical Review D, 34, 470–491.
Maudlin, T. (2010). Can the world be only wavefunction? In: A. K. S. Saunders J. Barrett, &
D. Wallace (Eds.), Many worlds? Everett, quantum theory, & reality (pp. 121–143). Oxford
University Press.
McQueen, K. J., & Vaidman, L. (2020). How the many worlds interpretation brings common sense
to paradoxical quantum experiments. In Scientiﬁc challenges to common sense philosophy (pp.
40–60). Routledge .
Ney, A. (2021). The world in the wave function: A metaphysics for quantum physics. Oxford
University Press.
Ney, A., & Albert, D. Z. (2013). The wave function: Essays on the metaphysics of quantum
mechanics. Oxford University Press.
Page, D. N. (2003) Mindless sensationalism: A quantum framework for consciousness.
In
Q. Smith, A. Jokic (Eds.), Consciousness: New philosophical perspectives (pp. 468–506). OUP
Oxford.
Pearle, P. (1976). Reduction of the state vector by a nonlinear schrödinger equation. Physical
Review D, 13(4), 857.
Wallace, D. (2012). The emergent multiverse: Quantum theory according to the everett interpreta-
tion. Oxford University Press.
Wallace, D. (2020). Against wavefunction realism. In: S. Dasgupta, R. Dotan, & B. Weslake (Eds.),
Current controversies in philosophy of science (pp. 63–74). Abingdon: Routledge.
Wigner, E. P. (1995). Remarks on the mind-body question.
In Philosophical reﬂections and
syntheses (pp. 247–260). Springer.
WorldSplitter (2012). Tel Aviv University. http://qol.tau.ac.il.
Vaidman, L. (1998). On schizophrenic experiences of the neutron or why we should believe in
the many-worlds interpretation of quantum theory. International Studies in the Philosophy of
Science, 12, 245–261.
Vaidman, L. (2002). Many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics. In: E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The
stanford encyclopedia of philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab. Stanford University.

14
Wave Function Realism and Three Dimensions
209
Vaidman, L. (2014). Quantum theory and determinism.
Quantum Studies: Mathematics and
Foundations, 1(1–2), 5–38.
Vaidman, L. (2016). All is ψ. Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 701, 012,020.
Vaidman, L. (2019). Ontology of the wave function and the many-worlds interpretation.
In
O. Lombardi, S. Fortin, C. López, & F. Holik (Eds.), Quantum worlds: Perspectives on the
ontology of quantum mechanics. Cambridge University Press.
Vaidman, L. (2020). Derivations of the born rule. In M. Hemmo, & O. Shenker (Eds.), Quantum,
probability, logic: The work and inﬂuence of itamar pitowsky (pp. 567–584). Springer Nature.
Von Neumann, J. (2018). Mathematical foundations of quantum mechanics. Princeton University
Press.

Chapter 15
Reality as a Vector in Hilbert Space
Sean M. Carroll
Abstract I defend the extremist position that the fundamental ontology of the
world consists of a vector in Hilbert space evolving according to the Schrödinger
equation. The laws of physics are determined solely by the energy eigenspectrum
of the Hamiltonian. The structure of our observed world, including space and ﬁelds
living within it, should arise as a higher-level emergent description. I sketch how
this might come about, although much work remains to be done.
Invited contribution to the volume Quantum Mechanics and Fundamentality:
Naturalizing Quantum Theory Between Scientiﬁc Realism and Ontological Inde-
terminacy; Valia Allori (ed.).
[I]t would be naive in the extreme to be a ‘Hilbert-space-vector realist’: to reify Hilbert
space, and take it as analogous to physical space. – Wallace (2017)
In Hilbert space, nobody can hear you scream. – Aharonov and Rohrlich (2005)
Almost a century after the 1927 Solvay Conference, the question of the ultimate
ontology of quantum mechanics remains unsettled. Essentially all formulations of
quantum theory rely on the use of a wave function or state vector (or mathematically
equivalent structures). But researchers do not agree on whether the state vector is
a complete and exact representation of reality, whether it represents part of reality
but needs to be augmented by additional variables to be complete, or whether it is
an epistemic tool rather than a representation of reality at all. And they further do
not agree on whether the state vector should be thought of as purely an element
of some abstract Hilbert space, or whether there is some fundamental ontological
status to a particular representation of that vector in terms of something more
directly physical, such as conﬁguration space or particles or ﬁelds in honest three-
dimensional “space.”
S. M. Carroll ()
Walter Burke Institute for Theoretical Physics, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA,
USA
Santa Fe Institute, Santa Fe, NM, USA
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
V. Allori (ed.), Quantum Mechanics and Fundamentality, Synthese Library 460,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-99642-0_15
211

212
S. M. Carroll
Here I want to argue for the plausibility of an extreme position among these
alternatives, that the fundamental ontology of the world is completely and exactly
represented by a vector in an abstract Hilbert space, evolving in time according to
unitary Schrödinger dynamics. Everything else, from particles and ﬁelds to space
itself, is rightly thought of as emergent from that austere set of ingredients. In
particular, there is no preferred set of observables or decomposition of Hilbert space.
This approach has been called “Mad-Dog Everettianism” (Carroll & Singh, 2019)
although “Hilbert Space Fundamentalism” would be equally accurate.
Let’s see how one might end up seduced by an ideology that is so radically
different from our direct experience of the world. When we are ﬁrst taught quantum
mechanics, we are shown how to construct quantum theories by taking classical
models and quantizing them. Imagine we have a classical precursor theory deﬁned
on some phase space, expressed mathematically as a symplectic manifold 	, with
evolution determined by some Hamiltonian function H : 	 →R. We choose
a “polarization” on phase space, which amounts to coordinatizing it in terms
of canonical coordinates Q (deﬁning “conﬁguration space”) and corresponding
canonical momenta P, where each symbol might stand for multiple dimensions.
This is a fairly general setup; for N point particles moving in D-dimensional
Euclidean space, conﬁguration space is isomorphic to RDN, but we could also
consider ﬁeld theory, for which the coordinates are simply the values of the ﬁelds
throughout space, and conﬁguration space is inﬁnite-dimensional.
One way to construct a corresponding quantum theory is to introduce complex-
valued wave functions of the coordinates alone, (Q) ∈C. Wave functions must be
normalizable, in the sense that they are square-integrable,

∗ dQ < ∞, where
∗is the complex conjugate of . Momenta are now represented by linear operators
ˆP , whose form can be derived from the canonical commutation relations [ ˆQ, ˆP ] =
i ¯h (where the operator ˆQ is simply multiplication by Q). This lets us promote the
classical Hamiltonian to a self-adjoint operator ˆH( ˆQ, ˆP ) (up to potential operator-
ordering ambiguities). We then posit that the wave function evolves according to the
Schrödinger equation,
ˆH = i ¯h ∂
∂t .
(15.1)
This form of the Schrödinger equation is perfectly general, and applies to relativistic
theories as well as non-relativistic ones, as long as one uses an appropriate
Hamiltonian. (There may be equivalent representations using what would, ex post
facto, be thought of as Lorentz-transformed Hamiltonians; if so, that should be
emergent from the dynamics speciﬁed by any representative Hamiltonian.)
This procedure gives us the beginnings of a quantum theory. For Everettians, it
gives us the complete theory; a unitarily-evolving quantum state describes the entire
ontology at a fundamental level. Other approaches require additional dynamical
rules, physical structures, or some combination thereof. Here our interest is in seeing
how far we can get from a minimal starting point, so the Everettian approach is
appropriate. (For more on structure in the Everett interpretation, see Saunders, 2021;
Wallace, 2003.)

15
Reality as a Vector in Hilbert Space
213
But how precisely should we think about this ontology? It might seem to
include at least the original conﬁguration space coordinatized by {Q}, the set of
wave functions (Q), and the Hamiltonian
ˆH. This has led Albert (1996) to
suggest “wave function realism”—the idea that it is the wave function (Q) that
describes reality, and that the wave function is deﬁned on conﬁguration space, so
that conﬁguration space (3N dimensional for N particles in 3 dimensions, inﬁnite-
dimensional for a ﬁeld theory) is where the wave function “really lives” (see also
Ney, 2013; North, 2013). This point of view has been criticized by Wallace (2017),
who points out that conﬁguration space is simply one possible way of representing
the wave function; it could also be represented in momentum space (as a function
of P), or an inﬁnite number of other choices. (Wallace also has other criticisms, and
other authors criticize the idea for other reasons Allori 2013; Myrvold 2015; Ney
has recently responded Ney 2021.)
The ambiguity between deﬁning wave functions in position versus momentum
space is an example of a broader issue. “Quantization” does not give us a one-
to-one map from classical theories to quantum ones, or even a well-deﬁned map
at all. A single classical precursor may correspond to multiple quantum theories,
due to operator-ordering ambiguities. Moreover, distinct classical models may have
identical quantizations, as in the dualities of quantum ﬁeld theory. This makes it
difﬁcult to uniquely pinpoint what a quantum theory is supposed to be a theory “of.”
In the duality between the massive Thirring model and sine-Gordon theory, a single
quantum theory can arise from classical precursors describing either fundamental
bosons or fundamental fermions (Coleman, 1975). In the AdS/CFT correspondence,
a nongravitational ﬁeld theory in D spacetime dimensions is dual to a quantum
gravity theory in D + 1 dimensions (Maldacena, 1999). So from a quantum theory
alone, it might be impossible to say what kinds of ﬁelds the model describes, or
even the number of dimensions they live in.
But the complicated relationship between classical and quantum theories is a
problem for physicists, not for physics. Nature simply is quantum from the start,
and the classical world arises as an emergent approximation in some appropriate
limit. If our interest is in fundamental ontology, rather than focusing on quantum
theories derived by quantizing classical precursors, it would make sense to consider
the inverse problem: given a quantum theory, what kind of classical limits might
arise within it?
So let us think carefully about what it means to be given a quantum theory (at
least from an Everettian perspective). Wave functions, as von Neumann noted long
ago, can be added and scaled by complex numbers, and have a natural inner product
deﬁned by (, ) =

∗. They therefore describe a complex, normed vector
space, called Hilbert space, and the fact that the Schrödinger equation is linear
means that it respects this structure. In vector-space language, the choice between
expressing the wave function in conﬁguration space or momentum space is merely
a change of basis in Hilbert space, which presumably has no physical importance
whatsoever. The physical quantum state—as distinguished from its representation
in some particular basis—is simply a vector in Hilbert space, sometimes called the
“state vector,” and written in Dirac notation as |⟩.

214
S. M. Carroll
It would therefore seem natural, if our goal is to take a nature’s-eye view of
things and specify the correct quantum theory of the world in its own right, to deﬁne
that theory as a set of state vectors |⟩in a Hilbert space H, evolving under the
Schrödinger equation via a speciﬁed Hamiltonian ˆH. The problem is that this is
very little structure indeed. Hilbert space itself is featureless; a particular choice
of Hilbert space is completely speciﬁed by its dimension d = dim H. A vector
in Hilbert space contains no direct speciﬁcation of what the physical content of
such a state is supposed to be; there is no mention of space, conﬁguration space,
particles, ﬁelds, or any such familiar notions. Presumably all of that is going to have
to somehow emerge from the dynamics, which seems like a tall order.
One might imagine that we can somehow read off the physical structure being
described from the explicit form of the Hamiltonian. For example, if we were
handed
ˆH = −¯h2
2m
∂2
∂x2 + 1
2mω2 ˆx2,
(15.2)
we would quickly surmise that we had a simple harmonic oscillator on our hands.
But that’s only because we have conveniently been given the Hamiltonian in a
particularly useful basis, in this case the position basis |x⟩. That is not part of
the speciﬁcation of the theory itself. Hilbert space does not come equipped with
a preferred basis; we should be able to deduce that the position basis (or some other
one) is useful to our analysis of the system, rather than assuming we have been given
it from the start.
Given that the only data that comes along with Hilbert space is its dimension
d, the only other thing we have to work with is the Hamiltonian considered as
an abstract operator. That does pick out one particular basis: that of the energy
eigenstates, vectors satisfying ˆH |n⟩= En |n⟩. (For simplicity we assume non-
degenerate energy eigenvalues, so that the states {|n⟩} deﬁne a unique basis.)
There is no information contained in the speciﬁcation of the energy eigenstates
themselves; they are just a collection of orthonormal vectors. The information
about the Hamiltonian is contained entirely in its set of eigenvalues {En}, called
the “spectrum” of the Hamiltonian. A speciﬁcation of a quantum theory consists
entirely, therefore, of this list of real numbers, the energy eigenspectrum.
There is an important caveat to this statement. If Hilbert space is non-separable
(inﬁnite non-countable dimension), there can be unitarily inequivalent representa-
tions of the canonical commutation relations (Haag, 1955). It is therefore necessary
to give additional information to deﬁne the theory; typically this would amount to
specifying an algebra of observables.
We have good reason, however, to expect that the Hilbert space for the real world
is ﬁnite-dimensional, at least if we restrict our attention to our observable universe
or any other ﬁnite region of space (Banks, 2001; Bao et al., 2017; Bekenstein, 1981;
Bousso, 1999; Jacobson, 2012). The reason is gravity. In the presence of gravity,
to make a long story short, the highest-entropy conﬁguration we can construct in a
spherical region R of radius r is a black hole, and black holes have a ﬁnite entropy

15
Reality as a Vector in Hilbert Space
215
SBH = A/4G = πr2/G, where A is the area of the event horizon and G is Newton’s
constant (and we set ¯h = c = 1). If we decompose Hilbert space into a tensor
product of a factor describing that region and one describing the rest of the world,
H = HR ⊗HE,
(15.3)
it follows that we have an upper bound on the dimensionality of HR, given by
dim HR ≤exp (eπr2/G).
(15.4)
If R represents our observable universe with current values of the cosmological
parameters, this works out to approximately dim HR ≤ee123, which is large but still
smaller than inﬁnity.1
We don’t know whether the dimension of the full Hilbert space H is ﬁnite
or inﬁnite, other than the indirect consideration that inﬁnite time evolution in
a ﬁnite-dimensional Hilbert space would lead to a proliferation of Boltzmann
Brains (Carroll, 2008; Dyson et al., 2002). But for our current purposes, it sufﬁces
that operations conﬁned to our observable universe effectively act on a ﬁnite-
dimensional part of Hilbert space. In that case, the set of in-principle observables is
simply all Hermitian operators on HR. What can be observed in practice will depend
on how we split further split Hilbert space into systems and observers, but the theory
is completely speciﬁed by the Hilbert space and Hamiltonian, or in other words, by
the discrete list of numbers {En} in the energy spectrum. By which we mean the
spectrum of the Hamiltonian acting on HR itself, assuming that interactions with
degrees of freedom in HE can be neglected for practical purposes. Henceforth we
will speak as if the ﬁnite-dimensional factor HR is the relevant part of Hilbert space,
and our world can be described by a unitarily-evolving state within it. Technically
it is more likely to be a mixed state described by a density operator, but that can
always be puriﬁed by adding a ﬁnite-dimensional auxiliary factor to Hilbert space,
so we won’t worry about such details.
The challenge facing such an approach should be clear. The world of our
experience doesn’t seem like a vector in Hilbert space, evolving according to a list
of energy eigenvalues. It seems like there is space, and objects located in space, and
those objects interact with each other, and so forth. How in the world is all of that
supposed to come from a description as abstract and featureless as a vector evolving
through Hilbert space? To make matters seemingly worse, the actual evolution is
pretty trivial; in the energy eigenbasis, an exact solution to the Schrödinger equation
1 There are a number of nuances here. In gauge theories, we cannot precisely decompose Hilbert
space into factors representing regions of space. And we are somewhat cheating by invoking
“regions of space” at all, although this will be a sensible notion on individual semiclassical
branches of the universal quantum state. For elaboration see (Bao et al., 2017).

216
S. M. Carroll
from an initial state |(0)⟩= 
n ψn |n⟩is
|(t)⟩=

n
ψne−iEnt |n⟩.
(15.5)
Each component simply evolves via an energy-dependent phase factor. It seems like
a long way from the complicated nonlinear dynamics of our world. This challenge
accounts for the epigraphs at the beginning of this paper.
Everettians tend to think that the right strategy for understanding the fundamental
nature of reality is not necessarily to start with what the world seems like and to
construct an ontology that hews as closely as possible to that. Rather, we should
start with some proposed ontology and ask what it would seem like to observers (if
any such exist) described by it. Clearly, “observers” are not represented directly
by a vector in Hilbert space, nor is the world that they observe. What we can
instead ask is whether there could be a higher-level description, emergent from our
ontology, that can successfully account for our world. Such a description is not
forced on us at the God’s-eye (or Laplace’s-Demon’s eye) view of the universe. It
would always be possible to say that reality is a vector in Hilbert space, evolving
through time, and stop at that. But that’s not the only thing we’re allowed to say. The
search for emergent levels is precisely the search for higher-level, non-fundamental
descriptions that approximately capture some of the relevant dynamics, perhaps
on the basis of incomplete information about the fundamental state. The question
is whether we can recover the patterns and phenomena of our experience (space,
objects, interactions) from the behavior of our fundamental ontology.
To get our bearings, consider the classic case of N massive particles moving in
three-dimensional space under the rules of classical Newtonian gravity. The state
of the system is speciﬁed by one point in a 6N-dimensional phase space. Yet
there is an overwhelming temptation to say that the system “really lives” in three-
dimensional space, not the 6N-dimensional phase space. Can we account for where
that temptation comes from without postulating any a priori metaphysical essence
to three-dimensional space?
There are two features of the description as N particles that make it seem more
natural than that featuring a single point in phase space, even though they are
mathematically equivalent. The ﬁrst is that the internal dynamics of the system are
more easily interpreted in the N-particle language. For example, it is immediately
clear that two particles will strongly affect each other when they are nearby and the
others are relatively far away. This kind of partial and approximate understanding of
the dynamics is transparent in the N-particle description, and obscured in the point-
in-phase-space description. The second is that the system looks like N particles.
That is, in the real-world analogues of this toy model, when we observe the system
by interacting with it as a separate physical system ourselves, what we immediately
see are N particles. There can be multiple equivalent ways of describing the internal
dynamics of a system, but the one we think of as “natural” or describing what “really
exists” is often predicated on how that system interacts with the outside world.

15
Reality as a Vector in Hilbert Space
217
Similar considerations apply to familiar examples of emergence, such as treating
a box of many atoms as a ﬂuid. In this case the two descriptions are not equivalent—
the emergent ﬂuid description is an approximation obtained by coarse-graining—but
the same principles apply. The internal dynamics of the particles in the box are
more easily apprehended in the ﬂuid description (fewer variables and equations
are required, given some short-distance coarse-graining scale), and we can measure
the ﬂuid properties directly (using thermometers and barometers and so on), while
the states of each individual atom are inaccessible to us. Emergent structures
that accurately describe the dynamics of part of a system using only information
accessible within the emergent description itself have every right to be thought of as
“real,” even if they are not “fundamental” (Dennett, 1991; Wallace, 2012).
These two considerations (internal dynamics and what we see) work in tandem:
we want the information we gather by observing a system to be sufﬁcient for us
to predict its subsequent behavior. The ontology that seems most natural for us
to ascribe to a physical subsystem thus depends on how that subsystem interacts
with the rest of the world (Zanardi et al., 2004). For our program of Hilbert-
space fundamentalism, this suggests that we should look for emergent descriptions
by considering ways to factorize H into a tensor product of factors representing
different subsystems, and ask how those subsystems interact with each other. (For
certain situations we might also consider direct-sum structures Kabernik et al.
2020.)
We are therefore interested in quantum mereology: how to decompose the whole
of Hilbert space into parts such that individual subsystems have simple internal
dynamics, and those dynamics are readily observed via interactions with other
subsystems, given nothing but the spectrum of the Hamiltonian (Carroll & Singh
2019; for related work see Brun & Hartle 1999; Hartle 2011; Ney 2020a; Tegmark
2015). This seems ambitious, but turns out to be surprisingly tractable.
Consider the most basic thing we might want to describe by such a factorization,
the distinction between a “system” representing a macroscopic object exhibiting
quasi-classical behavior and an “environment” describing degrees of freedom
that passively monitor the system and lead to decoherence. This corresponds to
expressing Hilbert space as the tensor product
H = HS ⊗HE.
(15.6)
Fixing the dimensions of HS and HE, different factorizations are related by unitary
transformations that mix the two factors together. For any speciﬁc factorization, we
automatically get a decomposition of the Hamiltonian into a self-Hamiltonian for
the system, another self-Hamiltonian for the environment, and an interaction term:
ˆH = ˆHS ⊗IE + IS ⊗ˆHE + ˆHint.
(15.7)
We can now ask, within the set of all possible factorizations, which ones lead
to system dynamics that can be described by approximate classical behavior in
appropriate circumstances?

218
S. M. Carroll
In this decomposition, internal dynamics of the system are governed by
ˆHS
and how it is observed by the environment is governed by
ˆHint. (We assume
that dim HE ≫dim HS and that the environment’s internal dynamics are largely
irrelevant.) To recover classical behavior when the system is macroscopic, we
want localized wave packets in HS to stay relatively localized and follow classical
equations of motion under ˆHS, but also for unentangled states in HS ⊗HE to
remain relatively unentangled; the environment is supposed to passively monitor the
system, not rapidly reach maximal entanglement with it. It was argued by Carroll
and Singh (2021) that generic Hamiltonians, as deﬁned by their spectra, have neither
of these features in any factorization; the Hamiltonian of the real world is apparently
non-generic, to nobody’s surprise.2
When the Hamiltonian and the system/environment split allow for classi-
cal behavior, the density operator for the system rapidly diagonalizes in the
dynamically-preferred pointer basis {|φn⟩}, such that the corresponding pointer
states are robust under environmental monitoring (Zurek, 1981). The pointer basis
deﬁnes a pointer observable in the system’s Hilbert space, ˆQS =  |φn⟩⟨φn|.
Pointer states are the ones that appear classical, and a standard pointer observable
is the position in space of a system; a macroscopically coherent cat is described
by a pointer state, but a superposition of cats in different physical conﬁgurations
is not (Joos & Zeh, 1985; Riedel et al., 2012; Zurek, 1993). In the Quantum
Measurement Limit, where ˆHint dominates over ˆHS, the pointer observable satisﬁes
Zurek’s commutativity criterion (Zurek, 1981),
[ ˆHint, ˆQS ⊗IE] ≈0,
(15.8)
reﬂecting the fact that the system in a pointer state does not continually entangle
with the environment.
These ideas about pointer states and decoherence are usually discussed within the
context of a known factorization, but they also suggest a criterion for determining
the factorization that allows for classical behavior (Carroll & Singh, 2021). Given
H and ˆH, we search through all possible factorizations, and for each one we deﬁne
a candidate pointer observable as the one that comes closest to achieving (15.8).
This candidate pointer observable embodies the idea that external observers “see”
certain features of the system, and that those features evolve classically. We can
then calculate, from an initially localized and unentangled system state, the rate of
delocalization and entanglement growth. The correct factorization is the one that
minimizes both. Simple numerical examples verify that this criterion picks out what
we usually think of as the standard system/environmentsplit. Again, the sought-after
behavior is non-generic; it doesn’t occur for random Hamiltonians, nor for random
factorizations with any given Hamiltonian.
2 If you are surprised, consider for example that the unitary dynamics in real-world physics seem
to be local in space to a high degree of precision. There are inﬁnitely many more ways for a
Hamiltonian to be non-local than for it to be local.

15
Reality as a Vector in Hilbert Space
219
The data contained within the spectrum of ˆH therefore seems to provide the
requisite information to pinpoint an appropriate emergent classical description,
when one exists. Thus reassured, let us be somewhat more ambitious, and train
our sights on the ontology that seems to accurately describe our low-energy world
(Carroll, 2021): an effective quantum ﬁeld theory that includes both gravity and the
Standard Model of particle physics, deﬁned in four-dimensional spacetime.
We can again take guidance from our experience of the real world. In quantum
ﬁeld theory (modulo previously-mentioned nuances), we can think about degrees of
freedom as being associated with regions of space. If we partition space into regions
indexed by α, there is a corresponding decomposition of Hilbert space into a tensor
product of local factors,
H =

α
Hα.
(15.9)
This lets us expand the Hamiltonian as a sum of self-Hamiltonians for each region,
plus interactions between pairs of regions, triplets of regions, and so on:
ˆH =

a
ha ˆO(self)
a
+

ab
hab ˆO(2−pt)
ab
+

abc
habc ˆO(3−pt)
abc
+ · · · ,
(15.10)
where the h··· are numerical parameters.
A necessary requirement for the emergence of a structure recognizable as
“space,” with local dynamics therein, is that the series (15.10) does not continue
indeﬁnitely when the factorization (15.9) corresponds to local regions. Degrees of
freedom only interact with a small number of nearest neighbors, not with regions
arbitrarily far away, which means that we only need interactions between a small
number of Hilbert-space factors to capture the entire Hamiltonian. Happily, this
requirement is also essentially sufﬁcient. As shown by Cotler et al. (2019), generic
Hamiltonians admit no local factorization at all, and when such a factorization
exists, it is unique up to irrelevant internal transformations (and some technicalities
that we won’t go into here). Therefore, the spectrum of the Hamiltonian is enough
to pick out the correct notion of an emergent spatial structure when one exists.
A natural next step would be to deﬁne an emergent dynamical metric on
spacetime, as in general relativity. Here results are much less deﬁnitive, but initial
auguries are promising. (For alternative perspectives see Carlip 2014; Giddings
2015; Hu 2009; Huggett & Wüthrich 2013; Ney 2020b; Nielsen & Kleppe 2013;
Raasakka 2017.) In the local decomposition of Hilbert space (15.9), given an overall
state |⟩we can calculate the reduced density matrix ˆρα for each factor or collection
of factors, and the corresponding von Neumann entropy Sα = −Tr ˆρ log ˆρ. The
amount of entanglement between two factors can be measured by the quantum
mutual information,
I(α : β) = Sα + Sβ −Sαβ.
(15.11)

220
S. M. Carroll
In the vacuum state of a quantum ﬁeld theory, we know that the entanglement
between two regions decreases monotonically (exponentially in theories with
massive ﬁelds, as a power law in conformal theories) with the distance between
them. We can therefore imagine turning this around, and deﬁning a distance metric
depending inversely on the mutual information.3 (In non-vacuum states, collections
of particles may have arbitrary entanglement regardless of their distance; however,
in realistic circumstances there are far more unexcited quantum-ﬁeld modes than
excited ones, so this fact makes essentially no quantitative difference.) If there exists
an emergent best-ﬁt smooth geometry, that can be uniquely determined using tech-
niques such as classical multidimensional scaling. Thus, both the dimensionality and
geometry of space can be deﬁned using the entanglement information contained in
a state |⟩, at least if that state is near to the vacuum (Cao et al., 2017).
We can go further, and show that under certain optimistic assumptions (most
notably, the eventual emergence of approximate Lorentz invariance), the resulting
geometry obeys Einstein’s equation of general relativity in the weak-ﬁeld limit (Cao
& Carroll, 2018). The basic idea, following Jacobson (1995), Jacobson (2016), is to
posit that perturbations in the quantum state lead to a change in the emergent area
of a codimension-one surface that is proportional to the change in entanglement
entropy across that surface,
δA ∝δS.
(15.12)
The area perturbation, being a geometric quantity, can then be related to the Einstein
tensor, while in the long-distance limit the entropy can be related to the stress-energy
tensor. Assuming emergent Lorentz symmetry, the resulting dynamical equation for
a perturbation of the vacuum (representing ﬂat spacetime) is
δGμν ∝δTμν,
(15.13)
just as Einstein leads us to expect.
This is a provocative result, but one that shouldn’t be over-interpreted. The
accomplishment is not that we recover speciﬁcally Einstein’s equation; there
aren’t that many other locally Lorentz-invariant equations one could imagine for
a dynamical spacetime metric. What matters is that the necessary information
required for such a description to emerge can be found in an abstract quantum
state evolving according to a Hamiltonian speciﬁed purely by its spectrum, without
any additional ontological assistance. Moreover, while we can use entanglement
3 The resulting metric is deﬁned on the same spacetime structure in which entanglement exists.
This is in contrast to the emergence of spacetime from entanglement in the AdS/CFT context
(Faulkner et al., 2014; Maldacena & Susskind, 2013; Swingle, 2012; van Raamsdonk, 2010),
where entanglement is on the boundary and geometry is in the bulk. There is no inconsistency,
as the procedure described here applies to weak-ﬁeld situations far from any horizons, while the
AdS/CFT construction extends over a cosmological spacetime where large-scale curvature is a
central part of the description.

15
Reality as a Vector in Hilbert Space
221
to deﬁne an emergent metric, we haven’t shown that it is the emergent metric,
the one whose geodesics deﬁne the motion of localized test particles. We can
imagine how this might happen; as just one piece of the puzzle, the Lieb-Robinson
bound in quantum information theory (Lieb & Robinson, 1972) provides a natural
mechanism whereby light-cone structures can emerge from quantum information
theory (Hamma et al., 2009).
What strictly emerges from entanglement in this story is the metric on space, not
on spacetime; a reconstruction of the latter depends on a procedure for stitching
together spatial surfaces evolving over time. Since our entire analysis is based
on the eigenvalues of the Hamiltonian appearing in the Schrödinger equation
ˆH |⟩= i∂t |⟩, we need to imagine that time itself is fundamental, rather than
emergent. The appearance of an explicit time parameter does not imply that this
parameter is in some sense preferred. Any Lorentz-invariant theory can be written in
Hamiltonian form by choosing a frame; such a form will not be manifestly Lorentz
invariant, but the symmetry is still there, so there is no obstacle to the emergent
theory being approximately Lorentz- and diffeomorphism-invariant. It would be
natural if Lorentz invariance is indeed only approximate, since we are working in a
ﬁnite-dimensional factor of Hilbert space, and there are no nontrivial representations
of non-compact symmetry groups on ﬁnite-dimensional vector spaces. This raises
the intriguing possibility of potential experimental signatures of these ideas, as
Lorentz invariance can be tested to high precision (Liberati, 2013). One might
also worry about compatibility with the Wheeler-DeWitt equation of quantum
gravity, which takes the form ˆH |⟩= 0. In this case the eigenvalues of ˆH are
seemingly irrelevant, since the world is fully described by a zero-energy eigenstate
(cf. Albrecht & Iglesias 2008). But there is also no fundamental time evolution; that
is the well-known “problem of time” (Anderson, 2010). A standard solution is to
imagine that time is emergent, which amounts to writing the full Hamiltonian as
ˆH = ˆHeff −i d
dτ ,
(15.14)
where τ is the emergent time parameter. In that case everything we have said thus
far still goes through, only using the eigenvalues of the effective Hamiltonian ˆHeff.
In addition to spacetime, we still have to show how local quantum ﬁelds
can emerge in the same sense as the spacetime metric. Less explicit progress
has been made in reconstructing approximate quantum ﬁeld theories from the
spectrum of the Hamiltonian, but it’s not unreasonable to hope that this task is
more straightforward than reconstructing spacetime itself. One promising route is
via “string net condensates,” which have been argued to lead naturally to emergent
gauge bosons and fermions (Levin & Wen, 2005).
Nothing in this perspective implies that we should think of spacetime or quantum
ﬁelds as illusory. They are emergent, but none the less real for that. As mentioned,
we may not be forced to invoke these concepts within our most fundamental picture,
but the fact that they play a role in an emergent description is highly non-trivial.
(Most Hamiltonians admit no local decomposition, most factorizations admit no

222
S. M. Carroll
classical limit, etc.) It is precisely this non-generic characteristic of the speciﬁc
features of the world of our experience that makes it possible to contemplate
uniquely deﬁning them in terms of the austere ingredients of the deeper theory.
They should therefore be thought of as equally real as tables and chairs.
This has been an overly concise discussion of an ambitious research program
(and one that may ultimately fail). But the lesson for fundamental ontology is
hopefully clear. Thinking of the world as represented by simply a vector in Hilbert
space, evolving unitarily according to the Schrödinger equation governed by a
Hamiltonian speciﬁed only by its energy eigenvalues, seems at ﬁrst hopelessly
far away from the warm, welcoming, richly-structured ontology we are used to
thinking about in physics. But recognizing that the latter is plausibly a higher-level
emergent description, and contemplating the possibility that the more fundamental
vocabulary is the one straightforwardly suggested by our simplest construal of the
rules of quantum theory, leads to a reconstruction program that appears remarkably
plausible. By taking the prospect of emergence seriously, and acknowledging that
our fondness for attributing metaphysical fundamentality to the spatial arena is more
a matter of convenience and convention than one of principle, it is possible to see
how the basic ingredients of the world might be boiled down to a list of energy
eigenvalues and the components of a vector in Hilbert space. If it did succeed, this
project would represent a triumph of uniﬁcation and simpliﬁcation, and is worth
taking seriously for that reason alone.
Acknowledgments It is a pleasure to thank Ashmeet Singh, Charles Cao, Spiros Mikhalakis, and
Ning Bao for collaboration on some of the work described here. This research is funded in part by
the Walter Burke Institute for Theoretical Physics at Caltech, by DOE grant DE-SC0011632, and
by the Foundational Questions Institute.
References
Aharonov, Y., & Rohrlich, D. (2005). Quantum paradoxes. New York: Wiley.
Albert, D. (1996). Elementary quantum metaphysics. In J. Cushing, A. Fine, & S. Goldstein (Eds.),
Bohmian mechanics and quantum theory: An appraisal (pp. 277–284). Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Albrecht, A., & Iglesias, A. (2008). The Clock ambiguity and the emergence of physical laws.
Physical Review, D77, 063506.
Allori, V. (2013). Primitive ontology and the structure of fundamental physical theories. In A. Ney,
& D. Albert (Eds.), The wave function: Essays on the metaphysics of quantum mechanics (pp.
58–75). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Anderson, E. (2010). The Problem of Time in Quantum Gravity. https://arxiv.org/abs/1009.2157
Banks, T. (2001). Cosmological breaking of supersymmetry? International Journal of Modern
Physics A, A16, 910–921.
Bao, N., Carroll, S. M., & Singh, A. (2017). The Hilbert space of quantum gravity is locally
ﬁnite-dimensional. International Journal of Modern Physics A, D26(12), 1743013.
Bekenstein, J. D. (1981). A universal upper bound on the entropy to energy ratio for bounded
systems. Physical Review, D23, 287.
Bousso, R. (1999). A covariant entropy conjecture. Journal of High Energy Physics, 07, 004.

15
Reality as a Vector in Hilbert Space
223
Brun, T. A., & Hartle, J. B. (1999). Classical dynamics of the quantum harmonic chain. Physical
Review D, 60(12), 123503.
Cao, C., & Carroll, S. M. (2018). Bulk entanglement gravity without a boundary: Towards ﬁnding
Einstein’s equation in Hilbert space. Physical Review D, 97(8), 086003.
Cao, C., Carroll, S. M., & Michalakis, S. (2017). Space from Hilbert space: Recovering geometry
from bulk entanglement. Physical Review D, D95(2), 024031.
Carlip, S. (2014). Challenges for emergent gravity. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science
Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 46, 200–208.
Carroll, S. M. (2008). What if Time Really Exists? https://arxiv.org/abs/0811.3772
Carroll, S. M. (2021).
The Quantum Field Theory on Which the Everyday World Supervenes.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2101.07884
Carroll, S. M., & Singh, A. (2019).
Mad-dog everettianism: Quantum mechanics at its most
minimal. In A. Aguirre, B. Foster, & Z. Merali (Eds.), What is fundamental? (pp. 95–104).
Springer.
Carroll, S. M., & Singh, A. (2021). Quantum mereology: Factorizing Hilbert space into subsystems
with quasiclassical dynamics. Physical Review A, 103(2), 022213.
Coleman, S. (1975).
Quantum sine-gordon equation as the massive thirring model.
Physical
Review D, 11, 2088–2097.
Cotler, J. S., Penington, G. R., & Ranard, D. H. (2019). Locality from the Spectrum. Communica-
tions in Mathematical Physics, 368(3), 1267–1296.
Dennett, D. C. (1991). Real patterns. The Journal of Philosophy, 88(1), 27–51.
Dyson, L., Kleban, M., & Susskind, L. (2002). Disturbing implications of a cosmological constant.
Journal of High Energy Physics, 10, 011.
Faulkner, T., Guica, M., Hartman, T., Myers, R. C., & Van Raamsdonk, M. (2014). Gravitation
from entanglement in holographic CFTs. Journal of High Energy Physics, 03, 051.
Giddings, S. B. (2015).
Hilbert space structure in quantum gravity: An algebraic perspective.
Journal of High Energy Physics, 12, 099.
Haag, R. (1955). On quantum ﬁeld theories. Matematisk-fysiske Meddelelser, 29(12), 1–37.
Hamma, A., Markopoulou, F., Premont-Schwarz, I., & Severini, S. (2009). Lieb-Robinson bounds
and the speed of light from topological order. Physical Review Letters, 102, 017204.
Hartle, J. B. (2011). The quasiclassical realms of this quantum universe. Foundations of Physics,
41, 982–1006.
Hu, B.-L. (2009). Emergent/quantum gravity: Macro/micro structures of spacetime. In Journal of
Physics: Conference Series (vol. 174, p. 012015). IOP Publishing.
Huggett, N., & Wüthrich, C. (2013). Emergent spacetime and empirical (in)coherence. Studies
in History and Philosophy of Science Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern
Physics, 44(3), 276–285.
Jacobson, T. (1995).
Thermodynamics of spacetime: The einstein equation of state. Physical
Review Letters, 75, 1260–1263.
Jacobson, T. (2012).
Gravitation and vacuum entanglement entropy.
International Journal of
Modern Physics D, D21, 1242006.
Jacobson, T. (2016). Entanglement equilibrium and the Einstein equation. Physical Review Letters,
116(20), 201101.
Joos, E., & Zeh, H. D. (1985). The emergence of classical properties through interaction with the
environment. Zeitschrift für Physik B Condensed Matter, 59, 223–243.
Kabernik, O., Pollack, J., & Singh, A. (2020). Quantum state reduction: Generalized bipartitions
from algebras of observables. Physical Review A, 101(3), 032303.
Levin, M. A., & Wen, X.-G. (2005). String net condensation: A physical mechanism for topological
phases. Physical Review B, 71, 045110.
Liberati, S. (2013). Tests of Lorentz invariance: A 2013 update. Classical and Quantum Gravity,
30, 133001.
Lieb, E. H., & Robinson, D. W. (1972).
The ﬁnite group velocity of quantum spin systems.
Communications in Mathematical Physics, 28, 251–257.

224
S. M. Carroll
Maldacena, J., & Susskind, L. (2013). Cool horizons for entangled black holes. Fortschritte der
Physik, 61, 781–811.
Maldacena, J. M. (1999). The Large N limit of superconformal ﬁeld theories and supergravity.
International Journal of Theoretical Physics, 38, 1113–1133.
Myrvold, W. C. (2015). What is a wavefunction? Synthese, 192(10), 3247–3274.
Ney, A. (2013). Introduction. In A. Ney, & D. Albert (Eds.), The wave function: Essays on the
metaphysics of quantum mechanics (pp. 1–51). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ney, A. (2020a). Finding the world in the wave function: Some strategies for solving the macro-
object problem. Synthese, 197(10), 4227–4249.
Ney, A. (2020b).
From quantum entanglement to spatiotemporal distance.
In C. Wüthrich,
B. Le Bihan, & N. Huggett (Eds.), Philosophy beyond spacetime: Implications from quantum
gravity. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ney, A. (2021). The world in the wave function: A metaphysics for quantum physics. New York,
NY, USA: Oxford University Press.
Nielsen, H. B., & Kleppe, A. (2013). Towards a derivation of space. Bled Workshops in Physics,
14(2), 171–196.
North, J. (2013). The structure of a quantum world. In A. Ney, & D. Albert (Eds.), The wave
function: Essays on the metaphysics of quantum mechanics (pp. 184–202). Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Raasakka, M. (2017).
Spacetime-free approach to quantum theory and effective spacetime
structure. SIGMA. Symmetry, Integrability and Geometry: Methods and Applications, 13, 006.
Riedel, J. C., Zurek, W. H., & Zwolak, M. (2012). The rise and fall of redundancy in decoherence
and quantum Darwinism. New Journal of Physics, 14(8), 083010.
Saunders, S. (2021).
The everett interpretation: Structure.
To be published in The routledge
companion to philosophy of physics, E. Knox and A. Wilson (eds.). http://philsci-archive.pitt.
edu/18772/
Swingle, B. (2012). Entanglement renormalization and holography. Physical Review D, 86(6),
065007.
Tegmark, M. (2015). Consciousness as a state of matter. Chaos Solitons Fractals, 76, 238–270.
van Raamsdonk, M. (2010). Building up spacetime with quantum entanglement. General Relativity
and Gravitation, 42, 2323–2329.
Wallace, D. (2003). Everett and structure. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part B:
Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 34(1), 87–105.
Wallace, D. (2012).
The emergent multiverse: Quantum theory according to the Everett
interpretation. Oxford University Press.
Wallace, D. (2017). Against wavefunction realism. In S. Dasgupta, R. Dotan, & B. Weslake (Eds.).
Current controversies in philosophy of science. Current Controversies in Philosophy (pp. 63–
74). New York: Routledge.
Zanardi, P., Lidar, D. A., & Lloyd, S. (2004). Quantum tensor product structures are observable
induced. Physical Review Letters, 92, 060402.
Zurek, W. H. (1981). Pointer basis of quantum apparatus: Into what mixture does the wave packet
collapse? Physical Review, D24, 1516–1525.
Zurek, W. H. (1993).
Preferred states, predictability, classicality and the environment-induced
decoherence. Progress of Theoretical Physics, 89(2), 281–312.

Chapter 16
Platonic Quantum Theory
Jacob A. Barandes
“One’s ideas must be as broad as Nature
if they are to interpret Nature.”
—Sherlock Holmes, in Arthur Conan Doyle’s A Study in
Scarlet, 1887
Abstract In this essay, I describe a novel interpretation of quantum theory, called
the Platonic interpretation or Platonic quantum theory. This new interpretation is
based on a sharp notion of ontology and on the Gelfand-Naimark-Segal (GNS)
construction, in contrast to traditional approaches that start instead by assuming the
textbook formalism of Hilbert spaces and wave functions. I show that the Platonic
interpretation naturally emerges from the consideration of random variables that
represent underlying physical properties but that lack a common sample space, in
the sense that they do not share an overall probability distribution despite having
individual probability distributions.
16.1
Introduction
16.1.1
The Measurement Problem
Quantum theory is the most empirically successful scientiﬁc framework in human
history. It is therefore remarkable that a century after the theory’s founding, there is
still no consensus over its proper physical interpretation. One can trace this ongoing
controversy directly to the Dirac-von Neumann axioms (Dirac, 1930; von Neumann,
1932c), which underlie quantum theory’s textbook formulation (Sakurai, 1993;
J. A. Barandes ()
Jefferson Physical Laboratory, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA
e-mail: barandes@physics.harvard.edu
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
V. Allori (ed.), Quantum Mechanics and Fundamentality, Synthese Library 460,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-99642-0_16
225

226
J. A. Barandes
Shankar, 1994) and contain a famous puzzle known as the measurement problem,
which is worth reviewing brieﬂy.
According to the Dirac-von Neumann axioms, a quantum system ordinarily
evolves in time according to the Schrödinger equation or, more generally, according
to an appropriate open-system master equation (Breuer and Petruccione 2002)—
except when the system is being ‘measured,’ in which case it instead undergoes
‘collapse’ to a deﬁnite outcome. Neither the Schrödinger equation nor master
equations generically single out deﬁnite measurement outcomes, whereas collapse,
by stipulation, does. However, the Dirac-von Neumann axioms do not provide
a rigorous deﬁnition of what physically constitutes a measurement, apart from
positing that measurements are something that ‘observers’ do. Hence, textbook
quantum theory is fundamentally ambiguous about when, on the one hand, to apply
the Schrödinger equation or a master equation, and when, on the other hand, to apply
collapse. This ambiguity is essentially the measurement problem.
One might hope that the subset of the Dirac-von Neumann axioms that specif-
ically concern measurements and collapse could be replaced by an adequately
sophisticated master equation that, by itself, could somehow produce deﬁnite
outcomes. Early efforts in this direction focused on decoherence (Bohm 1951; Zeh
1970; Joos & Zeh, 1985; Zurek 1994), which refers to the tendency of environmental
effects to cause a quantum system’s density operator to evolve rapidly into a form
that mathematically resembles a classical probability distribution. Unfortunately,
this hope is obstructed by the fact that decoherence simply does not single
out deﬁnite outcomes. Moreover, the textbook version of collapse is manifestly
nonlocal, apparently capable of reaching out instantaneously across vast stretches
of space to affect faraway systems, whereas the no-signaling/no-communication
theorem (Ghirardi et al., 1980; Jordan, 1983) guarantees that physically realistic
master equations are always fundamentally local.
16.1.2
A New Approach
A physical theory should ideally be transparent about its ontology, epistemology,
and nomology, which refer respectively to what the theory says exists in reality,
how the theory characterizes the limitations of our knowledge and probabilistic
predictions, and what laws capture the behavior of the theory’s ingredients. His-
torically, the challenge of reconciling these three basic theoretical ingredients with
the measurement problem in particular, as well as with the larger issue of making
sense of state vectors and Hilbert spaces more generally, has pushed physicists and
philosophers in a number of different interpretational directions.
Some of these interpretational directions, like the de Broglie-Bohm approach,
augment the Hilbert spaces and state vectors of quantum theory with a supplemen-
tary set of ontological variables. Other directions, like the Everett ‘many worlds’
approach, deny the need for deﬁnite outcomes altogether.
A case could be made that the ultimate source of all these difﬁculties is a
paradigm that assumes a fundamental status for quantum theory’s mathematical

16
Platonic Quantum Theory
227
ingredients—state vectors, wave functions, density operators, self-adjoint linear
operators, inner products, and so forth—which I will collectively call the Hilbert-
space picture. This paradigm is not sacrosanct and merits a critical re-evaluation.
With a nod to Magritte:
In this essay, which summarizes a more comprehensive companion treatment
(Barandes, forthcoming), I will show that by beginning at an entirely different
starting place, one can derive quantum theory from a sharp ontology consisting
of physical systems with basic properties that exhibit a nontrivial probability
structure. This approach sequesters the ontological content of quantum theory from
its epistemological and nomological content, and suggests a new interpretation of
the theory that I call the Platonic interpretation or Platonic quantum theory, for
reasons to be explained in the concluding section of this essay.
The Platonic interpretation asserts that a quantum system has
•
an ontology—a real-world existence—consisting of physical states of being that
are characterized by ontic properties with quantiﬁable underlying values,
•
an epistemology—a state of knowability—consisting of interdependent probabil-
ity distributions that capture to the degree to which those underlying values are
manifest to the external world,
•
and a nomology—a set of laws—consisting of a subtle but ultimately codiﬁable
collection of rules for the foregoing ingredients.
According to the Platonic interpretation, the ontic properties of a quantum
system do not generically share a meaningfully correct, overarching joint probability
distribution. In Platonic quantum theory, such joint probability distributions only
exist under speciﬁc conditions. These conditions include the requirement that
there should be negligible direct entanglement between the ontic properties in
question, as encoded in the information describing the interdependencies between
their individual probability distributions. As we will see, direct entanglement
between relevant ontic properties can approximately disappear at the conclusion of
a measurement process after decoherence by the surrounding environment, leading
to the emergence of a joint probability distribution that links together the relevant
ontic properties of the system being measured and the appropriate ontic properties
of the measuring device, in a manner consistent with the correct empirical results.
From the standpoint of the Platonic interpretation, the mathematical abstractions
of Hilbert spaces and wave functions are analogous to the gauge potentials of
electromagnetism—they show up only as convenient tools for calculations, and

228
J. A. Barandes
should not be taken to refer directly to physical aspects of reality. As a consequence,
we will see that the Platonic interpretation dissolves a number of long-standing
questions in quantum foundations, and also provides new ways of understanding
fermionic ﬁelds.
In Sect. 16.2, I will formulate classical probability theory in a manner that will
streamline my later derivation of quantum theory, which I will cover in Sect. 16.3.
I will then describe the measurement process in Sect. 16.4. I will conclude in
Sect. 16.5 with a summary of Platonic quantum theory and comparisons with other
prominent interpretations.
16.2
The Classical Case
16.2.1
Ontic States
In classical physics, one can imagine that a given physical system has a set of
properties that ground the system’s ontology, where the speciﬁc values of these ontic
properties at any one moment collectively deﬁne the system’s ontic state. Some of
these ontic properties may have values that vary from one ontic state to another,
whereas other ontic properties may have ﬁxed values across all the ontic states of
the given system.
Ontic properties with varying values characterize the nature and scope of the
system’s possible ontic states. By contrast, one could regard ontic properties that are
ﬁxed as intrinsic features that deﬁne the kind or species of the system in question.
One could also (or instead) allow such ﬁxed ontic properties to be dispositional in
the sense of playing a role in determining the system’s behavior.
Note that there is no need to assert the existence of a universally applicable set
of ontic properties—different kinds of classical systems can have different sets of
ontic properties. For a mechanical system consisting of non-relativistic particles,
these ontic properties might include their varying positions and momenta, as well as
their ﬁxed masses and charges. For a system of ﬁelds, these ontic properties would
more naturally consist of local ﬁeld intensities and their rates of change, setting
aside ambiguities that can arise for gauge theories.1
16.2.2
Epistemic States
In practical cases, a system’s speciﬁc underlying ontic state is knowable only with
imperfect precision. One therefore typically assigns the system an epistemology,
1 If it turns out that a speciﬁc kind of system happens to be the only fundamental kind of system
in the world, then one could potentially argue that only the ontic properties of that kind of system
would fundamentally exist in reality.

16
Platonic Quantum Theory
229
or an epistemic state, consisting of an overall probability distribution made up of
probabilities
p(x), p(x′), p(x′′), . . .
(16.1)
that correspond to each of the system’s mutually exclusive ontic states, which are
labeled as x, x′, x′′, . . . . These labels collectively deﬁne a set  called the system’s
sample space:2
 ≡{x, x′, x′′, . . . }.
(16.2)
The probabilities (16.1) satisfy the usual rules of being non-negative,
p(x) ≥0,
(16.3)
and having unit normalization,

x∈
p(x) = 1.
(16.4)
16.2.3
Random Variables
To each of the system’s ontic properties, one can associate a symbol
A,
(16.5)
called a random variable, that stands for a set of possible (not necessarily distinct)
real values
A(x), A(x′), A(x′′), . . .
(16.6)
that depend on the system’s ontic state, where, again, the labels x, x′, x′′, . . . denote
the system’s different possible ontic states. For instance, one can associate a random
variable
Px0
(16.7)
2 Just for purposes of mathematical simplicity, I will assume that our sample spaces are always
discrete sets—perhaps after some suitable coarse-graining—so that one can assign their individual
elements ﬁnite, nonzero probabilities.

230
J. A. Barandes
to the true-or-false statement that the system’s ontic state is the one labeled by x0,
with ‘true’ represented by 1 and ‘false’ represented by 0. Then Px0(x) is just the
Kronecker delta:
Px0(x) = δx0x ≡

1
for x = x0,
0
for x ̸= x0.
(16.8)
One can deﬁne any function f (A, B, C, . . . ) of our system’s random variables,
such as algebraic combinations like A + B and AB, to be a random variable in its
own right according to
f (A, B, C, . . . )(x) ≡f (A(x), B(x), C(x) . . .),
(16.9)
wherever the right-hand side is well-deﬁned (and thereby excluding, say, situations
involving a division by zero). In mathematical language, our collection of random
variables therefore becomes an algebra.
In particular, because 12 = 1 and 02 = 0, the random variable Px0 introduced in
(16.7) becomes a projector, meaning that it satisﬁes the idempotence condition
P 2
x0 = Px0.
(16.10)
One also has the mutual exclusivity condition
PxPx′ = δxx′Px,
(16.11)
as well as the completeness relation

x∈
Px = I,
(16.12)
where I is the identity random variable whose value is always the number 1.
Moreover, for any random variable A, one can easily check that A satisﬁes the
eigenvalue equation
APx = A(x)Px
(16.13)
and has the spectral decomposition
A =

x∈
A(x)Px.
(16.14)
(Despite the appearances of eigenvalue equations and spectral decompositions,
remember that we are still working in the classical case here.)

16
Platonic Quantum Theory
231
Given subsets E and F of the sample space,
E, F ⊂,
(16.15)
one can introduce corresponding generalized projectors PE and PF according to
PE ≡

x∈E
Px,
PF ≡

x∈F
Px.
(16.16)
As one can check, the product of these generalized projectors yields the projector
onto the set-theoretic intersection E ∩F,
PEPF = PE ∩F.
(16.17)
16.2.4
C∗-Algebras
Whatever one’s views on the physical meaning of the complex numbers, it is
undeniable that they are useful for capturing many patterns that arise throughout
physics. If one wishes to introduce complex numbers into the present context, then
one can deﬁne an involution operation ∗on our algebra of random variables by
saying that for a given complex-valued random variable
Z ≡A + iB,
(16.18)
where A and B are real-valued random variables, one can deﬁne Z∗as
Z∗≡A −iB.
(16.19)
Equivalently, in terms of underlying values,
(Z∗)(x) ≡Z(x),
(16.20)
where the right-hand side denotes ordinary complex conjugation of complex
numbers.
It will also be helpful to deﬁne a non-negative norm ∥Z∥≥0 for a given random
variable Z to be the supremum or least upper bound of the set of absolute values of
all the possible underlying values of Z. That is,
∥Z∥≡sup
x∈
{|Z(x)|} ≡sup{|Z(x)|, |Z(x′)|, |Z(x′′)|, . . . }.
(16.21)
One can use this norm to deﬁne notions of limits and continuity on our algebra
of random variables. It is then convenient to extend our algebra by including all

232
J. A. Barandes
the idealized limit points of Cauchy sequences of its random variables, so that the
algebra thereby becomes closed in the language of topology.
Collectively, our set of random variables together with their algebraic structure
(16.9), the ∗involution (16.20), the norm (16.21), and the inclusion of all limit points
deﬁne a C∗-algebra A (Segal 1947). (‘C’ stands for ‘closed’ and ‘C∗’ is pronounced
like ‘sea star.’)
16.2.5
State Maps
One can then subsume all of classical probability theory, including our system’s
epistemic state, into this C∗-algebra A together with the notion of a state map ω
deﬁned to give the statistically weighted average or expectation value of any random
variable A,
ω(A) ≡

x∈
p(x)A(x).
(16.22)
For example, one can express the individual probability p(x) of the ontic state
labeled by x in terms of the state map ω and the projector Px introduced in (16.7) as
ω(Px) = p(x).
(16.23)
More generally, one can express the probability p(E) of x belonging to a subset
E ⊂ of the sample space in terms of the generalized projector PE deﬁned in
(16.16) according to
ω(PE) =

x∈E
p(x) = p(E).
(16.24)
One can deﬁne the joint probability of x belonging both to E ⊂ and to F ⊂ as
ω(PEPF ) = ω(PE ∩F) = p(E and F).
(16.25)
One can also deﬁne the standard deviation A of a random variable A as the root-
mean-square of A,
A ≡

ω((A −ω(A)I)2) =

ω(A2) −(ω(A))2,
(16.26)
and one can deﬁne the covariance cov(A, B) of a pair of random variables A, B as
cov(A, B) ≡ω(A −ω(A)I)(B −ω(B)I) = ω(AB) −ω(A)ω(B).
(16.27)

16
Platonic Quantum Theory
233
The variance var(A) of A is deﬁned to be the covariance of A with itself,
var(A) ≡cov(A, A) = ω((A −ω(A)I)2) = ω(A2) −(ω(A))2,
(16.28)
meaning that the standard deviation of A is the square root of the variance of A,
A =

var(A).
(16.29)
Finally, one can re-express our C∗-norm (16.21) as
∥Z∥= sup
ω∈S
{

ω(Z∗Z)},
(16.30)
where the supremum is now taken over the set S of all the system’s state maps ω.
16.2.6
The Classical Measurement Process
One can neatly describe an idealized version of the classical measurement process in
terms of the framework laid out above. If the epistemology of a classical ‘subject’
system is initially encoded as a nontrivial state map ω, and a measuring device
identiﬁes the subject system’s speciﬁc ontic state x, then that measuring device is
now capable of determining the true underlying values A(x), B(x), C(x), . . . of all
the subject system’s random variables. Hence, the measuring device is now able to
employ a trivial state map ωx for the subject system that assigns unit probability to
all those speciﬁc underlying values.
The transition from ω to ωx is not a physical process, but merely represents the
measuring device carrying out an epistemically subjective update of its information
about the subject system. Indeed, a second measuring device that remains in the dark
as to the measurement outcome would retain the original state map ω for the subject
system. State maps are therefore effectively perspectival—that is, they depend on
one’s perspective.
16.3
Quantum Theory
16.3.1
Ontic Random Variables
The classical framework described above includes some assumptions that one could
imagine dropping. To generalize, consider again a physical system with ontic
properties represented by random variables A, B, C, . . . , but now suppose that we
discard the assumption of a common sample space , meaning simply that we no
longer require that there is a valid joint probability distribution for all the system’s
random variables as a whole.

234
J. A. Barandes
From this point of view, giving up the requirement of a common sample space
is therefore a matter of epistemology, not a matter of ontology. That is, the
absence of a common sample space is a statement about the degree to which our
system’s intrinsic features are knowable or exposed to the external world without
further intervention, as encoded in the language of probabilities and in information
characterizing relationships between probabilities. The lack of a common sample is
not a statement that the system has no ontic states or that the system’s ontic states do
not consist of ontic properties. Those ontic properties are still assumed to exist and
to be represented by random variables, which I will now call ontic random variables
to emphasize their connection with ontic properties.
Even without a common sample space, each such ontic random variable A still
has its own set of possible underlying values
A(a), A(a′), A(a′′), . . .
(16.31)
labeled by a, a′, a′′, . . . . These labels naturally deﬁne an individual sample space
A belonging to A,
A ≡{a, a′, a′′, . . . },
(16.32)
and A still has an associated set of probabilities,
pA(a), pA(a′), pA(a′′), . . . .
(16.33)
16.3.2
Incommensurable Probability Distributions
However, given another ontic random variable B with its own individual sample
space B ≡{b, b′, b′′, . . . } and probability distribution pB(b), it could be the
case that pA(a) and pB(b) are incommensurable probability distributions. By
incommensurable, I mean that there may not exist a physically accurate joint
probability distribution p(a, b) that reliably describes the current underlying values
of A and B and that yields the probability distributions pA(a) and pB(B) from the
respective marginalization rules 
b p(a, b) and 
a p(a, b).
For example, the existence of a meaningfully correct joint probability distribution
p(a, b) could be obstructed by detailed interdependencies between the probability
distributions pA(a) and pB(b). These interdependencies could take the form
of information specifying that certain physical effects that alter the probability
distribution pA(a)—say, due to interactions with other systems—can alter the
probability distribution pB(b), and vice versa.
For a pair of ontic random variables A and B with incommensurable probability
distributions, the algebraic structure of the classical case breaks down, because
without a joint probability distribution p(a, b), algebraic combinations like A + B
and AB lack well-deﬁned probability distributions of their own and are therefore no

16
Platonic Quantum Theory
235
longer random variables themselves. That is, A + B and AB are now merely formal
expressions and do not have an obvious meaning at this point.
Crucially, however, our system still has ontic states partially labeled by ordered
pairs of the form (a, b). In any such ontic state, the underlying values A(a) and
B(b) of the corresponding ontic properties are simultaneously well-deﬁned. It is
important not to confuse these underlying values A(a) and B(b) with the random
variables A and B that abstractly represent them.
In particular, in an ontic state partially labeled by (a, b), the underlying values
A(a) and B(b) are quantities that can be added together, A(a) + B(b), or
multiplied, A(a)B(b), and the results are still well-deﬁned quantities. The assumed
incommensurability of pA(a) and pB(b) merely implies that one cannot attach valid
probabilities to quantities like A(a)+ B(b) and A(a)B(b), and that these quantities
cannot be known with certainty by any other systems that abide by the laws of
physics. So even though the quantities A(a) + B(b) and A(a)B(b) exist, they are
simply not represented by the formal algebraic combinations A + B or AB of the
random variables A and B. Again, due to the assumed incommensurability of the
individual probability distributions for A and B, formal algebraic combinations like
A + B and AB are not valid random variables themselves.
16.3.3
Quantum State Maps
I will call our system a quantum system if it nonetheless admits a set S of state
maps ω with certain simple properties that are borrowed from the classical case, to
be described below.3 In this scenario, we will see that we can go back to employing
much of probability theory once again—in fact, we will eventually end up with the
usual rules of quantum theory.
In other words, we will see that quantum theory can be understood as a frame-
work for managing ontic random variables that have incommensurable probabilities
distributions.
As to the deﬁning properties of a quantum state map ω, I will require that it be a
map ω : A0 →C from the formal algebra A0 generated by our quantum system’s
ontic random variables A, B, C, . . . to the complex numbers,4 with the following
desiderata taken directly from the classical case.
•
Normalization:
ω(I) = 1.
(16.34)
3 I will address the question of non-uniqueness of S in this essay’s concluding section.
4 I will likewise address the status of the complex numbers in quantum theory in the concluding
section.

236
J. A. Barandes
•
Linearity: for complex numbers c1, c2, we have
ω(c1A + c2B) = c1ω(A) + c2ω(B).
(16.35)
•
Positivity: for Z ≡A + iB, we have
ω(Z∗Z) ≥0.
(16.36)
•
C∗-Norm: The norm deﬁned by
∥Z∥≡sup
ω∈S
{

ω(Z∗Z)} ≥0
(16.37)
satisﬁes the requirements of a C∗-norm, with the state maps ω continuous under
this C∗-norm.5
These desiderata further imply another important identity.
•
Complex Conjugation:6
ω(Z1Z2) = ω(Z∗
2Z∗
1).
(16.38)
So far these properties are all purely mathematical. In order to complete the
deﬁnition of a quantum state map ω, it is necessary to assign at least some of
its output values a physical meaning. That physical meaning will consist of the
statement that for the speciﬁc case of an ontic random variable A, the quantity ω(A)
is to be understood as the expectation value of A according to that particular state
map ω:
ω(A) = expectation value of A according to ω.
(16.39)
Because the underlying values A(a), A(a′), . . . of any ontic random variable A are
always real, A is naturally taken to be invariant under the ∗operation,
A∗= A,
(16.40)
so the complex-conjugation identity (16.38) immediately tells us that the expecta-
tion value of A according to ω is guaranteed to be real as well:
ω(A) ∈R.
(16.41)
5 A C∗-norm satisﬁes ∥cZ∥= |c| ∥Z∥(for c a complex number), ∥Z1 + Z2∥≤∥Z1∥+ ∥Z2∥, and
∥Z1Z2∥≤∥Z1∥∥Z2∥, along with the C∗-condition ∥Z∗Z∥= ∥Z∥2.
6 Be careful to note the different orderings of Z1 and Z2 on the two sides. One can prove this
identity using the previously stated desiderata by considering the inequality ω((Z1 + cZ2)∗(Z1 +
cZ2)) ≥0 in the two special cases c = 1 and c = i.

16
Platonic Quantum Theory
237
By contrast, generic elements Z of the formal algebra A0 generated by our
system’s ontic random variables are not typically ontic random variable themselves
and therefore do not represent underlying ontic properties. Acting with our quantum
state map ω on such a generic element Z will typically produce an output value
ω(Z) that is complex-valued and does not admit a clear physical interpretation.
Given a choice for our set of ontic random variables A, B, C, . . . , and given the
resulting formal algebra A0 that they generate, choosing a comprehensive set S
of state maps determines a speciﬁc algebraic structure on A0. For instance, given
speciﬁc elements A, B, and C of our formal algebra A0, if an equation of the general
form
ω(· · · AB · · · ) = ω(· · · C · · · )
(16.42)
holds for all state maps ω in S, then we have the algebraic relation
AB = C.
(16.43)
As an important example, the complex-conjugation identity (16.38) satisﬁed by our
state maps automatically implies that the ∗operation is product reversing:
(Z1Z2)∗= Z∗
2Z∗
1.
(16.44)
16.3.4
Noncommutative C∗-Algebras
As suggested by the previous identity, the resulting algebraic structure will generi-
cally be noncommutative, in the sense that some pairs A and B of our ontic random
variables may fail to commute:
AB ̸= BA.
(16.45)
Hence, the algebra generated by our ontic random variables, now with the speciﬁc
algebraic structure determined by our set S of state maps ω, becomes a noncommu-
tative C∗-algebra. We will use the symbol A in place of A0 to refer to this algebra.
Notice that if two particular ontic random variables A and B indeed fail to
commute under multiplication, AB ̸= BA, then the product-reversing property of
the ∗operation entails that (AB)∗= BA ̸= AB, meaning that AB fails to satisfy
the property (16.40) required of an ontic random variable. This observation serves as
a valuable reminder that arbitrary algebraic combinations of ontic random variables
will not generically be ontic random variables themselves, and will therefore play
a less physically transparent role in determining the fundamental structure of our
quantum system.

238
J. A. Barandes
Given an ontic random variable A that has possible underlying values (16.31),
A(a), A(a′), A(a′′), . . . ,
with labels a, a′, a′′, . . . constituting an individual sample space A for A, one can
introduce true-or-false projectors
PA,a, PA,a′, PA,a′′, . . .
(16.46)
that satisfy the same kind of mutual exclusivity condition as in (16.11),
PA,aPA,a′ = δaa′PA,a,
(16.47)
and the same kind of completeness relation as in (16.12),

a∈A
PA,a = I.
(16.48)
One also has analogues of the eigenvalue equation (16.13),
APA,a = A(a)PA,a,
(16.49)
and of the spectral decomposition (16.14),
A =

a∈A
A(a)PA,a.
(16.50)
In particular, one can express the probabilities (16.33) for A directly in terms of
the quantum state map ω and the projectors (16.46) as
ω(PA,a) = pA(a).
(16.51)
However, the counterpart to our classical expression (16.25) for joint probabilities
generically gives complex numbers:
ω(PA,aPB,b) = ω(PB,bPA,a) ̸= ω(PA,aPB,b).
(16.52)
If one were to try to make these quantities real and non-negative by, say, taking
their absolute values, then they would no longer satisfy the correct marginalization
rules. Attempting instead to replace the product PA,aPB,b with a combination
like (1/2)(PA,aPB,b + PB,bPA,a) to eliminate ordering ambiguities would not be
guaranteed to give a non-negative result.
Hence, if (16.52) is taken seriously, then it means that the joint probability of
A(a) and B(b) simply does not exist, as a fact of the matter. Again, in the approach
taken in this essay, the nonexistence of such joint probability distributions is not

16
Platonic Quantum Theory
239
regarded as an issue of ontology, but instead as an issue of epistemology—of what
is knowable or manifest to the external world about the given system without further
intervention.
16.3.5
The Gelfand-Naimark-Segal (GNS) Construction
So far this probabilistic framework might seem interesting but not obviously
connected with quantum theory. However, there exists a remarkable theorem, called
the Gelfand-Naimark-Segal (GNS) construction (Gelfand & Naimark, 1943; Segal
1947), that tells us that if we have a C∗-algebra A and a state map ω, then
•
there automatically exists a corresponding Hilbert space Hω,
•
the involution operation ∗on elements of the C∗-algebra becomes the adjoint
operation † on linear operators deﬁned on that Hilbert space Hω,
•
all the ontic random variables A, B, C, . . . and their ∗-invariant algebraic
combinations are represented as self-adjoint linear operators ˆAω, ˆBω, ˆCω, . . . on
Hω,
•
and there exists a distinguished unit-normalized vector |ω⟩in Hω that imple-
ments the state map ω according to
ω(A) = ⟨ω| ˆAω|ω⟩.
(16.53)
This last equation thereby serves as a ‘dictionary’ that translates between the
C∗-algebra formulation and the Hilbert-space formulation. Furthermore, the distin-
guished vector |ω⟩is cyclic, which means that essentially7 every other vector in
the Hilbert space Hω can be obtained from |ω⟩by acting with a particular operator
representing an element of our C∗-algebra, leading to a vector-operator correspon-
dence (or state-operator correspondence) that plays an especially important role in
the context of conformal ﬁeld theories.
To those familiar with textbook quantum theory, the dependence of the Hilbert
space, linear operators, and vectors on the state map ω, as indicated by the
appearance of ω as a subscript, may seem strange. I will explain later how the
formulation of quantum theory here matches onto the theory’s textbook version.8
7 Technically speaking, the set of vectors obtained by acting with operators on the cyclic vector
|ω⟩is a dense subset of the Hilbert space Hω.
8 When applied to the commutative C∗-algebra appropriate to the case of a classical system, the
GNS construction yields the Koopman-von Neumann formulation (Koopman 1931; von Neumann
1932a,b), a Hilbert-space picture for classical physics that has many applications in subjects like
dynamical-systems theory. This classical Hilbert-space picture is not typically taken seriously as a
physical statement about reality, and the Platonic interpretation essentially holds that one should
apply the same skepticism toward the Hilbert-space picture in the quantum case as well.

240
J. A. Barandes
As an important special case of the GNS dictionary (16.53), the formula (16.51)
for the probability pA(a) of the underlying value A(a) is given by
pA(a) = ⟨ω| ˆPω,A,a|ω⟩.
(16.54)
In the simplest situation in which ˆPω,A,a is a rank-one projector, there exists a vector
|ψω,A,a⟩in Hω for which ˆPω,A,a is the outer product
ˆPω,A,a = |ψω,A,a⟩⟨ψω,A,a|,
(16.55)
and (16.54) reduces to the famous Born rule:
pA(a) = |⟨ψω,A,a|ω⟩|2.
(16.56)
Furthermore, if a speciﬁc real-valued ontic random variable A has a trivial
probability distribution according to the given state map ω, in the sense that
pA(a) = 1 for a single value of the label a, then ω(A) = A(a) and the standard
deviation A vanishes:
A = 0.
Hence,
⟨ω|
 ˆAω −(A(a)) ˆI
† ˆAω −(A(a)) ˆI

|ω⟩
= ω((A −ω(A)I)2) = (A)2 = 0.
It follows immediately from the positive deﬁniteness of the Hilbert-space inner
product that
ˆAω|ω⟩= A(a)|ω⟩.
(16.57)
This result is the familiar eigenvector-eigenvalue link of quantum theory.
16.3.6
Pure State Maps and Mixed State Maps
In both the classical and quantum cases, one can construct new state maps out of old
state maps by forming convex linear combinations. That is, given two state maps ω1
and ω2 and a real number λ in the interval 0 < λ < 1, one can deﬁne a new state
map ω3 satisfying all the necessary desiderata (16.34)–(16.37) according to
ω3 ≡λω1 + (1 −λ)ω2,
(16.58)

16
Platonic Quantum Theory
241
where for any element Z of our system’s C∗-algebra,
ω3(Z) ≡λω1(Z) + (1 −λ)ω2(Z).
(16.59)
Following standard terminology, one calls a state map ω pure if it cannot
be expressed nontrivially as a convex linear combination of other state maps,
and mixed otherwise. The GNS construction implies (see, for instance, Barandes
(forthcoming)) that pure state maps produce Hilbert spaces that are irreducible
representations of the given C∗-algebra, whereas mixed state maps lead to reducible
representations. In what follows, I will retain the symbol ω for pure state maps, and
I will use ρ for the more general case of a state map that might be mixed.
In the classical case, every state map ρ satisﬁes (16.22),
ρ(A) =

x∈
p(x)A(x),
(16.60)
where p(x) is a probability distribution over the classical system’s fundamental
sample space  = {x, x′, x′′, . . . }. For any x in this fundamental sample space,
one can introduce a trivial pure state map ωx that merely outputs the corresponding
values of the system’s ontic random variables,
ωx(A) ≡A(x),
(16.61)
and in terms of which one can express the mixed state map (16.60) as the convex
linear combination
ρ =

x∈
p(x)ωx.
(16.62)
Thus, all pure classical state maps are trivial, and every mixed classical state map
has a unique decomposition (16.62) in terms of pure state maps. If desired, one
can therefore interpret a classical mixed state map as merely encoding subjective
epistemic uncertainty over the system’s true ontic state—that is, over the underlying
values of all the system’s ontic random variables.
The story is trickier in the quantum case. By assumption, the ontic random
variables of a quantum system may have incommensurable probability distributions.
As a consequence, there are no state maps that assign the system a trivial overall
probability distribution, as even a trivial overall probability distribution would be a
disallowed joint probability distribution. (This absence of trivial overall probability
distributions for quantum systems was ﬁrst rigorously proved by von Neumann in
1932 (von Neumann, 1932c, 2018).) Moreover, the presence of incommensurable
probability distributions implies that the quantum system’s state map contains
information about their detailed interdependencies, as well as information about
the degree to which potentially valid joint probability distributions fail to exist.

242
J. A. Barandes
Hence, even pure state maps are nontrivial in the quantum case, meaning that the
line between pure and mixed state maps is blurrier than in the classical case.
Mixed quantum state maps are also subtler than their classical counterparts, as
noted by Schrödinger in 1936 (Schrödinger, 1936). The more complicated nature
of mixed quantum state maps is due in large part to the fact that they lack unique
decompositions into pure state maps, in contrast with the classical case.
Mixed quantum state maps fall into two conceptually distinct categories
(d’Espagnat, 1976). In the ﬁrst category, one can imagine that a given quantum
system would be empirically best described by a particular pure state map, but,
solely because of subjective epistemic uncertainty, one is only able to say that the
system’s state map is one of several possibilities ω1, ω2, ω3, . . . with respective
subjective probabilities p1, p2, p3, . . . . In that case, one would naturally employ a
mixed state map deﬁned explicitly by
ρ ≡p1ω1 + p2ω2 + p3ω3 + · · · ,
(16.63)
and this mixed state map would be said to describe a proper mixture. In the classical
case, all mixed state maps describe proper mixtures, as we saw in (16.62).
However, it may happen for a quantum system that the empirically most correct
state map is fundamentally a mixed state map ρ, in the sense that no pure state map
does as good a job at capturing the system’s state of affairs or predicting its behavior.
Because mixed quantum state maps do not have unique decompositions into pure
state maps, there is, in particular, no canonical decomposition of such a state map
ρ as a convex linear combination of pure state maps. Consequently, one cannot
obviously interpret the coefﬁcients of any such decomposition of ρ as subjective
epistemic probabilities. In this case, one is therefore left with an understanding
of ρ only in its most general, abstract sense as an irreducible whole that encodes
the expectation values of its host system’s ontic random variables. The quantum
system’s state map ρ is then said to correspond to an improper mixture.
Given a mixed quantum state map ρ, and given a (not necessarily unique)
decomposition of that state map as a convex linear combination of pure state maps
ω1, ω2, ω3, . . . with respective coefﬁcients p1, p2, p3, . . . ,
ρ =

i
piωi,
(16.64)
one can express the system’s corresponding distinguished vector |ρ⟩from the GNS
dictionary (16.53) as a direct sum of the distinguished vectors |ω1⟩, |ω2⟩, |ω3⟩,
. . . that respectively correspond to the pure state maps ω1, ω2, ω3, . . . :
|ρ⟩=

i
√pi|ωi⟩.
(16.65)
The direct sum appearing here is taken over the system’s universal Hilbert space
Huniv, which is deﬁned to be the direct sum of the GNS Hilbert spaces Hω

16
Platonic Quantum Theory
243
corresponding to all the pure state maps ω in the set S of all the system’s state
maps:
Huniv ≡

all pure
ω∈S
Hω.
(16.66)
The formula (16.65) ensures compatibility with the GNS dictionary (16.53):
ρ(A) = ⟨ρ| ˆAρ|ρ⟩=

i
pi⟨ωi| ˆAωi|ωi⟩.
(16.67)
Alternatively, one can introduce the density operator (or density matrix)
ˆρ ≡

i
pi|ωi⟩⟨ωi |.
(16.68)
A simple calculation then shows that one can express the right-hand side of the
GNS dictionary (16.53) as the trace of the product of the density operator ˆρ with the
appropriate linear operator ˆAρ:
ρ(A) = Tr[ ˆρ ˆAρ].
(16.69)
16.3.7
Quantum Dynamics
Before considering dynamics—especially the kind of dynamics that conserves
information—it will be useful to discuss entropy and information brieﬂy. With a
notion of mixed state maps in hand, and momentarily considering the classical case,
one can deﬁne the Gibbs or Shannon entropy (Gibbs, 1902; Shannon, 1948) of a
classical system with state map ρ in accordance with the usual formula
σρ ≡−

i
pi log pi.
(16.70)
For the quantum case, the non-uniquenessof decompositions of mixed state maps
means that a quantum system does not have a unique Shannon entropy. The system’s
von Neumann entropy can be deﬁned as the minimal Shannon entropy from among
all decompositions of the system’s state map ρ as convex linear combinations of
pure state maps (Hughston, 1993; Jaynes, 1957). This deﬁnition turns out to be
expressible in terms of the system’s density operator ˆρ from (16.68) as
σρ = −Tr[ ˆρ log ˆρ].
(16.71)

244
J. A. Barandes
Turning now to dynamics, I will take information-conserving time evolution
for a given quantum system to mean a map parameterized by a time parameter
t and acting on the system’s C∗-algebra that leaves the overall structure of the
C∗-algebra and all its expectation values intact, so that, in particular, the system’s
entropy (16.71) remains unchanged. It then follows from a standard theorem (again,
see Barandes (forthcoming)) that information-conserving time evolution can be
implemented as a parameterized unitary transformation on the system’s universal
Hilbert space (16.66) through a sequence of distinguished vectors |(t)⟩≡|ωt ⟩∈
Hωt starting from an initial distinguished vector |(0)⟩≡|ω0⟩∈Hω0:
|(t)⟩= ˆU(t)|(0)⟩.
(16.72)
Here ˆU(t) is a unitary operator called the system’s time-evolution operator.
16.3.8
Textbook Quantum Theory
We are now ready to see how the foregoing formulation of quantum theory matches
onto its textbook version. Given a pure state map ω and its associated irreducible
GNS Hilbert space Hω, notice that every vector |ψ⟩in Hω deﬁnes a new map ωψ
according to the ‘reverse dictionary’
ωψ(A) ≡⟨ψ| ˆAω|ψ⟩,
(16.73)
where ωψ automatically satisﬁes all the required desiderata (16.34)–(16.37) of a
state map. The set SHω of all such state maps that can be deﬁned in this way from
the vectors of a single Hilbert space Hω is called the folium of that Hilbert space.
The Stone-von Neumann theorem (Stone, 1930; von Neumann, 1931) effectively
guarantees that for a quantum-mechanical system consisting of ﬁnitely many non-
relativistic particles, the folium SHω of any one irreducible GNS Hilbert space Hω
is sufﬁcient to encompass the entire set S of the system’s possible state maps, so
all the other GNS Hilbert spaces are redundant and one can pretend that H ≡Hω
is the system’s ‘one true’ Hilbert space.9 One can then drop the subscript ω from
the notation completely, and one ends up with non-relativistic textbook quantum
mechanics as we know it.
Beyond the case of non-relativistic quantum systems in particular, Fell’s theorem
(Fell, 1960) ensures that any GNS Hilbert space H that provides a faithful
representation of a given quantum system’s C∗-algebra has the resources necessary
to make empirical predictions that are accurate to any ﬁnite level of precision.10
9 Technically, one must restrict to the case of GNS representations that are regular.
10 More precisely, Fell’s theorem states that if ρ is any state map for a C∗-algebra A, and if
A1, . . . , An are any ﬁnite collection of n > 0 elements in that C∗-algebra A, then given any faithful

16
Platonic Quantum Theory
245
In light of Fell’s theorem, any such Hilbert space H would therefore appear to be
sufﬁcient according to an interpretation of quantum theory that, like the Platonic
interpretation, regards Hilbert-space pictures not as ontological in nature, but merely
as effective, instrumentalist contrivances for calculating predictions. One could
simply choose whichever such faithful representation and associated Hilbert-space
picture were most convenient for the application at hand.
Suppose now that one is given an empirically adequate GNS representation of
a speciﬁc quantum system, along with the unitary operator ˆU(t) that implements
smooth time evolution in that representation. Invoking Stone’s theorem (Stone,
1930), one can consider inﬁnitesimal time durations t →t + dt and deﬁne the
system’s Hamiltonian operator ˆH(t) according to
ˆH(t) ≡i ¯h
ˆU(t + dt) −ˆU(t)
dt
,
(16.74)
where the reduced Planck constant ¯h is introduced here to provide the Hamiltonian
operator with units of energy. The famous Schrödinger equation then follows from
a few simple rearrangements:
i ¯h∂|(t)⟩
∂t
= ˆH(t)|(t)⟩.
(16.75)
16.3.9
Hilbert-Space Ingredients as Gauge Variables
Having ﬁnally derived the familiar Hilbert-space picture, it is worth pointing out
yet one more reason to be suspicious about taking it too seriously as an aspect of
fundamental reality. Notice that we can rewrite the Schrödinger equation (16.75) in
the suggestive form
ˆDt|(t)⟩= 0,
(16.76)
representation of A with a Hilbert space H and a corresponding set of operators ˆA1, . . . , ˆAn on
H, and given any positive real number ϵ > 0, there exists a density operator ˆρ on the Hilbert
space H such that |ρ(Ai) −Tr[ ˆρ ˆAi]| < ϵ for all i = 1, . . . , n. See Clifton and Halvorson
(2001) for a review. Given that n can be any positive integer (say, the thousandth busy beaver
number raised to the power of a googolplex), and ϵ can be any positive real number (say, 1/n
for that same choice of n), it is difﬁcult to imagine how any faithful representation of A could
be empirically insufﬁcient without A itself being empirically insufﬁcient. In particular, no ﬁnite
amount of experimental data could ever distinguish between two faithful representations of A, even
if one of those representations contained certain limiting operators, called parochial observables,
that did not exactly exist in the other representation, or did not exactly exist even at the level of the
original C∗-algebra A.

246
J. A. Barandes
with the gauge-covariant derivative operator ˆDt deﬁned by
ˆDt ≡ˆI ∂
∂t + i
¯h
ˆH(t)
(16.77)
and with the Hamiltonian ˆH(t) playing the role of a corresponding gauge connec-
tion. As noted in Brown (1999), and as made manifest by this alternative form of
the Schrödinger equation, the Hilbert-space picture features a class of non-abelian
gauge transformations deﬁned by arbitrary, local-in-time, unitary operators ˆV (t)
according to11
|(t)⟩
→|′(t)⟩= ˆV (t)|(t)⟩,
ˆA(t) 
→ˆA′(t)
= ˆV (t) ˆA(t) ˆV †(t),
ˆH(t) 
→ˆH ′(t) = ˆV (t) ˆH(t) ˆV †(t) −i ¯h ˆV (t)∂ˆV †(t)
∂t
,
⎫
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎬
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎭
(16.78)
and which, in particular, leave the Schrödinger equation (16.76) unchanged in form:
ˆDt|(t)⟩= 0 
→ˆD′
t|′(t)⟩= 0.
(16.79)
The existence of this class of gauge transformations suggests that state vectors,
linear operators, and Hamiltonians are mere gauge variables—akin to the gauge
potentials of electromagnetism or of a Yang-Mills ﬁeld theory—and so one should
perhaps be skeptical about attaching too much physical meaning to the ingredients
of the Hilbert-space picture. What is invariant under the gauge transformations
(16.78) is the set of expectation values of all observable elements of the given
quantum system’s C∗-algebra A—which makes sense, because it is precisely those
expectation values (which include all Born-rule probabilities) that make up the
fundamental empirical content of a quantum system.
16.4
The Measurement Process
16.4.1
Pre-Measurement
In an archetypal quantum measurement, one considers a subject system with an
observable feature A, which we will take to be an ontic random variable. One
11 One can show that the Schrödinger, Heisenberg, and interaction pictures for describing a
quantum system’s time evolution correspond to speciﬁc choices of ˆV (t). These three pictures are
particularly useful for solving problems and for making empirical predictions in practice. However,
the set of possible choices of ˆV (t) vastly exceeds these three cases. For a review of non-abelian
gauge transformations in the context of quantum ﬁeld theory, see, for example, Weinberg (1996).

16
Platonic Quantum Theory
247
assumes that the subject system is prepared in a pure state map ωA represented
by a state vector |⟩describing a superposition over the possible underlying values
A(a) of A:
|⟩=

a
ca|a⟩.
(16.80)
One then brings in a measuring device that is initially prepared in a pure state map
represented by an eigenvector |d0⟩of its pointer variable D. Through unitary time
evolution, the measuring device becomes entangled with the subject system as the
measuring device measures the ontic random variable A,
|⟩⊗|d0⟩
→

a
ca|a⟩⊗|da⟩,
(16.81)
where each vector |da⟩is an eigenvector of the pointer variable D representing a
deﬁnite measurement result.
At this step, known as a pre-measurement (Zurek, 1994), the state map ωAD
of the overall system consisting of the subject system and the measuring device
together is pure, and exhibits direct entanglement between the subject system’s
observable A and the measuring device’s pointer variable D. This direct entan-
glement represents subtle, non-classical interdependencies between the respective
probability distributions for A and D, with empirical consequences like interference,
so the overall system’s state map ωAD does not resemble a classical proper mixture.
As such—and as explained in the introductory section of this essay—the Platonic
interpretation holds that the overall system’s state map ωAD does not yet describe a
well-deﬁned joint probability distribution for A and D.
16.4.2
Decoherence by the Environment
However, when the environment, initially in a pure state map represented by an
eigenvector |e0⟩of its own pointer variable E, couples to the measuring device,
 
a
ca|a⟩⊗|da⟩

⊗|e0⟩

→

a
ca|a⟩⊗|da⟩⊗|ea⟩,
(16.82)
the resulting decoherence causes the state map of the original two systems to
become a mixed state map ω′
AD that now formally resembles the separable ﬁnal
state map following a classical measurement. As a result, there is no longer direct
entanglement between A and D, and the overall state map ω′
AD of the subject system
and the measuring device resembles a classical proper mixture.

248
J. A. Barandes
At this point—again as noted in the introductory section of this essay—
the Platonic interpretation posits that the overall state map ω′
AD of the subject
system and the measuring device now represents a well-deﬁned joint probability
distribution describing the appropriate statistical correlation between the subject
system’s observable A and the measuring device’s pointer variable D. It is also
precisely at this post-measurement, physical decoherence step that the famous
nonlocality of quantum theory seeps into the story, with the underlying values of
A and D synchronizing as needed even if the subject system and measuring device
happen to be far apart in space when the environmental decoherence process (16.82)
occurs.
16.4.3
Wave-Function Collapse
To make future predictions about the subject system, the measuring device would
then naturally switch to using an updated pure state map in its description of the
subject system, replacing the initial pure state map ωA represented by |⟩with a
new state map ωa represented by the eigenvector |a⟩corresponding to the measure-
ment result that was actually obtained. Due to this epistemic conditionalization,
the measuring device therefore sees the effective appearance of wave-function
collapse:12
|⟩
→|a⟩.
(16.83)
Just as in the classical case, however, a second measuring device that remains
completely sealed off from the subject system, the ﬁrst measuring device, and
their local environment would continue using the classical-looking but uncollapsed
overall state map ω′
AD for the subject system and the measuring device. That is, just
like in the classical case, state maps in the quantum case are essentially perspectival.
So whereas decoherence (16.82) is a physical process that can actually entail
changes in the underlying values of ontic random variables (even nonlocally), wave-
function collapse (16.83) is subjectively epistemic in nature, and merely reﬂects the
different information available to the ﬁrst and second measuring devices for making
further predictions.
The ﬁrst measuring device’s inside view has the advantage of knowing the actual
measurement outcome, whereas the second measuring device’s outside view has
access to a more correct overall state map that makes it possible, in principle,
to carry out manipulations like the complete erasure of the measurement process
and the resulting restoration of the entire universe back to its prior conﬁguration
12 The same sort of post-measurement conditionalization occurs explicitly in the de Broglie-Bohm
interpretation, and also occurs implicitly in the Everett interpretation on a branch-by-branch basis.

16
Platonic Quantum Theory
249
before the measurement process took place—although such manipulations would
be thermodynamically impractical for all but the most microscopic of systems.
As far as the inside view is concerned, the subject system then evolves from its
new initial state vector |a⟩according to whatever quantum dynamics is most empir-
ically correct—whether that is the information-conserving Schrödinger equation
(16.75) if there are no further interactions with other systems, or an open-
system master equation such as the Lindblad equation (Lindblad 1976; Breuer &
Petruccione, 2002) in the case of additional external interventions. (In particular,
there is no need for ad hoc guiding equations or pilot waves of the kind that are part
of the de Broglie-Bohm formulation of quantum theory.)
Small discrepancies between the inside view’s predictions and the outside view’s
predictions are inevitable and unavoidable, but those predictions would more
neatly mesh together in the sense of a suitable ensemble average if one were
to consider sufﬁciently macroscopic measuring devices and a sufﬁciently isolated
subject system. If the subject system and both the inside and outside systems are
macroscopic, and a measurement process causes all appropriately coarse-grained
ontic random variables to become sharply peaked around their expectation values,
then the Ehrenfest theorem (see Sakurai (1993) for a review) would ensure that those
expectation values evolve according to classical equations of motion to an excellent
approximation, in agreement with our everyday experience of the world.
16.5
Conclusion
16.5.1
The Platonic Interpretation
The end result of the preceding discussion is a new interpretation of quantum theory
in which every quantum system has an ontology consisting of ontic properties—say,
positions and momenta for a mechanical system of non-relativistic particles, or local
intensities and rates of change for a ﬁeld theory—together with an epistemology
consisting of the varying degrees to which those ontic properties make their
underlying values known to the external world, as encoded in individual probability
distributions and information characterizing their relationships. These ontic and
epistemic ingredients follow a complicated but ultimately summarizable set of
rules, which provide quantum theory with its nomology—its laws. In particular,
the individual probability distributions for a quantum system’s ontic properties may
be incommensurable, in the sense that they cannot necessarily be joined together
into a physically accurate, overarching probability distribution on a common sample
space.
Merely at the level of mathematical description, one can encode a quantum
system’s ontic properties and their individual probability distributions as a set of
ontic random variables, perhaps with some convenient degree of coarse-graining.
One can then collectively codify those individual probability distributions, their
detailed interdependencies, and their rules in terms of a set S of state maps that

250
J. A. Barandes
collectively determines a speciﬁc C∗-algebraic structure on that set of ontic random
variables, leading to a speciﬁc C∗-algebra A for the quantum system in question.
Note that this speciﬁc C∗-algebraic structure—including any attendant commutation
relations—therefore captures epistemic-nomic data, and is not a statement about the
system’s ontology.
This mathematical reformulation in terms of a set S of state maps and a
C∗-algebra A simpliﬁes the task of identifying the circumstances under which
a quantum system’s ontic properties share a joint probability distribution that
accurately describes their current underlying values. Speciﬁcally, such a joint
probability distribution exists when the ontic random variables representing those
ontic properties commute and, moreover, when there is approximately no direct
entanglement between their respective systems.
In particular, this no-direct-entanglement condition is a novel ingredient of
the Platonic interpretation. As explained further in Barandes (forthcoming), this
condition threads the needle represented by the many no-go theorems that have
cropped up over the past century, as these no-go theorems typically rely on the
assumed existence of valid joint probability distributions even in the presence of
direct entanglement between the relevant quantum systems.
Given a C∗-algebra A and a set S of state maps for a given quantum system, the
GNS construction then yields a Hilbert-space picture for the system automatically.
None of the mathematical abstractions of the Hilbert-space picture, however, are to
be regarded as physically meaningful, despite providing a powerful set of tools for
calculations. Metaphorically, the GNS construction therefore plays a role akin to the
ﬁre in the cave of Plato’s famous allegory, projecting shadows onto the interior cave
wall that one can analogize to the ingredients of the Hilbert-space picture—hence
the name “Platonic” for this interpretation of quantum theory.
At a basic conceptual level, the Platonic interpretation implies that quantum
theory is not really about wave functions or Hilbert spaces. Moreover, within
the Platonic interpretation, one does not regard ontic random variables or their
underlying values as ‘hidden variables’ that are added to quantum theory, but regards
the ontic properties that they represent, their associated probabilities, and the set
of interdependencies and rules that they exhibit as the true stuff of reality. From
this point of view, the ingredients of the Hilbert-space picture are the true hidden
variables—indeed, no one ever directly sees wave functions or linear operators.
16.5.2
Questions of Uniqueness
According to Platonic quantum theory, the choice S for the set of state maps ω
plays a central role in codifying the nomology for a given quantum system—again,
S determines a speciﬁc algebraic structure on the system’s ontic random variables
and thus, via the GNS construction, generates a corresponding Hilbert-space picture
for the system. It is therefore natural to wonder whether one needs to be concerned
over questions of the uniqueness of S for a speciﬁc quantum system.

16
Platonic Quantum Theory
251
However, because S is not a matter of ontology, but merely a matter of how
one chooses to represent a given quantum system’s nomology mathematically,
uniqueness is not an issue. Just as the ‘ontological’ pattern of whole num-
bers 1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, 49, . . . can be codiﬁed by different-looking ‘nomological’
rules—say, the rule that we consider consecutive square integers, or the alternative
rule that we start with 1 and then repeatedly add consecutive odd numbers—the
ontological patterns inherent in fundamental physics can be codiﬁed by different-
looking nomologies.
Moreover, speciﬁc choices for mathematically representing a nomology may be
more useful in certain circumstances than other such choices. For instance, for our
‘ontological’ number sequence 1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, 49, . . ., computing the square of
a large integer may be easier than adding up many consecutive odd numbers. As a
more relevant example, quantum theory can, in principle, be formulated entirely
in terms of real numbers rather than complex numbers without compromising
the empirical success of the theory, provided that one is willing to work with a
much more complicated mathematical representation of the nomology that includes
superﬁcially new kinds of non-locality and various ad hoc features engineered to
mimic the role played by the imaginary unit i ≡
√
−1 (Myrheim, 1999; Renou,
2021; Stueckelberg, 1959, 1960).
16.5.3
Comparison with Other Approaches
Unlike the Everett ‘many worlds’ approach, Platonic quantum theory does not entail
reifying the Hilbert-space picture, nor does it contain ‘multiple worlds’ or any ontic
ingredients that ‘branch.’ Consequently, the Platonic interpretation does not need to
make ontological sense of emergent branches of wave functions in many- or inﬁnite-
dimensional Hilbert spaces, dissolves problems of identifying ontologically correct
ways to decompose wave functions into branches, and sidesteps the difﬁculty of
making sense of probability in a world in which all possible outcomes actually
occur.
In contrast to the de Broglie-Bohm approach, Platonic quantum theory does
not need to invoke guiding equations or pilot waves, nor does it derive its ontic
properties from the input arguments of coordinate-space wave functions or wave
functionals.13 As a result, the Platonic interpretation does not encounter conceptual
difﬁculties in handling systems like fermionic ﬁelds whose local ﬁeld operators
anticommute and that therefore do not have coordinate-space wave functionals in
13 For example, according to the de Broglie-Bohm approach, the ontic properties of a three-
dimensional particle with coordinate-space wave function (x, y, z) are the input arguments
x, y, z, which are just the particle’s Cartesian position coordinates, whereas the ontic properties of a
Klein-Gordon ﬁeld with coordinate-space wave functional [φ] are the input arguments φ(x, y, z),
which are just the Klein-Gordon ﬁeld’s local values. Notice that the particle’s position operators
ˆx, ˆy, ˆz mutually commute, as do the local Klein-Gordon ﬁeld operators ˆφ(x, y, z).

252
J. A. Barandes
any ordinary sense. In practice, fermionic ﬁeld operators have expectation values
that are ordinary complex numbers, and the Platonic interpretation therefore permits
us to choose the ontic random variables for a fermionic ﬁeld to be the ﬁeld’s
intensities and rates of change, just like for bosonic ﬁelds.
The Platonic interpretation also fundamentally differs from other prominent
interpretative approaches to quantum theory. Unlike the Copenhagen interpretation,
the Platonic interpretation does not invoke a Heisenberg cut that places micro-
scopic systems on an ontologically different footing from macroscopic systems.
Unlike spontaneous-collapse approaches, the Platonic interpretation does not alter
the dynamical laws of standard quantum theory. Finally, unlike instrumentalist
approaches like QBism, the Platonic interpretation posits a speciﬁc ontology for
every given quantum system.
Acknowledgments I would like to thank David Albert, Jeremy Butterﬁeld, Eddy Keming Chen,
Juliusz Doboszewski, Johannes Fankhauser, Benjamin Feintzeig, Samuel Fletcher, Peter Galison,
Ned Hall, Richard Healey, Mina Himwich, Carl Hoefer, David Kagan, Martin Lesourd, Logan
McCarty, Tushar Menon, Ana Raclariu, Simon Saunders, Chip Sebens, Jeremy Steager, Chris
Timpson, and David Wallace. I am especially grateful to Valia Allori for organizing the collection
in which this essay appears, as well as to two anonymous referees for their insightful comments
and questions.
References
Barandes, J. A. (forthcoming). The platonic interpretation of quantum theory.
Bohm, D. J. (1951). Quantum theory. Mineola: Courier Dover Publications. With Bohm’s prescient
discovery of decoherence in Chaps. 22–23.
Breuer, H. P., & Petruccione, F. (2002). The theory of open quantum systems. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Brown, H. (1999). Aspects of objectivity in quantum mechanics. In From physics to philosophy
(pp. 45–70). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. https://philpapers.org/rec/BROAOO-2
Clifton, R., & Halvorson, H. (2001). Are rindler quanta real? Inequivalent particle concepts in
quantum ﬁeld theory. The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 52(3):417–470. https://
www.jstor.org/stable/3541925
d’Espagnat, B. (1976).
Conceptual foundations of quantum mechanics.
New York : W.A.
Benjamin.
Dirac, P. A. M. (1930). The principles of quantum mechanics, 1st ed. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Fell, J. M. G. (1960). The dual spaces of C*-algebras. Transactions of the American Mathematical
Society, 94(3):365–403. https://doi.org/10.2307/1993431
Gelfand, I. M., & Naimark, M. A. (1943). On the imbedding of normed rings into the ring of
operators on a Hilbert space. Matematicheskii Sbornik, 12(54)(2):197–217. http://mi.mathnet.
ru/msb6155
Ghirardi, G. C., Rimini A., & Weber, T. (1980).
A general argument against superluminal
transmission through the quantum mechanical measurement process.
Lettere al Nuovo
Cimento, 27(10):293–298. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02817189
Gibbs, J. W. (1902). Elementary principles in statistical mechanics (1st ed.). New York: Scribner’s
Sons.

16
Platonic Quantum Theory
253
Hughston, L. P., Jozsa, R., & Wootters, W. K. (1993).
A complete classiﬁcation of quantum
ensembles having a given density matrix. Physics Letters A, 183(1):14–18. https://doi.org/
10.1016/0375-9601(93)90880-9
Jaynes, E. T. (1957).
Information theory and statistical mechanics. II.
Physical Review,
108(2):171–190. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.108.171
Joos, E., & Zeh, H.-D. (1985). The emergence of classical properties through interaction with the
environment. Zeitschrift für Physik B Condensed Matter, 59(2):223–243. https://doi.org/10.
1007/BF01725541
Jordan, T. F. (1983). Quantum correlations do not transmit signals. Physics Letters A, 94(6):264.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0375-9601(83)90713-2
Koopman, B. O. (1931). Hamiltonian systems and transformations in Hilbert space. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 17(5):315–318. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.17.5.315
Lindblad, G. (1976). On the generators of quantum dynamical semigroups. Communications in
Mathematical Physics, 48(2):119–130. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01608499
Myrheim, J. (1999). Quantum mechanics on a real Hilbert space. . https://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/
9905037 arXiv:quant-ph/9905037
Renou, M.-O., Trillo, D., Weilenmann, M., Thinh, L. P., Tavakoli, A., Gisin, N., Acin, A., &
Navascues, M. (2021).
Quantum physics needs complex numbers.
.
https://arxiv.org/abs/
2101.10873, arXiv:2101.10873
Sakurai, J. J. (1993). Modern quantum mechanics (revised edition). Boston: Addison Wesley.
Schrödinger, E. (1936).
Probability relations between separated systems.
Mathematical
Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, 32(3):446–452. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0305004100019137
Segal, I. E. (1947). Irreducible representations of operator algebras. Bulletin of the American
Mathematical Society, 53, 73–88. https://doi.org/10.1090/S0002-9904-1947-08742-5
Shankar, R. (1994). Principles of quantum mechanics (2nd ed.). New York: Plenum Press.
Shannon, C. E. (1948). A mathematical theory of communication. The Bell System Technical
Journal, 27(3):379–423. https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1538-7305.1948.tb01338.x
Stone, M. H. (1930). Linear transformations in Hilbert space. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, 16(2):172–175. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.16.2.172
Stueckelberg, E. C. G. (1959). Field quantisation and time reversal in real Hilbert space. Helvetica
Physica Acta, 32(4):254–256. https://www.e-periodica.ch/digbib/view?pid=hpa-001:1959:32::
145#260
Stueckelberg, E. C. G. (1960). Quantum theory in real Hilbert space. Helvetica Physica Acta,
33(4):727–752. https://www.e-periodica.ch/digbib/view?pid=hpa-001:1960:33::715#735
von Neumann, J. (1931). Die Eindeutigkeit der Schrödingerschen Operatoren. Mathematische
Annalen, 104(1):570–578. https://doi.org/10.2307/1968535
von Neumann, J. (1932a).
Zur Operatorenmethode In Der Klassischen Mechanik.
Annals of
Mathematics, 33(3):587–642. https://doi.org/10.2307/1968537
von Neumann, J. (1932b).
Zusatze Zur Arbeit ‘Zur Operatorenmethode. . .’.
Annals of
Mathematics, 33(4), 789–791. https://doi.org/10.2307/1968225
von Neumann, J. (1932c). Mathematische Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik. Berlin: Springer.
von Neumann, J. (2018).
Mathematical foundations of quantum mechanics: New edition.
Princeton: Princeton University Press. With the English translation by Robert T. Beyer, and
edited by Nicholas A. Wheeler.
Weinberg, S. (1996). The quantum theory of ﬁelds (Vol. 2). Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Zeh, H.-D. (1970). On the interpretation of measurement in quantum theory. Foundations of
Physics, 1(1):69–76. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00708656
Zurek, W. H. (1994). Decoherence and the existential interpretation of quantum theory, or ‘No
Information Without Representation’. In P. Grassberger & J.-P. Nadal (Eds.), From statistical
physics to statistical inference and back (pp. 341–350). Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-011-1068-6_23

Chapter 17
cat alive and cat dead Are not Cats!
Ontology and Statistics in “Realist”
Versions of Quantum Mechanics
Jean Bricmont
Abstract It is often claimed that there are three “realist” versions of quantum
mechanics: the de Broglie-Bohm theory or Bohmian mechanics, the spontaneous
collapse theories and the many worlds interpretation.
We will explain why the two latter proposals suffer from serious defects coming
from their ontology (or lack thereof) and that the many worlds interpretation is
unable to account for the statistics encoded in the Born rule. The de Broglie-Bohm
theory, on the other hand, has no problem of ontology and accounts naturally for the
Born rule.
17.1
Introduction: The Need for an Ontology
I wish I could use another word than “ontology”, which sounds too “philosophical”
to the ears of many physicists, but that is the word whose usage is generally
accepted.
However, there is no reason to be scared by this word; it simply refers to what
exists in the world, atoms, stars, electrons, fairies, gods (if the latter exist) etc. Of
course, to speak of an ontology, we need some theory or some idea of what the
world consists of.
In the classical worldview, the ontology consists of particles in motion and
(electromagnetic) waves plus a certain structure of space-time.
But what is the ontology postulated by quantum mechanics? That is far less clear.
Of course, quantum physicists speak of atoms, radiation, elementary particles etc.,
as if they existed in reality, namely as being part of the ontology. But they also insist,
at least most of them, that the complete description of those objects is given by their
wave function (or quantum state).
J. Bricmont ()
IRMP, Université catholique de Louvain, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium
e-mail: jean.bricmont@uclouvain.be
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
V. Allori (ed.), Quantum Mechanics and Fundamentality, Synthese Library 460,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-99642-0_17
255

256
J. Bricmont
But what does that mean? The standard meaning given to the wave function is
that it allows us to compute the probabilities of various “results of measurements”
performed in laboratories. So, if I tell you that an electron “out there” has such and
such wave function, all it means is that if I brought this electron in a laboratory
and performed experiments on it, I would get such and such result with certain
probabilities. But if I ask what are the properties of the electron “out there”, the
only honest answer, within ordinary quantum mechanics, is that it has none:1 no
position, no velocity, no energy, no spin value (in an arbitrary direction). But then,
what does it mean to say that the electron exists “out there”? It possesses intrinsic
properties common to all electrons, like its mass and electric charge, but no extrinsic
properties, like position, velocity etc., and it is not clear what it means to say that
objects without such extrinsic properties “exist”.
A possible reaction could be to restrict our ontology to measuring devices and
that is sometimes what one might think that “neo-Bohrians” believe. But that can’t
be right: everybody knows that measuring devices are made of more elementary
particles and, if they don’t exist, how come that the measuring device does?
Another reaction is to think, for one particle at least, that the wave function
represent some spread out density of matter or of electric charge (and that is how
Schrödinger thought of it at ﬁrst, see Allori et al. (2011)) but that cannot be right
either, partly because the free evolution of the wave function makes that supposed
density more and more spread out, but mostly because, for more than one particle,
the wave function is deﬁned on R3N, where N is the number of particles and not
on the ordinary space R3 (that is a major difference with respect to electromagnetic
waves and it prevents us to think of the wave function as some kind of “ﬁeld” in
space-time).
Finally one may think in terms of a naïve statistical interpretation (and that is
probably what is in the back of the minds of most of the “no worry about quantum
mechanics” physicists): particles do have properties such as position, velocity, spin
etc., but we cannot know or control them-we have only access to their wave function;
the latter gives the statistical distribution of the value of those quantities (through
the Born rule) over sets of particles having the same wave function. And, when we
perform a measurement of a property of a given particle, we learn what that value is
for that particle.
To spell out the naïve statistical interpretation, it means that, for each individual
system, there is a map v that assigns a value to each observable A and the wave
function simply assigns a probability distribution over such maps, in agreement with
Born’s rule.
Those values are what one calls “hidden variables”, namely variables that
characterize the state of an individual quantum system beyond its wave function.
It is curious that this expression is often considered by physicists not to be used
in polite company, yet is the most straightforward way to give an unproblematic
meaning to the wave function.
1 Unless the wave function happens to be an eigenstate of some operator.

17
cat alive and cat dead Are not Cats! Ontology and Statistics in...
257
And, if that worked, there would indeed be no reason to worry about the meaning
of quantum mechanics and we would have a decent ontology, but somewhat
“hidden” from us. In fact, we will see in Sect. 17.4 that this does work, but in a
subtly modiﬁed form. However, as stated here, it cannot work, because of well-
established theorems due to Bell (1966) and to Kochen and Specker (1967), but
that unfortunately are not widely known among physicists: those theorems show
that, if we assign values to various properties that are simultaneously measurable
according to ordinary quantum mechanics (and thus, if one such property possesses
a given value, so should the others),2 then one can deduce a contradiction (see
Mermin (1993) for pedagogical proofs and Daumer et al. (1996), or Bricmont et
al. (2019), for a discussion of the meaning of those results). In other words, what we
call the naïve statistical interpretation (individual quantum systems do have deﬁnite
properties but we are only able to know their statistical distributions) does not work.
Since none of the easy ways to assign a meaning to the wave function in the
world “out there” works, what one could call the meaning problem or the ontology
problem (what exists in the world according to quantum mechanics?) remains.
This problem is quite different from the most popular problem in the founda-
tions of quantum mechanics, the “measurement problem”, which is illustrated by
Schrödinger’s cat. As this example is well known, let us simply recall that, at the
end of an experiment where one measures the property of a particle that can take two
values, the measuring device, or the cat if we couple the device to the cat through a
poison capsule, is (leaving aside normalization factors):
cat alive + cat dead.
(17.1)
And that, argued Schrödinger, cannot be a complete description of the cat, which
is obviously either alive or dead but not both! The way out of this problem from the
point of view of ordinary quantum mechanics is to introduce the collapse postulate:
when one looks at the cat, one sees whether she is alive or dead and, depending on
what one sees, one reduces the wave function of the cat (and of the particle that
was measured and is thus coupled to the state of the cat) to either cat alive or
cat dead.
2 Technically, it means that the operators associated to those properties or “observables” commute.,
More precisely, the Bell-Kochen-Specker result implies that, if H is a Hilbert space of dimension at
least four, and if A is the set of self-adjoint operators on H, there does not exist a map v : A →R
such that:
(1) ∀O ∈A,
v(O) is an eigenvalue of O.
(2) ∀O, O′ ∈A with [O, O′] = OO′ −O′O = 0,
v(OO′) = v(O)v(O′).
Obviously, there cannot be a statistical distribution of maps that do not exist.

258
J. Bricmont
Since this is a deus ex machina from the point of view of the linear Schrödinger
evolution, justifying it is often viewed as the main problem in foundations of
quantum mechanics.
What we are suggesting here is that there is a deeper problem: neither cat alive
nor cat dead are cats: they are functions deﬁned on a high dimensional space R3N
(putting aside the fact that there are different kinds of particles and that they may
also have a spin) while cats are located in R3. And it is not clear what it means
to say that cat alive or cat dead are descriptions of cats, let alone “complete
descriptions” of them.3 Like all wave functions they allow us to predict results of
measurements done on the objects that they “describe”, but nothing else.
What most people do is to mentally identify cats and wave functions of cats. But
that is exactly what we argue is illegitimate. It is curious that even critics of the
Copenhagen interpretation like Einstein and Schrödinger did not, to my knowledge,
challenge that identiﬁcation. However, de Broglie did say in his report to the 1927
Solvay Conference: “it seems a little paradoxical to construct a conﬁguration space
with the coordinates of points that do not exist”. He also remarked that, if “the
propagation of a wave in space has a clear physical meaning, it is not the same as
the propagation of a wave in the abstract conﬁguration space” (Bacciagaluppi &
Valentini, 2009, p. 346). Just as in the well-known Magritte painting “this is not a
pipe”, a wave function deﬁned on a set of points that would constitute a cat, if those
points corresponded to particle positions, is simply not a cat if there are no particles.
Let us now consider the main proposals to solve the measurement problem, while
keeping in mind the problem of meaning (of the wave function) or the “ontology
problem”.
17.2
Statistics and Ontology in the Many-Worlds
Interpretation
The many-worlds interpretation was introduced in 1957 by Hugh Everett III. We
will ﬁrst discuss what we call the “naïve many-worlds interpretation”. Then, we will
give a mathematical formulation of it, due to Allori et al. (2011), and ﬁnally discuss
a more sophisticated version of the many-worlds interpretation which is favored by
some of its defenders.
17.2.1
The Naïve Many-Worlds Interpretation
The naïve view is that, when the proverbial cat (or any other macroscopic device)
ﬁnds itself in a superposed state, such as (17.1), then, instead of undergoing a
3 This idea is emphasized in Tumulka (2018) Sect. 5.1.

17
cat alive and cat dead Are not Cats! Ontology and Statistics in...
259
collapse by ﬁat as in ordinary quantum mechanics, both terms simply continue to
exist. But how can that be possible? We always see the cat alive or dead but not
both! The short answer is that they both exist, but in different “worlds”.
Hence, still thinking naively, whenever an experiment leads to a macroscopic
superposition, the world splits into two or more worlds, depending on the number
of distinct macroscopic states produced by that experiment, one for each possible
result. But why do I always perceive only one of the results? It is simple: I, meaning
my body, my brain (and thus also my consciousness) gets entangled with the states
of the cat, so there are two or more copies of me also, one seeing the dead cat in
one world, another seeing the live cat in another world. And that, of course, is also
true for everything else: every molecule in the entire world gets to be copied twice
(maybe not instantaneously, but that is another question).
In his original paper (Everett, 1957), Everett stressed that “all elements of a
superposition4 are ‘actual’, none any more ‘real’ than the rest.” Everett felt obliged
to write this because “some correspondents” had written to him saying that, since
we experience only one element of a superposition, we have only to assume the
existence of that unique element. This shows that some early readers of Everett
were already bafﬂed by the radical nature of the “many-worlds” proposal.5
Putting aside the issue of ontology (to be discussed in Sect. 17.2.2), as well
as the weirdness of the multiplication of “worlds”, one should ask whether the
many worlds scheme is coherent. Consider ﬁrst the Born rule. Suppose that the
probabilities of having the cat alive or dead, as a result of an experiment, are ( 1
2, 1
2).
And suppose that I decide to repeat the same experiment successively many times,
with different particles (and cats) but all having the same initial wave function. After
one experiment, there are two worlds, one with a dead cat and a copy of me seeing
a dead cat and one with a live cat and a copy of me seeing a live cat. Since both
copies of me are in the same state of mind as I was before the ﬁrst experiment (after
all, both copies are just copies of me!), each of them repeats that experiment. Then,
we have four worlds, one with two consecutive dead cats, one with two consecutive
live cats and two with one dead cat and one live cat. “I” (by that I mean each copy
of me in each of those four worlds) repeat the experiment again: we have now eight
worlds, with consecutive cats as follows (d=dead, l=live): ddd, ddl, dld, dll, ldd,
ldl, lld, lll. So there is one “history” of worlds with three dead cats, one history of
worlds with three live cats, three histories of worlds with one live cats and two dead
ones, three histories of worlds with one dead cat and two live ones.
Now, continue repeating that experiment: for every possible sequence of out-
comes, there will be some of my “descendants” (by that I refer to the copies of me,
that exist in all the future worlds) that will see it. There will be a sequence of worlds
in which the cats are always alive and another sequence where they are always dead.
4 Superposition refers to sums such (17.1) (Note of J.B.).
5 See Freire (2015) for an historical perspective on Everett (and other “dissidents” with respect to
the quantum orthodoxy) and Barrett (2018) for a discussion of various interpretations of Everett’s
ideas, many of which depart from the original ones.

260
J. Bricmont
There are also many sequences of worlds where the cats are alive one quarter of the
time and dead three quarters of the time, and that is true for any other statistics
different from ( 1
2, 1
2). So that we can be certain that many of our descendants will
not observe Born’s rule in their worlds. Of course, this is also true for many of
our “cousins”, i.e., descendants, like us, of some of our ancestors, if many identical
experiments have been made in the past in each of those worlds.
But one could argue, on the basis of the law of large numbers, that, at least in the
vast majority of worlds, the Born rule will be obeyed, since in the vast majority of
worlds the frequencies of dead and live cats will be close to ( 1
2, 1
2).
But what happens if, instead of being ( 1
2, 1
2), the probabilities predicted by
quantum mechanics are, say, ( 3
4, 1
4)? We will still have two worlds coming out
of each experiment, because these experiments have two possible outcomes. So,
the structure of the multiplication of worlds is exactly as when the predicted
probabilities were ( 1
2, 1
2).
But now, if one applies the law of large numbers as above, one arrives at the
conclusion that, in the vast majority of worlds, the quantum predictions will not be
observed, since our descendants will still see the cats alive in approximately 1
2 of
the worlds, and the cats dead also in approximately 1
2 of the worlds, instead of the
( 3
4, 1
4) frequencies predicted by the Born rule.
This is prima facie a serious problem for the many-worlds interpretation. There
have been many proposals to solve this problem and it would be too long and too
technical to discuss all of them here.
Some authors have argued that one should count the worlds differently, by
weighting them with the coefﬁcients that appear in the Born rule (e.g. Everett in
Everett (1957), but also Graham in DeWitt and Graham (1973)). However, this is
circular: the goal is to explain where the Born rule comes from in a deterministic
theory, not to impose it from the start. Hence, I ﬁnd these proposal unsatisfactory,
and the problem remains.6
Another “solution” is to give to low probability worlds (according to Born’s rule)
a lower degree of existence or of reality (see Vaidman (1998) or Damour (2006,
p. 155), quoted in Maudlin (2012)), but it is unclear what it means to live in a
low reality world since we cannot compare that life with one in a world with a
high degree of existence: indeed, different worlds don’t interact with each others.
And this “solution” is quite contrary to Everett’s original idea that “all elements
of a superposition are ‘actual’, none any more ‘real’ than the rest” (Everett, 1957).
Moreover,by assigning the low probability worlds (according to Born’s rule) a lower
degree of existence, even though they exist just as much as the high probability
worlds, the theory becomes borderline incoherent: if something exists, it has the
property of “being existent” simpliciter.
6 I develop these objections in Bricmont (2016) (Sect. 6.1). See also Norsen (2017) (Chap. 10) and
Maudlin (2019) (Chap. 6).

17
cat alive and cat dead Are not Cats! Ontology and Statistics in...
261
Another attempt to solve this problem, advocated by David Deutsch and David
Wallace is to justify the Born rule by appealing to betting strategies by a rational
agent (see, e.g., Deutsch (1999), Wallace (2003, 2007) and Maudlin (2014) for a
critique). But what have betting strategies to do with physics?7
What we call here the naïve view is rather vague and is not explicit about its
ontology. A paper by Allori et al. (2011) addresses this issue.
17.2.2
A Precise Many-Worlds Interpretation
Allori et al. (2011) associate a continuous matter density with the wave function of
a system of N particles. For each x ∈R3, and t ∈R, one deﬁnes
m(x, t) =
N

i=1
mi

R3N δ(x −xi)|(x1, . . . , xN, t)|2dx1 . . . dxN ,
(17.2)
where (x1, . . . , xN, t) is the usual wave function of the system at time t. This
equation makes a connection between the wave function deﬁned on the high-
dimensional conﬁguration space and an object, the matter density, existing in our
familiar space R3. Here, the ontology does not consist only of the wave function, but
also of the matter density. In our three-dimensional world, there is just a continuous
density of mass: no structure, no atoms, no molecules, no brain cells, etc., just an
amount of “stuff”, with high density in some places and low density elsewhere.
Let us note that, if the God of the physicists was trying not to be malicious8
and if the many-worlds version of Allori et al. (2011) is true, then He failed badly:
indeed, it means that we were wrong all along when we “discovered” atoms, nuclei,
electrons, etc., and that we are lying to schoolchildren when we tell them that matter
is mostly void with a few pieces of matter (the atoms) here and there. Indeed, in the
theory of Allori et al. (2011), matter is continuous after all, with higher and lower
density in some places, and we have simply been fooled by this version of the many-
worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics into thinking that it is not.
Of course, we might be forced to accept this ontology if there were independent
reasons for doing so, like a greater explanatory power of that theory, but we do not
see how this goal is reached.
Moreover, this many-worlds theory does not solve the problem of the proba-
bilities discussed in Sect. 17.2.1. Coming back to our example with two possible
outcomes, one having probability 3
4 and the other 1
4, the density of matter will be
different in the world where ones “sees” the outcome having probability 3
4 and in
the one having probability 1
4. But what difference does it make? In which way does
7 For more on all this, see e.g. Maudlin (2019) (Chap. 6).
8 The famous quote “The Lord God is subtle, but malicious he is not” is due to Einstein.

262
J. Bricmont
having a smaller or larger matter density affect my states of mind?9 And if it does
not, we are back to the problem that, if one repeats many times the experiment
whose outcomes have probabilities ( 3
4, 1
4), most of my descendants (some of course
having a small matter density) will see massive violations of the Born rule.
In any case, some defenders of the many-worlds interpretation dismiss both this
approach and the naïve one and prefer to speak of a pure wave function ontology,
something to be discussed now.
17.2.3
The Pure Wave Function Ontology
In this ontology, the world is made of a universal wave function and nothing else.10
There are, in actual fact, no cats, pointers, brains, etc., situated in ordinary three-
dimensional space, but only a mathematical object, a complex function deﬁned on
an abstract space, containing all the possible conﬁgurations of particles and ﬁelds
in the universe. In the language of Bell (1984), there are no “local beables” in that
theory, i.e., things that exist (beables) and that are localized in R3.
But it is important to realize that the ontology of the “pure wave function” many-
worlds interpretation is just a function deﬁned on a space of “conﬁgurations” (of
particles and ﬁelds), but without any particles or ﬁelds being part of the ontology.
Indeed, if we put particles and ﬁelds, existing in ordinary three-dimensional space,
into our ontology, then we get back to the “naïve” picture of worlds constantly
multiplying themselves.
But it is very difﬁcult to see how to make sense of this pure wave function
ontology, in particular how to relate it to our familiar experience of everyday objects
situated in three-dimensional space. If we think of the live and dead cat, in this
ontology, it just means that the wave function has a high value on conﬁgurations
corresponding to the dead cat and also on conﬁgurations corresponding to the live
cat, but without there being particles constituting the cat (either alive or dead).11
9 This problem is similar to the one posed by postulating a lower degree of existence for low
probability worlds, see Sect. 17.2.1.
10 For a more detailed discussion, see the section on what is called GRW0 in Allori et al. (2008),
and also Maudlin (2012) and Norsen (2014).
11 In Norsen (2014), the author explains why the pure wave function ontology is solipsism “for all
practical purposes” because the world of the pure wave function ontology has a status similar to
the idea that we are just brains in a vat, with our brains manipulated from the outside in just such
a way as to make our illusory conscious experiences what they are. For more discussion of this
ontology, see the collection of essays edited by Ney and Albert (2013).

17
cat alive and cat dead Are not Cats! Ontology and Statistics in...
263
17.3
Ontologies for the Spontaneous Collapse Theories
In Ghirardi et al. (1986) Ghirardi, Rimini, and Weber (GRW) introduced a mod-
iﬁed version of quantum mechanics in which wave functions spontaneously col-
lapse.12 To be precise, in their model, the wave function evolves according to the
Schrödinger equation most of the time, but there is a set of spacetime points (yi, ti)
chosen at random, such that the wave function (x1, . . . , xN, t) for a system of N
particles is multiplied at the chosen times ti by a Gaussian function in the variable
xk (k chosen uniformly among 1, . . . , N), centered in space at the chosen space
points yi. The probability distribution of these random points is determined by the
wave function of the system under consideration at the times when they occur, and
is given by the familiar ||2 distribution. This ensures that the predictions of the
GRW theory will (almost) coincide with the usual ones.
The above-mentioned multiplication factors localize the wave function in space,
and for a system of many particles in a superposed state, effectively collapse the
quantum state onto one of the terms. Now, the trick is to choose the parameters of
the theory so that spontaneous collapses are rare enough for a single or for a few
particles in order to ensure that they do not lead to detectable deviations from the
quantum predictions, but are frequent enough to ensure that a system composed of
a large number of particles, say N = 1023, will not stay in a superposed quantum
state such as (17.1) for more than a split second; imagine a system whose wave
function is a product of many wave functions for the individual particles composing
the system. If even one of those wave functions collapses to 0 at some location,
the product wave function of the system will also collapse to 0, since a product of
factors, one of which equals 0, vanishes.13
The GRW theory is not the same as ordinary quantum mechanics, since the
spontaneous collapse theory leads to predictions that differ from the usual ones,
even for systems made of a small number of particles. But the parameters of the
theory are simply adjusted so as to avoid being refuted by present experiments,
which is not exactly an appealing move.
Moreover, as for the many-worlds interpretation, there is also the problem of
making sense of a pure quantum state ontology (even when the latter collapses, since
the collapsed quantum state is still just a function deﬁned on a high-dimensional
space), which is called the “bare” GRW theory in Allori et al. (2008). Two solutions
have been proposed to give a meaning to the GRW theory beyond the pure wave
function ontology: the matter density ontology (Ghirardi et al., 1995) often denoted
GRWm, and the ﬂash ontology (Bell, 1987) denoted GRWf.
In the ﬁrst solution, one associates the continuous matter density deﬁned in (17.2)
with the wave function of a system of N particles. So the ontology here is exactly
12 For reviews and further discussions of those theories, see Ghirardi (2011), Ghirardi et al. (1995),
Allori et al. (2008), Goldstein et al. (2012), Norsen (2017) (Chap. 9), Maudlin (2019) (Chap. 4).
13 In actual fact, in GRW theories, wave functions do not collapses exactly to 0, but to a very small
value. This raises additional problems but we will not discuss them.

264
J. Bricmont
the same as in the version of many worlds due to Allori et al. (2011), but with a
different time evolution of the quantum state: whereas it was the pure Schrödinger
evolution in the many-worlds case, it is that evolution interrupted at some random
times by random collapses in the GRWm theory. This has the advantage that there
is, in practice, only one macroscopic world.
In the ﬂash ontology, one has a world made only of spacetime points at the center
of the Gaussian multipliers of the wave function that “collapse” it. No particles, no
ﬁelds, nothing at all, except a “galaxy” of spacetime points, called “ﬂashes”.
But again, if either the GRWm or the GRWf theories are true, then the God of the
physicists is quite malicious. In the GRWm case, this is true for the same reason as
for the version of many worlds described in Allori et al. (2011). On the other hand,
if the ﬂash ontology was true, then we have been fooled into thinking that there
exists something most of the time (like atoms): if we take the visible universe since
the Big Bang, it has contained only ﬁnitely many ﬂashes. Since the ﬂashes are all
there is in that ontology, this means that, most of the time, the universe is just empty.
Of course, as we said in Sect. 17.2.3, one might be forced to accept this ontology
if the theory had greater explanatory power or greater empirical adequacy. But, and
this is the most important point, empirical adequacy of any GRW theory would
mean that ordinary quantum mechanics is empirically wrong, since the predictions
of both theories differ, at least in principle (and that difference is not visible in
practice because the parameters of GRW theories are chosen so as to avoid possible
refutations). So, if one found that a GRW prediction is right where it differs from
ordinary quantum mechanics, it would be a major revolution in physics and we
might be forced to worry about those weird ontologies. But this hasn’t happened yet
and I would suggest not to worry about what to do after the revolution before that
revolution has occurred.
17.4
Ontologies for the de Broglie-Bohm Theory
In the de Broglie-Bohm theory (Bohm, 1952a,b), the complete state of a system with
N variables at time t is speciﬁed by

(t), X(t)

, where (t) is the usual quantum
state, (t) = (x1, . . . , xN, t) and X(t) =

X1(t), . . . , XN(t)

∈R3N are the
actual positions of the particles.14
14 Our presentation of the de Broglie-Bohm theory follows the one of Bell (2004) and of Dürr et al.
(2013) rather than the one of Bohm (1952a,b). This approach is actually close to the original one
of de Broglie, see Bacciagaluppi and Valentini (2009).
Many expositions of the de Broglie–Bohm theory are available, see, e.g., Albert (1994) or
Tumulka (2004) for elementary introductions and Bacciagaluppi and Valentini (2009), Bohm and
Hiley (1993), Bricmont (2016), Dürr and Teufel (2009), Dürr et al. (2013), Goldstein (2013),
Towler (2009) for more advanced ones. There are also pedagogical videos made by students in
Munich, available at: https://cast.itunes.uni-muenchen.de/vod/playlists/URqb5J7RBr.html.

17
cat alive and cat dead Are not Cats! Ontology and Statistics in...
265
The theory assumes that the particles have positions at all times, and therefore
trajectories, independently of whether one measures them or not.
The evolution of the state (, X) is given by two laws:
1.  obeys the usual Schrödinger equation at all times. The quantum state never
collapses.
2. The evolution of the positions of the particles is determined by the quantum state
at time t. One writes, for spinless particles,
(x1, . . . , xN, t) = R(x1, . . . , xN, t) exp iS(x1, . . . , xN, t),
and the dynamics is simply
d
dt Xk(t) = 1
mk
∇XkS

X1(t), . . . , XN(t), t

,
(17.3)
∀k = 1, . . . , N and mk being the mass of the particle with label k.
So the ontology consists here simply of particles in motion, as in classical
physics, but guided by a wave that itself is deﬁned on R3N and not on R3, as would
be the case for electromagnetic waves. The theory reproduces all the usual quantum
predictions, accounts for their statistical aspects through natural assumptions on
initial conditions and explains the absence of “hidden variables” other than positions
(see the references in footnote 14 for more explanations). The way it accomplishes
that latter feat is by showing that what are usually called “measurements” in ordinary
quantum mechanics are in reality interactions between the system and the measuring
device;15 thus, the latter does not measure any property of the particle (except for
position measurements) and the fact that the map v mentioned in Sect. 17.1 does
not exist has no consequence for the de Broglie-Bohm theory (except to make that
theory more natural).
The de Broglie-Bohm theory is thus a statistical theory, but unlike the naïve one
mentioned in Sect. 17.1, it is consistent and is not refuted by the theorems of Bell
(1966) and Kochen and Specker (1967).
For extensions of that theory to ﬁeld ontologies, see e.g. Struyve (2010) and
references therein.
We may also add that, as stressed in Valentini (2012), the de Broglie version
of the theory, which was introduced before 1927, was not trying to solve the
measurement problem, because that “problem” arose only within the post-1927
“orthodox” version of quantum mechanics.
15 For example, one could “measure” the spin of a particle in a given direction, with a Stern-Gerlach
apparatus, starting with exactly the same initial wave function and initial position for the particle,
but with two different orientations of the gradient of the magnetic ﬁeld in the apparatus, and obtain
two opposite results; thus no “spin property” of the particle has been measured; see Daumer et al.
(1996), Bricmont et al. (2019) for more details.

266
J. Bricmont
17.5
Comparison of Ontologies
To get a feeling for how odd the continuous matter and the ﬂash ontologies are,
compared to the particle ontology of the de Broglie–Bohm theory, consider what
happens, in those ontologies, with the thought experiment of Einstein’s boxes16
(discussed e.g. in Norsen (2005)): imagine a box containing just one particle that
is cut in two parts; one part is sent to New York, the other to Tokyo. The wave
function of the particle is a superposition of a wave function located in one box
+ a wave function located in the other box. In ordinary quantum mechanics, when
a person in New York opens its half-box and sees the particle, the wave function
collapses on the part of the wave function located in that half-box and, if he doesn’t
see it, the wave function collapses on the part located in the other half-box.17
In the de Broglie–Bohm theory, nothing surprising happens: the particle is in one
of the half-boxes all along and is found where it is. But in the GRWm theory, there
is one-half of the matter density of a single particle in each half-box. But when
one opens one of the half-boxes, the evolution of the wave function of the particle
becomes coupled with a macroscopic measuring device and many collapses occur
quite rapidly, so that the matter density suddenly jumps from being one-half of the
matter density of a single particle in each half-box to being the full matter density of
a particle in one half-box and nothing in the other. Of course, this happens randomly,
so that the matter density may jump from the half-box that one opens to the other
half-box. In any case, there is a nonlocal transfer of matter in the GRWm theory,
while there is no such thing in the de Broglie–Bohm theory, and not even anything
nonlocal when one deals with only one particle.
In the GRWf theory, there is simply nothing in either half-box, just a wave
function traveling so to speak with the half-boxes. When one opens one of the half-
boxes and the wave function of the particle becomes coupled with a macroscopic
device, there is suddenly a “galaxy of ﬂashes” appearing (randomly) in one of the
two half-boxes, which we interpret as meaning that the particle is in that half-box.
Again, the theory is more nonlocal, in a sense, than de Broglie–Bohm, since, by
opening one half-box, one may very well trigger a galaxy of ﬂashes in the other
half-box, on which nothing is done.18
16 See Maudlin (2011) (Chap. 10) for a similar discussion of the GRWm and GRWf ontologies, as
opposed to the de Broglie–Bohm ontology.
17 Some people might argue that cutting the box in two already collapses the wave function. Since
we discuss here gedanken experiments, it is not easy to determine what happens. But here is a
modiﬁcation of that experiment that avoids this objection: imagine that the box is inside a long
cylinder, stretching from New York to Tokyo if you wish, and that we remove the two sides of the
box perpendicular to the long side of the cylinder. Then the wave function will spread itself in the
cylinder and the particle can be detected later on one side or the other of the cylinder.
18 For other criticisms of the GRWf theory, in particular in what sense is it really Lorentz invariant,
see Esfeld and Gisin (2014).

17
cat alive and cat dead Are not Cats! Ontology and Statistics in...
267
In any case, this example should sufﬁce to convince any reasonable person of
the superiority in terms of naturalness of the de Broglie–Bohm theory over its
alternatives (many-worlds à la Allori et al. (2011) or GRWm or GRWf).
Acknowledgments I thank two referees for useful comments, Sheldon Goldstein and Tim
Maudlin for many discussions on Bohmian mechanics and the many-worlds theories, and specially
Valia Allori for illuminating exchanges on the topics discussed here.
References
Albert, D. (1994, May). Bohm’s alternative to quantum mechanics. Scientiﬁc American, 270, 32–
39.
Allori, V., Goldstein, S., Tumulka, R., & Zanghì, N. (2008). On the common structure of Bohmian
mechanics and the Ghirardi–Rimini–Weber theory.
British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science, 59, 353–389.
Allori, V., Goldstein, S., Tumulka, R., & Zanghì, N. (2011). Many-worlds and Schrödinger’s ﬁrst
quantum theory. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 62, 1–27.
Bacciagaluppi, G., & Valentini, A. (2009). Quantum Mechanics at the Crossroads. Reconsidering
the 1927 Solvay Conference. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Barrett, J. (2018). Everett’s relative-state formulation of quantum mechanics. Stanford Encyclope-
dia of Philosophy.
Bell, J. S. (1966). On the problem of hidden variables in quantum mechanics. Reviews of Modern
Physics, 38, 447–452. Reprinted as Chap. 1 in Bell (2004).
Bell, J. S. (1984). Beables for quantum ﬁeld theory. CERN-TH 4035/84. Reprinted as Chap. 19 in
Bell (2004).
Bell, J. S. (1987). Are there quantum jumps? In C. W. Kilmister (Ed.), Schrödinger. Centenary
celebration of a polymath (pp. 41–52). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Reprinted as
Chap. 22 in Bell (2004).
Bell, J. S. (2004). Speakable and unspeakable in quantum mechanics. Collected papers on quantum
philosophy (2nd ed.). With an introduction by Alain Aspect. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press (1st ed., 1987).
Bohm, D. (1952a). A suggested interpretation of the quantum theory in terms of “hidden” variables.
I. Physical Review, 85(2), 166–179.
Bohm, D. (1952b). A suggested interpretation of the quantum theory in terms of “hidden”
variables. II. Physical Review, 85(2), 180–193.
Bohm, D., & Hiley, B. J. (1993). The undivided universe. London: Routledge.
Bricmont, J. (2016). Making sense of quantum mechanics. Berlin: Springer.
Bricmont, J., Goldstein, S., & Hemmick, D. (2019). Schrödinger’s paradox and proofs of
nonlocality using only perfect correlation. Journal of Statistical Physics, 180, 74–91.
Damour, T. (2006). Once upon Einstein. Wellesley, MA: A.K. Peters.
Daumer, M., Dürr, D., Goldstein, S., & Zanghì, N. (1996). Naive realism about operators.
Erkenntnis, 45, 379–397.
Deutsch, D. (1999). Quantum theory of probability and decisions. Proceedings of the Royal Society
of London A, 455, 3129–3137.
DeWitt, B. S, & Graham, R. (Eds.) (1973). The many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Dürr, D., Goldstein, S., & Zanghì, N. (2013). Quantum physics without quantum philosophy.
Berlin: Springer.
Dürr, D., & Teufel, S. (2009). Bohmian mechanics. The physics and mathematics of quantum
theory. Berlin: Springer.

268
J. Bricmont
Esfeld, M., & Gisin, N. (2014). The GRW ﬂash theory: a relativistic quantum ontology of matter
in space-time? Philosophy of Science, 81, 248–264.
Everett, H. (1957). ‘Relative state’ formulation of quantum mechanics. Reviews of Modern Physics,
29, 454–462 (1957). Reprinted in DeWitt and Graham (1973) (pp. 141–149).
Freire, O. J. (2015). The quantum dissidents. Rebuilding the foundations of quantum mechanics
(1950-1990). Berlin: Springer..
Ghirardi, G. C., Rimini, A., & Weber, T. (1986). Uniﬁed dynamics for microscopic and macro-
scopic systems. Physical Review D, 34, 470–491.
Ghirardi, G. C., Grassi, R., & Benatti, F. (1995). Describing the macroscopic world: closing the
circle within the dynamical reduction program. Foundations of Physics, 25, 5–38.
Ghirardi, G. C. (2011). Collapse theories. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of
philosophy (Winter 2011 ed.). http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/qm-collapse/
Goldstein, S. (2013). Bohmian mechanics. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of phi-
losophy (Spring 2013 ed.). Available on plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2013/entries/qm-bohm/
Goldstein, S., Tumulka, R., & Zanghì, N. (2012). The quantum formalism and the GRW formalism.
Journal of Statistical Physics, 149, 142–201.
Kochen, S., & Specker, E. P. (1967). The problem of hidden variables in quantum mechanics.
Journal of Mathematics and Mechanics, 17, 59–87.
Maudlin, T. (2011). Quantum non-locality and relativity: Metaphysical intimations of modern
physics (3rd ed.). Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.
Maudlin, T. (2012). Can the world be only wavefunction? In S. Saunders et al. (Eds.), Many
Worlds?: Everett, quantum theory, and reality (Chap. 4). Oxford University Press.
Maudlin, T. (2014). Critical study. D. Wallace, The emergent multiverse: Quantum Theory
according to the Everett interpretation, Oxford University Press, 2012. Noûs, 48, 794–808.
Maudlin, T. (2019). Philosophy of physics. Quantum theory. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Mermin, N. D. (1993). Hidden variables and the two theorems of John Bell. Reviews of Modern
Physics, 65, 803–815.
Ney, A., & Albert, D. (Eds.) (2013). The wave function: Essays on the metaphysics of quantum
mechanics. New York: Oxford University Press.
Norsen, T. (2005). Einstein’s boxes. American Journal of Physics, 73, 164–176.
Norsen, T. (2014). Quantum solipsism and nonlocality. International Journal of Quantum Founda-
tions (electronic journal). Available at www.ijqf.org/archives/1548
Norsen, T. (2017). Foundations of quantum mechanics: An exploration of the physical meaning of
quantum theory. Cham: Springer International Publishing.
Struyve, W. (2010). Pilot-wave theory and quantum ﬁelds. Reports on Progress in Physics, 73,
106001.
Towler, M. (2009). De Broglie–Bohm pilot-wave theory and the foundations of quantum mechan-
ics. Lectures, available at www.tcm.phy.cam.ac.uk/~mdt26/
Tumulka, R. (2004). Understanding Bohmian mechanics — A dialogue. American Journal of
Physics, 72, 1220–1226.
Tumulka, R. (2018). Paradoxes and primitive ontology in collapse theories of quantum mechanics.
In S. Gao (Ed.), Collapse of the wave function (pp. 134–153). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Vaidman, L. (1998). On schizophrenic experiences of the neutron or why we should believe in
the many-worlds interpretation of quantum theory. International Studies in the Philosophy of
Science, 12, 245–261.
Valentini, A. (2012). de Broglie–Bohm pilot-wave theory: Many worlds in denial? In S. Saunders
et al. (Eds.), Many Worlds?: Everett, quantum theory, and reality (pp. 476–509). Oxford
University Press.
Wallace, D. (2003). Everett and structure. Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics,
34, 87–105.
Wallace, D. (2007). Quantum probability from subjective likelihood: Improving on Deutsch’s proof
of the probability rule. Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 38, 311–332.

Chapter 18
Cosmic Hylomorphism vs Bohmian
Dispositionalism
Implications of the ‘No-Successor Problem’
William M. R. Simpson and John M. Pemberton
Abstract The primitive ontology approach to Bohmian mechanics seeks to account
for quantum phenomena in terms of particles that follow continuous trajectories
and a law of nature that describes their temporal development. This approach to
explaining quantum phenomena is compatible with a dispositional account of the
wave function. In this paper, however, we argue that dispositional models which
posit powers that are stimulated according to the instantaneous conﬁguration of
the particles and manifest an instantaneous velocity proﬁle are subject to a ‘no-
successor dilemma’: either time must be discrete rather than continuous, or the
powers fail to determine the particles’ trajectories. What is needed is for the cosmos
to have a power to manifest a teleological process that determines the particles’
trajectories, where this process is metaphysically prior to their instantaneous
conﬁgurations.
Keywords Primitive ontology approach · Quantum mechanics · Causal powers ·
Causal process · Teleology · Hylomorphism · Aristotelianism
18.1
Introduction
One of the challenges confronting scientiﬁc realists is the problem of specifying the
ontological status of the wave function in quantum mechanics. In primitive ontology
approaches to quantum mechanics, the wave function enters the account through the
W. M. R. Simpson ()
Wolfson College, University of Cambridge, Faculty of Philosophy, Faculty of Divinity,
Cambridge, UK
e-mail: wmrs2@cam.ac.uk
J. M. Pemberton
Centre for the Philosophy of the Natural and Social Sciences, London School of Economics,
London, UK
e-mail: pemberton.john@virginmedia.com
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
V. Allori (ed.), Quantum Mechanics and Fundamentality, Synthese Library 460,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-99642-0_18
269

270
W. M. R. Simpson and J. M. Pemberton
nomological or dispositional role it plays in the dynamics of a primitive distribution
of matter in three-dimensional space (or four-dimensional spacetime) (Allori et al.,
2008; Esfeld, 2014; Esfeld et al., 2013). Maudlin has argued that the choice of
quantum dynamics for the wave function comes down to two options (Maudlin,
1995): either we should adopt something like the modiﬁed Schrödinger dynamics
proposed by Ghirardi, Rimini and Weber (Carlo et al., 1986), in which the wave
function undergoes spontaneous collapse, or something like the pilot wave theory
of de Broglie and Bohm (Bohm, 1951, 1952; de Broglie, 1928), which includes
an additional equation of motion for a particle conﬁguration whilst preserving
Schrödinger’s original dynamics.
Our focus in this paper will be on the second of these two alternatives, and
will rely upon the ﬁrst-order interpretation of the pilot wave theory advanced by
Dürr, Goldstein and Zanghí, in which the particles obey an equation of motion that
speciﬁes their instantaneous velocities (rather than their accelerations) (Dürr et al.,
1992). The velocities of the particles depend on both the positions of the particles
and the universal wave function. For those who adopt a primitive ontology approach
to quantum mechanics and reject primitivism about laws, there are two ways of
spelling out the role of the wave function in the temporal development of the particle
conﬁguration: namely, by appealing to a Humean account of laws, in which laws
summarise regularities in the spatiotemporal distribution of the particles, or to some
form of dispositionalism, in which the change in the distribution of the particles is
underwritten by powers (Esfeld et al., 2017).
In the ‘Super-Humean’ ontology recently proposed by Esfeld, for example, the
particles are nothing over and above the distance relations in which they stand,
and their spatiotemporal distribution is entirely contingent (Esfeld and Deckert,
2017). By contrast, in the theory of ‘Cosmic Hylomorphism’ recently proposed by
Simpson, the particle conﬁguration comprises a substance with an intrinsic power to
choreograph the trajectories of the particles, and the particles are caught up within
a process in which their causal powers are continually changing (Simpson, 2021).
In this paper, we seek to put forward an objection to a rival dispositional
model proposed by Suarez, which attributes permanent ‘Bohmian dispositions’ to
the individual particles (Suárez, 2015), where these powers are stimulated by the
instantaneous conﬁguration of the particles and manifest an instantaneous velocity
proﬁle. We shall argue that this alternative form of dispositionalism falls foul of a
‘no-successor dilemma’: either time must be regarded as discrete, or the powers fail
to determine the particles’ trajectories. In order for powers in a Bohmian cosmos
to underwrite change, we claim, the Bohmian cosmos as a whole must have a
power to manifest a teleological process in which the particles are directed to follow
certain trajectories,1 where this process is metaphysically prior to any instantaneous
conﬁgurations of the particles. Cosmic Hylomorphism is therefore to be preferred
to Bohmian dispositionalism.
1 A telological process is one directed toward some telos, ie. end.

18
Cosmic Hylomorphism vs Bohmian Dispositionalism
271
The discussion is structured as follows. In Sect. 18.2, we motivate and lay
out a dispositionalist version of the primitive ontology for Bohmian mechanics
based on Suarez’s proposal, in which the particles are endowed with intrinsic
powers to change their velocities. In Sect. 18.3, we argue that this proposal is
susceptible to the no-successor dilemma. Bohmian dispositionalism thus shares a
fundamental problem with a number of powers ontologies extant in the literature. In
Sect. 18.4, we suggest that dispositionalists should embrace a more thoroughgoing
Aristotelianism, in which powers manifest processes which are metaphysically
uniﬁed and fundamentally directed towards their telos.
18.2
Bohmian Dispositions
18.2.1
Bohmian Primitive Ontology
According to the primitive ontology approach to quantum mechanics, the world is
made of a distribution of matter, and the wave function plays a nomological or dis-
positional role in its temporal development. In the primitive ontology proposed by
Goldstein et al. (2005a,b) for the pilot wave theory of de Broglie and Bohm (Bohm,
1951, 1952; de Broglie, 1928), the matter consists of primitive particles.2
In the contemporary interpretation of the pilot wave theory championed by
Dürr, Goldstein and Zanghí under the name of ‘Bohmian mechanics’ Dürr et al.
(1992), the particles obey an equation of motion which is ﬁrst-order with respect
to time that determines their instantaneous velocities (rather than accelerations).
According to this interpretation, the particles do not have any intrinsic physical
properties like mass or charge, but each particle is assigned a position Qi, and
the equation of motion depends upon both the positions of all the particles and a
universal wave function ψ.3 The Schrödinger equation and the guiding equation
together comprise the non-classical dynamics of a particle conﬁguration that exists
independently of our observations, and the wave function induces a velocity ﬁeld
vψ
i that choreographs the trajectories of all the particles.
The Bohmian theory, for all practical purposes, is empirically equivalent to
standard quantum mechanics. Although the particles have determinate positions,
we cannot know where all of the particles are, and must conﬁne ourselves to
2 For recent textbook studies, see Bricmont (2016); Dürr and Teufel (2009); Dürr et al. (2012);
Holland (1993).
3 The particles are attributed gravitational mass, but the COW experiment suggests mass delo-
calises over the wave function and need not be regarded as an intrinsic property (Brown, 1996).

272
W. M. R. Simpson and J. M. Pemberton
probabilistic predictions of observable outcomes which satisfy the Born rule.4
Nonetheless, the physical state of the world at time t is completely speciﬁed by
both the wave function and the positions of the particles: (ψ, {Q1, . . . , QN})t.
It has recently been argued that sophisticated quantum ﬁeld theories can also be
interpreted in terms of an ontology of persisting particles that move on continuous
trajectories following a deterministic law (Deckert et al., 2019).
A primitive ontology approach to Bohmian mechanics enjoys a number of advan-
tages over other ways of interpreting this theory. Unlike multiﬁeld realism (Chen,
2017; Forrest, 1988; Hubert and Romano, 2018), it avoids the dualism of postulating
a multitude of ﬁelds which exist in ordinary physical space that are somehow
controlled by a wave function which exists in conﬁguration space.5 Multiﬁeld
realism leads to an interaction problem, in which the causal mechanism between
physical space and conﬁguration space is mysterious (Belot, 2012; Solé, 2013).
Unlike conﬁguration space realism (Albert, 1996; Ney, 2013; North, 2013), it avoids
exchanging ordinary three or four-dimensional space as the theatre of reality for the
abstract 3N-dimensional space of the wave function. Conﬁguration space realism
leads to a problem of perception, in which the arena of perceptual experience must
somehow be shown to ‘emerge’ from something very unlike the ordinary physical
space in which scientists conduct experiments (Belot, 2012; Monton, 2002; Solé,
2013). There is more than one way, however, of specifying the role of the wave
function in the temporal development of the primitive ontology in physical space.
18.2.2
Instantaneous powers
Suarez argues skilfully for a dispositional interpretation of the role of the wave
function in which the wave function represents dispositional properties of the
particle conﬁguration (Suárez, 2015). After all, the wave function itself is (in
principle) subject to evolution through time, in accordance with Schrödinger’s
dynamics, yet we normally conceive laws as determining the temporal development
of objects within their domain, rather than being themselves subject to temporal
evolution. If this ‘law’ is grounded in the powers of the particles, however, then the
time-dependence of the wave function can be explained.
In Suarez’s account, when it is applied to the ﬁrst-order interpretation of Bohmian
mechanics,6 the particles are endowed with their own ‘Bohmian dispositions’ to
4 Agreement with the Born Rule is secured if the initial conﬁguration of the particles at t may be
supposed to be randomly distributed with a probability distribution ρ(t = 0) = |ψt=0|2. It then
follows as a consequence of the Schrödinger equation and the Bohmian law of motion that this
relationship will hold at time t > 0 for the distribution ρ(t) = |ψt|2.
5 For further discussion of the multiﬁeld option, see (Suárez, 2015, pp. 3211–3212).
6 We recognise that Suarez’ theory need not be applied globally to all particles nor is it restricted to
the ﬁrst-order interpretation of the Bohmian equation of motion. These qualiﬁcations are imposed
within the primitive ontology approach to Bohmian mechanics.

18
Cosmic Hylomorphism vs Bohmian Dispositionalism
273
change their velocities (Suárez, 2015). Each of the particles exercises a power to
change its instantaneous velocity, which depends upon the instantaneous spatial
conﬁguration of all of the particles (however far apart they may be). The spatial
conﬁguration of the particles at time t, which may be explicated in terms of the
distance relations between the particles, serves as a stimulus condition for the
velocity proﬁle vψ(t), which is speciﬁed by the Bohmian equation of motion for
the particle conﬁguration. The nature of these causal powers is closely tied to
the ﬁrst-order interpretation of this guiding equation, which determines for every
possible particle position Qi a velocity vector vψ
i that depends on the wave function
ψ. According to Suarez, the velocity ﬁeld speciﬁed by this equation ‘describes
the dispositions of every particle conﬁguration in any real or imaginary system of
particles’ (Suárez, 2015, p.3216).
Since it seems rather extravagant to think of each of these particles as having
an inﬁnite number of numerically distinct powers, we may think of each particle as
instantiating a multi-track power instead, where each ‘track’ of a power corresponds
to a different instantaneous velocity proﬁle and is stimulated by a different
instantaneous spatial conﬁguration. The powers of the particle do not change in
time: they simply yield different instantaneous manifestations according to how the
particles are conﬁgured.
Esfeld et. al. have also developed a dispositional model, in which the conﬁgura-
tion as a whole instantiates a power (Esfeld et al., 2013). Likewise, in this alternative
model, we can think of the power that is instantiated by the particle conﬁguration
as being a multi-track power. There is no need in either of these models to include
another physical entity, in addition to the particle conﬁguration, in order to activate
these powers. Rather, for the Bohmian dispositionalist, the manifestation of the
power corresponding to the appropriate track is spontaneously actualised whenever
the particles happen to reside in the correct positions.
18.3
The No-Successor Problem
We wish to call into question the claim that Bohmian dispositions, whether they
belong to the particles individually or to the particle conﬁguration as a whole,
can explain change through time in a world that is governed by the laws of
Bohmian mechanics. Our objection to Bohmian dispositionalism is based on an
argument recently advanced by Pemberton against the concept of ‘state-state
powers’ (Pemberton, 2021), which adapts Bertrand Russell’s sceptical objections
to the concept of causation (Russell, 1913).
Russell conceived the law of causality as a determination relation between a
cause ‘event’, which occurs at a particular instant in time, and an effect event, which
also occurs at a particular instant. The central insight behind his sceptical attack is
that, just as there are no successors in the set of real numbers, an instantaneous
effect cannot occur just after an instantaneous cause without there being a time gap

274
W. M. R. Simpson and J. M. Pemberton
between them, assuming time to be continuous rather than discrete. Yet postulating
a temporal gap between a cause and its effect, or insisting upon the simultaneity
of the cause event and the effect event, turns out to be problematic in a number of
ways.
So it shall prove, we claim, for the Bohmian dispositionalist who invokes
Bohmian dispositions to explain how different conﬁgurations of the particles cause
the velocity proﬁle of the particles to change, when Russell’s argument is recast in
terms of the ‘activation’ (cause) and ‘manifestation’ (effect) states of these intrinsic
dispositions.7 Yet the solution is not to give up on causality, we shall argue, but to
drop Russell’s atomised conception of change.
18.3.1
State-State Powers
Many contemporary accounts of powers assume that once a power is in some
suitable activation state, a manifestation state will occur. When the power is in
circumstances sufﬁcient for its manifestation, it will bring about this manifestation
by some kind of natural necessity. We shall categorise these kinds of powers as
‘state-state powers’.
Suarez, for instance, appears to be committed to such a conception of powers. In
his model, an activation state in a Bohmian disposition results from an instantaneous
spatial arrangement of the particles {Q1, . . . , QN}, whilst a manifestation state
corresponds to an instantaneous velocity proﬁle vψ({Q1(t), . . . , QN(t)}) (Suárez,
2015). Likewise, Esfeld et al. seem committed to such a conception of powers, even
though there is just one Bohmian disposition in their model which is instantiated by
the whole particle conﬁguration (Esfeld et al., 2013).
Let us imagine a Bohmian world in which the powers of the particle con-
ﬁguration are in a collective activation state A at time t′, and in which they
yield a manifestation state M at time t, which is the new velocity proﬁle of the
particle conﬁguration. We shall assume A and M to be distinct states which obtain
instantaneously during the development of the particle conﬁguration. We make this
assumption because each instantaneous conﬁguration of the particles is supposed
to stimulate a numerically distinct Bohmian disposition (or a numerically distinct
track of a multi-track disposition) to manifest a different velocity proﬁle. If these
Bohmian dispositions are not to interfere with one another, it is reasonable to assume
that only one velocity proﬁle may be manifested at a given moment, which is the
velocity proﬁle that is speciﬁed by the differential equation of motion for the particle
conﬁguration. The question is: does M occur at the same moment of time as A, at
t = t′, or does M occur just after A, at some later moment of time, t > t′?
7 See Mumford and Anjum (2011) for a contemporary account of causation in terms of powers or
dispositions.

18
Cosmic Hylomorphism vs Bohmian Dispositionalism
275
On the one hand, suppose that M occurs at the same instant of time as A such
that no time elapses between the stimulation of the Bohmian disposition and the
manifestation of a new velocity proﬁle of the particles. In that case, it appears that
the powers of the particles do not underwrite change in the conﬁguration of the
particles. Let us return to considering this option in a moment. On the other hand,
suppose that M occurs after A. In that case, the particles would not change their
velocities at the same moment that the appropriate stimulus condition is satisﬁed,
but at some subsequent moment, t > t′. But just how much time should elapse
between A and M?
As a ﬁrst attempt at tackling this question, we might try putting a temporal gap
between A and M of ﬁnite duration. In that case, the particles would remain at
certain velocities for ﬁnite periods of time, before manifesting their powers and
changing their velocity proﬁles. However, this time lapse is inconsistent with the
theory of Bohmian mechanics, which does not represent the particles as following
zig-zag trajectories through space, but represents their velocities as continually
changing and their paths as smooth and continuous.
More troubling, however, is the fact that we can offer no intelligible account of
such a delay. As Russell complained: it ‘seems strange – too strange to be accepted,
in spite of the bare logical possibility—that the cause, after existing placidly for
some time, should suddenly explode into the effect’ (Russell, 1913, p.5). What could
be the reason for such a delay between the cause and the effect? It is rather difﬁcult
to say. Just how much time is required before the cause can produce the effect? Any
answer would seem to be arbitrary.
It may seem tempting, as a second attempt, to try and mitigate the problem by
making the temporal delay between A and M inﬁnitesimal, adopting a Leibnizian
notion of inﬁnitesimal quantities in order to reconcile the sequential conception of
causation embodied in Bohmian dispositionalism with the differential equation of
motion for the particle conﬁguration speciﬁed by Bohmian mechanics. Yet modern
analysis has dispensed with inﬁnitesimals, as Huemer and Kovitz observe (Huemer
and Kovitz, 2003): the ‘delta and epsilon’ proofs developed by Cauchy and
Weierstrass demonstrate that a rate-of-change quantity such as the velocity proﬁle
of the Bohmian particle conﬁguration can be understood in terms of relationships
between ﬁnite quantities.8 Moreover, this second attempt merely reiterates the
question: why this inﬁnitesimal delay?
As a third attempt, we might allow that activation and manifestation states should
be temporally contiguous, but conceive this cause-and-effect pairing as obtaining
on semi-open intervals of time: the activation-cause taking place during the interval
[T −δ, T ); the manifestation-effect taking place during [T, T + δ′). In that way,
they appear temporally distinct, without any time elapsing between them. Besides
being ad hoc, however, this solution is subject to another of Russell’s objections.
8 Recent work on inﬁnitesimals in non-standard mathematics should not be read as challenging
the contemporary mathematical orthodoxy which rejects the use of inﬁnitesimals within standard
mathematical methods, especially those applicable to the physical world.

276
W. M. R. Simpson and J. M. Pemberton
Suppose the activation state obtains during [T −δ, T ). Let us consider the ﬁrst half
of this period: [T −δ, T −δ/2). Since this period is not temporally contiguous
with the manifestation state, it cannot give rise to the manifestation state. In that
case, it must be the activation state during the second of this period that gives rise
to the manifestation state: [T −δ/2, T ). By repeating this analysis, however, we
can deduce that the causally salient part of the activation state obtains during the
interval, Lim[T −δ, T ) as δ →0, which is simply the empty set. In other words,
the causally salient part of the activation state never obtains at any time.
In a fourth attempt, we might allow activation and manifestation states to be
temporally contiguous by treating time as discrete. This is a coherent solution to the
problem, but it comes at a theoretical cost: in Bohmian mechanics, time is treated
as continuous. To adopt a discrete conception of time would be to concede that
any version of Bohmian mechanics which resembles the one under consideration,
including Bohmian treatments of quantum ﬁeld theories which are interpreted in
terms of particles that move on continuous trajectories following a deterministic
law, are merely effective theories which fail to refer to any fundamental physical
constituents.
Perhaps we should return, then, to the possibility of A and M being simultaneous,
allowing time to ﬂow independently of the activation and manifestation of powers
by admitting change as a primitive (like the Super-Humean), or relinquishing the
idea that time ﬂows by embracing four-dimensionalism. A defender of Suarez’s
account might reply that Bohmian dispositions are not susceptible to any Russellian-
type objections to their causal efﬁcacy: after all, the positions of the particles sets
the synchronic velocities of the particles via the velocity ﬁeld, the velocities of the
particles in turn sets the particles’ trajectories over time, and hence their positions
over time. What is the difﬁculty?
Granted, in Bohmian mechanics the position of the particles at time t′ sets their
synchronic velocity proﬁle at t′. And if time were discrete, then the velocity of a
particle at t′ would determine its position at the next contiguous moment. But if time
is continuous, then for any point P on the worldline of a particle that one may pick
after t′, there is another point that lies in between at which its velocity will change,
so its trajectory to P is not determined at t′. To determine subsequent positions of
the Bohmian particles we must establish the velocity of the particles over an interval
of time (t′, t′ + δ), where δ > 0. But the velocity at each point in this interval
is not yet available: in the primitive ontology approach to Bohmian mechanics,
the Bohmian equation of motion is ﬁrst-order in time, specifying velocities rather
than accelerations, and the Bohmian dispositions just determine the instantaneous
velocity proﬁle of the particle conﬁguration. Only where we have the acceleration of
the particle over (t′, t′ + δ) as a continuous function of time (at least, the Lebesgue
measure of the subset of points of discontinuity is zero), may we determine the
trajectories.
We thus arrive at the no-successor dilemma for state-state powers such as
Bohmian dispositions: either (i) the manifestation state occurs at the same time
as the activation state, but the powers do not determine the particles’ trajectories,
or (ii) the manifestation state is temporally contiguous with the activation state,

18
Cosmic Hylomorphism vs Bohmian Dispositionalism
277
but Bohmian mechanics mistakenly describes time as continuous. Neither of these
options is compatible with a realist approach to the theory of Bohmian mechanics
that explains the role of the wave function in terms of the particles (or the
conﬁguration) having Bohmian dispositions.
18.3.2
State-Process Powers
Suppose we seize the ﬁrst horn of the dilemma, but reconceive the manifestation of
a power as a process that exists through time, in an attempt to deﬂect the accusation
that the powers fail to underwrite continuous trajectories (Pemberton, 2021). The
activation state of the power and its manifestation state could share a single point in
time, yet the manifestation that is brought about by the power might extend beyond
that point continuously through time. Such a view would rule out both Suarez’s and
Esfeld’s conception of Bohmian dispositions, which manifest instantaneous velocity
proﬁles. Is there a revised conception of a manifestation process which can avoid
the no-successor dilemma?
As a ﬁrst attempt, we might think of a manifestation process as a ‘causal line’
consisting of a dense inﬁnity of similar states or events that lack any necessary
connections between them. Such a set of events might be picked out by its
association with the transmission of a conserved quantity. However, it is difﬁcult
to see how a power can be thought of as manifesting a process that consists merely
of a series of disconnected states or events, if the activation state of the power cannot
be said to necessitate any of the members of this series. Even if the power might be
said to necessitate the ﬁrst member of this series, it does not necessitate anything
that follows, so we are confronted once again with the no-successor dilemma, which
can be applied to the activation state of the power and the ﬁrst member of its
manifestation process.
Secondly, we might conceive of a manifestation process as a dense series of
temporally distinct states in which each state is necessitated by one and the same
causal power. In that case, however, all but one of the states comprising this process
would fail to be temporally contiguous to the activation state of the power. Such a
move merely ampliﬁes the no-successor problem by introducing a temporal delay
between the activation state of the power and the elements of which its manifestation
process is comprised. How can we explain the delay between the activation state of
the power and each of the manifestation states?
Thirdly, we might conceive of a manifestation process as a series of states in
which each state necessarily manifests the subsequent member, until some ﬁnal
state in the series is achieved. The power may be said to manifest the process by
necessitating the ﬁrst element of the process, which then necessitates the second,
and so on. However, the no-successor dilemma can just as readily be applied to a
state within the manifestation process and the subsequent state that it is supposed
to necessitate. If all the elements comprising the process are simultaneous, then this

278
W. M. R. Simpson and J. M. Pemberton
manifestation process does not exist through time, and the power which manifests
this process does not underwrite change.
Fourthly, we might consider the manifestation process to be a uniﬁed whole—
that is, a single manifestation that arises from the activation state. Such a process
could not be interrupted, for otherwise the manifestation might fail to occur, even
though the activation state has occurred, yielding (supposedly) a manifestation. But
how could it be that such a process through time should take place without any
possible interruption? This would seem to require some additional, implausible
story.
18.4
Cosmic Hylomorphism
18.4.1
Powers with Aristotelian-Timing
Another possibility remains: suppose we retain the idea of a power having a
manifestation process which exists through time, but reject the idea of a power
having an instantaneous activation state. Pemberton suggests that the best candidates
for avoiding the no-successor problem are ‘powers with Aristotelian-timing’, which
are powers that are active during the period of their manifesting (Pemberton, 2021).
It is supposed that such powers have bearers and that the manifesting of these
powers is the changing through time of the bearers, which must persist through
the period of this change.
Such a conception of powers demands a thoroughgoing rejection of the so-
called At-At theory of change presupposed by Russell in his infamous attack on
causation (Russell, 1903, pp. 469–473). In the At-At account, change amounts to
the instantiation of different properties at different times, rather than something
becoming different (Cleland, 1990). A process of change, from this point of view,
is grounded in the sum of its temporal parts.9 A process of manifestation that is
brought about by powers with Aristotelian-timing, however, is the changing through
time of the bearers of these powers. The temporal parts of a process, from this point
of view, are grounded in a process which exists through time.
For Aristotle, a process of change is a continuous thing, and a continuous thing
is more uniﬁed than the contemporary notion of a ‘mereological sum’. The spatial
or temporal parts of a continuous thing are potential parts, rather than actual parts,
which derive their identity from the physical whole of which they are part, rather
than possessing their identities independently of the whole. They are abstractions
from something which persists through space and time, rather than having a separate
existence of their own.10
9 The At-At conception of change was christened by Geach as ‘mere Cambridge change’.
10 See [Aristotle, Physics, Book III, v227a10-14] translated in Aristotle (1996).

18
Cosmic Hylomorphism vs Bohmian Dispositionalism
279
This Aristotelian account of powers, unlike Suarez’s or Esfeld’s conception
of powers, is able to avoid the no-successor dilemma. Since the activation of
the powers which bring about the manifestation process obtains during the same
temporal interval in which this process obtains, the activation and manifestation
of the powers are simultaneous. Nonetheless, the powers still underwrite change,
since the manifestation which they bring about by natural necessity is a process
which exists through time. We ﬁnd such an account of powers and processes to be
implemented in Cosmic Hylomorphism, which provides an alternative metaphysical
model for Bohmian mechanics (Simpson, 2021).
18.4.2
Cosmic Form
According to Aristotle, as he has often been understood, substances should be
analysed in terms of both their ‘matter’ and ‘form’, where form is said to determine
the matter of a substance and explain the unity of the substance as a whole. Cosmic
Hylomorphism combines the primitive ontology approach to quantum mechanics
with a contemporary adaptation of Aristotle’s doctrine of hylomorphism (Koons,
2014), reconceiving the primitive ontology of Bohmian mechanics such that the
particles depend for their natures and identities upon a ‘Cosmic Form’ (Simpson,
2021). In this metaphysical model, the particles have causal powers to change their
velocities in conformity with the Bohmian equation of motion, but these powers
derive their identities from the Cosmic Form and they are subject to change through
time.11 The Cosmic Form and the particles thus compose a single substance, which
is identiﬁed according to the Cosmic Form. The empowered particles are integral
parts of this Cosmic Substance, lacking any physical identities apart from the cosmic
whole of which they are parts.
We may think of the Cosmic Form as conferring a monadic nature upon the
Cosmic Substance which evolves through time toward its telos—like a seedling
growing into a tree – and of the particles as expressing this nature in having their
causal powers evolve over time.12 The Cosmic Substance is thus a metaphysically
uniﬁed whole which exercises a power to choreograph the trajectories of its particles
through time, whilst the wave function of quantum mechanics represents this
intrinsic power.13 Likewise, the process of change involving these particles is a
metaphysically uniﬁed whole, which derives its identity from the Cosmic Substance,
11 According to Simpson, the powers of the particles are metaphysically grounded in the Cosmic
Form, which unites itself to the particles by grounding their causal powers (Simpson, 2021).
12 See [Aristotle, Physics, Book II] translated in Aristotle (1996). See Waterlow (1982) on
Aristotelian natures.
13 Different accounts of the goal of this cosmic process might be given by panpsychists (Bruntrup
& Jaskolla, 2016) and by those seeking to revive a neo-Platonic conception of a ‘world
soul’ (Dumsday, 2019).

280
W. M. R. Simpson and J. M. Pemberton
since the empowered particles are integral parts of this substance. It derives its unity
from the Cosmic Form, since the Cosmic Form is directed toward a single telos.
Cosmic Hylomorphism is preferable to Bohmian dispositionalism on a number
of grounds (Simpson, 2021). For instance, a God who prefers the evolution of
the world to express the elegant mathematical form of the Schrödinger equation
seems more likely to choose a Cosmic Form to implement this choice, rather
than the elaborate conspiracy between the particles that is involved in Bohmian
dispositionalism. Moreover, the existence of a Cosmic Form explains the diachronic
and trans-world sameness of the cosmic power that grounds the Bohmian equation
of motion. We cannot explore all of these advantages here. Our concern is merely
to highlight how Cosmic Hylomorphism avoids the no-successor problem, unlike
Bohmian dispositionalism. This is evident in its conception of the cosmic power
and of the cosmic process that involves all of the particles.
In the ﬁrst place, the cosmic power in this metaphysical model exhibits the
requisite property of Aristotelian-timing, since its activation and manifestation exist
simultaneously during a period of time in which the particles are subject to change.
We are to think of the bearer of this cosmic power as the Cosmic Substance, which
is an entity that persists in time throughout this process of change. In the second
place, the process of change is the requisite kind of Aristotelian process, since it is
a teleological process which is uniﬁed by the telos of the Cosmic Substance. We
should think of any instantaneous conﬁguration of the particles as potential parts of
the cosmic process which must be abstracted from the cosmic process as a whole,
rather than as actual parts of this process which have their identity independently of
the whole, since the powers of the particles which bring about change in their spatial
conﬁguration are grounded at any time in the Cosmic Form of the substance.
References
Albert, D. Z. (1996). Elementary quantum metaphysics. In Bohmian mechanics and quantum
theory: An appraisal (pp. 277–284). Dordrecht: Springer.
Allori, V., Goldstein, S., Tumulka, R., & Zanghì, N. (2008). On the common structure of Bohmian
mechanics and the Ghirardi-Rimini-Weber theory: Dedicated to GianCarlo Ghirardi on the
occasion of his 70th birthday. The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 59(3):353–
389.
Aristotle (1996). Oxford world’s classics: Aristotle: Physics. Oxford World’s Classics: Aristotle:
Physics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Belot, G. (2012). Quantum states for primitive ontologists. Foundations of Physics, 2, 67–83.
Bohm, D. (1951). Quantum theory. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall.
Bohm, D. (1952). A suggested interpretation of the quantum theory in terms of “Hidden” variables.
I. Physical Review, 85(2):166–179.
Bricmont, J. (2016).
Making sense of quantum mechanics (Springer International Publishing,
Cham, 2016).
Brown, H. R. (1996). Bovine metaphysics: Remarks on the signiﬁcance of the gravitational phase
effect in quantum mechanics. In Perspectives on quantum reality (pp. 183–193). Dordrecht:
Springer.

18
Cosmic Hylomorphism vs Bohmian Dispositionalism
281
G. Bruntrup & L. Jaskolla (eds.) (2016).
Panpsychism: Contemporary perspectives.
Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Carlo Ghirardi, G., Rimini, A., & Weber, T. (1986).
Uniﬁed dynamics for microscopic and
macroscopic systems. Physical Review D, 34(2):470–491.
Chen, E. K. (2017). Our fundamental physical space: an essay on the metaphysics of the wave
function. The Journal of Philosophy, 114(7):333–365.
Cleland, C. E. (1990).
The difference between real change and “Mere” Cambridge change.
Philosophical Studies, 60, 1–25.
de Broglie, L. (1928). La nouvelle dynamique des quanta [The new dynamics of quanta] Electrons
et photons. Rapports et discussions du cinquième Conseil de physique tenu à Bruxelles du
24 au 29 octobre 1927 sous les auspices de l’Institut international de physique Solvay. Paris:
Gauthier-Villars (pp. 105–132). English translation. In G. Bacciagaluppi & A. Valentini, (eds.),
Quantum theory at the crossroads: Reconsidering the 1927 Solvay conference (pp. 341–371).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Deckert, D.-A., Esfeld, M., & Oldofredi, A. (2019). A persistent particle ontology for quantum
ﬁeld theory in terms of the Dirac sea.
The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science,
70(3):747–770.
Dumsday, T. (2019). Breathing new life into the world-soul? Revisiting an old doctrine through
the lens of current debates on special divine action. Modern Theology, 35(2):301–322.
Dürr, D., & Teufel, S. (2009). Bohmian mechanics. New York: Springer.
Dürr, D., Goldstein, S., & Zanghì, N. (1992). Quantum equilibrium and the origin of absolute
uncertainty. Journal of Statistical Physics, 67, 843–907.
Dürr, D., Goldstein, S., & Zanghì, N. (2012). Quantum physics without quantum philosophy. New
York: Springer.
Esfeld, M. (2014). The primitive ontology of quantum physics. Studies in History and Philosophy
of Modern Physics, 47(C):99–106.
Esfeld, M., & Deckert, D.-A. (2017).
A minimalist ontology of the natural world.
London:
Routledge.
Esfeld, M., Hubert, M., Lazarovici, D., & Durr, D. (2013). The ontology of Bohmian mechanics.
The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 65(4):773–796.
Esfeld, M., Lazarovici, D., Lam, V., & Hubert, M. (2017).
The physics and metaphysics of
primitive stuff. The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 68, 133–161.
Forrest, P. (1988). Quantum metaphysics. New York: Blackwell.
Goldstein, S., Taylor, J., Tumulka, R., & Zanghì, N. (2005a). Are all particles identical? Journal
of Physics A: Mathematical and General, 38(7):1567–1576.
Goldstein, S., Taylor, J., Tumulka, R., & Zanghı, N. (2005b). Are all particles real? Studies in
History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 36(1):103–112.
Holland, P. R. (1993). The quantum theory of motion. An account of the de Broglie–Bohm causal
interpretation of quantum mechanics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hubert, M., & Romano, D. (2018). The wave-function as a multi-ﬁeld. European Journal for
Philosophy of Science, 8(3):521–537.
Huemer, M., & Kovitz, B. (2003).
Causation as simultaneous and continuous.
Philosophical
Quarterly, 53(213):556–565.
Koons, R. (2014). Staunch vs. faint-hearted hylomorphism: Toward an Aristotelian account of
composition. Res Philosophica, 91(2):151–177.
Maudlin, T. (1995). Three measurement problems. Topoi, 14(1):7–15.
Monton, B. (2002). Wave function ontology. Synthese, 130(2):265–277.
Mumford, S., & Anjum, R. L. (2011). Getting causes from powers. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Ney, A. (2013). Ontological reduction and the wave function ontology. In A. Ney & D. Z. Albert
(eds.), The wave function. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
North, J. (2013). The structure of a quantum world. In A. Ney & D. Z. Albert (eds.), The wave
function. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

282
W. M. R. Simpson and J. M. Pemberton
Pemberton, J. (2021). Powers - The no-successor problem. Journal of the American Philosophical
Association, 7(2):213–230.
Russell, B. (1903). The principles of mathematics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Russell, B. (1913). On the notion of cause. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 13, 1–26.
Simpson, W. M. R. (2021). Cosmic hylomorphism. European Journal for Philosophy of Science,
11(28).
Solé, A. (2013). Bohmian mechanics without wave function ontology. Studies in History and
Philosophy of Modern Physics, 44(4):365–378.
Suárez, M. (2015). Bohmian dispositions. Synthese, 192(10):3203–3228.
Waterlow, S. (1982). Nature, change, and agency in Aristotle’s physics: A philosophical study.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Chapter 19
The Governing Conception
of the Wavefunction
Nina Emery
Abstract I distinguish between two different ways in which the wavefunction
might play a role in explaining the behavior of quantum systems and argue that a
satisfactory account of quantum ontology will make it possible for the wavefunction
to explain the behavior of quantum systems in both of these way. I then show how
this constraint has the potential to impact two quite different accounts of quantum
ontology.
The question of what the wavefunction represents is the central question of quantum
ontology.1 Just as one could not understand classical mechanics if one knew that
f = md2x
dt2
was one of the dynamical laws but did not know what f, m and x represent, one
cannot understand quantum theory if one knows only that Schrödinger’s equation
iℏd
dt ψ = ˆHψ
is one of the dynamical laws but does not know what ψ—the wavefuction—
represents.
1 I take it that this claim is compatible with a primitive ontology approach as exempliﬁed in Allori
et al. 2008 and Allori 2013. As I understand these views, the question of what the wavefunction
represents is still central, but it turns out that, given what the wavefunction represents, there must
be more to quantum ontology than just the wavefunction.
N. Emery ()
Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley, MA, USA
e-mail: emery@mtholyoke.edu
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
V. Allori (ed.), Quantum Mechanics and Fundamentality, Synthese Library 460,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-99642-0_19
283

284
N. Emery
This paper articulates one route by which we might approach the question of
what the wavefunction represents. This route starts by focusing on the explanatory
role of the wavefunction. I ﬁrst distinguish between two different aspects of this
explanatory role, and then argue that it is important that we respect not just one,
but both of these aspects. The result is what I call the governing conception of
the wavefunction. The governing conception of the wavefunction isn’t itself an
answer to the question of what the wavefunction represents, but it places signiﬁcant
and heretofore under-appreciated constraints on the possible ways by which we
might answer this question. I don’t expect that everyone will endorse the governing
conception of the wavefunction, but for those who don’t, the discussion below
should help clarify the potential costs of their view. The challenge will then be to
articulate why those costs are worth paying.
One quick clariﬁcation before we begin. Readers who are familiar with debates
about the metaphysics of laws will have some sense of the direction in which I am
headed, just from the title of the paper. But it’s worth emphasizing up front that
one can endorse the governing conception of the wavefunction even if one does not
endorse the governing conception of laws.2 (Indeed my reading of the literature
suggests that several prominent philosophers do just this.) I won’t say anything
here about whether that combination of positions is all things considered the best
combination. Nor will I say anything about whether one can endorse the speciﬁc
argument that I give below for the governing conception of the wavefunction without
endorsing a similar argument for the governing conception of laws. These are good
questions, but they are questions for another time.
19.1
What the Wavefunction Must Do
Here’s a claim that should not be at all controversial: The wavefunction plays a key
role in explaining the behavior of quantum systems. Although this claim should not
be controversial, it will be important. So it is worth going through a few examples.
19.1.1
Three Examples
First, consider the well-known double-slit experiment that is used to illustrate
the fact that quantum particles sometimes exhibit wave-like behavior. In this
experiment, we ﬁre a stream of electrons at a wall that has two small slits in it, near
the center. Some of the electrons pass through the slits and hit a detection screen
on the far side of the wall. If one of the slits but not the other is open, we see an
unsurprising result: there are a lot of hits on the detection screen near the center,
2 See Beebee 2000 and Maudlin 2007 for discussion of the governing conception of laws.

19
The Governing Conception of the Wavefunction
285
and fewer as one gets farther toward the top or the bottom. But if both slits are open
we see something quite different. Some areas near the center of the screen register
a lot of hits, but some areas—areas that registered many hits when only one slit
was open—suddenly register few or no hits at all. (More speciﬁcally we see what
physicists call an interference pattern.)
This result is surprising. Any complete account of the behavior of electrons will
need to explain it. Any complete account of the behavior of electrons, in other words,
will need to give a satisfying answer to the following question:
DS
Why is it that when we send lots of particles through a double slit, there will
be points near the center of the detection screen that register few or no hits?
The answer to this question has two parts. First, there is a claim about the wave-
function of the particles when they reach the detection screen. In this experiment,
when the particle reach the detection screen, the wavefunction for each particle has
an amplitude close to zero at a number of points near the center of the detection
screen. Call these points the central low points.
Second, there is a claim about the relationship between the amplitude of wave-
function of a particle at a certain point and the probability of ﬁnding that particle in
that location. According to Born’s rule, if the amplitude of the wavefunction is α at
a point, then the probability of ﬁnding the particle at that point is |α|2. Combined
with the initial claim that we made about the amplitude of the wavefunction at the
central low points, Born’s Rule entails that the probability of ﬁnding each particle
at one of the central low points is close to zero. This is why, even when we send lots
of particles through a double slit, there will be points near the center of the detection
screen that register few or no hits.
Here is the second example. We can think of the nucleus of a radium-226 atom
as containing a number of alpha particles (each consisting of two protons and two
neutrons). The alpha particles themselves do not have enough energy to overcome
the forces that keep them bound in the nucleus. But if you observe enough radium-
226 atoms, some of them will spontaneously emit an alpha particle. This is an
illustration of the phenomena of quantum tunneling. To use a metaphor common
in physics texts, we can model the forces keeping the alpha particles in the nucleus
as the walls of a well—a “potential well”—that contains the particles. The particles
don’t have enough energy to get up over the walls of the well, but if you wait long
enough you will occasionally see them “tunnel” through those walls.
This result is surprising. Any complete account of the behavior of alpha particles
will need to explain it. Any complete account of the behavior of alpha particles, in
other words, will need to give a satisfying answer to the following question:
R
Why is it that, if we observe enough radium-226 atoms, we will see some of
them will spontaneously emit an alpha particle?
The answer to this question again begins with a claim about the wavefunction
of the particles in a radium-226 atom. In particular the wavefunction of each alpha
particle has a non-zero amplitude outside the nucleus that contains it. Combined
with Born’s Rule, this entails that the probability of each of those particles being

286
N. Emery
found outside the nucleus is greater than zero. This is why, if we observe enough
radium-226 particles, some of them will spontaneously emit an alpha particle.
One ﬁnal example. It is possible to prepare pairs of silver atoms in a special way
that puts them into what physicists call the singlet state. When two silver atoms
are in the singlet state it doesn’t matter how far apart they are or how careful we
are to keep them from sending signals to one another—if we measure the spin of
both particles in a particular direction, the measurements will always have opposite
outcomes. This is an example of quantum entanglement.
This result is surprising. Any complete account of the behavior of silver atoms
will need to explain it. Any complete account of the behavior of silver atoms, in
other words, will need to give a satisfying answer to the following question:
S
Why is it that, regardless of how far apart they are, two particles in the singlet
state are always measured to have opposite spin?
Once again, the answer to this question begins with a claim about the wavefunc-
tion of the particles. But in this case, the particles, taken individually do not have
a wavefunction. There is only the wavefunction for the system as a whole. This
wavefunction takes as inputs states of the system as a whole—for instance, particle
1 having spin up in the z-direction while particle 2 has spin down in the z-direction,
or particles 1 and 2 both having spin up in the z-direction. The wavefunction of
a system that is in the singlet state is such that, according to Born’s rule, the
probability of the two particles having opposite spin in a particular direction is 1,
while the probability of the two particles having the same spin is 0. This is why,
regardless of how far apart they are, two particles in the singlet state are always
measured to have opposite spin.
19.1.2
Two Types of Why Questions
In all three examples above we had a phenomena that needed to be explained and we
did so by appealing to the wavefunction. More carefully, in each case, the question
we needed answered was a question about the relative frequency with which the
outcome of some experiment was observed. And in each case, the answer involved
pointing out that the wavefunction of the system in question had a certain form. In
conjunction with Born’s rule, this fact about the wavefunction then entailed that the
probability of the outcome in question matched the observed relative frequency.
What these examples show, therefore, is that the wavefunction plays a key role in
explaining the behavior of quantum systems. This much I think is uncontroversial.
But the reason it is uncontroversial is that we haven’t said anything at all about what
it means to explain the behavior of a quantum system.
Consider again the three requests for explanation that we saw above. One way of
interpreting these questions is as questions about why we should expect the relevant
behaviors:

19
The Governing Conception of the Wavefunction
287
DSE
Why should we expect that, when you send lots of particles through a double
slit, there will be points near the center of the detection screen that register
few or no hits?
RE
Why should we expect that, if we observe enough radium-226 particles, we
will see some of them will spontaneously emit an alpha particle?
SE
Why should we expect that, regardless of how far apart they are, two particles
in the singlet state are always measured to have opposite spin?
Call this kind of why question a why-should-we-expect question. The examples
discussed above demonstrate that everyone should be on board with the idea that
the wavefunction explains the behavior of quantum systems in the sense that the
wavefunction plays a key role in answering why-should-we-expect questions. This
just follows from the fact that Born’s rule is the standard rule for predicting the
behavior of quantum systems, and the fact that the wavefunction plays a central role
in Born’s rule.
Crucially, however, when we asked our original why-questions with respect to
each of the examples above, we might have meant something different. We might
instead have been asking about the reason why the behavior in question happened:
DSR
What is the reason why, when we send lots of particles through a double slit,
there are points near the center of the detection screen that register few or no
hits?
RR
What is the reason why, if we observe enough radium-226 particles, we see
some of them spontaneously emit an alpha particle?
SR
What is the reason why, regardless of how far apart they are, two particles in
the singlet state are always measured to have opposite spin?
Let’s call these kinds of questions reason-why questions.3
I think it would be a mistake to try to argue that one—and only one—of the two
kinds of why-questions just described is the right kind of question to be interested in
when we are looking for an explanation of some phenomena. Both have a plausible
claim on playing such a role. But I also think that it would be a mistake not to
clearly distinguish between which of these two kinds of questions you are after
when you are looking for an explanation. This is because it is often the case that
we can have a good answer to a why-should-we-expect question without having a
good answer to the corresponding reason-why question.4 Consider, for instance, a
case where we have reliable testimony. If someone who has just arrived from the
3 Bradford Skow (2016) has recently made extensive use of the terminology of ‘reasons why’.
Although there are obvious similarities between my view and his (e.g. causes are paradigm
examples of reasons why), there are also important differences (e.g. I take reasons why to provide
explanations, whereas Skow does not).
4 We can also have a good answer to a reason-why question without having a good answer to the
corresponding why-should-we-expect question. Consider, for instance, cases where the explanans
confers only low probability on the explanandum. In Scriven’s well known example, someone’s
having syphilis might be the reason why they got paresis, even though their having syphilis is
not a good answer to the question “why should we expect them to get paresis?” because having

288
N. Emery
relevant direction tells us that the highway is closed, we might have a good answer
to the question of why we should expect the highway to be closed without having
any answer at all as to the reason why the highway is closed. Or consider a case
in which you have inductive support for something happening. The fact that every
sample of salt that you have examined in your chemistry lab has been soluble, for
instance, might be a perfectly good answer to the question of why we should expect
the next sample of salt to soluble as well, while telling us nothing whatsoever about
the reason why the sample is soluble. In general, all you need to establish a good
answer to a why-should-we-expect question is a good epistemic rule. But as the
examples above show, not all good epistemic rules for ﬁguring out what is the case
involve identifying the reason why it is the case.
The fact that we can have a good answer to why-should-we-expect questions
without having a good answer to the corresponding reason-why questions means
that it is quite easy to end up talking past one another when we start talking about
the explanatory role of an entity like the wavefunction. Someone who thinks that
the wavefunction only needs to answer why-should-we-expect questions about the
behavior of quantum systems may be satisﬁed with a particular account of quantum
ontology while someone who thinks that the wavefunction needs to answer reason-
why questions ﬁnds the very same account lacking. (We will see a concrete example
of this in Sect. 19.2.1.) For this reason alone, it’s worth distinguishing these two
types of why questions and being more clear about which kind of question one
thinks the wavefunction is supposed to answer.
So what exactly does it take to answer reason-why questions? This is a difﬁcult
question, and much of what can be said in response to it will be highly controversial.
But here is a relatively neutral starting point: paradigm examples of good answers
to the question “What is the reason why X” involve identifying either (i) the cause
of X or (ii) the grounds of X. What we want to know, for instance, when we want
to know the reason why the highway is closed is what has caused the closure. And
what we want to know, when we want to know the reason why sodium is soluble, is
what it is about the nature of sodium that results in it being soluble.5
This suggests that good answers to reason why questions in general involve
identifying dependence relations. Paradigm examples of dependence relations are
causation and grounding,but insofar as there are other kinds of dependence relations
besides causation and grounding, those dependence relations, too, would underwrite
syphilis, though a necessary condition for getting paresis, still only gives someone a 25% chance
of developing the latter condition (Scriven 1959).
5 As an anonymous referee pointed out to me, we sometimes answer a why-should-we-expect
question by pointing to the cause or the ground of the explanandum. For instance, if I asked,
“Why should we expect the highway to be closed?” it would be reasonable to answer by saying,
“Because there is a snowstorm and the plows aren’t running.” I take this point to be compatible
with everything I have said here. In some cases (not all, cf. the previous footnote) it is possible
to answer why-should-we-expect questions by identifying a dependence relation. But in general
answering why-should-we-expect questions doesn’t require identifying such a relation. What is
distinctive about reason why questions is that they do require identifying such a relation.

19
The Governing Conception of the Wavefunction
289
good answers to reason why questions. In principle, at least, reason-why questions
could also involve identifying something that stands in a novel dependence relation
R to X.6
19.1.3
Why Reason Why Questions Must Be Answered
Returning to the observation that we started with at the beginning of this section,
we can now see that two different things might be meant by the claim that the
wavefunction plays a key role in explaining the behavior of quantum systems.
WE
The wavefunction plays a key role in answering why-should-we-expect
questions about the behavior of quantum systems.
WR
The wavefunction plays a key role in answering reason-why questions about
the behavior of quantum systems.
As I said above, everyone should agree with WE. WE just follows from the fact
that Born’s Rule is the standard rule for predicting the behavior of quantum systems,
and the fact that the wavefunction plays a central role in Born’s Rule. My view,
however, is that we should not only accept WE. We should accept both WE and WR.
This is what it means to adopt the governing conception of the wavefunction.
Why think that in addition to playing a central role in answering why-should-we-
expect questions about the behavior of quantum system, the wavefunction also plays
a central role in answering reason-why questions about the behavior of quantum
systems? First and foremost notice that if we can’t answer reason-why questions
like DSR, RR, or SR by appealing to the wavefunction, then we can’t answer them at
all. To give up on WR is to either admit that there is no reason why quantum systems
behave the way they do, or to admit that even if there is such a reason, we cannot
identify that reason using our best science.
To give up on WR, therefore, is a signiﬁcant cost. In my experience, most
philosophers and physicists alike recognize this. But many of them still have the
following concern: What if any account of quantum ontology on which WR comes
out true is an account where the wavefunction represents an entity that is strange
or novel or otherwise the kind of the thing that we would prefer not to have in our
metaphysics? In that kind of case, the costs of giving up on WR might be worth
paying.
6 Some philosophers are rightly cautious regarding the notion of grounding. But note that perhaps
the most prominent way of rejecting the notion of grounding, due to Jessica Wilson (2014), is
to argue that although there are many distinct non-causal dependence relations, there isn’t any
single coherent notion of grounding that groups them together. Those who are attracted to Wilson’s
approach should simply include all of the relevant non-causal dependence relations as possible
ways of answering reason-why questions. Those who instead think that there just is no such thing
as non-causal dependence at all, should feel free to ignore future references to grounding as a kind
of dependence relation (though note that this will make it harder to make sense of several of the
candidate views regarding quantum ontology).

290
N. Emery
In response to this kind of concern, I think it is highly instructive to consider some
historical cases in which scientists have found themselves in a similar situation.7
Consider, for instance, Pauli’s introduction of a massless, chargeless, previously
undetected particle—the neutrino—in the 1930s to explain the apparent loss of
energy and momentum in beta decay. The neutrino was a strange and novel kind of
particle. No one wanted to admit the existence of such an entity, and Pauli himself
called the neutrino a “desperate remedy”.8 But as strange as it was, it had to be
admitted. For there had to be some reason why energy and momentum appeared to
be lost during beta decay.
Or consider Faraday’s introduction of the electromagnetic ﬁeld in the 1850s and
the further development of that idea by Maxwell and Thomson. None of these
physicists was quite sure what the electromagnetic ﬁeld was, but they were quite
certain that it existed.9 Why? Because there had to be some reason why various
electromagnetic phenomena happened in the way that they did.
Or, ﬁnally, to take a more contemporary example, consider the introduction of
dark energy in cosmology following the observation of the accelerating rate of
expansion of the universe in the 1990s. Even today, although there is widespread
consensus that dark energy exists, there is little consensus as to what it is. Dark
energy is, ﬁrst and foremost, whatever explains the accelerating rate of expansion
of the universe.10
All of these cases are nuanced, and deserve a more detailed discussion than I
have time for here. But on a relatively straightforward understanding, they all have a
common structure. In each of these cases, physicists observed an unexpected pattern
in the data. And in each case they were, however reluctantly, willing to introduce
a type of entity that was highly strange or novel (or both) in order to explain that
phenomena. Indeed in each case, the kind of entity that was introduced was the kind
of thing that provided a good answer to not just the question of why we should
expect the pattern in question to occur; it also answered reason-why questions about
that pattern. The fact that beta decay results in the production of a neutrino is the
reason why there appears to be energy and momentum lost during beta decay. The
fact that the magnetic ﬁeld has a certain form is the reason why the iron ﬁlings
arrange themselves in a certain pattern. And the fact that there is a certain amount
7 I go through these cases in more detail in Emery Forthcoming.
8 A detailed discussion of this case can be found in Brown 1978.
9 Suggestions ranged from the ﬁeld being instantiated by an ether of contiguous, unobservable
particles, which transmitted the electromagnetic forces, to it being a collection of lines of force
that existed independently, to it being a ﬂuid ﬁlled with vortex tubes. See Faraday 1852, Maxwell
1861, Hesse 1962 (especially chapter 8) and Harman 1982.
10 See Carroll 2007, lectures 14–17. Note that I am using the term ‘dark energy’ in an expansive
sense that encompasses the notion of vacuum energy. This usage is in keeping both with early
discussions of dark energy (e.g. Turner 2001) and recent summary discussions (e.g. Carroll 2007),
but is not universal. If we reserve the term ‘dark energy’ for those hypotheses that would provide a
dynamical explanation, it is no longer true that there is a consensus regarding the existence of dark
energy.

19
The Governing Conception of the Wavefunction
291
of dark energy in the universe is the reason why the rate of expansion of the universe
is accelerating.
What these kinds of cases suggest, then, is that when we have a robust pattern
in the data, we need to identify some reason why that pattern occurs, even if doing
so comes with costs in terms of the kind of entities that we need to introduce into
our metaphysics. What these kinds of cases suggest, in other words, is that even if
it commits us to an account of quantum ontology that involves highly strange or
novel entities, we ought to ﬁnd some way to accept both WR and WE. Indeed if
we take the dark energy example as a guide, then even if all other analyses fail,
we should accept the governing conception of the wavefunction.11 Obviously that
is not an ideal situation—ideally we would be able to say something more about
what the wavefunction is or subsume it under a category of entity with which
we already somewhat familiar. But what the examples above show is that we do
not need any guarantee of the ideal situation being actual before accepting that
the wavefunction answers the relevant reason why questions. The way in which
a theory is explanatorily impoverished if it fails to answer reason-why questions is
the kind of consideration that trumps virtually any metaphysical scruples we might
antecedently have.
19.1.4
The Governing Conception of the Wavefunction
Here’s where we are so far. I have distinguished between why-we-should-expect-
that questions and reason-why questions and argued that the wavefunction must
represent the kind of thing that is the reason why quantum systems behave the way
they do. I will call this view the governing conception of the wavefunction.
The Governing Conception of the Wavefunction. The wave function represents
something that is the reason why quantum systems behave the way they do.12
Given what I said at the end of Sect. 19.1.2 about what it takes to provide good
answers to reason-why questions, the governing conception of the wavefunction can
be further spelled out as follows: the wavefunction either represents something that
causes quantum systems to behave the way they do; or the wavefunction represents
something that grounds the behavior of quantum systems; or the wavefunction
11 Perhaps, for instance, all we can say is that the wavefunction is a sui generis entity that answers
the relevant reason-why questions. See Maudlin 2013.
12 In general—and certainly in the examples in section 1.1—I take it that the wave function will
also answer why-should-we-expect questions about the behavior of quantum systems. Note that we
may want to leave open the possibility that the wavefunction plays a role in answering reason-why
questions about the behavior of quantum systems even when that behavior has a low probability of
occurring. If that is correct then the wavefunction may not always answer why-should-we-expect
question about the behavior of quantum systems.

292
N. Emery
represents something that is in some other way the reason why quantum systems
behave the way they do.
Notice that the governing conception isn’t itself an account of quantum ontology.
It does not tell us what the wavefunction represents. Instead it is a constraint on such
accounts. In part 2 of the paper I will say more about how this constraint impacts a
couple of candidate theories of quantum ontology. Before going on to discuss what
the wavefunction could represent, however, it is worth saying a bit more about two
ways in which one might resist the argument just given for the governing conception
of the wavefunction.
The ﬁrst way of resisting the argument is to insist that the only genuine
explanatory demands are demands for answers to why-we-should-expect questions.
On this view, reason-why questions are either unimportant or non-sensical. The ﬁrst
thing to say in response to this option is just that it is surprising. It seems as though
we can sensibly distinguish between questions about why we should expect some
phenomena and questions about the reason why that phenomena occurred and that
the latter are important. But perhaps more concretely, anyone who takes this route
owes us some kind of story about what was going on in the historical cases described
in Sect. 19.1.3. Why do we ever feel pressured to introduce surprising new entities
to answer reason-why questions about patterns in the data, if reason-why questions
aren’t important?
The second way to resist the argument in Sect. 19.1.3 is to try to identify
some middle ground between reason-why questions and why-should-we-expect
questions, and then to argue that all we need from an account of quantum ontology
is something that plays a role in explanation in this “middle ground” sense. On
this view, it isn’t enough just to identify some epistemic rule that will allow you
to predict the phenomena in question. You need to do something more; but that
something more falls short of identifying the reason why the phenomena occurred.
Of course, before we can really evaluate this way of resisting the argument we need
to know more about this “middle ground” sense of explanation. But it is worth
emphasizing that any account along these lines will also need to reckon with the
historical cases described above.13 In what sense did the sorts of entities introduced
in those cases satisfy the need for the relevant kind of explanation? Until we have an
answer to this question we should focus on accounts of quantum ontology on which
the wavefunction answers reason-why questions about the behavior of quantum
systems in addition to why-should-we-expect questions.
13 A common thought along these lines involves some sort of appeal to uniﬁcation. It isn’t enough
to show that the explanandum is to be expected—you have to show that it is to be expected in a way
that uniﬁes it with other phenomena. But what notion of uniﬁcation is relevant here? Think again
about the historical cases. In what way did introducing the neutrino or the electromagnetic ﬁeld or
dark energy unify the phenomena to be explained with other phenomena? I’m not claiming that
this question can’t be answered. But given how novel the electromagnetic ﬁeld and dark energy
were (in the latter case, still are) a satisfying answer will require quite a bit of philosophical work.

19
The Governing Conception of the Wavefunction
293
19.2
What the Wavefunction Could Represent
Let’s turn now to the question of what the wavefunction could represent. The central
idea is that the argument above—which is an argument about what the wavefunction
must do—constrains the possible answers to the question of what the wavefunction
could represent in interesting ways. Due to space, however, I will have to focus on
two speciﬁc points. The ﬁrst, I think, is relatively obvious, but deserves to be stated
more clearly in the literature. The second, I think is more surprising.
19.2.1
The Governing Conception and Epistemic Accounts
of the Wavefunction
Here is the ﬁrst point. Given the governing conception of the wavefunction, the
wavefunction cannot merely represent the degrees of belief that a particular observer
(or group of observers) should have in various possible outcomes of an experiment.
Why? Because the degrees of belief that an agent should have just are not the kinds
of things that can answer reasons-why questions about the behavior of quantum
system.
Consider, for instance, the following accounts of the wavefunction:
QBism. The wavefunction represents the degrees of belief that an observer should have in
the outcomes of various measurements given that the observer started with coherent initial
degrees of belief and updated consistently using Bayes Theorem.14
Pragmatism. The wavefunction represents the degrees of belief that observers should have
in the outcomes of various measurements given the kinds of creatures that we are and the
way in which we are epistemically situated in the world.15
Neither of these accounts would allow the wavefunction to provide answers to
reason-why questions about quantum phenomena unless one thinks that the reason
why quantum phenomena occur is, in part, some fact about us, the agents inves-
tigating those phenomena. Let us call facts about an individual’s initial credence
distribution, the way in which they update those credences, the kinds of creatures
we are and the way we are epistemically situated in the world epistemic facts. If
we accept both the governing conception of the wavefunction and either QBism or
pragmatism, we will be committed to epistemic facts being part of the reason why
quantum systems behave the way they do. This is not an inconsistent position, but it
is a position that the vast majority of us would, I assume, like to avoid. The reason
why quantum systems behave the way they do has nothing whatsoever to do with the
details of our epistemic situation as individuals, or as human agents, investigating
the world.
14 See Caves et al. 2002 and Fuchs et al. 2014.
15 See Healey 2012 and 2017.

294
N. Emery
Of course, if one is willing to give up the governing conception of the
wavefunction—if one thinks that the wavefunction merely plays a role in answering
why-should-we-expect questions about the wavefunction—either a QBist account
or a pragmatic account would appear to be perfectly well equipped to meet
the explanatory demands that arise from observing the behavior of quantum
systems. The details of our epistemic situation as individuals and as human agents
investigating the world are of course quite relevant to why we should expect
quantum systems to behave in various ways. This is worth emphasizing. If you
don’t care about reason-why questions, there is no explanatory pressure to go
beyond the kind of epistemic view captured by QBism or pragmatic accounts.
So although the point that if one accepts the governing conception of the
wavefunction then one should not endorse QBism or pragmatic accounts is straight-
forward, this is only true because we have been clear as to what kind of explanatory
demand is involved in this way of understanding the wavefunction. Insofar as
one just says, for instance, we should not adopt QBism because QBism doesn’t
respect the explanatory role of the wavefunction, it is quite easy to end up in a
rather confusing dialectic. In my experience, this happens often in conversation,
and it has also played out explicitly in the literature. Consider, for instance, the
worry voiced in Timpson 2008 and the reply found in Fuchs and Schack 2015.
Timpson complains that QBism has “troubles with explanation” because “we are
not interested in agents’ expectation that [a certain quantum system will behave a
certain way]; we are interested in why it in fact does so” (2008, p. 600). Timpson,
in other words, wants any interpretation of the quantum formalism to be able to
answer reason-why questions about the behavior of quantum systems. Fuchs and
Schack respond that the “explanation offered by quantum theory have a similar
character to explanations offered by probability theory” and that “probability theory
explains the agent’s expectations” (2015, 7–8). In other words, their response is that
a QBist interpretation does a perfectly adequate job in answering why-should-we-
expect questions about the behavior of quantum systems. The disagreement here is
not really over what QBism can do, it is over what kind of explanation is required
from a scientiﬁc theory of the sort that QBism purports to be.
19.2.2
The Governing Conception of the Wavefunction
and Conﬁguration Space Realism
Let’s turn now to a second way in which the governing conception of the
wavefunction constrains possible accounts of what the wavefunction represents.
One currently popular account of the wavefunction is what I will call conﬁguration
space realism.16 According to this view, the wavefunction represents a ﬁeld in an
16 This view also goes by the name wavefunction realism.

19
The Governing Conception of the Wavefunction
295
extremely high-dimensional space.17 I will argue that the governing conception of
the wavefunction makes it quite difﬁcult to be a conﬁguration space realist.
One of the motivations for conﬁguration space realism is that it is supposed
to be the most straightforward way of interpreting the quantum formalism. This
motivation has two distinct components. The ﬁrst is the idea that the wavefunc-
tion must represent a physical object. Philosophers of physics have pointed, for
instance, to an analogy with classical mechanics similar to the one made at the
beginning of this paper. Just as Newton’s second law describes how the properties
of certain physical objects—particles—change over time, we should think of
Schrodinger’s equation as describing the properties of a physical object—whatever
the wavefunction represents—changing over time.18 The second component of the
motivation is the idea that if the wavefunction represents a physical object, then
it must represent a ﬁeld. This thought turns on the fact that the wavefunction
is a function—it takes inputs from a speciﬁed domain and outputs a value.
In other mathematical formalisms—for instance in the formalism for classical
electromagnetism—functions are associated with ﬁelds.19
At this point, however, the conﬁguration space realist faces a complication. Think
back to the example involving quantum entanglement at the end of Sect. 19.1.1.
What that example showed is that the wavefunction is not deﬁned over a space
where each point corresponds to the possible properties of individual particles.
Instead it is deﬁned over a space where each point in the space corresponds to a
complete speciﬁcation of all of the degrees of freedom of the system as a whole.
This means that if the wavefunction represents a ﬁeld, it does not represent as ﬁeld
in ordinary 3-D space. Instead it represents a ﬁeld in an extremely high dimensional
space where each dimension corresponds to one degree of freedom for the system.20
The wavefunction of the universe as a whole, therefore, will represent a ﬁeld in a
space that has something like 3 × 1080 dimensions.21 This space is often called
conﬁguration space.
So conﬁguration space realism is the view that the wavefunction represents a
ﬁeld in conﬁguration space. But of course conﬁguration space is not the space of
our ordinary experience. Nor is it the space in which we do physics. The kinds
17 Advocates of conﬁguration space realism include Albert 1996, Loewer 1996, Ney 2012 and
2013 and North 2013. I have argued against this view on quite different grounds in Emery 2017.
The papers in Albert and Ney 2013 provide a helpful introduction to the topic.
18 See Albert 1996, 277; Ney 2012, 532, Lewis 2004, 714.
19 See Albert 1996, 278.
20 See the appendix of Ney 2012 for a detailed discussion of this point.
21 Philosophers of physics get this number by assuming that all degrees of freedom can be captured
by thinking about the location of a particle in 3D space. (For instance, the way that we measure spin
is by sending the particles through a magnetic ﬁeld that separates the particles into two groups. We
then interpret one group as the particles that have spin up in the relevant direction and one group as
the particles that have spin down in that direction.) A rough estimate is that there are 1080 particles
in the universe. So if the above assumption is correct then we can capture all of the degrees of
freedom by using a space of 3 × 1080 dimensions.

296
N. Emery
of experiments described in Sect. 19.1.1—the kinds of experiments that led to the
development of the quantum formalism—are experiments in 3D space involving
3D entities. The conﬁguration space realist therefore faces a challenge: they need
to explain how the wavefunction-ﬁeld in conﬁguration space is related to the 3D
entities like electrons and silver atoms and magnets and detection screens in 3D
space. Following Callender (2015), let’s call this the lost in space problem.22
Conﬁguration space realists are well aware of the lost in space problem. In
response they strive to come up with an account of how the wavefunction might
“enact” 3D entities or how to “ﬁnd” the 3D world in the wavefunction.23 But once
one accepts the governing conception of the wavefunction, it becomes more clear
what a satisfactory response to this problem would need to involve. If we adopt
the governing conception of the wavefunction and conﬁguration space realism, then
we must think that the wavefunction-ﬁeld in conﬁguration space is the reason why
3D entities in 3D space behave the way they do. In other words, an advocate of
the governing conception of laws who wants to be a conﬁguration space realist
will be explicitly committed to there being dependence relations between the high-
dimensional space in which the wavefunction ﬁeld exists, and the 3D space in which
our physics labs and experiments are located. In order to resolve the lost in space
problem, the conﬁguration space realist will therefore need to make sense of these
inter-spatial dependence relations.24 That is to say, the conﬁguration space realist
will need to make sense of a dependence relation in which the relata exist in distinct
physical spaces.
Now, inter-spatial dependence relations aren’t always strange of novel. Consider
a 3D cube and the 2D square that makes up one side of that cube. There are
straightforward inter-spatial dependence relations between these two entities: the
2D square is a part of the 3D cube. But in the case of conﬁguration space realism
the issue is more complicated. As everyone in the debate agrees, no three of the
dimensions within the high-dimensional space correspond to our ordinary 3D space.
There is no sense in which 3D space is a part of the high-dimensional space. Instead
22 As I read it, the lost in space problem is the same problem that Ney (2017 and 2021) calls ‘the
macro-object problem’.
23 The “enacting” terminology is found in Albert 2015. Ney 2017 uses the terminology of “ﬁnding”
the world in the wavefunction.
24 Once the lost in space problem for conﬁguration space realism is laid out so explicitly,
conﬁguration space realists may want to retreat to a somewhat different version of their view.
According to this alternative version, which I call conﬁguration space monism, the wavefunction
ﬁeld in the high-dimensional space is all that there is. The 3D entities of our everyday experience
(and our physics labs) are just an illusion. Conﬁguration space monism neatly eliminates the lost in
space problem as stated above, since there no longer is a 3D space or 3D entities. But it does so by
giving up on the governing conception of the wavefunction. The wavefunction no longer answers
reason-why questions about the behavior of quantum systems. (It might, of course, still answer
reason-why questions about aspects of our experience that seem like they are quantum systems.)

19
The Governing Conception of the Wavefunction
297
each dimension of the high-dimensional space corresponds to one degree of freedom
in the system that exists in the 3D space.25
The conﬁguration space realist who wants to make sense of the governing
conception of the wavefunction, therefore, must either make sense of inter-spatial
causation, inter-spatial grounding, or some kind of novel inter-spatial dependence
relation.26
I suspect that most philosophers will think that positing these kinds of inter-
spatial dependence relations is costly—all else being equal it would be better to
have a single space in which things depend on one another than to have two genuine
physical spaces such that what happens in one of those spaces is the reason why the
entities in the other space behave the way they do. So the question becomes whether
the costs associated with these kinds of inter-spatial dependence relations are worth
paying. A full answer to this question would require an in depth examination of
the alternatives to conﬁguration space realism, and I don’t have space to go in to
that sort of examination here. But let me say something brieﬂy about why I think
conﬁguration space realism faces a challenge.
As I noted above, one motivation for conﬁguration space realism is that it is a
straightforward interpretation of the quantum formalism. But now that the lost in
space problem is clearly on the table, we should ask straightforward in what sense?
Yes, the conﬁguration space realist has faithfully followed the standard ways of
interpreting the formalism of classical theories, but by doing so they have introduced
a kind of dependence relation that is wholly foreign to classical physics. Why think
that it is really so important to be straightforward in the very speciﬁc way that
the conﬁguration space realist is straightforward, when their theory is not at all
straightforward in other ways?
A second, often mentioned motivation for conﬁguration space realism is that
it preserves locality at the fundamental level.27 I don’t have space to go into a full
explanation of locality (and the related concept of separability) here. Sufﬁce it to say
that any interpretation of the quantum formalism that involves only 3D space and
3D entities will involve a non-local dynamics in the following sense: it will admit
that what happens at one point in 3D space depends on what happens at other points
in 3D space without there being any kind of signal or causal inﬂuence that travels
through space to connect those two points. Conﬁguration space realism avoids this
kind of non-locality in the space in which the wavefunction is deﬁned. Consider
25 Ney 2012 section 3 includes a helpful discussion of this point and why this also makes the
high-dimensionality of conﬁguration space different than the high-dimensionality of other physical
theories, like string theory.
26 As I understand it, the account found in Ney 2021 (section 7.4), according to which three-
dimensional entities are part of the wavefunction involves a inter-spatial dependence relation—
speciﬁcally inter-spatial constitution. According to Ney, three-dimensional objects are part of the
high-dimensional wavefunction. Ney acknowledges that this stretches the ordinary notion of ‘part’
according to which a part and a whole occupy the same physical space, but points out that we also
think that abstract objects have parts, even though they don’t exist in physical space at all.
27 See the discussion in Ney 2021, section 3.

298
N. Emery
a case in which there are two particles that are separated in 3D space but that are
nonetheless entangled with respect to their spin states. In conﬁguration space, this
system doesn’t involve multiple particles at all. There is only the wavefunction-
ﬁeld, which has different amplitudes at different points, each of which represent a
complete speciﬁcation of the properties of the system as a whole in 3D space.28
Philosophers of physics have rarely been explicit about why exactly they think
that preserving locality at the fundamental level is important.29 Of course, having a
non-local dynamics makes doing science signiﬁcantly harder—we can’t rule out
possible sources of inﬂuence on some phenomenon just by examining what is
nearby and testing for causal signals entering the relevant region.30 But surely the
conﬁguration space realist can’t care about this reason for prioritizing locality. After
all, the space in which we do science is 3D space, and the conﬁguration space realist
is still committed to the dynamics being non-local in that space. They have only
eliminated non-locality in the high-dimensional, fundamental space, and we don’t
do science in the high-dimensional, fundamental space.
Another reason why one might want to avoid non-locality is that a non-local
dynamics is novel or strange. In short, if one is at all conservative in one’s
metaphysics then one should want to avoid non-locality.31 But notice that once we
have accepted the governing conception of laws, the conﬁguration space realist is
also committed to something quite novel and strange. The conﬁguration space realist
is positing multiple physical spaces, connected by genuine dependence relations–
that is far from a conservative account of what the world is like!
All in all, the conﬁguration space realist who also accepts the governing
conception of the wavefunction seems to be on fairly shaky footing. On the one
hand, the main motivations for their theory seems to be premised on the idea that it
is relatively straightforward and conservative. On the other hand, in order to make
sense of the fact that the wavefunction-ﬁeld answers reason-why questions about
the behavior of quantum systems, they need to explicitly accept a metaphysics that
is deeply surprising. This doesn’t mean conﬁguration space realism is a non-starter.
But in order to defend their view against rival accounts of quantum ontology, the
conﬁguration space realist (insofar as they endorse the governing conception of the
wavefunction, at least) is going to need to get deep in the weeds with respect to
precisely what kind of straightforwardness and precisely what kind of conservatism
is important when interpreting physical theories, and why. These kinds of arguments
are rarely decisive.
28 In the Bohmian version of conﬁguration space realism, the high-dimensional space will include
the wavefunction ﬁeld and a single “uber particle”. I will set this complication aside.
29 Ney 2021, section 3, contains the ﬁrst real in-depth treatment of this question.
30 This idea can be traced back to Einstein 1948.
31 As I read her, this is the position that Ney 2021 ultimately ends up endorsing.

19
The Governing Conception of the Wavefunction
299
19.3
Conclusion
When making claims about the explanatory role of the wavefunction it is important
to distinguish between the claim that the wavefunction plays a role in answering
why-should-we-expect questions about the behavior of quantum systems, and the
claim that the wavefunction plays a role in answering reason-why questions about
that behavior as well.
If we only accept the former, then the explanatory role of the wavefunction
places few, if any signiﬁcant constraints on what the wavefunction can be. One
of the key claims of this paper, however, has been to argue that we should not
only accept the former claim–we should accept the latter claim as well. The view
that the wavefunction also plays a role in answering reason-why questions about
the behavior of quantum systems is what I call ‘the governing conception of the
wavefunction’.
Insofar as we accept the governing conception of laws, it will constrain the possi-
ble accounts of quantum ontology that we might give. First, and most obviously, we
should reject QBism and pragmatic accounts of the wavefunction. Second, it will be
quite challenging to be a conﬁguration space realist. And of course these are only
the ﬁrst steps in a much more detailed analysis that would involve the discussion
of alternative accounts of quantum ontology besides the ones mentioned here and
the ways in which the governing conception of the wavefunction impacts those
accounts.32 That is work yet to be done. But in closing let me also note that insofar as
we accept the governing account of the wavefunction, our understanding of what the
wavefunction could be will only be as good as our understanding of various possible
dependence relations. It may be, then, that those who are attracted to this view
should not focus exclusively on the existing literature on quantum ontology, but also
make sure they are immersed in discussions of causation, grounding, governance,
and other kinds of dependence relations that tend to take place in metaphysics texts.
A better understanding of these relations has the potential to reveal both novel
complications for existing accounts of quantum ontology, and to inspire alternative
accounts that have been overlooked or misunderstood in the current literature.33
32 One might wonder whether the governing conception of the wavefunction is compatible with
the view that the wavefunction represents a law or the view that the wavefunction represents the
dispositional properties of the particles in the quantum system. The answer is that it will depend
on whether one can make sense of the idea that laws or dispositional properties either cause the
behavior of quantum systems, ground the behavior of quantum systems, or stand in some other
dependence relation to that behavior. One way to put this is to say that combining the governing
conception of the wavefunction with a nomological or dispositional account of the wavefunction
will require making sense of the idea that laws or dispositional properties are able to govern.
33 Many thanks to the audience at the Foundations of Physics Workshop at Harvard University,
especially Jacob Barandes and Barry Loewer, and to an audience at the University of Toronto.
Thanks also to two anonymous referees for this volume.

300
N. Emery
References
Albert, D. Z. (1996). Elementary quantum metaphysics. In Cushing et al. (Eds.), Bohmian
mechanics and quantum theory: An appraisal (pp. 277–284). Springer.
Albert, D. Z. (2015). After physics. Harvard University Press.
Allori, V. (2013). Primitive ontology and the structure of fundamental physical theories. In A. Ney
& D. Z. Albert (Eds.), The wave function: Essays in the metaphysics of quantum mechanics.
Oxford University Press.
Allori, V., Goldstein, S., Tumulka, R., & Zanghì, N. (2008). On the common structure of Bohmian
mechanics and the Ghirardi–Rimini–Weber theory. British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science, 59(3), 353–389.
Beebee, H. (2000). The non-governing conception of Laws of nature. Philosophy and Phenomeno-
logical Research, 61, 571–594.
Brown, L. M. (1978). The idea of the neutrino. Physics Today, 31(9), 23.
Callender, C. (2015). One world, one beable. Synthese, 192(10), 3153–3177.
Carroll, S. (2007). Dark matter, dark energy: The dark side of the universe. The Teaching Company.
Caves, C., Fuchs, C., & Schack, R. (2002). Quantum probabilities as Bayesian probabilities.
Physical Review A, 65(022305), 1–6.
Emery, N. (2017). Against radical quantum ontologies. Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research, 95(3), 564–591.
Emery, N. Forthcoming. The governing conception of laws. Ergo.
Faraday, M. (1852). On the physical character of the lines of magnetic force. The London,
Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science, 3(20), 401–428.
Fuchs, C., & Schack, R. (2015). QBism and the Greeks: Why a quantum state does not represent
an element of physical reality. Physica Scripta, 90(1), 015104.
Fuchs, C., Mermin, D., & Schack, R. (2014). An introduction to QBism with an application to the
locality of quantum mechanics. American Journal of Physics, 82(8), 749–754.
Harman, P. M. (1982). Energy, force, and matter. Cambridge University Press.
Healey, R. (2012). Quantum theory: A pragmatist approach. British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science, 63, 729–771.
Healey, R. (2017). Quantum-Bayesian and pragmatist views of quantum theory. The Stan-
ford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2017/entries/quantum-
bayesian/
Hesse, M. (1962). Forces and ﬁelds: On the concept of action at a distance in the history of physics.
Dover Publications.
Lewis, P. (2004). Life in conﬁguration space. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 55,
713–729.
Loewer, B. (1996). Humean supervenience. Philosophical Topics, 24, 101–127.
Maudlin, T. (2007). The metaphysics within physics. Oxford University Press.
Maudlin, T. (2013). The nature of the quantum state. In A. Ney & D. Z. Albert (Eds.), The wave
function: Essays on the metaphysics of quantum mechanics (pp. 126–153). Oxford University
Press.
Maxwell, J. C. (1861). On physical lines of force. Part I. The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin
Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science, 4, 161–175.
Ney, A. (2012). The status of our ordinary three dimensions in a quantum universe. Noûs, 46(3),
525–560.
Ney, A. (2013). Ontological reduction and the wave function ontology. In A. Ney & D. Z. Albert
(Eds.), The wave function: Essays on the metaphysics of quantum mechanics (pp. 126–153).
Oxford University Press.
Ney, A. (2017). Finding the world in the wave function: Some strategies for solving the macro-
object problem. Synthese, 197, 4227–4249.
Ney, A. (2021). The world in the wave function: A metaphysics for quantum physics. Oxford
University Press.

19
The Governing Conception of the Wavefunction
301
Ney, A., & Albert, D. Z. (Eds.). (2013). The wave function: Essays in the metaphysics of quantum
mechanics. Oxford University Press.
Scriven, M. (1959). Explanation and prediction in evolutionary theory. Science, 30, 477–482.
Skow, B. (2016). Reasons why. Oxford University Press.
Timpson, C. (2008). Quantum Bayesianism: A study. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science
Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 39(3), 579–609.
Turner, M. (2001). Dark matter and dark energy in the universe. Particle Physics and the Universe,
2001, 210–220.
Wilson, J. (2014). No work for a theory of grounding. Inquiry, 57, 1–45.

Chapter 20
Representation and the Quantum State
Richard Healey
Abstract Alternative views of quantum states are often expressed using the lan-
guage of representation. It is important to distinguish three questions here: What is
a quantum state? How may a quantum state be represented? What, if anything, does
a quantum state represent? I defend answers to these questions against alternatives.
In brief, a quantum state is an objective relational property of a physical system
that describes neither its intrinsic physical properties nor anyone’s epistemic state.
A quantum state is representational (in my preferred sense of that term) and many
quantum states are real. Since its primary role is to assign Born probabilities to
certain physical events involving the system, a quantum state may be represented in
quantum theory by any mathematical object that facilitates this role. If it represents
anything, a quantum state represents the objective probabilities it yields in this way.
20.1
Introduction
Alternative views of quantum states are often expressed using the language of
representation. For example, after titling his 2014 review article “Is the quantum
state real?”, Leifer went on to say “The question of just what type of thing the
quantum state, or wavefunction, represents, has been with us since the beginnings
of quantum theory.” It is important to distinguish three questions here: What is
a quantum state? How may a quantum state be represented? What, if anything,
does a quantum state represent? I shall defend answers to these questions against
alternatives. In brief, a quantum state is an objective relational property of a physical
system that describes neither its intrinsic physical properties nor anyone’s epistemic
state. Since its primary role is to assign Born probabilities to certain physical events
involving the system, a quantum state may be represented in quantum theory by any
mathematical object that can play this role. If it represents anything, a quantum state
represents the objective probabilities it yields in this way.
R. Healey ()
University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
V. Allori (ed.), Quantum Mechanics and Fundamentality , Synthese Library 460,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-99642-0_20
303

304
R. Healey
The paper continues like this. Section 20.2 surveys a variety of equivalent ways
a quantum state may be represented in order to serve its function in quantum theory.
Section 20.3 argues that a quantum state is not a physical entity, while Sect. 20.4
argues that it is not a physical magnitude. In Sect. 20.5 I argue that a system’s
quantum state does not represent its intrinsic physical properties or those of three-
dimensional space. While few, if any, of these arguments are original or decisive,
I take them to motivate consideration of an alternative that can help improve our
understanding of quantum theory. So in Sect. 20.6 I develop a relational account
of a quantum state as what I call an extrinsically physical property of a system,
contrasting this with Rovelli’s relational quantum mechanics and QBism. In Sect.
20.7 I ponder whether this makes a quantum state representational: in my sense it is
representational and many quantum states are real. Section 20.8 says what quantum
states may represent and why this makes them modal properties. In Sect. 20.9 I show
why quantum states give a naturalist a reason to reject Representationalism.
20.2
How Quantum States May Be Represented
Schrödinger (1936) used the word ‘representative’ to refer to a wave function,
but a quantum state may be represented by many different mathematical objects.
A quantum state may be represented by a wave function in the Heisenberg,
Schrödinger or interaction picture. This wave function may be in position, momen-
tum or energy representation. In a Hilbert space of square-integrable functions
it may be represented by an equivalence class of functions that differ only on a
set of measure zero. It may be represented by a vector or a ray of vectors in
an abstract Hilbert space: a more general class of quantum states then includes
mixed states representable not by vectors but by density operators on the space.
In algebraic quantum theory a quantum state is represented by a normed, positive,
linear functional from a C* algebra into the complex numbers. There are states
on sub-algebras of the von Neumann algebra of bounded linear operators on a
Hilbert space that cannot even be represented by density operators. What all these
different representations of a quantum state have in common is their role in yielding
probabilities when (the appropriate form of) the Born rule is applied to them.
The negative conclusion of this section is that it is both a category mistake and
an unwarranted restriction on the scope of inquiry to identify the question “What
does the quantum state represent?” with the question “What does the wave function
represent?” But implicit in the very diversity of mathematical representations of
quantum states is a positive suggestion about what a quantum state is and what, if
anything, it represents.
Generating probabilities is a key role of a quantum state, no matter how that state
is represented. This suggests a preliminary answer to the nature of quantum states:
a quantum state is whatever it takes to generate the Born probabilities it represents.
I think this is basically the right answer, though more needs to be said to clarify and
justify it.

20
Representation and the Quantum State
305
20.3
Quantum States Are Not Physical Entities
One objection arises immediately. If all a quantum state does is to yield a bunch of
probabilities then that state is not real: but we should accept the reality of a central
posit of a spectacularly successful theory like quantum theory.
What lies behind this objection is a conception of what it is for a central posit of
a physical theory to be real. Oxygen is posited as a physical entity by a successful
theory of combustion, and to say that it is real is to say that the physical world
contains such an entity. On this conception, quantum states would be real if and
only if the physical world contains such entities as quantum states. But (the objector
continues) probabilities are not physical entities,1 and if all a quantum state does is
to generate probabilities then it is not real either.
I’ll defend the reality of quantum states in Sect. 20.7 and the objective probabil-
ities they yield in Sect. 20.8. But ﬁrst, in deciding whether they are real, quantum
states should not be thought of as (potential) physical entities.
A typical physical entity such as a speck of dust or a sample of oxygen
bears physical properties and relations and has physical parts, all of which may
change with time. It interacts causally with other physical entities. Typical physical
events are also entities with physical properties, relations and parts: They have
spatiotemporal locations and they interact causally with other physical entities.
Atypical physical entities may lack some of these characteristics. Democritus’s
atoms had no parts and their intrinsic properties did not change, though their
changing spatial relations were supposed to underlie all other physical change;
classical physics contemplated point events with no spatiotemporal extent and ﬁelds
located everywhere in spacetime.
By contrast, a quantum state has no physical properties, relations or parts: it
has no spatiotemporal location and does not interact causally. These claims may
be disputed. The ground state of a hydrogen atom is often depicted as an electron
cloud of varying density surrounding a central proton. But this does not locate the
state itself, but merely represents the position-probability distribution (or probability
amplitude—a real number in this case) for the electron in accordance with the Born
rule.
Some views privilege a particular representation of a quantum state. Ney (2020)
advocates wave function realism, according to which the wave function of the
universe represents a ﬁeld in a high-dimensional conﬁguration space. For a wave
function realist, this ﬁeld is a physical entity occupying the whole of this high-
dimensional analogue of the ordinary three-dimensional space alleged to emerge
from it dynamically. The universal wave function is supposed to act on matter
(represented by a point in conﬁguration space), conﬁrming its physicality. But wave
function realism does not square well with how physicists typically use quantum
1 When the subjectivist statistician Bruno De Finetti (1968) famously wrote PROBABILITY
DOES NOT EXIST he meant to deny that the physical world contains any such thing, just as
it contains no phlogiston, fairies or witches.

306
R. Healey
states in all forms of quantum theory, not to represent the entire universe all
at once but to predict and explain the behavior of selected physical subsystems
(such as the proton, helium atom, or ammonia molecule; superﬂuid helium-3, a
Heisenberg ferromagnet, or an entangled photon pair) by assigning them quantum
states and using these to generate probabilities concerning them and their four-
dimensional spacetime environment. There is nothing in these applications to
warrant privileging a conﬁguration-space wave function as representative of the
quantum states assigned, or to show these states are physical entities.
20.4
Quantum States Are Not Physical Magnitudes
Bell (2004) introduced the term ‘beable’ to refer to whatever a theory takes to be
physically real—as what may be “described in ‘classical terms’, because they are
there.” As examples he mentioned the settings of switches and knobs and currents
needed to prepare an unstable nucleus. These are not physical entities; each is a
physical magnitude. The famous EPR paper (1935) used the phrase ‘element of
physical reality’ to refer to such quantities in arguing that there are some that
quantum mechanics fails to describe. Perhaps quantum states are themselves such
elements of reality—real physical magnitudes, not real physical entities?
Wallace and Timpson’s (2010) spacetime state realism suggests that a density
operator is a magnitude representing a spacetime region’s physical properties the
way a real number T represents a room’s temperature properties. Anticipating an
incredulous stare, Wallace and Timpson say (op. cit., p. 710):
There need be no reason to blanche at an ontology merely because the basic properties are
represented by such objects: we know of no rule of segregation which states that only those
mathematical items to which one is introduced sufﬁciently early on in the schoolroom get
to count as possible representatives of physical quantities, for example!
If general relativity represents a quantity in a region of spacetime by an order-two
tensor ﬁeld, why should quantum theory not represent the physical properties of a
region of spacetime by a density operator on a Hilbert space?
There is a good answer. Each component of the stress-energy tensor ﬁeld at a
spacetime point gives the ﬂux at that point of a 4-momentum component across a
3-hypersurface. Each of the 16 components of this tensor in a coordinate system
has a real-numbered value on a common cardinal scale to satisfy the tensor’s
transformation properties. The components of any tensorial magnitude (scalar,
vector, or higher order) have values on some cardinal scale. But a density operator
on a Hilbert space is none of these, and its matrix elements in a basis for that space
are not the values of any magnitude on any cardinal scale. A quantum state is not a
physically real magnitude.

20
Representation and the Quantum State
307
20.5
A Quantum State Does Not Represent Any (Intrinsic)
Physical Properties
The instantaneous physical state of a system of n classical particles may be
represented by a point in a 6n-dimensional phase space that determines the value
of every other dynamical variable of the system. Associated with each measurable
region of phase space is a physical property that the system possesses just in case
the phase space point representing its state lies in that region. Some have thought a
system’s quantum state plays an analogous role in quantum theory with phase space
replaced by Hilbert space, each subspace N of which is associated with a physical
property the system deﬁnitely has if the density operator W representing its state
projects onto N but otherwise has only with probability given by TrWPN, where PN
is the projection operator uniquely corresponding to N.
But the analogy between phase space and Hilbert space as bearers of a probability
measure breaks down as a consequence of results due to Gleason (1957) and others.
Gleason proved that the only measures on (closed) subspaces of a Hilbert space of
dimension greater than 2 are those generated by some density operator. No such
measure is dispersion-free, in that it assigns either 0 or 1 to each subspace in a way
that can be interpreted as saying which properties corresponding to subspaces are
possessed and which are not. These negative results show that a quantum state does
not represent a system’s physical properties the way a phase space point represents
the dynamical properties of a classical system. Attempts to evade this conclusion by
adopting a kind of quantum logic governing reasoning about statements assigning
physical properties to a quantum system have the character of a degenerating
interpretative research program.
But the framework of ontological models (see Harrigan & Spekkens, 2010;
Leifer, 2014) explores the possibility that a quantum state yields a probability
distribution over some space of random variables, perhaps of a wholly novel kind,
the points of which may be parametrized by a variable λ whose value more
completely describes the system assigned that quantum state. In that framework,
Pusey, Barrett and Rudolph (PBR) (2012) proved a result they took to show both
that suitably prepared quantum states are physically real and that they are properties
of the systems so prepared.
The basic assumption of the ontological models framework is that after the
quantum state of a system has been prepared, the value of the variable λε  provides
a complete speciﬁcation of the physical properties of that system. But a preparation
procedure for a state represented by vector ψ may yield one of many distinct real
states λ, with a probability distribution μψ(λ) on . So distinct quantum states ψ1,
ψ2 result in different distributions μ1(λ), μ2(λ). These might or might not overlap: if
they did, then distinct quantum states would be compatible with the same underlying
real state λ. The parameter λ is also supposed to specify a ﬁne-grained probability
measure over all possible outcomes of measurements of magnitudes (“observables”)
to which a quantum state assigns a probability via the Born rule. Indeed, that Born

308
R. Healey
probability is assumed to arise by integrating this ﬁne-grained measure weighted by
the distribution μψ(λ) over the space .
For PBR, the variable λ represents the real state of a system assigned a quantum
state represented by ψ following some preparation procedure. They consider a state
represented by λ to be physically real because:
1. it determines all actual physical properties of the system, and
2. for each observable, it determines a probability distribution over the possible
outcomes of a measurement of that observable.
Assuming that systems that are prepared independently have independent physical
states, PBR proved that the quantum state assigned to each system is uniquely
determined by the value of λ that provides a complete speciﬁcation of the actual
physical properties of that system. Because it is determined by the physically real
state λ, they conclude that this quantum state is also a physically real property of
the system.
But the proof establishes its conclusion only if a system has a state meeting both
conditions (1) and (2). The ontological models framework simply assumes that it
does. But a quantum state meeting condition (2) may be real even though it does not
meet condition (1): and (pace PBS) a system may have a real physical state meeting
condition (1) but not condition (2). The PBR theorem does not show that a quantum
state is a physical property of the system to which it is assigned.
Some views of quantum theory assign a descriptive function to a privileged
universal quantum state. For non-relativistic quantum mechanics this would be the
state of all n particles in the universe (for some ﬁnite n). Monton (2006) takes this
universal quantum state to be pure, and to determine a holistic physical property
of the universe through the eigenstate →eigenvalue link: the universe’s particles
have property P at time t if its state vector |ψ(t) > is an eigenstate of a projection
operator uniquely corresponding to P with eigenvalue 1. If this description were
complete, then no particle would ever have a precise position, since a well-deﬁned
conﬁguration-space wave-function has no corresponding projection operator. But
some take Bohmian mechanics to offer a clear version of non-relativistic quantum
mechanics that also includes a precise trajectory for every particle in the universe
determined by a universal wave-function ψ(x1, x2, ..., xn, t) in accordance with a
law sometimes called the Bohmian guidance equation.
This universal wave-function can then be understood either to represent a holistic
physical property of the n particles at t, or to represent an n-place physical relation
among the points of space they then occupy. The latter option has been called the
multi-ﬁeld conception of the wave function (by Belot, 2012), as opposed to viewing
it as a ﬁeld on conﬁguration space. The former option has been proposed as a way of
ﬂeshing out a so-called nomological conception of the wave function—as something
required to state the law determining particle trajectories. The idea here is to regard

20
Representation and the Quantum State
309
this holistic property of the particles as a disposition grounding that law (see Esfeld
et al., 2014).2
The main problem I see with either of these options is that it applies only in
the artiﬁcially restricted context of a particular take on non-relativistic quantum
mechanics that assumes the existence of a universal wave function. But quantum
theory is applied much more widely outside of that context, where the quantum state
of a system is not represented by a wave function and it is not assumed that there
is any universal wave function. Quantum states play their role in all applications
without that assumption.
20.6
A Quantum State Is an Extrinsically Physical Property
of a System
A property may be either intrinsic or extrinsic to its bearer. Mass is an intrinsic
property of an electron (at least according to classical physics)—a property it has in
and of itself, without regard to the existence or properties of anything else: Being
lighter than a proton is an extrinsic property because it involves the electron’s
relation to the proton. Here this is a physical relation to something physical: I’ll
call such an extrinsic property extrinsically physical. Being married is an extrinsic
property but it is not extrinsically physical since it also involves a person’s social or
legal relations to another. These change with the death of a distant spouse but this
is no instantaneous action at a distance since it involves no immediate change in the
person’s intrinsic properties.
Having a particular position or velocity is not an intrinsic property of a classical
particle insofar as it implicitly depends on its relation to a reference frame. To
highlight the contrast with a system’s quantum state I shall ignore this complication
and treat these and all other classical dynamical properties determined by a system’s
phase space point as intrinsic properties. But a quantum state is an extrinsically
physical, not an intrinsic, property of a physical system.
QBists and others regard a quantum state as a state of knowledge or opinion of an
agent and take this to imply that it is not a property of the system to which the agent
assigns it. The system does have the extrinsic property of being assigned that state
by that agent. But this is not an extrinsically physical property because it depends
on an intentional relation to an agent, not a physical relation to a physical object or
situation.
A quantum state is ontic in Leifer’s (2014) sense, and not a state of knowledge
or opinion of some agent (though an agent may come to know this state).
2 Suarez (2015) has proposed an “intermediate” view with a dispositional velocity ﬁeld deﬁned at
each point of space that also faces the following problem.

310
R. Healey
...an ontic state refers to something that objectively exists in the world, independently of
any observer or agent. In other words, ontic states are the things that would still exist if all
intelligent beings were suddenly wiped out from the universe. op. cit. p. 69
Because a quantum state is an extrinsically physical property, a system in given
circumstances may have more than one quantum state, each relative to a different
physical relatum. But a system has a quantum state only relative to something
physical.
Everything in the previous paragraph accords with Rovelli’s (1996) relational
quantum mechanics. For Rovelli, the physical item relative to which a system has a
quantum state is a distinct physical system. He maintains that just as “the observer”
to which velocities must be relativized in Galilean relativity may be any physical
object (such as a table lamp), so also “the observer” to which the state of a physical
system must be relativized in quantum mechanics may be any physical system (such
as an electron). In his view
Quantum mechanics is a theory about the physical description of physical systems relative
to other systems, and this is a complete description of the world. (1996, p. 1650)
But it is difﬁcult if not impossible to reconcile this view with the objectivity of
physical description in quantum theory.
By examining how quantum states are used in applications of quantum theory
one can arrive at a better relational view. Quantum theory is applied not in order
to describe a physical system but in order to assign probabilities to a range
of statements about it. Such a probability assignment is useful for an agent in
a particular physical situation whose physical conditions make it impossible to
determine which statement in that range is true. What makes a quantum state an
extrinsically physical property of a system is not its relation to another physical
system but to such a physical situation. A system has a quantum state relative to
a physical situation because of features of the physical environment that constrain
the information accessible to any agent that may (or may not) happen to be in that
situation. That is why a system’s quantum state is ontic and not epistemic: to say
the system has that state is not to say what any observer knows, believes or suspects
of it.
A localized agent has direct epistemic access only to the contents of their
momentary past light-cone: but this may permit indirect epistemic access to events
outside it. Quantum theory mediates this access because a quantum state relative
to the agent’s momentary spacetime location yields probabilities concerning such
possible events. Bohm’s version of the EPR Gedankenexperiment provides a
memorable illustration of such relativity.
A pair of spin ½ particles has a physically extrinsic property represented by the
spin-singlet state vector. The z-spin component of particle R is measured with spin-
up outcome. Relative to points to the (absolute) future of that R-measurement event,
the quantum spin state of the L particle is represented by the vector |↓> z, a spin-
down z-spin eigenstate: but relative to other points, L’s spin state is represented by
a reduced density operator—the two dimensional identity operator I.

20
Representation and the Quantum State
311
|↓> z and I each represent the state of particle L (relative to different spacetime
locations), and the change from I to |↓> z is not a physical event, caused by the
measurement on particle R. It is a change in relativization from one spacetime
region to another to accommodate the change in physical situation of any agent
Alice whose world-line entered the future of the z-spin measurement on particle
R. As her physical situation changed, so would the quantum state that such a
(merely hypothetical) Alice should assign to particle L to yield the relevant Born
probabilities for her new situation. The spin-up outcome on R is the physical reason
why any such Alice should update her quantum state for L after gaining access to
new information about what happened to R.
The spacetime location of an actual or merely hypothetical agent may present
a less fundamental physical barrier to informational access. In the Gedankenexper-
iment of Wigner’s friend, Wigner has no informational access to the contents of
his isolated friend’s laboratory and so cannot observe the outcome of her quantum
measurement even when this does lie in his past light-cone. The Schrödinger picture
state vector of his friend’s laboratory evolves unitarily relative to Wigner’s physical
situation so after her measurement the system she measured has a mixed quantum
state relative to this external physical situation. But this is consistent with that
system’s having a pure quantum state relative to the physical situation of his friend
after she has measured it.
20.7
Is a Quantum State Representational?
The term ‘representational’ has been used in recent discussions to classify opposed
views of the nature of quantum states.3 The pragmatist view of quantum states I have
taken elsewhere (2012a, 2017a, b) and assumed here has sometimes been classiﬁed
as non-representational. But usage has not been consistent. To clear the air I shall
distinguish several possible senses of the term while explaining an important sense
in which a quantum state is representational in this view.
A quantum state could count as representational simply by being represented by
a wave function or other mathematical object. Since representation is an intentional
concept, a quantum state would then count as representational whether or not it
exists. A quantum state is representational in this minimal sense whether or not
it is real, and so are the philosophers’ stone, caloric and the properties of being
dephlogisticated or at absolute rest.
One could choose to say that a quantum state is non-representationalif a quantum
state is neither a physical entity nor magnitude and does not represent a system’s
intrinsic physical properties. Since Sects. 20.3, 20.4 and 20.5 ruled out these views
of a quantum state one would then call a quantum state non-representational.
3 See, for example, Krissmer (2018), Bub (2019), Wallace (2020) and several papers in French and
Saatsi (2020), Glick et al. (2020), Hemmo and Shenker (2020).

312
R. Healey
An alternative use of ‘representational’ ties it to truth-aptness. Emotivists claimed
that an ethical statement such as “Stealing money is wrong” expresses an emotion
rather than stating a fact and so cannot be evaluated for truth. They maintained
that despite its subject-predicate form, this statement is not truth-apt and the term
‘wrong’ is non-representational. Similarly, someone could deny that a statement
ascribing quantum state ψ to a system is truth-apt and so the predicate ‘being in
quantum state ψ’ counts as non-representational, on the grounds that this statement
does not state a fact but expresses an epistemic attitude.
But while the primary function of a statement ascribing a quantum state to a
system is not to describe or represent that system’s intrinsic physical properties,
that statement does have a truth-value (relative to an appropriate physical situation),
since a quantum state is an extrinsically physical property of a system. In this sense,
a quantum state is representational. Indeed, a statement ascribing a quantum state to
a system is useful only to the extent that statement is true (true enough, that is: see
Elgin, 2017) and so the state is real. It is because there are many such statements
ascribing a quantum state to a system that I consider those quantum states to be real.
Wallace (French & Saatsi, p. 87) has offered yet another understanding of what
it is for a quantum state to be representational. He considers
the classic Schrödinger-cat state α |live cat> + β |dead cat> which unitary quantum theory
can straightforwardly produce. If the quantum state can be understood representationally—
that is, if distinct quantum states correspond to distinct objective ways a physical system
can be—and if the theory is unsupplemented by hidden variables, then it looks as if such a
state must somehow represent a cat that is simultaneously alive and dead.
Since a quantum state is an extrinsically physical property of a system, that
system may have distinct quantum states, each relative to a different physical
situation. There is nothing subjective about its having these ontic states, and in that
sense each represents a distinctive objective way for that system to be. But a cat’s
death certainly involves a change in its intrinsic physical properties. The passage
suggests that two ways a physical system can be count as objectively distinct only
if these involve incompatible intrinsic physical properties of that system.
Entanglement-swappingfeatures quantum states that count as non-representational
on this narrower understanding of objective distinctness (see Healey, 2017b). In
entanglement swapping a particular pure entangled state is assigned to a system
after a measurement is performed on a second, distant system: which state is
assigned depends on the outcome of that measurement. Assuming it is a local
event, in the absence of retro- or spacelike causation the distant measurement does
not alter any intrinsic property of the ﬁrst system. So it has the same intrinsic
physical properties no matter which of two or more distinct pure quantum states
it is assigned. In that sense, these distinct quantum states do not correspond to
distinct objective ways that physical system can be. That is why these states count
as non-representational in this narrow sense of objective distinctness.
But there are other cases in which a quantum state is assigned to a system
following a procedure that is said to prepare or put the system into that state,
suggesting that being in this quantum state involves having associated intrinsic

20
Representation and the Quantum State
313
physical properties. A Stern-Gerlach (SG) experiment is a paradigm of such a
procedure. Spin ½ atoms in a beam may be detected by one of two detectors
placed on the z-axis symmetrically above and below the incoming beam after
passage through the magnet’s inhomogeneous magnetic ﬁeld. If the upper detector
is replaced by some experimental equipment, any atom that is subsequently detected
in this experiment is said to have been prepared in a quantum spin eigenstate |↑> z
through its local interaction with the magnetic ﬁeld.
Naively, the incoming beam has been split by the magnet into an upper “wave-
packet” of positive z-spin atoms and a lower “wave-packet” of negative z-spin atoms.
But as Wigner (1963) pointed out, unitary evolution of the quantum state vector
during passage through the magnet results in an entangled superposition of the
translational and spin quantum states of the atoms. Wessels (1997) called passage
through a z-oriented SG magnet a mere pseudo-preparation of z-spin eigenstates
in upper and lower beams on the grounds that the (reduced) quantum spin state of
emerging atoms was therefore a mixture rather than a pure state. She noted that
something similar is true of most if not all actual laboratory preparation procedures.
But these are real state preparations, involving a local interaction warranting
assignment of a superposed state followed by a conceptual selection of one
component with a view to a possible later local measurement-type interaction
involving the target system. The selected state does not represent an intrinsic
property of this system (like positive z-spin). A different selection would not have
represented a different intrinsic property: it would merely have selected the state
relative to a different possible subsequent local measurement-type interaction. State
preparation does not prepare a system’s intrinsic physical properties.4
20.8
What Quantum States May Represent, and Why This
Makes Them Modal
A quantum state is an extrinsically physical property of a physical system. It is
representational in the sense that a statement ascribing this property to a system is
truth-apt and may be true; when it is true, that state is objectively real, like a speck
of dust. But a speck of dust does not represent anything: does a quantum state? In
my (2017b) I said that if a quantum state represents anything, it is the objective
probabilistic relations between its backing conditions and its advice conditions.
Backing conditions describe physical situations and processes on which the state
supervenes: advice conditions are magnitude claims of the form Mε  to which the
4 The state of an individual system can sometimes be prepared with no selection step by controlling
its interactions with its environment, as in laser cooling or just letting the system relax when
coupled to a vacuum (Fröhlich & Schubnel, 2016). While it is tempting to conclude this works
by modifying its intrinsic properties, certiﬁcation of the procedure by quantum tomography on
many similarly prepared systems does not establish this conclusion.

314
R. Healey
Born rule assigns probabilities when legitimately applied. This requires the system
to be involved in an appropriate interaction—one modeled by rapid and robust
decoherence of a quantum state.5
Once one understands the function of a quantum state it matters little whether
one chooses to say that it represents the objective probabilistic relations between
its backing conditions and its advice conditions. Many true statements supervene
on these backing conditions. What distinguishes a statement assigning a system’s
quantum state is that it implies objective probabilistic relations between its backing
conditions and its advice conditions via the Born rule. Since probability is a modal
concept—a quantiﬁed possibility—if a system has a quantum state this means that
this statement has modal content because it implies many modal statements.
What makes Born probabilities objective is not that they are determined by all
local matters of particular fact but that they offer authoritative advice to any user
of quantum theory on how to set their credences (coherent degrees of belief) in
magnitude claims in a physical situation that blocks any more direct epistemic
access to the truth of those claims. The advice carries this authority insofar as
adjusting one’s credences to accord with Born probabilities is on the whole the
most reliable way of forming expectations in a situation of uncertainty.
Objective probabilities arise outside of quantum theory, in statistical physics and
so-called games of chance. The function of probability is to guide belief (and hence
action) in a situation of uncertainty: different situations require different objective
probabilities, in applications of quantum theory and elsewhere. A probability could
not adequately serve this function if its value were determined by any actual
frequency because following its guidance may not yield the expected results, even
in the long term. A quantum state has modal content because its function is to
yield modal objective probabilities. This content is doubly modal because these
probabilities concern sets of possibilities, where each set pertains to a different
hypothetical decoherence context, at most one of which is actual.
20.9
Representationalism and the Quantum State
Price (2011, 2013) has argued in favor of a distinctive view he calls subject
naturalism by contrast with object naturalism. The object naturalist holds that
ultimately all there is is the world of science and that all genuine knowledge is
scientiﬁc knowledge. The subject naturalist instead maintains that philosophy needs
to begin with what science tells us about ourselves—that we are natural creatures,
and that philosophy must proceed by acknowledging this fact.
An object naturalist has a proto-theory about language involving the assumption
of:
Representationalism: The function of statements is to represent ‘worldly’ states of affairs
and...true statements succeed in doing so. (Price, 2013, p. 24)
5 For further details see my (2012b).

20
Representation and the Quantum State
315
This leads to problems in view of the striking mismatch between the rich world
of ordinary discourse and the sparse world apparently described by science. For
there are many apparently true statements that don’t seem to line up neatly with
facts of the kind uncovered by natural science. These include not only normative
statements, in ethics and elsewhere, but also statements about probability, possibility
and causation—even when these occur within science itself.
Statements attributing quantum states to physical systems provide a striking
illustration within fundamental science of the superiority of subject naturalism
over an object naturalism burdened with Representationalism. For one who accepts
quantum theory, the fundamental facts about the world are stated by magnitude
claims. Truths about quantum states are not magnitude claims, although they
supervene on them. The function of a statement attributing a quantum state is not
to represent a ‘worldly’ state of affairs, even though many such statements are true.
Representationalism fails for these statements.
The function of a quantum state is to offer good advice to any suitably-placed
agent on how to set credences concerning magnitude claims whose truth-values they
are not in a position to determine more directly. This function is exercised through
application to the quantum state of the Born rule and adjustment of credences to
match the probabilities it yields. Science tells us that we (and potentially other kinds
of agents) are spatiotemporally localized natural creatures whose physical situation
limits epistemic access to many physical states of affairs. Such an agent is able
reliably to improve its epistemic state with respect to a physical system by applying
the Born rule to the appropriate quantum state for one in the agent’s physical
situation. For each such situation this yields a plethora of probability distributions,
each pertaining to a possible circumstance in which the system may ﬁnd itself. By
adjusting credences to match these probabilities the agent is better prepared to face
the unknown.
References
Bell, J. S. (2004). Speakable and unspeakable in quantum mechanics (Rev. ed.). Cambridge
University Press.
Belot, G. (2012). Quantum states for primitive ontologists. European Journal for Philosophy of
Science, 2, 67–83.
Bub, J. (2019). What is really there in the quantum world? In A. Cordero (Ed.), Philosophers look
at quantum mechanics (pp. 217–233). Springer.
De Finetti, B. (1968). Probability: The subjectivistic approach. In R. Klibansky (Ed.), La
Philosophie Contemporaine (pp. 45–53). La Nuova Italia.
Einstein, A., Podolsky, B., & Rosen, N. (1935) (EPR) “Can quantum-mechanical description of
physical reality be considered complete?” Physical Review, 47: 777–80.
Elgin, C. (2017). True enough. MIT Press.
Esfeld, M., Lazarovici, D., Hubert, M., & Dürr, D. (2014). The ontology of Bohmian mechanics.
British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 65, 773–796.
French, S., & Saatsi, J. (2020). Scientiﬁc realism and the quantum. Oxford University Press.

316
R. Healey
Fröhlich, J., & Schubnel, B. (2016). The preparation of states in quantum mechanics. Journal of
Mathematical Physics, 57, 042101.
Gleason, A. M. (1957). Measures on the closed subspaces of a Hilbert space. Journal of
Mathematics and Mechanics, 17, 59–81.
Glick, D., Darby, G., & Marmodoro, A. (2020). The foundation of reality. Oxford University Press.
Harrigan, N., & Spekkens, R. W. (2010). Einstein, incompleteness, and the epistemic view of
quantum states. Foundations of Physics, 40, 125–157.
Healey, R. (2012a). “Quantum theory: A pragmatist approach”, British. Journal for the Philosophy
of Science, 63, 729–771.
Healey, R. (2012b). Quantum decoherence in a pragmatist view: Dispelling Feynman’s mystery.
Foundations of Physics, 42, 1534–1555.
Healey, R. (2017a). The quantum revolution in philosophy. Oxford University Press.
Healey, R. (2017b). Quantum states as objective informational bridges. Foundations of Physics,
47, 161–173.
Hemmo, M., & Shenker, O. (2020). Quantum, probability, logic. Springer.
Krissmer, R. (2018). Representation lost: The case for a relational interpretation of quantum
mechanics. Entropy, 20, 975.
Leifer, M. (2014). Is the quantum state real? An extended review of -ontology theorems. Quanta,
3, 67–155.
Monton, B. (2006). Quantum mechanics and 3N-dimensional space. Philosophy of Science, 73,
778–789.
Ney, A. (2020). The world in the wave function. Oxford University Press.
Price, H. (2011). Naturalism without mirrors. Oxford University Press.
Price, H. (2013). Expressivism, pragmatism and representationialism. Cambridge University Press.
Pusey, M. F., Barrett, J., & Rudolph, T. (2012). On the reality of the quantum state. Nature Physics,
8, 475–478.
Rovelli, C. (1996). Relational quantum mechanics. International Journal of Theoretical Physics,
35, 1637–1678.
Schrödinger, E. (1936) Probability relations between separated systems. Mathematical Proceed-
ings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, 32, 446–452.
Suarez, M. (2015). Bohmian dispositions. Synthese, 192, 3203–3228.
Wallace, D. (2020). “On the plurality of quantum theories”, in French and Saatsi (2020): 78–102.
Wallace, D., & Timpson, C. (2010). Quantum mechanics on spacetime I: Spacetime state realism.
British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 61, 697–727.
Wessels, L. (1997). The preparation problem in quantum mechanics. In J. Earman & J. Norton
(Eds.), The cosmos of science (pp. 243–273). University of Pittsburgh Press.
Wigner, E. (1963). The problem of measurement. American Journal of Physics, 31, 6–15.

Part IV
Indeterminacy

Chapter 21
Quantum Mechanics Without
Indeterminacy
David Glick
Abstract Metaphysical indeterminacy in the context of quantum mechanics is
often motivated by the eigenstate-eigenvalue link. However, the sparse view of
Glick (Thought J Philos 6(3):204–213, 2017) illustrates why it has no such
implications. Other links connecting quantum states and property ascriptions—
such as those associated with the GRW theory—may introduce indeterminacy, but
such indeterminacy may be viewed as merely representational and is susceptible to
familiar treatments of vagueness. Thus, I contend that such links fail to provide a
compelling motivation for quantum metaphysical indeterminacy.
21.1
Quantum Metaphysical Indeterminacy
21.1.1
Metaphysical Indeterminacy
Quantum mechanics has often been associated with indeterminacy. In contrast
to familiar cases of vagueness, the indeterminacy involved has seemed to some
to be worldly as opposed to merely representational. There are several possible
explications of this notion of worldly or metaphysical indeterminacy. First, there
is the metaphysical supervaluationist approach developed by Barnes and Williams
(2011).1 According to the supervaluationist, a proposition is vague just in case it
admits of multiple precisiﬁcations, each of which assign it a truth value, but some
To appear in V. Allori (ed.) Quantum Mechanics and Fundamentality: Naturalizing Quantum
Theory between Scientiﬁc Realism and Ontological Indeterminacy, Springer Nature.
1 See also Akiba (2004) and Barnes (2010).
D. Glick ()
Department of Philosophy, University of California, Davis, Davis, CA, USA
e-mail: daglick@ucdavis.edu
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
V. Allori (ed.), Quantum Mechanics and Fundamentality, Synthese Library 460,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-99642-0_21
319

320
D. Glick
of which disagree about its value. Such vagueness is typically attributed to our
epistemic or representational limitations. According to Barnes and Williams, meta-
physical indeterminacy occurs when actuality admits of multiple precisiﬁcations,
each of which is represented by an ersatz possible world. On this view, reality is
indeterminate just in case there are propositions about actuality that are true at some
but not all candidate ersatz worlds.
An alternative account of metaphysical indeterminacy is provided by the
determinable-based approach of Wilson (2013, 2017). This view eschews the
precisiﬁcations of the supervaluationist and instead allows for indeterminate
states of affairs. The guiding idea is that a state of affairs is indeterminate just
in case it involves the instantiation of a determinable property without a unique
determinate.2 There are two ways this could occur: either a determinable property
could have more than one determinate (“glutty” indeterminacy) or no determinates
(“gappy” indeterminacy). Glutty indeterminacy involves the possessions of multiple
determinates of a single determinable in a relativized or degree-theoretic fashion.
Wilson (2013) gives the example of an iridescent feather that is both red (from one
perspective) and blue (from another) as a case of glutty indeterminacy. Below we
will see some potential examples of gappy indeterminacy in the context of quantum
mechanics.
In the discussion of quantum indeterminacy that follows, I’ll focus on Wilson’s
determinable-based understanding of metaphysical indeterminacy. There are two
reasons for this. First, there is a concern that the metaphysical supervaluationist
approach cannot be applied to the case of quantum indeterminacy. Several authors
have noticed that no-go results such as the Kochen-Specker theorem seem to rule
out the possibility of maximal and precise ersatz possible worlds that the approach
seems to require (Darby, 2010; Skow, 2010). This is an open area of debate and
tangential to my primary concerns.3 Second, much of the articulation and defense
of quantum indeterminacy occurs in the context of the determinable-based approach
(Bokulich, 2014; Calosi & Wilson, 2019, 2021; Lewis, 2016).
This chapter proceeds as follows. In the remainder of this section, I brieﬂy
introduce quantum indeterminacy in the context of so-called “orthodox” quantum
mechanics and the alternative offered by Glick (2017). In Sect. 21.2, I turn to
the GRW theory and the case for indeterminacy there. I argue that, while the
GRW theory does introduce vagueness via the links between quantum states and
properties, this indeterminacy may be viewed as representational. Finally, I conclude
in Sect. 21.3 by highlighting two remaining issues: alternative interpretations and
emergent indeterminacy.
2 A familiar example of the determinable-determinate relationship is red and scarlet. Scarlet is a
particular way of being red, hence it is a determinate of the determinable red. Note that a property
may be a determinate at one level of analysis, but a determinable at a “deeper” level—Venetian
scarlet is a determinate of the scarlet determinable.
3 See Darby and Pickup (2019) for an attempt to resolve this challenge facing the metaphysical
supervaluationist and Corti (2021) for criticism of their attempt.

21
Quantum Mechanics Without Indeterminacy
321
21.1.2
Quantum Indeterminacy
Assuming the determinable-based understanding, quantum mechanics is alleged
to involve metaphysical indeterminacy in so far as it describes systems that lack
unique determinate values of physical quantities. For instance, consider a particle
characterized by a quantum state of spin that is a superposition of up and down in
the x direction, ψ = c1|↑x⟩+ c2|↓x⟩. In order to move beyond the quantum state
description, we need a principle linking it to certain properties (“observables”). The
best known of these is a tenet of orthodox quantum mechanics:4
Eigenstate-Eigenvalue Link (EEL):
A system A has a value v of property P
if the quantum state of A is in an eigenstate of the associated operator ˆO with
eigenvalue v.
Applied to the particle, EEL implies that it lacks both the value “up” and “down”
of x-spin. Thus, one may be inclined to regard it as instantiating the determinable of
x-spin without a unique determinate of it.5 There are two ways this could go: either
it lacks any determinate of x-spin (gappy) or it possesses more than one determinate
(glutty). Initial applications of determinable-based metaphysical indeterminacy to
quantum mechanics focused on the gappy understanding (Bokulich, 2014; Wolff,
2015), but more recently, some authors have advocated for the glutty view. For
instance, the particle could be said to possess value “up” to a certain degree (given
by its modulus-squared coefﬁcient) and value “down” to a certain degree (Calosi &
Wilson, 2019, 2021).
However, EEL alone doesn’t imply indeterminacy of either form. It has the form
of a biconditional between a quantum state description and the attribution of a
speciﬁc value of an observable. The situations alleged to give rise to indeterminacy
are those where the quantum state isn’t in an eigenstate of the observable under
consideration. It follows that we cannot attribute a speciﬁc value of that observable.
But, as Glick (2017) observes, there is a clear distinction between (determinately)
lacking a property and possessing an indeterminate value of that property.6 So, EEL
is compatible with a view that eschews indeterminacy: the sparse view according to
which systems don’t possess properties—determinate or determinable—for which
4 It’s not entirely clear what constitutes “orthodox” quantum mechanics. For my purposes here,
I assume that it involves the eigenstate-eigenvalue link, the collapse postulate, and Born’s rule.
See Wallace (2019) for a criticism of this view and Gilton (2016) for a defence of the role of the
eigenstate-eigenvalue link in “orthodox” or “textbook” quantum mechanics.
5 I will be challenging this inclination below. For now, a motivating idea might be that we can
measure the particle’s x-spin, and when we do so, it will be found either up or down. So, the
particle in question is the kind of thing that can possess a precise value of x-spin even if it doesn’t
have one at the moment. This might incline one to regard it as possessing the x-spin determinable
without a unique determinate of it (until it’s measured).
6 Consider, for instance, category mistakes. The number two lacks a determinate mass, but this
does not imply that its mass is indeterminate because it lacks the determinable as well.

322
D. Glick
they aren’t in an eigenstate. On the sparse view, a particle in a superposition of
x-spin up and down simply lacks x-spin.
While the sparse view may illustrate that the EEL is strictly compatible with
metaphysical determinacy, if the sparse view is sufﬁciently implausible it may be
alleged that any reasonable understanding of orthodox quantum mechanics will
involve genuine metaphysical indeterminacy. Indeed, some allege that the sparse
view has the implausible consequence that particles are not located in spacetime and
that measuring a particle will cause it to pop into existence (Calosi & Wilson, 2021).
In order to see why such worries are misplaced, let’s brieﬂy reconsider location on
the sparse view of orthodox quantum mechanics.
21.1.3
Quantum Location
To simplify matters, consider a particle that’s conﬁned to a region X, which
is divided into two subregions A and B. We can write its position state as a
superposition c1|A⟩+ c2|B⟩, where |A⟩is the quantum state associated with being
in region A and likewise for |B⟩and B. From the Born rule we know that the
probability of ﬁnding the particle in region A is given by ||c1||2, and ||c2||2 for
region B. Moreover,we know that the probability of ﬁnding the particle in the region
X = A ∪B is 1. Given this, what should we say about the particle’s position?
EEL implies that the system is (determinately) located in the region X, as it is
in an eigenstate of the associated operator with eigenvalue 1. With respect to the
regions A and B, EEL precludes attributing to the system a (determinate) location
in either region. Thus, the sparse view (indeed, any version of orthodox QM) is
committed to saying that the particle has a location—namely, it is located in X. But,
despite being located in X, the particle isn’t located in either of the subregions that
X comprises, A and B. This may require a revision of our concept of position in
light of quantum mechanics. In particular, it motivates denying Precise Location.
Precise Location:
being located in a region X is a determinable with being
located in xi ∈X as determinates.
According to Precise Location, being located in a region X admits of further
speciﬁcity in terms of a proper subregion of X. Perhaps, as one moves to even
greater levels of speciﬁcity, the location of a system will bottom out in regions
that are exactly the same size as the object they contain.7 But Precise Location
doesn’t require this. All that is required is that the property associated with being
in a region X is, at the relevant level of speciﬁcity, a determinable property with its
only determinates corresponding to being located in proper subregions of X.
7 Of course, it’s often unclear what the “size” of a quantum system is. So, the relevant notion of a
maximally precise location might be the smallest region to which the system can in principle be
conﬁned.

21
Quantum Mechanics Without Indeterminacy
323
Precise Location leads to position indeterminacy when applied to the case
described above. The particle will possess the maximally-unspeciﬁc position deter-
minable with the determinate being located in X. At a deeper level of speciﬁcity,
it will possess the determinable being located in X. However, it will lack a unique
determinate of that determinable. Either it will possess no determinate or it will
possess multiple determinates (e.g., each to a degree less than one). One reaction to
this is to embrace position indeterminacy in quantum theory, another is to challenge
the assumption of Precise Location.
Imprecise Location:
being located in a region X can serve as an absolute
determinate.
On Precise Location, being located in X is both a determinate of a more
general location determinable and also a determinable with more precise location
properties as determinates. Imprecise Location, by contrast, allows for regions that
are intuitively larger than the physical system to serve as absolute determinates—
i.e., determinates that are not themselves determinables. How does this differ from
indeterminacy about position? After all, Wilson (2013) refers to states of affairs
involving determinables lacking unique determinates as both “indeterminate” and
“imprecise.” But absolute determinates are not bare determinables—only the latter
implies that an object has an indeterminate position. On Imprecise Location, if asked
where a particle conﬁned to a region X(> xp8) is located, the answer is simply “in
region X.” If asked where in region X the particle is located, the proper response
is not that it is indeterminate, but rather, that the question rests on a mistaken
assumption, namely, Precise Location. According to Imprecise Location, there is
nothing indeterminate about having a location given by a region that is intuitively
larger than the object in question.
This understanding of position is consistent with the standard formalism of
ordinary non-relativistic quantum mechanics. If we assume that observables are
associated with self-adjoint operators on Hilbert space, then there is a problem
with applying EEL to a position observable that incorporates Precise Location.
The corresponding operator will have a continuous spectrum rather than discrete
eigenstates. In order to apply EEL, we need to consider operators that project onto
the subspace corresponding to being in some ﬁnite region of space X. So, if we
take this seriously as a guide to thinking about position in quantum mechanics,
position should always be understood in terms of questions of the form: “Is the
particle conﬁned to region X?” Moreover, there will always be some smallest region
X beyond which the answer is always “no.” If the system isn’t in an eigenstate of
any operator corresponding to being located in a proper subregion xi ∈X, then EEL
precludes attributing to it a location more precise than X.9
8 Let xp denote a subregion of X that would be regarded as a maximally precise location for the
particle. See previous footnote.
9 Notice that there is nothing wrong with asking whether we will ﬁnd the particle in the region
xi ∈X if we were to measure its position. To answer this question we use Born’s rule, not EEL.

324
D. Glick
Imprecise Location allows us to see why the sparse view doesn’t imply that
particles aren’t located in spacetime and don’t pop into existence upon measure-
ment. In realistic scenarios, it may be impossible to ascribe a position more speciﬁc
than the entirety of space. Even after measurement, particles will never be perfectly
localized for any ﬁnite period of time. This may be unsatisfying, but such is orthodox
quantum mechanics. Notice that the fan of indeterminacy will be compelled to
adopt a parallel position: that position is almost always indeterminate. For instance,
realistic position measurements cannot be understood as removing indeterminacy
given that the particle isn’t precisely localized after a measurement either (at least
not for any ﬁnite period of time). The sparse view allows for a non-zero probability
of ﬁnding a particle in a region in which it isn’t located, but the implausibility of this
claim rests on an understanding of measurement as revealing preexisting properties,
which is rejected by orthodox quantum mechanics.
A more signiﬁcant problem with Imprecise Location is that intuitively quantum
theory provides a number of different ways in which a system can be located in
X. There are any number of quantum states that are eigenstates of a projector onto
the subspace associated with being located in X, for instance: the equally-weighted
superposition
1
√
2(|A⟩+ |B⟩); non-equally-weighted superpositions c1|A⟩+ c2|B⟩
(where c1 ̸= c2); a more precise location xi within X (|xi⟩). Each of these imply that
an ideal measurement will ﬁnd the particle in X with probability 1. Thus, Imprecise
Location may be unsatisfying as an explication of the location of the system as
it’s unable to make important distinctions between the various states which seem
to correspond to different ways the system may be located in X. A natural way to
correct this is to allow for determinates associated with each such quantum state.
Quantum Location:
being located in the region X is a determinable with being
in the quantum state ψi among its determinates, where P(being located in
X|ψi) = 1.
Quantum Location allows for many different ways of being located in the region
X. For instance, being in a particular superposition of |A⟩and |B⟩is one such
way. EEL doesn’t license the attribution of any precise position observables in
such a state, but so long as there is some self-adjoint operator associated with the
quantum state, then it will be in an eigenstate of that operator. Thus, EEL will license
the attribution of properties such as being in an equally-weighted superposition
of being located in A and being located in B.10 One might complain that such
a property isn’t a candidate for a physical property, but it has a clear connection
to measurement outcomes (via Born’s rule) and enters into causal/nomic relations
with other physical properties. If one allows speciﬁc superpositions to represent
novel determinates of position, then one gains additional resources that may allow
10 The quantum state will not be in a superposition of the operator invoked in EEL, but we may
wish to describe the state in terms of a distinct operator with clear physical signiﬁcance—in this
case, an operator with |A⟩and |B⟩as eigenstates.

21
Quantum Mechanics Without Indeterminacy
325
the sparse view to explain phenomena seen as challenging for the view, such as
interference phenomena.11
The case of position generalizes. If a system is described by a quantum state that
is a superposition of x-spin—ψ = c1| ↑x⟩+ c2| ↓x⟩—what is the indeterminate
property? Suppose the system in question is an electron. Then we know it has a
spin of ¯h
2, and we can use a two-dimensional Hilbert space to characterize its spin.
So, having a spin value is a determinable with a unique determinate. EEL provides
no basis for attributing the determinable having an x-spin. Indeed, it is often said
that (in orthodox quantum mechanics) having a spin in one direction precludes
having a spin in an orthogonal one. As in the position case, it seems better to limit
our ontological commitments to those properties which are determinate: either (a)
only attribute x-spin when the system is in an eigenstate of x-spin or (b) allow for
superpositions of x-spin to count as determinates of x-spin. On either approach,
we never ﬁnd determinables without unique determinates. On the ﬁrst approach,
a particle in a superposition of x-spin simply lacks x-spin (until measured). On
the second approach, such a particle has the property of being in a particular
superposition of x-spin, where such a property is a unique determinate of x-spin.
Again one might wonder how Quantum Location (and its generalization) differs
from indeterminacy. Perhaps saying the system is in a particular superposition of
x-spin (ψ = c1| ↑x⟩+ c2| ↓x⟩) could be understood as possessing the “up” and
“down” determinates to degrees given by the squared modulus of their coefﬁcients.
There are at least two problems with this proposal. First, EEL provides no basis
for this claim. The state is not an eigenstate of x-spin with multiple eigenvalues,
so another principle would need to be invoked.12 Second, and more signiﬁcantly,
distinct quantum states lead to the same expectation values for x-spin values, for
instance: the mixed state representing a system as x-spin “up” or x-spin “down”
with equal probability; a system in an eigenstate of y-spin orthogonal to x; a system
in an eigenstate of z-spin orthogonal to x and y. Thus, the property associated with
being in a particular superposition of x-spin cannot be identiﬁed with the weighted
possession of x-spin determinates.13
11 Of course, critics of the sparse view may allege that the quantum state must be given some
metaphysical analysis, and it’s here that metaphysical indeterminacy arises. Quantum Location is
a denial of this demand. The property possessed by a system in a particular superposition of more
precise position states is just that. Superpositions are novel kinds of determinates, not to be further
analyzed in terms of the observables that appear in their arguments.
12 Calosi and Wilson (2019) propose to replace EEL with DEEL, a principle that posits degrees
of possession proportional to the coefﬁcients of the arguments of a superposition. However, unlike
EEL, DEEL is not part of the standard formulation of orthodox QM. Moreover, it goes beyond
what is needed for orthodox QM to solve the measurement problem. See Sect. 21.3.
13 This means that Quantum Location (and its generalization) is distinct from the glutty inde-
terminacy view of Calosi and Wilson (2019). The former takes a particular superposition to be
a novel kind of determinate of the determinable associated with the operator that deﬁnes the
basis. The latter takes a particular superposition to correspond to a plurality of determinates (each
corresponding to eigenstates) each possessed to a degree less than 1. The present point is that

326
D. Glick
In sum, the argument for metaphysical indeterminacy in orthodox quantum
mechanics rests on two assumptions. First, that particles possess determinables
corresponding to operators of which they are not in eigenstates. Second, that these
determinables have only the eigenstates of the corresponding operators as their
determinates. Each of these assumptions may be challenged, leading to two versions
of orthodox QM without indeterminacy. Rejecting the ﬁrst assumption leads to
the sparse view on which one can only attribute properties to particles in special
circumstances, or when the properties in question are very general. This meager
ontology may be unsatisfying, but represents a natural way of thinking about
orthodox QM and doesn’t require denying that particles have locations or pop into
existence. Quantum location (and its generalization) rejects the second assumption
by expanding the determinates of determinables associated with operators to include
superpositions of their eigenstates. This view has the beneﬁt of attributing properties
corresponding to superpositions while retaining the one-to-one correspondence of
determinables and determinates.
21.2
Indeterminacy in GRW?
The sparse view shows that EEL fails to establish quantum metaphysical indeter-
minacy. But many regard orthodox quantum mechanics (and EEL) as problematic.
Other interpretations may provide a more compelling basis for quantum indeter-
minacy. In particular, discussion of the problem of tails in the GRW theory has
given rise to modiﬁcations of EEL which may be thought to provide a basis for
metaphysical indeterminacy.
21.2.1
The GRW Theory
The measurement problem results from the conﬂict between the linear, unitary
evolution of the quantum state according to Schrödinger’s equation and the apparent
fact that measurements have unique determinate results. The GRW theory attempts
to solve the problem by replacing deterministic linear Schrödinger dynamics
with a stochastic non-linear dynamics.14 In particular, GRW dynamics involve
spontaneous localization events (“hits”) centered on a random point c and occurring
the views are inequivalent because the quantum state contains more information than a weighted
collection of determinates.
14 The GRW theory is due to Ghirardi et al. (1986). It’s the simplest and best known of a family of
collapse interpretations. For more, see Ghirardi and Bassi (2020).

21
Quantum Mechanics Without Indeterminacy
327
randomly with an average frequency λ. The crucial points for our discussion are the
following:
•
Localizations (hits) are very unlikely for individual particles, but amplify rapidly
with entanglement making it extremely likely for a hit to occur immediately for
macroscopic systems.
•
Hits have the effect of applying a Gaussian distribution of width σ centered on a
random point c.
•
The probability of a given point being the center of localization is given by the
squared modulus of the amplitude of the wavefunction in accordance with Born’s
rule.
Like orthodox quantum mechanics, GRW is an indeterministic theory, but it
differs in precisely specifying the dynamics that lead to wavefunction collapse.15
With suitable values for the frequency of hits λ and the width of the Gaussian
σ, GRW may be regarded as consistent with the current empirical evidence for
quantum mechanics.
21.2.2
The Problem of Tails
In orthodox quantum mechanics, EEL acts as a principle linking quantum states
and observables. In GRW, however, EEL must be replaced by a more forgiving
linking principle. The reason is that hits fail to localize the wavefunction precisely
to a point. Indeed, while localizations cause the majority of wavefunction amplitude
to be concentrated near c, the tails of the wavefunction will extend arbitrarily far
away from c. Even after measurement, a particle will not be in an eigenstate of the
operator associated with being located in the neighborhood of c, so EEL does not
allow the attribution of a localized position to the particle. This is a problem as the
GRW theory aims to solve the measurement problem by changing the dynamics of
quantum mechanics so as to deliver determinate measurement outcomes.16
To solve this problem, several proposals for a revised link have been offered. In
conjunction with reasonable assumptions, these principles allow the GRW theory
to yield determinate outcomes for many kinds of quantum measurements. However,
15 It may be thought that indeterminism alone implies indeterminacy, and indeed, some motivate
metaphysical indeterminacy by consideration of the “open future” (Barnes & Cameron, 2009).
However, the metaphysical status of the future is largely independent of whether there are stochas-
tic laws of nature. The path from indeterminism to indeterminacy is not at all straightforward and
inevitable.
16 Armed with only EEL, the GRW theory is unable to secure determinate measurement outcomes
because it precludes the assignment of reasonably precise positions to macroscopic systems like
pointers that constitute such results. Again, the only position properties licensed by EEL are those
that attribute a location in the region to which a system is strictly conﬁned. Often this region will
be no less than the entirety of space.

328
D. Glick
they also introduce a certain degree of indeterminacy. First, consider Albert and
Loewer’s fuzzy link.
Fuzzy link:
Particle x is in region R if and only if the proportion of the total
squared amplitude of x’s wave function which is associated with points in R is
greater than or equal to 1 −p (Albert & Loewer, 1996, p. 87).
Generalizing somewhat, the fuzzy link allows one to attribute a property to a
system when its quantum state is sufﬁciently close to an eigenstate of the associated
operator. “Sufﬁciently close” is captured by the 1 −p term, which acts as a cutoff
below which a determinate property cannot be ascribed. Combined with GRW’s
non-linear stochastic dynamics and assumptions about the measurement process, the
fuzzy link allows for determinate outcomes. A position measurement induces a hit
to the wavefunction of a particle, after which it is sufﬁciently close to an eigenstate
of the operator ˆPc with eigenvalue 1 for the fuzzy link to ascribe the determinate
property of being located near c.17 This determinate position property accounts for
the measurement outcome, namely a detection near c.
The fuzzy link introduces indeterminacy into the ascription of observables in
GRW. While EEL is unambiguous about the conditions under which observables
are to be attributed, the fuzzy link requires imposing a threshold of “sufﬁciently
close to an eigenstate.” This threshold has features characteristic of vagueness:
whatever threshold is chosen will be arbitrary, subject to disagreement and context-
dependence, and will admit of borderline cases. Such vagueness is not unproblem-
atic, but is familiar from ordinary cases involving the boundaries of mountains
and clouds, baldness, etc. This would suggest that the strategies for dealing
with familiar vagueness will apply here as well. In particular, approaches such
as supervaluationism and epistemicism could be used to avoid the implication
of metaphysical indeterminacy. A supervaluationist could identify a number of
precisiﬁcations of “sufﬁciently close,” each free from indeterminacy, but which
disagree about the precise threshold. An epistemicist could claim that there is a
precise threshold that lies beyond our ken. Both approaches relegate the resultant
indeterminacy to the representational domain—the indeterminacy is the result of
our language or epistemic limits, not the world itself.
More recently, Peter Lewis has proposed another linking principle with a more
direct connection to metaphysical indeterminacy, the vague link.
Vague link:
A system has a determinate value for a given determinable property
to the extent that the squared projection of its state onto an eigenstate of
the corresponding operator is close to 1, where the determinate value is the
eigenvalue for that eigenstate (Lewis, 2016, p. 90).
The vague link allows for properties to be attributed in degrees. For a system
sufﬁciently close to an eigenstate, the vague link says that the system possesses
17 ˆPc is a projector onto the subspace of Hilbert space associated with being located in some region
C including c.

21
Quantum Mechanics Without Indeterminacy
329
the property to an extent close to 1. Crucially, it also allows that such a system
possesses other properties to a minimal extent. For example, a particle localized
around c would possess the property of being in the neighborhood of c to a very
high degree, but would also possess the property of being outside the neighborhood
of c to a very low degree. On its own, the vague link fails to serve the required
function for the GRW theory: it will not deliver (unique) determinate outcomes for
quantum measurements. One possible response would be to reject the demand for
determinate measurement outcomes, but such a stance removes much of the appeal
of dynamical collapse theories like GRW. At any rate, this isn’t the approach taken
by Lewis when presenting the vague link.
According to the vague link, my coffee mug almost entirely possesses the determinate
property of being on top of my desk, but it also very slightly possesses the determinate
property of being inside the drawer. Because the degree of possession of competing
properties is so slight, for all practical purposes I can say that the coffee mug is on the
desk. (Lewis, 2016, pp. 90–91)
This suggests that the vague link is to be supplemented with a further principle
that allows one to ascribe observables for all practical purposes when the degree
of possession is sufﬁciently high. This allows the GRW theorist to say that
measurements have determinate outcomes (for all practical purposes). But, again it
does so at the cost of introducing indeterminacy into the ascription of observables.
What counts as a sufﬁciently high degree of possession will exhibit the same
familiar characteristics of vagueness as the fuzzy link—arbitrariness, disagreement,
borderline cases, context dependence, etc. Moreover, these features will be suscep-
tible to the same representational analysis. What counts as a sufﬁciently high degree
may be subject to further precisiﬁcation or may be beyond our ken. Of course, the
phrase “for all practical purposes” suggests that Lewis may be happy to grant that
such indeterminacy in the ascription of observables is merely representational.
So, the vague link is similar to the fuzzy link FAPP (for all practical purposes)
but it differs in that, strictly speaking, it is naturally understood as positing glutty
indeterminacy. The opponent of metaphysical indeterminacy must deny this aspect
of the link, but there is very little cost in doing so. Quantum indeterminacy is
typically thought to reside outside of measurement contexts, but on the fuzzy link
indeterminacy is pervasive even after a maximally precise measurement. This is
why it’s unable to solve the measurement problem in the context of the GRW
theory without ascending to the FAPP level of description. Compare a view that
posits degrees of possession for the property of baldness, where a very bald person
possesses baldness to a degree close to 1 and a very not bald person possesses
baldness to a degree close to 0. This does nothing to resolve or clarify the vagueness
of our application of the predicate “bald.” We have just pushed the problem back to
what degree of possession is sufﬁcient to apply the predicate (FAPP). Similarly here,
positing degrees of possession leaves unchanged the question of when we should
ascribe a determinate value of some observable. The only remaining motivation
for this aspect of the fuzzy link is the thought that non-eigenstates must involve

330
D. Glick
metaphysical indeterminacy, but the considerations here are unchanged from the
discussion of orthodox quantum mechanics above.18
Thus, both links allow for the attribution of determinate properties (at least FAPP)
after measurement on the GRW theory, but in so doing introduce a certain degree of
indeterminacy. Such indeterminacy shares many of the features of familiar cases of
vagueness outside of quantum mechanics, but Lewis (2016) alleges that it’s unique
in at least two respects: (1) there is no continuum of property values in which a
vague boundary occurs and (2) it isn’t the result of composition.19 I will address
each point in turn.
First, it’s not obvious that there isn’t a continuum of properties in which
the boundary occurs. Recall that according to Quantum Location, each quantum
state is taken to describe a speciﬁc determinate property. In the context of a
position measurement, different quantum states could be arranged in a continuum
with respect to the degree of localization to which they correspond. Even if one
rejects this association of quantum states with determinates, there is nevertheless
an underlying continuum of quantum states (and corresponding probabilities) in
which the threshold for possession of a given observable is located according to
the fuzzy link. And again, where to locate this threshold within the continuum
of quantum states (or probabilities) exhibits the characteristic features of familiar
cases of vagueness. On the vague link, there is an additional level of properties
possessed to varying degrees, which may also be ordered in a continuum. Along
this continuum of degrees of possession, one must establish some threshold that
allows for ascription of the relevant observable for all practical purposes. As with
that of the fuzzy link, this threshold shares the characteristics of familiar cases of
vagueness and is susceptible to the usual representational treatments.
Second, the indeterminacy here isn’t the result of composition, but compo-
sition is not the only source of indeterminacy familiar from cases outside of
quantum mechanics. The indeterminacy of a mountain, or a cloud, or some other
medium-sized object may be understood in compositional terms. For instance, the
indeterminacy of a mountain can be taken to concern which molecules are part of
the mountain and which are not. The case of observables in GRW is not like this.
As best we know, electrons aren’t composed of anything, and so any indeterminacy
associated with them cannot be the result of their composition. However, there are
other instances of indeterminacy involving familiar (“non-quantum”) objects that
18 Of course, the GRW theory is a more “realist” interpretation than orthodox quantum mechanics,
so one might think that we are owed more of a story about non-eigenstates. However, rejecting
metaphysical indeterminacy doesn’t require silence about non-eigenstates. In addition to providing
probabilities for various measurement outcomes, such states can also provide a basis for the
attribution of novel properties along the lines of Quantum Location as outlined in Sect. 21.1.3.
19 Lewis takes the GRW theory to involve indeterminacy that is both metaphysical and distinct
from familiar non-quantum cases of indeterminacy. Here I treat the distinctness claim indepen-
dently with the aim to rebut the claim that there is anything distinctively “quantum” about the
indeterminacy introduced by the GRW links.

21
Quantum Mechanics Without Indeterminacy
331
are independent of their material composition. The indeterminacy exhibited by these
cases admits of representational analyses that make no appeal to composition.
Consider an ordinary doorstop. Whether a given object counts as a doorstop is
a matter of it performing a certain function, namely, holding open a door. Clearly
it can be vague whether a given object satisﬁes this functional role. For instance,
one may count a rock as a doorstop, but only if it is sufﬁciently large or heavy to
hold open the door, a matter that admits of degrees. Now, while it may be true that
a rock is composed of material parts, this fact is irrelevant to the indeterminacy
surrounding whether it is a doorstop or not. A representational view locates
the indeterminacy in our representation of the object as a doorstop, and hence,
denies that it is an instance of metaphysical indeterminacy. The representational
approach is compatible with either supervaluationism or epistemicism as applied
to the speciﬁcation of the functional role characterizing the entity rather than its
composition—the indeterminacy dissolves if the function of holding open a door is
speciﬁed or known with sufﬁcient precision.
Observables in GRW may be viewed as functional entities. Each property has
an associated probability of resulting in a certain measurement result. Indeed, it
is this connection that gives observables (and quantum mechanics more generally)
empirical signiﬁcance. This suggests that the indeterminacy introduced by the GRW
theory can be understood in terms of whether the system satisﬁes a given functional
role. Consider again the case of location near c. If the probability of being found
near c is sufﬁciently high, then it is natural to regard the particle as possessing the
determinate property, being located near c. But the probabilities form a continuum
corresponding to the extent to which the particle plays the functional role associated
with being located near c. Both the fuzzy and vague links may be seen as attempts
to ascribe observables to systems when they are almost certain to deliver the
corresponding measurement result. This is simply another way of representing the
nature of the functional role of observables in quantum mechanics.
Thus, even if some quantum systems are not composed of smaller parts, the
indeterminacy of property attribution in the GRW theory needn’t be seen as novel
or metaphysical. It can be seen as an instance of the familiar vagueness concerning
whether an entity satisﬁes a certain functional role. Such vagueness can be readily
understood as representational indeterminacy.
21.3
Remaining Issues
In this chapter I have argued that two approaches to quantum mechanics can be
understood without invoking metaphysical indeterminacy. In the case of orthodox
quantum mechanics, the sparse view demonstrates that EEL does not require
metaphysical indeterminacy. In the case of the GRW theory, the problem of tails
requires modifying EEL in a way that introduces some indeterminacy. However,
such indeterminacy may be regarded as merely representational.

332
D. Glick
21.3.1
Other Interpretations
Several issues remain. First, there are other interpretations of quantum mechanics
beyond those considered here, and nothing I’ve said rules out that they may
involve metaphysical indeterminacy. Indeed, there are variants of orthodox quantum
mechanics and the GRW theory that posit indeterminacy. For example, Calosi and
Wilson (2021) propose replacing EEL with a degree-theoretic variant:
DEEL:
A quantum system S has a deﬁnite value v for an observable O to a degree
y iff √y is the absolute value of the coefﬁcient of the associated eigenvector
having eigenvalue v in the quantum state of S (Calosi & Wilson, 2019, p. 2621).
However, unlike EEL, DEEL is not part of the standard formulation of orthodox
quantum mechanics, nor is it needed for the orthodox solution to the measurement
problem. In order to secure determinate measurement outcomes in the context of
orthodox quantum mechanics, we only need EEL, not DEEL. In the context of
the GRW theory, Lewis’s vague link is naturally understood as positing glutty
metaphysical indeterminacy. But, as noted above, the vague link alone is unable
to solve the measurement problem in the context of the GRW theory as it fails to
secure determinate measurement outcomes after a hit. Thus, neither link plays a role
in the solutions to the measurement problem offered by these interpretations.
Of course, the availability of indeterminacy-free versions of these interpreta-
tions isn’t an argument for them over their indeterminacy-involving counterparts.
Ultimately, as with many metaphysical issues in the sciences, the question of
metaphysical indeterminacy is underdetermined. However, there is prima facie
reason to prefer avoiding metaphysical indeterminacy in physical theories when it
is possible to do so. Other things being equal, we should avoid interpreting our
physical theories in a way that commits us to controversial metaphysical theses.
21.3.2
Emergent Indeterminacy
A second outstanding issue concerns the possibility of emergent metaphysical
indeterminacy.20 Suppose that an interpretation deploys a link from the quantum
state to observables that introduces some kind of indeterminacy. For example, the
GRW links discussed above allow for situations where there can be indeterminacy
surrounding the location of a particle after a position measurement. Any such
indeterminacy will be emergent in that it is derived from the fundamental description
provided by the quantum state of the system via the link in question. But just
because something is emergent doesn’t mean it’s not real, so this fact alone fails
to tell against quantum metaphysical indeterminacy. Indeed, this is once again a
20 For a defense of emergent quantum metaphysical indeterminacy, see Mariani (2021).

21
Quantum Mechanics Without Indeterminacy
333
matter that is underdetermined by one’s choice of interpretation qua solution to the
measurement problem. However, there is more to say about the status of emergent
metaphysical indeterminacy: whether one countenances it has more to do with one’s
attitude toward ordinary cases of non-fundamental indeterminacy than anything
speciﬁc to quantum theory. This means that quantum theory is unlikely to make
much of a difference to the debate—those who ﬁnd metaphysical indeterminacy in
the everyday world irrespective of quantum theory can maintain their beliefs and
likewise for opponents of metaphysical indeterminacy.
First, consider the situation in the GRW theory. Suppose the position wavefunc-
tion of a particle has support within the region R but also outside of it. Is the
particle located in R? Given that the system isn’t in an eigenstate of the associated
operator ( ˆPR), it will depend on the details of our link, which may (or may not)
introduce indeterminacy concerning the position of the particle. Such indeterminacy
can be given either a deﬂationary or inﬂationary reading. The former would say
the indeterminacy concerns the attribution of the predicate is located in R and
may rely on standard treatments of vagueness to resolve the indeterminacy. The
latter approach would regard the system’s location as genuinely metaphysically
indeterminate—even though there is no indeterminacy in the quantum state, the link
introduces indeterminacy in the location properties of the particle. It’s worth noting
that Barnes (2014) regards emergent metaphysical indeterminacy as impossible in
principle. Barnes argues that if the fundamental level is fully determinate, and it
determines the emergent level, then there is nowhere for indeterminacy to come
from. However, Lewis’s vague link provides a potential counterexample. For a
system like the particle considered above, its quantum state description will give
rise to multiple determinates of the location determinable (each possessed to an
extent less than 1).21 Alternatively, one can adopt Albert and Loewer’s fuzzy link
and only attribute determinate properties. There remains residual indeterminacy in
the speciﬁc conditions under which we can attribute determinate properties, but this
can be regarded as an ordinary case of representational vagueness.
Second, consider Wallace’s (2012) version of the Everett interpretation. On
this view, the fundamental ontology is described by the universal quantum state,
which evolves unitarily according to the Schrödinger equation.22 This fundamental
ontology gives rise to a vast emergent ontology of many quasi-classical worlds, each
21 Barnes doesn’t share Wilson’s determinable-based account of metaphysical indeterminacy,
however, one may develop an understanding of the vague link that ﬁts with the metaphysical
supervaluationist account. In the present case of a position measurement in GRW, one could posit a
candidate ersatz world corresponding to each location where the wavefunction has support. Then,
the position of the system will be metaphysically indeterminate in that the truth of a proposition
of the form the system is located in region R will differ between candidate ersatz worlds, hence it
will be indeterminate whether the system is located in R.
22 In the case of quantum ﬁeld theory, Wallace advocates for spacetime state realism, which
understands the universal quantum state in terms of density operators assigned to regions of
spacetime. On this view, the fundamental ontology includes spacetime (regions) and properties
corresponding to density operators (see Wallace & Timpson, 2010).

334
D. Glick
populated by a full complement of macroscopic objects. As Wallace recognizes, “it
is commonplace in emergence for there to be some indeterminacy” (Wallace, 2012,
p. 101). The number of worlds, the objects they contain, and even human minds
can exhibit indeterminacy. One reason for this is the process of environmental deco-
herence that Wallace’s account relies on, but equally important is the functionalist
account of emergent ontology he adopts. As noted above, functionalist criteria often
introduce a certain amount of indeterminacy. It follows that if one endows such
criteria with metaphysical signiﬁcance—i.e., regards them as existence criteria—
then emergent metaphysical indeterminacy results. There is nothing incoherent
about such a view, which would give rise to widespread metaphysical indeterminacy
in the quantum world. There is, however, an alternative. One could take a more
deﬂationary attitude toward the emergent multiverse as a way of representing
the universal quantum state in terms that we can more readily understand. As
Wallace (2002) argues, the many worlds of the Everett interpretation could be seen
as analogous to global planes of simultaneity in relativity, indeterminacy in the
properties of which is the result of our representational limitations, not the world
itself.23
What these examples show is that emergent indeterminacy in quantum inter-
pretations may be regarded as metaphysical or merely representational. Which
version of the interpretation one prefers will depend on their general attitude
toward indeterminacy in non-fundamental ontology. If one ﬁnds metaphysical
indeterminacy in everyday properties like baldness and heaphood, they may ﬁnd it
in quantum observables as well. But, if one prefers to adopt a deﬂationary strategy
in everyday contexts, they are free to do the same here. A link connecting the
quantum state to observables may be taken to be part of our representation of the
quantum world, in which case any indeterminacy such a link introduces will be
representational as well.
Acknowledgments Many thanks to Claudio Calosi, Sam Fletcher, Dana Goswick, Peter Lewis,
Cristian Mariani, Alyssa Ney, Paul Teller, Jessica Wilson, and audiences at the Dartmouth
Workshop on Quantum Indeterminacy, the University of California Davis, the Society for the
Metaphysics of Science, and the California Quantum Interpretation Network.
23 For example, whether two events are simultaneous is indeterminate in special relativity. Such
indeterminacy is naturally regarded as representational given that instants—global planes of
simultaneity—are artifacts of our representation of spacetime. Analogously, if the Everettian
multiverse is “a more useful description of an entity whose perfect description as a physical system
lies (at least for the moment) beyond our ability to comprehend directly”(Wallace, 2002, p. 654),
then any indeterminacy it engenders will be representational as well.

21
Quantum Mechanics Without Indeterminacy
335
References
Akiba, K. (2004). Vagueness in the world. Noûs, 38(3), 407–429.
Albert, D. Z., & Loewer, B. (1996). Tails of Schrödinger’s cat. In Perspectives on quantum reality
(pp. 81–92). Springer.
Barnes, E. (2010). Ontic vagueness: A guide for the perplexed 1. Noûs, 44(4), 601–627.
Barnes, E. (2014). Fundamental indeterminacy. Analytic Philosophy, 55(4), 339–362.
Barnes, E., & Cameron, R. (2009).
The open future: Bivalence, determinism and ontology.
Philosophical Studies, 146(2), 291.
Barnes, E., & Williams, J. R. G. (2011). A theory of metaphysical indeterminacy. In K. Bennett
& D. W. Zimmerman (Eds.), Oxford studies in metaphysics (Vol. 6, pp. 103–148). Oxford
University Press.
Bokulich, A. (2014).
Metaphysical indeterminacy, properties, and quantum theory.
Res
Philosophica, 91(3), 449–475.
Calosi, C., & Wilson, J. (2019). Quantum metaphysical indeterminacy. Philosophical Studies,
176(10), 2599–2627.
Calosi, C., & Wilson, J. (2021).
Quantum indeterminacy and the double-slit experiment.
Philosophical Studies, 1, 1–27.
Corti, A. (2021). Yet again, quantum indeterminacy is not worldly indecision. Synthese, 199,
5623–5643.
Darby, G. (2010). Quantum mechanics and metaphysical indeterminacy. Australasian Journal of
Philosophy, 88(2), 227–245.
Darby, G., & Pickup, M. (2019). Modelling deep indeterminacy. Synthese, 198, 1685–1710.
Ghirardi, G., & Bassi, A. (2020). Collapse theories. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia
of philosophy (Summer 2020 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.
Ghirardi, G. C., Rimini, A., & Weber, T. (1986).
Uniﬁed dynamics for microscopic and
macroscopic systems. Physical Review D, 34(2), 470.
Gilton, M. J. (2016). Whence the eigenstate–eigenvalue link? Studies in History and Philosophy
of Science Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 55, 92–100.
Glick, D. (2017). Against quantum indeterminacy. Thought: A Journal of Philosophy, 6(3), 204–
213.
Lewis, P. J. (2016). Quantum ontology: A guide to the metaphysics of quantum mechanics. Oxford
University Press.
Mariani, C. (2021). Emergent quantum indeterminacy. Ratio, 34(3), 183–192.
Skow, B. (2010). Deep metaphysical indeterminacy. The Philosophical Quarterly, 60(241), 851–
858.
Wallace, D. (2002). Worlds in the Everett interpretation. Studies in History and Philosophy of
Science Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 33(4), 637–661.
Wallace, D. (2012).
The emergent multiverse: Quantum theory according to the Everett
interpretation. Oxford: Oxford University Press
Wallace, D. (2019). What is orthodox quantum mechanics? In A. Cordero (Ed.), Philosophers
look at quantum mechanics (pp. 285–312). Cham: Springer International Publishing.
Wallace, D., & Timpson, C. G. (2010).
Quantum mechanics on spacetime I: Spacetime state
realism. The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 61(4), 697–727.
Wilson, J. M. (2013). A determinable-based account of metaphysical indeterminacy. Inquiry,
56(4), 359–385.
Wilson, J. M. (2017). Are there indeterminate states of affairs? Yes. In E. Barnes (Ed.), Current
controversies in metaphysics (Chap. 7, pp. 105–119). New York: Routledge.
Wolff, J. (2015). Spin as a determinable. Topoi, 34(2), 379–386.

Chapter 22
Derivative Metaphysical Indeterminacy
and Quantum Physics
Alessandro Torza
Abstract This chapter argues that quantum indeterminacy can be construed as
a merely derivative phenomenon. The possibility of merely derivative quantum
indeterminacy undermines both a recent argument against quantum indeterminacy
due to David Glick, and an argument against the possibility of merely derivative
indeterminacy due to Elizabeth Barnes.
Keywords Quantum logic · Classical logic · Logical space · Logical realism ·
Bivalence · Fundamentality · Naturalness
22.1
Introduction
It is a near platitude that a sizable part of our utterances are indeterminate in truth
value.1 Because the shirt I am wearing is a shade lying somewhere between green
and blue, my utterance of ‘this shirt is green’ is not quite true, but not false either.
And when asked where I live in my hometown, I say ‘near the historical center’
mainly because everyone knows where it is, and not because I live particularly close
to the historical center, although I do not live far from it, either.
In the last century, the philosophical consensus used to be that indeterminacy can
only originate in the way we represent the world, never in the nonrepresentational
world. Russell (1923, p. 85) wrote that “apart from representation, whether cognitive
or mechanical, there can be such thing as vagueness or precision: things are what
they are.” Dummett (1975, p. 314) would go as far as to claim that “the notion that
1 That near platitude has been nevertheless denied by those who recommend an epistemicist
understanding of vagueness (Williamson, 2002).
A. Torza ()
Instituto de Investigaciones Filosóﬁcas, UNAM, Circuito Mario de la Cueva, Ciudad
Universitaria, Coyoacán, Mexico
e-mail: atorza@me.com
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
V. Allori (ed.), Quantum Mechanics and Fundamentality, Synthese Library 460,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-99642-0_22
337

338
A. Torza
things might actually be vague, as well as being vaguely described, is not properly
intelligible.” Likewise, according to Lewis (1986, p. 212) “the only intelligible
account of vagueness locates it in our thought and language. The reason it’s vague
where the outback begins is not that there’s this thing, the outback, with imprecise
borders; rather there are many things, with different borders, and nobody has been
fool enough to try to enforce a choice of one of them as the ofﬁcial referent of the
word ‘outback’.”
Rhetoric aside, however, little has been provided in the way of arguments against
the notion of indeterminacy in the world, aka metaphysical indeterminacy (MI).
Sure, Evans (1978) and Salmon (1981, p. 338) have offered a clever and terse
disproofs of the possibility of vague objects. But the Evans-Salmon line of argument
only shows that an object cannot have indeterminate de re identity—it does not
rule out objects that are vague in other respects,2 nor does it rule out ways for
reality to display indeterminacy that do not involve any vague objects. And although
Williamson (2003) has provided a general argument against de re indeterminacy, his
conclusion rests on the speciﬁc limitations of his model theory of choice, rather than
on any substantive metaphysical considerations.
My diagnosis is that what kept philosophers from buying into MI was the lack
of suitable concepts that would allow them to theorize about it, rather than any
speciﬁc argument.3 The general attitude has indeed changed to some degree now
that a number of characterizations of MI have been put forward, as in Akiba (2004),
Barnes and Williams (2011), Darby and Pickup (2021), Smith and Rosen (2004),
Torza (2021), and Wilson (2013).
Potential manifestations of MI include (i) the ‘fuzzy’ objects of the macroscopic
world, such as clouds, mountains and persons; (ii) future contingents and the open
future; and (iii) quantum indeterminacy. Putative instances of iii include (iii.a) the
failure of value deﬁniteness of quantum observables; (iii.b) the vague identity of
quantum objects; and (iii.c) the count indeterminacy arising in quantum ﬁeld theory.
Although a good part of what I will be saying is the result of general features of my
favorite way of understanding MI, the focus of this chapter will be on iii.a.
The failure of value deﬁniteness is a typically quantum-mechanical phenomenon
whereby a system fails to have any determinate value of an observable at a time.
Given the eigenstate-eigenvalue link, the failure of value deﬁniteness follows from
the fact that a quantum state which is a superposition of eigenstates of an observable
is in general not an eigenstate of that same observable.4 For example, a particle in
2 For example, it has been argued that objects can have indeterminate coincidence (Akiba, 2000),
and indeterminate distinctness (Akiba, 2014).
3 Barnes (2010) has drawn a similar moral.
4 The eigenstate-eigenvalue link, a postulate of so-called ‘orthodox’ quantum mechanics (Gilton,
2016), states that a system has property O with value λ iff the quantum state of the system is
in an eigenstate of the associated operator ˆO with eigenvalue λ. It is worth mentioning that the
orthodoxy of the eigenstate-eigenvalue link has been challenged by Wallace (2019). For discussion
of the eigenstate-eigenvalue link vis-à-vis quantum indeterminacy, see Calosi and Wilson (2018),
Fletcher and Taylor (2021).

22
Derivative Metaphysical Indeterminacy and Quantum Physics
339
a superposition of position states has no determinate value of position. Although
the interpretative details may differ depending on the philosophical methodology
being employed, there appears to be a growing consensus that the failure of value
deﬁniteness constitutes evidence of MI (see Bokulich (2014), Calosi and Mariani
(2020, 2021), Calosi and Wilson (2018, 2021), Darby (2010), Darby and Pickup
(2021), Fletcher and Taylor (2021), Mariani (2021), Skow (2010), Torza (2020,
2021)).
A dissenting voice is Glick (2017), who has argued that no evidence of MI is to
be found in quantum theory. His overarching argument is as follows:
1. Orthodox quantum theory provides no evidence of fundamental MI.
2. The main realist interpretations of quantum theory provide no evidence of
fundamental MI.
3. Therefore, the main interpretations of quantum theory provide no evidence of
fundamental MI (from 1, 2).
4. MI cannot be derivative.
5. Therefore, the main interpretations of quantum theory provide no evidence of MI
(from 3, 4).
A comprehensive assessment of Glick’s argument lies outside the scope of this
work (see Calosi and Mariani (2020), Calosi and Wilson (2021) for criticism). I am
going to focus my attention on the thesis of line 4.
Glick’s belief that there is no derivative MI can be evinced from the following
passage, in which he argues that the failure of value deﬁniteness does not bring about
MI, if observables are derivative entities: “If, by contrast, one took the properties to
be ontologically derivative and quantum states to be fundamental, there would be
little room for metaphysical indeterminacy. [...] Any indeterminacy would occur
at the non-fundamental level and hence may be viewed as eliminable” (p. 206, my
emphasis).
But as already noted elsewhere, derivative does not amount to eliminable. We
can all agree that tables are derivative entities (whatever ‘derivative’ means), while
retaining our belief in the existence of tables. Indeed, the unpopularity of revisionist
ontological doctrines, such as mereological nihilism, is partly explained by the fact
that they demand us to give up on the existence of the medium-sized dry goods of
naive physics. Perhaps Glick thinks that although not everything which is derivative
is eliminable, some things are, and MI is one such thing. If that is the underlying
thought, however, we have not been given any arguments.
Here is a different line of reasoning that could be pursued on Glick’s behalf. In
lieu of 4, one could think that there is derivative MI only if there is fundamental
MI—in other words:
4∗. MI cannot be merely derivative.
By substituting 4∗for 4 in the argument, Glick can still draw his conclusion. For
if we have reason to reject fundamental MI, and if lack of fundamental MI entails
lack of derivative MI, we have reason to reject MI, period. Interestingly, Barnes

340
A. Torza
(2014) has offered a defense of 4∗. If her disproof of merely derivative MI turns out
to be conclusive, Glick could piggyback on that.
I make two claims: Barnes’ argument for 4∗is invalid; and, given my preferred
characterization of MI, 4∗is false. In this paper I will defend both claims, and
conclude that for all we know merely derivative MI arises in quantum physics.
22.2
Metaphysical Indeterminacy
As observed in the previous section, run-of-the-mill indeterminacy originates in
the way we represent reality. According to the standard account, representational
indeterminacy is semantic in character: it is rooted in the meaning of particular
subsentential expressions, such as predicates and names. The go-to semantic theory
of indeterminacy is the supervaluationism of Fine (1975), which characterizes
a term as indeterminate just in case its meaning is compatible with different
precisiﬁcations, that is to say, with different assignments of extensions in actuality.5
A sentence is said to be indeterminate in truth value just in case it is true on some
precisiﬁcations, and false on others.
The supervaluationist picture can be generalized in a most natural way by taking
precisiﬁcations to be assignments of intensions, rather than extensions. Accordingly,
a term is indeterminate just in case its meaning is compatible with different functions
from worlds to extensions. A sentence is said to be indeterminate in content if its
meaning is compatible with multiple functions from worlds to truth values—or,
equivalently, with multiple sets of worlds.
Now, let us identify coarse-grained facts (or states of affairs) with sets of worlds.
Say that a fact F obtains at world w if w ∈F; and that F obtains simpliciter if it
obtains at the actual world @. If sentence p is not indeterminate in content, let [p]
be the fact that p; and if it is indeterminate in content, let [p]1, [p]2, . . . be the facts
associated with the different precisiﬁcations of the language. The following holds:
FACT 1. On the supervaluationist picture, sentence p is indeterminate in truth value
just in case (i) it is indeterminate in content, and (ii) @ ∈[p]i and @ /∈[p]j, for
some i, j.
The left-to-right direction of FACT 1 highlights that, on the most popular semantic
account, all truth-value indeterminacy is indeterminacy in content.
Nevertheless, there appear to be sentences having indeterminate truth value but
determinate content, as exempliﬁed by Aristotle’s problem of the open future.6
5 A precisiﬁcation must be deﬁned for all terms at once, in order to preserve penumbral
connections, cf. Fine (1975, p. 271).
6 I am saying that there ‘appear’ to be such cases because, on two prominent characterizations
of MI—namely, the metaphysical supervaluationism of Barnes and Williams (2011), and the
determinable-based account of Wilson (2013)—MI does not involve truth-value gaps. However,
there are independent reasons for being skeptical of such approaches, since metaphysical super-

22
Derivative Metaphysical Indeterminacy and Quantum Physics
341
If there is no fact of the matter now as to whether there will be a sea battle
tomorrow, the sentence ‘there will be a sea battle’ is neither true nor false. Yet
each term occurring in it is semantically precise, and so the sentence cannot
pick out different intensions on different precisiﬁcations. This class of cases
suggests that the supervaluationist characterization of truth-value indeterminacy is
too restrictive, as it prejudges the possibility of indeterminacy originating in the
language-independent world. From now on I will therefore be assuming a deﬁnition
of truth-value indeterminacy which is neutral as to the source of the indeterminacy,
to the effect that p is indeterminate in truth value just in case p is neither true
nor false. Truth-value indeterminacy in this sense is entailed by, but does not entail
supervaluationist truth-value indeterminacy.
The above considerations suggest a negative characterization of MI as indetermi-
nacy that cannot be eliminated by precisifying the content of our assertions (Torza
(2020), cf. Barnes (2010, p. 604)):
IND−. MI arises if there is a sentence p which is indeterminate in truth value but not
in content.
According to IND−, MI occurs just when there is a sentence which is neither true
nor false, and yet picks out exactly one fact. However, MI can also be characterized
directly, as the phenomenon arising when there is no fact of the matter about
something. Fleshing out this alternative characterization will require that we say
more about the structure of logical space.
A logical space is a space of possibilities. In order for a class of facts to constitute
a logical space, they need to be closed under a number of logical operations such
as negation, conjunction etc. (cf. Rayo (2017)).7 A caveat: logical operations, as
objects in logical space mapping facts to facts, should not be confused with logical
operators, which are linguistic items mapping formulas to formulas. For example,
the negation operator ‘not’ is a logical constant having a negation operator as its
semantic value. Likewise for conjunction, disjunction etc. Accordingly, if F is the
fact that grass is green, the negation of F is the fact that grass is not green.
valuationism is unable to subsume quantum indeterminacy (Darby, 2010; Skow, 2010), whereas
the determinable-based theory has a hard time making sense of a number of phenomena such as
the open future, indeterminate identity, and indeterminate existence (Barnes & Cameron, 2016).
Moreover, it has been argued that the determinable-based account is inadequate in the way it deals
with quantum indeterminacy as well (Fletcher & Taylor, 2021; Torza, 2021). For a comparison
between the present approach and the determinable-based account see Lewis (2022) in this volume.
7 However, Turner (2016) has defended the idea that the relations holding between facts are quite
different from the familiar logical ones, and are akin to geometrical relations. Although Turner’s
view is both fascinating and compelling, discussing it would take me far aﬁeld. Sufﬁce to say that
everything I say here could be restated within Turner’s theory.

342
A. Torza
A logical space can be represented as a structure S = ⟨S, @, TS, −S, ⊓S . . .⟩,
such that:
1. S is a set of states (worlds). Among them is a distinguished item @, the actual
state.8
2. Facts are sets of states. The universal set S is the necessary fact; the empty set is
the impossible fact.
3. A fact F is said to obtain at state w (in symbols, TS(F, w)) if w ∈P; it is said
to obtain simpliciter if TS(F, @).
4. Logical operations are operations on facts: −SF is the negation of F; F ⊓S G is
the conjunction of F and G; etc.
One caveat: the above characterization is largely independent of questions in
modal metaphysics, such as whether worlds are concrete or abstract, or about the
nature of facts. All I am assuming is that logical space, whatever it is, instantiates
the structure deﬁned above. Likewise, when I speak of states (worlds) as points
or vectors in a structure, it is being assumed that states (worlds) play the relevant
structural role, and not that they are literally points or vectors.
Armed with those tools we can now state the idea that, relative to a logical space
S, MI amounts to there being no fact of the matter about something (Torza, 2021):
IND+. MI arises if there is a fact F such that neither F nor −SF obtains.
Prima facie, IND−and IND+ provide quite different characterizations of MI, in
that the former is semantic in character, whereas the latter deﬁnes a property of
logical space without making any detour through language. As it turns out, how-
ever, given some background assumptions the two characterizations are provably
equivalent:
FACT 2. Given a logical space S and a language L interpreted on S, there is a
sentence p of L which is indeterminate in truth value but not in content iff there
is a fact F in S such that neither F nor −SF obtains.9
8 If the logical space is the space of a dynamical system, @ should be a function of time, rather
than a constant. For present purpose, this complication can be set aside.
9 Proof. If p of L is determinate in content, it picks out a unique fact [p] in S. And if it is
indeterminate in truth value, neither TS([p], @) nor TS(−S[p], @) is the case. So, [p] is a fact
such that neither it nor its negation obtains. Conversely, if F is a fact in S such that neither it nor
its negation obtains, let p be a sentence of L such that [p] = F. Hence, p is not indeterminate in
content. Moreover, p is neither true nor false. QED.
This proof hinges on two background assumptions. One is that the object language L contains
no irreferential terms, such as ‘Vulcan’ or ‘God’. For otherwise there could be a sentence p∗such
as ‘Vulcan is a gas planet’ which, by not picking out any fact, is indeterminate in truth value (on
some semantic accounts, at least) but not in content (since indeterminacy in content requires that
it pick out multiple facts); and yet there would be no fact [p∗] such that neither it nor its negations
obtains (Torza, 2020). The other background assumption is that every fact F must be expressible
in L.
Insofar as one may reject either assumption, and so the equivalence, I take IND+ to be
my ofﬁcial characterization of MI. (Also notice that IND+, unlike IND−, does not involve any

22
Derivative Metaphysical Indeterminacy and Quantum Physics
343
Because of the equivalence between IND−and IND+, we can speak of MI with
no ambiguity.
22.3
Fundamentality and Derivativeness
Logical spaces of different kinds correspond to different logics. For example,
classical logical spaces differ from intuitionistic logical spaces in that classical
negation is involutive, unlike its intuitionistic counterpart. One fact that will play
a crucial role in the ensuing discussion is that the class of states of a physical system
can live in logical spaces of different kinds that agree about the assignment of values
to physical quantities.
Consider a Hilbert space H associated to a given quantum system. The class of all
states (unitary vectors) in H can be embedded in a classical logical space C, where
facts are arbitrary sets of vectors, negation is set-theoretic complementation, and
disjunction is set-theoretic union. The same class of states can also be embedded
in a quantum logical space Q, where facts are sets of vectors closed under linear
combination, negation is orthocomplementation,and disjunction is span10 (Birkhoff
& von Neumann, 1936). Note that the rays in H are maximally speciﬁc facts, i.e.,
facts about the system’s having a value of a particular observable. Since C and Q
on H contain the same rays, the two spaces will agree with respect to the obtaining
of facts about the assignment of values to physical quantities (e.g., about whether
the system is spin up along a particular direction). In other words, the classical and
the quantum logician will only disagree about the truth value of logically complex
sentences—in particular, sentences that contain either a negation or a disjunction.
Although a realist attitude towards orthodox quantum theory arguably favors Q
over C as representing the space of possibilities associated with a quantum system
(Torza, 2021, sec. 3.2; Fletcher & Taylor, 2021), there is no conclusive strategy for
picking one option over the other on the basis of empirical evidence alone. So, if
we think that there is such a thing as the One True logical space of a given quantum
system, the choice appears to be underdetermined by the physics.11 This is relevant
to the present discussion because, if it is underdetermined whether the states of a
representational machinery, and so can provide a reductive analysis of MI.) Nevertheless, it is
both interesting and illuminating that IND+ can be cast in semantic terms as IND−, given suitable
qualiﬁcations.
10 The orthocomplement of a fact F is the set of vectors that are orthogonal to each vector in F;
the span of facts F, G is the closure of the union of F and G under linear combination.
11 Quantum logic was famously defended as the One True logic in Putnam (1968) on the grounds
that it provides a solution to the measurement problem. Maudlin (2005) has argued against Putnam,
and concluded that there is no reason to replace classical with quantum logic. Although I agree
with Maudlin that quantum logic is of no help in addressing the measurement problem, I reject his
conclusion. Indeed, quantum logic is a consequence of accepting either the eigenstate-eigenvalue
link (Fletcher & Taylor, 2021) or the EPR criterion of reality (Torza, 2021, sec. 3.2).

344
A. Torza
quantum system live in classical or quantum logical space, the question of quantum
MI will also be underdetermined. For if the states of an arbitrary quantum system
deﬁne a classical logical space, MI cannot arise. Indeed, it is trivially the case that
every fact F of a classical logical space C is such that either it obtains or it does not
obtain (i.e., either TC(F, @) or not TC(F, @)). But because the classical negation
−C is complementation, it follows that F is such that either it or its negation
obtains (i.e., either TC(F, @) or TC(−CF, @)). On the other hand, if the states
of a quantum system deﬁne a quantum logical space, MI can and will arise. For
example, when a system composed by a single electron is in a superposition of z-
spin states described by the equation |ψ⟩=
1
√
2(| ↑z⟩e + | ↓z⟩e), neither the fact [e
is z-spin up] nor the fact [e is z-spin down] obtains. Since the quantum negation −Q
is orthocomplementation, [e is z-spin down]=−Q[e is z-spin up]. Hence, the fact [e
is z-spin up] is such that neither it nor its negation obtains (i.e., neither TQ([e is
z-spin up], @) nor TQ(−Q[e is z-spin up], @)).
Since the empirical evidence does not let us select a unique way of carving
the logical space associated with a quantum system, we seem to be faced with
underdetermination about logic. This raises a challenge to logical realism, the
view that there is One True logic, and that this is so in virtue of the way the
mind and language-independent world is like. The logical realist could rejoin as
follows: we can countenance multiple logical spaces, without thereby surrendering
to conventionalism, as long as they are ordered with respect to their relative
fundamentality. In that way, a physical system will be associated with One True
logical space, namely the fundamental one, as well as a number of nonfundamental
logical spaces.12
In the quantum case, talk of fundamental vs derivative logical spaces can be
cashed out in (at least) two ways. The ﬁrst strategy involves the realism about
structure articulated and defended in Sider (2011)—very roughly, the idea that
there is a metaphysically primitive and privileged way of carving reality into
natural properties, facts, etc. A realist about structure who regards classical logic
as fundamental will take there to be a metaphysically privileged way of carving
out the class of states of a quantum system, namely the classical one. This brand
of realist can countenance the existence of alternative ways of carving the same
class of states into a logical space, as long as those ways are nonfundamental.
The alternative carvings, despite being metaphysically second-rate, can be helpful
relative to speciﬁc theoretical or practical goals.
Of course, fundamentality talk is no solution to logical underdetermination if we
have no criteria to identify which logical space is fundamental. Fortunately, there are
sensible constraints on fundamentality that the realist can appeal to in order to make
progress. One such constraint is that, given a physical system, every nonfundamental
12 For a discussion of logical realism see McSweeney (2019), Tahko (2021).

22
Derivative Metaphysical Indeterminacy and Quantum Physics
345
logical space must be reducible to the fundamental one in the following sense
(Torza, 2021, sec. 6, cf. Sider, 2011, ch. 7):
COMPLETENESS. Let W be a class of states. If S is the fundamental logical space
on W, and S′ is any logical space on W, every fact in S′ is equivalent to some
fact in S.
The rationale for COMPLETENESS is that the facts of a nonfundamental space
should be nothing over and above the facts in the fundamental space.13 In order to
avoid irrelevant complications, I am taking fact equivalence to be cointensionality
(although more ﬁne-grained notions of fact equivalence could be employed, as in
Correia and Skiles (2019), Dorr (2016)). Thus, facts are equivalent just in case they
obtain at the exact same states. Since we are modeling facts as sets of states, and
since sets are extensional entities, fact equivalence reduces to strict identity.
Now, given a set W of states of a quantum system, it is compatible with
COMPLETENESS that a classical logical space C on W be fundamental and a
quantum logical space Q on W be nonfundamental, but not the other way around.
For recall that in Q only sets of vectors closed under linear combination count as
facts, whereas in C any arbitrary set of vectors is a fact. So, the facts in Q are
a proper subset of the facts in C, which entails that every fact in Q is equivalent
to a fact in C, but not vice versa. This guarantees that a realist about fundamental
structure can regard a system’s classical space as fundamental and its quantum space
as nonfundamental, but not vice versa.
I now turn to a strategy for justifying fundamentality talk in the quantum case
without relying on a metaphysical notion of structure. The reason why in quantum
logic facts are sets closed under linear combination is that the quantum logician
identiﬁes facts with experimental facts, which is to say, facts whose (non)obtaining
can be established by experimental means.14 But experiments are procedures for
determining the value of some quantum observable (position, momentum, spin,
etc.). Therefore, the facts that live in a quantum logical space Q are facts about
the possible values of physical observables. For the classical logician, on the other
hand, any set of vectors in a Hilbert space is a fact about the relevant system. So, the
facts of a classical space C need not be associated with a possible experiment, nor
are they deﬁned by reference to physical observables.
With that being said, here is the sketch of how classical and quantum logic
may coexist as two pictures of one and the same reality. According to quantum
logic, logical space is the space of experimental facts—the facts involving physical
observables. This is the familiar picture suggested by orthodox quantum theory.
13 But see Torza (2021, sec. 6) for an argument to the effect that COMPLETENESS is too stringent,
and should be replaced with a weaker condition of ‘collective completeness’. Although that
weakening has important consequences in the discussion on quantum MI, I must set it aside for
reasons of space.
14 This is due to the constraints that the Born rule sets on the possible outcomes of quantum
experiments (Birkhoff & von Neumann, 1936; Torza, 2021, sec. 3.2).

346
A. Torza
At the fundamental level, however, reality does not involve either experiments or
observables. Fundamentally, the world is isomorphic to a vector in Hilbert space,
and facts are regions of that space, i.e., sets of possible positions for the state
vector. This picture is exempliﬁed by the Hilbert Space Fundamentalism which
Sean Carroll defends in this volume:
Here I want to argue for the plausibility of an extreme position among these alternatives, that
the fundamental ontology of the world is completely and exactly represented by a vector
in an abstract Hilbert space, evolving in time according to unitary Schrödinger dynamics.
Everything else, from particles and ﬁelds to space itself, is rightly thought of as emergent
from that austere set of ingredients. (Carroll, 2022)
If something like Hilbert Space Fundamentalism is true, the structure of observ-
ables encoded in Q is nonfundamental, and grounded in C. On this theory, logical
space is fundamentally classical and derivatively quantum.
I have outlined two ways of motivating the view that C is fundamental and Q
is derivative: one from ﬁrst principles, and one inspired by foundational work in
physics. As I am about to argue, such a view bears on our central question. Let
us ﬁrst deﬁne what it is for MI to arise fundamentally, derivatively, and merely
derivatively:
FMI. Given a class W of states, fundamental MI arises if MI arises relative to a
fundamental logical space on W; derivative MI arises if MI arises relative to a
nonfundamental logical space on W; merely derivative MI arises if MI arises
derivatively but not fundamentally.
Since MI arises in quantum logical spaces, but not in classical logical spaces, we
can draw the following corollary:
FACT 3. Let W be the class of possible states of a given quantum system. If C on W is
fundamental, and Q on W is nonfundamental, MI will arise merely derivatively.
My ﬁrst main claim is now established: the assumption that
4∗. There is no merely derivative MI
which I have put forward on behalf of Glick, is unjustiﬁed. Consequently, the revised
argument against quantum MI from Sect. 22.1 is unsound. For all we know, MI
arises in quantum mechanics.
22.4
Against Barnes
I showed in the previous section that MI can be merely derivative, and I did so
constructively by providing an example from quantum physics. However, Barnes
(2014) has offered an argument purporting to show that merely derivative MI cannot
possibly arise. The goal of this section is to show that her argument is inconclusive.
Although replies to Barnes have already been offered (Eva, 2018; Mariani, 2021), I

22
Derivative Metaphysical Indeterminacy and Quantum Physics
347
will put forward a different line of resistance based on the observation that in general
there are multiple ways of carving logical space compatibly with the evidence.
Barnes’ argument purports to show that derivative MI does not arise unless
fundamental MI also arises. Let us start with some deﬁnitions, relative to a logical
space S:
1. A set F of facts entails a fact F if F obtains whenever each fact in F obtains.
2. A set F of facts is said to be complete if it entails every fact or its negation.
Here is a sketch of Barnes’ proof strategy, reformulated for consistency with the
present conventions. First, she supposes that there are a fundamental description
of reality, and a derivative description of reality. She also assumes crucially
(and implicitly) that both the facts picked out by statements of the fundamental
description and the facts picked out by statements of the derivative description—call
them fundamental and derivative facts, respectively—coexist in the same logical
space. Finally, she assumes that the set of obtaining fundamental facts is complete.15
Suppose now that the fundamental is determinate, i.e., that each fundamental fact
is such that either it or its negation obtains. Since the fundamental facts form
a complete set, they entail each derivative fact or its negation. The fundamental
being determinate, it follows that each derivative fact is such that either it or its
negation obtains. Therefore, the derivative is also determinate. It can be concluded
that merely derivative indeterminacy cannot arise.
The point where I distance myself from Barnes is the one I have ﬂagged, which
is her implicit assumption that both fundamental and derivative facts coexist in one
logical space. As the quantum case suggests, such an assumption is unjustiﬁed, since
different logical spaces can be deﬁned on the same set of states, and different spaces
correspond to descriptions of reality differing by their relative fundamentality. For
example, we can describe a quantum system as fundamentally isomorphic to a
vector in Hilbert space, which deﬁnes a classical logical space; and derivatively
as made up of observable properties such as position and momentum, which deﬁnes
a quantum logical space.
But once we account for the existence of multiple logical spaces ordered by
relative fundamentality, Barnes’ line of reasoning becomes invalid, as can be
evinced from the following reformulation of her argument (tailored to the quantum
case):
Consider a quantum system associated with a fundamental classical logical space C and a
nonfundamental quantum logical space Q. Because MI does not arise in C, the set C of
facts that obtain in C is complete. Now pick a fact F in Q. Because the facts in Q are a
subset of the facts in C, F is also a fact in C. Therefore, C entails either F or its negation. It
follows that either F or its negation obtains. Hence, every fact in Q is such that either it or
its negation obtains. Therefore, merely derivative MI does not arise in Q.
15 This assumption is Barnes’ version of the COMPLETENESS condition I discussed in Sect. 22.3.

348
A. Torza
The above argument is invalid because “either F or its negation obtains” is
ambiguous between the following two readings:
α. Either F or −CF obtains.
β. Either F or −QF obtains.
Notice that “C entails either F or its negation” should be read as “C entails either
F or −C F”, since the entailment takes place in C. From that α follows. But it does
not follow from α that every fact in Q is such that either it or its negation obtains,
because in Q the negation of F is −QF, and the obtaining takes place in Q. On the
other hand, whereas it follows from β that every fact in Q is such that either it or
its negation obtains, β does not follow from the fact that C entails either F or its
negation −CF.
The moral should be straightforward. It did not occur to Barnes that logical
operations are relative to a logical space, and that one and the same set of states can
be embedded in different logical spaces endowed with different sets of operations.
In the present case, although classical negation prevents MI from arising in C,
quantum negation allows for gaps in Q and, therefore, for merely derivative MI.
Thus, Barnes’ argument fails because it rests on the unwarranted assumption that
the fundamental and the derivative obey the same logic.
One might object that Barnes and I are talking past each other, since we assume
different characterizations of MI. Now, it is true that her own characterization of
MI—the metaphysical supervaluationism developed for example in Barnes and
Williams (2011)—neither requires nor postulates gaps in logical space, unlike the
view I articulated in Sect. 22.2. But our disagreement concerning the nature of MI is
irrelevant to the question as to whether her argument against merely derivative MI is
valid. For although on her theory the failure of bivalence is not a necessary condition
for MI, it still is a sufﬁcient condition. Indeed, metaphysical supervaluationism
says that MI arises just when there is a fact F such that it neither determinately
obtains nor determinately fails to obtain. But if a fact does not obtain, it does not
determinately obtain; and if it does not fail to obtain, it does not determinately fail to
obtain. So, there is MI in my sense only if there is MI in Barnes’ sense (although not
vice versa). If MI in my sense arises in Q, it will also arise according to Barnes.16
22.5
Conclusions
I have sketched two ways of motivating the view that every quantum system is
associated with a fundamental classical logical space, as well as a nonfundamental
quantum logical space—one based on realism about fundamental structure, and one
based on foundational work in physics. Since MI arises in quantum logical spaces
16 It is also worth mentioning that Darby (2010), Skow (2010) and Fletcher and Taylor (2021) have
independently argued that metaphysical supervaluationism is unable to model quantum MI.

22
Derivative Metaphysical Indeterminacy and Quantum Physics
349
but not in classical logical spaces, I have concluded that quantum physics can be
interpreted as giving rise to merely derivative MI, which is to say, MI arising only
at the nonfundamental level. This result has a twofold corollary: it undermines an
argument against quantum MI which improves on the one offered in Glick (2017);
and it provides a counterexample to an argument against merely derivative MI due
to Barnes (2014).
References
Akiba, K. (2000). Vagueness as a modality. The Philosophical Quarterly, 50(200), 359–370.
Akiba, K. (2004). Vagueness in the world. Noûs, 38, 407–29.
Akiba, K. (2014). A defense of indeterminate distinctness. Synthese, 191(15), 3557–3573.
Barnes, E. (2010). Ontic vagueness: A guide for the perplexed. Noûs, 44(4), 601–627.
Barnes, E. (2014). Fundamental indeterminacy. Analytic Philosophy, 55(4), 339–362.
Barnes, E., & Cameron, R. (2016). Are there indeterminate states of affairs? No. In E. Barnes (Ed.),
Current controversies in metaphysics (pp. 120–132). Routledge.
Barnes, E., & Williams, J. R. G. (2011). A theory of metaphysical indeterminacy. In D. Zimmerman
& K. Bennett (Eds.), Oxford studies in metaphysics (Vol. 6, pp. 103–48). Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Birkhoff, G., & von Neumann, J. (1936). The logic of quantum mechanics. The Annals of
Mathematics, 37(4), 823–843.
Bokulich, A. (2014). Metaphysical indeterminacy, properties, and quantum theory. Res Philosoph-
ica, 91(3), 449–475.
Calosi, C., & Mariani, C. (2020). Quantum relational indeterminacy. Studies in History and
Philosophy of Science Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 71, 158–
169.
Calosi, C., & Mariani, C. (2021). Quantum indeterminacy. Philosophy Compass. https://doi.org/
10.1111/phc3.12731
Calosi, C., & Wilson, J. M. (2018). Quantum metaphysical indeterminacy. Philosophical Studies,
38(3), 1–29.
Calosi, C., & Wilson, J. (2021). Quantum indeterminacy and the double-slit experiment. Philo-
sophical Studies, 178(10), 3291–3317.
Carroll, S. (2022). Reality as a vector in Hilbert space. In V. Allori (Ed.), Quantum mechanics
and fundamentality. Naturalizing quantum theory between scientiﬁc realism and ontological
indeterminacy. Synthese Library. Springer.
Correia, F., & Skiles, A. (2019). Grounding, essence, and identity. Philosophy and Phenomenolog-
ical Research, 98(3), 642–670.
Darby, G. (2010). Quantum mechanics and metaphysical indeterminacy. Australasian Journal of
Philosophy, 88(2), 227–245.
Darby, G., & Pickup, M. (2021). Modelling deep indeterminacy. Synthese, 198, 1685–1710.
Dorr, C. (2016). To be F is to be G. Philosophical Perspectives, 30(1), 39–134.
Dummett, M. (1975). Wang’s paradox. Synthese, 30(3–4), 201–232.
Eva, B. (2018). Emerging (in)determinacy. Thought: A Journal of Philosophy, 7(1), 31–39.
Evans, G. (1978). Can there be vague objects? Analysis, 38(4), 208.
Fine, K. (1975). Vagueness, truth, and logic. Synthese, 30(3–4), 265–300.
Fletcher, S. C., & Taylor, D. E. (2021). Quantum indeterminacy and the eigenstate-eigenvalue link.
Synthese, 199(3–4), 1–32.
Gilton, M. J. R. (2016). Whence the eigenstate-eigenvalue link? Studies in History and Philosophy
of Science Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 55, 92–100.

350
A. Torza
Glick, D. (2017). Against quantum indeterminacy. Thought: A Journal of Philosophy, 6(3), 204–
213.
Lewis, D. (1986). On the plurality of worlds. Wiley-Blackwell.
Lewis, P. J. (2022). Explicating quantum indeterminacy. In V. Allori (Ed.), Quantum mechanics
and fundamentality. Naturalizing quantum theory between scientiﬁc realism and ontological
indeterminacy. Synthese Library. Springer.
Mariani, C. (2021). Emergent quantum indeterminacy. Ratio, 34(3), 183–192.
Maudlin, T. (2005). The tale of quantum logic. In Y. Ben-Menahem (Ed.), Hilary Putnam (pp.
156–187). Cambridge University Press.
McSweeney, M. M. (2019). Logical realism and the metaphysics of logic. Philosophy Compass,
14(1), e12563.
Putnam, H. (1968). Is logic empirical? In R. Cohen & M. Wartofsky (Eds.), Boston studies in the
philosophy of science (Vol. 5, pp. 216–241). Dordrecht: Reidel.
Rayo, A. (2017). The world is the totality of facts, not of things. Philosophical Issues, 27(1), 250–
278.
Russell, B. (1923). Vagueness. Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 1(2), 84–92.
Salmon, N. (1981). Reference and essence. Princeton University Press.
Sider, T. (2011). Writing the book of the world. Oxford University Press.
Skow, B. (2010). Deep metaphysical indeterminacy. Philosophical Quarterly, 60(241), 851–858.
Smith, N. J. J., & Rosen, G. (2004). Worldly indeterminacy: A rough guide. Australasian Journal
of Philosophy, 82, 185–198.
Tahko, T. (2021). A survey of logical realism. Synthese, 198(5), 4775–4790.
Torza, A. (2020). Quantum metaphysical indeterminacy and worldly incompleteness. Synthese,
197, 4251–4264.
Torza, A. (2021). Quantum metametaphysics. Synthese, 199(3), 9809–9833.
Turner, J. (2016). The facts in logical space: A tractarian ontology. Oxford University Press.
Wallace, D. (2019). What is orthodox quantum mechanics? In A. Cordero (Ed.), Philosophers look
at quantum mechanics. Springer.
Williamson, T. (2002). Vagueness. Routledge.
Williamson, T. (2003). Vagueness in reality. In M. J. Loux & D. W. Zimmerman (Eds.), The Oxford
handbook of metaphysics. Oxford University Press.
Wilson, J. M. (2013). A determinable-based account of metaphysical indeterminacy. Inquiry, 56(4),
359–385.

Chapter 23
Explicating Quantum Indeterminacy
Peter J. Lewis
Abstract In recent years there has been a robust but inconclusive debate over
the existence and nature of indeterminacy in the world as described by quantum
mechanics. I suggest that the inconclusive nature of the debate stems from starting
from a metaphysical theory of indeterminacy. I propose instead framing the issue
as a Carnapian explication project: start with the informal notion of indeterminacy
used by physicists, and consider how best to make that concept precise. I defend
a precisiﬁcation based on von Neumann’s interpretation of quantum states, and
consider the nature of the indeterminacy that results.
23.1
Quantum Indeterminacy: The Challenges
The dispute about whether there is indeterminacy in the world is long and
inconclusive. At ﬁrst glance, it seems like quantum mechanics ought to provide
a quick, empirical resolution to the debate: prima facie, a photon in a superposition
of right-polarized and left-polarized states has an indeterminate polarization. But
quantum mechanics has not provided any such resolution; the controversy drags on.
In this paper, I suggest some reasons for this impasse, and lay out a path forward.
The typical argument that quantum mechanics exhibits genuine indeterminacy
goes something like this: First, a general account of indeterminacy is constructed,
and second, it is argued that quantum mechanics is an instance of that general
account (e.g. Calosi & Wilson, 2019). But this strategy runs into problems at each
step. At the ﬁrst step, the general accounts of indeterminacy are controversial,
both individually (Darby, 2010; Glick, 2017) and because they compete with each
other (Wilson, 2013). And at the second, even though quantum mechanics is
arguably our best case for an instance of indeterminacy in the world, it remains
a deeply problematic theory. There is no consensus over what, if anything, quantum
P. J. Lewis ()
Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH, USA
e-mail: peter.j.lewis@dartmouth.edu
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
V. Allori (ed.), Quantum Mechanics and Fundamentality, Synthese Library 460,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-99642-0_23
351

352
P. J. Lewis
mechanics tells us about the nature of the physical world (Lewis, 2016), and so any
proposed argument from quantum mechanics to indeterminacy faces the objection
that it rests on a mistaken interpretation of quantum mechanics (Glick, 2017).
Of course, this might just be the nature of philosophical debate. But I want to
suggest a strategy that might avoid some of these controversies. The strategy is
grounded in a broadly Carnapian methodology. As long as we see the issue of
indeterminacy as one of discovery, analogous to scientiﬁc discovery of empirical
facts, the impasse over its existence seems inevitable. Both the description of what
it is we are aiming to discover in the world, and the claim that in quantum mechanics
we have discovered it, remain controversial. But once we realize that the issue turns
in large part on constructing an appropriate conceptual structure to use, we can make
progress.
In his Logical Foundations of Probability, Carnap suggests that constructing
an appropriate concept is a matter of explication. Explication consists of taking
an imprecise “prescientiﬁc” concept and transforming it into a precisely-deﬁned
“scientiﬁc” concept (Carnap, 1950, 3). Of course, a concept can be precisiﬁed
in a number of different ways; Carnap suggests that we should judge potential
explications by how fruitful they are likely to be for the scientiﬁc enterprise,
weighing this against the potentially competing considerations of simplicity and
similarity to the prescientiﬁc conception (1950, 5). The targets of explication for
Carnap in this work are the concepts of conﬁrmation and probability: they are used
extensively but without precision in the sciences, and by paying attention to the way
they are used, we can see how to make them precise in a scientiﬁcally fruitful way.
My contention here is that the same is true of indeterminacy. That is, by looking at
quantum mechanics, we ﬁnd widespread appeal to an imprecisely deﬁned concept
of indeterminacy, and we can also see how that concept can be made more precise
in a way that is likely to be fruitful within physics.
In the next section, I argue that indeterminacy plays an important role in quantum
mechanics. In Sect. 23.3, I argue that constructing a precise version of this concept is
straightforward: the structure needed to represent indeterminacy precisely is already
present in the Hilbert-space formalism, and indeed a canonical interpretation of
the formalism by von Neumann already provides the required precisiﬁcation. In
Sect. 23.4, I defend the resulting account of indeterminacy: the road to this account
passes a number of conceptual choice-points leading to different interpretations of
quantum states, but I argue that the canonical one is superior as an explication. In
Sect. 23.5, I consider some more general questions about the nature of the concept
of indeterminacy explicated here: is it of the same kind as everyday instances
of indeterminacy, e.g. concerning the extent of the Australian Outback, and is it
genuinely metaphysical indeterminacy?

23
Explicating Quantum Indeterminacy
353
23.2
The Role of Indeterminacy in Quantum Mechanics
Open any textbook on quantum mechanics, and you will ﬁnd a passage something
like this:
Let us summarize our description of the z component of the angular momentum of a photon.
Corresponding to this physical quantity we have an operator, i.e. a matrix, ℏS. Photons that
are in an eigenstate, | R⟩or | L⟩, of this operator can be assigned a deﬁnite value of the
z component of angular momentum . . . Any other photon state | ψ⟩cannot be assigned a
deﬁnite value of angular momentum. (Baym, 1969, 17)
If we read “deﬁnite” as “determinate”, this says that in many states (in fact,
in all states except for a few special ones), the photon’s angular momentum
is indeterminate. Similar language can be found in the experimental literature.
For example, Juffmann et al. (2009) produce multi-slit self-interference between
C60 molecules, and then image the individual molecules making up the resulting
interference pattern. They describe the imaged individual molecules as “localized”,
but the molecules passing through the slits as “delocalized” (Juffmann et al., 2009,
3); again, we can read the positions of the former as determinate and the positions
of the latter as indeterminate.
Of course, the fact that physicists use a concept of indeterminacy doesn’t
tell us what kind of concept they are using. The textbook passage is closely
followed by a description of the Born rule, via which a state ﬁxes the probabilities
that the various possible values of angular momentum would be revealed by an
appropriate measurement. Since probabilities are often interpreted epistemically,
this is naturally read as suggesting that a photon whose state is not an eigenstate
nevertheless has a perfectly determinate angular momentum property, but one that
we do not know prior to measurement. In that case, the concept of indeterminacy
would apply to our knowledge of the world, not to the world itself. However, an
epistemic understanding of the quantum state faces well known difﬁculties, in the
form of various no-go theorems (Bell, 1964; Kochen & Specker, 1967; Pusey et
al., 2012). These theorems each show that, subject to plausible assumptions, an
epistemic understanding of the quantum state is incompatible with the predictions of
the theory. This does not mean that an epistemic understanding of the quantum state
is absolutely precluded; the assumptions underlying each theorem can be denied
(Leifer, 2014). But for present purposes I will set epistemic interpretations of the
quantum state aside. I also assume that we take a form of realism for granted; that
is, we don’t take the quantum state to be merely a guide to what we should believe
(Healey, 2012). In other words, for present purposes I assume that the quantum state
is a representation of the world rather than of our knowledge.
Given that assumption, the conclusion that a concept of worldly indeterminacy
plays an important role within quantum mechanics apparently follows straightfor-
wardly. The above-mentionedphoton, when its state is not | R⟩or | L⟩, has a non-zero
probability, on measurement, of being found to be right-polarized and a non-zero
probability of being found to be left-polarized. If these probabilities are not to be
understood epistemically, it looks like we must say that the photon has neither

354
P. J. Lewis
polarization prior to measurement. If the state is not to be understood instrumentally,
it looks like a non-eigenstate describes a state in which the photon has neither
polarization. But since, due to quantization, right-hand and left-hand polarization
are the only polarization properties the photon can (determinately) have, the natural
thing to say is that the photon’s polarization is indeterminate prior to measurement.
Furthermore, this kind of indeterminacy arguably plays a role in the kind of
explanations quantum mechanics gives. Consider self-interference of C60 molecules
again. The “delocalization” of each molecule as it passes through the slits is
apparently required to explain interference; a molecule that passes determinately
through one slit cannot exhibit self-interference. If the superposition is understood
in terms of molecules with indeterminate locations, an explanation of interference
is at least possible, insofar as the set of trajectories between which each molecule is
indeterminate includes trajectories passing through both slits and converging at the
screen (Calosi & Wilson, 2021). To the extent that physicists think of interference
phenomena in terms of overlap of delocalized trajectories of a single molecule, it
looks like they are helping themselves to the notion that molecule trajectories can
be indeterminate. Indeed, part of the motivation of researchers like Juffmann et al.
(2009) in exploring interference effects in larger and larger molecules is to ﬁnd
the extent of this indeterminacy: where does the indeterminacy characteristic of the
quantum micro-world give way to the determinacy of the observable macro-world?
It would be going too far to assert that quantum mechanics requires a concept
of indeterminacy: as we shall see in Sect. 23.4, it is possible to eliminate the
indeterminacy from quantum mechanics instead of explicating it. But for the
moment, let us proceed under the assumption that indeterminacy is a concept worth
retaining, and consider how it should be made precise.
23.3
The Structure of Quantum Indeterminacy
In fact, such a precisiﬁcation has largely been done for us, and indeed is almost as
old as quantum mechanics itself. In the ﬁrst systematic account of the structure
of quantum mechanics, von Neumann (1932) constructs an interpretation that
incorporates indeterminacy. We can think of his interpretation as an explication of
quantum indeterminacy in Carnap’s (1950) sense—a way of making the concept
precise in such a way as to be fruitful for the ﬂedgling discipline of quantum
mechanics.
The state of a system is represented in quantum mechanics by a vector in
a Hilbert space. An observable—a set of experimentally accessible, mutually
exclusive properties of the system—is represented by a Hermitian operator on the
Hilbert space that takes a vector as input and produces a vector as output. And, as
noted in the previous section, a system (determinately) has one of the properties that
make up the observable if, and only if, its state is an eigenstate of the corresponding

23
Explicating Quantum Indeterminacy
355
operator—a vector that is mapped to a scalar multiple of itself by the operator.1
The eigenstates of a Hermitian operator are mutually orthogonal vectors. A system
whose state is not one of the eigenstates of the operator does not determinately have
any property from among those that make up the observable, and is, to that extent,
indeterminate.
But here we need to be a little more careful. In the Juffmann apparatus, a
C60 molecule that is “delocalized”—that is not determinately approaching any
speciﬁed slit—can still be described as determinately “encountering” the slits, since
it is determinately located in the tube containing the slits and not anywhere else
(Juffmann et al., 2009, 2). The molecule does not determinately have a location
at sufﬁciently ﬁne grain, but nevertheless if we consider a disjunction of those
ﬁne-grained locations, the molecule determinately has the disjunctive property. To
understand indeterminacy, then, we need to understand its logic.
This is precisely what von Neumann (1932, 130–134) provides us with. Consider
an operator with n mutually orthogonal eigenstates φ1 through φn, corresponding to
n mutually exclusive properties p1 through pn. Let Pi be the proposition that the
system has property pi. Then Pi obtains (the system has property pi) iff the state
is φi. The disjunction Pi ∨Pj obtains (the system has pi or pj) iff the state lies in
the subspace spanned by φi and φj—if it lies somewhere in the plane formed by
arbitrary weighted sums αφi + βφj. The negation ¬Pi obtains (the system lacks
pi) iff the state is orthogonal to φi. More generally, for propositions Qi and Qj that
may themselves be compound, Qi ∨Qj obtains iff the state lies in the subspace
formed by arbitrary weighted sums of the vectors in the subspaces corresponding
to Qi obtaining and to Qj obtaining. The negation ¬Qi obtains iff the state lies in
the orthocomplement of Qi—the subspace formed by arbitrary weighted sums of
vectors orthogonal to every vector in the subspace corresponding to Qi obtaining.
This logic has become known as quantum logic (Birkhoff & von Neumann,
1936). Quantum logic is non-classical: bivalence fails, as does the compositionality
of disjunction. In particular, since the state of a system can be such that it is neither
in Qi nor orthogonal to Qi, the system can be indeterminate with respect to the
corresponding property, in the sense that it neither has it nor lacks it. Indeed (as
Torza (2021) suggests2), we can deﬁne indeterminacy in this way:
Deﬁnition 1: A system exhibits indeterminacy iff there is at least one property p such that
the system neither has p nor lacks p.
The eigenstates of a Hermitian operator form a complete basis: they span the vector
space, so that any vector in the space can be expressed as a linear combination of
eigenstates. This means that the set of mutually exclusive properties {p1, p2, . . . pn}
picked out by an operator is complete in a corresponding sense: the disjunction P1
1 From hereon I will generally drop the word “determinately”: to say that a system has a property
(lacks a property) means that it determinately has that property (determinately lacks that property).
2 Torza (2021) deﬁnes indeterminacy in terms of facts rather than property possession. The
deﬁnition here can be regarded as a special case of Torza’s for facts about the possession of a
property; this is the only kind of fact considered in this paper.

356
P. J. Lewis
∨P2 . . . ∨Pn necessarily obtains.3 But it does not follow that the system has any
one of the basic properties: it can be indeterminate whether the system has pi for
each pi. This gives us an alternative (and equivalent4) deﬁnition of indeterminacy:
Deﬁnition 2: A system exhibits indeterminacy iff it fails to have each of a non-empty
complete set of mutually exclusive properties {p1, p2, . . . pn}, where a set of properties
is complete iff the disjunction P1 ∨P2 . . . ∨Pn necessarily obtains.
Given this precisiﬁcation of the concept of indeterminacy,we can see how the claims
of physicists about the properties of quantum systems make sense. Consider C60
interference again, and consider a location observable whose eigenstates correspond
to the molecule being in a particular small region of space, say a 100 nanometer
cube. A C60 molecule passing through the slits is not in an eigenstate of this
location observable, and hence cannot be said to determinately pass through any
particular slit. Nevertheless, the state of the molecule does lie within the subspace
corresponding to the large disjunction of these small regions that makes up the tube
leading to the slits; hence the molecule can correctly be described as encountering
the slits.5 The location of the molecule is indeterminate at one scale, but not at
another.
23.4
The Conceptual Landscape
The account of indeterminacy in quantum mechanics presented so far has historical
precedence: it is the earliest, and has become canonical. But that doesn’t mean that
it is the best account. In laying out the account, I have breezed past some conceptual
choice-points. In particular, there are choices to be made concerning the association
of properties with quantum states, the logic obeyed by those property ascriptions,
and the deﬁnition of indeterminacy. So let us revisit these choices a little more
systematically to better examine whether the original explication of indeterminacy
is the one we should retain.
3 The nature of the necessity here is an interesting question. It is not a logical necessity that a
disjunction of this form is true. Rather, the source of the necessity is the property structure of the
world. Does this make it a metaphysical necessity? This question is brieﬂy taken up in Sect. 23.5.
4 Suppose a system satisﬁes Deﬁnition 1, and let q be the property of lacking p. Then the set {p, q}
is a non-empty complete set of mutually exclusive properties, and the system fails to have each of
them, hence satisfying Deﬁnition 2. Conversely, suppose a system violates Deﬁnition 1: for each
property pi in {p1, p2, . . . pn}, it either has pi or lacks pi. Since there is no vector that is orthogonal
to every eigenstate φi, the system cannot lack every property in the set. Hence it must have some
property in the set, in violation of Deﬁnition 2.
5 It is worth noting that the state of the molecule will not be exactly an eigenstate of being located
in the tube, since it will have a very small term corresponding to tunneling through the tube. Here
and in the following I assume that such small terms can be ignored, but the justiﬁcation for this
claim would take us too far aﬁeld; see Lewis (2016, 86).

23
Explicating Quantum Indeterminacy
357
First, I followed the textbooks in asserting that, for a given observable, a system
determinately has a property from among those making up the observable when its
state is an eigenstate of the corresponding operator, and otherwise is indeterminate
regarding those properties. So, for example, the z-spin operator for a spin-1/2
particle has two eigenstates, spin-up and spin-down. The particle has the z-spin-
up property when its state is the spin-up eigenstate, the z-spin-down property when
its state is the spin-down eigenstate, and otherwise has indeterminate z-spin. Call
this non-classical property ascription.
This is not the only way to describe these states. One could instead say that, for a
given observable, a system determinately has a property from among those making
up the observable when its state is an eigenstate of the corresponding operator, and
otherwise determinately lacks that property. So, for example, a spin-1/2 particle
has the z-spin-up property when its state is the spin-up eigenstate, the z-spin-
down property when its state is the spin-down eigenstate, and otherwise lacks both
the z-spin-up property and the z-spin-down property. Call this classical property
ascription.6
The choice regarding property ascription is clearly connected to the choice of
logic. Non-classical property ascription allows that a system can neither have nor
lack a given property, which is most naturally accommodated by a three-valued
logic such as quantum logic: for a non-eigenstate of z-spin, it is neither true nor false
that the system has z-spin-up. Classical property ascription allows the adoption of
a fully classical logic: for every property, a system either has it or lacks it, and for
a non-eigenstate of z-spin, it is false that the system is z-spin-up and false that it is
z-spin-down.
This pair of choices is also connected to the choice of a deﬁnition of indeter-
minacy. The former pair is naturally associated with Torza’s (2021) deﬁnition of
indeterminacy: a system exhibits indeterminacy iff there is at least one property p
such that the system neither has p nor lacks p. The latter pair is more naturally
associated with Wilson’s (2013) deﬁnition of indeterminacy: a system exhibits
indeterminacy iff it lacks every determinate property for a given determinable
property. So, for example, a system that is not in an eigenstate of z-spin lacks the
z-spin-up property and lacks the z-spin-down property, and these are the only two
determinate properties for the z-spin determinable.7
So we have two packages of conceptual choices: Torza’s (2021) and Wilson’s
(2013). Both yield the conclusion that there is indeterminacy in quantum mechanics,
via different routes. But there are other combinations of choices that do not yield
indeterminacy. If we combine classical property ascription and classical logic with
Torza’s deﬁnition of indeterminacy, we get a conceptual structure according to
6 Classical property ascription violates von Neumann’s association of every proposition with a
projection: “The particle lacks the z-spin-up property” does not correspond to a projection. This
asymmetry between having a property and lacking a property may or may not be problematic,
depending on whether one thinks there is a legitimate distinction here.
7 See also Bokulich (2014) and Wolff (2015) for discussion of a determinable-based deﬁnition of
indeterminacy.

358
P. J. Lewis
which non-eigenstates determinately lack the relevant property, so that there is no
property such that a system neither has it nor lacks it, and hence no indeterminacy.8
Similarly, if we combine non-classical property ascription and quantum logic with
Wilson’s deﬁnition of indeterminacy, we get a conceptual structure according to
which non-eigenstates do not determinately lack the relevant property, hence there
is no state that determinately lacks every property for a determinable, and hence no
indeterminacy.
How should we judge these competing conceptual structures? Recall Carnap’s
(1950, 5) four criteria for evaluation of a potential explication: the explicated
concept should be exact and fruitful, and it should also be simple and similar to
the imprecise concept on which it is based. These criteria may compete with each
other; it is the best overall package that should be adopted.
I submit that explications that do away with indeterminacy altogether fare poorly
under these criteria. Elimination of an imprecise prescientiﬁc concept is typically
an option in explication projects; one can replace the imprecise concept with
nothing, and let other concepts do the work. Sometimes elimination is a reasonable
option. For example, it is reasonable to hold that the only biologically respectable
explication of race is one that does away with the concept altogether (Spencer,
2018).
But elimination is clearly a radical option, faring very poorly on the similarity
criterion—the null concept is clearly very different from any substantive prescien-
tiﬁc concept. It is only a reasonable option when retaining the concept in question
would be worse. In the case of race, a precise, biologically respectable deﬁnition
arguably fares poorly on the simplicity criterion—it would have to be gerrymandered
and disjoint in order to bear any relation to our ordinary race concept—and also on
the fruitfulness criterion—generalizations over races may fail precisely because of
this disjoint structure. In the case of indeterminacy, there are no such downsides
to retaining the concept. The conceptual choices that eliminate indeterminacy are
no simpler than those that retain it: in both cases, you need to pair a particular
rule for property ascription and its associated logic with a particular deﬁnition
of indeterminacy, so simplicity is on a par.9 And the concept of indeterminacy,
as noted in Sect. 23.2, has been quite fruitful in the development of quantum
mechanics, appearing in standard expositions and arguably motivating a good deal
of experimental work.
So while skeptics like Glick (2017) are surely right that we can do without a
concept of indeterminacy in describing the quantum world, this doesn’t address the
question of whether we should. Glick’s “sparse view” of properties holds that a
system that lacks each determinate property for a determinable also thereby lacks
8 For this reason, Torza (2020, 4261) argues that adopting a non-classical logic is essential to an
account of quantum indeterminacy. But as Calosi and Wilson (2021) note, this is only so if one also
adopts Torza’s preferred deﬁnition of indeterminacy; it does not follow under Wilson’s deﬁnition.
9 There may be simplicity trade-offs: a classical logic is arguably simpler than a quantum logic, but
Torza’s deﬁnition of indeterminacy is arguably simpler than Wilson’s. My point is just that there
is no clear winner on simplicity grounds.

23
Explicating Quantum Indeterminacy
359
the determinable, and hence does not exhibit indeterminacy according to the letter
of Wilson’s deﬁnition. This has the effect of combining classical property ascription
with an account of indeterminacy according to which a system that lacks each
determinate property for an observable does not constitute a case of indeterminacy.
This combination of conceptual choices was considered above; there is nothing
wrong with it as a conceptual structure, but since the concept of indeterminacy is a
fruitful one, it is not one we should feel motivated to adopt.
The remaining question, then, is how we should judge the two packages of
views that endorse quantum indeterminacy: Torza’s and Wilson’s. This is a trickier
issue, and perhaps less important—either will probably do ﬁne. My endorsement
of Torza’s scheme above largely follows from considerations of similarity: it sticks
closer to the way physicists have understood the theory—e.g. through the work of
von Neumann—and this mode of understanding has also been extremely fruitful.
To be more speciﬁc: according to Wilson’s scheme, a particle that is not in a
location eigenstate (at a certain degree of ﬁne-grainedness) determinately lacks
each location, and hence lacks their disjunction. Torza (2020, 4262) interprets this
as meaning that the particle fails to have a position—that it is nowhere in space.
Calosi and Wilson (2021) correct this interpretation: being located in space, they
say, is a matter of having a determinable property, which cannot be reduced to a
disjunction of determinates. But the disjunctive account of coarse-grained location
and its associated non-classical logic are part and parcel of the way physicists think
about quantum systems: they are encapsulated in von Neumann’s interpretation,
which is, after all, canonical. One could replace this familiar conceptual structure
with an unfamiliar structure of determinables and determinates extracted from the
metaphysics literature, but it takes quite a lot of philosophical work to spell out this
alternative, and such a revision seems ultimately unnecessary.
It is worth noting, though, that a Carnapian approach embraces conceptual plu-
ralism. I have defended a particular approach to indeterminacy based on fruitfulness
for physics and similarity to concepts already used by physicists. But there may
be other goals, and other constituencies, relative to which Wilson’s approach is
preferable. And even in physics, it may prove useful to employ classical property
ascription and classical logic on occasion. For example, when explaining how von
Neumann’s interpretation of quantum state works, it may be useful to stress that
when a particle is in a superposition of being located at A and being located at B,
it is not located at A, and it is not located at B, so there is a sense in which “The
particle is either at A or at B” is false.
Two further views of indeterminacy are worth commenting on. First, I have been
concentrating on Wilson’s “gappy” account of indeterminacy, according to which
a system exhibits indeterminacy iff it lacks each determinate property for some
determinable. But she also constructs a “glutty” account of indeterminacy (2013,
367), and promotes it as an account of quantum indeterminacy (Calosi & Wilson,
2021). According to the “glutty” account, a system exhibits indeterminacy if it has
(to some degree) more than one determinate property for some determinable. It is
natural to combine this with classical logic and an account of property possession
according to which a system possesses a property (to some degree) unless its state

360
P. J. Lewis
is orthogonal to the relevant eigenstate. Again, we get a serviceable account of
indeterminacy. This account has the advantage that it allows us to take at face value
physicists’ claims that e.g. a particle can be “in two places at once”, whereas if we
adopt Torza’s account have to interpret this as loose talk that should be eliminated
from precise science. But accepting a “glutty” account adds a further complication
in addition to an appeal to the determinate/determinable distinction: it needs an
account of relativized or partial property possession, and this is neither simple nor
familiar.
Second, there is another prominent account of indeterminacy in literature,
namely the precisiﬁcationist approach of Barnes and Williams (2011). According
to this account, a system exhibits indeterminacy iff there are two or more pre-
cisiﬁcational possibilities—complete, classical property ascriptions—each of which
does not misrepresent reality. I don’t think this account ﬁts well with the kind of
indeterminacy we ﬁnd in the quantum world. As Darby (2010) and Skow (2010)
argue, the preciﬁcational possibilities violate quantum no-go theorems: a system
that satisﬁes a complete, classical property ascription could not reproduce quantum
mechanical empirical predictions. If the preciﬁcational possibilities don’t reproduce
well-conﬁrmed quantum mechanical predictions, it looks like they do misrepresent
reality: a quantum system couldn’t be represented by any of the precisiﬁcational
possibilities and still behave like a quantum system. While a precisiﬁcationist
account may apply well to cases of vagueness, it doesn’t apply so well to quantum
indeterminacy, where the indeterminacy does not (obviously) result from any kind
of vagueness. The relationship between quantum indeterminacy and indeterminacy
due to vagueness is taken up in the following section.
23.5
Remaining Issues
I have argued for a particular account of quantum indeterminacy over others. In
particular, I have argued that there is no reason to reject the canonical precisiﬁcation
of quantum indeterminacy based on the work of von Neumann in favor of an account
based on concepts drawn from metaphysics. But there are further important issues
that I can only touch on brieﬂy here and will have to remain for future work. The ﬁrst
concerns the relationship between quantum indeterminacy and common or garden
indeterminacy. Is the indeterminacy one ﬁnds in quantum mechanics of the same
kind as the indeterminacy one ﬁnds in the everyday world, such as the extent of the
Outback or of my lawn? If not, this might lead to a kind of skepticism: although we
have used the word “indeterminacy” to describe the concept we are explicating,
if it is not the same as everyday indeterminacy, perhaps we are not explicating
indeterminacy at all, but rather some sui generis quantum concept that we might
better call superposition.
There are clearly important differences between quantum indeterminacy and
ordinary indeterminacy. As just noted, ordinary indeterminacy involves vagueness,
whereas there is no obvious vagueness in the quantum case: under either classical or

23
Explicating Quantum Indeterminacy
361
non-classical property ascription, the line between having a property and lacking it,
or between having it and being indeterminate, is perfectly precise. Furthermore,
ordinary indeterminacy generally disappears when one moves to a more funda-
mental description: while the extent of my lawn may be indeterminate, the exact
proportion of grass to other plants at any location is not indeterminate, or at least,
not in the same way. In the quantum case, on the other hand, it is not clear whether
any more fundamental description is available. Admittedly, various underlying
ontologies for the quantum world have been posited, for example by Bohmian,
spontaneous collapse, and many-worlds theories of quantum mechanics (Lewis,
2016, 179). Glick (2017) argues against quantum indeterminacy in part based on
the claim that these underlying ontologies are always fully determinate; indeed, one
might take it as a desideratum that the properties of the underlying ontology should
be determinate. But all of these posited underlying accounts face problems (Lewis,
2016, 70), and even setting these problems aside, it is not obvious that reducibility to
a determinate underlying ontology undermines claims to indeterminacy at the higher
level (Calosi & Mariani, 2021). In fact, if quantum indeterminacy is reducible to a
determinate underlying ontology, the quantum case parallels the ordinary case quite
closely.
But even if there are differences between quantum indeterminacy and ordinary
indeterminacy, there are also signiﬁcant similarities, in particular regarding property
ascription. Consider a region in the vague border between my lawn and the
surrounding native plants. It seems natural to say that it neither determinately
has the “lawn” property nor determinately lacks it, in line with the deﬁnition of
indeterminacy advocated in Sect. 23.3 for quantum systems. That is, despite the
differences between quantum indeterminacy and ordinary indeterminacy, the same
concept of indeterminacy seems to be applicable. There is clearly a lot more work
to be done here, but it looks initially plausible, at least, that quantum indeterminacy
and ordinary indeterminacy can be conceived under the same general conceptual
structure.
Given that quantum indeterminacy really deserves the name, a further question
concerns how we should understand the resulting indeterminacy. A common
question about indeterminacy is whether it is metaphysical or merely semantic
(Barnes & Williams, 2011, 104; Wilson, 2013, 360; Torza, 2021). In Carnapian
vein, my inclination is to duck the question. Consider the question of whether there
are human races. In part, this is an empirical question: it depends on facts about
the morphology and phylogeny of certain creatures in the world. In part, it is a
terminological question: when do we count two humans as being of the same race?
Once we answer the empirical and terminological questions, we determine whether
there are human races in the world. If there is a further question concerning whether
what we are doing counts as metaphysics, that question needs to be spelled out.
Similarly for the question of whether there is indeterminacy. In the quantum case,
this depends on both empirical facts concerning the behavior of the physical world,
and terminological choices concerning what kinds of property structure we count as
exhibiting indeterminacy. Once we answer these questions, we determine whether
there is indeterminacy in the world. Again, if there is a further question concerning

362
P. J. Lewis
whether what we are doing counts as metaphysics, that question needs to be spelled
out.10 Clearly, though, such a stance raises deep metaontological questions, for
example concerning naturalness (Torza, 2021). I have not attempted to address such
questions here.
Acknowledgments I would like to thank Jeff Barrett, Claudio Calosi, David Glick, Chris
Hitchcock, Mahmoud Jalloh, Christian Mariani, Chip Sebens, Amie Thomasson, Alessandro
Torza, Jessica Wilson, and two anonymous referees for very helpful comments on earlier drafts
of this paper.
References
Barnes, E., & Williams, J. R. G. (2011). A theory of metaphysical indeterminacy. In K. Bennett &
D. Zimmerman (Eds.), Oxford studies in metaphysics (Vol. 6, pp. 103–148). Oxford University
Press.
Baym, G. (1969). Lectures on quantum mechanics. Addison-Wesley.
Bell, J. S. (1964). On the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paradox. Physics, 1, 195–200.
Birkhoff, G., & von Neumann, J. (1936). The logic of quantum mechanics. Annals of Mathematics,
37, 823–843.
Bokulich, A. (2014). Metaphysical indeterminacy, properties, and quantum theory. Res Philosoph-
ica, 91, 449–475.
Calosi, C., & Mariani, C. (2021). Quantum indeterminacy. Philosophy Compass, 16, e12731.
Calosi, C., & Wilson, J. (2019). Quantum metaphysical indeterminacy. Philosophical Studies, 176,
2599–2627.
Calosi, C., & Wilson, J. (2021). Quantum indeterminacy and the double-slit experiment. Philo-
sophical Studies, 178, 3291–3317.
Carnap, R. (1950). Logical foundations of probability. University of Chicago Press.
Darby, G. (2010). Quantum mechanics and metaphysical indeterminacy. Australasian Journal of
Philosophy, 88, 227–245.
Glick, D. (2017). Against quantum indeterminacy. Thought, 6, 204–213.
Healey, R. (2012). Quantum theory: A pragmatist approach. British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science, 63, 729–771.
Juffmann, T., Truppe, S., Geyer, P., Major, A. G., Deachapunya, S., Ulbricht, H., & Arndt, M.
(2009). Wave and particle in molecular interference lithography. Physical Review Letters, 103,
263601.
Kochen, S., & Specker, E. P. (1967). The problem of hidden variables in quantum mechanics.
Journal of Mathematics and Mechanics, 17, 59–87.
Leifer, M. S. (2014). Is the quantum state real? An extended review of ψ-ontology theorems.
Quanta, 3, 67–155.
Lewis, P. J. (2016). Quantum ontology. Oxford University Press.
Pusey, M. F., Barrett, J., & Rudolph, T. (2012). On the reality of the quantum state. Nature Physics,
8, 475–478.
Skow, B. (2010). Deep metaphysical indeterminacy. The Philosophical Quarterly, 60, 851–858.
Spencer, Q. (2018). Racial realism I: Are biological races real? Philosophy Compass, 13, e12468.
10 One might insist that metaphysical indeterminacy is indeterminacy at the fundamental level.
Then the question of whether quantum indeterminacy is metaphysical would reduce to the question
of whether it is fundamental. As just mentioned, this is not a settled issue.

23
Explicating Quantum Indeterminacy
363
Torza, A. (2020). Quantum metaphysical indeterminacy and worldly incompleteness. Synthese,
197, 4251–4264.
Torza, A. (2021). Quantum metametaphysics. Synthese, 199, 9809–9833.
Wilson, J. M. (2013). A determinable-based account of metaphysical indeterminacy. Inquiry, 56,
359–385.
Von Neumann, J. (1932). Mathematische Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik. Springer.
Wolff, J. (2015). Spin as a determinable. Topoi, 34, 379–386.

Chapter 24
Defending the Situations-Based
Approach to Deep Worldly
Indeterminacy
George Darby and Martin Pickup
Abstract This paper concerns metaphysical indeterminacy and, in particular, the
issue of whether quantum mechanics gives motivation for thinking the world
contains it. In a previous paper (Darby G, Pickup M. Synthese 198:1685–1710,
2021), we have offered one way to think about metaphysical indeterminacy which
we take to avoid some issues arising from certain features of quantum mechanics
(such as the Kochen-Specker theorem). This approach has recently been criticised
by Corti (Synthese, forthcoming), and we take this opportunity to respond. Our
paper will therefore reply to Corti’s argument, but we also take it as a case study in
‘naturalistic metaphysics’ and hence to contribute to a more general discussion of
the relationship between philosophy of science and analytic metaphysics.
24.1
Introduction
The question whether quantum mechanics involves metaphysical indeterminacy has
received much recent attention.1 This attention is focused both on the issue of
whether quantum mechanics can be a motivation for positing worldly unsettledness
of the type captured by theories of metaphysical indeterminacy, as well as on the
issue of how a theory of metaphysical indeterminacy could capture the supposed
unsettledness allegedly arising in quantum mechanics.
Quantum mechanics is a particular motivation for positing metaphysical
indeterminacy on a certain sort of naturalistic metaphysical approach. According
1 For examples illustrating the development of the debate, see French and Krause (2003), Chibeni
(2004), Calosi and Wilson (2019), Torza (forthcoming).
G. Darby ()
Oxford Brookes University, Oxford, UK
e-mail: gdarby@brookes.ac.uk
M. Pickup
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK
e-mail: m.pickup@bham.ac.uk
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
V. Allori (ed.), Quantum Mechanics and Fundamentality, Synthese Library 460,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-99642-0_24
365

366
G. Darby and M. Pickup
to this view, metaphysics should be read off physics, and (quantum) physics tells
us that the world itself is indeterminate. This is highly contentious, and can be
doubted for a number of different reasons. (We are each sympathetic to some of
these reasons.) Nevertheless, even granting the moves necessary to get such a view
going, internal problems arise.
A prominent way of thinking about indeterminacy in the metaphysics literature
ends up being incompatible with a natural way of getting indeterminacy from
quantum mechanics. As one of us has argued (Darby, 2010) this is (roughly) because
on that way of thinking reality is supposed to be indeterminate between maximally
speciﬁc ways for things to be, whereas the Kochen-Specker theorem shows that
there is no maximally speciﬁc way for things to be. So: You can interpret QM
as involving genuine metaphysical indeterminacy if you really must, but will then
require a different account of its nature.
In a later paper (Darby & Pickup, 2021) we have suggested that one way of
providing that account which makes use of situation semantics – a tool put to various
uses in analytic metaphysics. Brieﬂy, the idea is that when reality is indeterminate
between ways for things to be, these ways for things to be are fully precise but not
maximal. Situations, as parts of possible worlds, can naturally model this approach.
When reality is unsettled about whether something is the case, that thing is the case
in some but not all of the (partial) ways things could be.
Corti (forthcoming) has recently responded to this model, arguing that it does not
after all capture metaphysical indeterminacy as found in quantum mechanics. The
reason for this turns out to revolve around which propositions are true or false in the
relevant situations. We had in mind propositions such as “The particle is spin-up in
the x-direction”, “The particle is spin-down in the y direction”, etc. The argument of
Corti (forthcoming), on the other hand, revolves around propositions such as “The
system is in state psi-”.
This question, of what propositions and situations metaphysicians can legiti-
mately use in setting up an account of metaphysical indeterminacy, is connected
to prior questions of whether physics drives metaphysics or vice versa. Our
focus in the paper is primarily on the ﬁrst-order question of how to set up an
account of metaphysical indeterminacy using situation semantics that does justice
to quantum phenomena, but we also take it to illuminate some of those debates in
metametaphysics.
24.2
The Darby/Pickup Account
One family of approaches to metaphysical indeterminacy are known as meta-level
accounts.2 A meta-level account of metaphysical indeterminacy sees the unset-
2 Jessica Wilson is responsible for this terminology. See, e.g., her (2017).

24
Defending the Situations-Based Approach to Deep Worldly Indeterminacy
367
tledness of the world as arising from unsettledness between distinct, determinate
candidates for the way the world is.
A very inﬂuential meta-level account is given by Barnes and Williams in their
(2011). On this view, metaphysical indeterminacy consists in there being a number
of different ersatz possible worlds which do not determinately fail to represent
reality. So if some proposition is metaphysically indeterminate, it is true in (at least)
one possible world which is a candidate for actuality, and false in (at least) one
possible world which is a candidate for actuality. To speak somewhat poetically,
the metaphysical indeterminacy of the proposition consists in the world being
undecided about whether it is represented accurately by a possible world in which
the proposition is true or by a possible world in which it is not.
The BW account, however, suffers difﬁculties when applied to the very case that
seems the most naturalistically plausible example of genuinely worldly indetermi-
nacy: quantum mechanics. As has been shown independently by Darby (2010) and
Skow (2010), quantum mechanics gives rise to a distinctive deep indeterminacy.
This deep indeterminacy arises because of constraints like the Kochen-Specker
theorem, which dictates that certain groups of propositions just cannot all be
assigned determinate truth-values together. This means that an ersatz possible world
which assigned truth-values to all such propositions would determinately fail to
represent reality, and the BW model is thus inadequate for these cases.
In a previous paper, we have offered a ﬁx for this problem. The core idea is
that situations, rather than possible worlds, should be used to model metaphysical
indeterminacy. For the sake of brevity, not much will be lost by considering
situations here as simply parts of possible worlds.3 This solves the problem because
the situations which are candidates for actuality, and which the world is unsettled
between, need not be complete. In other words, they can give truth-values to some
but not all propositions (unlike possible worlds). According to our account of
metaphysical indeterminacy, then, a proposition is metaphysically indeterminate
when it is true in some situation which is a candidate for representing actuality,
and false in some other such situation.
24.3
Corti’s Objection
In a recent paper, Corti (forthcoming) offers a criticism of our account. He argues
that our account fails, and that this highlights a broader point about the inadequacy
of meta-level accounts in treating quantum indeterminacy as worldly indecision. In
this section, we will outline what we take to be the core objection.
Corti’s argument is that the model we present assigns incorrect truth-values
to propositions. In particular, Corti claims that we are committed to taking a
3 For more detail about situations, see Kratzer (2020) and Barwise and Perry (1983) as a starting
point.

368
G. Darby and M. Pickup
determinate feature of reality as indeterminate, which falsiﬁes our approach. To see
why this is so, we’ll brieﬂy restate the argument. This restatement is not entirely
innocent: we are adapting the properties and propositions Corti uses into our own
preferred terms. This is philosophically signiﬁcant, as will be discussed later in the
paper. But for the sake of showing how the objection is supposed to undermine our
view, we will present it this way.
Suppose a quantum system is prepared so that it is x-spin-up. Then it is in a
superposition for z-spin. This entails (again, assuming that one goes down the route
of interpreting QM as involving genuine worldly indeterminacy in the ﬁrst place)
indeterminacy about the system’s z-spin. In the situations-based way of thinking
about this, this is captured by asserting that there are two distinct situations s1 and
s2 where the following propositions are true:
s1: the system is z-spin-up
s2: the system is z-spin-down
Both situations are candidates for representing actuality because neither of them
determinately misrepresents it. This is what superposition consists in, on the model
we explore. (NB: to say that something is z-spin-up is to say that it has a certain
property – and this is not, or at least not obviously, the same as saying that its state
vector is |+x>)
There is another situation to mention, s4 (we follow Corti’s numbering here).4 In
s4 the very same system is x-spin-up.
s4: the system is x-spin-up
So far, we are happy to accept that these situations are all candidates to represent
actuality, and that these are the propositions true in them. Note that there may or
may not be other propositions true in these situations, depending on exactly which
situations we are choosing for s1, s2 and s4. But let’s assume for now that these are
the minimal situations in which these propositions are true.
The issue arises, according to Corti, because our view commits us to accepting
problematic additional situations as candidates for representing actuality. One in
particular is the following:
s5: the system is in a superposition of x-spin-up and x-spin-down5
This is supposed to be a problem because it is determinately the case that the system
is x-spin-up, and so determinately not in a superposition with respect to x-spin.
4 We are leaving out s3, which Corti takes to be a situation in which the propositions true in s1
and s2 are both true. We wouldn’t accept that such a situation is a candidate for actuality: it is
contradictory. (In fact, there is no such situation, candidate for actuality or otherwise.) We take
it that s3 is supposed to combine s1 and s2 in some way. We were careful to be explicit that in
any such situation, neither proposition is true (or false): s3 would be a situation in which each
proposition is indeterminate.
5 Corti actually describes two situation (s5 and s6), with different x-spin superpositions. The
general criticism can be stated without this detail.

24
Defending the Situations-Based Approach to Deep Worldly Indeterminacy
369
According to Corti, we are obliged to admit s5 as a candidate for representing
actuality, and (again, according to him) s5 entails the falsehood that the system’s
x-spin is metaphysically indeterminate.
Why is it that we are forced to accept s5 as a candidate for representing actuality?
Corti’s answer is that the proposition true in s1 is importantly related to the
proposition true in s5. In particular, the proposition true in s1 only differs from the
proposition true in s5 by there being a ‘mathematical object’ in one which is replaced
by an ‘equivalent’ ‘mathematical object’. Employing a principle he terms Equivalent
Candidates for representing Actuality (ECA), this entails that the situation in which
the latter is true is also a candidate for representing actuality.
24.4
Reply to Corti
Although there are a number of points where we disagree with Corti’s paper, for the
sake of simplicity we’ll restrict our comments to this central argument.
The core move of the argument is that by asserting that s1 is a candidate for
representing actuality, we are thereby committed to also accepting the problematic
s5 as a candidate for representing actuality. We agree that this would be a problem,
but deny that there is any such commitment.
To begin with, it is worth underlining that our account of metaphysical indeter-
minacy is not that there is indeterminacy in the world whenever a proposition is
neither true nor false in a situation which is a candidate for representing actuality.
This is far too broad. Even if reality were fully determinate, portions of that reality
(i.e. situations) would fail to settle the truth-value of propositions about other parts
of the world. Rather, metaphysical indeterminacy arises when there is a conﬂict
between situations which are both candidates for representing actuality.
With this in mind, let’s look at s5 in a bit more detail. The proposition which
is true in s5 states that the system is in an x-spin superposition. Given our model,
and given that superpositions are being interpreted as indeterminacy, this would
have to mean that there are a pair of distinct situations which are both candidates
for representing actuality such that the system is x-spin-up in one and x-spin-down
in the other. The property of being superposed is therefore a meta-level property
(in keeping with this meta-level account of metaphysical indeterminacy), which a
system has in a situation in virtue of the properties of that system in certain other
situations.
There is certainly a situation which is a candidate for actuality in which the
system is x-spin-up, namely s4. But we do not accept that there is any corresponding
situation which is a candidate for actuality in which the system is x-spin-down. So,
there is no situation which is a candidate for actuality in which the system is in a
superposition of spin up and x-spin-down.
But Corti thinks we must accept that there is such a situation (namely s5). This is
because (i) there is a candidate situation (s1) where the system has the property
of being z-spin-up and (ii) the property of being z-spin-up is connected to the

370
G. Darby and M. Pickup
property of being in an x-spin superposition in such a way that the instantiation
of the former in a situation which is a candidate for reality ensures that the latter is
also instantiated in a situation which is a candidate for reality.
The second step here is encoded in Corti’s ECA principle. We will shortly discuss
this principle. But before we do, it is worth highlighting that situation theory is
speciﬁcally designed to allow ﬁne-graining that undermines the motivation for ECA.
The properties of being indeterminate for x-spin and being z-spin-up are clearly
distinct properties. The ﬁrst is a meta-level property, while the second obtains
(uninformative as this is) just when the system is z-spin-up in that situation. So,
a (possible) situation in which the system is superposed in x-spin and the situation
in which the system is z-spin-up look importantly different.
Why, then, does Corti think that there is an intimate connection between the
candidacy for actuality of these different situations? The answer to this revolves
around Corti’s ECA principle:
Consider a situation s1 that is a candidate for representing actuality and veriﬁes only a
proposition p1 which contains a mathematical object o1. Any other situation s2 that differs
from s1 only in that it makes true a proposition p2 which is obtained by simply replacing o1
with o2, where the latter is a mathematical object equivalent to the former (i.e. o1 = o2), is
also a candidate for representing actuality. (p. 11)
This principle is connected to Corti’s version of metaphysical naturalism. It is
justiﬁed as follows:
Such a principle seems to be intuitively reasonable. Let us see how it works by presenting
a toy example. Suppose it is metaphysically indeterminate how many oranges there are in
the fridge; assume further that there might just be either three or four. According to Darby
and Pickup’s view, there is a possible situation in which there are three oranges, and a
possible situation in which there are four, but neither describes correctly nor misrepresents
the actual world (and therefore the propositions ‘there are three oranges in the fridge’ and
‘there are four oranges in the fridge’ are indeterminate, being true and false in at least one
situation). The principle (ECA) simply guarantees that if the possible situation in which
there are three oranges is a candidate for representing actuality, then also the situations that
verify respectively only the propositions ‘there are two plus one oranges in the fridge’ or
‘there are four minus one oranges in the fridge’, and so on, are candidates for representing
actuality. (ibid.)
A number of points are worth noting about this principle and its application:
First of all, this has nothing in particular to do with indeterminacy, but is more
about the workings of situations: The orange example shows that the (distinct?)
situations verifying the (distinct?) propositions that there are three oranges, that
there are 2 + 1 oranges, and that there are 4 −1 oranges, etc, will all be candidates
for representing reality if there are 3 oranges.
Second, it is not entirely obvious that the proposition that the proposition that
there are three oranges in the fridge and the proposition that there are 2 + 1
oranges in the fridge are really distinct propositions. (Are they both distinct from
the proposition that there are 1 + 2 oranges in the fridge?) If propositions are sets
of worlds, then it would seem not, for example.

24
Defending the Situations-Based Approach to Deep Worldly Indeterminacy
371
Third, it is also not entirely obvious, and depends on the details of the meta-
physics of situations, that the situation verifying the proposition that there are three
oranges in the fridge and the situation verifying the proposition that there are 2 + 1
oranges in the fridge are really distinct situations. If situations are individuated by
the propositions true in them, then this is parasitic on the previous paragraph. If,
by contrast, they are individuated by the entities they contain and the properties
they instantiate, then plausibly exactly the same entities and properties are in each
situation (even if the propositions are distinct). Either way, it is a substantive and
controversial claim that there can be distinct situations differing only in whether
they verify ‘there are 3 oranges in the fridge’ or ‘there are 2 + 1 oranges in the
fridge’.
On the other hand, one could no doubt construe things in such a way that the
required distinctions can be made – perhaps we are dealing with one proposition
concerning the oranges and the number 3, and another proposition concerning the
oranges and the numbers 1 and 2. Then perhaps there would be a non-trivial sense in
which there are two situations that are both candidates for representing actuality. Of
course one could also do that without involving the oranges at all: The situation that
veriﬁes the proposition that 1 + 2 = 3 and the situation that veriﬁes the proposition
that 4 – 1 = 3 would also both be candidates for representing actuality.
In the terms used in the deﬁnition of ECA, the ﬁrst situation differs from the
second “only in that it makes true a proposition [the proposition that 4 – 1 = 3]
which is obtained by simply replacing [1 + 2] with [4 −1], where the latter is a
mathematical object equivalent to the former”.
Again, the exact meaning of ECA depends on what it is for a proposition to
contain a mathematical object, which in turn depends on what propositions are, and
what mathematical objects are, and on what is meant by “equivalent”. One might
mean that the terms are equivalent, i.e. co-referential, but presumably not, because
here Corti is talking about objects, not terms. The mathematical objects might be
identical (as is suggested by “o1 = o2”), or isomorphic; or one sequence of operators
might be equivalent to another sequence of operators by having the same effect.
Or, of course, the mathematical objects themselves might be representationally
equivalent, perhaps because they represent the same physical state, for example,
but that depends on the details of the interpretation.
Our point in labouring this is that principles like ECA, and the “naturalistic”
approach to metaphysics that underlies them, mask a number of crucial assumptions.
In essence, Corti’s argument goes like this:
Consider a particle in an x-spin eigenstate. Then we would think of it (assuming,
as usual, that quantum mechanics is being interpreted as involving worldly indeter-
minacy) like this:
(1) It is indeterminate whether the particle is z-spin-up or z-spin-down.
And, on the situations way of thinking, that entails:
(2) the situation of the particle’s being z-spin-up is a candidate for actuality.
And presumably we should also accept:

372
G. Darby and M. Pickup
(3) The particle is not indeterminate for x-spin.
So, again on our way of thinking:
(4) The situation of the particle’s being indeterminate for x-spin is not a candidate for
actuality.
But suppose we also had:
(5) To be z-spin-up is to be indeterminate for x-spin.
Then (2) and (5) would entail:
(6) The situation of the particle’s being indeterminate for x-spin is a candidate for actuality.
Which contradicts (4).
But that assumption (5) just seems to be false – why should what it is to be
z-spin-up be the same as what it is to be indeterminate for x-spin?
This gap is supposed to be closed by the ECA, but of course the ECA can’t apply
to any of the statements above, because none of them describes, at least obviously,
a situation that veriﬁes a proposition that “contains a mathematical object”.
You can get mathematical objects into the picture like this (still using the example
of a particle with determinate x-spin):
(1′) It is indeterminate whether the particle is in state |+z> or |-z>.
So (2′) the situation of the particle’s being in state |+z> is a candidate for actuality
And then argue that, since the particle is supposed to be in an x-spin eigenstate,
and since |+z> is not an x-spin eigenstate, there is a candidate for actuality that
determinately misrepresents it, which would be a bad result. But this time, as far as
we can see, (1′) is straightforwardly false. It is not indeterminate whether the particle
is in state |+z> or |–z> but rather determinate that it is in the state 1/√2 |+z>
+ |–z>, which is straightforwardly neither |+z> nor |–z>. What is indeterminate
is whether the particle is z-spin-up. Equating being z-spin-up with being in state
|+z> is to make some deep assumptions about the connection between mathematical
formalism representing the states of quantum systems and the properties of those
quantum systems.
So, the point is that the argument only gets going if couched in terms of properties
rather than state vectors – but then the ECA, which revolves around “mathematical
objects” like state vectors, just doesn’t apply.
24.5
Conclusion
Have we established that quantum indeterminacy is worldly indecision? Of course
not – that would involve adopting a realist position in the philosophy of science, and
advocating for a particular interpretation of quantum mechanics (i.e. solution to the
measurement problem, e.g. some collapse interpretation), and putting a particular

24
Defending the Situations-Based Approach to Deep Worldly Indeterminacy
373
metaphysical spin on it so that the indeterminacy involved is “worldly”, and then
spelling out the metaphysical theory about how that worldly indecision is to be
understood.
The challenges and obstacles for that approach may be insurmountable – in
particular, it may be that Calosi and Wilson (2019) have shown that metaphysical
supervaluationist approaches are poorly motivated for a wide range of interpreta-
tions. Partly for this reason, and partly because we are at least somewhat drawn
to the idea that there is no such thing as worldly indeterminacy at all, we took the
supposed indeterminacy in QM, and the fact that it appears prima facie to be “deep”,
in Skow’s terms, as simply a suggestive motivation for something that it ought to be
possible to account for.
We do think that the machinery offered by situation theory – already used in
various areas of metaphysics – offers a way of doing so that, unlike “standard” meta-
level accounts of metaphysical indeterminacy, does justice to the general features
of quantum mechanics that motivate the idea of worldly indeterminacy in the ﬁrst
place. For the same reason, we think it worth noting that those general features of the
formalism don’t translate into straightforward difﬁculties for the account in the way
that Corti argues. More broadly, what we take this to show is that care is needed,
especially in this domain, to disentangle internal criticisms of metaphysical models
from external criticisms arising from naturalistic metametaphysical assumptions.
Our situations-based account of quantum metaphysical indeterminacy is explicitly
provisional on the controversial moves needed to get the game started. But closing
up the gap in which the theory would sit requires controversial assumptions of its
own.
References
Barnes, E., & Williams, R. (2011). A theory of metaphysical indeterminacy. Oxford Studies in
Metaphysics, 6, 103–148.
Barwise, J., & Perry, J. (1983). Situations and attitudes. The MIT Press.
Calosi, C., & Wilson, J. (2019). Quantum metaphysical indeterminacy. Philosophical Studies, 176,
2599–2627.
Chibeni, S. (2004). Ontic vagueness in microphysics. Sorites, 15, 29–41.
Corti, A. (forthcoming). Yet again, quantum indeterminacy is not worldly indecision. Synthese.
Darby, G. (2010). Quantum mechanics and metaphysical indeterminacy. Australasian Journal of
Philosophy, 88(2), 227–245.
Darby, G., & Pickup, M. (2021). Modelling deep indeterminacy. Synthese, 198, 1685–1710.
French, S., & Krause, D. (2003). Quantum vagueness. Erkenntnis, 59, 97–124.
Kratzer, A. (2020). Situations in natural language semantics. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.). The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2020 Edition). https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2020/
entries/situations-semantics/
Skow, B. (2010). Deep metaphysical indeterminacy. Philosophical Quarterly, 60(241), 851–858.
Torza, A. (forthcoming). Quantum Metametaphysics. Synthese.
Wilson, J. (2017). Are there indeterminate states of affairs? Yes. In E. Barnes (Ed.), Current
controversies in metaphysics (pp. 105–125). Taylor & Francis.

Chapter 25
Metaphysical Indeterminacy
in the Multiverse
Claudio Calosi and Jessica M. Wilson
Abstract One might suppose that Everettian quantum mechanics (EQM) is inhos-
pitable to indeterminacy (MI), given that, as A. Wilson (The nature of contingency:
Quantum physics as modal realism. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2020) puts it,
“the central idea of EQM is to replace indeterminacy with multiplicity” (77). But as
Wilson goes on to suggest, the popular decoherence-based understanding of EQM
(DEQM) appears to admit of indeterminacy in both world number and world nature,
where the latter indeterminacy–our focus here–is plausibly metaphysical. After a
brief presentation of DEQM, we bolster the case for there being MI in world nature
in DEQM. The remainder of the paper is devoted to a comparative assessment of
the two main approaches to MI for purposes of accommodating this MI–namely, a
metaphysical supervaluationist approach (as per Barnes and Williams (A theory of
metaphysical indeterminacy. In: Bennett K, Zimmerman DW (eds) Oxford studies
in metaphysics, vol 6. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp 103–148, 2011)) and
a determinable-based approach (as per Wilson (Inquiry 56:359–385, 2013) and
Calosi and Wilson (Philosophical Studies 176:2599–2627, 2018; Philosophical
Studies 178:3291–3317, 2021)). We brieﬂy describe each approach, then offer
ﬁve arguments in favour of a determinable-based approach to world nature MI in
DEQM.
25.1
Introduction
One might suppose that Everettian quantum mechanics (EQM) is inhospitable to
indeterminacy (MI), given that, as A. Wilson (2020) puts it, “the central idea of
EQM is to replace indeterminacy with multiplicity” (77). But as Wilson goes on
C. Calosi
University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland
e-mail: claudio.calosi@unige.ch
J. M. Wilson ()
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
e-mail: jessica.m.wilson@utoronto.ca
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
V. Allori (ed.), Quantum Mechanics and Fundamentality, Synthese Library 460,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-99642-0_25
375

376
C. Calosi and J. M. Wilson
to suggest, the popular decoherence-based understanding of EQM (henceforth:
DEQM) appears to admit of indeterminacy in both world number and world nature,
where the latter indeterminacy—our focus here—is plausibly metaphysical. After
a brief presentation of DEQM (Sect. 25.2), we bolster the case for there being
MI in world nature in DEQM (Sect. 25.3). The remainder of the paper is devoted
to a comparative assessment of the two main approaches to MI for purposes of
accommodating this MI—namely, a metaphysical supervaluationist approach (as
per Barnes and Williams 2011) and a determinable-based approach (as per Wilson
2013 and Calosi and Wilson 2018 and 2021). We brieﬂy describe each approach
(Sect. 25.4), then offer ﬁve arguments in favour of a determinable-based approach
to world nature MI in DEQM (Sect. 25.5).
25.2
Decoherence-Based EQM (DEQM)
We start with a brief overview of DEQM. Here and in the next section we
periodically excerpt from Wilson’s (2020) presentation, for continuity with the
discussion of indeterminacy in DEQM later in this paper.
Consider a simple superposition state such as that at issue in the case of
Schrödinger’s cat:
|ψ⟩= c1|Live Cat⟩+ c2|Dead Cat⟩
(25.1)
On the face of it, such a superposition state represents a system as being in a single
indeﬁnite or indeterminate state. But what does this come to, exactly? On a common
understanding (see Wallace 2008, 40; Wilson 2020, 77), the crucial insight at the
core of the EQM approach is that a superposition state such as (25.1) may be taken
to represent a multiplicity of systems, each in a familiar deﬁnite or determinate state,
rather than a single system in an unfamiliar indeterminate state. As Wilson puts it,
“the central idea of EQM is to replace indeterminacy with multiplicity” (77).
To be sure, the supposition that the multiplicity at issue involves multiple systems
represents a development of Everett’s own take on his (1957) theory (the ‘Relative
State Interpretation’), as involving multiple states of a single system. Everett’s take
was driven largely by concern with the measurement problem—in brief, the question
of how to bridge the gap between the world as Schrödinger’s equation (deterministi-
cally but indeterminately, via superpositions) expresses it as being, and the world as
we (indeterministically but determinately, via components of superpositions output
from individual measurements) experience it as being. Rather than bridge this gap
in ad hoc fashion via a supposed ‘collapse’ of the wave function upon measurement,
Everett suggested that measurements (e.g., opening the box) result in entanglements
generating relative states, so that, e.g., a single cat is dead relative to one substate
(or class of substates) and alive relative to another substate (or class of substates).1
1 Our own view is that Everett’s relative-state interpretation has a lot going for it—and moreover, is
appropriately seen as accommodating metaphysical indeterminacy of a speciﬁcally ‘glutty’ variety,
along lines of the multiple relativized determination discussed in Wilson 2013 and Calosi and

25
Metaphysical Indeterminacy in the Multiverse
377
The central idea was developed in inﬂuential fashion in Dewitt 1968 and
1970, with the multiplicity at issue involving multiple individual systems, and
indeed multiple worlds. There are many variations on the so-called ‘Many Worlds’
interpretation of quantum mechanics (see Saunders et al. 2010), aiming to address
stated concerns with, e.g., the reintroduction of something like collapse in talk
of ‘splitting’ of worlds upon measurement, or with the seeming need to stipulate
a preferred basis (reﬂecting that different bases for characterizing the universal
quantum state generate different worlds), or with the introduction of proﬂigate
fundamental ontology.2 Among these variants, the approach to EQM found most
promising of late has been that developed by Saunders (1993, 1994) and Wallace
(2008, 2012), along with other ‘Oxford Everettians’, according to which the
multiplicity of worlds is understood in terms of the branching structure induced
by decoherence. As Wilson (2020) puts it:
The most signiﬁcant step towards a plausible version of EQM came when, in the early
1990s, progress in technical work on decoherence was applied to the preferred basis
problem in EQM by Saunders (1993, 1994, 1995). Decoherence theory can be used to
model the quantum-mechanical interactions between a system and its environment [. . . ].
The essence of decoherence is that a broad range of quantum systems evolve in such a way
as to suppress to a negligible level the interference terms representing interactions between
components of the state of the system corresponding to distinct macroscopic properties. (80)
DEQM’s popularity reﬂects its neat handling of each of the aforementioned
concerns. First, the approach provides a principled and plausible answer to the
measurement problem.3 Decoherence suppresses interference—not entirely, but to
a degree sufﬁcient to prise apart the components of a given superposition state—
in a way consonant with ordinary experience, without requiring, e.g., conscious
observers to make a collapse-inducing ‘measurement’.4 Second, decoherence phe-
nomena ﬁx the preferred basis, in an approximate but non-stipulative way which is
ﬁne for all practical purposes (for short: FAPP):
Although decoherence suppresses interference between macroscopic superpositions, it does
not eliminate this interference altogether. The idea behind decoherence-based EQM is that
a preferred basis is approximately picked out by decoherence, to a degree of approximation
easily high enough to explain the fact that superpositions of macroscopic states are
unobserved and effectively unobservable. (Wilson 2020, 80)
Wilson 2018 and 2021. Development of this suggested reading, and its connection to Rovelli’s
‘Relational Quantum Mechanics’ (as in, e.g., Rovelli 1996), must await another occasion.
2 As on Deutsch’s (1985) proposal, according to which inﬁnitely many worlds correspond to each
individual physically possible history.
3 The measurement problem can be phrased as the joint inconsistency of the following three
statements: (i) the quantum state provides a complete description of a quantum system; (ii)
the quantum state always evolves according to the Schrödinger equation, and (iii) measurement
results are unique. Everettian Quantum Mechanics in general solves the problem by rejecting (iii).
Correspondingly, it is worth noting that decoherence per se does not provide a solution to the
measurement problem. Thanks to a referee here.
4 The worlds generated by decomposition are sometimes described as ‘semi-classical’, in being
(and notwithstanding that decoherence does not entirely eliminate interference between compo-
nents of macroscopic superpositions) compatible with the world as we ordinarily experience it.

378
C. Calosi and J. M. Wilson
Third, in DEQM the generation of ‘Everett worlds’ requires no new fundamental
ontology. At the fundamental level there is just one highly structured object: the
universal quantum state (the ‘universe’). Decoherence produces dynamically robust
patterns in the universal state; these patterns represent a multiplicity of differ-
ent worlds and objects within those worlds—the ‘multiverse’.5 Correspondingly,
Everettian worlds are derivative entities, ‘grounded’ (to speak schematically) in the
fundamental quantum state.
DEQM is naturally embedded in decoherent histories interpretations of quantum
theory. These interpretations use what is sometimes called the Heisenberg picture,
where operators representing measurable quantities change over time, while the
quantum state remains constant. This is in contrast with the intertranslatable
Schrödinger’s picture, where operators remain constant while the quantum state
evolves. As applied to DEQM, observables corresponding to the whole state of a
world at each time t are represented by a projection operator. Different possible
observable possibilities are represented by orthogonal projections ˆPi summing up
to unity, as per (25.2) and (25.3) below:
ˆPi ˆPj = δij ˆPi
(25.2)

i
ˆPi = 1
(25.3)
Equation (25.2) says that any two distinct projection operators are orthogonal,
whereas Eq. (25.3) says that such projection operators sum up to unity. These
equations are intended to encode that any two observational possibilities describing
the state of the whole world are mutually exclusive (25.2), and the collection of such
possibilities is—so to speak—exhaustive (25.3).
A partition of projection operators meeting the conditions in (25.2) and (25.3)
provides a ‘coarse graining’ of the universal state; a coarse graining in turn generates
histories Hi—time-ordered sequences of time-dependent projection operators:
Hi = ˆP in(tn) ˆP in−1(tn−1) . . . ˆP i0(t0)
(25.4)
A history is a sequence of operators describing the whole state of the world, with
one operator describing the entire observable state of the world for each time.
Correspondingly,a history provides a maximal description of the world at each time.
According to DEQM, individual such histories are potentially suited to represent
individual worlds, and sets of such histories are potentially suited to represent
complete multiverses. For this promise to be fulﬁlled, however, the histories
must be sufﬁciently causally isolated—sufﬁciently well-decohered—that they can
provide a basis for accommodating our experience of macroscopic phenomena as
5 Here and elsewhere we use ‘multiverse’ to refer to the multiplicity of Everettian worlds, following
Wallace (2012) and Wilson (2020).

25
Metaphysical Indeterminacy in the Multiverse
379
comparatively determinate. Effectively, what is required here is that the histories be
well-decohered enough to be dynamically independent (i.e., such that independent
probabilities can be assigned to those histories). This requirement is usually cashed
out in terms of the ‘medium decoherence condition’ (see Gell-Mann and Hartle
1993), where ρ is a density operator for the initial state of the universe, and Tr is
the trace:
Tr(HiρH †
j ) ≈Tr(HiρH †
i )δij
(25.5)
On DEQM, histories meeting condition (25.5) are taken to represent a multiplicity
of Everettian worlds—the (or a) multiverse.6 Decoherence is here thought of as
involving the suppression of quantum interference as a result either of internal
interaction within a system, or of external interaction with the environment, and
in cases of decoherence the component terms in the superposition behave semi-
classically (see note 4) in that we observe no interaction between them. It is in
this sense that decoherence produces a multiplicity of comparatively independent,
causally isolated systems and worlds—worlds which are independent and causally
isolated ‘FAPP’—a process referred to as branching. As Wilson (2020) describes it:
Branching occurs whenever decoherence becomes sufﬁcient to render different histories
effectively causally isolated, for example when a dust particle becomes entangled with a
radiation bath environment so that the components of the particle’s state corresponding to
superposition of macroscopic properties become negligible compared to the components
corresponding to reasonably precise macroscopic properties. Branching may be thought of
as a transition from a particle not yet correlated with its environment and with a relatively
indeterminate location, to multiple particles correlated with their environments, each with a
relatively determinate location. (84)
Situating DEQM in the decoherent histories formalism also provides a basis for
capturing the aforementioned approximate nature of decoherence, since different
coarse-grainings may satisfy the conditions. Decoherence results in fewer candidate
coarse-grainings and associated bases—again, sufﬁcient to capture failures to
experience macro-superpositions—but does not narrow these down to one.
25.3
Metaphysical Indeterminacy in World Nature
We are now in position to see how, notwithstanding the usual gloss on EQM as
replacing indeterminacy with multiplicity, there remains room for indeterminacy on
DEQM. Indeed, Wilson (2020) maintains that two sources of indeterminacy remain
on this view:
First, in contemporary decoherence-based EQM the space of Everett worlds is indeter-
minate with respect to the number of worlds it includes. Different coarse-grainings may
6 See note 5.

380
C. Calosi and J. M. Wilson
each give rise to decoherent history spaces satisfying the decoherence conditions, and
nothing in the theory picks out one over the other as the uniquely correct space of Everett
worlds. Second, Everett worlds are indeterminate in nature: a world for example may fail
to determine which of the two slits an electron travels through, if the electron wavefunction
does not decohere in the process. (172)
Each form of lingering indeterminacy can be seen as reﬂecting that, as above,
decoherence as a mechanism for suppression of interference “does not eliminate
this interference altogether”. That decoherence is only approximate entails that
different coarse-grainings generate different and differently numbered multiverses
of Everett worlds. No coarse-graining is (meta)physically privileged. As Wallace
(2012) puts is, there is no “natural grain”. Wilson takes the absence of privileged
grain to indicate that there is indeterminacy in world number. Here we are
primarily interested in indeterminacy in world nature, so at this point leave aside
indeterminacy in world number.
That the suppression of interference in decoherence is approximate also means
that branching results in worlds with relatively determinate as opposed to absolutely
determinate values of the observables at issue (e.g., position)—hence, there is
indeterminacy in world nature. As Wilson observes, the two indeterminacies are
deeply linked:
The more ﬁne-grained our partition of a consistent history space, the more histories there
are and the more determinate each history is—up to the point at which the decoherence
condition is not satisﬁed. It is a vague matter where this point is located. However coarsely
or ﬁnely we grain a decoherent history space, events within individual Everett worlds will
exhibit some (indeterminate) degree of indeterminacy in their properties. It is determinate
that there is qualitative indeterminacy in the worlds, but it is indeterminate exactly how
much indeterminacy there is. (180–1)
Importantly, this lingering indeterminacy is insuperable: “there is no way
of coarse-graining the history space as to make the actual Everett world fully
determinate” (181).
How should these forms of indeterminacy in DEQM be handled? Wilson (2020)
says, somewhat confusingly, that “both indeterminacies ought to be regarded as
epistemic or semantic in origin; however, indeterminacy of world nature [...] may
usefully be understood as a novel example of emergent ontic indeterminacy” (173).
Key here is that both forms of indeterminacy are associated with the ‘semi-arbitrary’
status of coarse-grainings (or the choice of a speciﬁc such coarse-graining), where
the arbitrariness at issue is taken (by Wilson) to reﬂect semantic or (less plausibly)
epistemic underdetermination. As he sees it, indeterminacy in world number is just
a matter of semi-arbitrary coarse-graining; however, indeterminacy in world nature
has an additional metaphysical component:
The indeterminacy of the actual world is representational, in the sense that it depends on a
semi-arbitrary choice of coarse-graining; but it is also worldly, in the sense that a complete
description of the actual world fails to eliminate this indeterminacy. (182)
So Wilson is friendly to the idea that indeterminacy in world nature in DEQM
is properly metaphysical; and in considering how such MI should be treated,

25
Metaphysical Indeterminacy in the Multiverse
381
he suggests that either a metaphysical supervaluationist (or ‘precisiﬁcationist’)7
account of the sort endorsed by Barnes and Williams (2011) or a determinable-
based account of the sort endorsed by Wilson (2013) might do the trick—though he
registers that a supervaluationist approach faces difﬁculties of the sort highlighted by
Darby (2010), Skow (2010), and others, and that a determinable-based approach has
several advantages, and “seems a more natural ﬁt” with DEQM in various respects.
We are also friendly to taking indeterminacy in world nature in DEQM to
be properly metaphysical, and also see a determinable-based approach as more
naturally accommodating such MI—more naturally than supervaluationism, in
particular—and in the remainder of the paper will develop these lines of thought.
We think there is more to say about the status and proper treatment of indeterminacy
in world number in DEQM, but due to considerations of space leave this for another
occasion.8
We start by ﬁlling in the case, ﬁrst, for there being indeterminacy in world
nature, and second, for this indeterminacy being reasonably taken to be ‘worldly’ or
metaphysical.
We offer three arguments for there being indeterminacy in world nature.9
The ﬁrst argument pertains to the fact that even in cases of decoherence of
the sort giving rise to branching and associated Everett worlds, there may remain
undecohered states. As above, the central idea of EQM is to “replace indeterminacy
with multiplicity”, such that superposition states such as (25.1) can be taken
to represent not single systems with unfamiliar indeterminate properties—that
is, as involving indeterminacy—but rather multiple systems, each with familiar
7 The notion of precisiﬁcation here is modeled on that associated with a supervaluationist theory
of vagueness (see, e.g., Fine 1975), on which a precisiﬁcation is a complete and maximal set of
sentences, each having a determinate truth value.
8 In lieu of a fuller treatment: we are inclined to think that indeterminacy in world number
is also aptly treated as properly metaphysical indeterminacy, and moreover is best treated in
determinable-based terms. Wilson (2020) suggests that indeterminacy in world number can be
given a semantic supervaluationist treatment in line with classical logic and semantics, along
lines of the non-standard supervaluationist approach proposed by McGee and McLaughlin (1995).
However, ﬁrst, it would be more systematic to treat indeterminacy in world number and in world
nature similarly; but it is not plausible to treat the lingering indeterminacy in world nature as
semantic. And second, a semantic supervaluationist treatment of indeterminacy in world number
along lines of the ‘preferred precisiﬁcation’ approach of McGee and McLaughlin is subject to the
same difﬁculties that Wilson highlights with an epistemic approach to indeterminacy—namely, that
it presupposes, implausibly, that there is a single preferred precisiﬁcation/basis/decoherent history
space/multiverse.
9 Quantum indeterminacy is commonly motivated by attention to the Eigenstate-Eigenvalue link
(EEL), according to which a quantum system has a deﬁnite value v for an observable O iff it is
in an eigenstate of O having eigenvalue v. However, some proponents of DEQM (e.g., Wallace,
2019) are skeptical about the link, and Wilson (2020) never mentions it in his discussion. So in
what follows we offer arguments that do not rely on EEL (or any variants thereof). See Calosi and
Mariani 2021 for discussion of how EEL has been taken to motivate quantum indeterminacy, and
see Calosi and Wilson 2018 for an argument that, given EEL, the phenomenon of incompatible
observables entails residual indeterminacy in Everett worlds.

382
C. Calosi and J. M. Wilson
determinate properties. And as above, on DEQM, multiplicity is only a matter of
decoherence—it is not a matter of conscious observers, new fundamental ontology,
or anything else. It follows that in the absence of decoherence as applying to a
superposition state such as (25.1), the state cannot be given a multiplicity reading,
but must rather be given an indeterminacy reading.10 But as Wilson (2020) observes,
decoherence sufﬁcient unto branching and the associated generation of Everett
worlds is compatible with any given Everett world containing superposition states
that are not decohered, as when “the world fails to determine which of the two slits
an electron travels through, if the electron wavefunction does not decohere in the
process” (172). So DEQM is compatible with there being Everett worlds containing
superposition states which cannot be given a multiplicity reading, but which must
rather be given an indeterminacy reading. And in practice this will often (always?)
be the case.
The second argument—a variation on the ﬁrst, from a different direction—
pertains to the connection between component interference and state indeterminacy.
As Wallace (2012, 61) notes, the state
|ψ⟩L = |Live Cat⟩
(25.6)
instantiates a structure that represents a live cat, and the state
|ψ⟩D = |Dead Cat⟩
(25.7)
instantiates a structure that represents a dead cat. Again, according to DEQM, there
is a reading of state (25.1) (the superposition of states 25.6 and 25.7) on which it
represents not one cat in an indeterminate state, but two cats—one in state (25.6),
the other in state (25.7). Yet as Wallace goes on to observe:
In general, even in a theory with linear equations, like electromagnetism or quantum theory,
adding together two states with certain structures might cause those structures to overlap
and cancel out, so that the structure of the resultant state cannot just be read off from the
structures of the components. Indeed, in both electromagnetism and quantum theory, the
technical term for this “cancelling out” is the same: interference (62).
Here Wallace connects multiplicity to the absence of canceling out of the
structures associated with the components—in other words, to the absence of inter-
ference. More precisely, on DEQM it is required not that there be no interference,
but rather that any interference be negligible, as per the medium decoherence
condition. When interference between components of a superposition state is
10 The line of thought here presupposes a disjunctive premise to the effect that superposition
states must be interpreted either as indeterminacy states (involving a single system having an
indeterminate property) or as multiplicity states (involving multiple systems having determinate
properties). In general, this disjunctive premise might not available, for there might be other read-
ings of superposition states. However, here we are concerned not with all available interpretations
of superposition states, but just with what interpretations are available given DEQM as standardly
motivated; and here the disjunctive premise is in place.

25
Metaphysical Indeterminacy in the Multiverse
383
negligible, then the multiplicity reading is available. It remains, however, that
branching is compatible with there being some superposition states for which the
interference is not negligible. For any such states, the multiplicity reading of states
like (25.1) is not available, and the states must rather be given an indeterminacy
reading (see note 10). And again, in practice this will often (always?) be the
case. Hence it is, for example, that the double-slit experiments have the empirical
interference results that they do.
The third argument pertains to the fact that even in cases of decohered states,
the decoherence is approximate, rendering the values of the associated observables
comparatively or relatively determinate, not absolutely determinate. For purposes of
generating an Everett world, all that is required is that decoherence renders certain
states determinate FAPP—determinate enough, in particular, to accommodate
ordinary experience in response to the measurement problem. Even so, decoherence
does not eliminate all interference between components of a given superposition,
and hence the values of the associated observables in the state components are
rendered only comparatively or relatively determinate—that is, to some small extent
indeterminate. Hence there is lingering indeterminacy even in cases of decohered
superposition states.11
The upshot of the previous arguments is that there is indeterminacy in world
nature in DEQM, associated with both cohered and decohered states. Is this
indeterminacy moreover metaphysical in nature? Wilson thinks so: “indeterminacy
in world nature may be thought of as a naturalistic form of metaphysical indetermi-
nacy” (182).12 We agree, but it is worth saying a bit more by way of substantiating
the claim.
We might start with the presumed core insight of EQM. Here the choice
presented is as between a reading of superposition states as involving ‘unfamiliar
indeterminate properties’ and one involving multiplicity along with determinate
properties; but indeterminacy in properties is metaphysical indeterminacy. And
as we have just argued (and as Wilson agrees), the EQM strategy as cashed via
DEQM does not, after all, result in elimination of the ‘unfamiliar indeterminate
properties’; at best, it renders some of them more determinate. That may be good
enough to resolve the measurement problem that was Everett’s main focus, but there
remains some portion of the seeming MI originally at issue—namely, that associated
with there being indeterminate quantum properties associated with not-completely-
decohered superposition states.
It is also worth noting that standard motivations for or presuppositions required
for treating a given case of indeterminacy as semantic or epistemic are not in
place for MI in world nature. To start, semantic or epistemic treatments are most
11 That there is indeterminacy even in cases of decohered states would appear to undercut
the claim that (with exceptions for cases where micro-superpositions are magniﬁed to a larger
scale) “determinacy will tend to be associated with macroscopic states of affairs, with extensive
indeterminacy restricted to microscopic states of affairs” (Wilson 2020, 181). On the contrary,
decohered macroscopic states will still be a locus of indeterminacy.
12 See also Lewis 2016.

384
C. Calosi and J. M. Wilson
often directed at cases of vagueness involving borderline cases and associated
Sorites-susceptibility;13 but indeterminacy in world nature does not obviously
involve borderline cases. Moreover, semantic accounts also typically proceed on
the assumption that relevant expressions in the relevant language(s) are vague;
but the mathematical language of the decoherent histories formalism is not vague.
To be sure, Wilson thinks that indeterminacy in world number can be handled
in semantic or epistemic terms, on grounds that coarse-grainings’ being ‘semi-
arbitrary’ provides a basis for treating indeterminacy in world number as reﬂecting
a kind of ambiguity or ignorance in which representation correctly describes
the actual world. But as he observes, these strategies don’t carry over to the
case of indeterminacy in world nature, for having resolved any representational
indeterminacy, indeterminacy in world nature will remain. Finally, an epistemic
approach to indeterminacy in world nature presupposes that each Everett world is
maximally precise, such that any indeterminacy reﬂects just our ignorance about
which precise way a given Everett world is. But in DEQM there is no way to make
Everettian worlds maximally precise; for (as noted above) at a certain point, the
medium decoherence condition (25.5) will fail to be satisﬁed, and the precise worlds
in question will fail to be members of the set of decoherent histories. We will return
to this line of thought in Sect. 25.5.1.
There thus appears to be good reason to take there to be indeterminacy in world
nature in DEQM, and to take this indeterminacy to be properly metaphysical. At
least this seems reasonable contingent on there being an account of MI up to the
task of making sense of MI on DEQM—as we will argue there is, below.
Supposing that we (and Wilson) are correct that there is MI in world nature in
DEQM, this is of signiﬁcance to the metaphysics of MI, not just as a naturalistically
motivated general case study, but also because the indeterminacy at issue in DEQM
is distinctively derivative, on the assumption (which we are here granting) that the
fundamental ontology of the theory—given solely by the universal quantum state—
is maximally determinate.14 Some have argued that any metaphysical indeterminacy
there might be must be fundamental (Barnes 2014) or that any derivative meta-
physical indeterminacy there might be is eliminable (Glick 2017). As we discuss
further below, Barnes’s argument applies only to a certain approach to metaphysical
indeterminacy, different from the approach we endorse; and in our (2021) we argue
that Glick’s argument doesn’t go through. In any case, the case of derivative MI in
DEQM stands as a challenge to both arguments.
13 See Calosi and Mariani 2021.
14 We grant that the sole fundamental entity in DEQM—the universal wavefunction/quantum
state—is maximally determinate in that its properties are maximally determined (as, e.g., the
property of having such and such amplitude and phase at such and such point). The further
metaphysical picture behind DEQM is not perfectly clear. To start, there are several incompatible
ways to interpret the universal wavefunction. Moreover, there remains controversy over how to
recover derivative entities from the universal wavefunction. Just to mention two options: Wallace
(2012) takes derivative entities to be patterns in the universal wavefunction, whereas Ney (2021)
takes them to be parts.

25
Metaphysical Indeterminacy in the Multiverse
385
25.4
Two Approaches to MI
Given that DEQM involves MI in world nature, the question remains of how to
account for this indeterminacy. In this and the following section, we offer an answer
to this question. We start with brief summaries of the two main approaches to MI:
ﬁrst, metaphysical supervaluationism; second, a determinable-based approach.
25.4.1
Metaphysical Supervaluationism
A metaphysical supervaluationist account of MI takes a ‘meta-level’ approach to
MI, according to which MI involves its being indeterminate which state of affairs,
of some range of determinate/precise states of affairs, obtains. As Barnes (2010)
expresses the general idea:
It’s perfectly determinate that everything is precise, but [. . .] it’s indeterminate which
precise way things are. (622)
Somewhat more speciﬁcally, Barnes and Williams (2011) say:
When p is metaphysically indeterminate, there are two possible (exhaustive, exclusive)
states of affairs—the state of affairs that p and the state of affairs that not-p—and it is
simply unsettled which in fact obtains (113–14).
Here the sense of a ‘possible’ state of affairs—where states of affairs may be
local or global (i.e., entire worlds)—is one restricted to ‘admissible’ possibilities:
possibilities that are compatible with what is actually the case, in that they do not
determinately misrepresent reality.15 This leads to the following characterization:
Metaphysical Supervaluationism: It is metaphysically indeterminate whether P iff there are
two possibly admissible, exhaustive and exclusive states of affairs (SOAs): the SOA that p
and the SOA that ¬p, and it is indeterminate which of these SOAs obtains.
On the face of it, such a view might seem well-suited to accommodating the sort
of quantum metaphysical indeterminacy (QMI) that is our concern here:
[There is] a suggestive parallel between the terms in the superposition and the idea [. . . ] of
precisiﬁcations. One of the terms in the superposition [. . . ] is a term where the cat is alive,
the other is not; that is reminiscent of multiple ways of drawing the extension of ‘alive’, on
some of which ‘the cat is alive’ comes out true, on some, false. (Darby 2010, 235)
15 Otherwise it would be settled that such an (incompatible) state of affairs (possibility) does not
obtain.

386
C. Calosi and J. M. Wilson
Crucially, the precisiﬁcations that are identiﬁed with superposition terms are
maximal—or complete—and classical, hence indeterminacy-free:
Importantly, given our picture of indeterminacy, all the worlds in the space of precisiﬁca-
tions are themselves maximal and classical (Barnes and Williams 2011, 116).
25.4.2
Determinable-Based MI
A determinable-based approach to MI was initially proposed in Wilson 2013, and
defended in Wilson 2016; it has been applied to the case of quantum metaphysical
indeterminacy in Bokulich 2014, Calosi and Wilson 2018 and 2021, and elsewhere.
A determinable-based account takes an ‘object-level’ approach to MI, according
to which indeterminacy is located in indeterminate states of affairs themselves,
and where what it is for a state of affairs to be indeterminate is more speciﬁcally
cashed in terms of a certain pattern of instantiation of determinable and determinate
features:
Determinable-based MI: What it is for an SOA to be MI in a given respect R at a time t
is for the SOA to constitutively involve an object (more generally, entity) O such that (i) O
has a determinable property P at t, and (ii) for some level L of determination of P, O does
not have a unique level-L determinate of P at t (Wilson 2013: 366).
There are two ways in which an object (system) can have a determinable but
no unique determinate of that determinable (at a level L, etc.; henceforth we
suppress this qualiﬁcation): either there is no candidate determinate (‘gappy MI’), or
there are too many candidate determinates, preventing attribution of a unique such
determinate (‘glutty MI’). There are, moreover, two variations on the ‘glutty’ theme,
whereby:
1. multiple determinates are instantiated, albeit in relativized fashion; or
2. multiple determinates are instantiated, each to degree less than one.
As discussed in Wilson 2013 and 2016, a determinable-based approach to MI
differs from a supervaluationist approach in various important ways, including that a
determinable-based account reduces MI to a pattern of instantiation of determinable
and determinate properties, and so (unlike a supervaluationist account) does not
take MI to be primitive (a point to which we return below); a determinable-based
account does not introduce propositional indeterminacy, and so (unlike a supervalu-
ationist account) does not require introducing an indeterminacy operator into one’s
semantics or logic; and a determinable-based account is more generally thoroughly
compatible with classical logic and semantics, and so (unlike a supervaluationist
account) requires no revision in these classical theories.

25
Metaphysical Indeterminacy in the Multiverse
387
25.5
Supervaluationist vs. Determinable-Based Treatments
of MI in World Nature in DEQM
We now offer ﬁve arguments aimed at establishing that a determinable-based
approach has a clear comparative advantage over a metaphysical supervaluationist
approach, so far as accommodating MI in DEQM is concerned.
25.5.1
The Argument from Imprecise Histories
Histories cannot be maximally precise: after a certain point, they fail to meet the
medium decoherence condition (5). Roughly (see Gell-Mann and Hartle 1990 for
technical details), if the medium decoherence condition fails to be met, the histories
(could) interfere. And if they interfere, it is impossible to assign them independent
probabilities—as is required by the formalism, if histories are to represent somewhat
semi-classical worlds. As Gell-Mann and Hartle (1990) note:
[C]ompletely ﬁne-grained histories [. . . ] cannot be assigned probabilities; only suitable
coarse-grained histories can. (433)
Completely ﬁne-grained histories are those histories in which every value of
every projection operator is speciﬁed. It follows that it is not possible to assign
a precise value to every projection operator, if a history is going to qualify as
a decoherent history. Decoherent histories represent Everett worlds. So, Everett
worlds cannot be maximally precise.16
Now, a determinable-based approach to MI can take the failure of decoherent
histories—Everett worlds—to be maximally precise at face value, as representing
(for a given system) the system’s having a given determinable property—say, having
a certain life status, in the case of Schrödinger’s cat, or having traveled between the
emittor and the detector, in the case of the double-slit experiment—without the
system’s having a unique determinate of the determinable.
Not so for metaphysical supervaluationism. An application of this approach
would most naturally be seen as identifying precisiﬁcations with decoherent
histories. But precisiﬁcations are supposed to be classical: maximally pre-
cise and indeterminacy-free. Since decoherent histories are not maximally
precise/determinacy-free, supervaluationist precisiﬁcations cannot be identiﬁed
with decoherent histories. Equivalently: decoherent histories do not qualify as
admissible precisiﬁcations.
One might try to identify precisiﬁcations with suitable ﬁne-graining of decoher-
ent histories, as Wilson (2020) suggests:
16 Gell-Mann and Hartle (1990) consider different ways of coarse-graining completely ﬁne-grained
histories; one approach proceeds by specifying ranges of values rather than precise values to
associated observables (434).

388
C. Calosi and J. M. Wilson
Can we nonetheless ﬁnd suitable candidates for [ontic precisiﬁciations] within EQM? One
prospect is that they might be identiﬁed with quantum consistent histories [. . . ]. In order
to play the role of ontic precisiﬁcations, the consistent history space in question would
need to be maximally ﬁne-grained. The decoherence conditions fail for these ﬁne-grained
consistent histories, so they are not dynamically decoupled from one another and quantum
modal realists ought not to regard them as representing genuine alternative possibilities.
Still, these consistent histories may be apt to play a different role in the metaphysics of
quantum modal realism: the role of ontic precisiﬁcations in a Barnes–Williams-style model
of metaphysical indeterminacy. (182)
But this strategy won’t work—and not just because the the decoherence con-
ditions fail for such ﬁne-grained histories, rendering them unsuitable for being
genuine possibilities by lights of Wilson’s quantum modal realism. The more
general problem is that the failure of the decoherence conditions means that there is
no reason to expect that interference effects will be negligible. And as discussed
previously, with interference comes indeterminacy—contra the supervaluationist
supposition that precisiﬁcations are indeterminacy-free.
Nor does it make sense to simply stipulate that (to some extent indeterminate)
Everett worlds have multiple classical precisiﬁcations; for (in addition to such
precisiﬁcations’ not being admissible, on the usual understanding of admissibility
as requiring compatibility with the actual world) this would undercut the core
contention of DEQM, according to which the multiplicity of Everett worlds is
generated by decoherence alone.
The upshot is that a determinable-based approach can, while a metaphysical
supervaluationist approach cannot, accommodate MI in DEQM.
25.5.2
The Argument from Interference
In Sect. 25.2, we argued that MI in world nature in DEQM is strictly related to
interference—such MI is present on DEQM when and only when there are residual
interference effects.17
As we argue in our (2021), a determinable-based approach to MI can accom-
modate, and indeed provides the basis for, an intelligible explanation of quantum
interference. There, and here, we use the case of quantum self-interference in the
17 Recall the argument in Sect. 25.2. There we observed that DEQM can resort to the multiplicity
reading of superposition states—the reading that eliminates indeterminacy—iff interference effects
are negligible. In what follows we are going to discuss an experimental setting in which such effects
are not negligible—namely, the double-slit experiment. In such cases, we contend, we are left with
the indeterminacy reading.

25
Metaphysical Indeterminacy in the Multiverse
389
double-slit experiment as our case-in-point.18 Simplifying a bit, we can ascribe
to each particle traveling from the source to the screen detector in the double-slit
experiment the following superposition state:
|ψ⟩= c1 |A⟩+ c2 |B⟩
(25.8)
Here |A⟩represents the state of the particle’s traveling from emitter to detector
through slit A but not slit B, and |B⟩represents the state of the particle’s traveling
from emitter to detector through slit B but not slit A. On a determinable-based
account, the MI associated with double-slit indeterminacy is understood as follows:
[T]he associated QMI reﬂects that, on any given pass of the experiment, the emitted particle
has the determinable property having traversed the region between source and detector
(which property is itself a determinate of position or of being spatiotemporally located),
but does not have a unique determinate of that determinable, due to too many of the
determinates of the determinable, associated in particular with the states |A⟩and |B⟩, being
instantiated, in glutty fashion (Calosi and Wilson 2021).
As above, glutty MI can be cashed out in at least two ways: one in which the
relevant object (system) has different determinates relative to different perspectives,
and one in which its has the different determinates to a degree less than 1. On the
relativization variant of glutty MI as applied to the case at hand, while superposition
prevents attributing a unique trajectory to the particle, there remains a sense in which
the particle can, in relativized fashion, consistently travel through both slits at a
time. The claim is then that these relativized instantiations can interact, consonant
with self-interference. On the degree-theoretic variant of glutty MI the particle
has both determinates associated with states |A⟩and |B⟩, to degrees |c1|2 and
|c2|2 respectively. The claim is then that these degreed instantiations can interact,
consonant with self interference. (Again, see our 2021 for further details about these
implementations of glutty MI.) Either way, interference is the result of the relevant
particle’s having—either in relativized fashion, or to a degree less than one—each
of the causally efﬁcacious determinate properties associated with |A⟩and |B⟩.
By way of contrast, as we argue in our (2021), a metaphysical supervaluationist
account of MI does not have the resources to explain the existence of the interference
patterns characteristic of the double-slit experiment:
On [metaphysical supervaluationism], a superposition is a state whose precisiﬁcations are
given by the terms of the superposition. Superposition QMI is then taken to reﬂect its being
indeterminate which term (or associated property) of the superposition obtains.
How does such an approach fare as an account of the double-slit experiment? Not well.
For the supervaluationist, indeterminacy is unsettledness about which one of a range of
maximally precise states of affairs obtains. On this view, it is determinate that only one such
state of affairs obtains, notwithstanding that it is indeterminate which one obtains. Hence in
the case of the double-slit experiment, the supervaluationist takes the superposition QMI at
issue to reﬂect its being indeterminate which one of the states |A⟩or |B⟩obtains. On this
18 The discussion to follow is abbreviated, for considerations of space. See Calosi and Wilson
(2021) for further details.

390
C. Calosi and J. M. Wilson
account, there is no question of there being any sense in which both states obtain; again, it
is determinate that only one of the states obtains. But if only one of the states obtains, then
there’s no physical basis for the interference characteristic of the double-slit pattern.
More generally, and for the same reason, metaphysical supervaluationism cannot
accommodate quantum interference as associated with superpositions. But MI on
DEQM precisely consists in the presence of interference. Hence metaphysical
supervaluationism cannot accommodate MI on DEQM.19
25.5.3
The Argument from Nonfundamental MI
As previously noted, the MI in DEQM is derivative: it attaches to nonfundamental
rather than fundamental ontology.
A determinable-based approach to MI can accommodate derivative MI, since this
approach is compatible with MI’s being either fundamental or derivative. As above,
on the determinable-based approach, MI involves indeterminacy in a given state
of affairs itself, where the status of a state of affairs as indeterminate is cashed in
the holding of a certain pattern of determinable and determinate features.20 This
pattern—whereby an object (entity, system) has a determinable feature, but no
unique determinate of that determinable feature—may be instantiated by states of
affairs that are fundamental and by states of affairs that are derivative. If the state
of affairs instantiating the pattern is fundamental, then so will be the associated
MI; if the state of affairs instantiating the pattern is derivative, then so will be the
associated MI. Reﬂecting this ﬂexibility, past applications of a determinable-based
account have sometimes pertained to fundamental cases of MI (involving certain
readings of certain interpretations of QM) and sometimes pertained to derivative
cases of MI (involving macro-object boundaries and the open future).
By way of contrast, one of the main proponents of a metaphysical supervalua-
tionist approach—namely, Barnes—has argued that this approach is incompatible
with MI’s being derivative. More speciﬁcally, Barnes (2014) argues that if there is
MI, it must exist at the fundamental level, on pain of contradiction.
As we observe in our (2021), Barnes’s argument presupposes (as per a meta-
level metaphysical supervaluationist approach to MI) that MI involves its being
indeterminate which of some range of perfectly determinate options obtains. In
19 One might wonder whether the supervaluationist might aim to provide a non-causal explanation
of interference, as Wilson (2020) is himself inclined to do, as somehow reﬂecting patterns of
variation across different worlds. However, Wilson’s non-causal conception aims to accommodate
interference across different branches, not within a branch. Interference within a branch would
presumably remain a causal affair.
20 Note that here there is no indeterminacy in ‘which’ states of affairs, precise or imprecise, do or do
not obtain. Hence it is that, unlike a supervaluationist account of MI, a determinable-based account
does not require or invoke propositional or sentential indeterminacy, or associated indeterminacy
operators, and as such requires no departures from classical logic or semantics.

25
Metaphysical Indeterminacy in the Multiverse
391
particular, Barnes’s “simple argument that in order for there to be metaphysical
indeterminacy at all there has to be indeterminacy in how things are fundamentally”
(341) has as a premise that “For some complete description, D, of a way for
things to be derivatively, it is indeterminate whether D is true”. This claim is
rejected on an object-level determinable-based approach to MI. Correspondingly,
Barnes’s argument shows, at best, that any MI of the meta-level, metaphysical
supervaluationist variety must be fundamental.
So to the extent that Barnes’s argument goes through, it serves also to show that
metaphysical supervaluationism cannot accommodate the MI at issue in DEQM.
25.5.4
The Argument from ‘Unfamiliar Properties’
While the EQM strategy of ‘replacing indeterminacy with multiplicity’ was pri-
marily motivated by the aim of providing a non-ad-hoc basis for reconciling
Schödinger’s equation with ordinary experience, a secondary motivation was no
doubt to avoid commitment to the ‘unfamiliar indeterminate properties’ seemingly
represented by superposition states. DEQM provides an attractive means of accom-
plishing the ﬁrst aim, but commitment to indeterminate properties remains, on this
view. As such, it would be an advantage of an account of MI if it could not only
accommodate MI in world nature on DEQM, but do so in a way rendering this MI
familiar or in any case intelligible.
A determinable-based account has an advantage over a metaphysical superval-
uationist account, in appealing to pretheoretically and independently understood
notions—a certain pattern of properties of the sort with which we are experientially
and theoretically familiar—as opposed to a primitive feature of worldly ‘unsettled-
ness’. As even proponents of a supervaluationist account admit:
The conceptual advantage [of a determinable-based account over a supervaluationist
account] is this: nobody who understands the machinery of determinates and determinable
can fail to understand Wilson when she says that the world is metaphysically indeterminate.
She has told you exactly what that means: it is for a certain kind of property to be
instantiated without a certain [unique] other kind of property to be instantiated. If you
understand what she means by such properties—if you grasp the determinate/determinable
distinction—then there is simply no room for not understanding worldly indeterminacy.
Our own account, by contrast, makes ineliminable appeal to the notion of indeterminacy
when we tell you how the world is. When p is indeterminate, we tell you that either the
demands for p’s truth or the demands for p’s falsity are met, it is simply indeterminate
which. Someone who is sceptical about the very idea of worldly indeterminacy is of course
not going to be helped by this. (Barnes and Cameron 2016, 127–8)
To be sure, proponents of metaphysical supervaluationism aim to ﬁll in their
primitive by modeling it along lines familiar from supervaluationist treatments of
semantic indeterminacy, with metaphysical indeterminacy reﬂecting unsettledness
not between linguistic precisiﬁcations, but between precisiﬁcationally possible
worlds or states of affairs. Even so, the parallel doesn’t extend so far as to render
a primitivist account of MI intelligible. In particular, while it is clear enough how

392
C. Calosi and J. M. Wilson
semantic indeterminacy might reﬂect our having not yet decided how to use our
language, it is not as clear how MI might reﬂect the world’s having not yet decided
which actual way it is. In the non-quantum context: how could the world be settled
(right now) about Mount Everest’s having a determinate boundary, but be unsettled
(right now) about which boundary that is? In the quantum context: how could the
world be settled (right now) that the particle has gone through exactly one slit, but
be unsettled (right now) about which slit that was? Appeals to ‘multiple actualities’
and the like don’t do much to render such claims intelligible, much less familiar.
That said, one might wonder if a determinable-based account really does
accommodate MI in familiar terms, insofar as this account rejects a traditional
assumption about determinables and determinates, according to which an object
possessing a determinable property also possesses one and only one—a unique—
determinate of that property (at a given level of determination). As discussed in
Wilson 2013, however, attention to cases such as that of an iridescent feather (which
has the determinable colour but no unique determinate of that determinable) indicate
that the uniqueness supposition is arguably too strong, and should be rejected as
generally characterizing determinables and determinates.21 In addition, as Wilson
goes on to discuss (Sect. III.iv), the slate of traditionally endorsed features of
determinables and determinates can be imported without much ado into the more
general (and more accurate) understanding of determinables and determinates.22
Correspondingly,it remains that a determinable-based account as involving a certain
pattern of instantiation of determinable and determinate properties accommodates
MI in terms that are—unlike the primitivist terms of a supervaluationist account—
experientially and theoretically familiar.
25.5.5
The Argument from Quantum Modal Realism
Our ﬁfth argument elaborates the ﬁrst, in a way drawing on Wilson’s 2020
suggestion that DEQM provides a basis for Quantum Modal Realism (QMR)—a
streamlined, naturalistic heir to Lewis’s classical modal realism. A core tenet of
QMR is what Wilson calls Alignment:
Alignment: to be a metaphysically possible world is to be an Everett world. (22)
21 For discussion of other sources of resistance to the uniqueness supposition, see Wilson 2017.
22 For example, consider the ‘core’ feature of the determinable/determinate relation, according
to which it is a relation of increased speciﬁcity different from the conjunct/conjunction and
disjunction/disjunct relations. Even if a determinable instance may be multiply determined (in
relativized or degree-theoretic fashion) or undetermined, this core feature would characterize each
of the actual or counterfactual determinable/determinate relations at issue. It also remains that
instances of determinates are necessarily accompanied by instances of all associated determinables.
The traditional supposition that the determinates associated with a given determinable may be
ordered along one or more ‘determination dimensions’ remains intact. And so on.

25
Metaphysical Indeterminacy in the Multiverse
393
On QMR, roughly speaking, “for an event to be metaphysically possible is for
it to occur in some Everett world, for it to be metaphysically necessary is for it to
occur in all Everett worlds, and for it to be actual is for it to occur in our own world”
(29).
Given QMR, the ﬁrst argument in this section can be precisiﬁed (no pun
intended) as follows. Supervaluationist precisiﬁcations are maximally precise;
hence they are not Everett worlds. It follows, given Alignment, that supervaluationist
precisiﬁcations are not metaphysically possible worlds. In that case, however, a
proponent of QMR cannot appeal to metaphysical supervaluationism as a means of
accommodating MI in decoherence-based EQM, for not only will supervaluationist
precisiﬁcations be inadmissible, they will be metaphysically impossible. To be
sure, Wilson does consider impossible worlds as a means of making sense of
epistemic and conceptual modalities; but such uses of impossible worlds do
not clearly carry over to the explicitly metaphysical case of quantum MI. An
additional difﬁculty is that precisiﬁcations are supposed to be admissable, in not
determinately misrepresenting reality. As such, an appeal to impossible worlds in a
supervaluationist treatment of MI in world nature in DEQM would need to argue
that something impossible does not determinately misrepresent something possible
(and indeed actual). That seems like a hard row to hoe, to put it mildly.
25.6
Conclusion
Let’s sum up the main results of this paper and their signiﬁcance. First and
perhaps most importantly, on a widely endorsed realist interpretation of quantum
mechanics—(Decoherence Only) Everettian Quantum Mechanics—there is meta-
physical indeterminacy, and in particular, indeterminacy in world nature. This is
signiﬁcant, insofar as quantum indeterminacy has most frequently been located
in the less popular orthodox interpretation (as in Darby’s 2010 and Skow’s 2010
discussions; but see Calosi and Wilson (2018)). Second, indeterminacy in world
nature in DEQM is derivative, a result which undercuts recent arguments according
to which metaphysical indeterminacy must be fundamental. Third, indeterminacy
in world nature in DEQM cannot be accounted in metaphysical supervaluationist
terms, as yet another case-in-point of the failure of a supervaluationist approach
to quantum indeterminacy. Fourth, and by way of contrast, a determinable-based
account of metaphysical indeterminacy provides the basis for an illuminating
explanation of indeterminacy in the multiverse, as yet another case-in-point of the
success of a determinable-based approach to quantum indeterminacy. It is also worth
noting that, reﬂecting that the Eigenstate-Eigenvalue link plays no role in DEQM,
these results do not hinge on acceptance of that link; hence they sidestep concerns
(as in Fletcher and Taylor 2021) about treatments of quantum indeterminacy relying
on that link. All told, then, indeterminacy in world nature in DEQM represents a
powerful case study of quantum metaphysical indeterminacy and of the aptitude of
a determinable-based account to accommodate such indeterminacy.

394
C. Calosi and J. M. Wilson
Acknowledgments We would like to thank Valia Allori, Alastair Wilson, and two anonymous
referees for helpful comments and suggestions. Calosi acknowledges the support of the Swiss
National Science Foundation, Project Number PCEFP1_181088, and Wilson acknowledges the
support of the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council (SSHRC), Fellowship Number
435-2017-1362.
References
Barnes, E. (2010). Ontic vagueness: A guide for the perplexed. Noûs, 44, 601–627.
Barnes, E. (2014). Fundamental indeterminacy. Analytic Philosophy, 55, 339–362.
Barnes, E., & Cameron, R. (2016). Are there indeterminate states of affairs? No. In E. Barnes
(Ed.), Current controversies in metaphysics. London: Routledge.
Barnes, E., & Williams, J. R. G. (2011). A theory of metaphysical indeterminacy. In K. Bennett &
D. W. Zimmerman (eds.), Oxford studies in metaphysics (Vol. 6, pp. 103–148). Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Bokulich, A. (2014).
Metaphysical indeterminacy, properties, and quantum theory.
Res
Philosophica, 91, 449–475.
Calosi, C., & Mariani, C. (2021). Quantum indeterminacy. Philosophy Compass, 16(4), e12731.
Calosi, C., & Wilson, J. M. (2018). Quantum metaphysical indeterminacy. Philosophical Studies,
176, 2599–2627.
Calosi, C., & Wilson, J. M. (2021).
Quantum indeterminacy and the double slit experiment.
Philosophical Studies, 178, 3291–3317.
Darby, G. (2010). Quantum mechanics and metaphysical indeterminacy. Australasian Journal of
Philosophy, 88, 227–245.
Deutsch, D. (1985). Quantum theory as a universal physical theory. International Journal for
Theoretical Physics, 24, 1–41.
Dewitt, B. (1968). The Everett-Wheeler interpretation of quantum mechanics. In C. DeWitt &
J. Wheeler (Eds.), Battelle Rencontres: 1967 Lectures in Mathematics and Physics. New York:
W. A. Benjamin.
Dewitt, B. (1970). Physics Today 23(9), 30–35.
Everett, H. (1957). Relative state formulation of quantum mechanics. Review of Modern Physics,
29, 454–462.
Fine, K. (1975). Vagueness, truth and logic. Synthese, 30, 265–300.
Fletcher, S. C. & Taylor, D. E. (2021). Quantum indeterminacy and the eigenstate-eigenvalue link.
Synthese, 199, 1–32.
Gell-Mann, M., & Hartle, J. B. (1990). Quantum mechanics in the light of quantum cosmology. In
W. Zurek (ed.), Complexity, entropy and the physics of information. Boston: Addison Wesley.
Gell-Mann, M., & Hartle, J. B. (1993). Categories and induction in young children. Physical
Review D, 47, 3345.
Glick, D. (2017). Against quantum indeterminacy. Thought, 6, 204–213.
Lewis, P. J. (2016). Quantum ontology: A guide to the metaphysics of quantum mechanics. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
McGee, V., & McLaughlin, B. (1995). Distinctions without a difference. Southern Journal of
Philosophy, 33,203–251.
Ney, A. (2021). The World in the Wave Function: A Metaphysics for Quantum Physics. New York,
NY: Oxford University Press.
Rovelli, C. (1996). Relational quantum mechanics. International Journal of Theoretical Physics,
35, 1637–1678.
Saunders, S. (1993). Decoherence, relative states, and evolutionary adaptation. Foundations of
Physics, 23, 1553–1585.

25
Metaphysical Indeterminacy in the Multiverse
395
Saunders, S. (1994). What is the problem of measurement? The Harvard Review of Philosophy, 4,
4–22.
Saunders, S. (1995). Time, decoherence and quantum mechanics. Synthese, 102, 235–266.
Saunders, S., Barrett, J., Kent, A., & Wallace, D. (2010). Many worlds?: Everett, quantum theory,
& reality. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Skow, B. (2010). Deep metaphysical indeterminacy. Philosophical Quarterly, 60, 851–858.
Wallace, D. (2008).
Philosophy of quantum mechanics.
In D. Rickles (Ed.), The Ashgate
companion to contemporary philosophy of physics (pp. 16–98). Burlington: Ashgate Publishing
Company.
Wallace, D. (2012).
The emergent multiverse: Quantum theory according to the Everett
interpretation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wallace, D. (2019). What is orthodox quantum mechanics? In A. Cordero (Ed.), Philosophers
Look at Quantum Mechanics. Springer Verlag.
Wilson, J. M. (2013). A determinable-based account of metaphysical indeterminacy. Inquiry, 56,
359–385.
Wilson, J. M. (2016). Are there indeterminate states of affairs? Yes. In E. Barnes (Ed.), Current
Controversies in Metaphysics. London: Routledge.
Wilson, J. M. (2017). Determinables and determinates. Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy.
Wilson, A. (2020). The nature of contingency: Quantum physics as modal realism. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

Chapter 26
Fundamentality and Levels in Everettian
Quantum Mechanics
Alastair Wilson
Abstract Distinctions in fundamentality between different levels of description
are central to the viability of contemporary decoherence-based Everettian quantum
mechanics (EQM). This approach to quantum theory characteristically combines a
determinate fundamental reality (one universal wavefunction) with an indeterminate
emergent reality (multiple decoherent worlds). In this chapter I explore how the
Everettian appeal to fundamentality and emergence can be understood within
existing metaphysical frameworks, identify grounding and concept fundamentality
as promising theoretical tools, and use them to characterize a system of explanatory
levels (with associated laws of nature) for EQM. This Everettian levels structure
encompasses and extends the ‘classical’ levels structure. The ‘classical’ levels of
physics, chemistry, biology, etc. are recovered, but they are emergent in character
and potentially variable across Everett worlds. EQM invokes an additional funda-
mental level, not present in the classical levels picture, and a novel potential role for
self-location in interlevel metaphysics. When given a modal realist interpretation,
EQM also makes trouble for supervenience-based approaches to levels.
26.1
Introduction
Quantum physics is dramatically different from classical physics, but it is an open
question exactly how deep the differences run. Some approaches to quantum the-
ory – such as Bohmian mechanics allied with a ‘nomic’ reading of the wavefunction
(Miller, 2014; Callender, 2014; Esfeld, 2014; Bhogal & Perry, 2017) – retain a pic-
ture of fundamental reality which closely resembles a classical fundamental picture
of particles or ﬁelds. The distinctive novelty of quantum theory is then located in
how the fundamental stuff behaves, rather than in what there fundamentally is or in
A. Wilson ()
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK
Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia
e-mail: a.j.wilson@bham.ac.uk
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
V. Allori (ed.), Quantum Mechanics and Fundamentality, Synthese Library 460,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-99642-0_26
397

398
A. Wilson
how the fundamental stuff grounds everything else. By contrast, Everettian quantum
mechanics (EQM) revises both our view of fundamental reality and our view of how
fundamental reality grounds the non-fundamental.
This chapter explores the distinctive role which the notion of fundamentality
plays in EQM of the contemporary ‘decoherence-based’ variety, in which quantum
theory is understood along scientiﬁc realist lines without any collapse of the wave-
function. Everettians including Saunders and Wallace have exploited techniques
from decoherence theory (see Crull, 2022) to argue that a space of approximately
classical histories can be identiﬁed within a suitable, unitarily evolving, universal
quantum state. As originally emphasized by Simon Saunders (1993, 1995, 1998),
and subsequently by David Wallace (2003, 2010), the emergence of the multiverse
of Everett worlds from the universal quantum state has an imprecise and for-all-
practical-purposes character. This feature even makes it into the title of Wallace’s
authoritative work on the Everett interpretation, The Emergent Multiverse (Wallace,
2012); it is the source of some of the most philosophically interesting features of
EQM.
Everettians give a highly unfamiliar picture of fundamental reality. It evolves
deterministically and encompasses all of the different quantum possibilities rather
than corresponding only to one quantum possibility among many. From this alien
starting point, Everettians then reconceptualize ordinary scientiﬁc reasoning as
correctly capturing truths about a non-fundamental subject-matter: the contents
of our own Everett world. A distinction with respect to fundamentality between
the fundamental quantum state and the emergent multiverse thus plays a central
enabling role in the theory: it provides a principled basis for Everettians to use
decoherence theory in modelling quantum measurement, it defuses demands for
precise individuation criteria for worlds, and it aligns the high-level ontology of
Everett worlds with higher-level ontology in science much more generally. If Everett
worlds do not need to be seen as fundamental structure within the theory, and
can instead be posited as higher-level explanatory structure, then adopting the
many-worlds language and concepts for quantum theory is recast as a relatively
conservative interpretive move rather than as a decidedly non-conservative revision
of the fundamental physics. Saunders calls this point Wallace’s ‘killer observation’
(Saunders, 2010a). In my own recent work on the metaphysics of EQM (A. Wilson,
2020a) I have likewise relied on the emergent nature of the Everett multiverse when
developing accounts of modality, probability, causation, moral value, and related
notions in the Everettian setting.
There is clear need for a serviceable notion of fundamentality if we are to make
sense of the decoherence-onlyEverettian picture. Which accounts of fundamentality
can measure up? I will suggest in Sect. 26.2 that Everettians would do well to
co-opt some existing account of fundamentality which is both ﬂexible enough to
accommodate their novel relative fundamentality claims while still capturing more
familiar relative fundamentality relationships in established higher-level sciences.
I commend to them the options of grounding and concept fundamentality in
particular.

26
Fundamentality and Levels in Everettian Quantum Mechanics
399
What consequences does EQM have for the metaphysics of levels? I will describe
in Sect. 26.3 how straightforward implementations of an Everettian system of levels
extend orthodox views of levels in a way which is analogous to conservative
extension of theories in logic and mathematics. A traditional ordering of scientiﬁc
levels is then recovered, but as an emergent substructure of the overall levels
structure rather than as fundamental – and moreover, as an emergent structure which
emerges in a dynamical way and may be different across different regions of the
multiverse.
What consequences does EQM have for the metaphysics of laws? I will suggest
in Sect. 26.4 that the system of Everettian levels here outlined is naturally paired
with a multi-level law structure, such that the concept of law has a uniﬁed
character (that of modally strong generalization) which plays out in different ways
at different levels of the Everettian hierarchy. Even though laws of Everett worlds
are all non-fundamental strictly speaking, we can still make sense of gradations of
fundamentality amongst the laws of these worlds.
Finally, in Sect. 26.5, I will argue that Everett-speciﬁc considerations tell against
using the familiar notion of supervenience to capture a levels structure. The more
ﬂexible notions of grounding and of concept fundamentality are better suited to
model a scenario where physical contingency itself is emergent. The arguments
of Sect. 26.5 draw on controversial premises about the interpretation of modality
and probability in EQM, which I defend at some length in a recent book (A.
Wilson 2020a). The arguments of Sects. 26.2, 26.3 and 26.4, however, rely only
on assumptions which are common to most contemporary Everettians.
26.2
Frameworks for Fundamentality in Everettian
Quantum Theory
Why is an account of fundamentality in EQM needed? Wallace has after all
provided an account of the emergent multiverse in terms of Dennett’s notion of real
patterns (Wallace, 2003, 2010; Dennett, 1991). From most metaphysicians’ point
of view, real patterns are intriguing but underdeveloped; more importantly, in their
application to EQM they are embedded within the distinctive metaphysical view
of science called ontic structural realism (OSR) which Wallace favours; see also
Ladyman and Ross (2007). Wallace’s speciﬁc application of OSR to the Everettian
setting is directed at the ontology of decoherent worlds. The idea, roughly, is that
Everett worlds are dynamically robust patterns in the fundamental quantum state.
It is not my intention here either to undermine OSR or to defend it; for a recent
critical discussion, see Sider (2020). Instead, in this section I will offer schematic
accounts of the emergent multiverse which do not presuppose OSR and which are
congenial to a wider range of metaphysical views of science – including orthodox
scientiﬁc realism, as well as more radically eliminative views of science. I hope
that everything I say in what follows will be compatible with OSR, but one of the

400
A. Wilson
secondary messages of the chapter is that the full package of OSR is not compulsory
for Everettians. So: how might we regiment the ontology of decoherence-based
EQM using the tools of contemporary metaphysics?
Supervenience is a natural place to start; it is familiar to philosophers from
40 years of disputes over the deﬁnition of physicalism in the philosophy of mind.
Supervenience is modal correlation: the A-facts supervene on the B-facts iff there
can be no difference in the A-facts without some difference in the B-facts. While
this relationship can hold symmetrically, we can easily deﬁne a one-way notion: A
one-way supervenes on B iff A supervenes on B and B does not supervene on A.
One-way supervenience of all facts on the fundamental physical facts is close to a
universal assumption within philosophy of physics, and it is typically presupposed
in all discussions of EQM (with the exceptions of outliers such as Albert and
Loewer 1988). Supervenience can also provide a simple but effective system of
levels characterized in modal terms: levels can be modelled as a partial order
generated by the relation of one-way supervenience between subject-matters, with
the microphysical level at the base of the supervenience ordering. A contemporary
version of this approach is offered by List (2019).
Minimalist accounts of intertheoretic relations have often tried to make do with
nothing but a supervenience ordering; this was Lewis’ considered approach, for
example (Lewis, 1994). But philosophical times change, and increasing dissatis-
faction with supervenience as a level-connection relation has come to focus on its
perceived explanatory limitations. The story is told (from a dissenting point of view)
by Kovacs (2019); but a consensus in many areas of metaphysics has emerged that a
notion distinct from supervenience is needed to account for the explanatory role of
intertheoretic relations. The holding of that distinct relation would then explain one-
way supervenience, but not vice versa. This explanatory objection to supervenience
applies equally to its use in characterizing the emergence of the emergent Everettian
multiverse, and I think it gives good reason to look beyond supervenience when
explicating the Everettian worldview. However, there is an additional reason for
Everettians in particular to avoid appeal to supervenience in the present context.
Doing so would rule out one of the main prospective philosophical applications of
EQM – to the metaphysics of modality – and complicate the project of making sense
of objective probability in EQM. This additional reason is the focus of Sect. 26.5.
In the remainder of this section I will show how the distinctively Everettian com-
bination of a fundamental universal quantum state with an emergent multiverse of
non-fundamental Everett worlds can be captured within two speciﬁc metaphysical
frameworks for fundamentality: metaphysical grounding and concept fundamental-
ity. Both these frameworks have the advantage that they do not presuppose any
particular ontological or metaphysical account of the nature of physical reality;
they can be applied to the physical facts regardless of what we may discover or
hypothesize about their underlying nature.
The theory of metaphysical grounding (henceforth, just ‘grounding’) has proven
a popular theoretical tool in recent metaphysics. Much of its appeal stems from
its relative theoretical neutrality, which permits comparisons to be made between

26
Fundamentality and Levels in Everettian Quantum Mechanics
401
different metaphysical approaches1; key discussions of the notion are Fine (2012),
Rosen (2010), Schaffer (2009), Bennett (2017). Grounding permits a logically
transparent account of interlevel relations which generalizes to any kind of subject-
matter: facts at one level can ground facts at another, whatever peculiar kinds
of properties or logical structures those facts might involve. This feature will be
exploited in Sect. 26.3 to relate the very metaphysically heterogenous kinds of levels
which are combined into the decoherence-based EQM picture. Grounding is also
assigned a constitutive link to explanation. In some approaches to grounding (e.g.
Fine, 2012), this link to explanation is assumed as basic, but in others (e.g. Dasgupta,
2015; Schaffer, 2017; A. Wilson, 2018, 2020b) the explanatory element is linked to
the presence of mediating principles which systematize the pattern of grounding
relationships.
The notion of grounding has been applied to physics in a number of recent
works (e.g. Schaffer & Ismael, 2020; Hicks MS). Without attempting a survey of
these applications, what they typically have in common is the attempt to map a
relationship in physics where there is an important asymmetry overlaid on certain
background symmetric features. For example, in the context of Noether’s theorem
(Hicks’ example), the existence of a suitable symmetry principle and the existence
of a corresponding conservation law are interderivable in the presence of certain
assumptions about the form of our dynamical theory. Despite this interderivability,
consensus holds that symmetries are explanatorily prior to conservation laws. That
judgment of explanatory priority can be captured by the idea that symmetries ground
conservation principles in theories of the kind to which Noether’s theorem applies.
For the applications to physics, the standard logical properties of ground –
irreﬂexivity, transitivity, and anti-symmetry – are typically held ﬁxed, although it
has been suggested that anti-symmetry might be weakened to help model quantum
entanglement (Calosi & Morganti, forthcoming make a related move, though in
the context of essential dependence rather than of grounding). We will not need to
tweak any of the standard logical properties of ground for the Everettian application,
although in Sect. 26.3.2 I will argue that Everettians would do well to adopt a
slightly non-standard approach to the distinction between partial and full grounds.
Grounding is not the only interlevel game in town. Another prominent approach
to the fundamental in recent metaphysics is Ted Sider’s generalization of Lewisian
naturalness (Lewis, 1983), into a more ﬂexible notion of concept fundamentality
(Sider, 2011, 2020). Like grounding, concept fundamentality is a framework which
is well suited to EQM. Items of all categories – not just properties and relations –
can correspond to fundamental concepts. So we have the prospect that Ψ itself, the
fundamental quantum state, is a perfectly fundamental concept. The Siderian notion
of concept fundamentality is detached from any link to free recombination: there
is no automatic presumption that if some particular items of vocabulary correctly
capture some aspect of the structure of the world then all possible sentences which
can be grammatically formed out of those items of vocabulary correspond to
1 There are limits to this theoretical neutrality; see A. Wilson (2019) for discussion.

402
A. Wilson
possible ways for the world to be. This keeps the door open to a characterization
of the fundamental quantum state of the world in terms of fundamental concepts,
and an account of the higher-level structure of Everett worlds and laws thereof in
terms of a Sider-style metaphysical semantics (Sider, 2011) speciﬁed in terms of
the fundamental. A metaphysical semantics is, at a ﬁrst pass, a speciﬁcation of
what it is for some facts to hold in terms of some other facts which are regarded
as conceptually more fundamental.
The key difference between grounding theory and concept fundamentality,
elaborated by Sider (2011), is that concept fundamentality and the associated notion
of metaphysical semantics are naturally read as metaphysically deﬂationary with
respect to the higher level facts: all that the higher-level facts amount to is a certain
conﬁguration (encoded by the metaphysical semantics) of the fundamental level.
The concept-fundamentality picture can therefore be seen as a generalization of the
often-caricatured nihilist metaphysician’s view of the world as ‘simples arranged
tablewise’ – now we have ‘fundamentalia conﬁgured derivative-wise’, where there
is no restriction on the fundamentalia to be simples and no restriction on the
conﬁguration to be a spatiotemporal one, and where ‘derivative-wise’ is in principle
speciﬁable using fundamental concepts. Grounding, on the other hand, is naturally
interpreted as metaphysically inﬂationary: when something is grounded in the
fundamental, it is not merely a redescription of the fundamental in non-fundamental
terms but is something real in its own right, at least partly distinct from its grounds.
This conception of ground is clearly articulated by Schaffer (2009). It ties ground
closely to the notion of ontological levels; to the extent that the pattern of grounding
relations forms a stratiﬁed structure, grounding brings with it ontological levels.
While the contrast I have just drawn between grounding and concept-
fundamentality could of course be contested, it will serve for the purposes of this
paper to illustrate the consequences of applying different conceptions of interlevel
relations – as merely representational, or as metaphysically substantial – to the
context of Everettian levels.
In this section I have suggested that both grounding and Siderian concept funda-
mentality are promising potential candidates for illuminating the levels structure
of an Everettian worldview. In the next section, I explore their application to
the Everettian scenario, and three distinct types of inter-level relationship which
decoherence-based EQM encompasses.
26.3
Explanatory Levels in Everettian Quantum Theory
26.3.1
The Fundamental Level and the Multiverse Level
The fundamental quantum state is a strange beast. There are two main ontological
accounts offered by Everettians of this state: wavefunction realism and spacetime
state realism. Fundamental reality according to wavefunction-realist EQM resides in

26
Fundamentality and Levels in Everettian Quantum Mechanics
403
conﬁguration space rather than in three-dimensional space (Albert, 1996; Albert &
Ney, 2013; Ney, 2021). Spacetime state realism is unique to the Everettian scenario,
and it involves attributing an extraordinary amount of structure to a given spacetime
region (Wallace & Timpson, 2010).2 In this chapter I will try to stay neutral on the
ontology of the quantum state, and instead focus on some facts about it which are
relatively uncontroversial among Everettians. It evolves deterministically according
to the unitary/linear Schrödinger equation. It exhausts fundamental physical reality.
And it gives rise to an emergent multiverse.
The metaphysics of the emergent multiverse is also a disputed matter which I will
ﬁnesse so far as possible. Wallace’s real pattern criterion has a strongly pragmatist
streak: all that it takes for something to be real is that it be useful for someone
to track it for some theoretical purpose or other. Saunders (2010b) and A. Wilson
(2013, 2020a) have taken this pragmatist line of thought one step further, arguing
that the best pattern to extract from the fundamental state is a pattern of diverging,
or parallel, worlds – rather than the splitting worlds often envisaged by Everettians.
Any pattern-based strategy of this kind is of course fraught with controversy: see
Kent 2010, Maudlin 2010, and Hawthorne 2010 for a variety of critiques of the
Everettian appeal to ontic structural realism. I will set all of these critiques aside
here: if no account of high-level ontology as patterns in the low-level ontology
can be sustained, then the version of decoherence-based Everett which this chapter
considers is a non-starter.
If an Everettian approach to the ontology of decoherent worlds succeeds at
least in broad outline, we are still left with a number of puzzles. The decoherence
basis (in which we obtain histories strongly peaked around approximately classical
evolutions of macroscopic observables) is itself only approximately deﬁned. This
immediately gives rise to a corresponding indeterminacy in the space of Everett
worlds – both with respect to what each individual world is like, but also (at least if
the state space of the cosmos is ﬁnite) with respect to how many of them there are.
In A. Wilson (2020a) I call the former indeterminacy of world nature and the latter
indeterminacy of world number. These indeterminacies are closely (and inversely)
linked, since the more worlds there are the more determinate each individual
world becomes, up to the (vaguely deﬁned) point at which the worlds become so
determinate that decoherence conditions cease to be satisﬁed and the worlds are no
longer dynamically decoupled from each other. Quantum indeterminacy is a huge
and difﬁcult topic; for some recent discussions, see J. Wilson (2013), Wolff (2015),
Calosi and Wilson (2019).
The presence of these unfamiliar forms of imprecision in the space of emergent
quasi-classical worlds strongly suggests we are not dealing with a standard case
of interlevel relations. This suggestion is substantiated by closer consideration of
2 I have not seen any detailed discussion of the application of spacetime state realism to quantum
gravity scenarios which lack fundamental spacetime. The simplest extension of the view would be
to transfer what spacetime state realism says about spacetime over mutatis mutandis to whichever
fundamental space hosts the ﬁelds posited by one’s preferred theory of quantum gravity.

404
A. Wilson
the metaphysical relationship which Everettians identify between the fundamental
ontology and the individual worlds of an Everettian multiverse. Everett worlds are
not parts of the fundamental object, the quantum state – rather, Everett worlds are
parts of the multiverse, a complex derivative object identiﬁed as a distinctive kind of
pattern in the fundamental object. The individual Everett worlds are indeterminate in
nature, and their mereological fusion is likewise indeterminate, while the underlying
fundamental quantum state remains determinate.
The Everettian picture of levels, then, incorporates a distinctive holism: the
fundamental state is a single object, and multiplicity of Everett worlds is only
found at the derivative level. The relationship here is not one of part/whole; there
are no interesting mereological relations between fundamental elements as parts
and Everett worlds as wholes, or vice versa.3 Wallace instead says that the Everett
worlds are ‘instantiated by’ the fundamental state. This observation rules out the
application of some inﬂuential accounts of interlevel relationships which rely on
mereological relations, such as that of Oppenheim and Putnam (1958). However, the
ﬂexibility of the two approaches which we have adopted for this chapter allows them
to be applied immediately to the emergence of the emergent multiverse. Grounding
applies straightforwardly: we obtain a real, grounded, imprecise multiverse. Meta-
physical semantics also applies straightforwardly: we have a emergent multiverse
language with an imprecise semantics in terms of the precise fundamental language.
26.3.2
The Multiverse Level and the Everett World Level
The move from the multiverse level to the Everett world level is a quite different
kind of shift from the move from the fundamental level to the multiverse level
just discussed. There is no new vagueness introduced at the level of an individual
Everett world, over and above the vagueness in world number and world nature
already present at the multiverse level. What is introduced instead is the world-
centric perspective: a given system being centred in one speciﬁc Everett world,
and having a corresponding special relationship with other events centred in same
world. The distinctive explanatory power of the world-centric perspective derives
from the dynamic decoupling of the worlds, such that they obey approximately
classical equations of motion: systems located in one of the worlds have their causal
interactions effectively limited to other systems located in the very same world.
It might seem peculiar (even misguided) to label the shift from the multiverse
perspective to the Everett world perspective a shift in level. After all, we don’t label
the shift from considering the whole of my lawn to considering a quarter of the lawn
a change in levels – and aren’t individual Everett worlds just parts of the Everett
3 The parthood claim might be vindicated by loosening usual assumptions about mereology and its
relation to space and time in the manner of Le Bihan (2018); Saunders (2010b) provides axioms
for a mereology of state vectors which makes Everett worlds part of the universal quantum state.

26
Fundamentality and Levels in Everettian Quantum Mechanics
405
multiverse in the same way that a quarter of my lawn is part of the lawn? But the
analogy breaks down immediately: the shift from the multiverse perspective to the
individual Everett world perspective is more like the relation between the lawn and
my own location on the lawn. Facts about which world is ours are not to be found in
the fundamental physics of EQM, or in a third-person-perspective description of the
whole emergent multiverse. Rather, adopting the Everett world perspective requires
adopting a perspective on the multiverse, a perspective from inside one individual
world and one which is occupied in common with all one’s worldmates.
What outcome of quantum processes you and I observe is a matter of which
Everett world we are both in. The self-locating element of a fact about an outcome
of a quantum process, in the Everettian picture, is not something which is in any
way determined by the non-self-locating facts about the multiverse. Knowing all
there is to know about the multiverse cannot tell us where we are in it, any more than
a paper map (no matter how detailed) will tell me where in my environment I am
currently located without further supplementation with, e.g., perceptual information.
The case is familiar from what philosophers of language call ‘essential indexicals’ –
expressions like ‘here’ and ‘now’ which cannot be replaced with the speciﬁc places
or times they refer to without distortion of meaning. Just as I can know that someone
is spilling sugar but not know that this person is myself (this example is from Perry
1979), subsequent to a Stern-Gerlach measurement I can know that there is an x-
spin-up world and a x-spin-down world but not know which of these two worlds I
am in. These self-locating contents are no mere curiosity: for many Everettians they
provide the subject-matter for objective probabilities in EQM (Saunders & Wallace,
2008; Saunders, 2010b; Wallace, 2012; A. Wilson, 2013, 2020a; Sebens & Carroll,
2018).
There is little by way of consensus in the broader metaphysics of perspec-
tives about how to think about essentially self-locating facts, especially where
these facts play important explanatory roles as they do in EQM. Some of the
options on the table for understanding them include deﬂationary approaches, where
perspectives are conceived as wholly representational; perspectives are just a
mode of presentation of a non-perspectival reality. The options also include more
inﬂationary approaches, including the prospect of perspectival facts (Giere, 2006) or
an irreducible fragmentation to reality (Fine, 2005; Lipman, 2015). But it’s clear that
Everettians need to give some sort of positive account of the nature of perspectives,
given the unique explanatory role that perspectives on the multiverse play in their
overall worldview – the role of accounting for our observations of speciﬁc outcomes
of quantum processes.
Grounding can handle the relation between the multiverse and Everett world
levels in a distinctive way, if we acknowledge the possibility of partial grounds
which cannot be completed into any set of full grounds. The perspectival fact about
the outcome of a quantum process is partially grounded in the multiverse, of course –
the multiverse determines what the possible outcomes of that process are. But the
perspectival fact also includes a self-locating element which is not grounded in the
multiverse, and is incomplete without it; so the perspectival fact can be modelled as
partially grounded (in the multiverse) without being wholly grounded in it. Which

406
A. Wilson
world is ours is, in grounding terms, a brute fact. See Leuenberger (2020) for more
on partial grounds without any full ground, and Bader (2021) for the connection to
bruteness (though neither envisage the Everettian application I am suggesting).
Concept fundamentality, and the associated metaphysical semantics, can also be
used to account for the in-world perspective. What concept-fundamentalists should
say is that some of our concepts – not the wholly fundamental ones, but still rela-
tively fundamental ones, through which we view all of the contingent goings-on that
are the regular subject-matter of the sciences – are essentially self-locating/indexical
in character. This approach is metaphysically more lightweight than the appeal to
grounding, it is recognisably a descendant of Lewis’ treatment of the semantics of
centred content (Lewis 1979), and it still allows for a distinctive explanatory force
to the Everett-world level facts, given that the concepts they involve are at least
relatively concept-fundamental.Accordingly I think this approach is likely to appeal
to many Everettians.
Some may wish, though, to avoid giving indexicality any role at all in the higher-
level facts. It remains an option for Everettians to avoid bringing indexicality either
into the grounding network or into fundamental concepts, and instead to make do
with a purely representational account of indexicality. This would be to do without
a distinct Everett world level altogether, locating special science levels as above the
multiverse level without intermediaries, and would thereby avoid some of the more
interesting features of the full levels hierarchy I have been describing. I leave it up
to the reader to decide whether that would be a good thing.
26.3.3
The Everett World Level and the Special-Science Levels
The classical model of a multi-levelled science consists of a bottom level of
fundamental physics, with additional levels corresponding (at least broadly, or
perhaps in the ideal limit) to key explanatory disciplines like chemistry, biology,
and psychology. I will assume three features will be had by any adequate account
of these levels. First, the ordering of levels is partial rather than total: levels related
‘horizontally’ such as economics and geology need not stand in any direct depen-
dence relation. Second, the dependence between levels is asymmetric at least for
the most part: the higher level depends on the lower level in an ‘upwards’ fashion.4
Third, dependence between levels is synchronic rather than diachronic. This latter
feature is usually taken to rule out a causal understanding of interlevel relations, but
it still leaves open a variety of possible views of the interlevel dependence relation:
reduction (whether by deﬁnitional extension, model construction, or some other
method), grounding, elimination of the higher level, identiﬁcation of the higher-
level as the lower level, composition, essential dependence – and various others.
4 Some acknowledge some higher to lower level ‘downwards’ dependence against a background
of mostly upwards dependence: Gillett (2016) offers one such view.

26
Fundamentality and Levels in Everettian Quantum Mechanics
407
How does the novel Everettian level structure relate to the familiar ‘classical’
level structure, of the special sciences overlaid on top of physics? It does so by
approximating this structure within a limited domain, and extending it beyond that
domain. The classical level structure is wholly embedded within the Everettian
level picture, as an emergent substructure. The full hierarchy of Everettian levels,
including the new fundamental level of the non-contingent quantum state, is
therefore something like a semi-conservative extension of the structures of laws
envisaged by previous theories of levels. The special science level and Everett world
level, taken together, approximate previously envisaged systems of levels; but they
should be understood by Everettians as a self-contained and largely autonomous
subsystem within a deeper levels hierarchy.
The Everettian reconceptualization of classical levels as the higher levels within
an enlarged level structure leaves most of their core features intact. That is only
to be expected: a theory at the intersection of physics and metaphysics should
not have substantive implications for chemistry, for biology, or for the relation
between them.5 The upshot is that, as with classical levels, we can use either
grounding or concept fundamentality to model the Everettian’s emergent quasi-
classical levels. When grounding is applied to the Everettian context, there need
be no in-principle distinction between how the Everettian multiverse depends on the
fundamental level and how different scientiﬁc levels depend on one another within
the emergent Everett worlds. The differences between these types of dependence
will boil down to the character of the mediating principles linking the levels in
each case. Likewise, there is no difﬁculty in principle in specifying a metaphysical
semantics for (say) facts about the frequency of a sound in terms of facts about the
underlying oscillations of the air molecules.
There is a very extensive discussion to be had about what non-fundamental
laws there are and about how quantum mechanics underwrites and enables their
operation. However, we will be able to mostly bypass that debate here, since the
focus of this chapter is on Everettian quantum theory speciﬁcally, and there are few
reasons to think that higher-level lawhood will play out differently depending on the
interpretation of quantum mechanics that is chosen.6
The Everettian implementation of classical levels does, though, place some
constraints on which interlevel relations can be involved in linking levels. In
particular, the global chance measure incorporated into Everettian quantum theory
is distinctively antagonistic to the type of strong emergence in which the nomic
behaviour of complex systems fails to supervene on the nomic behaviour of
simpler subsystems. Probabilities for events at the micro-level – and, via physicalist
5 Why disciplines have this autonomy is an interesting question, raised by Fodor (1997) and
discussed by Loewer (2009) and Strevens (2012). What matters for present purposes is that they
have it.
6 One possible exception is the arrow of time, for which Albert (2000) ﬂoats a candidate
explanation relying on distinctive features of the Ghirardi-Rimini-Weber theory; however, that
explanation would render the arrow of time after all a fundamental phenomenon rather than a
high-level phenomenon, so it need not detain us here.

408
A. Wilson
supervenience, for all events – are ﬁxed by the global chance measure. This
apparently leaves no room for emergent laws at higher levels to have any further
effect on those probabilities.7
Not all the features of the classical level structure are retained in the emergent
levels of EQM: in particular, there is likely to be physical contingency in the
levels structure, with very different higher-level phenomena playing out in Everett
worlds in different regions of the multiverse. This hypothesis is supported by the
apparent extreme sensitivity of physical phenomena in our current cosmological
epoch to the exact value of certain ‘ﬁne-tuned’ cosmological parameters. If – as
seems quite plausible – even one of these parameters takes its value as the result
of a quantum-mechanical process, then there will be Everett worlds in which the
parameter took on a different value, and in those Everett worlds there will be
very different physical processes ordered into different sorts of levels structures. A
potential candidate mechanism is a compactiﬁcation process that generates a string
landscape cosmology; see Susskind (2005).
The Everettian scenario of physically contingent levels contrasts with the
classical picture, where levels structures are typically regarded as physically –
perhaps even metaphysically – non-contingent. That is, any worlds with the same
fundamental physical laws as ours (perhaps even any worlds with the same natural
kinds as ours) are typically expected to also have the same levels structure. The
emergent levels of EQM confound this expectation.
Putting the pieces of this section together, we obtain the resulting structure of
levels:
7 See Meacham (2014) for arguments of this general form.

26
Fundamentality and Levels in Everettian Quantum Mechanics
409
26.4
Levels of Laws in Everettian Quantum Theory
To ﬁx the details of an Everettian multiverse, what is needed is a suitable
initial quantum state evolving according to the unitary evolution described by the
Schrödinger equation. The unitary evolution, and perhaps the initial quantum state
too, are obvious candidates for being truly fundamental laws of physics in an
Everettian scenario. In A. Wilson (2020a) I speculated that as cosmology progresses
the initial quantum state of physical reality will turn out to be a precisely deﬁned
pure quantum state, most likely with a high or maximal level of symmetry; this
assumption is in line with the expectations of Wallace (2012, Forthcoming).
It is important for Everettians to mark the difference between the fundamental
quantum state and the emergent multiverse. It is correspondingly important to
mark the difference between laws of the fundamental quantum reality and laws
of individual Everett worlds. The former are novel in character, without direct
analogue amongst laws of classical physics. The latter resemble closely what have
traditionally been regarded as fundamental physical laws: constraint laws, force
laws, conservation laws, and the like. When contrasted with classical physics, the
fundamental laws in a decoherence-based Everettian picture supplement the laws
which we had previously regarded as physically fundamental rather than replacing
those laws directly.
In A. Wilson (2020a), I offer a uniﬁed account of the fundamental and non-
fundamental laws at work in the Everettian picture, making use of the notion of
modally strong generalization: roughly, a generalization which is non-accidentally
true. Laws of individual Everett worlds are true generalizations which hold across
instances not only in the actual Everett world but also in other Everett worlds.
(Fundamental laws are degenerately modally strong, since there is only one
fundamental quantum state.) Each individual Everett world, on this account, comes
equipped with a set of laws of its own, including both fundamental and non-
fundamental laws.
Lawsets of individual Everett worlds are in some respects similar to the total
lawsets envisaged in one-world interpretations of quantum and classical physics:
they assign probabilities (including of 0 and 1) to various histories. But they are
importantly dissimilar in other respects. The Schrödinger equation itself will not
appear in the laws of individual Everett worlds; that law holds only of physical
reality as a whole. Likewise, the initial quantum state of physical reality is not
amongst the laws of any individual Everett world, even the fundamental laws of that
world. The Schrödinger equation and the initial quantum state may of course still be
used by physicists to predict and explain actual events – on the present proposal, it
is not only laws of the actual world which can play that predictive and explanatory
role.

410
A. Wilson
This does not rule out a fundamental law of individual Everett worlds taking
a boundary-condition form; (Chen, Forthcoming) highlights this possibility. One
respect in which the lawsets of individual Everett worlds resemble lawsets of worlds
in a one-world theory is that both kinds of lawset give rise to the problem of the
arrow of time. From where, we may ask, does the evident temporal asymmetry of
the actual world arise? Everettians, of course, can appeal to the initial quantum
state and whatever symmetries it has, as an explanation of why the evolution of the
universal quantum state is temporally asymmetric. But this account works at the
fundamental level, as opposed to at the level of an individual Everett world.
Here I suggest that there is a role for a vague Past Hypothesis of each individual
Everett world which speciﬁes that world’s macroscopic state at a suitable early time.
Chen implements this idea as a constraint on an impure state’s density matrix in
an interpretation-neutral setting.8 The resulting quantum Past Hypothesis has the
curious feature of being a vague yet very general physical law. Chen suggests that
we respond by positing vague fundamental laws, but the quantum modal realist can
instead say that it shows that fundamental laws of individual Everett worlds can be
vague even while the truly fundamental laws remain wholly precise. Then we would
have an emergent vague Past Hypothesis holding within each Everett world as well
as a fundamental precise initial pure quantum state of high symmetry: a boundary
condition for the whole of physical reality.
Here then is a full proposed hierarchy of levels of laws for Everettian quantum
theory:
8 This would bring the Everett-world-level explanations of the source of probabilities and of the
arrow of time much closer to the ‘Mentaculus’ picture of statistical mechanics associated with
David Albert and Barry Loewer (Loewer, 2020); Chen calls his alternative the Wentaculus (Chen,
Forthcoming).

26
Fundamentality and Levels in Everettian Quantum Mechanics
411
26.5
Novel Features of Everettian Levels
Sections 26.3 and 26.4 sketched the application of grounding and concept funda-
mentality to the complex system of levels and laws which arise in decoherence-
based EQM. But could more modest theoretical tools, in particular the more familiar
and purely modal notion of supervenience, also do the trick? In this section I will
argue that the answer is no: the distinctive nature of physical contingency in EQM
precludes the exclusive use of supervenience in modelling Everettian levels.
To make my case for the need to go beyond supervenience in modelling
fundamentality in EQM, I will need to introduce some further assumptions about
the interpretation of EQM – assumptions not shared by all Everettians. Up to this
point I have tried to stay neutral on disputed features of decoherence-based EQM,
but I now want to focus on the speciﬁc consequences of my preferred approach to
probability in EQM: quantum modal realism. In a recent book (A. Wilson, 2020a) I
argued that EQM furnishes a powerful reductive account of objective contingency.
To be possible is to occur in some Everett world; to be necessary is to occur at them
all.
The core principles of quantum modal realism are:
Alignment: to be a metaphysically possible world is to be an Everett world. (ibid. p. 22)
Indexicality-of-actuality: Each Everett world is actual according to its own inhabitants,
and only according to its own inhabitants. (ibid. p. 22)
Everett worlds then represent alternative possibilities – different ways things
objectively could turn out – rather than representing different parts of one single,
complicated, possibility.
Quantum modal realism renders supervenience hopeless as an account of
interlevel dependence within EQM itself. If contingency is a matter of variation
across the multiverse, then the fundamental quantum state itself is non-contingent.
If the emergent multiverse supervenes on the fundamental state, then there is no
possible difference in the emergent multiverse without some possible difference
in the fundamental. Since a non-contingent fundamental quantum state cannot be
different, nor can the emergent multiverse. And so we lose the one-way nature
of the dependence relationship: the fundamental quantum state supervenes on the
emergent multiverse and vice versa. This ought to be no surprise: when modality
lives wholly inside an Everett multiverse, it can’t also be used to characterise the
emergence of that multiverse from something else.
What is needed for EQM, it emerges, is an interlevel relation which can hold
compatibly with one-way supervenience – and which entails one-way supervenience
in cases where there is any modal variation at all – but which can also hold non-
trivially in the absence of modal variation. It is also desirable that this relation should
be an explanatory relation: we want to be able to explain the higher levels, including
the emergence of a multiverse, on the underlying fundamental quantum level. Both
of these considerations point towards employing a more substantial metaphysical
level-connector framework such as grounding or concept fundamentality. In each

412
A. Wilson
case, it is supposed that the holding of the relevant grounding relation or the relevant
portion of the metaphysical semantics explains why any corresponding relation
of one-way supervenience holds. More directly it is supposed that the holding of
the ground facts (facts speciﬁed in terms of fundamental concepts), itself explains
the holding of the grounded facts (facts speciﬁed in terms of less-fundamental
concepts). Hence the holding of these relations underwrites both the one-way
supervenience between levels and the corresponding explanatory asymmetry.
Numerous other candidate relations other than grounding and concept funda-
mentality have of course been suggested in the literature. Several of the relations
which J. Wilson (2014) calls ‘small-g’ grounding relations – relations of functional
realization, set membership, determinate/determinable relations – are also intended
to carry explanatory weight, and hence to be able to explain the holding of
supervenience. What is required is that the notion in question should be able to
hold in asymmetric patterns even in the presence of symmetric modal dependence –
and realization, set membership and determinate/determinablerelations all meet this
condition. My argument accordingly does not tell against the application of these
notions to EQM – it is only directed against those who would try to make do with
nothing but supervenience.
26.6
Conclusion
An Everettian approach to quantum theory invokes a levels structure which extends
previous conceptions of levels by including a level below the fundamental level of
previous systems of laws. In extending systems of laws downwards in this way,
the distinction between metaphysics and physics becomes blurred, and accordingly
there is reason to look for explanatory relations between levels which are at home
both in the contingent domain and in the noncontingent domain, and in both physics
and metaphysics.
Grounding and Siderian concept fundamentality both offer potential metaphysi-
cal frameworks which can accommodate an Everettian level structure. As in other
domains, these approaches differ in their implications for the metaphysics of the
emergent worlds; concept fundamentality lends itself to a deﬂationary picture where
Everett worlds are really just a manner of speaking about the fundamental level
of the universal quantum state, while grounding lends itself to a more inﬂationary
picture where Everett worlds are genuine, though grounded, emergent ingredients
of reality.
Acknowledgements My thanks to the FraMEPhys work-in-progress group (especially Nicholas
Emmerson, Joaquim Giannotti, Michael Townsen Hicks, Francis Longworth, John Murphy, Joshua
Quirke, Noelia Iranzo Ribera, and Katie Robertson), to Baptiste Le Bihan and Elizabeth Miller
for written comments and helpful discussion, to two very constructive referees for this volume,
to an audience at the Nature of Quantum Objects conference in Geneva, and to Valia Allori for
masterminding the volume. This work forms part of the project A Framework for Metaphysical
Explanation in Physics (FraMEPhys), which received funding from the European Research

26
Fundamentality and Levels in Everettian Quantum Mechanics
413
Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme
(grant agreement no. 757295). Funding was also provided by the Australian Research Council
(grant agreement no. DP180100105).
References
Albert, D. Z. (1996). Elementary quantum metaphysics. In J. T. Cushing, A. Fine, & S.
Goldstein (Eds.), Bohmian mechanics and quantum theory: An appraisal (Boston Studies in
the Philosophy of Science 184) (pp. 277–284). Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Albert, D. Z. (2000). Time and chance. Harvard University Press.
Albert, D. Z., & Loewer, B. (1988). Interpreting the many worlds interpretation. Synthese, 77,
195–213.
Albert, D., & Ney, A. (Eds) (2013). The Wave Function: Essays on the Metaphysics of Quantum
Mechanics. New York: Oxford University Press.
Bader, R. (2021). The fundamental and the brute. Philosophical Studies, 178, 1121–1142.
Bennett, K. (2017). Making things up. Oxford University Press.
Bhogal, H., & Perry, Z. (2017). What the humean should say about entanglement. Noûs, 51(1),
74–94.
Callender, C. (2014). One world, one beable. Synthese, 192, 3153–3177.
Calosi, C., & Morganti, M. (Forthcoming). Interpreting quantum entanglement: Steps towards
coherentist quantum mechanics. The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science.
Calosi, C., & Wilson, J. (2019). Quantum metaphysical indeterminacy. Philosophical Studies, 176,
2599–2627.
Chen, E. K. (Forthcoming). Fundamental nomic vagueness. The Philosophical Review.
Crull, E. (2022). Decoherence. In E. Knox & A. Wilson (Eds.), The Routledge companion to the
philosophy of physics. Routledge.
Dasgupta, S. (2015). The possibility of physicalism. Journal of Philosophy, 111(9), 557–592.
Dennett, D. (1991). Real patterns. Journal of Philosophy, 88(1), 27–51.
Esfeld, M. (2014). Quantum humeanism, or: Physicalism without properties. The Philosophical
Quarterly, 64(256), 453–470.
Fine, K. (2005). Tense and reality. In Modality and tense: Philosophical papers (pp. 261–320).
Oxford University Press.
Fine, K. (2012). Guide to ground. In F. Correia & B. Schnieder (Eds.), Metaphysical grounding.
Cambridge University Press.
Fodor, J. (1997). Special sciences: Still autonomous after all these years. Philosophical Perspec-
tives, 11, 149–163.
Giere, R. (2006). Scientiﬁc perspectivism. University of Chicago Press.
Gillett, C. (2016). Reduction and emergence in science and philosophy. Cambridge University
Press.
Hawthorne, J. (2010). A metaphysician looks at the Everett interpretation. In S. Saunders, J.
Barrett, A. Kent, & D. Wallace (Eds.), Many worlds? Everett, quantum theory, and reality.
Oxford University Press.
Hicks, M. T. (MS). Symmetries, explanation, and the metaphysics of laws. Unpublished
manuscript.
Kent, A. (2010). One world versus many: The inadequacy of Everettian accounts of evolution,
probability, and scientiﬁc conﬁrmation. In S. Saunders, J. Barrett, A. Kent, & D. Wallace (Eds.),
Many worlds? Everett, quantum theory, and reality. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kovacs, D. (2019). The myth of the myth of supervenience. Philosophical Studies, 176, 1967–
1989.
Ladyman, J., & Ross, D. (2007). Every thing must go: Metaphysics naturalized. Oxford University
Press.

414
A. Wilson
Le Bihan, B. (2018). Priority monism beyond spacetime. Metaphysica, 19(1), 95–111.
Leuenberger, S. (2020). The fundamental: Ungrounded or all-grounding? Philosophical Studies,
177(9), 2647–2669.
Lewis, D. (1979). Attitudes De Dicto and De Se. The Philosophical Review, 88(4), 513–543.
Lewis, D. (1983). New work for a theory of universals. Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 61(4),
343–377.
Lewis, D. (1994). Reduction of mind. In S. Guttenplan (Ed.), The Blackwell companion to the
philosophy of mind (pp. 412–431). Blackwell.
Lipman, M. (2015). On ﬁne’s fragmentalism. Philosophical Studies, 172(12), 3119–3133.
List, C. (2019). Levels: Descriptive, explanatory and ontological. Noûs, 53(4), 852–883.
Loewer, B. (2009). Why is there anything except physics? Synthese, 170, 217–233.
Loewer, B. (2020). The mentaculus vision. In V. Allori (Ed.), Statistical mechanics and scientiﬁc
explanation (pp. 3–29). World Scientiﬁc.
Maudlin, T. (2010). Can the world be only wavefunction? In S. Saunders, J. Barrett, A. Kent, & D.
Wallace (Eds.), Many worlds? Everett, quantum theory, and reality. Oxford University Press.
Meacham, C. (2014). Autonomous chances and the conﬂicts problem. In A. Wilson (Ed.), Chance
and temporal asymmetry. Oxford University Press.
Miller, E. (2014). Quantum entanglement, Bohmian mechanics, and humean supervenience.
Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 92(3), 567–583.
Ney, A. (2021). The world in the wave function. Oxford University Press.
Oppenheim, P & Putnam, H. (1958). “The unity of science as a working hypothesis”, Minnesota
Studies in the Philosophy of Science 2:3–36. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Perry, J. (1979). The problem of the essential indexical. Noûs, 13(1), 3–21.
Rosen, G. (2010). Metaphysical dependence: Grounding and reduction. In B. Hale & A. Hoffmann
(Eds.), Modality: Metaphysics, logic, and epistemology (pp. 109–136). Oxford University
Press.
Saunders, S. (1993). Decoherence, relative states, and evolutionary adaptation. Foundations of
Physics, 23, 1553–1585.
Saunders, S. (1995). Time, quantum mechanics, and decoherence. Synthese, 102, 235–266.
Saunders, S. (1998). Time, quantum mechanics, and probability. Synthese, 114(3), 373–404.
Saunders, S. (2010a). Many worlds: An introduction. In S. Saunders, J. Barrett, A. Kent, & D.
Wallace (Eds.), Many worlds? Everett, quantum theory, and reality. Oxford University Press.
Saunders, S. (2010b). Chance in the Everett interpretation. In S. Saunders, J. Barrett, A. Kent, & D.
Wallace (Eds.), Many worlds? Everett, quantum theory, and reality. Oxford University Press.
Saunders, S., & Wallace, D. (2008). Branching and uncertainty. The British Journal for the
Philosophy of Science, 59(3), 293–305.
Schaffer, J. (2009). On what grounds what. In D. Chalmers, D. Manley, & R. Wasserman (Eds.),
Metametaphysics. Oxford University Press.
Schaffer, J. (2017). Laws for metaphysical explanation. Philosophical Issues, 27, 302–321.
Schaffer, J., & Ismael, J. (2020). Quantum holism: Non-separability as common ground. Synthèse,
197, 4131–4160.
Sebens, C., & Carroll, S. (2018). Self-locating uncertainty and the origin of probability in
Everettian quantum mechanics. The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 69(1), 25–
74.
Sider, T. (2011). Writing the book of the world. Oxford University Press.
Sider, T. (2020). The tools of metaphysics and the metaphysics of science. Oxford University Press.
Strevens, M. (2012). The explanatory role of irreducible properties. Noûs, 46, 754–780.
Susskind, L. (2005). The cosmic landscape: String theory and the illusion of intelligent design.
Little, Brown, and Co.
Wallace, D. (2003). Everett and structure. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science B, 34(1),
87–105.
Wallace, D. (2010). Decoherence and ontology. In S. Saunders, J. Barrett, A. Kent, & D. Wallace
(Eds.), Many worlds? Everett, quantum theory, and reality. Oxford University Press.

26
Fundamentality and Levels in Everettian Quantum Mechanics
415
Wallace, D. (2012). The emergent multiverse: Quantum theory according to the Everett interpre-
tation. Oxford University Press.
Wallace, D. (Forthcoming). The logic of the past hypothesis. In B. Loewer, E. Winsberg, & B.
Weslake (Eds.), Time’s arrows and the probability structure of the world. Harvard University
Press.
Wallace, D., & Timpson, C. G. (2010). Quantum mechanics on spacetime I: Spacetime state
realism. The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 61(4), 697–727.
Wilson, A. (2013). Objective probability in Everettian quantum mechanics. The British Journal for
the Philosophy of Science, 64(4), 709–737.
Wilson, J. (2013). A determinable-based account of metaphysical indeterminacy. Inquiry, 56, 359–
385.
Wilson, J. (2014). No work for a theory of grounding. Inquiry, 57(5–6), 535–579.
Wilson, A. (2018). Metaphysical causation. Noûs, 52(4), 723–751.
Wilson, A. (2019). Making things up, by Karen Bennett. Mind, 28(510), 588–600.
Wilson, A. (2020a). The nature of contingency: Quantum physics as modal realism. Oxford
University Press.
Wilson, A. (2020b). Classifying dependencies. In D. Glick, G. Darby, & A. Marmodoro (Eds.),
The foundation of reality: Fundamentality, space and time. Oxford University Press.
Wolff, J. (2015). Spin as a determinable. Topoi, 34(2), 379–386.

