Quantum Field Theory
549
Q
Literature
1. R. P. Feynman, R. B. Leighton, M. Sands: The Feynman Lectures on Physics (Addison-Wesley,
Reading, MA 1965, Vol. III, sec. 3)
2. M. O. Scully, B.-G. Englert, H. Walther: Quantum optical tests of complementarity. Nature 351,
111–116 (1991)
3. M. O. Scully, K. Dr¨uhl: Quantum eraser: a proposed photon correlation experiment concerning
observation and the “delayed choice” in quantum mechanics. Phys. Rev. 25A, 2208–2213(1982)
4. B. J. Hiley, R. E. Callaghan: What is erased in the quantum erasure? Found. Phys. 36, 1869–1883
(2006)
5. B. -G. Englert, J. A. Bergou: Quantitative quantum eraser. Optics Commun. 179, 337–355
(2000)
6. N. Bohr: Atomic Physics and Human Knowledge (Science Editions, New York, 1961, p. 50)
7. J. A. Wheeler: The ‘Past’ and the ‘Delayed Choice’ Double-slit Experiment, in Mathematical
Foundations of Quantum Theory, ed. A. R. Marlow (Academic Press, New York, 1978, pp. 9–48)
Quantum Field Theory
Frank Wilczek
Quantum ﬁeld theory is the application of quantum mechanics to systems whose
degrees of freedom depend continuously on space and time. In the quantum me-
chanics of a point particle, states are speciﬁed by  wave function ψ(x), which
gives the probability amplitude to ﬁnd the particle at the position x. In quantum
ﬁeld theory, states are speciﬁed by a wave function (φ(x)) which speciﬁes the
probability amplitude for the ﬁeld φ to be in the conﬁguration φ(x).
Quantum ﬁeld theory was ﬁrst developed to enable the application of quan-
tum mechanics to theories that obey the special theory of relativity, speciﬁcally
Maxwell’s electrodynamics and Dirac’s electron theory. Relativistic theories of in-
teracting point particles are awkward to construct. The limiting speed of propagation
c means that the inﬂuence felt by a given particle due to a second particle depends
on where that second particle was in the past. Thus to evolve the state of set of par-
ticles, it is not sufﬁcient to know their present positions. Fields avoid this difﬁculty,
because the state of the ﬁeld reﬂects the propagating inﬂuences as they propagate.
Quantum ﬁeld theory is the framework in which the regnant theories of the elec-
troweak and strong interactions, which together form the Standard Model  particle
physics, are formulated.  Quantum Electrodynamics (QED), besides providing a
complete foundation for atomic physics and chemistry, has supported calculations of
physical quantities with unparalleled precision. The experimentally measured value
of the magnetic dipole moment of the muon,
(gμ −2)exp. = 233 184 600 (1680) × 10−11,
(1)

550
Quantum Field Theory
for example, should be compared with the theoretical prediction
(gμ −2)theor. = 233 183 478 (308) × 10−11.
(2)
In  Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) we cannot, for the foreseeable future,
aspire to comparable accuracy. Yet QCD provides different, and at least equally im-
pressive, evidence for the validity of the basic principles of quantum ﬁeld theory.
Indeed, because in QCD the interactions are stronger, QCD manifests a wider vari-
ety of phenomena characteristic of quantum ﬁeld theory. These include especially
running of the effective coupling with distance or energy scale and the phenomenon
of conﬁnement. QCD has supported, and rewarded with experimental conﬁrmation,
both heroic calculations of multiloop diagrams and massive numerical simulations
of (a discretized version of) the complete theory.
The techniques of quantum ﬁeld theory have also proved fruitful for describing
the dynamics of many interacting particles, in the same spirit that hydrodynamics
emerges as a fruitful description of systems of many interacting atoms. Impres-
sive applications include  superconductivity, the low-temperature behavior of the
quantum liquids He3 and He4, and the theory of second-order phase transitions.
Although for reasons of space and focus I will not attempt to do justice to this as-
pect here, the continuing interchange of ideas between condensed matter and high
energy theory, through the medium of quantum ﬁeld theory, is a remarkable phe-
nomenon in itself. A partial list of historically important examples includes global
and local spontaneous symmetry breaking, the  renormalization group, effective
ﬁeld theory,  solitons, instantons, and fractional charge and statistics.
Quantum Field Theory and Reality
What are the essential features of quantum ﬁeld theory?
This question has no sharp answer. Theoretical physicists are very ﬂexible in
adapting their tools, and no axiomization can keep up with them. However I think
it is fair to say that there are two characteristic, core ideas of quantum ﬁeld theory.
First: The basic dynamical degrees of freedom are operator functions of space and
time – quantum ﬁelds, that obey appropriate commutation relations. Second: The
interactions of these ﬁelds are local in space and time. Thus the equations of mo-
tion and commutation relations governing the evolution of a given quantum ﬁeld at
a given point in space-time should depend only on the behavior of ﬁelds and their
derivatives at that point. One might ﬁnd it convenient to use other variables, whose
equations are not local, but in the spirit of quantum ﬁeld theory there must always
be some underlying fundamental, local variables. These ideas, combined with pos-
tulates of  symmetry (e.g., in the context of the standard model, Lorentz and gauge
invariance) turn out to be amazingly powerful, as will emerge the discussion below.
The ﬁeld concept came to dominate physics starting with the work of Faraday
in the mid-nineteenth century. Its conceptual advantage over the earlier Newtonian

Quantum Field Theory
551
Q
program of physics, to formulate the fundamental laws in terms of forces among
atomic particles, emerges when we take into account the circumstance, unknown
to Newton (or, for that matter, Faraday) but fundamental in special relativity, that
inﬂuences travel no faster than a ﬁnite limiting speed. For then the force on a given
particle at a given time cannot be deduced from the positions of other particles at that
time, but must be deduced in a complicated way from their previous positions. Fara-
day’s intuition that the fundamental laws of electromagnetism could be expressed
most simply in terms of ﬁelds ﬁlling space and time was of course brilliantly vindi-
cated by Maxwell’s mathematical theory.
The concept of  locality, in the crude form that one can predict the behavior of
nearby objects without reference to distant ones, is basic to scientiﬁc practice. Prac-
tical experimenters – if not astrologers – conﬁdently expect, on the basis of much
successful experience, that after reasonable (generally quite modest) precautions to
isolate their experiments from the environment they will obtain reproducible results.
The deep and ancient historic roots of the ﬁeld and locality concepts provide
no guarantee that these concepts remain relevant or valid when extrapolated far
beyond their origins in experience, into the subatomic and quantum domain. This
extrapolation must be judged by its fruits. That brings us, naturally, to a second
question:
What does quantum ﬁeld theory add to our understanding of the world, that was
not already present in quantum mechanics and classical ﬁeld theory separately?
Undoubtedly the single most profound fact about Nature that quantum ﬁeld the-
ory uniquely explains is the existence of different, yet indistinguishable, copies of
elementary particles. Two  electrons anywhere in the Universe, whatever their
origin or history, are observed to have exactly the same properties. We understand
this as a consequence of the fact that both are excitations of the same primary reality,
the electron ﬁeld. The same logic, of course, applies to photons ( light quantum)
or quarks (see  Color Charge Degree of Freedom in Particle Physics; Mixing and
Oscillations of Particles; Particle Physics; Parton Model; QCD); or even to compos-
ite objects such as atomic nuclei, atoms, or molecules. The indistinguishability of
particles is so familiar, and so fundamental to all of modern physical science, that
we could easily take it for granted. Yet it is by no means obvious. For example, it
directly contradicts one of the pillars of Leibniz’ metaphysics, his “principle of the
identity of indiscernables,” according to which two objects cannot differ solely in
number. Maxwell thought the similarity of different molecules so remarkable that
he devoted the last part of his Encyclopedia Brittanica entry on Atoms – well over
a thousand words – to discussing it. He concluded that “the formation of a molecule
is therefore an event not belonging to that order of nature in which we live ... it must
be referred to the epoch, not of the formation of the earth or the solar system ... but
of the establishment of the existing order of nature ...”.
The existence of classes of indistinguishable particles is the necessary logical
prerequisite to a second profound insight from quantum ﬁeld theory: the assign-
ment of unique quantum statistics to each class. Given the  indistinguishability of
a class of elementary particles, and complete invariance of their interactions under
interchange, the general principles of quantum mechanics teach us that solutions

552
Quantum Field Theory
forming any representation of the permutation symmetry group retain that property
in time; but they do not constrain which representations are realized. Quantum ﬁeld
theory not only explains the existence of indistinguishable particles and the invari-
ance of their interactions under interchange, but also constrains the symmetry of the
solutions. For bosons only the identity representation is physical (symmetric wave
functions), for fermions only the one-dimensional odd representation is physical
(antisymmetric wave functions). One also has the  spin statistics theorem, accord-
ing to which objects with integer spin are bosons, whereas objects with half odd
integer  spin are fermions. Of course, these general predictions have been veriﬁed
in many experiments. The fermion character of electrons, in particular, underlies the
stability of matter and the structure of the periodic table.
A third profound general insight from quantum ﬁeld theory is the existence of
antiparticles. This was ﬁrst inferred by Dirac on the basis of a brilliant but obso-
lete interpretation of his equation for the electron ﬁeld, whose elucidation was a
crucial step in the formulation of quantum ﬁeld theory. In quantum ﬁeld theory, we
reinterpret the Dirac wave function as a position (and time) dependent operator. It
can be expanded in terms of the solutions of the  Dirac equation, with operator
coefﬁcients. The coefﬁcients of positive-energy solutions are operators that destroy
electrons, and the coefﬁcients of the negative-energy solutions are operators that
create positrons (with positive energy). With this interpretation, an improved ver-
sion of Dirac’s hole theory emerges in a straightforward way. (Unlike the original
hole theory, it has a sensible generalization to bosons, and to processes where the
number of electrons minus positrons changes.) A very general consequence of quan-
tum ﬁeld theory, valid in the presence of arbitrarily complicated interactions, is the
 CPT theorem. It states that the product of charge conjugation,  parity, and time
reversal is always a symmetry of the world, although each may be – and is! – vi-
olated separately. Antiparticles are strictly deﬁned as the CPT conjugates of their
corresponding particles.
The three outstanding facts we have discussed so far: the existence of indistin-
guishable particles, the phenomenon of  quantum statistics, and the existence of
antiparticles, are all essentially consequences of free quantum ﬁeld theory. When
one incorporates interactions into quantum ﬁeld theory, two other profound features
of the physical reality get brightly illuminated.
The ﬁrst of these is the ubiquity of particle creation and destruction processes.
Local interactions involve products of ﬁeld operators at a point. When the ﬁelds are
expanded into  creation and annihilation operators multiplying modes, we see that
such interactions correspond to processes wherein particles can be created, annihi-
lated, or changed into different kinds of particles.
This possibility arose, of course, arose in the primeval quantum ﬁeld theory,
quantum electrodynamics, where the primary interaction arises from a product of the
electron ﬁeld, its Hermitean conjugate, and the photon ﬁeld. Processes of radiation
and absorption of photons by electrons (or positrons), as well as electron–positron
pair creation, are encoded in that product. But because the emission and absorption
of light is such a common experience, and electrodynamics is such a special and
familiar classical ﬁeld theory, this correspondence between formalism and reality

Quantum Field Theory
553
Q
initially did not make a big impression. The ﬁrst conscious exploitation of quantum
ﬁeld theory’s potential to describe processes of transformation was Fermi’s the-
ory of beta decay. He turned the procedure around, by inferring from the observed
processes of particle transformation the nature of the underlying local interaction
of ﬁelds. Fermi’s theory involved creation and annihilation not of photons, but of
atomic nuclei and electrons (as well as neutrinos) – the traditional ingredients of
“matter.” It began the process whereby classic atomism, involving stable individual
objects, was replaced by a more sophisticated and accurate picture. In this picture
it is only the ﬁelds, and not the individual objects they create and destroy, that are
permanent.
The second is the association of forces and interactions with particle exchange.
When Maxwell completed the equations of electrodynamics, he found that they sup-
ported source-free electromagnetic waves. Thus the classical electric and magnetic
ﬁelds took on a life of their own. Electric and magnetic forces between charged
particles are explained as due to one particle acting as a source for electric and mag-
netic ﬁelds, which then inﬂuence other charged particles. Given that particles arise
as excitations of quantum ﬁelds, Maxwell’s discovery corresponds to the existence
of real photons, while the mediation of forces through ﬁelds corresponds to the ex-
change of virtual photons.
This logic applies generally. Thus the connection between interactions and the
exchange of particles is a general feature of quantum ﬁeld theory. It was used by
Yukawa to infer the existence and mass of pions from the range of nuclear forces, in
electroweak theory to infer the existence, mass, and properties of W and Z bosons
prior to their observation, and in QCD to infer the existence and properties of gluon
jets prior to their observation.
The two additional outstanding facts we just discussed: the possibility of particle
creation and destruction, and the association of particles with forces, are essentially
consequences of classical ﬁeld theory supplemented by the connection between
particles and ﬁelds we learn from free ﬁeld theory. Indeed, classical waves with
nonlinear interactions will change form, scatter, and radiate, and these processes
exactly mirror the transformation, interaction, and creation of particles. In quantum
ﬁeld theory, they are properties one sees already in tree graphs.
The foregoing major consequences of free quantum ﬁeld theory, and of its for-
mal extension to include nonlinear interactions, were all well appreciated by the late
1930s. The deeper properties of quantum ﬁeld theory, which will form the subject
of the remainder of this paper, arise from the need to introduce inﬁnitely many de-
grees of freedom, and the possibility that all these degrees of freedom are excited as
quantum-mechanical ﬂuctuations. From a mathematical point of view, these deeper
properties arise when we consider loop graphs.
From a physical point of view, the potential pitfalls associated with the existence
of an inﬁnite number of degrees of freedom ﬁrst showed up in connection with the
problem which led to the birth of quantum theory, that is the ultraviolet catastro-
phe of blackbody radiation theory. Somewhat ironically, in view of later history,
in that context the crucial contribution of the quantum theory was to remove the
disastrous consequences of the inﬁnite number of degrees of freedom possessed

554
Quantum Field Theory
by classical electrodynamics. The classical electrodynamic ﬁeld can be decom-
posed into independent oscillators with arbitrarily high values of the wavevector.
According to the equipartition theorem of classical statistical mechanics, in ther-
mal equilibrium at temperature T each of these oscillators should have average
energy kT . Quantum mechanics alters this situation by insisting that the oscilla-
tors of frequency ω have energy quantized in units of ℏω. Then the high-frequency
modes are exponentially suppressed by the Boltzmann factor, and instead of kT re-
ceive [ℏω exp(−ℏω/kT )]/[1 −exp(−ℏω/kT )]. The role of the quantum, then, is
to prevent accumulation of energy in the form of very small amplitude excitations
of arbitrarily high frequency modes. It is very effective in suppressing the thermal
excitation of high-frequency modes.
But while removing arbitrarily small amplitude excitations, quantum theory
introduces the idea that the modes are always intrinsically excited to a small extent,
proportional to ℏ. This so-called zero point motion is a consequence of the uncer-
tainty principle. For a harmonic oscillator of frequency ω, the ground state energy is
not zero, but 1
2ℏω. In the case of the electromagnetic ﬁeld this leads, upon summing
over its high-frequency modes, to a highly divergent total ground state energy. For
most physical purposes the absolute normalization of energy is unimportant, and so
this particular divergence does not necessarily render the theory useless.1 It does,
however, illustrate the dangerous character of the high-frequency modes, and its
treatment gives a ﬁrst indication of the leading theme of renormalization theory: we
can only require – and generally will only obtain – sensible, ﬁnite answers when we
ask questions that have direct, operational physical meaning.
The existence of an inﬁnite number of degrees of freedom was ﬁrst encoun-
tered in the theory of the electromagnetic ﬁeld, but it is a general phenomenon,
deeply connected with the requirement of locality in the interactions of ﬁelds. For
in order to construct the local ﬁeld ψ(x) at a space-time point x, one must take a
superposition
ψ(x) =

d4k
(2π)4 eikx ˜ψ(k)
(3)
that includes ﬁeld components ˜ψ(k) extending to arbitrarily large momenta. More-
over in a generic interaction

L =

ψ(x)3 =

d4k1
(2π)4
d4k2
(2π)4
d4k3
(2π)4 ˜ψ(k1) ˜ψ(k2) ˜ψ(k3)(2π)4δ4(k1 + k2 + k3)
(4)
we see that a low momentum mode k1 ≈0 will couple without any suppression
factor to high-momentum modes k2 and k3 ≈−k2. In this sense, local couplings
are “hard.” Because locality requires the existence of inﬁnitely many degrees of
1 One would think that gravity should care about the absolute normalization of energy. The zero-
point energy of the electromagnetic ﬁeld, in that context, generates an inﬁnite cosmological
constant. This might be canceled by similar negative contributions from fermion ﬁelds, as occurs
in supersymmetric theories, or it might indicate the need for some other profound modiﬁcation of
physical theory.

Quantum Field Theory
555
Q
freedom at large momenta, with hard interactions, ultraviolet divergences similar to
the ones cured by Planck, but driven by quantum rather than thermal ﬂuctuations,
are never far off stage. The deeper physical consequences of quantum ﬁeld theory
arise from this circumstance.
First of all, it is much more difﬁcult to construct nontrivial examples of inter-
acting relativistic quantum ﬁeld theories than purely formal considerations would
suggest. One ﬁnds that consistent quantum ﬁeld theories form a quite limited class,
whose extent depends sensitively on the dimension of space-time and the spins of
the particles involved. Their construction is quite delicate, requiring limiting pro-
cedures whose logical implementation leads directly to renormalization theory, the
running of couplings, and asymptotic freedom.  Color Charge Degree of Freedom
in Particles Physics; QCD.
Secondly, even those quantum theories that can be constructed display less
symmetry than their formal properties would suggest. Violations of naive scaling
relations – that is, ordinary dimensional analysis – in QCD, and of baryon num-
ber conservation in the standard electroweak model are examples of this general
phenomenon. The original example, unfortunately too complicated to explain fully
here, involved the decay process πo →γ γ , for which chiral symmetry (treated
classically) predicts much too small a rate. When the correction introduced by quan-
tum ﬁeld theory (the so-called ‘anomaly’) is retained, excellent agreement with
experiment results.
These deeper consequences of quantum ﬁeld theory, which superﬁcially might
appear rather technical, largely dictate the structure and behavior of the so-called
standard model – and, therefore, of the physical world.
Formulation
The physical constants ℏand c are so deeply embedded in the formulation of rel-
ativistic quantum ﬁeld theory that it is standard practice to declare them to be the
units of action and velocity, respectively. In these units, of course, ℏ= c = 1. With
this convention, all physical quantities of interest have units which are powers of
mass. Thus the dimension of momentum is (mass)1 or simply 1, since mass×c is a
momentum, and the dimension of length is (mass)−1 or simply -1, since ℏc/mass is
a length. The usual way to construct quantum ﬁeld theories is by applying the rules
of  quantization to a continuum ﬁeld theory, following the canonical procedure of
replacing Poisson brackets by commutators (or, for fermionic ﬁelds, anticommuta-
tors). The ﬁeld theories that describe free spin 0 or free spin 1
2 ﬁelds of mass m, μ
respectively are based on the Lagrangian densities
L0(x) = 1
2∂αφ(x)∂αφ(x) −m2
2 φ(x)2
(5)
L 1
2 (x) = ¯ψ(x)(iγ α∂α −μ)ψ(x).
(6)

556
Quantum Field Theory
Since the action

d4xL has mass dimension 0, the mass dimension of a scalar
ﬁeld like φ is 1 and of a spinor ﬁeld like ψ is 3
2. For free spin 1 ﬁelds the Lagrangian
density is that of Maxwell,
L1(x) = −1
4(∂αAβ(x) −∂βAα(x))(∂αAβ(x) −∂βAα(x)),
(7)
so that the mass dimension of the vector ﬁeld A is 1. The same result is true for
nonabelian vector ﬁelds (Yang-Mills ﬁelds).
Thus far all our Lagrangian densities have been quadratic in the ﬁelds. Local in-
teraction terms are obtained from Lagrangian densities involving products of ﬁelds
and their derivatives at a point. The coefﬁcient of such a term is a coupling constant,
and must have the appropriate mass dimension so that the Lagrangian density has
mass dimension 4. Thus the mass dimension of a Yukawa coupling y, which mul-
tiplies the product of two spinor ﬁelds and a scalar ﬁeld, is zero. Gauge couplings
g arising in the minimal coupling procedure ∂α →∂α + igAα are also evidently of
mass dimension zero.
The possibilities for couplings with nonnegative mass dimension are very re-
stricted. This fact is quite important, for the following reason. Consider the effect
of treating a given interaction term as a perturbation. If the coupling κ associated to
this interaction has negative mass dimension −p, then successive powers of it will
occur in the form of powers of κ&p, where & is some parameter with dimensions of
mass. Because, as we have seen, the interactions in a local ﬁeld theory are hard, we
can anticipate that & will characterize the largest mass scale we allow to occur (the
cutoff), and will diverge to inﬁnity as the limit on this mass scale is removed. So
we expect that it will be difﬁcult to make sense of fundamental interactions having
negative mass dimensions, at least in perturbation theory. Such interactions are said
to be nonrenormalizable.
The standard model is formulated entirely using renormalizable interactions. If
nonrenormalizable interactions occur in an effective description of physical behav-
ior below a certain mass scale, then the theory must change its nature – presumably
by displaying new degrees of freedom – at some larger mass scale. The fact that
the standard model contains only renormalizable operators signiﬁes that it does not
require modiﬁcation up to arbitrarily high scales (at least on the grounds of diver-
gences in perturbation theory).
Moreover, all the renormalizable interactions consistent with the gauge symme-
try and multiplet structure of the standard model do seem to occur – “what is not
forbidden, is mandatory”. There is a beautiful agreement between the symmetries
of the standard model, allowing arbitrary renormalizable interactions, and the sym-
metries of the world. One understands, for example, why strangeness is violated
but baryon number is not. (The only discordant element is the so-called θ term of
QCD, which is allowed by the symmetries of the standard model but is measured
to be quite accurately zero. A plausible solution to this problem exists. It involves a
characteristic very light axion ﬁeld.)

Quantum Field Theory
557
Q
The power counting rules for estimating divergences assume that there are no
special symmetries canceling off the contribution of high energy modes. They do
not apply, without further consideration, to antisymmetric theories, in which the
contributions of boson and fermionic modes cancels, nor to theories derived from
supersymmetric theories by soft supersymmetry breaking. In the latter case the scale
of supersymmetry breaking plays the role of the cutoff &.
The power counting rules, as discussed so far, are too crude to detect divergences
of the form ln &2. Yet divergences of this form are pervasive and extremely signiﬁ-
cant, as we shall now discuss.
Running Couplings
The problem of calculating the energy associated with a constant magnetic ﬁeld, in
the more general context of an arbitrary nonabelian gauge theory coupled to spin 0
and spin 1
2 charged particles, provides an excellent concrete illustration of how the
inﬁnities of quantum ﬁeld theory arise, and of how they are dealt with. It introduces
the concept of running couplings in a natural way, and leads directly to qualitative
and quantitative results of great signiﬁcance for physics. The interactions of concern
to us appear in the Lagrangian density
L = −1
4g2 GI
αβGIαβ + ¯ψ(iγ νDν −μ)ψ + φ†(−DνDν −m2)φ
(8)
where GI
αβ ≡∂αAI
β −∂βAI
α −f IJKAJ
αAK
β and Dν ≡∂ν + iAI
νT I are the standard
ﬁeld strengths and covariant derivative, respectively. Here the f IJK are the structure
constants of the gauge group, and the T I are the representation matrices appropriate
to the ﬁeld on which the covariant derivative acts. This Lagrangian differs from
the usual one by a rescaling gA →A, which serves to emphasize that the gauge
coupling g occurs only as a prefactor in the ﬁrst term. It parameterizes the energetic
cost of nontrivial gauge curvature, or in other words the stiffness of the gauge ﬁelds.
Small g corresponds to gauge ﬁelds that are difﬁcult to excite.
From this Lagrangian it would appear that the energy required to set up a mag-
netic ﬁeld BI is just
1
2g2 (BI)2. That is the classical energy, but in the quantum
theory it is not the whole story. A more accurate calculation must include the effect
of the imposed magnetic ﬁeld on the  zero-point energy of the charged ﬁelds. Ear-
lier, we met and brieﬂy discussed a formally inﬁnite contribution to the energy of
the ground state of a quantum ﬁeld theory (speciﬁcally, the electromagnetic ﬁeld)
due to the irreducible quantum ﬂuctuations of its modes, which mapped to an in-
ﬁnite number of independent harmonic oscillators. Insofar as only differences in
energy are physically signiﬁcant, we could ignore that inﬁnity. But the change in
the zero-point energy in response to a magnetic ﬁeld is reﬂected in the work it takes
to impose the ﬁeld, and is a measurable effect.

558
Quantum Field Theory
Postponing momentarily the derivation, let me anticipate the form of the an-
swer, and discuss its interpretation. Without loss of generality, I will suppose that
the magnetic ﬁeld is aligned along a normalized, diagonal generator of the gauge
group. This allows us to drop the index, and to use terminology and intuition from
electrodynamics freely. If we restrict the sum to modes whose energy is less than a
cutoff &, we ﬁnd for the energy
E(B) = E + δE =
1
2g2(&2)B2 −1
2ηB2(ln(&2/B) + ﬁnite)
(9)
where
η =
1
96π2 [−(T (Ro)−2T (R 1
2 )+2T (R1))]+
1
96π2 [3(−2T (R 1
2 )+8T (R1))], (10)
and the terms not displayed are ﬁnite as & →∞. The notation g2(&2) has been
introduced for later convenience. The factor T (Rs) is the trace of the representation
for spin s, and basically represents the sum of the squares of the charges for the
particles of that spin. The denominator in the logarithm is ﬁxed by dimensional
analysis, assuming B ≫μ2, m2.
The most striking, and at ﬁrst sight disturbing, aspect of this calculation is that
a cutoff is necessary in order to obtain a ﬁnite result. If we are not to introduce a
new fundamental scale and compromise locality, we must remove reference to the
arbitrary cutoff & from our description of physically meaningful quantities. This
is the challenge addressed by the renormalization program. Its guiding idea is the
thought that if we are working with experimental probes characterized by energy
and momentum scales well below &, we should expect that our capacity to affect,
or be sensitive to, the modes of much higher energy will be quite restricted. Thus
one expects that when attention is restricted to low energy-momentum processes, all
explicit reference to the cutoff & can be removed.
In our magnetic energy example, for instance, we see immediately that the dif-
ference in susceptibilities
E(B1)/B2
1 −E(B0)/B2
0 = ﬁnite
(11)
is independent of & as & →∞. Thus once we measure the susceptibility, or equiv-
alently the coupling constant, at one reference value of B, the calculation gives
sensible, unambiguous predictions for all other values of B.
This simple example illustrates a much more general result, the central result of
the classic renormalization program. It goes as follows. A small number of quan-
tities, corresponding to the couplings and masses in the original Lagrangian, that
if calculated formally would diverge or depend on the cutoff, are chosen to ﬁt ex-
periment. They deﬁne the physical, as opposed to the original, or “bare,” couplings.
Thus, in our example, we can deﬁne the susceptibility to be
1
2g2(B0) at some refer-
ence ﬁeld B0. Then we have the physical or renormalized coupling

Quantum Field Theory
559
Q
1
g2(B0) =
1
g2(&2) −η ln(&2/B0).
(12)
(In this equation I have ignored, for simplicity in exposition, the ﬁnite terms. These
are relatively negligible for large B0. Also, there are corrections of higher order in
g2.) This of course determines the “bare” coupling to be
1
g2(&2) =
1
g2(B0) + η ln(&2/B0).
(13)
In these terms, the central result of perturbative renormalization theory is that
after bare couplings and masses are reexpressed in terms of their physical, renor-
malized counterparts, the coefﬁcients in the perturbation expansion of any physical
quantity approach ﬁnite limits, independent of the cutoff, as the cutoff is taken
to inﬁnity. (To be perfectly accurate, one must also perform wave-function renor-
malization. This is no different in principle; it amounts to expressing the bare
coefﬁcients of the kinetic terms in the Lagrangian in terms of renormalized val-
ues.) The question whether this perturbation theory converges, or is some sort of
asymptotic expansion of a soundly deﬁned theory, is a separate issue. This loophole
is no mere technicality, as we will soon see.
Picking a scale B0 at which the coupling is deﬁned is analogous to choosing
the origin of a coordinate system in geometry. One can describe the same physics
using different choices of normalization scale, so long as one adjusts the coupling
appropriately. We capture this idea by introducing the concept of a running coupling
deﬁned, in accordance with (12), to satisfy
d
d ln B
1
g2(B) = η.
(14)
With this deﬁnition, the choice of a particular scale at which to deﬁne the coupling
will not affect the ﬁnal result.
It is profoundly important, however, that the running coupling does make a
real distinction between the behavior at different mass scales, even if the original
underlying theory was formally scale invariant (as is QCD with massless quarks),
and even at mass scales much larger than the mass of any particle in the theory.
The distinction among scales, in a formally scale-invariant theory, embodies
the phenomenon of dimensional transmutation. Rather than a range of theories,
parametrized by a dimensionless coupling, we have a range of theories differing
only in the value of a dimensional parameter, say (for example) the value of B at
which 1/g2(B) = 1.
Clearly, the qualitative behavior of solutions of (14) depends on the sign of η.
If η > 0, the coupling g2(B) will get smaller as B grows, or in other words as we
treat more and more modes as dynamical, and approach closer to the bare charge.
These modes were enhancing, or antiscreening the bare charge. This is the case of
asymptotic freedom.

560
Quantum Field Theory
In asymptotically free theories, we can complete the renormalization program in
a convincing fashion. There is no barrier to including the effect of very large energy
modes, and removing the cutoff. We can conﬁdently expect, then, that the theory is
well-deﬁned, independent of perturbation theory. In particular, suppose the theory
has been discretized on a space-time lattice. This amounts to excluding the modes
of high energy and momentum. In an asymptotically free theory one can compen-
sate for these modes by adjusting the coupling in a well-deﬁned, controlled way as
one shrinks the discretization scale. Very impressive nonperturbative calculations in
QCD, involving massive computer simulations, have exploited this strategy. They
demonstrate the complete consistency of the theory and its ability to account quan-
titatively for the masses of hadrons.
In a nonasymptotically free theory the coupling does not become small, there is
no simple foolproof way to compensate for the missing modes, and the existence of
an underlying limiting theory becomes doubtful.
Now let us discuss how η can be calculated. The two terms in (10) correspond
to two distinct physical effects. The ﬁrst is the convective, diamagnetic (screening)
term. The overall constant is a little tricky to calculate, and I do not have space to do
it here. Its general form, however, is transparent. The effect is independent of spin,
and so it simply counts the number of components (one for scalar particles, two
for spin-1/2 or massless spin-1, both with two helicities). It is screening for bosons,
while for fermions there is a sign ﬂip, because the zero-point energy is negative for
fermionic oscillators.
The second is the paramagnetic spin susceptibility. For a massless particle with
spin s and gyromagnetic ratio gm the energies shift, giving rise to the altered zero-
point energy
E =
 E=&
0
d3k
(2π)3
1
2(
9
k2 + gmsB +
9
k2 −gmsB −2
)
k2).
(15)
This is readily calculated as
E = −B2(gms)2
1
32π2 ln(&2
B ).
(16)
With gm = 2, s = 1 (and T = 1) this is the spin-1 contribution, and with gm = 2,
s = 1
2, after a sign ﬂip, it is the spin- 1
2 contribution. The preferred moment gm = 2
is a direct consequence of the Yang-Mills and Dirac equations, respectively.
This elementary calculation gives us a nice heuristic understanding of the un-
usual antiscreening behavior of nonabelian gauge theories. It is due to the large
paramagnetic response of charged vector ﬁelds. Because we are interested in very
high energy modes, the usual intuition that charge will be screened, which is based
on the electric response of heavy particles, does not apply. Magnetic interactions,
which can be attractive for like charges (paramagnetism) are, for highly relativistic
particles, in no way suppressed. Indeed, they dominate numerically.

Quantum Field Theory
561
Q
Though I have presented it in the very speciﬁc context of vacuum magnetic
susceptibility, the concept of running coupling is much more widely applicable.
The basic heuristic idea is that in analyzing processes whose characteristic energy-
momentum scale (squared) is Q2, it is appropriate to use the running coupling at
Q2, i.e., in our earlier notation g2(B = Q2). For in this way we capture the dynami-
cal effect of the virtual oscillators which can be appreciably excited, while avoiding
the formal divergence encountered if we tried to include all of them (up to inﬁ-
nite mass scale). At a more formal level, use of the appropriate effective coupling
allows us to avoid large logarithms in the calculation of Feynman graphs, by nor-
malizing the vertices close to where they need to be evaluated. There is a highly
developed, elaborate chapter of quantum ﬁeld theory which justiﬁes and reﬁnes this
rough idea into a form where it makes detailed, quantitative predictions for concrete
experiments. Calculations of two- and even three-loop graphs with complicated
interactions among the virtual particles are needed to do justice to the attainable
experimental accuracy.
An interesting feature visible in Fig. 1 is that the theoretical prediction for the
coupling focuses at large Q2, in the sense that a wide range of values at small
Fig. 1 Comparison of theory and experiment in QCD, illustrating the running of couplings. Sev-
eral of the points on this curve represent hundreds of independent measurements, any one of which
might have falsiﬁed the theory. Figure from Schmelling, hep-ex/9701002

562
Quantum Field Theory
Q2 converge to a much narrower range at larger Q2. Thus even crude estimates of
what are the appropriate scales (e.g., one expects g2(Q2)/4π ∼1 where the strong
interaction is strong, say for 100 MeV ≲
)
Q2 ≲1 GeV) allow one to predict the
value of g2(M2
Z) with ∼10% accuracy. The original idea of Pauli and others that
calculating the ﬁne structure constant was the next great item on the agenda of the-
oretical physics now seems misguided. We see this constant as just another running
coupling, neither more nor less fundamental than many other parameters, and not
likely to be the most accessible theoretically. But our essentially parameter-free ap-
proximate determination of the observable strong interaction analogue of the ﬁne
structure constant realizes a form of their dream.
The electroweak interactions start with much smaller couplings at low mass
scales, so the effects of their running are less dramatic (though they have been
observed). Far more spectacular than the modest quantitative effects we can
test directly, however, is the conceptual breakthrough that results from applica-
tion of these ideas to uniﬁed models of the strong, electromagnetic, and weak
interactions.
The different components of the standard model have a similar mathematical
structure, all being gauge theories. Their common structure encourages the spec-
ulation that they are different facets of a more encompassing  gauge symmetry,
in which the different strong and weak color charges, as well as electromagnetic
charge, would all appear on the same footing. The multiplet structure of the quarks
and leptons in the standard model ﬁts beautifully into small representations of uni-
ﬁcation groups such as SU(5) or SO(10). There is the apparent difﬁculty, however,
that the coupling strengths of the different standard model interactions are widely
different, whereas the symmetry required for uniﬁcation requires that they share
a common value.The running of couplings suggests an escape from this impasse.
Since the strong, weak, and electromagnetic couplings run at different rates, their
inequality at currently accessible scales need not reﬂect the ultimate state of af-
fairs. We can imagine that spontaneous symmetry breaking – a soft effect – has
hidden the full symmetry of the uniﬁed interaction. What is really required is that
the fundamental, bare couplings be equal, or in more prosaic terms, that the run-
ning couplings of the different interactions should become equal beyond some large
scale.
Using simple generalizations of the formulas derived and tested in QCD, we can
calculate the running of couplings, to see whether this requirement is satisﬁed in
reality. In doing so one must make some hypothesis about the spectrum of virtual
particles. If there are additional massive particles (or, better, ﬁelds) that have not yet
been observed, they will contribute signiﬁcantly to the running of couplings once
the scale exceeds their mass. Let us ﬁrst consider the default assumption, that there
are no new ﬁelds beyond those that occur in the standard model. The results of this
calculation are displayed in Fig. 2.
Considering the enormity of the extrapolation this calculation works remarkably
well, but the accurate experimental data indicates unequivocally that something is
wrong. There is one particularly attractive way to extend the standard model, by
including supersymmetry. Supersymmetry cannot be exact, but if it is only mildly

Quantum Field Theory
563
Q
Fig. 2 Running of the couplings extrapolated toward very high scales, using just the ﬁelds of the
standard model. The couplings do not quite meet. Experimental uncertainties in the extrapolation
are indicated by the width of the lines. Figure courtesy of Dienes
broken (so that the superpartners have masses ≲1 TeV) it can help explain why
radiative corrections to the Higgs mass parameter, and thus to the scale of weak
symmetry breaking, are not enormously large. In the absence of supersymmetry
power counting would indicate a hard, quadratic dependence of this parameter on
the cutoff. Supersymmetry removes the most divergent contribution, by cancelling
boson against fermion loops. If the masses of the superpartners are not too heavy,
the residual ﬁnite contributions due to supersymmetry breaking will not be too
large.
The minimal supersymmetric extension of the standard model, then, makes semi-
quantitative predictions for the spectrum of virtual particles starting at 1 TeV or so.
Since the running of couplings is logarithmic, it is not extremely sensitive to the
unknown details of the supersymmetric mass spectrum, and we can assess the im-
pact of supersymmetry on the uniﬁcation hypothesis quantitatively. The results, as
shown in Fig. 3, are quite encouraging.
A notable result of the uniﬁcation of couplings calculation, especially in its
supersymmetric form, is that the uniﬁcation occurs at an energy scale which is enor-
mously large by the standards of traditional  particle physics, perhaps approaching
1016−17 GeV. From a phenomenological viewpoint, this is fortunate. The most com-
pelling uniﬁcation schemes merge quarks, antiquarks, leptons, and antileptons into

564
Quantum Field Theory
Fig. 3 Running of the couplings extrapolated to high scales, including the effects of supersym-
metric particles starting at 1 TeV. Within experimental and theoretical uncertainties, the couplings
do meet
common multiplets, and have gauge bosons mediating transitions among all these
particle types. Baryon number violating processes almost inevitably result, whose
rate is inversely proportional to the fourth power of the gauge boson masses, and
thus to the fourth power of the uniﬁcation scale. Only for such large values of the
scale is one safe from experimental limits on nucleon instability. From a theoretical
point of view the large scale is fascinating because it brings us from the internal
logic of the experimentally grounded domain of particle physics to the threshold of
 quantum gravity.
Literature
For further information about quantum ﬁeld theory, the reader may wish to consult:
1. T.P. Cheng and L.F. Li, Gauge Theory of Elementary Particle Physics (Oxford 1984)
2. M. Peskin and D. Schroeder, Introduction to Quantum Field Theory (Addison-Wesley 1995)
3. S. Weinberg, The Quantum Theory of Fields, I (Cambridge 1995) and The Quantum Theory of
Fields, II (Cambridge 1996)

