Correspondence Principle
125
C
Correlations play a starring role in some proposed interpretations of quantum me-
chanics. Mermin [12] claims that while correlations have physical reality, that which
they correlate does not. This view of correlations without correlata has produced
philosophical debate but little consensus.
See Consistent histories, Ignorance interpretation, Ithaca Interpretation, Many
Worlds Interpretation, Modal Interpretation, Orthodox Interpretation, Transactional
Interpretation.
Primary Literature
1. A. Aspect, J. Dalibard, G. Roger, Experimental test of Bell’s Inequalities using time-varying
analyzers, Physical Review Letters 49: 1804–7, 1982.
2. J.S. Bell, On the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paradox, Physics 1: 195–200, 1964.
3. A. Einstein, Quantentheorie und Wirklichkeit, Dialectica 2: 320–4, 1948.
4. A. Fine, Joint distributions, quantum correlations, and commuting observables, Journal of
Mathematical Physics 23: 1306–10, 1982.
5. R. Hanbury-Brown and R.Q. Twiss, Correlations between photons in two coherent beams of
light, Nature 177: 27–9, 1956.
Secondary Literature
6. J. Bub, Interpreting the Quantum World, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1997.
7. P. Grangier, G. Roger and A. Aspect, Experimental evidence for a photon anticorrelation effect
on a beamsplitter, Europhysics Letters 1: 173–9, 1986.
8. M. Hennrich, A. Kuhn, and G. Rempe, Transition from antibunching to bunching in cavity
QED, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94: 53604-1–4, 2005.
9. A.J. Leggett and A. Garg, Quantum mechanics versus macroscopic realism: Is the ﬂux there
when nobody looks?, Phys. Rev. Lett. 54: 857–60, 1985.
10. T. Maudlin, Quantum Non-locality and Relativity, Blackwell, Oxford 1994.
11. N.D. Mermin, Simple uniﬁed form for the major no-hidden-variables theorems, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 65: 3373–7, 1990
12. N.D. Mermin, What is quantum mechanics trying to tell us?, American Journal of Physics 66:
753–67, 1998.
13. A. Shimony, Bell’s Theorem at http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/bell-theorem/.
14. S.J. Summers and R.F. Werner, The vacuum violates Bell’s inequalities, Phys. Lett. A 110:
257–9, 1985.
Correspondence Principle
Brigitte Falkenburg
The correspondence principle is due to Niels Bohr (1885–1962).According to Bohr,
the principle justiﬁes the use of formal classical expressions in quantum theory and
a physical interpretation of quantum theory in terms of classical concepts. The prin-
ciple emerged from his use of classical concepts and formal analogies in  Bohr’s

126
Correspondence Principle
atomic model of 1913. Before the rise of quantum mechanics (i.e., in “old” quantum
theory), Bohr employed the principle in order to establish inter-theoretical relations
between the classical theory of radiation and the quantum theory of atomic spec-
tra. After the rise of quantum mechanics, he justiﬁed his  complementarity view
of quantum mechanics in terms of the correspondence between mutually exclusive
quantum phenomena on the one hand and the classical concepts of wave or parti-
cle (particle picture, wave picture) ( Franck–Hertz experiment; Davisson–Germer
experiment; Stern–Gerlach experiment; Schr¨odinger equation) on the other hand.
Werner Heisenberg (1901–1976) made heuristic use of Bohr’s correspondence
principle when he developed his  matrix mechanics. In 1930, he developed a gen-
eralized version of the correspondence principle which emphasized the heuristic and
interpretative aspects of the correspondence principle.
See also  Bohmian mechanics; Measurement theory; Metaphysics in Quantum
Mechanics; Modal Interpretation; Objectiﬁcation; Projection Postulate.
In view of the quantum measurement problem, a generalized correspondence
principle is indispensable up to the present day. In particular, it underlies the  semi-
classical models of atomic and nuclear physics, condensed matter physics etc.
Classical Concepts in “Old” Quantum Theory
 Bohr’s atomic model of 1913 was based on quantum postulates which violate
the classical laws of radiation. The model raised the question of how the quantized
transitions between the stationary electron states relate to the classical theory of
radiation. In order to explain this, Bohr postulated a formal analogy between the har-
monics of classical radiation and the various quantum jumps from a given stationary
state. This analogy warranted the asymptotic agreement between the classical and
quantum-theoretical radiations in the limit of large  quantum numbers (when the
quantum jumps become very small) [1, 9, 10]. Together with Ehrenfest’s “adiabatic
hypothesis” (which concerned the energy of the permitted electron motions [2]), the
analogy justiﬁed a limited use of the classical concepts of energy and frequency
in quantum theory. In particular, it made it possible to interpret the quantum law
E = hν in terms of the classical concepts of energy and frequency. This was the
germ of the correspondence principle. 1914–1918, Bohr elaborated the analogy for
periodic systems and extended it to multi-periodic systems and more general cases
[10]. He managed to derive  selection rules for the line splitting of the hydrogen
spectrum in an electric or magnetic ﬁeld, i.e., the  Stark and  Zeeman effects.
After Einstein had introduced transition probability coefﬁcients [3], Bohr expected
that the limited use of classical electrodynamics should also give correct intensities
and polarizations for the spectral lines. The calculations were performed by Hen-
drik Anthony Kramers (1894–1952) [4], who applied the correspondence principle
to the Fourier analysis of the classical stationary motions and derived in this way
the intensities and polarizations of the hydrogen lines, including the ﬁne structure,
Stark and Zeeman effects.

Correspondence Principle
127
C
Finally, in 1920 Bohr gave the following explicit formulation of the correspon-
dence principle [5, p. 23–24; quoted in 10, p. 137–138]:
[...] there is found [...] to exist a far-reaching correspondence between the various types of
possible transitions between the stationary states on the one hand and the various harmonic
components of the motion on the other hand. This correspondence is of such a nature that
the present theory of spectra is in a certain sense to be regarded as a rational generalization
of the ordinary theory of radiation.
Here, the correspondence principle comes in two steps. First, it states the actual cor-
respondence of the possible quantum transitions to components of the classical mo-
tion. Second, it claims that the quantum theory of atomic spectra should be regarded
as a “rational generalization” of the classical theory of radiation. The ﬁrst point jus-
tiﬁed the use of classical concepts in quantum theory. The second point justiﬁed the
heuristic use of the correspondence principle for the derivation of quantum laws.
To regard the quantum theory of atomic spectra as a “rational generalization” of
the classical theory of radiation has two aspects, a formal and an interpretative one
[10, p. 82; 12]. The classical orbit is merely formal since it can by no means be
measured and is only related to the quantum radiation in a formal, indirect manner.
At the same time, the correspondenceprinciple associates the symbol ν in the formal
expression E = hν with the familiar quantity of a light frequency measured by a
spectrometer, in accordance with the laws of classical wave optics.
In old quantum theory, the correspondence principle had a hybrid theoretical
status. On the one hand, it was a meta-theoretical principle. It established inter-
theoretical relations between classical radiation theory and the laws of old quantum
theory. On the other hand, it put inner-theoretical constraints on the formulation of
quantum laws, thus making the extension of old quantum theory possible. Hence,
Bohr’s correspondence principle should not be confused with an empirical rule of
correspondence in the sense of empiricist philosophy of science. It does much more
than only assigning the empirical concept of a “line in the spectrum” to the formal
law of radiation E = hν, as Ernest Nagel (1901–1985) suggested [14]. In par-
ticular, it does not relate theoretical concepts directly to an observational language.
Rather, it is an inter-theoretical relation that establishes a formal (numerical) and
interpretative (physical) analogy between classical radiation theory and quantum
theory. This two-fold analogy allows for the continued use of the classical concepts
of ‘frequency’, ‘wavelength’, ‘energy’, ‘polarization’, etc. in the quantum theory of
atoms and line spectra. Even taken as an internal principle of old quantum theory,
the correspondence principle only expresses constraints that derive from an inter-
theoretical relation.
Correspondence and Complementarity
Quantum mechanics emerged from the crisis of old quantum theory confronted by
the anomalous Zeeman effect and other problems with which the correspondence
principle could not cope. Nevertheless, Bohr’s correspondence principle played a

128
Correspondence Principle
crucial heuristic role for Heisenberg when he developed his matrix mechanics. Af-
ter the rise of quantum mechanics, Heisenberg emphasized that the correspondence
principle helps to obtain a quantum theory from quantizing the corresponding clas-
sical theory (see below).
In view of quantum mechanics, Bohr employed the correspondence principle
in order to interpret the formal quantum concepts. He considered Schr¨odinger’s
 wave function  as a mere symbol, as a formal tool that lacks any direct
physical meaning [9,15]. His  complementarity view of quantum mechanics aimed
at interpreting quantum phenomena in terms of the corresponding classical con-
cepts. According to his famous Como lecture,  Heisenberg’s uncertainty relations
describe quantum phenomena which correspond to mutually exclusive classical de-
scriptions and appear under mutually exclusive experimental conditions [6]. Bohr’s
examples of complementary quantum phenomena are  particle tracks and  scat-
tering events such as the  Compton effect, on the one hand, and interference
fringes, on the other hand. The physical magnitudes attributed to these phenom-
ena (i.e., either momentum-energy, or spatio-temporal magnitudes) are classical.
According to Bohr’s writings of 1927 and later, any physical magnitude attributed
to a quantum phenomenon represents the outcome of a measurement, and all mea-
surement results have to be expressed in classical terms. Bohr thought that a full
understanding of quantum phenomena is only possible in terms of the corresponding
classical concepts (i.e., either momentum-energy or spatio-temporal location) and
classical models (i.e., the complementary wave and particle picture  Franck–Hertz
experiment; Davisson–Germer experiment; Stern–Gerlach experiment; Schr¨odinger
equation [9–11,13,15].
The Generalized Correspondence Principle
In 1930, Heisenberg generalized Bohr’s correspondence principle. His generalized
principle deals explicitly with inter-theoretical relations, extending Bohr’s original
analogy between classical and quantized radiation frequencies to many more physi-
cal quantities. Heisenberg emphasizes three features of the general correspondence
principle [7, p. 70]:
1. It postulates a detailed analogy between the quantum theory and the appropriate
“mental picture”, i.e., the classical wave or particle picture.
2. This analogy is a “guide to the discovery of formal laws”, i.e., it has heuristic
meaning in the formation of a quantum theory. Here, Heisenberg means the well-
known  quantization of a classical theory.
3. In addition, it “furnishes the interpretation of the formal laws in terms of the
mental picture used”, i.e., the analogy tells us that we may attribute to the quan-
tized  observables the physical properties of the corresponding classical wave
or particle picture.

Correspondence Principle
129
C
Like Bohr’s original version, Heisenberg’s generalized correspondenceprinciple is a
principle of semantic continuity [10, p. 133–137; 11; 12, p. 188–194]. It guarantees
that the predicates for the classical physical properties of ‘position’, ‘momentum’,
‘mass’, ‘energy’, etc. can also be deﬁned in the domain of quantum mechanics, and
that one may interpret them operationally in accordance with classical measurement
methods. It provides many inter-theoretical relations by means of which the formal
concepts and models of quantum mechanics can be ﬁlled with physical meaning.
Bohr and Heisenberg both called this physical meaning “intuitive”, even though in
quite a different sense [6,11].
In modern textbooks of quantum mechanics, the generalized correspondence
principle shows up for example in  Ehrenfest theorem.
Correspondence in Semi-Classical Models
Often, the general correspondence principle helps to interpret the abstract formalism
of a quantum theory in such a way that it can be applied against the background of
classical physics and on semi-classical conditions. In the semi-classical models of
quantum physics, the correspondence principle is tacitly employed up to the present
day. Important examples stem from condensed matter physics, atomic and nuclear
physics, as well as  particle physics.
In condensed matter physics, the macroscopic state of a solid is necessarily
presupposed. As a macroscopic state, it has obviously to be described in classi-
cal terms. As Philip K. Anderson (∗1923) emphasized, the existence of a solid (or
the regularity of the ground states of most assemblages of atoms, respectively) can
not be explained by quantum theory [16, p. 3]. In addition, the quantum behavior
of a complex many-particle system cannot be calculated ab initio. Therefore, semi-
classical approximations are indispensable in condensed matter physics or atomic
physics. Many  scattering experiments of atomic, nuclear, and  particle physics
are based on  semi-classical models, too. The models of the scattering of sub-
atomic particles off the atoms inside macroscopic measuring devices are based on
several semi-classical conditions. In these models, a generalized correspondence
principle is employed in the following ways [12, pp. 125–160]:
1. The simplest models of quantum mechanical scattering theory correspond to
classical Rutherford scattering. Exact correspondence between the classical and
quantum mechanical differential scattering cross sections ( scattering experi-
ments) is given in the case of the Rutherford formula, that is, for the Coulomb
potential, for non-relativistic probe particles, and in the absence of quantum me-
chanical  spin or exchange effects.
2. In the domain of  relativistic quantum mechanics and  quantum ﬁeld theory,
there is a chain of models of quantum mechanical scattering theory, namely Mott
scattering and Dirac scattering, that approximately correspond to Rutherford

130
Correspondence Principle
scattering under well-deﬁned conditions. Here, the tacit use of a generalized
correspondence principle is extended to the inter-theoretical relation between rel-
ativistic and non-relativistic concepts.
3. To describe the charge distribution inside the atom by a classical form factor
( nuclear models) is based on the correspondence between the quantum me-
chanical many-particle  wave function | (r) |2 of charged subatomic particles
and the classical charge distribution ρ(r), which is the Fourier transform of a
classical form factor F(q).
4. In the domain of relativistic quantum ﬁeld theory, the above correspondence as-
sumptions (1)–(3) come together in the deﬁnition of structure functions, which
express (via correspondence to the classical case, again) the momentum distribu-
tions of the partons ( parton model) or quark constituents of the nucleons, the
proton and neutron ( large angle scattering).
5. The data analysis of the particle tracks taken in such ( scattering experiments)
is based on a similar chain of models, which relate the quantum mechanics of
scattering to the corresponding classical case.
In all  semi-classical models, the generalized correspondence principle bridges
the semantic gaps between quantum theory and the classical theories, which are due
to the unresolved problems of the  measurement process. Hence, the correspon-
dence principle connects the languages of classical physics and quantum theory. In
a further common generalization, it bridges the languages of non-relativistic and
relativistic theories.
Limitations of Correspondence
Obviously, the correspondence principle does not exhaust the domain of the current
quantum theories. Indeed quantum mechanics emerged from its limitations in old
quantum theory. These early limitations were due to the spin-orbit coupling effects
in the spectra of complex atoms. Later, the  nonlocality of quantum mechanics
predicted in the famous  EPR paper showed up. Today, in addition to the EPR cor-
relations many non-local quantum phenomena without any classical correspondence
are known, such as, e.g., super conductivity, the Bohm–Aharanov effect, etc.
However, the semi-classical models of quantum physics are affected by the lim-
itations of the correspondence principle, too. In particular, such limitations are
relevant for the data analysis of  particle tracks. According to the classical particle
picture, a particle loses energy along its track due to dissipation, where the energy
loss is due to the ionization of atoms (e.g., in Wilson’s cloud chamber). There is in-
deed a classical model of the process, namely Bohr’s classical calculation of energy
loss by ionization [8]. However, for charged particles that pass the cloud chamber
with non-vanishing energy, the results of this model are wrong by a factor of 2. In
addition, the non-relativistic model of the energy loss via ionization no longer corre-
sponds to the relativistic description of the scattering processes along the track of a

Correspondence Principle
131
C
particle of high energy. In particular, the process of pair creation, which becomes the
more probable the higher the particle energy is, does not have any classical analogue
[12, p. 174–187].
Primary Literature
1. N. Bohr: On the Constitution of Atoms and Molecules (1913). In: Bohr’s Collected Works
(BCW). Amsterdam: North-Holland (Elsevier) 2, 161–233.
2. P. Ehrenfest: Adiabatische Invarianten und Quantentheorie. Annalen der Physik 51 (1916),
327–52.
3. A. Einstein: Zur Quantentheorie der Strahlung. Physikalische Zeitschrift 18 (1917), 121–28.
4. H. A. Kramers: Intensities of spectral lines. Der Kongelige Danske Videnskabernes Selskab,
Mathematisk-fysiske Meddelser 8/3/3 (1919), 284–388.
5. N. Bohr: The Theory of Spectra and Atomic Constitution. (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press 1922).
6. W. Heisenberg: ¨Uber den anschaulichen Inhalt der quantentheoretischen Kinematik und
Mechanik. Z. f¨ur Physik 43 (1927), 172–98. N. Bohr: The Quantum Postulate and the Recent
Development of Atomic Theory. Como Lecture (1927). Modiﬁed version: Nature 121 (1928),
580–90. Both versions in: BCW 6, 109–58.
7. W. Heisenberg: Physikalische Prinzipien der Quantentheorie. Leipzig: Hirzel 1930. Engl.
Transl.: The Physical Principles of Quantum Theory. Transl. by C. Eckart and F.C. Hoyt.
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1930).
8. N. Bohr: On the Theory of the Decrease of Velocity of Moving Electriﬁed Particles on Passing
through Matter (1913). In: BCW Vol. 2, 18–39. On the Decrease of Velocity of Swiftly Moving
Electriﬁed Particles on Passing through Matter. In: BCW 8, 127–60.
Secondary Literature
9. C. Chevalley: Introduction and Glossaire. In: Niels Bohr: Physique atomique et connaissance
humaine. (Paris: Gallimard, 1991), 17–144 and 345–567.
10. O. Darrigol 1992, From c-Numbers to q-Numbers. (Berkeley: University of California Press
1992), Part B.
11. B. Falkenburg: Bohr’s Principles of Unifying Quantum Disunities. Phil. naturalis 35/1 (1998),
95–120. Functions of Intuition in Quantum Physics. In: Carson and Huber (eds.): Intuition and
the Axiomatic Method. (Dordrecht: Springer 2006), 267–92.
12. B. Falkenburg: Particle Metaphysics. A Critical Account of Subatomic Reality. (Heidelberg:
Springer 2007).
13. K. M. Meyer-Abich: Korrespondenz, Individualit¨at und Komplementarit¨at. (Wiesbaden:
Steiner 1965).
14. E. Nagel: The Structure of Science. Problems in the Logic of Scientiﬁc Explanation. (London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul 1961).
15. H. Pringe: Critique of the Quantum Power of Judgement. (Berlin: De Gruyter 2007).
16. P. W. Anderson: Concepts in Solids. (Singapore: World Scientiﬁc 1997).

