Holism in Quantum Mechanics
295
H
Challenging questions remain open in the theory of nonseparable Hilbert spaces.
These arise mathematically from inﬁnite tensor products of separable Hilbert spaces
and physically from the study of quantum ﬁelds.
Primary Literature
1. J. von Neumann: Mathematische Begr¨undung der Quantenmechanik. Nach- richten G¨ottinger
Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften, 1–57 (1927). In Collected Works, Vol. I (Pergamon, New
York 1961, 151–207)
2. D. Hilbert: Grundz¨uge einer allgemeinen Theorie der Integralgleichungen (Teubner, Leipzig
1912)
3. H. Weyl: Gruppentheorie und Quantenmechanik (Hirzel, Leipzig 1928, second edition 1931);
English The Theory of Groups and Quantum Mechanics (Dutten, New York 1931)
4. J. von Neumann: Mathematische Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik (Springer, Berlin 1932,
reprint 1968); English Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics (Princeton Univer-
sity Press, Princeton 1955)
5. J. Lacki: The early axiomatization of quantum mechanics: Jordan, von Neumann and the con-
tinuation of Hilbert’s program. Archive for History of Exact Sciences 54, 279–318 (2000)
6. M. R´edei: Von Neumann’s concept of quantum logic and quantum probability. In John von
Neumann and the Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, ed. by M. R´edei and M. St¨oltzner
(Kluwer, Dordrecht 2005, 153–172)
Secondary Literature
7. F. Riesz and B. Sz.-Nagy: Functional Analysis (Frederick Ungar Publishing, New York 1955;
reprint Dover Publications, Mineola 1991)
8. M. Reed and B. Simon: Methods of Modern Mathematical Physics I: Functional Analysis
(Academic, New York 1972, second edition 1980)
9. W. Młak: Hilbert Spaces and Operator Theory (Springer, Dordrecht 1991)
10. D. Werner: Funktionalanalysis (Springer, Berlin 1995, third edition 2000)
11. G. Ludwig: Foundations of Quantum Mechanics I (Springer, New York 1983), Appendix IV
12. E. Prugoveˇcki: Quantum Mechanics in Hilbert Space (Academic, New York 1971, second
edition 1981; reprint Dover Publications, Mineola 2006)
Holism in Quantum Mechanics
Richard Healey
In slogan form, holism is the thesis that the whole is more than the sum of its parts.
Explanatory holism is the view that a satisfactory explanation of the behavior of
a system cannot be given by explaining the behavior of its parts. Property holism

296
Holism in Quantum Mechanics
is the view that the properties of a whole are not wholly determined by those of
its parts. Ontological holism denies that some supposedly composite object has
(proper) parts. Quantum phenomena exhibit holism of at least the ﬁrst two kinds.
Quantum mechanics is often applied to a system as a whole, even though it is
known to be composed of many subsystems. Such applications supply many in-
stances of explanatory holism. Interference has been experimentally demonstrated
between beams of sodium atoms and of fullerenes (C60 molecules  mesoscopic
quantum phenomena) [11]. The result of these experiments is readily explained
by direct application of quantum mechanics to such composite objects. It would
be futile to try to explain their behavior by applying quantum mechanics to their
quark and lepton components. Many phenomena in condensed matter physics are
explained by applying quantum mechanics directly to systems composed of very
large numbers of atomic or subatomic particles: only in special cases can the theory
be applied at the level of these components [9].
Even when classical physics is applied to the behavior of the solar system by
treating planets as wholes, the planetary motions and interplanetary gravitational
forces are readily understood to be constituted by the motions and gravitational in-
teractions of their constituent particles in a way that permits a simple summation.
But any attempt to analyze the behavior of a compound quantum system into the
behavior of its components encounters a barrier: In quantum mechanics, the state
of a compound system is not always determined by the states of its components:
each such failure of determination in quantum mechanics is an example of state
holism. Schr¨odinger called the subsystems in such a compound state ‘entangled’
[5]. Assuming a system’s state speciﬁes its properties, state holism implies prop-
erty holism.
Consider two  spin 1/2 particles that emerge from an interaction in the sin-
glet state
| ψs⟩=
1
√
2
(|↑⟩⊗|↓⟩−|↓⟩⊗|↑⟩)
(1)
Suppose that before the interaction, the state of the ith particle was represented by
a vector | ψi⟩∈Hi (i = 1, 2), where Hi is a 2-dimensional complex vector space.
The state of the pair was then represented by the vector | ψ1⟩⊗| ψ2⟩, an element of
the 4-dimensional tensor product space H = H1 ⊗H2. But while the vector | ψs⟩is
also an element of H1 ⊗H2, there is no pair of vectors | ϕ1⟩∈H1, | ϕ2⟩∈H2 such
that | ψs⟩= | ϕ1⟩⊗|ϕ2⟩. The singlet spin state is entangled: the state of neither par-
ticle may be represented by a vector in its own state space. There is a sense in which
a typical state of a compound system is entangled: the set of entangled vectors in a
tensor product Hilbert space is dense. Moreover, because it must be totally antisym-
metric under particle exchange, every state-vector representing a system composed
of more than one electron is entangled, whether or not these  electrons have pre-
viously interacted.
It is still possible to represent the state of a component of an entangled state, not
by a vector but by a density operator. Consider the more general entangled spin state
| ψ⟩= α (|↑⟩⊗|↓⟩+ β |↓⟩⊗|↑⟩)
:
|α|2 + |β|2 = 1
(2)

Holism in Quantum Mechanics
297
H
Assignment of the reduced density operator W1 = |α|2 |↑⟩⟨↑| + |β|2 |↓⟩⟨↓| to the
ﬁrst particle and W2 = |β|2 |↑⟩⟨↑| + |α|2 |↓⟩⟨↓| to the second particle will predict
the same statistics as |ψ⟩for the measurement of any spin magnitude on either
particle alone. (These reduced states are arrived at by “tracing over” the  Hilbert
space of the rest of the system: see e.g. [7].) But note that if one does take Wi to
be the state of the ith particle, then these states do not determine |ψ⟩as the state of
the pair: many other states of the pair are equally compatible with individual states
{W1, W2}, including W1 ⊗W2 and
| ψ⟩= α (|↑⟩⊗|↓⟩−β |↓⟩⊗|↑⟩)
(3)
If the state of an entangled component is represented by its reduced density operator,
then these states fail to determine the state of the whole system.
A third option is to assign a relative state to each component in an entangled
state. The ﬁrst particle in (2) would be assigned state |↑⟩relative to state |↓⟩for the
second particle, but state |↓⟩relative to state |↑⟩for the second particle. This option
is favored by the so-called relational interpretation of quantum mechanics [8].
On each of these three options, quantum mechanics implies state holism. All
three conﬂict with Einstein’s view that, for a pair of separated systems AB
The real state of the pair AB consists precisely of the real state of A and the real state of B,
which states have nothing to do with one another. [4]
Bohm proposed an interpretation of quantum mechanics that seems to accord
better with Einstein’s view [1]. In its “minimal” version this takes the real state of
a system of particles to be completely speciﬁed by the positions of all the particles.
Each particle has a determinate trajectory, with velocity determined by the gradient
of the phase of the particles’  wave function, evaluated at the positions of all
the particles. But this interpretation conﬂicts with property holism to the extent that
the wave-function (or the resultant velocity ﬁeld, or “quantum potential”) must itself
be included in the whole system to which quantum mechanics is applied. Bohm
himself stressed the holism of the quantum world [2]. This is in keeping with the
fact that on his interpretation the wave-function never “collapses” on measurement
 wave function collapse. Such “collapse” provided Schr¨odinger with a mechanism
for periodically disentangling quantum states.
The indivisibility of a quantum ﬁeld manifests a kind of holism. Their indiscerni-
bility, superposability and failure of localization makes ﬁeld quanta like photons
( light quantum) poor candidates for distinct parts of the ﬁeld, suggesting ontolog-
ical holism. If one insists on breaking the ﬁeld into parts by covering space-time by
open regions (as one does in algebraic quantum ﬁeld theory), then one has a case of
state holism: states on the local algebras of  observables typically fail to determine
a state on a global space-time algebra.
In the early days of quantum mechanics, Bohr advocated a different kind of
holism. He took the essence of quantum theory to be expressed in
...the so-called quantum postulate, which attributes to any atomic process an essential dis-
continuity, or rather individuality...symbolized by Planck’s quantum of action. [3]

298
Holism in Quantum Mechanics
He took this to imply that
any observation of atomic phenomena will involve an interaction with the agency of ob-
servation not to be neglected. Accordingly, an independent reality in the ordinary physical
sense can neither be ascribed to the phenomena nor to the agencies of observation. (ibid.)
The entire experimental arrangement, including both “atomic” system and mea-
suring device must therefore be treated as an indivisible whole. Neither has a state
independent of the other. The former may be ascribed a quantum state while the
latter must be described classically. But the choice of the experimenter on how to
divide the entire experimental arrangement into these two parts is to an extent arbi-
trary. Any ascription of quantum state is therefore doubly relative – to a choice of
experimental arrangement, and to a subsidiary choice as to how to analyze the entire
arrangement into parts. Only in this doubly relativized sense do quantum systems
or measuring devices have properties. Such properties are not independent of the
arrangement and its division, and cannot therefore be taken to determine the proper-
ties of the whole experimental arrangement. This, too, is incompatible with property
holism.
Primary Literature
1. D. Bohm: A suggested interpretation of the quantum theory in terms of ‘hidden’ variables,
I and II. Physical Review 85: 166–93, 1952.
2. D. Bohm: Wholeness and the Implicate Order (New York: Routledge, Kegan Paul, 1980).
3. N. Bohr: The quantum postulate and the recent development of atomic theory. Nature 121:
580–90, 1928.
4. A. Einstein: Letter to E. Schr¨odinger of June 19th, 1935; quoted and translated by D. Howard
in Einstein on Locality and Separability. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 16:
171–201, 1985.
5. E. Schr¨odinger: Discussion of probability relations between separated systems. Proceedings of
the Cambridge Philosophical Society 31: 555–63, 1935.
Secondary Literature
6. R. Healey: Holism and nonseparability in physics at http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/physics-
holism/.
7. J.M. Jauch: Foundations of Quantum Mechanics (Reading, MA: Addison Wesley, 1968).
8. F. Laudisa, C. Rovelli: Relational quantum mechanics at http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/qm-
relational/.
9. A.J. Leggett: The Problems of Physics (New York: Oxford University Press, 1987), p. 113.
10. T. Maudlin: Part and whole in quantum mechanics, in E. Castellani, ed. Interpreting Bodies
(Princeton: Princeton University Press: 1998), 46–60.
11. O. Nairz, M. Arndt, A. Zeilinger: Quantum interference experiments with large molecules.
American Journal of Physics 71: 319–25, 2003.

