Peter Hehenberger
Maki Habib
David Bradley   Editors
EcoMechatronics
Challenges for Evolution, Development 
and Sustainability

EcoMechatronics

Peter Hehenberger · Maki Habib · David Bradley
Editors
EcoMechatronics
Challenges for Evolution, Development
and Sustainability

Editors
Peter Hehenberger
School of Engineering
University of Applied Sciences
Upper Austria
Wels, Austria
David Bradley
Abertay University
Dundee, UK
Maki Habib
Department of Mechanical Engineering
The American University in Cairo
New Cairo, Egypt
ISBN 978-3-031-07554-4
ISBN 978-3-031-07555-1 (eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-07555-1
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Switzerland AG 2022
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether
the whole or part of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse
of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and
transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar
or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication
does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors, and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book
are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or
the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any
errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional
claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Switzerland AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland

Foreword
Introduction
When Barack Obama was asked on a US talk show in 2020 what his greatest lesser-
known achievement as President was, his answer was surprising: appliance standards.
He said new rules for energy-efﬁcient appliances equated to the equivalent of taking
20 million automobiles off the road annually in greenhouse gas emission reductions.
Particularly in the energy sector, incremental improvements are often overlooked
by politicians in favour of completely novel technologies. In the run-up to the United
Nations climate change conference COP26, US climate envoy John Kerry caused
a stir by saying that 50% of the reductions that are required to get to Net Zero
are going to come from technologies that we don’t yet have. There is a tension
between those who believe we can live sustainably through a combination of existing
low-carbon technology and behavioural change (e.g., much less ﬂying and meat
consumption) and those, sometimes referred to as EcoModernists, who believe that
new technologies like nuclear fusion and geoengineering will be able to enable
prosperous lifestyles for all without compromise.
What is clear, however, is that every increase in efﬁciency or more sustainable
resource use will make Net Zero more achievable and less expensive. Incremental
improvements can also be achieved faster than by developing new, unproven tech-
nologies. As climate change is a cumulative problem, near-term action is more valu-
able in preventing dangerous levels of global warming than emissions cuts in future
decades.
The climate system is complex and modelling it involves inherent uncertainty, so
every small positive change we make now reduces the chances of reaching various
ecological tipping points that could result in worst-case scenarios for humanity and
the natural world.
v

vi
Foreword
Deﬁnitions of Sustainability
The ultimate aim of the global energy transition that is underway must be to provide
a good standard of living for the growing billions of people in the world in a manner
that is sustainable. Various deﬁnitions of sustainable abound, and are explored in
EcoMechatronics, but the most famous is perhaps Brundland’s development that
meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations
to meet their own needs.
It is often not even easy to determine which technologies are sustainable. Often
renewable energy is conﬂated with sustainable energy, but this is not necessarily
the case. Nuclear power in its current form is not strictly renewable, but with some
moderate innovation in uranium mining and recycling of waste, its fuel could become
essentially inexhaustible, meaning that it would be sustainable. Conversely, using
biomass for energy is technically renewable but, without very strict control of where
the source material comes from, it may not be sustainable. Similar concerns surround
policies to promote the uptake of electric vehicles given the high embedded carbon
emissions and resource extraction involved in manufacturing, in particular, lithium-
ion batteries. Rethinking our approach to transport may be a better idea than replacing
one inefﬁcient mode of transport with another.
Predictions that humanity would run out of key resources, or of ecological
collapse, have also come and gone, of course. Humans have proven themselves inge-
nious at extracting more resources from the ground and improving farming produc-
tivity. Today we produce enough food globally so that famines are almost unheard
of, except when caused by political strife. Innovation in the oil and gas sector to
expand to reserves of extractable fossil fuels also means that climate change will not
be solved by peak oil.
This ingenuity would be something to celebrate if the risk to the world were not
so great. Our planet is a complex system and positive feedback loops may result in
the acceleration of climate change to the extent that we cannot innovate our way to
sustainability without rapid emissions reductions and action to preserve resources.
Risks and Challenges
Some of the risks and challenges of delivering a Net Zero world are explored
in EcoMechatronics. The rebound effect, or Jevon’s Paradox, is the observed
phenomenon of how making something cheaper or more available will mean that
people use more of it. For example, although recent advances in energy-efﬁcient
lighting have reduced overall energy use, it has become so inexpensive that much
more artiﬁcial lighting is used than ever before.
Technological lock-in is another risk. Decisions made today may put us on paths
that make sustainability more difﬁcult to achieve. In reaching Net Zero, carbon
capture and storage (CCS) is considered crucial. But CCS is not one technology, it

Foreword
vii
is a ﬂeet of technology options, and none have yet been proven to be economic at
the scale required to have an impact. Multi-billion-pound investments will need to
be made that may lead us done an expensive and inefﬁcient technology cul-de-sac.
Both the rebound effect and technological lock-in effects may also occur due to
the uptake of autonomous vehicles. If the auto industry delivers on the potential of
self-driving cars, the convenience may mean that more sustainable forms of transport
become less popular.
Cause for Optimism
There is reason to be optimistic, however. Cost reductions of wind and solar power
have exceeded all expectations. Battery electric vehicles are following the same
trajectory, albeit a decade behind. We are also developing more resilient infrastruc-
ture that is able to withstand rising seas and more powerful storms. More contro-
versially, solutions to global warming that involve geoengineering are being taken
more seriously. The collective commitments made at COP26 may have gotten us to
a point where limiting global warming to two degrees Celsius is achievable, but only
if every country lives up to its promise. Geoengineering may be necessary if they
don’t.
One trend that is already happening, and which will continue to develop, is the
increasing electriﬁcation of our energy system. Electric car sales are rising exponen-
tially and eventually in a large proportion of the heating systems in buildings gas
boilers will be replaced, at least in part, by heat pumps.
These, and other developments, open up opportunities for making increased use
of big data and smart technology to improve the efﬁciency of buildings and transport
systems, especially as they become more interconnected.
EcoMechatronics
The boundaries between engineering disciplines have been breaking down for many
decades. EcoMechatronics is an important next step. It recognises the beneﬁts of
interdisciplinarity and highlights the potential of engineering to make giant leaps in
progress by integrating big data and emerging ﬁelds like artiﬁcial intelligence.
By embedding sustainability in all steps of the engineering process, EcoMecha-
tronics is a ﬁeld that can make an enormous contribution to our race to live sustain-
ably on Earth before we reach an environmental tipping point from which we cannot
recover.
It is not just about improving efﬁciency; it is about improving the user experience.
Basic electric vehicles have been on the road for a long time, but until the last decade
have been considered unfashionable and impractical. What has happened in recent

viii
Foreword
years is that people are increasingly trying out electric vehicles and ﬁnding out they
are not only cleaner than those with an internal combustion engine, but also offer a
better user experience for the driver.
The beneﬁt of EcoMechatronics, therefore, lies not just in making our devices,
building, and vehicles more efﬁcient, but in making them more desirable to the
consumer. We cannot rely on the environmentalist instincts of people to choose the
more sustainable option out of their altruistic instincts.
Building decarbonisation is one good example. It is sometimes said that home-
owners like their gas boilers and will be reluctant to give them up, but they have
not yet been presented with a better option. New smart heating systems and ventila-
tion management may eventually encourage a rapid uptake. Homes will be able to
control temperature and humidity room-by-room and they will generate their own
electricity and share it with their neighbours. The EcoMechatronics approach will
also see engineered systems interact not just with each other, but also responding
and adapting to factors like the real-time changes in weather and occupancy.
In this context, the Covid-19 pandemic has made ventilation a more important
factor to consider, especially in workplaces and public transport. It will be up to engi-
neers to come up with solutions that ensure we can breathe clean air indoors without
expending huge quantities of energy on inefﬁcient air-conditioning or excessive
deployment of air-sanitation devices.
Skills
In 2021, the Institution of Mechanical Engineers (IMechE) polled our members on
what they thought would be the key skills required for manufacturing engineers in
the future. The top answer, from a list of 22 options, was automation, robotics and
mechatronics.
As professional engineering institutions (PEIs), the IMechE has certain key roles.
In certifying university degrees, we need to encourage academia to embed the concept
of sustainability across the whole curriculum. Engineering graduates should enter the
workforce with a philosophy of environmental protection engrained in their thinking
across design, manufacturing, operation and end-of-life.
A second important role is continued professional development. The pace of tech-
nological change means that engineers and technicians who qualify today may need
to retrain and/or upskill multiple times throughout their careers. Businesses, govern-
ments and educational establishments should collaborate to ensure the workforce
has the right skills today and they should also proactively horizon scan to plan for
what is required 10 or 20 years hence.
It is also important to embed a philosophy of sustainability as early as possible in
our education systems. In the absence of dedicated engineering teaching in schools,
the IMechE and other engineering organisations help to train primary school teachers
so that they have conﬁdence in talking to students about such topics. Volunteers from

Foreword
ix
this initiative, Primary Engineer, were in attendance at COP26 in Glasgow in 2021
showcasing hands-on activities for young people to engage with emissions reduction,
including a ﬂat-pack wind turbine.
Conclusion
Although I began this foreword with the importance of incremental improvements
in technology, the EcoMechatronics approach is a step change from merely thinking
about reducing the adverse effects on the environment. Actively thinking about waste,
in all its various forms, can be put to productive use to beneﬁt the entire system. As
Simpson et al. explains in their chapter, EcoMechatronics challenges engineers to go
beyond the mindset of doing less bad and to instead reframe from problem in terms
of doing more good.
Matthew Rooney
Head of Engineering Policy
Institution of Mechanical Engineers
London, UK
Matthew Rooney is a Chartered Mechanical Engineer and Head of Policy at the Institution of
Mechanical Engineers (IMechE) in London. He holds an MPhil in Technology Policy from the
University of Cambridge and an MEng in Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering from the
Queen’s University of Belfast.
After spending six years as a mechanical engineer working on the design and manufacture of
componentsforparticleacceleratorsattheHarwellScienceandInnovationCampus,Mattreturnedto
university to study technology policy. The main focus of his research was on deployment strategies
for new energy technologies, with case studies including carbon capture and storage and small
modular reactors. Following this, he spent 18 months as an Energy Policy Research Fellow at the
prominent think tank Policy Exchange in Westminster before joining IMechE in May 2018.
He is a British Science Association Media Fellow, having worked brieﬂy as a science journalist
with Times Higher Education. His other media work includes appearances on BBC News, BBC World
Service, and the Naked Scientists radio programme and podcast.1 He has had articles published
in BusinessGreen,2 Professional Engineering, and The Engineer and he has been quoted in the
Financial Times and on the BBC News website.
He has authored or co-authored over ten reports on the topic of energy and technology policy.
1 www.thenakedscientists.com/.
2 www.businessgreen.com.

Contents
EcoMechatronics: Concepts, Objectives and Outcomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
Peter Hehenberger, Maki K. Habib, and David Bradley
Methods + Technologies
Re-envisioning Innovation for Sustainability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
Eddie Simpson, Kai Whiting, and Luis Gabriel Carmona
Mechatronic Applications in Respect of Sustainability and Climate
Change . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
Brendan McGlynn
EcoMechatronics and Bioinspired Design
Ecology, Circular Economy, and Sustainability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
Maki K. Habib
A Holistic and Sustainable View on the Product Creation Process
for Mechatronic Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
Peter Hehenberger
Applied Sensor Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
Abbas Dehghani-Sanij and Uriel Martinez-Hernandez
MBSE for Mechatronic Systems Design with Human, Energetic,
Cyber, and Physical Aspects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
101
Faïda Mhenni and Jean-Yves Choley
Concurrent Multi-domain Modelling and Simulation
for Energy-Efﬁcient Mechatronic Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
111
Stanislao Patalano and Ferdinando Vitolo
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Ethics and Privacy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
129
Roger White and David Bradley
xi

xii
Contents
Applications
Mechatronic Applications in Rail Systems and Technologies . . . . . . . . . . .
155
Christopher Ward, Roger Goodall, Tim Harrison, and Will Midgley
Sustainable Mechatronic Solution for Agricultural Precision
Farming Inspired by Space Robotics Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
177
Cong Niu, Youhua Li, and Xiu-Tian Yan
The Achievement of Sustainability in the Built Environment . . . . . . . . . . .
195
Crina Oltean-Dumbrava and Margherita Finamore
Eco-Design of Mechatronic Hydropower Device in River . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
217
Jun Chen, C. Greg Jensen, and Haiyan H. Zhang
Micro/Nanopositioning Systems with Piezoelectric Actuators
and Their Role in Sustainability and Ecosystems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
233
Morteza Mohammadzaheri, Payam Soltani, and Mojtaba Ghodsi
Eco Motion Planning for Mechatronic Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
251
Paolo Boscariol, Dario Richiedei, and Alberto Trevisani
Minimization of CO2-Footprint of Hybrid Propulsion Systems
for Mobility and Power-Tool Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
271
Stephan Schmidt, Hans-Jürgen Schacht, Alexander Hagenberger,
and Dimitrios Vogiatzis
Education
Developing Education in Mechatronics to Support the Challenges
for Evolution, Development, and Sustainability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
291
Martin Edin Grimheden and Elias Flening
Education and Simulation for Electric and Mechatronic Systems
in Renewable Energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
307
P. J. van Duijsen
Robot-Assisted Teaching—The Future of Education? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
329
Robert Rayner, Kristina Kerwin, and Nicholas Valentine
Conclusion
EcoMechatronics Enabling Technologies, and Future Prospects . . . . . . . .
361
Maki K. Habib, Peter Hehenberger, and David Bradley

Editors and Contributors
About the Editors
Dr. Peter Hehenberger is Professor for Integrated Product Development, Head
of the Smart Mechatronics Engineering Research Group and Academic Director
of the Institute for Agile Transformation at the School of Engineering, University of
Applied Sciences Upper Austria, Wels/Austria.
Prior to this appointment, he was an Assistant Professor and Deputy Head at the
Institute of Mechatronic Design and Production of the Johannes Kepler University of
Linz (JKU), Austria and Deputy Research Area Coordinator for Process Modelling
and Mechatronic Design at the Linz Center of Mechatronics (LCM). In 2015, he
was invited as a Visiting Professor at the Universite de Technologie de Compiegne,
Departement Genie des Systemes Mecaniques, France.
He completed his Diploma and Doctorate in Mechatronics from JKU in 2000
and 2004, respectively. In 2016, he received the post-doctoral lecturing qualiﬁcation
(venia docendi) for the subject area of Engineering Design. Core research interests
include Sustainability in Development and Production of Mechatronic Systems and
Engineering Processes along with selected topics on Digital Transformation.
He has published over 140 peer-reviewed papers in international journals and
conference proceedings and has been a guest editor for three journal special issues.
He serves as an Editorial Board Member for the IFAC journals Mechatronics,
Computer-Aided Design and Applications and International Journal of Product Life-
cycle Management (IPLM). In addition, he has authored or co-authored 6 books
related to his research ﬁeld.
Dr. Hehenberger has practical experience with industry and design projects and
has been a key researcher and manager of several successful national and interna-
tional research projects. He is active in the research community where he refers to
his research area of Mechatronic Design as group member of IFIP WG5.1 Global
Product development for the whole life-cycle, IFAC TC 4.2 Mechatronic Systems,
SAE SETC Small Powertrains and Energy Systems Technology Conference. He is
Austrian representative and Communications Publications & Events Ofﬁcer for IFIP
TC 5 Information Technology Applications.
xiii

xiv
Editors and Contributors
Prof. Maki Habib obtained his Ph.D. in Intelligent and Autonomous Robotics from
the University of Tsukuba, Japan, and now specialises in Robotics and Mechatronics.
He was previously a research scientist at RIKEN, Japan, a senior researcher at RISO-
Laboratories, Japan, and a visiting researcher at EPFL, Switzerland. He has also
been a Visiting Expert at the Asian Development Bank (ADB) serving the Malaysian
industry, anAssociateProfessor at UTM, Malaysia, andaSenior Manager at MCRIA,
Malaysia. He was a leading senior research scientist with GMD-Japan where he
led the Telecooperation Research Group and an Associate Professor with Monash
University (Australia/Malaysia) to develop and lead the Mechatronics Engineering
programme.
He was appointed as a Full Professor of Robotics and Mechatronics at Swinburne
University (Australia/Malaysia), an invited Professor at KAIST, South Korea, and a
Resident Professor at Saga University, Japan. Since September 2007, he has been a
Full Professor of Robotics and Mechatronics at the American University in Cairo.
He was, and continues to be, a consultant and technical advisor to many interna-
tional industrial companies and research consortiums, such as Toyota and ABB. He
also has research collaborations with several international research groups associated
with research centres and universities. His current research includes:
• Robotics for Humanitarian Demining Use.
• Autonomous Electric Vehicles.
• Nanorobotics for Biomedical Purposes.
• Robots for the Physically Impaired using Biological Signals (such as EEG and
EMG).
• Industry 4.0, Internet of Things (IoT), and CPS.
• EcoMechatronics and Bioinspired Design.
• Intelligent Drone systems.
• Robotics and Industrial Automation.
• Tele-cooperation, Distributed Mixed Realities, and Collaborative Control.
Prof. Emeritus David Bradley has been involved in the design, development and
teaching of mechatronics since the 1980s and this current work is the fourth of a
series of mechatronics related-books that he has edited for Springer. He has been the
author, lead author, co-author or contributing editor for 10 books, the majority of
which have had mechatronics as their main subject. He has also published over 50
journal papers and 150 plus conference papers and book chapters.
Having taught at Lancaster University, Bangor University and Abertay University
in the UK, he was a visiting fellow at the Technical University of Denmark and a
research consultant at Shefﬁeld University and Barnsley Hospital, and a research
engineer, while on sabbatical leave, at New Zealand Electricity. His research interests
have included engineering design, power system harmonics, construction robotics,
eHealth & mHealth technologies and the modelling of hydro-power stations. He
remains active in research as a consultant/advisor to research groups working in
areas such as the design and operation of advanced prostheses, health care and the

Editors and Contributors
xv
built environment and was recently a contributor and co-author to an IMechE policy
paper produced for COP26.
He has also acted as a consultant on mechatronics course development in, among
others, South Africa, Mauritius, Singapore and Colombia, and has been a visiting
lecturer on mechatronics programmes in Colombia, Singapore, South Africa as well
as at several locations in Europe. A co-founder of the UK Mechatronics Forum,
later the Mechatronics Forum, he was also the originator of the Mechatronics Forum
Conference series.
Contributors
Paolo Boscariol has been associate professor of Mechanics of Machines at the
Department of Management and Engineering (DTG) of the University of Padova,
Italy, since 2021. He received his Ph.D. in Industrial and Information Engineering
from the University of Udine, Italy, in 2012, where he has been from 2008 to 2015.
He is author of more than 90 publications in the ﬁeld of mechatronics and robotics.
He is an active member of IFToMM Italy, the Italian branch of IFToMM.
His research interest lies in the broad areas of modern robotics and mechatronics,
being mainly focused on the development of motion design methods for industrial
devices and robots. In particular, he has been developing solutions to improve the
energetic efﬁciency of mechatronic devices, by exploiting new motion design rules
and using redundancy. His current research activity is focused also on the energy-
optimal design of servo-actuated systems. He has also investigated the develop-
ment of robust motion design methods, through which the performance of uncertain
system can be enhanced. In particular, he has focused on the development of indirect
model-based method based on variational solutions and sensitivity shaping. In addi-
tion, he has also made numerous contributions to the topic of vibration reduction in
mechanisms with pronounced ﬂexibility, by investigating the issues of modelling,
simulating, controlling ﬂexible-link mechanisms.
Luis Gabriel Carmona is a Marie Curie Research Fellow working on resource
efﬁciency, material/energy services and the circular economy at University of
Cambridge. In 2020, Gabriel completed his Ph.D. in Sustainable Energy Systems
at the University of Lisbon (Portugal). He focused on the stock-ﬂow-service nexus
to facilitate a more comprehensive analysis of resource production, consumption,
and accumulation. Gabriel worked on several H2020 projects, where he assessed the
sustainability of emerging technologies. He also has over ﬁfteen years of experience
working as a consultant and sustainability professional. He advised Latin American
companies in the public transport, infrastructure, and hydrocarbon sectors. Gabriel
obtained an Environmental Engineering degree at La Salle University (Colombia)
and a master’s degree in Energy Efﬁciency and Industrial Ecology at the University
of Zaragoza (Spain).

xvi
Editors and Contributors
Dr. Jun Chen is currently a Professor of Mechanical Engineering at Purdue Univer-
sity. He received his B.S. degree and M.S. degree in aerospace engineering from
Beijing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics. He obtained his Ph.D. degree
in mechanical engineering from Johns Hopkins University in 2005 and did post-
doctoral research at Los Alamos National Laboratory. He joined the Purdue faculty
of the School of Mechanical Engineering in 2008. Dr. Chen’s research interests are
in the general area of experimental and applied ﬂuid dynamics, including advanced
ﬂow diagnostics techniques, benchmark experiments and modeling, and applied ﬂuid
dynamics. He also led the student team in Purdue Global Engineering Program to
develop low-cost energy solutions for rural communities in developing countries.
His teams won the 2016 YCOSST P3 AWARD presented by the AIChE Institute for
Sustainability and the 2018 ASCE Sustainable Development Award. His research on
renewable energy devices received funding support from the United States Depart-
ment of Energy, Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and industry sponsors.
Dr. Chen is one of the co-founders of Poseidon Energy Inc., which develops products
to harvest energy from river currents.
Dr. Chen is an associate editor of the ASME Journal of Fluids Engineering and
the chair of the ASME Fluid Mechanics Technical Committee. He has organized and
chaired many technical conferences for ASME. He is an active reviewer for more
than 25 journals, panels of national agencies, and several international agencies. He
is a recipient of the 2005 Outstanding Fluid Mechanics Paper Award of Measurement
Science and Technology and the 2014 ASME Robert T. Knapp Award. He was elected
to the ASME Fellow in 2020.
Dr. Jean-Yves Choley obtained a Masters degree in Mechanics and Automation
and a Master of Advanced Studies in Automated Manufacturing from ENS Cachan,
France (recently renamed ENS Paris-Saclay). He obtained a Ph.D. degree in Indus-
trial Engineering in 2005 from Ecole Centrale Paris, France (recently renamed
CentraleSupélec), related to GPS mechanical tolerancing and 3D metrology. He
gained industry operational experience (1986–1988) in systems engineering and
quality/reliability at Arianespace, Kourou (French Guyana), France, working both
on ground facilities and satellites launchers Ariane 1 to 4.
He is Professor and Research Director of ISAE-Supméca, France, responsible
for the IS2M (Ingénierie des Systèmes Mécatroniques et Multiphysiques) research
team of Quartz laboratory and is in charge of research and teaching activities,
focusing mainly on tools, languages and methodologies for the collaborative design
of complex systems such as mechatronic systems, CPS (Cyber-Physical Systems)
and CPPS (Cyber-Physical Production Systems). In the past 10 years, he has mainly
focused on the Digital Twin concept, Model-Based Systems Engineering (MBSE)
and Model-Based Safety Assessment (MBSA), together with multiphysics modeling
for the collaborative design of safety critical systems, such as autonomous vehicle
and Factory of the Future systems (Industry 4.0 and Industry 5.0).
Abbas Dehghani-Sanji a Ph.D. graduate from the University of Leeds, UK, is
professor of Bio-Mechatronics and Medical Robotics in the School of Mechanical
Engineering at the University of Leeds. His research interests include bio-robotics,

Editors and Contributors
xvii
intelligent control, sensors, and actuators using integrated system design approach
where functional materials, sensors, actuators, and control are brought together to
develop intelligent systems/devices. His research focus is mobility and intelligent
control in robots and development of devices to support mobility in patients and
the growing aging population as well as wearable robotic systems for enhancing
human capabilities. His current research includes design and development of intel-
ligent robotic exoskeletons, soft robotics, and artiﬁcial limbs. Professor Dehghani is
the leader of Robotic Exoskeleton Research and has had in his team 11 Postdocs and
40 research students. He has extensive government and industrial funded research
and over 150 journal and conference publications. He has been Director of ExoLab
research and was the founding Director of the Centre for Mechatronics and Robotics
at the University of Leeds. He is a member of the IMechE Mechatronics Forum
Steering Committee.
Margherita Finamore with more than 20 years experience in the public sector on
retroﬁtting cultural heritage, Margherita Finamore has been for many years inves-
tigating and guiding sustainability implementation, especially in the design and
retroﬁtting of schools, school-gyms and social-housing.
Margherita is currently leader of research on sustainable construction with respon-
sibility as project manager for public works at Pesaro Council where she is engaged
in environmental sustainability and energy efﬁciency design and is the lead in devel-
oping the requirement assessments and technical speciﬁcations to achieve high values
of sustainability and energy savings. Since joining the council in 1997 her work has
focused primarily on sustainable cultural heritage, public buildings and retroﬁtting
projects where she has been involved in international projects with colleagues from
different cultures around the world.
Having graduated in Architecture from the University of Florence she has gained
Masters in Environmental Sustainability and Energy Efﬁciency on Historical Build-
ings (University of Ferrara) and BioArchitecture (University of Bologna) and is a
Technical Architect specialist in Historical and Cultural Environment with the Italian
NationalTrust.ShewasselectedtoparticipateinelementsoftheEuropeanFederation
of Agencies and Regions for Energy and Environment (FEDARENE) programme
and is currently a Ph.D. student at Bradford University (UK) researching the circular
economy in the built environment with a special focus on existing buildings. Her last
project, the Antonio Brancati School in Pesaro in Italy received the 2020–21 Inter-
national Green Solution Awards Energy and Temperate Climates prize at COP26 in
Glasgow.
EliasFlening isadoctoralstudentatKTHMechatronics.Hisinterestliesinexploring
organizational issues in engineering systems design in general, and in the project
management of mechatronic systems development processes in particular. The topic
area of his doctoral research follows this interest, investigated through exploratory
and mostly qualitative research designs. Elias Flening is cross-disciplinarily disposi-
tioned, loving the mixing of potent (and sometimes explosive) different worldviews
in research.

xviii
Editors and Contributors
He was previously a research assistant at Stockholm School of Economics in
various research projects, mostly relating to activity-based ofﬁce design and devel-
opment. He also retains a strong professional and personal interest in Japan, having
studied and lived there over two periods and travels there regularly.
Mojtaba Ghodsi is a Senior Lecturer in Instrumentation, and Measurement Systems
in the School of Energy and Electronic Engineering at the University of Portsmouth,
UK. He received his Ph.D. in Precision Engineering from the University of Tokyo,
Japan in 2007 and continued his research as a JSPS postdoctoral fellow (2009) at
the University of Tokyo. His main research interests are around smart materials and
structures to develop actuators, sensors, energy harvesters, vibration control, NDT
and mechatronic systems.
Roger Goodall is an Emeritus Professor in Control Systems Engineering in the
Wolfson School at Loughborough University, UK. He has a long history in both
industry and university of contributing to the subject of mechatronics, particularly
with signiﬁcant theoretical and practical contributions relating to railway technology.
He was elected as a Fellow of the Royal Academy of Engineering in 2007. He has
held a variety of external appointments, including a long-standing involvement with
IFAC for which he is a former Vice President, and is now both a Fellow and an
Advisor of the Federation.
Martin Edin Grimheden is associate professor in Mechatronics at KTH Royal
Institute of Technology and has been publishing studies on mechatronics education
since 2001. Research interests include learning in mechatronics in a broad sense,
with studies on experimental learning, collaborative learning, globally distributed
teams as well as product innovation.
He has been director of KTH B.Sc. program in Mechanical Engineering as
well as M.Sc. programs in Engineering Design and Mechatronics and is currently
Head of Department at KTH Machine Design as well as Head of Gender Equality,
Heterogeneity and Equal Treatment at KTH School of Industrial Engineering and
Management.
Alexander Hagenberger is a junior researcher at the Institute of Thermodynamics
and Sustainable Propulsion Systems at Graz University of Technology. His research
focuses on the simulation of small hybrid propulsion systems.
Dr. Tim Harrison is a Senior Research Associate working with the Control Systems
research group in the Wolfson School of Mechanical, Electrical and Manufacturing
EngineeringatLoughboroughUniversity.HeholdsaPh.D.inAerospaceEngineering
from the University of Manchester. After working in aerospace systems engineering
for several years, Tim returned to academia focussing on rail related systems and
technologies. His research projects have an emphasis on developing solutions to
real world problems in collaboration with rail industry bodies, improving service
reliability and resilience and reducing environmental impact.

Editors and Contributors
xix
Dr. C. Greg Jensen is currently a Professor of Engineering Practice, Mechanical
Engineering at Purdue University. He received his B.S. and M. Design and Manufac-
turingdegreesfromBrighamYoungUniversity.HisPh.D.inMechanicalEngineering
was granted in 1993 from Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN. He rejoined the
Mechanical Engineering faculty at Brigham Young University in 1993 and retired
from teaching and research after 32 years of service in 2015.
In 2018, after a short self-employment and engineering consulting endeavour, he
joined the Mechanical Engineering faculty at Purdue University as their Director
of Senior (Capstone) Design. His interests and strengths over his long career have
been closely aligned with the optimization of product and process design. Today,
he annually oversees more than 100 senior design/build/test/iterate semester-long
projects. He has authored more than 50 journal articles, 5 book chapters, and 70
conference papers. He is the author, and inventor on more than 40 design and manu-
facturing patents, with others in provisional and pending status. He has worked for
and/or consulted with, among others, Boeing, GM, Ford, Lockheed Martin, Pratt &
Whitney and Raytheon.
Kristina Kerwin is a design engineer and a researcher working at London South
Bank University (LSBU). She graduated from LSBU in 2017 with a B.Sc. (Hons) in
Engineering Product Design and continued to a master’s degree at Kingston Univer-
sity while working part-time at a secondary school. As part of her master’s degree,
Kristina carried out a study titled Studying the efﬁcacy of teaching STEM subjects
to primary school age students using LEGO robots to demonstrate how the use
of robotic devices can provide a more engaging and active learning experience
for pupils. She presented her preliminary ﬁndings at Horizons in STEM Higher
Education Conference 2019.
Youhua Li is a research Assistant in department of Design Manufacturing and
Engineering Management at the University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, UK. After
working in manufacturing company for about 10 years, she joined the department
of DMEM, working on several mechatronic education, research and knowledge
exchange projects, including areas of smart farming, agricultural robotics and smart
factory costing. Her research interests include software validation for engineering
and agricultural applications, and design for manufacture.
Uriel Martinez-Hernandez received his Ph.D. degree in Robotics and Tactile
Perception from the University of Shefﬁeld, Shefﬁeld, U.K., in 2015, and his M.Sc.
degree in Computer Science from the Centre for Research and Advanced Studies
(CINVESTAV), Mexico City, Mexico in 2008. He was Research Fellow in the Insti-
tute for Design, Robotics and Optimisation (iDRO), the University of Leeds, and
Research Associate in Shefﬁeld Robotics Lab, the University of Shefﬁeld.
Currently, he is a Lecturer (Assistant Professor) in Robotics and Autonomous
Systems at the Department of Electronics and Electrical Engineering, Faculty of
Engineering and Design, University of Bath. Uriel is leader of the Multimodal
Interaction and Robot Active Perception (inte-R-action) group where he under-
takes research and supervises work on human-robot interaction, autonomous robots,

xx
Editors and Contributors
activity recognition methods, tactile sensors for robotics, vision and tactile percep-
tion, wearable haptic devices and wearable assistive robots. He is core member of
the Centre for Autonomous Robotics (CENTAUR), and member of the Accountable,
Responsible and Transparent AI (ART-AI) CDT.
Uriel has published over 40 scientiﬁc and technical papers in international jour-
nals and conferences, 3 book chapters and he has 1 patent. He has also worked
in large multidisciplinary projects funded by EPSRC, The Royal Society, Cancer
Research UK and EU with universities and research groups across the UK and
Europe. His research interests include active touch and vision perception, human-
robot interaction and collaboration, machine learning for autonomous robots, bioin-
spired cognitive architectures for robot control, wearable assistive robots, multimodal
activity recognition and haptics and wearable immersive devices for telepresence and
telerobotics.
Brendan McGlynn gained a Bachelor of Engineering degree in Electrical with a
focus on Advanced Maths and Electronics at the University College Cork in Ireland
and is currently completing a Bachelor of Commerce degree from University College
Dublin. He has pursued a career in radar and telecommunications R&D, avionics,
global data networks and main frame computer systems working for airlines in
Europe, East Africa, Middle East, S.E. Asia, Far East, USA and the Paciﬁc. He
has also been a project manager and regional sales manager in telecommunications
engineering in Europe, the Middle East and the USA. He is also CEO of an SME
covering electronic sensors and robotics across applications in security, health and
military environments. He has also been funded for 7 years as a lead partner on
two EU Commission projects and is currently working on wearable sensors and
innovative renewable energy. He is active in swimming, trekking, cycling and the
propagation of native deciduous trees and sequoia conifers on his own land.
Faïda Mhenni holds a Ph.D. in Engineering Sciences from Ecole Centrale de Paris,
France entitled Integration of systems engineering and safety assessment and a Ph.D.
in Mechanical Engineering from Ecole Nationale d’Ingénieurs de Monastir (ENIM),
Tunisia entitled Effect of tolerances on the behavior of mechanisms. She has a degree
in electromechanical engineering from from Ecole Nationale d’Ingénieurs de Sfax
(ENIS), Tunisia.
She is Associate Professor at ISAE-Supméca in France and a member of
Quartz laboratory, IS2M (Ingénierie des Systèmes Mécatroniques et Multiphysiques)
research team. Her main research domains include Model-Based Systems Engi-
neering (MBSE) methods and tools, safety assessment and MBSA (Model-Based
Safety Assessment), mechatronics and multiphysics, tolerancing and multi-domain
models consistency.
Dr. Will Midgley is Senior Lecturer in Intelligent Mechatronics and Control Systems
Engineering in the Wolfson School of Mechanical, Electrical and Manufacturing
Engineering at Loughborough University. He holds a Ph.D. in engineering from the
University of Cambridge, United Kingdom. His research interests are the application
of mechatronics engineering to complex systems such as transportation with the aim

Editors and Contributors
xxi
of decarbonising these systems and reducing their environmental impact. Previous
work has focussed on reducing the fuel usage of heavy goods vehicles and rail
vehicles. He works closely with industry to implement his research and to ensure it
has impact.
Morteza Mohammadzaheri is a Senior Lecturer in Mechatronics at Birmingham
City University, UK on leave from his position as Assistant Professor of Dynamic
Systems and Control in the Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering of
SultanQaboosUniversity,Oman.HereceivedhisPhDfromtheSchoolofMechanical
Engineering, University of Adelaide, Australia in 2011.
Dr. Mohammadzaheri has published/presented more than 120 peer-reviewed arti-
cles in technical journals and conferences mostly on application of artiﬁcial intelli-
gence in control, modelling and optimisation of engineering systems. He has recently
worked on micro/nanopositioning with use of piezoelectric actuators and structural
health monitoring thru intelligent vibration analysis.
Cong Niu has been awarded the B.E. with Honours. Degree of Electronic Engi-
neering from the University of Central Lancashire, Preston, UK in 2014. He was
then awarded with the M.Sc. in Embedded Digital System from the University of
Sussex, Brighton, UK in 2015. He completed his Ph.D. in Mechatronics in depart-
ment of Design Manufacturing and Engineering Management at the University of
Strathclyde, Glasgow, UK in 2021. He is currently a research assistant in Depart-
ment of Design, Manufacturing and Engineering Management (DMEM), Univer-
sity of Strathclyde, Glasgow, UK. His current research interests include robotics,
autonomous systems, mechatronics, ﬁeld and indoor path planning, modeling and
simulation, unmanned ground and aerial vehicles. He is a Student Member of IEEE.
Prof. Crina Oltean-Dumbrava is an academic with over 40 years’ teaching and
research experience in the UK, France, Germany, Italy, Greece, and Romania and
is the chair of Sustainable Built Environment at the University of Bradford in the
UK. Research interests cover all aspects of sustainability within the context of the
built environment including decision support and risk assessment, water and waste
management, transport infrastructure, road noise mitigation, energy efﬁciency in
buildings and the circular economy in construction.
Prof. Oltean-Dumbrava was appointed in 2013 to the European Committee for
Standardisation CEN/TC 226/WG6 (Noise Reducing Devices) and in 2014 as the
liaison ofﬁcer between CEN/TC 226 (Road Equipment) and CEN/TC 350 (Sustain-
ability of Construction Works). In 2017 she became a partner and expert for the
UN’s Sustainable Buildings and Construction Programm. In 2021 she was appointed
as an output assessor for REF 2021 Sub-panel 12: Engineering and became the
academic member of a team representing the construction industry in the ICE Carbon
Champions programme.
Prof. Oltean-Dumbrava is a Past Chair of the Association of Civil Engineering
Departments in UK and a JBM Board member, and a member of the JBM Accredi-
tation Visiting Panel involved in the accreditation of civil engineering courses in the
UK. She is also a visiting professor at the Technical University of Cluj-Napoca in

xxii
Editors and Contributors
Romania, represents Romania on the European Council of Construction Economists
(CEEC), is a member of the Multi-Criteria Aid for Decisions, European Working
Group in France, of the International Association for Housing Science (IAHS) in the
USA and of the International Society on Multiple Criteria Decision Making.
Prof. Oltean-Dumbrava has published some 140 articles and papers in books,
journals and at conferences and is or has been Principal Investigator, Co-Investigator
or Collaborator for wide range of research and teaching projects, including multi-
national projects.
Stanislao Patalano obtained a Master’s Degree (cum laude) in Mechanical Engi-
neering in 1997 at the Univ. of Naples Federico II (UNINA) and a Ph.D. in Machine
Design and Construction in 2001. He was a researcher working on Design and
MethodsofEngineeringDesignfrom1999to2010andAssociateProfessorofDesign
and Methods of Engineering Design from 2010 to 2018. He has been a full professor
since 2018.
His research interests include CAD methodologies and Knowledge-Based Engi-
neering, Variation Analysis, Tolerance Design and Design for Assembly, Object
Oriented Programming and Simulation, Mechatronic Systems Design. He has
published more than 100 papers in International conference proceedings, in Interna-
tional journals and National journals.
He has been member and co-ordinator of research groups in research projects
funded by national public agencies (MUR, Campania Region). From 2011 to 2021,
he has been scientiﬁcal responsible for the research activities of UNINA-DII with
two PON Projects and one H2020 project, in cooperation with Fiat Chrysler vehicles.
He is currently professor of Geometric Modelling and Virtual Prototyping and
Modelling and Simulation of Mechatronic Systems at UNINA.
Dr. Robert Rayner is a Senior Lecturer in Automotive Engineering, University of
Hertfordshire where he teaches and researches extensively in his areas of specialism
which include mechatronic systems, robotics, and autonomous vehicles. He is an
experienced engineering University academic who has worked at a number of
UK Universities including the University of Bath, Imperial College London, and
Kingston University London. He has also spent time working at a private school in
St. Albans, Hertfordshire where he was the Deputy Head of Mathematics. He has also
spent time in industry with companies such as Cummins Power Generation, Molins
ITCM and Mercedes Benz. Dr. Rayner is very active in the Engineering Education
world and has worked IMechE Education Ofﬁcer for the Greater London Region for
several years.
Dario Richiedei is full professor of Mechanics of Machines at the Department of
Management and Engineering (DTG) of the University of Padova, Italy, since 2021.
He is, currently, author or co-author of more than 120 papers, published in Interna-
tional indexed journals (more than 60 papers), in proceedings of International confer-
ences or as book chapters. He is a member of the editorial board of 3 International
journals.

Editors and Contributors
xxiii
His research activities are developed within the framework of several research
projects funded by public institutions and private companies and in collaborations
with scholars from Italian and other universities. His current research interests are
mainly in the following areas of research, and including both theoretical and experi-
mental activities: multibody system dynamics (modeling, simulation, co-simulation,
model reduction, model updating, state estimation); motion planning and vibration
control in ﬂexible systems; model-based design optimization of vibrating systems
through inverse dynamic structural modiﬁcation; energy optimal design of mecha-
tronic systems; motion planning of industrial mechatronic and robotic systems
(energy efﬁcient trajectory planning, motion planning and control of cable driven
robots).
Dr. Hans-Jürgen Schacht is scientiﬁc senior researcher at the Institute of Thermo-
dynamics and Sustainable Propulsion Systems at Graz University of Technology.
His research focuses on small hybrid propulsion systems.
Dr. Stephan Schmidt is research area vice head at the Institute of Thermodynamics
and Sustainable Propulsion Systems at Graz University of Technology. His research
focus comprises the simulation, design and experimental development of sustainable
small propulsion and energy systems as well as the use of sustainable fuels.
Eddie Simpson career started in the Army taking him across the world with particu-
larly challenging appointments and considerable responsibility at HQ Scotland and
the United Nations. Eddie continues links to the Ministry of Defence in his role as
the Convener of Tayforth Military Education Committee promoting defence studies.
Since entering Higher Education as a lecturer nearly 30 years ago Eddie has been
Programme Leader on various courses including B.Sc. (Hons) Quantity Surveying,
B.Sc. (Hons) Construction Management and M.Sc. Construction Management. He
has also created, implemented and developed innovative educational courses and
collaborations including a B.Sc. (Hons) Sustainable Architectural Design. Eddie’s
experience and reputation have led to appointments such as Higher Education repre-
sentative (Scotland) for the built environment and Chairman of Validation Panels and
Qualiﬁcation Development Specialist. His professional qualiﬁcations include Char-
tered Environmentalist, Fellow of the Chartered Institute of Building and Senior
Fellow of the Higher Education Academy.
Eddie’s research interests and recent publications in the last 5 years include a
broad range of issues covering Higher Education, procurement in the context of MoD
projects, Stoicism as a philosophy and its alignment with environmental issues, and
sustainability. Recent publications include the following indicative issues: innovation
and failure in mechatronics design education, corporate environmental sustainability,
how Stoics can have a diet that aligns with environmental facts, and what we can
learn from Stoic philosophy and Freirean environmental pedagogies.
Payam Soltani is currently a Senior Lecturer in Mechanical Engineering at the
School of Engineering and the Built Environment at Birmingham City Univer-
sity, UK. He obtained his Ph.D. in Mechanical Engineering on nonlinear modelling

xxiv
Editors and Contributors
and structural dynamics of nanostructures in 2012. He then contributed to research
projects in piezoelectric-based smart structures in collaboration with the Structural
and Material Computational Mechanics (MSC) group in the BATir department at the
University of Brussels (ULB) and the Space Structure and Systems Lab (S3L) at the
University of Liege (ULg).
He then joined the Dynamic Research Group (DRG) at the University of Shefﬁeld,
and as the member of the Programme for Simulation Innovation (PSi) project he
developed novel simulation tools for Jaguar Land Rover aiming at capturing the
effects of material ageing in vehicle components. As the Associate Fellow of Institute
for Future Transport and Cities (IFTC) at Coventry University, he continued his
research in simulation of dynamically coupled smart structures (dynamic absorbers
and energy harvesters) and 3D-printed structures. Developing modern simulation
methodologies, science, and tools (digital modelling and data-informed, data-driven
simulation) for complex mechanical systems such as nanostructures, 3D-printed
structures, 3D-printing processes, and smart structures are the main cores of his
current research activities and interests.
Alberto Trevisani has been a full professor of Mechanics of Machines at the Depart-
ment of Management and Engineering (DTG) of the University of Padova since 2015.
He is the President of the Degree Courses (B.Sc. & M.Sc.) of Product Innovation
Engineering.
He is the author or co-author of more than 150 papers and regularly serves as
invited peer reviewer for several indexed journals and has national and international
founding. He has been the principal investigator of 6 research programs funded by
public or private agencies and coordinator of 12 research and technology transfer
projects with private companies.
His current research interests are in the ﬁelds of ﬂexible-link multibody systems
(model reduction, model updating, state estimation, motion and vibration control),
design optimization of vibrating systems (inverse dynamic structural modiﬁcation,
model reduction), industrial manipulators (performance evaluation, energy efﬁ-
cient trajectory planning, collaborative robots) and cable driven robots (modelling,
trajectory. planning, performance evaluation, recovery strategies in case of cable
failures).
Nicholas Valentine holds an M.Sc. in Robotics and Automation and a B.Eng. in
Mechanical Engineering from the University of Salford and is a Trials and Experi-
mentation engineer for the UK Ministry of Defence. Nick has worked in a variety of
organisations across defence and has lived in both the Middle East and Canada. He is
also an active volunteer with the Institution of Mechanical Engineers (IMechE) and
is currently one of the Vice Chairs of its Young Members Board. Through his volun-
teering with the IMechE, he founded CHAIN Events, an organisation that produces
events for young and developing engineers around the world. He is also a keen Army
Reservist in the British Army’s Royal Engineers. In what little spare time he has, he
enjoys tinkering with his 3D printer and visiting as many museums as he can.

Editors and Contributors
xxv
Dr. Peter van Duijsen is Professor of Practice at IIT Guwahati, India and has
worked with computer simulation and power electronics for nearly 35 years. After
receiving his Masters in Electrical Engineering, and working at the Technical Univer-
sity of Delft, he founded Simulation Research and developed the simulation program
CASPOC. In 2003 he was awarded a Ph.D. degree in the ﬁeld of Modeling and Simu-
lation of Power Electronic Systems and currently heads the research and development
department at Simulation Research.
From 2013 until 2019 he was a part-time researcher at the Technical University of
Delft in The Netherlands where the focus was on electric machine control, wireless
powertransferforEVchargingandDCgridsforfastcharging.Since2008hehasbeen
an invited lecturer at the Korean University of Technology and since 2020 Researcher
at the DC-LAB (dc-lab.org) at the THUAS University of Applied Sciences in Delft,
TheNetherlands.HewasappointedasProfessorofPracticeattheIIT-Guwahati-India
in 2020.
Dr. van Duijsen co-authored several textbooks in the ﬁeld of Power Electronics,
Drives, Solar, Wind and electric vehicles and is involved in the development of
educational training hardware in the ﬁeld of renewable energy and holds a patent on
the wireless charging of eBikes.
Ferdinando Vitolo is assistant professor of Technical Drawing and Concept Design
of New Vehicles at the University of Naples Federico II. His major research interests
are focused on System Engineering and Knowledge Based Engineering, Mechanical
Design, Methodologies for advanced CAD modelling, Mechatronic systems, Object
Oriented Programming.
He received his Master’s degree in Mechanical Engineering (cum laude) from the
University of Naples Federico II in 2012. From 2012 to 2014 he has collaborated
with the University of Naples Federico II on the National Project: PON 01_1268,
Digital Pattern Product Development; a pattern driven approach for industrial product
design, simulation, and manufacturing. After his Ph.D. in Industrial Engineering, in
2017, he won post-doctoral fellowship for research on Human-Robot collaboration—
Modelling and design of collaborative workplace and devices.
Dimitrios Vogiatzis is a junior researcher at the Institute of Thermodynamics and
Sustainable Propulsion Systems at Graz University of Technology. His research
focuses on the development of hybrid propulsion systems for hand-held power tools.
Dr. Christopher Ward is a Senior Lecturer in Control Systems Engineering in the
Wolfson School at Loughborough University, UK. His work focuses on the applica-
tion of control, mechatronics and conditions monitoring to a wide variety of systems,
but with a core focus on the rail sector. This work has a practical motivation and is
driven by a desire to create a railway that is ﬁt for the coming challenges of climate
change, energy usage and customer demands. He holds a Ph.D. in automotive power-
train control from the University of Liverpool, is a chartered engineer and member
of the IMechE.

xxvi
Editors and Contributors
Dr. Roger White is the founder, president & CSO of RC2 Inc, a research consultancy
based in Ontario Canada. He has over 35 years experience in R&D, marketing, and
entrepreneurship in optronic sensing, robotics, and AI focussed largely on the devel-
opment of novel analytical systems for use in real-time macromolecular characteri-
sation. After completing a Ph.D. in Materials Science from Bath University in 1985,
he worked as a Research Engineer on thin ﬁlm optics & distributed laser sensing for
a variety of military and civilian application areas before moving ﬁrst into technical
marketing/product management and then joining a specialist personal robotics start
up as European Product Manager for Laboratory Automation & Assisted Living.
In 1992, he established a specialist analytical instrumentation distribution,
contract analysis and R&D company and was responsible for managing and partic-
ipating in a range of collaborative research projects funded by UK & EU bodies as
well as developing a low cost protein aggregation analyser based on guided wave
laser light scattering. In 2006, he relocated to Ontario where he created RC2 Inc. as a
design and development consultancy. Key projects undertaken to date have resulted
in the spin out of an innovative low cost micro-volume protein analyser that can be
operated using a smartphone, and a multi-channel ﬁbre-optic UV detector capable
of monitoring 12 process separations in parallel.
He has also been involved in a number of business development initiatives,
includingasaprimemoverinaWelshindustry/academiacollaborativeprojectfunded
by the EU to develop an Optronic Innovation & Business Centre in North Wales.
He is currently working on a Transatlantic project to assist EU and North American
SMEs in developing IIoT3/AI and health related mechatronic products & services.
Kai Whiting is based at UCLouvain in Belgium. He did his Ph.D. in Sustainable
Energy Systems at the University of Lisbon, Portugal and completed a Masters in
Renewable Energy at the University of Zaragoza, Spain and a Masters in Environ-
ment and Business at Abertay University, Scotland. He worked on UNIDO’s 2013
World Small Hydropower Report as a member of the International Centre on Small
Hydropower’s research and editorial team. He was a member of the civil society
table and technical support group for Extractives Industries Transparency Initiative
Colombia.
Kai’s research interests are in sustainable resource use, particularly from a service
perspective. He is currently working on tracing energy and materials from source
to wellbeing. He also researches the integration of energy, material and ecosystem
services. He writes and frequently appears on podcasts to discuss the application of
Stoic philosophy to matters linked to sustainable development. He is the co-author
of Being Better: Stoicism for a World Worth Living in.
Xiu-Tian Yan is Professor in Mechatronic Systems Technology and the Director
of Space Mechatronic Systems Technology Laboratory (SMeSTech), based in the
Department of Design, Manufacture and Engineering Management of the University
of Strathclyde. Through over 30 years’ research investigation, he has developed a
portfolio of research topics in mechatronic system design, including the development
3 Industrial Internet of Things.

Editors and Contributors
xxvii
and application of mechatronic design process models, modelling and simulation of
these systems, and techniques in prototyping these systems for validation. He has
managed many projects in his research ﬁelds funded by the UK government funding
bodies, European Commission, international funding bodies and industrial partners.
He was the Chairman of Robotics and Mechatronics Technical Professional Network
of the Institution of Engineering and Technology.
Hereceivedhis Ph.D. fromLoughboroughUniversityof Technology. Heis aChar-
tered Engineer and a Fellow of the IET and a Fellow of the IMechE. His research
interests include mechatronic systems design, especially in recent years in multi-
perspective mechatronic system modelling, design and simulation, computer support
mechatronic systems design using AI techniques, knowledge intensive product
modelling and simulation, and their applications in robotics for agriculture, manufac-
turing and space applications. He has organized and chaired four international confer-
ences. He has published over 260 technical papers in major international journals
and conferences and edited or wrote 6 books in the ﬁelds.
Dr. Haiyan H. Zhang is currently a Professor of Mechanical Engineering Tech-
nology in the School of Engineering Technology at Purdue University, West
Lafayette, IN. He is also the founding director of Center for Technology Development
(CTD) at Purdue University. He received his BS and MS Mechanical Engineering
degrees from Shanghai Jiao Tong University, and his Ph.D. in Mechanical Engi-
neering in 1996 from University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI. Dr. Zhang’s research
focuses on Analytical Mechatronics and Multidisciplinary Product Design.
Dr. Zhang is an expert of analytical mechatronics governing design and control
of smart devices/smart machines, which can produce the thinking-based motions via
the intelligence controlled, reconﬁgurable multidisciplinary mechanisms for high
product value through augmented functionality.
Before Dr. Zhang joined Purdue University, he was a senior specialist of automatic
transmission engineering in automotive industry, and designed electro-hydraulic
controlsystemsandsensorsofautomatictransmissions.HisMultidisciplinaryDesign
Laboratory (MDL), functions as a ThinkBox for Ph.D. students and FabLab for MS
students in Mechatronic Systems, and is dedicated to the innovation of multidis-
ciplinary products through the co-simulation and has been awarded with technical
patents. Dr. Zhang also has experience in HEV Drivetrains, Digital Hydraulics, and
large ﬂow VFS Development for vehicle powertrains.

EcoMechatronics: Concepts, Objectives
and Outcomes
Peter Hehenberger, Maki K. Habib, and David Bradley
Abstract The concept of sustainability in the application and operation of engi-
neering systems is of increasing signiﬁcance in relation to the requirements for the
mitigation of climate change along with achieving global targets for the reduction
of emissions of all types of greenhouse gasses. As a major contributor to the design
and operation of many current systems, mechatronics has a great deal to contribute
to achieving many of the climate-oriented goals that have been identiﬁed. This has
in turn led to the development of the concept of EcoMechatronics in which the
approaches to the design and operation of mechatronic systems which have evolved
over the years are modiﬁed to encompass consideration of the issues of sustainability
and environmental impact.
Introduction
Mechatronics [1–3] is an interdisciplinary ﬁeld of engineering science centred on
the synergy, at the design level, of multidimensional and multifaceted knowledge
across a range of domains, facilitated by tools and methodologies that support the
implementation of smart and sustainable systems and manufacturing processes of any
scale, while promoting cleaner futures that reduce ecological impact while improving
sustainability and quality of life. This implies adapting the functionality of mecha-
tronics technologies with the aim of realizing a sustainable global society. Such an
approach may be termed as EcoMechatronics.
The vision of EcoMechatronics is therefore one of aiming to improve human
behaviour and quality of life while moving towards more sustainable lifestyles. In
P. Hehenberger (B)
University of Applied Sciences Upper Austria, Wels, Austria
e-mail: peter.hehenberger@fh-wels.at
M. K. Habib
The American University in Cairo, New Cairo, Egypt
D. Bradley
Abertay University, Dundee, UK
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
P. Hehenberger et al. (eds.), EcoMechatronics,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-07555-1_1
1

2
P. Hehenberger et al.
Fig. 1 UN sustainable development goals [4]
doing so, it has the ability to effectively address the interdisciplinary challenges
that such a shift presents with a potential to support the synergy of experience and
ways of working, technologies and knowledge to optimize the design and devel-
opment processes, and hence to maximize functionality while providing efﬁcient
and economical ways of utilizing resources, maximizing added value and limiting
environmental and social impact. There is also a need to put forward effective goals
which aim to support the development of a wide range of technologies, processes,
products, systems and machines that can contribute to a reduction of dependence
on the combustion of fossil fuels while lowering associated carbon footprints by
reducing energy consumption and waste.
Such developments contribute to improved productivity, better environmental
performance, the introduction of more energy-efﬁcient machinery, reduced energy
costs and reduced environmental impact along with more effective management of
waste and recycling with less material usage and waste, enhanced environmental
sustainability and safety with high user comfort. Ecologically sustainable design
also represents an environmentally aware and motivated design process that inte-
grates ecologically sustainable feature requirements in line with the United Nations
Sustainable Development Goals of Fig. 1 [4] to improve environmental performance
and optimize economic outcomes through the development of effective smart tech-
nologies and design processes along with near-zero waste manufacturing systems
and strategies.
In order to achieve such outcomes and to produce an ecologically sustainable
society, there is a need to develop novel design strategies which embed sustainability
at their core. Over the years, a wide range of eco-design techniques and methods
have been developed to evaluate and improve the environmental performance of
products and their associated production processes, and these in their turn support
the evolution of the EcoMechatronics concept.

EcoMechatronics: Concepts, Objectives and Outcomes
3
Synergy of Digital, Sustainable and Agile Transformations
for EcoMechatronics
The importance of design and development methodologies to support the whole life
cycle of technical systems such as mechatronic systems, cyber-physical systems and
others has become increasingly signiﬁcant in recent years. The main drivers for these
developments [5, 6] are the digitalization of systems such as lies at the heart of the
concepts of Industry 4.0 and Smart Manufacturing which along with the guiding
principles of processes such as Agile Management and Agile Production integrate
with aspects of sustainability such as Green Production and the Circular Economy
to drive forward the sustainability agenda. EcoMechatronics as a design paradigm
then supports the goal of achieving an economical, ecological and social efﬁciency
of products and processes as suggested in Fig. 2.
In that context, EcoMechatronics builds on previous insights into the develop-
ment of the mechatronic concept, originating in part with the publication in 2010 of
Mechatronics in Action [7] which looked at the ways in which the basic concepts of
mechatronics were being applied across a range of application domains from manu-
facturing to vehicles. This was followed in 2016 by Mechatronic Futures [8] which
considered how these underlying concepts were evolving both the meet new appli-
cation challenges as well as accommodate new technologies such as those of The
Cloud. Then in 2020, Reinventing Mechatronics [9] aimed to understand how mecha-
tronics practitioners were looking forward to new applications areas such as agricul-
ture and approaches accordingly and adapting their thinking and design processes
accordingly. EcoMechatronics then takes this forward with a speciﬁc focus on how
mechatronics can contribute towards achieving a sustainable society. It must also
be noted that education is an important aspect of mechatronics. Each of the texts
referred to has introduced chapters on various aspects of mechatronics education for
all ages.
Fig. 2 Main drivers for
EcoMechatronics

4
P. Hehenberger et al.
Fig. 3 EcoMechatronics
structures
The EcoMechatronics-Paradigm
The concept of sustainability in the application and operation of engineering systems
is becoming increasingly signiﬁcant in relation to the requirement to mitigate climate
change and achieve global targets for the reduction of the emissions of all types of
greenhouse gasses.
As a major contributor to the design and operation of many current systems,
mechatronics has a great deal to contribute to achieving many of the climate-oriented
goals that have been identiﬁed. This has in turn led to the development of the concept
of EcoMechatronics in which the approaches to the design and operation of mecha-
tronic systems which have evolved over the years are modiﬁed to encompass consid-
eration of the issues of sustainability and environmental impact. Figures 3 and 4 then
present some of the key elements of EcoMechatronics and its evolution related to
applications.
Goals, Structure and Content of the Book
In order to achieve the goals, the book is structured around both a discussion of
some of the underlying issues associated with such a shift in thinking, for instance,
in understanding the nature of sustainability and its implications and challenges for
engineering design along with issues such as sensor technologies, artiﬁcial intelli-
gence, machine ethics and privacy which impact on the way in which systems are
designed and operated.
It also seeks to introduce through the technical chapters some of the areas in
which current research is beginning to evolve into what might be considered ﬁrst-
generation EcoMechatronics systems in areas such as rail transport, agriculture and

EcoMechatronics: Concepts, Objectives and Outcomes
5
Fig. 4 The evolution of mechatronics & EcoMechatronics in relation to applications
design methods. However, it is not possible in a book of this size to encompass
all approaches to achieving EcoMechatronic solutions, not to cover all aspects or
applications of each of these efforts. Thus, there are a number of issues and topics
that can only be considered in outline and these are presented here in the introduction
and include.
4th Industrial Revolution—Referring to Fig. 5, we now sit in the middle of the 4th
Industrial Revolution, one characterized by enhanced automation, the use of digital
technologies and integrated communication. In this environment, manufacturing is
structured around robotics and advanced machine tools, which are mechatronic in
Fig. 5 Industrial revolutions

6
P. Hehenberger et al.
Fig. 6 Global greenhouse gas emissions by sector in 2016 (Our World in Data [10])
nature. By adopting an EcoMechatronic approach to design, these can be made more
effective and efﬁcient, consuming less energy and producing less waste.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Machine Learning—Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) and
Machine learning have not as yet effectively demonstrated or fulﬁlled their promise
or potential across a wide range of mechatronics-based applications. However, devel-
opments in several areas including, among others, Cyber-Physical Systems, Health
Care, Manufacturing Technology and Robotics, each of which is structured around
mechatronic components, systems and sub-systems, are beginning to demonstrate
potential in respect of applications.
Autonomy—Systems are becoming increasingly autonomous in relation to aspects
of their operation, relying on embedded software to make decisions that can impact
the individual or collective well-being of individuals or groups of individuals. The
adoption of such systems is, therefore, subject to achieving the necessary balance
between providing support for those individuals, and the ability to make decisions
on their behalf.

EcoMechatronics: Concepts, Objectives and Outcomes
7
Built Environment—Referring to Fig. 6 it can be seen that in 2016 the built environ-
mentaccountedforsome8.6BilliontonnesCO2 equivalent(~17.5%)ofglobalgreen-
house gas emissions without taking account of the embedded carbon in their produc-
tion. Modern building design incorporates a wide range of mechatronic elements in
relation to operational features such as energy efﬁciency and use and ventilation, as
well as integrating within the concept of the urban Digital Twin.
Data—Mechatronics systems generate large volumes of data related to their oper-
ation which, when integrated with data from other sources provides a powerful
resource to understand impact and outcomes. The processing of this data must
however be subject to due and appropriate consideration of issues such as privacy,
both of the individual and the organization.
Digital Twins—The concept of the Digital Twin evolved in relation to the opera-
tion and management of complex systems such as aero-engines and has now been
extended to encompass the operation of buildings [11] and environmental issues such
as ﬂood management and control [12]. Again, many of the embedded systems are
mechatronics and may also be supported by their own Digital Twin, resulting in a
layered hierarchy.
Dynamics of Change—If the goal of achieving Net Zero greenhouse gas emissions
by 2050 is to be achieved, then the ﬁrst steps must be based on the effective deploy-
ment of existing technologies. The adoption of an EcoMechatronics approach to
design and implementation has an important role to play in this.
Education—The educational requirements for mechatronics are incorporated within
the wider concept of the STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathe-
matics) approach. This means that it is important to engage students from the earliest
possible age in the underlying concepts supporting sustainable development and the
application of EcoMechtronics and others approaches to achieving this.
Information Management—As has been stated, mechatronic systems generate
large volumes of data which can then be analysed and interpreted to provide feedback
as to effective outcomes, and hence to adjust system operation accordingly.
Privacy and Ethics—Increased autonomy of systems is presenting challenges in
respect of user privacy as well as raising issues as to the ethical implementation of
such systems.
Society—The aim of moving towards a more sustainable approach to the design,
development and implementation of a wide range of systems is to achieve a sustain-
able framework across all levels of society. Societal impact therefore needs to be
increasingly incorporated into the design processes for EcoMechatronics.
Transport Systems—As can be seen from Fig. 6 in 2016 transport contributed
some 8 Billion tonnes CO2 equivalent (~16.2%) of global greenhouse gas emissions.
Many of the systems involved in modern transport, from road to rail and aircraft are
mechatronic in nature and EcoMechatronic thinking is therefore positioned to have
a major impact on the reduction and management of these emissions.

8
P. Hehenberger et al.
Fig. 7 Structure and content of the book
The book is structured around a series of chapters from invited authors, each of
whom is an expert in a particular area of EcoMechatronics. In each case, the authors
were challenged to establish the current state of the art using their own research or
professional expertise as the starting point and then to try to isolate and identify
those key areas in which signiﬁcant development is needed or likely to take place in
coming years. These chapters are organized into three speciﬁc sections as follows
(see also Fig. 7):
• Methods and Technologies—Presents and describes the methodological back-
ground for EcoMechatronics.
• Applications—Presents selected applications for EcoMechatronics.
• Education—Presents aspects of the integration of the EcoMechatronics paradigm
in education programmes.
The book thus provides the reader with an insight into the issues and challenges
associated with EcoMechatronics and its role in achieving a sustainable future.
References
1. Harashima F, Tomizuka M, Fukuda T (1996) Mechatronics-what is it, why, and how?
IEEE/ASME Trans Mechatron 1(1):1–4
2. De Silva CW (2005) Mechatronics–an integrated approach. CRC Press London, New York &
Washington DC
3. Habib MK (2007) Mechatronics a unifying interdisciplinary and intelligent engineering science
paradigm. IEEE Ind Electron Mag 1(2):12–24
4. United Nations (2015) The 2030 agenda for sustainable development, 17 sustainable develop-
ment goals (SDGs). sdgs.un.org/goals. Last Accessed 31 Mar 2022
5. Merschak S, Hehenberger P (2019) Ecodesign methods for mechatronic systems: a litera-
ture review and classiﬁcation. 20th International conference on research and education in
mechatronics (REM). Wels, Austria
6. Hehenberger P, Vogel-Heuser B, Bradley D, Eynard B, Tomiyama T, Achiche S (2016) Design,
modelling, simulation and integration of cyber physical systems: methods and applications.
Comput Ind 82:273–289. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2016.05.006. Last Accessed 31
Mar 2022. (Elsevier)

EcoMechatronics: Concepts, Objectives and Outcomes
9
7. Bradley D, Russell D (2010) Mechatronics in action: case studies in mechatronics-applications
and education. Springer International. ISBN-13 978-1849960793
8. Hehenberger P, Bradley D (2016) Mechatronic futures–challenges and solutions for future
mechatronic systems and designers. Springer International. ISBN 13 978-3319321547
9. Yan X-T, Bradley D, Russell D, Moore P (2020) Reinventing mechatronics, developing future
directions for mechatronics. Springer International. ISBN 13 978-3030291303
10. Our World in Data. ourworldindata.org. Last Accessed 9 Sept 2021
11. Dembski F, Wössner U, Letzgus M, Ruddat M, Yamu C (2020) Urban digital twins for smart
cities and citizens: the case study of Herrenberg. Ger Sustain 12(6):2307
12. digitaltwinhub.co.uk/credo-ﬁlm/#credoapp. Last Accessed 9 Sept 2021

Methods + Technologies

Re-envisioning Innovation
for Sustainability
Eddie Simpson, Kai Whiting, and Luis Gabriel Carmona
Abstract The chapter explores the concept of sustainability and its associated chal-
lenges within a mechatronics context. The primary aim is to promote critical thinking
and innovation within an EcoMechatronics framing, i.e., via an application of mecha-
tronics that at its core works with nature (rather than against it). Innovative technology
per se is neither a force for good nor bad. However, EcoMechatronics permits a
broader approach to innovation by considering socioenvironmental aspects as instru-
mental to improved performance, not as mere ‘add ons’. Throughout the chapter, the
authors tease out how innovation for sustainability can be so much more than merely
doing ‘less bad’ (e.g. fewer emissions or less waste) when we are capable of doing
‘more good’, for example, by improving the soil or capturing and regenerating energy
that would otherwise have dissipated. While the authors do compare two potential
braking systems within an EcoMechatronics framing, their goal is not to provide a
tickboxmethodologyoraone-size-ﬁts-allanswerbutinsteadtoprovokedeeperques-
tioning and reﬂection that enables mechatronics practitioners to sustainably innovate
according to their own speciﬁc set of circumstances and challenges.
Introduction
The 1987 WCED report [1], often referred to as The Brundtland Report, is a seminal
investigation into the necessity for global action to ensure that resource use does not
adversely affect the environment to the detriment of future generations. A key concept
within the report is that of ‘sustainability’. Since its publication, various actors in a
wide range of professional disciplines and industry sectors have attempted to shape
E. Simpson (B)
Abertay University, Dundee, UK
e-mail: e.simpson@abertay.ac.uk
K. Whiting
Université Catholique de Louvain, Ottignies-Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium
L. G. Carmona
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
P. Hehenberger et al. (eds.), EcoMechatronics,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-07555-1_2
13

14
E. Simpson et al.
sustainable development, in accordance with the norms, values and practices of their
specialism or ﬁeld. This chapter explores the concept of sustainability, innovation
and their respective challenges within a mechatronics context. However, we do not
just consider how mechatronics can be applied to environmental problems but rather
highlight the added value of re-conceptualising mechatronics applications into an
EcoMechatronics framing. The latter is an integration of knowledge and innovation
across various engineering and computing ﬁelds in order to positively contribute to
the environment. This means that EcoMechatronic design and practice goes beyond
even a proactive anticipation of environmental harms and their mitigation because
it leads those in the mechatronics ﬁeld to design for improved functioning of the
ecosystem.
The notion of sustainability and how it leads to the expansion of mechatronics into
EcoMechatronics is explored through an in-depth philosophical discussion on what
is often considered to be ‘green’, and why a much more nuanced positioned is needed
if we are to truly innovate for sustainability. In particular, the authors consider (1)
the extent to which relative efﬁciency gains are beneﬁcial given that they are known
to often trigger increases in absolute resource consumption; (2) whether the circular
economy can exist given the physical limits of recoverability, as dictated by the
Second Law of Thermodynamics; (3) whether recycling is sustainable and (4) the
limitations of biomimicry and other ‘green’ solutions. The purpose of this critical
examination is not to criticise efforts thus far to achieve sustainable goals nor to
suggest that none of these aforementioned practices has been beneﬁcial. Rather it
is to give mechatronics practitioners the questions they need to be able to ask to
establish what is required of them if they are to direct innovation, and by extension
society, towards a more sustainable path in the future.
What is Sustainability?
The Brundtland Report [1] puts forward the notion of sustainability as ‘develop-
ment that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future
generations to meet their own needs’. In this context, sustainability encompasses the
following principles:
• The planet’s ecology must be conserved, as the loss of plant and animal species
is likely to impact the health and wellbeing of future human generations.
• Each generation has a moral obligation to conserve nature and maintain, and
where possible improve the planet’s biochemical cycles.
These principles are rooted in a holistic understanding of planet Earth as a multi-
faceted and intricately interconnected complex system, whose health depends on the
successful operation of all its parts and the relationships between them. Innovative
technology per se is neither a force for good nor bad. However, restricting what is

Re-envisioning Innovation for Sustainability
15
seen as ‘good’ to the optimisation of the socioeconomic system or to what is favoured
by a select group of human individuals, as opposed to what is good for all of humanity
and non-humanity, has often generated unforeseen system feedback mechanisms to
the detriment of the whole.
An increasing awareness of environmental problems has led companies to embark
on sustainability drives focused on reducing speciﬁc aspects of environmental harm.
Forexample,inresponsetoenvironmentaldamage,theaviationsectorhassetsustain-
ability targets linked to a reduction in CO2 emissions. These targets can be achieved
by reducing fuel consumption in absolute terms or by improving overall aviation
fuel efﬁciency per air mile travelled, which is a reduction in fuel use in relative terms
[2]. There is also a move towards new generations of aircraft using batteries, fuel
cells or hydrogen [3–5] as alternatives to fossil fuels and commercial options for
such aircraft are becoming increasingly viable. There are, for example, concepts for
hydrogen-fuelled airliners being put forward by Airbus which combine hydrogen-
burninggasturbineswithhydrogenfuelcellsthatgeneratesufﬁcientelectricalstorage
capacity to carry up to 200 passengers for a predicted range of 2,000 nautical miles
[6]. However, we are still some way from introducing these kinds of systems into
commercial passenger operations. In the meantime, improving conventional fuel
efﬁciency remains the principal strategy for sustainability.
Improved fuel efﬁciency offers considerable cost savings [7] and results in lower
levels of air pollution per air mile travelled [8]. However, net environmental beneﬁts
will only occur if there is no increase in the number of air miles ﬂown. In other words,
any carbon emission reductions per air mile will only result in a better environment
if cost savings discourage or stabilise air travel rather than promote additional travel.
However, if a company can make more proﬁt per mile ﬂown through fuel savings,
are fuel efﬁciency improvements likely to incentivise or reduce the market offer for
ﬂights? If cheaper fuel costs are passed onto the consumer because an airline wants
to increase its market competitiveness, will this encourage the consumer to travel
further or more often, as it is now cheaper to do so? This highlights the fact that
even with the best intentions, it can be extremely difﬁcult to argue that resource
and/or carbon-intensive industries can ever have green credentials or meaningful
contributions to a transition towards a more sustainable economy.
The paradoxical relationship between fuel savings in relative terms and increased
consumption in absolute terms was documented in the nineteenth century by Stanley
Jevons [9]. Jevons identiﬁed how technological innovations such as the steam engine
and better iron smelting methods increased resource efﬁciency, which paradoxically
increased resource consumption because cheaper commodities and energy prices
heightened production demand [10, 11]. This paradox continues into the present
day as shown in Fig. 1, which highlights how an increase in UK fuel efﬁciency
in cars has, at least in part, enabled a higher overall fuel consumption nationally.
Such consumption patterns accelerate changes in travel preferences, consequently
in travel infrastructure, and thus a societal preference for cars leads to more roads

16
E. Simpson et al.
Fig. 1 An example of the Jevon Paradox: UK car fuel efﬁciency versus total fuel consumption.
Source data (Rodrigues et al. [13])
and less public transport, creating and maintaining unsustainable consumer lock-
ins. Here, the term ‘lock-in’ refers to the phenomenon that occurs when our present
decisions tie both present and future generations into behavioural patterns that are
not easy to eradicate. Negative lock-ins are then those that diminish the quality of
the environment rather than improve it [12].
Understanding the attitudes and behaviours of businesses and society, as explained
through the Jevons’ Paradox and the concept of consumer lock-ins, is key if
mechatronic designs are to work with nature and support sustainable development.
The notion of a Circular Economy, whereby the quantity of resources used and
waste/emissions created are reduced, is being promoted as one way of thinking
sustainably. This is due to its emphasis on the ability to reuse, repair, refurbish,
maintain and recycle materials [14–16]. Extending material life expectancy through
a cyclical approach that re-integrates waste material back into the socioeconomic
system, rather than letting it leave via incineration or landﬁll, reduces the extrac-
tion and consumption of virgin materials and frees up land that would be other-
wise designated to, or detrimentally affected, by waste management operations. The
sustainability of the circular economy rests on the idea that humanity can self-contain
its demand within a closed-loop system because eventually there will be a peak in
resource extraction, meaning that society will no longer consume more than what
has already been extracted.
The problem is that the Second Law of Thermodynamics dictates that with each
cycle both the quantity and quality of resources degrade. In turn, this means that
signiﬁcantly, and successively more, energy and raw materials will be required to
recover end-of-life material so that it is in a useable state. The Second Law also
ensures that it is physically impossible to recover all material. No matter how careful
one is or how efﬁcient our technology is, some material will inevitably leave the

Re-envisioning Innovation for Sustainability
17
system. No amount of innovation can change this fact and the best we can hope to
obtain is a spiral rather than a circular economy [17]. Physical limits aside, there are
also sociopolitical obstacles hindering the development of cyclic/spiral consumption
patterns. For instance, to what extent can a circular economy operate alongside polit-
ical inﬂuence and interference, which encourages rather than constrains economic
growth?
This does not mean that the circular economy holds no value [18]. Indeed, its
sustainable outlook on a complex problem has moved society in the right direction.
Amongst other things, its strategies have led to a reduction of some end-of-life issues
because of its promotion of a more sustainable design stage. Appropriate designs can
effectively remove various downstream problems before they occur [17, 19]. They
can also begin to mitigate some of the unforeseen damages, such as the plastic ﬁbrous
releases from clothes, which contaminate the oceans [20–22].
Decisions at the early stages of a product’s life cycle also have the potential to
either create or avoid trade-offs [23]. These include those linked to resource efﬁciency
and product recyclability, reparability and life expectancy. Policy development and
legislation can also support circular economy initiatives. For example, through the
‘right to repair’ and a ban on planned obsolescence, as enacted by the French Law
n°2020-105 [24], society can create a more sustainable path forward. This legislation
grew out of consumer dissatisfaction with planned obsolescence and the concerted
efforts of the French consumer group Halte à l’Obsolescence Programmée.1 This
was built on the 2015 French Law no. 2015-992 on Energy Transition for Green
Growth2 [25], which made planned obsolescence an offence.
In 2018, the Italian Competition Authority, Autorità Garante Della Concorrenza
E Del Mercato, ﬁned two hi-tech companies for forcing users to accept software that
slowed their devices, leaving them with little alternative but to buy newer ‘faster’
devices when their older ones were, if not for the updates, fully functioning [26].
Laws and legal proceedings underpinned by circular economy principles certainly
hold merit, but how effective are they against the many commercial pressures to
manufacture new products? How will designers inﬂuence the re-education of society
regarding the role of technological innovation and lifestyle choices? To what extent
can national laws address the global socioenvironmental cost of throwing away items
long before they have reached the end-of-life stage?
Another complex problem linked to product longevity is that replacing a boiler
that is perfectly functional but not very energy efﬁcient with a newer one that is
highly energy efﬁcient is only a sustainable solution to environmental harm if we
restrict our scope to carbon emissions. However, if one focuses on the environmental
harm caused by waste generation, then replacing the boiler is completely unsustain-
able. The notion of sustainability, in its truer sense, is a holistic one that requires
careful consideration of not only how nature operates but how it ﬂourishes. The best
strategies, including designs and ways of working, are those that harmonise rather
1 HOP—Stop Planned Obsolescence.
2 Energy Transition Law.

18
E. Simpson et al.
than antagonise biochemical cycles. They support rather than encroach upon plant
and animal populations and their habits. This is the kind of innovation we propose
in the transition towards a more sustainable approach to mechatronics design and
function.
Nature, Inspiration and Learning
Natureoperatesefﬁcientlybecauseeverythingisusefulandthereisnomaterialwaste.
Whilst the answer to ‘what is nature?’ goes beyond the conﬁnes of this chapter, it
is a system from which we have much to learn. Humans form part of this system
and, as an integrated part of it, what we do impacts the rest, sometimes for better and
sometimes for worse. As part of the system, we are also reliant upon its offerings
and subject to its feedback mechanisms, including those that we accidentally, or
purposefully, inﬂuence or manipulate. Whilst a relatively straightforward notion to
grasp, it appears that we humans often fail to recognise that we are very much a
product of nature and that nature is affected by, and evolves alongside, us. In this
respect, we can choose to contribute positively or negatively to the health of the
whole. Given that we are all intricately linked and thrive, or fail, together, it makes
sense that we work with, rather than against, nature.
Studying nature provides both a source of inspiration and a repository of knowl-
edge, which we can use to improve the world around us [27]. Natural cycles always
tend towards equilibrium, the lowest energy state possible, and they operate in closed
material loops. In nature, the inter-dependencies among organisms operate on the
basis that the needs of one organism are met in some form or another by the constant
rejuvenationandre-packagingofresourcesthathavepreviouslybeenusedbyanother.
Some forward-thinking innovators have begun to re-envision resources in this way
via what has become known as ‘Cradle to Cradle’ thinking [28]. This concept chal-
lenges individuals and corporations to go beyond the mindset of ‘doing less bad’3
and invites them to reframe the problem in terms of ‘doing more good’. Fundamen-
tally, it leads to the setting of positive targets such as creating compostable cups that
can provide nutrients and improve soil structure. These kinds of targets encourage
designs and practices that seek to avoid waste altogether by reconceptualising it
and using it to improve the functioning of the ecosystem. Once we begin to think
and act in this way, it becomes difﬁcult to accept waste as an inevitable necessary
consequence of production. Instead, we begin to understand it for what it is in many
instances, namely a design failure and a lack of imagination [29, 30]. This paradigm
shift is built upon asking more challenging questions such as why settle for trying to
reduce the amount of toxins we emit to the environment if we can simply avoid them
altogether? Why assume there is a trade-off between designing for aesthetics and
3 For instance by producing less carbon emissions or solid waste.

Re-envisioning Innovation for Sustainability
19
sustainability? Why only substitute materials for cheaper options, if we can substi-
tute them for better ones? Asking ourselves these kinds of questions opens up the
possibility of re-purposing, re-integration and upcycling rather than merely thinking
about how we might rescue resources from landﬁlls via recycling [31].
The problem with recycling is that it results in material degradation and is not an
effective method for preventing landﬁll in the long term. It also does little to increase
resource utilization. Even recycled steel and paper which are, arguably, two of the
biggest success stories have restricted uses because the virgin material is inevitably
of better quality.
Taking the engineering example of a retaining wall, we can compare two different
sustainable design proposals. In option 1, the approach may be to adopt concrete
but reduce its environmental impact during the extraction, processing and produc-
tion stages, by proactively reducing energy intensity and, consequently, CO2 emis-
sions, which are considerable [32, 33]. Yet producing cement as just one material for
concrete, even with the best available technology, is still energy-intensive and emits
various pollutants during processing [34, 35]. While improvements in cement manu-
facturing thus far have been signiﬁcant [36], it still results in wastewater efﬂuents,
solid waste (e.g., cement kiln dust), particulate matter and considerable freshwater
consumption [37]. Concrete is also difﬁcult to recycle with each re-use resulting
in material degradation and a reduction in consistency and strength. Some improve-
ments have been made via microwave ovens. Certainly, the 0.93–2.86 kgCO2/t aggre-
gate is considerably lower than the kerosene furnace/rubbing or rotatory kiln/sorting
process that generates 69.53–98.01 kgCO2/t aggregate [38]. The microwave oven
route also provides a higher quality recycled aggregate which increases potential
uses and price [39]. This is certainly progress that the closed-loop process is made,
but is there a better option?
In option 2, there is a vegetated retaining wall, which offers a structural design
option that makes use of upcycled plastic that also supports plant and insect life,
because it forms an extended part of their habitat. Vegetated retaining walls are not a
new idea, and there are various examples going back more than 2,000 years, which
made use of local and readily available materials such as reeds, willow and branches
for reinforcement [40, 41]. All these materials are biodegradable and offer similar
performance characteristics to newly developed innovative geosynthetic materials
such as Flex MSE [42], which are much less biodegradable [43, 44].
Perhaps, an even better design option is to mimic nature rather than trying to
become ‘more sustainable’? Biomimicry can give us models to work from which
involve, for example, the observing of birds and their nest making activities, as a
means to appreciate the physical limits of what is achievable in sustainable design
and practice [45–47].
The Beijing National Stadium, designed by Swiss architects Herzog & de Meuron,
is often described as the ‘bird’s nest’ stadium. This description comes from the
appearance of the steel structure with interwoven twigs resembling an upturned nest
[48]. The amount of steel required was approximately half of that under a typical
stadium design and inﬁll materials between the structural elements for insulation and

20
E. Simpson et al.
protection from the elements decreased structural loading, via the ethylene tetraﬂu-
oroethylene (ETFE) panels [49]. The problem with ETFE lies with its recyclability
in comparison to other potential options given that it is a plastic-based material.
There were also some missed opportunities for doing more good when it comes to
covering the stadium’s needs; for instance, solar energy covers only the stadium’s
underground parking requirements [50].
This raises the question of just how far can we realistically adopt biomimicry as a
speciﬁc source of eco-design inspiration? Even as we learn from nature and align our
behaviour and technology more closely with natural systems, there will inevitably
be constraints and compromises at each step of the life cycle, even if the goal is to
design in such a way that the outcome contributes more to the environment than it
takes out [51].
Sustainability Assessment and Life Cycle
To solve some of the issues mentioned above, one can undertake sustainability assess-
ments to objectively determine whether the solution proposed is better than other
reasonable alternatives. One particularly useful tool is life cycle assessment (LCA).
According to Curran [52], the purpose of an LCA is to identify, qualify and quantify
the environmental impacts generated within a given scope. An LCA thus permits the
establishment and the quantiﬁcation of the environmental impact inventory associ-
ated with a given product or service. It is used to state and compare environmental
impacts from the cradle to the grave, meaning from extraction to disposal [53]. For
an LCA assessment, one calculates that which enters the system (in terms of raw
materials and energy) and that which leaves (i.e. air, water and residual solid emis-
sions). These ﬂows are then summed and subsequently represent the total effect
of that product or service on the environment. All informational inputs should be
transparent and objective. That said, an LCA is not a completely objective method
and typically involves some form of interpretation. The scoping exercise and the
deﬁnition of boundaries are also subjective, albeit based on objective factors. Any
assumptions or purposeful exclusion from a case study should be stated as such [54].
For example, does the scope range from gate-to-gate (solely production processes),
well to wheel (fossil fuel extraction to mechanical drive) or cradle to grave?
A well-considered LCA will enable a company or individual to calculate the
sustainability of a product at each step across multiple environmental aspects such as
material recovery, energy efﬁciency, carbon emissions and waste generation. To use
anexample, onecanconsider whether theupcyclingof anend-of-lifemachiningknife
to a new wood turning tool is sustainable beyond the mere fact of delaying disposal
and removing the need to mine for the metal associated with the wood turning tool. To
do this, one could calculate the carbon footprint of the upcycled tool with an identical
one made via conventional production. It may well be that the carbon emissions
released during the grinding of the machining knife to provide the metal for the
wood cutting tool is just as high, if not higher than the production of metal extracted

Re-envisioning Innovation for Sustainability
21
from an ore and manufactured into a metal sheet. Of course, carbon emissions are
just one aspect, which is why the weighting of all impacts is important. If one wishes
to prioritise metal recoverability, then the LCA will indicate a positive result because
the metal is upcycled rather than downcycled scrap. If one considers energy to be
of primary importance, it may be that the upcycling has a negative result. Hence
the subjectivity of an LCA. It may also be that the environmental considerations are
secondary to social issues such as mining encroachment on indigenous land or child
labour in mines. In such a situation, the above LCA would need to be expanded into
a life cycle sustainability assessment (LCSA), which incorporates life cycle costing
(LCC) and social life cycle assessment (sLCA). LCC takes into account the economic
costsoftherawmaterials,equipment,energyandlabourcostsassociatedwithproduct
processing. An sLCA evaluates worker safety, delocalisation and migration, child
labour practices, corruption issues and respect for indigenous rights [55]. One way to
reduce the probability of these issues is through tracing and reducing the complexity
of the supply chain. The LCA/LCSA helps with this objective because it encourages
both transparency and accountability.
EcoMechatronics
Before exploring the nature of EcoMechatronics and how we can use it re-envision
innovation, a brief analysis of mechatronics and its purpose is required. Mechatronics
is an interdisciplinary engineering subject that integrates aspects of mechanical engi-
neering, industrial engineering, production engineering, civil engineering electronics
and computer systems with advanced controls for the designing, construction, and
operation of ‘intelligent’ (but not necessarily smart) products and processes [56].
The term smart has come to mean, in practice, the capability of being interconnected
via the internet, including situations where there is no embedded capacity for data
interpretation or analysis; thus ‘smart’ tends to imply connectivity as part of the
Internet of Things (IoT) and is a misnomer in that it does not actually mean that in
every case there is an embedded capacity to make decisions on received data.
One area where mechatronics is extremely prevalent is in the transport sector. In
2010, 30–35% of a new, higher class, passenger car’s economic value was linked to
embedded electronics and mechatronics. This is unsurprising given that such a car
will typically contain 2.5 km of cables, approximately 40 sensors, 100–150 elec-
tromotors and 45–75 microcontrollers of various types [57]. Mechatronic elements
have also been increasingly incorporated into vehicles in response to environmental
regulations, particularly in respect of emissions and air quality standards [58]. There
has also been an increasing awareness that engineers must consider performance
factors relating to customer satisfaction and economic cost reduction strategies [59].
Mechatronics, as a discipline, is also signiﬁcant when one considers the potential
for autonomous vehicles to inﬂuence not just the economy but how we think about
road travel. An early mechatronics system introduced into vehicles was the anti-lock

22
E. Simpson et al.
brake system (ABS) in the 1970s, enabled through developments in integrated elec-
tronics and microcomputers [60]. Since then, there have been various developments
including traction control systems and, more recently, adaptive cruise control and
automatic motor stop systems. The latter saves on fuel consumption by shutting the
engine down when the car is operating but at a standstill.
Mechatronic elements are also favoured relative to conventional options as they
tend to be lighter than the mechanical components they replace, leading to lower
fuel consumption and lower power levels needed to obtain the same level of tech-
nical performance. However, as we have made clear in the previous sections, using
mechatronics to reduce vehicle weight or within cost-cutting options does not auto-
matically, or necessarily, lead to a sustainable policy or practice. This is especially
the case if mechatronics solutions result in downcycling and an increased tendency
towards landﬁll disposal, instead of recuperation, re-use, recycling and upcycling.
In fact, and as we have already suggested, shifts towards mechatronics solutions that
solely focus on energy savings at the cost of material efﬁciency or which fail to
consider a more holistic evaluation of system efﬁciency can exacerbate rather than
mitigate environmental issues.
This is where an EcoMechatronic approach comes in, whereby the utility of
mechatronics is not just concerned with higher system performance in and of itself,
or merely in relation to economic factors, but in terms of how the system and its
parts impact the environment. Consequently, our conceptual framing of EcoMecha-
tronics is as an interdisciplinary engineering subject that integrates knowledge and
innovation across various engineering and computing ﬁelds, including environmental
engineering and earth system science to ensure that the design, construction and oper-
ation of ‘intelligent’ products and processes positively contribute to the environment
and all those living beings that rely on optimally functioning natural processes (see
Fig. 2).
Braking System—An EcoMechatronic Case Study
We will here examine an EcoMechatronics approach via two braking systems. The
design of braking systems has typically been in terms of system performance linked
to the beneﬁts accrued in reducing vehicle weight and vibrations while improving
braking effectiveness, system safety and reliability at a lower cost [61]. The environ-
mental impact of the system’s materials is not a conventional performance character-
istic and is therefore typically ignored or of secondary importance. An EcoMecha-
tronicsapproachmeansthatthesustainabilityofthematerialsusedinbrakingsystems
becomes a core criterion, rather than an added bonus. Moubarak et al. [62] provide
an excellent EcoMechatronics example via their redesign of a brake system, which
couples a magnetic brake to a regular brake. Their aim was to reduce the friction that
causes copper to detach from the brake pad following its wear and tear.

Re-envisioning Innovation for Sustainability
23
Fig. 2 A conceptual model for the EcoMechatronics approach
Elevated copper levels are toxic to aquatic life, causing mortality and morbidity
and detrimentally affecting ﬁsh reproduction and growth. According to the US Envi-
ronmental Protection Agency [63], brake pads are a signiﬁcant source of the problem.
This is because they are responsible for 24–192 g of copper being released into the
environment, following road surface runoff, over the lifetime of the average car [62].
This problem is compounded by the fact that car ownership and use are increas-
ingly prevalent. The global car ﬂeet, for example, expanded from about 51 million in
1950 to over 800 million in 2007 [64]. The prototype developed by Moubarak et al.
[62] reduced copper release by up to a third. The reduced friction also increased the
brake longevity and consequently reduced waste disposal. However, the design by
Moubarak et al. is still an example of doing ‘less bad’ rather than ‘more good’, in
the sense it merely reduces copper contamination rather than innovates for positive
environmental impacts.
In comparison, and as an example of a braking example that attempts to ‘do
good’, we can examine regenerative braking systems (RBS). The principle behind
this system is straightforward. In the process of reducing vehicle speed, the RBS
transforms kinetic energy into electrical energy, storing the electrical energy recov-
ered in accumulators or batteries for later use [65]. This reduces the need for further
inputs as some of the energy that would have dissipated is captured. It also reduces
emissions either directly, through the reduced combustion of vehicle fuel, or indi-
rectly due to the lower quantities of fuel consumed during the electricity generation
process.
In one road test study, the incorporation of RBS signiﬁcantly reduced CO2 exhaust
emissions from hybrid vehicles. CO2 reduced from 140 g/km of CO2 to 108.4 g/km
of CO2 or from 44.8 to 67 g/km, depending on the driving mode [66]. There are other

24
E. Simpson et al.
positive beneﬁts. Laboratory tests show up to a 10–30% decrease in electrical energy
consumption from the electric/hybrid vehicle battery when RBS is utilised [67, 68].
RBS has also been shown to reduce braking friction, which as explained above
reduces environmental contamination [69] in addition to noise while increasing the
longevity of the component parts [68]. This is exactly the kind of innovative design
and operation that those who wish to work in EcoMechatronics need to envision
when designing for a sustainable future, precisely because it does not stop at merely
doing ‘less bad’.
Conclusions
The chapter explored the concept of sustainability and its associated challenges
within a mechatronics context. The primary aim was to promote critical thinking and
innovation within an EcoMechatronics framing, namely an application of mecha-
tronics that at its core works with nature rather than against it, to foster a better
environment.
The conceptual framing of EcoMechatronics is as an interdisciplinary engineering
subject that integrates knowledge and innovation across various engineering and
computing ﬁelds in order to positively contribute to the environment. Innovative
technology per se is neither a force for good nor bad. However, given that we are
all intricately linked and thrive, or fail, together, it makes sense that we work with
rather than against nature and use it as a source of inspiration, and a repository of
knowledge, to improve the world around us. In nature, everything is useful and there
is no material waste. Some forward-thinking innovators have begun to re-envision
resources in this way via what has become known as Cradle to Cradle thinking.
This concept challenges individuals and corporations to go beyond the mindset of
‘doing less bad’; for instance by producing less carbon emissions or solid waste and
invites them to reframe the problem in terms of ‘doing more good’. This reframing
encourages designs and practices that not only avoid waste altogether but actively
use the ‘waste’ that cannot be avoided to improve ecosystem function.
EcoMechatronics offers the conceptual framing needed to ask questions that will
lead engineers and corporate leaders to align their targets and measure product perfor-
mance against multiple socioenvironmental considerations with the end goal being
sustainable development. Key questions might include:
• How do we as a company engineer our products so that we do more good, rather
than less bad?
• What would such policies and designs look like in practice?
• What data do we need to collect and metrics do we need to invoke to ensure
that our product (or service) contributes to the environment rather than merely
mitigates our impacts?

Re-envisioning Innovation for Sustainability
25
• How does one go beyond environmental rhetoric and execute actionable plans
with clear milestones?
• To what extent can we upcycle rather than recycle or avoid landﬁll?
And ﬁnally, how and to what extent can mechatronics solutions advance sustain-
able innovation and support critical thinking for the beneﬁt of both present and future
generations?
Acknowledgements Kai Whiting acknowledges the ﬁnancial support by the Fonds de la Recherche
Scientiﬁque—FNRS under Grant No CR40001149. Luis Gabriel Carmona acknowledges the ﬁnan-
cial support of the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the
Marie Sklodowska-Curie grant agreement no. 101027892.
References
1. WCED (1987) Our common future. United Nations World Commission on Environment and
Development (WCED), Rio de Janeiro. https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/docume
nts/5987our-common-future.pdf. Last Accessed 11 Dec 2020
2. Yilmaz N, Atmanli A (2017) Sustainable alternative fuels in aviation. Energy 140:1378–1386
3. Ng W, Patil M, Datt A (2021) Hydrogen fuel cell and battery hybrid architecture for range
extension of electric VTOL (eVTOL) aircraft. J Am Helicopter Soc 66(1):1–13
4. Romeo G, Borello F, Correa G, Cestino E (2013) ENFICA-FC: design of transport aircraft
powered by fuel cell & ﬂight test of zero emission 2-seater aircraft powered by fuel cells fueled
by hydrogen. Intl J Hydrog Energy 38(1):469–479
5. Misra A (2018) Energy storage for electriﬁed aircraft: the need for better batteries, fuel cells,
and supercapacitors. IEEE Electriﬁcation Mag 6(3):54–61
6. Kramer D (2020) Hydrogen-powered aircraft may be getting a lift. Phys Today 73(12):27–31
7. Singh J, Sharma SK, Srivastava R (2019) AHP-Entropy based priority assessment of factors
to reduce aviation fuel consumption. Intl J Syst Assur Eng Manag 10(2):212–227
8. Brueckner J, Abreu C (2017) Airline fuel usage and carbon emissions: determining factors. J
Air Transp Manag 62:10–17
9. Jevons WS (1866) The coal question; an inquiry concerning the progress of the nation, and the
probable exhaustion of our coal-mines. Fortnightly 6(34):505–507
10. Lee JJ, Lukachko P, Waitz IA, Schafer A (2001) Historical and future trends in aircraft
performance, cost, and emissions. Annu Rev Energy Env 26(1):167–200
11. Sorrell S (2009) Jevons’ Paradox revisited: the evidence for backﬁre from improved energy
efﬁciency. Energy Policy 37(4):1456–1469
12. Ivanova D, Vita G, Wood R, Laussele C, Dumitru A, Krause K, Macsinga I, Hertwich EG (2018)
Carbon mitigation in domains of high consumer lock-in. Glob Environ Chang 52:117–130
13. Rodrigues B, Carmona LG, Whiting K, Sousa T (2021) Resource efﬁciency for UK cars from
1960 to 2015: from stocks and ﬂows to service provision. Environmental Development (in
review)
14. Rajala R, Hakanen E, Mattila J, Seppälä T, Westerlun M (2018) How do intelligent goods shape
closed-loop systems? Calif Manage Rev 60(3):20–44
15. Jun HB, Kiritsis D, Xirouchakis P (2007) Research issues on closed-loop PLM. Comput Ind
58(8–9):855–868
16. Tiefenbeck V, Tasic V, Schoeb S, Staake T (2013) Mechatronics to drive environmental sustain-
ability: measuring, visualizing and transforming consumer patterns on a large scale. In: IECON
2013 39th annual conference on IEEE industrial electronics society, pp 4768–4773

26
E. Simpson et al.
17. Valero A, Valero A (2019) Thermodynamic rarity and recyclability of raw materials in the
energy transition: the need for an in-spiral economy. Entropy 21(9):873
18. Di Maio F, Rem PC, Baldé K, Polder M (2017) Measuring resource efﬁciency and circular
economy: a market value approach. Resour Conserv Recycl 122:163–171
19. Ilic DD, Eriksson O, Ödlund L, Åberg M (2018) No zero burden assumption in a circular
economy. J Clean Prod 182:352–362
20. De Falco F, Di Pace E, Cocca M, Avella M (2019) The contribution of washing processes of
synthetic clothes to microplastic pollution. Sci Rep 9(1):1–11
21. Napper IE, Thompson RC (2016) Release of synthetic microplastic plastic ﬁbres from domestic
washing machines: effects of fabric type and washing conditions. Mar Pollut Bull 112(1–2):39–
45
22. Almroth BMC, Åström L, Roslund S, Petersson H, Johansson M, Persson NK (2018) Quan-
tifying shedding of synthetic ﬁbers from textiles; a source of microplastics released into the
environment. Environ Sci Pollut Res 25(2):1191–1199
23. Bradley D, Simpson E, Dawson D (2020) The challenge of complexity, COMEC occasional
paper no 13. www.comec.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/COMEC_Occasional_No13_
Challenging-Complexity.pdf?x24141. Last Accessed 6 Dec 2021
24. Legifrance (2020) Bulletins Ofﬁciels des conventions collectives. www.legifrance.gouv.fr/jorf/
id/JORFTEXT000041553759?r=yFtIxQRImr. Last Accessed 6 Dec 2021. (in French)
25. Legifrance(2020)BulletinsOfﬁcielsdesconventionscollectives.www.legifrance.gouv.fr/loda/
id/JORFTEXT000031044385/. Last Accessed 6 Dec 2021. (in French)
26. Mondaq
(2020)
Italy:
Samsung
and
Apple
were
ﬁned
for
‘Planned
Obsoles-
cence’. www.mondaq.com/italy/antitrust-eu-competition-/751640/samsung-and-apple-were-
ﬁned-for-planned-obsolescence. Last Accessed 6 Nov 2021
27. Lurie-Luke E (2014) Product and technology innovation: what can biomimicry inspire?
Biotechnol Adv 32(8):1494–1505
28. McDonough W, Braungart M (2010) Cradle to cradle: remaking the way we make things. North
Point Press
29. Wise C, Pawlyn M, Braungart M (2013) Eco-engineering: living in a materials world. Nature
494(7436):172–175
30. Carmona LG, Whiting K, Carrasco A, Sousa T, Domingos T (2017) Material services with
both eyes wide open. Sustainability 9(9):1508
31. McDonough W, Braungart M (1992) The hannover principles. William McDonough Architects.
mcdonough.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/03/HP-20_email_121023.pdf. Last Accessed 6
Dec 2021
32. Schneider M, Romer M, Tschudin M, Bolio H (2011) Sustainable cement production-present
and future. Cem Concr Res 41(7):642–650
33. Janssens-Maenhout G, Crippa M, Guizzardi D, Muntean M, Schaaf E, Dentener F, Bergamaschi
P, Pagliari V, Olivier JG, Peters JA, Van Aardenne JA (2019) EDGAR v4. 3.2 global Atlas of
the three major greenhouse gas emissions for the period 1970–2012. Earth Syst Sci Data
11(3):959–1002
34. Hasanbeigi A, Price L, Lin E (2012) Emerging energy-efﬁciency and CO2 emission-reduction
technologies for cement and concrete production: a technical review. Renew Sustain Energy
Rev 16(8):6220–6238
35. Gursel AP, Masanet E, Horvath A, Stadel A (2014) Life-cycle inventory analysis of concrete
production: a critical review. Cement Concr Compos 51:38–48
36. SebaibiN,BoutouilM(2020)Reducingenergyconsumptionofprefabricatedbuildingelements
and lowering the environmental impact of concrete. Eng Struct 213:110594
37. Van den Heede P, De Belie N (2012) Environmental impact and life cycle assessment (LCA) of
traditional and ‘green’ concretes: literature review and theoretical calculations. Cement Concr
Compos 34(4):431–442
38. Quattrone M, Angulo SC, John VM (2014) Energy and CO2 from high performance recycled
aggregate production. Resour, Conserv Rrecycling 90:21–33

Re-envisioning Innovation for Sustainability
27
39. Noguchi T, Kitagaki R, Tsujin M (2011) Minimizing environmental impact and maximizing
performance in concrete recycling. Struct Concr 12(1):36–46
40. Yang J, Tan FH, Tan A (2017) The ancient construction materials and methods: the Great Wall
of China in Jinshanling as a case study. J Constr Eng Proj Manag 7(1):37–49
41. ChouNN,YangKH,Barrett B,WuHM,LiuTY(2020)Sustainable characteristicsofreinforced
soil structures–from ancient great walls to modern GRS walls. Transp Infrastruct Geotechnol
7(3):445–460
42. Scotscape 2020 Flex MSE living wall. www.scotscape.co.uk/services/ﬂex-mse-vegetated-
green-wall#Building-With-Flex-MSE. Last Accessed 6 Dec 2021
43. Cislaghi A, Sala P, Borgonovo G, GandolﬁC, Bischetti GB (2021) Towards more sustainable
materials for geo-environmental engineering: the case of geogrids. Sustainability 13(5):2585
44. Oyenuga AA, Bhamidimarri R (2017) Upcycling ideas for sustainable construction and demo-
lition waste management: challenges, opportunities and boundaries. Intl J Innov Res Sci Eng
Technol 6(3):4066–4079
45. Mathews F (2011) Towards a deeper philosophy of biomimicry. Organ Environ 24(4):364–438
46. Heenan CB, Seymour RS (2011) Structural support, not insulation, is the primary driver for
avian cup-shaped nest design. Proc R Soc B Biol Sci 278(1720):2924–2929
47. Dicks H (2016) The philosophy of biomimicry. Philos Technol 29(3):223–243
48. Ren X (2008) Architecture and nation building in the age of globalization: construction of the
national stadium of Beijing for the 2008 Olympics. J Urban Aff 30(2):175–190
49. Rogers A, Yoon B, Malek C (2008) Beijing Olympic Stadium 2008 as biomimicry of
a bird’s nest. www.mcgill.ca/architecture/ﬁles/architecture/BiomimicrySSEFessay2007.pdf.
Last Accessed 6 Dec 2021
50. Yuhuan G, Tian M, Peng C (2010) Contributions of Green Olympics to ecological environ-
mental improvement in Beijing. In: 2010 International coneference on mechanic automation
and control engineering. IEEE, pp 2051–2054
51. Braungart M, McDonough W, Bollinger A (2007) Cradle-to-cradle design: creating healthy
emissions–a strategy for eco-effective product and system design. J Clean Prod 15(13–
14):1337–1348
52. Curran MA (2008) Development of life cycle assessment methodology: a focus on
co-product allocation. https://repub.eur.nl/pub/12679/PhD%20Thesis_Curran_May%202008.
pdf. Last Accessed 6 Dec 2021
53. Anielski M, Wilson J (2010) Environmental footprinting for agriculture in alberta: litera-
ture review and analysis, environmental stewardship division of alberta agriculture and rural
development. https://www1.agric.gov.ab.ca/$Department/deptdocs.nsf/ba3468a2a8681f6987
2569d60073fde1/0cd8b859692799e68725781c00674682/$FILE/Lit_Review.pdf. Accessed 4
June 2021
54. Stripple H, Erlandsson M (2004) Methods and possibilities for application of life cycle assess-
ment in strategic environmental assessment of transport infrastructures. www.ivl.se/download/
18.34244ba71728fcb3f3f6f6/1591704430908/B1661.pdf. Last Accessed 6 Dec 2021
55. Achten W, Barbeau-Baril J, Barros Telles Do Carmo B, Bolt P, Chandola V, Corona Bellostas
B, Dadhish Y, Di Eusanio M, Di Cesare S, Di Noi C, Eisfeldt F (2020) Guidelines for social life
cycle assessment of products and organizations. In: Guidelines for social life cycle assessment
of products and organizations, p 138
56. Kopacek P, Ceccharelli M, Hajrizi E, Stapleton L (2006) Mechatronics education and inter-
national stability: the development of university-level education programmes in advanced
engineering in Kosovo. IFAC Proc 39(23):1–7
57. Frede D, Khodabakhshian M, Malmquist D (2010) A state-of-the-art survey on vehicular
mechatronics focusing on by-wire systems. www.diva-portal.org/smash/get/diva2:460614/
FULLTEXT01.pdf. Last Accessed 6 Dec 2021
58. Ribbens WB (20120) Understanding automotive electronics, 7th edn. Waltham, Butterworth-
Heinemann
59. Chiabert P, D’Antonio G, Inoyatkhodjaev J, Lombardi F, Ruffa S (2015) Improvement of
powertrain mechatronics systems for lean automotive manufacturing. Procedia Cirp 33:53–58

28
E. Simpson et al.
60. Wellstead PE (1997) Analysis and redesign of an antilock brake system controller. IEEE Proc
Control Theory Appl 144(5):413–426
61. Goodall RM, Kortüm W (2002) Mechatronic developments for railway vehicles of the future.
Control Eng Pract 10(8):887–898
62. MoubarakJC,OuelletP,PlourdeD(2018)Innovativehybridbrakingsystemengineeringreport.
https://www.escholarship.mcgill.ca/downloads/0v838495q. Last Accessed 6 Dec 2021
63. US Environmental Protection Agency (2015) Memorandum of understanding on copper miti-
gation in watershed and waterways (United States). www.epa.gov/npdes/memorandum-unders
tanding-copper-mitigation-watershed-and-waterways. Last Accessed 6 Dec 2021
64. Moriarty P, Honnery D (2010) Rise and fall of the carbon civilisation: resolving global
environmental and resource problems. Springer, London
65. Chau KT (2014) Pure electric vehicles. In: Alternative fuels and advanced vehicle technologies
for improved environmental performance, pp 655–684. Woodhead Publishing
66. Clarke P, Muneer T, Cullinane K (2010) Cutting vehicle emissions with regenerative braking.
Transp Res Part D Transp Environ 15(3):160–167
67. Bielaczyc P, Sala R, Meinicke T (2021) Analysis of technical capabilities methodology and
test results of a light-commercial vehicle conversion to battery electric powertrain. Energies
14(4):1119
68. Wager G, Whale J, Braunl T (2018) Performance evaluation of regenerative braking systems.
Proc IMechE Part D J Automob Eng 232(10):1414–1427
69. Adamiec E, Jarosz-Krzemi´nska E, Wieszała R (2016) Heavy metals from non-exhaust vehicle
emissions in urban and motorway road dusts. Environ Monit Assess 188(6):1–11

Mechatronic Applications in Respect
of Sustainability and Climate Change
Brendan McGlynn
Abstract Sustainability and climate change are closely interlinked. Tipping points
in climate change that were identiﬁed some 20 years ago have now been surpassed.
Dramatic change is now inevitable. The responsibility for reducing the effects of
climate change now lies with the world population itself and how they press for
change at the national level. Sea levels are predicted to rise by up to 3 m by 2030
irrespective of climate change mitigating actions now being considered. Widespread
weather changes are also now inevitable and are in progress. New tipping points are
identiﬁed and will be upon us inside the next 15 years. All these changes herald crop
failures, wildﬁres, land erosion, more severe winds and rainfall coupled with drought
in other areas. Sustainability is under attack from many directions—famine, popula-
tion migration, loss of employment, disease, transport and housing. EcoMechatronics
offers solutions in mitigating climate change and its onward instability proﬁle to
disaster and has a strong role to play in inhibiting and reversing climate degradation.
This macro approach to micro data points delivers data on land use and soil condi-
tion, crop health plus security. On the micro side, a wide range of Internet of Things
(IoT) physical sensors is now available to support the smaller granularity world
that improves modern lifestyles, sustainability and environments. These new and
advanced sensors support the plans to improve lifestyle sustainability and mitigate
against climate change. This chapter intends to show the beneﬁcial effects that (a)
the emergence of low cost, miniaturized sensors coupled with embedded processing
and artiﬁcial intelligence delivers to some of the leading topics in sustainability and
climate change, (b) the engineering and chemical advancements in renewable power,
power storage, mobility power and (c) the removal of CO2 from the atmosphere by
substitution or active removal.
B. McGlynn (B)
Scorpion Networks Ltd, Kildare, Ireland
e-mail: bmcglynn@scorpionnetworks.com
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
P. Hehenberger et al. (eds.), EcoMechatronics,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-07555-1_3
29

30
B. McGlynn
Introduction
Climate change and sustainability have been in relative equilibrium since the end of
the last Ice Age. Climate order was restored by nature over the past 10,000 years (The
Holocene). The climate is now in a disorderly state having passed the equilibrium
and degraded to the ﬁrst tipping point of rapid change in recent years. To get back
to Holocene equilibrium requires major investment and global commitment. It is
inevitable that the world will degrade towards the next equilibrium point incurring
major climate and sustainability failures in the process. International organisations
and governments have not truly invested in the problem. In part, this may be because
vested interests and some governments are negating the risks which are partially
due to the climate change and sustainability problems not being irrevocable stated.
This chapter outlines a process within EcoMechatronics that illustrates the current
degrading situation and sets out milestones of equilibrium degradation until effective
action reverses trends.
The Nobel Prize Summit Our Planet, Our Future held in April 2021 [1] brought
together Nobel Prize laureates, scientists, policymakers, business leaders, and youth
leaders to explore the question:
What can be achieved in this decade to put the world on a path to a more sustainable, more
prosperous future for all of humanity?
The science sessions clariﬁed the new reality of the global sustainability chal-
lenges based on multiple lines of evidence to summarise the current state of knowl-
edge, acknowledging that society and nature are deeply intertwined and embedded
in the biosphere. The summit was hosted by the Nobel Foundation and organised by
the US National Academy of Sciences (NAS) in partnership with the Potsdam Insti-
tute for Climate Impact Research and the Stockholm Resilience Centre and Beiger
Institute [2]. The science sessions and seminars by Prof. Brian Walker of CSIRO
Sustainability Ecosystems, Australia also provide a useful insight [3] into the roles
of sustainability and resilience as paramount factors in climate change. Improve-
ments in lifestyle sustainability and climate may then be founded on three pillars as
follows:
• Technology Investment
Mitigationofblockingtechnologyacrossawiderangeofdisciplinesadvancesrapidly
with the ever-increasing speed of development [4]. These advances deliver solutions
for today’s problems and improve prospects for our planet and its population. Sustain-
ability is not one separate technology silo but is integrally connected with climate
change and other silos. This chapter looks at the complex non-intuitive connective
links between these silo domains.
• Investment
In its correct form, investment is critical in supporting technological advances.
Government and private investment in the academic world to support climate change

Mechatronic Applications in Respect …
31
R&D is not effective per se, and investment is also required to take the advances
in R&D out into industry, and the market. The USA is a prime example of how
the investment may be positively applied to R&D because of the private funding
nature of its venture capital market. When governments are the prime investment
vehicle using tax-based investment or grants, the outcomes suit the academic world
far better than the enterprise world. History demonstrates clearly that it is the small
enterprises that make the big advances [5, 6], but these enterprises are the least
supported by governments. The corporate world is focussed on next quarter’s results
and proﬁts. Governments are focussed on the next national budget and their strategies
for re-election.
Centralised governments can propose a 20–50-year economic plan and work
accordingly, but are less concerned with more immediate climate Change issues
and quality of life. Until a bottom-up pressure from the general population emerges,
governments will not react to climate change in a timely manner.
Without important organisations such as the Nobel Prize Seminars, the Paris
Accord and the Club of Rome, enabling a bottom-up pressure will be an insufﬁcient
investment to prevent the climate from reaching the next tipping point. The ﬁrst
tipping point probably has been recently passed (Antarctic West Ice Sheet). Some
scientists disagree with the global tipping point argument and say it is speculation.
Others, for instance, Timothy Lenton, Professor of Climate Change and Earth
System Science at the University of Exeter in the UK, argue that, despite the
uncertainty, the stakes are so high that it is too risky to bet against. They say ‘to
err on the side of danger is not a responsible option’, and call for an international
emergency response [7].
• Mitigation of Blocking
This will become an essential component of making substantial progress across
climate change and sustainability. The question then becomes ‘who are the blockers’?
The Silicon Valley model enables those with leading-edge research and development
across technology and processes to be properly funded via venture capital. This
avenue to investment is fuelled by the potential of the population to save funds and
make investments. This is a low tax strategy.
In contrast within the European Union with its high tax culture, the enterprising
population have fewer means to fund research and development. Funding is managed
by governments and civil servants who operate directly opposite to the Silicon
Valley model. Offering limited funding via 50–80% grants to enterprises when the
governments get some 50% + back in taxes is a blocking mechanism.
Changing the blocking aspects of government policy is a daunting task but must
be engaged with if lifestyle, climate change and sustainability action plans are to
reach the goals as now set out by the UN, USA, Canada, the EU and to a smaller
extent other global players. The COVID-19 actions at a global level illustrate the
positive and negative actions that are embedded in the current global economy.
One could describe the global players involved as the good, the bad and the
ugly. When populations were in immediate danger, investment ﬂowed, governments
cooperated, the corporate world set aside its asset interests for a short time and

32
B. McGlynn
vaccine solutions were found. Climate change does not present immediate danger
to many governments, but time has run out and climate change disasters are at their
initiationstages.Thebottom-upwaveforchangeatagloballevelhasbegunwithinthe
youth and the informed. EcoMechatronics will be one of the prime delivery paths to
reversing the trends and stopping the planet from reaching future degradation tipping
points.
The climate change and sustainability curves in the base space cluster can be
linked to other domain space curves of secondary climate change clusters [8]. In this
way, each point on the base curve has a complex function linking it to a point on
any one of the secondary climate change curves, thereby causing inﬂuences on the
base curve parameters and shape (Fig. 1). This use of conformal geometric algebra
enables a wider population audience to see exactly what the causes and effects are
[9].This may be the key to having the general population understand, in a graphical
way, what the consequence of current inaction holds.
It also holds the key to more complex modelling. Climate will drive any ecosystem
towards equilibrium while further climate change will degrade the system unless
recovery investment is applied. This is the ﬁrst failure of governments and industry.
Once a tipping point is reached, substantial investment can reverse the strong trend
beyond the tipping point and back to equilibrium (X). Ineffective or no investment
leads to a new and degraded equilibrium (Y). These cycles of instability and degra-
dation of one system are intricately linked to other systems and feedback loops. The
consequence of ineffective or no-action is ecosystem collapse to a degraded system
from which recovery is substantially more difﬁcult in the short to medium term of
10–100 years.
 
Fig. 1 Interaction of multiple climate change curves

Mechatronic Applications in Respect …
33
The Technology of Sustainability
The path for technology has only in the past 7 years received its due focus as an
important contributor to sustainability and climate change [10]. Major aspects of
this are renewable energy, recycling technology, food production efﬁciency and the
broad range of sensors that support these aspects at a granular level that can cover
the planet’s surface. Renewable energy is mainly seen as solar and wind. There are
important contributions from hydro and pump storage which requires off-peak power
and biomass. Future advances in nuclear fusion, expected within 30 years, will solve
the base-load issue of power grids.
The variability of wind and solar power generation is a current block to the full
replacement of the carbon cycle in coal, gas and oil-ﬁred power stations. Energy
storage technologies solve the block on eliminating fossil fuel power generation and
in the past 5 years there have been major advances in the use of Li, LiP and LiFe
battery designs, and recent new designs from R&D use hot liquid metals such as
CaSb (calcium-antimony) and others that reduce the cost of Li-based batteries by
67% [11] and deliver enhanced features of fast charging and power delivery coupled
to long life. These new batteries can support grid-level MW power storage. A recent
advance in CaSb-type batteries removes the rare earth materials from the battery and
are being deployed at the MW level in power grids. The geopolitical problems of
Lithium supply can now be resolved due to the wide availability of both calcium
and antimony across the planet. This battery revolution enables variable power from
renewables to replace base loads power stations, enables a far more ﬂexible power
grid and facilitates the widespread adoption of the electric vehicle and fast home
charging.
All these advances require AI in power supply management, sensors for all aspects
of weather, new composite materials for new types of wind turbines, more granular
solar and wind generation sites at local levels and the ability to locate and mine the
antimony for MW levels at a global level of power storage. This is EcoMechatronics
at its best. There is strong evidence that a bottom-up wave of innovation has left
governments behind in the sustainability aspects of power.
Australia has encouraged this bottom-up approach. However, the EU continues
to inhibit the renewable power strategy by using tax routes that offer no real
incentives. Other nations have varying levels of government support between these
two outlying strategies. Mechatronics is at the forefront of providing the required
range of solutions to enable on-site power storage across the power grids, MW
capacities at generation sites and multi-kilowatt capacities at the enterprise or home
sites. This local power can fully charge an EV in under 15 min at home or at an
EV charge station, thereby removing the primary range anxiety barrier to EVs. This
locally stored power can also be extracted by the power grid to cover peaks but
requires investment in edge-based AI.
Recycling materials carries substantial beneﬁt when the technology involved is
focussed on the initial product and the post-ﬁrst life use by adaption, re-use and
material disassembly coupled to re-assembly. Material resources are ﬁnite and having

34
B. McGlynn
raw materials scarce due to political manipulations or depletion of natural resources
raises the cost of these materials. A current case in point is Lithium as used in
modern batteries. Lithium deposits on the Earth are very ﬁnite with one country
holding over 70% of the current global supply. Geo-political issues now dominate
this market. Mechatronics is now being applied successfully through material and
electronic developments to bypass the lack of resources and replace Lithium with
other materials easily sourced globally and new R&D to divert the battery market
in a new sustainable direction. It is the enterprise that leads this ﬁeld of moving to
lower costing and easily obtained materials with positive consequences that reduce
carbon emissions from vehicles and incorporates greater efﬁciency into power grids.
The world population is increasing leading to food supply stresses. Concurrently,
climate change is disrupting food-producing lands in equatorial regions and altering
the growing seasons in temperate climates. Mechatronics can play an important role
in mitigating the effects of supply stress and climate consequences using satellite-
based data, ground-level sensors (low-cost Internet of Things devices) and the data
networktogathertheinformationandgenerateactionstosupportfoodproduction.By
linking sustainability and climate change through a wide range of technical solutions
food production is going to deliver safer food, more food and reverse climate change
effects such as global warming. Aspects of this positive process will be blocked by
corporations and governments who have conﬂicting interests. It will fall to enterprise
to overcome blockers and release the positive outcomes so desperately needed by
large swathes of the global market (Fig. 2).
UNDERFUNDED
SLOW & INADEQUAT E
PRIMARY DRIVING FORCE
BLO C KING
GLO BAL FO RCE
RISING, BUT TOO LATE FOR 
FIRST TIPPING POINT
Top-Down 
Governance
Government
Investment
Global
Stewardship
Institutional
Investment
Bo ttom-Up
Forces
Environment
Banks
Private
Invest ment
Standard 
Banking
Resilient
Investment
PPP
MECHATRONIC 
TECHNOLOGY FOR 
SUSTAINABILITY & 
CLIMATE CHANGE
ACADEMIC
ENTERPRISE
Fig. 2 Global reactions to climate change investment

Mechatronic Applications in Respect …
35
Connectivity Web
Mechatronics technology is a core pillar for dealing with climate change and sustain-
ability. It can deliver the solutions required across the full range of cause and effect,
but it is only half the solution to limit climate change and raise sustainability. Bottom-
up forces, which are actors of change that can trigger good investment strategies, as
experienced in the younger generations have raised the impetus to effect change and
re-think sustainability though the funding process remains fragmented and needs to
be simpliﬁed. Governments have proven themselves to be unable to provide leader-
ship or channel the investments. The conclusions drawn from Fig. 2 are that all actors
need to establish a global stewardship domain that prevents investment blocking, sets
targets to counter further tipping points and channels global investment to the most
effective channels for academia and enterprise. The paths in the diagram need to
be simpliﬁed and strengthened. The cost of inaction produces complex feedback
loops in multiple eco-environments with dangerous results for the global population.
Experts now agree that we have passed the ﬁrst climate tipping point of Antarctic
Ice Sheet melt and Atlantic Gulf Stream reduction. We must now prevent the next
and consequentially more disruptive cascaded tipping point series.
EcoMechatronics—Technology of Climate Change
The application of all arms of mechatronics has already resulted in some progress on
climate change, though EcoMechatronics remains hindered by a lack of investment
in its core technologies and policy plans. However, the pace of climate action is
insufﬁcient to date and the ﬁrst major tipping point has been passed. The Paris
Climate Accord and COP process has highlighted a prevalence of talking and not
doing. There is a wide expert body acknowledgement [1] that the world must expect
consequences derived from passing the 1.5 °C target tipping point. The planet is not
prepared for this shock (Figs. 3 and 4).
Power Generation
Advanced Electronics and Battery Chemistry
It is estimated that by 2050, 86% of electrical energy will be from renewables [13].
One of the most important elements of this process is power generation and usage.
Previous means of generating power such as coal, oil and gas will be greatly reduced
within 10 years. Carbon taxes may well aid this process but in the main it will be
driven by the climate change ambitions of governments and their populations seeking
attractive alternative generating solutions. Large-scale hydro-generating solutions

36
B. McGlynn
Fig. 3 CO2 and climate temperature rise trajectories [12]
NET ZERO EXTERNAL BARRIERS
ENTERPRISE INTERNAL BARRIERS
POLICY 
• Major policy changes not yet applied to boost 
net zero plans. 
• Government are taking a wait and see 
approach. 
• No global carbon value yet set. 
MARKET 
• Limited low carbon oﬀers on open market. 
• Public awareness remains confused. 
INVESTMENT 
• The USA model is too short term 
• New pathways that bypass government 
inacƟon are needed. 
• A viable return on investment over periods of 
up to 30 years is required free from naƟonal 
interference. 
• May be crypto-currency aligned. 
TECHNOLOGY 
• Energy technology is advancing and needs 
investment. 
• Carbon sequestraƟon is recently emerging. 
• When implemented via bio-organism path is 
well known and increasingly applied. 
• Technology of sustainability and resilience is 
only now beginning. 
OWNING A NET ZERO PLAN
• Middle management is reluctant to make 
changes required. 
• Lack of employees training at all levels. 
• Quarterly based corporate plans are a 
mismatch for net zero implementaƟon. 
LEADERSHIP SHORTFALL 
• Few of the global large enterprises have a 
coherent policy that matches global 
iniƟaƟves such as COP and the Paris Accord. 
• Academic leaders are clear with their 
message on Tipping Point and consequences. 
• Carbon taxes by governments will not 
advance net zero plan by much. 
ALIGN CLIMATE & SUSTAINABILITY PLANS 
• Enterprises that embrace net zero plans are 
exposed to compeƟƟve disadvantages. 
• The World Trade OrganisaƟon and major 
poliƟcal blocks must ensure that no 
advantages pass to errant behaviour. 
• A global penalty arrangement that is 
meaningful and impacƞul must be organised. 
• Market forces are the opƟmum control tool 
to use. 
CLEAR TARGETS & CONSEQUENCES 
• Long term targets for the next 50 years are 
required with Tipping Points clearly deﬁned. 
Fig. 4 Barriers to progress on climate change

Mechatronic Applications in Respect …
37
Fig. 5 Grid or renewable power ﬂow to home batteries
are delivering carbon-free power but at the cost of disruption to land use and major
earthworks. Hydro is an effective power solution for long-term base loads in some
countries. However, the opportunity is limited to terrain proﬁles and the sufﬁciency
of water ﬂow (Fig. 5).
The nuclear industry has a chequered history on safety, and the economic cases
for such power stations are often concealed by governments. Storage of radioactive
materialsisnotnecessarilypresentedtothepublicintrueeconomictermswheresome
material by-products have radiating lives of 1000s of years. Relatively new power
technologies that are becoming common with technological advances progressing
rapidly include solar, wind, small hydro and biogas. Nuclear fusion is an estimated
30 years away from being economically viable but carries solutions and advances
that nuclear ﬁssion cannot deliver.
Noncarbon-related power generation lowers CO2 from the atmosphere via carbon
sequestration, as an enterprise either by natural processes or hybrid solutions that
use minimum carbon cycle work. This includes re-afforestation, protection of
wetlands, seagrass planting and a move from fossil-fuelled heating to electric and
electrical-powered sequestration. Reverse effects must be identiﬁed and countered.
For instance, a by-product of fossil fuel use is SO2 in the upper atmosphere which
reﬂects sunlight. Removing fossil fuels from use also removes SO2 and allows more
heat onto the planet’s surface. Side effects like this need to be accounted for in the
predictions on climate change.
Green Power
Wind—The application of new generator and turbine designs
Mechatronics has been instrumental in the technological advances of wind power
generation. The combined resources of mechanical, electrical, chemical and compu-
tational assets have delivered viable solutions with further advances on the horizon.
Many engineering skills came together to design the common three-bladed high-
tower wind turbines with power capacities ranging from 0.5 to 10 MW. Mechanical
engineering drove the aerofoil designs, chemical engineering drove the move to
composite materials for aerofoils, electrical engineering drove the development of

38
B. McGlynn
more efﬁcient generators, power converters and high magnetic ﬁeld materials while
new computational tools such as computational ﬂuid dynamics (CFD) enabled the
virtual testing of complex wind ﬁelds before costly fabrication. The power available,
as per the formula, depends on air density, performance coefﬁcient (tip speed, pitch
angle), rotor surface area and the cube of the wind speed (Eq. 1).
pw = ρ · cp · (λ · δ)
2
· Ar · V 3
w
(1)
Computational ﬂuid dynamics (CFD) tools indicate an advance in design that
enables non-pylon/mast solutions with reduced capital expenditure and more accept-
able conditions to nearby residents in the range of 500 kW–2 MW capacity. This trend
supports the greening of electrical power and local ownership (smaller investors).
However, the corporate inﬂuence of the power grids will need to be balanced against
the interests of smaller more local ownership populations.
Solar
Inthecombinedmechatronicdomainsofchemistry,quantumphysicsandelectronics,
the efﬁciency of solar panels has increased slowly over the past 20 years and now
approaches 35% using hybrid organic–inorganic lead or tin halide-based material, as
the light-harvesting active layer (Perovskite). Panels of 1 m2 with 35% efﬁciency will
produce 273 kWh/year based on average solar irradiance (Fig. 6). Low latitude sites
in strong sunshine climates can generate 540 kWh/yr, while northern Europe sites can
produce only 140 kWh/yr. This is coupled with efﬁciency improvements in the power
inverter technologies using MOSFETs to replace silicon IGBT-based solutions with
99% inverter efﬁciency as possible. The solar power generated varies by the latitude
of the site, the summer–winter sun height above the horizon, weather and the angle
Photovoltaic 
panels
DC power
Inverter
DC/AC inverter
Data
Local & remote 
monitoring
AC power
Energy storage
DC Power
DC Power
Storage
DC energy 
storage
AC coupled 
energy 
storage
DC/DC 
buck-boost
DC/AC 
converter
AC power
Fig. 6 Solar power generation

Mechatronic Applications in Respect …
39
of the solar panel. This leads to a very variable renewable power in many global
locations and dictates that a battery is required in the solution. Major improvements
in battery efﬁciency and capacity have recently taken place and continue to improve
on capacity, cost and use of easily sourced materials. CaSb and other new batteries
open the potential for charging EV at home in 15 min for a 500 km range with more
progress to come. This breakthrough will ensure the faster uptake of EVs with fast
charging at home or on the road, thereby competing with fossil-fuelled vehicles. The
effect on CO2 emissions indicates that on average there will be a global reduction of
20% by eliminating much of the fossil-fuelled road vehicles.
Inverters (DC to AC) are a key component to bridge from power storage to power
usage (microinverters for residential, single phase for residential and commercial
and three phases for commercial and utilities). Power storage may be derived from
solar (DC), wind (AC), pump storage (AC) or battery (DC). The battery removes
the disadvantage of variable renewable power and capacities range from 200 kW
(typical home) to MW (typical multiple MW storage for power networks). Tesla has
launched the battery wall for homes which stores power from a variety of sources.
Lithium, however, has a chequered history in ﬁre dangers while the new hot metal
batteries such as CaSb have no ﬁre danger and can be mounted outside the home
with as much capacity as is required for the home and EV charging [11, 14].
Hydrogen
Hydrogen as a transport fuel is another green fuel to replace fossil fuels. However,
many hydrogen-producing plants use fossil fuel-derived power to generate hydrogen.
Only when hydrogen is produced by renewable energy can this type of fuel be
classiﬁed as green and renewable and the variable energy-producing solutions of
solar and wind can usefully use excess power to generate hydrogen. Hydrogen needs
to be stored with care and requires specialised distribution for vehicle use.
The emerging hot metal batteries are likely to be more attractive as a storage
solution at the point of distribution. In this case, the power grid delivers the EV power
to the distribution sites (re-charging stations) along with many other applications of
electrical power. Current progress in hot metal batteries indicates 2 MW type static
storage units of standard transport container size, and fast recharging capability for
transport (trucks, cars, trains, shipping and short-haul aircraft), where EV battery
tilting becomes a non-issue. Such hot metal batteries [11] will be deployed in the
transport solutions themselves. These changes now under trial will negate the current
hydrogen fuel trends.
Carbon sequestration—The application of bioremediation and technology
The Earth has been capturing carbon for some 2 billion years. In this way, the excess
CO2 in the atmosphere has been removed by the sea and plant life. This balance
between the solar heating effect of CO2 and runaway greenhouse effects has been
naturally balanced (Fig. 7). If this had gone awry, then Earth may easily become
Venus-like with no surface water and terrain temperatures of about 700 °C. Man has
injected additional CO2 into the Earth’s atmosphere causing temperature increase
and consequent climate change.

40
B. McGlynn
Combustion
CO2
Scrubbing
NH4HCO3
NH2 + H2O
NH4HCO3
CO2
CO2 to air
Decompose
Fertiliser 
application
Fossil 
fuel
Biomass
[CH2O]x
CaCO3
HCO3
Soil
Percolates 
down
Underground 
aquifer
Neutralised by alkaline
(i.e. Ca**)
Biomass formation
Nitrogen for NH4
+
Fossilise
Stable carbon 
compound for 
permanent 
sequestration
CO2 capture
Short term 
CO2 storage
Long term 
CO2 storage
Fig. 7 Pathways to carbon sequestration [15, 16]
These changes may not be fully caused by man’s activity and other cyclical natural
effects may be involved. It now becomes one of the most important tasks of man to
remove CO2 from the atmosphere or suffer swings in the climate that have not been
experienced since before the last Ice Age that ended 12,000 years ago or the earlier
more severe climatic conditions of hothouse/warm house/snowball Earth.
Forests have been a major carbon sink when left to mature, decay and re-generate
but burning forests breaks the cyclic sequestration and releases stored carbon into
the atmosphere. The same applies to general vegetation on land and sea, in particular
wetlands that generate peat, seagrass and kelp. Planting forests of coniferous trees
where original forests were deciduous is a temporary solution. Coniferous forest is
appropriate from temperate climates up to the tree line of the Arctic Circle but not
at lower latitudes. Coniferous forests cause acidic conditions in the earth, rivers and
streams.1
Technology, driven by excess electrical power, can scrub CO2 directly from the
atmosphere using an inefﬁcient process requiring energy input—refer to the diagram
below. The mechatronics approach of combining electrical, chemical, and mechan-
ical systems has produced such solutions. However, it is likely, as populations grow,
that excess electrical power will not be spare capacity in the future. One important
step to take is to stop the clearing of forests in South America and Southeast Asia.
1 The Sequoia tree is the most efﬁcient carbon storage tree and can live for hundreds of years. The
author has established a nursery based on cloning and seeds for general distribution.

Mechatronic Applications in Respect …
41
The Global Population Needs Access to Veriﬁed Data
Satellite data and climate specialists can clearly present the problem that local
works can damage global populations, however, politically orchestrated meetings
and soundbites coupled with empty promises have left the global population scep-
tical. The information derived from the multi-source collected and audited data needs
to be loaded into an EcoMechatronics engine free from political interference and false
narrative. The global community, both young and old, must have conﬁdence in an
EcoMechatronics solution that is controlled by the many and not by the few. This may
be sufﬁcient to stop further climate destruction beyond the tipping points and present
viable and enforceable options. This EcoMechatronics engine must have multiple
segments with sufﬁcient power, independent of governments, to identify the sources
of the CO2 and methane global metric tons/year emission problem, present the solu-
tions and penalise those running counter to the interests of the global population.
While EcoMechatronics can deliver the engineering, information technology and
artiﬁcial intelligence solutions for such an engine, there is currently no organisation
at a global level to carry out the task. A few have ambitions to be one such, but they
must be free of political interference. COP26 highlighted the actions of the fossil
fuel lobbyists in reducing the effectiveness of clear remedial solutions. The world
needs a climate tzar unencumbered by narrow government restrictions. COP26 may
have identiﬁed such individuals as one positive outcome.
The Strategy of Mitigating Blocking—How
EcoMechatronics Can Affect Political and Civil Change
Much of the important developments and research in developed economies emerge
from small enterprises and academic spin-out companies. The R&D efforts in large
corporations are often conﬁned by accounting principles (quarterly results etc.) and
a lack of foresight resulting in slow solution-oriented progress. The small enterprise
has no such limitations except being blocked by funding issues. Once a progressive
concept emerges from a small enterprise, a category of ﬁrst stage investors may
emerge by presenting limited funding support in the knowledge that the small enter-
prise will need second stage funding. It is at this stage that small enterprise owners are
diluted to give effective control to ﬁrst and second stage investors. The scene is then
set for early investors to sell successful solutions to larger corporations for the proﬁt
of the investors. The original small enterprise owners are often diluted to near zero
in this mix. Mechatronics can offer a solution to this degradation of new solutions.
Government departments managed by civil servants will fund the early investors
but rarely the small enterprise itself to a meaningful level. The same government
departments will, however, invest heavily in the corporate world to produce more
employment and hence increase tax revenue.

42
B. McGlynn
Mechatronics is often seen as a technology-linked domain. If the best climate
changeandmitigationideascomingfromacademicspinoutsandsmallenterprisesare
to mature for the beneﬁt of those taking the risks and the world, the impetus for these
new technologies is blocked to varying degrees by being excluded from venture and
other capital funding. Crowdfunding may be partially effective in resolving the lack
of venture capital but requires better regulation and encouragement. A globally-based
Mechatronics domain that is crowdfunded can be established. This will require well-
regulated computerised systems, global standards and ethics engine, an accounting
engine that exists outside of government interference but is transparent to all and
ownership by those investing as enterprise owners and subsequent investors. In
this way, the best solutions pertaining to sustainability and climate change can be
shepherded to maturity.
Blockchaining[17]offersapartialsolutioninthatawiderspreadofearlyinvestors
is managed by enterprise-seeking funding. The investment is private, secure and
global. Governments, banking and venture capital do not like block chaining because
it can be fully independent and operated at a low cost. Those blocking progress in
climate change technologies and sustainability are concerned by the in-depth and
global reach that may in the future bypass the current vested interests in the use
of fossil fuels. Whatever its faults, blockchain technology can manage the early
investment for the greater global good. There are dangers in the globalisation of
block chaining for the funding of new EcoMechatronics solutions, but the beneﬁts of
bypassing government and large corporate blocking far outweigh the disadvantages.
The Mechatronics of Food Supply
Climate changes that affect food production are already happening as the ﬁrst tipping
point is passed. This is derived from water shortage, heat, pest infestations, conﬂict
because of water and food shortages, sea-level rises, ﬂoods and increasingly severe
storms frequencies. A small percentage of farmed land is now compromised in equa-
torial regions and has become unsustainable. Mass migration of populations is the
direct consequence, which in turn diminishes the food and the water safety buffer
of populations living north and south of the equatorial regions. Mechatronics can
deliver some of the solutions to this expanding problem, but global government poli-
cies are needed to deliver real solutions to reverse the trend. It remains possible that a
global entity independent of governments and having an arsenal of EcoMechatronic
solutions can enforce remedial actions and reverse the climate change trajectory.
Sustainability follows remedial actions. The UN is not equipped to ﬁll this global
role because it is politically constrained.
Palm oil is one such issue. Rain forests in Brazil and Southeast Asia are being
destroyed to make room for palm oil trees. Carbon sequestration is greatly reduced
and ﬁres are used to clear the land to inject CO2 into the atmosphere. Palm oil itself
remains a suspect food ingredient. However, corporate proﬁts drive this process.
Large-scale cattle breeding contributes CO2 and methane to the atmosphere. Efforts

Mechatronic Applications in Respect …
43
to replace real meat and dairy products with synthetic alternatives are being made
at a global level. Human health is at stake here and the long-term effects of these
changes are undetermined. Compromises need to be made on the above and similar
issues globally. This requires an independent global authority to manage the changes
and compromises. A UN-type structure founded in science and EcoMechatronics
with global government support is required, but as COP26 clearly demonstrated, this
authority needs to be led by the world’s most climate change affected countries and
global youth equipped with accurate forecast tools relating to tipping points.
Satellite-based ground surveillance delivers data on crop health, surface miner-
alisation, pest infestation, crop water content, areas under different crops, forest
expansion or depletion, nearshore conditions of seaweed, seagrass and coral reefs.
However, the NASA Earth Observing System (in low earth orbit (LEO)) at 99-
min interval, is too course to give good ground condition pixilation. An LEO system
based on a Rosae-type constellation of 24+ satellites [18] using interferometry which
interrogates 90% of the Earth’s surface at 1 m2 resolution has been proven to work
mathematically, but funding is not available. This type of approach is likely to be the
future of the Earth observation. Coupling the satellite data to ground sensors veriﬁes
the satellite data and augments it. AI can then analyse the data from all sources to
give the following:
• Farming advice and forecasts, crop condition reports, water management.
• Global estimates of crop production per region.
• Location advice on suitable crop production areas as the climate changes.
• Food shortage predictions per region as an early warning of potential famine.
Food safety ensures less waste coupled with the protection of the food chain.
Sections of EcoMechatronics are being applied in this respect. Next-generation
sequencing is applied to ensure safety across complex supply chains with block
chaining IT and AI supporting the protection of the food chain from farmer to fork.
Improved management and safety contribute to less pollution and waste and the
potential to reduce food shortages in regions experiencing the worst of climate
change [19].
The Mechatronics of General Transportation
and Batteries—Transportation Contributes an Estimated
32% to CO2 Emissions: Technology Can Stop Most of This
Technology advances offer alternatives to the use of fossil fuels for transportation.
The recent arrival of affordable e-cars (EV) has delivered the ﬁrst step in moving
the personal transport and some of the public transport to electrical drive. Tesla
advances in electrical motors and drive trains, which indicates the potential for further
advancements. The advances in battery technology currently enable affordable EVs
to have a range of up to 400 km, based on Li-type battery material. More recent

44
B. McGlynn
advances, about to emerge from R&D, facilitate up to 600 km on one charge with
a 10-min quick charge, using battery material such as CaSb already referred to and
other materials that are common and cheaper than Li. The CaSb-type [11] battery
and future hot metal batteries while heavier than the Li types are ideally suited
to heavy public transport (bus, train and heavy road vehicles) and shipping. These
developments are based on new electrical motor designs, drive trains and fast re-
charge stations using power storage based on local renewable power and slow bulk
charge off national power grids. These match renewable energy production from
solar and wind at a widely distributed level.
While mass airline trafﬁc contributes some 1.9% of the CO2 emissions associated
with transport (at a total of 16.2% in 2016) [20], it is unlikely that we will see battery-
driven aircraft above the 50-seat capacity and 200 km range for some 20 years. The
advances in train transport based on the above battery developments coupled with
the advances in magnetic levitation will enable high-speed rail transportation, fast re-
charging and thereby greatly reduce the need for short-haul aircraft. The megawatt
(MW) capabilities of the CaSb and other new hot metal batteries used for road
vehicles, shipping and rail transport will enable renewable energy to further replace
the CO2 of fossil-fuelled power stations.
Global Impact on the Local—EcoMechatronics Helps Identify
the Cause and Effect of the Climate Feedback Loops, Tipping
Points and Other Complex Relationships
Multiple feedback loops occur in tiers (3D domains) with tipping points inherent
in the system—refer to the 2021 Nobel Prize Conference material [21]. Timothy
Lenton at Exeter University, England, and his team of researchers, had ﬁrst warned
in their landmark 2008 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences paper [22],
about the risks of climate tipping points and that large-scale discontinuities in the
climate system were considered likely only if global warming exceeded 5 °C above
pre-industrial levels. In 2019, Lenton and six co-authors thought that a new study
published in Nature in November 2019 [23], warned in language that is much starker
than the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) forecasts, that risks are
much more likely and much more imminent and that some tipping points may already
have been breached. It is clear to most climate scientists that exceeding one tipping
point in one sector is likely to trigger other tipping points in linked sectors. These
links and feedback paths may not be initially evident. A disruptive cause and effect in
a local ecology may trigger a tipping point in a seemingly unrelated ecology system,
in another locality (Fig. 8) [24]. Human activity with its CO2 and other emissions
may contribute to the removal of further shallow Ice Age cycles but the disruptive
cost to the equilibrium of the past 5,000 years is yet unknown.
A UN Environment Programme (UNEP) report [25] warns that unless global
greenhouse gas emissions fall by 7.6% each year between 2020 and 2030, the world

Mechatronic Applications in Respect …
45
Changes in Antarctic 
bottom water formation
Instability of west 
Antartica ice sheet
Change in El-Niño 
Souther Oscillation 
(ENSO) amplitude or 
frequency
Dieback of 
Amazonas 
rainforest
West African 
monsoon shift
Indian monsoon 
chaotic 
multistability
Sahara greening
Atlantic deep 
water formation
Boreal forest dieback
Boreal forest dieback
Arctic sea ice loss
Melt of
Greenland ice 
sheet
Climate change 
induced ozone 
hole
Fig. 8 Tipping points in Earth’s climate
will miss the opportunity to get on track towards the 1.5 °C temperature goal of the
Paris Agreement. Indeed, the report suggests that:
There is alarming evidence that important tipping points, leading to irreversible changes
in major ecosystems and the planetary climate system, may already have been reached or
passed. Ecosystems as diverse as the Amazon rainforest and the Arctic tundra, may be
approaching thresholds of dramatic change through warming and drying. Mountain glaciers
are in alarming retreat and the downstream effects of reduced water supply in the driest
months will have repercussions that transcend generations
In October 2018, the IPCC issued a special report [26] on the impacts of global
warmingof1.5°C,ﬁndingthatlimitingglobalwarmingto1.5°Cwouldrequirerapid,
far-reaching and unprecedented changes in all aspects of society. With clear beneﬁts
to people and natural ecosystems, the report found that limiting global warming to 1.5
°Ccomparedto2°Ccouldgohandinhandwithensuringamoresustainableandequi-
table society. While previous estimates focussed on estimating the damage if average
temperatures were to rise by 2 °C, this report shows that many of the adverse impacts
of climate change will come at the 1.5 °C mark. The report also highlights several
climate change impacts that could be avoided by limiting global warming to 1.5 °C
comparedto2°C,ormore.Forinstance,by2100,globalsea-levelrisewouldbe10cm
lower with global warming of 1.5 °C compared with 2 °C. The likelihood of the Arctic
Ocean being free of sea ice in summer would be once per century with global warming
of 1.5 °C, compared with at least once per decade with 2 °C. Coral reefs would decline
by 70–90% with global warming of 1.5 °C, whereas virtually all (>99%) would be
lost by 2 °C. The report ﬁnds that limiting global warming to 1.5 °C would require:
… rapid and far-reaching transitions in land, energy, industry, buildings, transport, and cities.
Global net human-caused emissions of CO2 would need to fall by about 45% from 2010

46
B. McGlynn
levels by 2030, reaching ‘net zero’ around 2050. This means that any remaining emissions
would need to be balanced by removing CO2 from the air
expending limited renewable energy to do so [27].
Applying Advanced Sensors—Rapid Development in Sensor
Technology Across All Domains of EcoMechatronics Delivers
Solutions
Detailed data is required on all ecosystems at a ﬁner granularity than is currently
available. The IoT (Internet of Things) has delivered a wide range of sensory systems
that augment the potential for ﬁne-grained data across all aspects of the climate,
sustainability, resilience, security, land use and more. Earth observation satellites
can get to 1 m2 granularity, but this is not yet funded. Coupled with Internet of
Things type sensors and network communications EcoMechatronics can have the
power to present the data after analysis such that all the populations can understand
the interlocking complexity of the environment. This necessary approach ensures that
the actors most active in all age groups can push from the bottom-up perspective. The
top-down actors of governments and older institutions will take more notice of the
bottom-up pressure because this cohort is also the cohort that elects them to ofﬁce.
The Effect of the Foregoing Paths on Sustainability
and Resilience—The Conferences of COP, Paris Accord,
the Noble Prize Group and Stockholm Institute Indicates
that Even if Governments Are Not Moving Fast Enough,
Others Are! [8, 28]
The World Business Council for Sustainable Development [29] is a Swiss-based
global organisation that aims to direct businesses towards a more sustainable future to
reach net carbon zero. As the initial stage of its SOS 1.5 project, WBCSD has devel-
oped a business roadmap to help companies design and implement their journeys
to achieve net-zero emissions before 2050. Developed with the Boston Consulting
Group and WBCSD member companies across sectors, the plan is to provide key
steps and actions which companies at any stage in the journey can follow to accel-
erate their journey to net-zero. The WBCSD is typical of several global [31, 32]
organisations consulting with enterprises to get to carbon net-zero. Some of these
global enterprises will do the minimum required while others under pressure from
the bottom-up will do substantially more. Governments have the power to ensure
large enterprises conform to a net-zero plan.

Mechatronic Applications in Respect …
47
Conclusions
The lack of comprehensive data from global sensors has allowed governments to
avoid their part in responsibility. The lack of understandable data that is presented
for the global populations has ensured lethargy at a global level. These negative inﬂu-
ences are now being addressed because of the clear and imminent dangers of climate
change. The recognition of danger has been too late to prevent the ﬁrst tipping point
related to the 1.5 °C global average increase. The complex web that is EcoMecha-
tronics can affect change mitigation and prevent further travel to the next tipping
points with consequential damage to climate change and sustainability. Reversing
past the last tipping point requires substantial global action and investment but the
time delay to get back to an earlier equilibrium is complex and exceedingly difﬁcult.
The world must now face long-term climate change consequences irrespective of
any future actions taken. EcoMechatronics is an important asset class that can stop
the world getting to another tipping point and start a decade or more of recovery to
get to the recently lost Holocene equilibrium. Nature is itself robust, and given time,
investment and care from the next generation, we can regain our lost equilibrium.
For the past 3 million years, Earth’s climate has been in an Icehouse state char-
acterised by alternating glacial and interglacial periods. Modern humans evolved
during this time, but greenhouse gas emissions and other human activities are now
driving the planet towards the warm-house and hothouse climate states not seen since
the Eocene epoch of 34 million years ago. During the early Eocene, there were no
polar ice caps, and average global temperatures were 9–14 °C higher than today [30].
The youth of today inherits the climate change effects and its degraded sustainability
and resilience but is now motivated and equipped to use bottom-up pressure to effect
change. EcoMechatronics is there to be an essential part of the change process when
governments are forced to act and its solutions and predictions, in being clear and
unequivocable, will not be ignored.
Acknowledgements Many enterprises and academic sites were researched to give EcoMecha-
tronics foundation to the above chapter. This includes solar, permanent magnet generators, batteries,
IT, AI, satellite earth observation, wind turbines, pump storage and recent conferences on climate
change, sustainability, resilience and the consequences of 1.5 °C. R&D material from Scorpion
Networks Ltd. and its partners in EU Commission-funded consortia in FP7, Horizon 2020 and
Horizon Europe 2021 has been incorporated.
References
1. www.nobelprize.org/events/nobel-prize-summit/2021. Last Accessed 14 Nov 2021
2. beijer.kva.se/news-item/urgent-plea-from-scientiﬁc-community/. Last Accessed 14 Nov 2021
3. www.stockholmresilience.org/. Last Accessed 14 Nov 2021
4. National academies of sciences, engineering, and medicine (2021) Progress, challenges, and
opportunities for sustainability science. In: Proceedings of the workshop in brief, The National
Academies Press, Washington, DC

48
B. McGlynn
5. Wu L, Wang D, Evans JA (2019) Large teams develop and small teams disrupt science and
technology. Nature 566(7744):378–382
6. Collison
P,
Nielsen
M
(2018)
Science
is
getting
less
bang
for
its
buck,
The
Atlantic, 16 November. www.theatlantic.com/science/archive/2018/11/diminishing-returns-
science/575665/. Last Accessed 8 Dec 2021
7. www.weforum.org/agenda/2019/12/climate-change-tipping-points-earth/. Last Accessed 14
Nov 2021
8. CGA complex equation links for climate change R&D at Scorpion Networks Ltd.
9. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conformal_geometric_algebra. Last Accessed 14 Nov 2021
10. www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gzhr9z32X9I&list=WL&index=2&t=696s. Last Accessed 14
Nov 2021
11. ambri.com/technology/
12. www.wbcsd.org/contentwbc/download/9499/144264/1. Last Accessed 14 Nov 2021
13. www.irena.org/publications/2019/Apr/Global-energy-transformation-A-roadmap-to-2050-
2019Edition
14. www.infineon.com/cms/en/applications/industrial/solar-energy-systems. Last Accessed 14
Nov 2021
15. www.wku.edu. Last Accessed 14 Nov 2021
16. www.usgs.gov/faqs/what-carbon-sequestration?qt-news_science_products=0#qt-news_scie
nce_products. Last Accessed 14 Nov 2021
17. Hassija V, Chamola V, Zeadally S (2020) BitFund: a blockchain-based crowd funding platform
for future smart and connected nation. Sustain Cities Soc 60:102145
18. patents.google.com/patent/US4602257A/en. Last Accessed 8 Dec
19. www.cremeglobal.com/predictive-microbiome. Last Accessed 14 Nov 2021
20. ourworldindata.org/ghg-emissions-by-sector. Last Accessed 14 Nov 2021
21. www.nobelprize.org/events/nob. Last Accessed 14 Nov 2021
22. Lenton TM, Held H, Kriegler E, Hall JW, Lucht W, Rahmstorf S, Schellnhuber HJ (2008)
Tipping elements in the earth’s climate system. Proc Natl Acad Sci 105(6):1786–1793
23. Lenton TM, Rockström J, Gaffney O, Rahmstorf S, Richardson K, Steffen W, chellnhuber HJ
(2019) Climate tipping points—too risky to bet against. Nature 575:592–595. www.nature.
com/articles/d41586-019-03595-0
24. /en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tipping_points_in_the_climate_system
25. www.globalstewards.org/environmental-issues.htm. Last Accessed 14 Nov 2021
26. www.ipcc.ch/sr15/. Last Accessed 6 Dec 2021
27. netzeroclimate.org/. Last Accessed 6 Dec 2021
28. www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLUWHlbMj0sOFGQQJIsNqck_zLlDCJWY9Z
29. www.wbcsd.org/Programs/Climate-and-Energy/Climate/SOS-1.5/Resources/SOS-1.5-The-
road-to-a-resilient-zero-carbon-future. Last Accessed 14 Nov 2021
30. phys.org/news/2020-09-high-ﬁdelity-earth-climate-history-current.html?_escaped_frag
ment_=&deviceType=desktop. Last Accessed 14 Nov 2021
Other Sources
Stockholm resilience centre TV, www.youtube.com/channel/UCG0QUKa0MTBzBKiW18AZfTg.
Last Accessed 14 Nov 2021
Bierbaum R, University of Michigan and University of Maryland, towards sustainable futures:
governance, inclusiveness and stewardship. www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZHaKqIFwBE8

EcoMechatronics and Bioinspired Design
Ecology, Circular Economy,
and Sustainability
Maki K. Habib
Abstract Bioinspiration is an interdisciplinary, creative, and innovative design
approach that merges technology with biology by observing nature, properties, and
biological systems. It aims to learn, discover, and capture essential principles and
concepts inspired by nature, transform ideas, create new designs, and develop new
technologies, techniques, algorithms, and systems. Biomimetic is a type of bioin-
spired design approach that aims to reproduce aspects of functions or properties
of the biological systems by solving practical problems through functional anal-
ysis. Biomimicry represents a subcategory of the bioinspired design approach that
considers nature an adaptable model and a source to learn from and ﬁnd evolved and
proven solutions, strategies, principles, valuable functions, and structures to meet
sustainable development challenges in social, environmental, resources and biodi-
versity perspectives. Hence, for effective synergy between EcoMechatronics and
bioinspired design approaches, it is vital to understand applications, ecology, envi-
ronment, sustainability, and the management of ecosystems requirements through
intensive analysis associated with the study and observation of natural systems.
The goal is to have a conscious conclusion to emulate nature’s best properties and
functions. Therefore, it is essential to understand the conditions that allow such an
approach to produce creative designs introducing new ideas, functions, and systems.
Creative design inspired by nature is the way to support new innovative and environ-
mentally friendly technological development. The development of smart materials is
laying down the foundation to create new biomimetic-based technologies. However,
the development in the ﬁeld is facing difﬁculties by different technical constraints
that continue to challenge and need to be addressed effectively.
M. K. Habib (B)
The American University in Cairo, Cairo, Egypt
e-mail: maki@aucegypt.edu
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
P. Hehenberger et al. (eds.), EcoMechatronics,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-07555-1_4
49

50
M. K. Habib
Introduction
Mechatronics is an interdisciplinary ﬁeld of engineering science centered on the
synergy of multidimensional knowledge. It focuses on developing intelligent and
sustainable designs with adaptive behaviors and optimized performance. It aims to
promote a prosperous and healthy future and a cleaner environment that reduces
ecological impact while improving the sustainability and functionality of mecha-
tronic technology to realize a sustainable global society. Such an approach within
the Mechatronics ﬁeld is termed EcoMechatronics. Thus, the visionary concept
of EcoMechatronics aims to enhance human behavior and improve the inter-
active human and technology relation with the environment toward a sustain-
able lifestyle. EcoMechatronics can effectively address the interdisciplinary chal-
lenges with a potential synergy of experience and way of work, technologies, and
knowledge to optimize the design development process and maximize functional-
ities. This approach contributes to developing new efﬁcient, economical, energy-
efﬁcient, and environmentally friendly technologies. Also, it utilizes resources with
added value practices while reducing the dependence on the combustion of fossil
fuels and lowering the associated carbon footprints, reducing energy consump-
tion, and reducing waste. The circular economy concept facilitates and manages
these outcomes. To achieve such requirements and to have an ecologically sustained
society, there is a need to develop novel design strategies.
Nature as a collective phenomenon of the physical world includes all plants,
animals, the landscape, and all forces, features, and products of the Earth that exist
independent of humans.1 Nature always works to optimize its design strategies as
evolutionary processes by removing those that are not surviving while revising and
enhancing efﬁcient and sustained outcomes. Such capability contributes to the opera-
tion of natural selection. The natural evolutionary process helps biological organisms,
phenomena, and systems to succeed in solving problems encountered in their natural
environments. Bioinspiration, biomimetics, biomimicry, bio-replication, and bionics
with their overlapping boundaries are overgrowing investigative ﬁelds reﬂecting the
inspiration of nature as a leading innovative design reference. These research direc-
tions attract researchers’ interest and help derive inspiration and solutions to address
and solve existing design problems and challenges [1]. Researchers in bioinspired
design and ecodesign consider nature a sustainability model and use biological
systems, organisms, environmental interactions, and properties as analogies when
developing an environmentally sustained design. Thus biology is described as a
modelforsustainability[2].However,researchershaveyettodiscover,learnfromand
apply sustainable design solutions within each living organism. Biological systems
exhibit essential physical properties and have always served as an endless source of
inspiration to humans.
Bioinspiration is a creative and innovative design approach that merges tech-
nology with biology by observing nature, properties, and biological systems. It
aims to learn, discover, and capture essential ecological and sustainable principles
1 Mariam-Webster Dictionary & Oxford English Dictionary.

EcoMechatronics and Bioinspired Design Ecology …
51
and concepts inspired by nature, transform ideas, create new designs, and develop
new technologies, techniques, algorithms, and systems. As a result, creative and
innovative developers have investigated bioinspired design approaches with their
overlapped areas to support further developments and applications. Using nature
as a source supporting ideas and solutions inspiration, the bioinspiration design
approach helps produce conscious abstraction of new principles for creative design
and solutions. It can contribute to answering many of the challenges by focusing
on ecology and sustainable development in different domains, directions, and needs.
Numerous bioinspired applications domains are inspired by nature available in many
real-life artiﬁcial ﬁelds, such as intelligent and autonomous robotics, optimization,
information processing, architecture design, structures, materials, etc. [3–6] along
witharea-relatedapplications,includingtransport,architecture,automotive,medical,
aerospace, etc. [1, 7–10].
However, for effective synergy between EcoMechatronics and bioinspired design
approaches, it is vital to understand applications, environment, and sustainable
requirements through intensive analysis associated with the study and observation of
natural systems. This approach would enhance the design process for a better expla-
nation, evaluation, and generation of effective solutions supporting innovative ideas
and design [3, 11]. Of course, there is no assurance that the bioinspired approach
will lead to creative design outcomes [12]. However, bio-design has been the basis of
innovative designs and is understood [13]. In addition, it is necessary to understand
that solutions developed by nature are not always the optimal ones. Hence, bioin-
spired solutions should identify and address the required design criteria supported
by the required attributes and technologies.
Of course, biology solves problems differently than engineering. However, such
biological solutions offer insight into alternative strategies as a source of inspira-
tion to develop efﬁcient engineering systems reﬂecting EcoMechatronics features
by expanding the knowledge and concept spaces to help visualize alternative and
innovative design.
Biomimicry concerns many sectors of human activity: medicine, research,
industry, the economy, architecture, urban planning, agriculture, ecosystem manage-
ment, development, and so forth. Different levels of learning and idea abstractions
are involved in successfully implementing biomimicry principles. For example, the
innovative design approach may cover mobility, functionality, behaviors, thinking
process,material,structures,andintelligentfunctionsofbiologicalcreaturesinnature
[3, 14]. But, on the other hand, it is motivated by learning and adopting concepts,
ideas, mechanisms, behaviors, and capabilities from nature, and using a potential
scientiﬁc approach led to the effective development of new materials, shapes and
structures, process, algorithms, systems, and other beneﬁts.
Bioinspiration is an emerging fast-evolving design and development approach
that adopts and uses processes, knowledge, and operational principles inspired by
nature. As a result, designers can collaborate in a scientiﬁc context to draw their ideas
from interdisciplinary and bioinspired sources of knowledge and ideas to address
and face the challenges of developing effective alternate innovative design solutions
supporting different levels of functionalities under different scenarios [15, 16].

52
M. K. Habib
This chapter introduces bioinspired design principles and presents the current
engineering design methodology. The chapter also explains the role of biomimicry
and ecologically sustainable design. It highlights the strengths ad weakness of design
methodologies and practices that lead to consistent and sustainable bioinspired
design. Further, it discusses the requirements for integrating an effective bioinspired
design strategy featuring sustainability, ecosystem, and circular economy principles.
Finally, it underlines the needs and the challenges for progress in this ﬁeld.
Bioinspiration: Biomimicry, Circular Economy,
and Sustainability
Bioinspiration
Current
conventional
technologies
and
methodologies
are
associated
with
constraints, which stimulates the demand to develop innovative and effective solu-
tions that enhance functionality and performance while reducing or eliminating waste
and reducing energy consumption. Such demands encourage creative thinking to
create new solutions that drive research to consider nature as a critical motivation
reference and source for new solutions. The biologically inspired design strategies
that integrate context-speciﬁc solutions represent a practical approach to overcoming
constraints.
Biomimetics is a term that originally came from bios which means life, and
mimesis, which means imitate, and accordingly, the term implies imitation of life. In
addition,thedeﬁnitionofbiomimicrydescribesinnovationsinspiredbynature[5,17–
20]. Therefore, Benyus [5] suggests considering nature as a reference design model
(source of innovation as a standard reference), a measure (performance of new ideas),
and a mentor to help understand the bioinspired concept of learning and knowledge
building sustainable design and methodologies. Further, bioinspiration, biomimetics,
biomimicry, bionics, ecodesign, and biognosis are other bioinspired developments
motivated by nature. These techniques were used to capture new ideas, functions,
and structures. This direction is facilitated by the superiority of biological systems’
properties in terms of robustness, ﬂexibility, agility, efﬁciency, and the ability to adapt
continuously and improve performance while surviving in real life. Furthermore,
biological systems also work in harmony to sustain the different ecosystem levels
[5, 6, 19–22].
Biomimicry is an interdisciplinary design approach encompassing biology and
engineering to describe a methodology and innovative process linking ecology and
technology. This approach helps to merge biological principles and physical appli-
cations to ﬁnd effective and environmentally friendly solutions adopted by nature
through its evolutionary processes to address modern society and human life prob-
lems. Further, this approach helps abstract, emulate, and inspire systems, functions,
and models from different species to improve life by developing innovative ideas,

EcoMechatronics and Bioinspired Design Ecology …
53
novel theories, efﬁcient designs, and technologies. Hence, understanding biological
systems and linking efforts between biologists and scientists present unique oppor-
tunities to develop potential concepts, ideas, methods, and paradigms that serve both
sides in ﬁnding solutions and efﬁcient design generations of intelligent tools, devices,
products, and materials [18].
Biomimicry: Ecosystem and Circular Economy
Ecology studies the individual living organism within a population of organisms, the
relation of these organisms to one another, the interaction of each organism with its
local environment impacting it, and the interaction and adaptation of the organisms
with that local environment [23]. Hence, it requires understanding all the compo-
nents forming the ecology, including the environment’s effect on a population of
organisms. Ecology also studies the interacting populations of biological commu-
nities representing multiple ecosystems and their relations to compete or cooperate
for resources. Further, ecology closely relates to physiology, behavior, genetics, and
evolution. An ecosystem thus represents a speciﬁc biological community that shares
a limited but loosely deﬁned physical environment. The physical environment is
essential in deciding the interacting living organisms and the non-living components
available in an ecosystem. Hence, an ecosystem is a subset of ecology, and it can be
of different types.
Biomimicry emulates the strategies available in real life of bringing together much
ofalreadyexistingfeaturesandfunctionsinecologicalinnovationbyhelpingtoassess
the way ecosystems work in nature and how they can contribute to solving human
problems within the design context [24–26]. Ecosystems are adaptable, evolving,
and resilient to disturbance. At the same time, they can create conditions that tend
to support life continuity [27]. Such features help ecosystems to provide a model
associated with a set of performance targets with their indicators. Correctly under-
standing different ecosystems can determine measurable targets, such as water catch-
ment, emissions levels, energy production, carbon storage, and resource production.
Ecosystem biomimicry enables tangible benchmarks to be devised over different
periods in time.
A circular economy represents an integrative paradigm inspired by nature with the
main focus on enhancing environmental sustainability and improving the economy
with no concept of waste while reducing carbon emission. Instead, nature gives us
the solution when every organism is considered a resource for the next higher level in
the cycle of interdependence [28, 29]. The functionalities of circular economy aim to
extend the value of materials and resources, reducing the need for further extraction
of natural resources. Therefore, based on the concept of ecosystem, resource efﬁ-
ciency and environmental sustainability are key elements enabling circularity within
human social activities and actors. However, this issue raises the need to change how
to deal with the ﬂow of material and energy at the system level while understanding
the unsustainable practice of how current production systems, consumer behaviors,

54
M. K. Habib
and waste disposal inﬂuence sustainability with the involvement of different inter-
dependence actors. This understanding helps in transforming the linear models into
circular ones. Interdependency between all elements of an ecosystem can be initi-
ated by learning from nature to understand the cyclic behavior at a different level
of shared purpose, intentions, logic, interaction, and values that enable interconnec-
tions among other levels or actors [30, 31]. It is vital to note that the outcome of the
system level associated with an ecosystem will be higher than the outcome of the
collective individual effects at each level making the ecosystem [30]. Therefore, the
circular economy concept requires creative design, new intelligent technologies, and
innovations to develop and implement cyclic technological loops focusing on energy
and materials. In line with such requirements, the circular economy demands critical
changes in management and business models and the sustainability directions toward
advancing and fulﬁlling its goals by building circular systems with low environmental
impact. Therefore, it is essential to assess the natural cyclic performance loops and
compare them to human-made systems and methods for better understanding and
further enhancement to secure resource supply and environmental sustainability.
Biomimicry and the circular economy are complementary approaches reﬂecting
nature as a principal model. Both represent models that depend on ecosystems’ opera-
tion, i.e., this operation is featured by waste-free, circular and autonomous processes.
Biomimicry helps develop methodologies and systems for the circular economy by
ﬁnding solutions to problems and transforming waste into resources. This can be
achieved by drawing positive inspiration from one species that feeds on another
species’ waste. Biomimicry makes rethinking to make the current circular economy
model possible. It allows researchers to conclude that the circular economy of nature
works with ﬂexible, complex, and open-ended loops. Hence, from the prospect of
biomimetic thinking and development, the ecosystem is the principal model of inspi-
ration. In addition, natural ecosystems inspire the circular economy, and the circular
economy provides biomimicry with an economic context. However, inspired learning
from biological processes should be ecosystemic and global, i.e., it should be done
by considering the overall ecological functioning when seeking to emulate the inno-
vations from different species. Further, the global view of biomimicry should ensure
renewable energy and effective recycling.
The circular economy has emerged as an essential paradigm in environmental
sustainability that challenges the linear model, which creates excessive waste and
drives climate change and pollution while resource use is inefﬁcient. The linear
model is associated with severe environmental problems, subjecting the biosphere
and its resource provider ecosystems to high risk [32]. Driven by the sustainable
design requirements, it is possible to list three pillars that describe the circular
economy principles: eliminate waste and pollution, circulate products and materials,
and regenerate nature [33]. It decouples economic activity from the consumption of
ﬁnite resources and critical global challenges ranging from climate change, waste,
pollution, and biodiversity loss.
The circular economy demonstrates quality economic models inspired by nature
to facilitate sustainable business opportunities where cyclical rather than linear
processes dominate. It promotes sustainable development goals and intends to create

EcoMechatronics and Bioinspired Design Ecology …
55
economic and industrial structures that help reduce natural resource usage and waste
by reconciling the economy with nature [28]. It is a resilient system that is good for
business, people, and the environment. The shift and the transition toward a circular
economy indicate the need to introduce new bioinspired ideas, innovative design,
and efﬁcient technologies [34].
The circular economy concept aims to achieve the desired principles related
to redesigning, repurposing, remanufacturing, reusing, recycling, refurbishing, and
recovering water, waste, materials, and nutrients to preserve natural resources. It lays
out the necessary conditions that enable economic and social players to develop and
adapt strategies to stimulate sustainable actions. However, the increase in complexity
of sustainability means that managerial economics and traditional engineering alone
cannot face the new challenges and fulﬁll the requirements toward environmentally
efﬁcient solutions [35]. Products and services in a circular economy are designed to
be reused in biological or technical cycles to tackle global climate change, biodi-
versity loss, waste, and pollution. This framework reduces resource input and opti-
mizes environmental, social, material, and economic values while maximizing waste
prevention.
Biomimetic Design and Sustainability
The key idea of the biomimicry concept is that nature always functions on a prin-
ciple of economy and optimal efﬁciency, minimal waste. Nature represents the best
example of sustainability as it provides novel and original solutions with innova-
tive features associated with change and adaptation to its environment and needs.
Besides, it eliminates design strategies that cannot withstand changes in their habi-
tats while optimizing design solutions over many revisions to achieve sustained
outcomes. Therefore, bioinspiration and sustainability should work together as inter-
disciplinary approaches for novel effects that develop systems and devices with a
zero-waste life cycle. Applying bioinspiration to stimulate innovation and facilitate
learning from natural systems to emulate and create a reliable, intelligent design
for sustainability with high performance saves energy, reduces materials and cost,
redeﬁnes and eliminates waste, and stops environmental damages [36].
Therefore, to achieve a sustained design and development quality of innovative
products and services, it is necessary to understand the role of the designers in
the sustainable world and the necessity within the design process to balance the
three key pillars representing social, ecological, and economic factors. This demand
for sustainable practices throughout the design process and development to inte-
grate these factors as a green solution into environmentally friendly behaviors while
considering natural resources as a part of the design process [37–39].
A bioinspired sustainability framework has been initiated to regain the advantages
of societal embeddedness in its environment through biological inspiration. Thus,
the biomimicry philosophy is explicitly part of a global strategy of responsible devel-
opment, concerned with establishing a viable balance between the resources offered
by the planet and their exploitation.

56
M. K. Habib
Biomimicry: Ecology, Circular Economy, and Sustainability
Biomimetic innovations inspired by nature can motivate sustainable design solu-
tions because biological systems are inherently sustainable [40]. However, the ISO
standard formulates top-down criteria to classify a product as a biomimetic. This
criterion has three integral components necessary to satisfy a product as biomimetic.
These components are: identify the main biological principles as a source triggering
function analysis, abstract a model from the biological system of the identiﬁed princi-
ples, and then transform the model into a practical design for possible implementation
[41]. Hence emulating and abstracting the time-tested patterns and ideas from natural
systems in the living nature will result in better sustainable features and performance.
Thus, to strengthen and widen bioinspired sustainable solution initiatives, there is
a need to establish a practical interdisciplinary framework connecting innovation
inspired by the natural biological system with the sustainable theory to achieve the
best way of realizing sustainability in practice.
It is essential to mention that not all bioinspired designs are biomimicry. However,
sustainability is a vital factor differentiating biomimicry from other bioinspired
design approaches, as it aims to meet sustainable development challenges in design
development. Biomimicry emphasizes learning from and emulating nature forms
and living systems with their technical transformations at all levels of abstraction.
Understanding living systems’ technological transformation may include functions,
patterns, processes, architectures, and ecosystems that are necessary to develop
regenerative engineering solutions to meet speciﬁc performance challenges and
solve problems sustainably. Hence, not all bioinspired solutions are sustainable,
but biomimicry solutions are. Thus, knowledge of ecosystem principles in ecology,
biology, industrial ecology, ecological design, and biomimicry is vital to consider ad
usetoformulateagroupofecosystemprinciplestocaptureaninterdisciplinaryunder-
standing of how an ecosystem functions. Biomimicry then helps integrate ecological
sustainability into the design process. Such a development approach aims to balance
the design by economic and environmental factors serving sustainability.
Human activities are becoming unsustainable and cause severe damage, especially
in terms of global depletion of resources, destabilization of natural systems, and harm
to its harm life on the planet. By taking biological systems as a model, it becomes
possibletoreconcileindustrialactivitiesandeconomicdevelopmentwhilepreserving
theenvironment,resources,andbiodiversity.Thekeyideaofthebioinspiredapproach
and biomimetic concepts is that nature always functions on a principle of economy
and maximizing performance and efﬁciency without waste. Therefore, the vision
of biomimicry is explicitly part of a global strategy of responsible development,
concerned with establishing a viable balance between the resources offered by the
planet and their exploitation while addressing human life, pollution, and climate
problems.
Whether animals, plants, or other biological models, drawing inspiration from
the living is a real possibility and is now alive. Biomimicry concerns many sectors
of human activity: medicine, research, industry, the economy, architecture, urban
planning, agriculture, ecosystem management, development, and so forth.

EcoMechatronics and Bioinspired Design Ecology …
57
Biomimetic innovations inspired by nature can motivate sustainable design solu-
tions because biological systems are inherently sustainable [40]. Hence, learning,
emulating, and abstracting the time-tested patterns and ideas from natural systems
in the living nature will result in better sustainable features and performance. Thus,
to strengthen and widen bioinspired sustainable solution initiatives, there is a need
to establish a practical interdisciplinary framework connecting innovation inspired
by the natural biological system with the sustainable theory to achieve the best way
of realizing sustainability in practice. Biomimicry has a vital role in the evolving
conceptualization of sustainability and measures of success needed to integrate
science-based targets and the interests of diverse stakeholders.
Biomimicry’s distinctive feature involves studying and learning from the ecosys-
tems, their structures, biological systems and their interaction among themselves,
the interaction with their living environment, and from nature’s model to emulate
functional strategies from natural forms, processes, and ecosystems tested and reﬁned
through biological evolution. Biomimicry can be applied to solve technical and social
challenges of any scale. Biomimicry is a principal design approach that helps to:
a.
Understand and learn how life in nature works,
b.
Integrate this understanding with human experience and knowledge,
c.
Emulate selected potential and efﬁcient functions, processes, and systems and
stimulate new potential discoveries merging through emulation,
d.
Use the outcome of the emulation to develop new and innovative life-friendly
engineering science designs contributing to a healthy planet and leading to a
sustainable evolution.
Biomimicry should consider allowing for positive contributions of bioinspired
technological development. Thus, it is not only considering limiting impacts on waste
and usage of resources, but it should have a positive effect by creating a condition
for life to exist and advance. When learning from natural and biological systems,
it is critical to understand and transfer the most advantageous property of life itself
reﬂected by sustainability. The property of life itself leads to sustainability.
Engineering Design Methodologies
The fundamental principle of a design methodology is to help improve design
processes to ﬁnd the best possible solution for each design scenario. Engineering
design methodologies invoke different modes of design thinking (divergence and
convergence) and aim to fulﬁll the engineering design requirements of systems in
alignment with the list of desired functions.
A design methodology establishes a set of rules that guide obtaining desired objec-
tives that cannot be generated by chance [41–44]. Hence, the development of design
methodologies is essential to help in ensuring control of the design process and opens
the way to explore and investigate new design tools. In general, design methodolo-
gies are about principles that guide design practices. Therefore, each available design

58
M. K. Habib
methodology should justify and explain the necessity of ﬁnding suitable solutions.
Some of the standard and traditional technology design methodologies may include
[45, 46]:
1.
The top-down-design starts from a solution and works backward while reﬁning
the design process at each step;
2.
The bottom-up-design starts from the foundation principles and works toward
a solution;
3.
The structured design identiﬁes and maps available inputs and desired outputs
using graphical representation;
4.
The structured analysis design describes the hierarchy of the system structures
and functions;
5.
The data structured system design determines the system structure; and
6.
The object-oriented design focuses on a system of interacting objects
A proper understanding of the cognitive abstraction process helps develop an
efﬁcient design methodology. Hence, assessing how each design methodology will
produce new knowledge is fundamental, and the available tools supporting it.
However, modifying or reusing already tested design concepts cannot meet new chal-
lenges in designing and solving new engineering and science problems that demand
effective and agile solutions. A successful design approach should combine natural
creativity with the systematic design methodologies associated with the availability
of the necessary design and assessing tools [47].
Bioinspired Deseign Methodologies
The analogy is a powerful design tool and process that helps designers identify
and develop creative and practical solutions. Considering analogy in the design
processes initiates inferences and helps to understand problems that lead to innova-
tive solutions in the design process. Design is analogous if sharing at least one prop-
erty/function/behavior from other systems [36, 48, 49]. The bioinspiration design
approach is regarded as an example that adopts analogy. However, the interdisci-
plinary bioinspired approach does not need to be inﬂuenced only by the design
appearance or style. Design solutions in nature undergo an evolutionary process that
makes them inherently superior to human solutions. Therefore, a bioinspired design
is approached using different design paradigms [1, 3, 50–55].
a.
Develop a design that starts by specifying an engineering problem to ﬁnd solu-
tions by searching for a suitable biological analogy or a phenomenon, such
as organisms or ecosystems, that can address the given engineering problem.
Findingsuchananalogyleadstoidentifying/abstractingrelevantprinciplesfrom
a biological model adopted from nature and then transforming/translating these
into scientiﬁc design knowledge that can be applied as real-life solutions to
engineering design problems. This approach is classiﬁed as an indirect design

EcoMechatronics and Bioinspired Design Ecology …
59
approach, and also it is referred to as a top-down or problem-driven approach, or
“design looking to nature/biology”. Efforts in developing databases with exam-
ples from nature are normalizing and standardizing the design process to help
solve technical problems.
b.
Develop a design technique that needs to understand biological analogies and
their applications better. This paradigm starts with an engineering solution and
tries to identify examples in nature/biology that help extend opportunities to
develop principles/features/functions that can contribute to ﬁnding creative or
improved solutions to the solution. This approach is a bottom-up, “biology inﬂu-
encing design”, or solution-driven bioinspired design. However, this approach
is less systematic.
c.
The sustainability-driven paradigm is classiﬁed as biomimicry. This paradigm
focuses on the technical transformation of biological forms, processes, patterns,
and systems that connect biomimicry to sustainability. Nature always, through
evolution, creates functions and resources that are efﬁcient to support ecolog-
ical solutions aiming to address challenges caused by humans (mainly the
environment).
d.
The bioreplication design paradigm focuses on realizing or reproducing speciﬁc
functions or structures of a biological system.
e.
Thelastparadigmrepresentsahybridbioinspireddesignapproachthatcombines
two or more paradigms above. It was recognized that designers who work with
the bottom-up design approach also employ the techniques extracted from the
top-down design approach, i.e., these two design approaches are both mean-
ingful and necessary throughout the design process. These design approaches
are not sequential processes but somewhat interrelated and require interdis-
ciplinary collaboration between biology and technology to fulﬁll functional
decomposition and functional optimization design needs. However, this repre-
sents a signiﬁcant need, but it is difﬁcult to achieve this in isolation between
the required ﬁelds and demand to interface biology, art, engineering, system
thinking, and materials.
Need for Effective Bioinspired Design and Tools
In general, to have effective design and tools that help the design processes, products,
forms, and functions, there is a critical need to learn how to design and, at the same
time, to learn the design process itself. This approach requires an environment that
associates learning with real-world practice [56]. The bioinspired design approach
represents an invaluable tool that inﬂuences modern science and engineering design,
fostering innovative and creative ideas, products, and functions. The following are
highlights of the main challenges and considerations in the biomimetics ﬁeld.
1.
It is essential to recognize that learning about nature differs from learning from
nature. Nevertheless, the needs require to fulﬁll both.

60
M. K. Habib
2.
It is crucial to generate good data sets, tools, and guidelines to systemize
and understand the bioinspired design process and available approaches. As a
result, the entire ecosystems are emulated as a base for the design.
3.
It is essential to recognize that nature may evolve different biological
mechanisms to solve real-world problems in different environments and ways.
4.
Bioinspiration does not mean adopting the weaknesses of biology systems
together with the strengths.
5.
Bioinspiration education must play a signiﬁcant role in developing efﬁcient
design thinking. Therefore, the bioinspired design should be an essential
element in the education syllabus of all engineering disciplines.
6.
There is a need to understand the cognitive mechanisms and develop tools and
techniques that help to support bioinspiration as innovative design solutions
to engineering problems. This direction requires understanding the different
operations that constitute the bioinspired design process.
7.
It is necessary to understand the different approaches to sustainability solutions
present in biology before developing practical tools and bioinspired design
methodologies.
8.
It is essential to recognize the potential coupling and interaction between
biology and information and micro/nano spaces to enable new innovative
solutions.
9.
It is necessary to have tools that help assess the environmental impacts
of concepts during the early phases of product design to select suitable,
sustainable concepts or ideas.
10.
Bioinspired designs are not all sustainable by default. Thus, it requires consid-
ering the entire product life cycle to determine whether a particular bioin-
spired feature confers a sustainability advantage to the design process and its
outcomes.
11.
It is necessary to have tools and guides to assess the environmental impacts of
concepts during the early phases of design to select adequate and sustainable
concepts and ideas efﬁciently.
12.
There is an urgent need to develop sustainable bioinspired design tools
and methodologies that help reduce the environmental impact of sustainable
engineering designs and have added value features,
13.
There is a need for in-depth studies of the theoretical bases of ideation methods
and the factors involved in executing bioinspired methodologies for different
knowledge domains to support creative and critical design scenarios.
14.
There is a need to understand the assembly of biological systems at the
components and system levels through their interaction.
15.
It is necessary to consider different levels of abstraction appropriate in under-
standing the making up of each biological system and functional interactions
as the abstraction at individual levels may lead to the wrong design if it is
taken out without considering all the interactive components of the biological
system.
16.
Biological adaptation to a given environment depends not only on the
circumstances of the environment but also on its entire evolutionary history.

EcoMechatronics and Bioinspired Design Ecology …
61
17.
Seek the possibility of integrating elements from different biological systems.
It is also necessary to combine natural/biological materials with the strength
of artiﬁcial components.
18.
It is necessary to note that nature can still give us conﬁdence in the correctness
of a result to enhance the survivability of living functions and systems by
reacting to changes in the dynamic environment, such as growth, learning,
repair, act, move, and so forth. Therefore, biomimetic products design should
reﬂect such capabilities.
19.
It is critical to understand the principles underlying adaptive behaviors of
intelligent systems and biological emotions to help develop systems/machines
that are intelligent with the capability to interact socially. Hence, this demands
deﬁnite design principles, paradigms, and theoretical formulations.
Conclusions
Maturing conventional design approaches and methodologies are often associated
with inadequate performance due to a range of constraints. However, such difﬁ-
culties stimulate the demand to ﬁnd innovative and creative solutions to maxi-
mize functionality and enhance performance while minimizing costs in energy and
materials.
In general, biologically inspired solutions are cost-efﬁcient, multifunctional, and
environmentally friendly. However, using a biological metaphor to inspire new inno-
vative design approaches does not necessarily imply that the bioinspired design
approach is well understood. In addition, biological organisms that emerge from
natural selection and evolutionary processes are multifunctional, and accordingly,
they cannot be optimized independently for any individual function.
It is not always necessary to solve biological problems to provide insight into
potential solutions; instead, it can be a valuable and challenging experience to inspire
exciting research ideas. In addition, it is not easy ﬁnding a natural element to provide
the required answer for innovative design.
The available bioinspired processes supporting creative design are not intensively
used and veriﬁed. Therefore, these processes are exploratory, and they cannot guar-
antee success. On the other hand, these processes may provide innovative solu-
tions that can obtain original solutions, representing advantages over others such as
normative processes.
The experience in developing a real, practical, and effective bioinspired design
methodology demands closer interdisciplinary collaboration. Such collaboration
shouldbeassociatedwiththenecessarydevelopment of documentationanddatabases
as a design reference supporting design inspired by nature. This approach will also
help normalize and standardize them to generate systematic, efﬁcient, and creative
design approaches.

62
M. K. Habib
The main challenge is to have a successful connection between the theory of
biomimicry and engineering through circular economy, allowing it to apply in
everyday life. In addition, the absence of evaluation tools resulted in unforeseen
impacts on the bioinspired design strategies and methodologies.
The biomimicry-inspired design will not by default lead to sustainable outcomes.
Thus, it is necessary to synergize biomimicry with a good understanding of nature and
ecosystemstorealizesustainabledesignoutcomes.Thisapproachdemandsnewways
of thinking, establishing efﬁcient practices, and having qualiﬁed practitioners with
creative visions and innovations. Such synergy is necessary to develop sustainable
solutions and innovative EcoMechatronics processes, forms, and ecosystems inspired
by nature. Therefore, it is essential to increase interdisciplinary research activities
where biologists, engineers, and computer scientists collaborate to develop, assess,
and tune methods and tools applied in each bioinspired design paradigm.
Finally, biomimicry needs to have a clear agreed deﬁnition with better visibility.
However, while bioinspiration can create innovative solutions to many problems, it
should have an ethical framework to assure proper usage to help humanity.
References
1. Lenau TA, Metze A-L, Hesselberg T (2018) Paradigms for biologically inspired design.
Proceedings SPIE 10593, Bioinspiration, Biomimetics, and Bioreplication VIII, 1059302.
https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2296560
2. O’Rourke J, Seepersad CC (2015) Using biology as a model for sustainability: insights for
Ecodesign and bioinspired design practitioners. In: Weber C, Husung S, Cantamessa M, Cascini
G, Marjanovic D, Venkataraman S (eds), section design theory and research methodology,
design processes, ICED, 2015, pp 187–196
3. Salgueredo CF (2013) Modeling biological inspiration for innovative NPD: lessons from
Biomimetics. Proceedings of the 20th international product development management confer-
ence, Jun 2013, Paris-France, pp.21
4. Speck T, Speck O (2008) Process sequences in biomimetic research. WIT transactions on
ecology and the environment, design and nature IV, Brebbia CA (ed), 114, 3–11, section
design theory and research methodology, design processes, ICED, 2015, pp 187–196
5. Benyus J (2002) Biomimicry: innovation inspired by nature, harper perennial (September 17,
2002)
6. Habib MK, Nagata F (2019) Bioinspired design: creativity and sustainability. International
conference on mechatronics education and research (REM 2019), 23–24 May 2019, Wels,
Austria
7. ZariMP(2009)Anarchitecturalloveoftheliving:bioinspireddesigninthepursuitofecological
regeneration and psychological well-being. In: Brebbia CA (ed), Sustainable development and
planning IV, Southampton, England: Wessex Institute of Technology Publisher, pp 293–302
8. Tucker VA, Parrott CG (1970) Aerodynamics of gliding ﬂight in a falcon and other birds. J
Exp Biol 1970(52):2345–2367
9. Norberg UM, Rayner JM (1987) Ecological morphology and ﬂight in bats (Mammalia;
Chiroptera): wing adaptations, ﬂight performance, foraging strategy and echolocation. Philos
Trans Royal Soc B Biol Sci 316:335–427
10. Budholiya S, Bhat A, Aravind Raj S, Hameed Sultan MT, Shah Md AU, Basri AA (2021) State
of the art review about bio-inspired design and applications: an aerospace perspective appl.
Science 11(11):5054. https://doi.org/10.3390/app11115054

EcoMechatronics and Bioinspired Design Ecology …
63
11. Vattam SS, Helms M, Goel A (2010) A content account of creative analogies in biologi-
cally inspired design. Artiﬁcial intelligence for engineering design, analysis and manufacturing
24(4):467–481
12. Gonçalves M, Cardoso C, Badke-Schaub P (2012) Find your inspiration: exploring different
levels of abstraction in textual stimuli. Proceeding of the 2nd international conference on design
creativity (ICDC2012), Cognition Section, 189–198, Glasgow UK.
13. Fu K, Moreno D, Yang M, Wood KL (2014) Bio-inspired design: an overview investigating
open questions from the broader ﬁeld of design-by-analogy. J Mech Design 136(11)
14. Bar Cohen Y (2003), Biologically inspired intelligent robotics. In: Proceedings of the SPIE
smart structures conference, San Diego, CA, Paper 5051–02
15. Yurtkuran S, Kırli G, Taneli Y (2013) Learning from nature: biomimetic design in architectural
education. 2nd cyprus international conference on educational research, (CY-ICER 2013).
Procedia Soc Behav Sci 89:633–639
16. Neves JCL, Francke ICM (2012) Creative product design using Biomimetics. WIT Trans Ecol
Environ 160(2012):149–155
17. Wang J, Chen W, Xiao X, Xu Y, Li C, Jia X, Max Q-H, Meng Q-H (2021) A survey of the
development of biomimetic intelligence and robotics. Biomimetics Intell Robot 1.https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.birob.2021.100001
18. Habib MK (2011) Biomimetics: innovations and robotics. Int J Mechatr Manuf Syst 4(2):2011
19. Habib MK, Watanabe K, Izumi K (2007a) Biomimetics intelligent robots and biological inspi-
ration. International conference on control, instrumentation and mechatronics, CIM; Malaysia,
pp 824–832
20. Habib MK, Watanabe K, Izumi K (2007b) Biomimetics robots: from bio-inspiration to imple-
mentation. The 33rd annual conference of the IEEE industrial electronics society IECON’2007,
Taipei, Taiwan, pp 143–148
21. Knight A (2009) Hidden histories: the story of sustainable design. ProQuest. Accessed Feb 23
2022. http://www.csa.com/discoveryguides/design/review.pdf
22. Habib MK, Nagata F (2018) Biomimetics and the evolution of robotics and intelligent systems.
Handbook of research on Biomimetics and biomedical robotics, Chapter 1, IGI Global, 2018,
pp 1–25
23. Lakna (2017) Difference between ecology and ecosystem, June 2017. Accessed Feb 23. https://
pediaa.com/difference-between-ecology-and-ecosystem/EcosystemandEcology
24. Pedersen Zari M (2015) (2015) Mimicking ecosystems for bio-inspired intelligent urban built
environments. Intell Build Int 8(2):57–77. https://doi.org/10.1080/17508975.2015.1007910
25. Reed B (2007) Shifting from ‘Sustainability’ to regeneration. Build Res Inf 35(6):674–680
26. Svec P, Berkebile R, Todd JA (2012) Regen: toward a tool for regenerative thinking. Build Res
Inf 40(1):81–94. https://doi.org/10.1080/09613218.2012.629112
27. Pedersen Zari M (2010) Biomimetic design for climate change adaptation and mitigation.
Archit Sci Rev 53(2):172–183
28. Aarikka-Stenroos L, Ritala P, Thomas LDW (2021) Circular economy ecosystems: a typology,
deﬁnitions, and implications. In: Teerikangas S, Onkila T, Koistinen K, Makela M (eds) Book:
handbook of sustainability, Chapter 17, Agency, Edward Elgar Publishing, Feb. 23rd 2022.
https://doi.org/10.4337/9781789906035.00024
29. Sharma PK, Madsen K (2021) Curricular framework for advancing circular economy. Lucart
Professional-educational
30. Thomas LDW, Autio E, Gann DM (2014) Architectural leverage: putting platforms in context.
Acad Manag Perspect 28(2):198–219
31. Adner R (2017) Ecosystem as structure: an actionable construct for strategy. J Manag 43(1):39–
58
32. González de Molina M, Toledo VM (2014) The social metabolism—a socio-ecological theory
of historical change. Springer, Berlin, Germany, vol 3. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3319-063
58-4
33. Ellen Macarthur Foundation. What is a Circular Economy? Accessed on Feb. 23rd, 2022.
https://ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/topics/circular-economy-introduction/overview

64
M. K. Habib
34. Saffré B, Nicolas Buttin N (2019) Activate the circular economy: reconcile economy and
nature. Kindle Edition
35. Stefanakis A, Nikolaou I (eds) (2022) Circular economy and sustainability, vol 2. Environ-
mental Engineering. 1st edn, Elsevier, Feb 23rd, 2022
36. Visser W (1996) Two functions of analogical reasoning in design: a cognitive-psychology
approach. Des Stud 17(4):417–434
37. Herrmann C, Schmidt C, Kurle D, Blume S, Thiede S (2014) Sustainability in manufacturing
and factories of the future. Int J Precis Eng Manuf-Green Tech 1(4):283–292
38. Bonilla S, Silva H, Terra da Silva M, Franco Gonçalves R, Sacomano J (2018) Industry
4.0 and sustainability implications: a scenario-based analysis of the impacts and challenges.
Sustainability 10(10):3740
39. Kiel D, Müller JM, Arnold C, Voigt K-I (2017) Sustainable industrial value creation: beneﬁts
and challenges of industry. Int J Innov Manag 21(8):1740015
40. Mead T, Jeanrenaud S (2017) The elephant in the room: Biomimetics and sustainability?.
Bioinsp Biomimetic Nanobiomater 6(2):113–121
41. Moreno DP, Hernandez A, Yang MC, Otto KN, Holtta K, Linsey JS, Wood KL, Linden A
(2014) Fundamental studies in design- by-analogy: a focus on domain-knowledge experts and
applications to transactional design problems. Des Stud 35(3):232–272
42. Mirjalili S, Gandomi AH, Mirjalili SZ, Saremi S, Faris H, Mirjalili SM (2017) Salp swarm
algorithm: a bio-inspired optimizer for engineering design problems. Adv Eng Softw 114:163–
191
43. Coyle S, Majidi C, LeDuc P, Hsia KJ (2018) Bio-inspired soft robotics: material selection,
actuation, and design. Extreme Mech Lett
44. Pan H, Jing X, Sun W, Gao H (2018) A bioinspired dynamics-based adaptive tracking control
for nonlinear suspension systems. IEEE Trans Control Syst Technol 26(3):903–914
45. Pahl G, Beitz W, Feldhusen J, Groe H-K (2007) Engineering design, 3rd edn. Springer-Verlag,
London, p 2007
46. Hubka V (1982) Principles of engineering design, Zürich, Heurista
47. Otto KN, Wood KL (2008) Product design: techniques in reverse engineering and new product
development. Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, N.J.
48. Qian L, Gero J (2009) Function behavior structure paths and their role in analogy-based design.
AI EDAM, 289–312
49. Linsey J, Laux J, Clauss E, Wood K, Markman A (2007) Effects of analogous product represen-
tation on design-by-analogy. International conference on engineering design, ICED’07. Paris,
France
50. El- RMA (2012) Biomimicry as a problem solving methodology in interior architecture.
Procedia Soc Behav Sci 50:502–512
51. Helms M, Swaroop SV, Geol AK (2009) Biologically inspired design: process and product.
Elsevier 606–622:2009
52. Helms M, Vattam SS, Goel AK (2009) Biologically inspired design: process and products.
Design Stud 30:606–622
53. Roshko T (2010) The pedagogy of Bbio-design: methodology development. WIT Trans Ecol
Environ 38. 2010 WIT Press
54. Hatchuel A, Salgueiredo CF (2018) Beyond analogy: a model of Bioinspiration for creative
design. AI EDAM, Cambridge University Press (CUP), 30, pp159–170
55. Vincent JFV, Bogatyreva OA, Pahl A-K, Bogatyrev NR, Bowyer A (2005) Putting biology into
TRIZ: a database of biological effects. Creativity Innov Manage 14:66–72
56. Schön DA (1988) Toward a marriage of artistry and applied science. The architectural design
studio. J Architect Educ 41(4):4–10

A Holistic and Sustainable View
on the Product Creation Process
for Mechatronic Systems
Peter Hehenberger
Abstract Nowadays sustainability is an important factor in the design and produc-
tion of mechatronic systems, especially the environmental aspects which will be
mainly deﬁned in the development phase and inﬂuence the whole later life cycle.
This chapter gives an overview of the main approaches like life cycle assessment
(LCA) or related key performance indicators (KPIs) and considers their relevance
to mechatronic design. Therefore, some methods for the early design phases are
presented based on the well-known approaches V-model and design structure matrix.
The summary will be reﬂected with two signiﬁcant use cases.
Introduction
In recent years, sustainability has obtained more importance in consideration of
the life cycle phases of mechatronic systems. The design/engineering phase is very
signiﬁcant here as the main properties will be ﬁxed and have a major inﬂuence on
production, usage and recycling.
Mechatronic systems are typically composed of multiple sub-systems, modules
and components which may include electrical, hydraulic and pneumatic drive
systems, automation and automated elements deploying a wide range and types
of sensors and actuators along with the necessary ancillary and structural compo-
nents. Crucial for the success of such a product from a sustainability point of view
is the holistic consideration of environmental behaviour of the integrated whole, as
sustainable-speciﬁc requirements essentially always relate to the whole system.
As state of the art, a lot of methods exist for modelling and analysing these aspects
in several domains (e.g. life cycle assessment (LCA), “Materials, Energy, Chemicals
and Others” MECO-matrix, see [1]). The motivation for this chapter is to present a
methodological approach for the speciﬁc usage of analysing mechatronic systems.
Over the last few decades, work in product development has changed dramatically.
Thedemandsofthemarketforshorterproductlifecycles(andtheresultingshortening
P. Hehenberger (B)
University of Applied Sciences Upper Austria, Wels, Austria
e-mail: peter.hehenberger@fh-wels.at
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
P. Hehenberger et al. (eds.), EcoMechatronics,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-07555-1_5
65

66
P. Hehenberger
Fig. 1 Life cycle phases and their importance
of their product development times) pose ever new challenges to the product devel-
opment process and for the improvement of the manufacturing processes of these
products. At the same time, the ever-cheaper hardware and, in contrast, improve-
ments in processor performance and memory capacities are making the computer an
increasingly important companion in all phases of the design process.
In the development of new products, the majority of product costs and environ-
mental aspects (see [2]) are determined in the planning and engineering phase. In
contrast, most of the impacts are felt in the production, usage and end-of-life (see
Fig. 1). The reduction of resource usage in these phases is achieved on the one hand
by new technologies, selected materials, and energy ﬂexibility of production, while
on the other hand, there is potential for savings through the use of the most speciﬁc
“Eco-design”-methods or “Design for Sustainability” [3, 4].
Background
Initially, consideration of the different terms and their relation to mechatronic product
creation processes is presented.
Sustainability with speciﬁc focus on ecological aspects
The development of sustainable products is thus a central prerequisite for maintaining
and increasing the competitiveness of manufacturing companies. Originally ecolog-
ically motivated, common deﬁnitions of sustainability placed ecological, economic

A Holistic and Sustainable View on the Product …
67
Fig. 2 Sustainability
and social aspects on an equal footing. This simple basic model is also called the
“Magic Triangle of Sustainability” or the “Three Pillars Model” (see Fig. 2, [5, 6]).
• Economic: The economic dimension addresses the need for constant competitive-
ness, sustainable product development and, in particular, the need for companies
to remain competitive.
• Social: The social dimension of sustainability takes into account aspects such
as social justice, equal distribution of resources, health, qualiﬁcation, education,
human lifestyles and social resources.
• Environmental (Ecological): The way of doing business has a signiﬁcant impact
on sustainable development.
Sustainable value creation must be ensured in terms of production, services and
trade, for example through the implementation of a circular economy or an envi-
ronmental management system. To ensure sustainability, the inclusion of various
strategies is necessary [7].
• One of these is increasing efﬁciency, which aims to reduce material and energy
use while maintaining the quality and quantity of products. This can be achieved
through efﬁcient processes, efﬁcient products (e.g. low consumption), increasing
the lifespan of products, their repairability and through optimised recycling.
• The sufﬁciency strategy targets human behaviour. The aim is to shape human
behaviour in such a way that it is less harmful to the environment.
• The consistency strategy, on the other hand, aims to adapt the existing energy
and material ﬂows to the ecological system and thus avoid ecological damage
in principle. This can be achieved, for example, through the use of renewable
resources.

68
P. Hehenberger
Life cycle assessment LCA as a selected method
Sustainability can be measured or veriﬁed by means of life cycle analysis, also called
life cycle assessment (LCA). Life cycle assessment is thus a procedure for analysing
the environmental aspects and effects of product systems. According to ISO EN
14,040 [8], a life cycle assessment can be deﬁned as follows:
LCA is a method for estimating the environmental aspects and product-speciﬁc potential
environmental impacts associated with a product. The LCA study examines the environ-
mental aspects and potential environmental impacts over the life cycle of a product (i.e.
cradle to grave) from raw material extraction, through production, use and disposal.
In 1997, a structure for LCA was deﬁned in the above ISO standard. The struc-
ture developed by SETAC (Society of Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry)
was largely retained. Only the improvement assessment component was replaced by
interpretation. The LCA according to ISO EN 14,040 [8] is divided into four phases,
which are shown in Fig. 3.
Goal and scope deﬁnition
The ﬁrst step in preparing a life cycle assessment is the deﬁnition of the objectives
and the scope of the study. The deﬁnition of the objectives provides the basis for the
scope of the study and is therefore crucial for the interpretation of the results. The
depth and accuracy of the study are determined on the basis of the required study
objectives.
In the course of deﬁning the scope of the study, the following topics are described
in more detail:
• The product system
• Technical system boundary
Fig. 3 LCA according to ISO EN 14,040 [8]

A Holistic and Sustainable View on the Product …
69
• Geographical system boundary
• Temporal system boundary
• The functional unit
• Data availability and depth of the study
Inventory Analysis
The next step is to draw up the life cycle inventory. This contains information on
all physical input variables such as resources, materials or semiﬁnished products
and output variables such as emissions, waste or valuable products that occur in the
product life cycle. The basis for many of these parameters is provided by databases
that are either publicly accessible or generated by companies from historical values.
Starting with data collection, the following steps are important:
• Flow diagram and reference quantities:
Building on the collected data from the phase of deﬁning the objectives and
the scope of the study, the product tree consisting of process modules is now
elaborated in detail. The ﬂow diagram consists of individual process modules,
which represent the smallest unit in a life cycle inventory. A ﬁrst pre-selection of
which process modules are not considered was already carried out in the previous
phase. In the next step, the individual process modules are broken down in more
detail, whereby a distinction is made here between two variants (Multi-input
processes or Multi-output processes). In a life cycle assessment, the data is related
to the output of a process module, which means that the original data usually has
to be converted into other units in order to create a uniform basis. For material
products, the reference unit is very often the mass of the ﬁnal product
• Data collection and data quality:
Before starting the investigations and preparing the life cycle inventory, the impact
categories and the requirements for data and data quality must be deﬁned and
selected. If, for example, only the impact area of climate change is to be inves-
tigated in the next step, the impact assessment, the life cycle inventory can be
restricted to substances that have an inﬂuence on climate change. The neces-
sary calculations of substance ﬂows from the environment into the system under
consideration and vice versa can be carried out on the basis of the data collected.
Impact Analysis
The impact assessment is necessary to describe the effect of the quantitatively
recorded material ﬂows on the environment. This makes it possible to assess all
environmental impacts and to compare different impacts on the environment. The
impact assessment consists of three main steps:
1.
Selection of impact categories:
The selection of impact categories has already been made in the previous steps,
but should be reviewed again at this point and adjusted if necessary. Subse-
quently, the characterisation model and the impact indicator must be deﬁned

70
P. Hehenberger
for each impact category. The cause–effect chain of the elementary ﬂows deter-
mined in the life cycle inventory is described by the characterisation model.
The appropriate impact indicator is then selected within this model. The impact
indicator is environmentally relevant and represents the effects of inputs and
outputs of the system on the impact endpoint.
2.
Classiﬁcation:
In classiﬁcation, an impact category is assigned to each elementary ﬂow as
determined in the life cycle inventory. Since several ﬂows can contribute to one
impact category, or vice versa, parallel as well as serial mechanisms must be
considered.
3.
Characterisation:
In this step, the impact indicator values of the individual elementary ﬂows
assigned to a category are calculated by multiplying the result of the life cycle
inventory by the characterisation factor of the substance. To obtain the result for
the impact category, all elementary ﬂuxes assigned to an impact category must
ﬁrst be converted into a common unit and then added together.
Interpretation
In the ﬁnal step of a life cycle assessment, the information and ﬁndings obtained are
summarised and interpreted. This should enable comprehensible statements to be
made for the target group and provide support for decision-making. The evaluation
is divided into three main sections:
1.
Identiﬁcation of signiﬁcant parameters: The aim is to identify those outcome
parameters for which there is a quantitative difference. This prevents misinter-
pretation.
2.
Assessment: The assessment phase should serve to check one’s own work. It
should include a completeness, sensitivity and consistency check to support
clear and understandable communication of the results.
3.
Conclusions, limitations and recommendations: In the ﬁnal part of the
evaluation, conclusions are drawn, limitations deﬁned and recommendations
formulated for the target group addressed.
Key performance indicators for describing the environmental aspects
There exist many key performance indicators (KPIs) for environmental aspects. The
most relevant mechatronic systems are presented here [1, 3, 9, 10]:
• Carbon footprint:
The carbon footprint is probably the best-known method of life cycle assessment
today and is used in numerous studies. Starting with simple products of daily
life such as milk or bread, there are various online tools to calculate a personal
carbon footprint. These are used as marketing tools for comparative studies of
competing companies or to provide the wider population with a relatively simple

A Holistic and Sustainable View on the Product …
71
and comprehensible proof as of how wastefully resources are sometimes used.
But what exactly is the carbon footprint? Since there is a multitude of deﬁnitions, a
deﬁnition that is valid for this work will be introduced here: “The carbon footprint
is a measure of the exclusive total amount of carbon dioxide emissions that is
directly and indirectly caused by an activity or is accumulated over the life stages
of a product” [9, 10].
• Material ﬂow analysis:
Material ﬂow analysis is understood as the input- and output-side balancing of
ecologically relevant materials and energy ﬂows. The term substance does not
distinguish between chemical elements or compounds and more complex objects
such as raw materials, semi-ﬁnished products or waste.
• Global warming potential (greenhouse gas potential):
According to the German Federal Ministry of Transport, Building and Urban
Affairs, global warming potential (GWP) can be deﬁned as follows: “The global
warming potential (GWP) is the potential contribution of a substance to the
warming of the air layers near the ground, i.e. to the so-called greenhouse effect.”
The ratio of the contribution of a substance relative to the global warming poten-
tial of the substance carbon dioxide is deﬁned as the GWP value. The lower this
GWP value, the lower the potential effect on global warming.
• Ecological scarcity method:
The ecological scarcity method can be used in the course of preparing a life cycle
assessment. Here, the weighting of environmental impacts of products or entire
systems is examined. The result of the life cycle inventory is needed to carry it
out. The result is the weighting of the data from the life cycle inventory, which
has so-called environmental impact points as a unit. To calculate the desired eco-
points, the life cycle inventory data are multiplied by the respective eco-factor.
By adding up the individual eco-points, the total number of points is obtained and
thus a measure of the environmental impact. This type of assessment can be used
as a basis for decision-making.
The Linkage between Mechatronics, Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS), and Product-
Service-Systems (PSS)
The word mechatronics was born over 40 years ago as an artiﬁcial word combining
mechanics and electronics in Japan. With the advent of microelectronics and later,
in particular, microprocessor technology, a further component of mechatronics was
added in the form of information technology. The VDI guideline VDI2206 [11]
describes mechatronics:
... as the synergetic interaction of the disciplines of mechanical engineering, electrical engi-
neering and information technology in the design and manufacture of industrial products
and in process design.
For many years now, information and communication technology has been the
absolute central innovation driver (and unfortunately also cost driver) in originally

72
P. Hehenberger
mechanically dominated disciplines, such as the automotive industry. According to
a recent study, the share of software development in the automotive sector will rise
to 40% of total development costs in the next few years.
The latest development around mechatronic systems is that of intelligent systems,
including so-called cyber-physical systems (CPS). Cyber-physical systems are
systems that incorporate inherent intelligence and networking [12]. The term
Internet-of-Things (IoT) should also be seen in this context; intelligence is here
an important aspect in order to allow the networked systems to cooperate in a goal-
oriented manner [13]. The development of CPS and software-intensive mechatronic
systems is very complex compared to earlier, purely mechanical systems. Systems
engineering is a possibility with an interdisciplinary approach to develop complex
products [14]. The overall system is broken down into several smaller sub-systems,
which can then be considered independent of each other. Systems engineering not
only considers purely technical aspects but also those of project management.
Product-service systems (PSS) are understood as service offerings with signiﬁcant
shares of both tangible goods and services (hybrid service bundles). The services are
not only provided at the beginning or on a few occasions (e.g. maintenance intervals)
butrepresentanintegralpartofthePSS.Theycan,forexample,beprovidedalongside
the ordering, procurement, use and billing of the range of services. Examples of PSS
in the area of consumer applications include rental bicycles and car-sharing systems
that are booked, organized and billed via the internet.
In the area of industrial products, where the buyer or user is an industrial customer,
there are now also numerous models for PSS. These include, for example, the produc-
tion and drilling of boreholes according to their number and size as well as according
to the material in which the holes are drilled. Also, for some users, it is no longer
possible to buy aircraft engines, but only to lease them against billing for miles and
time.
Customers beneﬁt from the reduced capital investment and suppliers can use these
business models to bind their customers more closely to them and gain important
information from the use of their products.
• Pure product:
Here, the product is owned by the customer and the customer is independently
responsible for the results or repairs. For example, the purchase of a washing
machine without additional services.
• Pure service:
In this example, it is a pure service, such as a launderette or car rental. Here, the
customer does not own the product, but beneﬁts exclusively from the outcome of
the service offered.
Three types of PSS are as follows [15]:
• Product-oriented PSS:
After selling the product to the customer, services such as warranty and mainte-
nance are provided [15]. For example, the sale of a TV or a smartphone to an end

A Holistic and Sustainable View on the Product …
73
customer. In the case of a product-oriented PSS, the classic sale of products is at
the centre of the business model.
• Use-oriented PSS:
Customer uses the product from the service provider but cannot own it [15]. For
example, the taxi service and hotel accommodation. In the case of a use-oriented
PSS, the product remains the property of the provider, and the use of the product
is the key to the business model.
• Result-oriented PSS:
Customer expects the outcome instead of the usage of the product retained by
the company [15]. For example, one can ask for food from the catering company
instead of renting utensils from a catering service and cooking food of their own.
In the case of an outcome-oriented PSS, an agreement is reached between the
customer and the provider on the goal to be achieved. The choice of product and
approach is up to the provider, the results count and are rewarded.
The inﬂuence on sustainability from PSS is presented by [16].
Viewpoints on Methodological Approaches for Mechatronics
This section presents some viewpoints for systematic processes to include environ-
mental aspects in the design and production of mechatronic systems.
Life cycle phases of products and their production systems
For a holistic view of the sustainable properties of mechatronic systems, it is neces-
sary to consider all life cycle phases and also the interaction between the product and
the production system. The phases established are beginning-of-life (BOL), middle-
of-life (MOL) and end-of-life (EOL). BOL phase contains the initial product design,
its development, testing, production and initial marketing. The MOL stage consists
of external logistics, use and support. The ﬁnal phase is EOL, where the retired
products are re-collected and re-manufactured for recovery [17].
From an engineering viewpoint, product lifecycle management (PLM) stages
are directly related to the development, production and distribution of the product.
Figure 4 shows a graphic representation of the PLM stages and processes from the
engineering viewpoint. The ﬁve phases of the product life cycle can be described in
detail as follows:
• Planing: The ideation phase happens when the product is just a concept in a
person’s mind. Aspects such as functions and requirements might be addressed.
• Engineering: Followed by the deﬁnition phase, where the idea is portrayed in
detail.
• Production: Then there is the realization phase, where the product is built.
• Usage: Afterwards follows the use/support phase, where the customer uses the
product. This stage is a rich source of information about the product. During this

74
P. Hehenberger
Fig. 4 Product—production system life cycle
phase, the performance of the product is observed. Based on that, it is decided if
changes in the design have to be done.
• End of Life: The ﬁnal phase is disposal/recycling/retirement. In this phase,
the customer disposes of the product. Depending on the material and the
manufacturing process, the product is recycled or deposited in a landﬁll.
The production system has the same phases and interacts with the other PLMs.
In the production phase the resources are very relevant and can be classiﬁed as:
• Energy: This is needed for the machines operating the production process and
also for the factory [18, 19].
• Material: This begins with the extraction of raw materials and also the recycling
of materials is important, see Circular Economy [20].
Eco conceptual mechatronic design—modularisation
It is proven that there is a permanent change in the product development process.
This transformation is inﬂuenced by changing market conditions and new product
requirements. Product complexity increased due to a much greater product variety
suitable for several markets and the constantly increasing availability and capability
of electrical components and the associated embedded software (mechatronics) in a
product [12].
The product development process is usually carried out as a project. The workﬂow
consists of activities that build on each other according to a model-like, theoretical
logic. The model is based on the procedure for solving complex problems and is
therefore generally valid for product development. The concrete workﬂow, meaning
the structural and procedural integration of these activities in a company, must, on

A Holistic and Sustainable View on the Product …
75
the other hand, always be adapted to the speciﬁc development context which forms
the basis for project management. The detailed planning of product development
processes is complicated by iterations and the co-evolution of the problem and the
solution associated with problem-solving. Competing objectives demand compro-
mises and the open solution space, which allows a multitude of possible solutions, and
recurrently requires a systematic evaluation of alternatives. These framework condi-
tions lead to typical requirements for the design of product development processes.
It needs to be possible that the initial objective can be readjusted regularly during
development in accordance with the progress of knowledge. Iterations in the process
must allow new ﬁndings to be taken into account. In order to keep iteration loops as
short as possible, veriﬁcation and validation of the fulﬁlment of requirements already
need to be performed for partial results during development [21]. In a sustainable
view, the concept decision (with analysis of the interaction between the involved
disciplines) is an important stage before the structure will be ﬁxed.
Modularity is an absolutely key issue in achieving sustainable products—the
product architecture has a major inﬂuence on the life cycle of a product. Thus,
modularity allows for achieving sustainability beneﬁts in every life cycle [22].
• Green modularisation methods: Refers to methods for modularising products
(methods for developing product architectures), taking into account the entire life
cycle. Most scientiﬁc publications refer to this overarching aspect.
• Design for X: Design for X (DfX) methods are well-known and established
methods for product development. An extension with regard to sustainability
and environmental protection has been the subject of numerous scientiﬁc publi-
cations, especially in recent years. Design for end-of-life and design for disas-
sembly contain guidelines for a broad application during product development.
The aforementioned DfX methods often make use of the properties of modularity
[23].
• Manufacture: The production of highly engineered goods is the pillar of pros-
perity in industrialised countries and modularisation offers a way to make produc-
tion efﬁcient. This can be done by optimising the utilisation of production lines,
increasing the efﬁciency of work organisation, improving quality and reducing
lead times. All these aspects can contribute to improving the eco-balance of a
production.
• Supply chains: The supply chain of production is another lever for improving
sustainability. In many industries, a long supply chain is necessary to produce
the products. If the supply chain is converted to a well-functioning just-in-time
procurement, for example, and the storage quantity is thus kept small, expensive
and resource-consuming, intermediate storage can be dispensed with. Here, too,
modularity helps to optimise the process.
• Usage: Refers to the phase in which the product is used. Modularity can offer
several advantages in this context. Technically obsolete modules can be replaced,
and maintenance and repairs can be carried out more easily (e.g. by exchanging
modules).

76
P. Hehenberger
Fig. 5 EcoMechatronics V-Model
EcoMechatronics and V-Model
The design process that follows a V-model is one of the methodologies available in
order to design a mechatronic system [11]. It is more popular nowadays and widely
used in a lot of different processes. This procedure is also known as the integration
of engineering across traditional boundaries. The design of a mechatronic system is
divided into a hierarchical sequence. In the following, it is possible to see an example
of a V-model, where the main mechatronic components have been integrated into the
system. These components are the mechanical system, the electronic system and the
information technology. Figure 5 is based on the VDI guideline 2206 [11], which
uses the V-model as the macro level and shows in addition integration of modelling
and analysing of environmental aspects at different stages.
As it has been explained in the previous section regarding the phases of the mecha-
tronic system design, the particular sub-systems which form the overall mechatronic
structure are decided after evaluation of the product speciﬁcations. The sub-systems
are developed simultaneously, and afterwards, they are tested. The next step is to
integrate them after which the execution of the combined system is analysed. If it is
necessary to correct something, all the phases have to be completed again.
With so many variables it is easy to make an error in the process, especially
considering that some of the variables are time-dependent. On each level, the simu-
lation and modelling have to be done separately. Once the system model has been
efﬁciently designed, the engineer or group of engineers who are in charge have to
assemble the model to run the simulation. The less critical functions available, which
do not have as much priority compared with other ones, are changed or not taken
into account.
Figure 5 presents the extension of the well-known V-model with speciﬁc tasks
related to the consideration of the ecological properties of the product. This leads

A Holistic and Sustainable View on the Product …
77
to an EcoMechatronics design procedure. In the system design phase, the relevance
of environmental aspects will be shown by using green modularisation methods
(integrating the DSM). If some design parameters are already ﬁxed, the analysis
with LCA-based approaches can start.
Applications
In this section, two applications will be presented. One is related to the engineering
phase and the other discusses a production-speciﬁc aspect.
Approach for evaluation in design phases
The identiﬁcation of the main inﬂuencing components in a product system can be
carried out using the following method framework. With little available LCA data,
this allows the identiﬁcation of the component that is likely to have the greatest
impact on the LCA already in the product development phase. Once the component
has been identiﬁed, this framework can be applied to it. The design structure matrix
(DSM) is therefore often used as a tool [24, 25]. A DSM is a highly ﬂexible network
model method with many applications in engineering management and other ﬁelds.
A DSM is also a tool used to describe the components comprising a system and
their interactions, thus emphasising the architecture of the system. The architecture
of a system is deﬁned as the structure of a system comprising components, the
relationships between them, and the design and development guidelines, altogether
resulting in the functions and behaviours of the system. DSM is especially suitable
for applications in the development of sophisticated and engineered systems and
applications include health care management, public policy, natural sciences, social
systems and ﬁnancial systems [26]. A square N × N matrix is used to represent a
DSM, mapping the interactions between the set of N system components. The rows
and columns are labelled and ordered equally. The off-diagonal components show
linkages between the ondiagonal components. DSM describes different architectures.
LCA-DSM Framework
The framework consists of the following steps (Fig. 6):
1.
System description: The ﬁrst step is to describe the product system in more
detail. The design or structure and function are explained and the tasks of the
individual components are explained. The description of the system from a
scientiﬁc point of view includes naming the individual material and energy
ﬂows as well as deﬁning the boundaries to the environment.
2.
List of components: In the second step, the system is broken down into its
individual components and presented in a list. Here, attention must be paid to
the correct degree of decomposition. If the system is broken down too deeply
down to the last screw, the view of the essential components will be lost. A too

78
P. Hehenberger
Fig. 6 LCA-DSM
framework
coarse subdivision will not give clear information about the inﬂuences of the
mentioned components in the further steps.
3.
Component correlations DSM: Depending on the type of system to be consid-
ered, the mutual dependencies of the individual components are now presented
in a design structure matrix. It makes sense not only to create a DSM for the
component geometry, for example, but also to represent other dependencies.
4.
LCA: In the LCA determination, all LCA data already collected or available are
summarised. This includes the breakdown of the life cycle into the individual life
phases such as production and distribution, use phase, maintenance if required
and the phase of disposal or recycling. For the further steps, it would be ideal
if concrete data on the energy consumption in the individual life phases of the
product were available.
5.
Components to phases: The assessment of the inﬂuence of the components
over the life phases is carried out here. An assessment system suitable for the
product system must be determined beforehand. The fewer data is available or
the more unclear the inﬂuence of the components is, the smaller the subdivision
of the evaluation scale is chosen. After analysing or assessing the individual
inﬂuencing components, the level of inﬂuence is to be entered in a matrix-based
representation. By simply adding up the assessment, an initial evaluation can
be made of the phases.
6.
Components of energy types: In this step, the individual forms of energy supply
for the components in the individual life phases are considered. The basis for
this is knowledge of the electricity mix, i.e. the division into non-renewable—
fossil or nuclear and renewable—biomass, wind, solar, geothermal or hydro.
Subsequently, in a matrix-based representation, the assessment carried out from
the components to phases step can be multiplied by the percentage share of the
individual energy forms.

A Holistic and Sustainable View on the Product …
79
7.
Evaluation/analysis: In the evaluation/analysis, ﬁrst a weighted evaluation of
the evaluation steps components over phases and components over energy forms
is carried out with factors from common evaluation methods. Possible evalua-
tion methods are the cumulative energy input, Ecoindicator 99 or the ecolog-
ical scarcity. The individual weighted evaluations are then analysed and the
components with the greatest inﬂuence on the product life cycle assessment are
determined.
8.
Detailed analysis of the components: After identifying the main inﬂuencing
components, this methodological framework can be applied to them in order to
identify further optimisation potential.
Case study refrigerator: Considerations and results
In this section, the methods’ framework will be presented by means of a case study.
The aim is to identify the components that have the greatest inﬂuence on the energy
balance in terms of production/distribution, operation, maintenance and disposal.
The principle of refrigeration is based on the physical principle that liquids that
evaporate extract heat from their surroundings. If a liquid evaporates, its temperature
remains the same, but it lowers the ambient temperature to liquid temperature. On
the other hand, when the vapour is compressed, the ambient temperature increases
and liquefaction of the vapour occurs. Refrigerators combine these two processes
and carry them out with the so-called coolant in a closed circuit. Figure 7 shows the
main components and their geometrical and cooling ﬂow interactions.
The individual life phases of a refrigerator, namely production and distribution,
operation, maintenance and disposal, were each assessed using assessment methods
(e.g. Cumulative Energy Expenditure, Eco-Indicator 99 and Ecological Scarcity)
over the individual life phases. A high signiﬁcance has the production and operation
with more than 90% share. The environmental impact of the components for main-
tenance and disposal can be neglected, as this type of equipment requires very little
maintenance and most components are recycled and thus follow the cut-off approach.
G
Geometry
R
RefrigeraƟon ﬂow
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12
ProducƟon
and
DistribuƟon OperaƟon
Simpliﬁed
EvaluaƟon
1 Enclosure
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
1
0
1
1
0
1
G
G
r
o
o
D
2
1
0
1
G
G
n
oit
alu
s
nI
3
4 Compressor
G
G
G,R G,R
R G,R G
2
2
4
5 Refrigerant
G,R
G, R G G,R G,R G
1
0
1
6 Condenser
G
G,R G,R
G
R
G
1
0
1
7 Dryer
G
G
G
G
G
1
0
1
8 Capillaries
G
R G,R R
G
G,R G
0
0
0
9 Evaporator
G
G,R G,R
G,R
G
1
0
1
0
0
0
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
g
nipiP
0
1
0
0
0
G
t
a
ts
o
m
r
e
h
T
1
1
1
1
G
scin
o
rtc
elE
2
1
2
Fig. 7 Main components of a refrigerator and presentation over phases

80
P. Hehenberger
In this section, the design structure matrices are presented and evaluated across
the phases. The inﬂuence of the components on the LCA in the individual phases is
evaluated with a scale from 0 to 2 as shown in Fig. 7.
• 0: The component has no or negligible inﬂuence on the LCA.
• 1: The component has an inﬂuence on the environmental balance, but is not
signiﬁcantly responsible for a negative balance.
• 2: The component has a major inﬂuence on the life cycle assessment.
In the production and distribution phase, the compressor has the greatest inﬂuence
on the life cycle assessment due to the high proportion of steel and copper and its
complex design compared to the other components. The capillary, the piping and
the thermostat, on the other hand, are negligible in terms of component size and the
amount of materials used and are therefore rated 0. The remaining components have
only a moderate impact on the product life cycle assessment and were given a rating
of 1.
During operation, with the exception of the compressor and the electronics, no
components have a negative impact on the life cycle assessment. Due to the conver-
sion of electricity into cooling, the compressor represents the largest environmental
impact variable in this phase and is therefore rated 2.
Here the DSM is evaluated in terms of the inﬂuences of the respective components
in the individual phases. First, the evaluation is carried out using a simple summation
and then a weighted evaluation is carried out using the cumulative energy input, the
ecological scarcity method and the Eco-Indicator 99. The simple evaluation shows
that the compressor has the greatest inﬂuence on the environmental impact and that
the inﬂuence of all other components can be neglected. Furthermore, it can be seen
that the production and distribution phase has a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the overall
system.
Energy-ﬂexible production systems
In the production processes of mechatronic systems, the usage of energy plays an
importantrole(e.g.rawmaterialandmanufacturingprocessesformechanicalcompo-
nents, production of electronic components). Nevertheless, the relevance of supply
chains and logistics also have to be considered due to their worldwide network, which
is necessary for establishing the high-efﬁcient production of mechatronic systems.
These industrial production processes consume a large amount of resources, espe-
cially in the operation phase of machine tools. On the other side, renewable energy’s
share is increasing. In factories of the future, it is now relevant to have a holistic view
of energy, which includes energy consumption, energy costs and the carbon footprint
of the energy type used.
Currently, approaches to energy efﬁciency can be found in a number of research
papers and projects. Since a large proportion of the energy consumed is used by
manufacturing companies and electrical energy, these are often the target of an inves-
tigation. Often the approaches to energy saving can only be applied very speciﬁcally.
Energy ﬂexible measures are a synergetic measure for energy efﬁciency. Here, the
focus is not on saving resources in terms of quantity, but on minimising associated

A Holistic and Sustainable View on the Product …
81
target variables, such as costs or emissions. In order to be able to use ﬂexibility,
volatility of the target values is fundamental (see VDI5207 [27]). In order to use
energetic ﬂexibility, energetically relevant target values must be used. In produc-
tion systems, a number of different energy sources are used whose target values
are volatile in different ways. The volatility takes into account not only the period
of change but also the relative change in value. With regard to the types of energy
used industrially, electrical energy, in particular, stands out in terms of volatility.
The volatility of electrical energy is inﬂuenced in particular by the day-ahead trad-
ability on energy exchanges, as well as the varying availability of electricity from
sustainable energy production.
Speciﬁcally, this includes the energy price on the wholesale market and the CO2-
equivalent emissions released. The CO2 equivalent emissions are an indicator that
takes into account a whole range of greenhouse gases and converts them to the
global warming potential of CO2. When calculating the CO2 equivalent emissions
for electrical energy, thetypeof energyproduction, inparticular, is takenintoaccount.
While sustainably produced energy from wind power or photovoltaics, for example,
has a low inherent CO2 equivalent, larger amounts are released when energy is
produced from fossil fuels. Due to ﬂuctuations in demand, solar irradiation and wind,
the composition of the electrical energy ﬂuctuates. Furthermore, there is a continuous
import and export across the deﬁned control zones of the electrical energy grid, which
creates additional volatility.
In order to account for the ﬂuctuations that occur, there are a number of possi-
bilities, which were deﬁned in Fig. 8 by Grassl [28]. However, these differ in the
degree of the operational or strategic time horizon. At the production process level,
for example, the production parameters can be adjusted. This does not necessarily
entail a change in the total manufacturing energy required, but may only change
the manufacturing time. At the machine level, for example, energy can be stored. In
production systems, storage can be used in particular by AGVs. Other applications
Fig. 8 Possibilities for managing energy-ﬂexibility in production [28]

82
P. Hehenberger
are based on the concepts of routing and scheduling, respectively, adjustment of the
machine occupancy and adjustment of the job sequence. However, these take place at
the level of production planning and control. Well-founded market data is only avail-
able one day in advance on the day-ahead market. For energy-ﬂexible production,
these restrictions must therefore also be taken into account.
Conclusions
There are many future research activities necessary to reach a holistic view. The main
inﬂuence has the engineering phase, where different methods like LCA are used. In
the production phase, it is the way from a lean factory over a lean digital factory to
a green lean digital factory. The digitalisation helps to establish more transparency
about energy and resource consumption during production. This goes in the strategic
direction of a resource-efﬁcient twin.
Acknowledgements The presented considerations and results were conducted within the research
projects of the research group “SMART MECHATRONICS ENGINEERING” at University of
Applied Sciences Upper Austria.
The author thanks all partners for valuable discussions within the H2020-project “EnerMan
Energy-efﬁcient manufacturing system Management” (grant agreement No 958478) and the Project
“XLCA CO2 Life Cycle Analysis in early stage design phase” as part of the COMET-Project
“Research Center for Low Carbon Special Powertrain”, which is funded by the Federal Ministry for
Transport, Innovation and Technology (BMVIT), the Federal Ministry for Digital and Economic
Affairs (BMDW) and the Provinces of Upper Austria and Styria.
References
1. Klöpffer W, Grahl B (2014) Life cycle assessment (LCA): a guide to best practice. Wiley-VCH,
Weinheim. https://doi.org/10.1002/9783527655625
2. Ehrlenspiel K, Kiewert A, Lindemann U (2007) Cost-efﬁcient design. Springer, Berlin
Heidelberg
3. Su D (ed) (2020) Sustainable product: development tools, methods and examples. Springer
Nature Switzerland AG
4. Buchert T, Pförtner A, Stark R (2017) Target-driven sustainable product development. In: Stark
R, Seliger G, Bonvoisin J (eds.) Sustainable manufacturing, sustainable production, life cycle
engineering and management. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp 129–146. https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-48514-0_9
5. Morelli J (2011) Environmental sustainability: a deﬁnition for environmental professionals. J
Environ Sustain 1(1):1–10. https://doi.org/10.14448/jes.01.0002
6. Merschak S, Hehenberger P (2019) Ecodesign methods for mechatronic systems: a litera-
ture review and classiﬁcation. 20th international conference on research and education in
mechatronics (REM), May 23–24, 2019, Wels, Austria
7. Hauschild MZ, Rosenbaum RK, Olsen SI (2018) Life cycle assessment theory and practice.
Springer

A Holistic and Sustainable View on the Product …
83
8. ISO 14040 (2006) Environmental management—life cycle assessment—principles and frame-
work. British Standards Institution, London
9. Pandey D, Agrawal M, Pandey JS (2011) Carbon footprint: current methods of estimation.
Environ Monit Assess 178:135–160. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10661-010-1678-y
10. Wiedmann T, Minx J (2007) A deﬁnition of ‘Carbon Footprint’. Pertsova CC ecological
economics research trends: Chapter 1, pp 1–11, Nova Science Publishers, Hauppauge NY,
USA, June 2007
11. VDI 2206 (2004) Design handbook 2206. Entwicklungsmethodik für mechatronische
systeme/design methodology for mechatronic systems. VDI Publishing Group, Düsseldorf
12. Hehenberger P, Bradley D (2016) Mechatronic futures—challenges and solutions for future
mechatronic systems and designers. Springer International Publishing
13. Hehenberger P, Bradley D, Dehghani A, Traxler P (2020) Mechatronic and cyber-physical
systems within the domain of the internet of things. In: Stjepandi´c J, Wognum N, Verhagen W
JC (eds) Systems engineering in research and industrial practice. ISBN 978-3-030-33311-9,
Springer, London, Berlin, Heidelberg
14. Hehenberger P, Vogel-Heuser B, Bradley D, Eynard B, Tomiyama T, Achiche S (2016) Design,
modelling, simulation and integration of cyber physical systems: methods and applications.
Comput Indus 82:273–289. Elsevier.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2016.05.006
15. Bertoni A, Bertoni M, Panarotto M, Johansson C, Larsson TC (2016) Value-driven product
service systems development: methods and industrial applications. CIRP J Manuf Sci Technol
15:42–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cirpj.2016.04.008
16. Doualle B, Medini K, Boucher X, Brissaud D, Laforest V (2016) Design of sustainable product-
service systems (PSS): towards an incremental stepwise assessment method. Procedia CIRP
48:152–157. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2016.04.074
17. Terzi S, Bouras A, Dutta D, Garetti M, Kiritsis D (2010) Product lifecycle management: from
its history to its new role. IJPLM 4:360. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJPLM.2010.036489
18. Chiu M-C, Chu C-H (2012) Review of sustainable product design from life cycle perspectives.
Int J Precis Eng Manuf 13:1259–1272. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12541-012-0169-1
19. Menghi R, Papetti A, Germani M, Marconi M (2019) Energy efﬁciency of manufacturing
systems: a review of energy assessment methods and tools. J Cleaner Prod, 240
20. Chouinard U, Pigosso DCA, McAloone TC, Baron L, Achiche S (2019) Potential of circular
economy implementation in the mechatronics industry: an exploratory research. J Cleaner Prod,
239.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.118014
21. Bender D, Gericke K (ed) (2020) Pahl/Beitz Konstruktionslehre, Methoden und Anwendung
erfolgreicher Produktentwicklung. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg
22. Krause D, Gebhardt N (2018) Methodische Entwicklung modularer Produktfamilien, Hohe
Produktvielfalt beherrschbar entwickeln. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg
23. Vajna S, Weber C, Zeman K, Hehenberger P, Gerhard D, Wartzack S (2018) CAx für
Ingenieure—Eine praxisbezogene Einführung. Springer Vieweg, Berlin
24. Buzuku S, Kraslawski A (2017) Use of design structure matrix for analysis of critical barriers
in implementing eco-design initiatives in the pulp and paper industry. Procedia Manuf 11:742–
750. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.promfg.2017.07.175
25. Schmidt DM, Schenkl SA, Mörtl M (2014) Matrix-based decision-making for compatible
systems in product planning concerning technologies for the reduction of CO2-emissions. In:
Marle F, Jankovic M, Maurer M, Schmidt DM, Lindemann U (eds) Risk and change manage-
ment in complex systems. Carl Hanser Verlag GmbH & Co. KG, München, pp 107–116. https://
doi.org/10.3139/9781569904923.011
26. Eppinger SD, Browning TR (2012) Design structure matrix methods and applications. MIT
Press, Cambridge, UK
27. VDI 5207 (2020) Energy-ﬂexible factory—fundamentals. Düsseldorf: VDI Publishing Group
28. Graßl M (2015) Bewertung der Energieﬂexibilität in der Produktion. PhD-Thesis TUM
München: Utz

Applied Sensor Technologies
Abbas Dehghani-Sanij and Uriel Martinez-Hernandez
Abstract A key element of any mechatronics system is in its interaction with the
environment within which it operates, and as such sensors and the processing of
sensor data play a major role in the operation of such systems. Indeed, in many
mechatronics applications from manufacturing to assistive technologies, and increas-
ingly within EcoMechatronics, the role of the embedded sensors is key not only to
the operation of an individual device, but also as a source of information impacting
upon the wider environment within which that device is operating. In this chapter,
the nature of sensing and sensor technology is considered in relation to mechatronic,
and particularly EcoMechatronic, applications along with the means by which the
resulting data may be analysed and interpreted, illustrated by examples drawn from
wearable robotic technologies in particular.
Introduction
Human interaction with environment has already shown an adverse impact which is
clearly manifested in global warming and the recent events around the world. These
events, although are natural, such as unprecedented rain falls and ﬂooding, and high
temperature and mass forest ﬁres as a consequence, are referred to as man-made
events. This is because we as human beings have not been careful on how to look
after the environment that we are living in and have caused catastrophic changes in
the atmosphere. Great efforts are now needed to reverse any adverse impacts from
our interactions with the environment.
A. Dehghani-Sanij (B)
University of Leeds, Leeds, UK
e-mail: a.dehghani@leeds.ac.uk
U. Martinez-Hernandez
University of Bath, Bath, UK
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
P. Hehenberger et al. (eds.), EcoMechatronics,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-07555-1_6
85

86
A. Dehghani-Sanij and U. Martinez-Hernandez
One of the ways to control the impact on the environment is to consider manufac-
turing. It is stated that “about 80% of the environmental impact of a machine is deter-
mined by its design” [1], this suggests that a proper design approach can considerably
reduce this impact. That is why EcoMechatronics can play an important role.
A mechatronic system in principle includes sensing, actuation and control where
an integrated approach will bring mechanics, electronics and computing together
to fulﬁl the design of an intelligent system. If the systems under consideration are
energy efﬁcient and are designed to last longer and the end user comfort has been
taken into account throughout the design and development process then such systems
will have much reduced environmental impact.
Considering manufacturing as referred to earlier, an EcoMechatronics approach
will ensure not only more efﬁcient systems but also less impact on the environment
and more sustainable outcomes. For example, noise pollution can harm those who
work in manufacturing environments. Less noise will certainly improve the comfort
of the workers and reduce harmful impacts.
This idea can be even further expanded to cover not just manufacturing but also
a large number of mechatronics products being used by different end users. On the
one hand, in the manufacturing of such products, EcoMechatronics can be applied
but, on the other hand, the design of the products themselves could be inﬂuenced by
this approach to enhance product efﬁciency, sustainability and end users’ comfort.
In any mechatronic system, sensors have a profound role to play. They are crucial
both in terms of sensing within the system itself and also in relation to external bodies
and the environment. Therefore, the development of sensor technologies has greatly
advanced mechatronic systems and will make great impacts on advancements of
EcoMechatronic systems across various applications.
The purpose of this chapter is to consider some sensor technologies in general and
to put these into the context of a typical application area and demonstrate how these
technologies have already inﬂuenced the systems under consideration, and how they
will do so in future both in such applications and in other similar applications alike.
One typical area that has beneﬁtted hugely from sensor technologies is in rela-
tion to those mechatronic devices which are used as assistive technologies to help
with the mobility of individuals with mobility impairments. Some typical sensors
will be reviewed ﬁrst and then typical examples in the form of case studies will be
presented. Furthermore, ideas will be exposed for potential future of sensor tech-
nologies to enhance this particular area of application and therefore inﬂuence impact
on environment and sustainability. The aspect of analysing data captured by sensors
and how best to use them across a range of applications will also be taken into
consideration in the context of data management.
Mobility monitoring and data management has a number of applications in, for
example, health care, device development and direct feedback to end users. Accu-
rate gait analysis in real time and real environments is essential both for patient
management and well-being and for design, development and improvement of intel-
ligent customized assistive devices. It is well known that the conventional methods
to assess human gait are expensive, complex and limited to laboratory environments.
Systematic reviews have identiﬁed the limitations and drawbacks of current sensor

Applied Sensor Technologies
87
technologies. A major challenge here is capturing accurate, validated, veriﬁable and
relevant mobility data from patients in real time and in real environments by using
appropriate advanced sensor technologies and then to properly manage and interpret
the data. Future research has a range of challenges, two of which are of considerable
importance: (1) identifying and developing sensing methods that are accurate and
reliable and can be used in an integrated real-time, real-environment patient mobility
monitoring system and (2) appropriate analytical methods that can be used to deal
with large amount of mobility data and analyse them in real time. The focus of this
chapter is to address these two aspects by considering the latest developments in
these areas and also looking into a few relevant case studies.
Sensor Technologies
There are a wide range of sensors which are used in mechatronic systems. However,
in this section, the focus will be on applied sensor technologies for assistive devices
which are to be used in contact and harmony with the human body. These devices
can be divided into two broad categories: (i) those which are used for people with
weakened body segments (such as in the older population) and they could be referred
to as wearable devices (exoskeletons, orthotics) and (ii) those which are expected to
replace a lost segment, e.g. in amputees (prosthetics).
These mechatronic devices require sensors within themselves along with other
elements for their proper functionality. For example, to ensure an accurate knee
angle position is achieved, a sensor should capture knee position at an appropriate
frequency and feedback this to the controller in the system. The controller then
compares this with the required knee angle position and sends the control signal to
the actuator. However, in addition to these sensors, other sensors are also needed to
ensure a proper interaction between the devices and human body to allow harmony
and assistance to be applied to impaired mobility of end users.
Electromyography (EMG) Sensors
One of the major challenges for mechatronic/robotic assistive devices to work in
harmony with human body is to capture user intent. This can be achieved either by
using invasive or non-invasive methods. Due to problems associated with invasive
methods (e.g. infections), it is very common to use non-invasive techniques. User
intent can be captured from the brain using arrays of electrodes embedded in a cap
(brain-computer interface, electroencephalography (EEG)). Research in this area is
ongoing by a number of researchers around the world. In our case studies, we have
not referred to this type of sensor technology.

88
A. Dehghani-Sanij and U. Martinez-Hernandez
The major sensor technologies that are most commonly used for intent recognition
is electromyography (EMG). This type of sensor can be very useful for real-time,
real-environment mobility data capture as well.
The movement in the body is based on contraction of muscles where they receive
the relevant signals from the brain. Two types of EMG sensors may be used. A
needle-based EMG will capture the electrical signal directly from within the muscle.
On the other hand, surface EMG (sEMG) electrodes are placed on the surface of
the skin on the belly of muscle to capture the electrical signal. The electrical signals
captured by sEMGs require signal conditioning to remove noise and amplify the
signal.
As the signals are usually weak, the positioning of the sEMG electrodes is very
critical. Latest development of sEMG sensor arrays has played an important role in
solving this problem to a great extent. However, the number of channels used and
associated signal conditioning require more computer processing and time.
sEMG are used in many application areas such as prosthetic devices and exoskele-
tons for their control and also for human gait analysis. Various machine learning
techniques are used for such analytical purposes.
It is also stated that “an EMG measures muscle activities such as the voluntary or
involuntary contractions. It can disclose muscle dysfunction, nerve dysfunction, and
transmission problems between the nerve and muscle all causing gait impairments
…and…thesurfaceEMG(sEMG)testingoffersanassessmentofvariousgait-related
features like changes in muscle properties paresis and muscle stiffness and tension”
[2].
Inertial Measurement Units (IMUs)
An inertial measurement unit (IMU) combines three different sensors in one unit:
accelerometer, gyroscope and magnetometer. It is a small and low-cost sensor which
is used in many applications and is particularly useful for mobility data capture.
IMU sensor measures the linear acceleration, angular velocity, orientation and
gravitational force. Some of these sensors have onboard processing and signal condi-
tioning units and provide ready data such as absolute orientation with the update rate
of 100 Hz. It is the most popular sensor for gait analysis application due to its various
advantages including internal sensor fusion of sensor data [2].
Force Sensors
Another category of sensors which are commonly used in mobility data collection and
gait analysis includes force or pressure sensors. These are particularly useful in cases
whereinteractionwithgroundisrequiredtobeincludedinthegaitanalysis.Examples
of such cases are determination of ground reaction force (GRF) or establishment of

Applied Sensor Technologies
89
Initial Contact (IC) or Terminal Contact (TC) in gait analysis. Arrays of such sensors
may also be used to investigate foot pressure pattern. Force sensors are divided into
four main categories: piezoelectric, resistive, capacitive and optical force sensors.
These sensors can be implemented in the shoes and soles, for example [2].
Vision Sensors
In principle, laboratory vision systems for gait analysis are the gold standard and
other systems are compared against these. They use large number of cameras in a
laboratory setting which capture motions of subject by interacting with markers that
are placed on different positions of the subject’s body. Suitable software packages
are then used to extract the required motion data from the captured image. The main
problem with such systems is that they are only useful for laboratory scenarios and
as such do not provide gait data for real environments. That is why wearable sensors
are used for real-environment mobility data capture.
Wearable cameras are also available, and they can provide a lot of useful data as
compared to other wearable sensors. For example, by using such sensors, contextual
information about the environment can be acquired. A camera system can be worn on
theuserwaistandassuchitcanprovidecontinuousinformationfromtheenvironment
in which the user is moving [3].
Analytical Methods
One of the challenges to have wearable systems capable of assisting humans safely
and reliably, and indeed of any complex mechatronic system, is the development
of methods for data processing, analysis and understanding of the data in real time.
Several methods from heuristic approaches based on rules to expert systems and
autonomous learning have been investigated during the last decades. A description
of these computational methods used for monitoring, recognition and control is
presented in the following sections.
Heuristic Methods
Heuristics-based methods employ a list of predeﬁned rules and conditions obtained
from the observation of the event to be addressed. A variety of heuristic methods have
been used for recognition of motion, control and assistance in respect of humans.
One of these heuristic approaches employed a threshold-crossing method to recog-
nize the angle of the lower limbs to decide when to apply the required assistance
[4]. This method was used with the robot suit HAL for the delivery of support

90
A. Dehghani-Sanij and U. Martinez-Hernandez
during walking and sit-to-stand activities [5]. Rule-based methods also use features
extracted from sensor data, e.g. mean value, standard deviation, zero-crossing, as
input for the decision-making process in assistive robotics. This heuristic approach
has been used with a single feature threshold-crossing algorithm for recognition of
sit and stand activities, achieving a range of accuracies from 70 to 90% [6, 7]. Such
heuristic methods have also been implemented in applications of bioinspired robots
for interaction with the environment, mechatronic tools for disassembly and recy-
cling, management of energy consumption and energy harvesting for sustainable
systems [8–10].
Heuristic methods are relatively simple approaches that can perform well under
controlled environments with invariant conditions. However, their nature of relying
on a predeﬁned and ﬁxed set of rules make these methods highly susceptible to
failure when even slight changes in sensor measurements or environment condi-
tions are present in the system. This is related to the ﬁxed set of rules that do
not permit the system to adapt to unexpected slight changes. For this reason, it is
preferable to use heuristic approaches together with other data processing methods.
For example, activity recognition has been investigated using probabilistic methods,
genetic algorithms and artiﬁcial neural networks with heuristic approaches to map
speciﬁc features from sensor data and monitoring [11, 12].
Machine Learning Methods
Machine Learning (ML) offers a promising approach capable of perceiving and
making decisions for the development of safe and reliable assistive robots. The
purpose of ML methods is to ﬁnd features and relations between datasets from
one or multiple sensors that can be used to create rules learned from data instead
of manually deﬁning the set of ﬁxed rules as in heuristic methods. This capability
of learning directly from data allows the assistive device to adapt to slight changes
observed in the data or slight changes in the environment.
One of the traditional methods used for activity recognition is Fuzzy Logic (FL),
which has been employed with different sensing modalities and control of robot
platforms [13]. FL and vision sensing have been able to detect sit-to-stand and tran-
sition activities with accuracies ranging from 69% to 94.6% [14]. A multilayer fuzzy
logic architecture has also shown the potential of this approach for recognition of
walking activities in level-ground walking and ramps using data from wearable iner-
tial measurement units [15]. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) together with
Support Vector Machines (SVM) has offered an approach for recognition of transi-
tions from sit-to-stand activities with an accuracy of 92.94%. This method was able
to achieve such high accuracy using a windowing approach and data from a large
number of inertial measurement units, force sensors and potentiometers [16]. SVMs
are usually employed for binary classiﬁcation; however, some works have used this
approach together with Decision Trees for multi-class recognition using visual data

Applied Sensor Technologies
91
[17]. This multi-class approach was able to improve the recognition accuracy of sit
to stand and transition to 94.6%.
Bayesian methods and sequential analysis have achieved accurate recognition of
sit-to-stand activities using a single wearable accelerometer [18]. The combination of
traditional machine learning methods such as Hidden Markov Models (HMM) and
artiﬁcial neural networks has ensured reliable prediction of sequential gait stages
[19]. Another popular method for monitoring and detection of human activity is
the Kalman ﬁlter. This approach has been able to successfully detect human fall
events using arrays of wearable sensors and typically achieving detection accura-
cies ranging from 95% to 99.4% [20, 21]. Kalman ﬁlters have been combined with
HMMs allowing assistive devices to track the human body accurately and classify
with a mean accuracy of 93% multiple activities of daily living in real-time and
well-controlled environments [22]. Sitting, standing and walking activities have also
been detected accurately by the extraction of features and processing with Gaussian
Mixture Models (GMM) [23].
Machine learning methods have been also used in other ﬁelds that require sustain-
able mechatronic systems. Examples of these applications include mechatronic
systems for sustainable agriculture, adaptive energy management for hybrid electric
vehicles, low-carbon systems for smart cities and collaborative farm robots [24–26].
Deep Learning Methods
Deep Learning methods are primarily focused on Neural Network (NN)-based archi-
tectures and have demonstrated their ability for accurate activity recognition with
complex datasets where other machine learning methods fail [27].
Deep Learning (DL) techniques based on Convolution Neural Networks (CNN)
have gained popularity for the identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation of human activities.
CNNs have been successfully trained with 3D data sequences from vision sensors and
inertial measurement units and able to detect a large number of activities achieving
high accuracy between 98% and 99.78% [28]. Ensemble of CNNs has also been
investigated for recognition of activities of daily living using wearable sensors such
as vision, inertial units and electromyography sensors. This approach showed an
improved activity recognition task with a mean accuracy of 99.68% [29]. Another
recent method that has gained the attention from researchers is Recurrent Neural
Networks (RNNs), which are useful for sequential analysis of sensor data. RNNs
combined with CNN methods have shown the potential of deep learning methods for
recognition of a large number of activities of daily living employing wearable sensors
[30, 31]. Other examples of RNN-based methods are Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM) methods and DeepConvLSTM architectures [32, 33] which are becoming
widely used for analysis and processing of sequential data from wearable sensors.
Deep Learning, together with a variety of sensing modalities, has also demon-
strated its potential in a wider range of applications such as mechatronic systems for

92
A. Dehghani-Sanij and U. Martinez-Hernandez
robot control, manufacturing processes in sustainable Industry 4.0, smart manage-
ment processes, smart cyber-physical production systems, management of plants and
plant diseases, and human–robot interaction and collaboration in assembly processes
[34–39].
Case Studies
The sensing technologies and methods for data analysis shown in the previous
sections have been used widely in assistive, rehabilitation and healthcare mecha-
tronic/robotic systems. Examples of these applications are described in the following
sections.
Wearable Assistive Robots for Locomotion Activities
Thereexistseveralwearablerobotsbuiltwithrigidandsemi-rigidmaterialsandstruc-
tures that are commonly known as exoskeletons and they are employed for assistance
in locomotion activities. These exoskeletons integrate multiple sensing technologies,
and different methods for data processing, recognition and control. Figure 1 shows
examples of lower limb exoskeletons for human assistance. The ReWalk robotic
system with a semi-rigid structure can assist the knee and hip of adults with partial
and complete mobility impairments [40], detecting and enhancing the user’s walking
action. They can assist humans to keep balance while walking but also to accomplish
daily activities including sitting, climbing stairs and kneeling [41–46]. These lower
limb devices can be conﬁgured to respond quickly to the user movement intention
using data from electromyographic (EMG), inertial measurement unit (IMU) and
torque sensors. Unfortunately, these devices tend to be bulky, heavy (lower limb
robots weighing between 15 and 25 kg) and expensive.
(a) 
  
(b) 
 
(c)
 
Fig. 1 Wearable assistive robots with rigid and semi-rigid structure: a HAL [41], b REX [45], c
Vanderbilt exoskeleton [46]

Applied Sensor Technologies
93
(a)
 (b) 
 
(c)
 
Fig. 2 Lower limb wearable assistive robots with soft materials and structure: a soft inﬂatable knee
exosuit [47], b soft exosuit for hip assistance [49], c multi-articular hip and knee exosuit [51]
Another type of robots that use a variety of sensing technologies, recognition and
control methods for locomotion assistance is the wearable soft robot. These robotics
platforms are mainly built with soft materials making these robots lightweight and
portable. Figure 2 shows examples of lower limb wearable soft robots.
Pneumatic artiﬁcial muscles, Boden cables, textiles and shape memory alloys are
the main material technologies that have been employed in a variety of wearable
soft robots. Soft wearable knee and ankle robots have been used to assist contrac-
tion/extension leg movements and also with foot movements in dorsiﬂexion, plan-
tarﬂexion, inversion and eversion orientations [47, 48]. Exosuits using textiles and
Boden cables are some of the most advanced and lightweight devices for assistance
to the hip, leg and ankle–foot while walking on ﬂat surfaces [49–51].
Recognition of Walking Activities and Assistance
Recognition of walking activities, composed of gait phases, periods and events,
is a key aspect needed to provide assistance appropriately with robotic systems.
This section presents a description of approaches for the recognition of locomo-
tion activities using different sensor technology, recognition methods and robotic
platforms.
Detection of gait events has been investigated for assistance of lower limb
amputees. This work employs heuristics methods and foot switches placed under-
neath the foot of participants [52]. The proposed method is capable of recognizing
Foot-Flat-Start (FFS) and Heel-Contact (HC) events while walking on ﬂat surfaces.
Figure 3 illustrates the experimental setup for data collection, data processing and
control. Overall, the detection accuracy was found to be 100% for Initial Contact,
FFS, and Toe-Off, and 98.3% for HC.
The use of arrays of inertial measurement units together with Dynamic Bayesian
Networks has been employed for the recognition of walking on ﬂat surfaces and
ascending and descending ramps [53]. This work has also been employed with

94
A. Dehghani-Sanij and U. Martinez-Hernandez
Fig. 3 Experimental setup for data collection, monitoring, data processing, control and recognition
of gait events [52]
modules for combining multiple sources of information and prediction processes,
which allows the system to speed up and improve the recognition accuracy. Figure 4
shows an example of the activities performed by participants and the ﬂowchart of
the recognition method.
An architecture for recognition of gait phases has been developed using an array
of classiﬁers, feature extraction modules and ﬁnite-state machines using data from
multichannel electromyography signals [54]. This approach is not only capable of
accurately recognizing gait phases from lower limb amputees but it also adapts to
Fig. 4 Walking activities (level-ground walking and ramps) and dynamic Bayesian network for
learning and prediction processes [53]

Applied Sensor Technologies
95
Fig. 5 The locomotion recognition system used for lower limb prosthesis control [54]
different terrains. Figure 5 shows the modules and their interconnections for the
recognition and control processes. This work showed that using an array of classiﬁers,
the assistive system can recognize all the gait phases during the walking cycle in real
time and with a mean accuracy of 92.70%.
Future Directions in Research and Sensor Technologies
Research in different areas ranging from medical, industrial, construction, agricul-
tural and environmental will be very much dependent on acquiring more accurate
data. The impact of more accurate data will be evident in safer and more sustainable
environments, as well as more productive and more efﬁcient outcomes. For this to
manifest itself, the huge amount of data that will become available as a result of
advancements in sensor technologies will require methods for analysis and making
sense of them to allow decision-making and accurate control.
Sensor technologies are advancing very rapidly in a number of areas. The trend
clearly shows that this technology has been and is moving more and more towards
miniaturization. By reducing the physical size of sensors and yet improving their
accuracy, they are made even more efﬁcient as they use less power. In close parallel
to this trend is the increase in their capabilities, moving in the direction of developing
more intelligent and smart sensors. Such sensors will have more autonomy in that
they not only sense a physical characteristic but also provide some initial processing
to the captured data.

96
A. Dehghani-Sanij and U. Martinez-Hernandez
Another clear direction is fusion of sensor data. There are many applications that
may require a range of different type of data to be collected to allow a proper decision-
making. For example, in some processes, temperature, humidity and pressure may
be needed and the captured data should be processed by fusion of all three categories
of data. In this context, the advancement is in two directions, on the one hand, the
sensor technologies are moving towards integration of different type of sensors, and,
on the other hand, methods such as machine learning are being developed to process
data.
Asaresultofminiaturization,smartsensorsandsensorfusion,itwillbecomemore
and more feasible to use many more sensors and therefore collect huge amounts of
data. This then necessitates technologies for transferring data in real time and facili-
ties to allow this quantity of data to be stored and processed. Therefore, technologies
for more efﬁcient wireless communication, the cloud and big data will be required.
Conclusions
The purpose of this chapter was to brieﬂy address two research challenges which
are relevant to many applications and indeed to the area of EcoMechatronics.: (1)
identifying and developing sensing methods that are accurate and reliable and (2)
appropriate analytical methods that can be used to deal with large amount of data
and analyse them in real time.
A few exemplar sensor technologies such as inertial measurement units, force
sensors and vision sensors were brieﬂy mentioned as they were directly related to
the case studies to be followed in the chapter. The application of such sensors is very
wide and has been used in many areas.
With respect to processing the captured data from sensors, a few analytical
methods were also covered. These included heuristic, machine learning and deep
learning methods.
These methods have been used in many applications such as the medical area of
assistive technologies where some case studies were presented here. They have also
been implemented in bioinspired robots for interaction with the environment, mecha-
tronic tools for disassembly and recycling, management of energy consumption
and energy harvesting for sustainable systems, mechatronic systems for sustainable
agriculture, adaptive energy management for hybrid electric vehicles, low-carbon
systems for smart cities and collaborative farm robots, mechatronic systems for
robot control, manufacturing processes in sustainable Industry 4.0, smart manage-
ment processes, smart cyber-physical production systems, management of plants and
plant diseases, and human–robot interaction and collaboration in assembly processes.
The future trend in sensor technologies will be on miniaturization, smart sensors
and fusion of sensing both in terms of developing sensors with multi-sensing func-
tionality and on board processing and also development of methods to deal with huge
data processing. This trend will result in safer and more sustainable environments
and improve productivity and reduce costs.

Applied Sensor Technologies
97
Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank the postdoctoral and PhD researchers who
were involved in the case studies referred to in this chapter. They have been referenced in the
references.
References
1. “Eco-design of Energy-Related Products”. European commission’s directorate-general for
energy. (Wikipedia, accessed Oct. 2021)
2. Abdul Saboor et al (2020) Latest research trends in gait analysis using wearable sensors and
machine learning: a systematic review. IEEE Access Spe Sect Body Area Netw 8
3. Vallabh P (2018) Reza Malekian. Fall detection monitoring systems: a comprehensive review.
J Ambient Intell Human Comput 9:1809–1833
4. Tsukahara A, Kawanishi R, Hasegawa Y, Sankai Y (2010) Sit-to-stand and stand–to-sit transfer
support for complete paraplegic patients with robot suit hal. Adv Robot 24(11):1615–1638
5. SuzukiK,MitoG,KawamotoH,HasegawaY,SankaiY(2007)Intention-basedwalkingsupport
for paraplegia patients with robot suit hal. Adv Robot 21(12):1441–1469
6. Capela NA, Lemaire ED, Baddour N (2015) Improving classiﬁcation of sit, stand, and lie in
a smartphone human activity recognition system. In: Medical measurements and applications
(MeMeA), 2015 IEEE international symposium on, IEEE, pp 473–478
7. Haché G, Lemaire ED, Baddour N (2011) Wearable mobility monitoring using a multimedia
smartphone platform. IEEE Trans Instrum Meas 60(9):3153–3161
8. Luneckas M et al (2021) Hexapod robot gait switching for energy consumption and cost of
transport management using heuristic algorithms. Appl Sci 11(3):1339
9. Favi C et al (2019) A design for disassembly tool oriented to mechatronic product de-
manufacturing and recycling. Adv Eng Inf 39:62–79
10. Noll M-U, Lentz L, von Wagner U (2020) On the improved modeling of the magnetoelastic
force in a vibrational energy harvesting system. J Vib Eng Technol 8(2):285–295
11. Feuz, Dillon K, Cook DJ (2014) Heterogeneous transfer learning for activity recognition using
heuristic search techniques Int J Pervas Comput Commun
12. Chen L, Hoey J, Nugent CD, Cook DJ, Yu Z (2012) Sensor-based activity recognition. IEEE
Trans Syst Man Cybern Part C (Appl Rev) 42(6):790–808
13. Kiguchi K, Tanaka T, Fukuda T (2004) Neuro-fuzzy control of a robotic exoskeleton with emg
signals. IEEE Trans Fuzzy Syst 12(4):481–490
14. Banerjee T, Keller JM, Skubic M, Abbott C (2010) Sit-to-stand detection using fuzzy clustering
techniques. In: Fuzzy systems (FUZZ), 2010 IEEE international conference on. IEEE, pp 1–8
15. Rubio-Solis A, Panoutsos G, Beltran-Perez C, Martinez-Hernandez U (2020) A multilayer
interval type-2 fuzzy extreme learning machine for the recognition of walking activities and
gait events using wearable sensors. Neurocomputing 389:42–55
16. Doulah A, Shen X, Sazonov E (2016) A method for early detection of the initiation of sit-to-
stand posture transitions. Physiol Measur 37(4):515
17. Qian H, Mao Y, Xiang W, Wang Z (2010) Recognition of human activities using svm multi-class
classiﬁer. Pattern Recogn Lett 31(2):100–111
18. Martinez-Hernandez U, Dehghani-Sanij AA (2019) Probabilistic identiﬁcation of sit-to-stand
and stand-to-sit with a wearable sensor. Pattern Recognit Lett 118:32–41
19. Zhao H, Wang Z, Qiu S, Wang J, Xu F, Wang Z, Shen Y (2019) Adaptive gait detection based
on foot-mounted inertial sensors and multi-sensor fusion. Inf Fusion 52:157–166
20. Anania G, Tognetti A, Carbonaro N, Tesconi M, Cutolo F, Zupone G, De Rossi D (2008)
Development of a novel algorithm for human fall detection using wearable sensors. In: Sensors,
2008 IEEE. IEEE, pp 1336–1339

98
A. Dehghani-Sanij and U. Martinez-Hernandez
21. He J, Bai S, Wang X (2017) An unobtrusive fall detection and alerting system based on Kalman
ﬁlter and Bayes network classiﬁer. Sensors 17(6):1393
22. Wu JK, Dong L, Xiao W (2007) Real-time physical activity classiﬁcation and tracking using
wearable sensors. In: Information, communications & signal processing, 2007 6th international
conference on, IEEE, 2007, pp 1–6
23. Piyathilaka L, Kodagoda S (2013) Gaussian mixture based HMM for human daily activity
recognition using 3D skeleton features. In: 2013 IEEE 8th conference on industrial electronics
and applications (ICIEA), pp 567–572. IEEE
24. Grau JB et al (2009) Sustainable agriculture using an intelligent mechatronic system. 2009
35th annual conference of IEEE industrial electronics. IEEE
25. Li G, Görges D (2018) Ecological adaptive cruise control and energy management strategy for
hybrid electric vehicles based on heuristic dynamic programming. IEEE Trans Intell Transp
Syst 20(9):3526–3535
26. Guo J, Xu T (2021) Intelligent low-carbon emission design concept for industrial cities driven
by artiﬁcial intelligence. 2021 5th international conference on intelligent computing and control
systems (ICICCS). IEEE
27. Hatcher WG, Yu W (2018) A survey of deep learning: platforms, applications and emerging
research trends. IEEE Access 6:24411–24432
28. Nunez JC, Cabido R, Pantrigo JJ, Montemayor AS, Velez JF (2018) Convolutional neural
networks and long short-term memory for skeleton-based human activity and hand gesture
recognition. Pattern Recogn 76:80–94
29. Ijjina EP, Mohan CK (2016) Hybrid deep neural network model for human action recognition.
Appl Soft Comput 46:936–952
30. Ignatov A (2018) Real-time human activity recognition from accelerometer data using
convolutional neural networks. Appl Soft Comput 62:915–922
31. Ordóñez, Javier F, Roggen D (2016) Deep convolutional and lstm recurrent neural networks
for multimodal wearable activity recognition. Sensors 16(1):115
32. Hammerla NY, Halloran S, Ploetz T (2016) Deep, convolutional, and recurrent models for
human activity recognition using wearables. In: Proceedings of the IJCAI international joint
conference on artiﬁcial intelligence, New York, NY, USA, 9–15 July 2016, vol 2016, pp 1533–
1540
33. Ordóñez FJ, Roggen D (2016) Deep convolutional and LSTM recurrent neural networks for
multimodal wearable activity recognition. Sensors 16:115
34. Xing K et al (2018) Hand gesture recognition based on deep learning method. 2018 IEEE third
international conference on data science in cyberspace (DSC). IEEE
35. Al GA, Estrela P, Martinez-Hernandez U (2020) Towards an intuitive human-robot interaction
based on hand gesture recognition and proximity sensors. 2020 IEEE international conference
on multisensor fusion and integration for intelligent systems (MFI). IEEE
36. Afolalu, Sunday A et al (2021) Enviable roles of manufacturing processes in sustainable fourth
industrial revolution–a case study of mechatronics. Mater Today Proc 44:2895–2901
37. Ampatzidis Y, De Bellis L, Luvisi A (2017) iPathology: robotic applications and management
of plants and plant diseases. Sustainability 9(6):1010
38. Andronie M et al (2021) Artiﬁcial intelligence-based decision-making algorithms, internet
of things sensing networks, and deep learning-assisted smart process management in cyber-
physical production systems. Electronics 10(20):2497
39. Male J, Martinez-Hernandez U (2021) Collaborative architecture for human-robot assembly
tasks using multimodal sensors. 2021 20th international conference on advanced robotics
(ICAR). IEEE
40. ChenB,MaH,QinLY,GaoF,ChanKM,LawSW,QinL,LiaoWH(2016)Recentdevelopments
and challenges of lower extremity exoskeletons. J Orthop Transl 5:26–37
41. Herr H (2009) Exoskeletons and orthoses: classiﬁcation, design challenges and future
directions. J Neuroeng Rehabil 6:1–9
42. EsquenaziA,TalatyM,PackelA,SaulinoM(2012)TheReWalkpoweredexoskeletontorestore
ambulatory function to individuals with thoracic-level motor-complete spinal cord injury. Am
J Phys Med Rehabil 91:911–921

Applied Sensor Technologies
99
43. Barbareschi G, Richards R, Thornton M, Carlson T, Holloway C (2015) Statically vs. dynami-
cally balanced gait: Analysis of a robotic exoskeleton compared with a human. In: Proceedings
of the 2015 37th annual international conference of the IEEE engineering in medicine and
biology society (EMBC), Milan, Italy, 25–29 August 2015, pp 6728–6731
44. Sankai Y (2010) HAL: Hybrid assistive limb based on cybernics. In: Robotics research;
Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, pp 25–34
45. Birch N, Graham J, Priestley T, Heywood C, Sakel M, Gall A, Nunn A, Signal N (2017)
Results of the ﬁrst interim analysis of the RAPPER II trial in patients with spinal cord injury:
ambulation and functional exercise programs in the REX powered walking aid. J Neuroeng
Rehabil 14:1–10
46. Yan T, Cempini M, Oddo CM, Vitiello N (2015) Review of assistive strategies in powered
lower-limb orthoses and exoskeletons. Robot Auton Syst 64:120–136
47. Sridar S, Qiao Z, Muthukrishnan N, Zhang W, Polygerinos P (2018) A soft-inﬂatable exosuit
for knee rehabilitation: assisting swing phase during walking. Front. Robot. AI 5:44
48. Park YL, Chen BR, Young D, Stirling L, Wood RJ, Goldﬁeld EC, Nagpal R (2014) Design and
control of a bio-inspired soft wearable robotic device for ankle-foot rehabilitation. Bioinspir
Biomim 9:016007
49. Asbeck AT, Schmidt K, Walsh CJ (2015) Soft exosuit for hip assistance. Robot Auton Syst
73:102–110
50. Asbeck AT, De Rossi SM, Holt KG, Walsh CJ (2015) A biologically inspired soft exosuit for
walking assistance. Int J Robot Res 34:744–762
51. Khomami AM, NajaﬁF (2021) A survey on soft lower limb cable-driven wearable robots
without rigid links and joints. Robot Auton Syst 144:103846
52. Maqbool HF, Husman MAB, Awad MI, Abouhossein A, Iqbal N, Tahir M, Dehghani-Sanij AA
(2018) Heuristic real-time detection of temporal gait events for lower limb amputees. IEEE
Sens J 19(8):3138–3148
53. Martinez-Hernandez U, Dehghani-Sanij AA (2018) Adaptive Bayesian inference system for
recognition of walking activities and prediction of gait events using wearable sensors. Neural
Netw 102:107–119
54. Liu M, Zhang F, Huang HH (2017) An adaptive classiﬁcation strategy for reliable locomotion
mode recognition. Sensors 17(9):

MBSE for Mechatronic Systems Design
with Human, Energetic, Cyber,
and Physical Aspects
Faïda Mhenni and Jean-Yves Choley
Abstract Technological advances are completely reshaping the world we live in by
allowing the design of increasingly sophisticated, fast, accurate systems that serve
and assist human beings in different domains. These systems increasingly rely on
information technology to process and exchange data to provide enhanced services.
Additionally, energy and material resources are getting scarce. To take into account
all these aspects during the design, we can then consider that today’s systems are
characterized by four dimensions: human, energetic, cyber, and physical. On the
other hand, machines and equipment are invading our daily life more than ever. The
production and use of these products damage the planet in two ways: ﬁrstly, by
greedily drawing on the earth’s limited resources (fossil fuels, rare materials, forests,
etc.), and secondly by emitting harmful and polluting emissions. Faced with this
imminent danger, awareness is growing and regulations are being enforced to control
the way we design and produce our systems. With this increasing complexity, current
design approaches are hitting their limits and require adaptation. In this perspective,
we propose a conceptual framework to structure current systems. This framework
will serve as the basis for a new design approach, of which we brieﬂy present an
outline with a focus on sustainability aspects. An insulin pump system is used as a
case study to illustrate the proposed work.
Introduction
Mechatronics is a key technology with relevant innovative collaborative design
methodologies, for today’s newly designed systems. It allows the coupling of the
physicalandmaterialworldwithcyberspace,mainlyincyber-physicalsystems(CPS)
and IoT. Interestingly, such complex systems increasingly interact with human beings
(operators, users, etc.), consume and/or produce or harvest energy of all kinds.
In this new context characterized by four main facets, namely cyber, physical,
human, and energetic, designing such systems has to deal with the environment,
F. Mhenni (B) · J.-Y. Choley
ISAE-Supméca, Saint-Ouen, France
e-mail: faida.mhenni@isae-Supmeca.fr
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
P. Hehenberger et al. (eds.), EcoMechatronics,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-07555-1_7
101

102
F. Mhenni and J.-Y. Choley
climate change, and sustainability concerns, and also has to take into account social
and corporate responsibility. It means that designers have to cope with energy
and physical resources considerations and human-friendly constraints while taking
advantage of the ability to be connected to cyberspace with relevant data, information,
and knowledge storage, as well as remote computing resources, including complex
AI ones.
Regarding their intrinsic complexity, it is obvious that designing such systems
relying on mechatronics to be efﬁciently interfaced with those four facets (or
spaces/pillars) has to summon model-based systems engineering (MBSE) for better
integration of different domains (mechanics, electronics, computing, etc.) and
physics (thermal, vibration, electromagnetism, etc.). MBSE methodologies shall
be then enhanced and enriched with speciﬁc system views in order to cope with
environmental, human, and life-centered concerns.
With regard to the environmental aspects, eco-design is an approach based on
the assessment and the improvement of performances, measured with environmental
performance indicators (EPI). An exhaustive list of EPI is provided in [1] and may
help to deﬁne the relevant speciﬁc indicators related to mechatronic systems. In
[2], a literature review of eco-design methods for mechatronic systems is proposed.
Authors highlight the need for reduced models in the development phase for the
calculation of the carbon footprint which moreover may take into account uncer-
tainties to be reduced at each stage of the design process. Regarding the production
processes, the availability of detailed models is also considered to be important.
Mechatronic system end-of-life (EoL) is a crucial problem to be managed for
mechatronic systems because they closely integrate mechanical parts and electronic
devices. Thus, the ease of disassembling such systems has to be rationalized. In [3],
the authors proposed a method and a design tool for disassemblability and recy-
clability that may be adapted for mechatronic systems. However, as highlighted in
[4], some new design methods and tools have to be developed in order to make
circular economy (CE) an unavoidable concern for mechatronic systems designers.
In [5], Bougain et al. proposed a methodology to integrate the environmental impacts
of a mechatronic product during its design. This is obtained through a parametric
diagram in which the cumulative energy demand is computed for four life cycle
phases: extraction, manufacturing, use, and end-of-life.
In this work, we rather propose a conceptual framework [6] to better struc-
ture newly designed systems in this constraining context. The different EPIs and
other eco-design criteria can then be integrated into this framework. Based on an
MBSE methodology adapted from [7], this framework is brieﬂy presented with an
application on an insulin pump system to illustrate the proposed work.
This chapter is organized as follows. Firstly, a new conceptual framework for
mechatronic systems is presented. Secondly, an MBSE approach is proposed in
order to support EcoMechatronic design. Then, an application to an insulin pump is
presented before giving the conclusion and some future works.

MBSE for Mechatronic Systems Design with Human …
103
New Conceptual Framework for Mechatronic Systems
Systems today have reached an exceptional level in terms of functionality offered
to users. Indeed, thanks to technological progress, modern man can be assisted in
all areas, such as transportation, medicine, and production machines, to cite only
a few. In an effort to improve the quality of life, the development of information
technology has made it possible to have near-real-time information in several areas.
Passengers can have instantaneous real-time information about trafﬁc on the streets
and about ﬂights and other public transportation. Doctors can remotely perform
surgeries and get follow-up information on their patients. As a matter of fact, we
can see that the cyber dimension is now omnipresent through monitoring and data
processing to improve the management of existing physical systems and provide
users with more functionality. Several research works focus on this transition from
mechatronic systems to cyber-physical systems [8].
In [9], the authors consider that mechatronic systems have their place at the inter-
face of cyber and physical spaces enabling these distinctive worlds to communicate.
However, as a consequence of these advances in modern systems and their tight inter-
action with humans, the level of complexity and interconnection of modern systems
has considerably increased.
Additionally, the increasing number of systems in use, often energy-intensive, that
constantly collect and process the required data, on the one hand, and the scarcity of
natural resources, on the other hand, make the energy and material aspects of primary
importance during systems design.
Based on these statements, one may consider that today’s world relies on four
main interconnected dimensions that must be thoroughly dealt with during the design
process:
– The human dimension. Indeed, systems are mainly intended to respond to a need
or provide service to humans. Humans may also be part of or closely interacting
with the systems, thus strongly impacting or contributing to their behavior. On the
ﬂip side, the modern world relies on technical systems for all kinds of tasks and
domains, which may cause several disturbances and constraints on humans such
as the increasing pollution (air, sounds, etc.), the induced environmental changes,
the scarcity of some resources, etc.
– The physical dimension. The physical dimension enables the system to act on
and sense all kinds of materials and objects be they static or dynamic, in a 3D
physical environment. The system itself is a 3D physical object made of materials.
– The informational (cyber) dimension. Modern systems increasingly rely on
data either collected internally from the different sensors or from external sources
within the system environment such as other interacting systems or different
operators and users. Being able to deal with such information allows systems
to optimize and adapt their behavior taking into account the different parameters.
However, this comes at the price of exposure to cyberattacks and bugs.

104
F. Mhenni and J.-Y. Choley
– The energetic dimension. The energetic concerns are of paramount importance
in today’s systems design. Indeed, systems need the energy to perform the required
functions but high energy consumption has both economic and ecological impli-
cations. Designs must optimize the energy consumption and whenever possible
try to recover lost energy.
A complex system is thus immersed in a four dimensions space, and mechatronic
components (i.e. sensors, actuators, embedded system software and hardware, HMI,
etc.) act mainly as interfaces between the four corresponding spaces, as shown in
Fig. 1.
Then, in order to better take into account the context of the new systems, we
propose a set of postulates and associated hypotheses as follows already presented
in [6].
These postulates and hypotheses will provide a framework that enables a better
consideration of the different facets during the design process.
– System Core Postulate (Abbreviated as CoPo): A system is articulated
around four complementary and synergistic domains, namely the physical (P),
cyber/information (C), energy (E), and human (H) spaces. As a hub providing
an interface between these domains, mechatronics enables synergies, based on
Fig. 1 Human, energy, cyber, and physical domains with mechatronics in new systems

MBSE for Mechatronic Systems Design with Human …
105
a backbone built with sensors, actuators, real-time embedded systems (hardware
and software), human system interface (HSI) devices, etc. as shown in Fig. 1;
– Safety Critical System Hypothesis (Abbreviated as SCHy): Systems, as
described in the basic system postulate, have (exhibit) a sophisticated struc-
ture and complex behavior. They are therefore potentially critical in terms of
safety and, more generally, subject to dependability issues (reliability, availability,
maintainability, safety, and security);
– System Rationale Postulate (Abbreviated as SRPo): The rationale of a system
is to respond to a need, by achieving a mission. This need is expressed by a set
of requirements, most of which constrain the parameters and variables of the
system. The system mission is formalized by operational scenarios describing the
expected behavior, in a speciﬁc context, for each phase of the system life cycle;
– Dynamic Requirements and Context Hypothesis (Abbreviated as DRHy):
Requirements continue to change throughout the life cycle of the system,
especially in an uncertain and evolving context (technology, standards, etc.);
– System Structure and Behavior Postulate (Abbreviated as SBPo): The mission
of a given system can be decomposed into a set of interacting functions, each of
which being achieved by a relevant component. This results in the structure of the
system (topology) and its overall behavior emerging from the interconnections
and interactions of the components. This emerging behavior of the system must
meet the expected behavior, Consequently, there is a duality between the structural
view and a behavioral view;
– Unintended Behavior Hypothesis (Abbreviated as UBHy): Interconnections
between physical components can give rise to unintended behaviors, generated,
for example, by multi-physical and geometric interference and interactions, as
well as by improper or inconsistent interfacing.
MBSE as a Support to EcoMechatronics
Mechatronic systems are inherently complex and are increasingly so in the new
context with increased functionality and more dimensions to take into account.
Hence, their design requires a global system approach to tackle the whole aspects,
whichiswhythereisaneedforasystemsengineeringandmainlyanMBSEapproach.
Our proposal relies on an MBSE methodology presented in [7] and consists of two
complementary phases (a black-box and a white-box phase). In this methodology, a
system architecture is developed progressively, based on the requirements, and the
system model is accordingly built in SysML. However, we intend to further develop
this methodology by integrating the postulates and hypotheses in order to take into
account the different MBSE concerns and also by structuring it according to the four
facets: human, energy, cyber, and physics.
From a model-based systems engineering point of view, human, energy, and
resources considerations can be taken into account both:

106
F. Mhenni and J.-Y. Choley
– During the “black box” analysis phase in order to elicit, capture and classify
requirements regarding human, energy, cyber, and physical aspects;
– During the “white box” analysis phase, in order to quote functional and compo-
nents architectures regarding some parameters related to energy and resources,
to reduce the number of components with fewer connections and interconnection
components (but probably with some recyclability concerns).
To do so, the idea is then to type the elements (functions or physical components
depending on the view) and links (representing the exchanged ﬂows) in the func-
tional and component views in the system model. The proposed types refer to the
main dimension of the element or link (H, E, C, and P). Based on this typing, for
each type, provide designers with criteria, guidelines, recommendations, etc. to efﬁ-
ciently consider the constraints relative to these facets. It is obvious that the criteria
and guidelines will be numerous and vary a lot according to the application area.
Establishing a generic list can only be accomplished for a speciﬁc ﬁeld and the list has
to be updated continuously in order to take into account the technological advances
as well as the knowledge acquired during different projects. In this work, we propose
to provide a list of example guidelines with a focus on the eco aspects applied to a
critical system: the insulin pump.
Illustration with a Case Study
The case study considered to illustrate this work is an insulin pump, also named
artiﬁcial pancreas. It is a device intended to regulate the glucose level in diabetes
patients’ blood. To this aim, the device shall continuously sense the glucose rate in
the patient blood, compute the required amount of insulin and then, when needed,
and infuse the right insulin dose into the patient body at the right time.
To this end, the device is composed of a “glucose sensor” to sense the glucose
level, a “touchscreen” to communicate with the patient, a “transceiver” to receive
and emit wireless data, a “controller” to manage the whole system and compute the
required insulin dose, a “battery” to store electrical energy, and a “pump” to drive
insulin from a cartridge to an “infusion cannula” ﬁtted on the patient’s skin.
A Layered System Model for the Insulin Pump
The system structure is described in a SysML internal block diagram (IBD) given in
Fig. 2.
In this model, one can notice that the ﬂows between components are typed
regarding each domain: human (presented in black), energy (presented in green),
cyber (presented in blue), and physical (presented in red). This classiﬁcation can
have many beneﬁts. It can for instance help in extracting different viewpoints (or
layers) of the system according to one or more facet(s) in order to ease analyses
performed by relevant domain designers. As an example, the different layers of the
insulin pump system are given in Fig. 3.

MBSE for Mechatronic Systems Design with Human …
107
Fig. 2 Insulin pump IBD diagram with ﬂows classiﬁcation
Fig. 3 Model layering regarding the four facets (human, energy, cyber, and physical)
A classiﬁcation of components would be more intricate since most of the compo-
nents have more than one facet. For instance, many components need energy to
operate (even if sometimes it may be negligible). All components (except software
ones if represented separately from their hardware supports) are physical and thus
subject to physical constraints and concerns. Physical concerns may contribute to
reducing the environmental impact through an adequate material choice, and fric-
tion reduction to reduce energy consumption and dust. Cyber and human facets on
the other hand usually concern fewer components. Nevertheless, we can attribute
different labels to components according to the different types of ﬂows that cross
them.

108
F. Mhenni and J.-Y. Choley
Speciﬁcation Matrix for EcoMechatronics Design
The system core postulate (CoPo) allows us to build an implication mapping of all
other postulates and hypotheses regarding each of the four proposed system facets
for a given system. Thus, as shown in Table 1, it is possible to specify a set of
complementary constraints, engineering proposals, guidelines, standards, templates,
etc. Each cell of this table has to be customized for a given industrial or engineering
domain (energy, transportation, medicine, etc.) and can help capitalize speciﬁcations.
In the MBSE design process, during a black-box analysis, a white-box analysis,
and a potential safety analysis, all the information registered in this table have to
be taken into account in order to better deﬁne the requirements, the system context,
the functional and dysfunctional behavior of the system, and the functional and
components-based system architectures. As an illustration, Table 2 proposes an
instantiation of this EcoMechatronics speciﬁcation matrix applied for the insulin
pump.
We can notice that information in columns “MBSA/Safety critical hypothesis”
and “MBSE/Unintended behavior hypothesis” may overlap, be complementary or
not. Indeed, an unintended behavior may not be safety-critical. In the same way,
safety considerations may not be related to unintended behavior.
Conclusions, Future Work
In this chapter, we have proposed a new conceptual framework taking into account
the new context for mechatronics with associated constraints such as eco-design,
low energy and resources consumption, and human friendly. Some postulates and
associatedhypothesesarealsoproposed,tostructurethedesignactivitieswhiletaking
Table 1 Speciﬁcations matrix for EcoMechatronics design
Mapping of constraints, engineering proposals, guidelines, standards, templates, etc. for
EcoMechatronic design of a given system
System views
according to
MBSA
analysis
Black box (MBSE) analysis
White box (MBSE) analysis
CoPo system
core postulate
SCHy safety
critical
hypothesis
SRPo system
rational (reqs,
etc.) postulate
DRHy
dynamic
requirements
and context
hypothesis
SBPo
structure and
behavior
postulate
UBHy
unintended
behavior
hypothesis
Human
H-SCHy
H-SRPo
H-DRHy
H-SBPo
H-UBHy
Energy
E-SCHy
E-SRPo
E-DRHy
E-SBPo
E-UBHy
Cyber
C-SCHy
C-SRPo
C-DRHy
C-SBPo
C-UBHy
Physical
P-SCHy
P-SRPo
P-DRHy
P-SBPo
P-UBHy

MBSE for Mechatronic Systems Design with Human …
109
Table 2 Speciﬁcation matrix for the insulin pump
System views
System
MBSA (Rams)
MBSE (Black box)
MBSE (White box)
P1: system core
post
H1: safety critical
hypothesis
P2: system rational
postulate
H2: dynamic reqs and
context hypothesis
P3: structure &
behavior post
H3: unintended behavior
hyp
Human
– User may damage
system
– System may harm user
– Autonomous process
– Ergonomic
requirements
– Medical relevance
– Economy relevance
– New medical practices’
ability
– Context (home, ofﬁce,
leisure)
– Cleaning context
– Touchscreen IHM
– May include a
mobile phone
– Wrong dosage
– No monitoring
– No communication
Energy
– Prohibit dangerous
energy source
– Prohibit dangerous
energy usage
(consumption,
transformation)
– High efﬁciency
required: low
consumption,
autonomy
– Use green energy
– Harvest energy
– Day and night mode
– Warm/cold conditions
– Waterproof
– Modularity to handle new
kind of energy technology
– PV, micro fuel cell
– Sudation chemical
energy
– Mechanical energy
(micro ﬂywheel,
spring)
– Short circuit
– Faulty connection
– Overconsumption
Cyber
– Internal ﬂaws (failure,
bug)
– Security (cyber attack)
– EMC
– Ability to be connected
(network, notebook,
telecom)
– Upgradable for new IT and
telecom (xG)
– Software modularity
– May include a
mobile application
– Dev. language
– EMC protection
– Faulty connection
– Cyber attack
– Bug/failure
– EMC pollution
Physical
– Maintainability
– Reliability
– Availability
– Vibrations and thermal
conditions
– Trade-off between
space/mass/duration/price
optimization versus
recyclability
– Upgradable for new
technologies/material
– Components modularity
– Materials,
production (RAMS,
pollution, toxicity,
cost)
– Multiphysics to be
taken into account
– Leak or clogged
– Overheating
– Toxic emission
– Material or component
defect

110
F. Mhenni and J.-Y. Choley
into account the four complementary domains (human, energy, cyber, and physical)
on which today’s systems rely with mechatronics acting as interfaces between these
domains.
We also proposed some guidelines to enhance an existing MBSE methodology
based on the layering of the system model and a speciﬁcation matrix for EcoMecha-
tronics, with respect to the four domains. This matrix could contain constraints
(such as integrating speciﬁc components or technologies or standard speciﬁcations),
design guidelines, and other speciﬁcations as well as different EPIs, and other eco-
design criteria relative to the system to be developed. The multilayer modeling allows
verifying that all the speciﬁcations have been taken into account.
A further step could be the implementation of the model layering according to the
four above-mentioned aspects allowing the designer to extract views with selected
aspects. A database of criteria relative to each domain could also be established
and updated all along the projects to support the designer in considering all the
appropriate constraints.
References
1. Heslouin C, Perrot-Bernardet V, Cornier A, Perry N (2017) A user oriented framework to support
environmental performance indicators selection. Procedia CIRP 61:709–714. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.procir.2016.11.211
2. Merschak S, Hehenberger P (2019) Ecodesign methods for mechatronic systems: a literature
review and classiﬁcation. In: 2019 20th international conference on research and education in
mechatronics (REM), Wels, Austria, mai 2019, pp 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1109/REM.2019.874
4105
3. Favi C, Marconi M, Germani M, Mandolini M (2019) A design for disassembly tool oriented to
mechatronic product de-manufacturing and recycling. Adv Eng Inform 39:62–79, janv. 2019.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aei.2018.11.008
4. Chouinard U, Pigosso DCA, McAloone TC, Baron L, Achiche S (2019) Potential of circular
economy implementation in the mechatronics industry: an exploratory research. J Clean Prod
239:118014, déc. 2019. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.118014
5. Bougain S, Gerhard D (2017) Integrating environmental impacts with SysML in MBSE methods.
Procedia CIRP 61:715–720. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2016.11.196
6. Mhenni F, Choley J-Y (2021) Mechatronics in a new context: a structuring conceptual framework
proposal for MBSE. In: 2021 18th international multi-conference on systems, signals & devices
(SSD), Monastir, Tunisia, mars 2021, pp 1459–1464. https://doi.org/10.1109/SSD52085.2021.
9429445
7. Mhenni F, Choley JY, Penas O, Plateaux R, Hammadi M (2014) A SysML-based methodology
for mechatronic systems architectural design. Adv Eng Inform 28(3):218–231. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.aei.2014.03.006
8. Penas O, Plateaux R, Patalano S, Hammadi M (2017) Multi-scale approach from mechatronic
to cyber-physical systems for the design of manufacturing systems. Comput Ind 86:52–69, avr.
2017. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2016.12.001
9. Choley J-Y, Mhenni F, Nguyen N, Baklouti A (2016) Topology-based safety analysis for safety
critical CPS. Procedia Comput Sci 95:32–39. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2016.09.290

Concurrent Multi-domain Modelling
and Simulation for Energy-Efﬁcient
Mechatronic Systems
Stanislao Patalano and Ferdinando Vitolo
Abstract Nowadays, mechatronic systems are used in every ﬁeld and all around
us, going through micro, small, medium and large power systems. Due to their
widespread use, mechatronic system design plays an important role in energy sustain-
ability. Mechatronic systems are generally complex systems from a modelling point
ofviewduetothepresenceofseveraldomainsandasetofrelatedinterfacesforenergy
exchanges. Such a context needs a multi-domain and integrated design to correctly
evaluate mechatronic system performances. Modelling and simulation tasks are
generally adopted to evaluate the behaviour of mechatronic systems in order to meet
system requirements. Unfortunately, energy saving is not always considered among
the set of primary requirements, while it is tackled only after reaching the expected
system behaviour. The present chapter tackles the multi-domain modelling and simu-
lation of mechatronic systems according to V-model steps and using the RFLP
approach driven by sustainability requirements. The key idea is to perform a concur-
rent evaluation of energy and domain performances. It summarises a case study, by
using Matlab/Simscape environment, to illustrate the used approach. Moreover, it
introduces the design of mechatronic systems pulled by environmental sustainability
as a new paradigm in opposition to the design pushed by system performances.
Introduction
The research and development of new technical solutions for mechatronic systems
provided a continuous improvement for such systems; we assisted over time, for
example, to different integration levels in mechatronic systems: (i) separated; (ii)
joined; (iii) included; (iv) merged [1]. Such a technological evolution induced a wide
diffusion of mechatronic systems, and such systems operate by managing micro,
S. Patalano · F. Vitolo (B)
Fraunhofer J-Lab IDEAS, Department of Industrial Engineering, University of Naples Federico
II, 80125 Naples, Italy
e-mail: ferdinando.vitolo@unina.it
S. Patalano
e-mail: patalano@unina.it
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
P. Hehenberger et al. (eds.), EcoMechatronics,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-07555-1_8
111

112
S. Patalano and F. Vitolo
small, medium and large power. Therefore, today, it is mandatory to address the
energy efﬁciency of mechatronic systems, as they can signiﬁcantly impact the carbon
footprint of ﬁnal consumer products.
In such a context, multi-domain object-oriented modelling is a signiﬁcant and
useful methodology for energy consumption assessment, but several challenges are
still open. A signiﬁcant survey evidenced the actual contribution in the literature to
methods devoted to eco-design and the actual challenges related to eco-design issues
[2]. Even if mature software environments are today available for numerical simula-
tion [3], several deﬁciencies are still existing, and they are related to methodological
issues. In particular, two challenges could be highlighted: (i) how to assure, focusing
on the design and development phase, a sustainable mechatronic system; (ii) how to
perform an effective concurrent multi-domain modelling, in the presence of opposite
needs related to different domains involved (for example, electrical and mechanical
domains).
Performance-Based Versus Sustainability-Based Design
Let’s take a carrying system composed of a drive wheel engaged with a gearmotor
actuated by a control unit that modulates the system acceleration and deceleration
(Fig. 1).
Let’s compare the requirements deﬁned in a classical design process, i.e. a
performance-based process and the requirements deﬁned assuming energy consump-
tion as primary requirements, i.e. a sustainability-based process. Table 1 summaries
the requirements classiﬁed as follows:
– Basicrequirementsaretherequirementsspeciﬁedtoassurethebasicperformances
of the system;
– Primary requirements are the requirements that have to be met with the highest
priority; therefore, they mainly drive the design process.
Fig. 1 Drive wheel system

Concurrent Multi-domain Modelling and Simulation …
113
Table 1 Different requirement lists for performance-based and sustainability-based designing
process of a drive wheel system
C1: System requirements pushed
by performances
C2: System requirements pulled by
sustainability
Basic requirements
System has to carry a mass m = 10000 kg
Stroke s = 20 m
Operating speed 0.15 m/s ≤v ≤0.30 m/s
Wheel Diameter Dw = [0.2, 0.25, 0.30] m
Primary requirements
Acceleration time ttr = 5 s
Energy consumption E ≤0.55 kWh
In the carrying system development phase, the requirements are different for
the transitional state: within a performance-based process (see C1 in Table 1) only
mechanical performances are deﬁned and, in particular, the acceleration time is a
primary constraint; within a system requirements deﬁnition pulled by sustainability
(see C2 in Table 1) and, taking into account energy consumption, a different primary
requirement is ﬁxed, accordingly.
Let’s see the carrying system. By assuming for both cases:
– a constant resistive force Fr = 10000 ∗Dw[N];
– worm gearbox (speed ratio 1/τ = [40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100] and efﬁciency η =
[0.80, 0.77, 0.73, 0.7, 0.67, 0.630.6]) engaged with an three-phase asynchronous
motor with 4 poles characterised by an angular speed nm = 1400 rpm at nominal
torque,
Let’s deﬁne the admissible gearbox speed ratio. It can be computed as follows:
1
τ = nm ∗2π
60 ∗Dw
2 ∗v
=
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
97.7 →100
per
Dw = 0.20 m, v = 0.15 m/s
49 →50
per
Dw = 0.20 m, v = 0.3 m/s
122 →na
per
Dw = 0.25 m, v = 0.15 m/s
61 →70
per
Dw = 0.25 m, v = 0.3 m/s
146 →na
per
Dw = 0.30 m, v = 0.15 m/s
73 →80
per
Dw = 0.30 m, v = 0.3 m/s
(1)
Case C1—Neglecting energy aspects, it is plausible the event of covering the
total stroke occurs within a lesser time. This theory brings about the highest speed
v = 0.3 m/s.
Let’s take into account the inertia force as an added resistive force during
acceleration. The inertia force can be computed as follows:
Fi = m ∗a = m ∗v
ttr
= 10000 ∗0.3
5 = 600 N
(2)

114
S. Patalano and F. Vitolo
The system is characterised by a steady state (sr) and transient regime (tr) which
require a different power to perform the task. The resistive torque at the motor shaft
and the required motor power are computed as follows:
Mtr = (Fr + Fi) ∗Dw
2 ∗tau
η
=
⎧
⎨
⎩
(10000∗0.20+600)∗0.20
2∗50∗0.77
= 6.75 Nm
(10000∗0.25+600)∗0.25
2∗70∗0.70
= 7.91 Nm
(10000∗0.30+600)∗0.30
2∗80∗0.67
= 10.07 Nm
(3)
Selecting the conﬁguration with the minimum resistive torque, the system could
be characterised by a Dw = 0.2m and a gearbox with 1/τ = 50 and η = 0.77.
Msr = (Fr) ∗Dw
2 ∗tau
η
= (10000 ∗0.2) ∗0.20
2 ∗50 ∗0.77
= 5.2 Nm
(4)
Ptr ≥Mtr ∗nm ∗2π
60 = 6.75 ∗1400 ∗2π
60 = 0.99 kW
(5)
Psr ≥Mtr ∗nm ∗2π
60 = 5.2 ∗1400 ∗2π
60 = 0.76 kW
(6)
During the total stroke, it can be deﬁned into three phases: acceleration phase,
steady-state phase and deceleration phase. Assuming the same slope for the acceler-
ation and deceleration phases, the stroke time (ts) and the power average (P) can be
computed as follows:
xtr = v
2 ∗ttr = 0.3
2 ∗5 = 0.75 m
(7)
tsr = s −2 ∗xtr
v
= 20 −2 ∗0.75
0.3
≈62 s
(8)
ts = tsr + 2 ∗ttr = 62 + 2 ∗5 = 72 s
(9)
P = Psr ∗tsr + 2 ∗Ptr ∗ttr
ts
= 0.76 ∗62 + 2 ∗0.99 ∗5
72
= 0.79 kW
(10)
Case C2—Let’s take into account a maximum motor power P = 0.55 kW. In
this condition, it is plausible the event of covering the total stroke occurs by using
a lesser admissible speed. By Eq. (1), there is only one admissible wheel diameter
Dw = 0.2 m. Therefore, assuming the efﬁciency η = 0.6 for gearmotor veriﬁcation,
the speed ratio can be deﬁned as follows:
1
τ = (Fr + Fi) ∗Dw
2
P∗η
nm ∗60
2π
= (10000 ∗0.2) ∗0.2
2
550∗0.6
1400
∗60
2π
= 89 →90
(11)

Concurrent Multi-domain Modelling and Simulation …
115
v = nm ∗2π
60 ∗τ ∗Dw
2
= 1400 ∗2π
60 ∗1
90 ∗0.2
2 = 0.16 m/s
(12)
Mm = P
nm
∗60
2π = 550
1400 ∗60
2π = 3.75 Nm
(13)
By Eqs. (2) and (3), the acceleration time ttr can be computed that can be provided
by
ttr =
m ∗v
Fi + Fr
=
m ∗v
Mm∗2∗η
Dw∗τ
−Fr
=
10000 ∗0.16
3.75∗2∗0.63∗90
0.2
−10000 ∗0.2 = 12.7 s
(14)
Fi = m ∗a = m ∗v
ttr
= 10000 ∗0.16
12.7 = 126 N
(15)
Mtr = (Fr + Fi) ∗Dw
2 ∗tau
η
= (10000 ∗0.2 + 126) ∗0.20
2 ∗90 ∗0.63
= 3.75 Nm
(16)
Msr = Fr ∗Dw
2 ∗tau
η
= (10000 ∗0.2) ∗0.20
2 ∗90 ∗0.63
= 3.53 Nm
(17)
Ptr ≥Mtr ∗nm ∗2π
60 = 3.75 ∗1400 ∗2π
60 = 0.55 kW
(18)
Psr ≥Msr ∗nm ∗2π
60 = 3.53 ∗1400 ∗2π
60 = 0.52 kW
(19)
xtr = v
2 ∗ttr = 0.16
2
∗12.7 = 1.02 m
(20)
tsr = s −2 ∗xtr
v
= 20 −2 ∗1.02
0.16
≈112.3 s
(21)
ts = tsr + 2 ∗ttr = 112.3 + 2 ∗12.7 = 137.7 s
(22)
P = Psr ∗tsr + 2 ∗Prt ∗ttr
ts
= 0.52 ∗112.3 + 2 ∗0.55 ∗12.7
137.7
= 0.53 kW (23)
Comparing Eqs. (10) and (23) ﬁgures out 0.26 kWh of energy saving. Assuming
20 years of operating time and 10 h of operating time per day, an energy saving of
18,980 kWh equal to 1329 e (for 0.07 e/kWh) and 4840 kg of saved CO2 (0.255 kg
CO2/kWh) can be estimated.

116
S. Patalano and F. Vitolo
The Design and Development of Sustainable Mechatronic
Systems
The methodology to assure the design and development of sustainable mechatronic
systems has been deﬁnitively accomplished and validated. Model Based Systems
Engineering (MBSE) is considered the most effective methodology for mechatronic
system development, veriﬁcation and validation by adopting the V-cycle approach
[4–8]. In particular, the VDI2206 guideline is a practice-oriented guideline for
the systematic development of a mechatronic system, and it provides a functional
modelling methodology based on the V-model. VDI2206 proposes the integration of
differentmethodstocreateasystemmodelabletocaptureandprocess:(i)information
about the system purpose, and (ii) the functions of its components to fulﬁl the system
purpose [9]. A signiﬁcant contribution of VDI2206 is that mechatronic system design
can be structured into four major phases, called “system design”, “domain-speciﬁc
design”, “system integration” and “assurance of properties” (Fig. 2).
A declination of the V-model proposed for mechatronic systems is the RFLP
approach. The descending branch of V-model is organised into 4 views: Require-
ment engineering view, Functional view, Logical view and Physical view. In partic-
ular, in the Logical view, multi-domain software environments and tools are used
to model and carry out numerical analysis, such as Modelica, Matlab/Simulink and
Bondgraphs.
Finally, an effective eco-design methodology for mechatronic systems cannot fail
to consider the entire life cycle of the system. In particular, an eco-design method-
ology must consider the four main phases of the life cycle, as stated in [2]: (i)
Development; (ii) Production; (iii) Usage, and (iv) End-of-Life (Fig. 3). Taking into
account these four phases, it is possible to integrate the inﬂuences of Production,
Usage and EoL phases in the Development phase; such integration also allows the
ecological assessment of the mechatronic system. The integration of “successive”
phases of the system life cycle is generally performed by collecting data related to
Fig. 2 V-cycle from
VDI2206 [10]

Concurrent Multi-domain Modelling and Simulation …
117
Fig. 3 Life cycle of a mechatronic system [2]
Development (CAD data, Material data), Production (Tool data, Production capacity
and Logistic data), Usage (Use data, Operating conditions), and EoL (Recycling
data, Disposal Data) [2].
The Concurrent Multi-domain Modelling and Simulation
for Mechatronic System Development
The present approach for mechatronic system development tackles the mechanical
and electrical domains considered by VDI2206 as mechatronic system performances
are widely inﬂuenced by the development phase involving such domains.
The key concept of the approach is that the mechatronic system development is not
“pushed by” system performances but is “pulled by” environmental sustainability,
as depicted in Fig. 4.
Furthermore, in the presence of opposite needs related to mechanical and electrical
domains, concurrent multi-domain modelling is used according to the VDI2206 V-
cycle and the corresponding declination using RFLP views. In particular, concurrent
modelling refers to the concurrent development of the model, related to the involved
domains, by performing a zig-zagging among them in order to accomplish the same
level of detail—for subsystems and component development—through all domains.
In such a context, there does not exist a “domain-speciﬁc design” but only the concur-
rent design of the whole system. Simulation is then the way to assign operational
input and verify system performances thus anticipating the integration of the usage
phase with the development phase.
Case Study: Hangar Sliding Door System
Huge sliding doors are the usual equipment of aircraft hangars and shipyard plants.
it is machinery characterised by redundant safety to avoid failures and collisions
with itself, aircraft and/or human beings. Its general conﬁguration is composed of

118
S. Patalano and F. Vitolo
Fig. 4 Key concept of the
approach for mechatronic
system development
System 
Performances
Mechatronic 
System 
Development
System 
Performance 
Veriﬁcaon
Environmental 
Sustainability
Sustainability 
Veriﬁcaon
Mechatronic 
System 
Development
an embedded control unit and gearmotors which drive the side sliding of leaves
guided by bottom and top rails that are either continuous or staggered (Fig. 5).
Due to overall doorway size (up to width = 100 m height = 30 m), the hangar
sliding door could require up to 30 kWh energy consumption. Therefore, based
on operating energy consumption, the hangar sliding door can be classiﬁed as an
energy-eater mechatronic system. This section compares the performance-based and
sustainability-based design approaches applied to a hangar sliding door system by
ﬁguring out workﬂow and result differences.
The case study faces a hangar sliding door design with two continuous parallel
rails; it closes with a doorway width of 33.5 m and height of 10 m. The automation
level is dead-man which means that the operator has to press the button for sliding
the door; otherwise, the door is ﬁxed.
Requirement Deﬁnition
The ﬁrst step of the RFPL approach consists of requirement deﬁnitions. Table 2
shows all the deﬁned requirements for both performance-based and sustainability
design approaches, and it highlights the basic and the primary requirements.
The requirement lists have been implemented within Simulink Requirements
Environment. For each requirement, a hierarchy and a class have been assigned.
Initially, all the requirements were assumed as functional requirements that should
be implemented and veriﬁed; clearly, during construction, it was necessary to make
changes distinguishing
• Functional—the requirements that could be implemented and/or veriﬁed;
• Container—the requirements that served to contain sub-requirements and that did
not deserve to be implemented and veriﬁed;

Concurrent Multi-domain Modelling and Simulation …
119
Table 2 Different requirement lists for performance-based and sustainability-based designing
process of an Hangar Sliding Door System
HD1
Performance-based requirements
HD2
Sustainability-based requirements
Basic requirements
System has to carry a mass m = 10000 kg
Leaves
The system must be composed of 4 leaves
The system has to have a sliding mass of 3500 kg
The system must be transportable
Drive wheel diameter = [200 230 260] mm
Leaf must have an embedded powertrain
Leaf must be actuated by a three-phase asynchronous motor
Power supply must be 400 versus 50 Hz
Power connection must slide with leaf
Safety requirements
Door must not overturn
The system must avoid collision with people and itself
The system must have a redundant collision detector
Maintenance
The system must guarantee access to electrical and mechanical parts
Material
The material must not be ﬂammable
The visible material colour must be anti-reﬂective
The system must be resistant to corrosion
The system must be impact-resistant and shock-proof
The system must guarantee thermal insulation
Primary requirements
The sliding speed must be 0.17 m/s
(no exceed)
The sliding speed must be
0.17 m/s (no exceed)
Leaf acceleration and deceleration
time is 5 s
Overall energy consumption must
not exceed 1 kWh
• Informational—the requirements that provide additional information and do not
contribute to implementation and veriﬁcation;
• Justiﬁcations—all those requirements that are veriﬁed outside Matlab such as
requirements that have been developed in a CAD or that simply complied with
European regulations.
Functional Architecture
The functional architecture of the hangar sliding door has been implemented as
depicted in Fig. 6. The “obstacle signal”, “operator command” and “power source”
ports have been deﬁned as inputs. The “Receive command data signal” block received

120
S. Patalano and F. Vitolo
Fig. 5 Hangar sliding door system –2 + 2 continuous parallel sliding leaves
Fig. 6 Hangar sliding door system—door functional architecture
a command from the operator, and sent a reference signal to the “Process signal”
which compares it with the signal coming from the “Detect obstacles” block which
is responsible for detecting obstacles during operating states. The “Process signal”
output reaches the “Modulate electric power” block that modulates electric power
in order to supply “Regulate mechanical energy” block which regulates power for

Concurrent Multi-domain Modelling and Simulation …
121
Fig. 7 Logical architecture of the hangar sliding door system—control panel block
mechanical parts of the system represented by the “Receive mechanical power”
block.
Moreover, “Modulate electric power” block has got an external link through the
power source port.
Logical Architecture
Logical architecture is composed of two main blocks:
• Control Panel (Fig. 7) that represents the operator interface;
• Hangar system (Fig. 8) that is the whole electromechanical system.
This last logical block has been decomposed into the logical elements necessary
for the low-level description of the system.
The hangar system block is composed of
• an electromechanical block for each door;
• a controller block for each door;
• an obstacle block that represents both photocells (used to detect obstacles) and
load cell (used to detect collisions);
• a multibody block that gives a 3D representation of the whole system.
Multi-domain Modelling
A digital model of the real system is created by using blocks belonging to the different
domains involved within the system. The multi-domain physical model mainly char-
acterises the performance-based design from the sustainability-based design; in fact,

122
S. Patalano and F. Vitolo
Fig. 8 Logical architecture of the hangar sliding door system—hangar system block
the two respective models are only separated by the control logic for pursuing the
speed target; both models present the same architecture as depicted in Fig. 9. The
controller block of the performance-based model modulates the leaf acceleration by
using an inverter programmed in order to obtain an acceleration slope of 5 s. The
controller block of the sustainability-based model modulates the supply of energy in
order to not overcome the speciﬁed limit for energy consumption.
The electromechanical model of a single leaf is shown in Fig. 8. The model is
composed of a three-phase voltage source of 400 V (VRMS) and a frequency of
50 Hz. The source is connected to a circuit breaker; its goal is to turn off the power
whenever a collision is detected by the collision sensor. An electric motor is driven by
an inverter composed of a three-phase rectiﬁer, an intermediate layer and an inverter.
Theintermediatelayerisusedtostabilisetherectiﬁedcurrent,toavoidpeakofcurrent
and to separate the source from the system. The inverter is commanded through the
signal generated by the control block. That control signal can assume three values:
• value 1 is associated with the motion of the door in the same direction as the
reference;
• value −1 is associated with the motion of the door in the opposite direction of the
reference;
• value 0 is associated with the quiet condition of the door.
A three-phase asynchronous motor is represented by an ad-hoc subsystem block
characterised by a heat power port. The source of heat power represents the active
power dissipated according to the power factor and the efﬁciency of the machine.

Concurrent Multi-domain Modelling and Simulation …
123
Fig. 9 Hangar sliding door system—electromechanical system of a single leaf modelled in
Simscape environment

124
S. Patalano and F. Vitolo
Motor power reaches the chain transmission and the rotational-translational
conversion of the motion. The mechanical behaviour of the door is generated by
using several parallel blocks: a block models the mass, a block models the stiffness,
three blocks model the friction between the motion wheel and the rail track, and a
block models the friction between the antitipping wheel and the upper track due to
the wind pressure. Each door has been equipped with two limit switches: one for
closing and the other for opening. The closing limit switch is modelled by a position
sensor. According to the position, the limit switch will provide a Boolean signal
equal to 1 (24 V signal) if the door is moving, or a signal equal to 0 (0 V signal) if
the door reaches the limit position. In case of an obstacle, the reverse of the motion is
provided to guarantee the re-opening of the door. In case of collision between leaves,
the turn off of the system is provided.
The controller block has the goal to calculate the low power signal to command
the inverter. According to the operating mode, the command signal can assume three
different values:
• 1 (+24 V)—the operating mode is total closing. The limit switch signal is used
as the second input and signal 1 will be sent to the inverter if the door is far from
the limit switches; a signal 0 is sent if the door is in touch with the limit switch.
In case of an obstacle, the signal to the inverter is set to −1 to have the reverse of
the motion;
• 0 (0 V) the door has to keep the quiet condition, therefore, a 0 signal is sent to the
inverter;
• −1 (−24 V)—the leaf must be opened. So, the inverter will be sent a −1 signal,
when the door is between the limit switches, otherwise, a 0 signal will be sent to
the inverter. In case of an obstacle, a 0 signal will be sent to the inverter to shut
down the power supply.
The obstacle block has the goal to model both obstacles (detected by the photo-
cells) and the collisions (detected by the load cells). The obstacle block is composed
of trigger blocks commanded by random signals.
Model Simulation
The developed model of the hangar sliding door has been simulated by using “System
Composer”. The reference systems to compute the displacement of each leaf are
depicted in Fig. 10.
Each leaf has been assumed as a point-mass (red dot), which slides during oper-
ating mode; the maximum clearance available is 33.8 m but two side pockets have
been provided to accommodate the doors when they are fully open.
Figures 11 and 12 show the simulation results of the performance-based model
(speed performance set on 0.1 m/s) for whole stroke and obstacle detection, respec-
tively. Diagrams show that during operating mode without obstacle (Fig. 10), the
obstacle signal is null, and the leaf slides for 16.9 m (starting from 25.35 up to
42.25 m) by reaching a maximum speed of about 0.1 m/s. Instead, in the case of
obstacle detection (Fig. 11) the leaf stops its sliding when the obstacle signal changes
from 0 to −1.

Concurrent Multi-domain Modelling and Simulation …
125
Fig. 10 Reference systems for hangar leaves
Fig. 11 Simulation results without obstacles
Figure 13 compares the speed and power supply during leaf sliding for
performance-based and sustainability-based models set according to the requirement
lists (Table 2). Diagrams show results without noises (low-pass ﬁltered).

126
S. Patalano and F. Vitolo
Fig. 12 Simulation results with obstacle detection
Discussion
As expected, different design approach lead to different results. Figure 13 shows
that the leaves reach the reference sliding speed for both models. Although the
performance-based model is faster than the sustainability-based model, the last one
is a lower energy consumption model. In fact, the performance-based model demands
0.313 kW/h while the sustainability-based model demands 0.203 kW/h. It means an
energy saving of 0.11 kW/h.
Assuming 20 years of operating time and 10 h of operating time per day, an energy
saving of 8030 kWh equal to 562 e (for 0.07 e/kWh) and 2048 kg of saved CO2
(0.255 kg CO2/kWh) can be estimated.
Conclusions
Mechatronic systems are today widely used and therefore it is mandatory to introduce
new paradigms and new approaches to both design and development phases in order
to assure system environmental sustainability. Even if a consistent eco-design could

Concurrent Multi-domain Modelling and Simulation …
127
Fig. 13 Comparison between performance-based and sustainability-based simulation results
be fully accomplished only by tackling the whole system life cycle, it is possible
to tend to an increasingly enhanced sustainability by adopting, the key concept that
the mechatronic system development is not “pushed by” system performances but
is “pulled by” environmental sustainability. The present work has demonstrated that
mechatronic system design “pulled by” environmental sustainability assures energy
saving as well as a reduction of CO2 production with huge beneﬁts thus enabling
green and healthy design.
Further efforts must be made to perform a design “pulled by” environmental
sustainability during the early phases of mechatronic system development as the
high uncertainty for several design parameters could create a further limitation for
the development of behavioural models and simulations.
Acknowledgements This study was developed with the economic support of European Commis-
sion under the remit of the H2020 project “ENERgy-efﬁcient manufacturing system MANage-
ment—ENERMAN”, DT-FOF-09-2020, n. 958478.

128
S. Patalano and F. Vitolo
References
1. Zheng C, Bricogne M, Le Duigou J, Eynard B (2014) Survey on mechatronic engineering: a
focus on design methods and product models. Adv Eng Inform 28:241–257
2. Merschak S, Hehenberger P (2019) Ecodesign methods for mechatronic systems: a litera-
ture review and classiﬁcation. In: 20th international conference on research and education in
mechatronics (REM), pp 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1109/REM.2019.8744105
3. Ranjana S (2021) Simulation and analysis of modern power systems, Mc Graw-Hill
4. Akundi A, Lopez V (2021) A review on application of model based systems engineering to
manufacturing and production engineering systems. Procedia Comput Sci 185:101–108
5. Kleiner S, Kramer C (2013) Model based design with systems engineering based on RFLP
Using V6. In: Proceedings of the 23rd CIRP design conference. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-642-30817
6. Mhenni F, Choley J-Y, Penas O, Plateaux R, Hammadi M (2014) A SysML-based methodology
for mechatronic systems architectural design. Adv Eng Inform 28:218–231
7. Hammadi M, Iebba M, Camargo Rosa F, Veneri O, Capasso C, Patalano S, Copertino G
(2015) System approach to the pre-design of electric propulsion systems for road vehicles.
In: Proceedings of IEEE international symposium on systems engineering, ISSE 2015, Rome,
Italy, pp 229–236. ISBN: 978-147991920-8.https://doi.org/10.1109/SysEng.2015.7302762
8. Patalano S, Vitolo F, Lanzotti, A (2015) Object-oriented model validation for single bowden
power window system development. In: Proceedings of IEEE international symposium on
systems engineering, ISSE 2015, Rome, Italy, pp 150–154. https://doi.org/10.1109/SysEng.
2015.7302748
9. VDI2206,
DesignHandbook2206
(2003)
Entwicklungsmethodik
fur
mechatronische
Systeme/Design methodology for mechatronic systems. VDI Publishing Group, Dusseldorf
10. Bathelt J, Jonsson A, Bacs C, Dierssen S, Meier M (2005) Applying the new VDI design
guideline 2206 on mechatronic systems controlled by a PLC. In: International conference on
engineering design (ICED 05), Melbourne, Australia, pp 1–14
11. Capasso C, Hammadi M, Patalano S, Renaud R, Veneri O (2015) RFLP approach in the
designing of power-trains for road electric vehicles. In: Sousse MH et al (eds) Multiphysics
modelling and simulation for systems design and monitoring: proceedings of the multiphysics
modelling and simulation for systems design conference, MMSSD 2014. Springer International
Publishing, pp 249–258. ISBN 978-3-319-14531-0

Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Ethics and Privacy
Roger White and David Bradley
Abstract Mechatronics-based technologies are associated with the collection of
large volumes of data associated with both systems operation and the users of those
systems. This data has the potential to form a major resource in respect of applications
ranging from healthcare to energy systems, transport and manufacturing. However,
the analysis and interpretation of the data, particularly when associated with the
application of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI), presents many challenges in relation to
individual privacy, as well as wider ethical issues associated both with the individual
and with the ability of such systems to autonomously make decisions which can
impact on the wellbeing of both individuals and larger groups. The chapter, therefore,
sets out not to provide speciﬁc answers or solutions to the many and various issues
associated with the deployment of AI and Big Data analytics, but to help systems
designers in identifying those questions that need to be asked. For this reason, the
chapter includes a wide-ranging, but by no means all-inclusive or fully comprehen-
sive, bibliography as well as more conventional references as a means of directing
and aiding systems designers in identifying problem-speciﬁc solutions.
Introduction
The growth in the numbers and capability of devices able to capture and record a
wide range of data, including personal data, while making it available for analysis is
creating signiﬁcant issues and raising signiﬁcant questions in respect of system ethics
and individual privacy, the needs of which need to be balanced against the potential
beneﬁts that could potentially be achieved through appropriate data interpretation
and analysis in areas such as health.
R. White (B)
RC2 Inc., Arden, ON, Canada
e-mail: rjw_rc2@icloud.com
D. Bradley
Abertay University, Dundee, UK
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
P. Hehenberger et al. (eds.), EcoMechatronics,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-07555-1_9
129

130
R. White and D. Bradley
Consider for instance the operation of a device such as the AirTag introduced by
Apple in 2021. In essence, this enables a user to determine the location, typically
within metres, of an object ﬁtted with such a tag anywhere in the world, so (hopefully)
no more lost suitcases at airports! However, the tag relies for its operation not on
access to its owner’s iPhone or iPad, which may be some signiﬁcant distance away,1
butontheabilitytocommunicateviaBluetoothwithotherAppledevicesinitsvicinity
which then act to relay the information to the owner’s system [1]. While arguing that
privacy is maintained as the AirTag itself does not contain user data, and that its
data can only be accessed by the owner with the intermediary devices, and their
owners, remaining anonymous, a number of vulnerabilities have been suggested, for
instance, the owner of a device used by the tag as a remote node potentially being
faced with roaming charges [2]. Other privacy issues exist with home-based devices
and technologies such as video doorbells which have been used to generate proﬁles
of behaviour, and hence establish if a house is occupied or not [3, 4].
While there is now considerable, and increasing, attention, being given to issues
such as privacy in respect of applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI), for instance
through the introduction of the General Data Protection Regulations (GDPR) in
Europe [5], and more recently in the form of a white paper on the application of AI
[6], this interest has only developed relatively recently. It is in this context that along
with the usual list of references, the chapter also includes an extensive bibliography.
The chapter itself comprises four main elements; a discussion on AI and related
issues is followed by sections looking at ethics and ethical issues and privacy after
which a number of exemplars are provided before the conclusions.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Despite the hype about the use of Machine Learning (ML) as a route to Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (AI) in recent years, with the usual claims that “we are just 5 years
away from commercialising self driving cars, home robot maids, etc.”, there is a
growing awareness that the current technology has a long way to go to meet the
standards required for Human Intelligence (HI). Of potentially even more concern,
governments, corporations and ﬁnancial institutions are deploying machine learning
in ways that have the potential to manipulate people into altering their behaviour to
better ﬁt the models being deployed to make many administrative processes more
“efﬁcient”. In a quest for cost savings in the name of “fairness”, “diversity” and
“preventing discrimination”, algorithms have been deployed by governments for
identifying potential criminals, by corporate human resources (HR) in assessing
potential employees, by universities in selecting potential students and more. As
this practice has expanded, levels of technological and business innovation have
1 Including on the other side of the world!

Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Ethics and Privacy
131
in general declined in advanced economies, workplaces have become less diverse
in terms of socio-economic background and race, and the life chances of young
offenders permanently blighted.
On the plus side, as a result of political turmoil as well as the acceleration of
digital working through the Covid-19 pandemic, many issues surrounding the use of
data-intensive modelling are now starting to be realised by the political establishment
and wider public. Aside from obvious privacy concerns about the collection of large
volumes of data from individuals by a small cohort of technology corporations whose
raison d’être is to package and sell access to their databases for the training of
algorithms, there is a growing awareness that algorithms based on historical data are
only as good as the human assumptions that are built-in during their creation.
There are many areas where machine learning provides powerful insights that can
assist researchers to identify patterns in complex data sets that would take decades
for a human to uncover, if ever. This can dramatically enhance areas such as drug
discovery, vaccine development, x-ray imaging and elsewhere where many interre-
lated mechanisms are in operation that make traditional analysis difﬁcult. However,
it is also becoming clear that making real-world decisions based on correlations
between human behavioural factors using machine learning is fraught with ethical
and practical issues that prevent any equivalence with human intelligence in the
manner suggested by many AI cheerleaders, something which has on occasion led
to the overselling of capability. For instance, the capabilities of the Watson Health
system developed by IBM for cancer diagnosis and management were exaggerated
by marketing while the data collection and training processes resulted in potentially
biased outcomes [7].
At its core, the problem comes down to being able to state with conﬁdence
that correlation is demonstrating causation, i.e. when something has been shown
to happen in a particular way historically, it does so as a result of an underlying
invariant causal mechanism. Data reduction in bio-medical research is successful
because by and large this condition is met, and a limited set of assumptions need to
be applied to the analysis as performed. Once Human Intelligence starts to interact
with Artiﬁcial Intelligence, causation becomes much more difﬁcult to identify from
historical correlations, and outputs tend to become a function of the assumptions
applied by human programmers when developing algorithms.
How these assumptions are applied will, to a large extent, determine how close
an AI prediction gets to a correct real-world prediction. So, in essence, AI can only
be as good as the HI that develops it, leading to a range of perverse outcomes from
reducing workforce diversity and increasing social inequity to reducing innovation.
Global supply chain issues are a classic example of the shortcomings of the AI-
driven algorithmic resource planning that underpins global “Just-in-Time” delivery.
While the global economy was acting in a historically predictable, steady-state
fashion, then systems designed to ensure efﬁcient use of supply chains were able to
predict future trends with a high level of conﬁdence. However, built in to this highly
tuned model of operation were the seeds of its own destruction. Once the Covid-
19 pandemic created the need for countrywide lockdowns in advanced economies,
the predictive capability of these automated systems broke down as there was no

132
R. White and D. Bradley
longer relevant historic data on which to base decisions. As a result, the initial drop
in economic activity was over predicted, while the equally unexpected upswing in
online commerce was under predicted. With no slack in such a ﬁnely tuned system,
chaos has resulted. The main lessons to draw from recent experiences are:
1.
Machine learning is an effective method of extracting useful information from
large complex sets of data requiring signiﬁcant mathematical analysis, but is
generally poor at predicting behaviour when unpredictable (human) factors
change the existing paradigm.
2.
Human intelligence is poor at using pure logic to extract knowledge from
large, complex data sets, but good when applying empathic skills to determine
solutions to problems not easily accessible to pure logic.
To improve the ability of AI as a predictive tool, without some completely novel
approach to the computational processes that underpin it, will require a massive
expansion of data capture capabilities as well as structural changes in how the algo-
rithms that use the data collected are developed and deployed. This will represent
either a major shift of power from democratic governments to technology corpo-
rations that collect the data, or a takeover by governments of the data collected on
the citizens within their borders—with all the potential implications ﬁrst laid out
by George Orwell in 1984. An additional practical outcome of the growth in data
capture would be the unsustainable increase in the need for power generation with
all the climate implications this would entail. A ﬁnal, more philosophical question
to answer with regard to AI is:
If the software could be developed that matched human capabilities in areas such as empathy
such that it could be said to be truly intelligent, would it actually perform any better than the
human brain?
While the discussions on the use of automation in general, and AI in particular,
have tended to focus on a binary good/bad argument, with technology companies
pushing the efﬁciency beneﬁts of AI, while social scientists stress the damage to
mental health and social equity of replacing humans with machines, there is an
alternative. Increasingly, as the focus has shifted towards the ethics of AI and its
social impact, the discussion has moved to Government level regulation to mitigate
the privacy and ethical concerns of the wider public. In a global digital society,
however, this is always going to be an impossible task as it leads to a growth in
perverse scenarios created by the imperfections in regulatory processes coupled with
fragmented, nationalistic politics that reduce enforcement possibilities.
A more proﬁtable approach may, therefore, be to recognise the beneﬁts of automa-
tion and human thought and create systems that augment human performance limita-
tions through the use of robotics and machine learning. In this way, human intellect
can be freed up to expand on knowledge derived from a synergistic mixture of
machine learning to pull out obscure results from complex data sets that can then
drive true innovation.

Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Ethics and Privacy
133
Ethics and Ethical Issues
The question of the ethics of systems incorporating or based on the use of AI is
one that is becoming increasingly signiﬁcant. Of particular concern are questions of
transparency of operation where the AI can evolve, as a result of its own internal
learning processes, to function and take actions in ways that were not foreseen by
either the programme designers or users. An illustration of this was seen during the
Go challenge match which took place in 2016 between the AI programme AlphaGo
and the 9th dan Go master Lee Sedol of South Korea when the 19th stone by AlphaGo
in game 2 was variously referred to by commentators at the time as “creative” and
“unique”2 and “a rare and intriguing shoulder hit”,3 such was its uniqueness.
Other ethical issues associated with the operation of AI revolve around questions
of discrimination and fairness, and in particular, issues where the AI operates in such
a way as to display an operational bias against different groups in society. Referred
to as “Algorithmic Bias” or “Algorithmic Discrimination”, this can often arise unin-
tentionally as a result of the training sets being used or the way the programme is
deployed in the real world [8–10]. Other areas of ethical concern relate to the impact
of the operation of the AI on user privacy, and the ability to potentially aggregate
individual items of anonymised data such as to be able to identify an individual.
As a consequence, consideration is increasingly being given to the introduction
of standards, rules and regulations, for instance, in the manner expressed in Europe
in 2020 in the form of the White Paper On Artiﬁcial Intelligence—A European
approach to excellence and trust [11] which sets out to try to establish the basis for
such regulations. There are also unresolved issues as to the responsibilities associated
with the operation of the AI, is it for instance the programmer or the person who
devised the training set, or indeed, is it the AI itself that has evolved as a result of
its inbuilt learning strategies to develop new modes of operation? [12, 13]. In this
context, the World Economic Forum has suggested an approach to the management
of AI based on the concepts of [14]:
Active Inclusion—the requirement that applications should be based on a diversity
of inputs that reﬂect the nature of individual populations and societies.
Fairness—That the nature of what is fair and right in the context of the application
is prioritised in the design, development and implementation of that application.
Right to Understanding—Where the operation of the AI has the potential to impact
upon individual rights, then this must be disclosed and an explanation provided,
which is understandable to all users, as to the decision-making processes involved.
Access to Redress—All involved in the design, development and implementation of
an AI system are responsible for identifying any potential negative impacts and must
provide appropriate avenues for redress.
2 Michael Redmond, 9th dan.
3 An Young-gil, 8th dan.

134
R. White and D. Bradley
The challenge for any systems designer is, therefore, to be able to incorporate the
appropriate and relevant AI structures into system operation while ensuring that the
appropriate and relevant safeguards are in place. In relation to EcoMechatronics, this
means taking the relevant environmental issues into consideration from the onset of
the design process.
Privacy and Privacy Issues
The question of personal privacy is one that has increasingly come to the fore with the
ability of a wide range of mechatronic-based systems to gather information about an
individual, their behaviour and movements. Even when the use of such information
may be considered beneﬁcial either in terms of the individual, for instance, through
the recording of health-related data to support that individual in relation to, say, their
ability to live independently or, as during the Covid-19 pandemic, for the greater
public good as part of a track-and-trace system, there are legitimate concerns over
its collection and use.
Even when measures such as data anonymisation are deployed in relation to data
being gathered, this needs to be considered in relation to the use of such data in
combination with other data from other sources to ensure that individuals cannot
be identiﬁed as a result of the combination of information derived from multiple
data sources. This has, in turn, led to the development of Privacy by Design [15–17]
thinking in which the concepts and structures of privacy are embedded at all levels
within the design process [18–20]. The implementation of mechatronic components
and devices within both Cyber-Physical Systems and the Internet of Things is gener-
ally associated with all aspects of data collection, often involving personal or user
data with the potential to create larger data sets through aggregation of data from and
across multiple users. This aggregation of data carries with it implications for the
privacy and security of both individual and aggregated users [21–23]. Table 1 then
illustrates how the concepts of privacy have been involved in relation to deployed
technologies in the period from 1945 to date.
This then suggests a Privacy by Design strategy for mechatronics along the
following lines:
1.
Establish the nature of the data being collected and whether it can be linked to
an individual, and hence identify the associated privacy issues.
2.
Evaluate privacy implications associated with the authorisation, authentication,
validation and veriﬁcation of the data and its onward transmission.
3.
Evaluate the privacy implications associated with the authorisation, authentica-
tion, validation and veriﬁcation of data on receipt.
4.
Establish the protocols required to allow a user to exercise control over the
authorisation, authentication, validation and veriﬁcation of data for both onward
transmission and receipt.
5.
Embed these user protocols within the core of the mechatronic system.

Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Ethics and Privacy
135
Table 1 Privacy eras {after [24, 25]}
Period
Characteristics
1945–1960
Privacy Baseline
• Limited information technology developments
• High public trust in government and business sector
• A general comfort with the information collection
1961–1979
First Era of Privacy Development
• Rise of information privacy as an explicit social,
political, and legal issue
• Early recognition of potential dark sides of the new
technologies
• Formulation of the Fair Information Practices (FIP)
Framework
• Government regulatory mechanisms such as the Privacy
Act of 1974
1980–1989
Second Era of Privacy Development
• Rise of computers and network systems
• Database capabilities
• Legislation designed to channel the new technologies
into FIP, including the Privacy Protection Act of 1984
• National data protection laws for both the private and
public sectors
1990–2010
Third Era of Privacy Development
• Growth of the Internet
• Reported privacy concerns increase
2010 to date
Current Privacy Era
• Social media
• Mobile devices
• Online activity and eCommerce
• Cyber crime
• Trading and transfer of personal data
6.
Establish the system protocols required for the authorisation, authentication,
validation and veriﬁcation of data for both onward transmission and on receipt.
7.
Embed these system protocols within the core of the mechatronic system.
These considerations then need to be integrated with the established methods and
procedures associated with the design of mechatronic systems.
The Role of Big Data
The term Big Data is generally applied to the analysis and interpretation of large and
complex data sets for which conventional data processing methods and techniques
are inadequate [26–28]. Such sets are in many instances, as for instance in the case of
health related data, structured around an individual’s personal data and can be added
to, often without the knowledge of the individual, by devices such as those used to
measure and record exercise levels. The analysis of such large data sets has resulted
in the evolution of methods such as predictive analytics, knowledge discovery and
data mining as a means of extracting information, and hence knowledge, from such

136
R. White and D. Bradley
data. However, the ability to extract such knowledge also carries with it privacy
implications for those individuals whose data is incorporated into the overall data
set.
In recognition of this potential conﬂict between the privacy of the individual and
the use of Big Data methods to extract both information and knowledge, in the US,
the President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST), 2014,
produced a report dealing with issues of individual privacy in relation to Big Data
[29]. This concluded that:
• Encryption is not a perfect solution for securing data, it is, however, a valuable
component of a comprehensive privacy strategy.
• Third parties would create privacy proﬁles for consumers who would then select
their proﬁle such that data holders would be required to differentiate data use
between users based on the user’s adopted privacy proﬁle.
• Anonymisation and de-identiﬁcation have limited relevance as linked data points
tend to take on other identiﬁable attributes.
• Deletion and non-retention policies are not effective means of protecting
individual privacy.
It went on to recommend that:
• Concentration should be on data use rather than collection and analysis.
• Policies and regulations should be expressed in terms of intended outcomes and
not technological solutions.
• Research into privacy technologies should be strengthened.
• There is a need for more education and training in the area of privacy protection.
• There is a need for policies that stimulate the introduction of practical privacy
protection policies.
When taken together with the analysis of the links between the Internet of Things
and Big Data, a number of issues can be identiﬁed, including:
• It is no longer adequate to rely on hard methods to protect privacy.
• It is the responsibility of everyone involved in the data chain to manage and ensure
privacy.
• In protecting privacy, the use to which the data is to be put is more signiﬁcant
than its collection and analysis.
• Education and training have important roles to play in increasing awareness of
privacy issues and solutions at all levels from design to implementation.
In the UK, the Commercial and Markets Authority in 2015 issued a report on a
survey into the ways in which consumer data was being collected and used [30]. The
conclusions reached were that:
• Consumers should know when and how their data is being collected and used and
be able to decide whether and how to participate.
• They should have access to information as to how their data is collected, stored
and used.

Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Ethics and Privacy
137
• Firms should compete on all issues that matter to consumers, including the
provision of clear and useable controls to enable consumers to manage data
sharing.
• Consumers and ﬁrms should share the beneﬁts of using consumer data. Consumers
may get a new or better service or lower prices because ﬁrms become more
efﬁcient, or even trade their data for a direct ﬁnancial reward. Firms may gain
more sales or market share or become more proﬁtable.
• The regulation of the collection and use of data should ensure the protection of
essential rights such as privacy. The market can help achieve this goal where
regulations encourage competition and choice, allowing a ‘race to the top’ by
ﬁrms to offer consumers better service.
• Non-compliance with regulation should be tackled proportionately and effec-
tively, so that ﬁrms and consumers can feel conﬁdent that the rules are being
applied fairly.
Within the general context of Big Data, mechatronic systems are most usually
associated with the collection and onward transmission of data which can then be
integrated with similar data from other users. The mechatronic system is, therefore,
functioning as a data source for the wider networks, which has implications for
both component and system operation and for design in order to ensure the privacy
of the user(s). Considering the need to ensure individual privacy, there is also a
requirement to take into account the fact that in areas such as healthcare [31, 32],
the ability to analyse related data across large numbers of individuals brings with it
the possibility of generating new knowledge of potential beneﬁt to all users. Such
conﬂicts of interest between the need to preserve individual privacy and anonymity
and the greater beneﬁt to the community as a whole present signiﬁcant challenge at
the system level, and hence to system designers.
Exemplars
Algorithmic Discrimination
Algorithmic discrimination refers to the actions of the machine learning algorithms
that form a part of an AI system in providing results that effectively discriminate
against sectors of the population to whom the algorithm is applied [8]. For instance,
the choice of training data will signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the behaviour of the AI system
in operation, but the available training data sets may not represent a broad spectrum of
the population, resulting in a potential bias against those members of the community
not represented in the training data. Similarly, local regulatory considerations, as for
instance whether certain speciﬁc types of data speciﬁc may be collected and used,
may inﬂuence outcomes. Even where adequate training data is available, there still
remains signiﬁcant potential for discrimination. Possible sources of error include:

138
R. White and D. Bradley
Model design—The fact that an AI construct proved effective in one context does
not mean that it will operate effectively in another, perhaps superﬁcially similar,
environment. Thus, a model used for predicting, say, loan eligibility in one country
may prove discriminatory if deployed in a country with different ﬁnancial models.
Unintended bias—The users of AI models are likely to have an idea of what consti-
tutes a successful outcome and may adjust the model so that the results conform with
their perception of success, reﬂecting what are often unexpressed and unintended
prejudices. For instance, a model which uses geographical data on crimes to allo-
cate police resources may result in discrimination against speciﬁc social groupings
depending on how the algorithm is implemented in respect of the type of crimes
being considered. As for instance, between high volume, low level crime in respect
of low volume, high impact crime.
Lackof oversight—OnceanAI construct appears tobefunctional, humansupervision
may be withdrawn with the result that the AI begins to take prejudicial actions which
would be easily detected by a ‘human in the loop’ model to provide conﬁrmation
of a decision. Thus, a diagnostic programme may wrongly identify individuals with
speciﬁc conditions who would otherwise have automatically been removed from the
diagnostic pathway by a clinician.
Unpredictability—It needs to be clear to the users of AI how decisions are arrived at.
However, as an AI evolves through its own internal processes, the ability to predict,
and indeed understand, the nature of the response in speciﬁc circumstances may well
decrease.
Inappropriate training data—This arises across all aspects of human activity where
the data sets collected to be used for training are themselves not truly representative
(facial recognition, education, employment, commercial credit, and so forth), leading
to enhanced levels of discrimination rather than less.
Intentional discrimination—It is possible for the designers of AI systems to build in
intentional bias, as opposed to unintended bias arising out of an inadequate data set
or unforeseen and unanticipated modes of use. This suggests a need for regulation
to ensure user redress.
In illustration of the above, consider the following. Police forces in the US
attempted to use machine learning to model and predict criminal behaviour as part
of a drive towards preventative policing. Data sets from state criminal records were
used to train software used by parole boards when deciding on the prisoner release,
and in some cases by regional forces looking to plan deployment levels based on
predictions of likely future “criminality”. However, by assuming that past criminal
behaviour is a predictor of future conduct, the ability of an offender to rehabilitate
is reduced by the perpetuation of the belief that “once a thief, always a thief ”. More
insidiously, because the decisions made are based on historical criminal records in
a justice system in which the individuals included are disproportionately poor and
from ethnic minorities, the training set itself will hard wire in these discriminatory
factors, targeting communities simply because they are overrepresented in the data.

Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Ethics and Privacy
139
One potential workaround for the limitations of this AI-centric approach to
predicting human behaviour, though perhaps questionable ethically, is for govern-
ments, ﬁnancial institutions and corporations to attempt to “train” populations to
behave in ways that allow machine learning to better predict outcomes. A credit
score is an obvious example of this approach, where ﬁnancial institutions “educate”
customers on how to behave to enhance their score, and hence enhance their ability
to borrow money.
An alternative, and perhaps more ethically acceptable approach, is to use machine
learning algorithms to augment human intelligence through the rapid analysis of data
patterns that will ﬂag obvious issues relating to the decision in hand, then pass this
information on as part of an HI assessment of the overall picture based on data,
experience and intuition with automated post-decision safety checks used to check
for discrimination as part an audit process.
These, and related, concerns led in 2017 to the setting out of what is referred to as
the Asilomar AI Principles [33, 34] which try to establish a series of questions and
protocols to be associated with the development and implementation of AI systems
to minimise potential impacts.
Business Models
There has been a growing belief in recent years that increased efﬁciency and reduced
discrimination can be achieved by replacing “subjective” HI management processes
with “objective” AI systems across most areas of business practice from HR, through
production/stock control to ﬁnancial planning/credit control and marketing. The
belief is that by removing high-cost human employees from routine decision-making,
discrimination and bias can be avoided and labour costs reduced.
Thus, the use of algorithms to credit score loan applications, allowing banks to
reduce costs through the elimination of experienced human lending managers while
pretending it is a more “objective” process, is likely to lead to less bad debts or
discrimination, but also acts to reduce the numbers of good, entrepreneurial ideas
coming to market. Predicting from past history how successful a given start-up will
be in a speciﬁc geographic and technology market will almost invariably reduce
innovation. Any algorithm needs data to work on, while a start-up based on a novel
idea has, by deﬁnition, none available. As a result, any genuinely novel idea becomes
a high-risk outlier in machine learning terms, leading to (ridiculous) requests from
lenders that a start-up looking for funding provides 3 years of ﬁnancial history to
base their decision on. Real innovation levels have been in decline as a result since
the 1970s, while levels of bad debt have increased rather than reduced. More impor-
tantly, the squeezing of entrepreneurial activity that has resulted has lead to increased
concentrations of corporate power amongst the few, largely well-connected compa-
nies that were able to get funding, dramatically boosting inequality and reducing the
overall efﬁciency of free-market capitalism.

140
R. White and D. Bradley
That is not to say that all business AI has a negative impact. Just-in-Time manu-
facture on a global scale has been implemented using AI-driven predictive modelling
to control costs of production. Business efﬁciency can be enhanced in this way where
AI is an invaluable tool in analysing production ﬂows to reduce the effect of capital
held in unused stock. This is particularly true in markets where product lifetimes are
short such as cell phones.
As with all systems that place too much reliance on the outputs of algorithms using
historical data to predict the future, the short-medium term cost savings derived from
eliminating “waste” from the supply chain can be overwhelmed by the cost of the
system breaking down when an unexpected (i.e. not included in the training data)
event occurs. While there are many interrelated issues behind the global supply
chain failures associated with the Covid-19 pandemic, one thing is clear; corporate
decisions to assume that a free ﬂow of goods would continue unfettered by World
affairs making it unnecessary to build in sufﬁcient surplus stockpiles in regional
centres, has not been helpful. The AI behind a lot of the logistics issues has been
excellent at predicting steady-state trade ﬂows, but has no model on which to base
contingencyplanningsinceithasbeenprogrammedtooptimise“businessefﬁciency”.
Combining AI pattern analysis with experienced logistics, HI could have enabled
slack to be built into the system based on human intuition and experiences.
Corporate marketing has also become highly dependent on algorithmic surveil-
lance capitalism practises developed by Google et al., in the belief that through
advertisement micro-targeting, sales conversion rates will be enhanced as the mate-
rial should be being viewed by just the individuals it has been designed to inﬂuence.
With the increased focus on the principles behind surveillance capitalism seen in
recent years, research groups are starting to examine whether this is true as an under-
lying truth. The contra-argument is that while you reduce the cost of reaching people
already interested in buying your product, there is no direct evidence to suggest that
they become more likely to buy as a result, since they would have received the same
messaging from traditional mass marketing. No strong increases in sales conversion
rates have been apparent with the shift to micro-targeting, though research is at a very
early stage. Conversely, opportunities to reach people who do not yet realise they
need a company’s products or services are actually reduced, potentially constraining
market growth in the medium-long term as individual needs and wants change over
time.
Recruitment of “the best people” based on algorithmic analysis of resumes should
also be easier, boosting corporate innovation levels, reducing churn of high-value
employees, and reducing/eliminating discrimination. One of the key issues around
the use of machine learning to screen university candidates or employment resumes
centres on a key assumption—that the metrics Governments have decided to use as
measures of academic achievement are an accurate guide to future performance. To
get to a “good” university, speciﬁc examination grades need to be obtained in quali-
fying examinations as these are the main metric used to forecast likely degree marks.
However, people develop academically at very different rates and are stimulated to
perform by differing learning environments. Going back to the 1970 and 1980s’ in
the UK, there was a lot of anecdotal evidence that the inverse may actually be true

Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Ethics and Privacy
141
with students with lower A-level grades at entry ending up with the highest degree
grades on graduation. This was postulated to be a result of both a change in the
learning environment between school and university and a jolt to underperforming
students to work harder to avoid further low grades.
Studies have been undertaken to try and identify the truth of these arguments, the
results of which seem to suggest that this is no statistically valid correlation between
18+ and degree level grades [35]. Thus, to base university application decisions on
automated screening will simply leave out late developers, unconventional thinkers,
or poorer students unable to afford private tuition from ever coming in front of a
human decision maker, leading to increasing homogeneity in student intake and
increased inequality as those with the means to pay for professional support gain
an advantage. Over-reliance on degree certiﬁcates in employment screening simply
ampliﬁes this problem—how would Einstein reached the position he did in a modern
automated World!
Recently, a body of research has been accumulating to suggest that human replace-
ment in business management methods is far more complex than media commen-
tators and business leaders would have people believe. Algorithms are written by
humans and trained using data collected by and from humans. As a result, when
used to predict outcomes in recruitment by initial screening of resumes, there is a
tendency for the pool of successful candidates to become increasingly monolithic
in their skills, history and social attributes. Worst still, recruitment advisors have
developed techniques for predicting what should go in a resume to stand a better
chance of passing the automated screening phase, leaving potentially far more suit-
able candidates in the reject column. Human interview panels are increasingly asked
to select candidates that are clones of each other and well suited in theory to maintain
the status quo in an organisation.
Successful team development and innovation in business require a mix of gener-
alist and specialist skills, with the former providing lateral thinking to solve problems
in novel ways. Unfortunately, in any model of human behaviour, such individuals
are outliers in any statistical analysis of behavioural attributes related to employment
skills and are often ﬁltered out of automated selection models based on historical
training sets and optimised correlation factors that form the basis of machine learning
algorithms.
As a result of all these factors, the use of AI to increase diversity in the search
for equality and innovation in a corporate workplace can actually work in opposition
to these goals since increasingly the “mavericks” needed in any team to provide
essential dynamism in group thinking do not make it to a human interview panel
where the managers present may have seen through experience and intuition that
a person had the right “spark” to be successful despite not meeting the perceived
attribute scores that have been decided upon through machine learning.

142
R. White and D. Bradley
Health Care
Home-based healthcare solutions using personal robotic systems coupled with AI
have been promoted in recent years as a cost-effective solution to the increasing
problem of supporting an ageing population. Signiﬁcant investment has gone into
both Smart Home and wearable technologies coupled to Cloud-based AI to monitor
the health of an individual in their own home, and hence reduce the workload of
community medical staff while delaying the need for long-term hospitalisation and/or
care and support.
Until recently, the focus has been on ways to reduce the direct costs of supporting
an ageing population through a reduction in direct contact between individuals and
overstretched health professionals, relying instead on remote telemetry and algo-
rithmic diagnostics. While this approach has many attractions economically, and
perceived beneﬁts relating to maintaining health and independent living for the
elderly in particular, there are also concerns as to the long-term effects. This came
to a head in the Covid-19 pandemic, where it has been realised that the break in the
direct link between doctor and patient can lead to a range of mental health issues
as well as an increase in excess deaths in the home due to delays in treatment of
diseases such as cancers where lateral (human) diagnostic skills at an early stage can
be crucial in patient long term survival.
Reliance on technology heavy approaches also creates a number of ethical and
privacy issues that need to be addressed. As well as obvious concerns regarding data
security and personal privacy in a medical environment, a number of key questions
will need to be answered if the goal of enhancing the quality of life over an extending
lifespan, while at the same time, containing costs to a manageable level is to be
achieved. These include:
1.
Who “owns” the data collected from an individual, and how do you ensure that
professionals requiring access can do so without breaching privacy?
2.
The development of robust diagnostic models for speciﬁc conditions will require
population-level monitoring to avoid biassing data through selecting groups
that are atypical, including monitoring those without any signs of illness. A
degree of compulsion may well be necessary to achieve such a level playing
ﬁeld, as an ability to opt-out of screening will skew training data towards the
“worried well” and those already known to have, or be prone to developing,
the condition of diagnostic interest. This will require stringent regulation and
policing, which could lead to increased anxiety-driven mental health issues,
social unrest, for instance, is seen within anti-vaxxer movements, and signiﬁcant
additional government spending to administer.
3.
Algorithmic approaches to diagnosis, while better in some instances at picking
up early stage conditions, also suffer from being over-speciﬁc, i.e. they diagnose
based on the strongest correlation between symptoms, bio-markers and genetics
to provide a diagnosis based on a “best-ﬁt” model without considering that the
individual, or their lifestyle, may not follow the historical trends used in training.

Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Ethics and Privacy
143
4.
For such systems to work correctly, remote rural communities will need to have
the same level of internet access as large conurbations. Maximum cost beneﬁts
for using remote, AI-driven healthcare will be obtained through deployment in
these communities, where different medical issues will also exist that need to be
built into the predictive diagnostics. Even in advanced economies such as North
America, up to 30% of the population remain either unconnected, or using dial-
up speeds that make deployment impossible without large-scale infrastructure
upgrades.
5.
Social inequity is also an issue that needs to be considered, as it will be predom-
inantly those in lower socio-economic groups where participation in AI-based
healthcare will be lowest—as is the case more generally with healthcare models
that require an element of patient funding. AI approaches will need to overcome
the inherent bias that this creates both in existing medical data used to train
systems, and in the ongoing evolution of such algorithmic support systems.
Without this, social inequity will be enhanced as decision-making becomes
increasingly biassed by data from the economically comfortable capable of
participating.
6.
Expansion of the infrastructure to accommodate both rural communities and
the exponential growth that will be needed in Cloud data storage will also result
in a potentially unsustainable increase in the carbon footprint of the modern
internet. Already, it has been demonstrated that the current global data network
has an equivalent footprint to that of air transport, largely as a result of the need
for data warehousing [36]. How the expansion of the internet infrastructure to
accommodate healthcare using current correlation-based AI is a crucial element
of any expanded rollout in the future.
Alternative approaches do exist that may provide answers to these questions while
maintaining the essential face-to-face link between patients and health professionals.
Using decentralised robot “pets” (or even household appliances in certain circum-
stances) in the homes of people living alone to monitor and map everyday activity,
maintain contact with friends and family and provide key medical data in the event of
an emergency while collecting data on a continuous basis for storage on an isolated
hub in the home. This hub would upload speciﬁed information on a daily basis to the
individual’s medical centre for incorporation into their medical records. With correct
permissions in place, this data could then be shared with medical researchers.
The main beneﬁt of such a system is that it would allow a doctor to be better
informed of an individual’s overall wellbeing on a semi-continuous basis, and allow
him/her to schedule visits, etc. It would also allow for early signs of decline to be
ﬂagged, such as increasing apathy about moving around the house or going out that
can lead to growing incapacity, mental decline through loneliness and accelerated
need for in-home care to be provided to someone living alone. Social care budgets
can be stretched a lot further by delaying the need for in-home carer support for even
a relatively short period of time.

144
R. White and D. Bradley
Military Systems
The possible creation of a future generation of what military systems which incor-
porate the possibility of acting autonomously in deploying lethal force, referred to
as Lethal Autonomous Weapons Systems (LAWS), is both a matter of concern and
debate and led in 2015 to the publication at the International Joint Conference on Arti-
ﬁcial Intelligence of an open letter calling for a ban on such systems [37]. Current
military systems are restricted to incorporating a “human-in-the-loop” who must
authorise the use of any weaponry. There are, however, exceptions for certain types
of what are referred to as ‘defensive’ systems, such as the Iron Dome missile and air
defence system developed in Israel [38], acting in response to perceived threats, the
classiﬁcation of which is generally determined by embedded AI [39].
Drone Technologies
Dronesareperhapsthemostoftencitedexampleofatechnologythatcouldbeadapted
through onboard AI to act autonomously when deploying advanced weaponry. A
range of drone types is deployed for both civilian (mapping, surveying, aerial photog-
raphy, cinematography) and military (surveillance, reconnaissance, target strikes)
purposes [40]. At the moment, weapons-armed drones such as the MQ-9 Reaper
[41] have a human operator to make command decisions but are potentially capable
of operating autonomously [42]. Other drone types, and in particular, nano drones
present their own particular problems in relation to autonomous operation, some-
thing graphically illustrated by the Slaughterbots video released by the Future of
Life Institute [43, 44].
Vehicle Systems
Modern vehicles are increasingly conﬁgured around a range of smart components
and systems, including Cyber-Physical Systems, which can be integrated within
an Internet of Vehicles (IoV). This will involve not only communication between
individual vehicles, but also links into Cloud-based systems for trafﬁc management
and route planning [45–47]. Consider the apparently simple question of ﬁnding a
parking space. Studies suggest that considerable time, and hence cost is involved in
drivers locating parking spaces, reaching in 2017 an average annual search time for
a parking space of 67 h for a driver in London at an annual cost of £1,104 (~£1,200
in 2020). In the same year in New York, it was reported as 107 h at an annual cost

Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Ethics and Privacy
145
Fig. 1 The basic trolley
problem
of $2,243 (~$2,370 in 2020) [48, 49]. By allowing vehicles to negotiate both with
each other and with parking locations, this time penalty and cost could be effectively
eliminated, resulting in signiﬁcant savings in CO2 emissions4 and more effective and
efﬁcient use of space [50–52].
An ability for individual vehicles to autonomously negotiate with other vehicles,
and indeed other road users, also has the potential to signiﬁcantly impact other areas
of trafﬁc management. A major issue in towns is that of trafﬁc ﬂow, which is often of
a stop–start nature. While trafﬁc ﬂows can be improved by linking the operation of
trafﬁc lights to trafﬁc density, using the information provided by the vehicles them-
selves, an alternative, which has been shown to be potentially effective in smoothing
out ﬂow, is to remove trafﬁc lights completely and rely on the negotiation between
vehicles to optimise trafﬁc ﬂow at junctions [53].
Finally, by linking vehicles to their digital twin, constant monitoring and check
on performance can be obtained, enabling a much more rapid response to fault
conditions. It is, therefore, possible to imagine a vehicle, in cooperation with its
digital twin which will, in turn, be drawing on information from all cars of that type
in operation, detecting an incipient fault when it will check the user’s diary and
book itself in for a service. At the garage, instead of having to hold a wide range
of components and sub-assemblies, with all the implications for resource extraction,
manufacturing and distribution that implies, the requisite parts will be produced at
the garage on-demand using additive manufacturing methods.
Autonomous Vehicles
However, perhaps the most contentious area of vehicle technology is that of
autonomous operation, and in particular how such a vehicle should respond to emer-
gency situations. Often cited as the ‘Trolley Problem’ [54–58] and expressed in the
form of a decision to be made in the form shown in Fig. 1 where the vehicle is
presented with two options either (1) continue straight ahead and run into the group
4 Assuming that the average distance travelled in London while looking for a parking location is
5 km, this translates to around 0.6 kg of CO2 per vehicle based on data from www.eea.europa.eu/
ims/co2-performance-of-new-passenger (accessed 8 December 2021).

146
R. White and D. Bradley
Fig. 2 A more complex
scenario
of pedestrians, saving the occupants of the vehicle but killing the pedestrians or (2)
swerving to hit the barrier, killing the occupants of the car but saving the pedestrians.
A more complicated scenario is that of Fig. 2, where an autonomous car is
presented with the case where a bus suddenly swerves out of its lane and heads
towards the crash barrier. Under option (1), the car continues towards the bus risking
casualties on board both the car and the bus at differing levels of severity. This is
sometimesreferredtoastheHumanistorEgalitarianoptionasitspreadstheoutcomes
across all participants. Under option (2), the Protectionist option, the car takes all
necessary action to safeguard its passengers, even though this may well increase the
likelihood of severe casualties on the bus as it hits the crash barrier a the side of
the road. Option (3), the Sacriﬁce option, would result in the probability of severe
casualties on both the car and the bus with no beneﬁt to either.
The situation is further complicated by individual preferences regarding the
outcomes of any incidents, something which is demonstrated by the results of the
Moral Machine Experiment carried out by MIT [59] in which individuals were asked
to express their preferred outcomes in relation to a number of different scenarios,
resulting in issues such as preferences for sparing pedestrians over passengers, the
young over the elderly or the more over the fewer. The results also illustrated that
views and opinions differed signiﬁcantly from country to country!
Conclusions
Artiﬁcial Intelligence has in recent years been moving from the laboratory into real-
world environments where the simplicity of computer logic meets the complexity
of human evolutionary experience. With the Covid-19 pandemic forcing the pace
on remote working and learning, coupled with a growing awareness of the political
implications of AI, there is a need to consider the detailed costs and beneﬁts of
deploying deep learning algorithms in speciﬁc applications. Thus:
• Before deploying an AI construct to model and control any given application, can
it be stated with conﬁdence that correlation is demonstrating causation. Namely
that when something has been shown to happen in a particular way, it does so as a
result of an underlying invariant causal mechanism. Such relationships are found
in many biological and mechanical systems, but can the same be said for human
behaviour?

Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Ethics and Privacy
147
• AI constructs are developed by humans using a set of assumptions as to how
outcomes should be determined, and human selected data sets are used to train
the algorithms. Computers will then provide the “optimum” solution to any issue
based on mathematical logic, which may not be ethical in human terms. What
regulations need to be put in place globally to ensure that AI works to promote
equality and reduce discrimination rather than exacerbate current tensions?
• The main difference between today and earlier attempts at commercialising AI
is the ability to collect vast arrays of data on people through the promotion of
online activities such as social media and shopping. Who owns this data, and
how permission is gained to use it, is becoming a major issue as the inﬂuence
of surveillance capitalism business models, as well as the sustainability of mega
data-centres with a carbon footprint equivalent to the airline industry, have come
under the political spotlight in recent years.
• How do AI systems trained on such data ensure that an individual’s privacy is not
compromised through ill-informed consent provisions in service contracts and
thus prevent customers turning into a mineable raw material?
• If regulations allowing opt outs from data collection are introduced, how can bias
in training data be avoided when privacy concerns are not consistent across the
range of human behaviour that goes into the creation of big data training sets?
• An AI construct is only as good as the training data used in its construction,
leading to problems with unconscious bias and discriminatory outcomes in the
models based on a given model. Examples of such bias based on unrepresentative
data sets have resulted in historical discrimination against minority groups that
feed into and inﬂuences the training models used and which has led to increases
in discrimination in, amongst others, policing, human resource management and
education.
• There has been a tendency in recent years, encouraged by the broader political
imperative of reducing the role of government by relaxing regulations on the
corporate business sector to encourage economic growth, for technologists to
assume that populations can be manipulated into behaviour patterns that allow the
limitations of correlation-based predictions to be overlooked, i.e. change human
behaviour to better match the idealised world predicted by any given AI model.
This assumption has been shown to be inadequate in the face of unexpected events
outside the scope of collected training data sets, such as the effects of the current
pandemic on global political and economical systems, and climate change. Deep
learning works best when history is predictable but struggles due to the limitations
inherent in the assumptions used in the face of sudden lateral shifts in events, as
can be seen in part with the current global supply chain issues. How can future
systems be designed to allow for automated modelling systems to ensure sufﬁcient
“inefﬁciency” is included to allow for the unexpected?
AI, once again, is at a crossroads. Should it continue in a largely technocratic way,
absorbing individual personality into a corporate body controlled by a small elite,
banned as a threat to humanity, or developed as an assistive tool that marries HI with
AI to enhance productivity and innovation while promoting equality and working to
eliminate discrimination.

148
R. White and D. Bradley
References
1. www.apple.com/uk/airtag/. Last Accessed 18 May 2021
2. https://theconversation.com/remember-apple-airtags-and-ﬁnd-my-app-only-work-because-
of-a-vast-largely-covert-tracking-network-160781. Last Accessed 16 Dec 2021
3. Jia Y, Xing L, Mao Y, Zhao D, Wang X, Zhao S, Zhang Y (2020) Burglars’ IoT paradise:
understanding and mitigating security risks of general messaging protocols on IoT clouds. In:
IEEE symposiyum security &privacy, pp 465–481
4. Chalhoub G, Kraemer MJ, Nthala N, Flechais I (2021) “It did not give me an option to decline”:
a longitudinal analysis of the user experience of security and privacy in smart home products.
In: Proceedings of 2021 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems, pp 1–16
5. Watt S, Milne C, Bradley D, Russell D, Hehenberger P, Azorin-Lopez J (2016) Privacy matters–
issues within mechatronics. IFAC-PapersOnLine 49(21):423–430
6. https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/default/ﬁles/commission-white-paper-artiﬁcial-intelligence-feb
2020_en.pdf. Last Accessed 2 June 2022
7. Kahan R (2021) IBM bids goodbye to Watson health, its interactive AI system. www.calcalist
ech.com/ctech/articles/0,7340,L-3895071,00.html. Last Accessed 3 Jan 2022
8. O’Neill C (2016) Weapons of math destruction: how big data increases inequality and threatens
democracy. Penguin Random House
9. Žliobait˙e I (2017) Measuring discrimination in algorithmic decision making. Data Min Knowl
Disc 31(4):1060–1089
10. Kleinberg J, Ludwig J, Mullainathan S, Sunstein CR (2018) Discrimination in the age of
algorithms. J Leg Anal 10:113–174
11. European Commission (2020) On artiﬁcial intelligence-a European approach to excellence
and trust, COM(2020) 65 ﬁnal. https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/default/ﬁles/commission-white-
paper-artiﬁcial-intelligence-feb2020_en.pdf. Last Accessed 2 June 2022
12. Hagendorff T (2020) The ethics of AI ethics: an evaluation of guidelines. Mind Mach 30(1):99–
120
13. Coeckelbergh M (2020) AI ethics. MIT Press
14. World Economic Forum (2020) How to prevent discriminatory outcomes in machine
learning. https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_40065_White_Paper_How_to_Prevent_Disc
riminatory_Outcomes_in_Machine_Learning.pdf Accessed 2 June 2021
15. Cavoukian A (2009) Privacy by design: the 7 foundational principles. Information and Privacy
Commissioner of Ontario, Canada
16. Cavoukian A (2012) Privacy by design and the emerging personal data ecosystem. www.ipc.
on.ca/wp-content/uploads/Resources/pbd-pde.pdf. Last Accessed 24 Aug 2021
17. Mulligan DK, King J (2011) Bridging the gap between privacy and design. U Pa J Const Law
14(4):989–1034
18. Cavoukian A, Jonas J (2012) Privacy by design in the age of big data. Information and Privacy
Commissioner of Ontario, Canada
19. Perera C, McCormick C, Bandara AK, Price BA, Nuseibeh B (2016) Privacy-by-design
framework for assessing internet of things applications and platforms. In: Proceedings of 6th
international conference on the Internet of Things, pp 83–92
20. BednarK,SpiekermannS,LangheinrichM(2019)Engineeringprivacybydesign:areengineers
ready to live up to the challenge? Inf Soc 35(3):122–142
21. Bu F, Wang N, Jiang B, Liang H (2020) “Privacy by Design” implementation: information
system engineers’ perspective. Intl J Inf Manag 53:102124
22. Porter ME, Heppelmann JE (2014) How smart, connected products are transforming competi-
tion. Harv Bus Rev 92(11):64–88
23. Sadeghi AR, Wachsmann C, Waidner M (2015) Security and privacy challenges in industrial
Internet of Things. In: Proceedings of 52nd annual design automation conference, pp 54–59
24. Smith HJ, Dinev T, Xu H (2011) Information privacy research: an interdisciplinary review.
MIS Q 35(4):989–1016

Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Ethics and Privacy
149
25. Westin AF (2003) Social and political dimensions of privacy. J Soc Issues 59(2):431–453
26. Hashem IAT, Yaqoob I, Anuar NB, Mokhtar S, Gani A, Khan SU (2015) The rise of “big data”
on cloud computing: review and open research issues. Systems 47:98–115
27. Herschel R, Miori VM (2017) Ethics & big data. Technol Soc 49:31–36
28. Wang J, Yang Y, Wang T, Sherratt RS, Zhang J (2020) Big data service architecture: a survey.
J Internet Technol 21(2):393–405
29. PCAST (2014) Big data and privacy: a technological perspective. www.whitehouse.gov/sites/
default/ﬁles/microsites/ostp/PCAST/pcast_big_data_and_privacy_-_may_2014.pdf.
Last
Accessed 27 Jan 2016
30. UK Competition & Markets Authority (2015) The commercial use of consumer data. www.gov.
uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/ﬁle/435817/The_commercial_use_
of_consumer_data.pdf. Last Accessed 19 Sept 2016
31. Dash S, Shakyawar SK, Sharma M, Kaushik S (2019) Big data in healthcare: management,
analysis and future prospects. J Big Data 6(1):1–25
32. Price WN, Cohen IG (2019) Privacy in the age of medical big data. Nat Med 25(1):37–43
33. https://futureoﬂife.org/2017/08/11/ai-principles/. Last Accessed 2 June 2022
34. https://futureoﬂife.org/bai-2017/ Last Accessed 2 June 2022
35. Sear K (1983) The correlation between a level grades and degree results in England and Wales.
High Educ 12(5):609–619
36. Obringer R, Rachunok B, Maia-Silva D, Arbabzadeh M, Nateghi R, Madani K (2021)
The overlooked environmental footprint of increasing Internet use. Resour Conserv Recycl
167:105389
37. https://futureoﬂife.org/2016/02/09/open-letter-autonomous-weapons-ai-robotics/.
Last
Accessed 2 June 2021
38. Block J (2017) A laws of war review of contemporary land-based missile defence system ‘Iron
Dome’. Sci MilIa: S Afr J Mil Stud 45(2):105–128
39. Carayannis E, Wilson RL, Iftimie IA, Iftimie MC (2020) The ethics of autonomy and lethality.
In: Proceedings of 18th international conference ethical & social impacts of ICT, ETHICOMP
2020, pp 280–283
40. Mátyás P, Máté N (2019) Brief history of UAV development. Repüléstudományi Közlemények
31(1):155–166
41. www.af.mil/About-Us/Fact-Sheets/Display/Article/104470/mq-9-reaper/. Last Accessed 29
Nov 2021
42. WilsonRL(2019)RequirementsformakingtheMQ-9fullyautonomous:ananticipatoryethical
analysis. In: European conference impact of artiﬁcial intelligence and robotics, ECIAIR 2019,
pp 369–376
43. www.youtube.com/watch?v=6Ipkq-BASaM. Last Accessed 29 Nov 2021
44. https://futureoﬂife.org/2021/02/25/stuart-russell-and-zachary-kallenborn-on-drone-swarms-
and-the-riskiest-aspects-of-lethal-autonomous-weapons/. Last Accessed 2 June 2022
45. Contreras-Castillo J, Zeadally S, Guerrero-Ibañez JA (2017) Internet of vehicles: architecture,
protocols, and security. IEEE Internet of Things J 5(5):3701–3709
46. Gerla M, Lee EK, Pau EG, Lee U (2014) Internet of vehicles: from intelligent grid to
autonomous cars and vehicular clouds. IEEE World Forum Internet of Things 241–246
47. Xu W, Zhou H, Cheng N, Lyu F, Shi W, Chen J, Shen X (2017) Internet of vehicles in big data
era. IEEE/CAA J Autom Sin 5(1):19–35
48. https://inrix.com/press-releases/parking-pain-uk/. Last Accessed 1 Mar 2021
49. https://inrix.com/press-releases/parking-pain-us/. Last Accessed 1 Mar 2021
50. Azshwanth D, Koshy MT, Balachander MT (2019) Automated car parking system. J Phys Conf
Ser 1362(1):012059
51. Aliedani A, Loke SW (2019) Cooperative car parking using vehicle-to-vehicle communication:
an agent-based analysis. Comput Environ Urban Syst 77:101256
52. Zheng Y, Rajasegarar S, Leckie C (2015) Parking availability prediction for sensor-enabled
car parks in smart cities. In: IEEE 10th international conference intelligent sensors, sensor
networks and information processing, pp 1–6

150
R. White and D. Bradley
53. World Economic Forum (2020) Guidelines for city mobility. http://www3.weforum.org/docs/
WEF_Guidelines_for_City_Mobility_2020.pdf Last Accessed 2 June2022
54. Smith CH (2018) The Tesla problem: trolleys, proximity, and duty, ephemeris, the undergrad-
uate. J Philos 18(1):22–32
55. Keeling G (2020) Why trolley problems matter for the ethics of automated vehicles. Sci Eng
Ethics 26(1):293–307
56. Goodall NJ (2014) Machine ethics and automated vehicles. Springer, In Road vehicle
automation, pp 93–102
57. Lawlor R (2021) The ethics of automated vehicles: why self-driving cars should not swerve in
dilemma cases. Res Publica 1–24
58. De Freitas J, Censi A, Smith BW, Di Lillo L, Anthony SE, Frazzoli E (2021) From driverless
dilemmas to more practical commonsense tests for automated vehicles. Proc Natl Acad Sci
118(11):9
59. Awad E, Dsouza S, Kim R, Schulz J, Henrich J, Shariff A, Bonnefon JF, Rahwan I (2018) The
moral machine experiment. Nature 563(7729):59–64
Bibliography
Amoore L (2020) Cloud ethics: Algorithms and the attributes of ourselves and others. Duke
University Press. ISBN-13: 978-1-4780-0831-6
Anderson M (ed) (2018) Machine ethics. Cambridge University Press. ISBN: 9781108461757
Aoun J (2017) Robot-proof: higher education in the age of artiﬁcial intelligence. MIT Press, ISBN:
9780262037280
Barrat J (2015) Our ﬁnal invention: artiﬁcial intelligence and the end of the human era. Macmillan.
ISBN: 9781250058782
Bartneck C, Lütge C, Wagner A, Welsh S (2020) An introduction to ethics in robotics and AI.
Springer. ISBN: 9783030511098
Bergstrom CT, West JD (2020) Calling bullshit–the art of scepticism in a data-driven world. Allen
Lane. ISBN: 9780241327234
Broussard M (2019) Artiﬁcial unintelligence: how computers misunderstand the world. MIT Press.
ISBN-13: 978-0-262-53,701-8
Burns L (2018) Autonomy: the quest to build the driverless car-and how it will reshape our world.
William Collins. ISBN: 978-0008302061
Carr N (2016) The glass cage–who needs humans anyway? Vintage. ISBN: 9780099597452
Chamayou G (2015) Drone theory. Penguin. ISBN: 978-0241970348
Christian B (2020) The alignment problem; machine learning and human values. WW Norton.
ISBN-13: 978-0–393-63582-9
Coeckelbergh M (2020) AI ethics. MIT Press. ISBN: 9780262538190
Crawford K (2021) Atlas of AI: power, politics, and the planetary costs of artiﬁcial intelligence.
Yale University Press. ISBN-13: 978-0-300-20957-0
Daub A (2020) What tech calls thinking: an inquiry into the intellectual bedrock of Silicon Valley.
FSGO/Logic. ISBN-13: 978-0-374-53864-4
Davies A (2021) Driven: the race to create the autonomous car. Simon & Schuster. ISBN: 978-
1501199431
Denardis L (2020) The internet in everything: freedom and security in a world with no off switch.
Yale University Press. ISBN: 978-0300233070
Du Sautoy M (2019) The creativity code: art & innovation in the age of AI. Belknap Harvard.
ISBN-13: 978-0-674-98813-2
Epstein D (2019) Range: why generalists triumph in a specialized world. Riverhead Books. ISBN-
13: 978-0-735-21448-4

Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Ethics and Privacy
151
Eubanks V (2019) Automating inequality: how high-tech tools proﬁle, police, and punish the poor.
Picador. ISBN-13: 978-1-250-21578-9
Ford M (2015) The rise of the robots. Oneworld. ISBN: 9781780747491
Fosch-Villaronga E (2020) Robots, healthcare, and the law: regulating automation in personal
healthcare. Routledge. ISBN-13: 978-0-367-07661-0
Galliott J, Macintosh D, Ohlin JD (eds) (2020) Lethal autonomous weapons: re-examining the law
and ethics of robotic warfare. Oxford University Press. ISBN: 978-0197546048
Gawdat M (2021) Scary smart: the future of artiﬁcial intelligence and how you can save our world.
Bluebird Books. ISBN: 978-1529077186
Greenguard S (2021) The Internet of Things. MIT Press. ISBN: 978-0262542623
Haque E (2020) The ultimate modern guide to artiﬁcial intelligence: including machine learning,
deep learning, IoT, data science, robotics, the future of jobs, required upskilling and intelligent
industries, independent. ISBN: 9798691930768
Hare S (2022) Technology is not neutral: a short guide to technology ethics. London Publishing
Partnership. ISBN: 978-1907994975
Helfand DJ (2016) A survival guide to the misinformation age. Columbia University Press. ISBN:
9780231168724
Hwang T (2020) Subprime attention crisis; advertising and the time bomb at the heart of the internet.
FSGO/Logic. ISBN-13: 978-0-374-53865-1
Kane E, Kane M (2021) Future modes of travel 2020’s & 2030’s, independent. ISBN: 979-
8591491758
Kearns M, Roth A (2020) The ethical algorithm. Oxford University Press. ISBN-139780190948207
Kissinger HA, Schmidt E, Huttenlocher D (2021) The age of AI: and our human future. Little,
Brown & Company. ISBN-13: 978-0-316-27380-0
Kreps SE, Kaag JJ (2014) Drone warfare. Polity Press. ISBN: 978-0745680989
Lanier J (2018) Ten arguments for deleting your social media accounts right now. Bodley Head.
ISBN: 9781847925398
Lepore J (2020) If then: how one data company invented the future. Liveright. ISBN-13: 978-1-
631-49610-3
Liao SL (ed) (2020) Ethics of artiﬁcial intelligence. Oxford University Press. ISBN: 978-0-19-
090504-0
Lin P, Jenkins R, Abney K (eds) (2019) Robot ethics 2.0: from autonomous cars to artiﬁcial
intelligence. Oxford University Press. ISBN: 9780197503584
Marcus G, Davis E (2019) Rebooting AI: building artiﬁcial intelligence we can trust. Pantheon
Books. ISBN-13: 978-1-524-74825-8
McNamee R (2019) Zucked: waking up to the facebook catastrophe. Harper Collins. ISBN:
9780008318994
Mitchell M (2019) Artiﬁcial intelligence: a guide for thinking humans. Pelican. ISBN:
9780241404829
Morgan SL, Winship C (2015) Counterfactuals and causal inference: methods and principles for
social research, 2nd edn. Cambridge University Press. ISBN-13: 978-1-107-69416-3
O’Neill C (2016) Weapons of math destruction: how big data increases inequality and threatens
democracy. Penguin Random House. ISBN: 9780553418811
Pak R, De Visser EJ, Rovira E (eds) (2020) Living with robots: emerging issues on the psychological
and social implications of robotics. Academic Press. ISBN-13: 978-0-12-815367-3
Pasquale F (2020) New laws of robotics–defending human expertise in the age of AI. Harvard
University Press. ISBN: 9780674975224
Pasquale F (2015) The black box society: the secret algorithms that control money and information.
Harvard University Press. ISBN-13: 978-0-674-97084-7
Pearl J, Mackenzie D (2018) The book of why: the new science of cause and effect. Basic Books.
ISBN-13: 978-0-465-09760-9
Ratti C, Claudel M (2016) The city of tomorrow: sensors, networks, hackers, and the future of urban
life. ISBN: 9780300204803

152
R. White and D. Bradley
Rirchie S (2020) Science ﬁctions: exposing fraud, bias, negligence and hype in science. Bodley
Head. ISBN: 9781847925657
Rouhiainen L (2018) Artiﬁcial intelligence: 101 things you must know today about our future.
CreateSpace. ISBN: 9781982048808
Russell S (2019) Human compatible; artiﬁcial intelligence and the problem of control. Viking.
ISBN-13: 978-0-525-55861-3
Singer PW (2009) Wired for war: the robotics revolution and conﬂict in the 21st century. Penguin.
ISBN: 9781594201981
Tegmark M (2018) Life 3.0: being human in the age of artiﬁcial intelligence. Allen Lane. ISBN:
9780241237199
Wallach W (2010) Moral machines: teaching robots right from wrong. Oxford University Press.
ISBN: 9780199737970
West DM (2019) The future of work: robots, AI, and automation. Brookings Institution Press. ISBN:
978-0815737865
Wooldridge M (2020) The road to conscious machines: the story of AI. Pelican. ISBN:
9780241396742
Yates K (2019) The math of life and death: 7 mathematical principles that shape our lives. Scribner.
ISBN-13: 978-1-982-11187-8
Zuboff S (2019) The age of surveillance capitalism: the ﬁght for a human future at the new frontier
of power. PublicAffairs. ISBN-13: 978-1-610-39569-4

Applications

Mechatronic Applications in Rail
Systems and Technologies
Christopher Ward, Roger Goodall, Tim Harrison, and Will Midgley
Abstract Rail systems are the longest established of the land-based mass transit
forms. With a ﬁxed infrastructure, the possibility of being fully electriﬁed, huge
capacity potential and low ‘energy loss’ running dynamics, they make a compelling
case for being at the core of any ‘net-zero’ future transport system. These systems
though are constrained by these same aspects that provide the beneﬁts (ﬁxed routes,
formations and signalling systems), constraining capacity and limiting ﬂexibility.
One enduring concept to unlock these beneﬁts is the use of mechatronics in the
vehicle and the infrastructure. But why have these concepts not been more widely
applied before and how can they make a system wide difference?
Introduction
Rail systems make a compelling case to be at the core of any future low-carbon
transport system. ‘Steel on steel’ rolling contact is exceptionally efﬁcient in terms
of energy loss [1], the capacity potential of a mainline railway line is comparable to
several multi-lane roads [2], and electriﬁcation making the use of renewable sources
is relatively straightforward [3]. They also offer true city centre to city centre travel
that cannot be matched by any other mode. This is remarkable for a system that was
conceived and ﬁrst implemented in the early 1800s [4].
However, the Victorian origins that provided so many beneﬁts are also the cause
of many of the constraints in the implementation of contemporary systems globally.
Signalling systems that control the ﬂow of rolling stock have been developed for
very good reasons, primarily driven by safety. As such the capacity of a railway is
not constrained by physical space and driver behaviour, as on a highway, but by the
signalling logic (and to a lesser extent the physical capacity of the volume that trains
pass through, the ‘gauging’). Taking the UK as an example, four aspect signalling
is very common (red, single yellow, double yellow and green) [5]. Signals control
C. Ward (B) · R. Goodall · T. Harrison · W. Midgley
Wolfson School of Mechanical, Electrical and Manufacturing Engineering, Loughborough
University, Loughborough L11 3TU, UK
e-mail: c.p.ward@lboro.ac.uk
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
P. Hehenberger et al. (eds.), EcoMechatronics,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-07555-1_10
155

156
C. Ward et al.
the entry to ‘blocks’ of track, for a 200 km/h line these are typically 1.1 km long
(governed by braking distance appropriate to the speed). To run at full speed the
driver must see a green aspect, meaning three blocks in front are clear. This roughly
equates to a minimum of 3.3 km of track being unoccupied between trains. This is
very conservative in its outlook and means tracks are virtually empty, even at peak
times. Re-routing of trains is also very difﬁcult and has ripple effects that can be felt
across an entire network. The formation (and therefore capacity) of trains is often
ﬁxed and cannot be changed in the short term. In common with road transportation,
railways are a very expensive endeavour with a large amount of ‘embedded carbon’
required to create the ﬁxed infrastructure [6]. Attempts to improve this situation are
usually classiﬁed as conservative, incremental, and reactionary to current issues.
With this background in mind, railways around the world are undergoing huge
changes with ambitious targets to reduce energy use and primarily improve the
customer experience. Incremental progress is not going to see these aims fulﬁlled,
and it is the conjecture here that disruptive, fundamental changes are required.
Industry Vision
In the UK, the industry has created a series of visions for improvement. The 2012
Rail Technical Strategy (RTS) [7] created a 30-year vision, key aspects of this being:
1.
Running trains closer together
2.
Minimal disruption to train services
3.
Efﬁcient passenger ﬂow through stations and trains
4.
More value from data
5.
Optimal energy use
6.
More space on trains
7.
Services timed to the second
8.
Intelligent trains
9.
Personalised customer experience
10.
Flexible freight
11.
Low-cost railway solutions
12.
Accelerated research, development, and technology deployment
This was updated in 2021 [8] and picks up many of the same themes. However,
the vision now concentrates on ﬁve main areas that are less focussed on technical
speciﬁcs:
1.
Easy to use for all
2.
Low emissions
3.
Optimised train operations
4.
Reliable and easy to maintain
5.
Data driven

Mechatronic Applications in Rail Systems and Technologies
157
This is backed by a wider European outlook with the Shift2Rail [9] initiative
under EC Horizon 2020, with the follow-up work streams currently being decided
in the Horizon Europe framework [10].
It is the authors’ opinion that, welcome as these initiatives are, they again only
provide an incremental view of how the railways should develop and that the tradi-
tional path of incremental improvements is not going to deliver the embedded vision
of any of the strategies. This is where mechatronics comes in as an enabler to see the
visions into fruition.
Embedding Mechatronics in Transport
Many of the key industrial competitors to rail have systematically embedded mecha-
tronics systems design over many decades. Mechatronics is not seen as an addition to
‘cure ills’, but as a fundamental design paradigm. The following are transport system
examples over a similar time-period (post-war to the modern day).
Military Aerospace
Military aerospace was perhaps the ﬁrst industry to realise the true potential of
mechatronics in transportation systems. Figure 1 is an example of two frontline
ﬁghter jets employed by the Royal Air Force (RAF). The ﬁrst is the de Havilland
Vampire that was ﬁrst in service in the late 1940s. This was conventional by most
metrics with the design (except for the twin boom tail) being of mixed wood and metal
construction, swept leading edge wings, stable conﬁguration, and manual controls.
The second of these is the most modern ﬁghter in the arsenal, the F-35B Lightning,
that entered service in 2018. A very different aircraft it encapsulates an advanced
composite construction, relaxed stability, full digital ﬂight controls, short take off
and vertical landing capability, and stealth. This can be seen as the current pinnacle
Fig. 1 de Havilland Vampire and Lockheed Martin F-35B (Chris Ward)

158
C. Ward et al.
Fig. 2 Mercedes Benz 300SL and S-Class (Phil D and Martin Katler on Unsplash)
of a deployed mechatronic ﬂight control system that began with the development of
the methodology in the middle of the twentieth century.
In the 1960s there was a signiﬁcant lobby against digital ﬂight controls that
were said to be dangerous, too slow to react, un-maintainable, and would never be
accepted by pilots [11]. The exact opposite of these concerns is why mechatronics
is so embedded in everything military aerospace undertakes in the modern era.
Automotive Systems
This trend is not limited to the aerospace sphere. In the automotive sector mecha-
tronics is embedded in both the drivetrains and the chassis. Figure 2 shows a compar-
ison for the development of chassis technology. The 1950s era Mercedes-Benz 300SL
had a conventional suspension system with passive springs and dampers. The stability
and safety of the vehicle was fundamentally a function of the operation of the driver to
perceive and not go beyond the ‘mechanical limit’. In the modern era the Mercedes-
Benz S-class is always a technology showcase. The suspension system is now via air
springs, with continuously variable damping, tilt control, and feedforward scanning.
The stability of the vehicle is actively augmented and will prevent the vehicle (or
recover it from) exceeding the limits of the tyres.
Along the lines of aerospace, embedding these concepts at the outset of design is
now a fundamental part of automotive engineering culture as well as being enshrined
in law. As of 2012 all new vehicles sold in the United States are required to be ﬁtted
with a minimum level of electronic stability control (ESC), with the EU following
this lead in 2014 [12].
Rail
Rail has a history of innovation and embedding novel thinking into technology.
In the UK much of the innovative work on understanding rail vehicle dynamics
was led by British Rail Research, who were centred in Derby. An example of this

Mechatronic Applications in Rail Systems and Technologies
159
Fig. 3 Active lateral suspension experimental implementation
Fig. 4 Mark 1 and mark 5 UK coaching stock (Loughborough University and Chris Ward)
innovative thinking is seen in Fig. 3, the ﬁrst example of an active lateral suspension
control. Concepts such as active steering and guidance, low speed magnetically
suspended vehicles, and signalling moving from mechanical relay based to solid
state interlocking were also pioneered there [13].
However, if we look at the development of rail systems in service, many of the
innovations are not embedded as a matter of course. Figure 4 shows two train forma-
tions over the same period as the aerospace and automotive examples. The vehicles
on the left of the ﬁgure being hauled by a steam locomotive are British Rail mark
1 coaches, the guidance system for which is based on solid axle wheelsets, bogie
systems, and two stages of passive suspension. The train on the right is the modern
incarnation of a locomotive hauled train, a class 68 Diesel locomotive, with mark
5 coaches. The modern vehicle set is demonstrably better than its predecessor in
terms of performance, maintainability, and customer experience, but the operational
fundamentals remain the same. The guidance system is still solid axle wheelsets,
bogies, and two stages of passive suspension.
As such the vehicle is designed to operate on a system that will struggle to fulﬁl the
aims of the RTS and still operates in an environment constrained by a conservative
signalling system.

160
C. Ward et al.
The Rail Vehicle ‘Opportunity Space’
There is a particular focus on the vehicle side of the implementation of mecha-
tronics in this chapter. There is a very speciﬁc reason for this in terms of the vehicle
representing the biggest use of ‘operational carbon’ and that the infrastructure is asso-
ciated with ‘embedded carbon’ [14]. Mechatronics offers the possibility of simpli-
fying infrastructure by transferring complexity to the vehicle (reducing embedded
carbon), and at the same time minimising operational energy requirements (reducing
operational carbon).
A rail vehicle has several fundamental top-level functions that are deﬁned in
European standard [15]. These can be summarised as the ability to carry out the
following functions with the elements in bold highlighted as being the key targets
for the use of vehicle mechatronics.
• Carry and protect passengers, train crew and load
• Provide appropriate conditions to passenger, train crew and load
• Provide access and loading
• Connect vehicles and/or consists
• Provide energy
• Accelerate, maintain speed, brake and stop
• Provide train communication, monitoring and control
• Support and guide the train on the track
• Integrate the vehicle into the complete railway system
Rail vehicles can be broken down also in terms of subsystems, with the items in
bold the focus of the following sections. From the EC ModTrain project [16] these
were deﬁned as.
• Car body, ﬁttings, interiors and lighting
• Bogies and running gear
• Power and propulsion system
• Auxiliary systems
• Braking system
• On-board vehicle control
• Passenger Information System
• Communication systems
• Cabling and Cabinets
• Door System
• HVAC
• Tilt system
• Couplers

Mechatronic Applications in Rail Systems and Technologies
161
Fig. 5 Traction system
schematic
Power and Propulsion
Electric trains are a mature technology with a signiﬁcant majority of vehicles
employing this form of traction. This is an instance where the automotive industry
is catching up with the established practice of the rail industry. A fully electriﬁed
railway is in a unique position to make the most of the decarbonisation of the energy
system.
Figure 5 is a schematic of a typical traction system that collects energy from an
overhead AC electrical supply, with the addition of energy storage devices. The latter
is seen as a key part of any new drivetrain with the previously lost braking energy
being reused in the accelerative traction process. This is, as of 2021, an underutilised
method, due to the complexity of the control methods.
Active Suspension Systems
Active control of suspension systems has been proposed for the last half century, but
most of the suspension systems on rail vehicles are still purely passive. The exception
to this is the use of active vehicle body tilt control, which is now an accepted mature
technology.
Railway vehicle suspension systems are complex, operate in multiple directions
and control the steering characteristics. Most of the research work into active methods
has focused on the vertical suspension aspect, either on the primary or secondary
element. As such this has little impact on the operational concept of the vehicle
(it is still fundamentally passively guided) and the business case is not clear for
implementation. Passenger’s perception of improved ride quality is mixed and very
often not a driver in how they choose a service. Tilt control is part of this in that it
inﬂuences passenger’s perception of cornering, not the vehicle’s ability to traverse
curves. Therefore, the business case is difﬁcult to build. Away from tilt control, active
secondary lateral control of the body has been deployed in Japan on the E2 and E3
class of Shinkansen [17].

162
C. Ward et al.
Mechatronics however can fundamentally be used to change how a vehicle steers
and interacts with the infrastructure. This is covered in more detail below, with the
business case being more convincing when system beneﬁts can be shown.
Braking Systems
Most rail braking systems are based upon pneumatic actuation and friction materials,
these can be used on either a disk attached to the wheelset or directly onto the tread
itself. Other methods are to apply friction material directly to the track or make use
of eddy current induction, again in the track.
The downside to the pneumatically actuated methods is the production, move-
ment, and storage of the compressed air. Removal of this would greatly simplify
the construction of vehicles and the move to electrically actuated friction brakes has
been predicted for many years. But to date, a satisfactory solution to the fail-safe
power-off application of brakes, balanced against not requiring constant energy ﬂow
to hold brakes off under operation, has not been reached.
The use of the electric drivetrain has increasingly become an important part of the
braking power. The generation of electrical energy from braking requires dissipation,
and this is achieved through resistor banks or moving electrical energy back into the
power distribution infrastructure.
The ideal would be no mechanical brakes down to zero speed and re-use of as
much of the energy as possible. This is a large area of focus.
More or All Electric Trains
The current trend in aerospace and automotive is to remove hydraulic and pneumatic
energy systems and replace these with electrical systems. Modern airliners such as
the Boeing 787 and the Airbus A350 are indicators of this, with engine starting, de-
icing, air-conditioning, cabin pressure control, brakes, and hydraulic pumps moving
to be electrically driven. In the automotive sphere drivetrains, braking systems, and
steering system are transitioning to electric drive.
Where could rail move? The main targets are no pneumatic system, removing
air-spring based suspension, and electric braking solely through the traction system.
Rail Mechatronics
As the previous sections highlight there is a strong argument for the rail industry
to evaluate its long-term development strategy to be bolder and more inclusive of
technical developments to meet its own ambitious targets for future performance.

Mechatronic Applications in Rail Systems and Technologies
163
mutltiple close coupled pantographs
active coupling
double decker trains in UK loading gauge
space efficient guidance mechanism
FULL TRAIN SIDE VIEW
CARRIAGE END VIEW
CARRIAGE SIDE VIEW DETAIL
single active stage suspension
in-wheel traction motors
low floor
total condition monitoring
Fig. 6 Integrated mechatronic vehicle
Mechatronics offers the opportunity to rethink how vehicles operate. However, there
is no real incentive to make changes to a vehicle alone unless there is a perceived
system-wide beneﬁt.
Fully Integrated Vehicle
Overmanydecadestherehasbeenextensiveacademicworklookingataddingmecha-
tronic aspects to existing railway vehicles [17], but very little looking at the vehicle
as a system. The exception is the DLR ‘Next Generation Train’ (NGT) project [18]
and the European Mechatronic Train project [19].
Work by the authors [20] looked at what a vehicle combining these insights
would look like, and this is shown in Fig. 6. This encapsulated active guidance
bogie-less operation, active suspension, independently rotating wheels with in-wheel
traction motors, active pantographs, active coupling, total condition monitoring, and
autonomous operation.
However, as mentioned above, by itself a vehicle like this would most likely not
be adopted. This is due to a combination of issues: many of the beneﬁts would appear
for the infrastructure owner (reduced track damage, operational ﬂexibility), rather
than for the owner and operator of the vehicle. What would be the case for adoption?
Systems Perspective: What Can We Achieve with Control?
Railways are an integrated system, and any beneﬁts can only truly be quantiﬁed as
such. Researchers engaged in mechatronics of rail vehicle guidance have focussed
on immediate tangible beneﬁts. These tend to form around:

164
C. Ward et al.
• Mechanical simplicity through ‘bogie-less’ operation
Current bogie systems are highly complex, with multiple stages of suspension to
cope with the mechanical stability trade-off inherent with wheelsets. The mech-
anism is much simpliﬁed here with the guidance being provided synthetically
rather than passively. Reducing heavy engineering maintenance burdens.
• Improved functionality through removing curving versus stability trade-off
Passive suspension systems are a trade-off in terms of straight-line stability and
curving. In simple terms the choice is either straight-line high-speed stability
or being able to go slowly around tight curves. This is due to the governing
factor being the resistance of a wheelset to yaw, i.e. yaw stiffness. Active steering
removes this trade-off and can be adapted to any running condition, meaning
vehicles do not have to be speciﬁcally designed for a mode of operation.
• Reduced track damage
The yaw stiffness that provides the guidance mechanism stability for a passive
railway vehicle puts signiﬁcant strain on the infrastructure. Essentially the yaw
stiffness provides a damping mechanism by sliding the wheel across the railhead,
removing material from each. The longitudinal creep forces associated with guid-
ance can be removed almost entirely with mechatronic guidance, reducing the
wear and tear on the infrastructure.
These aspects are often dismissed by railway people as being inconsistent with
railway ﬁnance models that are ‘vertically segregated’ and therefore provide no
justiﬁcation for implementation. As outlined above the true beneﬁts of mechatronics
would come with what transformative action could be taken. The following are
several aspects that could build a business case for adoption:
• New modes of operation
Currently vehicles are under the control of the infrastructure. Switch and cross-
ings and signalling system determining where and when vehicles move around
a network constricting capacity. Vehicles that guide themselves could lead to
autonomous decentralised control that is governed by passenger demand and not
by timetable planning.
• Simpliﬁed infrastructure assets
Switch and crossing could become purely passive items where the vehicle decides
where it wants to go, rather than being driven by the position of the switch.
• Decentralised signalling system
Self-guided vehicle could mean centralised signalling systems could be removed
and vehicles could communicate peer-to-peer to locally optimise capacity; see
Fig. 7.
All of this potentially adds up to a complete shift in how a railway operates,
reducing carbon from the vehicle use, reducing the carbon locked up in infrastructure
and making the proposition for passengers much more attractive. It would take true

Mechatronic Applications in Rail Systems and Technologies
165
Fig. 7 Operational route
negotiation paradigm
vision on the side of the industry to implement this, with the drivers coming from a
push–pull in terms of legislative drivers, coupled with passengers demanding a step
change improvement in the user experience. The current funding model, in the UK
at least, would require a fundamental re-think to let this happen.
Examples of ‘Enabling Technology’ Projects
The following section highlights projects that have taken steps along the path to
quantifying the beneﬁts of and implementing the vision outlined above. These started
as fundamental explorations of the technologies but have gradually transitioned to
the operational aspects of railway.
Vehicle Mechatronics
The fundamentals of vehicle guidance have remained the same since the inception
of the railways in the early 1800s: a wheelset (two conical wheels ﬁxed on a single
axle) running on a pair of shaped steel rails.
The basic principles of guidance can be found in [1], but the underlying kinematics
are that a lateral displacement of a wheelset (as would happen through curving or due
to track irregularities) results in a difference of rolling radius causing the wheelset to
yaw and return to the centre of the track, at which point the rolling radius difference
returns to zero.
An unconstrained wheelset however is a mechanical oscillator and due to a lack of
damping in the movement described above results in a phenomenon called ‘hunting’.
This ‘hunting’ is constrained through the suspension system. Counter-intuitively,
adding ‘yaw stiffness’, stabilises the wheelset, up to a critical speed, where the

166
C. Ward et al.
hunting returns. This yaw constraint restricts the movement of the wheelset and
‘scrubs’ the wheelset across the railhead, creating energy dissipation or ‘damping’,
but at the cost of wearing the railhead and the wheel tread. This means that the
ﬁrst stage of suspension is required to be very stiff to constrain the wheelset and if
directly connected to the vehicle body would restrict cornering ability (rail vehicles
are typically 20+ m in length and the radial angles the wheelset would need to
adopt would be large for the tighter radius curves that can be below 500 m) and be
unacceptable to the passengers in terms of ride comfort. Therefore, short-wheelbase
trucks called bogies are used with a pair of wheelsets, which are connected to the
vehicle body through a soft vertical suspension, allowing the wheelset pairs to yaw
and shielding the passengers from track borne vibrations. However, the ‘wheelset
hunting’ can pass through to create ‘bogie hunting’ that requires dissipating through
a secondary level yaw damper.
There is a fundamental issue in that this complicated mechanical arrangement
presents a compromise and a critical choice for a designer, in simplistic terms:
• A vehicle that can go fast on relatively straight track then does not ‘curve’ very
well
Design fundamentals: Low conicity; high primary yaw stiffness; and large
amounts of secondary yaw damping
• A vehicle that can curve well is then limited in terms of the maximum speed
Design fundamentals: High conicity value: low primary yaw stiffness; and
(occasionally) without secondary yaw damping
This ultimately means that a vehicle must be designed speciﬁcally for the types
of routes on a network and cannot be generally used everywhere, increasing cost,
and limiting operational ﬂexibility. Mechatronics is a method of removing this
compromise and allowing ﬂexibility in the way (and where) vehicles are operated.
Vehicle Guidance and Vehicle-Based Switching
The principles of mechatronic guidance are covered in more detail in [21]. There are
several possible conﬁgurations, as seen in Fig. 8.
• Secondary yaw control (SYC).
Design fundamentals: Standard solid axle wheelsets and bogies; secondary yaw
dampers replaced with linear actuators.
– The simplest mechatronic form mechanically, with the guidance still provided
by the wheelset. The primary yaw stiffness can be lowered considerably to
allow better curving performance. The ensuing lower critical speed can be
regained by the secondary active damper [22].
– The disadvantage is that this is still relatively complex mechanically and the
wheelsets demonstrate similar wear properties.

Mechatronic Applications in Rail Systems and Technologies
167
Fig. 8 Mechatronic vehicle conﬁgurations
• Actuated solid axle wheelsets (ASW).
Design fundamentals: Retaining the solid axle wheelsets, but now providing yaw
actuation at the primary suspension level.
– The control algorithm balances longitudinal creep forces across the axle,
achieving what is known as ‘perfect curving’.
– The wheelset itself is a ‘closed loop system’, and the issue can be the actuated
control loop ‘ﬁghting’ the steering tendency of the wheelset. Large actuation
forces are required because of this and the compression required of the primary
suspension.
• Actuated independently rotating wheelsets (AIRW).
Designfundamentals:Thewheelsona‘wheelset’arefreetorotateindependently,
with yaw actuation provided at the primary suspension level.
– Allowing the wheels to rotate independently on a wheelset removes the natural
self-centring and curving ability of the wheelset. It also removes the longitu-
dinal creep forces associated with curving, reducing track and wheel damage.
The actuator and control algorithm are required to provide the cornering
performance.
– The downside with this approach is the requirement to estimate lateral
displacement, which is a nontrivial exercise.
• In-wheel motor wheelset (IWM).
Design fundamentals: IRW wheelsets with in-wheel motors for traction and
guidance purposes.

168
C. Ward et al.
– Like the AIRW system, but with the traction motors providing differential
torque to steer the vehicle.
– Control algorithms require careful consideration so as not to saturate the
available torque purely for steering.
Of the methods shown, the AIRW and IWM provide the maximum ﬂexibility and
provide the possibility of structural modiﬁcations to the vehicle. As illustrated, they
no longer required the complicated structure of bogies and could lead to ‘two-axle’
vehicles, freeing space within the cabin for passengers.
Of major interest is the possibility of true autonomy as the ‘vehicle’ provides
guidance through a track switch. This could ultimately lead to ‘passive’ switches
removing one of the key failure modes of any rail system [23]. In the short term
mechatronic vehicles can provide a huge reduction in the damage to current ‘active’
track switches, 25% of the current level, through steering [24].
SET Wheel Motor Project
To date, most of the vehicle mechatronics projects have purely been in the simulation
environment. The exception has been the along the lines of demonstration of vertical
suspension mechatronics [25] and a solid axle wheelset stabilisation method on a
full-scale roller rig [26].
A UK projects led by SET in Derby, with Loughborough University and The
University of Huddersﬁeld, sponsored by RSSB, demonstrated the use of in wheel
motors for guidance and traction in a full-scale rail vehicle (Fig. 9) [27]. This put
beyond doubt the feasibility of active guidance and traction. Of note is the control
design requirements and the ability to trade-off curving performance against straight
line stability and the level of traction torque used [28]. It also introduced the concept
of braking down to zero speed purely through the motors, further simplifying vehicle
systems and removing the need for compressed air in the future.
Fig. 9 Class 230 vehicle
used for the ‘Actiwheel’
project (Chris Ward)

Mechatronic Applications in Rail Systems and Technologies
169
Condition Monitoring Projects
As railways are considered safety critical a great deal of effort is spent on maintenance
of the vehicles and associated systems. At the date of writing, most maintenance
activities are calendar, rather than condition based. This can lead to systems being
‘over-serviced’ or in some cases ‘under-serviced’ where an item may have failed or
be in a degraded state in service without this being noticed.
Moving to a more mechatronic railway leads to a greater proliferation of sensing,
and therefore, more opportunity to do intelligent condition monitoring of assets.
Vehicle manufacturers have been pushing forward this trend for over a decade, for
example, Bombardier (now part of Alstom) took the Rolls Royce ‘power by the hour’
concept [29] to create their Orbita vehicle monitoring system [30].
There is still room for expansion in these concepts, incorporating the latest
processingandartiﬁcialintelligencemethods.Akeyaimofaproject,againsponsored
by RSSB, was to move from thinking about condition monitoring of speciﬁc compo-
nents and move to assessing the systems health and ﬁtness to run. If key operational
metrics were not reached, to look at the health of speciﬁc components [31].
Moving away from monitoring the vehicle, there are multiple opportunities to
explore the systematic health. A great deal of effort has been spent on development
of monitoring of the rail infrastructure from on board the vehicle [32]. Of ongoing
interest is monitoring of low-adhesion events that periodically occur, particularly
during the autumnal season. These can cause vehicle to slide un-controllably through
red signals and fail to stop at stations. Work from the simulation domain [33] is now
moving to full scale demonstration of the concept. In the long term continuous
monitoring from service vehicles should give a much clearer picture in terms of the
variations in adhesion and validate correlations back to climate and seasons.
Infrastructure Mechatronics
In addition to the vehicles, there are aspects of infrastructure that are not only safety
critical, operationally critical, but also due to their historic routes have multiple single
points of failure; track switches being a prime example.
Repoint
The Repoint switch system began as a thought experiment to reduce congestion at
network nodes (stations, junctions etc.). The nodes, rather than the plain line, deﬁne
the capacity of the railway network. Increasing capacity at the nodes will increase
the capacity of the system as a whole. Following discussion with industry insiders,
the project focussed on the capacity constraints baked into the method of signalling
trains on approach to points, by not allowing a train to approach until the points are
detected as correctly set. If the switch were reliable enough that it was certain the

170
C. Ward et al.
switch would complete its movement, then the train could continue to approach at
full speed while the switch is in motion.
Toimprovereliability,theRepointswitchintroducestwonovelfeatures,redundant
actuation and a bi-stable “passive locking” mechanism [23].
Redundant actuation is a concept used across safety critical industries. Multiple
actuators are used, any one of which is sufﬁcient to complete the necessary action.
So long as one of them remains operational, the others can fail, and the system as a
whole remains functional (Fig. 10).
Passive locking is necessary in this application. Conventional switch machines use
an active locking mechanism; however, active locking precludes the use of multiple
actuators. If the locking mechanism fails locked, then any number of duplicate actu-
ators cannot move the switch. The Repoint system introduces semi-circular motion.
The mechanism ﬁrst lifts the rail out of a locking detent, then moves the rails later-
ally, before lowering the rails into the locking detent in the opposite position. Lateral
movement of the switch rails is prevented when in the fully down position; however,
any one of the actuators can lift the mechanism out of its locked position. A side
beneﬁt of this mechanism is that it is bi-stable. Should the power fail during actuation,
the mechanism will fall under gravity into one of the locked positions (Fig. 11).
Fig. 10 Repoint
mechanism, showing the
semi-circular motion with
the locking features
highlighted in red
(Loughborough University)

Mechatronic Applications in Rail Systems and Technologies
171
Fig. 11 Repoint switch in-track, showing the three actuator bearers (Loughborough University)
Development passed through several iterations, beginning with a lab-based
demonstrator that proved the actuation and locking concept [34]. Subsequently, a
full-scale switch system was designed, built, and tested in-track [35]. There are 2
motors in each of the actuator bearers. The protype system has three actuator bearers
to achieve the redundancy aims. All 6 of the motors are controlled and synchronised
by a controller located in the lineside equipment cabinet. Development continues as
a part of the In2Track series of projects led by Network Rail.
Systems Mechatronics
Background
Technology is sometimes applied to transportation simply for technology’s sake. At
the extreme, we have ‘futuristic’ systems like Hyperloop [36] and the Las Vegas
Convention Centre Loop [37]. These rely on large capital outlays to build infras-
tructure (vacuum-sealed tubes or underground tunnels) to move small volumes of
passengers (in air-tight pods or electric cars) between stations, which makes their
economic and environmental value questionable. As outlaid above, the metal-on-
metal running contact of traditional rail transportation has many beneﬁts, and there
is huge scope for system wide beneﬁts from mechatronics.
Applications to the Rail Network
Electriﬁcation is the best way to decarbonise high-speed intercity rail, yet only around
38% of Great Britain’s rail network was electriﬁed as of 2019 [38]. This leads to
some routes being partially electriﬁed which means that there are still diesel trains

172
C. Ward et al.
running under electriﬁed overhead line equipment (OLE). This is especially the case
with freight traction that traverses the network and is not constrained to particular
routes.
In the near-term this has been partially solved by the introduction of hybrid vehi-
cles such as the Hitachi AT300 product family. Of interest are the Class 800 and
Class 802 trains, which are 5- or 9-car bi-mode (25 kV electric/diesel) trains capable
of operating at up to 225 km/h [39]. These bi-mode trains run on OLE when it is
available and change to their on-board diesel engine-generators when OLE is not
available.
This vehicle is an excellent example of mechatronics engineering. It includes
mechanical systems (the suspension and bogies), electrical systems (the generator,
25 kV rectiﬁer and power electronics for the electric machines), and software systems
(for controlling the diesel engine-generator and the electrical systems).
However, more can be done to use mechatronics to reduce the environmental
impact of this rail transport system. On the vehicle side, research has shown that a
feedforward control system can reduce the emissions of the Class 800/802 trains by
19% over a representative route [14].
The addition of batteries to the train could further reduce its emissions by allowing
thevehicletorunin‘hybridmode’whenoperatingonthedieselengine.A‘deployable
pantograph’ with integrated contact sensing, similar to that developed by Brecknell-
Willis [40] would allow the pantograph to be raised and lowered at speed and the
reduction of wear at the pantograph-OLE interface.
Combining these technologies (advanced controllers, battery systems and deploy-
able pantographs) will allow rapid decarbonisation of the rail transport system
through ‘intermittent electriﬁcation’. Intermittent electriﬁcation involves electriﬁ-
cation of discrete parts of a rail route, rather than electrifying continuously from one
endtotheother.Byreducingtheenergythattrainsuse(throughadvancedcontrollers),
efﬁciently storing this energy for use when not under OLE (in batteries) and allowing
the train to connect to the OLE at speed (using mechatronic pantographs), intermit-
tent electriﬁcation is an excellent example of mechatronics engineering allowing
complete (operational) decarbonisation of a transport system.1
Further Improvements
Integrating improvements such as mechatronic switches (e.g. REPOINT), vehicle-
based switching, in-cab signalling [41] and moving-block signalling [42] into
future railway systems will enable them to become truly mechatronic transportation
systems.
1 ‘Operational emissions’ are those from day-to-day operation of an asset/system. There are also
‘embodied emissions’ which are the emissions generated during the manufacture/installation of the
system. Thankfully there are many research projects underway to reduce the emissions generated
by building railways [43].

Mechatronic Applications in Rail Systems and Technologies
173
Such a system would have lower operational carbon emissions and be more reli-
able than a standard electriﬁed railway. Mechatronic railway switches are more
reliable than their standard mechanical counterparts, allowing higher throughput
of rail trafﬁc. Vehicle-based switching allows for intelligent re-routing of trains to
reduce their energy consumption and provide better services to passengers or freight
operators. In-cab signalling and moving-block signalling allow intelligent manage-
ment of rail vehicles to maximise the number of trains through the network without
compromising on safety.
Conclusions
Rail based transportation is at cross-roads. It is one of the few industries that can
claim to be capable of having a zero-carbon output at the point of use, as it is easily
capable of being fully electriﬁed. But it is constrained by a running system that limits
capacity and growth potential.
The industry has been reluctant to consider technologies that have a large impact
on these, instead preferring an incremental improvement path. The authors believe
this is reaching its limits and if the industry wants to fulﬁl its vision of making rail
more attractive to the passenger, then mechatronics seems an obvious route.
Research and development projects have shown the potential short and long term
improvement in running dynamics, energy consumption and ﬂexibility with mecha-
tronics. There is still a great deal to do in this area, not least of which will be
convincing the decision makers and investors that fundamental change is needed.
There is no technical reason not to, but the very nature of how the industry is
constructed precludes change. Environmental consideration may be the only catalyst
to make the changes that are required.
Acknowledgements We would like to thank our sponsors over the last decade (RSSB, Network
Rail, Transport for London, EPSRC, EC), the many partners we have worked with (University of
Birmingham, University of Huddersﬁeld, University of Shefﬁeld, University of Salford, University
of Nottingham, Nihon University, Politecnico di Milano, Southern Rail, Telent, SET Derby, Hitachi
Rail, Perpetuum) and the many researchers past and present who have contributed to the work.
References
1. Wickens A (1998) The dynamics of railway vehicles-from Stephenson to Carter. IMechE Part
F J Rail Rapid Transit 212(3):209–217
2. Anon, “Capacity–helping reduce overcrowding,” HS2 Ltd. https://www.hs2.org.uk/why/cap
acity/. Accessed 5 July 2021
3. Shirres D, Keemor G, Dolphin N, Hooper P (2021) “Why rail electriﬁcation?” Report. Rail
Industry Association, London
4. Wolmar C (2009) Fire and steam: a new history of the railways in Britain. Atlantic Books,
London

174
C. Ward et al.
5. Connor, P (2017) Basic railway Signalling. (7 May 2017). http://www.railway-technical.com/
signalling/infopaper-6-basic-railway.pdf. Accessed 3 July 2021
6. Anon (2021) Measuring and reducing embodied carbon in rail infrastructure, RSSB. https://
www.rssb.co.uk/en/sustainability/carbon. Accessed 5 July 2021
7. Anon (2021) The future railway-the industry’s rail technical strategy 2012, TSLG. https://www.
sparkrail.org/Lists/Records/DispForm.aspx?ID=2899. Accessed 5 July 2021
8. Anon (2021) Rail technical strategy. https://railtechnicalstrategy.co.uk/. Accessed 5 July 2021
9. Anon (2021) Shift2Rail. European Commission. https://shift2rail.org/. Accessed 5 July 2021
10. Anon (2021) Horizon Europe. European Commission. https://ec.europa.eu/info/research-and-
innovation/funding/funding-opportunities/funding-programmes-and-open-calls/horizon-eur
ope_en. Accessed 5 July 2021
11. Tischler M (1996) Advances in aircraft ﬂight control. Routledge, London
12. E. Commission (2021) Intelligent transport systems, vehicle safety systems. https://ec.europa.
eu/transport/themes/its/road/application_areas/vehicle_safety_systems_en. Accessed 3 Aug
2021
13. Gilchrist, AO (2009) History of engineering research on British railways. Institute of Railway
Studies, York
14. Harrison T, Midgley WJB, Goodall RM, Ward CP (2021) Development and control of a rail
vehicle model to reduce energy consumption and carbon dioxide emissions. Proc Inst Mech
Eng Part F J Rail Rapid Transit
15. Anon (2013) EN 15380–4:2013 Railway applications. Classiﬁcation system for railway
vehicles. Function groups, European Standards
16. Goodall R, Ward C (2014) Rolling stock technology for the future. In: International conference
on high speed rail, Birmingham
17. Fu B, Giossi RL, Persson R, Stichel S, Bruni S, Goodall R (2020) Active suspension in railway
vehicles: a literature survey. Railway Eng Sci 28:3–35
18. DLR, RTR Special (2011) NGT-Next Generation Train, Hamburg: Eurailpress
19. European Commission (2021) Mechatronic technologies for trains of the future. https://cordis.
europa.eu/project/id/BRPR970527. Accessed 3 Aug 2021
20. Ward C, Mei T, Hubbard P, Mirzapour M (2012) Railway vehicle optimisation using the concept
of “Design for Control”. In: Railways 2014: the second international conference on railway
technology: research, development and maintenance, Ajaccio
21. Farhat N, Ward C, Goodall R, Dixon R (2018) The beneﬁts of mechatronically-guided railway
vehicles: a multi-body physics simulation study. Mechatronics 51:115–126
22. Goodall RM, Ward CP, Prandi D, Bruni S (2016) Railway bogie stability control from secondary
yaw actuators. In: 24th Symposium of the international association for vehicle system dynamics
(IAVSD 2015), Graz
23. Bemment SD, Goodall RM, Dixon R, Ward CP (2018) Improving the reliability and availability
of railway track switching by analysing historical failure data and introducing functionally
redundant subsystems. Proc Inst Mech Eng Part F J Rail and Rapid Transit 232(5):1407–1424
24. Farhat N, Ward CP, Dixon R, Goodall R (2020) Beneﬁts of mechatronically guided vehicles
on railway track switches. Proc Inst Mech Eng Part F J Rail Rapid Transit 234(3):276–288
25. Qazizadeh A, Persson R, Stichel S (2015) On-track tests of active vertical suspension on a
passenger train. Veh Syst Dyn Int J Veh Mech Mobility 53(6):798–811
26. Pearson JT, Goodall RM, Mei TX, Himmelstein G (2002) Assessment of active stability control
strategies for a high speed bogie. IFAC Proc Vol 35(2):743–748
27. Dobell M (2019) Steering a course to the future. Rail engineer, pp 28–30. (29 Nov 2019)
28. Farhat N, Ward C, Shaebi O, Crosbee D, Stow J, Wang R, Goodall R, Whitley M (2019)
Controlling a rail vehicle with independently-rotating wheels. In: 26th Symposium of the
international association of vehicle system dynamics, IAVSD 2019, Gothenburg.
29. Anon (2021) Aftermarket services. Rolls Royce. https://www.rolls-royce.com/products-and-
services/civil-aerospace/aftermarket-services.aspx. Accessed 9 Aug 2021
30. Anon (2021) Services. Bombardier Rail. https://rail.bombardier.com/en/solutions-and-techno
logies/all-services.html#Operations_and_maintenance. Accessed 9 Aug 2021

Mechatronic Applications in Rail Systems and Technologies
175
31. Anon (2018) Railway operator challenge: integrated bogie monitoring & prognostics system.
RSSB. https://www.sparkrail.org/Lists/Records/DispForm.aspx?ID=24727. Accessed 28 Oct
2021
32. Ward CP, Weston PF, Stewart EJC, Li H, Goodall RM, Roberts C, Mei TX, Charles G, Dixon
R (2001) Condition monitoring opportunities using vehicle-based sensors. Proc IMechE Part
F J Rail Rapid Transit 225(2):202–218
33. Hubbard PD, Ward CP, Dixon R, Goodall RM (2014) Models for estimation of creep forces in
the wheel/rail contact under varying adhesion levels. In: Vehicle system dynamics: international
journal of vehicle mechanics and mobility, vol Sup 1, no IAVSD proceedings supplement, pp
370–386
34. BemmentSD,EbingerE,GoodallRM,WardCD,DixonR(2017)Rethinkingrailtrackswitches
for fault tolerance and enhanced performance. Proc Inst Mech Eng Part F J Rail Rapid Transit
231:1048–1065
35. Olaby O, Dutta S, Harrison T, Ward CP, Dixon R (2021) Realisation of a novel functionally
redundant actuation system for a railway track-switch. J Appl Sci
36. Ross PE (2016) Hyperloop: no pressure. IEEE Spectr 53(1):51–54
37. The Boring Company (2020) LVCC. https://www.boringcompany.com/lvcc. Accessed 14 July
2020
38. Ofﬁce of Rail and Road (2020) Rail infrastructure, assets and environmental 2018–19 Annual
Statistical Release. https://dataportal.orr.gov.uk/statistics/infrastructure-and-emissions/rail-inf
rastructure-and-assets/. Accessed 22 April 2020
39. Rogers A, Robinson C, Agatsuma K, Iwasaki M, Inarida S, Yamamoto T, Konishi K, Mochida T
(2014) Development of class 800/801 high-speed rolling stock for. Hitachi Rev 63(10):646–654
40. Brun L (2016) Closed loop pantograph for improved current collection and condition
monitoring
41. Institution of Mechanical Engineers (2016) ’In-cab’ signalling system to improve London
train service. (4 Aug 2016). https://www.imeche.org/news/news-article/advanced-in-cab-sig
nalling-system-to-improve-london-train-service. Accessed 03 Aug 2021
42. Basile D, ter Beek M, Ferrari A, Legay A (2019) Modelling and analysing ERTMS L3 Moving
block railway signalling with simulink and uppaal SMC. In: Formal methods for industrial
critical systems. FMICS 2019. Lecture notes in computer science, vol 11687
43. Network Rail (2019) Case study: Electriﬁcation embodied carbon savings. RSSB (16
May 2019). https://www.rssb.co.uk/sustainability/Electriﬁcation-Embodied-Carbon-Savings.
Accessed 15 July 2020

Sustainable Mechatronic Solution
for Agricultural Precision Farming
Inspired by Space Robotics Technologies
Cong Niu, Youhua Li, and Xiu-Tian Yan
Abstract Despite recent developments in satellite-based agricultural crop moni-
toring, agricultural food production is still very much a traditional process in which
the monitoring of the farming ﬁelds is still a manual process. In addition, the applica-
tion of crop nutrients and control of pest and disease remains at best a very much hard
automated process in respect of spreading fertilisers and pest control agents. There
is a strong desire from the farming community and at governmental level to accel-
erate the advancement of smart faming, which requires more frequent soil condition
measurement, precision fertiliser application and more optimal pest agent control
and application. Mechatronic systems as the outcome of an academic discipline have
much to offer to smart farming, and sustainable and secure food production. This
chapter looks at the recent development of mechatronic systems for farming appli-
cations and focuses on a sustainable approach with more energy efﬁcient ways of
designing a mechatronic solution for farm soil monitoring and selective harvesting.
It is intended that a more sustainable paradigm can be followed and strengthened for
more sustainable and energy efﬁcient food production.
Introduction
World population continues to grow, and it is estimated that it will reach 9 billion
by 2050 [1], an increase of 1.18 billion or 15% on 2020. As part of this growth,
the proportion of what may be considered middle-class is expected to increase from
3.77 billion in 2020 to 5.4 billion in 2030 by adding the number for each region
of the world from an interactive chart called Forecast of the global middle-class
population from 2015 to 2030 by region [2], a 43.6% increase, and this trend is
expected to continue. These population growth trends and middle-class population
C. Niu · Y. Li · X.-T. Yan (B)
Robotics and Autonomous Systems Group, The University of Strathclyde, Glasgow G1 1XJ, UK
e-mail: x.yan@strath.ac.uk
C. Niu
e-mail: cong.niu@strath.ac.uk
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
P. Hehenberger et al. (eds.), EcoMechatronics,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-07555-1_11
177

178
C. Niu et al.
and demographic changes are putting signiﬁcant pressure on the current global food
production system. Current food production approaches are unsustainable and can be
exempliﬁed by over fertilisation of crops and over-ﬁshing. Current food production is
alsoincreasinglynegativelyinﬂuencedbymorefrequentextremeweatherconditions,
such as droughts and ﬂoods.
Sustainable and secure food production hence becomes perhaps the only techno-
logical long-term solution to feeding this growing population and providing better
food quality to meet the middle-class demands. Sustainable development is thus
becoming one of the most important elements for future societal development and as
without the consideration of sustainability this will become a “contemporary issue”
as Klarin noted [3].
Similar tothefoodproductionchallenge, energyis another scareresource. This is a
complexchallenge,especiallyinthecontextofsocietalpressuretoreducegreenhouse
gas levels to achieve net-zero emissions. Energy is however critical for sustainable
development in many industrial sectors. Even though coal consumption for gener-
ating electricity has decreased from 38.4% in 2003 to 22.4% in 2019, electricity
generated from fossil fuel still represents 53.8% of all electricity generated according
to the International Energy Organisation (IEA), extracted from the chart of the share
of OECD gross electricity production by source, 1974-2020p [4].
Theseenergydevelopmenttrendspointtotheneedforsystemdesignsthatinfuture
hence consider energy efﬁciency more carefully [5]. In the context of agricultural
equipment design, especially with the commitment of many global governments to
the gradual removal of fossil fuel powered vehicles for both transportation of goods
and commuting [6], electriﬁcation becomes a popular technological approach which
will help to achieve net-zero emissions in 2050 [7]. It is hence increasingly important
to design agricultural equipment with as high an electricity efﬁciency as possible to
achieve overall energy efﬁciency [8], assuming that is that electricity will be the main
form of energy available for agricultural equipment.
Itisclearthattraditionalengineeringdesignapproachesfacechallengesinmeeting
the world’s future population and demographic changes. Scarce energy resources
demand more novel solutions to minimise energy wastage in order to optimise energy
usage in food production. This overall energy saving will lead to better protection of
our Blue Planet from irreversible climate change [9]. It is time to think more radically
about different technological solutions to address the above challenges.
Mechatronic Approach With a Focus on Energy
Consumption of The Systems
Mechatronics as an academic discipline is concerned with the exploitation and
maximisation of potential beneﬁts for society by searching and exploring a techno-
logical solution from a spectrum of traditional academic disciplines such as mechan-
ical, electrical, control, computing and more recently artiﬁcial intelligence. This

Sustainable Mechatronic Solution for Agricultural Precision Farming …
179
exploration often leads to novel solutions to address complex problems which them-
selves are challenging, dynamically evolving, and often demanding from multiple
perspectives with conﬂicting requirements. In the context of sustainable develop-
ment, in particular for sustainable food production [10], mechatronics is considered
to be unique in enabling engineering designers to explore a vastly increased design
solution space, ﬂexible in coping with conﬂicting demands, expandable as more
cross-disciplinary solutions can be incorporated and integrated through typically
modular structure. A systematic approach through an appropriate design method-
ology is considered to be important for any of such mechatronic system to be designed
to meet the demanding requirements.
Design Methodology
Before generating an energy efﬁcient mechatronic design solution, it is necessary to
investigateagenericmethodologyconsideringallimportantaspectsofthesystemand
environmental factors so that such a methodology would be applicable across more
applications. In this chapter, a purpose-generated design methodology is presented
for developing an energy efﬁcient system, focusing on path planning of mobile
robotics designed for agricultural apparitions. An energy optimisation algorithm
is then derived for detailed modelling and path optimisation to improve energy
efﬁciency and long-distance operations.
An initial design process model presented by Yan et al. [11] consists of three
pillars, namely an information repository pillar, a design process pillar and an energy
pillar. The information repository pillar is concerned with the representation of the
design information expansion process in which as more design decisions are made,
more design parameters values are committed, and hence more information deter-
mined. The design process pillar represents the conventional process of designing
mechatronic systems such as a mobile rover. These processes ﬂow from top to bottom
and help a designer to progress to a satisfactory design. Building on this work,
an extended design methodology is proposed which introduces a new pillar which
focuses on the consideration of energy conversion and the external impact factors of
ﬁeld robots with a focus on agricultural applications. Speciﬁcally, the methodology
now includes the consideration of the dynamically changing environment and its
impact on the energy consumption of a mobile robotic system. These factors include
the elevation of the terrain, the surface unevenness of the terrain and the hardness of
the surfaces over which the mobile rover needs to travel. With these considerations in
the design process model, it is believed that a full and comprehensive consideration
for a systematic design can be achieved to ensure that the mobile robot is energy
efﬁcient by design.
In the information repository pillar on the left of Fig. 1, the design information for
the mechatronic system design process is shown and is available to support the whole
design process. It gradually expands or grows as system design decisions are made
and the relationships between each interconnecting part are clariﬁed and decided.

180
C. Niu et al.
Fig. 1 A three-pillar mechatronic design methodology focusing on energy
This evolving process is shown on the left of the ﬁgure with the Evolving Informa-
tion ﬂow arrow. This evolving information can be categorised into four groups with
different level of details from the top to the bottom of the pillar. These include infor-
mationondesigninitialisationandtaskclariﬁcation,whichcanbefurtherdividedinto
the description of the system level needs of customers, speciﬁcations through anal-
ysis, also the market intelligence for commercialising a mobile robot for a researched
market. The information becomes richer as shown in Fig. 1 by the darkening colour
on the robot design speciﬁcation. This evolving information ﬂow is enriched in the
form of the existing design information for the next stage. Ultimately, there results
in a design solution in the form of a mixture of statements of the customers need and
benchmark research results, conceptual design solution models, embodiment design
and importantly a set of design models from multiple perspectives, and a control
design model. All of these help in make decisions in designing the robot.
The middle pillar, from the top to the bottom in Fig. 1, shows the mechatronic
system design process and activities in generating a ﬁnal design solution. It involves

Sustainable Mechatronic Solution for Agricultural Precision Farming …
181
both concept generation and qualitative modelling. In this step, concepts are gener-
ated and evaluated according to speciﬁc working principles and with the existing
information of design speciﬁcations produced earlier.
The information of a concept as generated and evaluated is passed to the next
step of embodiment design and quantitative modelling for evaluation. Embodiment
and detail design are ﬁrst undertaken so that all components are speciﬁed, then the
evolving information is passed to the embodiment models, along with the fully devel-
oped solution models. These can then be simulated and evaluated for quantitative
evaluation.
Finally, the last stage of the mechatronic system design process in the middle pillar
is about multi-perspective modelling and simulation, in which a mobile robot solution
is fully modelled and simulated from several perspectives as in the last element of
the information repository pillar. Together, these multi-perspective models provide
a full representation of a mobile system for intensive evaluation. There are more
intertwined relationships and trades-offs required and considered at this stage to
achieve an optimal solution. In this step, many models are designed as shown in the
bottom left and top right of Fig. 1. Building on the library of simulation models and
simulation and visualisation, a mechatronic system can be fully generated, evaluated
and validated in this virtual modelling world. A fully developed concept model is
created for further evaluation at the end of this process.
From the energy optimisation point of view, the design process model of Fig. 1
considers the following: environment, path planning and terrain. Environment covers
the wind, temperature and lighting conditions which have impact on navigation and
actuation. Terrain consideration includes surface modelling of the ﬁeld from, typi-
cally, satellite images and the difference between it and the actual terrain as experi-
enced by a mobile platform. For the path planning, on top of the left pillar a clear set
of requirements for this need to be formulated, including how the planning algorithm
focuses on the ratio between shortest path and lowest energy cost and their trade-
offs. The platform characteristics needs to be considered, depending on the difference
between each platform’s characteristics and different path planning methods to be
utilised. After the ﬁrst stage of Analysis of Need, the design can proceed to stage 2 and
concept generation and evaluation. At this stage, the energy critical design parameters
such as weight and friction coefﬁcients are considered. This allows energy optimisa-
tion when a path is generated. Such a path can be virtually implemented on a target
mobile platform, on which a series of simulation covering the static, kinematic and
dynamic behaviour of the system. These provide a full and in-depth understanding of
the energy behaviour of the design system through this qualitative conceptual design
and quantitative design and simulation at the embodiment design stage.
Finally, on the right of Fig. 1 is the design of the path planning algorithm with
from the top the data collected by various methods including on-board and offboard
sensors, and weather stations. Satellite images are also used to model the terrain of
the target ﬁeld, according to the requirements of the applications which could include
air-based ground-based water-based autonomous systems. After the modelling of the
environment, there is a processing algorithm for each of the environmental models
that provides different priorities according to the objectives of the speciﬁc platform.

182
C. Niu et al.
These can include a higher rating on the requirement of maximum distance travelled
for a task, or faster coverage of a full ﬁeld, or exploration of an unknow farming envi-
ronment and so on. Based on the importance of these possible objectives, each of the
environmental models will be selected, processed and used for simulation accord-
ingly. With these selected inputs of priorities, the energy optimisation algorithm is
used independently to generate an energy efﬁcient path for the speciﬁc platform.
Then the result of the path generated is simulated again and the parameters of the
planning algorithm can be tuned to improve the performance of the energy optimised
path planning. When the performance is determined and satisfactory, the algorithm
can be implemented on an individual platform and the ﬁeld test can be performed.
Energy Focused Mechatronic Modelling
For energy efﬁcient mobile rover design, a list of considerations has been compiled
based on a literature review and ﬁeld studies. These can then be used to help to
build comprehensive representations of energy models for a mobile rover design. It
is aimed that the energy model will provide a comprehensive representation of the
key energy outputs required for a ﬁeld robotic system.
A total energy model is developed, considering all critical energy used in a typical
rover system and the energy in consideration is represented in the form of power in
this case and can be derived by the following equation (Eq. 1):
t2

t1

Pm + Ps + Pf + Ph + Pe

· dt
(1)
where:
• Pm is the summation of the power on each wheel and at any given time,
Pm = F · V l.
• Ps is then the summation of the power consumed by the steering system, and is
calculated as Ps = τ · ω.
• To overcome the friction between the rover and the contact surface the term Pf is
introduced.
• During operation, there will be heat generated due to mechanical friction and
electrical energy to mechanical rotation conversion. The power associated with
these heat losses in the propulsion driving system can be represented by Ph. This
portion of the power is proportional to the power that is used by the rover for its
motion and can be further integrated by considering its sub-systems.
• Finally, Pe represents the power required for the on-board electronic equipment to
perform varying tasks at different stages. This can be a signiﬁcant part of energy
consumption if computationally intensive calculations are performed for tasks
such as navigation and path re-planning.

Sustainable Mechatronic Solution for Agricultural Precision Farming …
183
AgriRover Design as an Example
AgriRover [11] (Fig. 2) is designed as a multipurpose autonomous robotic mobile
platform speciﬁcally for agricultural applications, aiming to address the pressing
needs of monitoring soil condition and harvesting for overall development of smart
farming. Speciﬁcally, the design is focused on functions such as soil sampling, fruit
and vegetable harvesting and ﬁeld mapping. This multipurpose agricultural robotic
mobile platform is designed with the inspiration of Interplanetary Rovers. In partic-
ular, cost minimisation is a key driver of the design and this leads to the consider-
ation of operational cost, including energy usage from on-board power sources in
order to maximise the economic beneﬁts to farmers. The key energy components of
AgriRover utilise a set of rechargeable lithium batteries as the energy source and drive
electrical actuators and motors as the mobility system. The AgriRover is designed
with the focus of eco-friendly and sustainable development as it is important both
environmentally for the wellbeing of ourselves and ﬁnancially and makes sense in
long term. One of the design perspectives is to make the AgriRover energy efﬁcient
during its operation and this can be achieved by following an energy efﬁcient pathway
using an energy model.
Perception of Agricultural Environment Through Vision
Perception of the farming environment is of signiﬁcance in understanding the
surroundings of an agriculture robot. A full mapping of the obstacles, including
buildings, tractors, trees, fancies and other agricultural objects, helps a robot to plan
Fig. 2 AgriRover prototype
performing soil sampling
and monitoring

184
C. Niu et al.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 3 AgriRover’s vision-based perception system and processing a Original image and b
Processed image for recognition
its path more efﬁciently. In the context of energy perspective modelling, this critical
location information of these objects can help a mobile robot to generate an energy
efﬁcient path for a particular agriculture task. The exact location of the subject is
stored in the navigation map and used to build the occupancy grid for the map. Based
on this occupancy grid, a suitable navigation path can be generated, and the overall
distance travelled is calculated to optimise energy consumption. Whenever possible,
the shortest path is generated for the rover to reach the next via-point and perform
the next operations.
A visual image of a farmhouse is captured and shown in Fig. 3a. This is a typical
farming environment within which these objects exist, and it is important for a robot
to understand this environment. To train a robot to understand these objects, these
objects are segmented for training purposes and the resulting segmented image is
as shown in Fig. 3b and is used for developing an obstacle recognition capability of
commonly found surroundings.
An Energy Efﬁcient Path Planning for a Field Trial
Through further discussion with partners in Beijing, it became clear that the initial
selected ﬁeld has been divided into 32 small blocks and each of these blocks have
had applied a different fertiliser for experimental purpose over several years. It is
therefore desirable to sample each of these blocks so that a comparison and link to the
yield could be made. A number of path plan concepts have therefore been developed.
Plan 1 shown in Fig. 4 is designed to cover all 32 points in the centre of each
block in a sequential manner following the vertical path. This plan requires the rover
to turn 14 times and it never passes any sampling point twice. The total distance the
rover travels is calculated to be 530 m. The advantage of this plan is that it travels
the least distance.
Plan 2 shown in Fig. 5 is also designed to cover all 32 points in the centre of each
block in a slightly more complicated pattern travelling along the diagonal direction
between the blocks. This plan requires the rover to turn 11 times, and it passes twice

Sustainable Mechatronic Solution for Agricultural Precision Farming …
185
Fig. 4 A complete parallel
robotic soil sampling path
plan for the selected farm at
NERCITA
Fig. 5 An alternative
diagonal robotic soil
sampling path plan for the
same selected farm at
NERCITA
two sampling points at the bottom left corner. The total travel distance is 576.9, 46.7 m
or 8.8% more than Plan 1. Based on the above, it was decided Plan 1 offers an optimal
solution and was chosen for the ﬁeld trial to minimise the energy consumption.
Dynamic Energy Modelling and Simulation
Robots working in a ﬁeld typically experience signiﬁcant variations in energy
consumption due to the nature of unstructured environment such as hilly terrain,
uneven surfaces, and soil clay soils. It is therefore desirable to investigate the dynamic
nature of energy consumption in such environments. One of the approaches used is
to perform a dynamic cooperative simulation to assess the energy consumed. This

186
C. Niu et al.
simulation can also be used to verify the results of the planned path. Dynamic cooper-
ative simulation uses two models from MATLAB/Simulink and Adams. The former
is used as a control module and the ADAMS model then provides a 3-dimensional
kinematic and dynamic representation including detailed modelling of the terrain and
the Rover used for the dynamic simulation. The two systems work together collab-
oratively to generate a solution to evaluate the energy performance with systematic
and detailed dynamic modelling.
In this co-simulation the path generated with the path planning algorithm has the
goal set to lowest energy consumption. The start point is indicated as a green circle.
For a given terrain, it is necessary to optimise a path and a result is shown in Fig. 6(1).
From the co-simulation, the total energy consumption of the planned path shown in
Fig. 6(2) is lower than the straight-line path one shown in Fig. 6(5) and the height
change of planned path has a lower slop shown in Fig. 6(2) compared to that for the
straight-line path in Fig. 6(6).
Figure 6(1), (2) and (3) show the simulation results for the planned path, energy
consumption and height proﬁle for the energy optimised path. The total run time
of this simulation is 305 s and the total energy equivalent cost shown is 6.277 ×
107N · mm · s by each wheel, this intermediate variable is due to the limitation of the
software. This value is an integral of τ × v with respect to time, where the speed v
Fig. 6 Co-simulation results of an optimal path in comparison with a standard path: (1), an opti-
mised path, (2) energy used for the path in (1), (3) the height proﬁle of the optimised path (4)
standard or normal path, (5) energy used for the path in (4), (6) the height proﬁle of the straight path

Sustainable Mechatronic Solution for Agricultural Precision Farming …
187
is in unit of mm/s as the ADAMS uses this intermediate variable as the output. So to
calculate the ﬁnal total energy consumption in joules, Eq. 2 is used to represent the
total work done in the period from t1 to t2. by integrating the rotational work.
Work =
t2

t1
τωdt =
t2

t1
τ × v
r dt
(2)
As mentioned the intermediate variable is τ × v therefore the radius needs to be
divided to ﬁt the Eq. 2. The radius of the AgriRover wheel is 80 mm. As the AgriRover
has two driving wheels when simulated, and the length units were in mm with the
intermediate variable, the ﬁnal energy cost is calculated as 6.28 × 107/80/1000 × 2
and the total energy required is 1,567.5 J.
As shown in Fig. 6(4), 6(5), 6(6) for a straight path, the total run time is 223 s and
this is shorter than 290 s for the planned path as shown in Fig. 6(1), 6(2) and 6(3).
Despite the total length of the path is less with the straight path, the total energy cost
shown is 1.01×108N·mm·s which is higher due to the work done by the AgriRover
against gravity is higher. Using Eq. 3 following the same procedure as before, the
energy cost is 2,525 J.
Field Tests
The ﬁrst ﬁeld test was conducted at a farmland ﬁeld near Glasgow in the UK as
shown in Fig. 7 and two groups of tests have been set up and undertaken. The ﬁrst
group of tests focused on the energy optimised planning. The second set of ﬁeld tests
took place in Beijing and focused on multipoint planning from an energy perspective.
Due to technical problems with the AgriRover, full results were not obtained based
on the original plan.
Fig. 7 Field tests at a farm near Glasgow

188
C. Niu et al.
The ﬁrst set of tests is designed to perform the following tasks.
1.
Demonstrate the capability of the planning algorithm in identifying an optimal
path for any given points in the ﬁeld, e.g. from point A at the bottom to point B
at the top of other locations.
2.
Utilising the energy optimised path planning to establish alternative, and more
energy efﬁcient, paths from point A to point B.
3.
Obtain relevant comparison data:
(a)
The ﬁrst test is to capture data on the energy consumption between a direct
straight or shortest path between set points,
(b)
The second test is to obtain data energy consumption on a path that has
been generated by the energy optimised planning algorithm.
These results of two types of planning are compared in Table 1.
The energy optimised path planning algorithm generates an energy optimised
path from any point A to point B taking into consideration of ﬁeld terrain using a
potential ﬁeld path planning algorithm. The waypoint then is converted from National
Grid (British National Grid System) to GPS coordinates which can be used by the
AgriRover. The conversion has been done by utilising a MATLAB function named
‘OS2LL’. All the waypoints for the ﬁeld test are converted into GPS coordinates and
the results are shown in Table 1. These points are plotted on a satellite map as shown
in Fig. 8.
When a straight path is followed by the Rover. The height change data plotted has
a higher interval of height change that requires the rover to overcome a climb of a
5.63 m hilly slope from the lowest 78.85–84.48 m above the sea level. This is 1.62 m
higher than optimised path in which a peak of 5.63 m on the straight path is avoided.
Table 1 Details of energy optimised way points set
Points
Latitude
Longitude
Points
Latitude
Longitude
1
55.90361
−4.1826
12
55.90395
−4.1835
2
55.90365
−4.18268
13
55.9039
−4.18358
3
55.90369
−4.18277
14
55.90386
−4.18365
4
55.90374
−4.18285
15
55.90381
−4.18373
5
55.90378
−4.18293
16
55.90376
−4.18381
6
55.90382
−4.18301
17
55.90372
−4.18389
7
55.90387
−4.1831
18
55.90367
−4.18396
8
55.90391
−4.18318
19
55.90362
−4.18404
9
55.90395
−4.18326
20
55.90358
−4.18412
10
55.904
−4.18334
21
55.90353
−4.1842
11
55.904
−4.18342
22
55.90353
−4.18428

Sustainable Mechatronic Solution for Agricultural Precision Farming …
189
Fig. 8 Energy optimised way point set plotted on the satellite map
Figure 9 shows the 3D view of the energy optimised path, starting from green
circle to destination shown in magenta diamond which is generated by the algorithm
and focused on energy optimization. The elevation change data is plotted with a
height change that requires a climb of 4.01 m from lowest 78.85 m to a highest point
of 82.86 m as shown in Fig. 9(2).
When a straight path is followed by the AgriRover. The height change data plotted
has a higher interval of height change that requires the rover to overcome a climb
of a 5.63 m hilly slope from the lowest 78.85–84.48 m above the sea level. This is
1.62 m higher than optimised path in which a peak of 5.63 m on the straight path is
avoided.
As shown in Fig. 6(3), the height change that the rover needs to overcome with the
Energyoptimisedpathis 4.01mstartingfromthestartingpoint as 0mhigh, compared
to the straight path which is 5.63 m as shown in Fig. 6(6). This is over 28% height
reduction in climbing and reaching the same point, during which unnecessary energy
is used and which can be avoided.

190
C. Niu et al.
Fig. 9 Energy optimised path in 3D map (1) and the height change of the path (2)
Comparison of Simulation and Field Test Results
Comparing the straight path and the optimised path, the simulation shows the latter
represents a saving of 957.5 J or 37.9% in total energy cost. This is achieved from
a total energy cost saving of 1567.5 J for the optimised path in comparison with
2525 J for the straight path. The actual energy measured during the ﬁeld tests differ
as expected. The energy in the ﬁeld test shows an energy consumption of 3640.5 J
for the planed path and 4628.3 J for the straight path, resulting in a 21.3% of the
energy saving for optimised path. This is slightly less than the 37.9% energy saving
derived from the simulation run.
There are several reasons for the discrepancies between simulation and ﬁeld test
results and these are explained below. Firstly, the test ﬁeld is far more complex in
its terrain surface conditions and the presence of small agricultural obstacles. The
ﬁeld had stalks remaining after harvesting, and these are clearly seen in Fig. 7.
This additional resistance in moving AgriRover forward was not considered in the

Sustainable Mechatronic Solution for Agricultural Precision Farming …
191
simulation as this condition results in additional resistance as denser stalks increase
the resistance, and hence requires more energy to drive the AgriRover. Furthermore,
the farmland has variable rolling resistance due to the condition of the soil, high
moisture content and low temperature. Some parts of the ﬁeld are muddy and some
parts had ice coverage, all conditions which increase the resistance and also introduce
more randomness to the whole system.
Secondly, as the simulation of the system is based on a static rolling resistance
factor, energy consumption will be different to the real world. It appears that the
rolling resistance set in the simulation is lower overall in comparison to the real
world, hence the overall energy consumption in simulation when compared to the
ﬁeld test is lower. Due to very high calculation resource requirement by implementing
the ADAMS and MATLAB collaborative simulation, the randomly generated rolling
resistant coefﬁcient matrix was not implemented. The current simulation takes three
days to complete, using a computer that is equipped with a 4 core 8 thread processor
and 32 Gigabyte of RAM. By adding more complexity, the simulation has a higher
rate of crashing which makes it hard to generate useful results in a reasonable time
frame.
In addition, it was raining for 2 days before the test, so the farmland around those
areas with lower elevation was muddy and some parts were frozen because of the
low temperature during the test. All of these make the AgriRover experience a harder
time in traversing the ﬁeld due to the increased friction and slippage from the terrain.
Future EcoMechatronic Development
Smart farming is only at its infancy. This new way of farming can be potentially
enabled by advancements in a range of technologies, including robotics, and satellite
enabled and unmanned aerial vehicle-based remote sensing along with advances in
the genomic studies of crops along with crops management. Many of these technolo-
gies are enabled and supported by a variety of electronic components devices which
could also be found in systems such as robots, satellites and unmanned aerial vehi-
cles. It is therefore argued that electronics system solutions or ever wider informa-
tion scientiﬁc systems do provide promising enablers to support sustainable develop-
ment and contribute signiﬁcantly to an emerging EcoMechatronic discipline. Specif-
ically, this chapter demonstrates a contribution to sustainable development from two
perspectives as set out in the following sections.

192
C. Niu et al.
AgriRover Enabled New Energy Efﬁcient and Sustainable
Approach to Food Production
The AgriRover is designed to be sustainable from three perspectives. Firstly, instead
of using typically large and energy hungry farming equipment such as tractors,
AgriRover is more efﬁcient and has a signiﬁcantly smaller footprint both in the ﬁeld
and in terms of energy consumption. Secondly, through energy optimization in path
planning, a high proportion of energy can be saved as demonstrated in the chapter.
Finally, the soil quality measurement capability embodied in the AgriRover enables
timely precision measurement of the fertilisers required for the current growing
season. In contrast to this real time and in situ soil fertility and quality measurement,
traditional practises typically rely on out of date data for farmers to determine the
amount of fertiliser to be applied in the ﬁeld. This often results in over fertilisation
and consequently has a negative impact on the environment and in long term on
sustainable food production. The AgriRover work has therefore demonstrated a new
way of smart farming.
An Energy Optimization Method in Path Planning
for Multiple Robots
The path learning algorithm utilises an artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld as the means of
pathﬁnding, therefore it is possible to introduce an additional matrix ﬁeld containing
the real-time position of multiple Rovers. As evaluated before, the path planning
algorithm that utilising the artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld uses less computational power
when compared to other path planning algorithms such as those based on machine
learning and genetic algorithms, and therefore makes it possible to be implanted on
the on-board computer of the Rover which then runs the path planning algorithm in
real time.
Such architectures can be conﬁgured as a centralised or decentralised cluster
depending on the application. For a centralised cluster architecture there will be
a master and slaves structurer in which the master can be a ground-station or a
particular Rover which all the other Rovers report to. A current position matrix can
be generated and broadcasted to all Rovers. For a decentralised cluster architecture,
each Rover will have their own position sent via a data link to neighbouring Rovers
or Rovers within a speciﬁed radius which will then have the position data relative to
themselves, which is enough for the task of collision avoidance.
Both of the architectures had their beneﬁts and limitations. For the centralised
cluster the planning algorithm will have a real-time position for each Rover and
therefore is more controllable for planning a task, the limitation is that communica-
tions distance is limited and therefore the performance of the task solving capability
of the cluster will degrade when the size of the cluster or the distance between rovers
increases. For the decentralised cluster architecture this problem is avoided because

Sustainable Mechatronic Solution for Agricultural Precision Farming …
193
each member of the cluster only needs to communicate with a certain radius, but the
capability of centralised planning will be harder to achieve. To solve this problem
the architecture of the Rovers can be operated in a hybrid mode where the control
centre sends the tasks to the Rovers within the communication radius, then the task
is then passed to all the Rovers via data-link, and the position of the Rovers returned.
Although this will increase the load on each of the Rovers because of the additional
data that needs to be repeated, and which may require a hardware upgrade, this is
a solution for a collaborative multi rover architecture that can be investigated in the
future.
Conclusions
The chapter has described a new approach to sustainable and energy efﬁcient food
production by deploying technologies such as AgriRover. This type of mechatronic
solution brings along with it many advantages. It enables farmers to have avail-
able the most recent data when required and the example in the chapter shows that
AgriRover is capable of providing autonomous navigation in a ﬁeld in an energy
efﬁcient manner. The chapter also shows that the total energy costs of same planning
task when using the energy optimised path planning algorithm with the AgriRover
when running in an undulating terrain environment can save energy in comparison
with a standard planning for straight-line path. The dynamic collaboratively simula-
tion results illustrate a 37.9% total energy cost saving with 1567.5 J for the planned
path in comparison to 2,525 J for the straight path. This is conﬁrmed and veriﬁed
through a ﬁeld test, showing 3,640.5 J for the optimised and planned path against
4,628.3 J for the straight path, resulting 21.3% of the energy saving. The energy
consumption reduction rate with unit distance travelled is 45.5%, which proves the
energy optimised planned path has successfully reduced the energy consumption by
avoiding the unnecessary terrain overcrossing. There is a difference of 16.6% in the
energy consumption between the simulation results of 37.9% and ﬁeld test results
at 21.3%, this is explained by the variations of condition parameters used in the
simulation.
A new energy optimised path planning method is proposed which is capable of
generating a path for the AgriRover whilst simultaneously avoiding the problem
of unnecessary terrain overcrossing when running in terrain rich environment. The
chapter demonstrates that with an application of energy optimisation, AgriRover
can achieve a 21.3% total energy saving. This can be applied to other mechatronic
systems designed for agricultural applications and collectively they can result in a
signiﬁcant saving of energy.
By implementing electrically powered mobile platforms such as AgriRover
instead of fossil fuel, this also represents a signiﬁcant step towards an improve-
ment for the environment. Currently, electrical energy is mostly generated using
fossil fuels, and in fact this amounts to 53.8% of all electricity generated according
to the International Energy Organisation in 2020. This trend will however change

194
C. Niu et al.
as increasingly the public and governments around the world realise the potentially
irreversible damage that increasing temperature will do to the fragile earth environ-
ment. The Paris Agreement of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change speciﬁcally sets target of maintaining a global temperature rise this century
well below 2 °C above pre-industrial levels. The mechatronic solution presented in
this chapter surely provides a feasible option for engineers, designers and policy-
makers to pursue for a more sustainable and energy efﬁcient food production. Further
improvements can be made by deploying solutions such as the proposed path plan-
ning method and other mechatronic technologies and moving a big step forward
towards more eco-friendly agriculture powered by advanced EcoMechatronics.
Acknowledgements The authors of the chapter would like to thank Innovate UK and UK Space
Agency for providing funding to develop an AgriRover for trial under SmartFarm project. The
authors would also like to acknowledge the signiﬁcant contribution towards AgriRover prototyping
by colleagues from Robotics Group of RAL Space. In addition, the authors would like to thank
colleagues at the National Engineering Research Center for Information Technology in Agriculture
(NERCITA), China for providing information of their farm for trial planning reported in this chapter.
References
1. World Population to Reach 9.9 Billion by 2050. News. Retrieved November 15, 2021, from
https://sdg.iisd.org/news/world-population-to-reach-9-9-billion-by-2050/
2. Forecast of the global middle class population from 2015 to 2030, by region (in millions).
Statista. Retrieved November 15, 2021, from www.statista.com/statistics/255591/forecast-on-
the-worldwide-middle-class-population-by-region
3. Klarin T (2018) The concept of sustainable development: from its beginning to the contempo-
rary issues. Zagreb Int Rev Econ Bus 21(1):67–94
4. Electricity Information: Overview. Retrieved November 15, 2021, from www.iea.org/reports/
electricity-information-overview
5. Gerstlberger W, Præst Knudsen M, Stampe I (2014) Sustainable development strategies for
product innovation and energy efﬁciency. Bus Strateg Environ 23(2):131–144
6. Hosseini SE, Butler B (2020) An overview of development and challenges in hydrogen powered
vehicles. Int J Green Energy 17(1):13–37
7. WalkerP,MasonR,CarringtonD(2019)Theresa maycommitstonet zeroUKcarbonemissions
by 2050. The Guardian 11(6):19. Retrieved November 14, 2021, from www.theguardian.com/
environment/2019/jun/11/theresa-may-commits-to-net-zero-uk-carbon-emissions-by-2050
8. Gellings CW (2009) Energy efﬁciency in agricultural equipment. EOLSS Publishers, Efﬁcient
Use and Conservation of Energy, pp 106–122
9. Hunt ND, Liebman M, Thakrar SK, Hill JD (2020) Fossil energy use, climate change impacts,
and air quality-related human health damages of conventional and diversiﬁed cropping systems
in Iowa USA. Environ Scie Technol 54(18):11002–11014
10. NegreteJC(2017)MechatronicsandprecisionlivestockfarminginMexicananimalproduction.
Anim Rev 4(1):1–7
11. Yan X-T, Bianco A, Niu C, Palazzetti R, Henry G, Li YH, Tubby W, Kisdi A, Irshad R, Sanders
S, Scott R (2020) The AgriRover: a reinvented mechatronic platform from space robotics for
precision farming. In Reinventing Mechatronics. Springer, pp 55–73

The Achievement of Sustainability
in the Built Environment
Crina Oltean-Dumbrava and Margherita Finamore
Abstract The built environment presents particular challenges in relation to the
achievement of sustainability, not least because of the number of building types and
the uses to which they are put. Design issues thus include ensuring that buildings
are energy efﬁcient with effective ventilation in relation to use while enabling the
maximum utilization of shared spaces and ﬂexibility of use. In this context, many of
theunderlyingtechnologies,asforinstancethoseinvolvedinenergymanagementand
use, are mechatronic in nature while developments such as Building Digital Twins
are supporting real-time responses to changing conditions. The chapter examines
the background to these issues and places them into the context of the developing
approach to building construction, operation and management. In doing so, it draws
onas anexemplar theawardwinning, includingat COP26, designanddevelopment of
the Antonio Brancati School in Pesaro in Italy to illustrate how innovative approaches
to design and the use of technology have enabled the creation not only of a place of
learning, but also a shared resource for the local community.
Introduction
As suggested by White [1], perhaps the most commonly referenced deﬁnition of
sustainability is that proposed by the 1987 World Commission on Environment and
Development chaired by Gro Harlem Bruntland, the then Prime Minister of Norway,
asbeing:“…developmentwhichmeetstheneedsofthepresentwithoutcompromising
the ability of future generations to meet their own needs” [2]. A more socially oriented
deﬁnition is that put forward in 1989 by Pearce, Makandia and Barbier [3] that
“Sustainable development involves devising a social and economic system, which
ensures that these goals are sustained, i.e., that real incomes rise, that educational
C. Oltean-Dumbrava (B)
University of Bradford, Bradford, UK
e-mail: m.c.a.oltean-dumbrava@bradford.ac.uk
M. Finamore
Comune Pesaro Municipality, Italy
e-mail: m.ﬁnamore@comune.pesaro.pu.it
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
P. Hehenberger et al. (eds.), EcoMechatronics,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-07555-1_12
195

196
C. Oltean-Dumbrava and M. Finamore
standards increase, that the health of the nation improves, that the general quality
of life is advanced.” More recently, the United Nations has published a series of
Sustainable Development Goals [4] of which Goal 11 has as its stated objective to
“make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable”. This
includes speciﬁc reference to aspects of service provision which may in turn be
considered in relation to [5, 6]:
Infrastructure Services—Encompassing water and sanitation, waste collection and
management, transport and energy.
Social Services—Encompassing education, health, housing and elderly and child
care.
Quality of Life Services—Encompassing public safety, urban planning, culture and
entertainment, sport and public spaces.
In the context of the built environment, the term Sustainability Framework has
been deﬁned as “The structure used to select and organize criteria, indicators
and benchmarks”. Projects often have associated with them a number of sustain-
ability frameworks for the assessment of environmental, economic and social factors.
However, few address the technical elements separately.
Considering the built environment as a whole, issues associated with achieving
sustainability include
• Building design for material recovery and reuse and associated construction
methods and techniques.
• Development of a low carbon society.
• Effective utilization of shared spaces and recreational facilities.
• Energy systems and energy efﬁciency including local energy sources and smart
grid infrastructures.
• Impact on climate and climate change.
• Management of change, including innovation.
• Management of the building stock.
• Materials recycling and waste reduction where the construction industry is one of
the biggest sources of non-recyclable waste.
• Refurbishment and reuse of existing building stock as compared to demolition
and rebuild.
• Resource management with an emphasis on the use of local resources.
• The design of new build to support easy change of function and use.
• The role of Information Technologies (IT) in supporting change of use and
sustainability.
Many of the technologies associated with achieving an efﬁcient and sustainable
performance are associated with mechatronics systems and subsystems, for instance,
in respect of environmental control and energy management. The EcoMechatronic
concept, in which these systems are increasingly integrated with building operation
and use, is therefore likely to play an increasingly signiﬁcant role in building design
and operation as part of a whole lifetime approach which includes recovery, recycling
and reuse at the end of life.

The Achievement of Sustainability in the Built Environment
197
Technologies
These include:
Construction technologies—The use of traditional technologies does not necessarily
prevent the achievement of optimal results and design concepts increasingly aim to
maximize the envelope efﬁciency and ﬁnd natural solutions providing free gains.
Thus, shape, position and orientation are chosen to best exploit solar radiation and
optimizenaturallightingandshadestructuredaroundthecollectionandinterpretation
of related climate change data.
Alternative and novel construction technologies such as the 3D printing of build-
ings [7] then afford opportunities to develop new strategies for the management
of such structures over their lifetime. Similarly, by designing elements such as
digital communications as part of the construction process, the ability to create smart
buildings capable of reconﬁguration is increased.
Smart building technologies—A Building Energy Management System (BEMS) is
an integral part of a building wide system which introduces artiﬁcial intelligence
into building operation and enables innovative modes of automation, management
and the remote control of plant [8, 9]. The hardware elements of such plant are often
essentially mechatronic in nature and use intelligent sensors to deﬁne system opera-
tion along with cloud-based software platforms to optimize, in real-time, behaviours
structured around Internet of Things (IoT) solutions to increase comfort and reduce
energy consumption while transforming each building into a smart building with
zero emissions.
Systems are also monitored, controlled and regulated remotely to ensure
maximum control of the internal conditions and at the same time deﬁne and imple-
ment energy strategy and manage operating costs in real time. BEMS thus allows
the user not only to remotely control all managed systems, but also to enable
• Access to environmental and energy certiﬁcations (e.g. ISO50001 and ISO14001).
• Control of indoor and outdoor lighting as well as security and ﬁre alarms.
• Effective monitoring of energy consumption.
• Effective utilization of solar radiation, including the operation of shading systems.
• Greater reliability and durability of plant.
• Maintenance scheduling and support.
• Optimal values of comfort and the best quality of natural and artiﬁcial light.
• Real-time monitoring of electricity consumption from the grid and of energy
production by any photovoltaic system.
• Real-time monitoring of water consumption.
• Reduction of maintenance costs and greater effectiveness in the planning of
ordinary and extraordinary maintenance.
Building Information Modelling (BIM)—The ISO standard 19,650:2019 deﬁnes BIM
as “The use of a shared digital representation of a built asset to facilitate design,
construction and operation processes to form a reliable basis for decisions.” In

198
C. Oltean-Dumbrava and M. Finamore
contrast with conventional building design practices, BIM introduces a range of
additional information such as time, costs and asset management as well as sustain-
ability, in order to enable the evaluation of the building from planning through to
construction, its operational life and ultimately disposal. The information model
created in BIM integrates individual stakeholder models to support coordination and
development along with decision-making [10].
User interactions—The ways in which users interact with buildings and the ways in
which they utilize the space is a major design factor which impacts sustainability.
This requires that the design team takes into all stakeholder views and integrates
these with the building function, including external issues such as landscaping.
Environment—The key issue here is generally user comfort which involves factors
such as
• Customized temperature control throughout the occupied space.
• Integrated control of both natural and artiﬁcial light.
• High acoustic performance obtained to create the best environment for the
intended use.
• Monitoring and control of indoor air quality with an air exchange cycle of 5 times
per hour.
• Use of natural ventilation.
• Parking for bicycles, electric charging stations for cars.
Communication and Networking—The ability to create both internal and external
networks in support of Internet of Things conﬁgurations as part of a smart building
infrastructure is of increasing importance. In an EcoMechatronics context, this
enables the individual systems to interact with each other, and hence respond in
real time to changes in weather conditions and occupancy. In the wider context, the
extension of the network from the building to the wider environment then supports
the interaction both with users and with external systems such as transport.
Digital Twins—Digital Twins are dynamic digital models which use artiﬁcial intel-
ligence, machine learning and data analytics to monitor and update in real time the
status of their physical counterpart. In operation, the Digital Twin uses both real
time and historic data from the physical system to learn about the behaviour of that
system and hence to maintain itself as close to the real systems working condition or
position as possible. The results can then be integrated to both update and improve
the generic model and to identify areas and issues of potential concern. Digital Twins
are therefore increasingly ﬁnding application in support of the optimization of the
operation of a range of physical assets, including sustainable smart buildings. Here,
the Digital Twin would be developed in parallel with the building, including the
design and construction phases, to the point where it provides real-time support for
the operation and maintenance of the building, for instance in respect of energy
management and efﬁciency. Twins at the level of individual buildings can then be

The Achievement of Sustainability in the Built Environment
199
integrated as part of a network of twins within the wider context of a Smart City
environment [11–13].
Antonio Brancati School
The Antonio Brancati School (Fig. 1) is a new school built in an abandoned urban area
of Pesaro in Italy (Fig. 2) and has a very important role in terms of social sustainability
for the area, as well as providing an example of green construction. The decision
was made by the municipality to reuse a site with zero land consumption for the new
middle school by redeveloping an abandoned urban area and replacing three army
barracks built inthe1950s. Theexcellenceof theresultingschool buildingis theresult
of the ambitious commitment of Pesaro municipality to preserve the environment
and tackle climate change through a refocusing of the mandate of local construction
on efﬁciency, sustainability and responsibility. Then in 2017 it was decided to utilize
the school design and construction as pilot project with the aim of encouraging a
holistic approach within an ambition to accelerate the transition towards a circular
economy [14]. This would enable construction ﬁrms to move beyond the current,
and outdated, ‘take-make-dispose’ model and contribute to a mainstreaming of the
circular economy [15] concept within and outside the city.
In the case of the Antonio Brancati school, the approach to public procurement
[16] has changed signiﬁcantly. Instead of taking a traditional approach focusing on
the construction of the building itself on the basis of the lowest tender price, the focus
shifted towards achieving a high energy environmental performance [17] building.
The building itself also has to take into consideration issues of environmental protec-
tion, health and comfort, well-being and social requirements based on public and user
needs. The school will accommodate some 375 students in 15 classrooms along with
Fig. 1 The Antonio Brancati school

200
C. Oltean-Dumbrava and M. Finamore
Fig. 2 Pesaro
6 classrooms for special activities and one for music, a teacher meeting room, a
canteen, multipurpose spaces and a library also open to the local residents. Though it
is strictly speaking a school building, it is designed to act as a catalyst for the whole
neighbourhood and its residents.
An analysis of not only educational needs but also of public expectation was
carried out to make the building more circular in terms of its functionality and make
sure that it can be used by everyone all day, every day as a user-friendly community
space. The aim was to transfer all the requirements into relevant technical elements to
reducetheenvironmentalimpactofthebuildingfromtheconstructionphasetoitsuse.
Thus, a great deal of signiﬁcance is given to thermo-hygrometric comfort, acoustic
comfort, correct use of natural and artiﬁcial light, optimization of the building enve-
lope to maximize solar effects, appropriate use of water, choice of materials and
the use of appropriate technologies to maximize the energy performance including
adjustable solar shading and green roof designed not only to insulate but to mitigate
water use and the heat island effect [18]. It is important not only to achieve a reduced
energy consumption, [19] but also to enhance the indoor environment for students
and staff through advanced acoustics, improved air quality and high levels of thermal
comfort [20] to create a good working environment. All these considerations were
part of the tender requirement, so construction ﬁrms had to respond to these as part
of the bidding process.

The Achievement of Sustainability in the Built Environment
201
This analysis of not only educational needs but also of citizens expectations estab-
lished the central theme, how to make the building more ﬂexible and adaptable in
terms of its functionality and ensure that it can be used by everyone all day, every
day. To respond to this need, there is a large entrance hall to encourage circulation
and interaction with others. The hall has been planned as a mixed-use space and the
design of the circulation pattern encourages people to sit down and use the space.
This is the ﬁrst Italian school project to use a Green Public Procurement approach
with such clear and ambitious conditions. Above all two criteria were selected as
mandatory in respect of achieving the desired outcomes:
• High energy efﬁciency goal by obtaining a nearly zero energy building (nZEB)
design for the school [21]
• Improved environmental quality by providing environmental energy certiﬁcation
using the LEED certiﬁcation scheme with a minimum LEED Gold certiﬁcation.
To ensure that companies could prepare appropriately, the tender documents [22]
included technical speciﬁcations and provided measurables against which the tenders
would be evaluated. Performance-based criteria describe the expected results and
mandatory outputs were deﬁned. Eleven core criteria were chosen from a range of 23
and grouped into three macro-areas: improvement to building envelope performance,
improvementtoenergyperformanceandimprovementtoenvironmentalperformance
as set out in Table 1. Each element was described in detail in the tender documents
and linked to a reward system to lead companies towards a quality offer rather than
minimum cost.
Referring to Table 1, the role of information, and hence of an EcoMechatronics
approach,withinthecontextofasmartbuilding[23]insupportingboththedesignand
operation of such buildings become clear, particularly in relation to the monitoring
and control functions associated with achieving the desired energy performance, but
Table 1 Tender technical speciﬁcations
Building envelope
Thermo-hygrometric efﬁciency of transparent elements
Thermo-hygrometric efﬁciency of the roof
Thermo-hygrometric efﬁciency of outer walls
Ventilated facade
Solar screen
Energy performance
Automated lighting system
Use of controlled mechanical ventilation and heat recovery
systems
Heat pumps
Energy consumption monitoring system
Environmental performance
Waste materials management
Environmental energy efﬁciency certiﬁcation

202
C. Oltean-Dumbrava and M. Finamore
also in relation to features such as ventilation and solar screening. Further, informa-
tion gained on the operation of the building in areas such as the management of waste
materials both during construction and in operation will support long-term decision-
making, perhaps supported in future designs by reference to concepts such as Digital
Twins. Such information ﬂows also have the potential to enable the building to learn
about its proﬁle of use, and hence to autonomously adapt and adjust over time to
better match users’ requirements, for instance, in relation to lighting and comfort
levels.
In this context, as bidders were asked to offer a radical improvement of the energy
and environmental performances of the building, the use of the Building Information
Modelling (BIM) [24] was not required in the tender. Nevertheless, the Architectural,
Engineering and Construction ﬁrms (AEC) involved decided voluntarily to use BIM
from the planning stage in order to provide a more effective construction cost estima-
tion with a focus on higher value factors such as identifying construction activities
and risks.
The experiment was successful as it achieved the goal of a building that performs
exceptionallyineverysustainableLEEDevaluationareawithascoreof88/110points
as conﬁrmed by the assessment records. It is the ﬁrst school building in Europe to
achieve this high score. The tendering process can be replicated by other munic-
ipalities to obtain not only energy-efﬁcient buildings, but above all to reduce the
buildings’ carbon footprint.
This project thus provides the ﬁrst concrete example of mainstreaming circular
practices in public procurement. The innovation of this project is in putting into
practice circular principles within public procurement and ensuring that the proce-
dure runs efﬁciently and achieves the expected results based on environmental and
social requirements. The project also demonstrates that the Green Public Procure-
ment process in which environmental requirements are made mandatory within the
tendering process by using predetermined award criteria is essential for delivering
environmental social value, inﬂuencing the market towards sustainable materials and
products and improving new skills on green jobs.
The environmental impacts were improved by the tendering process to build a
low energy concept school using good design to support not only passive heating
and cooling technologies, but relevant active mechanisms as needed. Moreover,
considering how green requirements will affect the procurement process for works
and implementing them in line with the legal obligation, materials and methods of
production and provision are considered when deﬁning appropriate selection criteria.
Concerning the tendering process and the requirements asked of the bidders, a
thorough analysis of the costs and of the possibility of ﬁnding materials and building
components in the market was carried out to check the sustainability of the ‘Business
Plan’ and its consequent operational effectiveness. This analysis was carried out to
make effective the requirements in the call for tender and to enable the bidder to be
able to put forward their best proposal.
As a result, the tender includes technical speciﬁcation on energy efﬁciency,
product lifecycle, waste management, water efﬁciency with attention paid to internal
comfort to create the best indoor environmental conditions for the students and

The Achievement of Sustainability in the Built Environment
203
teachers. It is relevant not only to the energy consumption reduction but also to the
indoor quality for the students and staff through acoustics, air quality and thermal
comfort requirements. These results are guaranteed by the environmental energy
certiﬁcation made mandatory in the tender notice and measured in accordance with
the Minimum Environmental Criteria (MEC).
As a consequence of this approach, the Antonio Brancati school has received:
• The highest score in the school’s energy environmental certiﬁcation in Europe
[25, 26].
• The third highest score in the school’s energy environmental certiﬁcation in the
world out of 1,733 such certiﬁcations using the LEED system [27–29].
• The highest score in v4 school’s certiﬁcation in the world [30].
Construction and Environmental Issues
When planning the building, emphasis is given to thermo-hygrometric comfort,
acoustic comfort, correct use of natural and artiﬁcial light, optimisation of the
building envelope to maximize free beneﬁts of the sun, appropriate use of water,
choice of materials, use of appropriate technologies to maximize the energy perfor-
mance with adjustable solar shading and green roof designed not only to insulate but
also to mitigate water use and the heat island effect. All these features were part of
the requirements for tender, so companies had to respond to these criteria as part of
the bidding process. The coloured façade of the building is composed of a modular
system of porcelain stoneware and ﬁnished with earthy colours introduce a smoothly
playful dash of colour in the streetscape. The characteristic colour provides a strong
and recognizable identity and establishes the school as a playful, eye-catching beacon
for the vibrant neighbourhood.
A study of heat gains and losses was carried out to optimize the thermal capacity
of the building envelope, which has been achieved by using a green roof, automated
solar shadings, and the ventilated wall. All the elements which make up the envelope
contribute to its efﬁciency:
• Integrated and motorized shutters with sensors for natural light and overheating
control.
• Insulation is rock wool with 120/150 kg/m3, free of petroleum derivatives and
recyclable.
• A green roof made of Mediterranean plants with low water need to moderate
the impact of high temperatures, capture stormwater, abate pollution and act as
carbon sinks, while enhancing biodiversity.
• A ventilated wall made of modular porcelain stoneware avoids overheating,
minimizes losses and reduces also the maintenance costs of the façade.
• High-performance wooden windows with U = 0.74 also certiﬁed Forest Steward-
ship Council-Chain of Custody (FSC-CoC)

204
C. Oltean-Dumbrava and M. Finamore
The ventilated wall, made of porcelain stoneware, reduces the maintenance costs
of the facade and with the green roof and solar shading supports minimization of
energy demand. As a result, the mechatronic elements such as the PV system are
simpler and less expensive in terms of initial costs and maintenance.
The school is equipped with a mechanical ﬁltered ventilation and climate control
system to guarantee higher levels of indoor air quality with a rate of exchange equiva-
lent to 5 times the enclosed volume per hour. To obtain the energy and environmental
certiﬁcation, it was mandatory to take into account the following benchmarks:
• Global warming potential (greenhouse gases).
• Depletion of the stratospheric ozone.
• Acidiﬁcation of land and water sources.
• Eutrophication.
• Formation of tropospheric ozone (photochemical oxidant formation).
• Depletion of non-renewable energy resources.
In relation to the four main phases of the building life, namely,
• Construction materials.
• Transportation to site.
• Maintenance and material replacement.
• End of life.
Acoustic quality was another crucial goal requiring compliance Italian standards
UNI 11,367: 2010, UNI 11,534–1: 2018 and UNI 11,534–2: 2020. Usually, a report
is provided with the evaluation of external noise soundprooﬁng by the material data
sheets and rarely a campaign of in situ measurements is carried out at the end of
works to verify the real quality of acoustic performance.
As it is a school building, it was crucial to verify the acoustic standard to achieve
the best quality of sound transmission so that teachers are not forced to raise their
voices to be heard and make equivalent all student locations inside the classroom.
To ensure the best level of acoustic comfort two sets of in situ measurements were
carried out. Based on the ﬁrst set of results it was necessary to replace a small area
of the suspended ceilings in the ground ﬂoor classrooms and add some elements to
the walls on the ﬁrst ﬂoor to correct the reverberation levels. This demonstrated the
importance of carrying out an in situ veriﬁcation.
The second series of tests was carried out after these remedial actions to verify
the acoustic standard achieved and it gave the following results:
• Speech transmission index in classroom is ≥0.55.
• The clarity C50 (500–1000-2000 Hz) is ≥2 dB.
• Reverberation time is compliant with formulas and graphs from DIN 18,041, the
optimal reverberation time (depending on volume) is referred to the furnished and
occupied state at 80% of capacity.

The Achievement of Sustainability in the Built Environment
205
Table 2 Antonio Brancati
school energy system
Heating system
Condensing gas boiler
Heat pump
Low-temperature ﬂoor heating
Variable Air Volume system (VAV)
System
Hot water system
Heat pump
Cooling system
Reversible heat pump
VAV System
Floor cooling
Ventilation system
Double ﬂow heat exchanger
Renewable systems
Solar photovoltaic
Heat pump
Smart Building Technologies
A BEMS system was installed in the building for the control, operation and regulation
of thermomechanical systems according to need, including:
• Continuous monitoring of weather conditions.
• Detection and regulation of thermo-hygrometric comfort parameters.
• Hygienic replacement of air according to indoor CO2 level.
• Operation of thermo-refrigerators, UTA, networks and terminals.
In particular, the motorized actuators of the installed valves allow for a ﬁner
regulation of the operation of the radiant ﬂoor circuits (0 to 100% in continuous
mode), depending on the temperature of the individual room, with the possibility of
minimum attenuation (2–3 °C), in case of short periods of occupant absence, and
‘energy saving’ (4–5 °C), in case of closure of the building.
During the construction phase, the maintenance service was involved in meeting
all building and school requirements with a particular attention to the BEMS
features.1
Heating, Lighting and Ventilation
The energy system provides 57% of renewable energy production and is made up of
the components of Table 2.
The renewable energy system as installed has a signiﬁcant impact on the perfor-
mance and overall quality of the services provided. It features a high-efﬁciency
1 It should be noted that this community engagement process is not usual in Italy or in this
municipality, so a great effort was made to involve people who are not usually involved at any
level.

206
C. Oltean-Dumbrava and M. Finamore
reversible air/water heat pump, rated at 135 kwt2 and 113.5 kWf.3 The heat pump
can produce hot water at up to 55 °C with outdoor air temperatures of −6 °C, and up
to 40 °C with an outdoor temperature of −15 °C,4 so it can also work for pre-heating
of the ACS upstream of the relevant boiler. In summer, water can be produced at 7 °C
with outside temperature up to 46 °C. This system leads to a signiﬁcant increase in the
energy efﬁciency of the generator even when operating at partial loads. Despite the
extension to the entire building of the mechanical ventilation system, it also presents
a signiﬁcant step forward in relation to primary energy systems.
In addition to the air used for heat exchange, the electrical input necessary for
operation comes from green energy, including the deployment of photovoltaic panels
on the roof of the school and grid electricity from certiﬁed renewable sources.
From an environmental point of view, the main advantage is in the signiﬁcant
reduction of the consumption of fossil energy sources and hence CO2 emissions. In
detail:
• 0 ppm NOx (−100%);–0 ppm CO2 (−100%);
• Expected annual emissions of 2,420 kgco2 (−86%);
• Expected annual economic savings of EUR 1,052 (−84%).
From the economic point of view, it also results in a signiﬁcant reduction in
operating costs, further increased by the installation of an additional heat pump of
the same type and size, to ensure continuity of service and increase the useful life of
system components.
With particular regard to renewable energy production, the building is equipped
with a photovoltaic system of 96 monocrystalline silicon panels each with a rating
of 300 Wp located on the roof for a speciﬁc power of 28.8 kwp. The PV system is
installed on the central part of the roof of the school building. Performance details
are:
• Photovoltaic installation of 158.40 m2.
• 96 photovoltaic modules of 300 W and 1.96 m2 each.
• Photovoltaic power ratings 28.8 kW continuous.
• SolarEdge inverter 27.6 kW alternating current.
• 113.5 kW heat pump.
• Heating system–Floor heating and VAV system (variable air volume)
• Cooling system: Floor cooling and VAV system (variable air volume)
Lighting
The school is equipped with high luminous efﬁciency LED lamps that will allow
optimization of the energy consumption of the building without limiting the visual
2 Water to the condenser at 30–35 °C and external air at 7 °C b.s., or 6 °C b.u.
3 Water to the evaporator at 12–7 °C and external air at 35 °C.
4 The winter design temperature for Pesaro is −2 °C.

The Achievement of Sustainability in the Built Environment
207
comfort produced. It was also decided to equip the lighting systems for the class-
rooms with a system for the automatic regulation of the luminous ﬂux according
to the levels of daylight. This results in an important optimization of the energy
consumption of the building. The is managed by the Digital Addressable Lighting
Interface DALI protocol controlled by a supervision system in KNX standard (EN
50,090–EN 13,321–1 and ISO/IEC 14,543).5 The system also controls the automated
shutters to optimize the natural light and integrates via a Bacnet interface with the
mechanical plant management system.
The call for tender highlighted that the lighting system must meet the minimum
requirements imposed by the standards UNI EN 12,464–1 ‘Lighting of indoor work-
places’ and the D.M. of 11 January 2017, in point 2.4.2.11 ‘Lighting systems for
indoorandoutdoor’andemergencylightingstandards.Lightinganalysisofallrooms
was required, including both Isolux curves and the average illumination value within
each room. This must meet the minimum values set by UNI EN 12,464–1 according
to the intended use of each environment. Only offers that took into account the use
of LED technology were evaluated. According to Italian standard UNI 10,840, the
daylight factor is > = 3% in each classroom. Furthermore, according to the EN
12,464 standard, an illuminance value of not less than 500 lx is guaranteed in each
classroom through a sensor that integrates daylight with LED light.
In the call for tender bidders were asked to provide a speciﬁc lighting simulation
and light efﬁciency measurements and the lighting analysis of the entire building
developed by the speciﬁc reports referring to each room. Each report had to be accom-
panied by a plan of the classrooms and multifunctionality spaces indicating the Isolux
curves, the average, maximum and minimum illumination values on worktables as
required by the regulations, number and type of equipment provided,6 their arrange-
ment and their installation height. The reports had to demonstrate that the minimum
values imposed by the regulations based on the intended use of the premises are
respected (average illumination, UGR glare index, colour rendering Ra, etc.).
Ventilation
The air conditioning system consists of
• A heat pump generator, installed on the roof, with an additional methane boiler
located in the technology plant room.
• Thermostatic storage upstream of the ﬂuid distribution networks, which provides
the radiant heating system and the primary air plant with heat recovery.
5 KNX comes from Konnex, an open standard (EN 50,090, ISO/IEC 14,543) for commercial and
building automation.
6 Deﬁned by brand and type.

208
C. Oltean-Dumbrava and M. Finamore
The school is equipped with a mechanically ﬁltered ventilation climate system
HVAC with a CO2 monitor able to guarantee higher levels of indoor air quality with
the air exchange of 5 volumes per hour. The individual air networks branch off to all
classrooms and spaces to ensure constantly renewed air of high quality without any
air exchange among the classrooms themselves. The energy supply for the HVAC
system is provided by photovoltaic (PV) panels installed on the roof in compliance
with the nZEB standard.
Instead of using galvanized sheet metal for the distribution channels as usual, to
ensure the best health conditions and the minimum maintenance costs those installed
are made with sandwich panels composed of
• Rigid polyurethane foam as a structural element.
• Coating on with zeolite-treated aluminium foil to be antimicrobial. The nanos-
tructured coating retains a surface in contact with the extremely smooth airﬂow
that, also thanks to the absence of sharp edges, gives the channels a self-cleaning
property, reducing the need for manual cleaning of the channels.
Also, to the beneﬁt of air quality, the surfaces of ﬂexible ducts are treated with
the technology effective against 600 strains of micro-organisms and certiﬁed for the
reduction of the proliferation of pathogens. The plenums are equipped with linear
vents installed on the wall or in special lowered ceilings inside some rooms. The
exhaust air extraction system from the toilets has also been extended to the service
rooms.
The mechanical ventilation and heat recovery system optimize energy perfor-
mance, with an improvement of 42% of the performance of the building compared
to the reference project. The design of the ventilation system has been carried out
with a BIM system, in order to solve in advance any interference. It is installed a
thermal generator with a backup function of the heat pump with a 150 kwt boiler (T
sent 40 °C) with modulating burner, that provides complete backup for the winter
period, allowing not only to support the operation of the heat pump in periods of
low outside temperatures, but also to face the entire thermal demand of the building.
The increase in power is also accompanied by an increase in efﬁciency, from 104.6
(50–30 °C) to 109.4 (40–30 °C) and numerous other advantages, including
• Low start-up emissions due to modulating burner and high-water content of
circuits.
• Minimum climate-altering and polluting emissions from the surface burner.
• Increase in thermal recovery from condensation (up to 6%).
• Rapid adjustment of operating times.
• Simpliﬁcation of the methane distribution system, with a consequent reduction in
safety risks.
• High thermal comfort thanks to the detection of external temperature and solar
radiation (by weather forecast).
• Control of management costs.
• Low maintenance costs due to low emission combustion and self-cleaning Al/Fe
heat exchanger.

The Achievement of Sustainability in the Built Environment
209
The installation of the most powerful boiler did not involve changes to the layout of
the technology plant, nor to the layout of the ﬂuid distribution networks that, before
reaching the terminals in the environment, are stored in an inertial accumulation
(1,000 l). This has also reduced the consumption of electricity by the circulation
groups, due to the high-water content of the circuits.
Green Solution Awards
The Green Solutions Awards are an international competition run by the Construc-
tion21 [31] network and supported by the UN environment programme, Global
Alliance for Buildings and Construction [32] in partnership among others with the
World Green Building Council, BUILD UP, the European portal for energy efﬁciency
in building, FEDARENE, ICLEI Local Governments for Sustainability.
The competition includes a national phase, where candidates ﬁrst compete within
their own country, and an international phase which brings together the national
winners. Originally a competition dedicated to green buildings, the Green Solutions
Awards have in recent years expanded their scope to districts and infrastructures in
order to take into account a wider variety of sustainable city solutions and actors. The
competition is the concrete embodiment of all statements on ecological transition;
it aims to promote already existing solutions, integrated in buildings, districts and
infrastructures.
The purpose of the competition is, as Christian Brodhag the President of Construc-
tion21 [33], has stated, to showcase innovations in order to turn them into standard
practices on a global scale. The competition is open to all professionals to demon-
stratetheirthinkingandtechnologyandaimstocontributetothepreventionofclimate
change by becoming a source of inspiration through the worldwide communication
plan provided by the Construction21 network.
In the 2020–2021 competition, 192 candidates participated in the contest at the
global level, 148 of which were buildings from 15 countries including Australia,
Austria, Benin, Canada, India, Italy, Moldavia, the Netherlands, Slovenia, Sri Lanka,
Switzerland, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom and the USA.
From these, 52 ﬁnalists were selected including 39 buildings, mostly in the Low
Carbon and Energy & Temperate Climates categories.
Out of 192 buildings, districts and infrastructures, only 24 went forward to the
international phase of the competition and the Brancati school project, after winning
from among 9 ﬁnalists at the national level, was among the 8 overall international
winners [34], receiving the 2020–21 Energy and Temperate Climates award.
Themeritoftheprojectwastoestablishnotonlyafriendlyenvironmentfavourable
to teaching and learning in a high-energy-efﬁcient building but also to develop a
replicable model on a large scale to make it possible to reduce carbon emissions. The
model is based on the dialogue between project holders and professionals seeking
to adopt innovative solutions, and thanks to this strong collaboration among all the
people involved it was possible to achieve valuable results.

210
C. Oltean-Dumbrava and M. Finamore
Issues and Concerns
Future Trajectories
The built environment comprises residential and other buildings and related infras-
tructure elements such as roads. In terms of waste generation, construction and demo-
lition is by far the greatest contributor [19], implying that there needs to be a radical
shift in the way in which these industries operate, both to reduce waste and to increase
the proportion of recovered and recyclable materials. The World Economic Forum
in its report on the Infrastructure and Urban Development (IU) industry considered
three primary scenarios as suggested in Table 3 [35]
A key component of each of these scenarios is that they rely on the close inte-
gration of the physical elements with an information infrastructure to provide the
connectivity. This same information infrastructure is then likely to form the basis for
operational issues such as might be associated with smart city concepts as well as
providing the information link with individuals within the physical and information
environments.
Table 3 Possible future scenarios
Scenario
Building a virtual world
Factories run the world
A green reboot
• Requires increased
residential, recreational and
passenger mobility assets
• Interconnected intelligent
systems and robots run the
industry
• Software organizations gain
power
• New businesses emerge
around data and services
• Prefabrication and
modularization create
cost-efﬁcient structures
• Emphasis on industrial and
commercial buildings and
infrastructure
• Value chain emphasizes
prefabrication, lean
processes and mass
customization
• Suppliers beneﬁt
• Businesses focus on
integrated systems and
logistics
• Emphasis on
environmental-friendly
construction methods and
sustainable materials
• Increased conﬂict over
scarce resources and climate
change
• Sustainability is the main
decision criterion
• Innovative technologies,
new materials and
sensor-based surveillance to
ensure low environmental
impact
• Participants with a deep
knowledge of materials and
local brownﬁeld portfolios
thrive
• Opportunities centre around
environmental-focused
services and materials
recycling

The Achievement of Sustainability in the Built Environment
211
Smart Cities and Big Data
The concept of a smart city is generally structured around the deployment and use
of information technologies and the Internet of Things in order to:
1.
Enable, enhance, the effective use of the physical infrastructure in support of
economic, social and cultural development.
2.
Enhance the involvement and engagement of people in local governance through
strategies of e-participation and e-governance.
3.
Support adaption and innovation in respond efﬁciently, effectively and promptly
to changing circumstances.
This implies empowering the population through access to open platforms and
the introduction of city-wide information networks to collect, gather and transmit
data in real time. To be effective, such data must have both value and context at the
level of the individual, and be accessible as required [36–38].
The use of Big Data analysis raises all sorts of issues, but also links into the
self-management of local communities empowered by mobile technology to bypass
otherwise restrictive practices, for instance, in the formation of farm co-operatives to
sell produce directly rather than through middlemen. There are also issues regarding
healthcare and health management [39, 40].
In a Smart City context, the nature of the data and its context is of primary
importance in establishing viability with users. What works in one urban community
may not have value in another. For instance, information on taxi availability as used
in Singapore [41] may have limited value in the city of Jos in central Nigeria where
the emphasis might be on (say) rubbish collection. With a limited resource budget,
the impact of the unit spent needs to be maximized and this implies that
1.
There is an understanding of the impact of decisions made in relation to the
short, medium and long terms.
2.
That the data gathering and analysis processes are neutral.
The Internet of Things has a signiﬁcant potential for impacting on quality of life,
but is structured around an ability to access and utilize robust data and information
in a timely and appropriate manner, with in some cases such data and information
becoming a commodity to be traded. Additionally, there needs to be in place mech-
anisms to properly understand the nature of the technology being employed in order
to avoid issues of technological lock-in and the ‘dumping’ of a technology (from
tractors to televisions) on a society to essentially force them to adopt, and become
locked-in to, a speciﬁc technology.
People
It acknowledged that “we know very little about what interventions are most effective
in reducing vulnerability, saving lives and rebuilding livelihoods in urban contexts”

212
C. Oltean-Dumbrava and M. Finamore
[42]. Thus, there is an overwhelming need to target interventions to maximize the
security, prosperity and well-being of urban populations while recognizing that these
are not discrete challenges but are interconnected with each other and with a range
of other factors. This is indicative of a need to train and educate the local population
to operate and maintain the resulting systems and technologies, and education thus
needstobeincorporatedintotheprojectevaluationandassessmentprocess.Technical
considerations then include:
• The ways in which infrastructure projects are linked to sustainability, resilience
and climate change.
• The identiﬁcation of their impact on sustainability and related factors.
• The ways in which data is gathered and integrated in relation to issues such as
Smart Cities.
Conclusions
To comply with the concepts of sustainability in the built environment while applying
circular economy principles the main lessons learnt from this project are as set out
below.
Firstly, the EU Sustainable Product Policy sets out that “EcoDesign is a core
tool in the matrix of approaches that enables the Circular Economy” and the Green
Public Procurement is then an instrument with a key role to play in the EU’s efforts
to become a more resource-efﬁcient economy. This is then a key driver for decision-
making. Thus when considering the building as a product along with its complexity,
it is necessary to use deﬁned sustainable design concepts in respect of the creation
of products and services that have properly and fully considered the environmental,
social and economic impacts from the initial phase through to the end of life.
As a consequence, these elements and issues are a crucial aspect of the thinking
about a multiuse building not only for educational purposes but for whole community
use. This includes the incorporation of technical features which will allow for its use
all year and all day, despite the fact that in Italy schools are currently closed from
the beginning of June till the middle of September and indeed are usually used only
in the mornings.
By making informed decisions conforming with citizen’s expectations and needs
and integrating these with climate data collection, designers can reduce environ-
mental impact, resulting in less greenhouse gas emissions and a more efﬁcient use
of natural resources. Climate data collection is thus key to designing an efﬁcient
operating envelope to minimize energy demand and make the plant less expensive
as well as integrating a cooling functionality which is equally crucial with respect to
energy saving. Thanks to the operating envelope efﬁciency, the PV panels provide
all the energy needed for the school at a cost of only 36.000e.
Another crucial point is the IT-based strategy designed to reduce operational and
maintenance costs and lead to higher proﬁtability as the monitoring process during
the construction phase results in the saving of both time and materials.

The Achievement of Sustainability in the Built Environment
213
Finally, to build trust in the project, an integrated and multidisciplinary approach
as used to share the vision with the community to obtain a sustainable building is
extremely important element in achieving the task in a proper and timely manner.
References
1. White MA (2013) Sustainability: i know it when i see it. Ecol Econ 86:213–217
2. Keeble R (1988) The Brundtland report: ‘Our common future’. Med War 4(1):17–25. https://
doi.org/10.1080/07488008808408783
3. Pearce D, Makandia A, Barbier E (1989) Blueprint for a green economy. Earthscan Publications
4. Retrieved July 14, 2021, from sdgs.un.org/goals
5. Perkins R (2013) Sustainable development and the making and unmaking of a developing
world. Eviron Plann C Gov Policy 31(6):1003–1022
6. Collier MJ et al (2013) Transitioning to resilience and sustainability in urban communities.
Cities 32:S21–S28
7. Shahrubudin N, Lee TC, Ramlan R (2019) An overview on 3D printing technology:
technological, materials, and applications. Proc Manufact 35:1286–1296
8. Manic M, Wijayasekara D, Amarasinghe K, Rodriguez-Andina JJ (2016) Building energy
management systems: the age of intelligent and adaptive buildings. IEEE Ind Electron Mag
10(1):25–39
9. Froufe MM, Chinelli CK, Guedes ALA, Haddad AN, Hammad AW, Soare CAP (2020) Smart
buildings: systems and drivers. Buildings 10(9):153–161
10. GaoH,KochC,WuY(2019)Buildinginformationmodellingbasedbuildingenergymodelling:
a review. Appl Energy 238:320–343
11. Jones D, Snider C, Nassehi A, Yon J, Hicks B (2020) Characterising the digital twin: a
systematic literature review. CIRP J Manufact Sci and Technol 29:36–52
12. Farsi M, Daneshkhah MA, Hosseinian-Far A, Jahankhani H (eds) (2020) Digital twin
technologies and smart cities. Springer
13. Ketzler B, Naserentin V, Latino F, Zangelidis FC, Thuvander L, Logg A (2020) Digital twins
for cities: a state of the art review. Built Environ 46(4):547–573
14. Merli R, Preziosi M, Acampor A (2018) How do scholars approach the circular economy? A
systematic literature review. J Clean Prod 178:703–722
15. European Commission (2014) Communication from the commission to the European parlia-
ment, the council, the european economic and social committee and the committee of the
regions towards a circular economy: a zero waste programme for Europe. Retrieved March
4, 2021, from ec.europa.eu/environment/circular-economy/pdf/circular-economy-communica
tion.pdf
16. European Commission (2008) Communication from the Commission to the European Parlia-
ment, the Council, the European Economic and social committee and the committee of the
regions: public procurement for a better environment. Retrieved March 4, 2021, from ec.europa.
eu/transparency/regdoc/rep/1/2008/EN/1-2008-400-EN-F2-1.pdf. EUR-Lex - 52008DC0400 -
EN - EUR-Lex (europa.eu)
17. European Commission (2016) EU GPP criteria for ofﬁce building design, construction
and management. Retrieved March 4, 2021, from ec.europa.eu/environment/gpp/pdf/swd_
2016_180.pdf
18. Li X, Zhou Y, Yu S, Jia G, Li H, Li W (2019) Urban heat island impacts on building energy
consumption: a review of approaches and ﬁndings. Energy 174:407–419
19. ItalianMinistryofEconomicDevelopment(2015)Applicationofmethodologiesforcalculating
energy performance and deﬁnition of minimum requirements for buildings. Retrieved March
4, 2021, from www.gazzettaufﬁciale.it/eli/id/2015/07/15/15A05198/sg

214
C. Oltean-Dumbrava and M. Finamore
20. Italian Ministry of the Environment (2017) Minimum environmental criteria for the award of
design services and works for the new construction, renovation and maintenance of public
buildings. Retrieved March 5, 2021, from www.gazzettaufﬁciale.it/eli/id/2017/11/06/17A074
39/sg
21. Attia S, Eleftheriou P, Xeni F, Morlot R, Ménézo C, Kostopoulos V, Betsi M, Kalaitzoglou
I, Pagliano L, Cellura M, Almeida M (2017) Overview and future challenges of nearly zero
energy buildings (nZEB) design in Southern Europe. Energy Build 155:439–458
22. Italian Government (2016) Implementation of Directives 2014/23/EU, 2014/24/EU and
2014/25/EU on the award of concession contracts, public contracts and procurement proce-
dures of entities operating in the water sector, energy, transport and postal services, as well as
for the reorganization of the current regulations on public contracts relating to works, services
and supplies. Legislative Decree 2016 18 April 2016, n. 50 Italy. Retrieved March 5, 2021,
from www.gazzettaufﬁciale.it/sommario/codici/contrattiPubblici
23. Sinopoli JM (2009) Smart buildings systems for architects, owners and builders. Butterworth-
Heinemann
24. Shirowzhan S, Sepasgozar SM, Edwards DJ, Li H, Wang C (2020) BIM compatibility and
its differentiation with interoperability challenges as an innovation factor. Autom Constr
112:103086
25. Goldman D, Ayalon O, Baum D, Weis B (2018) Inﬂuence of ‘green school certiﬁcation ’on
students’ environmental literacy and adoption of sustainable practice by schools. J Clean Prod
183:1300–1313
26. Pereira LD, Raimondo D, Corgnati SP, Da Silva MG (2014) Energy consumption in schools–a
review paper. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 40:911–922
27. Reeder L (2010) Guide to green building rating systems: understanding LEED, green globes,
energy star, the national green building standard, and more. John Wiley & Sons
28. U˘gur LO, Leblebici N (2018) An examination of the LEED green building certiﬁcation system
in terms of construction costs. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 81:1476–1483
29. Retrieved March 19, 2021, from www.usgbc.org/articles/explore-30-leedcertiﬁed-schools-
2019
30. Retrieved March 19, 2021, from www.qualhub.co.uk/qualification-search/qualification-detail/
level-4-certificate-for-the-advanced-practitioner-in-schools-and-colleges-552
31. Retrieved November 29, 2021, from www.construction21.org/static/Green-Solutions-Awards.
html
32. Retrieved November 29, 2021, from globalabc.org
33. Retrieved November 29, 2021, from www.construction21.org/member/44/christian-brodhag.
html
34. Retrieved November 29, 2021, from www.construction21.org/contest/h/green-solutions-awa
rds-2020-2021.html
35. World Economic Forum (2018) Shaping the future of construction–future scenarios and impli-
cations for the industry. Retrieved March 1, 2021, from www.weforum.org/docs/Future_Sce
narios_Implications_Industry_report_2018.pdf
36. Perera A, Zaslavsky A, Christen P, Georgakopoulos D (2014) Sensing as a service model for
smart cities supported by internet of things. Trans Emerg Telecommun Technol 25(1):81–93
37. Rathore MM, Ahmad A, Paul A, Rho S (2016) Urban planning and building smart cities based
on the internet of things using big data analytics. Comput Netw 101:63–80
38. Helbing D, Frey BS, Gigerenzer G, Hafen E, Hagner M, Hofstetter Y, Van Den Hoven J, Zicari
RV, Zwitter A (2019) Will democracy survive big data and artiﬁcial intelligence? Springer,
Towards Digital Enlightenment, pp 73–98

The Achievement of Sustainability in the Built Environment
215
39. Feroz A, Perveen S, Aftab W (2017) Role of mHealth applications for improving antenatal and
postnatal care in low and middle income countries: a systematic review. BMC Health Serv Res
17(1):704–714
40. Iribarren SJ, Brown W III, Giguere R, Stone P, Schnall R, Staggers N, Carballo-Dieguez A
(2017) Scoping review and evaluation of SMS/text messaging platforms for mHealth projects
or clinical interventions. Intl J Med Inform 101:28–40
41. Retrieved March 1, 2021, from senseable.mit.edu/livesingapore/visualizations.html
42. Nussbaum T, Zorbas E, Koros M (2012) A new deal for engagement in fragile states. Conﬂ
Secur Dev 12(5):559–587

Eco-Design of Mechatronic Hydropower
Device in River
Jun Chen, C. Greg Jensen, and Haiyan H. Zhang
Abstract The off-grid energy provided by renewable resources is urgently needed
for modern life, economic growth, and even medical care in many remote commu-
nities. Very often near the remote communities, there are rivers with hydropower
potential. As an affordable and available solution for off-grid energy, the hydropower
device can generate electricity, which can meet a wide range of market needs. For
this purpose, we present an eco-design of mechatronic modular river current energy
converter (MRCEC), using an onboard intelligent mechanism to control the cross-
ﬂow cycloid turbine to operate optimally under various river conditions in a year,
and the hydraulic-based transmission system transfers the mechanical energy from
the underwater turbine to a generator on the platform ﬂoating on the surface of water.
Introduction
In the developing countries, extending the power grid to remote areas may be a costly
option. In fact, a small energy system that can provide electric power of 6kWh per
month can greatly improve people’s living conditions and meet their education needs.
Even in the United States, in the ﬁrst decade of twenty-ﬁrst century, at least 180,000
households were living outside the power grid, and this number is increasing year
by year due to the pursuit of environmental protection and a return to nature lifestyle
[4]. Consulting company Accenture further predicts that by 2035, 12% of American
households and 11% of European households will be off the grid. Off-grid solutions
will become a real need of the market in a decade.
For off-grid power solutions of utilizing different renewable resources, speciﬁc
technical treatments for varying factors, such as the strong day and night changes of
solar radiation or wind, are needed. In addition, attention should be paid to improve-
ment of system efﬁciency over the technical barriers and the reduction of installation,
operation and maintenance costs.
J. Chen · C. G. Jensen · H. H. Zhang (B)
Purdue University, West Lafayette, USA
e-mail: hhzhang@purdue.edu
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
P. Hehenberger et al. (eds.), EcoMechatronics,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-07555-1_13
217

218
J. Chen et al.
The proposal of off-grid solutions for remote communities should not ignore
the basic fact that most of the domestic and international remote communities are
located in nearby locations with rivers of hydropower potential. Per IRENA reports,
hydropower-based minigrids have globally supported the population of 6.4 million
in 2016, which doubled the population served in 2007 [5]. In the United States, the
undeveloped hydropower carried by the rivers has capability over one trillion watt-
hours (TWh/yr) per year to support millions of people with locally sourced, clean
and reliable energy.
Centuries of engineering practice have shown that the use of hydropower to
generate electricity is an efﬁcient and reliable way. It is very attractive to design a
river energy converter (RCEC), suitable for low/zero water head hydropower, whose
rotating water turbine driven by the river currents harvests hydropower for electric
generation in the rural and remote areas. It neither produces greenhouse gases nor
negatively affects the environment. Ref. [7] pointed out that it has become a major
interest in Europe, and an important option for rural electriﬁcation in underdeveloped
countries.
However, RCEC has several issues to be resolved: (1) low efﬁciency: because its
turbine in low-head river usually runs at much lower efﬁciency than the theoretical
Betz limit (59%) without pipe/diffuser enhancement; (2) high mounting cost: the
installation of hydropower turbines, whether it is bottom structure mounting (BSM),
near-surface structure mounting (NSM) or ﬂoating structure mounting (FSM), the
design of the mountings are more complicated than the hydropower device itself, and
cost of the structure is very expensive; (3) high maintenance cost: Because the turbine
and its power system (transmission and generator) are underwater, and the lubrication
and replacement of faulty parts are performed outside the water, the maintenance cost
is high, especially at remote sites. The underwater powertrain is sealed and water-
proof, further increasing the complexity of the design; (4) high operation costs: For
the seasonal ﬂow changes of most rivers, the traditional design of turbines lacks the
ﬂexibility to work effectively under different inﬂow conditions. Since the individual
modules in the multi-module array have their own independent systems, their gener-
ators, control electronics, etc. are redundant, which further increases operating costs.
In order to maximally harvest the river hydropower, further development is needed
for RCEC, whose integration and design while ensuring its structural stability and
reliability under different operating conditions must be properly treated for the next
generation of technology.
We present an approach of modular river current energy converter (MRCEC) as a
stable, affordable, and environmental-friendly off-grid energy solution for residential
households and small businesses in remote areas. MRCEC integrates high-ﬁdelity
hydrodynamic analysis, optimized mechatronics control, and high efﬁciency trans-
mission system to maximize efﬁciency while minimizing installation, operation and
maintenancecosts.ThedesignspeciﬁcationsofeachMRCECmoduleare:togenerate
at least 10KW of electricity at a water ﬂow speed of 2.0 m/s; to improve turbine hydro-
dynamic efﬁciency up to 50% in comparison to 20–30% of other existing designs;
to have smart onboard control optimizes the system operation at seasonal variation;

Eco-Design of Mechatronic Hydropower Device in River
219
to be environmentally-friendly, less disturbance to the eco-system, at the same time
affordable; to meet various power needs using the modular design that can formulate
individual or array applications.
Cycloidal Turbine with Optimal Blade Pitch Control
Cycloidal turbine is a subset of the H-bar type turbines, and it can maximize the
harvested energy by varying the blade pitch angle during the revolution. Figure 1
presentsthepowercoefﬁcientofdifferentwindturbinesasafunctionoftipspeedratio
(TSR,λ = r/V∞)andthesameanalysiscanguidetheanalysisoftheirhydrokinetic
counterparts. The traditional ﬁxed-pitch Darrieus turbine’s blades often fail to extract
more power or stall during each revolution. These attenuate power-harvesting, and
the oscillatory loads cause undesirable damages, and prohibit self-start at a low
rotational speed. Cycloidal turbines can overcome these difﬁculties. However, the
proper selection of blade pitching scheme is nontrivial, and most of the previous
efforts were based on a certain trial-and-error approach.
Our approach incorporates the concept of a horizontally deployed cycloidal
turbine (cross-ﬂow cycloidal turbine) for harvesting the mechanical energy from
the river current. (see Fig. 2) The optimal turbine blade design and optimal blade
pitching adjustment are explored. We have applied this approach to study the loading
of a 10-m diameter wind turbine [10]. Recently, we investigated the design of the
cycloidal turbines and proposed a model, Fluxline Theory, to optimize the pitch
adjustment scheme [1]. The experiments on a three-blade vertical axis wind turbine
demonstrated an efﬁciency of 40–55% when the TSR ranges from 1.5 to 2.5 [2],
signiﬁcantly higher than that with other pitch-control schemes, even when the pitch
scheme is applied to off-design conditions (Fig. 3). However, from that test, it was
Fig. 1 Efﬁciency trends of
wind turbine types versus
tip-speed ratio [8]

220
J. Chen et al.
Fig. 2 Schematic of pitching adjusting scheme of a cycloidal turbine blade (left) and velocity
vectors (right) at different cyclic
Fig. 3 Comparison of measured power coefﬁcient (efﬁciency) of a three-blade cylcodiao turbine
with results from other cycloturbine experiments. More details can be found in Adam and Chen [2].
Two optimal pitching schemes are applied for two design conditions (λ = 1.5 and 2.25), showing
the performance at both design and off-design conditions. Error bars represent a 95% conﬁdence
interval
also identiﬁed that the single section straight blades result in unwanted oscillating
loads on the turbine shaft, which may cripple the duty life of the system.
By simulating both the turbine revolution at a chosen TSR and rotation of indi-
vidual turbine due to pitch adjustment at different phase angle, we are able to under-
stand the evolution of the different hydrodynamic parameters, e.g, the power coef-
ﬁcient, as the turbine/blade rotates. This approach has been proven effective by
comparing to the experimental results. Properly controlling the TSR in the vicinity
of the optimum, the turbine system can perform optimally at efﬁciency much higher
than the existing technologies.
In order to maximize the power coefﬁcient, a pitching mechanism algorithm is
developed to determine the pitch motion of the hydrofoil, which is the pitch angle of

Eco-Design of Mechatronic Hydropower Device in River
221
Fig. 4 Schematic of
three-section turbine
installed inside the
inlet-diffuser duct
the hydrofoil in a revolution. Based on the following Eq. (1), for a given freestream
velocity and rotation speed, the power coefﬁcient is proportional to the torque. Thus,
the pitch angle of the hydrofoil is determined by maximizing the generated torque
on the rotation shaft at each azimuthal angle,
θ(φ) = argmax(T (θ, φ))
(1)
with the input of hydrofoil data, incoming ﬂow velocity, and turbine dimensions.
The pitch motion of the hydrofoil is highly related to the tip speed ratio. By
running the pitch analysis with different input of freestream velocity and rotation
speed, the pitch motion for different tip speed ratio. At low rotation speed (λ < 1),
the pitch angle exceeds 90◦for some azimuthal angles, which is difﬁcult to achieve
physically. Since the turbine usually operates at a relatively higher rotation speed, a
±75◦pitch angle limit is applied.
To determine the optimal TSR for the cycloidal turbine, the three-section model
with the inlet-diffuser duct (Fig. 4) is studied at a TSR range from 0.25 to 2.5 via 3D
CFD simulations. Figure 5 presents the pitch motion optimized for different TSRs.
The torque generated by the turbine at different TSRs is presented in Fig. 6a. With
Fig. 5 Pitch schedule optimized for different TSRs

222
J. Chen et al.
Fig. 6 a Torque at different TSRs and b averaged power coefﬁcient at different TSRs
the increase of λ, the torque increases for λ < 0.75 and decreases for λ > 0.75. 5(b)
illustrates the power coefﬁcient at different TSRs. The maximum power coefﬁcient,
C p = 0.511, occurs at λ = 2.25. Therefore, λ = 2.25 is chosen as the design
condition for TSR.
Figure 7 illustrates the power coefﬁcient of this design in one revolution. The
power coefﬁcient maintains a nearly constant value of 0.515, which is signiﬁcantly
higher than other existing designs. An innovative three-dimensional (3D) multilayer
cam is designed to achieve the pitch motion to achieve an impressive extracted power
coefﬁcient and facilitate effective mode switches to adapt to the change in river
ﬂow velocity. As a critical component in achieving pitch motion, the cam proﬁle
is developed with the pitch variance mechanism for different modes: park mode,
startup mode, and several operation modes for different tip speed ratios.
The theoretical equation to reﬂect the relationship between the cam radius and
the pitch angle as shown in Fig. 8,
Fig. 7 Power coefﬁcient obtained by the ﬁnal design

Eco-Design of Mechatronic Hydropower Device in River
223
Fig. 8 Schematic of cam
proﬁle determination
rcam = rcam, θ = 0 +

(L2
1 −L2
2) −

L2
1 −(L2cosθ(φ))2

+ L2sinθ(φ)
(2)
where L1, L2 and rcam,θ=0 are strategically selected constants for the pitch variance
mechanism to aid in the ease manufacturing of these components.
By repeating the equation for a revolution of azimuthal angle, the cam proﬁle can
be further determined. For the operation modes, several cam proﬁles are generated
with the same algorithm based on different pitch motion optimized at λ = 1.5,
λ = 2.0, λ = 2.25, and λ = 2.5. For the startup mode, the pitch motion is specially
developed based on a very low rotation speed (0.25 rad/s) with the cam proﬁle
generated using the algorithm discussed above. For the park mode, the cam proﬁle is
designed to set the angle of attack of the hydrofoil in a nearly always stalled position.
Hydraulic Transmission System
For our MRCEC, neither a gearbox nor a heavy generator with multiple pole pairs
is an ideal solution for the cross-ﬂow cycloidal turbine. A hydraulic transmission
system with much less weight than a gearbox becomes the best choice to transfer
energy from the turbine to the generator for the design of the MRCEC. The hydraulic
transmission system is easy to be arranged on the turbine system, which can damper
the energy ﬂuctuation shocks from the incoming river streams. It also has good heat
dissipation performance underwater and can integrate power from multiple modules
of MRCEC together into one generating system, which leads to the great potential
of reducing the cost of installation, operation and maintenance.
For the MRCEC, the hydraulic pump will be immersed in the river. If hydraulic
oil is used as the medium in the hydraulic system, the oil leakage will pollute the

224
J. Chen et al.
Fig. 9 Hydraulic transmission system of the MRCEC
river environment and signiﬁcantly weaken the functionality of the power genera-
tion system. To ensure complete environmental friendliness, and to utilize the water
from the river to replenish the leaked hydraulic medium without manual reﬁlling of
hydraulic ﬂuids, a hydraulic transmission system based on water as the hydraulic
medium is designed for the MRCEC.
The hydraulic transmission system consists of a radial piston pump, an axial piston
motor, a bladder accumulator, control valves, and hoses. (see Fig. 9) To provide
theoretical support for the product development stage of the MRCEC, mathematical
models of the hydraulic components in the transmission system are derived, and
the control strategy of the rotational speed regulation of the generator is developed
as well. Also, special features of the radial piston pump are designed for the water
medium directly taken from the river.
The radial piston pumps with large displacement are usually the choice for appli-
cations with high-torque but low rotational speed. The structure of the radial piston
pump is shown in Fig. 10.
The mathematical modeling of the radial piston pump includes a steady-state
equation for the operational states, and the dynamic equations for hydraulic machines
as follows:
dρ =
∂ρ
∂p

Tl
dp +
 ∂ρ
∂Tl

p
dTl
(3)
v
βe
˙p + ˙V = (win −wout)
ρ
(4)
qp = Dpωpηpv
(5)

Eco-Design of Mechatronic Hydropower Device in River
225
Fig. 10 Radial piston pump
of the MRCEC
ηpv = 1 −qpv_loss
Dpωp
(6)
Tp = Dp

pph −plow

ηpmh
(7)
˙Vph + Vph
βe
˙pph = −C pil

pph −plow

−C pel

pph

−qph
(8)
C pil

pph −plow

= rieC pil

pph

(9)
Jp ˙ωp = Td −Bpωp −Dp

pph −plow

(10)
˙θp = ωp
(11)
Jp ˙ωp = ηpmhTd −Dp

pph −plow

(12)
ηmmh Dm(pmh −plow) = Jm ˙ωm + Tl
(13)
qm = Dmωm + km_leak(pmh −plow)
(14)
km_leak = km_H P
vρ
(15)
km_H P = Vm_maxωmnom(1 −ηmv)vm_nomρm_nom
pm_nom
(16)

226
J. Chen et al.
where Tl is the temperature in the hydraulic liquid; ρ and p are the density and
pressure of the liquid; ρ is the density of the hydraulic ﬂuid; βe is the effective bulk
modulus of the liquid βe = ρ

∂p
∂ρ

Tl; win = ρqin, and wout = ρqout are the mass
ﬂows into and out of the volume of the pump with the volumetric ﬂuid ﬂow rates qin
and qout; qp is the ﬂow rate through the pump; Dp is the pump displacement; ωp is the
rotationspeedofthepumpshaft;ηpv isthevolumetricefﬁciencyforthepump;qpv_loss
isthevolumetriclossesforthepumpasafunctionofthepressure

pph −plow

,where
pph is the pressure on the high-pressure side for the pump, plow is the pressure on
the low-pressure side; Tp is the pump input torque; ηpmh is the mechanical hydraulic
efﬁciency for the pump; Vph is the volume on the high-pressure side of the pump;
C pil and C pel are functions for the pump internal and external leakage; qph is the
outlet ﬂow rate of the pump; ˙Vph is the change rate of the hydraulic volume on the
high-pressure side: ˙Vph = −Dpωp; rie is the ratio of the pump internal leakage to
the external leakage, changing within the range 1–3; Jp is the moment of inertia for
the pump; θp is the angle of rotation of the pump shaft; Td is the driving torque on
the pump shaft; Bp is the viscous damping coefﬁcient; ηmmh is the motor mechanical
hydraulic efﬁciency; Dm is the motor volumetric displacement; pmh is the pressure
on the high-pressure side of the motor; Jm is the moment of inertia for the motor;
ωm is the motor rotational speed; Tl is the torque produced by the generator load;
qm is the ﬂuid ﬂow rate at the motor side; km_leak is the leakage coefﬁcient at the
motor side; km_H P is the Hagen-Poiseuille coefﬁcient for the motor; Vm_max is the
maximum motor displacement; ωmnom is nominal motor angular speed; ηmv is motor
volumetric efﬁciency; vm_nom is nominal motor ﬂuid kinematic viscosity; ρm_nom is
nominal motor ﬂuid density; pm_nom is nominal motor differential pressure.
For the hydraulic system of the MRCEC, an accumulator with 1 L volume with
a maximum pressure of 207 bar is selected in the market to damper the energy
ﬂuctuation from the incoming river streams. Ideal gas law is applied to the nitrogen
in the bladder, and its isothermal model is as follows:
PgVg = nRT
(17)
Pg = P0V0n
Vgn
=
P0V0n

V0 +
	
Qadt
n
(18)
Qa = −V0P0
5
7
1.4Pg
12
7
d Pg
dt
(19)
where Pg and Vg are the pressure and volume of the nitrogen gas in the accumulator;
P0 and V0 are the pre-charge pressure and the initial volume of the nitrogen gas; Qa
is the hydraulic ﬂuid ﬂow into or out of the accumulator; n = 1 in this isothermal
model.

Eco-Design of Mechatronic Hydropower Device in River
227
Hoses are used to connect hydraulic components and carry hydraulic ﬂuid in the
transmission line. Neglecting the hose deformation, hydraulic pressure losses along
the hose line are neglected. Therefore, the hose dynamics is as follows:
d P
dt = (Qe −Qb)β
V
(20)
where V is the ﬂuid volume inside hoses; β is the bulk modulus of the ﬂuid; Qe is
the ﬂow rate at the end of the hose; and Qb is the ﬂow rate at the beginning of the
hose.
Based on the mathematical model of all the components in the hydraulic transmis-
sion system, numeric simulation of the system operational performance is performed
according to technical datasheets (see Fig. 11).
Giving the signal input of the turbine’s designed operational speed (4.5 rad/s for
the 2 m/s incoming river ﬂow) with some turbulence in the input curve to simulate
the sudden increase of the river ﬂow speed, the reaction rotational speed curve of
the hydraulic motor (generator) with electrical load is shown in Fig. 12. The actual
overall efﬁciency of the hydraulic transmission system is calculated to be 74.6%.
Fig. 11 Simulation blocks of the hydraulic transmission system
Fig. 12 a Input speed curve of the turbine; b Reaction speed curve of the hydraulic motor/generator

228
J. Chen et al.
Mechatronic Control System
The blade pitch scheme is real time controlled by onboard sensing and smart
mechanism. The cycloidal turbines are controlled by the mechatronic system. The
pitch adjustment of the cycloidal turbines is realized with smart mechanisms and
supporting structures, smart sensing techniques and data acquisition, precision actu-
ators, and their operations, electrical/hydraulic power resources, embedded micro-
controllers, control laws, and the drives for actuators, integrated circuits, controller
as well as its programming. Linear actuator PA-17 and turbine speed sensor are inte-
grated into a waterproofed sealing enclosure box, mounted on the MRCEC framing
adapter, to drive the 3D cam, on which the smart mechanism adjusts the cycloidal
turbine’s blades according to the blade pitch scheme (see Fig. 13).
The sensors used in the MRCEC system include the following devices: a ﬂow
velocity sensor, a turbine rotary speed sensor, a 3D cam position sensor, and a battery
level sensor. For the ﬂow velocity, a pitot tube with a pressure transducer is employed,
and its difference of total ﬂow pressure Pt and static ﬂow pressure Ps is transduced
as a voltage signal to calculate the ﬂow velocity. M393 speed sensor module is used
to indicate the turbine rotary speed. The position sensor of the 3D cam is integrated
with linear actuator PA-17, and the position signal will be utilized to calculate the
linear actuator stroke. The battery level sensor monitors the battery level.
The working modes of MRCEC include startup mode, high efﬁciency mode,
constant power mode, and park mode. The startup mode will be activated when the
mechatronic control system of MRCEC is initiated. Then MRCEC will automatically
enter other different working modes according to the river ﬂow conditions. There
are two working modes, i.e, high-efﬁciency mode and constant power mode. Under
extreme circumstances, the control system will enter the park mode.
During the MRCEC’s startup mode, the load from the generator is eliminated by
the proportional valve being fully opened to bypass all the ﬂow. At the same time,
the river ﬂow speed will be measured by the ﬂow velocity sensor to determine further
action. For the ﬂow speed less than 0.5 m/s the generator will be idled because the
ﬂow does not have enough energy to harvest. For the ﬂow speed between 0.5 to
Fig. 13 Control analysis and simulation of MRCEC

Eco-Design of Mechatronic Hydropower Device in River
229
3.5 m/s, the control system will operate in high-efﬁciency mode. For the ﬂow speed
higher than 3.5 m/s, the system will shift to park mode due to the extreme conditions.
For high-efﬁciency mode, the power harvested by the turbine will depend on the
power coefﬁcient under a given ﬂow speed, as shown in Eq. (21):
P = 0.5ρu3
∞SC p
(21)
where u∞is freestream velocity, ρ is density of water, and S is the blade surface.
The turbine can keep running at maximum power coefﬁcient C pmax as long as the
tip-speed ratio of the turbine is λ = 2.25. By controlling the position of the 3D
camshaft, if the turbine angle is adjusted to keep the optimal tip speed ratio, the best
power coefﬁcient remains.
In order to protect the MRCEC system under extreme conditions, the maximum
output power Pn = 11 KW is determined due to mechanical strength, consumer elec-
tricity consumption, and other physical properties. Once the control system adopts
constant power mode, keeping the output power at Pn rather than optimal tip speed
ratio will be a priority.
To ensure the safety of the MRCEC system at extreme conditions, the system will
shift to park mode when ﬂow speed is higher than 3.0 m/s. In this mode, the turbine
shaft will not rotate, the output power will be 0.
The control procedure of MRCEC is implemented as shown in Fig. 14. The entire
MRCEC system is shown in Fig. 15.
The output ports of hydraulic systems of MRCEC units can be connected with
ﬂexible hoses to drive a single hydraulic motor. Thus, the generator can be placed on
a deck above the water or directly on the nearby bank. The hydraulic transmission
system is designed watertight. The hydraulic transmission system has features of a
low-pass ﬁlter for smoothing the ﬂuctuations of hydrodynamic power collected from
a mechanical blade system so it contributes to lengthen turbines lifetime and thus
further reduce maintenance cost, as shown in Fig. 16.
Control Unit
Power supply
Manually Switch
Lm393 Speed 
Sensor
Delay 1
Delay 2
Flow Velocity sensor
Linear actuator for 
Proportional valve
Linear actuator for 
3D Cam
Battery level sensor
Fig. 14 Control system block diagram

230
J. Chen et al.
Fig. 15 MRCEC system
Fig. 16 Electricity generation of the multi-module array by a hydraulic manifold
Conclusion and Future Work
Constant reliable energy impacts nearly every aspect of life, standard of living and is a
determinant factor of societal well-being, economic growth, healthcare, etc. Most of
the off-grid energy solutions are frequently disturbed by the unstable nature of these
renewable resources. Likewise, most of the off-grid remote communities, domestic
and international, are located on sites with nearby hydropower potentials. Producing
electricity from the riverine currents thus presents an ideal off-grid energy solution
and presents a signiﬁcant market opportunity.

Eco-Design of Mechatronic Hydropower Device in River
231
In this work, our team summarizes the design of a new product, Modular River
Current Energy Converter (MRCEC), which can effectively produce electricity from
rivers with increased energy affordability and availability. The design features: (1)
a cross-ﬂow cycloidal turbine that yields a high power coefﬁcient (51.5%); (2) an
onboard intelligent mechanism controls the turbine functioning optimally over a
range of river conditions; and (3) a hydraulic-based drivetrain feeds the harvested
mechanical energy from the underwater turbine to the generator(s) placed above the
water.
The hydrodynamic performance of the turbine at different operating conditions
was analyzed using high-ﬁdelity CFD simulation, which accounts for the varying of
the blade pitch angle at different rotating phase. An optimal hydrofoil was designed
for MRCEC. A four-section three-blade design was adopted for the turbine to obtain
smooth power output and stable hydrodynamic loads. At different inﬂow conditions,
the blade pitch can be controlled accordingly.
With the hydrofoil pitch variance, the turbine can produce efﬁcient optimal power
as the river ﬂow varies across its annual cycle. A control system monitors the
ﬂow condition and turbine operation conditions by collecting signals from sensors
installed on the turbine and system. The controller sends out control signals to a
linear actuator that adjusts the position of the 3D cam accordingly. The turbine is
enclosed by an inlet–outlet-duct to further improve its performance.
The drivetrain includes a radial piston pump, an axial piston motor, generator(s),
and hydraulic lines. Water is used as the hydraulic ﬂuid so it eliminates the contami-
nation to rivers. Optimal design and model analysis report a power efﬁciency 74.6%
for the entire drivetrain. The turbine system is supported by a ﬂoatation platform such
that it harvests energy from the near-surface current that has a larger velocity than
the bottom current. The self-contained design of MRCEC also signiﬁcantly eases
the installation, operation, and maintenance.
Ongoing and future work includes a prototype test to validate the performance of
individualsubsystem,aswelltheintegratedone.Thisinvolvestestsinwell-controlled
lab experiments (e.g, in water tunnels) and realistic open water tests that experience
unavoidable ﬂow variation. Reducing the manufacturing cost and operation cost
is further explored by adopting new materials and manufacture procedures. Further
studyofMRCECinanarraysettingwillidentifynewneedforelaboratedmechatronic
control that does not exist for individual MRCEC module. Moreover, incorporation
of the mechatronic sensing and control into a digital twin for the MRCEC will add
its merit for industrial application.
Acknowledgements This work was supported by the grant DOE-EERE Project Review
EE0008950. We would like students Yijie Wang, Zhen Li, Pradip Murugan, Heming Liu, Ethan
Guenther, Joohyun Lee, Mridul Rathi, Gunnar Rich, Lauren Sailor, Haoyang Shi, and Zack Zhang
in School of Mechanical Engineering in College of Engineering, and in School of Engineering
Technology in Polytechnic Institute at Purdue University.

232
J. Chen et al.
References
1. Adams Z, Chen J (2017) Flux-line theory: a novel analytical model for cycloturbines. AIAA J
3851–3867
2. Adams Z, Chen J (2018) Optimization and validation of cycloturbine blade-pitching kinematics
via ﬂux-line theory. AIAA J 1894–1909
3. Benedict, M, Lakshminarayan, V, Pino, J, Chopra I (2013) Fundamental understanding of the
physics of small-scale vertical axis wind turbine with dynamic blade pitching: an experimental
and computational approach. In: 54th AIAA/ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC structures, structural
dynamics, and materials conference, AIAA Paper 2013–1553
4. Davidson P (2006) Off the grid or on, solar and wind power gain; incentives, savings push
more families to renewable energy. USA Today, 13
5. International Renewable Energy Agency (2018) Off-grid renewable energy solutions: global
and regional status and trends
6. Madsen H, Lundgren K (1980) The Voith–Schneider wind turbine: some theoretical and exper-
imental results on the aerodynamics of the Voith–Schneider Wind Turbine, Tech Rept NP-
2900722, Institue of Industrial Constructions and Energy Technology, Aslborg Univ. Centre,
Aslborg, Denmark
7. Paish O (2002) Micro-hydropower: Status and prospects. Proc Inst Mech Eng, Part A: J Power
Energy 216(1):31–40
8. Pritchard PJ, Mitchell JW (2016) Fox and McDonald’s introduction to ﬂuid mechanics. John
Wiley & Sons
9. Vandenberghe D, Dick E (1986) A theoretical and experimental investigation into the straight
bladed vertical axis wind turbine with second order harmonic pitch control. Wind Eng 10(3):22–
138
10. Zhou N, Chen J, Adams DE, Fleeter S (2015) Inﬂuence of inﬂow conditions on turbine loading
and wake structures predicted by large eddy simulations using exact geometry. Wind Energy

Micro/Nanopositioning Systems
with Piezoelectric Actuators and Their
Role in Sustainability and Ecosystems
Morteza Mohammadzaheri, Payam Soltani, and Mojtaba Ghodsi
Abstract Micro/nanopositioners based on piezoelectric actuators and their role to
preserve the biodiversity of the ecosystem and achieve a sustainable manufacturing
sector are presented in this chapter. These positioners are precise at micro/nanometre
resolution and have improved and assisted reproduction and somatic cell nuclear
transfer, playing an increasingly important role in preserving endangered species
from extinction. Studies suggest these technologies are potentially key factors in
our ability to decelerate the degradation of our nature. Further, piezo-actuated
micro/nanopositioners are the foundation of add-on accuracy increasing systems,
which can return outdated machine tools to service, with minor changes and at a
performance level higher than new machines. This avoids waste of energy and mate-
rials, as the outdated machines or their major parts would otherwise be deposed
of. In addition, piezo-actuated micropositioners play an essential role in vibration-
assisted machining, which reduces energy consumption, increases product quality
and extends machine lifetimes.
Introduction
Nano/micropositioning aims to control position at the nano/micrometre scale for
applications such as ﬁne machining [1], manipulation of biological cells [2], scan-
ning probe microscopy [3] and robotic surgery [4]. Different types of actuators
such as magnetostrictive actuators [5] and worm gears [6] have been used in
nano/micropositioning. However, piezoelectric actuators are the least bulky, most
precise and now the most common actuators for nano/micropositioning [7]. The
technology also has a high potential to contribute to environmental sustainability.
M. Mohammadzaheri (B) · P. Soltani
School of Engineering and the Built Environment, Birmingham City University, Birmingham, UK
e-mail: mmzahery@gmail.com; morteza.mohammadzaheri@bcu.ac.uk
M. Ghodsi
School of Energy and Electronic Engineering, University of Portsmouth, Portsmouth, UK
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
P. Hehenberger et al. (eds.), EcoMechatronics,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-07555-1_14
233

234
M. Mohammadzaheri et al.
Piezo-actuated micro/nanopositioning systems may include (i) a piezoelectric
actuator, which deforms in relation to its input electrical voltage, (ii) a sensor to
obtain the position of (a point or a surface on) the piezoelectric actuator and (iii) a
control system which provides the required excitation voltage to realise the desired
position. Of these three components, the actuator and the control system are essential
and sensors may be excluded [8, 9]. Choice of the designer in respect of any of these
components affects the performance, expense and operational requirements of the
nano/micropositioner.
Role of Piezo-Actuated Micro/Nanopositioning Systems
in Biodiversity Protection and Sustainable Manufacturing
Biodiversity Protection
Biodiversity and maintaining an intact biodiverse ecosystem have a direct link to
health and sustainable development. According to recent research [10], more than one
million species are currently at risk of extinction, and losing any takes our ecosystem
one step closer to irreversible degradation. Recent developments in biotechnology,
particularly in cell manipulation, have aided species preservation [11] with assisted
reproductive techniques (ARTs) such as intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI),
in vitro fertilisation (IVF), cryopreservation of gametes, artiﬁcial insemination, and
embryo transfer. ARTs are being used extensively to increase the population of
endangered animal species [12].
Piezo-actuated micro/nanopositioning systems are employed in cell manipula-
tion and play a crucial role in increasing the performance and success rate of ARTs
[13]. For instance, in ICSI, a single spermatozoon of the species is injected into
the cytoplasm of a mature oocyte as shown in Fig. 1. The use of a piezo-actuated
nanopositioner (attached to the needle) for injection improves the performance of
the system [14]. With the use of a piezo-actuated nanopositioner, wider pipes (with
outer diameters up to 30µm) can be successfully driven into the plasma without a
membrane break; this is almost impossible in the conventional ICSI, where needle
size is restricted to only a few micrometres [14]. Piezo-actuated ICSI systems provide
a precise and fast motion for the tip of the needle with speeds of nearly 40µm/s;
this facilitates control of the procedure as the sperm tail oolemma is disrupted in a
well-controlled manner rather than manually. Positive effects of using piezo-actuated
nanopositioners on the outcome of ICSI procedures have been reported [14, 15]. As
an instance, a recent study [16] clearly indicates the signiﬁcant increase in fertili-
sation rates with the use of piezo-actuated micro/nanopositioning systems in ICSI
when compared to conventional ICIS; and that piezo-ICSI reduces the rate of oocyte
degeneration and abnormal fertilisation.

Micro/Nanopositioning Systems with Piezoelectric Actuators …
235
a
b
c
d
Fig. 1 ICIS setup and oocyte of different species: a Equine oocyte, b ovine oocyte, c domestic cat
oocyte and d leopard oocyte. PB, polar body [15]
Somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) is another emerging and promising tech-
nique for maintaining biodiversity and tackling the issue of the extinction and endan-
germent of many species [17]. SCNT could be used not only for saving the endan-
gered species [18], but also as an effective tool for the reproduction of genetically
valuable animals, generation of transgenic species, and manufacturing of modern
medicines [18]. SCNT cloning also has a great potential to help in ﬁghting new
diseases like Covid-19 [19]. As depicted in Fig. 2, nuclear DNA is removed from an
oocyte and replaced by a somatic cell nucleus. There are two main methods to place
Fig. 2 a Different steps in somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) [18], b donor cell injection process
[22]

236
M. Mohammadzaheri et al.
a somatic cell nucleus into an oocyte: (i) conventional electrofusion of the somatic
cell to the cytoplasm of the oocyte and (ii) one-step micromanipulation (OSM) as
depicted in Fig. 2. Research has revealed that the latter provides better efﬁciency
and leads to a higher in vitro blastocyst development rate [20]. In OSM, the needle
tip is usually driven by a piezo-actuated micromanipulator. Figure 3 shows a typical
experimental setup for SCNT. A piezo-actuated micropositioner is mounted on the
injection micropipettes for both enucleation of the somatic cell and nuclear transfer
to oocytes [21].
Sustainable Manufacturing
Sustainable manufacturing and production systems also beneﬁt from the technical
attributes of piezo-actuated micro/nanopositioning systems. Machine tools signiﬁ-
cantly inﬂuence sustainability, and social, economic and environmental issues [23].
A third of the worldwide energy consumption and CO2 emissions is in the produc-
tion industry, where machine tools are major role players [24]. The use of outdated
machinetools,commonindevelopingnations,leadstoaconsiderablewasteofenergy
and raw materials [24]. The constant replacement or retroﬁtting of machine tools
consumes material and energy resources, a threat to sustainable growth. According
to the International Energy Agency (IEA), there exists signiﬁcant potential for
energy and raw material saving through the upgrade and reuse of these outdated
machine tools without extensive modiﬁcation or replacing their core components
[25]. Upgrading existing machine tools with minor changes, as an alternative method
a
c
b
Fig. 3 a Micromanipulation chamber and setup for somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) to oocytes
including micropipettes b holding pipette (right) and enucleation or nuclear transfer micropipette
(left) coupled to c piezoelectric micromanipulating system Eppendorf PiezoXpert [21]

Micro/Nanopositioning Systems with Piezoelectric Actuators …
237
to retroﬁtting and refurbishment, can considerably improve the sustainability aspect
of manufacturing processes [26].
One of the major issues with outdated machine tools is insufﬁcient posi-
tioning accuracy. In outdated machine tools, mispositioning errors yield low-quality
machined products, the main reason for their replacement, retroﬁtting and major
overhaul [25]. A sustainable solution to this problem is to use an add-on system
to compensate for these positioning errors and such add-ons are often based on
piezo-actuated micropositioners. As an example, a piezo-actuated add-on accuracy
increasing system (AAIS), shown in Fig. 4b, was introduced [24], as a sustainable
solution. This is a modular station with high accuracy in error compensation that
can be easily mounted on the worktable of a machine to upgrade it and improve its
functionality, as shown in Fig. 4a [23]. Figure 4c shows that an outdated machine
with an AAIS may perform even better than a new machine tool, in terms of posi-
tioning accuracy. The add-on not only increases the precision of positioning but also
acts as an active control system to diminish chatter and avoid stick–slip problems
[24], increasing the life span of the machine and further sustainability. An AAIS
consists of a series of sensors measuring kinetic (forces and torques) and kinematic
(displacement, velocity and acceleration) errors of the machine during its operation.
A control unit, separate from the main control unit of the machine, analyses these
a
b
c
Fig. 4 a AAISsetupmountedonamillingmachineFP4NC,FRIEDRICHDECKELAG,München,
Germany [23]. b Error compensation table with piezoelectric actuators in two directions (x,y)
[24]. c Measured positioning error in the x-axis of the setup for FP4NC (old), upgraded FP4NC
(FP4NC+wAAIS) and a new DMU 50 milling machine [24]

238
M. Mohammadzaheri et al.
Fig. 5 Schematic of a piezo-actuated micropositioner/vibrator for VAM [29]
errors and commands a high stiffness two-dimensional piezo-actuated microposi-
tioning system mounted on the AAIS table, as depicted in Fig. 4a. Add-ons, including
piezo-actuated micropositioners, can be widely used to upgrade all different types of
machine tools. This avoids replacing or retroﬁtting outdating machines without loss
of product quality.
In addition to improved positioning accuracy and reduction of chatter, piezo-
actuated micro/nanopositioning systems can enhance manufacturing sustainability
with a realisation of vibration-assisted machining (VAM), as depicted in Fig. 5. In
VAM, a precise low-amplitude, high-frequency vibration in the cutting direction is
applied on the cutting tool [27] to create a reciprocating motion at the tip. For a
speciﬁc combination of amplitude and frequency and feed velocity, the tip of the
tool periodically gets detached from the workpiece, reducing machining forces, fric-
tion and heat, improving the surface ﬁnish and increasing the accuracy [27]. VAM
also increases tool life span and leads to almost zero burrs [28]. For the frequen-
cies (>5 kHz) and vibration amplitudes (<50 µm) required by VAM, piezo-actuated
micropositioners attached to the tooltip or the worktable are the best candidates to
generate the required vibrations.
Different Types of Piezoelectric Actuators
in Micro/Nanopositioners
Piezoelectricity, the interaction of mechanical and electrical quantities in piezoelec-
tric materials, was discovered in the 1880s for quartz by the French physicists, the
Curie brothers [30]. Currently, quartz [31] and other crystals [32] are still used
to produce piezoelectric materials. These materials are also produced with piezo-
ceramics (e.g. barium titanate, BaTio3), ferroelectric polycrystalline ceramics and
most commonly with lead zirconate titanate (PZT) [30].
The piezoelectricity phenomenon is rooted in the asymmetrical distribution of
electrons within ions of particular materials [33]. As a result of this, in piezoelectric

Micro/Nanopositioning Systems with Piezoelectric Actuators …
239
Fig. 6 Stacked piezoelectric actuators with the shape of a cylinder [41] (left), a rectangular prism
(middle) and a ring [38] (right)
materials, application of either mechanical force or an electrical voltage results in
the generation of a voltage or mechanical deformation and force. The generation of
deformation or force due to an applied voltage is known as inverse piezoelectricity
[34]. Piezoelectric materials intentionally produced to use inverse piezoelectricity
are called piezoelectric actuators [35].
Piezoelectric actuators are the foremost actuators in nano/micropositioning due
to their nanometre displacement resolution, large bandwidth, fast response and high
stiffness [36]. There are three types of piezoelectric actuators commercially available
as follows.
Piezoelectric Stacks
Stacks are composed of layers of a piezoelectric material [37] and are commonly
coated with polymers [38]. Stacked piezoelectric actuators are stiff and easy to use
for nano/micropositioning purposes [7]. Stacks with various shapes have been used
including rectangular prism [39], cylinder [38] or ring [40] as shown in Fig. 6. As
a rule of thumb, the maximum deﬂection of rectangular prism stacks is generally
slightly >0.1% of their length [38]. The relationship between the applied voltage on
a stack piezo actuator and its deﬂection has been repeatedly reported to be highly
nonlinear [39].
Piezoelectric Tubes
Piezoelectric tubes are made of a metal cylinder covered by piezoelectric material
internally and externally. The inner layer is continuous and grounded, as depicted in
Fig. 7. The outer layer is divided into a number of (e.g. 4 [42] or 12 [43]) segments
or electrodes. These actuators should be differentiated from the piezo stack with
a long ring or tube shape [38]. Piezoelectric tubes can deﬂect in three directions.
Nevertheless, they are quite fragile; thus, these actuators need more care and occa-
sionally more complicated stands for operation [33]. Piezoelectric tubes are widely
used for probe scanning microscopy [44], particularly in atomic force microscopy
[45]. The ﬁrst natural or resonance frequency of the tubes employed in atomic force
microscopy is in the range of 200–1500 Hz [46], though relatively short piezo tubes

240
M. Mohammadzaheri et al.
Fig. 7 Cross section and electrical connections of a piezoelectric tube actuator [48]
may exhibit ﬁrst natural frequencies up to hundreds of kilohertz [47]. A large piezo-
electric tube (e.g. 100 mm long and with an outer diameter of 15 mm) is likely to
produce displacements of up to 100 µm. For some tube piezo actuators, the rela-
tionship between applied voltage and produced deﬂection has been reported to be
slightly nonlinear [42] or nearly linear [44].
Piezoelectric Benders
Piezoelectric benders may be composed of one, two or multiple piezoelectric plate(s)
and possibly thin layers of shim or metal [49]. Benders with rectangular [49] or
circular [50] sections, depicted in Fig. 8, are commercially available. Piezoelectric
benders with one (two) piezoelectric plate(s) are known as unimorph (bimorph)
benders [35] and have been widely used in micro- and nanopositioning [35]. High
deﬂection and low natural frequency, in comparison with tubes and stacks, are the
two main characteristics of benders, i.e. a typical piezoelectric bender can have a
maximum deﬂection of 2 mm [38] and the ﬁrst natural frequency in the range of tens
to hundreds of hertz [38].
Fig. 8 Piezoelectric benders [50]

Micro/Nanopositioning Systems with Piezoelectric Actuators …
241
Different Types of Sensors Used in Micro/Nanopositioners
Two categories of sensors may be used in micro/nanopositioning: (1) sensors with
mechanical contact and (2) contactless sensors.
Sensors with Mechanical Contact
Strain gauges and precise Linear Differential Variable Transformers (LVDTs) are
suitable candidates for the measurement with mechanical contact, which are detailed
in the following.
Strain Gauges
These inexpensive sensors originally measure strain; however, since the dimensions
of the actuators are much larger than their deﬂections, they are widely used as
displacement or position sensors [51]. The resolution of a precision strain gauge
is approximately 1 µ (10–6) [52]; thus for a piezoelectric stack with a length of 5 cm
(5 × 10–2 m), a strain gauge can measure displacements as small as 50 nm (10–6
× 5 × 10–2 m). Although the strain gauge can be bonded to the actuator surface,
any misalignment between the longitudinal axis of the strain gauge with the strain
direction of the piezoelectric actuator needs to be compensated. Furthermore, the
strain gauges need a resistive bridge box, similar to the one in Fig. 9, and special
ampliﬁers to provide measurable voltage [53]. In addition, dummy gauges are needed
to compensate the effect of both environmental magnetic ﬁelds and thermal stress.
Linear Differential Variable Transformer (LVDT)
LVDT is one of the most reliable and robust displacement sensors. An LVDT, shown
in Fig. 10a, consists of a primary coil, two secondary coils and a ferromagnetic core
connected to a non-ferromagnetic stem [55]. To measure displacement, the tip of
LVDT’s plunger, Fig. 10b is attached to the target. The variation of the rectiﬁed output
voltage of the secondary coil is proportional to the displacement of the target. LVDTs
Fig. 9 A bridge strain gauge
circuit [54]

242
M. Mohammadzaheri et al.
Fig. 10 a Internal structure of LVDT. b Real photo of LVDT [57]
have a relatively low price (approximately US$ 1000) and a long life span; however,
they are not recommended for motions with frequencies higher than 1 kHz [56].
Contactless Sensors
Contactless measurement can be conducted with optical sensors (e.g. laser triangular
sensor, laser interferometer and ﬁbre optic) and capacitive sensors, introduced in the
following subsections.
Laser Triangulation Sensor
Laser triangulation sensors have a range of accuracies and resolutions. Resolutions
of 1 nm at the sampling frequency of 392 kHz are achievable with a triangular
laser sensor [58]. Compared to a laser interferometer, its reference distance (the
required gap between the sensor tip and the target) is smaller; however, its lower cost
(US$10,000) and easy initial setup make it attractive for many nano/micropositioning
applications.
Laser Doppler Vibrometer
Laser Doppler Vibrometers (LDVs) are the most precise commercially available
position sensors providing sub-nanometre resolution. However, they are expensive,
costingatleastUS$20,000andmeasuringvelocityratherthanposition/displacement.
To ﬁnd the position, the velocity must be integrated which potentially leads to
drift. Nevertheless, laser vibrometers offer a large reference distance and have been
successfully employed in nanopositioning [59].
Fibre Optic Displacement Sensor
Fibre optic displacement/position sensors can reach resolutions as small as 8 nm [60]
and have been reported to be successfully used in nanopositioning [8]. These sensors
need to be calibrated before each use [61], itself a precise operation. A ﬁbre optic
sensor with its essential accessories, including a proper ampliﬁer, costs around US$
1000.

Micro/Nanopositioning Systems with Piezoelectric Actuators …
243
Capacitive Sensor
Capacitive sensors measure the capacitance between two metal surfaces and map
the change of capacitance into displacement. They may provide resolutions as small
as 1 nm [62]. This type of sensor is widely used in nanopositioning due to its high
accuracy and reasonable price (e.g. below $2500) [42].
Control System of Micro/Nanopositioners
Figure 11 depicts a nano/micropositioning system in terms of control. The control
system may receive three types of inputs:
(1)
Desired position, normally as a function of time [42].
(2)
Position signal from a position/displacement sensor, non-existent in some
control systems.
(3)
Voltage signals collected from the piezoelectric actuator, some or all of these
signals are non-existent in some control systems. These signals are (i) the
voltage across the piezoelectric actuator, known as the piezoelectric voltage
[63] (V P in Fig. 12), (ii) the voltage across an electrical element in series with
the piezoelectric actuator, known as the sensing voltage [64] (V S in Fig. 12) and
(iii)thevoltageinducedonanon-excitedsegmentorelectrodeofapiezoelectric
tube actuator (unavailable in other types of piezo actuators), known as the
induced voltage.
Fig. 11 A schematic of a piezo-actuated nano/micropositioning system
Fig. 12 Excitation,
piezoelectric and sensing
voltages (Ve, VP and VS) in
a circuit. The sensing
element, if exists, is a part of
the control system

244
M. Mohammadzaheri et al.
There
are
two
major
approaches
to
controlling
piezo-actuated
nano/micropositioners: (i) voltage-based and (ii) charge-based [7]. In the voltage-
based approach (e.g. [42]), the position is directly controlled by the tuning of V e.
However, in a charge-based approach (e.g. [65]), the desired position is mapped into
the desired charge, and then the charge is controlled by the tuning of V e.
Voltage-Based Approach
Voltage-based
control
systems
are
widely
used
for
piezo-actuated
nano/micropositioners with different control architectures and controller types.
Figures 13 and 14 depict two feedback voltage-based control systems with the use
of a sensor (conventional feedback) and a position estimator, respectively. Nonlinear
controllers [66] have been used in feedback control systems, similar to the ones of
Figs. 13 and 14, due to their inherited nonlinearity. Figure 15 depicts a feedforward
control system, which uses neither a measured position nor a voltage signal.
The development of position estimators for piezoelectric actuators is still a chal-
lenge; the reason is the complexity of the relationship between the voltage signals and
position. Some researchers have tried to explain and model this relationship through
three separate phenomena: vibration, hysteresis and creep [45]. Several physics-
based [67] and data-driven [39, 42, 68–70] methods have been tried to estimate the
position using one [70, 71] or a number of voltage signals [8, 65], and this area of
research is still active [72]. Amongst the voltage signals, V P has been tried most to
estimate position, e.g. in [69–71, 73].
Fig. 13 A schematic of a conventional feedback voltage-based control system for a piezo-actuated
nano/micropositioner
Fig. 14 A schematic of a feedback voltage-based control system for a piezo-actuated
nano/micropositioner with use of estimated position

Micro/Nanopositioning Systems with Piezoelectric Actuators …
245
Fig. 15 A schematic of a feedforward voltage-based control system for a piezo-actuated
nano/micropositioner
Fig. 16 A schematic of a charge-based piezo-actuated nano/micropositioning system
Charge-Based Approach
Figure 16 depicts the schematics of a charge-based control system for piezo-
actuated nano/micropositioners. In this approach, position control is divided into
two problems:
(i)
Mapping position to piezoelectric electric charge;
(ii)
Charge control by tuning V e.
Regardingpoint(i),advantageously,chargeandpositionareproportionallyrelated
in wide operating areas for many piezoelectric actuators. This simpliﬁes charge–
position mapping to identiﬁcation/use of a simple gain.
Regarding point (ii), estimation and control of charge can be performed within
an electrical circuit with no need to involve complexities of a voltage–position rela-
tionship, e.g. hysteresis and … [74]. In this approach, V S is used to estimate charge,
rather than to deform the actuator. As a result, V S is also called voltage drop.
Summary of Control Systems Section
Bothvoltage-basedandcharge-basedcontrolapproacheshavebeensuccessfullyused
for piezo-actuated nano/micropositioners. Each has its own advantages, as brieﬂy
listed in Table 1.
Charge-based control systems do not include a position sensor while retaining
accuracy. This is often considered as an advantage, as position sensors are costly and
Table 1 Relative advantages
of different approaches to
piezo-actuated
nano/micropositioners
Relative advantages of
voltage-based
Relative advantages of
charge-based
• No voltage drop in most
cases
• Satisfactory sensorless
performance
• No limits in operating
area
• No need for complex nonlinear
controllers or models
• Implementable as an analog
circuit

246
M. Mohammadzaheri et al.
occasionally time-consuming to calibrate and operate, particularly in small spaces.
Further, charge-based control systems, unlike voltage-based control systems, do not
require complex nonlinear control to provide satisfactory performance. Such intricate
control systems not only have challenging design procedures but also can only be
implemented with digital processors, adding to implementation complexity. On the
other hand, charge-based control systems advantageously can be implemented as
analog circuits and still perform well.
However, hardware-wise, the potential of charge-based control systems for analog
implementation does not necessarily mean more simplicity. In comparison with
voltage-based control systems, charge-based ones need an extra sensing element e.g.
the one shown in Fig.12 [75]. Moreover, if they are implemented as analog circuits,
an extra voltage ampliﬁer and, at least, an extra resistor parallel with the actuator
are also needed [74]. In addition, a portion of excitation voltage is wasted in charge-
based methods due to voltage drop. The most serious limitation of the charge-based
approach is, however, its relatively limited operating areas. The operating areas,
where the charge–position relationship for the piezo actuator is not proportional, are
not considered appropriate to use charge-based methods. In addition, low-frequency
operating areas (e.g. frequencies below 2 Hz in [64] and below 5 Hz in [63, 75]) do
not suit charge-based methods. Voltage-based methods, on the other hand, can be
designed and used for all operating areas.
Conclusions
This chapter introduced piezo-actuated micro/nanopositioners, the systems which
exhibit controlled position at the micro/nanometre scale. In addition, the contribu-
tion of these systems to the biodiversity of our ecosystem and sustainability of the
manufacturing sector was presented.
Piezo-actuated micro/nanopositioning, through the enhancement of cell manip-
ulation, has created signiﬁcant advancements in assisted reproduction and somatic
cell nuclear transfer. These techniques are increasingly used to raise the popula-
tion of threatened animal species and save them from extinction. It is believed that
such technologies are essential to help species in extremis, and any future habitat
restoration depends upon progress in these technologies.
In addition, piezo-actuated micro/nanopositioners are progressively employed as
a core component of add-on accuracy increasing systems (AAISs). These systems,
with minor changes, can considerably improve the performance of outdated machine
tools. This is a substantial contribution to sustainable manufacturing, knowing that
all existing alternatives lead to a huge waste of materials and energy. Without piezo-
actuated AAISs, outdated machine tools are either disposed of or their major parts
are replaced as otherwise they would witness a signiﬁcant decrease in product quality
and increase in energy consumption. Moreover, piezo-actuated micropositioners play
an essential role in vibration-assisted machining, which results in a considerable
decrease in consumed energy and an increase in machine life span.

Micro/Nanopositioning Systems with Piezoelectric Actuators …
247
The chapter also introduced the triple major components of a piezo-actuated
micro/nanopositioner: actuator, control system and sensor, where the latter does not
exist in sensorless micro/nanopositioners. The chapter highlights some shortcom-
ings in this area of technology. As an instance, all methods of both prevalent control
approaches, voltage-based and charge-based, suffer from signiﬁcant drawbacks.
Voltage-based methods still struggle to identify and control an intricate nonlinear
dynamic system, and charge-based methods are unable to perform in low-frequency
operating areas. A hybrid method to appropriately function over the entire operating
area is yet to be developed. Due to the increasingly important role of piezo-actuated
micro/nanopositioning systems in the preservation of biodiversity and in the sustain-
ability of manufacturing, further investments in technology development of such
systems is highly recommended.
References
1. Tang H, Zeng Z, Gao J, Zhang X (2015) A ﬂexible parallel nanopositioner for large-stroke
micro/nano machining. In: International conference on manipulation, manufacturing and
measurement on the nanoscale (3M-NANO), pp 107–110
2. Li X, Cheah C (2015) Robotic cell manipulation using optical tweezers with unknown trapping
stiffness and limited FOV. IEEE/ASME Trans Mechatron 20(4):1624–1632
3. Clayton GM, Tien S, Leang KK, Zou Q, Devasia S (2009) A review of feedforward control
approaches in nanopositioning for high-speed SPM. J Dyn Syst Measur Control 131061101
4. Saedi S, Mirbagheri A, Jafari A, Farahmand F (2014) A local hybrid actuator for robotic surgery
instruments. Int J Biomech Biomed Robot 3(2):100–105
5. Ghodsi M, Saleem A, Özer A, Bahadur I, Alam K, Al-Yahmadi A et al (2016) Elimination of
thermal instability in precise positioning of Galfenol actuators. Behav Mech Multifunct Mater
Compos 9800980008
6. Protopopov V (ed) (2014) Beam alignment and positioning techniques in practical opto-
electronics. Springer, pp 309–334
7. Mohammadzaheri M, AlQallaf A (2017) Nanopositioning systems with piezoelectric actuators,
current state and future perspective. Sci Adv Mater 9(7):1071–1080
8. Bazghaleh M, Grainger S, Mohammadzaheri M, Cazzolato B, Lu T-F (2013) A novel digital
charge-based displacement estimator for sensorless control of a grounded-load piezoelectric
tube actuator. Sens Actuat A: Phys 198:91–98, 15 August 2013
9. Roshandel N, Soleymanzadeh D, Ghafarirad H, Koupaei AS (2021) A modiﬁed sensorless
position estimation approach for piezoelectric bending actuators, Mech Syst Sig Process
149107231
10. Lovejoy TE, Hannah L, Wilson EO (2019) Biodiversity and climate change: transforming the
biosphere. Yale University Press
11. Supple MA, Shapiro B (2018) Conservation of biodiversity in the genomics era. Genome Biol
19(1):1–12
12. Presicce G (2020) Reproductive technologies in animals. Academic Press
13. Sansinena M (ed) (2020) Assisted reproductive biotechnologies in the horse in reproductive
technologies in animals. Elsevier, pp 13–30
14. Yoshida N, Perry AC (2007) Piezo-actuated mouse intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI).
Nat Protoc 2(2):296–304
15. Salamone DF, Canel NG, Rodríguez MB (2017) Intracytoplasmic sperm injection in domestic
and wild mammals. Reproduction 154(6):F111–F124

248
M. Mohammadzaheri et al.
16. Zander-Fox D, Lam K, Pacella-Ince L, Tully C, Hamilton H, Hiraoka K et al (2021) PIEZO-
ICSI increases fertilization rates compared with standard ICSI-A prospective cohort study,
Reproductive BioMedicine Online
17. Iqbal A, Ping J, Ali S, Zhen G, Kang JZ, Yi PZ et al (2021) Conservation of endangered species
through somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT). Conserv Genet Resourc 1–9
18. Czernik M, Anzalone DA, Palazzese L, Oikawa M, Loi P (2019) Somatic cell nuclear transfer:
failures, successes and the challenges ahead. Int J Devel Biol 63(3–4–5):123–130
19. Singh B, Mal G, Verma V, Tiwari R, Khan MI, Mohapatra RK et al (2021) Stem cell therapies
and benefaction of somatic cell nuclear transfer cloning in COVID-19 era. Stem Cell Res Ther
12(1):1–16
20. Zhou Q, Yang S, Ding C, He X, Xie Y, Hildebrandt T et al (2006) A comparative approach to
somatic cell nuclear transfer in the rhesus monkey. Hum Reprod 21(10):2564–2571
21. Boiani M. Somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) into mouse oocytes using Eppendorf
PiezoXpert®
22. Moon J, Jung M, Roh S (2017) Comparison of developmental efﬁciency of murine somatic
cell nuclear transfer protocol. J Embryo Transf 32(3):81–86
23. Uhlmann E, Peukert B, Thom S, Prasol L, Fürstmann P, Sammler F et al (2017) Solut Sustain
Mach 139(5)
24. Kianinejad K, Thom S, Kushwaha S, Uhlmann EJPC (2016) Add-on error compensation unit
as sustainable solution for outdated milling machines, 40174–178
25. Kianinejad K, Uhlmann E, Peukert B (2015) Investigation into energy efﬁciency of outdated
cutting machine tools and identiﬁcation of improvement potentials to promote sustainability.
Procedia CIRP 26533–26538
26. UhlmannE,KianinejadK(2013)Investigationoftheupgradingpotentialsofout-of-datecutting
machine tools to promote sustainable and global value creation. In: Proceeding of the 11th
global conference on sustainable manufacturing, pp 574–579
27. Singh H, Joshi R (2016) Piezoelectric transducer based devices for development of a sustainable
machining system—a review
28. Joshi RS, Singh H (2011) Piezoelectric transducer based devices for development of a sustain-
able machining system—a review. In: 2011 international symposium on applications of ferro-
electrics (ISAF/PFM) and 2011 international symposium on piezoresponse force microscopy
and nanoscale phenomena in polar materials, pp 1–4
29. Zheng L, Chen W, Huo D (2020) Review of vibration devices for vibration-assisted machining.
Int J Adv Manuf Technol 1081631–108165
30. Minase J, Lu T-F, Cazzolato B, Grainger S (2010) A review, supported by experimental results,
of voltage, charge and capacitor insertion method for driving piezoelectric actuators. Precis
Eng 34(4):692–700
31. Aggrey P, Salimon A, Korsunsky A (2020) Diatomite inspired nanostructured quartz as a
piezoelectric material. Limnol Freshw Biol 828–829
32. YangX,LiZ,FeiC,LiuY,LiD,HouSetal(2020)Highfrequencyneedleultrasonictransducers
based on Mn doped piezoelectric single crystal. J Alloys Comp 832154951
33. Sabek W, Al-mana A, Siddiqui AR, Assadi BE, Mohammad-khorasani M, Mohammadzaheri
M, Tafreshi R (2015) Experimental investigation of piezoelectric tube actuators dynamics. In:
2nd international conference on robotics and mechatronics, Madrid, Spain, 20–21 July 2015
34. Chopra I (2002) Review of state of art of smart structures and integrated systems. AIAA J
40(11):2145–2187
35. Rios S, Fleming A (2014) Control of piezoelectric benders using a charge drive. Proc Actuat.
In: 14th international conference on new actuators, Bremen, Germany, 23–25 June 2014
36. Zhang XL, Tan YH, Su MY, Xie YQ (2010) Neural networks based identiﬁcation and compen-
sation of rate-dependent hysteresis in piezoelectric actuators. Physica B-Condensed Matter
405(12):2687–2693
37. HussainF,KhesroA,LuZ,WangG,WangD(2020)Leadfreemultilayerpiezoelectricactuators
by economically new approach. Front Mater 7
38. PiezoDrive (2021) Piezoelectric actuators. https://www.piezodrive.com/actuators/

Micro/Nanopositioning Systems with Piezoelectric Actuators …
249
39. Ahmadpour H, Mohammadzaheri M, Emadi M, Ghods V, Mehrabi D, Tafreshi R (2015)
Neural modelling of a piezoelectric actuator inspired by the presiach approach. In: International
conference on artiﬁcial intelligence, energy and manufacturing engineering
40. Wang G, Zhao Z, Tan J, Cui S, Wu H (2020) A novel multifunctional piezoelectric composite
deviceformechatronicssystemsbyusingonesinglePZTring.SmartMaterStruct29(5):055027
41. Ceramics P (2021) Stack actuators. https://www.piceramic.com/en/products/piezoceramic-act
uators/stack-actuators/
42. Mohammadzaheri M, Grainger S, Bazghaleh M (2013) A system identiﬁcation approach to the
characterization and control of a piezoelectric tube actuator. Smart Mater Struct 22(10):105022
43. Moheimani SOR, Yong YK (2008) Simultaneous sensing and actuation with a piezoelectric
tube scanner. Rev Sci Instr 79(7)
44. Mohammadzaheri M, Grainger S, Kopaei MK, Bazghaleh M (2013) IMC-based feedforward
control of a piezoelectric tube actuator. In: IEEE eighth international conference on intelligent
sensors, sensor networks and information processing
45. Habibullah H (2020) 30 years of atomic force microscopy: creep, hysteresis, cross-coupling,
and vibration problems of piezoelectric tube scanners. Measurement 159107776
46. Abramovitch DY, Andersson SB, Pao LY, Schitter G (2007) A tutorial on the mechanisms,
dynamics, and control of atomic force microscopes. Am Control Conf 965–979
47. Moheimani SOR (2008) Invited review article: accurate and fast nanopositioning with piezo-
electric tube scanners: emerging trends and future challenges. Rev Sci Instrum 79(7):071101
48. Mohammadzaheri M, Tafreshi R, Mohammad-Khorasani M, Bazghaleh M, Grainger S (2015)
Evaluation of the induced voltage in driven electrodes of piezoelectric tube actuators for
sensorless nanopositioning. In: IEEE 8th GCC conference and exhibition (GCCCE), pp 1–5
49. Piezo.com (2021) Introduction to Piezos. https://piezo.com/pages/introduction-to-piezos
50. Ceramics P (2021) Piezo bender actuators. https://www.piceramic.com/en/products/piezocera
mic-actuators/bender-actuators/
51. Ghodsi M, Modabberifar M, Ueno T (2011) Quality factor, static and dynamic responses of
miniature galfenol actuator at wide range of temperature. Int J Phys Sci 6(36):8143–8150
52. Group VP. Strain gage instrumentation, micro-measurements. http://www.vishaypg.com/docs/
50002/50002.pdf
53. PiezoDrive. Strain gauge position measurement systems. https://www.piezodrive.com/actuat
ors/
54. Akbari H, Kazerooni A (2018) Improving the coupling errors of a Maltese cross-beams type
six-axis force/moment sensor using numerical shape-optimization technique. Measurement
126342–126355
55. Rerkratn A, Luangpol A, Petchmaneelumka W, Riewruja V (2020) Position signal detector for
linear variable differential transformer. Energy Rep 6603–6607
56. electronicspeciﬁer,
e.
https://www.electronicspeciﬁer.com/products/communications/lvdt-
range-suitable-for-high-frequency-response
57. OMEGA, O. https://www.omega.com/en-us/control-monitoring/motion-and-position/displa
cement-transducers/ld500/
58. Keyence K. https://www.keyence.co.uk/products/measure/laser-1d/lk-g5000/
59. Omidi E, Mahmoodi SN (2016) Vibration control of collocated smart structures using H∞
modiﬁed positive position and velocity feedback. J Vib Control 22(10):2434–2442
60. Philtec (ed) Fiber optic displacement sensors
61. Ghodsi M, Ueno T, Teshima H, Hirano H, Higuchi T, Summers E (2007) “Zero-power” posi-
tioning actuator for cryogenic environments by combining magnetostrictive bimetal and HTS.
Sens Actuat, A 135(2):787–791
62. MicroSense. Precision capacitive sensor. http://www.microsense.net/products-position-sen
sors.htm
63. Mohammadzaheri M, Emadi M, Ghodsi M, Jamshidi E, Bahadur I, Saleem A et al (2019)
A variable-resistance digital charge estimator for piezoelectric actuators: an alternative to
maximise accuracy and curb voltage drop. J Intell Mater Syst Struct 30(11):1699–1705

250
M. Mohammadzaheri et al.
64. Mohammadzaheri M, Emadi M, Ghodsi M, Bahadur IM, Zarog M, Saleem AJIJOAI et al.
(2020) Development of a charge estimator for piezoelectric actuators: a radial basis function
approach. Int J Artif Intell Mach Learn 10(1):31–44
65. Bazghaleh M, Mohammadzaheri M, Grainger S, Cazzolato B, Lu TF (2013) A new hybrid
method for sensorless control of piezoelectric actuators, Sens Actuat A: Phys 19425–19430
66. Mousavi Lajimi SA, Friswell MI (2020) Design, analysis, and feedback control of a nonlinear
micro-piezoelectric–electrostatic energy harvester. Nonlinear Dyn 1003029–1003042
67. Miri N, Mohammadzaheri M, Chen L (2013) A comparative study of different physics-
based approaches to modelling of piezoelectric actuators. In: The IEEE/ASME international
conference on advanced intelligent mechatronics
68. Mohammadzaheri M, Ziaeifar H, Bahadur I, Zarog M, Emadi M, Ghodsi M (2019) Data-driven
modelling of engineering systems with small data, a comparative study of artiﬁcial intelligence
techniques. In: 5th Iranian conference on signal processing and intelligent systems (ICSPIS)
69. Mohammadzaheri M, Grainger S, Bazghaleh M (2012) A comparative study on the use of
black box modelling for piezoelectric actuators. Int J Adv Manuf Technol 631247–631255
70. Mohammadzaheri M, Grainger S, Bazghaleh M (2012) Fuzzy modeling of a piezoelectric
actuator. Int J Precis Eng Manuf 13(5):663–670
71. Mohammadzaheri M, Grainger S, Bazghaleh M, Yaghmaee P (2012) Intelligent modeling of a
piezoelectric tube actuator. In: International symposium on innovations in intelligent systems
and applications (INISTA)
72. Ahmed K, Yan P (2021) Modeling and identiﬁcation of rate dependent hysteresis in piezo-
electric actuated nano-stage: a gray box neural network based approach. IEEE Access
965440–965448
73. Miri N, Mohammadzaheri M, Chen L, Grainger S, Bazghaleh M (2013) Physics-based
modellingofa piezoelectric actuatorusinggenetic algorithm.In: IEEE symposiumonindustrial
electronics and applications (ISIEA)
74. Bazghaleh M, Grainger S, Mohammadzaheri MJJOIMS, Structures (2018) A review of charge
methods for driving piezoelectric actuators. J Intell Mater Syst Struct 29(10):2096–22104
75. Mohammadzaheri M, AlSulti S, Ghodsi M, Bahadur I, Emadi M (2021) Assessment of
capacitor-based charge estimators for piezoelectric actuators. IEEE Int Conf Mech (ICM)
2021:1–6

Eco Motion Planning for Mechatronic
Systems
Paolo Boscariol, Dario Richiedei, and Alberto Trevisani
Abstract Saving energy while retaining productivity is one of the most desired fea-
tures in the modern production industry, which is currently responsible for a notable
amount of the worldwide energy need. Cutting down the costs of an energivorous
plant does not just provide economic savings, but it also reduces the carbon footprint
of commercial products. In this chapter, the wise use of energy in mechatronic sys-
tems is discussed, by focusing on Eco Motion Planning (EMP). The basic idea is that
an optimized motion planning, in terms of the selection of the motion time, of the
motion proﬁle, of the spatial trajectory and the of motion scheduling, can remarkably
reduce energy absorption without affecting the throughput of the mechatronic sys-
tem. The chapter brieﬂy reviews the most relevant methods that have been proposed
in the literature, ranging from simple machines with constant inertia to industrial
robots, and provides the most relevant equations and models of the energy consump-
tion that can be used in EMP. A numerical test case is then analyzed to outline a
method for designing an energy optimal motion proﬁle and optimal scheduling in
a robotic cell made by a system with constant inertia, and a multi-axis robot gov-
erned by a nonlinear dynamic model. Despite its conceptual simplicity, the proposed
method ensures remarkable energy improvements while retaining productivity and
without requiring any physical alteration of the plant and clearly proves the beneﬁt
of EMP.
Keywords Energy saving · Sustainability · Motion planning · Robotic cells ·
Mechatronic systems
P. Boscariol (B) · D. Richiedei · A. Trevisani
Dipartimento di Tecnica E Gestione Dei Sistemi Industriali, Universitá Degli Studi di Padova,
Stradella S. Nicola 3, 36100 Vicenza, Italy
e-mail: paolo.boscariol@unipd.it
D. Richiedei
e-mail: dario.richiedei@unipd.it
A. Trevisani
e-mail: alberto.trevisani@unipd.it
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
P. Hehenberger et al. (eds.), EcoMechatronics,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-07555-1_15
251

252
P. Boscariol et al.
Introduction
Improving the energy efﬁciency of mechatronic systems, while preserving high
throughput, is one of the key goals of EcoMechatronics [1] since current trends
reveal that global energy demand is expected to grow at a constant rate over the next
decades [2]. The relevance of this topic is also testiﬁed by the directions set by the
European Union policy [3] whose goal is reducing the primary energy consump-
tion of 30% by 2030. A signiﬁcant amount of the worldwide energy absorption is
related to manufacturing processes, where, in turn, a relevant contribution is due to
the energy required by automatic machines and robots adopted to perform simple
activities with a small added value, such as moving tools or conveying products. A
cost-free approach to improving energy efﬁciency of mechatronic systems is there-
fore the optimization of these phases by means of the optimization of the planned
motion: a wide literature, that will be reviewed in the following, has shown that
energy savings up to 30% can be achieved by a wise motion planning focused on
the energy absorption, compared to traditional approaches that usually discard this
issue. Several techniques have been developed in the literature, thus providing effec-
tive solutions for a wide range of machines and robots used in modern industries.
Optimization basically involves the selection of the spatial path and of the motion
law (often including the duration of motion). If at least two machines are taken into
account, also the scheduling of the operation can boost energy efﬁciency [4]. Indeed,
besides optimizing the energy consumption of each axis, a wise scheduling of motion
can optimize the energy exchange between accelerating and decelerating axes when
regenerative drives are used. The enhancement of the planned motion represents in
many cases the most feasible solution for energy saving since it can be applied both
when commissioning a new system as well as when retroﬁtting an existing one, with
no physical modiﬁcations of the electro-mechanical devices.
The discussion provided in this chapter covers some general issues and their
solutions, focusing on methods that are suitable for both researchers and industry
practitioners. The ﬁrst goal of the chapter is to provide a general overview of the
methodologies used in modeling and analysis of the energy consumption of mecha-
tronic systems, together with their use for reducing energy absorption. These two
issues are the pillars on which the idea of Eco Motion Planning (EMP) is rooted;
optimization of the spatial path, of the timing law and of the scheduling are the
tools exploited by EMP for improving energy efﬁciency. Then, the chapter provides
and discusses some models of energy absorption, and their use in EMP is proposed
through two meaningful examples. The ﬁrst example consists of the common case
of a constant inertia system, as those often adopted in industry, where EMP can be
solved through some analytical equations. Then, by considering a multi-axis sys-
tem with nonlinear dynamic behavior, a different solution technique is proposed by
exploiting numerical methods for the solution of the resulting multivariate optimiza-
tion problem.

Eco Motion Planning for Mechatronic Systems
253
Literature Review
Motion design, in its most general deﬁnition, is a branch of mechatronics and robotics
that deals with the deﬁnition of the reference proﬁles to be executed by an automatic
machine. This general problem applies to basic systems as well as to very complex
ones, such as robotic cells with several robots and some auxiliary axes. This variety
of applications has produced a literature on motion planning that counts for, literally,
hundreds of related works. Reviewing all of them is outside the scope of this work:
here just a brief overview of the most common applications of EMP is provided. For
a general overview of trajectory planning, the reader should refer to the classic titles,
such as [5–8]. A detailed list of papers on the problem of boosting energy efﬁciency
by means of motion design is provided also in [9] that quotes also other methods
not strictly related to motion design, which are therefore outside the scope of this
chapter.
Themost investigatedprobleminEMPis therest-to-rest motionof asingledegree-
of-freedom (DOF) system with constant inertia. A meaningful example of a com-
monly used method can be found in [10], which provides an analytic treatment of
the energy consumption and of the optimal motion time of a single servo-driven
axis with constant inertia when executing standard motion primitives. This work
and several related ones share a similar outline: the energy consumption is found
by the time integration of the algebraic equations representing the electric power
proﬁle, computed through the system electro-mechanical model that includes the
inverse dynamic model of the mechanical part and a simpliﬁed model of the motor.
The energy consumption therefore takes the form of a function of some parameters,
allowing for a simple optimization either through analytical equations, as proposed
in [10] and in the more recent paper [11], or through some basic numerical methods
based on computing the stationary points of simple cost functions, as proposed in
other works, such as [12–14]. Among the analytical solutions of the energy optimal
motion planning, the one proposed in [10] results in very simple equations, since
the features of the different motion primitives are summarized through a few coefﬁ-
cients that allow for a straightforward calculation and comparison. Simple analytical
formulations of the energy consumption can be formulated for a Cartesian robot as
well, due to the decoupling between the axis [15].
Some works have followed different approaches: for example, [16–18] solve
energy-optimal point-to-point motion within the framework of variational calculus.
Hence, the energy minimization problem is approached as an indirect optimization
or as an optimal control problem, which usually requires elaborate solution methods
[19]. Within a variational problem formulation, the motion proﬁle is generally not
constrained to a speciﬁc parametrized description of the motion proﬁle (for exam-
ple, by means of a polynomial function), but it is free to assume any form within
the feasible bounds: hence, among the inﬁnite possibilities, a variational problem
formulation computes the optimal motion law as the optimal sequence of positions
(and consequently speeds and accelerations) that minimizes a given cost function.
Variational solutions are virtually effective in ﬁnding the optimal solution; how-

254
P. Boscariol et al.
ever, they might fail to converge, and handling nonlinearities and hard constraints is
usually very cumbersome [20]. Additionally, they are hardly appealing for industry
practitioners since they require speciﬁc solvers.
If mechatronic systems with variable inertia are considered, the use of closed-
form solutions is usually impracticable and numerical computation routines should
be adopted: the complexity of the nonlinear equations of motions of even a single-
DOF system is generally too high to be handled by simple calculations. For example,
in [21, 22] numerical methods are adopted to solve the algebraic equations and
then to minimize the energy consumption of a toggle mechanism. Difﬁculties are
exacerbated in the case of multi-DOF systems, such as robots. A general overview
of the problem is provided in [23], which also sports a well-supported analysis of the
various sources of dissipation in industrial robots. A paper to be mentioned is [24],
which proposes a commonly used and technically sound approach for EMP in robots:
the optimization of a robot task as the result of an optimization procedure. The task
is ﬁrst designed by choosing a set of via-points that ensure a collision-free operation,
then an interpolation procedure is used to deﬁne the energy-optimal motion, using a
meta-heuristic optimization tool. The work [25] deals with the planning of a task that
involves at least three via-points, which are to be connected by straight lines and arcs,
i.e. by exploiting the most common motion primitives used in industrial robots. The
optimization is performed by searching for alternative paths that pass close to the
prescribed via-points without affecting the cycle time. A similar approach is proposed
in [26] as well, where different motion primitives, such as B-splines, are used to
interpolate via-points. In [27, 28], functionally redundant robots are discussed, and
the motion of the redundant degrees of freedom is optimally designed to reduce the
energy required to perform the task, by exactly passing through some prescribed via-
points. Numerical optimization routines are adopted due to the nonlinear dynamic
model of the robot.
To handle the complexity of robotic systems, some authors have suggested the
use of the so-called “CAD-based simulators”, such as in [29, 30], to exploit the
capabilities of the multibody dynamics simulators embedded in the most advanced
CAD packages that allow running simulations of the dynamics of the device under
development without having to explicitly deﬁne a dynamic model. These approaches
are therefore based on the solution of the differential equations governing the stud-
ied systems, by means of repeated simulations to optimize the motion design. These
approaches are often denoted as “direct” approaches [10], since optimization often
relies on trial-and-error procedures or enumeration and comparison of different solu-
tions. CAD-based simulations are the key elements of the optimization procedures
developed in other works as well, among which [31, 32] are worthy of mention,
where simulations are exploited to predict and hence optimize energy consumption.
Model-free approaches have been proposed as well, to overcome the difﬁculties
in developing reliable models of energy consumption and to correctly identify their
key parameters. One example of such an idea is found in [33], in which some ways
to estimate the energy consumption of a robot without having to explicitly develop
a dynamic model of the robot, for example by using identiﬁcation methods applied
to simulated data, are suggested. A different technique is suggested in [34], where

Eco Motion Planning for Mechatronic Systems
255
the data recorded by executing some trajectories with an industrial robot are used to
develop a black-box model to be used as the starting point for trajectory optimiza-
tion. Another model-free approach has been developed in [35, 36]: the method relies
on the use of the native robot software and on the optimization of alternative cost
functions, which can be based, for example, on pseudo-power (i.e. speed to accelera-
tion product), jerk, or weighted joint accelerations. The authors mention a reduction
up to 30% of the overall energy consumption for a given task without altering the
execution time or the path.
Finally, a different approach to improve the energetic efﬁciency of a robot without
the explicit use of a dynamic model is the one based on the use of some performance
indexes. One example is found in [37] that analyzes the relationship between the
motion proﬁle and the location of the task to be executed within the workspace, by
taking into consideration a 4-DOF parallel robot. The outcome of this work is the
development of energy maps that can guide the practitioners to position, whenever
possible, the task in an energy-optimal location. In a related work [38], the approach
is generalized by deﬁning two energy and trajectory-related indexes that can be
helpful not only during the robot programming phase but also in a previous stage,
for example, during the design of the cell or the robot. In this case, the deﬁnition of
an energetically sound trajectory is achieved by the minimization of a performance
index based on inertia ellipsoids, and thus the numerical integration of the inverse
dynamics electro-mechanical model of the robot is not needed.
This brief overview of motion-related energy optimization methods has high-
lighted a rather wide array of solutions and applications: the next section will guide
the reader through an example of motion optimization that follows one of the most
popular approaches, exploiting nonlinear optimization as the tool to deﬁne an energy-
optimal motion proﬁle for a robotic cell.
A Paradigmatic Test Case: A Robotic Cell
The aim of this section is to discuss two techniques for EMP that recall the common
approaches adopted in the quoted literature, to analyze and optimize the energy
efﬁciency of a robotic cell composed of a SCARA robot and a linear unit. The
robotic cell involves two mechatronic systems with different features that are widely
adopted in manufacturing plants: the linear unit is a constant inertia single-DOF
mechanism, while the robot is a multi-axis system with variable inertia. Discussing
this paradigmatic example allows explaining two different approaches to EMP, by
clarifying some issues discussed in the Introduction.
Thetasktakenintoconsiderationissplitintotwomainphasestohighlightdifferent
features: in the ﬁrst phase the product is conveyed by the linear unit, and the end-
effector of the robot is moved from the pallet to the location where the product can be
picked up. In the second phase, the product is displaced by the robot, while the linear
unit returns to the starting position with no load. The two devices are mechanically
decoupled and therefore they can be modeled and analyzed independently from

256
P. Boscariol et al.
Fig. 1 Layout of the robotic cell: SCARA robot and linear unit
the other. Additionally, it is assumed that no energy regeneration between them is
allowed: the energy absorption models are therefore decoupled as well. The system
is represented in Fig.1.
It is assumed that the whole operation has to be optimized for maximum energy
efﬁciency while retaining a ﬁxed total execution time. As an example, it has been
assumed that 10 pieces are to be processed in one minute, leading to a cycle time
equal to 6 s. The available degrees of freedom are the relative duration of the two
phases, and some parameters representing the motion law in time of the linear unit
and of the robot during each phase. Some resting phases, if beneﬁcial to reduce the
energy consumption, can be included in scheduling the operations.
Energy Optimization
In this section, the energy optimization of the system is developed by exploiting the
electro-mechanical models of the two systems. The inverse dynamics, an algebraic
model representing the energy consumption of the linear unit, can be integrated
both numerically and analytically, while the robot dynamics should be integrated
numerically due to the presence of nonlinearities.

Eco Motion Planning for Mechatronic Systems
257
Table 1 Linear unit: relevant modeling parameters
Parameter
Value
Pulley radius Rp
0.02626 m
Carriage weight mc
7 kg
Gear ratio i
5
Gearbox inertia Jr
27 × 10−6 kgm2
Equivalent inertia Jeq
3.8784 × 10−4 kgm2
Equivalent static friction torque Teq
0.434 Nm
Motor moment of inertia Jm,LU
1.45 × 10−4 kgm2
Motor viscous friction coefﬁcient kv,LU
1.24 × 10−4 Nms/rad
Motor winding resistance RLU
2.51 
Motor torque constant kt,LU
0.74 Nm/A
Motor back-emf constant Kb,LU
0.45 Nms/rad
Maximum speed vmax
3 m/s
Maximum acceleration amax
50 m/s2
Linear Unit
The linear unit is composed of a belt-driven carriage, supported and guided by ball
rails, and its actuation is provided by a brushless motor coupled to the pulley through
a gearbox. The main parameters of the linear unit are provided in Table1, which are
extracted from the manufacturer’s datasheet available in [39].
The dynamics of the linear unit can be described by the following equation:
Tm(t) = JLU ¨ϑm(t) + kv,LU ˙ϑm(t) + Teq
(1)
in which JLU accounts for the reﬂected moment of inertia of the motor, of the
gearbox, of the pulleys and of the mass of the carriage that conveys the product to
be displaced. The equivalent static friction torque Teq accounts for the contributions
of the motor, of the gearbox and of the linear unit as well. Equation (1) can be used
for the evaluation of the instantaneous torque required to track the desired speed and
acceleration proﬁles. Hence, the torque proﬁle Tm(t) is known once the reference
motion of the linear unit is deﬁned.
The electric power consumption associated with a point-to-point task can be eval-
uated by modeling the voltage drop across the motor. According to the common
approach adopted that the papers quoted in the introduction, the electro-mechanical
model of the motor, are deﬁned by means of its DC-motor equivalent, i.e. by using
the well-established Park’s direct-quadrature-zero transformation [40]:
V (t) = RI (t) + kb ˙ϑm(t) + L dI (t)
dt
(2)

258
P. Boscariol et al.
where the current absorbed by the motor is proportional to the exerted torque Tm:
I (t) = Tm(t)
kt
(3)
kt is the motor torque constant, R is its equivalent winding resistance, kb is the back-
emf constant, and L is the motor winding inductance; all these parameters are usually
listed in the motor datasheet. The electric power absorption of the motor that drives
the linear unit is deﬁned by the voltage-to-current product:
W = I (t)V (t)
(4)
and the energy consumed over the time frame [0, τ] is the integral of W, as in:
ELU =
τ

0
W(t)dt
(5)
It should be pointed out that only the positive values of W(t) are to be integrated
in Eq. (5) in the proposed example as it is assumed that the motor drive is not
regenerative. This model sufﬁces to properly estimate the energy associated with
one work cycle, as proved by the literature (see, e.g. [21, 41]). As discussed in the
introduction, EMP relies on the analytic computation of the energy, once the motion
primitive is chosen or properly written as a function of some meaningful parameters
(see, e.g. [10]). In this work, as an example of a widely adopted motion proﬁle, the
so-called “S-shaped” motion proﬁle is assumed. This motion law is often used as
a smoother alternative to the basic trapezoidal speed proﬁle [7] since it provides
continuity up to to the second derivative. It is conveniently described by splitting it
into three phases (acceleration, constant speed, deceleration), leading to the following
speed proﬁle:
˙ϑm(t) = vmax
2
(1 −cos(ω1t)) t ∈[0, τa)
˙ϑm(t) = vmax
t ∈[τa, τ LU
f
−τa)
˙ϑm(t) = vmax
2
(1 + cos(ω1t)) t ∈[τ LU
f
−τa, τ LU
f
]
(6)
This motion proﬁle is usually parametrized, in its symmetric form, by the total
motion duration τ LU
f
, the acceleration (and deceleration) phase duration, τa, and by
the overall displacement, h. The maximum speed is computed to ensure the proper
displacement h, according to the simple relation:
vmax =
h
τ LU
f
−τa
(7)

Eco Motion Planning for Mechatronic Systems
259
while continuity of acceleration is enforced by
ω1 = π
τa
(8)
Thismotionproﬁlecanalsobeconvenientlyformulatedthroughthedimensionless
ratio λ=τa/τ LU
f
, that is, usually assumed as a tuning parameter to trade off between
the conﬂicting requirements of reducing speed and acceleration (and hence torque)
[7]. In this work, such a parameter is adopted to optimize the energy consumption,
while complying with the speciﬁcations of the cycle of the robotic cell. The absorbed
energy can be conveniently written as a function of λ and analytic integration of
the algebraic equations can be performed, leading to a solution to the following
optimization problem that represents EMP for the linear unit, for each of the two
phases of the working cycle:
min
[λ] ELU(λ, τ LU
f
)
(9)
with: τ LU
f
ﬁxed;
subject to: λmin ≤λ ≤λmax
The minimum and maximum values of λ are set to ensure the speed (vlim) and
acceleration (alim) limits:
λmin =
τ LU
f
alim −

alim

2πh −alimτ LU
f
2
2τ LU
f
alim
(10)
λmax = min

1 −
h
τ LU
f
vlim
, 0.5

(11)
Other limits could be easily included, such as those stated in [10]. Equation (9) sets
a constrained nonlinear optimization problem, which is of fast and straightforward
solution using standard numerical optimization routines.
The results of the solution of the optimization problem in Eq. (9) for values of
τ LU
f
up to 6 s (that is the overall cycle time) are plotted in Fig.2. Each point of the
graph refers to an optimal solution. Figure2 shows, in the upper plot, the minimum
energy required by the linear unit to perform the ﬁrst phase of the motion to convey the
product toward the robot. The total energy is plotted versus the total motion duration:
each sample of the energy is evaluated by optimizing the energy consumption for
a given value of τ LU
f
, and then for each τ LU
f
the ratio λ is optimized. The optimal
values of λ are reported in the bottom plot of the same ﬁgure. τ LU
f
is lower limited
by the constraints imposed by the maximum allowed speed and torque (and hence
acceleration) due to the characteristic curve of the motor.

260
P. Boscariol et al.
Fig. 2 Linear unit: power
consumption ELU and
optimal λ value versus
execution time τ LU
f
of phase I
1
2
3
4
5
6
80
100
120
140
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
0.2
0.4
The ﬁrst plot in Fig.2 clearly shows the dependence between total execution
time and energy consumption, and reveals that the energy versus time curve can be
ideally split into two regions. For execution times smaller than the optimal value,
highlighted by the two circles, energy increases steeply as τ LU
f
is decreased, while
for values of τ LU
f
larger than the optimal value, the energy requirement increases
almost linearly. This is due to the different balance between two effects [10], i.e.
the effect of the terms depending on speed and accelerations, and the effect of the
motion-independent terms (such as those related to constant forces). Since the latter
are quite pronounced in the test case under consideration, due to high static friction
forces Teq in (1), increasing too much the motion time is not beneﬁcial in terms of
energy consumption.
These results refer to the ﬁrst phase of motion, and hence they include the payload
mL = 3 kg. The results of the application of the same method to the second phase
of motion, when the linear unit does not carry any payload and is returned to the
starting position, are very similar to the ones already displayed (and therefore are
not shown): the contribution of the payload mL is scarcely relevant to the dynamics
of the linear unit due to the high reduction ratio implemented by the belt drive and
the gearbox.
The Eco Motion Planning solution for the linear unit is therefore found by com-
pleting the ﬁrst phase of motion in 1.64 s, while the second one is to be executed
in 1.59 s, leading to an energy consumption over a cycle equal to 150.9 J. Both the
optimal motion times are consistent with the total execution time which has been set
in this example to be equal to 6 s. Two rest times are therefore required to ensure the
imposed cycle duration.

Eco Motion Planning for Mechatronic Systems
261
Table 2 Electric and mechanical parameters of the SCARA robot
Parameter
Joint 1
Joint 2
Joint 3
Link length
0.45m
0.35m
–
Link mass
14kg
18kg
2kg
Gear ratio
1/30
1/30
1/30
Motor inertia
1 · 10−4 kgm2
1 · 10−4 kgm2
1 · 10−4 kgm2
Viscous friction
coefﬁcient
0.001 Nms/rad
0.001 Nms/rad
0.001 Nms/rad
Coulomb friction force 2 · 10−2 Nm
2 · 10−2 Nm
2 · 10−2 Nm
Motor winding
resistance
3 
3 
3 
Motor back-emf
constant
0.375 Vs/rad
0.375 Vs/rad
0.375 Vs/rad
Motor torque constant
0.6 Nm/A
0.6 Nm/A
0.6 Nm/A
Peak motor torque
2.5N
2.5N
2.5N
Peak motor power
75W
75W
75W
SCARA Robot
The classical SCARA robot with three DOFs is assumed, which is commonly used
in pick and place operations given its high-speed capabilities and for its good
price/performance ratio. The robot is actuated by three brushless motors that are
assumed to be controlled by non-regenerative drives. The main parameters used to
describe its dynamics are reported in Table2.
The aim of the EMP is to deﬁne an energy optimal motion proﬁle for the robot
when executing a pick and place task, from the prescribed initial position to a ﬁnal
one, and then back again to the initial one. In accordance with the payload of the
linear unit already discussed, the robot payloads are equal to 0 and 3 kg in the ﬁrst
and second phases, respectively. The same via-points are assumed in the two phases
(obviously with reverse order); different motion durations in moving from one point
to the next one are instead adopted, since these intervals are exploited to optimize
the energy consumption.
The evaluation of the energy consumption starts from the robot inverse dynamic
model that allows estimating the torque required to the robot actuators, T j, as a
function of joint reference position, speed and acceleration, which are represented
by q and its time derivatives:
M(q)¨q(t) + C(q, ˙q) + g(q) + fv ˙q(t) + Fcsign(˙q(t)) = BT j(t)
(12)
M is the mass matrix, while C and g account for, respectively, the Coriolis accel-
eration terms and the gravity effects. Friction contributions are split into a speed-
dependent viscous term proportional to fv and a constant term Fc. Finally, B is the

262
P. Boscariol et al.
force distribution matrix. Once the torque to be provided by each motor is computed,
the evaluation of energy consumption relies on the electro-mechanical model in
Eqs. (2–4), by summing up the energy consumed by the three motors.
The goal of EMP is to minimize the energy consumption Erobot associated with
the execution of the task, by solving a constrained nonlinear optimization prob-
lem. Solving this optimization problem becomes a rather simple task if a proper
parametrization of the motion law, and hence of the cost function and of the bounds
is deﬁned. Following a common approach, [42–44] trajectory design can be deﬁned
through the solution of an interpolation problem. This problem is set up by deﬁning
a sequence of N via-points to be visited in sequence by the robot, either deﬁned in
the joint space or in the operative space, which are then interpolated according to
some trajectory primitives. The choice of the trajectory primitive is a topic which
has drawn much attention in the last 30 years [45]; this issue is however outside
the scope of this chapter. A standard method, such as the “4-3-4 motion proﬁle”, is
here used just to provide an example [42]. Without going into details, for which the
reader can refer to [28], the motion of the end-effector of the robot is deﬁned by a
sequence of polynomial functions: the result is a coordinated motion of the robot that
ensures exact interpolation of a set of pre-deﬁned via-points with continuity up to
acceleration.
Inthiscase,theenergyconsumedbytherobot, Erobot,canbeparametrizedthrough
the duration of each of the N −1 segments that connect the N via-points, τi. EMP for
each phase is translated into the following optimization problem that is parametric
with respect of the total execution time τ R
f of each phase:
min
[τ] Erobot
(13)
with:
N−1

i=1
τi = τ R
f
bounded |˙q|, |¨q|, |...q|;
bounded |We, j|, |Tj|, with j = 1, 2, 3;
The design variables, i.e. the problem unknowns, are collected in the vector of
motion durations τ, i.e. the motion times required for moving from one via-point
to another. As the pick and place motion comprises 6 via-points, τ has 5 entries.
The total execution time τ R
f of each phase is assumed to be ﬁxed, and therefore the
optimization problem is parametric with respect to such a variable in both the phases.
Additionally, hard bounds are set on the kinematic variables (speed, acceleration),
on the motor power absorption We,k and on motor torques Tj. Constraints on the jerk
are set as well, to ensure smooth motion.
Figure3 separately shows the optimized energy consumption of phases I and II,
computed through the solutions of the problem in Eq. (13), by assuming for both
the phases the feasible durations. Such a plot reveals that feasibility is ensured for
motion durations greater than 1.6 s and 2.6 s for the two phases, respectively, since

Eco Motion Planning for Mechatronic Systems
263
Fig. 3 Optimized energy
consumption of the robot
versus total execution time:
phase I and phase II
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
faster execution times are incompatible with the operative limits of the robot. Such
a Fig.3 reveals that the increased payload in phase II leads to a convex shape of
the energy consumption within the time domain of interest, due to relevant constant
loads, such as the ones related to the gravity force. This feature is consistent with
the observations provided (and proved analytically with reference to a single-DOF
system with constant inertia) in the work [10]. In contrast, the reduction of the energy
consumption in phase I is achieved if the motion time is as long as possible. These
results suggest that no rest phase should be assumed during the cycle lasting 6 s, and
therefore the sum of the durations of the two phases will be 6 s, τ R
I, f +τ R
I I, f = 6 s.
The total energy required by the robot to execute the whole task is plotted in Fig.4
as a function of the durations of the two phases τ R
I, f and τ R
I I, f (with the constraint of
Fig. 4 Robot energy
consumption for the whole
task versus phase I duration
τ R
I, f and phase I duration
τ R
I I, f

264
P. Boscariol et al.
Fig. 5 Eco motion planning
solution: scheduling of the
motion phases
a cycle time equal to 6 s). The minimum is achieved by splitting the total duration of
the task, into a ﬁrst phase that lasts τ R
I, f = 2.81 s and a second one that lasts τ R
I I, f =
3.19 s. This choice sets the overall robot energy consumption to Erobot = 76.4 J that
is the optimal value for the test case under investigation.
Analysis of the Cell
In the light of the optimized motion proﬁles obtained for both the robot and the linear
unit, the sequence of motions of the two cell components during the two phases of
motion is optimally scheduled as shown in Fig.5, which highlights the time frames
in which the motion of the linear and of the robot happen, as well as the two rest
phases of the linear unit.
Analysis of the Robot Joint Motion
The optimized motion solution is compared with a benchmark motion proﬁle (here-
after denoted also as the “non-optimized” one), obtained by using the standard “chord
length distribution” to choose the distribution of the time intervals between two con-
secutive via-points. As for the distribution between phases I and II, assuming equal
motion durations (3 s) for both the phases is not allowed, since the maximum motor
torque exerted by the robot would violate the constraints set in Eq. (13) during phase
II. The duration of phase II has to be increased up to 4.3 s to obtain a feasible solution,
thus the duration of the ﬁrst one is to be reduced to just 1.7 s. The motion of the linear
unit follows the same time frames, and it is not optimized as λ is set equal to 0.25
in both cases, as often done by practitioners, and no rest is assumed. The resulting
energy consumption is 75.6 J and 78.6 J for the linear unit, 33.9 J and 78.2 J for the
robot, by referring to the ﬁrst and second phases, respectively. The overall energy
consumption over a cycle is therefore equal to 267.3 J. Comparing this result with
the optimized motion planning and scheduling reveals that an energy reduction equal
to 14.8% is achieved, while ensuring the same productivity of the robotic cell. This
is clear evidence of the beneﬁts of using EMP in designing and scheduling motions

Eco Motion Planning for Mechatronic Systems
265
Fig. 6 Robot joint
acceleration proﬁles, phase I:
optimized versus
non-optimized solution
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
-10
0
10
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
-1
0
1
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
-20
0
20
Fig. 7 Robot joint
acceleration proﬁles, phase
II: optimized versus
non-optimized solution
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
-5
0
5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
-0.5
0
0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
-2
0
2
in a robotic cell. This saving is expected to be even greater on a larger scale system,
such as when focusing on a whole production line or even a whole plant.
The obtained motion proﬁles are shown and compared in ﬁgures from Figs. 6, 7,
8 and 9, which show the acceleration proﬁles of the robot and compare the optimized
with the non-optimized solutions. The relationship between joint accelerations and
energy consumption is non-obvious, suggesting that solutions based on heuristic
approaches that discard the model of the energy consumption are usually hardly
capable of leading to an energy-optimal solution.
The instantaneous values of the electric power drawn by each robot actuator are
plotted as well in Figs.8 and 9, which separately refer to each phase. Figure8 shows
that the non-optimized motion is characterized by a pronounced power absorption
as a result of its short duration, especially for the ﬁrst two joints. Looking at Fig.9,
which refers to the second phase, it can be seen that, due to the longer execution

266
P. Boscariol et al.
Fig. 8 Robot power
absorption, phase I:
optimized versus
non-optimized solution
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
-50
0
50
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
0
10
20
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
-10
0
10
Fig. 9 Robot power
absorption, phase II:
optimized versus
non-optimized solution
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
-10
0
10
20
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
0
5
10
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
0
20
40
time of the non-optimized motion, the power consumption is lower for joints 1 and
2 in comparison with the optimized solution. However, this improvement is made
irrelevant by the far worse energetic performance shown by the last joint. As the last
joint carries a relevant payload during the last phase, with a relevant effect of gravity
force, its duration should be, ideally, shorter.
Conclusion
This chapter proposes, ﬁrst of all, a literature review of the main methods used to
improve energy efﬁciency by means of motion design, the so-called Eco Motion
Planning (EMP) that is one effective tool of EcoMechatronics. To allows the reader

Eco Motion Planning for Mechatronic Systems
267
to appreciate the beneﬁts and the use of the techniques of EMP, a paradigmatic
example is proposed and solved, together with the main models and equations to
be adopted. The test case consists of a simple robotic cell, like those often adopted
in manufacturing plants, that comprises a belt-driven linear unit, i.e. a single-DOF
system with constant inertia, and a SCARA robot, as a representative example of
a nonlinear multi-DOFs system. For both the systems involved in the robotic cell
under study, an electro-mechanical model is developed and then used to reduce the
overall energy consumption when executing two sequential tasks by optimizing some
parameters of the motion proﬁles that are some pillars of EMP: the motion time, the
shape of the timing law and the motion scheduling. In particular, the application of
the proposed method, that summarizes the features of some common state-of-the-art
techniques, allows deﬁning the best distribution of the duration of each phase of
motion and the best motion proﬁle for each device. The outcome of the optimization
procedure shows that signiﬁcant improvements in the energy consumption can be
obtained, which is found equal to 14.8% in comparison to a standard solution. This
improvement is relevant as it can be obtained without any physical alteration of the
setup or any modiﬁcation of the cycle times. The method here discussed, as well as
those proposed in the quoted literature, clearly shows how EMP is an essential step
toward the development of sustainable mechatronic systems.
References
1. European Parliament and Council (2009) Directive 2009/125/EC of the European Parliament
and of the Council of 21 october 2009, establishing a framework for the setting of ecodesign
requirements for energy related products (recast). Ofﬁcial J Europ Commun
2. US Energy Information Administration (2019) International energy outlook 2019 with projec-
tions to 2050
3. Helm D (2014) The european framework for energy and climate policies. Energy Policy 64:29–
35
4. Meike D, Ribickis L (2011) Energy efﬁcient use of robotics in the automobile industry. In 2011
15th international conference on advanced robotics (ICAR), pp 507–511, IEEE
5. Laumond J-P et al (1998) Robot motion planning and control, vol 229. Springer
6. LaValle SM (2006) Planning algorithms. Cambridge university press
7. Biagiotti L, Melchiorri C (2008) Trajectory planning for automatic machines and robots.
Springer Science & Business Media
8. Latombe J-C (2012) Robot motion planning, vol 124. Springer Science & Business Media
9. Carabin G, Wehrle E, Vidoni R (2017) A review on energy-saving optimization methods for
robotic and automatic systems. Robotics 6(4):39
10. Richiedei D, Trevisani A (2016) Analytical computation of the energy-efﬁcient optimal plan-
ning in rest-to-rest motion of constant inertia systems. Mechatronics 39:147–159
11. Carabin G, Vidoni R (2021) Energy-saving optimization method for point-to-point trajectories
planned via standard primitives in 1-dof mechatronic systems. Int J Adv Manuf Technol, pp 1–
14
12. Yu Z, Han C, Haihua M (2015) A novel approach of tuning trapezoidal velocity proﬁle
for energy saving in servomotor systems. In: 2015 34th Chinese control conference (CCC),
pp 4412–4417. IEEE

268
P. Boscariol et al.
13. Chen H, Mu H, Zhu Y (2016) Real-time generation of trapezoidal velocity proﬁle for minimum
energy consumption and zero residual vibration in servomotor systems. In: 2016 American
control conference (ACC)
14. Boscariol P, Carabin G, Gasparetto A, Lever N, Vidoni R (2015) Energy-efﬁcient point-to-
point trajectory generation for industrial robotic machines. In: Proceedings of the ECCOMAS
thematic conference on multibody dynamics, Barcelona, Spain, pp 1425–1433
15. Boscariol P, Richiedei Da (2019) Energy-efﬁcient design of multipoint trajectories for cartesian
robots. Int J Adv Manuf Technol 102:1853–1870
16. Inoue K, Ogata K, Kato T (2008) An effcient induction motor drive method with a regenerative
power storage system driven by an optimal torque. In: 2008 IEEE power electronics specialists
conference, pp 359–364, IEEE
17. Inoue K, Asano Y, Kotera K, Kato T (2014) Optimal energy saving trajectories of induc-
tion motor with suppression of sudden acceleration and deceleration. In: 2014 IEEE energy
conversion congress and exposition (ECCE), pp 3219–3223. IEEE
18. Asano Y, Inoue K, Kotera K, Kato T (2014) An energy saving drive method of an induction
motor with the suppression of sudden acceleration and deceleration. In: 2014 International
power electronics conference (IPEC-Hiroshima 2014-ECCE ASIA). IEEE
19. Betts JT (2010) Practical methods for optimal control and estimation using nonlinear program-
ming. SIAM
20. Von Stryk O, Bulirsch R (1992) Direct and indirect methods for trajectory optimization. Annals
Operat Res 37(1):357–373
21. Hsu Y-L, Huang M-S, Fung R-F (2013) Energy-saving trajectory planning for a toggle mech-
anism driven by a PMSM. IFAC Proceed Vol 46(5):628–635
22. Hsu Y-L, Huang M-S, Fung R-F (2014) Energy-saving trajectory planning for a toggle mech-
anism driven by a PMSM. Mechatronics 24(1):23–31
23. Paryanto, Brossog M, Bornschlegl M, Franke J et al (2015) Reducing the energy consumption
of industrial robots in manufacturing systems. Int J Adv Manuf Technol 78(5-8):1315–1328
24. Sengupta A, Chakraborti T, Konar A, Nagar A (2011) Energy efﬁcient trajectory planning by
a robot arm using invasive weed optimization technique. In: 2011 Third world congress on
nature and biologically inspired computing, pp 311–316. IEEE
25. Fenucci A, Indri M, Romanelli F (2016) An off-line robot motion planning approach for the
reduction of the energy consumption. In: 2016 IEEE 21st International conference on emerging
technologies and factory automation (ETFA), pp 1–8. IEEE
26. He T, Zhang Y, Sun F, Shi X (2016) Immune optimization based multi-objective six-DOF tra-
jectory planning for industrial robot manipulators. In: 2016 12th World congress on intelligent
control and automation (WCICA), pp 2945–2950. IEEE
27. Boscariol P, Caracciolo R, Richiedei D, Trevisani A (2021) Energy optimization of functionally
redundant robots through motion design. Appl Sci 10:1–13
28. Boscariol P, Richiedei D (2018) Spline-based energy-optimal trajectory planning for function-
ally redundant robots. In: 2018 14th IEEE/ASME international conference on mechatronic and
embedded systems and applications (MESA), pp 1–6. IEEE
29. Van Oosterwyck N, Vanbecelaere F, Haemers M, Ceulemans D, Stockman K, Derammelaere
S (2019) CAD enabled trajectory optimization and accurate motion control for repetitive tasks.
In: 2019 IEEE 15th international conference on control and automation (ICCA), pp 387–392.
IEEE
30. Van Oosterwyck N, Cuyt A, Derammelaere, S et al (2020) CAD based trajectory optimization
of PTP motions using Chebyshev polynomials. In: 2020 IEEE/ASME international conference
on advanced intelligent mechatronics (AIM), pp 403–408. IEEE
31. Pellicciari M, Berselli G, Balugani F (2014) On designing optimal trajectories for servo-
actuated mechanisms: detailed virtual prototyping and experimental evaluation. IEEE/ASME
Trans Mechatron 20(5):2039–2052
32. Berselli G, Balugani F, Pellicciari M, Gadaleta M (2016) Energy-optimal motions for servo-
systems: a comparison of spline interpolants and performance indexes using a CAD-based
approach. Robot Comput Int Manuf 40:55–65

Eco Motion Planning for Mechatronic Systems
269
33. Liu A, Liu H, Yao B, Xu W, Yang M (2018) Energy consumption modeling of indus-
trial robot based on simulated power data and parameter identiﬁcation. Adv Mech Eng
10(5):1687814018773852
34. Yin S, Ji W, Wang L (2019) A machine learning based energy efﬁcient trajectory planning
approach for industrial robots. Procedia CIRP 81:429–434
35. Riazi S, Bengtsson K, Bischoff R, Aurnhammer A, Wigström O, Lennartson B (2016)Energy
and peak-power optimization of existing time-optimal robot trajectories. In: 2016 IEEE inter-
national conference on automation science and engineering (CASE), pp 321–327. IEEE
36. Riazi S, Wigström O, Bengtsson K, Lennartson B (2017) Energy and peak power optimization
of time-bounded robot trajectories. IEEE Trans Automat Sci Eng 14(2):646–657
37. Scalera L, Boscariol P, Carabin G, Vidoni R, Gasparetto A (2020) Enhancing energy efﬁciency
of a 4-DOF parallel robot through task-related analysis. Machines 8(1):10
38. Vidussi F, Boscariol P, Scalera L, Gasparetto A (2021) Local and trajectory-based indexes
for task-related energetic performance optimization of robotic manipulators. J Mech Robot
13(2):021018
39. Rexroth B (2021) Compact modules CKK/CKR catalog. published online on www.
boschrexroth.com
40. Pillay P, Krishnan R (1988) Modeling of permanent magnet motor drives. IEEE Trans Indust
Electron 35(4):537–541
41. Hansen C, Kotlarski J, Ortmaier T (2013) Experimental validation of advanced minimum
energy robot trajectory optimization. In: 2013 16th international conference on advanced
robotics (ICAR), pp 1–8. IEEE
42. Cook C, Ho C (1984) The application of spline functions to trajectory generation for computer-
controlled manipulators. In: Computing techniques for robots, pp 101–110. Springer
43. Petrinec K, Kovacic Z (2007) Trajectory planning algorithm based on the continuity of jerk.
In: 2007 mediterranean conference on control & automation, pp 1–5. IEEE
44. Boscariol P, Gasparetto A, Vidoni R (2012) Planning continuous-jerk trajectories for industrial
manipulators. In: Engineering systems design and analysis, vol 44861, pp 127–136. American
Society of Mechanical Engineers
45. Gasparetto A, Boscariol P, Lanzutti A, Vidoni R (2012) Trajectory planning in robotics. Math
Comput Sci 6(3):269–279

Minimization of CO2-Footprint
of Hybrid Propulsion Systems
for Mobility and Power-Tool Applications
Stephan Schmidt, Hans-Jürgen Schacht, Alexander Hagenberger,
and Dimitrios Vogiatzis
Abstract Research and development activities for propulsion systems follow the
demands of users/customers, production companies and legal boundary conditions.
While in the past the topics of functionality, producibility and cost in compliance
with the actual legal boundary conditions were decisive for R&D, now the mini-
mization of CO2 footprint tends to become a requirement. In the ﬁeld of propulsion
systems for mobile and power-tool applications, in the past CO2 emissions during
use were a factor of interest in respect of fuel consumption, as traditional fuels
are fossil based and emit CO2 as combustion product. In some sub-ﬁelds of these
applications, fuel consumption is one part of the legal regulations or a key value
which has to be published for customer information. Nowadays, the whole life cycle
including production and disposal or recycling of a propulsions system has to be
taken into account when calculating CO2 emissions. In this chapter, the question
is addressed, how the development task of minimization of whole life cycle CO2
balance of mechatronic hybrid propulsion systems in combination with the still valid
general demands can be fulﬁlled by the use of design, simulation and experimental
development. A framework of R&D methodologies is described with examples of
two hybrid propulsions systems, one for two-wheeler and power sport applications
and one designed for hand-held power tools.
Introduction
The CO2 footprint of a combustion engine propulsion unit is commonly assessed by
the CO2 emitted during its operation (“tank-to wheel”). Different methods for life
cycle analyses regarding CO2 and different areas of CO2 emission exist, whereas
the most comprehensive approach is to consider the production, operation and recy-
cling (“cradle to grave”) [1]. Since the discussion about e-mobility, the inclusion of
the powertrain production cost in CO2 is mandatory for a comparison of different
propulsion technologies.
S. Schmidt (B) · H.-J. Schacht · A. Hagenberger · D. Vogiatzis
Graz University of Technology, Graz, Austria
e-mail: Schmidt@ivt.tugraz.at
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
P. Hehenberger et al. (eds.), EcoMechatronics,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-07555-1_16
271

272
S. Schmidt et al.
Up to now, the development of technical systems was driven by the fulﬁlment of
demands like legal regulations, customer needs, marketing aspects, costs and suit-
ability for production. Especially for highly complex hybrid powertrain systems, a
balancing between these demands is time-consuming and expensive and the consid-
eration of the CO2 footprint by a Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) introduces a new
parameter into all stages of the development. The task of developing a hybrid propul-
sion unit taking account all issues including CO2 footprint can only be solved by inte-
grating CO2 assessment methods in the development process and into the Computer
Aided Technologies (CAT) environment. In the following sections, a framework of
R&D methodologies is described using examples of two hybrid propulsions systems
with the focus on the production and operation phases.
Mechatronic Powertrain
In today’s pure internal combustion engine (ICE) powertrain systems, there is already
an interaction taking place between the mechanical and electrical components. This is
intensiﬁed in hybrid powertrain concepts1 as a second energy converter and a battery
are incorporated into the powertrain. This highly complex mechatronic system can be
divided into hardware and software, both existing on component and system levels.
A major part of the mechatronic hybrid powertrain is the electronic control of the
components and the control of the interaction of the propulsion components with the
operation strategy.
Hybrid Powertrain Concepts
In the ﬁeld of passenger cars, hybrid propulsion units are state of the art, while two-
wheeler, power sport vehicles and power tools2 are still at the beginning of hybrid
powertrain introduction. This is due to stringent demands on weight, packaging and
cost which leads to simple but satisfying concepts.
Hybrid concepts are used in the automotive sector range from Plug-in-Hybrid,
which comprises two fully functional propulsion modes (ICE and electric) and allows
for pure ICE, mixed and pure electric operation modes including external battery
charging to Full-Hybrid with same functionality as Plug-in Hybrid but without
external battery charging and Mild Hybrid where electric propulsion is used as a
1 Hybrid powertrain concepts consist of at least two independent energy sources and/or energy
converter. In this context, hybrid means a combination of an internal combustion engine and an
electrical machine.
2 Hand-held power tools are equipment like chainsaw, hedge-trimmer, blower and others.

Minimization of CO2-Footprint of Hybrid …
273
Fig. 1 Toyota prius functional concept schematic [2] and cross-section model [3]
propulsion assist. Another concept is that of a Range Extender, where an internal
combustion engine is used as backup for battery charging in an electric propulsion
unit.
Three examples of actual hybrid propulsion concepts show the complexity of
these systems.
Toyota Prius (Power-Split)
One of the ﬁrst hybrid systems available on the automotive market was the Toyota
Prius, which was equipped with a highly complex power-split conﬁguration. Figure 1
shows the signiﬁcantly enlarged powertrain and its additional components consisting
of an electric motor, a generator connected to the engine clutch, and a one-speed
reduction gearbox driven via a planetary drive. This planetary drive enables control
of the power transfer in any direction to represent the different operating modes. The
modes range from pure electric drive, electric boost, load point shifting and charging
the battery by the ICE during stand-still. It is the most versatile, but also the most
complex hybrid conﬁguration. On top of the mechanical and electrical components, a
complex operation strategy controls the different operating modes, deﬁning the split
of energy coming from the individual sources and torques delivered by the ICE and
e-motor. Additionally, the operating strategy ensures the health of all components
by monitoring temperatures and system conditions in respect of the operating point
decisions.
Range Extender for Small Two-Wheeler Application
Latest ﬁgures of motorcycle and moped registrations in Europe [4] show that electric
mopeds have a share of over 20% of new registrations, whereas motorcycle have only

274
S. Schmidt et al.
Fig. 2 L1e-Scooter range extender unit developed at FVT3 for Lohner4
Table 1 Technical
speciﬁcations of the range
extender for L1e-category
vehicle
Electric power
1.6 kW
Packaging volume
23 ltr
Weight
15 kg
Speciﬁc fuel consumption
450 g/KWh
Fuel capacity
4.5 ltr
Engine
50 cm3 single cylinder 2-stroke
internal combustion engine
2% share. This indicates that electric driving is more accepted for low power two-
wheelers, which are generally driven in an urban environment and most of the time
have less range demands. To overcome range anxiety as main inhibition threshold
for acceptance and willingness to buy electric two-wheelers, hybridization by means
of a less complex range extender conﬁguration could be a solution. Figure 2 shows
a compact and lightweight concept, which can be retroﬁtted to any existing pure
electric scooter as an add-on electric power source, the speciﬁcations for which are
given in Table 1. This opens up the possibility to connect it whenever greater range is
required and omit it when the battery alone covers the distance. The operating logic
only starts the engine if a low battery level and/or a high load is detected [5].
Motorcycle Hybrid Powertrain
The L-category, which includes 2, 3 and 4-wheeled vehicles less than 450 kg (for
passenger transportation), respectively, and 600 kg (for goods transportation) is
lagging behind in terms of hybridization. Although a number of hybrid concepts
regularly appear at motor shows, the only hybrid vehicle introduced in the market
3 Forschungsgesellschaft für Verbrennungskraftmaschinen und Thermodynamik mbH, Graz -
Austria.
4 Lohnerwerke GmbH & Co KG.

Minimization of CO2-Footprint of Hybrid …
275
Fig. 3 Piaggio MP3 Hybrid vehicle (left [6]) and powertrain concept (right [7])
was the Piaggi MP3 Hybrid of 2010 (Fig. 3). Two versions were available with 125
cm3 and 300 cm3 internal combustion engines, each coupled to a 2.6. kW electric
motor installed in the secondary gearbox, driving the rear wheel directly. This corre-
sponds to a P3 parallel hybrid conﬁguration, which allows to drive purely electric
(activated by the driver for up to a speed of 30 kph) in restricted urban areas as well
as boosting and energy recuperation from braking.
Even though the MP3 is the only homologated hybrid l-category vehicle to date,
several manufacturers seem to be preparing hybrid models. According to occasional
teasers in the press and patent publications, Kawasaki, Yamaha, Suzuki along with
start-ups like Furlon [8] are working in this direction.
Development Process
The process of product development of two-wheelers and powered tools can be
divided into the three stages such as “research and concept development phase”, “pre-
development” and “product development”. Several decision gates are contained in
the development process, at least one at the end of each stage. At these gate decisions
for a certain technology and most importantly, for or against a continuation of the
development are made. In all stages, CAx methods are used, starting with CAD for
the concept layout, followed by simulations and ﬁnally production planning during
the ﬁnal stages of transformation into mass production.
While the research and concept development phase consists largely of non-
product-related basic research and concept investigations, the pre-development phase
is characterized by detailed concept layouts and concept proofs against the back-
ground of a speciﬁc product idea. At the stage of product development, all major
parameters are deﬁned and the realization of the concept into a mass-production
ready product deﬁnition takes place.
During the different stages, all aspects and demands on the future product or tech-
nology have to be covered and decisions about technical, technological, logistic and
commercial topics are made. In order to develop a product with minimal CO2 emis-
sion during production, operation and recycling, the CO2 issue has to be considered

276
S. Schmidt et al.
Fig. 4 Inﬂuence on carbon footprint in different development phases
in addition to the traditional criteria of each development stage and in respect of each
decision.
It is known that within the different development stages, the inﬂuence of the
decisions on traditional criteria like product key parameters, fuel consumption, cost
and so on are very different. A majority of the production costs are deﬁned during
the ﬁrst two steps of the development, while during the third part only a small
inﬂuence is possible. Considering CO2, a similar distribution of inﬂuence during
the development stages can be identiﬁed as it is shown in Fig. 4. In the following
sections, the possibilities/necessities for a consideration of CO2 emission during the
different development stages are explained.
Research and Concept Development Phase
During the research and concept development phase, a ﬁrst estimation of the CO2
contribution during the powertrain operation is made by assessing the vehicle fuel
consumption. In parallel, an identiﬁcation of CO2-relevant areas in production and
recycling can be made. This concerns special CO2 intensive production technolo-
gies or materials, for which recycling is difﬁcult. The CO2 contribution of various
technical and technological solutions also have to be assessed as a rough estimation
for comparison, as data for technical and technological decisions are gathered in this
phase.
Two examples describe the conﬂict and frequent trade-off between traditional
development targets and reduction of CO2 footprint. For novel powertrain concepts,
theuseofalternativefuelsismandatory.ThesefuelshaveanimpactonCO2 emissions
during operation, as they can be produced in a CO2 neutral cycle. But as these fuels
oftenhavedifferentpropertiesregardingmaterialcompatibility,appropriatematerials
have to be used which might have a worse CO2 production balance than traditional
ones. This can reduce the positive effect of the CO2 reduction during operation. A
hybrid-related example is the use of different types of electric propulsion motors.
A decision between an Asynchronous Motor and a Permanent Magnet Synchronous
Motor (PMSM) is usually based on criteria of cost and performance in relation to

Minimization of CO2-Footprint of Hybrid …
277
factors such as mass and power density. However, these two options have different
CO2 impacts on the production processes as they use different materials.
Pre-development
During pre-development, all major parameters are deﬁned. Subsequent to the concept
phase a proof of concept is performed and data for decisions for or against product
development options are generated. The ﬁrst estimations of the prior phase are veri-
ﬁed on the base of more detailed data and, with respect to CO2 emission, critical
areas identiﬁed during phase 1 which are evaluated by performing CO2 life cycle
analyses and variant calculations.
During pre-development, novel technologies are investigated for the use in the
targeted application. Often, variants are compared with each other regarding the key
parameters and suitability for the application. In this comparison, a CO2 footprint of
the technology production has to be included. If, for example, two different cylinder
liner coatings are investigated with different inﬂuences on the fuel consumption due
to different friction behaviour, the difference in CO2 footprint during the coating
process and the materials used (and production sites) have to be taken into account.
Product Development
While in the ﬁnal development phase the in-use CO2 emission can be reduced to
a certain extent only minor inﬂuence on the CO2 production footprint is possible,
as most relevant decisions have been made during the prior phases. One important
impact on the production CO2 emissions is the choice of the production sites. This
is due to the circumstances that different boundary conditions in the production site
areas lead to a different local CO2 footprint, and the transport and logistics is an
inﬂuential parameter for the production CO2 emissions.
A very important task during product development is the calculation of the total
CO2 footprint using a life cycle analysis based on the detailed available data of the
future product. This CO2 footprint serves as a base for documentation according to
legal regulations as well as for marketing and strategic purposes.
Development Framework
In order to cope with the demands of CO2 footprint consideration in the development
process, a framework of tools and methods has to be developed and implemented.
Dedicated methods to be used in the different development stages have to be closely
coupled to or integrated into the CAx methods to enable a consistent CO2 footprinting

278
S. Schmidt et al.
Fig. 5 Development framework for CO2 footprint consideration
dependent on available information. In Fig. 5, a development framework for the
consideration of the CO2 footprint of a hybrid propulsion powertrain is shown.
In the different development phases, various development tools are used. Some
of them deliver information for an assessment of the carbon footprint. In the concept
stage, relatively little information is available, and a material and technology CO2
matrix can be used for a ﬁrst assessment of the hybrid powertrain concept. In the
second stage, more detailed information can be gathered from CAD and longitudinal
vehicle dynamic simulation (LDS). With this information a “life cycle analysis in
early design stages” [9] is performed, providing input for a decision for or against
a certain technology or material. During the last phase of product development, all
detailed parameters of the powertrain are deﬁned, but as most key parameters have
been deﬁned during the pre-development, the LCA has a low inﬂuence on the system
layout. Instead, the complex and entire information set is used to perform a detailed
LCA, which is used for legal affairs, marketing and strategic decisions.
In the following sections, tools and methods which can deliver CO2 footprinting
information are presented.
Production Technology and Material Matrix
From studies such as that by Arguillarena et al. [10] the carbon footprint of various
materials and production technologies can be extracted and organized in a matrix
to compare key parameters including the carbon footprint. This matrix can be used
in each step of the development process, but mainly during the concept phase and
pre-development together with the LCA in early design stages [2]. This company
speciﬁc matrix serves as comparison table between different possibilities and does

Minimization of CO2-Footprint of Hybrid …
279
not need to be exact. Nevertheless, a regular check for up-to-datedness as well as
enhancement for novel technologies is necessary. If included in the development
process as a mandatory tool, the matrix can also raise the awareness and experience
regarding CO2 contribution of different technologies and materials.
Computer-Aided Design Software
Several CAx tools are used during the development of hybrid propulsion systems,
with two of them delivering data relevant for carbon footprinting. CAD systems are
used in all stages of the development process, from ﬁrst sketches through packaging
analyses to detailed 3D design and manufacturing drawings. For all stages of the
CAD design process, CO2 relevant data can be obtained. These are in the ﬁrst stages
mass and volume of the single parts and later also in respect of production steps and
materials. This information can be obtained in an automatic process from the CAD
system by user-deﬁned functions implemented into the CAD workﬂow.
Longitudinal Vehicle Dynamics Simulation LDS
Longitudinal (vehicle) dynamic simulations (LDS) are used to assess the behaviour of
hybrid systems and their sub-systems over a period of time for given load proﬁles or
driving cycles. The output regarding CO2 assessment ranges from direct calculation
of CO2 emission (in terms of fuel consumption and electric energy demand) during
operation to indirect assessment of production CO2 emission by the deﬁnition of
optimized system architecture, optimal sub-system choice (i.e. e-motor type) and
sub-system sizes (i.e. battery size).
The LDS is used for the investigation of driving performance and interaction
between the hybrid components, optimization of hybrid structures as well as for the
development of the operation strategy of the hybrid system. As the LDS is based on
vehicle data such as driving resistance and key parameters of the sub-systems (efﬁ-
ciencies, energy capacities and performance), the signiﬁcance of the gathered results
depend on the depth of detail of these input data and hence on the development stage.
Usually, several calculation cycles with increasing accuracy of the input parameters
are carried out.
The results with respect to carbon footprint are CO2 emissions during operation
in terms of energy5 consumption and the choice of sub-systems and sub-system
parameters such as the energy content of the battery or power and type of the electric
motor. These parameters inﬂuence the production carbon footprint, for example,
different battery sizes lead to different CO2 footprints.
5 Fuel and electric energy.

280
S. Schmidt et al.
Fig. 6 Backward LDS simulation of a parallel hybrid powertrain
Two main simulation methods of LDS exist: forward and backward simulation.
Both methods have advantages and disadvantages. With the help of forward simu-
lation, various control mechanisms are investigated and parametrized and operation
strategies can be developed. However, considerably more data about the vehicle
and sub-system dynamics is necessary. A backward simulation delivers much faster
results, while requiring fewer input parameters, but information about control is
not available as there is no embedded feedback control loop. In the following, one
example for each simulation method is given.
Backward Simulation
In the backward LDS, the torque demand is calculated at each time step using the
target velocity of a driving or load proﬁle and the overall powertrain efﬁciency.
The result is fed back to the hybrid system, and the actual state of the sub-system
variables is derived. For instance, the rotational speed of internal combustion engines
and e-motor or the trend of state of charge of the battery.
In Fig. 6, a backward simulation of a parallel hybrid powertrain is shown. It
consists of two propulsion units, one internal combustion engine and one e-motor,
two clutches and gearboxes and a Hybrid Control Unit (HCU). With the backward
simulation, an assessment and optimization of the hybrid system and the sub-systems
regarding fuel consumption, battery energy content, number of gears and further
parameters is possible without consideration of the dynamic behaviour. Adding
thermal properties and thermal behaviour to the individual modules allows for an
overall thermal assessment of the hybrid system and optimizations of the cooling
systems are possible.
Forward Simulation
In contrast to backward simulation, a typical forward simulation (Fig. 7) uses a
control module (driver) to compare the actual speed with the desired speed gained

Minimization of CO2-Footprint of Hybrid …
281
Fig. 7 Forward LDS simulation of a parallel hybrid powertrain
from the test cycle and to adapt the torque demand. The control module is usually
a PI-control in a closed-loop control system and needs a parametrization to the
dynamic behaviour of the system. The modelling of forward simulation is more
time-consuming and needs more input data than a comparable backward simulation,
but delivers considerably more information. Special modules like tyre slip or gearbox
modules with dynamic parameters allow for an assessment of the dynamic behaviour
ofthesystem.Thehybridcontrolunitisusedtoextractreal-timedataoftheembedded
operating strategy and even a software-based parametrization of real-life hardware
like the electronic control units of sub-systems is possible.
Examples
Concept and Layout of a Hybrid Propulsion for Power Sport
Vehicles
In automotive as well as in power sports electriﬁed powertrain development, there
are different ways as to how to integrate the electric motor into the (existing) combus-
tion engine powertrain [11]. In a parallel hybrid conﬁguration not only the internal
combustion engine, but also the electric motor is capable of driving the vehicle via
its wheels. The fact that in a parallel P2 conﬁguration, the electric motor is connected
to the driveshaft between the combustion engine and the driven wheels, allows the
integration of an additional (automatic) 2-speed gearbox for the electric motor. In
this example, a hybrid powertrain for power sport applications is developed, whereas
in a concept layout special focus is put on the introduction of a multi-gear gearbox.
The inﬂuence of a 2-speed as compared to a single-speed gearbox for the elec-
tric motor is far-reaching as the vehicle driving capabilities, its overall powertrain
efﬁciency, packaging and mass as well as its general powertrain complexity are

282
S. Schmidt et al.
Fig. 8 CO2 footprint within different life cycle product phases of single-speed and 2-speed gearbox
variant for the E-Motor
inﬂuenced signiﬁcantly. These criteria are, furthermore, interacting with the CO2
assessment of the ﬁnal product. In Fig. 8, the inﬂuences of the two variants in the
different CO2 relevant stages are shown in the box on the left side, resulting in
little difference in an overall ranking (right side). While the single-speed variant has
obvious beneﬁts in production and recycling CO2 emission due to less parts, the 2-
speed variant shows beneﬁts during operation as the following paragraph describes
in detail.
Depending on the vehicle, the typical driving proﬁle (speed and road gradient)
and the electric motor characteristics (max. power and torque), an additional second
gear can help to increase the vehicle driving capabilities. The beneﬁts prove to be
larger for high torque demand scenarios. These scenarios can be characterized by
high vehicle masses and steep road gradients or simply pure electric driving, without
torque assistance of the ICE. The beneﬁt of two gears has shown to be minor for high
power load points, like lower vehicle mass and ﬂat road gradients or while hybrid
(ICE + electric motor) driving. The main reason is that one single-speed gear ratio
always represents a compromise compared to two separate gear ratios, resulting in
limited available torque at the driven wheel.
Figure 9 shows the vehicle speed traces at full-load acceleration starting from a
simulation time of 10 s. It illustrates that the performance beneﬁt of a 2-speed over
the single-speed gearbox for the electric motor is larger under high torque conditions,
which in this case is pure electric mode without ICE support.
In general, the ICE as well as the electric motor show better efﬁciencies in rela-
tively higher load operation points. Especially the second gear of a 2-speed gearbox
with a lower gear ratio can result in higher torque demand at the electric motor,
shifting its operational points to regions of better efﬁciency within the efﬁciency
map. As a consequence of the rise in efﬁciency, fuel consumption and therefore CO2
emission decreases proportionally. In the next step, an adequate shifting strategy
between the two gears needs to be found. This strategy should, on the one hand,

Minimization of CO2-Footprint of Hybrid …
283
Fig. 9 Acceleration performance of a hybrid vehicle with single-speed and 2-speed gearbox in
hybrid and pure e-drive mode compared to the pure ICE reference
satisfy the shifting and driving behaviour according to the driver’s throttle input.
On the other hand, it needs to be optimized to minimize fuel/energy consumption.
The development of this strategy results in higher overall development effort and
complexity compared to the single-gear variant. Longitudinal dynamic simulation
(in MATLAB/Simulink in this case) is the key tool used for dimensioning and devel-
oping such hybrid powertrain concepts and its corresponding operation strategy.
LDS though is purely mathematically based and does not consider constructive
coherencies within the power- and drivetrain.
Due to the greater mechanical complexity, the number of parts in the 2-speed
gearbox is signiﬁcantly higher compared to the single-speed variant. This not only
affects the mass of the gearbox and the complete vehicle, but also presents chal-
lenges regarding packaging. In automotive and even more in power sports applica-
tions compact packaging and best possible power-to-weight ratio are key criteria.
In order to evaluate the change to a 2-speed instead of a single-speed gearbox, a
CAD packaging analysis is carried out. The CAD model is capable of assessing
the changes in terms of overall mass and the position of the centre of gravity, for
instance. These changes are then implemented into the LDS and the results can be
evaluated accordingly. Furthermore, the CAD packaging concept allows the drawing
of conclusions as to how much resource will be required in course of the production
process which inﬂuences the production of CO2 emissions.
With the CO2 relevant information gathered in the simulation and design
processes, the overall CO2 emissions of the product can be predicted (see Fig. 9).
The closed-loop development process mentioned above allows for optimization
of product life cycle CO2 footprint and enables the researcher/developer to make
decisions which lead to a minimization of the overall CO2 emissions of the product.

284
S. Schmidt et al.
Concept and Layout of a Hybrid Propulsion for Hand-Held
Power Tool
On the basis of hybrid powertrain investigations for CO2 reduction in hand-held
power tools such as brush-cutters or chainsaws, numerous parameters regarding the
complete CO2 footprint of the product but also boundary conditions have to be taken
into consideration. Among the parameters of consideration are the hybrid conﬁgu-
ration, the number, technology and size of power units to be used, the operational
strategy and the technology and size of the battery. As for the boundary conditions,
the hybrid tool should respect the overall carbon footprint, life cycle cost, weight and
volume limitations of the baseline combustion-engine driven tool. Further, an impor-
tant constraint is that the energy of the hybrid tool should come only from the fuel
and not from the grid, meaning that the State of Charge (SoC) of the battery has to be
controlled in order to remain as constant as possible during the whole load cycle. A
fully parametric simulation model is thus necessary for identifying the weightiness
of each parameter with respect to the aforementioned constraints in order to reduce
CO2 emissions of future hand-held tools [12].
One of the ﬁrst questions to be addressed for the hybrid tool is the hybrid conﬁg-
uration. Two conﬁgurations, the serial and parallel hybrid are possible for this type
of application. This decision inﬂuences not only CO2 emissions in operation but
also the production carbon footprint, as different parts and units are necessary. In
the following, a methodology for determining the optimum hybrid conﬁguration is
shown using a simulation model in MATLAB/Simulink (Fig. 10).
A serial hybrid conﬁguration [13] uses the electric motor to drive the tool while
the internal combustion engine is coupled with an electric generator which produces
the energy needed for driving. In a parallel hybrid 1:1 conﬁguration, the electric
motor is attached on the same shaft as the internal combustion engine which enables
a utilization of both torques of internal combustion engine and electric motor. The
serial hybrid needs three power units and two driveshaft while the parallel hybrid
needs two power units and one driveshaft (Fig. 11). With the energy coming only
from the fuel, in both cases, the battery is responsible for transmitting energy between
the power units by acting as an energy buffer.
Learning from the automotive ﬁeld, the three main operation modes giving a
CO2 reduction beneﬁt during the operation phase for the hybrid compared with
the pure internal combustion engine powertrain are the idle-off, regeneration and
load-point-shifting functions.
• The Idle-off mode replaces the internal combustion engine idle with e-start. Real-
world load cycles of chainsaws, brush-cutters and blowers show, that idling of
hand-held tools can reach up to 30% of the duration of the load cycle. Thus, the
CO2 reduction potential of reducing the idle time is not negligible. Comparing
the beneﬁt of this mode with the two hybrid conﬁgurations, in both the total
duration of internal combustion engine idle can be abolished, the frequency of

Minimization of CO2-Footprint of Hybrid …
285
Fig. 10 Simulation model of hand-held hybrid tools
Fig. 11 Parallel versus serial hybrid conﬁguration
start-stops for the parallel hybrid is signiﬁcantly higher based on the load cycle
proﬁle. Further, the number of start-stops for the serial hybrid could be limited in
a very small number based on the battery capacity.
• The Regeneration mode takes advantage of the load cycle deceleration ramps by
braking the tool and storing the energy of the driveshaft inertia to the battery.
While the inertias of hand-held tools are small, deceleration ramps of high-speed
differences (e.g. from 13,000 rpm down to idle) can give a beneﬁt for this mode of
operation. Due to the fact that the dominant inertia of the tool driveshaft is coming
from the ICE and not from the tool blade or chain, in this mode the parallel hybrid
tool has a beneﬁt over the serial variant.

286
S. Schmidt et al.
• The Load point shifting mode uses the 1st and 4th quadrant torque of an electric
motor to operate the internal combustion engine in the best-efﬁciency area. While
even a small electric motor maintains a high efﬁciency over almost all regions
of the operating map, the small low-complexity internal combustion engine used
for hand-held tools optimizes its efﬁciency only in a small region of its map.
Serial hybrids can take the most beneﬁt from this mode by operating the internal
combustion engine on the lowest fuel consumption point while parallel hybrid
can only operate in the best operational speed line. The best operational speed
line for these applications is almost always at the Wide-Open Throttle.
After simulating the load cycle, the accumulative energy consumption differ-
ences at the end of the load cycle between the combustion-driven powertrain and the
serial hybrid or parallel hybrid powertrain for each of the three operation modii are
summarizing the results of the simulation model. As each mode has a well-deﬁned
time domain of operation inside the load cycle, the energy consumed or produced
during this domain is compared with the energy consumed by the combustion engine-
driven tool for the same domain. Here, the domain of idle-off function (idle-domain)
is below 4000 rpm where the tool6 is not connected to the drivetrain due to centrifugal
clutch disengagement, the domain of regeneration (dec-domain) occurs when the tool
decelerates from speed larger than 9000 rpm below to 4000 rpm and the domain of
load point shifting (load-domain) is on load.
Using the simulation model, the overall CO2 reduction potential (Ec) of different
hybrid variants compared to the pure combustion engine version can be calculated
(Eq. (1)) from the energy differences of the single operation modii.
Ec = Eidle + Eregeneration + Eload
(1)
The difference in CO2 emissions is considered by implementing functions for
each inﬂuencing factor (production, weight, size and life cycle cost from produc-
tion to recycling). These functions are normalized with the corresponding values of
the baseline combustion-driven tool. So, a cost minimization function (A) of Ec,
production-consumed CO2 (P), weight (W), volume (V) and life cycle cost (LCC)
is introduced (Eq. (2)). Based on the design criteria, each one of the ﬁve variables is
multiplied with a weight factor α.
A = min
 
−aEc ∗Ec + aP ∗P + aw ∗W + av ∗V + alcc ∗LCC

SH
,

−aEc ∗Ec + aP ∗P + aw ∗W + av ∗V + alcc ∗LCC

P H

(2)
with
SH
=
Serial hybrid conf iguration
and
P H
=
Parallel hybrid conf iguration.
The hybrid conﬁguration with the resulting minimum value for A is the optimum
for the given tool or load cycle based on a combined criteria matrix.
6 i.e. cutting tool.

Minimization of CO2-Footprint of Hybrid …
287
Summary
The consideration of the CO2 emissions of hybrid powertrain has to cover the stages
production,operationandrecyclingoftheproduct.InordertodevelopaCO2 footprint
optimized product, measures for an assessment of the CO2 impact of the powertrain
have to be taken in each development phase, starting from the concept phase through
pre-development to product development. At the various phases, different depth of
information becomes available and different possibilities for technology and material
decisions exist, different CO2 consideration approaches are necessary.
A close collaboration between the traditional development tools like CAD and
simulation and the CO2 life cycle assessment tools and methods is necessary.
Future strategies for the development process have to integrate the LCA methods
into the traditional development tools and enable a seamless exchange of data and
information. This allows for well-funded decisions during the development process
which includes the lifetime CO2 balance of the powertrain.
References
1. Tagliaferri C, Evangelisti S, Acconcia F, Domenech T, Ekins P, Barletta D, Lettieri P (2016) Life
cycle assessment of future electric and hybrid vehicles: a cradle-to-grave systems engineering
approach. Chem Eng Res Des 112:298-309. ISSN 0263-8762. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cherd.
2016.07.003
2. http://matteodilallo.tech/il-sistema-hybrid-synergy-drive-di-toyota/ 9.7.2021
3. © Toyota & MotorNews; Der neue Toyota Prius 2016 – Quantensprung in alle Richtungen
4. ACEM “Registrations in the European Union – 2021”. https://www.acem.eu/market-data
5. CS-Consulting Patent No. AT 516418 B1
6. https://www.motorradonline.de/elektro/test-piaggio-mp3-der-neue-piaggio-mp3-mit-hybrid
antrieb/ 9.7.2021
7. Presentation, Piaggio for eco-enviroment – Hybrid and Electric Technology; Paolo Badalassi;
Piaggio&C.s.p.a. 03.04.2014
8. https://furion-motorcycles.com/ loaded on July 19th 2021
9. Merschak S, Hehenberger P, Schmidt S, Kirchberger R (2020) Considerations of life cycle
assessment and the estimate of carbon footprint of powertrains. SAE Tech Pap 2020-32-2314.
https://doi.org/10.4271/2020-32-2314
10. Arguillarena A, Margallo M, Urtiaga A (2021) Carbon footprint of the hot-dip galvanisation
process using a life cycle assessment approach. Clean Eng Technol 2(100041). ISSN 2666-
7908. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clet.2021.100041
11. Singh KV, Bansal HO, Singh D (2019) A comprehensive review on hybrid electric vehicles:
architectures and components. J Mod Transp 27:77–107. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40534-019-
0184-3
12. Vogiatzis D, Schacht H, Schmidt S, Kirchberger R (2020) A concept investigation simulation
model on hybrid powertrains for handheld tools. SAE Tech Pap 2020-32-2316. https://doi.org/
10.4271/2020-32-2316.
13. Khajepour A, Fallah S, Goodarzi A (2014) Electric and hybrid vehicles technologies, modelling
and control: a mechatronic approach. Wiley Ltd. ISBN 9781118341513

Education

Developing Education in Mechatronics
to Support the Challenges for Evolution,
Development, and Sustainability
Martin Edin Grimheden and Elias Flening
Abstract In this chapter, we propose a roadmap for the development of educa-
tion in mechatronics. This development is intended to support future mechatronics
engineers in accepting challenges in evolution, development, and sustainability. We
explore curricula design, learning strategies, and misalignment between education
and professional needs in relation to these challenges. The exploration is based on
the fact that the subject mechatronics has now been around for 50 years, and, in
particular, relates to the experiences and previous research of the authors, who are
based at KTH Royal Institute of Technology where most of the empirical data is
from. In this chapter, we argue that the above challenges require new roles, skills,
and competencies among mechatronics engineers. With examples from complex
product development, we argue that an increased systems perspective with systems
architect competencies and experiences can support the embracing of additional
systems design factors, which, for example, can enable sustainable development
aspects into product design. We explore the interface between mechatronics and
systems engineering, via embedded systems, as a possible future development of the
subject of mechatronics. Embedded systems can be seen as a related subject, or as a
subset of mechatronics, or vice versa. With this chapter, we argue that the subject of
embedded systems can provide a shortcut for mechatronics education to approach
the role of systems engineering, thereby reaching a level of competence and skills
where the above challenges can be approached. The mechatronics engineer can play
an important role in sustainable development. With existing curricula, mechatronics
engineers are prepared to accept complex problem-solving, utilize solutions from
various domains and disciplines, and create domain-independent solutions. These
skills are crucial in embracing sustainable development, which puts the mechatronics
engineer in a unique position. We also bridge the above discussion with current
trends in learning, such as life-long learning and e-learning. The mechanisms that
enable the mechatronics engineer to achieve a systems engineering skillset, which,
M. E. Grimheden (B) · E. Flening
Department of Machine Design, School of Industrial Engineering and Management, KTH Royal
Institute of Technology, 100 44, Stockholm, Sweden
e-mail: mjg@kth.se
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
P. Hehenberger et al. (eds.), EcoMechatronics,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-07555-1_17
291

292
M. E. Grimheden and E. Flening
according to our results, needs to be based on engineering experiences, is facilitated
both by a professional education system (life-long learning) and by a ﬂexible setup
(e-learning).
Introduction
This chapter is based on the following structure:
1.
Challenges that relate to sustainable development and eco-design can be
approached from a mechatronics perspective, meaning with mechatronics
solutions or a mechatronics design thinking perspective.
2.
Mechatronics education and mechatronics, in general, provide a suitable base
for eco-design with a focus on synergistic integration, non-domain-speciﬁc
solutions. A mechatronics focus gives a broader solution space.
3.
A new type of mechatronics engineer and a new mechatronics program would be
required, with more focus on complex problems. Skills in systems engineering
and systems architecture would facilitate this.
4.
A current shift from mechatronics toward embedded systems design can be
a step in this direction. With focus on embedded systems design, skills, and
competencies in systems engineering, systems design, and systems architecture
can be achieved.
5.
The current shift from program-based curricula toward life-long learning and
e-learning can support competence development for experienced mechatronics
engineers.
6.
The new mechatronics engineer will have skills and competencies to accept
challenges relating to sustainable development and eco-design.
Background
“We will never be able to solve the problems of tomorrow with the thinking of today”.
The famous quote by Albert Einstein implies that we, both as educators and
students, always will be a step behind. We develop university programs today.
Students will attend these programs, taking their courses in a few years from now.
Future employees will hire these students and expect them to contribute to mecha-
tronics engineering, developing new products and engaging in engineering chal-
lenges. A decade might pass between the ﬁrst concepts around program (re)design
to when a student from that program get their ﬁrst job. In current research, we
note discrepancies between early engineering professional capabilities in compar-
ison with expectations from employers. There has long been a mismatch between
what is expected from a university engineering graduate and the relevant hiring
industry. Even so, the Einstein quote takes this an additional step—we must think

Developing Education in Mechatronics …
293
even further than that, it is not enough with the challenges of today, we need to
consider the challenges of tomorrow as well—long after ﬁrst employment.
Many studies of misalignment; discrepancies between expectations; focus on vari-
ationsinexpectationsbetweenengineeringskills;and“softskills”,suchasteamwork,
communication, etc. But studies also show variations within engineering skills, lack
of technical depth in certain areas, or the need to include new topics and areas. Such a
lack includes the common inability to consciously switch between modes of thinking
that are inherent to different engineering disciplines, such as the constituent disci-
plines of mechatronics. Switching ways of thinking therefore does not only pertain
to addressing either “technical” or “non-technical” issues or people, but different
aspects of engineering as well.
How should we then train students that will be able to accept and solve these chal-
lenges? How do we educate a student to become capable of answering the challenges
of climate change? Reduce the carbon footprint? Sustain our quality of life?
Learn from Yesterday—Live for Today
What we do know is that mechatronics, as an interdisciplinary ﬁeld of engi-
neering science centered on the concept of synergy, provides tools and opportu-
nities to develop new products and new solutions and—in particular—engineers
capable of accepting multi-disciplinary challenges. In the early days, around 1970–
1980, mechatronics bridged gaps between mechanical engineering and electrical
engineering, computer science, and control theory, enabling new technologies and
solutions. Today, mechatronics creates bridges also with other areas—embedded
systems, systems engineering, cyber-physical systems—creating synergistic prod-
ucts and solutions based on electrically, and software-controlled mechanical parts,
for example, distributed via intercommunicating nodes. Looking back at the past
50 years, most breakthroughs can be seen in these interrelations, when ideas from
different areas merge, when technological developments in one area are applied to
another.
The key factor here is the engineer. It is the engineer who sees the opportunity to
apply something from somewhere else, necessitating conscious mode-switching. It is
the engineer who can synergistically apply a control method to a mechanical problem.
It is the engineer who understands that a computer can control a process, and how this
controllercaninteractwithvariouscomponents.Thisengineerunderstandsenough—
of mechanical engineering, of electrical engineering, of computer science, of control
theory—that they can see the opportunity for synergistic integration of these areas.
An expert of mechanical engineering or a computer scientist might not be able to
see this. Multidisciplinary approaches both require and enable this conscious mode-
switching which underlies insights for synergistic integration between disparate areas
of engineering knowledge.
In this chapter, our main driver is to promote the idea of learning engineering skills
bypractice.Learningbytraining,learningbyengineering.Howdoesapersonbecome

294
M. E. Grimheden and E. Flening
an elite athlete? The answer is: by conscious and deliberate practice. How does a
person become a professional musician? The answer is the same. A professional
musician beneﬁts from a lot of theoretical studies as well, but the theoretical studies
do not guarantee the musical skills. In this perspective, a university program in
engineering does not guarantee all the necessary engineering skills.
Background
A Brief Reﬂection on Mechatronics History
50 years ago, when the subject of mechatronics emerged, things were different. In
hindsight, it can easily be understood that the idea of integrating mechanics and
electronics was revolutionary. Mechanical products were controlled by mechanical
controllers.Theuseofelectronicsinmechanicalproductspresentedaradicalshift[1].
In 1976, a charismatic professor in machine elements at KTH, Royal Institute of
Technology, visited Stanford University during a sabbatical. He brought a micro-
controller back to KTH, an Intel 8008, declaring upon his return that this micro-
controller, from now on, should be regarded as a machine element. In the years
following, the microcontroller indeed radically changed the subject of mechanical
engineering and, in particular, machine elements, at KTH. In the 1980s, research
projects emerged exploring added functionality in traditional machine elements,
such as adaptive vehicle suspension and motion control in general. The 80s and
90s saw some spin-off companies with relation to KTH researchers and research
projects, some of which grew into large industries. All were based on radical inno-
vation via technology shifts, basically by the shift from mechanical engineering into
mechatronics engineering.
A Brief Reﬂection of Historic Mechatronics Founders
The professor in machine elements was probably not unique. As a professor, then
appointed by the government of Sweden, he had a responsibility to represent and
develop the subject of machine elements. It was not uncommon then for profes-
sors in applied subjects to be recruited from industry and many professors had the
ability to balance both analysis and synthesis, to strive for what we today refer to as
innovation and impact. It might have been easier to disregard the microcontroller,
to simply state that it’s not a machine element, and keep the subject of machine
elements narrower. But, with industrial and societal impact in mind, the function-
ality of machine elements increases drastically if the subject can be expanded to
include microcontrollers. When we turn to the role for mechatronics in the current
challenges later in this chapter, let’s keep this in mind [2, 3].

Developing Education in Mechatronics …
295
In one study of the role of the mechatronics engineer in product development [4],
several people with previous relationships to the establishment of mechatronics at
KTH were interviewed. In one of the interviews, the technical manager of a mid-sized
company reﬂects on the role of their top systems architect. The company develops
extremely complex machines that push the limits of both physics (in terms of mate-
rials and optical wavelengths) and computer science (in terms of data throughput).
Also,theboundariesformechanicshavebeenpushedintermsofmechanicalstability,
precision motion control, and vibrations. The technical director of this company, with
around 1000 employees, stated in the interview that there is only one person in the
organization who truly carries a holistic understanding of the machine: the systems
architect [4]. This person understood the limitations of physics, the relation between
these limitations and the limitations of applied control, mechanics as well as the
capabilities of software systems. A key research focus of this study, and following
studies, is the question of the mechanisms that promote this ability. For this chapter,
we need to embrace the above, and, at the same time, realize that the challenges of
today are even more complex, when including the global sustainability challenges
considered in EcoMechatronics.
A Brief Reﬂection of Mechatronics Education History
In several previous publications [5–7], we have reﬂected on the ﬁrst 50 years of
mechatronics and the role of universities in the development thereof. As in the
example above, most mechatronics programs emerged from mechanical engineering
programs and departments.
In one of these studies [8], we discussed future scenarios of the development of
the subject of mechatronics. We argued that the subject of mechatronics would cover
larger and larger areas, and that there would be a need to reformulate the subject
to prevent it from being diminished. If everything becomes mechatronics, and if
mechatronics becomes everything, then the identity is lost. In a study 20 years later,
we argue that this has in fact happened [5] already.
Current mechatronics educational programs vary greatly in content, level, and
scope. At KTH, mechatronics is a master’s degree program offered for students
with a mechanical engineering background. At Chalmers University of Technology,
a 5-year integrated bachelor’s and master’s program in mechatronics leans toward
industrial automation. Chalmers University of Technology also offers a master’s
program in mechatronics that is based in automatic control. In other universities in
Sweden, mechatronics programs aim at either innovation or offer individual courses.
In comparison, mechanical engineering, for example, is rather established and quite
similar across universities. Even though each university has its own specializations
and focus, the general setup is very similar. In comparison, mechatronics seems
chaotic.

296
M. E. Grimheden and E. Flening
Outside Sweden, the situation is even more chaotic. In JKU Linz, mechatronics
is offered as a 5-year integrated broad bachelor’s and master’s program that includes
subjects such as mechanical engineering. Mechatronics is an umbrella for mechan-
ical engineering, electrical engineering, etc., while at KTH, among several others,
mechatronics is a specialization of mechanical engineering. Therefore, a critical
feature of the educational ﬁeld of mechatronics is that it is considerably local and
speciﬁc, rather than global and general.
Key Competencies Required to Approach the Challenges
of the Future
So, what then are the competencies required to tackle the long-term challenges?
What kind of training can stimulate the ability to “solve the problems of tomorrow”?
What role can mechatronics play in this situation?
Looking Back: Tool Integration, Systems Modeling,
and Communication
In one of the earliest mechatronics research projects at KTH, as mentioned above,
adaptive vehicle suspension was studied [9]. The implementation required knowl-
edge and skills in vehicle dynamics and control. Modeling tools in the mechan-
ical engineering domain existed that could be used in the design of the controller.
The controller could be implemented in a microcontroller-based system with some
understandings of sensors and actuators.
In the following years, more and more focus was put on tool integration and
integrated product development methods. For many years, many research projects
investigated tool development, integration of tools from various domains, integra-
tion of tools for mechanical engineering design, and, for example, control systems.
Even today the idea of an ultimate tool, the holistic tool that optimizes a design
from all technical aspects, is still discussed [10]. A tool that optimizes cost and
performance based on variable mechanical design, electrical design, control design,
material design, etc. Many have tried to integrate existing tools, and many approaches
exist. Even as we speak, spin-off companies emerge focusing on providing, for
example, plugins for design tools, enabling a tool to communicate with another
tool.
Aparalleldevelopmentrelatestoworkorganization.Besidesthetoolsitself,aneed
toestablishnewworkmethodsbecomesapparent.Inthehistoricsetting,amechanical
engineer handed over his design to an electrical engineer, who handed over to a
software developer, etc. A product developer handed over drawings to a production
engineer. At KTH, the subject of integrated development emerged concurrently with

Developing Education in Mechatronics …
297
the development of the subject of mechatronics, and showed many similarities. Both
these developments showed the need for joint languages, communication, integrated
tools, and processes.
A Current Study on Mechatronics Product Development
In a study of a mechatronic product development project at a large Swedish company,
we further investigated the role of mechatronics engineers in this integrated devel-
opment landscape. A researcher followed a development project closely for about 1
year, participating in all project meetings and interviewing relevant team members.
The team consisted originally of ﬁve people and grew to about ten as product
launch neared. The product in focus was a hand-held tool, a product with motors,
sensors, gearbox, microcontrollers, and communication modules. The product was
intended for professional use, very speciﬁc use cases with a narrow range of potential
customers.
The product development team originally consisted of a mechanical engineer, an
electronics engineer, a project manager, a test engineer, and an embedded systems
engineer. In the later stages of the project, several more embedded system engineers
were added to support software development.
Only the embedded systems engineer appeared to take a holistic view of the
product. The mechanical engineer made many wise design decisions, and was able
to make designs based on ergonomic use cases, heat transfer, etc.—some decisions
that can be outside the immediate purview of a mechanical designer. But the mechan-
ical designer stayed away from discussions and decisions that related to power,
battery design, control systems, communication, etc. Thus, the mechanical design
was isolated from the design of the other aspects of the tool.
5 People or 1000 People? Small Project or Large Project?
In the earlier example [4], the technical director of one of the most complex product
development projects in Sweden at the time stated that only his top systems architect
could fully have a holistic view of the product and project, i.e., only one person out of
1000 had the ability to fully understand the machine. What are the similarities with
the above study, in comparison a much simpler product and project, with a team of
ﬁve people? Is it fair to say that only the embedded systems engineer had a holistic
perspective, and only one person (out of ﬁve) that could understand the product?
There is one important similarity between these two projects, and it can be illus-
trated more easily from the smaller project and the individuals there. The embedded
systems engineer had an abstract multi-disciplinary mental model of the product. He
also had mathematical models of the system behavior, based on the CAD models, the
electrical characteristics, and the control models. The embedded systems engineer

298
M. E. Grimheden and E. Flening
had a bachelor’s degree in mechanical engineering and a master’s degree in mecha-
tronics. The embedded systems engineer did not have the detailed understanding
of the mechanical characteristics as the mechanical engineer, but he did understand
enough. Likewise, he understood enough of the electrical characteristics to be able
to design a control system for the product. The embedded systems engineer had
sufﬁcient knowledge, skills, and tools to get a holistic view, to synergistically make
decisions on allocation of functionality, for example, for making decisions that affect
different domains, to optimize the product based on the overall functionality.
Are there any similarities between this embedded systems engineer and the
systems architect described earlier? Are there any similarities between the 5-person
product development team and the 1000-person product development team? In both
cases, one person is seen to have a holistic view of the project. In the smaller project,
this emerged from the project meetings and the interviews with the engineers. In the
larger project, it is stated by the head of technical development at the company. In
the large project, the systems architect is supposed to have this understanding, it’s
part of his or her role in the company. The systems architect, on the other hand, is not
expected to have detailed knowledge in the subdomains. In the case of the smaller
project, the embedded systems engineer has detailed knowledge of the subdomains
as well.
Shaping Education
Embedded Systems and Systems Engineering
The embedded systems engineer had a master’s degree in mechatronics. This is not
necessarily a general rule, as an embedded systems engineer today is more likely to
be a graduate from computer science or software engineering.
What we now note here is that we can identify a kind of continuum, from mecha-
tronics to systems engineering via embedded systems. Small project: mechatronics
and embedded systems engineering. Large project: systems engineering.
In the early years of mechatronics education at KTH, we saw a unique role for
mechatronics engineers. They supported radical innovation, enabled new technolog-
ical shifts by introducing embedded control systems into mainly mechanical engi-
neering organizations. Companies at that time were still organized into mechanical
departments and electrical departments. As time passes, we note that the mecha-
tronics engineers move more and more into software. In the beginning of our mecha-
tronics program, we had only one or two programming courses that enabled the
mechatronics engineers to understand software. Today, mechatronics engineers from
KTH are fully ﬂedged programmers in embedded systems. There is no real competi-
tion; there are not so many other programs to recruit from, and the existing computer
science programs stay away from the physical hardware, the hardware-oriented

Developing Education in Mechatronics …
299
aspects of programming. Anyhow, as presented earlier [5], we note that a transi-
tion has happened, from mechatronics into embedded systems, which we argue is
mainly due to the increased complexity of mechatronics or embedded systems over
the last 50 years.
We argue that the transition from mechatronics into embedded systems is a reac-
tion of a weakened identity of the subject of mechatronics, which relates to the
broadening of the subject. We also note that the software of a mechatronics product
has increased in importance during these 50 years, to encompass most of both the
development cost and the value of a product.
Now, let’s assume the following. An embedded systems engineer with a degree in
mechatronics will have a higher degree of understanding of the physical properties
of the product as well as the electrical properties, control aspects, etc. compared to an
embedded systems engineer with a more specialized computer science background.
If this is the case, how does this come into play when the embedded systems are
designed? Can the embedded systems engineer use embedded systems as a tool for
creating a holistic view of the product? Are we seeing a transition from embedded
systems to embedded systems engineering?
International Council of Systems Engineering, INCOSE
INCOSE, one of the main professional bodies for systems engineering, gathers
systems engineers and systems architects. The professional body publishes recom-
mendations and academic guidelines. INCOSE gives a recommendation that is rarely
seen in other professional bodies. INCOSE states that systems engineering requires
professional experience.
Traditional professional roles have similar requirements. To become an electri-
cian, a plumber, a painter, you traditionally must gather experience ﬁrst. Educational
programs are based on a master-apprentice system where a student works together
with an experienced professional for a few years before becoming certiﬁed and inde-
pendent. In medicine, several career steps follow academic graduation and relate
to both further theoretical education and professional experiences. In academia, a
tenure track system bases career development on professional achievements which
directly relate to professional experiences. So, in this perspective, it is not unrealistic
to state that a competence in systems engineering relates to professional experience.
What is unique though is that, as a consequence, systems engineering, according to
INCOSE, cannot be taught at universities the way universities have been running
for hundreds of years. There is a huge difference in the comparisons with medicine
and academic development in general. In medicine, it’s a specialization. In academic
tenure track, it’s about establishing a subject and growing as a researcher and faculty
member. In systems engineering, it’s about something else. It’s about taking a leap
from one area to another, from something into systems engineering, to be able to
grasp a wider area, a broadening of understandings, taking a holistic perspective.
And to master the tools that support these activities.

300
M. E. Grimheden and E. Flening
ITRL—Moving System Boundaries
The following example is intended to illustrate one of the main pillars of the argumen-
tation, the idea that a shift in the level of abstraction can enable the transition from
design to eco-design, from development to sustainable development. The example
shows a transition of a research theme, from transport systems into sustainable trans-
port systems. This is not related to the subject of mechatronics but can illustrate
how mechatronics could possibly transition into EcoMechatronics or sustainable
mechatronics.
This example, from KTH, has been inﬂuential in the shaping of the thoughts
of this chapter. In 2012, a research center was established based on a substantial
donation from a Swedish major truck manufacturer (Scania). Research relating to
vehicle technologies had turned out to be fragmented or, to view it more positively,
the technological advancements led to several new potential interactions between a
truckmanufacturerandauniversity.Thenewresearchcenter,theIntegratedTransport
Research Lab, ITRL, was established with the purpose of gathering the KTH research
that related to transport and allowing the research center to become a bridge builder
between various research groups at KTH and various research and development
groups at Scania.
Before long, other industries joined, as well as governmental agencies relating
to transport. Swedish telecom industry Ericsson saw opportunities in digitalization
of transport systems, government agencies saw the need for new legislation. Many
research teams at KTH saw opportunities to interact with industrial partners in joint
research applications and projects.
In the beginning, the research center explored mainly technical innovations and
research, from vehicle dynamics, control systems as well as ongoing research on
transport systems. Now, almost 10 years later, a shift from transport systems toward
sustainable transport systems has occurred. The introduction of new technologies
and the increased focus on sustainable transports drives a paradigm shift, aimed at
achieving a sustainable transport system. The business model for the research group
hasdevelopedintotheircurrentmissionstatement:“…tointegratedisciplines,system
levels and stakeholders”.
In the beginning of ITRL, the core consisted of a selection of KTH researchers,
from the various contributing research groups. Now, about 10 years later, the core
research team is built based on new recruitments—from various systems engineering
programs,researcherswithbackgroundinsocialsciences,withdesignthinkingskills,
with systems thinking skills. The research group today has competencies in mathe-
matical modeling, systems engineering, and sustainable development. The research
group has established itself within the area of “Complex Dynamic Systems”. This is
an effect of the ambition to approach the grand challenges, and, more speciﬁcally,
to tackle the issue of sustainable transport systems. The systems dimension was the
missing piece of the puzzle that made the group complete. As a result, the group is
now able to adopt a system view on complex issues, such as sustainable transport

Developing Education in Mechatronics …
301
systems, where the system boundary includes models of user behavior, legal issues,
and of other stakeholders as well as the technical fundamentals.
We therefore would like to bring the experiences from this development into the
discussion on EcoMechatronics, how the subject of mechatronics can support the
long-term challenges. We believe there is a middle path here, a balance between
depth and width, between the two aspects of the “T” in a T-shaped engineer [11].
An extreme in one direction could lead to pure systems engineering, to include
everything in the models, basically to include more areas by raising the level of
abstraction. The other extreme could lead to basically putting too much content into a
curriculum, to create an ultimate engineer able to solve any challenge. The conclusion
of the above is that we base the discussion on a mechatronics engineer, with a
specialization in synergistic integration, able to develop mechatronics products. This
mechatronicsengineerdevelopsintoanembeddedsystemsengineer,usingembedded
systems thinking to apply a systems thinking perspective on the product, project or
problem, and that this competence is developed further and further into a more
fully ﬂedged systems engineer, with a mechatronics background. We believe that a
university can produce these engineers and, if given chances, these engineers can, if
supported during a life-time career, be the right people to accept the grand challenges.
Challenges of both today and tomorrow.
Proposing a Way Forward
Now we are ready to outline the proposal for future strategy.
We start with a bachelor’s program in mechanical engineering. Then we add a
master’s program in mechatronics. The master’s program can have different focus
(more about this later). Then, after some time, we add systems engineering as a
professional development program. With this setup, we can prepare the more tradi-
tional mechatronics engineers, we can provide industry with the embedded systems
engineer (as in the smaller project presented above), and we provide opportunities
for future systems architects, as in the example with the large project.
The idea of the T-shaped engineer can be applied to this setup. Each T-shaped
engineer will have a specialization, a depth, and a competence in a speciﬁc area. It
can be in mechanical engineering, in electrical engineering, in applied control, or any
other subject. The horizontal part of the “T” represents an ability to synergistically
interact with other people, other engineers, and with other specializations. These
competencies and skills refer not only to teamwork and project management, but
also to the technical ability to understand other specializations and interact with
them (Fig. 1).

302
M. E. Grimheden and E. Flening
Fig. 1 The proposed way forward: The concept of life-long learning enables professional further
education as well as the transfer of experience from senior engineers to more junior engineers. The
concept is facilitated by the current move towards more ﬂexible learning processes via e-learning,
MOOCs etc.
Bachelor’s Degree Level
The bachelor’s degree, or part of the academic education, is therefore not crucial in
terms of focus. As with the T-shaped engineers, it is more relevant with a hetero-
geneity than uniformity. It is important, though, that students recruited to the next
stage, the master’s degree level, have an expertise in a subject that is relevant to
mechatronics: mechanical engineering, electrical engineering, etc.
Master’s Degree Level
The master’s degree level should add both more general competencies and speciﬁc
skills and competencies. A student with a bachelor’s degree in mechanical engi-
neering should be able to broaden their skills with studies in electrical engineering,
applied control, etc., and, at the same time, deepen their skills and competen-
cies in mechanical engineering—all with the addition of training in the synergistic
integration of these skillsets.
Now, let’s relate this to the previous discussion on the importance of embedded
systems.Wearguethatthemaster’slevelshouldincludeembeddedsystemseducation
with the purpose of using embedded systems training to create a system perspec-
tive on mechatronics. Meaning, embedded systems education should provide both
programming skills and architecture skills, as well as introducing students to a
systems engineering perspective.
We note many ambitions in favor of the above. Several authors have emphasized
the need for a more stringent mathematical approach to mechatronics [12], while
others have argued for a deeper focus on computer science and to start investigating
the systematic approach [13]. A transition from mechatronics into cyber-physical
systems (CPS) is one step in this direction that emphasizes a system perspective.

Developing Education in Mechatronics …
303
What we believe is the missing piece here is the ability to integrate other domains
into this system perspective. We would like to include what was described earlier
as integrated product development; we would like to integrate tool integration ideas,
current research on synergistic integration of various domains.
In the ﬁrst example, we discussed the development of an active suspension. This
development project could easily be done by one individual, a mechatronics engineer,
at least into a proof of concept, a pre-study. In the second example (the small develop-
ment project with about ﬁve engineers), a mechatronics engineer with competencies
in embedded systems could grasp the project, understand all aspects, and integrate
various domains. In the third case, the systems architect was an extremely skilled
systems engineer.
So, with this perspective, we believe the master’s degree level could target these
different levels. An individual student could very well reach a T-shaped expertise,
with expert knowledge in one area and some skills enabling them to collaborate with
others. This person could be heavy in the vertical aspect of the “T”, ready to solve
intricate challenges. Another person could be more balanced between the horizontal
and vertical aspects of the “T”, with more emphasis on systems engineering skills,
integrative skills, and abilities to collaborate with other domains.
But—to reach the next level requires new thinking.
Life-Long Learning
A combination of e-learning, MOOCs, and the pandemic situation has led to an
increased focus on continuous education and re-training of workforces. KTH has
announced an ambition that at least 20% of all education within a few years will
be offered to non-program students, “outside” the university system. People with
existing degrees wishing to learn new things, perhaps people already employed at
companies who want to develop their careers. The underlying idea is that university
education should no longer be seen as an activity before an industrial career, but
rather that university education can support the reality that most people will need to
train, re-train, and continue to learn during an entire career.
So the circle is closing. We now have a mechanism in place that can provide the
third step, the step that INCOSE mentioned as necessary to develop a systems engi-
neering competence. This third step could be the mechanism where mechatronics
and embedded systems engineers train and develop into systems engineers, systems
architects, engineers capable of having a holistic view and approaching the chal-
lenges of the future. This third step could include more steps, it could be based on
the proven method of “master/apprentice” if more experienced systems engineers can
share experiences with junior engineers. We therefore believe that the design of this
third step, continuous education, life-long learning, is extremely important so that this
training can synergistically integrate and utilize both previous educational training
periods and experiences from previous industry positions, and include expertise and

304
M. E. Grimheden and E. Flening
experiences from senior engineers. Could this be the forum where the systems archi-
tect from the 1000-person project trains the embedded systems engineer from the
ﬁve-person project? And the university, which is the expert on learning and training,
facilitates the training?
Conclusions
The underlying reasoning and argument is based on the notion that we cannot solve
the problems of tomorrow with the thinking of today. The problems of tomorrow,
which are in a way already the problems of today, are directly related to sustainability.
All design needs to embrace the concept of eco-design. The thinking of tomorrow, as
in the example of the KTH Integrated Transport Research Lab, is that the scope needs
to be widened, the level of abstraction needs to be raised, and a system perspective
needs to be applied—but without losing the specialist technical domain-speciﬁc
competencies.
Mechatronics education has for 50 years balanced between breadth and depth,
between general and speciﬁc knowledge, and between various levels of abstraction.
The mechatronics engineer is a specialist in solving problems and creating products
that cross disciplines and domains, where the technical solution is optimal regardless
of implementation.
With this approach, the mechatronics engineer, with a system perspective, can
integrate social aspects, societal aspects, aspects of sustainability, aspects of gender
equality—any aspects—as long as the product development team includes enough
engineers with the right vertical aspects of the “T”-shape, and so long as enough
people in the team get the opportunity to increase the horizontal aspects of their
“T”s, for example, by systems engineering training. The example of ITRL shows
that these boundaries can be pushed, with the right people and the right training, and
that this creates unique possibilities to approach the grand challenges.
An effect of the COVID pandemic is the transition to e-learning, remote education.
This transition, together with the emerging need for professional, continuous educa-
tion, or life-long learning, opens up new possibilities. The main professional body
for systems engineering, INCOSE, states that systems engineering can only truly be
learnt by experienced engineers. What we see here is the chance to use this oppor-
tunity for life-long learning to educate experienced mechatronics and embedded
systems engineers in systems engineering, and that this group of new engineers will
be sufﬁciently trained and ready to handle the challenges of sustainable development
and eco-design.

Developing Education in Mechatronics …
305
References
1. Auslander DM (1996) What is mechatronics? IEEE/ASME Trans Mechatron 1(1):5–9
2. Törngren M, Grimheden M, Adamsson N (2007) Experiences from large embedded systems
development projects in education, involving industry and research. ACM SIGBED Rev
4(1):55–63
3. Törngren M, Edin Grimheden M, Gustafsson J, Birk W, Strategies and considerations in shaping
cyber-physical systems education. ACM SIGBED Rev 14(1):53–60
4. Ghattas H (2016) Managing complex product development projects: an analytical framework
for complex product development (Dissertation), KTH
5. Edin Grimheden M, Flening E, 50 years of mechatronics—what is next? Proceedings of the
20th international conference on research and education in mechatronics
6. Flening E, Edin Grimheden M, Many mechatronics: a discursive model of mechatronics’
deﬁnitions. Proceedings of the 2018 mechatronics forum, Glasgow
7. Edin M (2013) Can agile methods enhance mechatronics design education? Mechatronics
23:967–973
8. Grimheden M, Hanson M (2005) Mechatronics—the evolution of an academic discipline in
engineering education. Mechatronics 15:179–192
9. Lizell M (1985) Micro computer aided suspension. Lic.-avh. Stockholm: Tekn högsk
10. Rahimi F (2021) Towards a concurrent multidisciplinary design optimization of mechatronic
systems, Doctoral Thesis, KTH
11. Rogers P, Freuler RJ, The “T-Shaped” engineer paper presented at 2015 ASEE annual
conference & exposition, Seattle, Washington. https://doi.org/10.18260/p.24844
12. Lee EA, Seshia SA (2011) Introduction to embedded systems, a cyber-physical systems
approach. http://LeeSeshia.org, ISBN 978-0-557-70857-4
13. Marwedel P, Rhode W, Morik K (2013) The TU Dortmund cyber-physical systems program:
a step towards multi-disciplinary education. Proceedings of the ﬁrst workshop on cyber-
physical systems education (CPS-Ed 2013) at cyber physical systems week (CPSWeek 2013),
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA

Education and Simulation for Electric
and Mechatronic Systems in Renewable
Energy
P. J. van Duijsen
Abstract Mechatronicsystemscovervarioustechnicaldomains,ofwhichelectronics
andmechanicsarethemostprominent.Butalsoheattransferandcontrolareimportant
domains.EcoMechatronicapplicationsforsustainableenergysystemsaretobefound
in generation, storage and mobility. Wind power generators, photovoltaic, battery and
ﬂywheel storage and especially electric vehicles are the new work-horses in the world
ofsustainableenergy.Mostoftheapplicationsunderdiscussionuseelectricmachines,
and probably the most prominent example of this in EcoMechatronics is the electric
vehicle. Therefore, many subjects in this chapter are devoted to the modeling and sim-
ulation of electric vehicles and especially how modeling and simulation are applied in
the education of EcoMechatronics. In engineering, the role of simulation is undoubt-
edly strictly woven into the design process, or in other words, modern design without
the involvement of simulation is exceptionally rare. Simulation is extensively used to
examinethecorrectnessofdesigns,inadditiontoitsuseasatooltobetterunderstandand
optimizetheperformanceand/orreliabilityofasystem.Ineducation,theroleofsimu-
lationisincludedmainlytoteachtheuseofsimulationinthedesignprocess.However,
also as an educational method, simulation plays a signiﬁcant role in the form of visu-
alization by means of animation and virtual prototyping. Contrary to the engineering
design process where the choice of a simulation method and complexity of the under-
lying mathematical model is done by the engineer to ﬁnally realize a prototype that
fulﬁlls expectations, for education the role of simulation is to aid the understanding of
the working principles of systems. Engineers seek the highest performance at the low-
estcost,whereasforeducationthegoalistoexplainthebehaviorofasystemormethod,
studytheapplicationbychangingparametersandcomparethedifferentresults.Inthis
chapter,thevariousmodelingmethodsarebrieﬂyexploredandcompared.Depending
on the domains in which the application is operating, the different modeling methods
are discussed. A worked-out example of a sustainable solar-powered electric vehicle
demonstrates the use of various simulation methods, along with their mathematical
modeling techniques.
P. J. van Duijsen (B)
The Hague University of Applied Sciences, Delft, The Netherlands
e-mail: p.j.vanduijsen@hhs.nl
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
P. Hehenberger et al. (eds.), EcoMechatronics,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-07555-1_18
307

308
P. J. van Duijsen
Introduction
How to apply simulation for education in the ﬁeld of EcoMechatronics? The simu-
lation should enhance the educational material and not become a subject of its own.
Therefore, the use of simulation and the underlying mathematical model should be
thoroughly investigated before putting it into practice. In EcoMechatronic systems,
sustainability becomes equally important, as is the combination of various technical
domains. This means the modeling should also include the special models for sustain-
able components used in EcoMechatronic systems like solar panels and wind genera-
tors, battery and ﬂywheel storage as well as control of electrical machines in electric
vehicles. Mechatronics covers a broad spectrum of various disciplines [5, 6]. In this
section,wewillconcentrateontheelectricalsystemsthatareusedinrenewableenergy
systems. This means that we will focus on motor drives for emobility [7], but not on
servo drives. Also, we will discuss solar power generation and storage (Fig. 1).
OverviewofApplications
Therearemanydifferentapplicationsrequiringvariousdisciplines.Inthissection,we
will focus on the electrical systems such as
• Electric drives,
• Solar power,
• Battery storage and
• eMobility.
Fig. 1 Education from textbook to virtual prototype

Education and Simulation for Electric and Mechatronic Systems in Renewable Energy
309
Thequestionisifanapplicationismechatronicorsomethingelse?Inreality,various
applications are a combination of an actuator with mechanical load, its power supply
withanenergysourceanditscontrol.Varyingfromasmallplungeruptoahigh-power
tractiondrive,thetechniquesandtoolsfordesigningthatsystemarefairlysimilar.The
physicalrelations,convertedintoamathematicalmodel,areﬁnallysolvednumerically
to obtain static and/or dynamic behavior.
Because of this reason, the methods outlined in the next sections apply to various
applications,butbecausethistextislimitedinlength,wewillconcentrateontheappli-
cation of a traction drive for an electric passenger vehicle.
Inanelectriﬁedtractiondrive,variousdomainsarecoupled,likemechanics,electric,
thermal and hydraulic. Control is a combination of basic analog control ICs on the
lower level, up to embedded digital control for the complete system at the top level.
Using the electric vehicle as an application example throughout this chapter allows us
toemphasizeonmodelingandsimulationtechniquesforalargeamountofmechatronic
applications.
EducationalMethods
There is nothing wrong with a classical printed textbook with static pictures. On the
contrary, this source of information is still required to cover the complete topic and
explain in detail the physical and mathematical relations. However, adding additional
training methods such as visualization and worked-out numerical examples enriches
the classical textbook.
Textbook
The textbooks give a good overview of the subject and can detail the evaluation of the
mathematical relations that describe the behavior of each mechatronic system. How-
ever, practicing those equations requires something more, as will be outlined next.
NumericalExamples
Worked-out numerical examples are valuable since they give insight into the nominal
numerical values used in the equations. For example, for an electro-technical student,
thenumericalvalueofinertiaofamechanicalloadinaservosystem,orforalargeindus-
trialdrivelikeamill,isnotsoobvious.Themaximumratingsofanoperationalampliﬁer
regarding output voltage range, current sink capability and slew rate are understand-
able for him, but a student in the mechanical domain might not be familiar with those
values. The equations should not be too complicated, just detailed enough, such that

310
P. J. van Duijsen
Fig. 2 Animation shows the relation between the angular rotor position, back-emf and outputs from
the Hall sensors. The student can choose between 60 and 120◦Hall sensor placement and rotate the
rotor manually to evaluate the momentaneous back-emf and sensor values [16]
students can follow the approach. For the more detailed numerical examples, the use
of simulation (including the explanation of its model and parameters) can give a bet-
ter understanding. Especially when the student can do parameter variations and can
observe the inﬂuence of design parameters on the system’s behavior.
Animation
Animationcanbringtheﬁguresfromthetextbooktolife.Manualinteractionbysetting
parametersorshiftingslidersimmediatelyshowstheirinﬂuence.Figure2givesinsight
intowhat Hall signals aregeneratedwhentherotor has acertainangular position. Sec-
ondly, it gives information on the back-emf of the motor and when the current through
each winding should be energized.
Design Tool
The design tool is of help when students encounter an application for the ﬁrst time
and have not yet ﬁgured out the size of each component and its parameters. The design
toolsimpliﬁesandgivesdefaultvaluesfordedicatedapplicationsanddirectlyprovides
parameters,graphsandstaticanddynamicbehavior.Changingparametersand/orcom-
ponent size directly reveals their inﬂuence, even if the student is not familiar with the
operation of the application yet. For example, selecting the values of components in a
simulation tool can be challenging if its behavior is unclear and has to be studied. In a
design tool, the student has a default value as the starting point. Also, the design tool
calculates required parameters after changing the size of a component. For example,
thegainandtimeconstantofaproportional-integralcontrollerinathree-phaseinverter
drive with a permanent magnet synchronous machine [12] are calculated and used as

Education and Simulation for Electric and Mechatronic Systems in Renewable Energy
311
Fig.3 DesigntooldirectlygivesdefaultvaluesforPIcontrollersandcalculatesthedynamicbehavior
in Caspoc [16]
defaultvaluesforagivenelectricmachinesize.Thestart-uptransientresponseofsuch
a drive is then immediately calculated and displayed in the design tool, as can be seen
in Fig.3.
Simulation andAnimation
Simulation shows the dynamic behavior of the overall system. For design and veriﬁ-
cation, simulation can become complex, but for educational purposes, the simulation
and its underlying model and parameters should be as simple as possible. Animation
during the simulation reveals visual insight into the application. For example, the ﬂow
and amplitude of a current through an electric circuit can be visualized as well as the
rotation of a drive train.
VirtualPrototype
Preparing students before going into the laboratory can be done using a virtual pro-
totype. In Fig.4, an electric drive laboratory exercise can be practiced in advance, and
evenfaultconditionscanbestudied.Asthevirtualprototypehasthesamelookandfeels
as the real setup in the laboratory, students are better prepared when starting the prac-
tical assignment in the lab. Also, for explaining basic electronics, virtual breadboards,
as shown on the right side in Fig.4, can be used [16].

312
P. J. van Duijsen
Fig. 4 Virtual laboratory of an induction machine-driven fan on the left side and basic electronics
using a virtual breadboard on the right side
Laboratory Assignment
Nothing beats the look and feel of a real practical assignment, but certain results are
hard or sometimes even impossible to measure and show, because of safety or difﬁ-
culty to measure. For example, how to show the magnetic ﬁeld distribution within an
electromagnetic actuator during full operation, or the ﬂow of current in all branches of
the circuit at the same time.
However, the combination, where students can prepare the laboratory assignment
usingdesigntools,simulationandanimationtoolsandvirtualprototyping,helpsthem
to understand what is happening in the laboratory setup on forehand. Secondly, after
going through the virtual prototype, the students are prepared for the laboratory setup.
Remote Laboratory
Althoughmultiplestudentscanaccessaremotelaboratory,thereisstillalimitednum-
ber of seats available at the same time. Also, the fact that the result is displayed on a
computer screen, compared to a real physical measurement, positions this method at
the same level as a virtual prototype. Sharing an expensive laboratory setup among
several institutes can be arranged via an online booking system.
Verify LaboratoryResultswith Simulation Results
Verifying the predicted simulation results, with ﬁnal measurements, can give valuable
insight into both the shortcomings of a simulation model on one side and the unex-
pected behavior of real systems on the other side. Nevertheless, the differences can be
explained, in that a measurement is always containing noise and that the simulation
result only can be as good as the underlying model and its parameters.

Education and Simulation for Electric and Mechatronic Systems in Renewable Energy
313
ModelingDomains
The modeling domains, not only for mechatronics, but in general for engineering,
include the following [8]:
• Electrical,
• Electromagnetic/Electrostatic,
• Mechanical(Translational and Rotational),
• Hydraulic/Acoustic and
• Thermal.
Also, the signal ﬂow in a control is a modeling domain of its own, but is physically
implemented as an electronic or mechanical system and therefore not included in the
list above.
The mathematical relations are equivalent in the above domains and are important
to understand by the students when moving between the domains [9].
Domain
Across
Through
Electrical
Voltage
V [v]
Current
I[A]
Mechanical (Translational)
Speed
v[m/s]
Force
F[N]
Mechanical (Rotational)
Angular speed
ω[rad/s]
Torque
T [Nm]
Electromagnetic
Field intensity
H[A/m]
Flux
B[T ]
Electrostatic
Field intensity
E[v/m]
Flux
D[C/m2]
Hydraulic, Acoustic
Pressure
P[Pa]
Flow
Q[m3/s]
Thermal
Temperature
T [C]
Power
P[W]
Before starting going in depth on a speciﬁc application, it is worth to introduce the
similaritiesinmodelingtothestudents.Thishelpsinunderstandingphysicalproperties
outside the scope of a student’s discipline. For example, students who are profound in
electricsystemswillunderstandthemechanicalrelationsmucheasierwhentherotating
mass or inertia is modeled by a capacitor.
Ic = C dUc
dt
(1)
T = J dω
dt
(2)
By simply replacing current with torque and voltage by angular speed, an electrical
engineering student will better understand the numerical value for the inertia J. Sec-
ondly, it will help him to set up a multi-domain model as he will be able to translate
componentsfromonetoanotherdomain.Letustaketheexampleofapermanentmag-
net dc motor. From an electric viewpoint, the motor has a winding resistance R and
inductance L, and there is a back-emf voltage Uem f , depending on the angular speed
ω of the rotor. From a mechanical viewpoint, there is a rotating mass(the shaft) with
inertia J, that is driven by a torque T , originating from the current through the stator
winding. Those two models are each given by their own symbols; see Fig.5.

314
P. J. van Duijsen
Fig. 5 Electrical and
mechanical domains for a
permanent magnet dc motor
Fig. 6 Coupled electrical
and mechanical domain by an
ideal model
We can use a dedicated actuator model to couple both domains, and in this case, the
ideal dc motor; see Fig.6.
Combining both domains using a four terminal ideal transformer with gain K, see
Fig.7, couples the electric and mechanical domains as
T = K · i
(3)
Uem f = K · ω
(4)
Becauseofthewideavailabilityofsimulatorsforelectriccircuits,themotorisoften
modeled in the electrical domain where the mechanical domain is translated into the
electrical domain; see Fig.8.
Here, the inertia J as given in (2) is replaced by a capacitor. The capacitor current
is related to the torque via (3) and the capacitor voltage is related to the angular speed
by4.Anidealtransformergivenby (3)and(4)isnowmodeledbyacurrent-controlled
currentsource,forthecurrentandtorquerelation(3),andavoltage-controlledvoltage
source, for the angular rotor speed and the back-emf voltage (4), as shown in Fig.9.
Themainadvantageisthatnowtheentiremodelcanbehandledbyasinglesimulator
forelectriccircuits.Thecomplexityofthemodelcanevenbereducedbytransforming
thecomponentsontherightsideofthecouplingtotheleftside,takingintoaccountthe
gain K of the coupling; see Fig.10.
The model is now greatly simpliﬁed, but the results from the simulation have to
be interpreted accordingly. In the simulation, the output torque is measured via the
inductor current and is linearly proportional as given by (3). The back-emf Uem f is
Fig. 7 Coupled electrical
and mechanical domain by
controlled sources
Fig. 8 Coupled electrical
and mechanical domain by an
ideal transformer and
capacitor for modeling the
inertia

Education and Simulation for Electric and Mechatronic Systems in Renewable Energy
315
Fig. 9 Coupled electrical
and mechanical domain
using controlled source and
capacitor for modeling the
inertia
Fig. 10 Coupled electrical
and mechanical domain
represented by electrical
model
measured, which is linearly proportional to the angular speed ω by (4). In Fig.10, the
angular speed ω is now measured by the voltage across the capacitor and has to be
scaled according to (4). The value of the capacitor is scaled as given by (2) and (1) as
C = J/K 2.
In a similar way, thermal models are created and represented by their equivalent
circuitmodelaswillbeshowninthenextsectionontheunderlyingmathematicsofthe
model.
Mathematics ofModeling
Themathematicalmodelisusedtodiscoverthestaticordynamicbehaviorofthesystem
that is being studied. Depending on the result that is required, ﬁrst a decision has to
be made, on what kind of mathematical model is going to be used. For example, when
studyingacontrolsystem,ablockdiagramrepresentationoftheunderlyingdifferential
equations is mostlysatisfactory, but if onewants tosimulateananalogcontroller build
around op amps, a circuit simulation would be preferred.
1D Block Diagram
In a block diagram, a signal ﬂow from input to output is calculated.
2D Circuit model
Acircuitmodelistwo-dimensional,describingthemathematicalrelationsbetween
the across and through quantities obeying the two Kirchhoff laws:
Kirchhoff’sCurrentLaw:Thesummationofallcurrentsﬂowingintoacircuitnode
is zero.
Kirchhoff’s Voltage Law: The summation of all voltages in a closed loop is zero.
3D Finite Elements
Thermal,mechanic,magneticandelectricﬁeldproblemsaremainlydescribedby
alargenumberofmathematicalnon-linearrelationsandcanbedescribedbyeither
2D or 3D partial differential equations.

316
P. J. van Duijsen
BlockDiagram
TheBlockDiagramisinprincipleavisualizationofadifferentialequation[3, 4].There-
fore, it lends itself to describe dynamic systems as well as control structures. Its uni-
directional signal ﬂow can contain feedback loops as long as the loop is broken by
inserting memory blocks like an integrator block or delay block.
Naturally, physical dynamic systems can be written using causal mathematical
relations, so a block diagram using integrator blocks can be used. However, when
non-causal relations are included, a Differential Algebraic Equation [DAE] has to be
used[3, 4].Electriccircuitandmechanicalsystemscontainingnon-linearcomponents
almost all have to be modeled by a DAE.
Since modeling of a system in a mathematical model has to be done manually, this
type of modeling is not easy to understand in vocational training.
CircuitModel
A circuit model is a two-dimensional representation of a DAE, where the non-causal
relations are included easily.
Non-linear relations have to be modeled, but require the use of numerical solvers,
like the Newton-Raphson [NR] or Steepest Decent [Gradient] methods; see [1].
ModiﬁedNodalAnalysis[2]isappliedinmostpopularcircuitsimulationprograms,
because of the straightforward implementation and the inclusion of non-linear math-
ematical relations. Two-dimensional Finite Difference Methods [FDM], for solving
two-dimensional electromagnetic and heat spreading problems, can be seen as circuit
models,basedonﬁrst-orderdifferentialequations.Forexample,heatspreadingunder-
neath a semiconductor is modeled by a one-dimensional Foster or Cauer network con-
taining resistors and capacitors. Modeling the thermal coupling between two adjacent
semiconductorsasathermalresistorchangesthemathematicalmodelfromﬁrst-order
differential equations into two-dimensional partial differential equations. Modeling
the connections in a circuit model represents the actual layout of the system and is,
therefore, easy to understand.
Finite Elements
Finite Element Method [FEM], Boundary Element Method [BEM], Finite Difference
Method[FDM]andMethodsofMoment[MoM]areusedintwoandthree-dimensional
problems for all disciplines; see [18]. The application in education is limited to the
higher grade classes, because of the complexity of the underlying mathematical prin-
ciplesandtheunderstandingofcorrectmeshing.Althoughappliedinmechanicalengi-
neering for stress analysis and in heat transfer for ﬂuid and airﬂow, the user interface

Education and Simulation for Electric and Mechatronic Systems in Renewable Energy
317
hidesthecomplexityoftranslatingthephysicalapplicationintoamathematicalmodel
and the choices made regarding meshing and material properties. Also, there is nearly
no insight into the inﬂuence of certain parameters of the application on the results, for
example, the inﬂuence of the thickness of a rod on bending. Only multiple simulations
with parameter variations give numerical insight.
ThermalMathematicsExample
The losses and thermal behavior are typical examples of how different types of math-
ematical equations are used to calculate the behavior. In the ﬁrst place, a simple linear
relation states that power loss through a thermal resistor will give a temperature rise,
calculated as
T = Tambient + Ploss · Rthermal
(5)
Thisgivesaveryrudeﬁrstguessregardingmaximumtemperatureatmaximumpower
loss. A simple block diagram containing a single multiplication would sufﬁce.
However,thetemperatureriseisadynamicprocess,andthetemperature-dependent
variationoftheparametersofsemiconductorswitcheslikeMosfetsinﬂuencesthegen-
eratedlosses.Thedynamicbehaviorcanbemodeledbyadifferentialequation.Acircuit
modelcontainingresistorsandcapacitorscanmodelthedifferentialequation[13];see
Fig.11a.
The power loss from a semiconductor is represented by a ﬂow and modeled by a
currentsource;thethermalresistanceismodeledbyanelectricresistor,andacrossthis
resistor, the electric voltage is the temperature rise or fall. Masses that store thermal
energy are modeled by a capacitor. The temperature of the mass is represented by the
voltage across the capacitor, as shown in Fig.11a.
ThisequivalentcircuitmodelfromFig.11amodelsthethermalbehavioroftheMos-
fet correctly, as long as the parameters for the equivalent circuit model are chosen cor-
rectly.
When the cooling components cannot be modeled by an equivalent electric circuit,
because of the complex structure of that component, a partial differential equation has
to be used to solve the temperature distribution. A Finite Element or Finite Difference
thermal model is then used to calculate the heat spreading on the surface of the printed
circuit board; see Fig.11b.
To model the thermal spreading of the power loss in a printed circuit board, a 2D
modelwouldbetheﬁrstapproachtostudytheheatspreading.AFEMpackagecouldbe
used, but analternativeapproachis touseacircuit simulator andmodel heat spreading
bya2Dcircuitmodelcontainingresistorsandcapacitors.Formodelingtheheatspread-
ing in a circuit simulator, 2D and even 3D models are possible, as shown in Fig.12. A
2D model would contain a single layer from the model in Fig.12 and only the con-
ducted heat ﬂow is considered. By connecting the ‘upper’ and ‘lower’ nodes, the two-
dimensional models become three-dimensional.

318
P. J. van Duijsen
Fig. 11 Thermal modeling for power electronic losses
Fig. 12 Thermal modeling of three layers in a printed circuit board [13]
ModelingDetail
Depending on the goal of the outcome of the simulation, one has to choose a level of
modeling. Easiness of using the model should be evaluated against the complexity of
the model and the number of required parameters; see Fig.13.
Theaffordablesimulationtimeistypicallywhattheuserexpectsandwhatisknown
asgettingsimulationresultsimmediately,afteracoffeebreakorovernight.Increasing
the model complexity and therewith the number of parameters also increases simu-
lation time. Therefore, only a short time period can be simulated. So, for example, to
simulate the detailed transient ringing during on-off switching of the semiconductors
taking place on a nanoseconds scale should not be combined with a complete drive
cycle simulation for an electric vehicle taking 1200 s for a typical drive cycle. In that
case, an averaged model with a maximum simulation time step of, for example, 1 ms
to 100 ms should be used.
Acomplexmodelcanbesupportedbyjustafewparametersifinternallythedetailed
parameters of the model can be derived from just a very basic set of parameters from
theuser.Atypicalexampleisthedetailedparametersfortheelectromagneticrelations
in a synchronous generator based on a single parameter, being only the power level.

Education and Simulation for Electric and Mechatronic Systems in Renewable Energy
319
Fig. 13 Model complexity versus simulation time
FirstGradeCourses
Simulationtoshowbehaviorforﬁrstgradecoursesrequiresalimitedsetofparameters,
but needs internally a complex model to mimic dynamic behavior in detail. Take the
example of the solar module for which we would like to see the characteristic current-
voltage relation for various solar insolation values; see Fig.14. To measure these char-
acteristicsinasimulation,wewouldﬁrstneedadetailedsolarmodulemodel,andithas
tobeloadedwithavariableloadtomeasureeverypossibleloadpoint;seeFig.14a.For
aﬁrstgradecourse,thiswouldbeover-complicatingthesubjecttodiscuss,namelyhow
do voltage and current change when there is more or less solar insolation. Dedicated
solar module models that can be fed with basic parameters like the number of cells in
series and the overall size of the module, temperature and a typical efﬁciency indica-
tion give enough information to obtain the characteristics [14, 15]. By including the
numerical values for the series wire and parallel leakage resistance, the characteristic
can even be tuned to the characteristic given in the datasheet. To see the characteris-
tic for various solar insolation values, this parameter is directly set to step from 100 to
1000 W/m2 in steps of 200 W/m2; see Fig.14b. Each time the parameter is stepped,
the complete characteristic was drawn in the scope.

320
P. J. van Duijsen
Fig. 14 Characteristics for a solar module for various solar insolation values in Caspoc [16], which
is varying from 100 to 1000 W/m2 in steps of 200 W/m2
Fig. 15 PID controller modeled by Block Diagram in Caspoc [16]
DetailedSimulation
Detailed models where all parameters are accessible to the user to show the non-linear
inﬂuence of parameters of components in the overall system sometimes require a dif-
ferent approach. Take the examples of a PID controller as modeled in Fig.15. Only a
single parameter per block is required, being the P, the I and the D value. The sim-
ulation will nicely calculate the transient response to an input step function, but will
neglect any saturation, bandwidth and slew rate issues known with PID controllers.
If the simulation is modeled by a more detailed circuit model, the Op amp model
takes care of those linearities; see Fig.16. The drawback is that you have to know how
thecircuitwillbedesignedandwhatthecircuitparametersaregoingtobe.Butthesim-
ulation will now include the saturation because of the supply voltage and the transient
response is now in accordance with the bandwidth and slew rate limitations of the Op
amp.
Fig. 16 PID controller modeled by a circuit model with op amps in Caspoc [16]

Education and Simulation for Electric and Mechatronic Systems in Renewable Energy
321
Fig. 17 Speed and current PI controllers modeled by block diagram and embedded into C code in
microprocessor [17]
ControlDesign
Veriﬁcationofcontrolmethodsandtheinﬂuenceofparametersonthedynamicbehav-
ior is one of the important aspects of simulation. From the control structure, C code
for the embedded microcontroller should be possible to derive and to be implemented
into the target hardware. If we take the PID control example from Fig.15, C code can
directly be exported. A typical current control in a drive system modeled in Caspoc-
Embed [17] is shown in Fig.17. In this ﬁgure, the PID controller from Fig.15 is part
of a larger model that is modeled on different abstract layers. Finally, the C code for
the complete control is exported and uploaded into the target hardware and the control
system can be tested on the real target hardware.
Example Simulation
Two open-source numerical methods are presented to simulate the acceleration and
powerconsumptionofanelectricvehicle.Theﬁrstdemonstratestheusageofaspread-
sheet,andthesecondisanumericalintegrationmethodimplementedusingJavaScript
in an Internet browser.
Using a simulation program in a spreadsheet, you can see how the drive cycle is
used to calculate the amount of power required to drive the vehicle and how much the
battery is discharged. Since this is primarily a calculation based on the data from the
drive cycle, a simple spreadsheet can be used.
Toperformasimulation,anumericalintegrationmethodhastobeapplied.Insteadof
using a commercial simulation program, the simulation is programmed in JavaScript,
and HTML is used to visualize the results. All results can be viewed numerically in a
browser.

322
P. J. van Duijsen
Drive Cycle
The drive cycle is a look-up table containing the speed of the vehicle against time [10,
11]. From this data, the acceleration is calculated, from which the required power to
drive the vehicle is calculated. The spreadsheet from the companion website https://
caspoc.com/books/ecomech/ containstheEUDCdrivecycle,whereintheﬁrstcolumn
thetimeinsecondsandinthesecondcolumnthespeedofthevehicleinkm/haregiven.
The intermediate speed during two time points can be achieved by interpolation, but is
not really required. We are only interested in the acceleration during that time step and
the average speed. Both are calculated from the time and speed information as
ai = ( 1
3.6)vi −vi−1
ti −ti−1
(6)
vi
average = ( 1
3.6)vi + vi−1
2
(7)
where v is the speed of the vehicle in kilometer per hour, v0 = 0 and vaverage is the
average speed in meter per second. The time steps are given by the index i and t is the
time in seconds. From this, the amount of traction force Ft[Nm] required to drive the
vehicle is calculated. First, the road load force Fr, the slope force Fs and the drag force
Fd are calculated as well as the force required to accelerate the vehicle Fa
Fs = m · g · sin(α)
(8)
Fr = m · g · cr · cos(α)
(9)
Fd = 1
2ρ · cd · A · vaverage
2
(10)
Fa = m · a
(11)
wherem isthetotalmassofthevehicleinkg,g ≈9.8 m/s2 isthegravitationalconstant,
α is the slope of the road in radians, the road load coefﬁcient cr ≈0.01, drag coefﬁ-
cientcd ≈3.5,ρ = 1.25 kg/m3 istheairdensityandthefrontalarea A ≈2.4 m2.The
accelerationa inm/s2 andtheaveragevehiclespeedvaverage inm/s aretheinputsfrom
the columns from the spreadsheet.
The amount of power P[Watt], traction motor torque Tm[Nm] and current
Ibattery[A] required are then calculated from the total traction force Ft[Nm].

Education and Simulation for Electric and Mechatronic Systems in Renewable Energy
323
Ft = Fs + Fr + Fd + Fa
(12)
Tm = 1
nrw · Ft
(13)
ωm = n vaverage
rw
(14)
P = Tt · ωm
(15)
Ibattery =
P
Vbattery
(16)
where Vbattery[V ] is the battery voltage, n ≈4 is the gear ratio between the electric
machine and the drive axis andrw ≈0.3 is the wheel radius. The gear ratio is approxi-
matelysetsuchthatthemotorrotateswith314 rad/swhilethevehiclerunsat80 km/h
to 100 km/h.
For each time period indicated by the index i, the traction force, motor torque and
speedarecalculatedandaredisplayedinnewcolumns.Usingthespreadsheetexample,
the parameters of the vehicle can be changed to calculate the consumption for various
types of vehicles (Fig. 18).
Electric VehicleSimulation
In the previous paragraph, speed and acceleration were given in a look-up table. But if
weareinterestedinknowingthespeedforagivenmaximummotorpowerandtorque,a
numericalsimulationinthetimedomaincanbeperformed.Forthis,weneedthediffer-
ential equations describing the system, and using a numerical integration method, the
dynamicresponseinthetimedomaincanbesimulated.Sincevehiclespeedandaccel-
eration have to be calculated and are not given in a table like in the previous example,
they are calculated in the same way as the maximum torque from the electric machine.
Fig. 18 Parameters of the electric vehicle for the drive cycle simulation in an spreadsheet, with the
graphical representation of electric vehicle speed [km/h] and wheel torque [Nm]

324
P. J. van Duijsen
Ft = n · Tm
rw
(17)
Fa = Ft −(Fs + Fr + Fd)
(18)
a = Fa/m
(19)
where Fs, Fr and Fd are calculated as in (8), (9) and (10).
The differential equation a = dv
dt is now rewritten into an integral form
v =

time
a dt
(20)
The numerical integration of the integral in (20) is a good exercise in numeri-
cal simulation in the time domain, as students can learn the inﬂuence of the simu-
lation time step dt and will understand on how to rewrite a differential equation in
the form of an integral equation that can be solved numerically. There are various
numerical integration methods that can be taught here, but as a ﬁrst introduction,
Forward Euler [1] is easy to implement,
vi+1 = vi + dt · ai
(21)
ti+1 = ti + dt
(22)
where i is the index for each numerical integration time step and time t is updated for
each numerical integration time step with the integration step size dt.
The listing below shows the implementation of the mathematical relations using
JavaScript.
1 t =0;
2 while (t <= Tsim )
3
{
4
Ft=n*Tm/rw;
//
Traction
force
5
Fs=m*g* Math . sin( alpha );
//
Road
slope
force
6
Fr=m*g*cr* Math .cos( alpha );
//
Road
load
force
7
Fd =0.5* rho*cd*A*v*v;
//
Drag
force
8
a=(Ft -Fs -Fr -Fd)/m;
//
Acceleration
9
v=v+dt*a;
//
Calculate
new
speed
v
10
t=t+dt;
//
Update
time
with
dt
11
document . write (" Time ="+t+"[s] Speed ="+v+"[m/s]<br >");
12
}
Listing 18.1 Javascript source code for calculating vehicle speed where Tsim is the total simulation
time
Instead of using a commercial simulation software, Listing 1 shows how to set up
suchabasicsimulationusingJavaScriptanddisplayresultsusingHTMLinastandard

Education and Simulation for Electric and Mechatronic Systems in Renewable Energy
325
Internet browser. Only a text editor is required to create the HTLM/JavaScript page,
and the browser will take care of the interpretation and calculation of the JavaScript.
Worked-OutExample
In this example, the different simulation methods and their underlying mathematical
modelsaredescribed.Itisnottheintentiontoderiveasinglebulkymodelthatincludes
allaspects,butmoreanattempttoguidethereaderonwhichsimulationmethodisbest
suited for a speciﬁc component. Instead of focusing on a single mathematical model
thatincludesallbehavior,ortryingtocoverallpossiblemathematicalmodelsthatcould
be used, for some typical components, a single simulation method is demonstrated
based on a mathematical model that includes just enough detail to verify the dynamic
behavior. Based on the vehicle simulation from the previous section, in the following
online sections, typical components are discussed, and how to apply simulation for
such a component is also discussed (see Fig. 19).
Companion Website
On the companion website https://caspoc.com/books/ecomech/ you will ﬁnd the
worked-out examples as well as the spreadsheet for the drive cycle simulation and the
simulation of the electric vehicle (Fig. 20).
Fig.19 InamultiphysicalsimulationinCaspoc[16],theentireelectricalmodelfromthesolarpanel,
via batteries, dc-dc converters, inverter and control to the wheel is included

326
P. J. van Duijsen
Fig. 20 Examples on the https://caspoc.com/books/ecomech/ page
Conclusions
The application of modeling and simulation in EcoMechatronics, for the purpose of
education, is various. Teaching the basic principles of mechatronics, simulation and
especially animation enriches the process of education. Simulation can be applied in
all educational stages, to enhance the understanding, but also to replace laboratory
assignments with virtual prototypes. The complexity of the mathematical model,
underlying the simulation in EcoMechatronic systems, depends on what kinds of sim-
ulation results are required by the user. Depending on this, simple or more detailed
models are to be used. The chapter concludes with two basic simulation examples that
canbereproducedwithouttherequirementofthird-partysoftware.Anelectricvehicle
combines many aspects of EcoMechatronics and is, therefore, used as an application
in these simulations. More detailed simulations of a solar power electric vehicle are
available on the companion website https://caspoc.com/books/ecomech/.

Education and Simulation for Electric and Mechatronic Systems in Renewable Energy
327
References
1. Press WH et al (2007) Numerical recipes 3rd Edition: the art of scientiﬁc computing. Cambridge
University Press; 3rd edn. ISBN-13:978-0521880688
2. Ho CW, Ruehli A, Brennan P (1975) The modiﬁed nodal approach to network analysis. IEEE
Trans Circuits Syst 22(6):504–509. https://doi.org/10.1109/TCS.1975.1084079
3. DorfR,BishopR(2016)Moderncontrolsystems,13thedn.Pearson.ISBN-13:978-0134407623
4. Bishop RH (2017) Mechatronic systems, sensors, and actuators: fundamentals and modeling
(Electrical Engineering Handbook) 2nd ed. CRC Press. ISBN-13:978-0849392580
5. Schiessle E, Wolf F, Linser J, Vogt A (2002) Mechatronik 1. Vogel Communications Group
GmbH & Co, KG. -13:978-3802318603
6. Schiessle E, Reichert M, Ruf W, Vogt A (2002) Mechatronik 2. Vogel Communications Group
GmbH & Co, KG. -13:978-3802319044
7. Emadi A (2005) Handbook of automotive power electronics and motor drives. Taylor & Francis
Inc. ISBN:978-0-8247-2361-3
8. Heimann B, Albert A, Ortmaier T, Rissing L (2015) Mechatronik: Komponenten-Methoden-
Beispiele. Carl Hanser Verlag GmbH & Co, KG. -13:978-3446444515
9. Lenk A, Pfeifer G, Werthschützky R (2001) Elektromechanische Systeme, Mechanische
und akustische Netzwerke, deren Wechselwirkungen und Anwendungen. Springer-Verlag.
ISBN:978-3-662-06984-4
10. Guzzella L, Sciarretta A (2015) Vehicle propulsion systems: introduction to modeling and opti-
mization, 3rd edn. Springer. ISBN: 978-3642438479
11. Ehsani M, Gao Y, Longo S, Ebrahimi K (2018) Modern electric, hybrid electric, and fuel cell
vehicles, 3rd edn. CRC Press. ISBN: 978-1498761772
12. Schröder D (2015) Elektrische Antriebe-Regelung von Antriebssystemen. Springer Vieweg,
4.Auﬂ. ISBN:978-3642300950
13. Lutz J, Schlangenotto H, Scheuermann U, De Doncker R (2018) Semiconductor power devices:
physics, characteristics, reliability, 2nd edn. Springer. ISBN:978-3319709161
14. Quaschning V (2019) Regenerative energiesysteme: Technologie-Berechnung-Klimaschutz,
10th edn. Carl Hanser Verlag. ISBN: 978-3446461130
15. MertensK(2020)Photovoltaik:LehrbuchzuGrundlagen,TechnologieundPraxis,5thedn.Carl
Hanser Verlag. ISBN:978-3446464049
16. Caspoc (2021) Simulation research. https://www.caspoc.com/
17. Caspoc-Embed, Caspoc (2022) https://caspoc.com/embed
18. Binns KJ, Lawrenson PJ, Trowbridge CW (1995) The analytical and numerical solution of elec-
tric and magnetic ﬁelds. Wiley. ISBN: 9780471962427

Robot-Assisted Teaching—The Future
of Education?
Robert Rayner, Kristina Kerwin, and Nicholas Valentine
Introduction
One of the most recent and signiﬁcant developments in education in recent times is
the creation of new, innovative teaching aids. These new educational products aim to
help teachers provide students of all ages with a more varied and engaging learning
experience, with the goal of allowing them to achieve better learning. One such tool,
which currently sits at the state of the art, is the creation of a variety of new robotic
education devices, each with their own set of features and capabilities. Whilst these
devices are no doubt fun and exciting for learners, much debate exists around their
pedagogical efﬁcacy. This chapter will seek to contribute to this debate, by providing
insights into the world of teaching with robots as experienced from the points of view
of three very different individuals, each looking at the topic from a very different
angle. Ultimately this chapter will seek to address the question, are robotic teaching
aids a passing fad, or are they really the future of education?
In Part I, Kristina Kerwin will consider the theory behind active learning and how
it ties with the use of robotic devices in teaching from the research perspective and
will look at a study that was carried out to demonstrate how the use of this state-of-
the-art technology can provide a more engaging and active learning experience for
pupils.
R. Rayner (B)
University of Hertfordshire, London, UK
e-mail: r.rayner2@herts.ac.uk
K. Kerwin
London South Bank University, London, UK
e-mail: kerwink2@lsbu.ac.uk
N. Valentine
UK Ministry of Defence, London, UK
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
P. Hehenberger et al. (eds.), EcoMechatronics,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-07555-1_19
329

330
R. Rayner et al.
In Part II, Robert Rayner will talk about his experience of using robots in teaching
wherehehasovertheyearsexperimentedwithavarietyofroboticsystemsasteaching
tools in his lessons and will share some of his experiences.
Finally, inPart III NickValentine, apractisingrobotics engineer, will thenconsider
the situation from a learner’s perspective and will depict how his interaction with
robotics in a classroom environment led to him pursuing a career in engineering. A
learner who was once inspired by a robot who became an engineer who builds them.
Part I—Kristina Kerwin
The Researcher’s View
It is argued [1] that true sign of mastery in the art of teaching is an ability to achieve
a state of deep learning in one’s students—a high level of sustained engagement that
translates into solid understanding of the topic and performance. Success depends
on the efﬁciency of the method by which the teacher delivers subject information
to the students. In the past, the dominant teaching methodology was based entirely
on directed instruction. More recently, researchers suggested that use of interactive
processes in learning has proven to be the most effective and is advocated as one of
the best practice methods. This approach is also known as Constructivist Approach,
and it is what UK curriculum Key Stages are based upon. It is also often referred to
as “active learning” or “hands-on/minds-on approach”.
Every modern-day classroom in the developed world takes the advantage of
currently available technologies to enhance student active learning. Thus in 2014,
BBC education correspondent Sean Coughlan reported that almost 70% of primary
and secondary schools in the UK used tablet computers [2]. Technologies such
as overhead projectors, social networking, online teaching, class blogs and wikis,
podcasting, interactive whiteboards, tablets, and mobile devices—are now consid-
ered as everyday staples in the UK schools. Further, it is predicted that education
will continue to improve through integration of new technologies and methods [3].
In recent years, commercially available robotic devices have attracted the atten-
tion of Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) educators. It is
perceived that these devices hold a great potential for enhancing active learning and
adding interactivity during the lessons. As a consequence, robots are being gradually
introduced to the classrooms as teaching aids, particularly when delivering STEM
subjects.
For example the Nao robot has recently been used successfully to teach Special
Educational Needs (SEN) students. Because of its humanoid appearance and lack
of distractive emotional facial expressions, Nao proved to be efﬁcient in teaching
children with autism. The robot is designed to be ﬁtted with sensors for different
applications and has an online interface that makes it fairly easy for teachers to

Robot-Assisted Teaching—The Future of Education?
331
customise their teaching sessions [4]. LEGO Robots [5] have been used in teaching
basics of control theory at HE and FE level and proved to be a popular tool among
university and college level students and staff.
There have been several other projects involving robots for teaching in the
recent years and in the UK one of these studies made it to GCSE curriculum as
a pilot syllabus aimed at KS3 and KS4 students with an aim to engage students in
STEM subjects and inspire them to pursue a career in engineering. The program
was designed to help students learn both practical and theoretical STEM skills
using FANUK robots in partnership with VEX robotics, teaching students about the
installation and maintenance of the robots within the manufacturing environment [6].
Another study, conducted by Faisal and Kapila [7] from the Polytechnic Insti-
tute of New York University tested the use of LEGO Mindstorm Robots [5] in an
elementary school to determine the advantages of the use of robotic devices over the
conventional instructional method of teaching. The study involved students working
in groups while conducting an activity that was designed to ensure that every child
team member participated. The researchers emphasised that the use of LEGO Robots
[5] was viewed by the students as a reward and offered a meaningful minds-on expe-
rience as well as accommodating for versatile learning styles and stimulating deep
learning.
Interestingly, Hobeika et al. [8], Gerraty et al. [9] and Bunzeck et al. [10] all
agree that having meaningful experiences beneﬁts human cognitive development
by connecting new information with already existing mental frameworks. This
process interconnects the brain networks associated with memory, insight, analogical
thinking, awareness, motivation and lastly—reward. Hence, there is a good argu-
ment that using toy robots to explain abstract STEM theory through play could bring
a positive input into the quality of teaching STEM subjects, with children being able
to retain more information long term. In addition, the versatility and programmability
of robotic toy kits also makes them well-suited for this task.
Nonetheless, although it has been strongly suggested that such devices could be
beneﬁcial as teaching aids, little work has been done to quantify their effectiveness.
Additionally, little work has been done to identify the best methods of using such
devices as teaching aids. In this context, research was carried out to study the efﬁcacy
of using LEGO Robots [5] to teach STEM subjects to primary school pupils. The
intension was to explore and quantify the effectiveness of using robotic devices in
teaching of STEM theory at UK Key Stage 2 (KS2), and to suggest the scheme of
best practice methods to do so [11].
The Theory of Learning
To fully evaluate the efﬁcacy of the use of robotic devices in the realm of teaching it
was important for me to understand the theory behind deep learning and what triggers
the effective information retention in students. Prior to building my experiment I felt
it was imperative to study different teaching approaches that involved active learning

332
R. Rayner et al.
and identify the most relevant method. The research carried out by Marton and Säljö
[12] categorised learning into two types:
Surface learning or short-term memory—All new information we receive is
initially stored as a short-term memory. In surface learning students only concen-
trate on the main facts of given information without understanding of the meaning
behind the material. In other words, they are memorising the information in a
disengaged manner. This is not an effective way of learning as most effort is spent
on memorising rather than understanding information. Obviously, when it comes
to recalling the material, signiﬁcantly less information is remembered [13].
Deep learning is where the real learning begins. Students transform the knowl-
edge they gain by exploring it deeper, aiming to understand the meaning behind
the written words in their textbooks. This learning process occurs when students
interact by getting real-life examples of the applications of information they learnt.
Contrary to memorisation, learners are engaged in critical thought. Because deep
learning is more engaging, the information is more likely to be retained long term.
It can be argued that the more actively one is engaged with the topic, the better
understanding of the topic is achieved leading to one’s development. According
to McLeod [14] the deeper the information processing level is during the learning
process, the easier it would be to recall later. In other words, characteristic of
deep learning is a high level of sustained engagement in the topic which then
translates into high level of understanding and performance [15]. The ultimate
goal in teaching is in-fact to achieve the state of deep learning in students. Marton
and Säljö [12] identiﬁed 6 conceptions of learning that students experience when
studying. Starting from the lowest those 6 conceptions are:
Conception 1—Quantitative increase in knowledge.
Conception 2—Memorisation.
Conception 3—Acquisition of facts for later use.
Conception 4—Abstraction of meaning or making sense.
Conception 5—Process designed to understand reality.
Conception 6—Personal development.
Frederic Reif suggests that knowledge can be split even further into the categories
of usable, effective, efﬁcient and reliable. Usable knowledge is knowledge deep
enough that it can be applied in different spontaneous situations [15].
It appears that in order to achieve the state of deep learning one needs to actively
engage the learners in the topic which can be realised through interaction and applica-
tion of the information using the real-world scenarios, also known as practical tasks.
Rosenshine [16] argues that best in their ﬁeld teaching practitioners always preferred
using hands-on activities after basic material was learned, as a most efﬁcient way of
ensuring that students acquired, rehearsed, and connected knowledge. He concludes
that the most efﬁcient way of supporting deep learning is through reiteration of the
information mixed with practical tasks after the end of each step of the lesson. This
active learning approach is historically known as or Constructivism. Traditionally,
there are two main schools of thought on constructivism:

Robot-Assisted Teaching—The Future of Education?
333
• Jean Piaget’s ‘Constructivism’. Piaget was a pioneer of the theory and the author
of the systematic theory of Cognitive Development [16].
• Lev Vygotsky’s Cultural-Historical theory and Zone of Proximal Development
(ZPD) [18].
Although advocating two different constructivist approaches, both theories agree
on the importance of delivering new knowledge to children through active learning
approach. Constructivist theorystems fromascientiﬁcstudybasedontheobservation
of humancognitivedevelopment. Inessence, it states that humans activelycreatetheir
own new skills, by exploring and assessing what they already know [19].
A constructivist approach considers a number of different teaching practices,
but it is narrowed down to encouraging students to use active techniques such as
practical experiments and real-world problem solving, and then accessing the learnt
information and reﬂecting on their understanding with some teacher guidance to help
build on the knowledge gained.
Piaget argues that children perceive four stages of maturation and experience, that
children are active learners and learn through assimilation and accommodation, the
key is interaction with physical and social environments. Piaget further states that
development occurs in 4 stages [20]:
1.
The sensorimotor—age 0–2.
2.
Preoperational—age 2–7.
3.
Concrete operational—age 7–12.
4.
Formal operational period—adolescence through to adulthood.
In 1988 in the UK the Education Reform Act was introduced [22] which brought
about the UK National Curriculum, in which constructivist theory is prevalent to
this day as is evident from its Key Stage structure. The most recent version of the
UK National Curriculum was introduced in September 2014. Inﬂuenced by Piaget’s
theory of Stages of Development, it consists of 4 Key Stages with each stage based
aroundaveragechild’sdevelopmentofthatage.Thecurriculumisdesignedtoaddress
the learning needs within the child’s ability [22].
Vygotsky’s Cultural-Historical Theory
In his Cultural-Historical theory Lev Vygotsky reasons that the role of culture and
socialinteractionsplayamajorpartinhumancognitivedevelopment.Vygotskystates
that any function in the child’s cultural development is biplanar: ﬁrst it appears on
the social plane, and then on the psychological plane. Speech is major psychological
tool in child’s development of thinking. With age and development of child basic
speech becomes more complex [23]. Vygotsky’s theory is guided by the following
basic assumptions:
1.
The knowledge derives from culture, community, and society.
2.
Speech and thought initially develop separately, then merge with maturation.

334
R. Rayner et al.
3.
Conversation with adults assists child development.
4.
Children are able to perform more challenging tasks if assisted by advanced
individuals—a technique called ‘scaffolding’.
5.
Play is accentuated as very important in the learning process since play leads to
abstract thought which in turn leads to higher mental functions.
6.
The difference between the ability to perform a task assisted, with minimal
assistance and independently is called Zone of Proximal Development and that
is where the learning occurs.
Although Piaget’s Constructivism is the preferred model in the modern-day
curriculum, it is interesting to note that Vygotsky’s theory found strong support in
contemporary models of professional development, where the emphasis is placed on
‘social interaction’ as means for faster development of professionals [24]. Further-
more, in recent years, Vygotsky’s sociocultural approach has been gaining popularity
among the educators and is often used together with standard teaching curriculum
methods and in teaching children with SEN [25].
As a matter of fact, there are several contemporary teaching theories stemming
from the Constructivist approach that have become popular in the recent decade. The
two classics have evolved and merged into new, more reﬁned theories that are appli-
cable in modern-day schooling. For example, Benjamin Bloom’s Taxonomy [26],
has underlying links to Paige’s constructivism. Bloom’s 3 main domains are based
on Paige’s cognitive stages and the constructivist theory that learning development
occurs on the basis of building on the previous knowledge. However, it also inter-
links with Vygotsky’s theory of scaffolding as the means of identifying target skills
needed for learning.
To date, there is no single distinctive theory that offers a perfect solution to the
problem of maximising the process of deep learning. There is, however, a number
of different best practice methods that have been reviewed, modiﬁed, and combined
over the years, and they all agree that active learning with the guidance of an advanced
individual plays a big role in the quality of our deep learning.
Case Study—The Efﬁcacy of Teaching STEM Subjects
to Primary School Age Students Using LEGO Robots
A great part of all STEM related subjects is theory-based which is difﬁcult to deliver
via active learning. This lack of active learning affects students’ potential for deep
learning and their perception of STEM subjects in general. With this in mind, the
focus was on the delivery of the fundamentals of STEM theory to a young audience
because of their innate tendency to learn through play, selecting an abstract STEM
topic that would be difﬁcult to convey in an active, tactile manner. The aim was
to measure the state of deep learning achieved through the use of robots in class vs
conventional teaching methods and to quantify the effectiveness of using robotic toys
in delivering STEM related subjects to KS2 students. The chosen age group was Year

Robot-Assisted Teaching—The Future of Education?
335
Fig. 1 Systematic procedure
in the form of a lesson plan
 
Teacher introduces the 
lesson
Quiz 1
(5 min)
Presentation
Theory
(10 min)
Construction 
on previous 
knowledge
Practical
(25 min)
Quiz & option 
questionnaire
(25 min)
Lesson plan
50 min
5 KS2 students (aged between 10 and 11 years). The taught theoretical STEM subject
was Speed. All the teaching materials and testing methods developed for the purpose
of the study reﬂected the age of the participants, incorporating constructivist (i.e.
Piaget’s)argumentthatchildrenperceiveseveralstagesofmaturationandexperience.
It was important to consider both the quality of deep learning and the quality of
children’s learning experience. The evaluation of the quality of deep learning was
achieved by using a 3-stage knowledge testing process in the form of a quiz and the
assessment of the learning experience was achieved using the opinion questionnaire.
To help establish the effect of using robotic aids on children’s deep learning, the
lesson was taught under controlled conditions using the lesson plan sown in Fig. 1.
This helped evaluate whether the input variable (of using robots in teaching) had
a signiﬁcant impact on the desired output and manifested in greater information
retention in children.
Two groups of children were taught the same topic using the same lesson plan
with one group being taught using robotic devices, another (control group) using
an alternative classic active learning method. The purpose of the experiment was
to compare the two approaches: lesson using the robotic devices versus the lesson
using classic teaching methods, to justify the use of robotic devices in teaching
STEM theory. A classic active learning method is also referred to as ‘bodystorming’
in the study. Bodystorming is a technique often used by product designers in the
ﬁrst stages of design process where subjects represent and act out different ideas
using their bodies (for example, when deciding where to put a particular feature on
a car seat). In this instance test subjects were using their bodies to solve a number of
velocity problems by running, walking, or jumping around the classroom.
Design of Experiment
To effectively carry out the experiment with minimal noise, the input was designed
in such a way that it could be applied universally using both models: with robotic
aids and without. It was noted that to further reduce the bias and ensure experiment
quality, it was favourable for both lesson variations to be delivered by the same

336
R. Rayner et al.
Table 1 Design of experiment
Input
Level
Responses
Lesson on speed
Controlled
Variables
Uncontrolled Variables
Age/KS/Year Group
Practical using
robotic aids
1. Teaching quality
2. Children’s cognitive
abilities
10 y/o KS2 Year 5
1. Quality of surface
learning
2. Quality of deep
learning
3. Quality of learning
experience
Practical using
bodystorming
teacher, however this was not practically possible in a school setting. It was also
essential that the children participating in the experiment were generally not familiar
with the topic, of similar age and were not streamed according to their cognitive
abilities (see Table 1). The method was designed to be suitable for an unassisted
third-party use, i.e. teaching practitioners were able to follow the experiment using
provided detailed instructions.
The reason behind choosing KS2 Year 5 s was, because in primary education
children are not separated into classes according to their cognitive abilities and are
not familiar with the topic, therefore the year group was in line with the parameters
outlined above in Table 1 and fell into normal distribution range, since randomisation
was necessary to avoid the impact of hidden variables.
The experiment was carried out at a primary school with a total sample of 45
students (two Year 5 groups: 23 (±1) mixed ability students in class). Each class
had its own teacher (a variable that could not be omitted). To assess the quality of
deep learning a 3-stage testing procedure was designed and delivered in the form of
a quiz which was given to the students at 3 instances: at the beginning of the lesson,
immediately after and 4 weeks after the lesson. The tasks were split into three levels
of difﬁculty to give children some feeling of conﬁdence, as difﬁcult testing could
result in negative feedback on learning experience which in turn could affect ﬁnal
results. Children were also told that they were expected not to be able to answer
the questions in the ﬁrst test as this is a completely new topic for them. They were
encouraged not to guess the answers. All 3 tests were identical in values, however, to
avoid any discrepancies in data collection, the test was designed in such a way that
it could be delivered to children on three different occasions without the danger of
basic memorisation. Hence, the multi-choice answers within the questions had been
shufﬂed while the actual answers remained the same for each question.
The lesson was designed around the questions asked in the Quiz, to ensure the rele-
vant information on the topic of speed could be learned and retained. This, however,
did not involve any direct answering or practicing of those questions. Detailed lesson
instructions and materials were given to teachers in advance of the lesson. Teachers
were also shown how to operate the robots prior to the lesson.

Robot-Assisted Teaching—The Future of Education?
337
Fig. 2 Task ﬂow diagram
The ﬁrst test was given to children at the beginning of the lesson to assess their
base knowledge level, followed by a short PowerPoint presentation on basic speed
theory and a warm-up task to encourage student interaction to construct on children’s
prior knowledge. After the warm-up task pupils were split into groups and were given
a worksheet with instructions and equipment for the practical task. In the group using
robots, teacher ﬁrst demonstrated how to operate the devices for pupils to be able to
follow on their own. In the control group the teacher explained about bodystorming.
There were 3 tasks in total for the practical part with enough iterations for each child
to take part as set out in Fig. 2. Each task reﬂected a different formula subject: speed,
time, and distance.
At the end of the lesson students were given the test again to assess the level of their
surface learning, and opinion questionnaire to assess their learning experience. It was
observed that children appeared more excited about the ﬁnal test part as opposed to
initial quiz and most of them vocally expressed feeling ‘clever’, because they were
able to answer the questions.
Results
A total of 45 children participated in the study: 21 pupils in the robotics group and
24 in bodystorming group. The year groups were mixed at a ratio of 5 girls to 6 boys.
Results reﬂecting on the quality of learning experience are shown in Fig. 3. Here, the
technology enhanced group (the group using the robots) is represented in light grey
with the bodystorming group in black. The results indicate that technology enhanced
group enjoyed the experience more. This group rated the ﬁrst 3 lesson activities
higher than the bodystorming group. During this time the robots were introduced
to the lesson and used in the practical task. The lesson wrap up was initiated while
children completed the second test (the ﬁnal stage of the lesson) and the drop in the
score for that stage of the lesson reﬂects that the children were no longer exited by
the activities of the lesson.

338
R. Rayner et al.
Fig. 3 Quality of learning experience—opinion questionnaire results
Childreninthetechnologyenhancedgrouponaveragescoredhigherintheopinion
questionnaire, despite initially perceiving STEM subjects with lower conﬁdence that
the other group, meaning they had greater quality of learning experience than the
bodystorming group, even though both groups were actively engaged in the lesson.
Level of Surface and Deep Learning Data Analysis
The Quiz results are shown in Table 2 and Fig. 4. By taking the mean average scores
from the available test results for both groups, it became obvious that the group
taught using robotic aids showed a higher percentage increase in subject knowledge
when the average scores were compared.
To quantify the degree of surface and deep learning in both groups, percentage
change was calculated between tests 1, 2 and 3 using the following metric:
% = Score 2 −Score 1
Score 1
× 100
First, by assessing the degree of surface learning, percentage change between
Tests 1 and 2 was calculated. The results show that the technology enhanced group
beneﬁted slightly more from the lesson on average with 76% vs 63% respectively.
This was further conﬁrmed when assessing participant individual scores, the group
taught using robots beneﬁted more in general, considering that group on average
scored lower in basic knowledge test (Test 1).
Next, percentage change was calculated between Test 2 (Level of Surface
Learning) and Test 3 (Level of Deep Learning, given 4 weeks after the lesson).
As can be seen from Fig. 4, there is a fair percentage decrease in the non-robotic
lesson group. This can be explained by the fact that over time (i.e., after 4 weeks)
children naturally forgot some of the information that they had learnt in the lesson,
which is in line with currently available literature on cognitive development stating
that forgetting rate when using best practice teaching methods can be up to 29% [27].

Robot-Assisted Teaching—The Future of Education?
339
Table 2 Mean average test scores
Group subject knowledge levels before and after lesson
Base knowledge
(%)e
Score percentage
change Test 1 v
Test 2 (%)
Score percentage
change Test 1 v
Test 3 (%)
Score percentage
change Test 2 v
Test 3 (%)
Test 1—base
knowledge
(points out of 9
points)
Test 2—surface
learning (points
out of 9 points)
Test 3—deep
learning (points
out of 9 points)
Group 1—Robots
29
76
107
17
2.64
4.65
5.44
Group
2—Bodystorming
43
63
28
−22
3.88
6.32
4.95

340
R. Rayner et al.
Fig. 4 Subject knowledge level percentage change all tests compared: Group 1—Robots v Group
2—Bodystorming
Overall, technology enhanced group showed a 17% increase in their Test 2 vs Test
3 average score. Group 1, the technology enhanced group scored higher 4 weeks later
than straight after the lesson, whereas average ﬁnal test score 4 weeks after the lesson
for Group 2, the group that used bodystorming method, decreased by 22%.
The Quality of Deep Learning score of the technology enhanced group has more
than doubled, considering their initial base knowledge score (in Test 1) which was
lower than the other group’s score. This indicates that the quality of deep learning in
the group that had the lesson using robots, is much greater than the group that was
taught using conventional best practice methods, although both groups have shown
a good degree of information retention long term.
It could be argued that although both groups appeared to have gained and retained
information long term in general, the fact that the technology enhanced group’s test
scores have more than doubled four weeks after the lesson, as opposed to naturally
decreasing over time, as was the case with the group that used conventional best
practice teaching methods, suggested that using robotic teaching aids signiﬁcantly
impacted on the quality of their surface and deep learning. Furthermore, the evidence
from the opinion questionnaire indicated that the quality of learning experience was
better for the technology enhanced group, although both lessons were taught in an
active manner using hands-on-minds-on approach. It should be noted that several
months after the experiment the math tutor involved in the delivery of the lessons
mentioned that the students still retained the knowledge on speed.
Conclusion—The Researcher’s View
Based on the ﬁndings of this research, it is safe to conclude that there is a positive
correlation between the levels of learning in test groups, and the presence of the
robotic teaching aids during the lesson. This also seems to have had a positive impact
on the quality of learning experience, conﬁrming that using robotic aids in teaching
can be an effective way of achieving greater information retention levels in learners.

Robot-Assisted Teaching—The Future of Education?
341
It is clear that there is strong evidence of pedagogical usefulness therefore suggesting
that robot-assisted lesson could well be a feature of future teaching.
Part II—Robert Rayner
The Educator’s View
An important aspect of being an effective communicator is to have the ability to
thoroughly understand the psychology of your audience. With this knowledge, it is
then possible to tailor the style and nature of the manner of your delivery to allow
you to best connect with their mindset. The best communicators are able to speak in
a way that draws in their audiences and captures their attention for just long enough
to convey their messages but does not demand so much attention from them as to
exhaust or bore them. Good communicators use a variety of tactics to draw in an
audience and extend the time that they can hold their attention. Good communicators
are also careful to use language, which is natural and easy to understand, avoiding,
for example, the use of overly complex technical jargon, which some members of
the audience might not understand.
Through my years working as a schoolteacher and university lecturer, prac-
tising and honing these fundamental communication skills has been instrumental
in increasing my ability as an educator. Thankfully, this aspect of my work has
been greatly aided by a large body of research, carried out over many decades,
into the ways in which people, and in particular youngsters, think and learn. This
research has result in the development of a wide variety of teaching methods and
classroom tactics, which have been evidenced to work with the psychology of young
minds to increase the chances of achieving the gold standard effect in teaching, deep
learning. The nature of these tactics and more speciﬁc information on the psycho-
logical mechanics of learning is discussed in the ﬁrst part of the chapter and so will
not be repeated here.
A daunting issue for modern educators is that a lot of the fundamental research
work into the mechanisms of learning is quite old, with the most signiﬁcant work by
Piaget et al. [18–20, 23–25] having been published over a century ago. A comforting
fact for educators of today is that the fundamental psychology of young people has
not changed signiﬁcantly since this work was done and the mechanisms of learning,
as identiﬁed all those years ago, are just as relevant in today’s twenty-ﬁrst century
world as they were when they were ﬁrst published. Vygotsky, Piaget et al. observed
that best learning was achieved when students are emotionally invested and engaged
in their lessons. Students have also been observed to learn best when they can draw on
their past experiences to reinforce and solidify the concepts being taught. Teaching
methods that can achieve these effects have been observed to be effective in drawing
in and holding the attention of students, putting their minds in the best possible
psychological state to take in and store information. These concepts are practical

342
R. Rayner et al.
embodiments of the pedagogical philosophy of constructivism and are embodied in
modern-day teaching practice in the theory of active learning.
Whilst the fundamental psychology of students has not changed over the decades,
arguably the expectations of students has become more demanding in recent times.
Teaching methods and teaching tools that might once have been seen as state of the
art may now be seen as dull and old fashioned by modern students. For example,
once upon a time, a textbook with coloured, high-resolution images included in its
pages might have been a thing of wonder and excitement to students. Today however,
such a feature is commonplace and so students are on the lookout for the next big
thing to entice and excite them during their learning journey.
In accordance with the teachings of Vygotsky, Piaget et al., signiﬁcant effort
has been placed in recent years to develop learning curricula that are rich in active
learning. The rationale for this work is evidential ﬁndings that active learning is both
more enjoyable for students and is a highly effective way of achieving better deep
learning. Developing of such curricula, is a long-standing challenge for teachers, with
the development of active learning teaching methods to teach fundamental aspects
of STEM subjects being particularly difﬁcult. To help overcome this problem a wide
variety of teaching tools have been developed, and made available for purchase by
educators, to facilitate a wide range of active learning activities. Particularly in more
recent times, some of these tools have been very technically advanced, with a plethora
of state-of-the-art products such as computer software and electronic devices being
released. Perhaps the current pinnacle of the state of the art of high-tech teaching
aids are robots.
A lot of debate currently exists in the teaching community regarding the efﬁcacy
of such devices as teaching aids. The ﬁrst part of this chapter, however, describes
research which suggests that robots could be highly effective teaching tools, and
can even provide a mechanism for the teaching of fundamental, theoretical STEM
topics using active learning methods. The work, however, describes the use of one
particular type of robot deployed in one particular lesson plan. The robot chosen in
the work was well understood by the research team, prior to the work being carried
out. The capabilities and limitations of the robot were well known, and signiﬁcant
preparatory work was done to identify the best way of using the robot. There are,
however, available today a wide range of other educational robotic devices, which
can be integrated into lesson plans in numerous different ways.
For educators looking to use robots in a teaching environment, choosing the right
robot for a particular purpose can be very daunting. Firstly, it can be difﬁcult to weigh
up the strengths and weaknesses of different robotic devices and to be able to identify
their key features. It can also be difﬁcult to understand how best to use a given robot
in a lesson. With robotic teaching aids being a relatively new development, there is
currently only a limited level of understanding of these issues. As a teacher who has
had the luxury to teach extensively using robots, I have experimented with numerous
robot-assisted lesson plans and observed hundreds of learners interacting with educa-
tional robots, with these interactions often leading to some surprising, unexpected
but pedagogically useful effects. Perhaps most importantly, I have experienced, ﬁrst-
hand how robots can be powerful teaching tools, drawing looks of amazement and

Robot-Assisted Teaching—The Future of Education?
343
awe from learners and providing them with learning experiences that are unique,
varied and highly memorable. In this section of this chapter, I will discuss some of
the key observations I have made whilst teaching with robots, observations that will
hopefully be useful for other educational professionals considering using them in
their lesson plans.
Reactions to Robots
As previously discussed, a particular challenge with modern students is that they are
invariably very forward looking and aspirational people. They are constantly looking
to the future to visualise what their future world could be like. With the rapidly
developing scientiﬁc and technological world in which we live today, this mindset
is entirely understandable and should be encouraged. The particular challenge that
this modern mindset presents educators, however, is that classical, tried, tested and
established teaching methods, such as the use of pens, paper and textbooks, can in
the presence of a rapidly technically developing world, appear to learners, outdated
and dull despite their proven pedagogical beneﬁts. An additional issue with current
teaching practice is that, in many classrooms around the world, the use of such
classical teaching methods is predominant with little variety in lesson plans being
practiced. This lack of variety can, understandably disengage some students from
the learning process as the repetitive use of a limited number of teaching methods
can over time become dull an uninteresting for them, limiting the quality of their
learning.
A particular issue with classical teaching methods is that, when contrasted to
some more modern equivalents, they lack the ability to effectively draw on modern
learners’ experiences and emotions, so limiting the scope for their active engagement
in the learning process, again limiting the quality of their learning. In an attempt to
combat this, signiﬁcant work has been done throughout the teaching community
to develop new, novel lesson plans which align more closely with the mindset of
modern students. The goal of these lesson plans is to make the learning experience
more engaging and varied for them, allowing them to immerse themselves more fully
in the learning process. One such development, is the use of educational computer
programs such as Kahoot, GeoGebra and Mathletics1 in teaching plans. Modern
students are well used to using computers in their everyday lives and so the use
of computers to assist with their learning feels natural and current for them. The
use of computer software also provides students with a different learning experi-
ence compared to classical teaching methods. The use of computer software assisted
lesson plans alongside lessons taught using traditional methods can add variety to
a curriculum, so making the learning experience more interesting, enjoyable and
engaging.
1 At www.kahoot.com/, www.geogebra.org & www.mathletics.com respectively.

344
R. Rayner et al.
An additional lesson style that has, to date, been less commonly explored, involves
the use of robots as teaching aids. As previously mentioned, I have taught numerous
lessons using robots and I have observed students universally enjoying and embracing
this form of lesson, no matter what the age of the student. Students understand that
robotics is an area of technology which is rapidly developing, with robots becoming
more advanced as time goes on. Some people, including me, believe that robots will
someday become integral parts of our everyday lives. Indeed, this is a vision of the
future that many futuristic, science ﬁction stories portray. As such students perceive
learning with robots as a glimpse of the future world, a world which fascinates
and captivates them. From a lesson planning point of view, the inclusion of lessons
including robots can allow educators to develop new teaching methods and new
lesson plans, which are distinctly different from those already developed. As such,
on the most basic level, the use of robots as teaching aids allows for additional lesson
variety in taught curricula.
In terms of pedagogical usefulness, much debate currently surrounds robots. In
concurrence with the ﬁndings of the investigation described in the ﬁrst section of this
chapter, I have found robots to provide a strong positive pedagogical effect. It must
be stated however that presently, due to the fact that the use of robots as teaching aids
is so rare, robot-enabled lessons currently enjoy a level of exclusivity and novelty
and are therefore extremely memorable for students. Indeed, whenever I have taught
classes with robots, students have freely commented to me that the class was a unique
experience, the like of which they had never experienced before.
This feedback in itself, is evidence of the pedagogical beneﬁt of robots which
they generate through their current novel status. The current rarity of lessons taught
using robots and the distinct nature of these lessons in contrast to what students
routinely experience, result in robot-enabled lessons to be viewed by students as
highly memorable, special events. Many students are able to remember these lessons
long into the future. Indeed, in the next section of this chapter, Nick Valentine,
now a grown adult, discusses how he can still vividly remember a lesson he was
taught involving a robot when he was just a young child. The positive psychological
effects of creating highly memorable events can be exploited by educators to achieve
excellent learning in students, with the use of robots providing a means of doing so.
Broadly speaking, when humans experience a particularly special event, memo-
ries of this event are placed in a portion of the brain responsible for long term memory
storage. These memories can be recalled and recollected from memory by individ-
uals, often with great accuracy, long periods of time into the future. By making an
educational event a memorable, special event, as information of the particulars of
the event is stored in long term memory, so too is information regarding the educa-
tional concepts being taught. Information regarding the event as well as information
regarding the educational concepts taught are then able to be recalled by individuals
long into the future. Since this process has resulted in educational information being
stored in long term memory and with this information also being easily retrievable,
it can be seen that the highest standard of learning, deep learning, has been achieved.
I have personally, exploited this powerful, novelty-driven, pedagogical effect in
a lesson plan to assist with the teaching of a fundamental mathematical concept. On

Robot-Assisted Teaching—The Future of Education?
345
Fig. 5 The Nao robot (© Robert Rayner)
this occasion, I used a humanoid, educational robot called Nao, manufactured by
Softbank Robotics,2 to teach an aspect of core algebra to a cohort of 15-year-old
boys. An image of this robot can be seen in Fig. 5.
In my lesson plan, I used the Nao robot as a robotic sidekick. With its ability to
generate audible speech and its ability to recreate human-like motion, the robot was
used to dictate and act out a story to provide a narrative for the lesson. This story
sought to provide an applied context for the mathematical concept being taught. The
cohort was enthralled by the robot and freely admitted that the lesson was unlike
any they had previously experienced. They also said that they had enjoyed the lesson
and found it fun and exciting. Evidence of the quality of learning achieved through
that lesson was evident when I taught the same cohort again over a year later. Whilst
the cohort struggled to recall and apply some other mathematical concepts taught
in other lessons, which had not involved robots, they were able to readily recall the
robot-assisted lesson and the mathematical concepts taught in that lesson, with great
accuracy. Since so much time had passed between the moment of memory recall
and the moment of teaching, there is strong evidence that deep learning had been
achieved.
It is important to note that in the robot-assisted lesson, the robot was used purely
as an actor, with which the students were not able to directly interact. The lesson
was very didactic in style with the lesson plan lacking in active learning elements.
This is of course a very sub-optimal way of teaching and a very sub-optimal way of
using the robot since it does not exploit its active learning enabling features. Despite
this however, the students were able to remember the lesson with extreme clarity,
an effect, which I suspect is due primarily to the novelty of the lesson. This would
2 www.softbankrobotics.com.

346
R. Rayner et al.
therefore suggest that currently, due to novelty, robots are able to generate a strong
positive pedagogical effect simply by the fact that they are used in a lesson. The
effect will occur even if the method of use of the robot is sub-optimal and even if the
robot has somewhat inappropriate features for a given lesson plan.
In the short term, educators can certainly exploit this novelty effect to amplify
the effectiveness of lessons but in the long term this effect cannot be relied on. Just
as students are no longer amazed by high-resolution images in textbooks, should
robots become commonplace in educational environments, they too will cease to be
viewed as exciting novel devices and this effect will be lost. In the long term what
will make robots useful as educational tools will be their designs, their combinations
of features and the way they will be integrated into lesson plans.
Robot Design—Creating Immersion and Relatability
A key component to achieving good learning is to create opportunities where learners
can directly engage with and immerse themselves in the subject matter and learning
process. This of course is a key ingredient for good active learning. A particular
beneﬁt of the use of computer software as a learning tool compared with classical
pen and paper-based learning, is the fact that using software allows students to be
more directly involved in the subject matter and to control their own learning process
moreﬂuidly.Theyarethereforegrantedanopportunitytoexperienceamoreengaging
learning experience resulting in better learning.
In my opinion, using robots as teaching aids can provide an even greater sense
of engagement and involvement in the learning process, especially if the lesson plan
requires students to independently solve problems through the control and manip-
ulation of the robot’s actions through direct interaction. I base this opinion, on the
observation that whilst a piece of educational software might provide excellent peda-
gogical results, the level of immersion of the software is limited by the fact that
the student has to engage with the experience through a two-dimensional computer
screen, with interaction being, typically through a computer keyboard and mouse.
These factors can isolate some students somewhat from the learning experience,
limiting their quality of learning. In contrast to this, no such barriers exist between
studentsandrobots,withrobotsbeingphysical,real-world,three-dimensionalobjects
which can be seen, touched and directly interacted with, sometimes even using verbal
and tactile inputs. This physical presence of a robot and the ability for students to
interact with such devices, sometimes using instinctive and simple means, presents
a far more immersive and engaging learning experience for students, allowing for
better learning to be achieved.
Even more effective active learning can be achieved if a learning activity requires
learners to use past life experiences and aspects of pre-knowledge in learning activ-
ities. Best learning has also been documented as being achieved when, learners are
able to create direct psychological bonds with the learning process. Robots, when

Robot-Assisted Teaching—The Future of Education?
347
well designed, provide an effective mechanism to achieve these very effects through
their features and design characteristics.
A good example of a robot that promotes such effects is the previously mentioned
Nao robot. This robot, through its clever design, exploits many human psychological
effects, effects which can create memorable and impactful learning experiences.
Nao takes the form of a humanoid being and is equipped with a wide variety of
sensors allowing it to replicate many of the senses of a human being including
sight, hearing and aspects of tactile sensing. The robot can also emit speech and can
perform human-like movements with its limbs and has the ability to pick up and
grasp objects, walk unaided and can even climb to its feet automatically if it falls
over. Whilst clearly robotic in appearance, the physical design and the way in which
it presents itself during operation has been cleverly structured to create a strong
psychological and emotional bond with learners. In particular, the robot has been
designed with the physical appearance of a young child in mind, with the robot have
comparable dimensions, being approximately 60 cm tall and being approximately
5 kg in weight.
The ratios of its body elements also provide a strong resemblance to a young
child. For example, young children when compared with adults typically have larger
heads and eyes when compared to the size of their bodies. These characteristics along
with many others are incorporated in the physical design of Nao. When in operation,
further similarities between the robot and a young child are evident, with the robot
having a slightly ungainly walking gait and being set by default to emit synthesised
speech in a high-pitched, childlike tone. To people interacting with the robot, these
human-like characteristics help create an illusion that it is a young child of some form,
prompting students and onlookers alike to form emotional bonds with it, exploiting
a subconscious natural tendency of human beings to form caring, emotional bonds
with children. With the establishment of psychological bonds between the robot and
the students, a scenario is created in which very effective learning can be achieved.
Through my work, I have been lucky enough to observe a wide variety of people
of all ages, both old and young, interact with the Nao robot and I have always been
fascinated by the way this robot captivates, draws in and emotionally inﬂuences
people. Particularly fascinating is the way that many people interact with the robot
as if it genuinely is a young child. For example, when picking up and transporting the
robot, it was not uncommon for adults, particularly those who are used to interacting
and caring for young children, to handle and carry it in a manner similar to that which
might use to carry a young child, namely by placing one hand on the buttock of the
robot to support its weight, leaning its body onto the chest of the person involved
and then resting the head of the robot on the person’s shoulder. I have also observed
that when adults provided verbal commands to the robot they often did so in a soft
vocal tone and using over-simpliﬁed language as if addressing a very young child.
Watching children’s interactions with the robot followed a similar pattern, with
most treating the robot as an entity which should be cared for, cherished and offered
affection. Some treated the robot as if it was a younger sibling whilst other treated
the robot as a form of pet or sidekick. Particularly with the robot’s diminutive stature,
children were often very careful to treat the robot with care and with a gentle touch.

348
R. Rayner et al.
Often children petted and stroked the robot and when the robot fell over, they were
genuinely upset and concerned that the robot had hurt itself. They did this despite
the fact that the robot has been designed to be sturdy and robust and has design
features which suggest that the robot is in some way armour-plated. Like adults,
many children addressed the robot in over-simpliﬁed language as if addressing a pet
or a young child.
The key theme running through these patterns of interactions is that as a result
of the clever design of the robot, people tended to interact with it as if it was a real-
life living entity and not an artiﬁcial, man-made machine. The robot reinforces this
illusion through it actions when standing idle, by gently swaying its limbs and slowly
raising and lowering its chest region, giving the impression that it is breathing. With
its emotive, childlike features the robot also suggests to people that it is a being of
very young age, prompting people to connect and interact with it accordingly. Most
strikingly when people speak to the robot, they tend to speak to it in over-simpliﬁed
language more suited for addressing a young child rather than addressing a state of
the art, high powered computer system which the robot actually is!
The fact that people of all ages tend to react in this way to the robot indicates
that through its design and operational features, it has prompted people to form an
emotional connection and bond with it, a bond which as result of a fundamental
human afﬁnity to care and give special attention to children, is particularly strong.
Furthermore, despite the robot being an entirely artiﬁcial, man-made and emotionless
device, people interacting with it, subconsciously impart onto the robot a personality
and character. Not only does it indicate that the robot is effective in engaging and
holding the attention of people, an important aspect of the learning process, but the
fact that people impart onto it a character, shows that they are drawing on past life
experiences when interacting with it. Both these aspects are important components
of good active learning.
On its most fundamental level, Nao succeeds in engaging learners by having
design features which people can easily recognise, identify with and relate to and
which prompt emotional reactions. Perhaps the most important feature of the robot is
its head, which whilst appearing quite alien in appearance has accentuated features
which draw people’s attention and exploit the human instinct to recognise facial
features in images and objects. The design of the head is therefore key to allowing
people to relate to the robot and build bonds with it. Indeed, it is interesting to note
that in the next section of this chapter, Nick Valentine comments that one of the most
memorable features of the robot he worked with, was its cartoon-like face.
I believe that the best teaching robots, particularly for use with younger students,
possess design features which allow it to create strong psychological and emotional
bonds with users. The Nao robot is an excellent example of such a device, with its
ability to create such bonds being aided by the fact that it is humanoid in form and
so possesses many obvious features to which people can identify and relate. The
Nao robot however, despite all its clever design features and dextrous, human-like
motion has limits to its performance capabilities. For example, it is not a quick robot
and can only propel itself around the ﬂoor at a relatively slow speed, slower than
typical human walking pace. Should a lesson plan require a robot to be able to move

Robot-Assisted Teaching—The Future of Education?
349
Fig. 6 The Lego Mindstorm Robot in a wheeled conﬁguration with the ultrasound sensor shown
(© Kristina Kerwin)
quickly then the Nao robot would be unsuitable for this purpose. For example, the
investigation discussed in the previous section of this chapter discusses a lesson
about the concept of speed. For this purpose, a far faster wheeled robot, the Lego
Mindstorm robot, depicted in Fig. 6, is used.
Wheeled robots, whilst they typically have the advantage of being able to move
across the ground faster than humanoid, walking robots, lack natural, obvious looking
features to which people can relate, such as a head or other limbs, making it more
challenging for users to build emotional bonds with such devices. To overcome
this, some wheeled robots seek to include such features in their design, including,
for example cartoon-like faces on the bodywork or the shaping and positioning of
sensors on the robot to resemble humanoid features such as eyes. An example of this
can be seen if Fig. 6, where the ultrasonic sensors, on the Lego Mindstorm robot,
which must usually be placed on the front of a robot to function properly, resemble
the eyes of the robot. Indeed, having taught lessons using Lego Mindstorm robots,
constructed in various conﬁgurations, far greater levels of student engagement have
been observed when robots were designed with such quasi-humanoid features than
when constructed without.
Conclusion—The Educator’s View
As a professional educator, who has been lucky enough to experiment with teaching
lessons using robots, I can honestly say that the experience has been positive and
horizon broadening. It has been particularly fascinating, watching how learners of

350
R. Rayner et al.
all ages have reacted to such robotic teaching aids, sometimes in very unexpected
and surprising but universally positive ways.
Through these observations, and in agreement with the research described in the
previous section of this chapter, I strongly believe that robots have the potential to be
powerful educational tools, particularly in lesson plans where students are given the
opportunity to interact and build bonds with the robot. As with any new device, how
to best use educational robots is still the subject of signiﬁcant research but as time
goes on, new and exciting ways will undoubtedly be discovered. Robots too, will
continue to develop, with the inclusion of new, exciting features and more reﬁned
design.
Currently, a signiﬁcant aspect of robots’ pedagogical beneﬁts come from their
novelty and scarcity of use in the classroom, an effect which will certainly diminish
over time. Despite this, I strongly believe the usefulness of robots as teaching aids
will not be limited by this loss of novelty but will instead be limited only by the
skill and imagination of those using and developing them, qualities that teachers,
lecturers and engineers alike all exude in abundance. For these reasons I am sure
robot-assisted teaching will be the future of education.
Part III—Nick Valentine
A Learner’s Perspective
I was recently wondering where my robotics journey began. I knew where my passion
for engineering came from, that was easy to explain. From a very early age I loved to
design. Be it spaceships, vehicles, sailing ships, town plans, model railways, I was
constantly drawing things. Not that I could draw very well, having dyspraxia made
ﬁne motor movements particularly challenging. The straight lines necessary for say,
the interior decks of a space ship came much more easily to me and my designs
never transitioned into what you might call art. The designs were always strictly
functional. A spaceship to battle aliens. A sailing ship to ﬁght pirates. A railway to
serve a village.
The creativity was always there though which, as it could not be satisﬁed through
drawing, manifested itself in story writing. The stories I wrote were always thor-
oughly impractical, rarely featured anything technical, and frequently verged on the
absurd. This created an interesting contrast with my frequently dismal performances
in maths and the sciences. This isn’t the conventional story people expect to hear
when an engineer recounts their path into the profession. Normally the story goes:
engineer meets maths and science, engineer and maths and science fall deeply for
one another, engineer and maths and science live happily ever after. I however fall
into a tribe deﬁned by the Institution of Mechanical Engineers (IMechE) as the social
artist tribe. In the IMechE’s report Five Tribes: Personalising Engineering Education
[28], social artists are described as a large and creative section of the population who

Robot-Assisted Teaching—The Future of Education?
351
seemingly have little afﬁnity with STEM. They are however, the second largest of
the ﬁve tribes, and a segment of the population that tends to be omitted in STEM
outreach. This can mean that the potential skills and talents they bring to engineering
and science are largely lost and as such, the diversity of thought and ideas within the
industry is reduced.
So, it didn’t seem like I was really destined for a career in engineering. How on
earth did I end up living a career in engineering, a vocation that I thoroughly love
and would recommend? If you need any proof of this commitment, here I am writing
a part of a chapter of a book on the subject in my spare time!
Well, the ﬁnal piece of the puzzle lies in another untapped motivator that STEM
outreach frequently neglects, the human capacity for compassion. That need to work
as a team, to progress, learn, and grow in order to fulﬁl our need to empathise and
connect with others.
When it comes to engineering endeavour, too often I hear the terms ‘because it’s
cool’ or ‘because we can’. These are normally associated with making something go
fast, making it go far, or making it ﬂy high. It is comparatively rare that I hear that
the reason for engineering excellence is simply to help others. And whilst there is a
certainlyaplaceforthescientiﬁclearninggainedbydoingsomethingbecausewecan,
that attitude simply doesn’t resonate with sections of the population who are more
attuned to the needs and struggles of the world around us. Despite the achievements
held up as exemplars of engineering and technology: spaceﬂight, supersonic cars,
or the great feats of civil engineering, at its most fundamental engineering is a way
of advancing civilisation and raising our collective standard of living. That’s why I
ended up studying and pursuing a career in it, it showed me a tangible way that I
could take my creativity and apply it in a way that helps others. It wasn’t an easy
path. As mentioned previously I struggled with maths and science. But that vision
of creating and making in order to improve life for others inspired me to persevere.
It wasn’t a particular love of the sciences that drove me, I had to learn that. No,
what I needed was a practical, constructive, and tangible outlet for my creativity.
Engineering was to provide that outlet.
That explains my engineering trajectory, but why robotics speciﬁcally?
The ‘traditional’ view of mine was that my interest in robotics had formed during
my industrial placement year at National Grid. My mentor, master of electrical
metaphors Carl, introduced me to the different technologies that National Grid were
investigating to help manage their equipment. These included Virtual Reality, Arti-
ﬁcial Intelligence, mobile robots, and the Internet of Things—technologies which
commonly fall into the ‘Industry 4.0’ bracket. Whilst working with Carl, I came to
realise the potential of these technologies, and particularly the power that could be
unlocked by combining them in all kinds of weird and wonderful ways. It was also
apparent to me that the energy sector wouldn’t be the only one that would be making
use of these concepts. And so I ﬁrmly decided that I wanted to become an engineer
that could take advantage of this potential.

352
R. Rayner et al.
The challenge then, was to ﬁnd a way of building a career where I could learn
and grow in these areas. At the time I was studying for my undergraduate degree
and it just so happened that there was a Master’s degree course at my institution
that included modules in mobile robots, virtual reality, and artiﬁcial intelligence.
The subject? Robotics and Automation. Robotics was the subject that combined
all of the concepts that I was so excited about. Robotics is a discipline that is, by
its very nature, a system of systems, and so it made sense that the course would
encompass a range of technology areas. However, what particularly drew me to this
particular robotics course was its inclusion of a virtual reality module. Robotics and
virtual environments are symbiotic in nature, we design, simulate, train, rehearse, and
monitor our robotic systems in virtual environments. This, along with modular nature
of robots presents a fantastic opportunity for education, outreach and creativity. We’ll
come back to that idea later.
So that was that, that was deﬁnitely one hundred percent why I embarked on a
career in robotics. I conducted the placement at National Grid, was inspired by the
potential of emerging technologies, undertook an MSc in Robotics and Automation,
and just like that I was a roboticist. End of story.
Except that it’s not. The reality was that the story begins much, much earlier, in
the dark murky days of… primary school.
Whilst thinking about the concepts we talk about in this book, how to teach
mechatronics, how to encourage people to engage with it, and what methods could
we use to inspire interest in the subject, I was suddenly reminded of an experience I
had 25 years ago.
Along with the vague memories of portacabins, school pets, and those plastic balls
with all the holes in them that never went in the direction I wanted when I kicked
them, I had a distinct memory of playing with a large, grey dome like object with
buttons on the top of its surface. By pressing these buttons with arrows and the like
on them, the object could be made to move across the polished wooden ﬂoor. The
arrows would be pressed in a certain order, and the object would then follow this
pattern in a route. This was not an activity that was usual in my school. This was a
visitor, a special occasion for which we had left our classroom and ventured out into
the school corridor, and it was an occasion I distinctly remember. I remember the
location, I remember the actions needed to make it move, I remember the feeling,
and I remember what it was called, this domelike object. Its name was Roamer, and
it was a robot.
And this was the thing, I had no concept that this was a robot. Roamer was like
another, fancier, toy, and I had used my creativity to come up with a route in my head.
This was a revelation to me. My creativity could be used, not just to commit ideas to
paper, but to have a machine do something I had wanted it to do. This was a way of
bringing my ideas off the page, and into the real world. In a very minor way, I had
taken ownership and control the real-world actions of something other than myself.
I, as a small child, owned the behaviour of something else and I trusted it to perform
what I had asked it to do. For that short time Roamer, and its actions and behaviours,
were mine. This is most likely the very ﬁrst time that I had such responsibility, and it

Robot-Assisted Teaching—The Future of Education?
353
had been enabled by the use of a robot in a safe, but empowering, environment. How
had I achieved this control? I had entered commands into a computer to form a series
of instructions. I had had my very ﬁrst introduction to programming. Not that I knew
it at the time, and nor would I be introduced to the concept of programming again
for at least another 10 years. This almost certainly presents a missed opportunity, but
that nascent spark would not be wasted.
Another element that I ﬁnd interesting about this memory was that I simply
accepted Roamer’s existence. Not once did I question Roamer’s technological feasi-
bility. Or why I wasn’t seeing such technology elsewhere in my day to day existence
as a small boy in Stockport. Roamer was there. I pressed buttons in a pattern on its
exterior, and Roamer did what I asked it to. Perhaps at this age we are a lot more
accepting and receptive to what is presented to us, this open mindedness makes early
years education a critical and often underestimated part of our development. The
impact this short activity has had is notable by its endurance in my mind. Even the
name has stuck with me, over 25 years later. There aren’t many memories of mine
that have lasted that amount of time. For some reason, that memory stuck with me.
This could simply be down to the novelty of the experience, novelty certainly makes
things more memorable, but I also think that interaction with a robot in itself made
the experience more memorable. Being able to learn alongside a system expressing
its own simple, non-human behaviour deepened the experience and ﬁrmly embedded
the memory. Although in recent research I have subsequently found that Roamer was
very much smaller than the image I have in those memories created by a small boy.
Memory (and growing up) can be ﬁckle.
When conducting research into Roamer (just to be doubly sure that I hadn’t made
thewholethingup),theimagesIfoundoftenfeaturedRoamer withasimplesmileand
a pair of eyes drawn on its exterior, in an attempt to make Roamer more relatable and,
for want of a better word, ‘cute’. I don’t have a particular memory of the Roamer
I encountered having a face upon it, but giving educational robots these features,
albeit simple ones, can assist in building emotional relationships between us and
‘them’ and deepen the interaction we have with them. Having these systems display
recognisably organic, friendly, features can be one way of building trust between
the children and the machine. Trust between humans and autonomous machines is
currently a big topic in robotics, in industry we need to be able to trust autonomous
machines to perform their task in a manner that isn’t going to cause harm, be it
physical or psychological.
In education too, children need to be able to trust the system to behave within the
bounds of expected behaviour whilst accompanying them on their learning journey.
However, to encourage learning this trust must be balanced with the freedom to
explore the unexpected, and importantly the freedom to fail in a safe and forgiving
environment. Having a ‘companion’ to explore these concepts with, without the
behaviouralissuesyoumightencounterinanotherhumanbeing,maybehelpfulwhen
trying to embed learning deeper. This is particularly true with younger children, when
social skills might not be fully developed. This interaction with a companion then
enables education through stealth. You’re completely unaware that you’re learning,

354
R. Rayner et al.
you’re just playing with the cute toy. We don’t even need to call it a robot, or engi-
neering, or science. Rather than teaching concepts in an abstract way, we can use
ubiquitous, relatively cheap, and accessible technology to build trust and enable
education through play. This of course depends on the resources available to a school,
but perhaps we can use cheaper mechatronic systems, with their inherent modularity,
to unlock creativity and subconsciously teach those concepts.
It seems odd to think about it now, but at the time I encountered Roamer I, of
course, had no idea that my life would ultimately involve working with mobile robots.
This early exposure to the technology has ultimately led to me working on systems
that are a lot larger, and in a lot of ways much more frightening than Roamer, the
benign creature that crawled along the polished wooden ﬂoors of a 1990s primary
school.
Other later memories from school aren’t quite so entertaining or interesting.
Following my early experience with Roamer, there was then a distinct lack of
robots at school. Robots did not feature at all in my high school experience, where I
was learning about friendships, relationships, and thinking more seriously about my
future. Picture the scene, we’ve all been here. Tables, plastic chairs, a paper notebook
(mine inexplicably ‘backed’ with wallpaper) and the board at the front. Lines appear
on the board, but the lines don’t seem to mean anything to me. They’re there, but I
can’t understand why they’re there, what they mean, or what I’m supposed to do with
them. ‘Turn to page X in your textbooks’. On page X Farmer Joe (never Farmer Jane)
has a problem. He needs to build a fence and so wants to know how much fence
he needs for the job. Using maths, ﬁgure out how much fence Farmer Joe needs.
Answers can be found at the back of the textbook.
In my childhood brain, real-world Farmer Joe was probably out in the sunshine
somewhere having great fun whacking in fence poles with a big hammer, and I bet he
didn’t bother doing any maths to ﬁgure out how much fence he needed. He probably
just went out with however much fence he had and guessed. Or he just got out some
string and measured it like a normal person. All in all I was rather jealous of Farmer
Joe and his farm, and his fence. Meanwhile I was stuck in a stuffy classroom, staring
at the yellow, worn, pages of a textbook that nobody had ever had any fondness for.
I can still remember the smell of the textbooks. And it still gives me a headache.
This contrasted with my experiences at home, where I was engaging more and
more with engineering and robotics, not that I knew it in those terms. I had progressed
from drawings on paper and was now building things for myself. Using construc-
tion toys such as K’NEX, which mix electrical and mechanical components, I was
expressing my creativity in a constructive way and using the K’NEX motors to make
my creations move for themselves. This shows that even from a young age, uncon-
strained by convention, we are able to mix the disciplines that tend to become more
separateandmoresiloedasourtechnicaleducationcontinues.Thislackofconstraints
and freedom of imagination in combining concepts is a distinct advantage in robotics.
If during our developmental years we can play with educational tools that mix disci-
plines, those concepts are embedded within us. This is particularly true when that
play is coupled with the right learning environment and teaching techniques.

Robot-Assisted Teaching—The Future of Education?
355
As systems that are themselves a mix of disciplines, robots lend themselves as to
teaching these concepts and fortunately, let’s be honest, people love robots. They’re
like us in some ways, and yet they are decidedly not us. Consequently, people connect
with them, trust them, and form teams and relationships with them in unique ways.
This makes them an obvious choice as educational tools. Not only can we teach tech-
nological concepts with them, they can also be used to teach concepts encompassing
psychology, sociology, ethical and legal issues. This is because robots are a system of
systems and when we interact with them, we ourselves become a part of that system.
Interestingly this means that robots can serve as a gateway between engineering and
the humanities, not to mention the arts.
Whilst I was able to comfortably mix electronics and mechanical engineering
concepts at a young age, one area that was more difﬁcult for me to reach during
my childhood was simulation and virtual environments. Today, gaming technology
has made simulation and virtual environments far more accessible, and they have
become vital within the robotics industry for developing and understanding robot
behaviours. The behaviour of a robot is often programmed, simulated and optimised
in these virtual worlds, preferably worlds that are representative of the real-world
environment that they will be operating in. Once the robot developer is happy with
the behaviour of the robot in the simulation, the programming is transferred directly
onto the real-world robot and tested in the physical environment.
Some organisations are now controlling their robots directly from the virtual envi-
ronment, combining the virtual and real worlds in a ‘cyber physical system’. Having
their pedigree in the games industry means that contemporary virtual environments
are limited only by the imagination of the developer. This almost boundless virtual
space to play with, combined with the modular nature of robots, makes for an exciting
ecosystem full of educational potential. And children today are much more familiar
with digital technologies, they are growing up with them and as such are known
as ‘digital natives’. This gives them the mental tools to easily grasp and make use
of these technologies, who knows what will come out of the combination of the
technology and the skills and creativity of children?
This mixing and matching of professions and disciplines is something that we
need more of within engineering. The lines between the disciplines are becoming
ever more blurred, with engineering solutions frequently combining mechanical,
electrical, and software engineering. Robots are a clear example of this. It is almost
inconceivable today that a mechanical system would not include elements of elec-
tronicsandsoftware.Despitethiswestilltendtoself-categoriseourselvesintodistinct
technical groups. We almost seem to revel in it. To encourage cross pollination
of ideas and disciplines, we need ways of further breaking down the self-imposed
barriers between our specialisms. There are organisations such as CHAIN, which
attempt to inspire emerging engineers to work together, learn from each other, and
engage with the lessons from across the engineering spectrum. However, by the time
we are at the stage where we need to start collaborating and innovating with other
disciplines, those divides are already entrenched. This conﬂicts with the trend for
the lines between technologies to become blurred, and as such, we should look to
prevent these barriers from even forming at an earlier age, and explore how all of our

356
R. Rayner et al.
different professions interact and complement each other to make the world a better
place. When we combine this with disciplines that usually fall outside of engineering
and technology, this presents us with some powerful and exciting opportunities. By
engaging with these disciplines, we can also start to engage with people that wouldn’t
normally relate with engineering.
Every sector requires diversity of thought and skills. We all need those creatives,
those social artists that aren’t typically reached by STEM outreach, to help us reach
those solutions that we might never conceive. Consequently, we need educational
solutions that engage with people in the widest possible terms. That needs ﬂexibility,
modularity and novel thinking.
So how do we keep our education of STEM novel? Fortunately, given the pace
with which the ﬁelds of mechatronics and robotics are progressing, new applica-
tions and technologies are constantly emerging and crucially, the price of sensors
and processing also falls. Coupled with this, the open source movement has made
technology, and the skills to develop it, more accessible than ever, with more and
more people constantly uploading new and exciting code for others to build further
upon.
Whilst this may create a ‘novelty arms race’, I believe that we can rely on the
creativity and imagination of children to make use of the canvasses that robotics and
virtual environments present. A case in point is Minecraft, at the time of writing the
most popular computer game in the world, with there already being STEM initiatives
that rightly make use of it as a powerful education tool.
If we can use mechatronics’ inherently modular nature to engage people’s
creativity, if we can unlock the potential of virtual environments to allow people
to explore the limits of their imaginations, if we can unleash the nascent creativity
and imagination of those who want to help and do good in the world, and if we can
pair this with people and communities who have problems waiting to be solved, then
I believe that we’ll be a good part of the way towards a future that allows everyone
to use their skills to build a more inclusive and fairer future.
References
1. Kerwin K (2019) Studying the efﬁcacy of teaching stem subjects to primary school age students
using Lego robots, MSc in engineering projects & systems management Thesis, Kingston
University
2. Coughlan S (2014) Tablet computers in ‘70% of schools’, BBC News @ www.bbc.co.uk/news/
education-30216408. Accessed 24 Nov 2021
3. Education Technology (2017) How technology will shape the future of education—Educa-
tion Technology @ edtechnology.co.uk/comments/how-technology-will-shape-the-future-of-
education/. Accessed 24 Nov 2021
4. Abilitymagazine (2018) Nao—Robot for Autism @ abilitymagazine.com/Nao-Robot.html.
Accessed 24 Nov 2021
5. https://www.lego.com/en-gb/product/lego-mindstorms-ev3-31313
6. Education Technology (2018) First robotics curriculum launched @ edtechnology.co.uk/Art
icle/ﬁrst-robotics-curriculum-launched. Accessed 24 Nov 2021

Robot-Assisted Teaching—The Future of Education?
357
7. Faisal A (2012) Using robots to promote learning in elementary grades. Polytechnic Institute
of New York University, MSc
8. Hobeika L, Diard-Detoeuf C, Garcin B, Levy R, Volle E (2016) General and specialized brain
correlates for analogical reasoning: a meta-analysis of functional imaging studies. Human Brain
Mapping 37(5):1953–1969
9. Gerraty R, Davidow J, Wimmer G, Kahn I, Shohamy D (2014) Transfer of learning relates to
intrinsic connectivity between hippocampus, ventromedial prefrontal cortex, and large-scale
networks. J Neurosci 34(34):11297–11303
10. Bunzeck N, Doeller C, Dolan R, Duzel E (2011) Contextual interaction between novelty and
reward processing within the mesolimbic system. Hum Brain Mapp 33(6):1309–1324
11. ukstemconference.ﬁles.wordpress.com/2019/06/horizons-conf-19-abstract-booklet-.pdf.
Accessed 4 Feb 2022
12. Marton F, Säljö R (1997) Approaches to learning. In: Marton F, Hounsell D, Entwistle ND
(eds) The experience of learning. Scottish Academic Press, pp 39–58
13. Mcleod S (2007) Levels of processing | Simply Psychology @ www.simplypsychology.org/
levelsofprocessing.html. Accessed 24 Nov 2021
14. Wang M, Derry S, Ge X (2017) Guest editorial: fostering deep learning in problem-solving
contextswiththesupportoftechnologyjournalofeducationaltechnology&society.Palmerston
North 20(4):162–165
15. Reif F (2008) Applying cognitive science to education. The MIT Press
16. Rosenshine B (2012) Principles of instruction: research-based strategies that all teachers should
know. Am Educ 36(1):12
17. Ukessays.com (2018) The development of concept through the national curriculum @ www.
ukessays.com/essays/education/the-development-of-concept-through-the-national-education-
essay.php. Accessed 24 Nov 2021
18. Yasnitsky A, van der Veer R (eds) (2016) Revisionist revolution in Vygotsky studies. Routledge
19. Cook M (1955) The construction of reality in the child. In Piaget J (ed) The construction of
reality in the child, Routledge & Kegan Paul, vol 82
20. Teach-nology.com (2018) Piaget’s theory on constructivism. @ www.teach-nology.com/cur
renttrends/constructivism/piaget/. Accessed 24 Nov 2021
21. Legislation.gov.uk. (2018) Education Reform Act 1988 @ www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/
1988/40/contents. Accessed 24 Nov 2021
22. Department for Education (2018) Next generation of young people gaining the skills Britain
needs @ www.gov.uk/government/news/next-generation-of-young-people-gaining-the-skills-
britain-needs. Accessed 24 Nov 2021
23. Learning Theories (2018) Social Development Theory @ www.learning-theories.com/vygots
kys-social-learning-theory.html. Accessed 24 Nov 2021
24. Shabani K (2016) Applications of Vygotsky’s sociocultural approach for teachers’ professional
development. Cogent Educ 3(1):1252177
25. Daniels H, Hedegaard M (2011) Vygotsky and special needs education. Continuum Interna-
tional Pub. Group
26. Bloom’s Taxonomy (2018) Bloom’s Taxonomy @ bloomstaxonomy2013.weebly.com.
Accessed 24 Nov 2021
27. Thalheimer W (2019) How much do people forget? @ www.worklearning.com/2010/12/14/
how-much-do-people-forget/. Accessed 24 Nov 2021
28. IMechE, Five tribes—personalising engineering education @ www.imeche.org/policy-and-
press/reports/detail/ﬁve-tribes-personalising-engineering-education. Accessed 24 Nov 2021

Conclusion

EcoMechatronics Enabling Technologies,
and Future Prospects
Maki K. Habib, Peter Hehenberger, and David Bradley
Abstract EcoMechatronics is an interdisciplinary ﬁeld that is evolving to have a
holistic impact on the development of current and future smart technologies, method-
ologies,algorithms,techniques,products,processes,andsystems.Thekeyfeaturesof
thisevolutionarethesynergyofthenewideas,designs,anddevelopmentwiththenew
concepts of eco-design, sustainability, environment friendly, and circular economy
supported by clean and energy-saving technologies. The aim is the implementation
of Net-Zero EcoMechatronic systems which are the basis of sustainable, environ-
mentally friendly, and cost-effective intelligent products, processes, and systems.
This book on EcoMechatronics represents the latest research efforts in the ﬁeld
and it is presented in three sections. The ﬁrst deals with the underlying issues of
sustainability and enabling technologies. The second then looks at a range of its
applications, including some, such as the built environment, that have not previously
been considered as containing signiﬁcant mechatronic elements. The ﬁnal section
of the book then focuses on educational concerns and issues. Finally, this chapter
highlights some of the enabling and driving technologies contributing to the ﬁeld of
EcoMechatronics and also it introduces the future prospect of the ﬁeld as projected
through a range of open-ended research areas.
M. K. Habib (B)
The American University in Cairo, New Cairo, Egypt
e-mail: maki@aucegypt.edu
P. Hehenberger
University of Applied Sciences Upper Austria, Wels, Austria
D. Bradley
Abertay University, Dundee, UK
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
P. Hehenberger et al. (eds.), EcoMechatronics,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-07555-1_20
361

362
M. K. Habib et al.
Introduction
EcoMechatronics represents a range of new Mechatronics technological develop-
ment, implementation, and breakthroughs in interdisciplinary innovation. These are
rapidly evolving to impact the ways in which to develop and design new smart tech-
nologies that can think, learn and adapt, optimize performance, and drive research,
leading to the creation of new ideas and effective new and advanced technolo-
gies and techniques. Such development aims to improve both the functionality
of these new technologies and their reliability, adaptability, and design ﬂexibility
while adopting a practical inspiration to managing ecosystems that integrates the
latest technological developments with reduced ecological impact. Furthermore, this
trend of technological development aims to reduce and manage energy consumption
and enhance efﬁciency and reduce ecological impact while being environmentally
friendly while supporting sustainability with effective resource management and
being cost-effective with enhanced user comfort. Thus, EcoMechatronics aims to
impact every aspect of technological development with an integrative and holistic
positive inﬂuence on the design process for better planetary ecosystems management
that reduces or eliminates waste and controls this through the adoption of a circular
economy approach and associated planning.
Natural resources and environmental problems such as air and water pollution are
critical issues facing the planet and humanity. At the same time, climate change is
a signiﬁcant challenge that requires joint actions. These issues need to be urgently
addressed through effective planning and regulatory policies that reduce the effect of
greenhouse gases, particularly carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide, and methane. In addi-
tion, there should be a focus on developing and using renewable clean energy while
optimizing energy consumption. Further, there is a critical need to develop creative
solutions, promote and develop new innovative technologies that limit emissions
and help eliminate or reduce the pollutants to the environment by 2050. EcoMecha-
tronics, as an essential interdisciplinary ﬁeld, has a signiﬁcant role in designing
net-zero energy efﬁciency technologies at all levels, contributing to the design devel-
opment process and integrating these within the concepts of a circular economy
subject to effective ecosystem management. This design and development approach
requires new ways of creative thinking covering ideas and solutions associated with
the design and implementation of Net-Zero EcoMechatronics systems as the basis
of sustainable devices, products, and systems across a broad range of applications.
Developing effective Net-Zero emissions products and systems demands the whole
system thinking covering technical, social, and environmental issues. In contrast,
lifecycle design covers the design requirements that quantify ecological impacts and
assure sustainable design strategies (energy, material, and lifetime).
Mechatronic systems, subsystems, and components form the primary data gath-
ering element of many devices, processes, or systems and also provide the direct
action layers of many applications. The conceptual formations of such opera-
tions, techniques, systems, and subsystems indicate that Mechatronics design should

EcoMechatronics Enabling Technologies …
363
accommodate functions and technologies featuring smartness, ﬂexibility, and relia-
bility. In addition, achieving an effective technical, social, and environmental balance
during the design process should be given signiﬁcant and detailed consideration.
Thus, many of the actions of EcoMechatronics systems described by smartness
are associated with computational capabilities and experiential learning that utilizes
digitized data with Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) and Machine learning (ML) tech-
niques. These techniques raise the question of individual privacy, cybersecurity, and
ethical issues that need to be adequately addressed and effectively treated. Of partic-
ular concern is the increasing use of autonomous systems, ranging from real-time
healthcare to military applications, where the actions of the AI component, and hence
the response of the Mechatronics component, can be a threat to life.
EcoMechatronics Development and Enabling Technologies
The driving and enabling technologies, techniques, and algorithms that support
evolving EcoMechatronics devices, processes, and systems aim to assure sustain-
able design strategies to facilitate the design and development that focuses on energy,
materials, and lifetime. Some of these technologies evolved from integrating tradi-
tional technologies with IT-based tools and technology, while the other trends in the
development are purely new innovative design development. This enabling devel-
opment includes integrating different layers of the technologies and the subsequent
integration of vital concepts, such as ecology management and the Green Circular
Economic. This demands skilled personnel and an effective education system to play
a critical role in establishing and maintaining an understanding of what is involved in
EcoMechatronics and the evolution of the associated technologies. Table 1 presents
some of the enabling technologies supporting the growth of EcoMechatronics.
EcoMechatronics: Issues and Future Prospects
Ecodesign and sustainable design strategies are critical issues facing the development
of EcoMechatronics technologies, materials, processes, intelligence, systems, and
future evolution. The evolution of EcoMechatronics needs to focus on developments
in respect of a wide range of open-ended research areas, including, but not exclusive
to:
• Advanced, distributed computing
• Agile systems
• Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning including for Education
• Bio-hybrid robots
• Biosensors and sensor networking
• Clean energy and energy harvesting

364
M. K. Habib et al.
Table 1 EcoMechatronics enabling technologies
Domain
Technologies
Computing
• Distributed and Optical Computing
• DNA Data Storage
• Miniaturized Computing Technologies
• Molecular Computers
• Neuromorphic Computers
• Quantum Computers
Digitalisation
• Artiﬁcial Intelligence
• Blockchain
• Cyber Security and Privacy Protection
• Digital Twins for Real-Time Insight, Optimization, and
Decision-Making
• Human/Robot Interaction
• Smart Cities and Urban Mobility
• Virtual and Augmented Reality
• Wearable Devices
Intelligence
• Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Machine Learning, Real-time Learning, and
Deep Learning
• Autonomous Systems, Autonomous Robots, Vehicles, and Navigation
• Big Data, Data Analytics, and Data Fusion
• Connected devices, Internet of Things (IoT), and Cyber-Physical
Systems (CPS)
• Real-Time Interactions
• Robotics
• Smart Grids
• Smart Factories
Nanotechnology
• Biophysics
• Micro and Nano Manufacturing
• Nanocomputation
• Nanomedicine
• Nanorobotics
• Nano Smart Materials and Green Technologies
Robotics
• Additive Manufacturing and Rapid Prototyping
• Autonomous Aerial, Maritime, Road, and Underwater Vehicles
• Heterogeneous Multi-Robot Systems
• Industrial, Service a, and Personal Robotics
• Intelligent Robot Mechanisms
• Medical Robots
• Robot Agility
Sensors and actuators • Actuator Design and Technologies
• Biosensors and Bio-Actuators
• Nano-Sensors and Nano-Actuators
• Sensor Design and Integration
• Wireless Sensor Networks
• Sensors, Actuators, and Smart Materials

EcoMechatronics Enabling Technologies …
365
• Distributed data, computing, analysis, and decision-making
• Ecodesign and circular economy
• Edge computing
• Effective and fast networking to support distributed real-time requirements in
different domains
• Evolution of eco-design and circular economies
• Fully autonomous systems
• Green technologies and eco-friendly solutions
• Human adaptive and friendly technologies
• Integrated intelligence and digitalization
• Integrative multi-dimensional computational intelligence
• Intelligent adaptive behaviors
• Intelligent and adaptive mechanisms
• Machine intelligence, intelligent systems, and techniques
• Nanotechnologies leading to effective nanorobotics, nano-devices, and nano-
systems
• New and novel actuator designs involving bioinspiration
• Smart manufacturing systems and nanomanufacturingSmart materials and bio-
materials
• Virtuality, augmented reality, and mixed realities
It is necessary to recognize that this list of future research and development topics
andareasisintendedtobeindicativeratherthancomprehensive.Astheunderstanding
of the impact of technologies and methods in relation to sustainability goals develops,
additional new and novel areas of activity, interest, and research will emerge. In this
context, consideration of the short, medium, and long term actions and responses to
EcoMechatronics and the meetings of climate change goals suggests the following.
Short Term Responses and Actions—These should be based on the use of existing
technologies, and it is therefore synchronized to a degree reﬂected in the background
to EcoMechatronics as expressed in Mechatronics in Action, Mechatronic Futures,
and Reinventing Mechatronics along with studies by organizations such as the World
Economic Forum (WEF) on the impact of technologies on society and employment
and the work of Conference Of the Parties (COP26) in association with the 2021
United Nations Climate Change Conference.
Medium Term Responses and Actions—This represents implementing systems
that are reaching the ﬁnal stages of their research and development immediately prior
to their deployment. The methodologies, technologies, algorithms, techniques, and
systems described in EcoMechatronics could be considered to fall into this category
with implementation horizons of 5–10 years.

366
M. K. Habib et al.
Long Term Responses and Actions—These represent open-ended potential new
motivations, concepts, and ideas supporting the evolution of EcoMechatronics in the
early stages of research or perhaps may not even have reached the initial stages of
concept development. Some of the contributed materials presented in EcoMecha-
tronics hint at some of these future development prospects that are difﬁcult to isolate
and worth mentioning.

