Entropy of Entanglement
205
E
12. P. Horodecki: Separability criterion and inseparable mixed states with positive partial transpo-
sition. Phys. Lett. A 232, 333 (1997).
13. M. Horodecki, P. Horodecki, R. Horodecki: Mixed-State Entanglement and Distillation:
Is there a Bound Entanglement in Nature? Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 5239 (1998).
14. W. D¨ur, J.I. Cirac, M. Lewenstein, D. Bruß: Distillability and partial transposition in bipartite
systems. Phys. Rev. A 61, 062313 (2000).
15. D. DiVincenzo, P. Shor, J. Smolin, B. Terhal, A. Thapliyal: Evidence for bound entangled states
with negative partial transpose. Phys. Rev. A 61, 062312 (2000).
16. J. Watrous: Many Copies May Be Required for Entanglement Distillation. Phys. Rev. Lett. 93,
010502 (2004).
17. Z.-W. Wang et al: Experimental Entanglement Distillation of Two-Qubit Mixed States under
Local Operations, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 220505 (2006).
Secondary Literature
18. M. Lewenstein, D. Bruß, J. I. Cirac, B. Kraus, M. Ku´s, J. Samsonowicz, A. Sanpera, R. Tarrach:
Separability and distillability in composite quantum systems – a primer. Journ. Mod. Opt. 47,
2841 (2000).
19. D. Bruß: Characterizing entanglement. J. Math. Phys. 43, 4237 (2002).
20. R. Horodecki, P. Horodecki, M. Horodecki, K. Horodecki: Quantum entanglement. arXiv:
quant-ph/0702225, subm. to Rev. Mod. Phys.
21. M. Nielsen, I. Chuang: Quantum Computation and Information. Cambridge University Press
(2000).
22. Quantum Information: An Introduction to Basic Theoretical Concepts and Experiments
(Springer Tracts in Modern Physics, 173). Eds. G. Alber, T. Beth, M. Horodecki, P. Horodecki,
R. Horodecki, M. R¨otteler, H. Weinfurter, R. Werner, A. Zeilinger, Springer-Verlag (April
2001).
23. Lectures on Quantum Information. Eds. D. Bruß G. Leuchs: WILEY-VCH Weinheim (2007).
Entropy of Entanglement
Dominik Janzing
An essential feature of an entangled joint state ( entanglement) of two physical
systems A, B is that the state of each subsystem is always mixed even though the
joint state of the bipartite system may be pure. The entropy of the subsystems can
therefore be used to quantify the entanglement of pure bipartite quantum states. For
simplicity, we restrict ourselves to ﬁnite dimensions. Every pure state on Cℓ⊗Cd
(with d ⩽ℓ) can be written as
|γ ⟩=
d

j=1
cj|φj⟩⊗|ψj⟩

206
Entropy of Entanglement
where |φj⟩and |ψj⟩are orthonormal vectors deﬁned in the  Hilbert spaces of
system A and B, respectively. The number of summands in this so-called Schmidt
decomposition [3–5] is at most the dimension of the smaller subsystem. The state is
entangled if the number of terms is at least 2. When restricting our attention to one
of the subsystems we no longer can describe its quantum state by a  wave function.
Instead, the “reduced states” of A and B are given by the  density operators
ρA =
d

j=1
|cj|2|φj⟩⟨φj |
and
ρB =
d

j=1
|cj|2|ψj⟩⟨ψj| .
The following argument, which uses basically the von Neumann projection postu-
late, shows why this is the case. A measurement on system B cannot change the
mixed state of A as long as the measurement result is ignored.1 Consider a von
Neumann measurement corresponding to a self-adjoint observable B having the
states |ψj⟩as (non-degenerate) eigenvectors. A possible choice is
B :=
d

j=1
j|ψj⟩⟨ψj |.
Given that the measurement result is j, which happens with probability
pj := |cj|2,
(1)
the wave function of the joint system has been “collapsed” to the state
|φj⟩⊗|ψj⟩.
The state of A is then given by |φj⟩. When ignoring the measurement result we thus
obtain
ρA :=
d

j=1
pj|φj⟩⟨φj|.
Using similar measurements on system A we conclude that the state of the right
hand system reads
ρB :=
d

j=1
pj|ψj⟩⟨ψj |,
1 Since this fact is sometimes blurred by incorrect descriptions of the phenomenon of entanglement,
it should be stressed that such a locality principle still remains true in quantum theory: For distant
subsystems, measurements on B can only change the statistics of experiments performed on A if
the result is communicated to A, where an operation is performed that depends on the result.

Entropy of Entanglement
207
E
The key observation to quantify entanglement is that the eigenvalues of both
density operators are the same. Hence their von-Neumann entropies ( quantum
entropy) coincide, i.e.,
S(ρB) = S(ρA) = H(p),
(2)
where H(p) denotes the Shannon entropy [6] of the probability distribution
(p1, . . . , pd) deﬁned in (1). The entropy thus can considered as a property of
the bipartite state, the entropy of entanglement.
The interpretation of the entropy of entanglement is not obvious. Note that the
state of the joint system is completely known in the sense of being a pure state and
the wave functions of the subsystems are not deﬁned. It would therefore not be
justiﬁed to consider the entropy as “missing knowledge” on the states of A and B.
In order to describe an information-theoretic interpretation, we show that the
entropy of entanglement is the maximal amount of classical information that mea-
suring one system can provide about the results of measurements performed on the
second. First consider observables A and B having the vectors |φj⟩and |ψj⟩that ap-
pear in the Schmidt decomposition as non-degenerate eigenvectors. The uncertainty
of the measurement results of A is given by the entropy H(p). However, given the
measurement result of B, the entropy is 0 since both results will always coincide.
Hence the result of B provides the information H(p) about the result of A. The fol-
lowing argument shows that there cannot exist any pair of measurements for which
the mutual information exceeds the entropy of entanglement. Label the results of
an arbitrary measurement performed on B by i in some index set I (for simplicity
we assume I to be countable) and denote the probability to obtain i by qi. Let σi
denote the state of A given that the result of B was i. Due to the so-called Holevo-
bound [1], measurements performed on an unknown quantum state taken from a set
of states {σi | i ∈I}, each occurring with probability qi, can never provide more
information than
χ := S
% 
i∈I
qiσi
&
−

i∈I
qiS(σi).
According to our locality arguments above, the mixture 
i∈I qiσi coincides with
ρA. Hence we get χ ⩽S(ρA). This shows that the classical information about
the measurement outcomes of A obtained by measurements on B can never exceed
S(ρA). Hence the entropy of entanglement is the maximal classical mutual informa-
tion between measurement results performed on both systems separately. It should
be emphasized that this amount of classical information does not coincide with the
quantum mutual information
I(A : B) = S(ρA) + S(ρB) −S(ρ),
which is for pure states twice the entropy of entanglement.
An alternative interpretation of entropy of entanglement is that it quantiﬁes the
amount of quantum information that has to be transferred if one party wants to send
his/her part of the entangled state to a third party. To sketch this idea, we consider a
scenario where two parties A and B share n copies of the entangled state in (2) and B

208
Entropy of Entanglement
wants to forward his part of the entangled states to a third party C such that the state
|γ ⟩⊗n is shared by A and C instead of being shared by A and B. A straightforward
way to achieve this would be to transfer the dn-dimensional quantum system from
B to C. However, this is not the most economical method. The key observation for
saving communication resources is the following. The Schmidt decomposition of
|γ ⟩deﬁnes in a straightforward way a Schmidt decomposition of the n-fold copy:
|γ ⟩⊗n =

1⩽j1,...,jn⩽d
cj1 · · · cjn|φj1⟩⊗· · · ⊗|φjn⟩⊗|ψj1⟩⊗· · · ⊗|ψjn⟩.
(3)
This sum may contain dn non-zero coefﬁcients, but often many of them can be
ignored since their total contribution is small. Roughly speaking, we drop those n-
tuples j1, . . . , jn for which the numbers nj of occurrences of index j do not satisfy

j
nj
n lognj
n ≈

j
|cj|2log|cj|2.
After formalizing this condition appropriately,2 one can show that the contribution
of such “untypical terms” is negligible for n →∞. The numbers N(n) of remaining
terms satisfy
lim
n→∞
log N(n)
n
= S(ρB).
The entanglement thus can be transferred from B to C using N(n)-dimensional
quantum systems in such a way that the resulting state coincides with the desired one
in the asymptotics n →∞. One can furthermoreshow that limn→∞(logN(n))/n <
S(ρB) would not work. Hence S(ρB) quantiﬁes the asymptotic number of qubits
per copy required to transfer the entanglement to C (provided that the entropy is
measured in terms of bits, i.e. is deﬁned using the logarithm to the basis 2.)
The fact that the restriction of pure entangled states to subsystems have non-
vanishing entropy has important implications for quantum thermodynamics as
opposed to classical thermodynamics. If a quantum system couples to an envi-
ronment the joint dynamics can generate entanglement between the two systems.
Hence the entropy of the system can increase. The decisive difference to classical
physics is that this can happen even though the state of the environment is perfectly
known. For this reason, models of the transition of a physical system to its ther-
mal equilibrium do not necessarily require the assumption of incomplete knowledge
about the state of the environment [7, 8]. Assuming that system and environment
is in a pure joint state, strong entanglement is (for an environment being a high-
dimensional quantum system) the typical situation rather than being the exception.
To be more speciﬁc we consider B and A as models for the system and its environ-
ment, respectively. If d ≪ℓthe overwhelming majority of pure states (see [8] for
2 Compare  quantum entropy and the deﬁnition of “typical sequences” in classical coding theory
[6] as well as the deﬁnition of “typical subspaces” in quantum coding theory [2].

EPR-Problem (Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen Problem)
209
E
details) have the property that the restriction to system B is close to the maximally
mixed state
ρB := 1
d 1.
Imposing some physically natural assumptions on the Hamiltonians of A and B and
their interactions, Ref. [8] derives furthermore a statement that makes the thermo-
dynamical relevance of entanglement even more obvious: almost every pure joint
state lying in the subspace corresponding to some small interval of energy values
has the property that its restriction to B is close to the thermodynamical Gibbs
state.
See also creation and detection of entanglement; entanglement puriﬁcation and
distillation.
Literature
1. M. Nielsen and I. Chuang: Quantum Information and Computation. (Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 2000)
2. B. Schumacher: Phys. Rev. A 51(4), 2738–2747 (1995)
3. E. Schmidt: Math. Ann. 63 (1907)
4. A. Ekert, P. Knight: Am. J. Phys. 63, 415 (1995)
5. A. Peres: Quantum Theory: Concepts and Methods. (Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1995)
6. T. Cover, J. Thomas: Elements of Information Theory. (Wiley, New York, 1991)
7. J. Gemmer, M. Michel, G. Mahler: Quantum Thermodynamics: Emergence of Thermodynamic
Behavior Within Composite Quantum Systems. (Springer, Berlin, 2005)
8. S. Popescu, A. Short, A. Winter: The foundations of statistical mechanics from entanglement:
Individual states vs. averages. Nature Physics 2(11), 754–758 (2006). http://arxiv.org/abs/quant-
ph/0511225
EPR-Problem (Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen
Problem)
Peter Mittelstaedt
In 1935, Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen published a paper [1] in which they tried to
show that the quantum-mechanical description of physical reality is not complete.
For the demonstration of this result, the authors made use of two assumptions, the
principle of reality (R) and the principle of  locality (L). These assumptions read:
(R): If, without in any way disturbing a system, we can predict with certainty (i.e.
with probability equal to unity) the value of a physical quantity, then there exists an
element of physical reality corresponding to this physical quantity.

