Dirac Equation
171
D
interpretational questions. Do the (“gauge equivalent”) ﬁelds T and ˜T represent
distinct physical situations? If so, does the (diffeomorphism invariant) theory fail
to prescribe the dynamics of the ﬁeld uniquely? These questions are addressed in
the famous hole-argument, originally put forward by Einstein in 1913 in the con-
text of his search for the theory of general relativity [1]. Later, these difﬁculties
were circumvented by focusing on (gauge-) invariant observables. Nevertheless, the
values of ﬁelds alone can not be used to individuate points of the manifold. This
makes a realistic interpretation of the manifold as spacetime less tenable. Therefore,
diffeomorphism invariance (general covariance) plays an important role in the con-
text of the spacetime structuralism-realism debate [3].
Earman, Stachel, Norton revived the hole argument in view of modern develop-
ments in spacetime and gauge theories. The discussion still continues [4].
Literature
1. A. Einstein: Die formale Grundlage der allgemeinen Relativit¨atstheorie.. . . Sitzungsber. Preuss.
Akad. Wiss. Phys.-math. Klasse, 2 (1914) 1030–1085
2. E. Kretschmann: ¨Uber den physikalischen Sinn der Relativit¨atspostulate . . . Ann. Phys.
358, 575–614 (1918)
3. J. Earman: World Enough and Spacetime (MIT, Cambridge, MA 1989)
4. J.D. Norton: The hole argument. In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/spacetime-holearg/ (2004)
5. T. Frankel: The Geometry of Physics (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1997)
Dirac Equation
Helge Kragh
The Dirac equation is a fundamental wave equation that satisﬁes the requirements
of the special theory of relativity. Shortly after the appearance of the  Schr¨odinger
equation, several physicists attempted to extend it to the relativistic domain. The
result – known as the Klein-Gordon-equation  relativistic quantum mechanics –
was however unable to describe  electrons correctly. Paul A.M. Dirac realized that
the formal structure of the Schr¨odinger equation, the form Hψ = i ℏ∂ψ/∂t, had to
be retained also in a relativistic theory, implying that the  Hamilton operator must
be of the ﬁrst order in the space derivatives. By “playing around with mathematics”
he derived in late 1927 a wave equation which was linear in both space and time
derivatives. For a free electron he wrote it as (W/c + α · p + βm0c)ψ = 0, where
the quantities α and β were 4×4 matrices. In later literature the matrices were often
designated γμ(μ = 1, 2, 3, 4).

172
Dirac Notation
As Dirac showed in his paper of 1928, the operators or matrices have the math-
ematical properties that γ 2
μ = 1 and, for μ ̸= ν, γμγν + γνγμ = 0. In fact, it
were these relations that led him to the equation. Dirac had not originally thought of
 spin, but discovered that his equation was able to account for the electron’s mag-
netic moment, hence its spin. When it turned out that the equation provided a full
explanation of the hydrogen spectrum ( spectroscopy), including the ﬁne-structure
components, it was quickly accepted by the physics community as the fundamental
equation for the electron and presumably also the proton. Only after World War II,
with the discovery of the Lamb shift, was it shown that the predictions from Dirac’s
theory disagree slightly with the measured spectrum.
Dirac’s relativistic equation led to serious conceptual difﬁculties, principally be-
cause the wave function has four components rather than the two corresponding to
the electron’s spin states. Its solutions seemingly referred to electrons with negative
energy – entities with no physical meaning. The so-called “±-difﬁculty” was turned
into a success with Dirac’s theory of the anti-electron (and other anti-particles)
which he developed 1929–31. According to Dirac’s theory of 1931, two of the four
components of the  wave function referred to an electron with positive electrical
charge, soon to be known as a positron. When the positron was detected in cosmic-
ray experiments 1932–33, it was considered a great triumph of the Dirac equation.
In 1995 a plaque was unveiled in Westminster Abbey, commemorating Dirac. It
contains a version of the Dirac wave equation in the compact form iγ · ∂ψ = mψ.
Primary Literature
1. P. A. M. Dirac: The Quantum Theory of the Electron. Proceedings of the Royal Society of
London A 117, 610–624; A 118, 351–361 (1928)
2. P. A. M. Dirac: The Principles of Quantum Mechanics (Clarendon, Oxford 1930)
Secondary Literature
3. H. Kragh: Dirac. A Scientiﬁc Biography (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1990)
4. J. Mehra, H. Rechenberg: The Historical Development of Quantum Theory. (Springer, New York
2000, Vol. 6, Part 1)
Dirac Notation
Roderich Tumulka
The “bra”-and-“ket” notation (introduced by Dirac) uses the symbols |ψ⟩and ⟨ψ|
for vectors in and linear forms on  Hilbert space.

