750
Superconductivity
11. M. Jammer: The Conceptual Development of Quantum Mechanics (McGraw Hill, New York
1966)
12. M. Morrison: Spin: All is not what it seems. Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern
Physics 38, 529–57 (2007)
13. F. Weinert: Wrong Theory – Right Experiment: The Signiﬁcance of the Stern–Gerlach Exper-
iments. Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 26, 75–86 (1995)
14. W. Walter: Otto Stern: Leistung und Schicksal. Gesellschaft Deutscher Chemiker, Fachgruppe
Geschichte der Chemie: Mitteilungen 3, 69–82 (1989)
15. R. Heinrich, H.-R. Bachmann: Walther Gerlach (Deutsches Museum, Munich1989, esp.
48–54)
Superconductivity
Kostas Gavroglu
Electrical Resistance in the Very Cold
The ﬁrst systematic studies of the dependence of electrical resistance on temper-
ature had been undertaken by L.P. Cailletet (1832–1913), E. Bouty (1846–1922)
and Z.F. Wroblewski (1845–1888) in 1885. Their researches led them to the as-
sertion that it would not be unreasonable to expect a zero value for the resistance
for a temperature higher than −273◦C. The next set of exhaustive measurements of
the electrical resistance of various metals were performed by James Dewar (1842–
1923) and John Ambrose Fleming (1849–1945). In 1896 they completed a study of
the resistance of mercury at liquid air temperature, and their results indicated that
the resistance of mercury could vanish at zero degrees Kelvin.
After having liqueﬁed helium in 1908, Heike Kamerlingh Onnes (1853–1926),in
1911, at Leiden, measured the resistance of platinum and that of pure mercury at he-
lium temperatures. He found that at 3K the value of the resistance of pure mercury
became 0.0001 times the value of the resistance of solid mercury at 0◦C, extrap-
olated from the melting point. Later that year the phenomenon was reafﬁrmed at
4.19K. By 1913 it was realized that impurities did not play any role in hindering the
disappearance of the ordinary resistance, and the phenomenon was for the ﬁrst time
called the “superconductivity” of mercury [22]. In 1914 Kamerlingh Onnes discov-
ered that an external magnetic ﬁeld could disturb superconductivity by “generating
resistance” in lead and tin. It was, also, found that superconductivity was destroyed
when current above a certain threshold value passed through the superconductor.
Eduard Riecke (1845–1915) and Paul Drude (1863–1906) [12] treated the elec-
tric current in a metal as a drift of an electron gas under the inﬂuence of an electric
ﬁeld. H.A. Lorentz’s (1853–1928) theory of electrical conduction had as a start-
ing point the statistical theory of Maxwell and Boltzmann, and he investigated the
dynamics of the collision processes. Nevertheless, his theory could not account for
the rapid fall of resistance at extremely low temperatures.

Superconductivity
751
S
In 1924 Lorentz drew attention to a remark originally made by Maxwell concern-
ing perfect electrical conductors: If a conductor has no resistance there will be no
electric ﬁeld inside it even when there is a current ﬂowing. The physical meaning of
this result was that any change of the external magnetic ﬁeld induced currents on the
surface of the metal, and the magnetic ﬁeld of these currents inside the metal com-
pensated the change of external ﬁeld, thus keeping the ﬁeld “frozen-in” the metal.
This physical assumption was regarded as being so self-evident that there was no
systematic experimental study of the phenomenon.
It was Felix Bloch (1905–1983) who in 1928 proposed a satisfactory electron
theory of conduction on the basis of  wave mechanics. The  electrons in a metal
were considered to be uncoupled, though the ﬁeld in which any one electron moved
was found by an averaging process over the other electrons. If the metal was at abso-
lute zero, its lattice determined a periodic potential ﬁeld for the electronic motions,
and the electrical resistance by the immobile lattice was zero. The resistance con-
sisted of the “impurity resistance” and the resistance due to the thermal motion of
the atoms. According to Bloch’s analysis of the motion of an electron in a perfect
lattice, all the electrons in a metal could be considered to be “free”, but it did not
necessarily follow that they were all conduction electrons. This theory accounted
for metals, semi-conductors and insulators but not for superconductors. Bloch tried
unsuccessfully to solve the problem in 1928–1929. He showed that the most stable
state of a conductor, in the absence of an external magnetic ﬁeld, was a state with
no currents. But, superconductivity was a stable state displaying persistent currents
without external ﬁelds: “This brought me to the facetious statement that all theo-
ries of superconductivity can be disproved, later quoted in the more radical form of
“Bloch’s theorem”; Superconductivity is impossible.” [4]
In 1932, W.H. Keesom (1876–1976) with J.N. van den Ende found a jump
of the  speciﬁc heat at the critical temperature of tin. This prompted Paul
Ehrenfest (1880–1933), to introduce the notion of phase transition of second order.
A.J. Rutgers suggested its application to superconductivity. C.J. Gorter proceeded
to calculate the difference in the Gibbs function of a superconductive sample in zero
magnetic ﬁeld and of the same sample in the normal state. At about the same period
Lev Landau (1908–1968) attempted to show that the resulting superconductive state
can have lower free energy than the state of random motion. Assuming uniform
saturation current density, Landau showed that it is possible to ﬁnd a balanced
system of local currents which will be electrodynamically stable.
The End of Old Certainties
At the beginning of November 1933 there appeared a short letter in Naturwis-
senschaften by Walther Meissner (1882–1974) and R. Ochsenfeld (1901–1993)
which presented strong evidence that, contrary to every expectation and belief of the
past twenty years, a superconductor expelled the magnetic ﬁeld. Superconductors
were found to be diamagnetic. The letter noted several experimental arrangements,

752
Superconductivity
involving a pair of solid tin or lead cylinders or a cylindrical lead tube. In each case
the sample was cooled below its transition point in a constant magnetic ﬁeld. When
the transition point was reached a sharp increase of ﬂux was registered. Meissner and
Ochsenfeld concluded that the magnetic ﬂux in the specimen did not remain con-
stant, but the lines of force were driven out of the superconductor,thereby increasing
the ﬂux in its neighbourhood. It appeared that the magnetic ﬁeld was pushed out
after the transition to the superconducting state and the magnetic ﬂux became zero.
The phenomenon of transition to the superconducting state turned out to be a re-
versible phenomenon:It did not matter whether the transition to the superconducting
state had been realized in the presence of an external magnetic ﬁeld or in the absence
of such a ﬁeld.
Gorter immediately sent a note to Nature, suggesting B = 0 to be a general
characteristic of superconductivity. This meant that the condition B = 0 assumed in
the thermodynamical treatment was not a restrictive hypothesis. In other words, after
the Meissner-Ochsenfeld result, a superconductor could be regarded as a perfect
conductor as well as a perfect diamagnet.
The Theory of Fritz and Heinz London
The ﬁrst successful theory of superconductivity was formulated by Fritz London
(1900–1954) and Heinz London (1907–1970). The Londons assumed that the dia-
magnetism must be taken to be an intrinsic property of an ideal superconductor, and
not merely a consequence of perfect conductivity. They proposed that superconduc-
tivity demanded an entirely new relation in which the current was connected not
with the electric, but with the magnetic ﬁeld. The breakthrough came when they
realised that the original acceleration equation proposed by Heinz in his doctor-
ate and which involved a relation between time derivatives of the current and the
magnetic ﬁeld, could be integrated without having to add a constant of integration.
Such an assumption would lead to the electrodynamics of a superconductor which
were consistent both with the zero resistance and the Meissner effect. By the end
of September 1934, Fritz and Heinz London had formulated the phenomenologi-
cal theory of the electrodynamics of a superconductor which was published in the
Proceedings of the Royal Society on November 13, 1934.
The “obvious” thing to do with the Meissner-Ochsenfeld result was to try to ﬁt
it into Maxwell’s electrodynamics, but with the permeability changing to zero, the
equations became indeterminate. The ﬁrst such attempt to supplement Maxwell’s
equation was made by F. Becker, F. Sauter and C. Heller. They argued that in a
superconductor, or rather in a body without any resistance, one cannot have any
change of magnetic ﬁeld, and they pointed out that, because of the inertia of the
electrons, an applied electric ﬁeld would accelerate them steadily. But the Londons
objected to such an approach, feeling that the equations proposed by Becker, Heller
and Sauter implied more than “is veriﬁed by experiment”. What they proposed can
be summarised as follows.

Superconductivity
753
S
Maxwell’s second equation of the electrodynamic ﬁeld took the form
dH/dt = −c curlE = 0
(1)
and after integration
H = H0
where H was the ﬁeld in the specimen when the latter lost its resistance. If there are
n electrons per cm3 of mass m, charge e and velocity v, the current density j = neν,
and
E = (4πλ2/c2)δJ/δt
(2)
where λ is a constant. Taking curls on both sides of (1) and using Faraday’s law
(4πλ2/c2)curlJ = −δH/δt
(3)
Substituting in Maxwell’s equation curl H = (4π/c)J,
λ2∇2δH/δt = δH/δt
(4)
Integrating with respect to time, (4) became
λ2∇2(H −H0) = (H −H0)
(5)
where H0 is an arbitrary ﬁeld–the ﬁeld which happened to be inside the body when it
last lost its resistance. The general solution of (4), therefore, meant that, practically,
the original ﬁeld persisted in the superconductor for ever. Fritz and Heinz, however,
noted that equation (1) implied more.
From the magnetic properties of a perfect conductorthe simpler result δH/δt = 0
(1) was obtained instead of (4). The novelty of (4) was in showing that the value
δH/δt = 0 (or H = H0) was also to be found only at a depth inside the metal
greater than λ. Indeed, the solutions of this equation decreased exponentially as one
receded from the surface, where they were ﬁtted into the values of the external ﬁeld.
There was no point in developing this form of the theory any further, for equation (3)
merely led to equation H = H0 with the modiﬁcation that the magnetic ﬁeld pene-
trated the body to a small but ﬁnite depth. The Londons proposed that the connection
between magnetic ﬁeld H and current density Js for the pure superconductive case
may be given by the equation
(4πλ2/c2)curlJ = −H
(6)
Equation (6) can be obtained by time integration from (3) if it is assumed that the
constant of integration is zero (H0 = 0) and it was considered as a completion
of Becker, Heller and Sauter’s formalism by ﬁxing the integration constant of the
magnetic ﬁeld according to the Meissner effect.
Equation (6) led to
λ2∇2H = H
(7)

754
Superconductivity
For large specimens, the characteristic feature of the solutions of this equation is
that they decay exponentially into the interior of the specimen. At a distance λ from
the surface the ﬁeld is practically zero. Meissner’s experimental result is represented
by (6) with one restriction, namely that the magnetic ﬂux decreases, not abruptly on
the surface, but continuously in a very small interval below the surface. Equations
(2) and (6) described the zero resistance and the Meissner effect respectively.
Equation (6) says more than (3), so far as it includes the Meissner effect. Pro-
ceeding from (6) to (3) by differentiating with respect to time, it is not possible to
deduce (2). Nevertheless, the following weaker statement is obtained from (3).
curl((4πλ2/c2)J −E) = 0
which shows that
(4πλ2/c2)J −E = gradμ
where μ is a scalar. On the other hand (2) leads not to (6) but only to its time
derivative (3). Thus, the propositions (2) and (6) “posses, so to speak, the same
degree of generality”. [24]
It is not, then, unreasonable to take (6) to be “more fundamental” than (2), and
this was an indication that a supercurrent could be regarded as a kind of diamagnetic
current. In examining the relation between the behaviour of a ring and the Meissner
effect, Fritz London showed that (6) can be expressed in such a way as to provide
some clues for what was required of a fundamental theory of superconductivity.
He suggested that the entire superconductor behaves as a “single big diamagnetic
atom”. He then went on to argue that if the ground state eigenfunction is “rigid” and,
thus, not modiﬁed very much by an applied magnetic ﬁeld, the current density will
be proportional to the vector potential and, thus, give the equation which describes
the Meissner effect.
Fritz and Heinz London supposed “the electrons to be coupled by some form
of interaction. Then the lowest state of the electron may be separated by a ﬁnite
distance from the excited ones” [24]. This may the earliest suggestion of an energy
gap. In 1935 Fritz London showed that the average momentum of the electrons did
not change in a superconductorwhen the ﬁeld was applied, and he suggested that the
reason may be a long range order which maintained the local average value of the
momentum constant over large distances in space. This order would be maintained
even in the presence of the magnetic ﬁeld. The ordered ground state was regarded as
a single quantum state extending throughout the metal. It was these considerations
which led London to present for the ﬁrst time his views about superconductivity as a
macroscopic quantum phenomenon.
When London talked of a “macroscopic” interpretation he meant a phenomeno-
logical theory whose interpretation depended on a “microscopic” mechanism which
set it apart from that used to explain ordinary conduction. The differentiating char-
acteristic of this new microscopic mechanism was the macroscopic dimensions of
the stationary waves.

Superconductivity
755
S
Some Further Developments in the Theory of Superconductivity
The need to clarify the character of the electron-electron interaction was becoming
more and more urgent. This was so, especially, since it was, still, very difﬁcult to
understand why the independent electron model of metals worked so well.
One of the ﬁrst deﬁnite proposals for such an interaction was due to
W. Heinsenberg (1901–1976). In 1947 Heisenberg suggested that the singular
part of the Coulomb interaction could lead to superconductivity. Heisenberg as-
sumed that in an electrically neutral metal, the ﬁrst-order perturbation caused by
this interaction vanished and that only the second-order perturbation was signiﬁ-
cant. For the lowest temperatures, Heisenberg suggested that there might be a very
large number of “current threads” which are randomly distributed and did not give
rise to a macroscopic current. However, if these current threads form a monocrys-
tal by freezing, then the macrocurrent will persist in such a system. From such
considerations, Heisenberg was able to derive the basic equations of the Londons.
In 1950 V.L. Ginzburg and Landau proposed a model where the energy needed
to produce a change in the superconducting state over any distance was explicitly
included in the theory. They worked out the thermodynamics of their model by
deﬁning a parameter ω, which was a measure of order in the superconducting phase
and which was zero above the transition temperature. They, then, identiﬁed ω with
the square of an effective  wave function , which they set equal to the concen-
tration of the superconducting electrons.  did not describe a single particle, but
the motion of the superconducting condensate as a whole. Their theory predicted
correctly the dependence of critical ﬁeld upon the temperature. When the effective
wave function was considered constant, the Ginzburg–Landau theory gave the Lon-
don equations.
Since the discovery of superconductivity there had been a widely and ﬁrmly
held belief that the ion masses, being so much larger than the electron masses,
could not play an important role in the establishment of the superconductive state.
H. Frohlich in 1950 conceived the idea that just the “opposite of the ‘dictum’ con-
tains the truth.” [10] The  quantum ﬁeld theoretical treatment showed that the
kinetic energy of the ions attached to a moving electron may be much smaller than
the kinetic energy of the electron. Frohlich applied the ﬁeld theoretic methods to the
interaction of the electrons in a metal with the lattice vibrations, and he found that
the interaction would lead to an attraction between the electrons. At the same time,
and independently of what was predicted by these theoretical developments, experi-
ments were undertaken to determine whether or not there was, in fact, a dependence
of critical temperature on isotopic mass. These experiments showed, surprisingly at
the time, that the critical temperature varied inversely with the square root of the
isotopic mass.
Frohlich’s 1950 paper was followed by John Bardeen (1908–1991) attempt to
formulate an interaction between electrons and phonons as the basis of a theory of
superconductivity. His model had many similarities with that of Frohlich. Neverthe-
less, the predicted condensation energy was too large. Also in such a case, where
the properties of the state were dramatically altered, the use of perturbation theory

756
Superconductivity
was unjustiﬁed and M.R. Schafroth had shown that the theory could not lead to
the Meissner effect. Nevertheless, most members of the community believed that in
the assumption that electron-phonon interaction should be somehow responsible for
superconductivity.
In 1952 Frohlich used a canonical transformation in order to circumvent
the deadlocks of perturbation theory. He proposed an effective electron-phonon
interaction without taking into account the Coulomb repulsion whose effects, it
was possible, to shadow the Frohlich interaction. In 1955 Bardeen and D. Pines
showed that this was not the case: for pairs of electrons whose energies were within
a characteristic phonon energy of the Fermi surface, this attractive interaction would
dominate the repulsive screened Coulomb interaction.
At about the same time Ginsburg and Schafroth, noted that such electron pairs
would obey  Bose-Einstein statistics. Schanfroth together with Blatt and Butler, in
1957 suggested that by choosing the form of the interaction between the particles, a
Fermi gas would behave like a gas made up of charged bosons.
An important result was derived by L.N. Cooper in 1956. He showed that if there
is an effective attractive interaction, a pair of quasi-particles above the Fermi sea
will form a bound state no matter how weak the interaction. Thus, in the presence of
attractive interactions, the Fermi sea which describes the ground state of the normal
metal is unstable against the formation of such bound pairs.
Bardeen, Cooper and J.R. Schrieffer made the decisive step for the formulation
of a microscopic theory of superconductivity. In 1957 they showed how to general-
ize the Cooper pair states to the many-body problem at absolute zero and derived
an expression for the ground state energy difference between normal and super-
conducting states and for the energy gap at t = 0 K. They, then, extended their
theory to obtain the excitation spectrum and made detailed calculations for vari-
ous thermal and transport properties at temperatures above absolute zero showing
that it was the second-order phase transition between electrons which caused them
to couple to the phonons. In 1972 all three received the Nobel Prize for physics.
John Bardeen became the ﬁrst person to have received the Nobel Prize twice in the
same ﬁeld.
Literature
1. J. Bardeen: On superconductivity, in S. Flugge ed., Encyclopedia of Physics, Volume XV
(1956)
2. J. Bardeen, L. N. Cooper, J. R. Schrieffer: Theory of superconductivity. Physical Review 108,
1175–12000 (1957)
3. J. M. Blatt: Theory of Superconductivity (Academic, New York 1964)
4. F. Bloch: Some remarks on theory of superconductivity. Physics Today, 19, 27–36 (1966)
5. H. Casimir: Superconductivity and Superﬂuidity, in J. Mehra ed. The Physicist’s Conception
of Nature, (Reidel, Dordrecht 1973)
6. P. F. Dahl: Superconductivity, its Historical Roots and Development from Mercury to the Ce-
ramic Oxides (American Institute of Physics, New York 1973)
7. B. S. Deaver, W. M. Fairbank: Experimental evidence for quantized ﬂux in superconducting
cylinders. Physical Review Letters 7, 43–46 (1961)

Superconductivity
757
S
8. J. Dewar, J. A. Fleming: The electrical resistance of metals and alloys at temperatures ap-
proaching the absolute zero. Philosophical Magazine XXXVI, 271–299 (1896)
9. H. Frohlich: Isotope effect in superconductivity. Proceedings of the Physical Society (London)
A63, 778 (1950)
10. H. Frohlich: The theory of superconductive state. Reports on Progress in Physics 24, 1–23
(1961)
11. K. Gavroglu: Fritz London (1900–1954), A Scientiﬁc Biography. Afterword by John Bardeen
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1995)
12. K. Gavroglu, Y. Goudaroulis: Methodological Aspects in the Development of Low Temperature
Physics 1881–1957: Concepts out of Context(s) (Kluwer, Dordrecht 1989)
13. K. Gavroglu, Y. Goudaroulis: The Remarkable Work of ‘Le Gentleman du zero absolu’,
in Through Measurement to Knowledge: The Selected Papers of Heike Kamerlingh Onnes
1853–1926 (Kluwer, Dordrecht 1991, 1–94)
14. K. Gavroglu, Y. Goudaroulis: Some Methodological and Historical Considerations in Low
Temperature Physics. The Case of Superconductivity 1911–1957. Annals of Science 41,
135–149 (1984)
15. C. J. Gorter: Some remarks on the thermodynamics of superconductivity. Archives du Mus´ee
Teyler, ser. III, Vol.VII, 378–387 (1933a)
16. C. J. Gorter, H. B. G. Casimir: On supraconductivity I. Physica 1, 306–320 (1934)
17. W. Heisenberg: The electron theory of superconductivity. Two Lectures (Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge 1949)
18. E. Jurkowitz: The Old School and the History of Science. Ph.D. Dissertation University of
Toronto (1994)
19. H. Kamerlingh Onnes: The importance of accurate measurements at very low temperatures.
CPL (Supplement) 9 (1904)
20. H. Kamerlingh Onnes: The liquefaction of helium. CPL, 108 (1908)
21. H. Kamerlingh Onnes: Further experiments with liquid helium, D. on the change of the electri-
cal resistance of pure metals at very low temperatures. V. The disappearance of the resistance
of mercury. CPL 122b and CPL 124c (1911)
22. H. Kamerlingh Onnes: Report on the researches made in the Leiden cryogenics laboratory
between the second and third international congress of refrigeration. CPL (Supplement) 34b,
37–70 (1913)
23. M. Laue von: Theorie der Supraleitung. Naturwissenschaften 34, 441–442 (1947)
24. F. London, H. London: The electromagnetic equations of the supraconductor. Proceedings of
the Royal Society 149, 71–88 (1935)
25. F. London: Macroscopical interpretation of supraconductivity. Proceedings of the Royal Soci-
ety 152, 24–34 (1935)
26. F. London: Superﬂuids. Vol.1 (Wiley, New York 1950)
27. J. C. McLennan: Opening address in a discussion on superconductivity and other low temper-
ature phenomena. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A152, 1–8 (1935)
28. W. Meissner, R. Ochsenfeld: Ein neuer Effect bei Eintritt der Supraleitfahigkeit. Die Naturwis-
senschaften 21, 787–788 (1933)
29. W. Meissner: The magnetic effects occurring on transition to the supraconductive state. Pro-
ceedings of the Royal Society (London) A152, 13–15 (1935)

