Integrated Science 7
Nima Rezaei
Amene Saghazadeh   Editors
Thinking
Bioengineering of Science and Art

Integrated Science
Volume 7
Editor-in-Chief
Nima Rezaei, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran

The Integrated Science Series aims to publish the most relevant and novel research
in all areas of Formal Sciences, Physical and Chemical Sciences, Biological
Sciences, Medical Sciences, and Social Sciences. We are especially focused on the
research involving the integration of two of more academic ﬁelds offering an
innovative view, which is one of the main focuses of Universal Scientiﬁc Education
and Research Network (USERN), science without borders.
Integrated Science is committed to upholding the integrity of the scientiﬁc
record and will follow the Committee on Publication Ethics (COPE) guidelines on
how to deal with potential acts of misconduct and correcting the literature.
More information about this series at https://link.springer.com/bookseries/16554

Nima Rezaei • Amene Saghazadeh
Editors
Thinking
Bioengineering of Science and Art
123

Editors
Nima Rezaei
Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research
Network (USERN)
Tehran, Iran
Amene Saghazadeh
Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research
Network (USERN)
Tehran, Iran
ISSN 2662-9461
ISSN 2662-947X
(electronic)
Integrated Science
ISBN 978-3-031-04074-0
ISBN 978-3-031-04075-7
(eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04075-7
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Switzerland AG 2022
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether
the whole or part of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of
illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and
transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar
or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from
the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors, and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this
book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the
authors or the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained
herein or for any errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard
to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Switzerland AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland

This book series would not have been
possible without the continuous
encouragement of our families. We dedicate
this book series to our parents, who taught us
how to see the world and think.

Preface
Thinking: Bioengineering of Science and Art follows a rule that it does not stick to
any rules, any limits, any boundaries, any interpretations, any levels, any dimen-
sions, any concepts, any words, any worlds, any reason, any science, any laws, any
environments, any principles, any states, any conditions, any patterns, any con-
notation, any commons, any currents, any horizon, any measurable, any sensible,
any traditions, any explanations, any conventions, any language, any communi-
cation, any functionality, any account, any images/concepts of self, any separation,
any rigidities, any classiﬁcation, any time, any space, any time-space, and even any
human power when it is given, “I think.” It, based on this mind map, therefore, feels
free to embrace viewpoints from philosophers, naturalists, physiologists, biologists,
biologists, physicists, mathematicians, chemists, pathologists, economists, and
computers scientists to emphasize universal thinking is an accomplishment of
thoughts of all kinds of professions.
Greatest thoughts are future bright achievements of those who become aware of
present instabilities and have passions to improve their skills and abilities patiently
and integrate themselves into the multidimensional world. In the book, a broad
range of abilities will appear: orientation, embracing contradictions, risk taking,
understanding, information interpretation or evaluation, open-mindedness, intel-
lectual empathy, ﬂuent idea expression, thinking modality-shifting, understanding,
translation, and encoding symbolic information, elaboration, abstract reasoning,
reading between the lines, dealing with uncertainty, investment decision-making,
ﬁne discrimination, conﬂict resolution skills, complex problem-solving, risk
recognition, bias detection, developing perspectives of a given situation with
remarkable differences, problem space dissection using systematic approaches,
framing, root cause identiﬁcation and analysis, information processing, perceptual
learning and knowledge acquisition, leading design transformation models, design
thinking, artistic interpretation, questioning, inference-making ability, social
self-care, self-management, self-projection, using observation and data curation
tools, understanding conspeciﬁcs’ mental states, intuition, theory of mind, empathy,
evaluating the speech and related properties, experiencing and expressing emotions,
seeing new relationships, learning, language, sense-making, averting ecological
crises, imagination, alliance formation, self-organization, communication, simula-
tion,
seeing
alternate
realities,
predicting
actions’
consequences,
linguistic
vii

acquisition, explaining complex information, actualization and consciousness of
reality, concentration, speaking, and dialoging.
From this book, we cannot expect to ﬁnd a word with the same application,
implication, meaning, activity, or ability throughout the book. Just as an example,
three of “generation”! We see “generation” as a part of the generation of novel
ideas, which is practiced at the end of creativity elsewhere, and here it occurs as
regular and spontaneous, not as the ﬁrst priority! Mostly, this book, however, pays
attention to “generation” when expressing very concerns about our children and
children of these children. Continuously, we move our thoughts from passing
generation to future generations, from this generation to that generation, between
generations, and across generations. This movement’s target is “science of educa-
tion of thinking,” regarding creativity, criticality, ﬁnance and economy, world
complex problems, global challenges, problem-solving, ecosystem, and maybe a
very small nudge to the biophilosophy of birth, life, and death. And this movement
is inclusive of what we call regeneration and degeneration both at the level of
thinking brain cells, neurons, and the level of thinking sustainability, policies,
environment, and society.
Life stands under frequent discussions in the book. It includes our thought on the
lives of non-human species and laboratory beings. It is, however, mostly focused on
the life of human beings at the level of individual and society, on the life of
ourselves and of others, and on the life of a body and of a mind. It elaborates on
human life, about its idea, quality, levels, forms, characteristics, history, standards,
ﬂow, change, use, origins, reproduction, manipulation, transmutation, circle, con-
ception, process, conditions, science, autonomy, philosophy, stages, dialectic,
evolutionary roots, inseparability, inaccessibility, appearance, occurrence, and
emergence. And again, this elaboration does not think of life as the same but
considers it differently, as a phenomenon, as a position, as a category, as a class, as
a moment, as information, as a whole.
Thoughts cover a spectrum of power or force that ranges from empty thinking to
pseudo-thinking to real thinking. When thinking in real, thoughts can reach the
level to penetrate, so changing the inner states/structures of the people/things. We,
in the book, see how music and listening to music in a conscious, attentive,
real-time, skilled, and active manner; aesthetic appreciation and performing art;
visualization and understanding images, symbols and using symbolic objects for
data categorization; language and speaking out of conventions into a poetic manner;
soul and unbounded expansion in believing the being are powerful in inducing as
well as accelerating thinking that is both real and strong; therefore, pleased.
Act of thinking is the book pivot with pillars of many other acts, such as
denotation, creation, life, making sense of complexities, perception, directing inner
and outer energies, translating spirituality or beauty into a comprehensible object,
judgment, drawing conclusions, linking, enumerating, creativity, interpretation,
power, reason, understanding, knowing and knowledge, love, contemplation, ask-
ing, writing and rewriting, and reconstruction.
It has been, without any bias to choose one side, our pleasure to build the world
of arguments in this book. You will ﬁnd narratives against reductionism, between
viii
Preface

hemispheres, between natural and eternal law, the dialectic of mind and matter, in
favor of vegetarianism, between human and non-human life, and between signs and
symbols in the context of marginal analogy, about the beginning of religion, and
taboo and penalty functions. It is a powerful building that could keep our minds
warm, moving from one argument to another.
Discourses happen of their own accord. They begin to speak to make thinking
interested on soaring journeys to mind, matter, world, complex problems, design,
language, speaking, nature, information, signals, symbols, human, being, envi-
ronment, identity, learning, education, forbidden sentences, God, divine, mathe-
matics, biology, evolution, life, rationality, philosophy, aesthetics, emotions, truth,
will, and theology; thought without any efforts of being competitive to put an end in
themselves. It remains for us again, either to consider a given discourse has reached
the point of conclusion or instead to continue its ﬂow.
The book affords to enable our eyes to see the sky of different worlds, some-
where over the clouds of sound, reality and virtuality, individual, people, the uni-
verse, art and artist, culture, whole, disorder, order, hemispheres, present, Middle
Ages, Western, religion, text, human beings, reﬂection, mind, matter, method,
object, subject, language, rational and irrational, ethical, mechanism, literature,
outer and inner, external and internal, emotions, empiric, outside and inside, chaos,
thinking and thought, modernism, post-modernism, civilization, DNA, experiences,
concepts, bioengineering, cyborg, animals, meaning, security, biophysics, imma-
teriality and materiality, nature and supra nature, living things, ecology, ideas,
interconnections, mentality and physicality, research and education, representa-
tions, actions, phantoms-appearances, events as a phenomenon, brain-body, envi-
ronment, and existing. Going up to the clouds and enjoying more and more pure
whiteness, we need more than ever to practice imaginative thinking to bring some
purely born thoughts with ourselves along the vertical axis.
There is a beautiful movement between the internal and the external on the
ground. Moving to the internal, we ﬁnd reference, states, imagery, impression,
processes, consistencies, mechanism of activities, focus, logic, problems, dialogue,
mechanisms of feedback, sensations, telos, structures, connections, sensory powers,
language, entity, represented form, force, organization, the conﬁguration of the
unity, limits of knowledge, anchors, feelings, interfaces, guide, and debt. Moving to
the external, the environment, which is a part of the external world, includes ref-
erence, extension, input, entities, some parts of the brain and body, relationships,
inferences, social occurrences, consistencies, processes, problems, changes, inter-
actions, obligation, inputs, stimuli, actions, objects, ﬁve senses, realities, execution,
causes, goals, and observer. Walking along the horizontal axis, we have to maintain
the balance while permitting ourselves to repeat reﬂection on problems and ques-
tions hidden on the horizon.
The book has its own way working though problems with regards to the world,
universe, mind, mind-brain, mind-body, nonlocality, entanglement, binding, mul-
tisensory integration, cognitive neuroscience, technology and learning, multifac-
torial
interactions
among
human
activities,
environment,
and
ecosystem,
eutrophication in water bodies, data available not enough for large-scale analysis
Preface
ix

and management decision-making, modern thinking theories and methodologies,
economic thinking, carbon dioxide, cultural diversity, disengagement, society,
science and religion, business law, environment, and social responsibility,
humanities and the natural sciences, dialectic of mind and matter, cognitive pro-
cesses, mental realities, global warming, wars, design, metaphysics, thinking and its
essence, philosophy, knowledge and limits, mathematics, language-games, varia-
tion, growth, and co-evolution of symbolic forms in living systems, form, organism,
attention layer, uncertainty of paternity, social sciences, identity stability, politics,
education, energy, climate change, biosecurity, ﬁnancial security, crises, awareness
of being, life, forces, visual information transmission, the relationship among
thought, language, and speech, and human consciousness. The book peacefully
arranges a collection of knowledge without being obsessed with a single reason or
solution.
Integrated Science: Science Without Borders is the title of the ﬁrst volume of the
Integrated Science (Int Sci or IS) Book Series—that is intended to integrate things
which are different and otherwise come separately to scientiﬁc argument and dis-
cussion—that though it is a short title but is a big enough subject to satisfying the
ﬁrst movement of our intention to show that the needs of the changing man, the
changing world, and the changing problems are too complex for an isolated,
speciﬁc type of knowledge, thought, science, system, or context. Still, we can
manage them effectively by deﬁning different kinds of useful integration at present
and then applying them to understand how a sustainable future is achievable. The
mystery co-ﬂy by Int Sci globally hidden in the puzzle of the Integrated Science:
Science Without Borders explicitly itself states what do we expect our idea to bring
for scientists: a ﬂight of largest living diversity, and therefore, of highest
thoroughness.
Integrated Science: Transdisciplinarity is a subsequent volume moved on to see
how the practice, with the presence of integrated science, is in its way. From the
window of Transdisciplinarity, there is a new light that changes our way of looking,
guiding us to see and communicate with different knowledge works at the same
time: archeology, architecture, sport sciences, biology, chemistry, ecology, envi-
ronmental sciences, agriculture, economics, mathematics, engineering, industry
management, information technology, marketing, nanoscience, neuroscience, space
exploration, philosophy, design, marketing, psychology, and social sciences. The
mystery science and society hidden in the puzzle of Transdisciplinarity is a simple
reﬂection that we think Transdisciplinarity can address challenges, overcome
limits, and cross all bridges that occur between science and society and serve to
diversify the applications of science for its intended audience, society.
Integrated Science: Multidisciplinary and Interdisciplinary in Health came after the
above volumes to put in the integrated context the health that will concern both
scientists and society people. It is the text written based on interdisciplinary studies
(IDS) where the brain, lifestyle behaviors, pandemics, drug discovery, nuclear
medicine,
dentistry,
neuropsychiatric
conditions,
artiﬁcial
intelligence
(AI),
x
Preface

information technology (IT), medical education, social capital, and discrimination
in research happen—in a non-specialized way—to at least two academic ﬁelds of
science. Let isolation die let IDS dance us hidden in the puzzle of Multidisciplinary
and Interdisciplinary in Health introduces our latest idea that it is for their isolation
that the health sciences are imperfect and IDS provide higher levels of thinking that
is from above where seeing is not labor possible owing to our eyes, but it—without
effort—is only the consequence of being there.
Art and science have been the parents of all the above volumes and will remain
at the end of their integrated kind for this and our future volumes. Each chapter
begins with a famous quote to show that the very meaning of the chapter is as
insightful as the multiple core messages of the text are thoughtful. Also, each
chapter contains—in addition to the narrative Summary—a Graphical Abstract/Art
Performance to makes a speciﬁc sense in which the very idea of the chapter is as
simply expressed as the code of the chapter is beautifully in order with the very
mystery of the book that is hidden in the puzzle of the book. For Integrated
Science: Science Without Borders, Integrated Science: Transdisciplinarity, and
Integrated Science: Multidisciplinary and Interdisciplinary in Health, there is a
binary code for each chapter that immediately appears after Graphical Abstract/Art
Performance. This code is associated with letters that make up the keyword of the
chapter, a word that occurs in the chapter’s text and should be put in place in the
puzzle according to the clues provided in the last chapter of each volume. For
THINKING: Bioengineering of Science and Art, there is a QR code, instead of a
binary code, for each chapter. Scanning this code directs to the word cloud of the
chapter that is made up of words we will discuss throughout the whole book in
relation to the keyword of the chapter that is intentionally not included in the word
cloud. Finding out what is the chapter keyword promotes integrated thinking, using
the abilities to design search strategies, hypothesize, and ﬁnally deduce. The key-
words should be put in place in the puzzle according to the clues provided in the
last chapter (Chap. 36), where you will get a surprise of this volume!
Future thoughts are the integral we end each volume with. Despite the ubiquity
of thinking about the future, the idea that integrated frameworks of thinking are that
can retain our position as a passionate thinker, our prestige as an all-time master,
and our presence as a perfect parent still seems to not have happened. We have so
far built three of such frameworks in the last chapter of each volume. Another
speciﬁc to Thinking: Bioengineering of Science and Art will appear in Chap. 36.
Welcome to worlds of thoughts, fears, and hopes in Thinking: Bioengineering of
Science and Art.
Tehran, Iran
Nima Rezaei, M.D., Ph.D.
January 2022
Amene Saghazadeh, M.D.
Preface
xi

Contents
1
Introduction on THINKING: Bioengineering of Science
and Art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
Nima Rezaei and Amene Saghazadeh
2
Thinking as a Philosophical, Theological and Psychological
Phenomenon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
Sergey S. Horujy
3
How to Think About Human-Animal Differences in Thinking:
Two Cases of Marginal Analogy in the Philosophical Explication
of Animal Cognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
Carlo Brentari
4
Homo Pictor: A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origins
of Human Thinking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
Roberto Franzini Tibaldeo
5
Idealism and Science of Life: An Intersection Between Philosophy
and Biology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
111
Stefania Achella
6
Embodied Creativity and Symbolic Variation in the Evolution
of Life . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
133
Mirko Di Bernardo
7
Within the Box: Captives of Our Own Mind . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
151
Christopher A. Haines
8
The Dialectic of Mind and Matter in the Trialectic Approach:
A New Path of the Cognition Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
171
Ulrich Richter
9
Efforts Deployed in the Penetration of “Thought” . . . . . . . . . . . . .
193
Eva Reyes-Gacitúa
10
Pseudo-Thinking and Real Thinking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
211
Ryota Ono
xiii

11
Three Paradoxes of Thought: Thought Power Measured . . . . . . . .
235
Tamás Lajtner
12
A New Philosophical Paradigm of Thinking for Particular
Sciences: Physics, Cognitive Neuroscience, and Biology . . . . . . . . .
269
Gabriel Vacariu and Mihai Vacariu
13
Indicators of Variation in Thinking Actions and Reactions . . . . . .
285
Trevor J. Tebbs
14
Multidimensional Thinking: Economizing Thinking
and Maximizing Outcomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
311
Leander Penaso Marquez
15
How You Know What I Know that She Said About You:
Theory of Mind, Intentionality and the Evolutionary Roots
of Artistic Practice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
329
Dustin Hellberg
16
A Philosophical Perspective on the Bioengineering of Art:
Ethical Shifts in Mimesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
345
Amine Harbi
17
Thinking Through the Body: Art and Philosophy in Dialogue . . . .
361
Louise Mackenzie and María Antonia González Valerio
18
Mechanism Versus Organism: A Loosely Kantian Perspective
and Its Implications for Bioengineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
381
Reto Gubelmann and Marco Toscano
19
New Media Art: The Liminal Space Between Thinking
and Perceiving . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
397
Paola Lopreiato
20
Towards a New Science of Interfaces: Bridging Art
and Engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
413
Luca Iandoli, Alejandro Salado, and Giuseppe Zollo
21
Art as Metacognitive Tool for Critical Thinking
in Engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
437
Patricia Caratozzolo
22
Dimensions of Thinking, Reﬂecting and Knowing
Through Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
455
Harah Chon
23
Thinking Through Sound: Music Listening as a Model
for Enhanced Cognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
473
Mark Reybrouck
xiv
Contents

24
Poetic Thinking and the Constitution of Our World:
On Language and Reality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
493
Marko Pajević
25
Thinking as the Invention of New Aspects Within
Language-Games. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
511
Cristiane Maria Cornelia Gottschalk
26
Literature as a Genealogy of Social Sciences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
529
Julio Juan Ruiz
27
How Rational Thought is Conceived in Christian Doctrine:
The Case of Saint Thomas Aquinas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
537
Rogelio Jiménez Marce
28
The Interest of Religion on Ethical Thought in Science . . . . . . . . .
555
Jude Likori Omukaga
29
Thinking, Politics, and the Evolutionary Process of Societies . . . . .
573
Mauro Scalercio
30
Information Processing in Reasoning in the Environment
of Forbidden Sentences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
591
Wojciech Krysztoﬁak
31
The Impact of Economic Science on Human Thinking . . . . . . . . . .
615
Khasankhonova Nodira Isametdinovna
32
Generations of Systems Thinking: Models for Future
Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
629
Stephen Spain
33
Systems Thinking and Action for an Entrepreneurial Journey
Towards the House of Lab Science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
653
Christian Hugo Hoffmann
34
Systems Approach for Modeling Multifactorial Human
Interactions that Affect Ecological and Environmental
Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
671
Fernando Ramos-Quintana and Ana Itzel Casarrubias-Jaimez
35
Cradle to Cradle and Cradle to Grave: Discussing the Case
of Eco-cofﬁns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
693
Grace Anywar, Helen Kopnina, and Kim Poldner
Contents
xv

36
Thinking 2050: Bioengineering of Science and Art . . . . . . . . . . . . .
713
Nima Rezaei, Amene Saghazadeh, Alejandro Salado, Amine Harbi,
Ana Itzel Casarrubias-Jaimez, Carlo Brentari,
Christian Hugo Hoffmann, Christopher A. Haines,
Cristiane Maria Cornelia Gottschalk, Dustin Hellberg,
Eva Reyes-Gacitúa, Fernando Ramos-Quintana, Gabriel Vacariu,
Giuseppe Zollo, Grace Anywar, Harah Chon, Helen Kopnina,
Jude Likori, Julio Juan Ruiz, Khasankhonova Nodira Isametdinovna,
Kim Poldner, Leander Penaso Marquez, Louise Mackenzie,
Luca Iandoli, Marco Toscano, María Antonia González Valerio,
Mark Reybrouck, Marko Pajević, Mauro Scalercio, Mihai Vacariu,
Mirko Di Bernardo, Paola Lopreiato,
Patricia Olga Caratozzolo Martelliti, Reto Gubelmann,
Roberto Franzini Tibaldeo, Rogelio Jiménez Marce, Ryota Ono,
Sergey Horujy, Stefania Achella, Stephen Spain, Tamás Lajtner,
Trevor J. Tebbs, Ulrich Richter, and Wojciech Krysztoﬁak
Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
753
xvi
Contents

1
Introduction on THINKING:
Bioengineering of Science and Art
Nima Rezaei and Amene Saghazadeh
“Not two cultures—one scientiﬁc and the other aesthetic, or one
rational and the other irrational—but one. The scientist and the
artist, far from being engaged in opposed or incompatible
activity are both trying to extend our knowledge and experience
by the use of creative imagination subjected to critical control.”
Brian Magee
Summary
THINKING: Bioengineering of Science and Art is inclusive of the philosophy of
thinking by using different knowledge works. This chapter is, therefore, no
longer an attempt to introduce the book. Rather, we notice thoughts of different
contexts and many relations among them, giving rise to various sets of
integrations. One important result of this introduction is that integrated thinking
represents the highest level of development, and scientiﬁc thinking may be only
one of many integrant elements and a range of integrative relations—the point to
which we devote our attention in THINKING: Bioengineering of Science and
Art.
N. Rezaei (&)  A. Saghazadeh
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education
and Research Network (USERN), Tehran, Iran
e-mail: Rezaei_nima@tums.ac.ir
N. Rezaei  A. Saghazadeh
Research Center for Immunodeﬁciencies, Children’s Medical Center,
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Dr. Qarib St, Keshavarz Blvd, 14194 Tehran, Iran
N. Rezaei
Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh (eds.), Thinking, Integrated Science 7,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04075-7_1
1

Bioengineering of science and art: simple or complex?
[Adapted from the Association of Science and Art (ASA), Universal Scientiﬁc
Education and Research Network (USERN); Made by Mona Mirbeyk.]
Keywords
Art  Engineering  Education  Integrated  Science  Thoughts  Worlds
QR code
2
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh

Scanning the QR code directs you to the word cloud of the chapter that is made up
of the words we discussed throughout the whole book in relation to the chapter’s
keyword, which is intentionally not included in the word cloud. Find the keyword
and put it in place in the puzzle according to the clues provided in Chap. 36. The
mystery hidden in the puzzle is the quote of THINKING: Bioengineering of Science
and Art.
Introduction
Whether it is correct or not, thinking is regarded as the most closely related to what
humans know of themselves, personhood or identity, and why we say it is not
correct lies in that it is language, not thinking, that is unique to homo sapiens, while,
thinking occurs in non-human primates [1]. Is the human identity similar to
non-human primates’ identity? Or should there exist a language of thinking speciﬁc
to us? That we are writing about THINKING means we are, of course, with the latter
and that the book title includes Bioengineering of science and Art means now we
talk of integration as the language of human thinking.
Art-science meeting is a sustainable phenomenon. In relation to science, art was
once believed to be a separate culture, then became a tool to obtain representations
initially for scientiﬁc communications and descriptions that are in the representa-
tional space of science—the so-called representational art—and now is, also,
employed for thinking through everything that is in the non-representational space
of science, also known as the “sea of ignorance.” Art is, therefore, with its
non-representational mode of thinking, encouraged to meet science to manage the
risks of what are misdiagnosed as bifurcations in views of nature, e.g., the objective
versus the subjective, the matter versus the mind, the nature versus culture, the body
versus mind, and in parallel to all of this, scientiﬁc thinking is treated to be abstract
enough, yet not reductionist, to welcome and work with what that is otherwise the
invisible and so remained undiagnosed [2], simply to think in the world “from
above.” From above, there is a present ground, but also are the past and the future
grounds: all in one. So, is not from above thinking superior (better to say speedier)
to long-term thinking in providing sustainability [3]?
From the discussion of scientiﬁc thinking as a dual system of intuitions (fast
thinking) and reasoning (slow thinking), it emerges that all a science of rationality
and a homogenous team of scientiﬁc experts and a scientiﬁc worldview are
imperfect [4]. But, breakthroughs in science come from novel ideas, from a
heterogeneous group made randomly from people, and from remote associations.
Factors that trigger these events include having empty time and breaks for reﬂective
thinking to work, nonselective exposure to information through attending informal
gatherings and social meetings, and a complementary partner. Who can be a perfect
partner for science in the way of sustainable innovations?
1
Introduction on THINKING: Bioengineering of Science and Art
3

Art is a partner of science. When ﬁelds are deﬁned as a function of (i) process,
analytic versus synthetic; and (ii) content, symbolic versus real, we will have four
main classes of ﬁelds: analytic symbolic, synthetic symbolic, analytic real, and
synthetic real. There are two pairs of exactly complementary ﬁelds:
(i) science and design; science is a ﬁeld dominated by analytic process and
symbolic content, whereas design by synthetic process and real content; and
(ii) medicine and art, medicine mainly relies on analytic process and real content,
whereas art on the synthetic process and symbolic content [5].
This implies that decision-making tends to be defective in science and medicine,
and design and art solutions can help them to complement this defect.
Primary artists-secondary scientists are the proof of the above. Following the
history of science, we see how nonverbal thinking has led to the development of
verbal thinking in the form of painter-scientists, poet-scientists, and musician-
scientists, called correlated talents (Fig. 1.1) [6]. High-level creative scientiﬁc
thinking is what we mean by verbal thinking here. We use development as these
scientists were ﬁrst painters, musicians, or poets and then became scientists; we call
them secondary scientists. Imaginative thinking is the art of nonverbal thinking
skills that include a wide range of thoughts listed in this chapter.
Fig. 1.1 Painter-invertor-engineers. Robert Fulton (1765–1815) was a portrait and landscape
painter who engineered the ﬁrst steamboat. Samuel Morse (1791–1872) was a portrait painter who
developed the telegraph. (Adapted from Wikimedia Commons, the free media repository, https://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robert_Fulton#/media/File:Fulton.jpg; https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Samuel_
Morse#/media/File:Samuel_Morse_1840.jpg)
4
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh

Art and science, however, suffer from the same: both are rather subjective in
their approach. Design science came into existence to ﬁll the gap by an objective,
rational approach to working. On the other hand, complex real-world problems
often engage engineers to make things or to make things better. For example,
climate changes have caused the need for adaptation strategies to provide resilient
infrastructure. Its thinking begins with risk assessment and cost-effectiveness
evaluation of adaptation strategies using modeling approaches and proceeds to
recommendations that are risk-reducing and economically feasible [7]. Indeed,
engineering is the mainstay of the treatment of infrastructure. The objectivity and
rationality of design thinking turned out to be an interest to, particularly, engi-
neering branches of science [8]. This movement arrived at engineering art and
science to design. It is worth mentioning that we valued design and science as
complementary pairs of ﬁelds earlier. We, more precisely, emphasize they are
engineering design (synthetic, real) and engineering science (analytic, symbolic).
Taking part in art, design, engineering, and science meetings requires recog-
nizing the basics of thinking in these contexts. Then, it is interesting to address
which forms of thinking are they integrated? and for what purposes? Throughout
the chapter, formally agreed to the deﬁnition of most forms of thinking is lacking;
however, there have been referred to representative lists of features characterizing
each of them.
Scientific Thinking
Knowing and knowledge are said to be the nature of science [9]; so, “knowledge
seeking” deﬁnes the core of scientiﬁc thinking that presents a type of highly
developed thinking, but not the only one [10]. Scientiﬁc thinking development
begins early in life since four years of age [11], when humans begin to build
experience-based constructs and continue to revise these constructs as they grow
longer and encounter more experiences. Theory of Mind (ToM) is an important
facet of this development and is referred to as the ability essential to understand
what beliefs are false and be aware of what the knowledge sources are. Then, the
knowledge sources we choose as theoretical and experimental, and the evidence we
choose as determinate versus indeterminate lies in this awareness [11]. When
conceptually revising the initial constructs, theories, and beliefs, humans enjoy
making sense of the world and phenomena that become less and less imperfect and,
in this process towards perfection, lie from knowledge acquisition to reconstruction
of conceptions and thoughts to understanding [10].
Scientiﬁc thinking is crucial to argument formation. We form arguments in every
decision-making step, holding a belief, stating or referring to a judgment, and
drawing an inference or a conclusion [12]. There is a range of scientiﬁc thinking
skills that are mainly employed in relation to either an investigation or inference.
The investigative skills enable one to design experiments and produce evidence,
and this evidence is that on which inferential activities are based. Investigative and
1
Introduction on THINKING: Bioengineering of Science and Art
5

inferential skills prompt scientiﬁc thinkers to claim in different ways theoretically.
The type of claim one makes reﬂects the degree to which he/she views the world
wisely, and the more compatible the theoretical claim is with the real world, the
wiser the claim. And the more those investigative and inferential activities are
integrated, the more compatible the theoretical claim [11].
Altogether, making-mistaking-re-making enjoyment is a way scientiﬁc thinking
development empowers humans in terms of a shift from theories-based to
evidence-based responses and more and speedier spontaneous and prompted
responses we make. Scientiﬁc thinking skills are teachable from elementary school
[13]. Therefore, scientiﬁc thinking strategy development is a lifelong process that
can happen throughout the mentally normal life cycle, instantly regenerating the
feeling that we can be better thinkers: we are still four years old!
To practice science means to seek information in an intentional way, which is
associated
with
gain-of-knowledge,
change-of-knowledge,
and
produce-of-
knowledge activities that have their roots in cognitive spaces related to hypothe-
sizing, investigating, and evaluating and come about question formulation, mod-
eling,
investigation
planning,
data
analysis,
evidence
interpretation,
and
constructing explanations, and designing solutions [14]. Many aspects are proposed
to represent the nature of scientiﬁc thinking, for example, anticipatory, social, and
situated, to name some [15]. Scientiﬁc thinking requires one to solve problems,
reason, formulate, investigate, use real and symbolic objects, and revisit
hypotheses/theories [16]. For these abilities to emerge, individual factors are
important as well as context-related factors. Individual factors are mainly cognitive
and metacognitive skills. In this context, there is an environment that provides
science-supporting tools and instruction. At a higher level is a scientist who is a
prospective thinker who knows the world is a dynamic system that is changing and
has a desire to know and make hypotheses about what is accounting for the change.
These qualify the process of scientiﬁc thinking development from basic cognition to
prospective cognition [15]. Scientiﬁc thinking models result from endeavors of two
groups: educators and researchers, which, through the years, have made three
perspectives of science thinking: science-as-practice, science-as-reasoning, and
science-as-conceptual change [17]. And now, there is a need for an integrative
framework.
Design Thinking
We can follow this form of thinking in history by two main terms of design and
Dasein. The roots of Desein are Da and Sein; the former, in German, is meant as there
and the latter as being, collectively, “being there.” Known for his contribution to the
principle of uncertainty, Heidegger uses the term Dasein regarding modes of being
there. There is no need to mean design, given the all-clear to draw, plan, mark out, etc.
(for review; see [18]). Important that design reveals a modern, practical variant of
Dasein regarding being in the world and other differences, as reviewed in [18].
6
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh

Design thinking dates back to the sixteenth century. It has had a long run of
evolution characterized by several peaks [19]. Focusing on the twentieth century,
the Arts and Craft movement was developed in response to a series of nineteenth
century-driven efforts towards increasingly industrialized and seriously standard-
ized goods and services to bridge the gap between craft and technology. Design
thinking then was integrated into science and activities like mass production and
industrial education, giving rise to modern products like refrigerators, cars, etc.
However, it was until world war II that human–machine interaction became
important, leading to the integration of human dimensions, like aesthetic appreci-
ation, into design products, the ﬁrst example of which is the receiver speaker.
International movements and systems design were put forward to build relation-
ships between different cultures’ design; the former bridges nations and the latter
bridges home and work. Of most recent discussions of design thinking is con-
cerning social responsibility and environmental factors that we are humans, design
for humans, and live in an environment; so, another movement, humanitarian
design, get started to design sustainable products with low environmental impact. It
is still in its infancy, and cradle-to-cradle and cradle-to-grave are some of its
attempts. Nowadays, we see design thinking contributing to multidisciplinary
educational and learning education and improving creativity, innovation, imagi-
nation [20, 21]. Interestingly, it can particularly apply to both rural and remote
systems.
For a design insight to become preferred and for a design product to become
desired is a long way that economic, technological, social, and consumer-related
factors play a role. Design thinking process steps vary signiﬁcantly through liter-
ature. For example, it might begin with observation-inspiration, ideation, testing,
deﬁnition-synthesis, prototyping, and communication. Elsewhere, it is a process
that requires “problem deﬁnition, insights and empathy, iterative approach,
abductive reasoning, an ethnographic approach, brainstorming and ideation, pro-
totyping techniques, co-creation, and learning launch, pilot, and ﬁeld experiments”
[22]. An important note is a bidirectional ﬂow between steps [23].
Metaphors can be utilized to deﬁne design thinking. Bricolage is a metaphor
[24], referred to as “the creation of structure out of events.” The designer, the
so-called bricoleur, works with what is available. For this purpose and given that
there is a closed collection of tools, the bricoleur is powerful in making an adaptive
dialogue with his tools and redeﬁning means using semi-deﬁned elements that are
abstract like a concept and concrete like an image, the so-called virtual signs, and
dynamically changing his decisions about “which” and “where” an element is used.
To replace or remove an element means to reorganize the structure. The ﬁnal work
is not ideal in terms of consistency with his preferences or imagination and the
project requirements, but it is unique in terms of its unpredictability imposed by
internal and external inﬂuences, e.g., limitations, adversities, and idiosyncratic
thinking. The direction of thinking is from events to the structure (events imposed
on structure), simply events synthesis.
This thinking applies to different areas of science, art, and engineering [25].
Design thinking is characterized as follows;
1
Introduction on THINKING: Bioengineering of Science and Art
7

(i)
it is a human-centric, empathic way of thinking;
(ii)
it is a union of thinkers coming from a variety of professions, departments,
and groups;
(iii)
for being both a problem- and solution-based approach, design thinking
incorporates the holistic understanding of the consumer/customer’ needs,
wants, thoughts, and behaviors into the producer knowledge and expertise;
(iv)
it is a way of improving thinking; it continuously tries to improve the
collective mindset of a given problem through re-deﬁnition of problems and
solutions that are not well-deﬁned and posing questions to run previously
deﬁned problems, solutions, and assumptions into challenges;
(v)
it is a way of innovative, outside-the-box thinking, it the initiative of
deﬁning new/alternative problems and solutions and making a prototype;
(vi)
it is a way of scientiﬁc thinking; it deals with experimentation and simu-
lation of new/alternative solutions to assess potential challenges and reﬁne
the product to maximize effectiveness;
(vii)
it is a way of thinking within the box, the method it employs to undertake
the process of selection among potentially identiﬁed solutions is nothing
than rational thought that constitutes in itself the analysis-based results
monitoring the relation of solutions with the current circumstances and
conditions;
(viii)
it applies an integrated approach, also known as the “third” way of thinking,
that is the combination of both scientiﬁc thinking and thinking with
empathy; in other words, as a representative of both quantitative thinking
and qualitative thinking, to solve complex problems of the real-world as
well as to facilitate communication between designer people;
(ix)
it is a non-linear way of thinking with bidirectional interactions between or
cyclical ﬂow of different stages of thinking mentioned above; and
(x)
it is a thinking for all.
Therefore, design-based ﬁrms can play a complementary role to knowledge-
based ﬁrms. They offer an embodied approach introducing knowledge to practice to
deal with world problems that are often wicked. In contrast, the theoretical aspect of
knowledge-based ﬁrms remains dominant in investigating scientiﬁc issues. More-
over, creativity is the center of design thinking, while rationality is for knowledge
work [26].
Engineering Thinking
In contrast to bricolage, an engineer evaluates what the project needs to make them
available. Like a scientist, an engineer has a universe of tools, and therefore,
engineering thinking dialogs engage the universe, not a collection as it is in design
thinking. Engineering thinking is a process of creating means using concepts that
are abstract [24]. Therefore, the primary results of engineering thinking satisfy the
8
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh

project’s predetermined assumptions, regardless of secondary outcomes and events
in the meantime. The direction of thinking is from the structure to events (structure
imposed on events); simply structure synthesis.
The following six skills characterize engineering thinking:
(i)
systems thinking, the ability to view the whole system and its parts, reason
on how these parts connect and depend upon each other, and synthesize a
new thing;
(ii)
problem-ﬁnding, the ability to deﬁne the problem, ﬁnd whether any relevant
solutions are available, do a search on the issue, and verify solutions;
(iii)
visualizing, the ability to make connections between abstract and concrete
terms, manipulate materials, and mentally rehearse the physical space and
solutions;
(iv)
improving the ability to build better things by constantly attempting to
investigate, design, hypothesize, conjecture, and prototype;
(v)
creative problem-solving, the ability to use tips, tools, and techniques from
different cultures of knowledge, has a teamwork view of engineering, and
effectively make an opinion and work within a team to achieve new ideas and
solutions;
(vi)
adapting, the ability to test, analyze, reﬂect, re-think, and be mentally and
physically ﬂexible
The above characteristics, known as engineering habits of mind (EHoM), are
used for real-world learning (RWL), a program aimed at engineers’ mental
preparation to overcome the shortage of engineers in the future [27].
Engineering thinking is all-ages thinking. It can be practiced using different
models that are easy to understand for different age groups, such as playing with
blocks, objects, and materials in prekindergarten children [28–30]. Engineering
thinking is an all-emergencies approach. It is, as general thinking to enhance the
ability to innovate and create new versions and employ the current versions to new
situations of interest to many disciplines and professions. Also, engineering
thinking is educable via both in-person programs and virtual internships [31]. This
possibility that engineering thinking can be cultivated on a large scale has added an
attempt to diversify the community of engineering. However, to ideally accomplish
all of these potential advantages, engineers need to take technical proﬁciency and
social responsibility into account [32]. This consideration is the result of a higher
level of understanding that the world’ problems are, only in part, the function of
which are known as the engineering knowledge’ errors and deﬁciencies, but in
another important part, are due to the gap between what are the community’ needs
and the solutions designed in response to those errors and deﬁciencies.
1
Introduction on THINKING: Bioengineering of Science and Art
9

Systems Thinking
Like many forms of thinking, systems thinking is controversial regarding meanings,
origins, and approaches. Some consider it a methodology of speciﬁc applicability
and of speciﬁc social movement, whereas others see it as a collective of methods of
general implications and general dynamics [33]. Against both of these groups is the
third group that no longer tries to address what systems thinking is clearly referred
to as and where systems thinking come from but characterize systems thinking in
terms of ideas, approaches, methods, theories, sciences, problems, and solutions it
can encompass [33]. From such a perspective, a big picture of thinking that
involves both short-term and long-term goals is attributed to systems thinking that
uses both measurable and unmeasurable variables to guide the understanding of
interdependent dynamics of complex systems [34]. Keeping in mind that we our-
selves are a part of this comprehensive viewpoint, systems thinking has many tools
that lead to the development of something rich that will be referred to as a
framework, a language, a model, or simply a way that applies to problems dealing
with different disciplines simultaneously (multidisciplinary), between disciplines
(interdisciplinary), and across disciplines (transdisciplinary). What else can one
expect from thinking that has opened many hands to put a systems’ end embracing
us directing towards wholeness?
Computational Thinking
It is a universal language different from mathematical and engineering thinking but
acts in a complementary way. Computational thinkers can understand human be-
havior and design systems rooted in need for complex problem-solving. Given that
no discipline exists free of complex problems, computational thinking is important
to different disciplines. In addition to abstraction ability, different computation,
computational, and computing skills play a role in making a computational thinker
competent [35]. Despite being highly recognized in practice, there is a need to
overcome different challenges for computational thinking to become integrated into
curriculum and learning programs for secondary and undergraduate education.
Some experiences for the K-12 curriculum are described in [36]. In particular,
people from non-computer sciences, e.g., departments of art, history, music, biol-
ogy, humanities, politics, and economics, need to show interest and extend the
scope of their collaboration, so the product of their activities become tangible, for
example, an international curriculum of integrated computational thinking.
10
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh

Art Thinking
It is a radical form of design thinking; the design thinking works in a user-oriented
manner aimed at arriving a better position than before design thinking is operated,
while for art thinking that works in a breakthrough-oriented manner, better is not
good; there is an optimal position that needs to be ﬁlled [22]. To become possible,
art thinking is a much more time-demanding task than design thinking. If we
consider it as a type of breakthrough thinking, then it is characterized by a long
search process while signiﬁcant progress is not visible, followed by a precipitating
phenomenon that leads to a relatively short search process, ﬁnding a solution
(cognitive snap), and so, surprise (sense of transformation) when remembering
where I was and where I am [37]?
Art thinking is also different from scientiﬁc (engineering) thinking in terms of
the ﬁgure of speech [24]. Art uses metaphors or homologs for an order, whereas
scientiﬁc (engineering) thinking works through cause and effect metonymies. In
terms of the direction of thinking, art thinking is a combination of design and
scientiﬁc thinking [24]; it provides a representation of the structure that is in
representational space (structure imposed on events) and also a representation of
events shaped by intrinsic and extrinsic properties of the subject and related context
and their interactions with themselves and their world and with the artist and the
artist’s
world
(events
imposed
on
structure).
It
is,
therefore,
simply
a
structure-events integration.
Creative Thinking
It is a multidimensional concept that a range of cognitive and metacognitive abil-
ities, skills, and interactions contribute to developing what is considered creative.
Looking at the top 15 skills for 2025, we see creativity, originality, and initiative
have occupied the 5th rank after analytical thinking and innovation, active learning
and learning strategies, complex problem-solving, and critical thinking and analysis
[38]. On the ground, the creator is one who can create while standing at the center
of a system of forces and relationships between them. The culture, society, social
environment, groups, individual differences, personality traits, affective and cog-
nitive skills, training, a systems approach, and a neurological basis are all suggested
to be integrated into a systems view of creativity [39]. To review other integrated
models of creativity, see [40]. Creative thinking is characterized by different lists of
features [5], which mainly consists of four components of the person, product,
process, and press, also known as 4Ps [40]. Some argue that creative thinking is
cross-disciplinary; it means creative thinking in discipline A can interact with and
improve creative thinking in discipline B [41]. On the other hand, we have multiple
intelligence theories that value one intelligence superior to the other. In this chapter,
where is our position is clear when different combinations of creative thinking come
to exist!
1
Introduction on THINKING: Bioengineering of Science and Art
11

The Importance of Problem Discovery
The ﬁrst moments of creative thinking are to deﬁne the problem. Importantly, to
which extent solutions are creative depends on which extent problems are creative;
so, how a problem is creatively deﬁned is important. Studies associate creative
performance with a range of exploratory problem-discovery behaviors in different
domains. With regards to non-verbal thinking, for example, the time used for the
exploration of objects and the number of explored objects before drawing are of
such behaviors that have been corresponded to the amount of originality of the
artwork in art students. As for verbal thinking, the number of explored objects
indicates the number of changes in reality and the originality of essays in children
who write creative essays. Even if the essay is not creative, the number of explored
objects corresponds to the ﬂuency of the assay, as represented in the essay’s word
count. Also, these studies show differences between the position the problem is
presented to us and that we ourselves discover the problem. Students have a better
creative performance for problems they themselves discover in terms of the number
of ideas they can draw [42].
From Leisure Activities of an Adolescent to Job
Accomplishments and Life Satisfaction of an Adult
Giftedness is an element that crucially determines creative thinking and perfor-
mance. It is, in turn, a composite, four-dimensional concept where socioeconomic
status (SES), age, culture and subculture, sex, autonomy, learning style, and task
commitment are personality-related factors playing a role. Giftedness ranges from
no and mild to moderate and profound levels. Its deﬁnition occurs in relation to the
study setting, i.e., community, home, and school. Giftedness is of main four
categories:
(i)
general intelligence, this is the intelligence from which we can develop
different thoughts, e.g., abstract thinking, systematic thinking, and logic
thinking; so, it is a means of problem-solving;
(ii)
speciﬁc intellectual ability, this is the intelligence that enables the individual
to develop domain-speciﬁc thoughts, e.g., mathematical thinking, musical
thinking, scientiﬁc thinking, language learning, aesthetic appreciation, etc.;
(iii)
general original thinking that is creativity allows one to be a highly qualiﬁed
problem solver who comes up with ideas and solutions which are unex-
pected, surprising, and brilliant; and
(iv)
speciﬁc creative talent is domain-speciﬁc and corresponds to creativity in the
domains as mentioned above, similar to speciﬁc intellectual ability.
Longitudinal studies that followed individuals during a long-term period provide
explicit evidence that our real-world creativity in adulthood is a function of our
creative performance during adolescence. Creative performance is deﬁned in terms
12
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh

of leisure activities that students enjoy making them outside school. Engaging with
these voluntary activities, including playing music and scientiﬁc lab experiments,
students reach a high level of hard-working, intellectuality, and pleasure, which
totally and gradually embrace the adolescent turning him/her into a great achiever.
However, it is noteworthy mentioning that such development depends meaningfully
upon how creative performance in adolescence is matched with that of adulthood.
An 18-year follow-up study shows that those who had matched leisure activities
during adolescence were better in job accomplishments and life satisfaction [43].
Creativity development will be inﬂuenced by the teaching method. In grade 3
students, synectics appear better than brainstorming patterns and brainstorming
patterns better than traditional teaching in developing students’ creativity, as
assessed by the production of creative solutions with the Torrance test of creative
thinking (TTCT) [44]. We can, therefore, summarize creativity as the sum of
giftedness, discovery behaviors, teaching methods, and leisure activities.
Critical Thinking
Critical and analytical thinking are of higher-order thinking considered as art,
helping to improve communication, collaboration, innovation, and ﬂexibility, all of
which are required for ﬁtness and survival in today’s world that competitiveness is
globally distributed and the key for success is to solve complex problems that arise
with the changing needs of society [45, 46]. Critical thinking is not a type of
thinking, but a spectrum of thinking which depends on two components: skills or
abilities to generate reasons of acceptable relevance and strength, collectively
referred to as good reasons, as well as dispositions taking these reasons into sys-
tematic or routine use, here called productive dispositions. The good reasons
include beliefs, actions (and respective mechanism), judgments, and productive
dispositions: open-mindedness, fair-mindedness, independent-mindedness, inquiry-
mindedness, and international-mindedness that is respectful to others and their
values [47]. Therefore, a critical thinker might expect to build up some intellect
through knowledge acquisition, operationalization, and standardization, as well as
the formation of the body of effective habits and heuristics in mind [48].
Visual Art Thinking
Visual art is a resource of thoughts that goes beyond the base art, playing the
beautiful game of expanded thoughts with non-art sciences; so, it is regarded as an
engine of thinking [49]. However, from the scientiﬁc point of view, art, especially
visual art, still receives less support to transfer to other schools of thinking. The
neglect behind this is a lack of understanding of the cognitive domain of art. This
has caused even misunderstandings that, to the extreme negative, are, for example,
1
Introduction on THINKING: Bioengineering of Science and Art
13

that arts do not need any skills and thoughts, and so to learn arts does mean to think
nothing important. Whereas Arnheim, in Visual Thinking, says “unless the stuff of
the senses remains present, the mind has nothing to think with” [50]. Moreover,
below are eight tasks/behaviors we see in the art classroom that, in Winner’ words
[51], are interpreted as “studio habits of mind:”
(i)
crafting, art is an experience ﬁlled with different craft techniques and tips
learners need to draw a perspective or proportion, shade, shadow, create a
composite, mix colors, etc.;
(ii)
observation, being a visually literate person, it requires us to practice
attentive observations of the world and the model. The view-ﬁnder is a tool
teachers use to coordinate this practice, through which learners are encour-
aged to intentionally omit the complicated structure, for example, a com-
posite, from their ﬁeld of view and concentrate on simple elements, e.g.,
colors, lines, shapes, and textures, and their relation to each other, in terms of
distance and thickness, that lie in the given structure they need to draw to
build the given structure;
(iii)
envisioning, this skill is developed and practiced more and more when
learners are encouraged to draw not on the paper, but in their mind; in other
words, to draw an imagination. By this, they need to go deeper and consider
very details just in their mind and then, for example, present their imagined
drawing of themselves when they are 60: how are the wrinkles? Which color
the hair is?;
(iv)
reﬂection, constructive reﬂective thinking occurs when art students are also
asked to assess their works themselves: what and why did they intend to
make? Was the process done as expected? Which were and how did they
solve the challenges? Finally, how do they assess their work? And what did
they learn they wish to apply to future work?;
(v)
expression, this occurs at least once per artwork; when the artist makes a
thing, he/she will put a part of his existence in that. This manner the artist
undertakes to declare himself/herself is seen as many times as laborious and
conceptual than the verbal message one might formulate for this purpose;
(vi)
strechment and exploration, creativity, and innovation are products of such
skills. And anyone can claim that two drawings are the same? Remember the
school-age when we all used to draw a square and a triangle to build a home
for our family, and all our homes were different and still are;
(vii)
engagement and persistence to make a work in arts, like in other systems, can
be a daunting task accompanied by challenges and even frustration. Even we
know artworks that remain not completed. This implies how everything has
been disappointing for the artist to cease work. Artists need to be competent
thinkers not to give up and return to us.
14
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh

Art students acquire domain-speciﬁc knowledge, for example, art history, as
well as the collective knowledge of the community of arts. This understanding is
required for them to initiate collaborative projects and choose their career in the
future.
Imaginative Thinking
Imaginative thinking is a skill that allows us to think of all possibilities to see
solutions beyond what is simply actual. It is, therefore, a means of creativity and
innovation [52]. It is a part of the narrative mode of thinking, in which a range of
notions, such as meaning and truth, metaphors, analogies, paradoxes, and irrational
thoughts happen, that complements the paradigmatic mode of thinking, which is
fundamentally concerned with logic, mathematics, arguments, and rational
thoughts. Science education, by its deﬁnition, is, therefore, unlikely to support a
balanced engagement in paradigmatic and narrative thinking. This calls for the
integration of imaginative thinking into science education.
Metaphoric Thinking
Metaphoric thinking reﬂects poetry in practice; indeed, poetic thinking and poetry
writing are the result of integrating metaphoric thinking and creative thinking [53].
It is not easy to ﬁnd a science or education that does not bear a metaphor from the
garden of poetry. An example is “the great tree” as used by Charles Darwin to
explain life, along with “line of defense,” “foreign,” and “warning system,” which
are military vocabulary words but have been added to the science of immunology to
explain what is and how does the immune system work [54]. More generally, as a
prototype of sciences featured by high rates of uncertainties, medical sciences
employ a language of metaphors. Thinking with metaphors has been a habit of
medical specialists when dealing with medical conditions and diseases. For
example, “sticky neurons” or “sticky brains” are metaphors used to characterize how
a group of pediatric patients who are affected by pervasive developmental disorders
(PDD) think; these children are very attentive, and their thoughts are said to be
preservative [55]. Therefore, this metaphoric way of medical thinking incorporates
scientiﬁc and humanistic thinking.
Thinking and the Box
Thinking outside of the box is simply innovative thinking through which the mind
has to go beyond the general problem space and enter a new problem space. There
is an enjoyment that is endless when seeing a new place and understanding a new
1
Introduction on THINKING: Bioengineering of Science and Art
15

phenomenon while ﬁnding new ways, strategies, and safe solutions pose labor to
the mind. Storytelling is powerful in that they stimulate the mind to think outside
the box and imagine speciﬁc, new situations, for example, a new world in the sky
that has a beautiful city, where trees are humans of that world, they do not move,
they have strong roots, so they have a home for all their life-time and are near to
their father and mother to the end of their life; there is no end to enjoy life, love, and
childhood.
Thinking within the box is simply thinking of problems that are already known
to the mind knowledge space so that there have been developed patterns of
problem-solving, schemas. Those who stick to these schemas for solving problems
can solve repetitive problems but might be more likely to fail to solve sticky
problems. A similar situation is that high school students with high academic grades
often will be qualiﬁed with high academic grades in universities and colleges but
might fail in job-related innovative accomplishments.
Janusian Thinking
It is referred to as “the capacity to conceive and utilize two or more opposite or
contradictory ideas, concepts, or images simultaneously.” This form of thinking,
similar to that we see of “yin and yang,” is mainly discussed for its role in cre-
ativity, making contributions to architecture, art, literature, mathematics, music,
psychology, and science [56]. For this speciﬁc type of creative thinking, there is a
special place for psychological factors to play artfully, a key to supporting the idea
of psychotherapy [56]. Taking such a broad view, Janusian thinking is ubiquitous;
however, it remains a less documented thinking in literature [57].
Wishful Thinking
It is a thinking that applies to conﬂict prevention in organizations and institutions
that manage to make important decisions, policies, and democracy or critical
strategies, for example, about a crisis. Conﬂict prevention is both a science and art
[58] for which managers and practitioners not only need to hold meta-theoretical
(practical) considerations, but also to take the potential psych(pathol)ogy of the
organizational/institutional network based on person-speciﬁc skills, motivations,
and abilities into account to deﬁne the organization and/or institutional goals,
determine the assessment methods of performance and success, and plan the path of
practice.
On the other hand, like Janusian thinking and for a similar reason, wishful
thinking is ubiquitous. However, unlike Janusian thinking, it is well-recognized
thinking behind all psychological biases people have with regards to optimistic
information processing and respective beliefs, desires, preferences, and predictions
16
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh

that are false or wrong [59, 60]. In this way, this thinking causes prices that can be
prevented through real-world information processing and by considering uncer-
tainties; thereby, the truth and accuracy are promoted.
Manager Thinking
This heading discussion has a background addressing the two below:
(i) Is there a pattern?
It is a very simple formation if no interconnection exists between the individual
units; it is a fairly simple formation when there are a few interconnections between
a small subset of individual units; it turns into a pattern when all possible inter-
connections are established between the individual units [61]. Then, we can say it is
simple or not, and there is a formation or pattern, but still unable to conclude that
the pattern is complex. And what about the degree of complexity? So, complexity is
not merely a matter of patterns of interconnections.
(ii) Is the pattern simple or complex? If complex, how much is complex?
Complexity is said to correspond to the length of the shortest message we can make
using the collection of standards of wording, i.e., standard grammar and standard
vocabulary, to “describe a system, at a given level of course gaining, to someone at a
distance, employing language, knowledge, and understanding that both parties share
(and know they share) beforehand” [62]. The length of the message indicates the
amount of difﬁculties we experience of complexity. It is a practical, working deﬁ-
nition; however, it seems to us it has ambiguities with regards to distance. Is it
spatial? Or temporal? And with regards to someone: is the receiver, in nature, present
as the sender? Suppose a student at two points of time, once when he/she is ﬁrst given
an assignment and when he/she is again given a similar assignment. In that case, it
would be interesting to compare the length of e-mails written to his/her supervisor for
the same purpose of, for example, updating the status of the project. Even if the
student makes meetings, then again, he/she needs more and less length of oral
communication. So, the project was, ﬁrst, perceived as complex and then became
simple. From the ﬁrst, it was a simple one for the supervisor. What is happening?
Managing a complex organization inevitably involves thinking of complex
systems, which is mainly characterized by incompressibility and commensurable
pluralism [63]. The former indicates that complex systems cannot be reduced to
representations that are simpler than the systems themselves; i.e., they are incom-
pressible or irreducible. The latter implies that there is a fundamental language in
terms of which all complexity-related laws are expressible, i.e., a language of every
complexity. Complexity thinking can be accomplished in three main contexts of
neo-reductionism, metaphorism, and critical pluralism, as reviewed in [63].
1
Introduction on THINKING: Bioengineering of Science and Art
17

Teacher Thinking
Like manager thinking, teacher thinking is both an art and science. It is an art when
making conversations is important to understanding the learners’ psychological
constructs, such as intentions, behaviors, and needs [64]. As for its science, teacher
thinking plays a crucial role in cultivating scientiﬁc thinking to improve learning
and motivation in primary education [65]. Anti-science attitudes, for example,
anti-vaccination attitudes, are an inevitable consequence of scientiﬁc illiteracy, and
scientiﬁc illiteracy is due to failures of preparation systems that teach thinking about
science. Often, teachers have a good public image of science. Such an image,
Cobern and Loving developed and revised [66], includes epistemology of science,
science and the economy, science and the environment, public regulation of sci-
ence, science and public health, science and religion, science and aesthetics, sci-
ence, race, and gender, and science for all. They, however, need to practice
thinking about science. An explicit and reﬂective approach has been shown to be
more effective for teachers in terms of becoming familiar with the nature of science
than an implicit approach [9]. Also, teacher thinking needs to be sustainable; i.e., it
evolves professionally to embrace and inform learners of the most recent scientiﬁc
developments [65].
Integrating Creative and Critical Thinking
It is so traditional that we choose to use creative mode or critical mode of thinking
independently. Instead, criticality and creativity have long been inseparable ele-
ments of thought required to do meaningful work, e.g., from reading and learning to
listening and writing about language, concepts, logic, and science [67, 68].
Moreover, creative thinking skills and critical thinking remain related signiﬁcantly
to each other as well as to the total cognitive learning results in university students
[69, 70]. It is, therefore, a fair claim that one who can, at the same time, think
creatively and critically when facing complex problems is both a scientist and an
artist; a scientist who conducts some analysis and an artist who is able to deduce
new things from his/her analysis results [71]. Thinking skills (TS) strategy is based
on the integration of both creative and critical thinking, with the mind, that the
interaction between these thinking skills results in the development of strategies.
When compared to the control group, students in the TS group have better creative
thinking performance in terms of ﬂuency, ﬂexibility, and originality [72]. Also,
problem-based learning (PBL) allows students to balance the creative and critical
forces to integrated thinking [73].
18
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh

Integrating Creative, Critical Thinking into Clinical Thinking
We require that creative, critical thinking is not far from practice. This issue is of
particular importance to ﬁelds where there is a research-practice gap and creative
and critical thinking skills are believed to be sufﬁcient to support academic pur-
poses and seem not necessary to be transferable to clinical settings [74]. Education
of creative, critical thinking is a tangible step to reduce this gap, for which
context-speciﬁc courses are required to take place in the clinical environment, for
example, regular journal clubs, conferences, and events for nursing students [74].
Integrating Visual Art Thinking and Scientific Thinking
Visual thinking has been shown to help secondary scientists move from initial
observation to extrapolation and the imagination of models. Visual thinking also
means seeing with the eye of the forehead but reading with the eye of mind boosts
information ﬁltering. This ability enables the mind to exclude unnecessary infor-
mation from the image while keeping the necessary information there. Even the
mind might decide to include new information! Such professional thinking and
decision-making are done on raw data to make perceptions, referred to as the
process of mental visualization. Generously gifted with this process, one can
experience doing science all in mind, from mixing current ideas to sorting and
standardizing their mixtures to generating correlated ideas and drawing new dia-
grams. This non-linear thinking is useful in dealing with complex problems when
correlations between variables are non-linear, but our verbal thinking is linear [6].
Also, there seems to be a positive correlation between visual thinking and geometric
reasoning. Art students who had training in the visual arts were higher in geometric
reasoning skills than psychology students who had no such training [75]. Examples
of this type of secondary scientists are Louis Pasteur, Theodor Boveri, Santiago
Ramon y Cajal, Wilhelm Ostwald, James Clerk Maxwell, J. Willard Gibbs, and
Albert Einstein for their works on asymmetry, cell mysteries, brain anatomy,
physical chemistry, electromagnetic ﬁelds, phase diagram, and relativity (for review
see [6]).
Integrating Musical Thinking and Scientific Thinking
The ear can recognize patterns as the eye can, but also it gives us more power of
analytical thinking in terms of the higher number of variables that occur simulta-
neously and are recognizable by the ear than by the eye. This analytical thinking is a
part of what musical thinking can enhance. Indeed, musical thinking also uses
kinesthetic, sensory, aesthetic, and analogizing abilities. We know composers who
enormously contributed to scientiﬁc ﬁelds, including mathematics, chemistry,
1
Introduction on THINKING: Bioengineering of Science and Art
19

physics, medicine, surgery, medical specialties, microbiology, psychology, engi-
neering, geology, astronomy, physiology, epidemiology, etc. [41] (Fig. 1.2). Of
important accomplishments of musician-scientists are quantum physics and
resonance.
Integrated Visual-Spatial Thinking and Scientific Thinking
Visual-spatial thinking involves both visual and imaginary cognitive skills [76]. With
our head’s eyes, we see and think about the world, objects, events, and other subjects
and discover the position of ourselves in relation to all these phenomena. With our
mind’s eyes, we make mental images through a series of internal processes that occur
due to our intents while no visual stimulus is present. Observation, recognition, and
orientation are the major processes engaged by the former, whereas generation,
inspection, and transformation are by the latter. Visual perception and memory
Fig. 1.2 A ﬂutist-physician. René Laennec (1781–1826) was a ﬂutist who then made the ﬁrst
stethoscope, an acoustic medical device used to listen to the body sounds, e.g., heart, lungs, and
abdomen. (Adapted from Wikimedia Commons, the free media repository, https://upload.
wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/e/eb/Rene-Theophile-Hyacinthe_Laennec.jpg; https://upload.
wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/a6/Rene-Theophile-Hyacinthe_Laennec_Drawings_stethosc
ope_1819.jpg)
20
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh

contribute to both. Through pattern, color, and movement detection and estimation,
visual perception represents a three-dimensional mental image, and this representa-
tion would be inﬂuenced by our prior knowledge that is our memory that takes the
responsibility of recording our life and learnings instantly. Yet in an asymmetric
manner, both brain hemispheres are working to make such representation possible:
the right hemisphere is mainly for processing the imagery part of visual-spatial
thinking, while his left counterpart is for structural information processing.
As a part of evolution, visual-spatial thinking is seen in both non-human and
human primates by varying degrees. Training improves the ability, and the more
visual-spatial ability, the higher the ability to adapt to the environment. A higher
imager or stronger visualizer might be more likely to be a creative scientist/
engineer, given that creativity in science/engineering is completely dependent upon
the imagination of images, metaphors, and themes, that if this was not the case,
from Mathewson’ view, then we could expect computers to process entirely from
scientiﬁc investigations to scientiﬁc discoveries to engineering buildings. Despite
the importance of visual-spatial thinking in scientiﬁc discoveries as well as the
inﬂuence of practice on its development and improvement, it remains less con-
sidered in science education [76].
Visual Thinking at the Entrance to the Science-Society Gap
Visualization offers an effective, multimodal approach that can inﬂuence multiple
literacies and cultures [77]. Using a symbolic language, a visual thinker can
re-formulate and re-semiotize meanings of, for example, the very ideas and prin-
ciples between contexts of different semiotic senses, a process referred to as
meaning transformation. This way, visualization would more strongly inﬂuence the
audience and can even engage a non-specialized audience in communication with a
specialized community.
Visual Thinking at the Entrance to the Education
Not only can visual thinking serve as a means of communication, but it is an
approach to learning in science and engineering. Brilliant resources are the outcome
of knowledge-producing activities scientists could do in response to the changing
problems. To search and acquire knowledge from these resources is, in itself, a task
that requires integrated thinking, and visual thinking has a lot of tools, strategies,
technologies, courses, and programs in her hands to make this not only possible but
also through paving the way for active learning, do more to engage all students,
even underrepresented students, exposing them to problem-solving, enabling them
to creative thoughts and actions, leading them to technical degrees and certiﬁcates,
and ultimately introducing them to science and engineering careers [78]. The
periodic table is, for example, just a very simple frame of view, without which it
could be not as easy and fast to memorize elements, groups, charges, and etc. [79].
1
Introduction on THINKING: Bioengineering of Science and Art
21

Visual Thinking at the Entrance to the Integrated Science
No doubt remains that how visual thinking is helpful to adopt a transdisciplinary
approach for sciences to tackle “societal dilemmas,” which is, Ravetz and Ravetz
say, like “seeing the wood for the trees” [80]. Earlier, we discussed argumentation
under the heading scientiﬁc thinking; however, the point is that scientiﬁc arguments
need to be understandable by people of different disciplinary works, and this is
where visual thinking can fulﬁll another purpose: argumentation. Social Science 3.0
gives an example we can ﬁnd the importance of visual thinking to connect scientists
of socio-cultural, policy-making, ecology, economics, and technology domains
with regards to the problem of climate and enabling them to learn and share
knowledge in a synergistic manner [80], without which scientists might remain
disconnected, being susceptible to syndromes–consequences of working within a
specialized domain and dealing with a given level of uncertainty–that simply attack
humanities in unexpected conditions and circumstances, but are fully expected
given a resistance the mindset has towards being resilient enough to see beyond,
think above, and prepare for other complexities. The reader is supposed to see how
our experience of the pandemic COVID and related mortality and morbidity is as
preparing this book and then answer to the question: do we move on so?
Integrating Scientific Thinking, Religious Thinking, and Art
Thinking
While science uses methods to measure the truth quantitatively, art and religion
must view aesthetic and ethical angles qualitatively; this is Plato’s triad of “true
good,” in which the importance of integrated qualitative and quantitative thinking is
embraced [81]. Matrix thinking is the product of this integration [82]. Archaeo-
logical and evolutionary science is the basis of the proposal of this integration, and
matrix thinking was initially applicable to signs, but in its modern form, it covers
symbols, models, relationships, perception, and emotions. Matrix thinking is an
adaptive cognition that favors human evolution and leads to ﬂexibility and cre-
ativity [82]. In the process, matrix thinking leads to the representation of compo-
nents in the form of a mental matrix, for example, through tabulation, by which the
mind will be able to compare, extrapolate, and imagine. The product of this process
is a new culture of knowledge [82].
Integrating Design Thinking and Creative Thinking
Creative scientists are ﬁnders or makers: the former work in an analysis-oriented
manner to investigate less understood issues (scholars), and this understanding is
directed to discovery (scientists); the latter work in a synthesis-oriented manner to
22
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh

synthesize their knowledge directed to architect (architectures), design (designers),
engineer (engineers), and make (artists) new ones (simply invention) [5]. Designing
is, therefore, necessarily a creative activity. For a creative design, a feedback-based
process deals with the design’s function, structure, and behavior, involving the
formulation, synthesis, analysis, evaluation, documentation, reformulation, and
modiﬁcation of the design [40, 83]. Creative design thinking is inﬂuenced by a
range of metacognitive processes, such as divergent thinking, convergent thinking,
constraint satisfaction, problem ﬁnding, and problem-solving [84].
Integrating Creative Thinking and Scientific-Engineering
Thinking
Thinking in science and engineering is associated with a circular, dynamic model,
including the possibility of tacking back at all stages: immersion, incubation, il-
lumination (insight), explanation, and creative synthesis of some product [83].
Finally, through a validation procedure, the product validity is determined based on
personal or collective experience. Noteworthy mentioning is that affects, moods,
and emotions can modulate the process negatively and positively, inﬂuencing the
thinker’s mental and physiological states and concentration; therefore, the ultimate
invention.
Integrating Art Thinking and Creative Thinking
Art education opens the inquiry from ﬁnding to solving problems [85]. To make an
artwork is a process from idea conceptualization, development, and realization to
the work ﬁnalization. It is a dynamic practice, and its product is creativity by a
non-linear function along with experience, knowledge acquisition, and cognitive
perceptions [40]. Meta-analyses reveal correlations between studying art and cre-
ativity performance, particularly ﬁgural creativity, but not verbal creativity [85].
However, the main limitation is that studies included in these meta-analyses are of
correlational type; so, the cause and effect cannot be established [85]. Therefore, an
art approach is among activities that can apply to classrooms to enhance scientiﬁc
creativity [86]. This application can be effectively supplemented with science
learning, as shown in, for example, a study of arts and science high-school students
who improved in creative thinking following arts education, either visual art or
music [87]. We must, however, notice that the effect of this supplemental education
does not uniformly happen to all students. Instead, there is a need for arrangement
to adjust according to the grades and departments in place.
1
Introduction on THINKING: Bioengineering of Science and Art
23

Integrating Art Thinking and Design Thinking
Despite its breakthroughs, art is, however, a soft branch; and so is largely separated
from technology, a hard branch. For these two, arts and technology, integration is
needed to become meaningful to the community. Integrator is the design thinking, a
consumer-centered style of thinking [22].
Integrating Art Thinking and Engineering Thinking
Art narrative modalities apply to speaking and writing strategies to convey a
communicative objective. These modalities include rhetorical, opinion, knowledge,
understanding, and evaluative outsideness [88]. The inclusion of artistic-narrative
modality in the classroom appears to enhance critical thinking in engineering stu-
dents [89].
Integrating Engineering Thinking and Architectural
Thinking
Both engineering and architectural thinking apply design thinking for building [84].
However, they are different from each other. In general, the design approach in
engineering is rather linear and technical than it is in architecture. Particularly,
engineering thinking is directed towards functionality, building efﬁcient structures
that comply with the codes of practice and safety requirements, while architectural
thinking is user-centered and so needs to meet underlying aesthetic aspects as well.
These two similar, yet different, builders are increasingly working together for
solving complex problems, like climate change resilient constructions.
Four main factors contributing to creativity are ﬂuency, ﬂexibility, originality,
and usefulness. The role of expertise in creative engineering design is not clear;
originality and usefulness showed no correlation with total creative engineering
design score, while ﬂuency and ﬂexibility did it [84]. It seems originality and
usefulness can compensate for lack of expertise somehow.
Integrating Critical Thinking and Engineering Thinking
A representative model embedding this integration is found in [45]. It considers six
main skills:
(i)
interpretation
(classiﬁcation,
meaning
clariﬁcation,
and
signiﬁcance
determination);
(ii)
analysis (hypothesis (investigation and argument identiﬁcation and analysis);
24
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh

(iii)
inference (evidence extraction, exploration of alternative hypotheses, and
drawing conclusions);
(iv)
evaluation (evaluation of claims and arguments);
(v)
explanation (organization of obtained results, justiﬁcation of the procedure,
and presentation of arguments); and
(vi)
self-regulation (self-examination and self-correction).
Integrating this model into the engineering classroom can improve students’
participation and interpersonal communication skills, oral speaking, and under-
standing of the problem. This integration is not only modeled but also has been a
part of engineering programs, for example, writing and critical thinking (WAC) in
the ABET (the Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology); however, it
poses challenges [90]. Cognitive strategies to improve critical thinking in engi-
neering students include vocabulary enrichment, formulation of coherent speech
patterns, and argumentative practices.
Integrating Design Thinking and Engineering Thinking
Both design thinking and engineering thinking can assist with complex environ-
mental problems. A qualitative study investigated how civil engineering students
approach a water problem in the local environment. The responsive themes proved
that competency in reaching novel and feasible solutions was higher in those who
used a design thinking approach than those who used problem-solving strategies as
usually are present in engineering [23]. It carries the capacity of integrated design
thinking in engineering programs to solve problems as well as deﬁne problems.
O-CDIO (Observing–Conceiving–Designing–Implementing–Operating) is a variant
of the CDIO engineering program that considers design thinking, especially focused
on its user-centered feature [91]. The observing component of O-CDIO indicates a
kind of dance where there is an ambiguity that is before being involved in a
solution-containing zone. It is, probably, the end of creative, radical thinking when
the ambiguity can no longer be tolerated, that the problem solver moves ahead with
the next steps that mainly rely on natural sciences and systems thinking. The
O-CDIO program has been shown to enhance tolerance to ambiguity [91].
Integrated Computational Thinking and Art Thinking
Interest in this integration is increasing given the increased application of digital
media. Computational skills enable artists and art students to develop code-based
artworks. As a part of new art media, code-based artworks can incorporate visual,
auditory, and other sensory areas. Indeed, they provide learners with multisensory
integration [61] and improve studio art practice [92].
1
Introduction on THINKING: Bioengineering of Science and Art
25

Integrated Data-Based Thinking and Art Thinking
Data art is the product of this integration. Data is not vital but valuable for that it
offers a lived … about real, complex life and all that it embraces, and for that this …
is measurable, analyzable, and completely objectively interpretable. Data, therefore,
calls us outside our old traditions to necessarily and merely endeavor to be
understandably, narratively, and qualitatively explainable. We can, therefore, see in
the perfect friendship between data science and art that extraordinary ability to do
art performance with data, to visualize data, to manipulate data, to monitor data, to
manage data. Then, it is an effortless task to present and disseminate the forms that
emerge, i.e., visualization, manipulation, management, and monitoring [93].
Integrated Thoughts Products: STEM, STEAM, and STEMM
STEMM
Arts, crafts, and design (ACD) practices have been shown to improve modeling and
playing skills being considered as important thinking tools in science, technology,
engineering, mathematics, and medical (STEMM) programs [94]. These tools
include logic, intuition, visual imaging, verbalization, non-verbal imagery,
abstractions, analogizing, mental models, physical models, and playing.
STEM
World problems are evolved in nature, so linear thinking is not sufﬁcient for solving
them, but non-linear thinking that can take complexity into account is required [95].
Therefore, science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) emerged as
a cross-disciplinary education approach to meet this issue.
STEAM
The current educational setting beneﬁts from STEM; however, it is cautious with
STEAM, which is the STEM plus arts. In line with STEAM, arts are catalysts
helping students reach STEM goals, i.e., thinking creatively and learning from
different disciplines or transdisciplinary learning [35, 95]. Human-centered design
can help the implementation of STEAM in education. Also, the PBL approach can
pave the way for STEAM integration in learning, for example, acid and base in the
context of a chemistry classroom, and increase the engagement of students to
develop creative and critical thinking skills [96].
26
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh

Integrating Artificial Thinking and STEAM Thinking
Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI)-based approaches have been of recent interest to improve
STEAM students’ learning. These approaches can take different circumstances and
constraints into reasoning and prompt students to shape well-deﬁned problems and
come across respective solutions [97].
Thinking in Classroom
Constructivist Classrooms
STEAM programs and courses offer such a classroom. It is a place where con-
versations can be constructive for a learning journey, when the students ask other
classmates and then all, together, do to answer for themselves [98]. The teacher acts
as a frame of reference for such students in such a classroom. An example STEAM
program includes the main phases of discovery, project-based learning, and cre-
ation. In the ﬁrst phase, they are to make their own knowledge through discovering
principles
of
mathematics,
science,
technology,
and
engineering
through
experience-based discovery: they do and they learn. In the learning phase, they will
apply the knowledge to real projects. And in the last phase, they are expected to do
nothing other than enjoy doing projects. All art and design are in the last two
phases.
Such classroom is so different from what we remember from our school-age
when the teacher was the center of the class, she taught, we should not talk to other
classmates even throughout the hour of a class, listen to the teacher, and write
everything she said, and very occasionally, we had a lab class when we could only
observe some limited experimentations and should be continuously worried that
nothing was damaged.
Thinking Differences
Yet, thinking is vulnerable to a variety of biases [99]. Thinking differences may be a
source of peace for those who are used to thinking fairly, considering differences
between professions, intelligence types, novices and experts, circadian typologies,
genders, personality types, cultures, etc. [100].
Profession
Studies show that art and science students might have slight differences in the speed
of creativity and also learning styles; however, they are comparable in terms of
creative problem-solving performance [101, 102].
1
Introduction on THINKING: Bioengineering of Science and Art
27

Circadian Typology
That you are a morning-type, intermediate-type, or evening-type individual is also
important in style you prefer to think; morning-type individuals are better in left
thinking and evening-type individuals are better in right thinking. More interesting
is that while, with regards to lateralized thinking, i.e., left thinking and right
thinking, the effect of this, the so-called circadian typology, seems to be more than
that the effect of gender, for integrated thinking, no such a circadian typology effect
exists, but instead a gender effect is rather signiﬁcant: women are better in inte-
grated thinking than men [103].
Expertise
As mentioned earlier, problem decomposition crucially takes place in the design
process that leads a designer to deﬁne a new well-structured problem and/or reﬁne
an ill-structured problem by deﬁning well-structured subproblems. The level of
experience inﬂuences designer’s problem-decomposing strategies of thinking;
generally, the strategy an expert designer follows is explicit and working-forward,
also known as top-down, that moves from the initial state, i.e., design problem, to
the goal state, i.e., design solution, through which the designer applies
knowledge-seeking strategies and incorporates design criteria and his/her experi-
ences, whereas that a novice one follows is rather implicit and working-backward,
also known as bottom-up or data-driven approach, that moves from the goal state to
the initial state [104].
Intelligence
Intelligence measures correspond to divergent thinking varying by types of intel-
ligence and divergent thinking-related parameters. Studies of university students
show a direct relationship between ideational ﬂuency, for example, and total cre-
ativity and creativity pertaining to crafts, performing arts, and math science. Also,
the ability to develop abstract ideas, as an indicator of verbal intelligence measured
by the concept mastery test (CMT), is positively related to total creativity and
creativity speciﬁc to art and literature [105].
Personality
When students from natural sciences, social science, and arts were compared,
natural sciences students showed the best divergent thinking ﬂuency, while arts
students were highest on self-rated creativity and creative achievement. Demo-
graphic variables did not show any signiﬁcant interaction, but personality traits did:
openness and conscientiousness with divergent thinking ﬂuency; openness and
28
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh

extraversion with self-rated creativity; and neuroticism and extraversion with cre-
ative achievement [106]. In another study of science and arts university students,
psychoticism is positively associated with several divergent thinking-related
parameters, e.g., pattern meanings, uses, similarities, and line meanings [102].
Culture
Cultural differences remain a deterministic factor to the styles of thinking, e.g.,
thinking of uncertainty or probabilistic thinking [107], critical thinking [108],
creative thinking [70], and holistic versus analytical thinking [109]. This empha-
sizes the diversity of human thinking and the role of understanding cultural
diversity. Therefore, the Symbiosis of civilizations is crucial to coordinating sci-
entiﬁc thinking, as exempliﬁed for Uzbekistan in [110].
Gender
Female students are more conﬁdent to think computationally and take part in
computational thinking-related activities, such as STEM careers [111]. With
regards to creative thinking, there is an interaction among the effect of gender, the
effect of education, and the subdomain of creativity: among university-educated
people, women exhibit higher creativity in terms of verbal ﬂuency than men; among
those in primary and secondary education, women display lower creativity in terms
of ﬁgural originality and ﬁgural creativity than men in the same level of education
[112]; and among school-age children, girls do thorough thinking more than boys,
while they are rather weak in using a boundary-breaking method of thinking than
boys [113]. Also, as mentioned above, women appear to be generally better than
men in integrated thinking. A study of undergraduates conﬁrm this result and add
that it might be, at least in part, owing to women’ attitude of research that tends to
conservative, explicit, and integrated approaches, standing in contrast to men’
attitude that relies rather on personal opinions and decisions [114]. Despite their
potential creativity plus better integrative thinking ability, women mostly remain
underrepresented in creative ﬁelds of education and the workplace [115], posing a
complex problem that needs international investment.
Thinking Sustainability
As thinking complexity is an inevitable aspect of living and working in a complex
world and system, so as thinking ecological sustainability to wish and act for a
better future for the next generations [3]. Thinking of the future and corresponding
decision-making and judgments all call for thinking of problems that will emerge in
the long term, which are, in nature, a matter of time.
1
Introduction on THINKING: Bioengineering of Science and Art
29

Integrating Critical Thinking, Metacognition, and Scientific
Thinking
Looking for critical thinking, we see many processes and corresponding products
very close to our eyes. In summary, critical thinking is a lived process that is
generated in response to positive and negative events. Probably it will have certain
tools, such as using propaganda, clarifying hidden assumptions, knowing inten-
tional deception, searching on information credibility, identifying problems, and
appraising related decisions. So, it is easy to manipulate a thinker’s mindset to be
more resilient, willing to do so, persistent, and self-correct, thereby positively
inﬂuencing the thinker’s science to achieve consensus. Dynamic awareness is the
main feature of such deep manipulation; i.e., not only the thinker is not blind to
what is happening in his/her thinking, but he/she is aware of what patterns are
adapting, and of course, loves this adaptation. This self-awareness and likeness to
adaptation are the fundamental constructs of metacognitive abilities that are used to
check and control the self-related development in different cognitive domains,
particularly judgments, insight, and conﬁdence, preparing the self for future situ-
ations that might be novel and are at present unpredictable. In the context of
thinking sustainability, we view judgments as the most important category that
involves subcategories, “ease-of-learning judgments,” “judgments of leaning,” and
“feeling-of-knowing judgments.” When the thinker’ mindset complies with all
these judgments, the thinker is both a competent and a metacompetent; one who not
only can effectively manage changes and uncertainties to survive but also under-
takes this management conﬁdently to sustain supply, and comfortable smiling is the
product of management effectiveness and conﬁdence [116].
Integral Thinking
Fragmented thinking is against us in our way of sustainability. Integral thinking is
an advanced modality of thinking mainly derived from the holonic theory, which
concerns both the whole and the parts constituting the whole and relationships
between the whole and related parts. Integral thinking is moving the thinker a step
closer to awake, aware, and thinking inﬁnitely, without being contaminated to
boundaries, limits, and borders that are continuously trying to keep the parts sep-
arate from each other, which of interest to the present chapter are science and art,
mechanistic and materialistic philosophy, and many alike, which are not necessary
to be mentioned here as they are the main subject of most chapters of the
THINKING: Bioengineering of Science and Art. Advanced modalities of thinking
include logic-formal thinking, mythic-religious-cultural thinking, rational, dialectic,
rhetoric thinking, design-oriented, creative, positive thinking, symbolic-spiritual
thinking, post-formal, vision-logic thinking, thinking of the “branches,” spiritual
advanced, metaphysical thinking, and integral thinking, to name some [117].
30
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh

Holistic Thinking
Integral thinking variants emerged in need for different conditions and contexts.
Holistic thinking is, for example, known for its contributions to medical sciences,
for the view of a human being as the whole, not the parts, e.g., bodily systems,
organs, tissues, cells, etc. This does not mean ignoring the parts completely, but it is
to appreciate the presence and status of these parts in relation to the condition of the
whole continuously. To better understand the study of these relationships, we get
help from the concept of holarchy, a form of hierarchy composed of holons ad their
relationships, as reviewed in [117].
Conclusion
From the above long list of integrations of thoughts, we can think of levels above
the present; both higher and even the highest ones are possible, with higher levels
achievable through each integration. Education is needed to ensure all strategies
mentioned above are learnable and thinking is teachable in the real world (proving
it is not a type of pseudo). In the next volume: Integrated Education and Learning,
you will ﬁnd how learning styles can be integrated into different education
departments to guide thinking outside the box and thinking within the box.
Therefore, the integrity of these two bases of thinking is maintained, thereby taking
a step closer to bridging the gap between pre-practical (education) and practical
(employment and corporation) worlds.
Core Messages
• Art‐science meeting is sustainable.
• Art is a partner of science.
• Art and science, however, suffer from the same: both are rather subjective
in their approach.
• Design and engineering can complement integrated science and art.
• Thoughts under the umbrella bioengineering of science and art can be
integrated to fulﬁll different purposes.
1
Introduction on THINKING: Bioengineering of Science and Art
31

References
1. Dunbar K, Fugelsang J (2005) Scientiﬁc thinking and reasoning. In: The Cambridge
handbook of thinking and reasoning, pp 705–725
2. Lapworth AC (2015) Beyond bifurcation: thinking the abstractions of art-science after AN
Whitehead. Transformations 26:5
3. Klauer B, Manstetten R, Petersen T, Schiller J (2013) The art of long-term thinking: a bridge
between sustainability science and politics. Ecol Econ 93:79–84
4. Scheffer M, Bascompte J, Bjordam TK, Carpenter SR, Clarke LB, Folke C et al (2015) Dual
thinking for scientists. Ecol Soc 20(2)
5. Owen C (2007) Design thinking: notes on its nature and use. Des Res Q 2(1):16–27
6. Root-Bernstein RS (1985) Visual thinking: the art of imagining reality. Trans Am Philos Soc
75(6):50–67
7. Stewart Mark G, Deng X (2015) Climate impact risks and climate adaptation engineering for
built infrastructure. ASCE—ASME J Risk Uncertainty Eng Syst Part A Civ Eng 1
(1):04014001. https://doi.org/10.1061/AJRUA6.0000809
8. Cross N (2012) From a design science to a design discipline: understanding designerly ways
of knowing and thinking. In: Design research now. Birkhäuser, pp 41–54
9. Abd-El-Khalick F, Lederman NG (2000) Improving science teachers’ conceptions of nature
of science: a critical review of the literature. Int J Sci Educ 22(7):665–701
10. Kuhn D (2011) What is scientiﬁc thinking and how does it develop?
11. Kuhn D, Pearsall S (2000) Developmental origins of scientiﬁc thinking. J Cogn Dev 1
(1):113–129
12. Kuhn D (1993) Science as argument: implications for teaching and learning scientiﬁc
thinking. Science education
13. Zimmerman C (2007) The development of scientiﬁc thinking skills in elementary and
middle school. Dev Rev 27(2):172–223
14. Zimmerman C, Klahr D (2018) Development of scientiﬁc thinking. In: Stevens’ handbook of
experimental psychology and cognitive neuroscience, vol 4, pp 1–25
15. Zimmerman C, Croker S (2014) A prospective cognition analysis of scientiﬁc thinking and
the implications for teaching and learning science. J Cogn Educ Psychol 13(2):245–257
16. Kuhn D, Amsel E, O’Loughlin M, Schauble L, Leadbeater B, Yotive W (1988) The
development of scientiﬁc thinking skills. Academic Press
17. Lehrer R, Schauble L (2015) The development of scientiﬁc thinking
18. Mitcham C (2001) Dasein versus design: the problematics of turning making into thinking.
Int J Technol Des Educ 11(1):27–36
19. Vogel CM (2009) Notes on the evolution of design thinking: a work in progress. Des
Manage Rev 20(2):16–27
20. Anderson N (2012) Design thinking: employing an effective multidisciplinary pedagogical
framework to foster creativity and innovation in rural and remote education. Aust Int J Rural
Educ 22(2):43–52
21. Altringer B, Habbal F (2015) Embedding design thinking in a multidisciplinary engineering
curriculum. National collegiate inventors and innovators alliance, p 1
22. Robbins P (2018) From design thinking to art thinking with an open innovation perspective
—a case study of how art thinking rescued a cultural institution in Dublin. J Open Innov
Technol Mark Complex 4(4):57
23. Léger MT, Laroche A-M, Pruneau D (2020) Using design thinking to solve a local
environmental problem in the context of a university civil engineering course—an intrinsic
case study. Glob J Eng Educ 22(1):6–12
24. Louridas P (1999) Design as bricolage: anthropology meets design thinking. Des Stud 20
(6):517–535
25. Dam R, Siang T (2018) What is design thinking and why is it so popular. Interaction Design
Foundation
32
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh

26. Rylander A (2009) Design thinking as knowledge work: epistemological foundations and
practical implications. Des Manage J 4(1):7–19
27. Lucas B, Hanson J (2014) Thinking like an engineer: using engineering habits of mind to
redesign engineering education for global competitiveness
28. Bagiati A, Evangelou D (2016) Practicing engineering while building with blocks:
identifying engineering thinking. Eur Early Child Educ Res J 24(1):67–85
29. Lippard CN, Lamm MH, Riley KL (2017) Engineering thinking in prekindergarten children:
a systematic literature review. J Eng Educ 106(3):454–474
30. Brophy S, Evangelou D (2007) Precursors to engineering thinking (PET), pp 12.1169.1–
12.1169.11
31. Chesler NC, Ruis AR, Collier W, Swiecki Z, Arastoopour G, Williamson Shaffer D (2015)
A novel paradigm for engineering education: virtual internships with individualized
mentoring and assessment of engineering thinking. J Biomech Eng 137(2):024701
32. Beder S (1999) Beyond technicalities: expanding engineering thinking. J Prof Issues Eng
Educ Pract 125(1):12–18
33. Cabrera D, Colosi L, Lobdell C (2008) Systems thinking. Eval Program Plann 31(3):
299–310
34. Anderson V, Johnson L (1997) Systems thinking basics. Pegasus Communications
Cambridge, MA
35. Psycharis S (2018) STEAM in education: a literature review on the role of computational
thinking, engineering epistemology and computational science. Computational steam
pedagogy (CSP). Sci Culture 4(2):51–72
36. Settle A, Goldberg DS, Barr V (2013) Beyond computer science: computational thinking
across disciplines, pp 311–312
37. Perkins DN (2001) The eureka effect: the art and logic of breakthrough thinking. WW
Norton & Company
38. World Economic F (2020) The future of jobs report 2020. World Economic Forum Geneva
39. Hennessey BA, Amabile TM (2009) Creativity. Annu Rev Psychol 61(1):569–598. https://
doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.093008.100416
40. Corazza GE, Agnoli S (2016) Multidisciplinary contributions to the science of creative
thinking. Springer
41. Root-Bernstein RS (2001) Music, creativity and scientiﬁc thinking. Leonardo 34(1):63–68
42. Runco MA, Okuda SM (1988) Problem discovery, divergent thinking, and the creative
process. J Youth Adolesc 17(3):211–220
43. Milgram RM, Hong E (1993) Creative thinking and creative performance in adolescents as
predictors of creative attainments in adults: a follow-up study after 18 years. Roeper Rev 15
(3):135–139
44. Aiamy M, Haghani F (2012) The effect of synectics and brainstorming on 3rd grade
students’ development of creative thinking on science. Proc Soc Behav Sci 47:610–613
45. ŽivkoviĿ S (2016) A model of critical thinking as an important attribute for success in the
21st century. Proc Soc Behav Sci 232:102–108
46. Paul RW, Binker AJA (1990) Critical thinking: what every person needs to survive in a
rapidly changing world. ERIC
47. Blake N, Smeyers P, Smith RD, Standish P (2008) The Blackwell guide to the philosophy of
education, vol 6. John Wiley & Sons
48. Bailin S, Case R, Coombs JR, Daniels LB (1999) Conceptualizing critical thinking. J Curric
Stud 31(3):285–302
49. Maynard P (2000) The engine of visualization: thinking through photography. Cornell
University Press
50. Arnheim R (1997) Visual thinking. University of California Press
51. Winner E (2007) Visual thinking in arts education: homage to Rudolf Arnheim. Psychol
Aesthet Creat Arts 1(1):25
1
Introduction on THINKING: Bioengineering of Science and Art
33

52. Hadzigeorgiou Y, Fotinos N (2007) Imaginative thinking and the learning of science. Sci
Educ Rev 6(1):15–23
53. Bakri M, Rahmat A, Lustyantie N (2019) Creative thinking using metaphoric language to
improve poetry writing skills. Getsempena Engl Educ J 6(2):201–213
54. Pollio H (1987) Practical poetry: metaphoric thinking in science, art, literature and, nearly
everywhere else
55. Bleakley A (2017) Thinking with metaphors in medicine: the state of the art. Routledge
56. Rothenberg A (1971) The process of Janusian thinking in creativity. Arch Gen Psychiatry
24(3):195–205
57. Kao C-Y (2006) Learning vocabulary through Janusian thinking, a ubiquitous but neglected
creative process
58. Kurtz G, Meyer CO (2019) Is conﬂict prevention a science, craft, or art? Moving beyond
technocracy and wishful thinking. Global Aff 5(1):23–39
59. Caplin A, Leahy JV (2019) Wishful thinking. National Bureau of Economic Research
60. Mayraz G (2011) Wishful thinking. Available at SSRN 1955644
61. Gell-Mann M (1988) Simplicity and complexity in the description of nature. Eng Sci 51(3):
2–9
62. Chia R (1998) From complexity science to complex thinking: organization as simple
location. Organization 5(3):341–369
63. Richardson KA (2008) Managing complex organizations: complexity thinking and the
science and art of management. Emergence Complexity Organ 10(2)
64. Pope M, Denicolo P (1993) The art and science of constructivist research in teacher thinking.
Teach Teach Educ 9(5–6):529–544
65. Miller RG, Curwen MS, White-Smith KA, Calfee RC (2015) Cultivating primary students’
scientiﬁc thinking through sustained teacher professional development. Early Childhood
Educ J 43(4):317–326
66. Cobern WW, Loving CC (2002) Investigation of preservice elementary teachers’ thinking
about science. J Res Sci Teach 39(10):1016–1031
67. Chen XM (2021) Integration of creative thinking and critical thinking to improve
geosciences education. Geogr Teach 18(1):19–23
68. Paul R, Elder L (2004) Critical and creative thinking. The Foundation for Critical Thinking,
Dillon Beach, CA
69. Siburian J, Corebima AD, Saptasari M (2019) The correlation between critical and creative
thinking skills on cognitive learning results. Eurasian J Educ Res 19(81):99–114
70. Tsai K-C (2019) Investigating the empirical links between creative and critical thinking.
Psychol Soc Educ 11(3):267–280
71. Kim JCS (1994) The art of creative critical thinking
72. Alghafri ASR, Ismail HNB (2014) The effects of integrating creative and critical thinking on
schools students’ thinking. Int J Soc Sci Humanity 4(6):518
73. Eldy EF, Sulaiman F (2013) Integrated PBL approach: preliminary ﬁndings towards physics
students’ critical thinking and creative-critical thinking. Int J Humanit Soc Sci Invention
2(3):18–25
74. Seymour B, Kinn S, Sutherland N (2003) Valuing both critical and creative thinking in
clinical practice: narrowing the research–practice gap? J Adv Nurs 42(3):288–296
75. Walker CM, Winner E, Hetland L, Simmons S, Goldsmith L (2011) Visual thinking: art
students have an advantage in geometric reasoning. Creat Educ 2(01):22
76. Mathewson JH (1999) Visual-spatial thinking: an aspect of science overlooked by educators.
Sci Educ 83(1):33–54
77. Fernández-Fontecha A, O’Halloran KL, Tan S, Wignell P (2019) A multimodal approach to
visual thinking: the scientiﬁc sketch note. Vis Commun 18(1):5–29
78. McGrath MB, Brown JR (2005) Visual learning for science and engineering. IEEE Comput
Graph Appl 25(5):56–63
34
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh

79. Fan JE (2015) Drawing to learn: how producing graphical representations enhances scientiﬁc
thinking. Transl Issues Psychol Sci 1(2):170
80. Ravetz J, Ravetz A (2017) Seeing the wood for the trees: social science 3.0 and the role of
visual thinking. Innov Eur J Soc Sci Res 30(1):104–120
81. Holloway I, Todres L (2007) Thinking differently: challenges in qualitative research. Int J
Qual Stud Health Well Being 2(1):12–18
82. Rappaport MB, Corbally C (2015) Matrix thinking: an adaptation at the foundation of
human science, religion, and art. Zygon® 50(1):84–112
83. Botella M, Lubart T (2016) Creative processes: art, design and science. In: Multidisciplinary
contributions to the science of creative thinking. Springer, pp 53–65
84. Avsec S, Jagiełło-Kowalczyk M, Markiewicz P (2018) Engineering thinking to enhance
architectural design. World Trans on Eng and Technol Educ 16(2):134–139
85. Moga E, Burger K, Hetland L, Winner E (2000) Does studying the arts engender creative
thinking? Evidence for near but not far transfer. J Aesthetic Educ 34(3/4):91–104
86. Hadzigeorgiou Y, Fokialis P, Kabouropoulou M (2012) Thinking about creativity in science
education. Creat Educ 3(05):603
87. Ulger K (2019) Comparing the effects of art education and science education on creative
thinking in high school students. Arts Educ Policy Rev 120(2):57–79
88. Hühn P, Meister JC, Pier J, Schmid W (2014) Handbook of narratology. Walter de Gruyter
GmbH & Co KG
89. Caratozzolo P, Alvarez-Delgado A, Hosseini S (2019) Strengthening critical thinking in
engineering students. Int J Interact Des Manuf (IJIDeM) 13(3):995–1012
90. Gunnink B, Bernhardt KLS (2002) Writing, critical thinking, and engineering curricula.
IEEE, pp F3H-F3H
91. Taajamaa V, Eskandari M, Karanian B, Airola A, Pahikkala T, Salakoski T (2016) O-CDIO:
emphasizing design thinking in CDIO engineering cycle. Int J Eng Educ 32(3):1530–1539
92. Knochel AD, Patton RM (2015) If art education then critical digital making: computational
thinking and creative code. Stud Art Educ 57(1):21–38
93. Baumer B (2015) A data science course for undergraduates: thinking with data. Am Stat
69(4):334–342
94. Root-Bernstein R, Van Dyke M, Peruski A, Root-Bernstein M (2019) Correlation between
tools for thinking; arts, crafts, and design avocations; and scientiﬁc achievement among
STEMM professionals. Proc Natl Acad Sci 116(6):1910–1917
95. Guy B From STEM to STEAM: toward a human centered education, pp 26–28 (2013)
96. Rahmawati Y, Ridwan A, Hadinugrahaningsih T (2019) Developing critical and creative
thinking skills through STEAM integration in chemistry learning. IOP Publishing, p 012033
97. How M-L, Hung WLD (2019) Educing AI-thinking in science, technology, engineering,
arts, and mathematics (STEAM) education. Educ Sci 9(3):184
98. Gross K, Gross S (2016) Transformation: constructivism, design thinking, and elementary
STEAM. Art Educ 69(6):36–43
99. De Neys W, Bonnefon J-F (2013) The ‘whys’ and ‘whens’ of individual differences in
thinking biases. Trends Cogn Sci 17(4):172–178. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2013.02.001
100. Irigaray L (2001) Thinking the difference: for a peaceful revolution. A&C Black
101. Williamson PK (2011) The creative problem solving skills of arts and science students—the
two cultures debate revisited. Thinking Skills Creativity 6(1):31–43
102. Woody E, Claridge G (1977) Psychoticism and thinking. Br J Soc Clin Psychol 16(3):
241–248
103. Fabbri M, Antonietti A, Giorgetti M, Tonetti L, Natale V (2007) Circadian typology and
style of thinking differences. Learn Individ Differ 17(2):175–180
104. Ho C-H (2001) Some phenomena of problem decomposition strategy for design thinking:
differences between novices and experts. Des Stud 22(1):27–45
105. Hocevar D (1980) Intelligence, divergent thinking, and creativity. Intelligence 4(1):25–40
1
Introduction on THINKING: Bioengineering of Science and Art
35

106. Furnham A, Batey M, Booth TW, Patel V, Lozinskaya D (2011) Individual difference
predictors of creativity in art and science students. Thinking skills creativity 6(2):114–121
107. Wright GN, Phillips LD (1980) Cultural variation in probabilistic thinking: alternative ways
of dealing with uncertainty. Int J Psychol 15(1–4):239–257
108. Lun VM-C, Fischer R, Ward C (2010) Exploring cultural differences in critical thinking: is it
about my thinking style or the language I speak? Learn Individ Differ 20(6):604–616. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.lindif.2010.07.001
109. Monga AB, John DR (2007) Cultural differences in brand extension evaluation: the
inﬂuence of analytic versus holistic thinking. J Consum Res 33(4):529–536
110. Sharipov S (2020) Symbiosis of civilizations as an important factor in the formation and
development of scientiﬁc thinking in Uzbekistan. Mental Enlightenment Sci Methodolog-
ical J 2020(1):1–12
111. Orton K, Weintrop D, Beheshti E, Horn M, Jona K, Wilensky U (2016) Bringing
computational thinking into high school mathematics and science classrooms. International
Society of the Learning Sciences, Singapore
112. Matud MP, Rodríguez C, Grande J (2007) Gender differences in creative thinking. Pers
Individ Differ 43(5):1137–1147
113. He W-j, Wong W-c (2011) Gender differences in creative thinking revisited: ﬁndings from
analysis of variability. Pers Individ Differ 51(7):807–811. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.
2011.06.027
114. Babalis
T,
Xanthakou
Y,
Kaila
M,
Stavrou
N
(2012)
Research
attitude
and
innovative-creative thinking: differences between undergraduate male and female students.
Proc Soc Behav Sci 69:1452–1461. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2012.12.085
115. Potur AA, Barkul O (2009) Gender and creative thinking in education: a theoretical and
experimental overview. A|Z ITU J Fac Archit 6(2):44–57
116. Maudsley G, Strivens J (2000) Science, critical thinking and competence for tomorrow’s
doctors. A review of terms and concepts. Med Educ 34(1):53–60
117. Gallifa J (2019) Integral thinking and its application to integral education. J Int Educ Pract
1(2)
Nima Rezaei gained his medical degree (M.D.) from Tehran
University of Medical Sciences (TUMS) in 2002 and subse-
quently obtained an MSc in Molecular and Genetic Medicine in
2006 and a Ph.D. in Clinical Immunology and Human Genetics in
2009 from the University of Shefﬁeld, UK. He also spent a
short-term fellowship in Pediatric Clinical Immunology and Bone
Marrow Transplantation in the Newcastle General Hospital. Since
2010, Prof. Rezaei has worked at the Department of Immunology
and Biology, School of Medicine, TUMS; he is now the Full
Professor and Vice Dean of International Affairs, School of
Medicine, TUMS, and the co-founder and Head of the Research
Center for Immunodeﬁciencies. He is also the founding President
of
Universal
Scientiﬁc
Education
and
Research
Network
(USERN). He has edited more than 40 international books, has
presented more than 500 lectures/posters in congresses/meetings,
and has published more than 1000 articles in international sci-
entiﬁc journals.
36
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh

Amene Saghazadeh gained her M.D. from TUMS in 2019. She
researches
clinical
immunology,
genetics,
epigenetics,
and
nutrition at the Research Center for Immunodeﬁciencies, Chil-
dren’s Medical Center, TUMS. She is the manager of the Inte-
grated Science Association (ISA) in the USERN.
1
Introduction on THINKING: Bioengineering of Science and Art
37

2
Thinking as a Philosophical,
Theological and Psychological
Phenomenon
Sergey S. Horujy
THE TEACHER: One can grasp the essence of the nature of
thinking only if we turn back from thinking.
[1, p. 31]
Abstract
The chapter presents a concise history of the comprehension of thinking through
all ages of Western culture, from Greek pre-Socratics to today’s radical
constructivists. The analytical presentation identiﬁes principal structures and
paradigms inherent in Western thinking over thinking. The ﬁrst and most
long-lived of them is what I call the pre-Socratic matrix: a structure comprising
two
kinds
of
thinking,
namely,
“ontological
thinking”
(a
universal
collecting-and-uniting activity) and the “individual thinking” (belonging to an
individual human) connected with each other in some way. The exposition
represents brief descriptions of the set of principal landmarks in the history of
thinking. Thinkers chosen as the landmarks are as follows: pre-Socratics
(Parmenides and Heraclitus), Aristotle, Thomas Aquinas, Descartes, Hegel,
Husserl, Heidegger, and Wittgenstein. Besides the landmarks, principal theories
and conceptions of thinking created in the last century are described as well,
such as the cultural-historical psychology of Lev Vygotsky, the conception of
the action-thought by Georgy Shchedrovitsky, heterophenomenology of Daniel
Dennett, and theories of enactivism and radical constructivism. The text
concludes with a discussion of the present status of the problem of thinking.
The author is deceased, https://ﬁlosoﬁa.dickinson.edu/encyclopedia/horujy-sergey/
S. S. Horujy (&)
Institute of Philosphy, The Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh (eds.), Thinking, Integrated Science 7,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04075-7_2
39

Graphical Abstract/Art Performance
Multidimensional thinking (Adapted with permission from the Health and Art
(HEART), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network (USERN);
Painting by Emanuela Ciupa)
Keywords
Cognition  Epistemology  Mind  Ontological thinking  Pre-Socratics 
Phenomenology  Radical constructivism  Thinking
40
S. S. Horujy

QR Code
Scanning the QR code directs you to the word cloud of the chapter that is made
up of the words we discussed throughout the whole book in relation to the chapter’s
keyword, which is intentionally not included in the word cloud. Find the keyword
and put it in place in the puzzle according to the clues provided in Chap. 36. The
mystery hidden in the puzzle is the quote of THINKING: Bioengineering of Science
and Art.
Introduction: How to Approach Thinking?
According to the quoted words of the Swabian Teacher, thinking is surely one of
the most controversial, elusive, and even mysterious subjects of our thinking. It
would be natural to begin the systematic presentation of this subject with its formal
deﬁnition. Such deﬁnitions abound in literature, but, as a rule, on closer exami-
nation, they turn out to be insufﬁcient or incorrect or both.
For example, here is the deﬁnition found in a recent huge Philosophical Ency-
clopedia: “The thinking is the process of solving problems, which represents the
transition from conditions determining the problem to the achievement of the result.
The thinking involves constructive activity of restructuring the initial data, their
breaking-down, synthesizing and complementing” [2, p. 626]. This formulation is
not too long, but it contains multiple lacunae and implicit assumptions. What does
the “problem” mean here? This term cannot be part of a deﬁnition because it needs
a deﬁnition of its own. Moreover, such a deﬁnition would refer to a complicated
context with many elements, which, in their turn, need to be deﬁned. The term
“process” also conceals important elements that need clariﬁcation. Is it a process in
the empirical space–time? Where does it unfold? What is the substance of the
process? Is it performed by some acting agent? Evidently, the context suggests
implicitly that the thinking is a certain human activity, and the process in question is
a mental process. But it means that, when it comes to the test, the deﬁnition
implicitly involves some undeﬁned things of both anthropological nature (human
activity) and psychological nature (mental process). And these things are big and
obscure: What is human? Must “mental process” be conceived as a process in the
2
Thinking as a Philosophical, Theological …
41

brain or consciousness or mind or somewhere else? All these options lead to very
different conceptions of thinking. As a result, we conclude that the deﬁnition dis-
cussed is strongly deﬁcient; it is only a pseudo-deﬁnition.
Now, let us take another example from the last period of classical metaphysics.
At the beginning of the 20th century, the basic reference book in general philosophy
was the fundamental Wörterbuch der philosophische Begriffe by Rudolph Eisler.
Here the deﬁnition is split into two parts: “(a) Psychologically: [the thinking is]
apperceptive activity, inner action of the will, by means of which representations
are decomposed into elements, compared to and connected with each other, are
acknowledged as the unity and intentionally and purposely joined together. Thus,
the thinking is the analytic-synthetic, comparing-connecting, selecting, distributing
priorities, restrictive (hemmende) activity, which presupposes associations, but is
not an association; it forms-up associations actively and spontaneously, creating
mental combinations. (b) Logically: the formation of notions, judgments, conclu-
sions, of which that of judgments is the principal function. The (desired) function of
the thinking is the establishment of objectively valid connections in the set of
possible representations and notions, the search for truth, bringing-forth of the
deﬁniteness into the indeﬁnite, the formation and division of the content of a
representation into structures, in which the reality, the being of objects comes to the
(symbolic) expression…. The concrete thinking works with visible images
(Anschauungen) and images of recollections, the abstract thinking with notions,
which are decomposed and united by it, and this is impossible without language”
[3, p. 213].
This deﬁnition does not contradict the previous one but is noticeably different
from it. Its advantage is that it is more systematic and scrupulous so that the
conceptual context is now well-deﬁned: the thinking has two principal aspects or
dimensions, namely psychological and logical, which means that it is the activity,
respectively, of human consciousness and the human mind. The thinking functions
are basically the same in both deﬁnitions, but in Eisler’s case, they obtained a more
detailed and profound description. Nevertheless, the advantages of this very careful
deﬁnition make it even more visible that it is also grossly incomplete. In several
points, it includes undeﬁned but highly meaningful terms with functions of prime
importance in the discourse: will, truth, language. Each of them brings the deﬁni-
tion out to some unknown semantic space so that it becomes an open text drastically
different from an accomplished deﬁnition.
One can ﬁnd many more deﬁnitions in philosophical and psychological litera-
ture, and the quality of the incompleteness and the absence of semantic
self-sufﬁciency are common to all of them. History of the problem shows clearly
that any deﬁnition of the thinking includes necessarily some undeﬁned components,
and any attempt to deﬁne these components would reveal in them, in their turn, new
undeﬁned components, and so on; and this regressus ad inﬁnitum makes it
impossible to achieve the accomplished deﬁnition. One must conclude that the
thinking belongs to a certain speciﬁc kind or class of entities that cannot be given a
rigorous deﬁnition. Characteristically, Martin Heidegger’s text devoted especially
to the concept of thinking does not manage to get any deﬁnition and leaves the
42
S. S. Horujy

problem open, ending with the question: Was heisst Denken? What is the thinking?
[4, p. 17]. In logical terms, entities of this class belong not to phenomena ex-
planandum but to those explanans. Undoubtedly, there are many particular kinds or
concrete acts of thinking, which can be described and explained comprehensively,
but they cannot exhaust the phenomenon of thinking as such. This makes us infer
that things explanans possess some quality or predicate or dimension absent in
things explanandum. In order to discover such a speciﬁc quality, we are going to
begin ab ovo, from the most general principles, trying to see someplace, locus or
topos, in their conﬁguration, where the thinking could be located.
The very ﬁrst principle that must be present in this conﬁguration, which we shall
call “the ontologic,” is Difference. The main reason for the primacy of the differ-
ence in the ontologic is its direct connection with what is, according to Heidegger,
“fundamental question of metaphysics:” “Why are there entities (Seiende) rather
than nothing?” [5, p. 3]. The answer to this question is exactly the difference: the
existence of the difference means that there are certain things (= entities), which
makes them different from each other. By deﬁnition, as things are different, entities
are plural; hence, the existing reality or “present being” or the All is a plurality, the
set of all entities. But, on the other hand, the All is one. By the mode of its
existence, the All is given as a plurality, yes, but at the same time, it is inevitably
considered as a single whole, as one; in other terms, we associate the All with the
predicate of unity. As a result, the All is provided with two opposite predicates; it is
both a plurality and a unity. But these two predicates are possessed by the All in
two different ways. The All is a unity in a manner and, in a sense, radically different
from those in which it is a plurality. In its present being, as empirical reality, the All
is a plurality and nothing else, the pure plurality as such. It is a unity when it is
considered by our mind that is in the representation or in the idea. It is also a certain
mode of existence/being, and this mode is evidently different from a present being.
We know nothing about this other mode of being, but we cannot reject it a priori as
something ﬁctitious.
This observation is an important contribution to our ontologic. It means that,
besides the usual mode of existence of any entity, there is also another mode: the
mode realized by the All-as-Unity. There is the “All-as-Plurality” and the
“All-as-Unity,” and “is” has a different meaning for them. In the ﬁrst case, “is”
means the existence or present being of any entity, while in the second case, it
means the mode of existence of the One, the All as a single whole. And it is this
mode that represents “is” pure and simple, “is” in its accomplished fullness. This
pure “is” the mode of existence of the One, the All-as-Unity we shall call “being.”
Principles and notions connected with being will be called ontological.
The way by which being enters our ontologic shows that it is a principle related
closely to thinking. The key point in the above reasoning was the observation that
the All exists as Unity “in the representation or the idea.” From here, one can easily
draw the conclusion that the All-as-Unity exists in the human mind, and hence it is
nothing but a product of human thinking. Such a conclusion would be too hasty,
however. One must slow down and look at the elements of the ontologic more
closely.
2
Thinking as a Philosophical, Theological …
43

What is necessary for the All, which is a plurality, to become Unity? Evidently,
the All must be taken in the prism of a certain relating, collecting, connecting, and
uniting activity. This activity is a new principle, which must be added to our onto-
logic. But we have no sufﬁcient reasons to identify this principle with human thinking
conceived as the ability of an empiric individual. On the contrary, we know that in
most cases, this empiric thinking, being sound and fully-ﬂedged by all criteria of
human thinking, still is far from being able to collect and unite the All. Sure, it is a
collecting and uniting activity, but in all such cases, it is simply not powerful enough.
Hence it follows that at the initial stage, at least, we must distinguish between the
human thinking inherent in empiric individuals and the activity shaping the
All-as-Unity, which must be considered so far as an ontological principle on its own.
The relationship between these two activities, respectively, empiric and ontological,
is completely similar to the relationship between present being (= being of enti-
ties = being of the All-as-Plurality) and being as such; it is an exact parallel to this
relationship in the predicative discourse. Based on this parallel, the ontological
activity that collects and unites the All constituting the All-as-Unity can be conceived
as the thinking as such; it can also be called the ontological thinking.
Now we see why the thinking cannot be given an accomplished deﬁnition like
ordinary things explanandum. It is its connection with being or, in other terms, the
fact that the thinking is endowed with the ontological aspect or dimension. We also
see the locus of the thinking in the ontologic of Difference: the thinking is closely
connected with being and the empiric (human, individual) thinking. Thus, the study
of the thinking as such must start with two ontological problems dealing with its
relationship, respectively, with being and with the empiric thinking.
Coming to this conclusion, we notice that the treatment of the problem of the
thinking in our ontologic of Difference almost copies the approach to this problem
at the earliest origin of philosophy, in the thought of pre-Socratics. That approach
recognized the ontological nature of the problem right from the outset. The Mile-
sians starting with Thales, stated that the All is unity, while later pre-Socratics
discovered a speciﬁc ontological status of the All-as-Unity and thematized the
ontological difference between being and the entity. Parmenides focused on the
connection of being and the (ontological) thinking, and Heraclitus concentrated on
the relationship between the individual thinking (“logos of the soul,” in his terms)
and the ontological thinking (Logos as such or “Logos itself”). Subsequent phi-
losophy followed this line, and the thinking was ﬁrmly, with rare exceptions,
treated as an ontological principle. However, this situation changed in the last
century: as we could see, both Eisler’s deﬁnition (1910) and Lektorsky’s deﬁnition
(2001) do not mention the ontological dimension of thinking. What happened in the
history of thinking was pushing away, forgetting, and sometimes outright denial of
ontological aspects of the thinking. In the light of this, our presentation of the
thinking as one of the principles in the ontologic of difference can be considered a
reminder of and the introduction in the ontological context of the problem. Next, we
turn to reconstruct this context in the diachrony, tracing its principal stages and
conceptualizations brieﬂy. Then we shall describe the later stages of the problem
when it was gradually losing its ontological dimension.
44
S. S. Horujy

Concise History of Thinking Over the Thinking
Indisputably, it is the pre-Socratics who opened up the Western history of thinking
about the thinking. Their philosophizing was of a special type: they had no systems,
theories or concepts, but possessed a speciﬁc philosophical vision, which made the
ontological dimension of reality directly evident and accessible to them. Articu-
lating their vision, they tried to describe this dimension, but their work has reached
us in disjoint fragments only. Foundations of the discourse on thinking were
established by Parmenides. Certainly, the thinking is conceived by him as the
ontological thinking, a general collecting-and-uniting element or activity, which
must be there if the All is unity.1 The central theme of his discourse of thinking is
the relation between thinking and being. The only known Parmenides” work, the
poem “On Nature,” is written in a strong, laconic, and categoric style and the
relation in question is summarized here in two brief formulas: “Thinking (noein)
and the thought that it is (noema) are the same” (Fragment 8, 34); “For to be aware
(noein) and to be are the same” (Fragment B 3). Taken together, they represent a
fundamental ontological thesis known as “Parmenides” identity of being and
thinking.”
This formula is too simple, however. The relationship between the two princi-
ples is most intricate, and new interpretations have been produced until now. Of
course, the fragment (B 3) is a direct statement of the identity, but this statement is
purely declarative and enigmatic without further explanations. Such explanations
are provided by (8, 34), and also by (6, 1–2) and (8, 36): “What can be spoken and
thought is; for it is possible for it to be, and it is not possible for what is nothing to
be” (6, 1–2); “There is not, and never shall be, anything besides what is” (8, 36). It
means that the object of thought (“what can be thought”) does exist, and the only
existing entity is “what is” (estin) that is being, whence it follows that the object of
thought is being. And now the (8, 34) adds the decisive ﬁnal point. It refers to the
crucially important difference of thinking from all other activities: the thinking does
not use any tools different from itself, and the object of thought is an intelligible
object; in other words, it is thought too. Thus, thinking and the object of thinking
coincide.2 But, as shown above, for Parmenides, the object of thought is nothing but
being, and, as a consequence, we come exactly to the thesis (B 3): thinking and
being are identical.
Parmenides's identity is the ﬁrst cornerstone in the big Western tradition of
thinking about thinking. In no way is it a solution to the problem of thinking, but it
is the best way to enter this problem. It makes one ask many further questions. First
of all, we see that the problem of thinking includes that of identity. Clearly, being
and thinking are not the same thing in the sense of the formal tautological identity
1 This key discovery of pre-Socratic thought, “the All is unity,” is clearly stated by Parmenides, cf.,
e.g.: “… epei nyn estin homou pan hen syneches… now “it is,” all at once, one, continuous,”
Fragment 8, 5–6. transl. by J. Burnet.
2 Let us note that this conclusion is valid equally if thinking is conceived as the “ontological
thinking,” a generalized collecting-and-uniting activity.
2
Thinking as a Philosophical, Theological …
45

A = A. It is impossible for many reasons. The ﬁrst is that the poles of the identity
are of different nature: thinking is a certain activity while being, as Parmenides
insists, is the immobility and absolute rest. Then how must the identity be con-
ceived? That is how another big problem of Western philosophy is opened, which
has a long history. The solutions were looked for in two directions: on the one hand,
alternative, non-tautological conceptions of the identity were propounded, and, on
the other hand, many modiﬁcations of Parmenides’s treatment of being were sug-
gested, which complemented being with some aspects that now, after Aristotle has
introduced the notion of energy, are usually called energetic and dynamical. We
mention just two examples: a “weak form of identity” was suggested, according to
which being and thinking are related coextensively (A.A. Long); another suggestion
was to admit that being constitutes a necessary condition for thinking.
Another problem associated with Parmenides’s identity is that of individual
thinking. Evidently, it cannot be identical to being, so what is it? Just something
seeming and illusionary, from the domain of opinions, doxai? What is its relation to
true, ontological thinking? Parmenides’s poem does not answer these questions.3
But they belong to central themes of Heraclitus, another great pre-Socratic thinker.
Due to the striking contrast between both ideas and styles of the two thinkers,
their teachings are traditionally considered as opposite to each other in the history
of philosophy. Now such a view is rejected; according to a recent capital study,
“With both Heraclitus and Parmenides corresponding to the “One” and the
becoming to the multiple conceived as the set of all pairs of the opposites. And… in
both cases, the One is conceived as an intelligible truth, while the multiple as an
illusion caused by the delusion of sensory perceptions. The only difference is that in
Parmenides, the ontological Absolute is unchangeable and immobile, while in
Heraclitus it is full of energy, motion and the incessant cyclic change” [6, p. 53].
One must add that Heraclitus’s discourse is also full of metaphors and allegories,
enigmas, and parables, so those special hermeneutics are needed for extracting his
philosophical positions out of this striking and completely unsystematic abundance.
Taking this into account, we restrict ourselves only to main subjects concerning our
theme, namely the thinking. All this theme is organized around one key principle,
the Logos.
It is impossible to translate this Heraclitus’s “groundword” (Heidegger’s term)
with any single term. Both in Heraclitus’s discourse and in the common Ancient
Greek usage, it is an extremely polysemantic word. According to Heidegger, it is a
word of “boundless scope of meaning,” and in Heraclitus’s universe, it is an
all-embracing and ubiquitous element. In the rich ensemble of its meanings, we ﬁnd
nearly all other “groundwords” or ontological principles: Heraclitus’s Logos rep-
resents the cosmos and being, the All and the One; at the same time, it keeps its
usual meanings such as word, speech, measure, or volume, etc. As for its relation to
the thinking, it can be reconstructed via its connection with the key thesis “The All
3 Although it mentions human thinking brieﬂy: according to the Fragment 16, “thought … does
come to men”, and, coming to men, it keeps the principal property (8, 34) of the ontological
thinking, “that which thinks is the same [as thought]”; at the same time, it is close to the sensation.
46
S. S. Horujy

is unity”: as we can see, this statement implies the presence of the ontological
thinking, which is exactly the activity that represents the All as unity. Such a
connection is ﬁrmly established, in particular, by one of the most important Her-
aclitus’s fragments: “ouk emou alla tou logou akousantas homologein sophon estin
hen panta einai – It is wise to hearken, not to me, but to the Word, and to confess
that all things are one.”4 According to this fragment, if we have enough wisdom to
hear the Logos, we spot the All in the Logos and ﬁnd that the All is one or unity. In
other words, it is the Logos that makes the All unity, which means that Logos is
involved in a collecting-and-uniting activity, and hence represents what we call
ontological thinking. Since it also represents being, we deduce that in Heraclitus’s
philosophy, the Parmenides’s identity of being and thinking is implicitly present.
Taking into account that Heraclitus’s Logos is “full of motion and change,” we also
conclude that being of Heraclitus, contrary to that of Parmenides, is a dynamic
principle.
It is time now to recall that our notion of ontological thinking is a general
ontological principle or “groundword,” which signiﬁcantly differs from the usual
conception of human thinking. The latter is very close to such concepts as (human)
mind and reason, but it was noticed by scholars that Heraclitus avoids identifying
his Logos with these concepts: “Nowhere in Heraclitus’ texts the term logos means
“reason”: it is a later, basically Hellenistic meaning of the word” [6, p. 104].
However, there is another ontological principle in Heraclitus’s discourse that is
closely related to human individual thinking. It is the “logos of soul.” The soul
(psyche, anima) in ancient philosophy is the essential quality of living, animated
beings, and the speciﬁc distinguishing feature of the soul of a human is that it is
endowed with logos. But the “logos of soul,” which belongs to the human, is in no
way identical to the logos as such or Logos. What is it then?
In Heraclitus’s context, it is the principal predicate of the human soul often
translated as its “measure,” like in the key fragment 67/45: “psyches peirata ion ouk
an exeuroio, pasan epiporeuomenos hodon houto bathyn logon echei – You will
not ﬁnd the boundaries of soul by traveling in any direction, so deep is the measure
(logos) of it.” Other fragments say that the logos of soul is endowed with the power
of the unbounded expansion (cf. The fragment 112/115 from the Dubia: “psyches
esti logos eauton auxon – To the soul belongs the self-multiplying logos.”). But the
real nature of this logos (sometimes called “small” or “human,” in contradistinction
to the logos as such or Logos) and the most essential of its properties we discover
focusing on its relation to the Logos. This relation is not presented explicitly, and its
reconstruction is one of the central problems in Heraclitus’s studies. The necessity
and importance of the relation can be seen by simple reasoning. Heraclitus states
that it is good and desirable for the soul to be dry and 5not humid. But the dryness is
the effect of heat and hence also of ﬁre, while the ﬁre is Heraclitus’s groundword
closely connected with the Logos (they both rule the Cosmos and are identiﬁed with
Zeus, etc.). Hence it follows that the “wisest and best” soul and its logos are
4 Fragment 26 (by Markovich)/50 (by Diels-Kranz), the translation of John Burnet.
5 cf. 68/118: “auge xere psyche sophotate kai ariste – The dry soul is the wisest and best”.
2
Thinking as a Philosophical, Theological …
47

connected with the Logos, and the character of this connection is such that the soul
and its logos are accessible to the effect of the Logos.
Much more can be said about this connection if we look more closely at the key
fragment 26/50. It describes a “wise” position of the human, which allows him to
discover the truth that “all things are one.” This position is to “hearken the Word
(Logos),” which means getting in touch with the Logos and following and obeying
its call. Such hearing and obeying collaboration of the human, the soul, and the
soul’s logos with the Logos are expressed by the verb homologein that means
literally “to speak the same.” Thus, we can conclude that the position described
grasps the very nature of the logos of soul: its mission is to hear the Logos and
speak the same or, in other words, to establish the relationship with the Logos and
act in accordance with the latter, in the same way. Essentially, it is the same
conclusion that Heidegger has drawn in his scrupulous analysis of the relation
between the two Heraclitus’s logoses: “The 50th fragment speaks about the
homological relation of the human “logos” to the “Logos” itself… Human asso-
ciation with the Logos is homologein” [7, pp. 362, 428].
Coming back to the problem of thinking, we ﬁnd that Heraclitus contributes
some important content to the Greek treatment of this problem. In his philosophy,
there are two different principles, the Logos (= the logos as such) and the logos of
soul (= the small logos = the human logos), the ﬁrst of which can be associated
with the ontological thinking, in our terms, and the second one with the human
individual thinking. One can also reconstruct from this philosophy what is the
relationship between the two principles: the logos of soul (respectively, the human
thinking) must actualize its relation to the Logos (respectively, the ontological
thinking) and act in the same way as the latter. In other words, human thinking must
participate in ontological thinking, and such participation is its only constitutive
activity, a kind of its deﬁnition. Thus, the nature of human thinking is relational;
one can say that this thinking is nothing but human’s relation and orientation to the
Logos. The constitutive relation to the ontological thinking is very individual:
Heraclitus’s view of the human is aristocratic. He holds that most humans are those
who “don’t understand,” “humid souls” that cannot actualize their relation to the
Logos. This relation is also dynamic: its actualization is a process in which the
participation of the human logos in the Logos becomes more and more complete.
Summing up, we see that the pre-Socratics possessed and cultivated a general-
ized vision of the thinking, which did not restrict it to the activity of individual
humans. Such a vision has let them develop a certain approach to the problem of
thinking based on distinguishing between two different kinds of thinking, the
generalized collecting-and-uniting activity, by virtue of which the All is One (we
call it the ontological thinking), and the individual (human, empiric) thinking. This
distinguishing was inherited by the subsequent philosophical tradition, and for
many centuries the relationship between the two kinds of thinking became the main
subject of the problem of thinking. This relation evolved in the course of history in
a very deﬁnite way. The origin of the tradition was Parmenides’s philosophy with
its radical ontologism, and here the ontological thinking had the absolute priority,
while the individual thinking was hardly visible, having an insigniﬁcant and rather
48
S. S. Horujy

indeﬁnite role and status. However, Heraclitus paid to the individual thinking (the
logos of the soul) more attention, and due to this, the relationship in question was
presented more clearly and precisely. Looking at the pre-Socratics à vol d'oiseau,
we conclude that they have created the conﬁguration of ontological principles that
can be considered a paradigm or matrix for treating the problem of thinking.
Western philosophy inherited this matrix and was guided by it during a very long
period up to the end of classical metaphysics. The matrix represents basically the set
of two kinds of thinking, the ontological and the individual, and the connecting
principle of the participation of the latter in the former (the Heraclitean principle
homologein).
The most general sense of this pre-Socratic matrix is the discovery that the
thinking represents the unique ability to actualize a certain meta-empirical or
“ontological” dimension of reality (in Heidegger’s terms, to actualize the onto-
logical difference between empirical entities and being). This surprising discovery,
like Pandora’s box, opens a vast set of fundamental questions and problems. The
ﬁrst and central of them is the mode of existence in this new dimension. What is
intelligible reality? A priori plenty of options are possible here, from the Par-
menidean standpoint, according to which the ontological dimension of being is the
only true reality that is, to the predominant position of modern postclassical phi-
losophy, according to which the dimension in question is not a self-consistent
reality, but only an epiphenomenon of the activity of the human brain.
The story of the problem of thinking unfolds in the space between these two
extreme poles. The general trend of the philosophical development was the gradual
reduction of the distance and the difference between the two kinds of thinking. This
process was one of many parts and aspects of the global cultural development that
proceeded, in a grossly averaging view, in the direction of the emancipation and
secularization of the human mind, the afﬁrmation of its self-consistency and
self-sufﬁciency. One of the ﬁrst steps in this direction was the interpretation
mentioned above of the Logos as the reason that took root in Late Antiquity and
ascribed to the Logos closer ties with human rational thinking. In the ﬁnal stages,
during the crisis and the rejection of classical metaphysics, the ontological thinking
was more and more drawn in the individual thinking, and eventually, in modern
theories like analytical philosophy and cognitive science, it disappeared completely,
with some of its dimensions and functions canceled and others transferred into the
individual thinking. In terms of the opposition of principles of the transcendent and
the immanent, such course of things can be qualiﬁed as the process of imma-
nentization. In what follows, we present the principal landmarks of this process.
For many centuries the word “philosopher,” when mentioned without a concrete
name, meant Aristotle. And for a good reason: the entire conceptual framework of
European philosophy has been created by him. The problem of thinking is no
exception: in his all-embracing system, this problem is one of the central themes,
and it is elaborated in great detail. Although he usually criticizes his predecessors
(in particular, Parmenides), but grosso modo, his conception of thinking preserves
the pre-Socratic matrix: it can be considered as a structure that includes two
opposite poles corresponding to the ontological and the individual thinking added
2
Thinking as a Philosophical, Theological …
49

with the set of connections between these poles, and also some intermediate or
hybrid types. The Aristotelian discourse of thinking (dianoia, noesis) develops
chieﬂy as the discourse of mind (nous, also translated as thought) since “The
motion of mind is thinking” (De Anima, 407a 20, transl. by J.A. Smith).
Let us ﬁrst describe the ontological pole. Aristotle’s thought is predominantly
rationalistic, and his discussion of ontological subjects is usually rather cautious and
laconic. There are few texts devoted to these subjects, and the principal of those that
consider mind and thinking, are Metaphysica, Book XII (esp. Chapters 7–9), and
De Anima, Book III, Ch.5. Here, we ﬁnd that there is one exceptional kind of mind
in the rich spectrum of its varieties, which is surely of ontological nature. In De
Anima, it is called the active mind and characterized as follows: “One sort of mind
(nous) exists by producing all things… like light… This mind is separate, unaf-
fected, and unmixed, being in its essence actuality… this alone is deathless and
everlasting… whereas the passive mind is perishable. And without this, nothing
thinks” (De an. 430a 14,16–17, 23–25). Aristotle’s thought usually tends to rep-
resent reality in the hierarchical paradigm, and he asserts that this sort of mind is the
highest of all. In Metaphysica XII, this sort is presented in a more detailed way. It
has two most important distinctions:
i. it is of divine nature; and
ii. the only object of its thinking is itself.
The closest connection of (the highest) mind/thought (nous) and God is stated
repeatedly. Cf., e.g., “Thought is held to be the most divine of things observed by
us” (Met. 1074b 16, the translation by W.D. Ross); “It [the highest mind/thought]
thinks of that which is most divine (theon) and precious, and it does not change”
(Met. 1074b 26), etc. Taken together, these two statements say that the highest
thought and its object are both divine. Like in De Anima III.5, Aristotle states the
active nature of the highest mind/thought again, stressing that it is not potency but
the very act of thinking, actuality. And it is exactly its full actuality that makes it
divine or even directly God: “The actuality of thought is life, and God is that
actuality” (Met. 1072b 27). In most cases, Aristotle’s discourse is vague on the
subject of whether something called divine belongs actually in God or it is only a
certain entity or a constituent in the human soul partaking of God. However, the last
assertion is unambiguous, and it brings us the right to the conclusion that the
highest mind and God are the same.
This ontological identity is considerably enriched when we take into account
principal predicates of both its sides. For the highest mind, it is the property ii
above, which lets us get deeper into the nature and structure of this sort of mind.
According to Aristotle, “thinking in itself deals with that which is best in itself, and
that which is the thinking in the fullest sense with that which is the best in the fullest
sense. And thought thinks on itself because it shares the nature of the object of
thought… so that thought and object of thought are the same” (Met. 1072b 18–22).
Since the best in the fullest sense is divine, this characteristic of the mechanism of
the highest mind shows the divine nature of the latter, and the further description
50
S. S. Horujy

reveals that this nature is eventually nothing but the thinking on thinking or (self-)
contemplation (theoria): “The possession [of the object of thought] is the divine
element which thought seems to contain … It must be of itself that the divine
thought thinks (since it is the most excellent of things), and its thinking is a thinking
on thinking … The act of contemplation is what is most pleasant and best” (Met.
1072b 23; 1074b 34; 1072b 24).
On the other hand, God is characterized as the ﬁrst or unmoved mover to proton
kinoyn, another fundamental principle of Aristotle’s system. It is introduced and
discussed in detail in his theory of motion presented in Physica, Books VII and
VIII, while in Metaphysica XII, he establishes its connection with–in fact, its
identity too–God. “There is something which moves while itself unmoved, existing
actually… being eternal, substance (ousia) and actuality… The ﬁrst mover, then,
exists of necessity, and in so far as it exists by necessity, its mode of being is good,
and it is in this sense a ﬁrst principle … On such a principle, then, depend the
heavens and the world of nature. And it is a life such as the best… it is ever in this
state, which we cannot be” (Met. 1072b 7, 1072a 25, 1072b 10–11, 1072b 14–15).
Evidently, this description corresponds fully to God.
Summing up, we ﬁnd that principal Aristotelian positions concerning ontological
thinking can be brought together in the form of an ontological identity:
The highest mind=thought ¼ The thinking on thinking contemplation
ð
Þ
¼ The unmoved mover ¼ God
The question arises unavoidably about the relation of this identity to Par-
menides’s identity of thinking and being. Formally, we could say that the latter is
present in Aristotle’s ontology, at least, implicitly: indeed, if one more ontological
identity, that of God and being, holds (which takes place in most metaphysical
systems after Aristotle), then, by virtue of transitivity, the two identities, respec-
tively, of the (highest) mind and God, and of the God and being, imply the identity
of the highest mind and being, which is at the same time the connection of thinking
and being since “the motion of mind is thinking.” This reasoning is too superﬁcial,
however. In contrast to Parmenides’s epic discourse with the absolute primacy of
being, Aristotle’s big and subtle system is centered more on the principle of sub-
stance, ousia, and includes a sophisticated net of various kinds and sorts of being so
that Stagirit never characterizes the relationship between thinking and being as a
plain identity (although he accepts another basic thesis by Parmenides, that the
(ontological) thinking and the object of thought are the same).
Finally, we should mention that the highest mind (and hence also other princi-
ples in the ontological identity) has an important ethical dimension: its basic
predicates include happiness (eudaimonia) and pleasure. In Aristotle’s ethics,
happiness is the supreme good, and since the thinking on thinking (contemplation)
is the best of all kinds of activity, he concludes that “perfect happiness is a con-
templative activity” (Nic. et. 1178b 8). This is equally true for God and man. The
closely connected ethical principle is pleasure, and so “the act of contemplation is
2
Thinking as a Philosophical, Theological …
51

what is most pleasant and best” (Met. 1072b 24), and “its [the ﬁrst mover’s]
actuality is also pleasure” (Met. 1072b 16). The general conclusion is that “for man
… the life according to reason (nous) is best and pleasantest… This life is also the
happiest” (Nic. et. 1178a 8).
Turning to the pole of the individual, common thinking, we ﬁnd that it is not so
much the opposite to ontological thinking as its dependent and imperfect form.
Aristotle’s thought, moderate and well-balanced, prefers subtle differentiations to
sharp oppositions similar to Parmenides’s oppositions of Being and Non-Being
(estin, to on vs. ouk on) or truth and opinion (aletheia vs. doxa). Thus, the two
kinds of mind/thought are related as the practical mind, directed to external goals,
and the theoretical or contemplative mind directed exclusively to itself. The prin-
cipal difference between them is that the former corresponds to the kind of mind,
which is only “the faculty of thought,” a potentiality, while the latter represents the
mind in its actuality, entelecheia. “It thinks, but this depends on something else…
that which is its substance is not the act of thinking, but a potency [so that] it cannot
be the best substance” (Met. XII 1074b 18–20). As directed to some external goal,
this kind of thinking is not self-sufﬁcient but deﬁcient compared to pure contem-
plative thinking. However, it can change and can diminish its deﬁciency. To some
extent, the relationship between the two kinds of thinking follows the general
paradigm of the Aristotelian hierarchical reality, according to which imperfect
entities yearn to become more perfect. This paradigm that manifests itself in many
contexts is rooted in the relationship between matter and form, which is described
as follows: “There is something divine, good and desirable… there are two other
principles, the one contrary to it, the other such as of its own nature to desire and
yearn for it. … The form cannot desire itself, for it is not defective… The truth is
that what desires the form is a matter as the female desires the male and the ugly the
beautiful” (Phys. I.9 192a 16–24). Thus, we can say that common thinking is such
that its own nature makes it desire and yearn for pure contemplative thinking.
Aristotle’s method of analysis of thinking as well as of other phenomena is often
called hylomorphic because it is based, as we have just seen, on general principles
of matter (hyle) and form (morphe), the relationship between which is described by
the set of the four causes (material, formal, efﬁcient, and ﬁnal). Individual thinking
is one of three basic faculties of the soul: nutrition, perception, and mind. The
distinction of the mind is that it is connected with the body in no way: “Mind…
cannot reasonably be regarded as blended with the body” (De an. III.4 429a 24).
The hylomorphic reasoning produces a more precise comprehension of the key
property of thinking: the thinking and its object are the same. Stagirit ﬁnds that “the
same” in this formula should mean not the plain identity, A = A, but an isomor-
phism that is the coincidence of forms since “It is not the stone which is present in
the soul, but its form” (De an. III.8 431b 29). The idea that the mind becomes
isomorphic with its object implies that the mind is conceived as a unique faculty
having unconstrained plasticity and an unbounded range of potentialities as soon as
it is capable of acquiring any form of any object. Then, thinking is the activity that
grasps structural features of objects of thought and cognition and creates isomor-
phisms between these objects and the potential or virtual world of our
52
S. S. Horujy

representations. One can agree that such a conception of thinking is quite shrewd
and even modern since it is open in tune with some paradigms of contemporary
cognitive science.
***
We have deliberately paid such great attention to the Greek origins of Western
thinking. These origins have determined the treatment of the problem of mind and
thinking in the West for all further history. As said above, the pre-Socratics created
the general matrix for this problem, and Aristotle equipped it with a rich conceptual
foundation and framework. The Greek basis proved to be so substantial and
powerful that the most systematic treatment of the problem in Christian époque
followed the Aristotelian model very closely, notwithstanding the religious diver-
gence and the historical distance of about one and half millennia.
This treatment was developed by medieval scholastics. However, the reap-
pearance of Aristotelianism took place in a radically changed intellectual and
spiritual context. In contrast to the Greek one, God was transcendent to the world in
the Christian universe, and this new relationship gave birth to a new kind of
thinking and a new discourse called theology. The relation to the transcendent God
had to be articulated by new ways and means on the basis of faith, Scripture, and
Tradition (expressed in Church dogmas and writings of the Church Fathers). Being
the thinking and the discourse on God, theology advances to its conclusions
accepting the irrational dogmatic statements unconditionally and also relying on
testimonies of faith about Christian experience, the ineluctable part of which is
mystical experience dealing with supernatural phenomena. Hence it follows that
theology is an epistemologically mixed discourse: it combines the discussion of
dogmatic problems and supernatural subjects, which cannot be investigated and
comprehended exhaustively by means of rational and non-contradictory reasoning,
and the discussion of other problems and subjects, which can be studied deeply
enough on the logical and rational basis.
Such a double structure of the dominant discourse of the Middle Ages brings us
back to the pre-Socratic matrix, although it appears now in a considerably modiﬁed
form. We see that medieval thought had to cultivate two kinds of thinking, mystical
and rational. As a result, there were two lines in theology, one with the prevalence
of the mystical discourse and the other with the prevalence of the rational discourse.
The rational line included Abelard, Anselm of Canterbury (“Father of the
scholasticism”), and, last but not least, Thomas Aquinas, the greatest medieval
thinker. Aquinas’s theological system, equally scrupulous and all-embracing, is
based throughout on Aristotelian concepts, epistemology, and logic. It adopts basic
dichotomies of form and matter (as well as the general paradigm of the hylomor-
phism), act and potency, substance and accidents, adding to them the dichotomy of
essence and existence, and it exploits the discursive technique of propositions and
syllogisms, divisions and subdivisions. The treatment of thinking also has the
Aristotelian basis, although changes caused by the difference of the Christian
ontology are considerable.
2
Thinking as a Philosophical, Theological …
53

Aquinas distinguishes three different principles or faculties belonging to the
domain of thinking: mind, intellect, and reason (mens, intellectus, ratio). Mind is a
collective notion denoting all the soul areas that are not attached to sensual reality.
It embraces both intellect and will; intellect means the faculty of thought and
knowledge, and ratio that of reasoning. The intellect that includes reason and is
itself included in the mind is the central principle of Aquinas’s conception of
thinking. The dichotomy of potency and act implies the similar dichotomy of the
two kinds of intellect, the passive and the active. The passive intellect, also called
possibilistic or the intellect in potency, is the lower form dealing with sensual
reality only and devoid of any intelligible contents, like the Aristotelian soul in its
initial state described by the concept tabula rasa. The active intellect, also called
parvum lumen, small light, performs several cognitive operations successively:
• ﬁrst, it creates intelligible notions and the language out of sensual images;
• then it creates judgments that relate notions to each other; and
• ﬁnally, it creates nets of judgments and chains of deductive conclusions.
The goal of the cognitive process is the same as it was for Aristotle, the con-
templation of God. However, both God and human’s relation to Him became
radically different, and so the conception of contemplation changed radically too.
Because of God’s transcendence, the accomplished and perfect act of contemplation
demands very special prerequisites such as the afterlife or the ecstatic state.
Catholicism’s act is conceived as visio beatiﬁca, the immediate vision of God’s
essence granted to the elect. Its necessary supernatural component is lumen gloriae,
the light of glory; the illumination that produces the elevation of intellectual powers
of the elect.
Theologians described many kinds and grades of thinking and cognition that
must lead to the higher contemplative state. Most versions of the cognitive and
spiritual process represent it as a kind of a ladder with steps by which the intellect
ascends from sensual phenomena to intelligible and then to the divine. Aquinas
relies on the scheme of the six steps or the six types of contemplation propounded
by Richard of St.-Victor (d. 1173) but presents his own interpretation of these steps.
This interpretation gives pride of place to intellectual activities, developing subtle
classiﬁcations of intelligible objects and stressing the role of such practices as
lecture, listening to sacred texts, and meditation. An important detail of this
ascending process is that on its lower steps, at least, dealing with sensual phe-
nomena, the Aristotelian isomorphism between thought and its object (adaequatio
intellectus et rei) holds. Moreover, as a separate and inaccessible top of the ladder
of human thinking, Thomas placed God conceived as the absolute mind, fully
actualized and alien to all potentiality, that is, the pure act, Actus purus.
The opposite line in theology that did not accept the Thomist primacy of reason
and knowledge included chieﬂy thinkers from the Franciscan order who disagreed
with Aquinas’s disagreements with St. Augustin’s teaching and insisted on sticking
to the primacy of love and will. The most signiﬁcant contributions of this line to the
problem of thinking belong to Bonaventure (1221–1274) and Duns Scotus (1264–
54
S. S. Horujy

1308), called respectively Doctor seraphicus and Doctor subtilis. In comparison
with Aquinas, they pay more attention to mystical, ascetical, and liturgical aspects
of theology and spiritual life; in particular, they reject his presentation of the highest
grade of contemplation as a purely intellectual vision: for Bonaventure, it is the
communion with God, and for Duns Scotus, it is the act of love for God. Duns
Scotus created a big and minutely elaborated system, which represented a
full-bodied counterpart to Aquinas’s system, also built on the Aristotelian basis, but
having different positions on the majority of principal subjects. In particular, he
presented a different description of the basic structure intellectus possibilis–intel-
lectus agens, interpreting the latter as a natural light that helps the former produce
species intelligibilis, intelligible objects of the universal meaning. Using this notion,
he developed the conception of cognition as the union of two cognitive activities,
the intuitive that gains the knowledge about the existence of things only, and the
abstractive that gains the knowledge of the essence of things. This conception
proved to be valuable for future epistemology.
In spite of polemics between Thomists and Scotists as well as other hot disputes
in the scholastic milieu, medieval scholastics can be considered as a single whole
characterized by some important universal features. Both Aquinas and Scotus held
that the Revelation does not contradict reason. Not all scholastic thinkers would
accept the famous maxim philosophia est ancilla theologiae (belonging to Peter
Damian, XI century), but all of them believed that philosophy is not a self-sufﬁcient
discourse capable of providing an accomplished system of knowledge embracing
both sensual and intelligible reality (Duns Scotus, the acutest philosophical mind of
scholastics, even presented a detailed proof of the insufﬁciency of philosophy),
while theology with the assistance of philosophy can produce such a system. In
particular, the higher, contemplative levels of thinking are deﬁnitely in the ﬁeld of
theology.
Thus, the thinking as it is conceived in medieval thought is essentially a theo-
logical phenomenon. It preserves basically the pre-Socratic matrix, i.e., a hierar-
chical structure that includes the higher and lower types of thinking with some
dynamical connections between them. It exploits the Aristotelian form of the matrix
intensely, but at the same time, it modiﬁes it considerably and complements it with
new, purely Christian types of thinking.
The next big landmark in the history of thinking is undoubtedly classical
metaphysics. There is no need to describe in detail its tenets since they are
well-known and given in textbooks. Grosso modo represents the gradual but irre-
versible turn of the Western mind from the Christian paradigm of the dominance of
God to the secular paradigm of the autonomy and self-sufﬁciency of the human
mind. The turn has been resolutely announced by Descartes, and the announcement
has been made in terms related directly to the problem of thinking. The core of all
Descartes’s philosophy is his new and revolutionary theory of thinking. The initial
basis of this theory consists of two fundamental statements called the ﬁrst and the
second truth:
2
Thinking as a Philosophical, Theological …
55

i. I think hence I am; Cogito ergo sum; and
ii. Human being represents the sum of the thinking part, res cogitans, and the
spatial or extended part, res extensa, which have nothing in common with each
other.
The ﬁrst truth is Descartes’s conclusion drawn from his analysis of a certain
mental experiment. It establishes that the human thinking Ego is the least and most
elementary agent that undoubtedly and ﬁrmly is. Taken together, two Cartesian
truths produce the conception that is strikingly different from all preceding theories
of thinking, both Greek and Christian. I mention here just two of its principal
distinctions:
• First, Descartes’s model of thinking is unitary: in contrast to all past models, his
cogito, the activity of thinking, is a uniﬁed activity that is not divided into any
kinds or types or levels, which form some hierarchical structure. The notion of
the res cogitans, the agent of this activity and the generating center of the
cognitive act, was soon transformed into the concept of the (Cartesian) subject of
cognition, which became the key concept of classical metaphysics. Descartes’s
description of the cognitive act based on this concept was the description from a
new viewpoint, in the subjectivist perspective. It included initial stages of the
radical doubt and concluding stages of correcting mistakes and distortions in the
act by means of inspection de l”esprit. This procedure anticipates the intentional
examination in Husserlian phenomenology; and
• Second, the process of thinking, i.e., cognition, must advance–again in contrast
to all past models–not from sensual objects to intelligible ones, but in the
opposite direction, from the ﬁrst principles to the scrupulous study of empiric
phenomena. Such an inversion of the process meant the diametrical change of
the goal of the cognition and hence of the human destination as well: now the
goal and the destination were seen not in the contemplation of and in union with
God, but in the clear and distinct vision of worldly things. It was the sharp turn
from God to the world, in other words, the resolute secularization of thought–the
key component of the general secularization of European civilization.
Descartes’s strategy was cautious, and he did not reject the orthodox religious
ontology. Instead, he presented a new epistemology that was virtually independent
of this ontology and strikingly efﬁcient. The main accent of his thought was on the
method: not so much he discussed what is thinking as demonstrated very precisely
how it should work. One can say that he offered his new clear and distinct Cartesian
coordinates not only to geometry but to all ﬁelds of human knowledge. This
strategy proved to be overwhelmingly successful. It quickly became clear that the
traditional ontology with its dependence upon theology is hardly compatible with
Cartesian coordinates, and so it was gradually superseded by various secularized
versions. In this process, Cartesian epistemology was quickly developing into a full
episteme that was later called the classical episteme by Michel Foucault.
56
S. S. Horujy

However, secularization was (and still is) a complicated process with many
unexpected twists and turns. As said above, in the ﬁeld of thinking, the general
trend of this process is immanentization that is the gradual reduction of ontological
and transcendent aspects of thinking. But our next landmark shows opposite fea-
tures. Moreover, this landmark keeps a special place in the history of thinking: all
immense Hegel’s System is a theory of thinking developed in such a way that it
embraces all ﬁelds of reality, turning into a true “theory of everything.” Hegel liked
to stress his elective afﬁnity with Heraclitus, and, indeed, the afﬁnity of his
dialectics with Heraclitus’s thought is evident and striking. But in fact, the suc-
cession of his System to Parmenides’s poem is no less essential and profound. The
System is a great paradox: undoubtedly, it belongs in the trend of secularization
with its growing distancing and separating from religious thought and life, but at the
same time, it demonstrates the unprecedented since Parmenides strict primacy of the
ontological thinking over the empiric individual thinking (although Hegel’s
dialectical ontologism does not accept Parmenides” thesis that non-being is not
absolutely).
According to Hegel’s cognitive paradigm, it is not an individual human who
cognizes and thinks. Thinking and cognition are the prerogative of the supreme
principle of the System, the Absolute Spirit (Geist) that acts on all levels of both
sensual and intelligible reality conceived as a sui generis many-level hierarchical
universe. Its global structure is determined by the manifestations of the Spirit in
three principal forms, respectively, the subjective (anthropology: soul and body,
perception, reason), objective (law and morals, state conceived as a special kind of
personality, world history) and absolute (art, religion, philosophy) spirit. On any
level, in any part or cell of this universe, the Spirit puts (setzt) some particular kind
or form of thinking. The universe is dynamic, and all forms of thinking are activities
with the same universal dynamic nature that is the dialectic. “Dialectic represents
the nature of the thinking as such… Dialectic is the moving soul of any scientiﬁc
unfolding of thought” [8, §§ 11, 81]. Roughly speaking, the dialectical nature of
thinking means that its structure “contains contraries within itself” so that it is based
on the contradiction, and this contradiction becomes the moving force of the
movement of thought, which is realized in the three stages, thesis, antithesis and
synthesis (the Hegelian triad). These stages are identiﬁed as abstract or formal,
concrete and speculative thinking, or, in other terms, as understanding (Verstand),
judgment (Satz), and reason (Vernunft).
The ubiquitous presence of the Spirit and the thinking is the reason why Hegel’s
system is often qualiﬁed as the panlogism (in Hegelian discourse, “Logic is the
science about thinking” [8, § 19]). Evidently, any panlogistic system tends to draw
being in the thinking that it tends to implement Parmenides’s identity in some way.
Looking from this angle, we discover that the identity of thinking and being is one
of the leitmotifs of Hegel’s System that is found repeatedly in many themes and
parts of it. Hegel states that this identity should not be postulated, as in Schelling’s
philosophy, but must be deduced. The relationship between thinking and being is
discussed in many aspects, with careful distinguishing between abstract and con-
crete levels. Hegel focuses on their differences [8, § 51], stresses that their
2
Thinking as a Philosophical, Theological …
57

indivisibility inherent in Cogito ergo sum is the most authentic knowledge [8, § 76]
and comes gradually to their identity (cf. “Being is identical to thinking” [8, §
413]). Eventually, this identity obtains a very sophisticated interpretation and ﬁnds
its reﬂections or correlates in many important moments of the System, such as the
famous maxim “What is rational is real, and what is real is rational” (Phil. der
Rechts. Vorrede), the identity of form and content, etc.
Inevitably, the all-embracing System also includes such types of thinking that
correspond to the “individual thinking” in our terms. Their place in the System is,
of course, in part assigned to the Subjective Spirit. As Hegel says, “The thinking, as
soon as it unfolds in time and belongs to individuality, has corporal manifestations
and is actualized predominantly in one’s head, in the brain, and in the system of
sense organs in general” [8, § 401]. Like any element of the System, these types are
described thoroughly, but nevertheless, they represent just initial and imperfect
forms associated with the lower stages of the dialectical process. Thus, on the
whole, Hegel’s conception of thinking restores the pre-Socratic matrix reproducing
basic motifs of both Heraclitus’s and Parmenides’s thoughts. In the further life of
philosophy, Hegel’s inﬂuence was strong and lasting, but his conception of thinking
was not too popular. One can see two main reasons for that. First, it was too
complicated: overburdened with nets of notions, multiple classiﬁcations, and
minute details and hence too difﬁcult to be widely used. Second, its absolute
primacy of ontological thinking contradicted the principal philosophical trends of
its time. One can say it was too Parmenidean to be modern. In both these points,
Descartes’s system, though it was much older, had an advantage over Hegel’s one,
and, as a consequence, in the overcoming of classical metaphysics, which soon
became the main task of philosophy, its role was more signiﬁcant. We are going to
see this right now, discussing our next landmark.
The overcoming of metaphysics and the transformation of philosophy into the
postclassical paradigm obtained the ﬁrm base in the phenomenology of Husserl.
The problem of thinking is at the center of phenomenology. One can say that
Husserl’s theory was essentially a new interpretation of thinking and hence a new
philosophical method based on the principle of intentionality. Intentionality is a
property of human consciousness, which is, according to Husserl (and F. Brentano
before him), its main and constitutive predicate. It means basically that the con-
sciousness has necessarily some object to which it is directed, and it has the ability
to concentrate on this object closely, ﬁxedly, and intently. When the consciousness
exercises this ability, it becomes the intentional consciousness, its object becomes
the intentional object, and the concentration on it is the intentional act. The core of
Husserl’s theory of thinking is the detailed analytic description of this act.
The crucially important preparatory stage is the phenomenological reduction: the
consciousness must reduce the sphere of its experience, restricting it to the expe-
rience related directly to the chosen object. It is done by means of a special
operation of excluding or “bracketing” all irrelevant contents, called epoche (the
abstention from the judgment, Greek). This usual description of the reduction is too
superﬁcial; however, in fact, the consciousness does not cut off the experience of
the outer world, outer but draws it into its inner world. The act itself represents the
58
S. S. Horujy

usual advancement from the sensual to the intelligible but performed in the speciﬁc,
intentional perspective. As a result of the reduction, the consciousness changes its
naïve “natural” attitude to the “phenomenological” attitude. It is divided by Husserl
into three phases:
i. hyletic, dealing with the “matter” of the act, its sensual data;
ii. noetic, when the noesis, the intellectual grasping of the object is performed;
and
iii. noematic,
on
which
the
noema,
the
noetically
processed
object,
is
contemplated.
The ﬁnal result of the act, the noema, is one of the most complicated Husserl’s
notions that can be brieﬂy deﬁned as the experiential object, which is placed into
the world of the subject of the experience (the reduction) and then is endowed with
eidetic structures (structures of the meaning) induced from this world (the noesis).
All phases are described in microscopic details, but this description is not subjec-
tivist nor psychological since Husserlian phenomenology does not reconstruct
subjective, but universal phenomena or, more precisely, structures of transcen-
dental subjectivity. As Husserl, himself pointed out, the theory of intentionality
resembles and continues Descartes’s treatment of thinking. Indeed, the epoche can
be likened to the Cartesian doubt; the famous cognitive act, in which the principle
cogito ergo sum is discovered, can be considered as a prototype of the intentional
act; and the Cartesian insistence on clara et distincta visio ﬁnds its parallel in the
Husserlian insistence on Evidenz, the evidence.
The principal role in an intentional act belongs to attention and memory; hence
Husserl’s theory includes detailed conceptions of these activities. Husserl ﬁnds that
certain varieties of attention overcome the Aristotelian opposition of the active and
the passive (to ergon–to paschein), and such varieties are especially important for
an intentional act. Indeed, this overcoming is the key predicate of intentional atti-
tude, and corresponding kinds of attention, unnoticed by secular science, were
always known and fruitfully exploited in spiritual practices. Another key feature of
phenomenological attitude is that its discourse is of a new type: it is both experi-
ential (and hence free of essentialist metaphysical concepts) and conceptual (and
hence free of theoretical helplessness of bare empiricism). Thus, it is exactly what
was needed as a renewal or replacement of classical metaphysics that was already
strongly criticized on the verge of the twentieth century, when phenomenology
appeared. For this reason, it was soon picked up by many followers, and a large
phenomenological movement emerged. Phenomenology developed into a new
epistemological paradigm and almost universal philosophical methodology that was
in differing degrees adopted by many contemporary philosophical currents and
disciplines such as existentialism, analytic philosophy, sociology, esthetics, etc., as
well as theology.
With Husserlian phenomenology, European philosophy enters its postclassical
period. On the whole, in this period, the further ousting and removal of the dis-
course of the transcendent takes place that implies the further immanentization in
2
Thinking as a Philosophical, Theological …
59

the treatment of thinking. The leading trend in this treatment is the interpretation of
thinking as a psychological phenomenon. Phenomenology makes a considerable
contribution to this trend, and it is a paradoxical fact since one of the main prin-
ciples of Husserl was the struggle against psychologism in philosophy. The solution
to the paradox is simple, however. The theory of an intentional act focuses chieﬂy
on psychological subjects such as attention, perception, temporal consciousness and
experience, etc., and the conceptual framework of phenomenology abounds with
psychological notions; but the use of them does not mean psychologism because in
the phenomenological attitude, this framework switches from the psychological
discourse to the transcendental one. But it is very easy to start exploiting this rich
framework forgetting about the phenomenological reduction and treating its ele-
ments as usual psychological notions. This happened repeatedly. But there was also
one important philosophical phenomenon that runs counter to the dominant trend of
the psychological interpretation of thinking.
In the context of the history of thinking, the role and place of Heidegger’s
thought is mutatis mutandis, similar to those of Hegel’s. We see a grandiose system
that categorically asserts the primacy of ontological thinking in deﬁance of the
dominating historical trend going in the opposite direction; in both cases, this
revenge is not complete and not long, despite the strong inﬂuence of the system as a
whole. The form in which this primacy is stated by Heidegger is as extreme as it
was in Parmenides: it is the thinking as such that is ontological, and any different
form of thinking can only be deﬁcient or illusory “simply put, thinking is thinking
of being” [9, p. 316]. Moreover, any forms, which we have at our disposal, are not
yet genuine thinking. Thus, we do not know what it is but can only ask about it so
that the proper discourse of thinking is not its description or its study, but only the
asking of the question: Was heisst Denken?
Nevertheless, principal predicates of (genuine) thinking can be pointed out. First
of all, Heidegger discusses in detail the fundamental relationship between thinking
and being (in one of his principal books, “Introduction to metaphysics,” the largest
chapter is “Being and thinking.”). He is convinced that pre-Socratics had a unique
ontological vision that gave them open access to the truth, and so, predictably, he
takes Parmenides’s side and shows that this relationship is an identity. But he
presents his own interpretation of this identity based on a new in-depth analysis of
the problem. Taking Parmenides and Heraclitus as his guides, he decides that being
and thinking correspond to pre-Socratic groundwords physis and logos, and “being
in the sense of physis is the power that emerges,” while “the basic meaning of logos
is the collection, to collect” [5, pp. 106, 105] (cf. our characteristic of the onto-
logical thinking as a collecting-and-uniting activity).
He argues then that the identity is directly connected with the “ontological
difference,” that is, the difference of being and the entity, das Seiende. He char-
acterizes this difference as a dynamic relationship that is, in fact, the unfolding of
the unity and the difference: a speciﬁc dynamic formation that he calls die Zwiefalt,
which means the fold or the doubling. The new concept of the fold with its dynamic
nature helps very aptly elucidate and articulate the real heart of Parmenides’s
identity, which is the identity itself, to auto, the “enigmatic word” (Heidegger).
60
S. S. Horujy

What is enigmatic is the seemingly incompatible nature of the poles of the identity.
Indeed, thinking is always conceived intuitively as a certain activity while being as
a kind of unchangeable state. As Heidegger argues, the mutual belonging
(Zusammengehörigkeit) of thinking and being can be realized only due to the fact
that being is involved into the fold with the entity and Parmenides’s identity must
be conceived, more precisely, as the identity of the thinking and the fold. “In the
enigmatic word to auto, the same, the disclosing accomplishment of the mutual
belonging of the fold and the thinking… maintains silence” [10, p. 45].
But, on the whole, Heidegger, unlike Hegel, and like most existentialist thinkers,
does not dwell on the problem of thinking too much. In his early masterwork,
“Being and Time,” this theme is virtually absent. In the late philosophy of the Event
(Ereignis), it is also not discussed because its central and generating principle, the
Event, is supposed to be such that it is inaccessible for any thinking, “not think-
able.” An exception to the rule is “Letter on humanism,” in which a concise
characteristic of “thinking of being” is given. Here the connection of this thinking
with the constitutive human’s mission of the “ecstatic stepping-out into the clearing
of being” is disclosed. “Thinking listens to the clearing of being, investing what it
says into language as the place of existence… What is done by thinking is neither
theoretical nor practical… Thinking surpasses all practice. Thinking towers above
all action and producing… The thinking of being… surpasses all theoretical con-
sideration because it is concerned with that in light of which the theoretical vision
can only take place and unfold” [9, p. 361–362].
The forgetting of being, the refusal of human’s constitutive mission has its
inevitable reﬂection in the domain of thinking. “Being as the element of thinking is
abandoned in favor of the technical interpretation of thinking” [9, p. 315].
According to Heidegger, such a technical interpretation and exploitation of thinking
is exactly what takes place in science. Thus, he makes a “scandalous statement” that
“science does not think,” and, what is more, there is “the abyss between science and
the thinking, and there is no bridge from science to the thinking, only the leap” [4,
pp. 7–8]. Due to this abyss, one can say that Heidegger’s conception of thinking
preserves the pre-Socratic matrix, at least, in its general structure, and, paradoxi-
cally, in the Heideggerian version of the matrix, the lower pole of the imperfect
thinking is represented by science, while the thinking of an uneducated peasant
toiling on earth is close to the higher, ontological pole. As for full-ﬂedged onto-
logical thinking (“thinking of being”) is a privilege of philosophy. Such absoluti-
zation of philosophy is one more common feature of Heidegger and Hegel.
***
There are two outstanding thinkers, Heidegger and Wittgenstein, born both in
1889, whose thought was of decisive inﬂuence on Western philosophizing since the
mid-20th century. In the ﬁeld of thinking, their contributions succeed each other:
grosso modo, Heidegger’s thought ﬁnishes a great époque of history of thinking,
and Wittgenstein’s thought opens the next period (that does not look like another
great époque so far). In this period, the global trend to treat thinking as a purely
immanent phenomenon achieves its ﬁnal stage: the pre-Socratic matrix and the
2
Thinking as a Philosophical, Theological …
61

ontological thinking are deﬁnitely left out, and conceptions of thinking become
completely immanent and unitary.
Wittgenstein states directly that thinking is purely immanent: “Man’s thinking
goes on within the inner recesses of his mind in a seclusion compared to which any
physical seclusion is a lying in full view” [11, Pt. II § 316, p. 233]. But despite this
outspoken immanentism, he dissociates his position from naturalistic and materi-
alistic conceptions of thinking. In late “Remarks on the philosophy of psychology”
(1946–49), he openly rejects such conceptions. He admits that there is some
“system of impulses” going from one’s brain and correlating with his/her thought
that was spoken or written, but such a system represents the thinking in no way.
Thus, he insists that there is no process in the brain that corresponds to thinking.
Contrary to all attempts to describe thinking in terms of such processes, he warns
that it is “extremely dangerous” to reason on the level of physiological processes,
and the conclusions of such reasoning are, generally speaking, invalid since “I don’t
know whether the people of my surrounding have nervous system.” Eventually, he
rejects any attempt to explain or deﬁne thinking. “We want to deﬁne the concept of
“thinking.” But then we shall be told that thinking is indeﬁnable. There must be
some indeﬁnable things” [12, p. 236].
His study of thinking unfolds within a novel discourse of analytic philosophy,
which he creates himself (alongside Russell and Moore) and which is focused
chieﬂy and almost exclusively on logical and linguistic problems. It means that he
does not attempt to grasp the nature of thinking but asks methodological questions:
Can thinking be observed? “How do we investigate the nature of thinking – or even
know that that is what we investigate? What am I to observe in order to know the
nature of thinking?” [12, p. 49], etc. Linguistic analysis is another principal working
ﬁeld: “We must talk of the peculiarities of the use of the word “thinking”” [12,
p. 172]. Great attention is also paid to the psychological aspects of thinking. As he
says in his Cambridge lectures of 1930, emotions like hope and fear, sensations like
pain, perceptions like the feeling of color are all forms of thought, and he reﬂects on
the structuring of such thoughts and their temporal dimension. He decides that the
thought is a “temporal symbolic process” that lasts as long as its expression. At the
same time, he warns, we should not mix up thinking and psychological phenomena
(mental processes): “True, we sometimes call accompanying a sentence by a mental
process “thinking”; nonetheless, that accompaniment is not what we call a
“thought”” [11, Pt. I § 332, p. 107]. He studies mechanisms of lying and pre-
tending, of mistakes of our perceptions, analyzes many speciﬁc kinds of thinking
such as “thinking without words,” “thinking in a ﬂash,” “outside speaking,” “cal-
culating in one’s head,” etc. On the whole, his treatment of thinking is a synthetic
approach; he identiﬁes carefully logical, linguistic, and psychological dimensions of
the phenomenon and then studies them both separately and in their connections and
correlations using his speciﬁc technique of the “change of aspect (Aspektwechsel),”
a shift or a turn of the point of view. One can see a certain parallel between this
technique and Hegel’s deﬁnition of the experience as the “turn of the
consciousness.”
62
S. S. Horujy

The important problem of the relationship between thinking and talking–or
thought, language, and speech–is discussed in-depth. Wittgenstein considers these
activities as inseparable. “When I think in words, I don’t have “meanings” in my
mind in addition to the verbal expressions; rather, language itself is the vehicle of
thought… Thinking is not an incorporeal process which lends life and sense to
speaking, and which it would be possible to detach from speaking” [11, Pt. I §§
329, 339, pp. 106, 109]. To be more precise, the relationship is not symmetrical
because “talking without thought” is possible. Yes, “the purpose of language is to
express thoughts” [11, Pt. I § 501, p. 139], but this purpose may not be reached in
some actual speech acts. Nevertheless, the connection of thinking with language is
more profound and intimate than the connection with psychological phenomena
like emotions or sensations. At the same time, Wittgenstein’s discussion leaves
many questions open. For instance, besides verbal content, I have a stream of
images ﬂowing in my mind, and, evidently, this stream can also be accompanied by
thinking. Is it true for this thinking too that it is not possible to detach it from
speaking, or is it a different kind of thinking? The relationship between verbal and
visual content and activities of consciousness is one of the big problems in cine-
matography theory. It is also investigated in today’s cognitive science. The
mechanisms involved in the relation thought–word were studied in a more detailed
and multifaceted way by authors using different approaches, in the ﬁrst place, by
Jean Piaget (the approach of genetic epistemology) and Lev Vygotsky (the
approach of cultural-historical psychology, cf. below).
Bertrand Russell, Wittgenstein’s friend and great analytic philosopher, disap-
proved his works after “Tractatus logico-philosophicus” (1918) and said that there
is nothing interesting in “Philosophical investigations,” his basic late text, in which
his synthetic approach to thinking and consciousness was developed. However, we
see in retrospect that it is exactly this approach that is the main reason why
Wittgenstein is valued today as one of the greatest modern thinkers. In his late
works, the rigorous discourse and discipline of analytic philosophy outgrew its
narrow limits and started working on the whole transdisciplinary ﬁeld of logic,
linguistic, and psychology. Subsequently, analytic philosophy expanded into a large
philosophical movement that was connected closely with the “cognitive revolution”
of the 1950s and had many branches, the principal of which were logical positivism
and linguistic philosophy. However, regarding the problem of thinking, this
movement did not advance very far beyond Wittgenstein, moving mostly along the
lines he traced. The main new (but not quite new) element was the strong
enhancement of reductionist and materialistic trends stimulated by vigorous
development of molecular biology, neuroscience, cognitive computer models, etc.
The conceptual content of these trends is concentrated in the so-called
mind-brain identity theory, which puts on a table a very simple message: all
states and processes of the mind, including thinking, are identical to states and
processes of the brain. The theory substantiates this general thesis in great detail
based on the newest data from cognitive science, but the assertion as such is by no
means new. It is just another reincarnation of an old idea that repeatedly appeared in
Western philosophy. Leaving aside ancient materialists, we ﬁnd similar statements
2
Thinking as a Philosophical, Theological …
63

of the mind-brain identity in materialists of the 17th century, in David Hume (the
thinking is but “slight oscillations in the brain”), Charles Darwin (the thinking is a
certain “secretion of the brain”), e.a. But today the theory appears in a much more
solid form possessing both the phenomenal basis and conceptual elaboration. There
are multiple versions of it, corresponding to many possible ontological and epis-
temological interpretations of the identity. The strongest and most radical form of
reductionism is called physicalism. It is a materialistic conception that interprets the
identity in a full ontological sense: it asserts that all the processes of mental
experience are not merely correlated or connected with brain processes but are
really and literally brain processes. Evidently, such an approach denies the exis-
tence of any qualia that is irreducible non-physical properties of mental phenomena
and processes. Of all attempts to equip physicalism with a philosophical basis, the
most well-founded is the conception of heterophenomenology by Daniel Dennett.
Starting from Husserl’s intentional phenomenology (see above), Dennett tries to
transform its “phenomenological attitude,” realized by an intentional subject, into a
different attitude realized by an external observer. Such a transformation is the shift
of the generating focus of the phenomenological description from the ﬁrst to the
third person, and that is why Dennett calls his theory the “phenomenology of
the other.” The new heterophenomenological description accepts the self-report of
the intentional subject and then subjects it to a diversiﬁed veriﬁcation procedure
based on all relevant empirical data available to the “third person,” the researcher:
subject’s bodily responses and environment, evidence provided by neurological and
psychological studies, relevant researcher’s memories of his/her own experiences,
etc. Epistemologically, such a description is not a true phenomenological, but a
hybrid discourse combining in a forced way phenomenology and empiricism. Due
to this combination, the heterophenomenological description, in contrast to the
phenomenological one, does not create structures of transcendental subjectivity but
bears a directly opposite, truly anti-Husserlian fruit: the description of mental acts
that are in accordance with the materialistic mind-brain identity. Nevertheless,
Dennett claims justly that it is a fully-ﬂedged cognitive paradigm that is de facto
used widely in studies of human consciousness. Moreover, the usual intentional
cognitive paradigm needs some modiﬁcation or complement in order to take into
account intersubjective aspects of the cognitive act. This problem has been rec-
ognized by Husserl himself, and as long as it is not solved, Dennett’s theory can be
considered a rough approximation to its solution.
The radical approach of physicalism is far from being generally accepted,
however. A neighboring and more moderate reductionist position is functionalism
that abstains from deﬁnite statements on the nature of mental states and processes
and asserts only that they function identically to states and processes of the brain.
Such switching from ontological to epistemological discourse prompts one to
suggest that if the only thing that matters is the set of functional roles (the syntax),
then, generally speaking, the isomorphism Mind–Brain might be extended to other
systems, in which the same set is realized with other substrates, e.g., computers. It is
the so-called idea of multiple realizability, and, evidently, it leads to a generalized
interpretation of mind: why not call “mind” any viable realization of the syntax of
64
S. S. Horujy

the human mind? This generalization ﬁnds its parallel in theories of autopoiesis and
enactivism that develop somewhat similar generalized interpretations of cognition.
All these post-Wittgensteinian conceptions are still in the phase of active dis-
cussion and polemics. Many objections to both physicalism and functionalism were
propounded, some of them in the form of thought experiments such as the Chinese
room by John Searle and the Chinese nation by Ned Block. As Searle argued,
mental content cannot be fully expressed in functional terms. Taking into account
only functional roles of mental states, we cannot understand semantic and inten-
tional aspects of mind and thinking [13, pp. 417–424]. The validity of his argu-
ments can be illustrated by the words of Lev Vygotsky, whose work will further be
discussed: “The meaning of the word is… nothing but a generalization” [14,
pp. 297–298]: indeed, the notion of generalization refers to some meta-level and
hence is a concrete example of mental content that cannot be fully expressed in
functional terms. From a more general point of view, modern reductionist trends in
cognitive science are criticized by Noam Chomsky, who notes that the reduction
shares the role of a leading paradigm in the history of knowledge with the paradigm
of the union and points out that “True reduction is not so common in the history of
science, and need not be assumed automatically to be a model for what will happen
in the future” [15, p. 71]. Today the paradigm of reduction is dominant, but the
paradigm of union did not yet say its last word.
With regards to the problem of thinking, the Soviet psychological tradition that
lasted several decades represents a kind of continental counterpart to the
Anglo-American school. The comparison of them is instructive; most of their
principal typological features are opposite to each other. While the Anglo-American
school is strongly inclined to the primacy of logic and synchronistic methodologies
of analysis and description, the Soviet tradition is based on the primacy of the
historical approach and diachronic methodologies. The work of Lev Vygotsky
(1896–1934) represents a real landmark in the history of our problem. Vygotsky’s
approach called cultural-historical psychology presents a fully-ﬂedged theory of
thinking and consciousness that includes empiric studies and uses an original
“genetic” methodology relying partly on the ideas of Piaget. According to this
methodology, the elaboration of general conceptions usually starts with the empiric
discussion of some phenomena of children’s psychology so that children’s con-
sciousness serves as a kind of a laboratory, in which basic laws and features of
human consciousness can be clearly seen in their genesis.
Vygotsky’s main contribution to the problem of thinking consists in new
treatment and insightful, in-depth analysis of the relation thinking–word/speech
presented in his last book published posthumously. He develops a conceptual
framework for this analysis, arguing that “the meaning of the word” is the only
possible choice for the cornerstone of this framework. “There are all reasons to be
sure that the meaning of the word is not only the unity of thinking and speech, but
also the unity of the generalization and the intercourse, of communication and
thinking” [14, p. 17]. Beginning his analysis, he criticizes two opposite extreme
positions in the problem thinking/speech: the identiﬁcation of these activities, the
reduction of the thinking to speech, typical, in particular, of American science, and
2
Thinking as a Philosophical, Theological …
65

their separation, the independence of them stated, for example, by Bergson and the
Würzburg psychological school. He ﬁnds that both fail to present a satisfactory
treatment of the relationship in question, but his genetic method makes it possible
for him to overcome their binary opposition. He turns to empiric studies and, based
on their results, concludes: “We have obtained objective experimental proofs that
the thinking of a child goes through a pre-speech stage in its development.” After
this stage, “at a certain moment, about the age of two, the lines of the development
of thinking and speech which went separately cross each other, coincide and give
birth to a completely new form of behavior very characteristic of human person”
[14, p. 100, 101].
The discovery of the “pre-speech stage” and related Vygotsky’s results is sig-
niﬁcant progress in the problem of thinking. He proves that thinking and speech are
two different but closely intertwined processes in consciousness. He discloses
intricate mechanisms of their interaction in his studies of higher psychological
functions performed with the same genetic method. The main result is the detailed
reconstruction of the relationship between thinking and speech as a structured and
dynamic process in which the thought changes and matures. Starting stages of this
process, at which the thought just goes out of its pre-speech phase and begins its
way to the word, being only partly verbal or semi-verbal yet, are of special interest.
Describing them, Vygotsky grasps what many scholars, poets, and artists tried to
grasp, the act of the birth of the thought, when it just emerges as a kind of a
not-yet-verbal shoot of the future thought, which will form the inseparable unity
with the word. Such not-yet-verbal shoots of thoughts are an important factor in
many phenomena, e.g., in creative intellectual work and spiritual practices. Some
ancient schools of spiritual practice, like Eastern-Orthodox hesychasm, studied
them carefully and worked out sophisticated techniques for monitoring and con-
trolling their development (needed because the uncontrolled ﬂow of arbitrary shoots
of thoughts, logismoi, threats the holistic man’s ascent to the goal, telos, of the
practice).
In his own plans, Vygotsky considered the study of thinking as a preparatory
task for the global problem of the comprehension of human consciousness and even
human being as a whole. He introduced a general concept of “psychological sys-
tem” and stated that a human’s characteristic property is the ability to realize the
integration and self-management of the psychological system embracing an entire
human being. He was also convinced that humans must “rearrange their natural
structures” in order to create a “united center” for the management of this
all-embracing system. Surely, such a rearrangement must be the mission of the
thinking, in the ﬁrst place, and he started to develop his conception of thinking in
this direction. All these ideas of his last period remained in outline, and many of
them deserve further development.
In Soviet psychology and philosophy, we ﬁnd several signiﬁcant conceptions of
thinking belonging to Evald Ilyenkov (dialectical logic of a neo-Marxist type),
Sergey Rubinstein (the structural analysis of thinking as a mental process), Pyotr
Galperin (the “theory of stages of the formation of mental actions”), e.a. Indis-
putably, the most well-known and inﬂuential of them was Georgy Shchedrovitsky
66
S. S. Horujy

(1929–1994), the author of the conception of the action-thought and founder of the
Methodological movement. The movement was a unique phenomenon in the
late-soviet stagnating totalitarianism. Headed by a charismatic leader, it had dozens
of centers and thousands of followers all over the USSR, of whom many hold now
important positions in Russian politics and business. The main form of its activity
was
a
business
game
called
“Organizational
action
game”
invented
by
Shchedrovitsky; regular sessions of the game attracted hundreds of participants.
This game is a training in “methodology” that is interpreted by Shchedrovitsky as a
universal practical-theoretical ars magna, both wisdom and know-how, capable of
exercising the management of any problem and any situation. As he claims,
“Methodology is capable of everything… Methodology undertakes the function of
the elaboration of the accomplished worldview replacing philosophy… Method-
ological thinking is a new kind of thinking that must replace all preceding forms, in
particular, scientiﬁc thinking… Methodology is ethics of the twentieth century and
the next centuries” [16, pp. 552, 550, 566], etc.
Although his teaching was extremely efﬁcient as a set of practices of all sorts,
social, cultural, and intellectual, its theoretical basis is eclectic and muddled. It
comprises the conception of thinking and the conception of action united in the
theory of “system-action-thought methodology.” Shchedrovitsky insists that the
thinking and the action are two autonomous substances, which “do exist really,”
and the unity of them, “the world of thinking and action is the primary world,
[while] the world of people or people with their psychology is the secondary world,
the representation of the world of thinking and action” [16, p. 562]. Thus “we
should divide the world into the world of the action-thoughts and the natural world
or the world of nature. Moreover, the world of action-thoughts is the primary and
principal one, while the natural world cannot have pretensions to the status of
reality” [16, p. 563]. This ontology inevitably leads to the view that the human
person is of no importance. “What there is, is thinking, and it does not matter on
what it realizes itself. In our world, it does it accidentally on people, in another
world on penguins… It makes absolutely no difference on what it realizes itself…
We should consider the world of thinking and action, but not the world of people,
because people are casual epiphenomena of the world of thinking and action…
People are just an accidental substrate, on which thinking and action parasitize” [16,
p. 561, 562, 585].
Thus, in the core of Shchedrovitsky’s teaching, we ﬁnd a peculiar conception of
thinking that includes many seemingly incompatible standings but tries to avoid
self-contradictions by means of sophisticated syllogisms. The author claims to
adhere to Marxist and materialistic positions, but despite this, denies any depen-
dence of thinking upon the sensory input: “The thinking must be considered sep-
arately, in an orthogonal way to the sensory reﬂection, we should understand that
the thinking is formed-up without sensory forms of reﬂection, but not on the basis
of them… Thinking is devoid of images in principle” [16, p. 579]. In our terms, this
conception corresponds to ontological thinking. Being eclectic, it imbibes elements
of almost all classical philosophies:
2
Thinking as a Philosophical, Theological …
67

• Parmenides (the absolutization of thinking and being, the opposition of aletheia
and doxa, cf.: “What exists actually is essences [that is thinking and action, in
the
ﬁrst
place],
while
the
phenomenal
world
is
but
the
world
of
phantoms-appearances” [16, p. 560]);
• Descartes (“When Descartes said that there are two substances, matter, and
thinking, he was right. And he was right even in his dualist standing” [16,
p. 562]);
• Hegel (strictly speaking, a human does not think, but the thinking, like Hegel’s
Geist, realizes itself using him as a tool or a substrate);
• Husserl (the anti-psychologism and the demand of the replacement of the natural
attitude by an alternative, a bit similar to the phenomenological attitude); and
• Last but not least, modern cognitive science ideas about the possibility of
realizing the mind and thinking on non-human carriers
In sum, this conception is hardly a great contribution to the history of thinking,
but nevertheless, as the core of the doctrine of the Methodological movement, it
played and, to some extent, continues to play a considerable role in Russian phi-
losophy and culture of the last decades. Moreover, at least, some of its ideas, and,
ﬁrst of all, the basic concept of the action-thought, can be used fruitfully in other
contexts. Independent of Shchedrovitsky, this concept is studied and exploited
today in the works of Andrew Simsky (Okhotsimsky) (see, e.g. [17, in press]). He
makes it the basis of a constructive description of both anthropological and
sociocultural phenomena: using and extrapolating Nikolai Bernstein’s biodynami-
cal scheme of the multilevel hierarchical control of the inner motorics, he constructs
hierarchical systems of action thoughts that function on all anthropological and
social levels of reality.
Simsky’s work is but one example demonstrating that the concept of
action-thought has valuable potential for further development and use. In fact, both
Shchedrovitsky’s and Simsky’s work based on this concept can be considered a
Russian version of the constructivist trend that predominates today in cognitive
science. The idea that thinking, mind, and cognition are not opposed to action, but,
on the contrary, are connected inseparably with it, is the cornerstone of a whole
group of relatively new theories that are often united under the common title of
constructivism or, more precisely, radical constructivism. The message put in this
name is that mental activity is considered as having the constructing nature: its
elementary units are now not acts, but actions, the making of some constructions,
whence it follows that the action-thought is a true constructivist concept. The most
well-known in this group is the theory of autopoiesis developed by F. Varela and H.
Maturana in the 1970s and the enactivism propounded by Varela, E. Thompson, e.
a. in the 1990s.
In constructivist theories, all the set of basic notions related to mind and cog-
nition obtains the cardinal reassessment and generalization. The reassessment goes
back to Konrad Lorenz, the founder of ethology, whose studies of animals led him
to conclude that the interaction of the living organism with its environment can be
interpreted as a kind of cognitive activity or, brieﬂy, that “life is cognition.”
68
S. S. Horujy

Evidently, this thesis broke with the age-old tradition that considered cognition as a
prerogative of the human mind: now the cognition was conceived as a holistic
activity involving all processes of the interaction between the organism and its
environment (Cf., e.g., “I shall consider human understanding in the same way as
any other phylogenetically evolved function which serves the purposes of survival,
that is, as a function of a natural physical system interacting with a physical external
world” [18, p. 4]). It might seem that such innovation has nothing in common with
the tradition, but one can easily ﬁnd some intermediate viewpoint uniting both
conceptions, e.g., if we deﬁne cognition as the development of the ability of the
successful orientation in the world by means of constructing actions and concepts
that are more and more viable. The Lorentzian reinterpretation of the cognition
represented the radical generalization or extension of the old notion. The new
conception of extended cognition triggered the active process of a similarly ex-
tended reinterpretation of all related notions such as mind and consciousness.
It turned out that there are many possible ways to shape corresponding exten-
sions. Basically, the extensions must take into account two principal factors: the
dependence on the body and the involvement of the action. The focusing on the
structural coupling brain-body world resulted in the emergence of conceptions of
embodied cognition and embodied mind. Here the role of the body is reconstructed
in detail: it is shown that the body can function as a constraint on cognition, as
a distributor for cognitive processing, or as a regulator of cognitive activity. In
these functions, sensomotorics and inner motorics of the body are actively involved,
and I should mention that the scrupulous study of them was performed in the
mid-20th century in the USSR by Nikolai Bernstein (1896–1966), who used the
formula “cognition through action” and was indisputably a forerunner of today’s
constructivism. Besides the conceptions of the embodied mind and cognition, a
philosophical conception emerged based on the idea that one’s mind and cognitive
processing are not bound by the limits of brain and body but extend to all the world
of human experience (the environment). According to this conception of the
externalism or the extended mind, a human’s mind, body, and the environment
form, one interconnected system functioning on holistic principles so that all of it is
mind (the extended mind), and all of it is the body (the extended corporality).
Today the constructivist and enactivist conceptions of mind and cognition exist
in many competing versions, which did not yet ﬁnd their deﬁnitive form. Evidently,
there must be corresponding conceptions of the embodied and/or extended thinking,
but now they did not yet appear. Thus, our concise history of thinking comes to its
ﬁnal point here. The ﬁnal situation is fully in accordance with the words of Edgar
Morin: “We are, perhaps, living through a great paradigm shift. … We stand on the
threshold of a new beginning. We are not in the last stages of the history of
thinking… We are, rather, still in its prehistory” [19, p. 98].
2
Thinking as a Philosophical, Theological …
69

Conclusion
Looking back to all the long way of thinking over thinking, we see it as a
double-sided process, the development of the theory of thinking and the evolution
of the thinking itself. Surely, it was not a permanent progressive development; the
process had both gains and losses. A special question is about the destiny of
ontological thinking: modernity has decisively rejected it, but was this a gain or a
loss? Today the peak of the reductionist trend is over already, and the new con-
structivist vision tries to construct a broader perspective taking into account not
only the reductionist paradigm but also the paradigm of the union. The externalist
conception of the extended mind can be viewed as a turn in the direction of the
ontological thinking (and we saw really such a turn in Shchedrovitsky’s work), and
if it is true, all the way of the thinking will correspond to the ancient symbol of the
Uroboros, the serpent swallowing its tail: the symbol of the coincidence of the
beginning and the end. Connectionism, another constructivist conception, leads in
the same direction. It describes mental phenomena on the basis of artiﬁcial neural
networks treating the latter on the abstract level as large systems consisting of
elements of two kinds, some units and some connections between them. Such an
abstract view gives one the idea that connectionist architecture could have a more
general interpretation. We notice that it is very close to our conception of the
ontological thinking as a universal collecting-and-uniting activity; and we suggest
that thinking as such can be considered as a kind of the connectionist architecture
interpreted in the above mentioned abstract and generalized sense, as a dynamical
architecture of changing constructions of connections, not necessarily attached to
neural networks.
Accepting such a general interpretation of the connectionist architecture, we
notice that the thinking is not the only kind available to us, humans. The other is
love, and it is even more powerful: as Dante told us, Amor muove il sole e altre
stelle. This connectionist architecture also needs its concise history, but I would not
dare to write it.
“The thinking and speech are all entirely and indissolubly intertwined with being and
non-being, and we try to disentangle ourselves out from this tangle, and this is our ﬁrst and
foremost problem.”
[20, p. 436].
“Parmenides had more grounds than Nietzsche to say that he is the destiny, and the destiny
of the West speaks through him.”
[20, p. 435].
“It is not for nothing that Antiquity continues to attract us. But for Plato, on the contrary,
our New-European algebra would hardly be interesting; and for Aristotle combing of
immense celestial spaces without ontological perspective would be senseless.”
70
S. S. Horujy

[21, p. 78].
“Being has lost its advantage. It is quite bad with being. … Epistemology is a result of
misunderstanding… In reality, there is no theory, no contemplation, no knowledge. Plato’s
Sun does not shine in the sky … It exists inside nets, lamps, electron beams… It is
impossible to cognize anything if you are out of nets that organize skills and manipulate
them… We have only what is reduced or becomes reduced.”
[22, p. 284].
“Thinking exists in Russia like travelers survive at the North Pole or like soldiers live in
trenches. It is surprising that it exists nevertheless.”
[23, p. 135].
Core Messages
• The chapter presents a synposis of understanding of thinking through all
ages of Western culture.
• The analytical presentation identiﬁes principal structures and paradigms
inherent in Western thinking over thinking.
• The pre-Socratic matrix is a structure comprising two kinds of thinking:
“ontological thinking” and “individual thinking”.
• The exposition represents brief descriptions of the set of principal land-
marks in the history of thinking.
• The text concludes with a discussion of the present status of the problem of
thinking.
References
1. Heidegger M (1959) Aus einem Feldroeggespräch über das Denken. In: Heidegger M
Gelassenheit. Günther Neske, Pfullingen
2. Lektorsky VA (2001) Myshlenie (The Thinking). In: Filosofskaya Entsiklopediya (Philo-
sophical Encyclopedia), vol 2. Mysl”, Moscow
3. Eisler R (1910) Wörterbuch der philosophische Begriffe, vol 1. Ernst Siegfried Mittler
undSohn, Berlin
4. Heidegger M (1967a) Was heisst Denken? In: Heidegger M Vorträge und Aufsätze. Teil II.
Günther Neske, Pfullingen
5. Heidegger M (1961) An Introduction to Metaphysics (trans: Manheim R.). Doubleday and
Co, Inc., New-York
6. Lebedev AV (2014) Logos Geraklita Rekonstruktsiya mysli i slova. (The Logos of Heraclitus.
The Reconstructon of Thought and Verb). Nauka, St.-Petersburg
7. Heidegger M (2011) Geraklit [Heraclitus]. Vladimir Dal”, St.-Petersburg
8. Hegel GVF (1928) Enzyklopädie der philosophischen Wissenschaften. In: Glockner H
(ed) Hegel GVF Sämtliche Werke, vol. 4–5 Stuttgart
9. Heidegger M (1989) Brief über den Humanismus. In: Heidegger M Gesamtausgabe, vol. 9.
Vittorio Klostermann, Frankfurt amMain
2
Thinking as a Philosophical, Theological …
71

10. Heidegger M (1967b) Moira (Parmenides, fragment VIII, 34–41). In: Heidegger M Vorträge
und Aufsätze. Teil III. Günther Neske, Pfullingen: Neske
11. Wittgenstein L (2009) Philosophical Investigations (trans: Hacker PMS, Schulte J). Wiley &
Blackwell, Oxford
12. Wittgenstein L (1988) Lectures on Philosophical Psychology 1946–47. Geach PT (ed).
Harvester Wheatsheaf, New-York
13. Searle J (1980) Minds, brains and programs. Behav Brain Sci 3(3):417–424
14. Vygotsky LS (1996) Myshlenie i rech” (Thinking and speech). Labirint, Moscow
15. Chomsky N (2002) On nature and language. Belletti A, Rizzi L (eds). Cambridge University
Press, New York
16. Shchedrovitsky GP (1997) Filosoﬁya. Nauka. Metodologiya (Philosophy. Science. Method-
ology). Shkola Kul”turnoi Politiki, Moscow
17. Okhotsimsky AD (2020) Mysledeistvie kak sinergiya i ierarkhiya (Andrew Simsky.
Action-thought as Synergy and Hierarchy) Fonar” Diogena (Diogenes” Lantern) 5 (in press)
18. Lorenz K (1977) Behind the mirror: a search for a natural history of human knowledge (trans:
Taylor R.). Methuen and Co Ltd, London
19. Morin E (2008) On complexity. Hampton Press Inc., Cresskill, New Jersey
20. Bibikhin VV (2009) Chtenie ﬁlosoﬁi (Reading of philosophy). Nauka, St.-Petersburg
21. Bibikhin VV (2012) Sobstvennost” (Property). Nauka, St.-Petersburg
22. Latour B (2011) Pasteur: guerre et paix des microbes. La Découverte, Paris
23. Bibikhin VV (2015) Uznai sebya (Know yourself). Nauka, St.-Petersburg
Sergey S. Horujy b. 05.10.1941, in Skopin, USSR, graduated
from the Department of Physics of the Moscow State University,
got a Ph.D. and a Doctorate in theoretical and mathematical
physics. He worked in the ﬁeld of relativistic quantum theory
(until 2006) and, in parallel, philosophy, and theology (this work
was underground until the fall of the communist regime). He
developed a general anthropological conception called “synergic
anthropology” that includes the reconstruction of anthropology of
spiritual practices (in particular, Eastern-Christian Hesychasm,
Suﬁsm, and Zen). He founded the Institute of Synergic Anthro-
pologyin Moscow (2005) and the international anthropological
journal “Diogenes’ Lantern” (2015). He published about 20
books (translations in English, Chinese, and Serbian). He served
as the Professor of Philosophy, Institute of Philosophy of the
Russian Academy of Sciences (Moscow) and the Honorary
Professor of the Russian Christian Academy for Humanities (St.-
Petersburg), as well as the Member of the Accademia Sapientia et
Scientia
(Rome,
Italy).
Professor
Sergey
passed
away
in
September 2020. He lives on in our memory with his great
contribution to thinking over thinking.
72
S. S. Horujy

3
How to Think About Human-Animal
Differences in Thinking: Two Cases
of Marginal Analogy
in the Philosophical Explication
of Animal Cognition
Carlo Brentari
“Whenever he heard anyone use the words ‘man’ and ‘animal’
as opposites, Oskar Heinroth used to interrupt the speaker
politely and ask: ‘Forgive me, but when you talk of animal, do
you mean an amoeba or a chimpanzee’?”
Konrad Lorenz [1, p. 42]
Summary
This chapter provides some elements for the critical evaluation of a particular
philosophical approach to animal behavior: the argumentative strategy of
marginal analogy. By marginal analogy, we mean the establishment of analogies
between animal behavior in general on the one side and, on the other, some
marginal behavioral processes and/or cognitive processes in humans (such as
sleepwalking or reﬂex action), which occur without the aid of reﬂection or
higher symbolic consciousness. In authors such as René Descartes, Ernst
Cassirer, and Susanne Langer, the recourse to marginal analogy is essential from
the argumentative perspective. It is, in fact, functional to the afﬁrmation of the
thesis of the qualitative difference of non-human animals. The critical discussion
of marginal analogy, therefore, is a useful tool to overcome this thesis as well, in
the direction of consideration of non-human behavior and cognition as a ﬁeld of
C. Brentari (&)
University of Trento, via Tommaso Gar, 14-38122 Trento, Italy
e-mail: carlo.brentari@unitn.it
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education
and Research Network (USERN), Trento, Italy
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh (eds.), Thinking, Integrated Science 7,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04075-7_3
73

diffuse discontinuities. After the rejection of any analogy-based approach, much
of the non-human experience may remain inaccessible to the human observer;
what one can grasp, however, discloses a sphere of astounding biodiversity that
calls for preservation.
Apes in the Orange Grove.
[Painting by Henri Rousseau; adapted from Wikimedia Commons https://upload.
wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/da/Henri_Rousseau_-_Apes_in_the_
Orange_Grove.jpg.]
Keywords
Analogical approaches  Animal cognition  Ernst Cassirer  Hans Volkelt 
Human  Animal studies  Jakob von Uexküll  René Descartes  Susanne
Langer  Thomas Nagel
74
C. Brentari

QR Code
Scanning the QR code directs you to the word cloud of the chapter that is made up
of the words we discussed throughout the whole book in relation to the chapter’s
keyword, which is intentionally not included in the word cloud. Find the keyword
and put it in place in the puzzle according to the clues provided in Chap. 36. The
mystery hidden in the puzzle is the quote of THINKING: Bioengineering of Science
and Art.
Introduction
The chief aim of the present chapter is to highlight some common problems that
arise when, from a philosophical perspective, a scholar tries to think about the
difference between human and non-human animals, with particular regard to their
ability of thinking (Table 3.1). We adopt here, preliminarily, a rather broad concept
of thinking: thinking is, to our purposes, every process of spontaneous elaboration
of external inputs that leads (or can eventually lead) to an adaptive line of action.
There can be no claim to exhaustiveness in our presentation, neither about the
philosophers we will consider, nor about the animal behaviors we will examine.
The focus of the paper will be, instead, on some strategies of the analogical kind
that philosophers adopt to analyze animal actions and their cognitive background
(and, secondarily, in exposing their analyses to their readers). One of the most
signiﬁcant examples of these strategies, as we shall see, is the recourse to the
analogy with marginal human behaviors in order to explain non-human perceptive
and operative modalities. We will call it, brieﬂy, marginal analogy, in order to
distinguish it from all cases of explicit anthropomorphism or direct analogy (i.e., the
naïve ascription to non-human animals of the same mental process, or of the same
kind of consciousness, as human animals have). This second kind of analogy,
which has been criticized countless times by philosophers, ethologists, and scien-
tists, will remain outside of our consideration.
Before tackling the marginal analogy issue, however, some brief considerations
are needed about how non-human animals enter the philosophers’ attention span.
For much of the history of Western philosophy, non-human animals are scarcely an
3
How to Think About Human-Animal Differences in Thinking …
75

Table 3.1 Summary of models of the difference between non-human and human animals
Model of the
difference between
non-human and
human animals
Quantitative difference
Qualitative difference
Diffuse differences
Mentioned authors
Michel de Montaigne,
Charles Darwin,
Neo-Darwinism
René Descartes
Ernst Cassirer, Susanne
Langer
Thomas Nagel, Jakob von
Uexküll, Hans Volkelt
Kind of the
difference(s)
Adaptive
Gradual enhancement of
evolutionary traits already
present in non-human
animals (communication,
reason, moral behavior)
Ontological
Res cogitans (rational soul) as
monopoly of human animals
Semiotic
Symbol-based cognition as
the monopoly of human
animals
Qualitative differentiation inside a
common domain
Interspeciﬁc variability of
conscious subjectivity, leading to
qualitative differences running
through the entire ﬁeld of animal
life forms
Number of relevant
differences in the
entire
(non-human/human)
ﬁeld of animal life
forms
Plural
Singular
Singular
Plural
Argumentative
strategy
Analogy
Gradualism allows for
unrestricted use of
analogical interpretations
of animal behavior and
cognitive processes
Marginal analogy
Non-human cognition appears
understandable in analogy to
marginal human behaviors (reﬂex
actions, sleepwalking, other
actions performed in the absence
of reason)
Marginal analogy
Non-human cognition
appears understandable in
analogy to marginal human
behaviors (sign-based
semiosis, pre-linguistic
cognition)
Renounce to analogy
Reconstruction of the cognitive
sphere starting from observable
behavior
An effort to think of animal
cognition as phenomenological
and categorical otherness (with
consequent admission of the
partial unknowability of the inner
sphere of non-human animals)
76
C. Brentari

object of autonomous interest. With the great exception of Aristotle’s biological
works, the attention devoted to animal life forms in ancient and modern philosophy
is usually functional for other purposes. In classical Greek thought, for example, the
reﬂection on the cognitive abilities of animals—which, however, starts to highlight
some signiﬁcant elements also from a scientiﬁc perspective—is frequently con-
ducted inside the discussion of vegetarianism (seen as a practice aimed at
improving the human being from the moral point of view). Arguments that favor
vegetarianism relying not only on the possibility of soul transmigration but also on
the statement that non-human animals possess a minimal degree of rationality are
representative of the Pythagorean and Neoplatonic repertoire. Particularly clear is,
in this regard, the incipit of Plutarch’s The Cleverness of Animals [2, pp. 321–325;
3, pp. 540, 550]. Functional to other purposes are also all those philosophical works
in which non-human animals provide a term of comparison in order to illustrate, by
contrast, some human features. This kind of comparison is a recurring strategy
when a philosopher wants to afﬁrm the ontological, moral, or religious superiority
of humans. Even the extensive and detailed review of non-human animals’ skills in
Montaigne’s Apology of Raymond Sebond provides cues ultimately oriented at an
ethical aim concerning the human being: to lower human presumption [4, p. 505].
Even if their interest in non-human animals is for other purposes, the passages
that ancient and modern philosophers devote to them allow us to identify the
methodological and logical problem that lies at the heart of this contribution.
Whether they want to afﬁrm the essential superiority of humans over animals, or (on
the contrary), they aim at highlighting the afﬁnities between the two forms of life,
each of their arguments suffers from the same limitation: the tendency to reason by
analogy, searching the observable behavior of non-humans for cases that appeared
explainable in terms of known human cognition and experience. Now, the ana-
logical nature of the inferences from the behavioral to the cognitive level is explicit
in those philosophers who want to afﬁrm the closeness and afﬁnity between human
and non-human animals and is hidden and implicit (but equally important) in the
ones who support the view of the qualitative alterity of human cognition. This is the
thesis that, through the analysis of two emblematic cases, we will try to demonstrate
in the following pages: even authors who support strong versions of the qualitative
difference of non-human animals, such as René Descartes, Ernst Cassirer, and
Susanne Langer, rely on marginal forms of human experience to gain an analogical
access key to the interior world of animals.
On Reflexes and Instincts
A paradigmatic case of marginal analogy occurs in Descartes’ discussion of the
difference between human and non-human animals. Descartes links consciousness
and thought to the soul’s possession (understood as res cogitans) and, therefore,
makes them an exclusive patrimony of humans. His position does not imply that
non-human animals have no sensitivity, but their sensitivity lies in the transmission
3
How to Think About Human-Animal Differences in Thinking …
77

of movement: perceptive stimuli impact the sensory organs and provoke a chain of
sub-processes that ﬁnally leads to action [5, p. 366]. The stimuli, however, are not
re-perceived on a conscious level since (in the absence of the rational soul) there is
no perceptive center playing the role of a subject. This mechanistic view of animal
behavior, universally known as the ‘animal machine’ theory, poses many problems,
especially in complex behaviors carried out by higher animals (it poses much fewer
difﬁculties when one observes a frog catching a ﬂy). In front of complex behaviors,
is it no longer rational to assume in non-human animals a limited capacity for
cognitive processing of stimuli, a small degree of judgment (if we want to use the
terms of the time)? Descartes’ answer is negative. His theory of perception seems
sufﬁcient to him to explain the whole animal behavior; a position, moreover, which
is supported by the belief that, if the possession of the res cogitans is limited to
humans, then the ﬁeld of the remaining animal behavior must be homogeneous [6,
pp. 546–649].
To our ends, however, what matters most is the argumentative strategy Descartes
brings into play to support this position. This strategy is clear in Descartes’ letters,
perhaps because, here, the philosopher has to answer direct questions regarding
animal behavior. His correspondence, and in particular the letter to the Marquess of
Newcastle of November 23, 1646, will therefore constitute our reference text (to-
gether with some passages of the Meditations on First Philosophy) (Fig. 3.1).
Descartes’ argument starts from the exclusion of the hypothesis, associated with the
name of Montaigne that animals have a certain degree of reason: “I cannot share
the opinion of Montaigne and others who attribute understanding or thought to
animals” [5, pp. 302]. According to Descartes, this view is the result of incorrect
analogical reasoning: “I see no argument for animals having thoughts except this
one: since they have eyes, ears, tongues and other sense-organs like us, it seems
likely that they have sensation like us; and since thought is included in our mode of
sensation, similar thought seems to be attributable to them” [5, p. 364]. The
adverse arguments, which Descartes qualiﬁes as “stronger and more numerous,”
include various lines of reasoning. Some of them sound weak to the contemporary
mindset: “it is more probable than worms, ﬂies, caterpillars and other animals
move like machines than that they have immortal souls” [5, p. 364]. The most
convincing among them, however, is the following one. Faced with the task of
understanding animal behavior in the absence of reason, Descartes proposes to
think as follows: “I consider that they [non-human animals] imitate or surpass us
only in those of our actions which are not guided by our thought. It often happens
that we walk or eat without thinking at all about what we are doing; and similarly,
without using our reason, we reject things which are harmful for us […]. Indeed,
even if we expressly willed not to put our hands in front of our head when we fall,
we could not prevent ourselves. I consider also that if we had no thought we would
walk, as the animals do, without having learnt to; and it is said that those who walk
in their sleep sometimes swim across streams in which they would drown if they
were awake” [5, pp. 302–303]. By the way, a similar passage can be found also in
the Fourth Set of Replies in the Meditations on First Philosophy: “a very large
number of the motions occurring inside us do not depend in any way on the mind
78
C. Brentari

Fig. 3.1 The title page of the 1641 edition of Descartes’ meditations on First philosophy. Adapted
from Wikimedia Commons, the free media repository https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/
commons/7/77/Meditationes_de_prima_philosophia_1641.jpg
3
How to Think About Human-Animal Differences in Thinking …
79

[…]. When people take a fall, and stick out their hands so as to protect their head,
it is not reason that instruct them to do this”; they act according to a physiological
process occurring “without any mental volition, just as it would be produced in a
machine” [7, p. 161].
Descartes includes three types of actions in this set of non-rational behavioral
modalities: reﬂex reactions, movements carried out in sleepwalking, and, more
generically, instincts (“they [animals] act only by instinct and without thinking”)
[5, pp. 302–304]. This choice is not without consequences: reﬂex motions and
instincts, in particular, will become in modern times the key tools of the mecha-
nistic interpretation of animal behavior. In the form of the reﬂex arc (as, among
others, in the works by Thomas Henry Huxley, William James, John Dewey; for an
introduction to this issue, see [8]), of Pavlovian conditioning, and of tropisms [9,
p. 23; 10], immediate and involuntary reactions to the external stimuli will become
the paradigm of animal action itself. At the same time, instinct, originally used by
Thomas Aquinas to underline the hetero-direction of animal action within a moral
comparison with human autonomy [11], quaestio 64, quaestio 95; [12], will
become the typology par excellence of the behavior of non-human animals. This
concept applies to some traits that, though seemingly positive (such as safety, if not
alleged infallibility), in reality, convey the idea of the rigidity of animals’ repertoire
of action. The mechanistic model takes on its most complete form in authors who,
like Hugo von Buttel-Reepen and Heinrich Ernst Ziegler, unify the two key con-
cepts (reﬂex and instinct) in the idea of the instinct as a chain of reﬂexes [13, p. 296;
14, p. 62; 15, pp. 136–137]. We cannot reconstruct here the whole history of the
mechanistic toolkit, limiting ourselves to pointing out that its importance is now
reduced. As far as the notion of instinct is concerned, Konrad Lorenz’s work has
shown that innate behavioral sequences are only a part of the behavioral repertoire
of animals (which also includes different varieties of learned behavior, exploratory
behavior, etc. [15, pp. 259–262, pp. 325–326]). Moreover, innate behavior now
appears as far from being immutable or perfect as in Descartes’ clockwork model.
We know, in fact, that it has been subjected to Darwinian adaptation processes to a
changing environment. As a good evolutionist, Lorenz was aware that innate motor
modules are inserted, like any other phenotypic trait, in an incessant adaptation
process to the environment, determining its usefulness in a contingent and
context-related way [15, p. 24–32]. Furthermore, in contemporary research, the
study of behavioral processes is mainly conducted by neurobiology and other
cognitive sciences, whose approach is not necessarily mechanistic (even when the
focus is the behavioral repertoire of insects [16]). The mechanistic model is still
alive in common sense, where ‘instinct’ often remains the most common
pseudo-explanation for complex animal behaviors.
Let us come back now to Descartes’ letter to the Marquise of Newcastle to
understand the complex strategy the philosopher deploys to convince his corre-
spondent of the validity of the thesis that animals are a machine. Descartes’ ﬁrst
move is to awake in the reader a strong sense of participation through the usage of
the ﬁrst plural person, “we:” “It often happens that we walk or eat without think-
ing….” The next step is to generalize some marginal human behaviors carried out
80
C. Brentari

in the absence of any self-conscious thinking activity, such as sleepwalking or the
reﬂex of self-protection in case of a fall. This step is extremely relevant. Descartes
proposes to use our imagination to set up a thought experiment on a great scale:
what if all animal behavior is equal to some human actions conducted in the
absence of reason, which we know by direct experience? The last step is to show
which advantages this hypothesis brings in. We limit ourselves to the two advan-
tages Descartes highlights in the examined letters:
i. ﬁrst, the hypothesis explains the impression of perfection and completeness
conveyed by many animal behaviors: “I know that animals do many things
better than we do, but this does not surprise me. It can even be used to prove
that they act naturally and mechanically, like a clock which tells the time better
than our judgement does” [5, p. 304]. Incidentally said, Descartes is among the
ﬁrst philosophers to afﬁrm the infallibility of instinct, a myth that (as we have
seen) will be deﬁnitively dispelled by Lorenz’s evolutionistic approach to
instinctive behavioral modes. Also, animal visual perception, in Descartes,
loses any possibility of contact with conscious reﬂection: “Animals”—writes
Descartes—“do not see as we do when we are aware that we see, but only as
we do when our mind is elsewhere” [5, pp. 61–62]; and
ii. the second advantage (from Descartes’ viewpoint, obviously) is that, after being
accepted by marginal analogy, the hypothesis of the mechanical or instinctive
nature of animal behavior provides a background to highlight, by contrast, the
qualitative differences of humans. In Descartes’ thought, the peculiarity of
humans pivots on two elements: on the metaphysical level, the possession of an
immortal and substantial soul; on the anthropologic and pragmatic one, the use
of language and other semiotic systems with denotative (and not merely
expressive) function. “None of our external actions”—writes Descartes—“can
show anyone who examines them that our body is not just a self-moving
machine but contains a soul with thoughts, with the exception of spoken words,
or other signs that have reference to particular topics without expressing any
passion” [5, p. 303].
We will return in the next section to the question of the semiotic capacities of
human and non-human animals; the second case of marginal analogy I want to
discuss belongs, indeed, to the disciplinary domain of zoosemiotics. Before
addressing this new ﬁeld, however, I would like to take stock of what the analyses
of Descartes’ writings have allowed us to understand about how humans can try to
think animal otherness. The line of reasoning that I have chosen to call “marginal
analogy” is useful because it opposes analogy to analogy. Descartes is opposing in
the ﬁrst place Montaigne, who in his Apology of Raymond Sebond had presented
the reader with a wide range of examples in which animal action appears organized
by cognitive processes that are similar to those of humans. Let us see a famous
example: “Consider the fox which Thracians employ when they want to cross the
ice of a frozen river […]. Were we to see it stopping at the river’s edge, bringing its
ear close to the ice to judge from the noise how near to the surface the current is
3
How to Think About Human-Animal Differences in Thinking …
81

running; darting forward or pulling back according to its estimate of the thickness
or thinness of the ice, would be not be right to conclude that the same reasoning
passes to its head as would pass through ours and that its ratiocinates and draws
consequences by its natural intelligence like this: ‘That which makes a noise is
moving; that which moves is not frozen; that which is not frozen is liquid; that
which is liquid bends under weight’?” [4, p. 515]. As has been said, Montaigne’s
intent in the Apology of Raymond Sebond is to break down human presumption by
showing the closeness of humans to non-human nature, especially animals. In
Descartes’s eyes, in doing this, Montaigne reinforces a dangerous habit of thought:
the tendency to consider animal behavior as arising from the exercise of reason, i.e.,
in the same way, it arises in humans [5, p. 303]. Descartes explicitly addresses the
tenacity of direct analogical thinking in a passage of the Meditations on First
Philosophy that immediately follows the denunciation of the false inference, on
whose basis we attribute “mind or thought” to non-human animals. This passage
sounds: “things which we have become convinced of since our earliest years, even
though they have subsequently been shown by rational arguments to be false,
cannot easily be eradicated from our beliefs unless we give the relevant arguments
our long and frequent attention” [7, p. 162].
On Signs and Symbols
As we have seen, Descartes’s argumentative strategy aimed to establish a strong
version of the thesis of humans’ qualitative difference. This difference is based, on
the metaphysical level, on the possession of a substantial and immortal soul (the res
cogitans), and, on the behavioral and pragmatic level, on the denotative (and not
merely expressive) usage of signs, especially of verbal signs (“spoken words, or
other signs that have reference to particular topics without expressing any pas-
sion”). We will not dwell on the ﬁrst point. From Kant onwards, the soul issue has
been declared inaccessible to the empirical inquiry, and therefore as inevitably
destined to produce nothing more than confusing speculations. Instead, we will deal
extensively with the second point, the usage of signs by human and non-human
animals. This issue is still at the center of a fruitful debate. Without pretending to
exhaust the theme, we would like to highlight that modern and contemporary
research inclines to attribute some semiotic abilities also to non-human animals. At
the same time, as we will see through the analysis of some texts by Ernst Cassirer
and Susanne Langer, this does not prevent many scholars from equally supporting
the thesis of humans’ qualitative difference. This difference, however, necessarily
takes a different form as in Descartes’s thought, where only humans had the
monopoly of the denotative usage of signs. In a similar way to what we have seen
happen with Descartes, also in the works by Cassirer and Langer, the thesis of the
qualitative difference of human animals requires, in a different version, the argu-
mentative tool of marginal analogy.
82
C. Brentari

Before starting with the exposition of this issue, it is appropriate to specify our
reasons for choosing these two authors among the many contemporary philosophers
supporting the view of the qualitative otherness of humans. Ernst Cassirer repre-
sents that part of German (and continental) philosophy that considers the reﬂection
on science as an integral part of philosophy itself. It is true both for:
i. the neo-Kantian phase of Cassirer’s writings, in which epistemological and
methodological interests prevail; and
ii. the anthropological phase, in which a particular scientiﬁc theme, the deﬁnition
of the human being, moves to the fore.
The second phase is the most important for us because it shows that (even in
German philosophy, traditionally rooted in idealism) the twentieth century brings
with it the urge to seek a deﬁnition of the human being that does not rely on the
attribution of some remote metaphysical entity – like Descartes’ res cogitans or the
Hegelian spirit. Also, by the inﬂuence of the classical philosophical anthropology
by Max Scheler, Helmuth Plessner, and Arnold Gehlen [17, p. 27; 18, pp. 215–17,
pp. 261–2], in Cassirer’s and Langer’s works, the metaphysical consideration of
human beings is increasingly replaced by the comparison with non-human animals.
In some cases, as in Cassirer’s work, the term Geist can also be maintained, but
with a new meaning that makes it a synonym of the vital (biological, instinctual,
and semiotic-cognitive) organization of the human being. In the case of Cassirer’s
American pupil Susanne Langer, the distance—also geographical—from the clas-
sical German philosophy and the inﬂuence of other philosophical currents (the
Vienna circle, American pragmatism) lead to a composite approach, in which
symbolic logic, individual psychology, studies on the nervous system and dreams,
ethology, and primatology coexist.
The following quotation by Langer can make us understand how the charac-
terization of the qualitative difference of humans has changed in contemporary
time: “We need not assume the presence of a transcendental ‘human spirit’, if we
recognize, for instance, the function of symbolic transformation as a natural
activity, a high form of nervous response, characteristic of man among the ani-
mals” [19, p. ii]. With the passage from modern to contemporary philosophy, in
short, the qualitative difference of humans is no longer metaphysical but empirical,
often related to communicative and semiotic behavior. Previously, even where the
semiotic dimension was not neglected (as in Descartes), the use of signs was seen as
a consequence of the metaphysical difference separating humans from non-human
animals.
We now come to expose the form that the thesis of the qualitative difference of
humans assumes in Cassirer and Langer (for this contribution, it is possible to
present this thesis by referring indifferently to the two authors, leaving aside the
terminological and, in a few cases, even conceptual differences between them). For
both authors, this difference lies in the human faculty of the symbolic transfor-
mation. The easiest way to introduce this concept is to start from the distinction,
introduced by Cassirer and taken up by his American pupil, between signs (or
3
How to Think About Human-Animal Differences in Thinking …
83

signals) on the one side and symbols on the other. Both signs/signals and symbols
are semiotic ways of referring to the objects of experience; in other terms, both can
absolve the semiotically basilar function of staying for other elements to a per-
ceiving agency. The difference between the two categories of semiotic elements lies
in the way they stay for their referent. Signs, which are spontaneously used by
animals, function as mere substitutes for the denoted element. In An Essay on Man,
Cassirer states that non-human animals naturally develop signs systems—“that we
ﬁnd rather complex systems of signs and signals in animal behaviour seems to be
an ascertained fact” [17, p. 36]—and also that humans can instruct them so that
they grasp new semiotic relationships: “the famous experiments of Pavlov prove
only that animals can easily be trained to react not merely to direct stimuli [i.e., the
perceptive qualities naturally linked to the object] but to all sorts of mediate or
representative stimuli” [17, p. 37]. It should be pointed out, here, that the term
“representative” does not refer to any kind of mental representations or concep-
tions through which the denoted object would be signiﬁed—a process which, for
Cassirer, is peculiar to humans as symbolic animals. At the animals’ semiotic level,
representation is nothing more than the function of signs to replace the denoted
object at the behavioral level (the Scholastic stare pro). According to Cassirer,
animals can only “respond to tokens [signs/signals] as substitute for food rewards
in the same way in which they respond to food itself” [17, p. 37].
Here we begin to glimpse the logical core of the distinction between animal
signs (or signals) and human symbols. The former denote their object without any
mediation through mental representations or concepts, by the merely associative
and substitutive way; the latter denote their object through the mental conception
they convey. The difference between the two categories of semiotic elements is
substantial. “Signals and symbols belong to two different universes of discourse”—
writes Cassirer—“a signal is part of the physical world of being; a symbol is part of
the human world of meaning. Signal are ‘operators’; symbols are ‘designators’
[and] have only a functional value” [17, p. 37]. The same distinction is summed up
by Langer as follows: “Symbols are not proxy for their objects but are vehicles for
the conception of objects” (emphasis by Langer) [19, p. 49]. Symbols, in short,
denote their object through mental conceptions; this applies not only to verbal
symbols, which remain for Cassirer and Langer the examples par excellence of
human symbolic activity, but also to artistic, mathematical, religious symbols, and
so on. The sole presence of mental conceptions inside the symbolic denotative
process can justify the thesis that Cassirer and Langer fall within the authors who
afﬁrm the qualitative otherness of humans. This thesis is supported by a detailed
analysis of the cognitive opportunities that, according to Cassirer and Langer, open
up to human beings thanks to the availability of mental conceptions:
• the possibility of disengaging from direct perceptual experience and to denote
absent or abstract objects, past or future events, etcetera; and
• the possibility of using mental conceptions regardless of any immediate bio-
logical, pragmatic, or behavioral need; and
84
C. Brentari

• the possibility of denoting other symbols, which makes possible (among other
things) the phenomenon of the recursion of human language, etc.
Even if Cassirer and Langer support the view of the full naturalness of human
animals (and of their higher faculties), the fact that they ascribe to humans the
monopoly in the use of symbols includes, at least implicitly, the belief in their
qualitative difference. Non-human animals remain conﬁned to the immediate per-
ceptive level, dominated by semiotic elements having “a sort of physical or sub-
stantial value” [17, p. 37]. To humans, on the contrary, the sphere of meaning
discloses—a sphere that Cassirer continues to deﬁne as Geist and Langer names,
instead, symbolic mentality or mind.1
For Cassirer and Langer, the distinction between signs and symbols is the
logical-semiotic basis of the qualitative difference between non-human and hu-
man animals. As in the case of Descartes, this difference has universal validity; it
applies to every animal species and every behavioral modality. It has the side
effect, in other terms, to homogenize the ﬁeld of non-human animal behavior and
cognition, eliminating every species-speciﬁc peculiarity. Again, as in Descartes,
this operation is not without problems. The adversaries can identify cases in
which non-human animal behavior is more easily explained by assuming the
existence of complex mental contents (for instance of mental maps or expecta-
tions about the conspeciﬁcs’ behavior) and not by merely associative processes.
That is what happens, typically, in the research on primates—which, therefore,
both Cassirer and Langer have to discuss in detail (the latter also making some
timid opening towards the possibility that a rudimentary symbolic mentality
begins to emerge in primates [19, pp. 90–91]).
Moreover, the radicalism of the semiotic separation of non-human from human
experience pushes both Cassirer and Langer to resort to the strategy of marginal
analogy. In other terms, they make their position more solid by offering the reader
the possibility to “enter” the cognitive and behavioral modality of non-human
animals (that is based, as we know, on the use of signs alone). The semiotic version
of the recourse to marginal analogy takes over this form:
1 From the ontological point of view, Cassirer and Langer's version of the body/mind dualism
(which has the form, as we have seen, of the dualism between a sign-based and a symbol-based
semiosis) is not a form of Cartesianism. Cassirer’s reﬂection on Kantian epistemology leads him to
afﬁrm the functional rather than substantial nature of the mind; for her part, Langer, inﬂuenced by
Whitehead, elaborates in Mind. An Essay on Human Feeling a complex ontology in which,
especially in the determination of organic matter, the category of substance is replaced by those of
act and process (see [20, 18]). This ontology of organic matter leads to an articulated theory of
hominization, in which the phylogenetic passage from primates to humans is read in terms of the
acquisition of symbolic consciousness (or symbolic mentality). This thesis is not abstractly stated,
but developed through a steady confrontation with authors who conduct ﬁrst-hand research on
animals, such as Wolfgang Koehler, Jakob von Uexküll, Konrad Lorenz and many others [18,
pp. 55–56, pp. 65–66, pp. 142–148, pp. 164–165, pp. 193].
3
How to Think About Human-Animal Differences in Thinking …
85

i. if non-human animals lack superior symbolic systems, how can we understand
their semiotic interactions with the environment? and
ii. we can do this because, in marginal cases, even human beings make use of
non-symbolic semiotic systems.
In the concrete development of the strategy, the choice of the marginal cases to
be discussed falls on cases of missing or incomplete mastery of verbal language.
Both Cassirer and Langer rely on the case studies (frequently discussed in the
psychological literature of the late 19th and early twentieth centuries) of Helen
Keller and Laura Bridgman, two deaf-mute girls who could learn language thanks
to the use of a manual alphabet. What our authors are interested in is not only the
process of acquisition of higher (linguistic) symbolic skills but the fact that, even
before this step, both girls were able to act in the world with relative success thanks
to associative semiotic tools. The passage from the associative phase to
symbol-based experience is described in terms of a cognitive revolution: “[Helen
Keller] had previously learned to combine a certain thing or event with a certain
sign. A ﬁxed association had been established between these things and certain
tactile impressions. But a series of such associations […] still does not implies an
understanding of what human speech is and means. […] Then, suddenly, the
crucial development takes place. It works like an intellectual revolution. The child
begins to see the world in a new light. It has learned the use of words not merely as
mechanical signs or signals but as an entirely new instrument of thought [the
symbol]” [17, p. 40]. Equally relevant, in the logic of marginal analogy, are
the cases where the acquisition of language fails. Langer dwells extensively on the
cases of the so-called wild boys, children who grew up in the wild without relevant
human contact. Particularly signiﬁcant is her discussion of the account left by the
Enlightenment physician Jean Itard of the case of Victor, a boy growing up in
solitude (it is said, aided by animals) in the French province of Aveyron [21].
In the exposition given by Langer, despite Itard’s best efforts, Victor never learns
the verbal language. His experience remains limited to the use of signs; such signs
could even be commonly used words, but he uses them in an associative modality
and with merely expressive functions. For example, he associates the French
phoneme [lɛ] with a glass of milk (lait) but uses it only as a sign of joy: “Victor
picked up a few spoken words […]; but as he merely said them when he contem-
plated their objects with joy or sorrow, not when he lacked anything” [19, p. 98].
For his part, Cassirer refers to people who, like Langer’s wild boys, manage to
reach only the associative level of human semiotic and cognitive faculties. This
limitation allows them to acquire only a low level of behavioral competence:
“patients suffering from aphasia or other kindred diseases […] can perform the
task of everyday life; some of them even develop considerable skill in all test of this
sort. But they are a complete loss as soon as the solution of the problem requires
any speciﬁc theoretical or reﬂective activity. They are no longer able to think in
general concepts or categories. Having lost their grip to universals, they stick to
immediate facts, to concrete situations. […] Without symbolism the life of man
would be like that of the prisoners in the cave of Plato’s famous simile”
86
C. Brentari

[17, pp. 46–47]. If the last statement is true, however, then non-human animals are
regular guests of that cave that human animals visit only under particular
conditions.
Finally, the recourse to marginal analogy is particularly evident where, in order
to show how signs-based cognition can work in non-human and human animals,
Langer refers to habits and repeated actions that we can easily track in the human
repertoire: “The interpretation of signs is the basis of animal intelligence. Animals
presumably do not distinguish between natural signs and artiﬁcial or fortuitous
signs; but they use both kinds to guide their practical activities. We do the same
thing all day long. We answer bells, watch the clock, obey warning signals, follow
arrows, take off the kettle when it whistles, come at the baby’s cry, close the
windows when we hear thunder. The logical basis of all these interpretations, the
mere correlation of trivial events with important ones, is really very simple and
common […]. It is the most elementary and most tangible sort of intellection; the
kind of knowledge that we share with animals […]. Its mechanism may be con-
ceived as an elaboration of the conditioned-reﬂex arc” [19, pp. 47–48]. This clear
passage contains some unsolved issues:
i. ﬁrstly, it questions the sense in which human signs-based conduct can be called
marginal. Langer’s statement that “we do it all day long” tells us that this
behavioral modality is, indeed, marginal for the deﬁnition of what is properly
human (which remains linked to the use of symbols and representations) but is
very frequent at the behavioral level. Signs-based experience seems to be a
lower functional system, always active (or ready to act) when conscious
symbols-based reﬂection is not required. Human beings, as it were, continu-
ously oscillate between these two functional systems. Let us assume we are in
front of the STOP road sign: if we are in sign mode, we limit ourselves to
stopping (without any need to think about the meaning of the English word ‘to
stop,’ so much so that the sign can also be learned and used by people who do
not know this language). If we are in symbolic mode, instead, the meaning of
the verbal sign makes its way into our mind, looking for points of contact with
the rest of our conscious life—let us imagine, a little poetically, a person who is
about to commit suicide and reads a symbolic message in the STOP road sign
(s)he meets on her/his way. If this is the case, however, then the peculiarity of
humans is not only the possibility of having recourse to the symbol but the
constant switch between two semiotic worlds of experience. This thesis, which
we do not have the possibility of deepening here, should be considered the core
of possible philosophical anthropology: the human being would not be the
symbolic animal but an animal endowed with semiotic plasticity; and
ii. secondly, the closing of the quotation allows us to highlight the conceptual
continuity that runs through all theories of the qualitative difference of humans
(a point that we will resume in the concluding remarks). Langer qualiﬁes
sign-based behavior as reducible to reﬂex reactions; reﬂex arc, so to speak,
seems to be the hidden mechanism governing animal action. In addition to
bringing us back to the Cartesian idea of the animal as a machine, this statement
3
How to Think About Human-Animal Differences in Thinking …
87

by Langer seems to contradict many of the efforts that, in other points of her
works [18, p. 108], she makes in order to recognize higher cognitive abilities
(exploratory behaviors, rudiments of symbolic mentality in apes, etc.) at least to
some non-human animal species. It, however, should not be surprising. As we
have already pointed out, a thesis as strong as that of the qualitative otherness
of humans brings with it, as a hardly controllable side effect, a whole series of
simpliﬁcations and potential devaluations of animal experience.
Conclusion: How to Depart from Marginal Analogy—
Animal Cognition as a Field of Diffuse Discontinuities
In a hypothetical general overview of the theories on animal cognition proposed by
philosophers throughout Western thought history, the theories based on the quali-
tative difference of humans and defended through the argumentative strategy of
marginal analogy would turn out to be the majority. Their logical core, which we
have tried to highlight in this chapter, afﬁrms a radical discontinuity between human
and non-human animals, based on the possession by the former of ontologically
and/or cognitively unique faculties. As a side effect, non-human perception,
behavior, and cognition appear as a domain run by lower functional systems
(reﬂexes, associative semiotics, instincts).
To be sustainable, this thesis needs to convince the opponent of the effectiveness
for practical purposes of the lower functional system. To this end, the recourse to
marginal analogy is very opportune: if, in marginal cases, human animals can act
even in the absence of the higher faculties that distinguish them, why not read the
entire animal behavior as a generalization of these cases, as an uninterrupted per-
manence in a condition of missing or scarce rationality, reﬂection, verbal skills,
symbolic mentality, and so on?
As we have seen, the Cartesian analogy between animal behavior and reﬂex
actions in humans (later strengthened in the idea of animal instinct as chains of
reﬂexes) runs like a red thread through many modern and contemporary theories of
humans’ qualitative difference. We have seen it reappear in Cassirer and Langer, in
a semiotic version that links reﬂex behavior to the associative usage of signs.
However, we could have analyzed, with equal legitimacy, Heidegger’s theory of the
animal Umwelt as a disinhibiting ring [22, pp. 253–257]. Heidegger makes no
secret of moving from a robust version of the qualitative otherness of the human
being. According to him, openness to being makes humans an ontological unicum,
whereas non-human animals dwell in a condition of “captivation,” in which
external entities are inaccessible as such and interact with animal life form only as a
“ring” of disinhibiting stimuli [22, pp. 136–246]. Heidegger’s idea of non-human
animals as “captivated” beings is reminiscent of Descartes’ sleepwalker condition
(and of the Platonic cave evoked by Cassirer); similarly, his view of the animal’s
condition of steady inhibition, interrupted only by the impact of the disinhibit-
ing stimuli, appears to our eyes as an upgrade of the view of the animal as a
88
C. Brentari

machine.2 Finally, we could have found clear cases of marginal analogy, functional
(as usual) to the thesis of the qualitative difference of humans, in that group of
theories that (relying on Frans de Waal) we can deﬁne as “veneer theories” [23,
p. 19]. Frequent in moral research and well represented in common sense and
popularized science, these theories aim at explaining the outbursts of human
aggressive and destructive behavior as the re-emergence of an original layer of
animality, which the subsequent “patina” of civilization can only hidden. Again, we
meet here the idea of the double functional system; and, again, the possibility opens
up of considering the whole animal behavior in analogy with those of human
actions that seem entirely instinctive, spontaneous, and natural (in analogy, in short,
with the way we would act etsi cultura non daretur).
The aim I pursue in these conclusive remarks, however, is not to provide a
review of all theories of the qualitative difference of humans that can be found in
Western thought but to indicate some guidelines for their critical evaluation. The
ﬁrst one is the (already expressed) recommendation to unveil the hidden analogies
that contribute so much to our acceptance of the “poor” descriptions of non-human
animals’ behavior and experience (on the possibility to give, for the same animal
behavior, both “rich” and “poor” descriptions [24]). The second critical guideline
consists in showing some advantages of the theories that reject the model of animal
life as a homogeneous ﬁeld, in which only humans stand out for their otherness. We
are not referring here to gradualist theories of the Darwinian or neo-Darwinian
matrix (according to which the higher faculties of humans are nothing but a
quantitative enhancement of animal faculties) but to a much smaller but
up-and-coming group of theories. These views of animal life can be named as
theories of diffuse discontinuities [25]. Without rejecting in toto the thesis of the
qualitative otherness of humans, such theories argue that the discontinuity that
separates humans from other forms of life is not the discontinuity par excellence but
rather one of the many qualitative differences widespread in the realm of the living
being. If considered in this way, we can investigate the discontinuity between
human and non-human animals without producing the deleterious side effect of
making the entire ﬁeld of animal behavior and cognition homogeneous. Further-
more, this perspective is entirely compatible with evolutionism, insofar as con-
temporary evolutionism admits the limits of gradualism and the need to admit
discontinuities and level jumps in the course of evolution itself.
The theories pivoting on the idea of diffuse discontinuities are often diverging
from each other in other respects. Examples include contemporary authors
belonging to different disciplinary ﬁelds: a neovitalist in biology (Jakob von
Uexküll), a Gestalt psychologist (Hans Volkelt), and a philosopher of the mind
2 Heidegger does not resort explicitly to the strategy of marginal analogy, maybe because he is
aware of its risks and disadvantages. In any case, his recurrent juxtaposition between the animal
condition of captivation and the ontological state of the profound boredom in humans (even if
accompanied by the philosopher’s warning that it is not the same phenomenon) leaves the reader
with the impression that, from a philosophical point of view, it is perfectly justiﬁable to speak of
animal cognition inside a discussion of the ontologically defective modalities of the Dasein
[22, pp 160–180, pp 279–282].
3
How to Think About Human-Animal Differences in Thinking …
89

(Thomas Nagel). Despite the diversity of their general approaches, they share as a
basic coordinate the idea that each animal species builds up a world of subjective
experience that is qualitatively different from that of other species. Their refusal of
the analogical procedure rests on a basic assumption that can, at ﬁrst sight, sound
paradoxical: the analogy is not only misleading but ultimately superﬂuous because
it is possible to deﬁne a unitary ﬁeld of experience inside which there can be
discontinuities. For Nagel, Uexküll, and Volkelt, this unitary ﬁeld that has to be
preliminarily delimited is conscious subjectivity. They understand it differently, but
(and this is what counts most) all three give of subjectivity a minimal and ﬂexible
deﬁnition so that the resulting ﬁeld of inquiry remains open to the greatest possible
number of internal differences—among which, without any privilege, that between
homo sapiens and the other species. It is useful to provide here at least two
examples of their minimal deﬁnitions: for Nagel, there is subjectivity whenever we
face a form of life for which the question makes sense: “what is like to be that
organism?” (emphasis by Nagel) [26, p. 436]. For Uexküll, subjectivity spikes in
the presence of any transcendental (i.e., a priori) tool used in the construction of a
species-speciﬁc world of experience (or Umwelt) [27, p. 3; 28, pp. 107–114].
As anticipated above, in this group of theories, animal cognition appears as a
ﬁeld of discontinuities but also as a domain that is sufﬁciently well deﬁned to allow
for a non-analogic study approach. In this approach, the inner aspects of animal
behavior are accessed in an indirect way, through the animals’ physiology and
observable behavior: “We cannot deny”—writes Uexküll—“that [in biology] we
may come across completely unknown stimuli, which we become aware of only
through the animals’ reactions” [29, p. 12]. With the caveat, however, that an
underlying extraneousness will remain, that animal life can be “a fundamentally
alien form of life” (emphasis by Nagel) [26, p. 438; 30]. The species-speciﬁc
otherness of animal experience does not consist only in the presence of different
sensory ﬁelds, as seen in bats when echolocating or in some migratory birds sen-
sitive to the earth’s electromagnetic ﬁelds. Discontinuities can rely on a cognitive or
(to use a Kantian concept) “categorial” organization of the mental contents radically
different from ours. For Volkelt, for instance, the observation of the predatory
behavior of the crusader spider (Araneus diadematus) leads to the hypothesis that
its experience relies on a different categorization of the perceived data. In particular,
its lived experience would lack the “thingness [Dinghaftigkeit]” [31, p. 41]—that is,
as happens in conscious human life, the structuring of perception into stable and
discrete entities and according to the substrate-quality categorical pair. We cannot
here reproduce the arguments with which Volkelt comes to clarify his view.
However, we can enunciate their key result: the conscious experience of the cru-
sader spider is devoid of “thing-constants” and, instead, organized by “overall
situations [Komplexqualität],” in which “only the whole, and not the particular, is
phenomenologically present” [31, p. 69]. The animal would orient its action not
based on the change in the qualities of well-limited things but the alteration of the
“atmospheres,” “colorations,” or nuances of the overall perceptive situation [31,
p. 90]. A similar, non-analogical conceptual effort to enter the alien worlds of
animal experience is also characteristic of Jakob von Uexküll’s approach. His
90
C. Brentari

reconstruction of the subjective Umwelt of the tick guides the reader into an alien
silent universe, empty of unitary things and in which, alternatively, rare tactile and
olfactory stimuli ignite [32, pp. 44–50].
These theories, based as they are on the model of the diffuse discontinuities,
renounce any (direct or marginal) analogical arguments; in doing so, they succeed
in opening phenomenologically new worlds. We can indeed transpose ourselves
only partially into these dimensions; as Nagel writes, “my realism about the sub-
jective domain in all its forms implies a belief in the existence of facts beyond the
reach of human concepts” [26, p. 3]. At the same time, however, these alien worlds
of experience challenge us to grasp Erlebnisse that has no analog in our conscious
experience. Indeed, both Volkelt and Uexküll use metaphors to qualify the animal
way to organize perception, for instance, comparing it to a “melody” of perceptive
contents [27, pp. 77; 31, pp. 190–191; 32, p. 126]. A metaphor, however, is not an
analogy: it conveys otherness but without ﬂattening it on what is already known.
Analogy, including the cases of marginal analogy we have discussed above, tends
to suppress our wonder for animal cognition diversity. On the contrary, if coupled
with rigorous observation, metaphors make it grow and allow us an insight into the
rich otherness of other species’ subjective point of view on reality, an otherness we
should consider and preserve as an integral part of the biodiversity of our living
planet.
Core Messages
• Analogical approaches can be misleading not only when they concede too
much to non-human animals but also when they give them too few.
• Animal life is a ﬁeld of discontinuities crossed by a plurality of qualitative
differences.
• That between human and non-human animals is one qualitative difference
among many others.
• The wonder we feel about non-human life forms should never disappear
from our theories on animal behavior and cognition.
References
1. Lorenz K (1977) Behind the mirror: a search for a natural history of human knowledge (trans:
R Taylor). Methuen & Co, London
2. Plutarch (1968) Whether land or sea animals are cleverer (trans: H Cherniss, W C Helmbold).
In: Plutarch’s Moralia. Loeb Classical Library, vol XII. Harvard University Press-William
Heinemann LDT, Cambridge (MA), London, pp 311–488
3. Dombrowski DA (2014) Philosophical vegetarianism and animal entitlement. In: Campbell G
(ed) The Oxford handbook of animals in classical thought and life. Oxford University Press,
Oxford, pp 535–555
3
How to Think About Human-Animal Differences in Thinking …
91

4. de Montaigne M (1991) The complete essays (trans: M A Screech). Penguin, London
5. Descartes R (1997) The correspondence (trans: JG Cottingham, R Stoothof, D Murdoch, A
Kenny). In: The philosophical writings of Descartes, vol III. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge
6. Cooney H (2019) Cavendish vs. Descartes on mechanism and animal souls. In: S Nadler, TM
Schmaltz, D Antoine-Mahut (eds) The Oxford handbook of Descartes and Cartesianism.
Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp 546–649
7. Descartes R (2008) The philosophical writings of Descartes (trans: J Cottingham), vol II.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
8. Phillips DC (1971) James, Dewey, and the reﬂex. ArcJHistIdeas 32(4):555–568
9. Loeb J (1918) Forced movements, tropisms, and animal conduct. Monographs on
experimental biology, vol 1. J B Lippincott Company, Philadelphia
10. Fangerau H (2016) Tierforschung unter mechanistischen Vorzeichen. Jacques Loeb,
Tropismen und das Vordenken des Behaviorismus. In: M Böhnert, K Köchy, M Wunsch
(eds) Philosophie der Tierforschung, vol 1. Methoden und Programme. Verlag Karl Alber,
München, pp 183–208
11. Aquinas St T (2006) Summa Theologica. From the complete American edition. Project
Gutenberg. https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/17611/pg17611-images.html. Accessed 23
July 2015
12. Diamond S (1971) Gestation of the instinct concept. JHistBehavSci 7(4):323–336
13. von Buttel-Reepen H (1909) Die moderne Tierpsychologie. ArchfRassenbiologie 3(1):289–
304
14. Ziegler HE (1910) Der Begriff des Instinktes einst und jetzt: Eine Studie über die Geschichte
und die Grundlagen der Tierpsychologie. Fischer, Jena
15. Lorenz K (1981) The foundations of ethology. Springer, London
16. Menzel R (2016) Von der reduktionistischen zur kognitiven Verhaltensbiologie. Wie
verhaltensbiologen über Kognition bei Tieren streiten. Forschungen über die Navigation bei
Insekten. In: Böhnert M, Köchy K, Wunsch M (eds) Philosophie der Tierforschung. vol 1.
Methoden und Programme. Verlag Karl Alber, München, pp 341–370
17. Cassirer E (2006) An essay on man. An introduction to a philosophy of human culture. In:
Gesammelte Werke Hamburger Ausgabe, vol 23. Felix Meiner Verlag, Hamburg
18. Langer S (1983) Mind: an essay on human feeling, vol II. The John Hopkins University Press,
Baltimore
19. Langer S (1954) Philosophy in a new key. A study in the symbolism of reason, rite, and art.
New American Library, New York
20. Langer S (1970) Mind: an essay on human feeling, vol I. Johns Hopkins University Press,
Baltimore
21. Itard JMG (1962) The wild boy of Aveyron (trans: G Humphrey, M Humphrey).
Appleton-Century-Crofts, New York
22. Heidegger M (1995) The fundamental concepts of metaphysics. World, ﬁnitude, solitude
(trans: W McNeill, N. Walker). Indiana University Press, Bloomington
23. De Waal F (2005) Our inner ape. A leading primatologist explains why we are who we are
(trans: A Sklar). New York, Riverhead
24. Colin A (2004) Is anyone a cognitive ethologist? BiolPhilos 19:589–607
25. Brentari C (2018) From the hiatus model to the diffuse discontinuities. A turning point in
human-animal studies. Biosemiotics-Neth 11:331–345
26. Nagel T (1974) What is it like to be a bat? PhilosRev 83(4):435–450
27. von Uexküll J (1928) Theoretische biologie. 2. gänzlich neu bearbeitete Auﬂage. Springer,
Berlin
28. Brentari C (2015) Jakob von Uexküll. The discovery of the Umwelt between biosemiotics and
theoretical biology (trans: C Graciet). Springer, Dordrecht
29. von Uexküll J (1905) Leitfaden in das Studium der experimentellen Biologie der Wassertiere.
Bergmann, Wiesbaden
92
C. Brentari

30. Godfrey-Smith P (2017) Other minds: the octopus, the sea, and the deep origins of
consciousness. HarperCollins, London
31. Volkelt H (1914) Über die Vorstellungen der Tiere. Ein Beitrag zur Entwicklungspsycholo-
gie. Verlag von Wilhelm Engelmann, Leipzig, Berlin
32. von Uexküll J (2010) A Foray into the worlds of animals and humans, with a theory of
meaning (trans: J D O’Neil). Posthumanities, vol 12. University of Minnesota Press,
Minneapolis
Carlo Brentari (1974) is Assistant professor at the Department
of Humanities of the University of Trento (Italy). In 2002, he
obtained a Ph.D. at the Karl-Franzens-Universität of Graz (Aus-
tria), with a dissertation on the American philosopher Susanne
Langer. His key research ﬁelds are the German philosophical
anthropology of the twentieth century, modern and contemporary
philosophy of biology, the Umwelt theory of Jakob von Uexküll,
and Nicolai Hartmann’s ontology of nature. Among his recent
publications: (2015) The discovery of the Umwelt between
biosemiotics and theoretical biology. Springer, 250 pp (2019) “A
collective ﬁxation of meaning.” Susanne K. Langer’s reprise of
J. Donovan’s thesis of the festal origin of language. ELT 1
(2):143–161, https://doi.org/10.1075/elt.00008.bre; (2020) Ernst
Cassirer’s reading of Jakob von Uexküll. In: Michelini F, Köchy
C (eds.), Jakob von Uexküll and Philosophy. Life, Environments,
Anthropology. Routledge. 106–121.
3
How to Think About Human-Animal Differences in Thinking …
93

4
Homo Pictor: A Philosophical Enquiry
into the Origins of Human Thinking
Roberto Franzini Tibaldeo
“A word devoid of thought is a dead thing, and a thought
unembodied in words remains a shadow”
Lev S. Vygotsky
Summary
The
chapter
inquires
into
the
human
condition
from
a philosophical-
anthropological perspective to clarify the human being’s distinctive faculties
and qualities. It shall be argued that the capacity to think plays an essential role
in this regard. Hans Jonas’ reﬂections are of great help to achieve this goal since
his account of the human speciﬁcity is pivoted on the eidetic and symbolic
experience, which equips the human being with a unique degree of freedom and
with capabilities like imagination, reﬂection, and speech, which are connected to
thinking. Indeed, these capabilities exhibit the multidimensionality of the
experience of thinking, which can be fruitfully clariﬁed thanks to philosophy’s
critical and meta-reﬂective approach.
R. Franzini Tibaldeo (&)
School of Education and Humanities, Pontiﬁcal Catholic University of Paraná, Curitiba Campus,
Curitiba, Brazil
e-mail: roberto.tibaldeo@pucpr.br
R. Franzini Tibaldeo
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Curitiba, Brazil
R. Franzini Tibaldeo
Rua Imaculada Conceição 1155, Prado Velho, Curitiba, CEP 80215-901, Brazil
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh (eds.), Thinking, Integrated Science 7,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04075-7_4
95

Imaginative thinking: inherent sight.
[Adapted with permission from the Health and Art (HEART), Universal
Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network (USERN); Painting by Arshida
Karami.]
Keywords
Hans Jonas Human being Image Imagination Philosophical anthropology
Reason  Reﬂection  Speech  Thinking  Understanding
QR Code
Scanning the QR code directs you to the word cloud of the chapter that is made up
of the words we discussed throughout the whole book in relation to the chapter’s
96
R. Franzini Tibaldeo

keyword, which is intentionally not included in the word cloud. Find the keyword
and put it in place in the puzzle according to the clues provided in Chap. 36. The
mystery hidden in the puzzle is the quote of THINKING: Bioengineering of Science
and Art.
Introduction
This chapter aims to inquire into human uniqueness, whose most prominent signs
are imagination, reﬂection, and speech. Indeed, these capabilities exhibit the mul-
tidimensionality of the experience of thinking. The approach I adopt is philo-
sophical and relies on a perspective generally understood as “philosophical
anthropology”—or better “philosophische Anthropologie,” since it has its origins in
Germany in the ﬁrst half of the twentieth century thanks to scholars like M. Scheler,
A. Gehlen, H. Plessner and A. Portmann [1]. Philosophical anthropology is a
“discipline within philosophy that seeks to unify the several empirical investiga-
tions of human nature in an effort to understand individuals as both creatures of
their environment and creators of their own values” [2]. These scholars deal with
controversial biological-philosophical issues, like the difference between living and
inanimate beings, the relationship between life and matter, the place of the human
being in the material world, etc., in an epoch of scientiﬁc crisis dominated by two
opposed—albeit
unsatisfactory—viewpoints,
namely
evolutionism
and
neo-
vitalism. According to the ﬁrst, life (including human life) can be explained in
purely materialistic and mechanical terms; on the contrary, according to the second
view, life is ontologically different from matter and essentially transcends it.
Philosophical anthropologists generally strive to ﬁnd a third way or “the golden
mean” [3, p. 77] between monistic reductionism and ontological dualism. They
strive for an overall reinterpretation of the living beings and their behavior capable
of overcoming mechanic reductionism and for a more comprehensive idea of life,
organism, and human being. They also aim to overcome various types of dualisms
regarding the human experience (internal and external, mind and body, psyche and
soma) thanks to a different method of inquiry, namely understanding the human
being through the analysis of his/her bodily experience and through a comparative
approach with other living beings.
Also, the German-born philosopher of Jewish origins Hans Jonas (1903–1993)
contributes to this joint effort. Indeed, the “philosophical biology” [4, 5, p. 105] he
develops in the second half of the twentieth century shows that the phenomenon of
life is thoroughly misunderstood by both dualistic and monistic reductionistic
perspectives. And yet, life is the most eminent feature of being. What is required to
understand it thoroughly—states thus Jonas—is a change of paradigm and a
renewed way of understanding life. Jonas refers to this rediscovery as an
4
Homo Pictor: A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origins …
97

“ontological revolution” [6, p. 222, 226; 4, p. 81; 7] capable of changing our idea of
life radically from its simplest form—namely, organic metabolism. Its “ontological”
feature depends on the fact that renewed research starting with the organic meta-
bolism may lead to understand the ontological characteristics of life, and to the
renewal of science.
Now, in Jonas’ inquiry into life, the role played by the human being is indeed
central, since it is the human being who carries out this inquiry and at the same time
is part of and involved in the research, because he/she inevitably has, or better, is a
living body. And, according to Jonas, the organic and living body “is the memento
of the still unsolved question of ontology, ‘What is being?’ and must be the canon
of coming attempts to solve it” [4, p. 19]. Thus dualism is programmatically
rejected.
On the other hand, the human being is a result of evolution, which is a process
that cannot be denied, but whose interpretation requires to go beyond a mere
Darwinian viz. materialistic-mechanistic and instrumental account [3, p. 76]. Pro-
viding a comprehensive portrait of evolution and of the human speciﬁcity—i.e.,
neither in simply monistic nor dualistic terms, but explained in the light of “a new,
integral, […] philosophical monism” [4, pp. 16–17]—is indeed Jonas’ main aim.
As we shall see, this entails achieving a renewed view of how human features like
imagination, reﬂection, and speech—in a word, thinking—rely on the evolutive
adventure of life.
Jonas’ Philosophical Account of the Human Specificity
It must be said that Jonas does not wish to carry out a biological inquiry but a
philosophical interpretation of biological facts. Therefore his philosophical account
of the human speciﬁcity does not lay claim to being a genealogical account of how
organic life gave birth to the human being. Quite the contrary, Jonas begins with a
historical phenomenon (the prehistoric appearance of ‘human’ artifacts). He
inquires into its prerequisites (the existence of living beings endowed with the
capability to produce such artifacts), which ultimately rely on a specialization of the
basic dynamic of life. So, to fully understand Jonas’ position, it is necessary to
contextualize Jonas’ anthropology brieﬂy in his overall philosophy of life.
In various passages of his work, when it comes to stressing the distinctive feature
of human beings, Jonas uses the expression “imago Dei.”1 This expression is
interesting for two reasons: ﬁrst, the “imago Dei” is traditionally invoked to contrast
humanity with the rest of nature, namely to underline the human being’s uniqueness
and irreducible metaphysic speciﬁcity [see esp. p. 269–274 in 4]—and this is
indeed what Jonas endeavors to achieve [4, p. 175], although not in the dualistic
1 This reference does not at all imply that Jonas’ philosophical reﬂection ultimately relies on
religion [see for instance 8]. Jonas cannot be classiﬁed as a religious thinker, although he
reappraises tradition by making a philosophical use of religious concepts.
98
R. Franzini Tibaldeo

sense of ontological separability and independence of the human essence from
matter; second, the “imago Dei” refers to the human being’s “appearance” or
“form” [4, pp. 167, 185–186]. Indeed form is a core aspect of Jonas’ phe-
nomenology of perception and anthropology, as related to the overall “philosoph-
ical biology,” where the dynamism of the “living form” plays a role of paramount
importance. In what sense?
Basically, according to Jonas, any living being is characterized by an “organic
form,” which stands in a “dialectical relation of needful freedom to matter” [4,
p. 80]. This “basic situation of freedom” [4, p. 83] relies on the following features:
i. dependence and, at the same time, “a certain independence of organic form
with respect to its own matter” [4, p. 81];
ii. the organism’s “emancipation from the type of ﬁxed self-identity that is
matter’s, to give scope to a different, viz., mediate and functional, kind of
identity” [4, p. 81], namely an identity “which from moment to moment
reasserts itself, achieves itself and deﬁes the equalizing forces of physical
sameness all around,” and which “is truly pitted against the rest of things” [4,
p. 83];
iii. the organism’s need of the world in order to exist, persist, and renew itself—
this means that the organism’s being and selfhood, “suspended in possibility, is
to be actualized by the use of the world” [9, p. 196]; and
iv. the organism’s need to develop “means of survival” to bridge the spatial–
temporal gap between itself and the world [9, p. 196, 204].
As a result, the “basic situation of freedom” characterizing organic form reveals
a “polarity of self and world, of internal and external, complementing that of form
and matter” [4, p. 83], which cannot be successfully understood neither in monistic
nor in dualistic terms. In a word, organic freedom is characterized by an opposing
and dialectical dynamic, which reveals the organism’s tendency to transcend itself
by going “constantly beyond the given state of things” and “beyond the given
condition” [9, p. 197]. At the same time, this outward dynamic is complemented by
an interior one, namely “inwardness or subjectivity,” which imbues “all the
encounters occasioned in its horizon with the quality of felt selfhood, however, faint
its voice” [4, p. 84]. In this sense, the organism’s self-concern and self-centeredness
“at the same time bridges the qualitative gulf to the rest of things by selective modes
of relation” [4, p. 84]. The result of this dual continuous process is “organic form,”
whose meaning cannot be simply reduced to dependence, although its existence
certainly relies on this feature [4, p. 80]. Life thus depends on a deep change and a
revolution in the relationship between form and matter, since “form becomes the
essence, matter the accident” [4, p. 80].
Moreover, according to Jonas, the organism’s “opening into an environment”
and “having a world” carries the evolutive “promise of higher and more compre-
hensive stages” of life [4, p. 83, 106]. What is envisaged here is that thanks to
self-transcendence, the organism’s striving for self-preservation somehow leads
beyond itself by opening to the broad phenomenon of evolution, which ultimately
4
Homo Pictor: A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origins …
99

culminates in the human being. In other words, the revolutionized, dynamic, and
dialectical attributes related to the primary level of life, deﬁned by metabolism and
organic form, also characterize the more complex levels of life, including the
human. Jonas achieves this result by extending the organic dynamics of
self-transcendence to the overall phenomenon of life. In this sense, Jonas’ inno-
vative anthropological reﬂections are the key to understanding both the human
being’s integral belonging to the living world and his/her irreducible difference.
Let me brieﬂy recall how Jonas describes the ‘progress’ within the evolutive
dynamic of life. On the one hand, different species share the same basic biological
pattern, while, on the other hand, they are characterized by a thorough disconti-
nuity. So, in addition to the basic discontinuity of the organic individual as regards
inorganic matter, life manifests a discontinuity of a different kind within its own
domain, which is related to the fact that individuality admits of a “more-or-less” and
is thus a matter of degree [9, p. 204]. The discontinuity within organic life relies on
dissimilarities in mediacy and distance; this is to say that living beings need to
bridge the gap between self and world to survive [9, p. 204]. According to Jonas,
the disparate degrees of individuality rely on the speciﬁc means of survival
developed by organic individuals in order to exist and cope with the dialectic of
mediacy and distance. For instance, as regards animal life, Jonas states that:
The spatial gap between subject and object, which is provisionally spanned by perception,
is at the same time the temporary gap between need and satisfaction that is provisionally
spanned by emotion (desire) and practically overcome by motion. All three modes [per-
ception, emotion, motion] express the mediacy of animal being, or the split between self
and world—a qualitative widening of the split which metabolism opened ﬁrst, and which is
thus at the root of life. The lesser integration of the animal into its environment as compared
to the plant, of which these modes of mediacy bear witness, is a measure of its greater
individuality [9, p. 204].
This evolutionary plurality of means of survival developed by life is but another
essential feature of life’s own essence [9, p. 196; 4, pp. 90–91, 106]. “Freedom” and
correlated “desire” are the concepts Jonas employs to clarify this evolutionary
dialectic, which—as we shall see shortly—characterizes, although with a radical
discontinuity, the human being too.
According to Jonas, human speciﬁcity in contradistinction to other living beings
resides in a “more-than-animal” and “symbolical” feature [4, p. 158]. However, it is
also true that between animal and human capabilities, there are “ﬂuid boundaries”
[3, p. 79]. To be sure, the possibility of distance-taking from the biological level
must, to certain degrees, “be credited even to some higher animals” [4, p. 170].
According to Jonas, these capabilities arise “with higher sense-perception as such
(i.e., prior to man)” [4, p. 178], and especially thanks to sight, the “noblest” of all
senses, due to the unique role played by sight “in the higher mental performances
[…] in the case of man” [4, p. 136].2 However, what guides animals is a ﬁxed
behavior pattern, something automatic and entirely conﬁned within the “realm of
2 Indeed, sight “contains trans-animal potentialities of beholding and attitude which a higher
mental faculty can actualize” [4, p. 184].
100
R. Franzini Tibaldeo

animal necessity” [3, p. 79] that human beings can invoke no more. Why not?
Because the human being “is one that indulges in the making of useless objects, or
has ends in addition to the biological ones, or can serve the latter in ways remote
from the direct usefulness of instrumental things” [4, p. 158]—in a word, the human
being has enhanced in a unique way organic freedom and the related potential to
transcend the given state of things.
How does Jonas justify this statement? He focuses on three speciﬁcally human
features:
i. the capacity to produce and use artiﬁcial “tools” [3, pp. 78–79];
ii. the “image faculty” as a “further degree of mediacy” distinguishing humans
from animals [4, p. 184]; and
iii. ﬁnally, a “threshold to a further mediation,” which is achieved thanks to
“reﬂection” [4, p. 185].
First, tool creation: although it is still “very closely connected with the realm of
animal necessity,” tool creation is indeed something new viz. human, since “it
serves animal needs in a supra-animal manner” [3, p. 79]. Second, the image
faculty, namely the speciﬁcally human capacity to make and behold images, which
are different from tools. But what is an image, and why is it so important to Jonas’
account of the human speciﬁcity? An image is both an internal and an external
entity characterized by a series of properties such as likeness, intentionality,
incompleteness, selection, alteration, visibility, symbolic detachment, and onto-
logical difference [4, pp. 159–165], which are fully developed by human beings
only. Images rely on sight, a sense organ that the human being shares with other
animals. But there is also an important difference: although all animals endowed
with movement and sight are somehow capable of image perceiving [4, pp. 135–
156], only human beings are capable of perceiving images “in a certain way” [4,
p. 165]—namely as images. What does this mean exactly? By actualizing the
evolutionary potentials related to sight [4, p. 152], human perception evidences the
achievement of a new capability, namely the faculty “of separating eidos from
concrete reality, or form from matter” [4, p. 167]: “The image becomes detached
from the object, that is, the presence of the eidos is made independent of that of the
thing” [4, p. 170; see also 10]. So, what truly distinguishes the human being is the
capacity to cope with the challenges of survival and bridge the gap with the world
by developing “eidetic freedom,” namely the capacity to produce internal and
external images. This twofold possibility relies on the “eidetic control of imagi-
nation” and the “eidetic control of motility,” respectively:
What we here have is a trans-animal, uniquely human fact: eidetic control of motility, that
is, muscular action governed not by set stimulus-response pattern but by freely chosen,
internally represented and purposely projected form. The eidetic control of motility, with its
freedom of external execution, complements the eidetic control of imagination, with its
freedom of internal drafting. Without the latter, there would be no rational faculty, but
without the former, its possession would be futile [4, pp. 172–173].
4
Homo Pictor: A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origins …
101

From the moment the homo develops the image faculty, he/she quits the kind of
freedom and mediacy characterizing animality and initiates a qualitatively different
viz. symbolic experience, in which new capabilities are developed:
Imaging and speaking man ceases to see things directly: he sees them through the screen of
representations of which he has become possessed by his own previous dealings with
objects […]. Their greatest role, however, lies in between experiences, when the actual
object is not present for direct perception: then the abstracted images that are at the
command of the subject provide in themselves the material for an ‘experience’ at a remove
—symbolic experience, in which the world is taken hold of without imposing its presence
[4, pp. 184–185].
However, “true man” viz. the very human peculiarity fully appears only thanks
to a further step in the dynamic of human mediacy involving the relationship
between image faculty and reﬂection, which generates a further radical turn in the
basic dynamic of life:
The fateful freedom of objectiﬁcation, which confronts the self with the potential sum total
of the “other,” the “world,” as an indeﬁnite realm for possible understanding and action,
can and eventually must turn back, with its burden of mediacy, upon the subject itself and
make it in turn the object of a relation which again takes the detour via the eidos. The
“form” here involved is different in kind from those of the whole realm of outwardness, for
it concerns the self’s relation to all outwardness. The new dimension of reﬂection unfolds,
where the subject of all objectiﬁcation appears as such to itself and becomes objectiﬁed for
a new and ever more self-mediating kind of relation. With the ﬁrst asking of the question,
What is man’s, what is my place and part in the scheme of things?, the self becomes
engulfed in the distantness in which all things are kept by man and from which they have to
be retrieved in acts of eidetic intentionality [4, p. 185].
According to Jonas, the human artifact embodying reﬂection is the grave, which
evidences the human being’s social and interpersonal trait (Jonas stresses the social
act of commemorating the dead—[3, p. 83]), as well as the capacity to transcend the
state of given things thanks to the belief and open resistance to the world: indeed,
common to the cult of the grave and the related beliefs “is that they somehow defy
our apparent mortality, pointing beyond what is visible to the invisible, from the
material to the immaterial. The grave bears visible testimony to this deﬁance”
[3, p. 83]. As a result, image faculty and reﬂection play a core role in human life,
since “Man models, experiences, and judges his own inner state and outward
conduct after the image of what is man’s. Willingly or not he lives the idea of man
—in agreement or in conﬂict, in acceptance or in deﬁance, in compliance or in
repudiation, with good or with bad conscience. The image of man never leaves
him, however much he may wish at times to revert to the bliss of animality”
[4, pp. 185–186].
102
R. Franzini Tibaldeo

Implications of Jonas’ Account for the Clarification
of ‘Thinking’
What I ﬁnd interesting in these reﬂections by Jonas is ﬁrstly that if the human being
had not integrally belonged to life and had not been connected to the world through
bodily experience, he/she would not have become human at all [see also p. 246 in
9].
Secondly,
being
human
entails
preserving
this
peculiar
bodily
and
worldly-connected experience [see also 11]. Thirdly, if the “homo” had not been
primarily “faber,” but especially “pictor” viz. “symbolicum,” he/she would not have
developed into “sapiens” [3, p. 79, 82; see also 12].3 Finally, Jonas’ reﬂections shed
light on the mutual connections between human faculties and qualities—like
imagination, reﬂection, and speech –, which characterize thinking.
I would like to add something in this last regard. What is thinking? Instead of
beginning with an abstract deﬁnition of ‘thinking’ equipped with certain features to
be examined,4 I choose a different path, which is more coherent with Jonas’
philosophical-anthropological approach. Namely, I assume that thinking is the
human being’s distinctive trait, and I endeavor to show how it relies on the pre-
viously analyzed qualities of the human phenomenon. For this purpose, Jonas’
reﬂections prove once again to be quite useful.
Let me brieﬂy return to the three human artifacts mentioned by Jonas: tool,
image, and grave. They reveal something about the being that produces and uses
them, and they show how he/she copes with and understands the world—in a word,
they exhibit the kind of freedom enjoyed by that being: “These are basic forms in
which man, in uniquely human fashion, answers and transcends what is an
unconditional given for man and animal alike. With the tool he surpasses physical
necessity through invention; with the image, passive perception through represen-
tation and imagination; with the tomb, inescapable death through faith and piety”
[9, p. 252]. May not invention, representation, imagination, and even faith and piety
be but understood as potential dimensions of thinking, and this is especially in the
light of the disciplines and the related practices that actually stem from them—
namely technology and physics, art, metaphysics, and history [3, p. 84–85]? What
is more, in his study in the phenomenology of the senses, Jonas details the role
played by bodily sight in the higher mental performances as follows: there are
“virtues inherent in sight” which provide “the ground for some basic concept of
philosophy. Simultaneity of presentation furnishes the idea of enduring present, the
contrast between change and the unchanging, between time and eternity. Dynamic
neutralization furnishes form as distinct from matter, essence as distinct from
existence, and the difference of theory and practice. Distance furnishes the idea of
inﬁnity. Thus the mind has gone where vision pointed” [4, p. 152]. That is to say, a
3 By the way, this statement has been recently validated thanks to the archaeologic discovery in
South Africa of a 73,000-year-old “abstract drawing” [13].
4 Indeed, the very deﬁnition of ‘thinking’ is contested, also because there are many recognised
types of thinking, like critical thinking, problem solving, decision-making, higher-order thinking,
creative thinking, caring thinking etc. [see for instance 11, 14–16].
4
Homo Pictor: A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origins …
103

thinking-related effort like philosophy and the concepts it uses, like time, eternity,
duality, and inﬁnity, rely on capacities provided by bodily sight and then actualized
by the human being.
I would like to spend a few more words on the centrality of the homo pictor to
thinking and then on the relationship between thinking and speech. As previously
mentioned, Jonas states that without the image-making ability, entailing “the eidetic
control of imagination, with its freedom of internal drafting,” the human being
would not have developed any “rational faculty” [4, pp. 172–173]. However, he
also warns not to overlook the “real qualitative novelty” [17, pp. 67–69] and the
difference between image-making and thinking, since “man’s image-making ability
[…] is not simply synonymous with ‘thinking’ but rather supports and enhances it
through playful imagination” [3, p. 78]. On the other hand, Jonas’ philosophical
inquiry highlights that thinking relies on a qualitatively peculiar kind of freedom (i.
e., eidetic freedom), which provides the human being with the unique capacity to
recreate and “ponder things in the imagination” [3, p. 81] and thus transcend the
world. At the same time, the homo pictor is still connected to the world, not only
because he/she is a living, perceiving body, but also because his/her ‘eidetic’
capability submits to the criterion of truth: “An image can be more or less true, i.e.,
faithful to the original. The intention to depict an object acknowledges it as it is and
accepts its verdict on the adequacy of the pictorial homage thus expressed” [3,
p. 81]. By the way, in this sense, the homo pictor’s ‘eidetic’ capability is the
precursor of both “verbally descriptive truth” and “scientiﬁc truth” [3, p. 81].
The reference to “verbally descriptive truth” alludes to speech—undeniably,
“man’s most outstanding trait” [3, p. 77]—, whose meaning and relationship to
thinking is now time to investigate further. As we shall see, the inquiry into speech
furnishes the homo pictor with additional thinking capacities enabling him/her to
ﬂourish as a human being. In brief, speech reveals the human being’s capacity to
transcend actual reality by means of communication, interpersonal recognition, and
understanding. Let us follow once more Jonas’ meditations, which reafﬁrm the
belonging of the human being to organic life, and especially to the domain of
animality, which is characterized by perception, emotion, and motion:
Animal life is expressive, even eager for expression. It displays itself; it has its sign codes,
its language; it communicates itself. Whole rituals of posture and gesture and expressive
movement serve the role of signals before the action or take its place, making the action
itself unnecessary, if warning was to be conveyed. Such spontaneous but strictly ﬁxed
symbolism counts on its being understood; untaught, animals do understand the mimics of
aggression, anger, and sexual courtship. It would be foolish to except man from all this [9,
pp. 245–246].5
Like the animal, the human being is an expressive being who communicates,
although in a more mediated and spontaneous way, relying on the previously
analyzed eidetic freedom. What is more, the human being seems to develop this
expressive and communicative trait in two speciﬁc directions: the ﬁrst is the homo
5 As regards the animal’s expressive nature and behaviour, see the wonderful and detailed account
provided by Adolf Portmann [18].
104
R. Franzini Tibaldeo

pictor’s intention to express him/herself in his/her paintings; the second is the
human being’s interpersonal intentionality and willingness to communicate with
someone else to achieve a certain goal. Recent ﬁndings in developmental and
comparative psychology seem to conﬁrm the centrality of this kind of intentionality
to mutualistic cooperation and the related development of humans’ species-forms of
cooperation, as well as their unique forms of cognition, communication, and social
life [19, 20]. What is more, according to this line of research, shared intentionality
relies on the speciﬁcally human conﬁguration of gaze, eyes, and sight, which gave
birth to the so-called “cooperative eye” [21]. It is thus true that—to paraphrase
Jonas—mind, thinking, and human behavior have gone where vision pointed.
But what about speech in particular? To some extent, language is already
encapsulated in the previously mentioned human features since understanding,
imagination, and speech are closely connected in that they rely on the human
capacity to deal with possibilities and potentialities mediated by symbols rather than
with sheer actualities [9, p. 247]. However, what reveals this human capability is
precisely language: “the very use of language for the generation of psychological
novelty—an actual enlargement of the soul’s estate—depends on this transcending
trait of our nature by which we are always indeﬁnably more than our present being”
[9, p. 247]. That is to say that speech sheds light on the human being’s
“self-transcending feat” [9, p. 257], while simultaneously recalling that being
human “takes place on the base and within the bounds of that abiding common
humanity which is somehow always at our call” [9, p. 257]. Indeed, as signiﬁcantly
pointed out almost a century ago by Lev Vygotsky, not only human development
and interpersonal-linguistic communication are structurally and dynamically
intertwined, but the ﬁrst somehow relies on the second [22, 23]. In this regard,
Jonas’ philosophical inquiry includes a further caveat about reductive interpreta-
tions of language and thinking, like the one proposed by the German-born art
theorist and perceptual psychologist Rudolf Arnheim, according to whom human
thinking cannot go beyond the patterns supplied by the human senses, since it takes
place in the realm of the senses exclusively [24, p. 233; 9, pp. 224–236, and
esp. 230]. To be sure, we know that according to Jonas, “true man” relies on the
homo pictor and that thought and speech rely on the image faculty. However, as
soon as the thinking and speaking human being makes his/her evolutive appear-
ance, it is absolutely clear that he/she has somehow gone ‘beyond’ the homo pictor,
just like thought and speech have somehow gone ‘beyond’ perception and sight.
This is how Jonas summarises the meaning of this speciﬁcally human capacity to
‘transcend’ actual reality: “language […] superimposes on it [= perception] a realm
of pure signiﬁcation, non-pictorial, free from the bonds of likeness, and therefore
the genuine vehicle for intellectual, suprasensible thought” [9, p. 231]. Conse-
quently, those who overlook the meaningful difference between language and
perception encounter a serious problem: what do they “make of so simple a
statement as ‘You shouldn’t have done this’? And what of the sentence I once
heard, to my unforgettable delight, a four-year-old girl just back from an errand to
the grocer’s address to her mother: ‘If you had given me a larger basket, I could
have brought more things’? I still remember the dazzling light this shed for me on
4
Homo Pictor: A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origins …
105

the human mind: its transcendence and freedom, distinct from animal mentality not
by degrees but by a qualitative leap” [9, p. 232].
A ﬁnal remark is on the dynamic of transcendence and freedom, which has
proved to be central to developing the human being’s capacity to think. For sure,
thinking is synonymous with rationality. But what about reason’s “dark side” [25],
namely irrationality? Is it synonymous with a lack of thinking? Surely not, unless
we want to relapse into a dualistic and unsatisfactory account of human affairs. An
effective way to deal with this delicate issue is to recall Jonas’ dialectical and
dynamic account of life and see how it applies to the homo pictor: thanks to the
development of the image faculty, the homo pictor achieves a qualitatively new viz.
eidetic way of transcending reality and dealing freely with it. Now, the point is that
this distantiation from actual reality thanks to the qualitative enhancement of the
homo pictor’s freedom is precisely where the basic dialectic of life gives ﬁnally rise
to the ambiguity of the human condition—which is open to either hope or despair,
truthfulness or deceit, good or evil, etc.6 –, and to the related need of ethical inquiry
and education [15, 19, 27–33]. As a result, all human traits and capacities, including
thinking, evidence an intrinsically twofold and ambiguous nature, and human be-
ings ought to carry the weight of this burden.
Conclusion
In this article, with the help of Hans Jonas, I carried out a philosophical-
anthropological inquiry into the human condition to clarify distinctive features, like
imagination, reﬂection, and speech, which exhibit the multidimensionality of
human thinking. Despite its transcendent and abstract appearance, the capacity to
think relies on a dual dynamic of freedom and necessity, distance and mediacy, and
transcendence and dependence, which characterizes life as a whole. Moreover,
human thinking stems from the evolution of life and depends on the human being’s
bodily experience. On the other hand, what sheds light on the peculiarity of the
human experience of thinking is precisely a qualitative discontinuity in the phe-
nomenon of life. Especially the homo pictor’s capacity to perceive and make
images is the prerequisite to understanding the kind of imaginative freedom
enabling him/her to actualize the potentialities related to his/her biological condi-
tion. And then it is thanks to a reﬂective turn in the homo pictor’s eidetic freedom
that we can understand his/her becoming fully human, namely capable of reﬂecting,
speaking, recognizing and being related with others, and thinking. Rather than
focusing on these capabilities separately, I tried to show their mutual and dynamic
connections, to shed light on the multidimensionality of human thinking: the image
faculty provides a basic bodily connection to the world and supports and enhances
6 It is worth noting that more or less in the same years as Jonas, the American literary theorist
Kenneth Burke proposes a similar deﬁnition of the human being as a “symbol-using,
symbol-making, and symbol-misusing animal” [26, p. 6], with the aim to develop a view of art
and literature as symbolic action.
106
R. Franzini Tibaldeo

thinking through playful and symbolic imagination; reﬂection and speech provide
thinking with a profound interiority and a powerful capacity to transcend the world
respectively; the ability to recognize and care about other beings evidences the
interpersonal and social intentionality related to human thinking.
Core Messages
• Imagination, reﬂection, and speech exhibit the multidimensional experi-
ence of thinking.
• Thanks to bodily experience, the homo was able to develop image-making
and image-perceiving capabilities and thus became “sapiens.”
• Speech reveals the human being’s capacity to transcend actual reality by
means of interpersonal recognition and thinking.
• The homo pictor’s freedom is at the origins of the ambiguity of the human
condition and of the need for ethical inquiry and education.
References
1. Fischer J (2008) Philosophische Anthropologie. Eine Denkrichtung des 20. Jahrhunderts.
Alber, Freiburg-München
2. Olafson FA (2019) Philosophical anthropology. Encyclopaedia Britannica. https://www.
britannica.com/topic/philosophical-anthropology. Accessed 6 Dec 2021
3. Jonas H (1996) Mortality and morality. A search for the good after Auschwitz. Northwestern
University Press, Evanston
4. Jonas H (1966) The phenomenon of life. Toward a philosophical biology. Harper & Row,
New York
5. Jonas H (1991) Erkenntnis und Verantwortung, Gespräch mit Ingo Hermann in der Reihe
“Zeugen des Jahrhunderts”. Lamuv, Göttingen
6. Jonas H (2008) Memoirs. Brandeis University Press, Lebanon
7. Franzini Tibaldeo R (2009) La rivoluzione ontologica di Hans Jonas. Uno studio sulla genesi
e il signiﬁcato di “Organismo e libertà”. Mimesis, Milano-Udine
8. Jonas H (2004) Wie können wir unsere Pﬂicht gegen die Nachwelt und die Erde unabhängig
vom Glauben begründen? In: Böhler D, Brune JP (eds) Orientierung und Verantwortung.
Begegnungen und Auseinandersetzungen mit Hans Jonas. Königshausen & Neumann,
Würzburg, pp 71–84
9. Jonas H (1974) Philosophical essays. From ancient creed to technological man. Prentice-Hall,
Englewood Cliffs
10. Wiesing L (2016) The visibility of the image. History and perspectives of formal aesthetics.
Bloomsbury, New York
11. Damasio A (1994) Descartes’ error: emotion, reason, and the human brain. Putnam, New
York
12. Cassirer E (1944) An essay on man. An introduction to a philosophy of culture. Doubleday
Anchor Books, Garden City
4
Homo Pictor: A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origins …
107

13. Henshilwood CS, d’Errico F, van Niekerk KL, Dayet L, Queffelec A, Pollarolo L (2018) An
abstract drawing from the 73,000-year-old levels at Blombos Cave, South Africa. Nature
562:115–118.
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-018-0514-3.epdf?sharing_token=gnq
XuKuZCcghq-dmv8_599RgN0jAjWel9jnR3ZoTv0Om7oE8mgx5t97mBOHpTj1Gj1t2fwx
XjVd-L6l4cK1MJBPG4DEkZkfwWV9g6czSkBSEKUCCWG0ZClVbZK7XLwrYGA34M7
I7etDBdN-IcN3Y_OLkoMIgc95xWs0J1r_NJn4LX1t26OBPsv_Cas-snr_dmmIpDQh6RhQm
bHoBbI32-kfGYcE9JteDfK0u-VDAs3snU9IQCN1a-wuqi5P0zZcW1WvmOaKuvnt3QJ8y6d
AB0WZWK3naXkGPO-XDjyQySCzZHUT65nqy5BrVfdrudETu6bCWSYM33UN83GUjJ6
xCVqGDItAM0SKwG3aLPfyABmWargHDLQaz_Pq1z2RKMID0&tracking_referrer=
www.repubblica.it. Accessed 6 Dec 2021
14. Bailin S (1987) Critical and creative thinking. Informal Logic 9(1):23–30
15. Lipman M (2003) Thinking in education. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
16. Hitchcock D (2018) Critical thinking. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. https://plato.
stanford.edu/entries/critical-thinking/. Accessed 6 Dec 2021
17. Jonas H (1984) The imperative of responsibility. In search of an ethics for the technological
age. University of Chicago Press, Chicago
18. Portmann A (1965) Aufbruch der Lebensforschung. Rhein, Zürich
19. Tomasello M, Melis AP, Tennie C, Wyman E, Herrmann E (2012) Two key steps in the evolution
of human cooperation: the interdependence hypothesis. Curr Anthropol 53(6):673–692
20. Tomasello M (2014) A natural history of human thinking. Harvard University Press,
Cambridge
21. Tomasello M, Hare B, Lehmann H, Call J (2007) Reliance on Head versus eyes in the gaze
following of great apes and human infants: the cooperative eye hypothesis. J Hum Evol
52:314–320
22. Vygotsky LS (2012). Thought and language. The MIT Press, Cambridge. Originally
Published in 1934
23. Kozulin A (2015) Vygotsky’s theory of cognitive development. In: Wright JD (ed) Interna-
tional encyclopedia of the social and behavioral sciences. Elsevier, Oxford, pp 322–328
24. Arnheim R (1969) Visual thinking. University of California Press, Berkeley
25. Smith JEH (2019) Irrationality: a history of the dark side of reason. Princeton University
Press, Princeton
26. Burke K (1966) Symbolic action. Essays on life, literature, and method. University of
California Press, Berkeley
27. Mondzain MJ (2003) Le Commerce des regards. Seuil, Paris
28. Wunenburger JJ (2003) L’imaginaire. PUF, Paris
29. Masschelein J (2010) E-ducating the Gaze: the idea of a poor pedagogy. Ethics Educ 5(1):
43–53
30. Levitas R (2013) Utopia as method. The imaginary reconstitution of society. Palgrave
Macmillan, New York
31. Sharp AM (2018) The other dimension of caring thinking. In: Gregory MR, Laverty MJ
(eds) In community of inquiry with Ann Margaret Sharp. Childhood, philosophy and
education. Routledge, Abingdon, pp 209–214
32. Sharp, AM, Laverty MJ (2018) Looking at others’ faces. In: Gregory MR, Laverty MJ
(eds) In community of inquiry with Ann Margaret Sharp. Childhood, philosophy and
education. Routledge, Abingdon, pp 120–130
33. Franzini Tibaldeo R, Frogneux N (2020) The dialectical dynamic of life’s self-preservation in
Hans Jonas’ philosophical biology. Grad Fac Philos J 41(2) (in press)
108
R. Franzini Tibaldeo

Roberto Franzini Tibaldeo (Ph.D. in Science of Culture,
Modena 2005, and in Philosophy, Torino 2011) is Adjunct pro-
fessor at the Escola de educação e humanidades, Pontifícia
Universidade Católica do Paraná, Curitiba (Brazil). Research
interests: continental philosophy (esp. Hans Jonas), ethics and
politics of responsibility, philosophy of education, philosophy
for/with children, interculturality, landscape studies. He is also a
practitioner of Philosophy for Children.
4
Homo Pictor: A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origins …
109

5
Idealism and Science of Life:
An Intersection Between Philosophy
and Biology
Stefania Achella
“Do you see this egg? With this you can topple every
theological theory, every church or temple in the world.”
[1]
Summary
While scrutinizing the interchange between philosophy and the sciences in the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries about the origins of life, this paper shows
how the commonality of research among different disciplines can lead to
moments of great discovery and theoretical advancement. In those years, in fact,
a new scientiﬁc form of knowledge is born under the name of biology, while
also one of the most important philosophical movements of modern history,
German idealism, ﬂourishes. The general aim of this paper is to emphasize the
richness of the dialogue between different kinds of knowledge, namely between
the so-called sciences of nature and the sciences of the mind (Geist).
S. Achella (&)
University of Chieti-Pescara, Chieti, Italy
e-mail: stefaniaachella@gmail.com
S. Achella
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Naples, Italy
S. Achella
Via dei Vestini, 31-66100 Chieti, Italy
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh (eds.), Thinking, Integrated Science 7,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04075-7_5
111

Rembrandt van Rijn, The Anatomy Lesson of Dr Nicolaes Tulp, 1632.
[Adapted from Europeana Collections, Public Domain Marked https://classic.
europeana.eu/portal/en/record/2021672/resource_document_mauritshuis_146.
html?q=anatomy+lesson#dcId=1600197000531&p=2.]
Keywords
Epigenetics  Hegel  Jacobi  Kant  Organism  Preformationism  Reason 
Schelling  Teleology
QR code
112
S. Achella

Scanning the QR code directs you to the word cloud of the chapter that is made
up of the words we discussed throughout the whole book in relation to the chapter’s
keyword, which is intentionally not included in the word cloud. Find the keyword
and put it in place in the puzzle according to the clues provided in Chap. 36. The
mystery hidden in the puzzle is the quote of THINKING: Bioengineering of Science
and Art.
Introduction
Taken from an imaginary conversation between Diderot and d’Alembert, the
opening quote clearly expresses the epochal transition produced in the eighteenth
century by discoveries in the life sciences and, in particular, in embryology. To
preformationism, according to which future life would already be included in small
format in the ovum or spermatozoon, one could oppose epigenetics, which takes
the living being to be the result of a development originating from natural matter
and driven by an internal force. This latter claim questions the idea that human
beings have been created by God: a real earthquake even within a centuries-old
culture. As Diderot also points out, this is not just a scientiﬁc question. Discussing
embryology involves questioning a worldview that has determined the idea of
nature, human beings, and the role of God for centuries. This transformation can
only really be understood as a phenomenon that involves religious, philosophical,
and anthropological standpoints.
While choosing to advocate the theory of generatio aequivoca rather than the
univocal one,1 to support the claims of epigenesis rather than those of preforma-
tionism, to argue in favor of a relationship of mutual dependence between human
beings and their environment, scholars take sides for a certain way of interpreting
the world. Scientiﬁc discoveries in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries involved
then a repositioning with respect to religion, philosophy, and so on; however, the
reverse is also true: these scientiﬁc discoveries were possible thanks to the progress
urged in more general epistemological terms by humanities, particularly within
philosophy. This explicit link between the science of life and humanities was,
however, later rejected if not repressed.
1 Based on the notion of generatio aequivoca the derivation of life from non-life is supposed to be
possible. This position was untenable even according to Kant, who instead leaned towards the
generatio homonyma, that is the idea that the organic can derive only from the organic.
5
Idealism and Science of Life: An Intersection …
113

As a clear sign of the victory of reductionist positivism, the subsequent history of
biology dismissed, sometimes hastily, the richness and theoretical scope of the
dialogue between Naturphilosophie, romantic science,2 and German idealism. The
scientiﬁc reasoning developed since the mid-nineteenth century rigorously sepa-
rates the objective study of the living from what subjectively the living is—i.e., a
dynamic and alive bond. The romantic debate has thus been consigned to the
prehistory of biology with “metaphysical” inclinations and, as such, banned. As a
result, the ground-breaking contributions of the so-called Goethezeit have been lost,
among these, in particular, the common effort to articulate a new common research
domain that looks at life in a different, organic way; the attempt to ﬁnd a place for
life in the order of the physical world; the birth of a new role in the world of
research, namely that of the médecin philosophe, the philosophischer Arzt, who
embodies the insufﬁciency of any single disciplinary ﬁeld to account for the living
being. A scrutiny of the debates of those years can therefore not only help us
retrieve a historical period that has been mystiﬁed but also offers a different model
for today's discussions between sciences and philosophy. One can notably learn
how philosophy has intervened with its questions and methodological instances in
the formation of science—e.g., biology3—and how a new scientiﬁc paradigm can
prompt philosophy to rethink its categories and concepts—e.g., the notion of ratio
in German idealism (Table 5.1).
Life and Its Origins: A Controversial Story
For centuries creationism had remained uncontested. Although attempts had been
made to identify theories that could scientiﬁcally explain the origins of living
beings, no open conﬂict with theology had been triggered; scientists would merely
investigate the ‘how’ and not the ‘why’ of life, that is to say, the way in which the
phenomena of the living manifested and not the causes that had determined their
origins. In the eighteenth century, thanks, among other things, to the scientiﬁc
2 At the end of the last century historiography distinguished between Naturphilosophie and
romantic science. In this regard, according to Richards, “Naturphilosophie speciﬁcally focused on
the organic core of nature, its archetypal structure, and its relationship to mind, while Romanticism
added aesthetic and moral features to this conception of nature” [2]. Differently, Stefano Poggi
draws attention to the fact that the appellation Naturphilosophie, as pars pro toto, does not bear
testimony to the complexity and scientiﬁc acumen of the research of these years. He therefore
suggests using the broader expression of “romantic science”. On the contrary, the term
Naturphilosophie lays emphasis on the aspiration to a speculative physics, and therefore on an idea
of science that would soon be rejected as an insufﬁciently rigorous model of knowledge [3].
3 This view is stated very clearly in the well-known book by John H. Zammito: “It is well-past time
to put this prejudice to rest along with all the other complacent dogmas of the positivist epoch. The
effort to consolidate biology found positive reinforcement in German Idealist philosophy, and
instead of viewing Naturphilosophie as a contamination, we might view it as historical evidence
that something essential to the character of biology as a special science was at stake, and thus, this
episode in the history of biology might reopen issues in our own philosophy of biology” [4].
114
S. Achella

reworking of the Montpellier school,4 vitalism introduced the concept of vital force,
no longer in terms of a merely metaphysical force, but as a natural one. As a result,
life was no longer made to depend on a creator but rather understood as a
self-organized system generated by material and natural causes. The vitalistic
hypothesis accompanied then the resurgence of the epigenesis (from Greek: ἐpί
“after” and cέmeriϛ “generation”).5
Epigenesis was ﬁrst elaborated by Aristotle [9], who argued that the agent of the
genesis process could be found in the male seminal ﬂuid. The latter would indeed
be the efﬁcient cause of the process; in other words, what triggers the change and
deploys its action by activating the process of formation of the new being. The
seminal ﬂuid is supposed to act on the matter provided by the mother by trans-
mitting a series of successive impulses to it. The new organism then becomes
independent of the parents. Its formation happens step by step: some parts appear at
an early stage, others later. Therefore, no external cause is required, as each
organism possesses the cause of its own development, which Aristotle calls soul
(psyche) or, at an early stage, the nutritive soul.
Table 5.1 Major differences between Newtonianism and Romantic Science
Newtonianism
Romantic science
The origin of phenomena explained by
reference to God
God not included in explanations of the
living being
Science investigates the “how” of life
Science investigates the “why” of life
World viewed as “non-organic” and
purposeless
World viewed as “organic” and purposive
Fundamentally mathematical
Mainly qualitative
Physics can explain the functioning of the
living
Living being needs an organic explanation
4 Since the Middle Ages an important medical training centre was based in Montpellier. In the
seventeenth century, an inﬂamed clash between mechanists and animists took place there: while
the iatrophysicians—led by Fizes (1690–1765)—claimed that the data of physics could fully
explain the functioning of the living, based on Descartes’ animal-machine model, on the opposite
front, scholars, among which Stahl (1659-1734), supported animism and saw the soul as the true
cause of vital phenomena. From this clash an original position emerged, namely that of the
autonomy of the science of life, which will seep through the vitalist current, in which Montpellier
played an absolutely decisive role. Cf. [5, 6]. The importance of Montpellier's médicin-
s-philosophes is due to two main achievements: they take up the idea of an “échelle commune des
êtres vivants”, as to integrate human being into nature and among other animal species; they reject
the separation between body and soul, as outlined in the medical treatises of the seventeenth
century, and develop a monist and global theory of the living and of human beings. Cf. [7].
5 As Paul S. Agutter and Denys N. Wheatley explain, “His ‘physics’ was in that sense organic, in
sharp contrast to modern physics. During embryo development, the uterus (formal cause) shapes
the growing seed (material cause) towards the goal-state of the mature organism (ﬁnal cause).
Aristotle’s accounts of all-natural processes broadly conform to this account of embryogenesis. As
a result, his worldview was entirely naturalistic but teleological rather than mechanistic. Every
process must have a ﬁnal cause, a ‘goal,’ just as embryo development does” [8].
5
Idealism and Science of Life: An Intersection …
115

In modern times, epigenesis is retrieved by the famous English physician Wil-
liam Harvey (1578–1657), who, in a text from 1651, Exercitationes de generatione
animalium, introduces the idea of the generation per epigenesin, the idea, that is,
that in some animals the formation of organs derives from a process of differen-
tiation and subsequent formation of the individual parts. Other animals, such as
insects, for example, instead, do this “per metamorphosis,” in other words, “they
are formed from ready-made material and only acquire a new ﬁgure”6 (Fig. 5.1).
While reviving the epigenetic claim, through his ideas on ready-made material,
Harvey also opens the door to preformationism, which, contrary to epigenetics, is
based on the assumption that all embryos already exist in the ﬁrst individual of each
species that appeared on earth. In the case of human beings, this amounts to saying
that there is a homunculus already present in the sperm, and thereby we are
“preformed”7 (Fig. 5.1).
Precisely thanks to its compatibility with Christian dogmas, preformationism
widely spread. According to this new standard theory, the entire human species—as
the preformationist Swammerdam writes in his Historia insectorum generalis (1669)
—already existed in Adam and Eve, and this would also explain why the whole of
humanity is condemned to their sin [11].8 The most radical ideas about preforma-
tionism and the encapsulation of embryos in animalculi were expressed in 1694 by
Nicolas Hartsoeker. In the Essay de dioptrique, he applies preformationist assumptions
to human beings and suggests that the entire fetus is a “homunculus” that micro-
scopically replicates the being in gestation, which is housed in the sperm (Fig. 5.2).
At the heart of preformationism lies the wish to decouple life sciences from the
Aristotelian ﬁnalistic approach, as well as from vitalism, which proves weak at the
experimental level. The vision that guides these scientists ﬁts into the mechanistic
Cartesian scheme. But despite the efforts to dismiss all ﬁnalism, these theories keep
referring to a primary cause or higher intelligence. Preformationism, therefore,
avoids confronting the issue of the origins and limits itself to analyzing vital
phenomena. As Charles Bonnet writes: “the production [of an individual] is not a
true generation but the simple development of what was already formed, […] the
simple evolution of what was already generated” [12].9 Starting from the
6 As William Harvey states, in some animals the origin has to be thought potius per epigenesin
quam per metamorphosin. Cf. [10].
7 Preformationism is based at an early stage on the hypothesis that ﬁrst there was an egg (ovism);
subsequently, on the idea that ﬁrst there was a spermatozoon (animalculism), with more
convincing outcomes at experimental level.
8 Animated by deep religious spirituality, the Dutch Swammerdam, who was among the ﬁrst to use
the microscope to dissect living bodies—especially insect bodies—sided against the idea of
metamorphosis and spontaneous generation, supporting preformationism instead.
9 And later on, accusing the defenders of epigenetics: “what amazes us is to see the naturalists
[Physiciens] who, in a century as enlightened as ours, take up these errors and deploy all the
strength of their genius to persuade us that an animal is formed like a crystal […]. They revive the
occult qualities that a good philosophy banned from natural philosophy [la Physique]. They resort
to instincts, forces of attraction [forces de rapports], chemical afﬁnities, organic molecules that are
neither vegetable nor animal and form from their combination [réunion] vegetables and animals”
[13].
116
S. Achella

mid-eighteenth century, a series of discoveries relaunches the vitalistic approach
and the epigenetic solution, namely exposing the failure of the great mechanistic
project, underpinning the theories of preformationism and the pre-existence of
Fig. 5.1 W. Harvey, Exercitationes de generatione animalium. Quibus accedunt quaedam de
partu: de membranis ac humoribus uteri: & de conceptione, Amstelædami: Apud I. (Exercises on
the Generation of Animals. To which are added the essays on parturition, on the membranes, ﬂuids
of the uterus, and conception, published in the Engraved frontispiece, 1651 by Ravesteynium).
(Adapted from Europeana Collections under CC BY 4.0 https://classic.europeana.eu/portal/en/
record/9200579/q9a6g97d.html?q=W.+Harvey%2C+Exercitationes+de+generatione+animalium#
dcId=1615948483190&p=1)
5
Idealism and Science of Life: An Intersection …
117

germs. Among these experiments, one could mention that of the English biologist
Needham (1713–1781) published in his Nouvelles observations microscopiques, in
1750, which allegedly demonstrated spontaneous generation—even though the
experiment was later denied.10 Needham comes to support the existence of an
“expansive internal force,” or of a “generative faculty,” even in the brute matter,
and insists on its “producing force”[14]. It is worth remarking here that the epi-
genetic hypotheses develop along different lines in France and Germany. While in
France, based on Newton's theory and the idea of mechanical force reinforced by
Maupertius’ research, scholars move in a materialistic direction in terms of
physical-chemical forces, a revival of Leibniz's ideas occurs in Germany. Along
Needham's line, epigenetics is there strongly qualiﬁed by the postulate on the
existence of speciﬁc vital forces.
Fig. 5.2 Sketch of a
homunculus enclosed in a
human spermatozoon, 1694,
from Essai de Dioptrique
(Nicolas Hatsoeker).
(Adapted from Wikimedia
Commons, the free media
repository https://en.
wikipedia.org/wiki/Nicolaas_
Hartsoeker#/media/File:
Preformation.GIF)
10 It is the Italian Lazzaro Spallanzani who conclusively refuted the epigenetic theses of generatio
aequivoca (Saggio di osservazioni microscopiche relative al sistema della generazione dei signori
Needham e Buffon, 1765). Epigenetics will regain ground only a few years later, and only for a
short time, thanks to the support of Goethe who, with his idea of morphology, introduced the
concept of metamorphosis as a solution to the issues epigenetics faced once the continuity between
organic and inorganic world was established.
118
S. Achella

Within this second tradition, the major exponent is Caspar Friedrich Wolff,
who, in his Theoria generationis (1759), advocates the idea of a life force
(Lebenskraft11) endowed with material and natural features. Wolff calls this force
vis essentialis and does not understand it in Newtonian terms as a mechanical
force but rather as a vital drive. He thus goes as far as to postulate the existence of
a vital principle that operates before the appearance of any vital function and that
presides to the entire embryonic development by associating itself with other
forces of physical–chemical type, which are responsible for the formation of
organs and tissues. This vis, like the Aristotelian nutritive soul, is the capacity to
distribute the nourishment, organize the parts to make the whole work, and
promote what will later be identiﬁed as the instinct of self-preservation.12 The
Wolfﬁan hypothesis restores then to an empirical and observable dimension the
still metaphysical reference of the ﬁrst theorists of vitalism (for example, Georg
Ernst Stahl). The embryo presents itself initially as a shapeless mass, and then
gradually, thanks to this vis, it becomes more articulated until the parts slowly
assume a deﬁnitive structure. An original force or instinct would develop over
time, determining completely new formations, not present from the beginning,
thus determining an evolution in “layers” of materials. This vital force would be
able to guide the emergence of the form within the organism. In this way, Wolff
grafts epigenetics into vitalism.13
Behind these different “embryo epistemologies” lie different worldviews. As
Farley also puts it, in the eighteenth century, a materialistic mechanist could only be
a good Christian if they adhered to preformationism [18].14 Centuries of doctrinal
teachings were indeed at stake. And hardly unexpected is the hostility, in Christian
circles, towards vitalistic theories. The case of Albrecht von Haller is in this respect
emblematic.
Initially close to epigenetics, Haller appreciated Buffon's work and promoted the
German translation of his Histoire Naturelle—for which he also wrote the preface
to the second volume. Upon his return to Switzerland, probably also in consequence
of the condemnation issued by the creationist theologian Reimarus—who consid-
ered materialism as a form of naturalistic Epicureanism as well as atheism—and the
inﬂuence of Bonnet—a strenuous defender of preformationism and creationist
mechanism and an opponent of the theory of spontaneous generation—Haller
decided once and for all to close any dialogue with the supporters of epigenesis and
to advocate preformationism openly.15
11 The concept of Lebenskraft or “life force” was introduced by the famous botanist Friedrich
Casimir Medicus in 1774. He uses this term for those chemical phenomena related to living matter
that could not be explained by the chemistry of inanimate objects and, in this respect, the use of the
term is not far from the idea of Newtonian force.
12 «Quaecumque vero sit haec vis […] modo praestet enarratos effectus, et ponatur, posita planta
et humoribus nutritiis applicatis […]: sufﬁciet ea praesenti scopo et vocabitur a me vis
vegetabilium essentialis», [15]. Cf. [16]
13 For an accurate account on the whole debate, cf. [17].
14 Roe calls this: “science within the limits of religion”. [19].
15 On the different perspectives embraced by Haller, initially close to epigenetics and then
completely converted to preformationism, see [20].
5
Idealism and Science of Life: An Intersection …
119

While it is clear how much religious discourse intervenes in scientiﬁc research of
the time, it is not the only factor inﬂuencing scientiﬁc choices. In accepting one
theory or another, one's ideological approach to experiments also plays a funda-
mental role. The use of microscopes and the possibility to closely observe “the
facts” pave the way to conﬂict between those who understand the role of the
naturalist as aimed at collecting positive results from observations—since,
according to the Newtonian motto, Hypoteses non ﬁngo, hypotheses could only
lead to unfounded and dangerous generalizations—and those who see science in
different terms: facts are only facts, bricks of science; the essence of science are
ideas. Two opposite fronts confront then each other: on the one side, a “ﬁdeistic”
experimental approach; on the other, a holistic approach aimed at understanding
“scientiﬁc evidence” in a wider system context—an example of this approach
is provided by the philosophical anatomy, also known as transcendental anatomy
presented in those years by Étienne Geoffroy de Saint-Hilaire and even earlier by
Goethe. What's more, also political factors have their bearing. While in Germany,
scientists are mostly linked to universities, the French government centralizes sci-
entiﬁc institutions. Access to careers is often ﬁltered through mechanisms that do
not exclusively rely on the reliability of scientiﬁc criteria. Aspiring naturalists were
well aware that their position on certain issues could affect their careers. One
example is provided by George Cuvier—permanent secretary of the Academie des
Sciences, professor at the Collège de France, member of the Conseil de l'Université
and friend of powerful politicians—who used his role to gather allies in the ﬁght
against the morphological approach to anatomy, as developed by Geoffroy de Saint
Hilaire and his people, giving rise to a heated dispute.16
Behind the debate on life and its origins, therefore, there is a much more
complex world that reaches well beyond scientiﬁc connotations and implies not
only a wide range of historiographical elements but also epistemological ones. It is
precisely with respect to this point that the role played by philosophy within this
constellation is particularly interesting.
Knowing Life
Whereas religious beliefs and political institutions affect the evolution of claims in
biology from the outside, philosophy has a different status. There is, in fact, a strong
philosophical component at the origins of the discourse of biology. The term “bi-
ology” as an autonomous discipline was introduced at the beginning of the nine-
teenth century.17 Both Jean-Baptiste de Lamarck and Gottfried Reinhold Treviranus
assess the essence of biology against its philosophical background. According to
Lamark, unlike physiology which takes life for granted, biology, while querying
itself concerning “what life is,” poses “philosophically” the problem of its own
16 About this debate see below.
17 Cf. [21–24].
120
S. Achella

foundation; for Treviranus, biology is not limited to describing events but rather
tries to elaborate theories and systems. For the scientists of these years, that is,
biology is a philosophy of living nature, Philosophie der lebenden Natur, as the
subtitle of Treviranus’ work reads. Biology is then an inquiry that, far from pivoting
on the mere observation of the results of experiments, is aimed at understanding life
as a system within a system. With its assessments, philosophy deeply inﬂuences the
structure of the new science. It underlines in particular:
• the need to move from a static vision to a dynamic one;
• the need for an organicistic and not only analytical approach;
• the resumption of a ﬁnalistic conception.
These philosophical contributions play a key role in the constitution of the
epistemology of biology, which, on their ground, can take distance from Newtonian
physics.
The Dynamic of the Living
In the course of the eighteenth century, Linnaeus’ abstract and static classifying
intent is replaced by the idea that nature as a living being is subject to a process of
transformation, not only external but also internal [25]. This dynamic component
also provides rehabilitation of the role of time, in reaction to the prevalence of the
spatial perspective typical of the early modern period. Unlike the bodies of New-
tonian physics, life is linked to a temporal process of development and formation.
The laws of its knowledge need to take into account a dynamic component. As a
result, the Naturbeschreibung—a description of nature framed by an afﬁnity-based
system—is ﬂanked by the Naturgeschichte—a narration of the history of nature.
What is at stake here is not only a question of historical knowledge but also a
dynamic vision of reality. Nature is recognized as an agency. Logic's artiﬁcial
regularities and the human deﬁnition of a set of categories schematically ordering
the world are believed to fail to accurately map the proliﬁc dispersion achieved by
nature. Classiﬁcation systems can certainly be employed as helpful artiﬁcial sign
systems, but it is a totally different matter if one accounts for the truth of these
processes. This is basically the contrast between the ﬁxism at the basis of prefor-
mationism and the dynamism at the basis of epigenetics.
The Organism as a Model
The second aspect based on which philosophy is recognized as criterium of
knowledge in the realm of living beings concerns the organism and the idea of
internal organization. Granted that nature is living, it does not follow a linear and
mechanical development, but it organizes itself in such a way as to preserve and
reproduce itself, following a sort of internal project. Mechanism appears to be a
5
Idealism and Science of Life: An Intersection …
121

necessary but not sufﬁcient interpretation of this process, and, in this respect, the
organism model has the upper hand [26].
The living being can no longer be understood as an aggregate of parts but must
be considered as a unity made up of limbs, and it is this unity that gives meaning to
the parts. The internal conﬁguration of this unity, together with its ratio essendi
(reason for being), determines its ratio cognoscendi (ground of knowledge). As
they elaborate and react to drives, even mechanical ones, according to their own
constitution and to a conatus to self-preservation, living beings cannot be read
based on external causes only. The organism requires a new understanding of the
relationship between the whole and the parts, as non-linear and chronological,
based on which the whole is always more than the sum of its parts. This introduces
a further epistemological shift with respect to classical physics: the parts are not like
wheels in a machine, which can be assessed separately from the whole; they rather
deﬁne themselves in reference to the whole, just as the whole can be identiﬁed only
as counter-effect of the aggregation of the parts. The famous dispute between
Cuvier and Geoffroy is compelling proof of the sudden importance of the notion of
organism in understanding the living. The main object of debate is, in fact, the
relationship between the functions of the organs and the organism. As he supports a
teleologically oriented position, Cuvier insists on the priority of function over
structure; Geoffroy instead supports the morphological position, hence the priority
of structure over function. Cuvier gives precedence to holistic and functional
considerations rather than strictly morphological ones. Geoffroy, on the contrary,
seeks to create a science of pure morphology. The failure of his theory might be
taken as the sign of its being too ahead of its time. The debate nevertheless features
the culmination of a struggle in biology, which can ultimately be traced back to the
idealistic attitude of the Platonic tradition. In the philosophical scenario of the time,
this tradition ﬁnds expression in the transcendental Kantian-Fichtian positions,
which clash against the Aristotelian teleological approach embraced by all the
Naturphilosophen.18 This ultimately fuels the contrast between comparative anat-
omy and morphology, as well as between teleology and transcendental abstraction.
For Cuvier, each part of an animal is designed to contribute to the functional
integrity of the animal or to adapt it to its environment. Whenever a new part is
needed for functional purposes, the creator can create a new and appropriate organ.
The function is of primary importance: the animal’s needs are considered sufﬁcient
to determine its structure. Clashing with the functionalist vision of nature, Geoffroy
outlines a theory of anatomy in philosophical or transcendental terms. Whereas
Cuvier argues that the animal structure is determined by the functional needs of an
organism, Geoffroy maintains that all animal structures are modiﬁed forms of a
18 As Appel states: “A closer study of the debate, however, shows that both Cuvier and Geoffroy
defended extreme positions. The signiﬁcance of the debate for the future of biology is that it laid
bare the untenability of both Cuvier's and Geoffroy's views, and challenged naturalists to come to a
creative resolution of them. While Geoffroy's more speculative doctrine of the “unity of
composition” in the animal kingdom may have been rejected in 1830, his morphological program,
known as “philosophical anatomy,” eventually became an integral part of biological science in
both France and Britain” [27].
122
S. Achella

single uniﬁed plan. Cuvier reﬂects the systematic and organistic position of ide-
alism; Goeffroy, on the other hand, embodies the attitude of the Naturphilosophen.
The dispute between the two scientists is the fallout of divergent philosophical
orientations. Beyond the empirical evidence of those years, such a slippery subject
as the relationship between organs and organisms has to be built necessarily upon
the basis of a worldview.
A New Teleology
A third element can be added to this picture, namely Kant's reintroduction of
ﬁnalism. At twenty-three years of age, in his 1747 dissertation, Thoughts on the
True Estimation of Living Forces (German: Gedanken von der wahren Schätzung
der lebendigen Kräfte), Kant tackles the issue of the insufﬁciency of mechanism in
the explanation of the living and looks for a principle of explanation for those forces
—what Leibniz inspires him to call living forces—which cannot be traced back to
the mechanical forces. Several years later, a much more mature Kant (Fig. 5.3),
while drafting the Critique of Judgement (1790), tries to solve this problem by
introducing the idea of a telos. He indeed admits that even if one aims to explain
everything in nature in mechanical terms through scientiﬁc inquiry, some objects
cannot be explained mechanically. These objects can be explained in teleological
terms.19 The end expresses here a dynamic model of relationship that connects
everything to the parts. There is, therefore, something more than the bipolar rela-
tionship that recalls the Newtonian-type tension between the forces. For Kant,
however, this idea of totality remains unattainable to the ﬁnite intellect and there-
fore retains only an “ideal” status [29].20 It can serve to guide our thinking, but it
provides no access to truth. As Lenoir argues [31, 32], Kant is at the origin of an
attitude, teleomechanism, that becomes typical of the sciences of the living, which
takes center stage in the discourses of the main naturalists of those years, from
Blumenbach, to the Göttingen school, to Reil, and which lays the ground of both
vitalistic materialism and epigenetic embryology.
Kantian instances push science to acknowledge that, with respect to the use of
the Newtonian method (i.e., the derivation of laws from an observational-
experimental investigation; the mathematical deductive explanation of phenomena
in the light of the same laws), the study of the living requires a more holistic
approach.
This philosophical standpoint urges scientiﬁc thinking to come to terms not only
with qualitative differences in addition to quantitative differences but also with the
need for an analytical account of phenomena in their entirety; this implies a pro-
gressive questioning of the primacy of mathematics and the analytical method and
draws attention to the need to develop—with the support of philosophy—new tools
for analysis. It is therefore clear, as Huneman states in reference to those years, that
19 See [28].
20 On the normative feature of the teleological judgement, see: [30].
5
Idealism and Science of Life: An Intersection …
123

“the line we are prompted to draw between science and philosophy appears quite
blurred, or more complicated than we thought, since people at those times would
spontaneously elaborate their explanatory strategy within both science and
Fig. 5.3 Portrait of Immanuel Kant. (Adapted from Europeana Collections, Public Domain Marked
https://classic.europeana.eu/portal/en/record/90402/RP_P_1886_A_10329.html?q=Immanuel+kant#
dcId=1600197000531&p=2)
124
S. Achella

philosophy” [33]. In conclusion, in the years between the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries, change in how living beings are scrutinized goes hand in hand with
philosophical accounts.
Thinking Life
The relation of inﬂuence between philosophy and sciences is clearly reciprocal. The
science of living with its problems and answers also plays an important role in
formulating a new idea of reason. In this respect, historiography has wrongly
identiﬁed the philosophical contributions of these years, especially in Germany, as a
mere relapse into a metaphysical and anti-scientiﬁc attitude.21 It should be clear,
instead, that being confronted with a dynamic and self-regulating object such as life
produces signiﬁcant effects on the philosophical discourse around the models of
rationality, as clearly shown by idealism. In other words, one could say that the
model of rationality elaborated in these years is also a reﬂection of the inﬂuences of
the new sciences of life.22
The starting point is, once again, Immanuel Kant. As is well known, while
embracing the critical stance brought forward by Hume's empiricism—which had
awakened him from dogmatic sleep—and sharing Newtonian positions and the
mechanistic approach, Kant initiated a fundamental investigation in the epistemo-
logical ﬁeld, which aimed to overcome classical metaphysics. The main aim of
Kant's critique was to overcome Hume's skepticism through a radical examination
of the assumptions that underpin our conscious experience of the natural world,
effectively delimiting the scope of human knowledge. If, as Kant recognizes,
humans can only know what they posit, the outcome could be either skepticism—
which is Hume’s conclusion—or self-limitation. This second solution, which is the
one chosen by Kant, however, opens up a deep rift between the plane of knowledge
and that of life: philosophy, like science, must build its knowledge by following a
rigorously mathematical method based on a priori principles. The outcome of
Kant’s operation, which has the merit of freeing philosophy from elements still
linked to the metaphysical tradition, leads to the distinction between a cognizable
sphere—what Kant deﬁnes as the phenomenon—and an unknowable sphere—the
space of the noumenon. Whereas on the epistemological level, Kant contributes to
clarifying the concept of truth and knowledge, on the level of the new sciences, his
distinction leads to an aporetic outcome. What happens then when this analysis is
applied to the living? Kant’s perspective leaves a deep mark on German idealism,
which seeks to overcome the separation between a homo phaenomenon and a homo
noumenon, that is to say, between ﬁnite and inﬁnite.
21 Zammito suggests “to link the gestation of biology in Germany with that most despised
phenomenon in the history and philosophy of science, Idealist Naturphilosophie” [34].
22 Richards ﬁnds the roots of nineteenth-century biology in the Romantic movement [35].
5
Idealism and Science of Life: An Intersection …
125

How to heal the fracture between man and nature? Can the human intellect know
nature and think life? These questions brought about in those years a redeﬁnition of
the idea of philosophy and its system. As previously seen, science shows that
certain aspects of living cannot be reduced to mechanical explanations. This issue is
clearly a product of the model of reason and knowledge born within the scientiﬁc
revolution. The effort made by post-Kantian idealism is, therefore, to go beyond the
separation between the mechanical dimension and the organic dimension. And it is
on this point that nascent biology has a strong inﬂuence.
The ﬁrst obvious inﬂuence concerns the imagery. The metaphorical reference to
scientiﬁc theories in describing the phenomena pertaining to the realm of mind is
certainly not a novelty of those years. It may sufﬁce to mention in this respect
Kant's famous reference to the Copernican revolution to describe the different
relationships of knowledge between the subject and the world. But in German
idealism, the metaphorical use of biological images takes on remarkable
proportions.
Beyond the metaphorical turning to the living, however, science has an essential
bearing on how idealism rethinks rational thinking itself. Schelling provides here a
good example. Among the ﬁrst advocates of Naturphilosophie, he explicitly the-
orizes the necessary link between philosophy and science and devotes himself to
speculative physics or natural philosophy. In his early writings, drafted at the end of
the eighteenth century, the concept of life takes center stage.
Life stands there for a unitary horizon, including the world and the subject.
Schelling is in this respect committed to showing the isomorphism between the
principles objectively given in nature and the acts subjectively deliberated by the
self. Based on the perspective adopted by the young Schelling, while exploring
nature, the scientist ﬁnds but the other realm of the self, that is to say, rationality.
Science and philosophy ultimately work on the same object. Only one reason is
assumed to govern both humans and nature, thought and world, and subjectivity
and objectivity [36]. Just as nature does not differ from the subject, in the same way,
no longer valid is the Kantian distinction between subjective representation and
objective world. Based on the ability to act and self-organize, which identiﬁes both
nature and the subject, thought and life are no longer seen as irreconcilable, and a
form of thought capable of grasping life, that is to say, the world is deemed
possible. Consistently, Schelling's efforts can be described as looking for a system
of knowledge that follows the model of organization identifying living organisms.
The same effort also appears in Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi's contributions. In the
well-known dispute with Fichte, Jacobi blames his interlocutor's transcendental
idealism for resorting to a form of rationality separate from life. In some of his
remarks, Fichte does not deny believing that thought could be at most speculum of
life. To this standpoint, Jacobi contrasts his anti-dualistic idea of philosophy and
life, which clearly incorporates a cognitive scheme derived from the biology of
those years.
Jacobi supports the superiority of a comprehension that goes beyond the con-
ceptual rigidities of the intellect and investigates the living nature of human beings
beyond their mere bios. Jacobi ultimately performs a turnaround that sets life as a
126
S. Achella

model for thought. As already stated in the Doctrine of Spinoza: “The principle of
all cognition is living being; living being proceeds from itself, it is progressive and
productive. The stirring of a worm, its sluggish pleasure or displeasure, could not
arise without an imagination holding [such stirrings] together according to the laws
of the worm’s principle of life, and producing a representation of its state. The more
manifold the felt existence that a being generates in this way, the more alive is such
a being” [37]. The form of knowledge is consequently seen as deriving from the
form of life that produces it: knowledge-reason expresses the life that is at its origin.
According to Jacobi, the distinctive autonomy of life is the opposite of the
heteronomy of the legality of physics.
A ﬁnal example of the effects of biology on philosophy is provided by Hegel. In
his work, the metaphorical use of scientiﬁc models developed by the biology of his
time is overwhelming. One could mention here not only the reference to the
functioning of digestion while describing the way knowledge proceeds,23 but also
the famous Preface to The Phenomenology of Spirit—drafted just a few days before
the delivery of the work to the printer while worrying that the manuscript would be
burnt by Napoleon's army marching on Jena. Hegel’ work was studded with the
metaphorical use of examples taken from biology:
• the image of the seed that disappears into bloom like the negative movement of
dialectics;
• the description of the passage to a new era, as equivalent to the “troubled” period
in which the child is about to be born and which arrives at the “ﬁrst breath” that
“shatters the gradualness of only quantitative growth—it makes a qualitative
leap and is born” [38];
• the equation between the abstractive capacity of the intellect and “death;”
• “the bacchanalian revel where not a member is sober” [39], to understand the
pervasiveness of the truth that touches every element of knowledge.
Alongside this metaphorical repertoire, what is surprising in Hegel's philosophy
is how biology is employed to grasp how thought works. The clearest example in
this respect is precisely the use of the concept of life. Whereas Newtonian physics,
relying on a Cartesian, analytical understanding of intellect, builds itself around the
idea of the force ﬁeld and therefore seeks a principle of explanation that remains
extrinsic to the analyzed objects, biology offers a more dynamic and articulated type
of knowledge that develops precisely within the living organism. Life is a system of
relationships that has the principle of its own knowledge within it. Even death,
previously understood according to the Epicurean deﬁnition as an alternative to life,
23 It should be remarked that at the end of the 1700s, the Italian scientist Lazzaro Spallanzani
conducted important research on digestion (see: Dissertations of animal and vegetative physics,
1780), based on which he was able to demonstrate the digestive action of gastric juice,
independently of any mechanical action of the walls of the digestive tract, and how digestive
processes differ from fermentation; he also succeeded in obtaining in vitro digestion, thus
providing a new, valuable means of analysis of the chemistry of digestion. Digestion was a key
scientiﬁc topic of the time.
5
Idealism and Science of Life: An Intersection …
127

now, thanks to Xavier Bichat's inquiries, falls within its orbit. Granted that life is
not primarily individual life, but rather the life of the species, it also incorporates
death. And, as Bichat makes clear in his studies of anatomopathology, death is
essential to the understanding of life. This is also how Hegel thinks about contra-
diction: a process that, like death, denies thought (life) but is essential to its
understanding. And there is yet another enlightening example, which is also quoted
by Foucault in The Birth of the Clinic and which concerns Bichat's invitation to
open up corpses and look at the dead body to understand life24; similarly, in a
famous passage from the Phenomenology, Hegel invites us to look at the negative
in the eyes: “spirit is not this power which, as the positive, avoids looking at the
negative, as is the case when we say of something that it is nothing, or that it is
false, and then, being done with it, go off on our own way on to something else. No,
spirit is this power only by looking the negative in the face and lingering with it”
[41].
The relationship between thought and life is even more explicit in Hegel's
philosophy at an epistemological level (Graphical Abstract). Hegel tries to build a
system of thought that does not just break down concepts into isolated and abstract
determinations. As biology exceeds the limits of physics in the understanding of the
living, in the same way, Hegel's speculative philosophy is aimed at overcoming the
internal limits of knowledge which, instead of addressing processes in their entirety,
prefers to decompose knowledge into individual prepositions. In short, Hegel shares
the same problem of the doctors, physiologists, scientists of his time: how to
develop a new form of understanding which can capture the whole movement in its
organicity [42]. In this respect, the model of the relationship between life and the
living offers a viable way to understand the type of relationship that must be
established at a logical level between the universal and the particular. This is also
the model for a new idea of reason. Given that this new model of reason is
dialectics, one should then claim, as Hegel does, that at the heart of dialectics is the
pounding beat of life.25 These examples of the inﬂuence of biology on the structure
of thought in German philosophy ultimately help us to clearly understand how
much the dialogue between different disciplines is capable of producing new
paradigms of knowledge and understanding.
24 As Bichat writes: “the more diseases are observed and the more corpses are opened up, the more
we are convinced of the need to consider local diseases not from the point of view of compound
organs, which are rarely affected in their entirety, but from the point of view of their different
tissues, which are almost always affected in isolation” [40].
25 Numerous studies have appeared in recent years on the importance of life in Hegel’s speculative
philosophy [43–45].
128
S. Achella

Conclusion
As I have tried to show, the reciprocal inﬂuences between biology and German
idealism in the nineteenth century provide an example of the rich possibilities of
dialogue between science and philosophy. The subsequent reinterpretation of this
historical period as anti-scientiﬁc, resulting from a reductionist mindset, ended up
missing some essential elements for the understanding of the origins of the epis-
temological discourse in both biology and philosophy. A full understanding of the
“paradigm shift” in biology requires taking into account the principles on which
philosophy is working at about the same time. Similarly incomplete would be an
understanding of the philosophical project of German idealism, which does not take
into account the changes in mindset produced by the science of life. The “case of
German idealism” shows to what extent the ideas of rationality and knowledge are
historically determined and to what extent the way of proceeding of humanities and
sciences is parallel and not antagonistic. Recovering this example of dialogue can
be key to avoiding today's impoverishment of both levels of research. As Hans
Jonas puts it: philosophy “obsessed with man alone, is in the habit of claiming as
his unique privilege and predicament much of what is rooted in organic existence as
such: in so doing, it withholds from the organic word the insight to be learned from
awareness of self. On its part, scientiﬁc biology, by its rules conﬁned to the
physical, outward facts, must ignore the dimension of inwardness that belongs to
life;” however, “in the mystery of living body, both poles (philosophy and sciences,
SA) are in fact integrated” [46].
Core Messages
• The relationship between philosophy and biology in the nineteenth century
makes an excellent case for integrating different disciplines.
• The intertwining of scientiﬁc and philosophical inquiries led to a new idea
of reason in those years.
• The dialogue between philosophy and biology in the nineteenth century
can provide a model for their interaction today.
References
1. Diderot D (2004) Conversation between D’Alembert and Diderot (1785) In: Dupré LK
(ed) The enlightenment and the intellectual foundations of modern culture. Yale University
Press, p 30
2. Richards RJ (2002) The romantic conception of life: science and philosophy in the age of
Goethe. The University of Chicago Press, ebook, p 720
3. Poggi S (2000) Il genio e l’unità della natura. La scienza della Germania romantica (1790–
1830), Il Mulino, pp 17 f
5
Idealism and Science of Life: An Intersection …
129

4. Zammito JH (2018) The gestation of German biology philosophy and physiology from Stahl
to Schelling. The University Chicago Press, p 4
5. Lavabre-Bertrand TH (2007) L’Ecole de Medicine de Montepellier, Académie des Sciences et
Lettres de Montpellier, n 37, pp 282–289
6. Wolfe CHT (2017) Models of organic organization in montpellier Vitalism. In: Early science
and medicine n 22 (2–3), pp 229–252
7. Carbone R (2017) Medicina e scienza dell’uomo. Paul-Joseph Barthez e la Scuola di
Montpellier. FedOAPress, pp 18–19
8. Agutter PS, Wheatley DN (2008) Thinking about Life. In: The history and philosophy of
biology and other sciences. Springer, p 29
9. Aristotle, De generatione animalium, II, 1, 734
10. Harvey W (1651) Exercitationes de generatione animalium, quibus accedunt quaedam de
partu, de membranis ac humoribus uteri, et de conceptione, Du Gaidianis, pp 121–122
11. Swammerdam J (1685) Historia insectorum generalis, Luchtmans, p 45
12. Bonnet CH (1762) Considérations sur les corps organisés, Marc-Michel Rey, vol 1, pp 253,
256
13. Ivi, p 307
14. Needham J (1750) Nouvelles observations microscopiques, Louis-Etienne Ganeau, pp 198,
241, 320
15. Wolff CF (1759) Theoria generationis, Diss., Halle, p 1
16. Duchesneau F (1982) La physiologie des lumières. Empirisme, modèles et theories. Springer
17. Barsanti G. (2002), L'Età dei Lumi: le scienze della vita. Dall'epigenesi al preformismo,
all'epigenesi riformata, Treccani
18. Farley J (1977) The spontaneous generation controversy from Descartes to Oparin, Johns
Hopkins University Press, p 29
19. Roe S (1984) Anatomia Animata: The Newtonian physiology of Albrecht von Hailer. In:
Mendelsohn E (ed) Transformations and tradition in the sciences. Cambridge University
Press, pp 273–300, p 284
20. Zammito JH (2018) The gestation of German biology: philosophy and physiology from Stahl
to Schelling, cit., chap. 5
21. Treviranus GR (1802) Biologie; oder die Philosophie der lebenden Natur für Naturforscher
und Ärzte, Johann Friedrich Röwer
22. Lamarck J-B (1800) Biologie, ou Considérations sur la nature, les facultés, les développe-
ments et l’origine des corps vivants (ms. 742), then in «Revue Scientiﬁque», 82, 1944,
pp 269–276
23. Lamarck J-B (1802) Hydrogéologie ou Recherches sur l’inﬂuence qu’ont les eaux sur la
surface du globe terrestre ; sur les causes de l’existence du bassin des mers, de son
déplacement et de son transport successif sur les différens points de la surface de ce globe;
enﬁn sur les changemens que les corps vivans exercent sur la nature et l’état de cette surface
24. Barsanti G (1994) Lamarck and the birth of biology 1740–1810. In: Poggi S, Bossi M
(eds) Romanticism in science. Boston studies in the philosophy of science, vol 152. Springer,
pp 47–74
25. Kearney M (2007) Philosophy and phylogenetics: historical and current connections. In
Hull DL, Ruse M (eds) The Cambridge companion to the philosophy of biology, Cambridge
University Press, pp 211–232, here p 212
26. Illetterati L, Michelini F (eds) (2008) Purposiveness. Teleology between nature and mind,
Ontos Verlag, pp 75–96
27. Appel TA (1987) The Cuvier-Geoffroy debate: French biology in the decades before Darwin.
Oxford University Press, p 3
28. Goy I, Watkins E (eds) (2014) Kant's theory of biology, De Gruyter
29. Kant I (2000) Critique of the power of judgment (1790) Guyer P (ed) Cambridge University
Press, § 65
130
S. Achella

30. Ginsborg H (1997) Kant on aesthetic and biological purposiveness. In: Reath A, Herman B,
Korsgaard C (eds), Reclaiming the history of ethics: essays for John Rawls. Cambridge
University Press
31. Lenoir T (1982) The strategy of life: teleology and mechanism in nineteenth-century German
biology. S.D. Reidel publishing company
32. Lenoir T (1981) The Göttingen school and the development of transcendental naturphiloso-
phie in the romantic era. In: studies in the history of biology n 5, pp 111–205
33. Huneman PH (2007) Understanding purpose: Kant and the philosophy of biology. University
of Rochester Press, p 3
34. Zammito JH (2018) The gestation of German biology: philosophy and physiology from Stahl
to Schelling, cit., p 3
35. Richards RJ (2002) The romantic conception of life: science and philosophy in the age of
Goethe, cit., p 21
36. Schelling FWJ (1857) Ideen zu einer Philosophie der Natur als Einleitung in das Studium
dieser Wissenschaft, (1797). In: Schellings Werke, ed Schelling KFA, vol 14, Cotta, Stuttgart,
1857, here vol 2, pp 275–299
37. Jacobi F (2009) Concerning the doctrine of Spinoza in letters to Moses Mendelssohn (1789)
[excerpts]. In: Id., the main philosophical writings and the Novel Allwill, di Giovanni G (ed),
McGill-Queen’s University Press, pp 339–378, here p 370
38. Hegel GWF (2018) The phenomenology of spirit (1807) In: Pinkard T (ed) Cambridge
University Press, pp 3–48, p 9
39. Ivi, p 29
40. Bichat X (1801) Anatomie générale, appliquée à la physiologie et à la médecine, ed. Broson,
Gabon et Cie, vol I, p 88
41. Hegel GWF (2018) The phenomenology of spirit, cit., p 21
42. Illetterati L (2016) Vita e concetto. Hegel e la grammatica del vivente, in «Il pensiero. Rivista
di ﬁlosoﬁa», LV, 2, pp 59–96, in part. pp 61–72
43. Ng K (2020) Hegel’s Concept of life. Self-consciousness, freedom, logic. Cambridge
University Press
44. Achella S (2020) Pensare la vita. Saggio su Hegel, Il Mulino
45. Sell A (2013) Der lebendige Begriff. Leben und Logik bei GWF Hegel, Karl Alber Verlag
46. Jonas H (2001) Preface to Id., The phenomenon of life. Toward a philosophical biology
(1966), Northwestern University Press, p 23
47. Faber R, Mahoney DF, Rommel G, Saul N (eds) (2020) Blütenstaub. Jahrbuch für
Frühromantik, vol 5. Königshausen und Neumann
Stefania Achella is an associate professor of Moral Philosophy at the University of Chieti-Pescara,
where she teaches Ethics. She is currently working on the relationship between philosophy and
biology in the nineteenth century and on the concepts of life and corporeity in classical German
philosophy. A selection of her publications includes: The Dark Side of Thought. The Body, the
Unconscious and Madness in Hegel’s Philosophy, in The Owl’s Flight. Hegel’s Legacy to
Contemporary Philosophy, ed. by S. Achella, F. Iannelli, et al., De Gruyter, Berlin/Boston 2021,
pp. 23–36; Reason and Life. Attempting a dialogue between Jacobi and Hegel, in “Archivio di
Filosoﬁa,” LXXXVIII, 2020, nn. 2–3, pp. 87–98; Das “unbegreiﬂiche Geheimnis:” innere
Zweckmäßigkeit und Leben bei Kant und Hegel, in “Hegel-Jahrbuch,” 2016, 1, 487–492.
5
Idealism and Science of Life: An Intersection …
131

6
Embodied Creativity and Symbolic
Variation in the Evolution of Life
Mirko Di Bernardo
“Once productive, art has become creative.”
Naum Gabo
Summary
The chapter is based on recent research in complexity theory to deepen, in an
interdisciplinary way, the emergence of creativity in biological processes in an
evolutionary and epigenetic perspective with particular attention to the problem
of variation, growth, and co-evolution of symbolic forms in living systems. This
level of analysis explores the hypothesis, in genealogical terms, to identify some
characteristics based on the possible outline of a metabiology of symbolic forms
that closely relate the artistic language with that of the biological sciences. In this
perspective, the creative dimension of nature is interpreted as an emerging reality
unpredictable and irreducible to the laws of classical physics.
M. Di Bernardo (&)
University of Rome “Tor Vergata”, Rome, Italy
e-mail: mirko.di.bernardo@uniroma2.it
M. Di Bernardo
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Rome, Italy
M. Di Bernardo
Department of Biomedicine and Prevention Via Montpellier, 1-00133 Rome, Italy
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh (eds.), Thinking, Integrated Science 7,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04075-7_6
133

Evolution of life in symbolic language.
[Adapted with permission from the Health and Art (HEART), Universal
Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network (USERN); Painting by Yekta
Esmaeili.]
Keywords
Autopoiesis  Creativity of nature  Epigenetics  Metabiology  Natural
evolution  Symbolic forms
QR code
Scanning the QR code directs you to the word cloud of the chapter that is made
up of the words we discussed throughout the whole book in relation to the chapter’s
134
M. Di Bernardo

keyword, which is intentionally not included in the word cloud. Find the keyword
and put it in place in the puzzle according to the clues provided in Chap. 36. The
mystery hidden in the puzzle is the quote of THINKING: Bioengineering of Science
and Art.
Introduction
The present work maintains as a theoretical frame of reference on the cultural
context that, starting from the second half of the twentieth century, has seen the
international research and studies on the complexity of the living world ranging
from the theory of autopoiesis to the doctrine of complex systems, from studies on
autonomous morphogenesis to the theory of computability, from the epistemology
of systems to that of the mind, and from neurophenomenology to the theory of
semantic information and post-neo-Darwinian evolutionary doctrines. In this per-
spective, an important theoretical synthesis able to probe the very roots of the
creativity of cellular life comes in the second half of the seventies with the concept
of autopoiesis to merge themes and methods from the most disparate sciences in an
admirable way [1]. This notion makes it possible to reconstitute the secret design of
the organic unity of the living at the level of the model, according to what were the
“dreams” of some philosophers of the classical age. In this perspective, biological
life is conﬁgured as “a cyclic process that produces the components that in turn
self-organize in the process itself” within a certain differential threshold of real-
ization [2]. In agreement with South American scholars, it is possible to deﬁne an
autopoietic as a unit that works in a self-maintaining manner through the
self-generation of components. This process is triggered by an intricate plot driven
by a speciﬁc internal teleology of molecular interactions [3]. This doctrine, in deep
harmony with the insights of Prigogine and Nicolis [4] on the thermodynamics of
irreversible processes and with the most recent studies of Kauffman [5–6] on the
elaboration of a theory of embodied information for greater intelligibility of bio-
logical processes, still offers an appropriate holistic anchorage for the generalization
of the deﬁnition of biological life [7]. Therefore, enaction and reﬂexivity appear as
two sides of the same coin, i.e., as two complementary aspects of the creative and
organismic dimension of every biological system. Suppose enaction is understood
as that process of extrapolation of meanings and of a world in the course of a
sensory-motor interaction with the environment and with others. In that case,
reﬂexivity represents, on the other hand, the inseparable dimension of the living
agent from the world with which it is united in a relationship of mutual speciﬁcation
and co-emergence. Therefore, this contribution aims to review the most recent
research and accordingly provide the main conceptual coordinates required to
understand embodied creativity better. This understanding can help investigate, at a
6
Embodied Creativity and Symbolic Variation …
135

theoretical level, how the fundamental characteristics of autonomous living agents
contribute to changing the image of nature and the very concept of symbolic form
in the light of a possible new relationship between art and natural sciences. This
new relationship is inspired by a multidimensional and autopoietic evolutionary
approach capable of sounding out the preconditions of the possible outlining of a
metabiology of artistic forms shaped by the epigenetic shift.
Art and Biology in Comparison with Nature
Among the ﬁrst attempts to delineate the biology of art capable of tackling the
philosophical problem of form by closely linking artistic production with scientiﬁc
research is the work of D’Arcy W. Thompson (1917) On Growth and Form. This
study embraces a framework of knowledge anchored to the reductionist approach of
classical biology, where form and growth are examined with reference to the
physics and mathematics of time, eliminating any ﬁnal cause and reducing the
importance of natural selection considered exclusively in its action aimed at dis-
carding unsuitable forms. According to this perspective, living structures are por-
tions of matter, and it is in obedience to the laws of physics that the particles that
compose them have been settled and shaped [8]. This perspective considers the
living form deprived of its individual character and investigated according to a
mathematical-geometric and mechanical theory that reduces the different expres-
sions to common generation models [9]. The forms are not analyzed in their pre-
sentation as individual events but are considered in relation to the process of growth
in which the forces acting on matter turn out to be the causes both of their origin
and their respective changes. Thompson can therefore say that the shape of an
object coincides with a diagram of forces, at least in the sense that it is possible to
deduce from it which forces act or have acted on it [8, pp. 11–15]. Starting from
general heuristic tools such as the laws of physics, mathematical formulas, and
geometry ﬁgures, Thompson’s investigation arrives at reconstructing the multi-
plicity of forms of nature by ﬁnding general rules universally applicable to both the
organic and inorganic world. Therefore, the Scottish scholar is deeply convinced
that an organism can be represented as a mathematical function that has to do with
the spatial and temporal order.
The biological sciences, with particular regard to physiology, seemed to be
initiated in the direction of a progressive approach to the concept of “true science”
by virtue of which the application of mathematics could be interpreted, as much as
that of an artistic technique, as a creative act, understood as an activity through
which man comes to codify the world around him by means of a language he
understands. This interpretation of Thompson’s work brings the discourse on the
generativity of nature back to an extensible and objective level where the creative
dimension is reduced to mere productivity according to the linear and mechanistic
models of classical biology. But “creating” implies something greater because
136
M. Di Bernardo

creativity in its actual artistic or biological dimension achieves a further step that
must always be based on cognition, and that is nevertheless beyond cognition itself
because the games that life can create are inﬁnite [10]. In fact, today, we know that
systems that involve the coding of ribonucleic acid (RNA)-deoxyribonucleic acid
(DNA), for example, the molded replication of real cells, more than a hundred years
after the Scottish naturalist’s considerations, no longer appear as the only possible
molecular mechanisms underlying the emergence of life on Earth. The important
idea here is that the activity that leads to life understood in metabiological terms as
the emergence of cognition and reﬂexivity, is a self-catalytic and organismic pro-
cess, i.e., dictated by the autonomous and self-constructive biochemical organiza-
tion of the entire system in play [11]. This “creative activity from within” is
expressed in all autopoiesis-related concepts, such as the notions of evolutionary
bricolage, enaction, and adaptation, intelligible through the use of a theoretical
framework inspired by rules of internal closure able to generate deep processes of
self-organization, stratiﬁed, and hierarchical in constant evolution and co-evolution
(reﬂexivity as forma formans or unpredictable reorganization of the structure), also
able to offer, in informational terms, an objective measure of the complexity, i.e.,
the continuous biological growth (cognition understood as assimilation) of the
autopoietic system in relation to a precise meaning of the environment [12]. In the
light of these considerations, therefore, according to the contemporary theory of
biological complexity, life appears as a transaction phenomenon, i.e., the result of
“a series of bi-directional transfers, independent of each other and at the same time
interconnected.” “Independence implies that each transfer is voluntary in itself, i.e.,
free; in other words, no transfer constitutes a prerequisite for putting the other into
action, since there is no external obligation” to act on the dynamics of the process.
The latter is a logic of molecular reciprocity. This logic is neither conditional nor
purely unconditional because if it is true that the molecular processes of a cell are
free, at the same time, without the response of some macromolecules, the system
does not realize its internal telos [13]. However, to these two characteristics
(conditionality/unconditionality and bi-directionality of transfers), a third one must
be added: transitivity. In highly complex systems such as living organisms, at a
molecular level, we have that the response of a molecule to a signal of another
molecule may not be directed towards that molecule that triggered the reciprocal
reaction but also towards a third element. In other words, A, which puts in place a
process towards B, triggers a process of chemical reciprocity not only if B responds
towards it but also if it acts reciprocally towards C (think, for example, to the
auto-catalytic closure of prebiotic systems). Therefore, this is what makes the
reciprocity of the bios something different from a crossed selﬁshness, also giving it
openness.
In
fact,
these
are
the
internal
dynamics
of
the
processes
of
self-organization of life. At the molecular level in living systems, the structure of
reciprocity that spontaneously emerges is normally triadic and therefore open, that
is a structure in which it is possible to trace not only phenomena of molecular
association but phenomena of cooperation in which each part, as there is only
through all the others, “it is also thought of as existing in view of the others and of
6
Embodied Creativity and Symbolic Variation …
137

the whole, that is, as a tool only then and for this reason such a product can be
called, as being organized and self-organizing, a natural purpose” [14, p. 207].
Right here, we can precisely recognize the mysterious mechanisms of what Kant
deﬁnes as an ethical life force about two hundred years before Maturana and Varela,
that is the particular interweaving of self-organization, complexity, emergency,
assimilation, and cognition that allows us to “read” life as a cognitive, co-evolutive,
and relational phenomenon, that is a phenomenon governed by a mysterious cre-
ative logic of molecular reciprocity. This logic of the concrete, which transcends the
extensional models conceived by Thompson’s classical biology and geometry of
nature, presents deep analogies with the concept of artistic creation elaborated by
Gabo. According to the artist, creativity is precisely the way in which man
accepting the principles that underlie nature, emancipates himself from it, becoming
“the further cause of its accretion” [15, p. 8].
In its implementation, Gabo’s eclectic use of methods of constructing mathe-
matical models, concepts such as curved space or images borrowed from mor-
phological research openly suggest that his constructions are, ﬁrst of all, the
expression of an aesthetic vision motivated by the desire to make his art accessible
on an intuitive level to the largest possible number of people. However, it is
matured ﬁrst of all in the awareness, typical of every artist, that nothing that is
exclusively correct from a mathematical perspective can show either the charac-
teristics of life or the attractiveness of beauty [10, p. 22]. The works of art are for
Gabo refractory to the simple formulas of mathematics, as are the phenomena of
organic life. Despite the apparent accuracy of lines, the precision of curves, and
intersections of planes, there is no formula that governs, for example, the structure
of linear construction in space [16]. The nylon thread draws a different proﬁle at
each successive step, and the sequence generated in this way, despite the undoubted
regularity, is composed of shapes that are never identical. This is the result of a
knowledge that cannot be reduced to any form of gnoseological reductionism; in
these forms, intuition plays a fundamental role that is expressed not only in the
ability to synthesize the characters of individual natural facts but in that more
general condition of man that consists in the awareness of sharing with those same
facts its root. For this, art is in turn not only creation but also growth in an effective
and autopoietic sense: it produces autonomous forms and images, generates an
accretion in the inﬁnite number of things surpassing its own object of investigation,
and becoming, in turn, a fascinating enigma for man as a self-conscious being
endowed with symbolic language. However, if for Gabo this creative dimension
could not be associated with the language and methods of classical biology, at that
time susceptible to mechanistic and deterministic demands, today instead we know
that a new alliance between art and science is possible based on an effective
evolution of the codes and principles within biology itself that have gradually
abandoned the ancient diatribe between structuralism and functionalism by virtue of
a systemic approach inspired by the anti-reductionist and anti-deterministic turn of
epigenetics [17]. Thus, once in opposition to Thompson’s formalism, Gabo’s
constructions can now be interpreted as prophetic insights into the history and
development of the biological sciences. Gabo’s work, as well as the works of Arp
138
M. Di Bernardo

and other artists today, more than in the past, stimulate interpretation, research, and
perhaps the creation of speciﬁc biology of art that probes its appearance and
structures [16]. However, it is a new science that is inherent in its destiny that
checkmate that was common to those who preceded it because we can analyze
forms and phenomena, but we remain astonished to contemplate their intrinsic and
harmonious organization of process [18].
Epigenetics and Metabiology
Recent ﬁndings in molecular biology and cognitive biology have led some scholars
to recover the centrality of development in evolutionary dynamics, thus giving new
emphasis to the processes of epigenesis and individual genotype modulation [19].
Such research opens the door to a more in-depth study of the relationship between
cultural evolution and natural evolution, going beyond the “genocentric” version of
the modern synthesis, according to which adaptation occurs exclusively by the
natural selection of random DNA modiﬁcations. In this perspective, therefore, the
role played by cultural evolution in genetic variation acquires a precise meaning, in
so far as hereditariness at this point involves not only DNA but also the information
(epigenetic instructions) that regulate its expression. Recent studies on the fruit gnat
conﬁrm that a DNA marker is transmitted from parents to their children, becoming
essential for embryo development [20]. This documents once again that DNA is not
the only biological information transmitted from parents to their children: epige-
netic instructions regulate gene expression without affecting the DNA sequence and
are transmitted to the offspring [21]. It means that “epigenetic memory is essential
for the development and survival of the new generation” because what we learn and
know affects, in ontogenetic terms, the growth of what we are. In reproduction,
therefore, “epigenetic information is not only inherited from one generation to
another but also important for the development of the embryo itself.” This process
leads to a review of the classical perspectives of identity and biological growth
presented, for example, by Thompson and Neodarwinian theorists, bringing out an
extremely more plastic conﬁguration of the living, pushing to the elaboration of a
new ontological reﬂection on the dynamic processes pertinent of the creative di-
mension of the living state of matter. Thus, these analyses make it possible to revisit
the relationship between growth and form, highlighted in the comparison between
Thompson and Gabo’s different perspectives, overcoming the ancient hiatus
existing between the mechanistic and repetitive dimension of scientiﬁc language
and the authentically creative dimension of artistic language. The epigenetic
paradigm shows that even the development can be selective so that part of the
innovations introduced in the genetic heritage of a species is screened and
expressed in the embryonic period. Intergenerational continuity is not maintained
only through gene transfer. There is an entire cell, including cytoplasm and nuclear
genome, which is transferred from one generation to another. With it, an organism
inherits not only a copy of the parental gene heritage but also a set of organelles and
6
Embodied Creativity and Symbolic Variation …
139

membranes that assimilate the history of life experiences that are transformed from
a plane of acquired knowledge to innate ontological realities inscribed and trans-
ferred in phylogenetic terms to subsequent generations [17]. A fertilized egg is
therefore not only a gene transmission vehicle but also a place of expression of
coded information and a place where the recombinatory potential of nucleotide
sequences is endowed with meaning because it is placed in a position to express
itself in the form of new transcripts and proteins [22]. In other words, the egg acts as
a context in which the gene message can become meaningful because it embodies
inﬁnite expressive creativity. At this level, the form is no longer a simple order or
structure but can rightly be deﬁned as a “dynamic growth process,” thus tran-
scending structuralism and functionalism [23]. In this sense, following the lines of
research traced in the epistemology of complexity and the fundamental hypothesis
of Maturana and Varela, we can infer that living beings are autopoietic systems, i.e.,
able to produce their own identity by constantly building themselves; consequently,
even if they are concretely modiﬁed, autopoietic systems are autonomous in the
sense that they subordinate any change to the maintenance of their own organi-
zation [1]. This progressive ﬂowering of the idea of autonomy and organizational
closure by the biological sciences is an exciting aspect of the contemporary sci-
entiﬁc paradigm that, at present, shifts the reﬂections on form towards approaches
that go from the world of given structures (syntactic level of bios) to the world of
the unpredictable functional and systemic capacities of DNA (semantic level of
bios) [24]. In this way, a behavior that takes shape is always linked to a biological
characteristic (synaptic plasticity), but it just occurs in the function of an experience
in contact with the environment and, however, is not determined by the “genetic
program” [22]. In this sense, the optimal organization of a biological system, in
deep relationship with the surrounding “environmental signiﬁcance,” should be
considered an effective compromise between maximum variability, on the one
hand, and the highest degree of speciﬁcity, on the other. Therefore, the epistemo-
logical discourse can refer to different ways of connection with the variability of the
information principles. The invariance that must be protected in a development
situation is that relating to the unitary coordination of deep growth patterns. In fact,
within this dynamic relationship between surface and depth, we can ﬁnd the telos
capable of making us understand how it is possible to maintain an analytical
identity even in the progressive and synthetic transformation of information
structures [11]. In such a framework, the epigenetic structures that live at the
sensorial level then appear to be ﬁltered in the making whose growth is indirectly
guided by the intellect through successive changes in the design of the measures at
a probabilistic and relational level obtained through the use of speciﬁc reﬂection
procedures [7]. In this sense, we can hypothesize that it is this intricate path that
allows, at least in part, to achieve a sort of assimilation, indirectly, of the external
message, assimilation that strengthens the coupling between the environment and
internal self-organizing processes [25]. This opens a new, but at the same time
ancient, chapter of research. This chapter currently represents one of the fulcrums of
the ongoing investigation in epigenetics and metabiology. No longer understood as
a catalog of forms to be reproduced, nature is therefore considered in its constant
140
M. Di Bernardo

becoming and presents itself as an analog of the creative process, a process that is
embodied in the biochemical ﬁbers of living systems and that today both the
sciences of nature and art are able to study. Therefore, revisiting artists such as
Gabo, Arp, and Moor, it is possible to examine under a new light the parallelism
between biology and art, speciﬁcally considering the formative dynamics through
which to create autonomous and meaningful images in the conviction that works
must be the result and witness of a process of growth and change just like the forms
of nature. Therefore, the renewed reﬂection on nature in the epigenetic ﬁeld makes
it possible to reread in a new way the relationship between Gabo’s works and
scientiﬁc thought. In both investigation ﬁelds, the organic concept ﬁnds its deﬁ-
nition in the gradual shift from the sphere of appearance to the systemic/organismic
one. Morphology understood as the “doctrine of the form” emerges as a possible
“unifying natural philosophy of the age to come,” since in it, form is considered in
its characteristics of “disposition, conﬁguration, organization, ordering,” no longer
understood exclusively in the static sense but analyzed in their production overtime
in an a priori unpredictable way [26, p. 20]. For this, Gabo and Arp rejected the
denomination of “abstract” for their art, preferring that of “concrete.” Even if
abstraction for some of them had represented the means to reach a non-ﬁgurative
art, they shared the opinion that to refer to their works, the word abstract has no
meaning since every form that has taken shape is already concrete; “Every work of
art in its real existence, being a sensation perceived by any of our ﬁve senses, is
concrete” [27, p. 109].
How concrete are the epigenetic mechanisms1 that can include enzymatic
modiﬁcations of DNA or histones or altered processing, editing, and expression of
small non-coding RNAs that can cover the chromatin? Such overlapping and
interdependent processes change the accessibility of complexes and proteins that
regulate transcription to DNA, inﬂuencing their translation and disproving any
deterministic hypothesis [28]. This investigation on the evolution of symbolic forms
at the level of systems biology has highlighted in recent years the fact that genetic
variations can be transmitted from one generation of cells to others in alternative
ways to the directional ﬂow of information through the genome. Epigenetic in-
heritance systems force us to review the gene as the only hereditary transmission
unit [17].
These results allow the development of a series of philosophical considerations
about the opportunity to elaborate an ontology of symbolic forms adapted to the
evolution of biological processes. This new research ﬁeld, the so-called metabiol-
ogy, can be summarized in the following essential points. First, this ﬁeld is a branch
of the increased attention given to the environment by biologists, and consequently,
a sudden worldwide wave of action that boosted research over the impact of
1 The most relevant mechanisms that cause epigenetic effects through the activation or deactivation
of genes consist of: a) chromatin remodeling due to both DNA methylation processes and histones
modiﬁcation; b) gene silencing due to pathway alteration of small non-coding RNA (microRNA).
These processes alter the physical accessibility to the regions of the genome on which proteins and
enzymes are bound. These last ones are devoted to gene expression and therefore alter the
expression of the gene.
6
Embodied Creativity and Symbolic Variation …
141

environmental factors on the determination of phenotypes. This led to identifying
epigenetic factors that introduce the effects of environmental and genetic factors
into the system through random noise to generate phenotypic changes while
modiﬁcations into the genetic code are hidden. Secondly, the investigation attempts
to reﬂect on the ontological fallout of biological data on the centrality of the concept
of plasticity in the recovery of the ﬁeld perspective, that is, a perspective open to
elaborating the semantics of biological processes. It can offer ﬁrst possible solutions
different from those of classical formal ontology: an ontology of the living adequate
to the fact that the functions (and uses) of organisms are not mappable, deﬁnable,
predictable, or inserted in a predeﬁned system of alternatives, but are associated
with history imbued with meanings understood as symbolic living structures
[12, 13]. These epistemological investigations also shed new light on the nature of
biological complexity, the ﬂexibility and reversibility of cellular destiny, and the
methodological limits of some models inspired by reductionist approaches followed
since discovering the DNA Double Helix by Watson and Crick in 1953. For
example, Waddington [29, 30] understood more than a decade earlier that life is a
systemic phenomenon where matter is constantly oriented by signiﬁcant, inde-
pendent, and hierarchical informational ﬂows; life is, therefore, a code that becomes
a process, a language that is expressed inﬁnitely through the bricolage of bio-
chemical ﬁbers in constant evolution. Living systems, then, producing what they
mean, are deeply connected with the emergence of a speciﬁc selective telos within
their own self-organization; in other words, they do not follow the Darwinian
natural selection principle exclusively, and their genome is not a tout-court DNA
sequence but a complex network of factors, functions, and memories, i.e., it is the
set of DNA and epigenetic factors whose codes have not yet had a complete
formalization. The thought emerges in history and results from cultural evolution in
continuous relationship with the natural one; therefore, it is necessary to rethink a
new metaphysics and a new philosophical realism inspired by new scenarios
opened by studies in biology and the evolution of dynamic systems. The metabi-
ology or semantics of biological processes seems to provide the appropriate tools to
study those systems whose emerging properties need to be described by identifying
the underlying main actors and their mutual interactions. Some issues require
explanations different from those we are used to in physics and chemistry:
• “the large number of dense interactivity of parts;
• the hierarchical (and multi-scale) organization of biological systems;
• the dependence of the identity of the parts and the interactions among them on
higher-order effects; and
• the robustness and adaptability of biological structures” [31].
The mechanistic paradigm where man and the living are seen as mechanical
aggregates on which one can intervene artiﬁcially to change their behavior gives
way to a metabiological vision that sees the living as a systemic information net-
work that must be regulated in a physiological way [28]. Epigenetics has allowed us
to follow the imprints that the environment leaves on our DNA, trying to study the
142
M. Di Bernardo

mechanisms that are used by cells to change, to adapt to the environment. It has
allowed us to read the signs of time and space on our bodies. The dimension of time
and history then comes to be considered as the alternative to the Monodian “genetic
program” and to the idea of predeﬁned and immutable atemporal symbolic forms.
In the works of Arp, Gabo, and Moore, as in those of the many other artists with
whom they shared the experimentation of new visual codes the search for forms
was the main common element. These forms did not refer to a referent, but that they
were able to exhaust in themselves their own meaning and their own content. The
forms they tried to create were not abstract but absolute [27]. This turning point
ﬁnds in the autopoietic approach to contemporary living systems and metabiology a
deep reverberation that allows us to rethink the methods and languages of science in
the light of a possible new paradigm of knowledge able to recover the strength and
semantic signiﬁcance of mythical narratives for deeper intelligibility of the cre-
ativity of nature and the human being.
Observing, however, is not enough for us; it leads us to want to touch, exper-
iment, and interact as creative beings who live both inside and outside evolution as
autopoietic (and therefore cognitive) generative systems of ever new symbolic
variation. All this allows us to read with new eyes the enlightening words of Gabo,
who in the ﬁrst issue of Abstraction-Création expressed himself as follows: “art
once reproductive has become creator” [32, p. 14]. His words today revisited, allow
us to look at the possibility of a deep union between art and science, a union that
can generate a new and at the same time ancient strand of scientiﬁc research in the
ﬁeld of biology of form whose foundations were laid in the systemic approach of
the ﬁrst half of the twentieth century by Waddington himself [30], who was a
pioneer of the epigenetic aspects of development. Gabo’s position has been shared
by many artists, albeit animated by different sensibilities. In particular, the works of
Arp, Gabo, and Moore can be analyzed together, starting from a common attitude
towards nature which was outlined in their production at the same time as a
reﬂection on the form. In their sculptures, this one appears freed from every link
with the notion of the image that implies the representation of an object and, above
all, with that of sign [9, 16]. The sign means (it refers to another), while the form
means itself (it produces what it means and does not refer to anything else).
Adjacent Possible and Creativity of Nature Beyond
the Entailing Laws of Physics
Within this complex framework of the revision of the doctrines of Thomson’s
geometry of nature and molecular biology of the mid-twentieth century, the recent
studies of Kauffman [18] on the self-organization of natural systems and the inte-
gration of Neodarwinian theory stand out. The evolution of the biosphere, in fact, is
interpreted according to a completely new vision of the world in which its becoming
cannot be established in advance because it does not appear “governed” by laws of
implication where everything that becomes constitutes Actual always New [5].
6
Embodied Creativity and Symbolic Variation …
143

Looking at history, Hegel says, in short, that there is a continuous and creative
dialectical process. We could ﬁnd in this conception of history, understood in a
broad sense, an expression of the antientropic process of the universe. What we think
of it as “the most complex system in the universe” has become an unpredictable
historical unfolding. We are the living children of nature; we are not superior to it.
We must not pretend to tear it away from us. Still, according to this new metabio-
logical paradigm, we must treat it with a sense of sacredness to rediscover, revisiting
ancient myths. Kauffman, in his book Humanity in a creative universe [33], con-
siders the hypothesis that the universe produces “all possible proteins with the length
of 200 amino acids,” with 20 types of amino acids bound in peptide bonds during its
lifetime. Please, remember that with 20 types of amino acids, there are 20200
“possible proteins with the length of 200 amino acids.” It is equivalent to about 10260
possibilities. Now, the shortest time in the life of the universe is 10–43 s on the
Planck scale. The “universe is 13.7 billion years old and has about 1080 particles.” It
is easy then, according to the American scientist, to calculate that even if all these
particles would only form proteins of the length of 200 amino acids in every moment
of Planck, it would take 1039 times the life of the universe to make all the possible
proteins of this length only once. Actually, the universe will not give rise to all the
possible proteins composed of 200 amino acids in 1039 repetitions of its life. At a
higher level than atoms, the universe is mostly non-ergodic.2 This has a physical
meaning: the story begins when the space of the possible is much wider than what
actually happens. The universe will not realize all possible proteins, cell types,
organs, and organisms, as well as the indeﬁnite hierarchy of levels of increasing
complexity at levels higher than the atomic one. In this way, the space of possibilities
becomes scarcer and scarcer, and it will become wider as peptides and proteins
increase. In Kauffman’s eyes, this phenomenon is at the basis of the antientropic
process that encloses a part of why the universe has become complex. In a profound
sense, the biosphere has become complex and different because it could, that is,
because it has transformed itself into the multiple possibilities, it has created and
continues to create [33, pp. 64–66]. From this point of view, we can revisit the notion
of organization or integers deepened by Kant in the Critique of judgment [14], not
conceivable without an end that identiﬁes with life, an end that is no longer imposed
from the outside, but which, on the contrary, ﬁnds its origin precisely within the
processes of self-organization. The reference is to living organisms. One way to
reach existence “in the non-ergodic universe above the level of atoms” is to be an
entire Kantian, “in which the function of the part is its causal consequences” that
allow keeping the whole alive. Therefore, given an entire Kantian that exists “in the
non-ergodic universe above the level of atoms, we can deﬁne the function of a part as
a subset of its causal consequences” and, in particular, those consequences that allow
keeping alive the whole Kantian [33, p. 67]. Speciﬁc examples of Kantian wholes are
autopoietic systems, i.e., systems that “build themselves” as autocatalytic [1].
Therefore, “an organized being is not a mere machine. For a machine has only
2 In standard statistical mechanics the meaning of “ergodic” is that the system will pass through all
the small volumes of the spatial state at a given time.
144
M. Di Bernardo

motive force,” while the organism contains within itself a forming and regulating
force that, as we have seen previously, “shapes” its own constituent materials.
According to Kauffman, following the theoretical groove traced by Kant, there exists
in living beings a particular force that determines a change of form and movement of
matter. This force alters and destroys the state of chemical rest that holds together the
constituent elements of food substances on which the organism feeds. G. Ashkenasy
has recently developed a similar system composed of nine polypeptides, each of
which “catalyzes the formation of a second copy of the next peptide” in a cycle of
nine peptides. This collective set is reproduced in the laboratory [34]. Therefore, we
can observe the following results:
i. “no peptide catalyzes its own formation;”
ii. the set of nine peptides “collectively” catalyzes its formation from the
exogenous starting block, i.e., the fragments of the nine peptides supplied from
outside;
iii. this autocatalytic system is a Kantian whole, or autopoietic system, in which
the whole exists for and by virtue of its parts, i.e., nine peptides;
iv. the function of each peptide is deﬁned in terms of its role in catalyzing the
formation of the next peptide. On the other hand, if a peptide causes water to
swing in the Petri dish that contains the nine-peptide system, the latter is not a
function but a “side effect.” We have thus distinguished the function of the
peptide, i.e., its causal role in forming other peptides, from other possible
causal consequences, which are side effects;
v. thanks to the evolution of such a set, the functions of peptides can sometimes
improve;
vi. this ability “to deﬁne a function as a subset of causal consequences that can be
improved in evolution further separates biology from physics, which cannot
make the distinction among all causal consequences into a subset which are
functions.” Therefore, as we will see later, Biology is beyond physics because
it cannot predict the evolution of new functions, i.e., it does not provide
implying “laws for the evolution of the biosphere;”
vii. if we deﬁne “catalytic reaction” as the functional “catalytic task,” the
nine-peptide system reaches a functional task closure in its world, which
allows it to survive in this universe that is not ergodic above the atomic level.
“The functional task closure in his world” is a metabiological concept that is
fundamental not only in the living realm but also in the artistic production of
conscious autopoietic systems like us humans. According to Kauffman, the
organisms exist as functional wholes that support functional closure, or more
generally, a functional “sufﬁciency” in an actual sense yet to be deﬁned, in
their worlds that may include other organisms with which they are functionally
coupled in a fruitful way.
In this sense, the entire biosphere reaches a wave of functional sufﬁciency that
propagates together with the events of speciation and extinction whose intricate
intertwining of interconnected functionalities goes beyond our narrative, as Darwin
6
Embodied Creativity and Symbolic Variation …
145

also said. The evolution of the biosphere is the unfolding of always functional
sufﬁciency, wave after wave, for 3.7 billion years, with small and large extinction
events and now, a myriad of species and even more interconnected structures and
processes in a continuous inﬁnitely creative DIY [5, 6]. “These ever-new functions
constitute the ever-changing phase space of biological evolution.” If we cannot
know which functions will emerge in the future, “we cannot write differential
equations of motion” for natural evolution either. Therefore, we have no implied
laws for evolution. Moreover, we cannot predict in a non-circulatory way the niche
of every organism in its world: we, therefore, lack both the laws of motion and the
boundary conditions, i.e., the niche that would allow the integration of implying
laws [31]. In light of all this, we can infer that, in accordance with the theses of
Kauffman and Ashkenasy, we have that:
i. the number of uses of a function in biology is indeﬁnite; and
ii. the hypothetical list of uses is a “nominal scale,” since they are all “different
uses.” “Thus, there is no ordering among these uses,” i.e., which one can be
“larger than.”
Suppose to accept statements i and ii. In that case, “no effective procedure or
algorithm can list all the uses of a screwdriver or ﬁnd new uses of screwdrivers.
Further no effective, propositional, procedure can ﬁnd a new, unordered, use of a
screwdriver” [33, p. 71]. Signiﬁcant examples of such dynamics in biology are the
Darwinian preadaptations. The feathers needed for ﬂight evolved in birds as a
thermoregulation tool were then co-opted for ﬂight. The little bones of the middle
ear that “transmit sound from the eardrum to the inner ear” were preadaptations of a
vibration-sensitive jaw with which a primitive ﬁsh was equipped. In both cases,
new functions were born in the biosphere, such as hearing and ﬂying. Evolution
itself, therefore, creates the future evolutionary possibilities of the biosphere. As for
the unpredictability of the evolution of the universe since the preadaptations, we
have overcome Darwin; it is the evolution of the biosphere itself that creates the
future evolutionary possibilities. “Life is a miracle of largely unprestatable
becoming.” New Actuals arise and do not cause, but enable new Adjacent Possi-
bles, new pathways or opportunities for evolution to “explore” in the antientropic
process” [33, p. 73]. In an even broader sense, in reductive materialism, Weinberg
dreamed of a unifying theory [35], which would include everything that must, can,
or could happen in the universe. The same was true for Thomson’s geometry of
nature which reduced the creativity of nature to mere objective and measurable
productivity according to universal parameters of an extensive nature. But the
evolving biosphere, which is part of the universe, is not involved by any law in its
becoming, so the dream of reductionism is broken. There could not be similar
implying laws for the becoming of the whole universe. We can still send probes to
Mars thanks to Newton’s laws, general relativity is widely conﬁrmed, and quantum
mechanics is veriﬁed up to the eleventh decimal place. Yet, no law implies the
speciﬁc evolution of the biosphere. Reductionism and determinism as a vision of
reality seem destined to failure. This metabiology or semantics of biological,
146
M. Di Bernardo

anti-reductionist, post-Newtonian, and post-neo-Darwinian processes, outlined so
far, is based on a model of post-nomothetic science and can be summarized in
Kauffman’s words as follows: “New Actuals are enabling constraints that create
new, typically unprestatable, Adjacent Possibles in which New Actuals may arise,
creating yet more new Adjacent Possibles” [33, p. 76]. This, being the case, there is
a continuous becoming in the unpredictable Adjacent Possibles that evolution itself
creates in an emergency that goes beyond any implying law. Science, therefore,
also consists of historical forms that allow establishing a new alliance between
biology and art. Artistic innovation, in fact, in this new metabiological paradigm is
like innovation in the biosphere, i.e., mostly unpredictable because it creates new
Adjacent Possibles that we inevitably evolve in epigenetic terms (by behavioral and
symbolic variation), without being able to predict the Adjacent possible that we
ourselves realize. We human autopoietic systems are radically free, radically
emerging, and radically creative. In fact, in human life, we are “sucked” into the
“Adjacent Possibles” that we ourselves, without knowing it, contribute to creating.
This new perspective can undoubtedly ﬁnd an artistic and symbolic reference in Jan
Vermeer’s 1669 work The Lacemaker [36], in which the kingdom of the Lacemaker
is depicted and whose freely conceived work of art allows the continuous emer-
gence of new possible forms of vision and life. The image of the Lacemaker can
therefore be a sort of icon symbolizing the evolution of symbolic forms in the
evolutionary evolution of the biosphere, which continuously favors the emergence
of new functions in Darwinian preadaptations and in many other types of adapta-
tion, for example, cultural niches [19]. In conclusion, we can infer that it is
impossible to establish in a way that is not vitiated by circularity the conditions
around the niche of an organism (meaning environment), separating it from the
organism itself. Once again, no law implies the becoming of the biosphere and the
evolution of symbolic forms of culture and art become life, i.e., embodied infor-
mation (self-organizing form in action) + meaning (selective response).3 Embodied
creativity, in this sense, is the autopoietic process of incarnation, reconstruction,
assimilation, and reduction of information in the biochemical ﬁbers of every living
organism (and therefore cognitive) realized under the conditions of double selection
and in accordance with sophisticated procedures of biological self-organization
(enaction and reﬂexivity). In other words, it appears necessarily modeled by the
symbolic forms and mathematical modules of non-linearity that, domesticating
chaos, determine and shape it.
3 It should be speciﬁed that the concept of meaning used here does not refer to consciousness, but
to the ability of each living system to respond selectively (by changing its behavior and the
environment around it) to the stimuli that determine signiﬁcant internal changes of state to achieve
a precise telos: the maintenance of its autonomy. The concept of meaning, therefore, within the
theory of complexity, is understood as a profound process (potentially inﬁnite capacity) of
“production of forms” (in the sense that it “cuts” forms creatively) and, in accordance with Carsetti
[12], Atlan and Louzoun [37], is applied in several disciplinary areas. In this sense creativity
coincides with maximum selectivity.
6
Embodied Creativity and Symbolic Variation …
147

Conclusion
“We cannot prestate the evolution of new functions in the biosphere, hence cannot
prestate the ever-changing phase space of biological evolution which includes
precisely the functions of organisms and their myriad parts and processes evolving
in their worlds” (process semantics). In this new metabiological and epigenetic
perspective, the evolution of the biosphere, but also of art and culture, are all
“stories” of the new current ones that create new “Adjacent Possibles” where the
evolution of the biosphere and our becoming ﬂows. Usually, we do not know the
Adjacent Possibles that we create and in which we ﬂow. These stories about atomic
levels in which the universe is non-ergodic are not something that happens, will-
ingly or not: it is an unfolding, mostly unpredictable, in which what is Actual
creates the possibilities of becoming ours and of the biosphere. Therefore, the
article highlighted the limits of reductionism (eliminative materialism) and genetic
determinism, laying the foundations for the elaboration of a metabiology of form
inspired by a naturalistic and autopoietic approach where the concept of meaning as
a selective response (whose creativity coincides with maximum selectivity) allows a
holistic anchorage for the study, in informational terms, of the relationship between
growth and form beyond the functionalism vs. structuralism dichotomy of classical
biology. At this level, embodied creativity coincides with the emergence of life
itself.
Core Messages
• This chapter identiﬁes the characteristics of the living from the perspective
of the epistemology of biology.
• It clariﬁes meaning as a selective response internal to biological
self-organization processes.
• It delineates the metabiological and epigenetic aspects of the biological
shapes interpreted as a gradual potential for growth.
• It includes a prolegomenon to an evolutionary metabiology of the cre-
ativity of symbolic and artistic forms.
• It analyzes selective aspects of biological information with reference to the
relationship between form, function, and meaning.
References
1. Maturana H, Varela F (1980) Autopoiesis and cognition: the realization of the living, 2nd edn.
Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science, The Netherlands, Dordrecht
2. Varela F, Maturana H, Uribe R (1974) Autopoiesis: the organization of living systems, its
characterization and a model. Biosystems 5:187–195
148
M. Di Bernardo

3. Varela F (1979) Principles of biological autonomy. North-Holland/Elsevier, New York
4. Prigogine I, Nicolis G (1977) Self-organization in non-equilibrium systems. Wiley, New York
5. Kauffman SA (2008) Reinventing the sacred. Basic Books, New York
6. Kauffman SA (2014) Evolution beyond entailing law: the roles of embodied information and
self-organization. In: Marks II RJ et al (eds) Biological information. New Perspectives, World
Scientiﬁc, Singapore, pp 513–532
7. Bitbol M, Luisi PL (2015) Autopoiesis with or without cognition: deﬁning life at its edge. La
Nuova Critica 65–66:51–72
8. Thomson DAW (1917) On growth and form. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
9. Mazocut-Mis M (1995) Gli enigmi della forma. Edizioni dell’Arco, Milano
10. Cook T (1978) The curves of life, being an account on spiral formations and their application
to growth in nature, to science and art. Cover Publication, New York
11. Carsetti A (2020) Metabiology. Non-standard models, general semantics and natural
evolution. Springer, Berlin
12. Carsetti A (2014) Life, cognition and metabiology. Cogn Process 15(4):423–434
13. Di Bernardo M (2015) Complexity and the emergence of meaning in natural sciences and
philosophy. Theol Sci 13(2):245–259
14. Kant I (1951) Critique of judgment. Hafner, New York
15. Gabo N (1971) The constructive idea in art. In Martin JL, Nicholson B, Gabo N (eds) Circle:
international survey of constructive arts. Prager Publishers, New York
16. Simoncelli S (2002) La natura della forma. Studio per una biologia dell’arte. Itinera, pp 1–22
17. Jablonka E, Lamb MJ (2015) The inheritance of acquired epigenetic variations. Int J
Epidemiol 44:1094–1103
18. Kauffman SA (2000) Investigations. Oxford University Press, New York
19. Jablonka E (2017) The evolutionary implications of epigenetic inheritance. Interface Focus
7:20160135
20. Zenk F, Loeser E, Schiavo R et al (2017) Germ line–inherited H3K27me3 restricts enhancer
function during maternal-to-zygotic transitino. Science 357:212–216
21. ZhangY, Chen Q (2019) The expanding repertoire of hereditary information carriers.
Development15 (146): pii: dev170902
22. Fox Keller E (2003) Making sense of life. Explaining biological development with models,
metaphors and machines. Harward University Press, Cambridge
23. Di Bernardo M (2020) Form, function and value in the emerging and self-organizing
processes of the natural evolution. Thaumàzein 8:1–20
24. Di Bernardo M (2015) Systemic approach and meaningful complexity in biology. Towards a
post-Bertalanffy systemics. Springer, Berlin, pp 149–157
25. Emmeche C, Kull K (eds) (2010) Towards a semiotic biology—life is the action of signs.
World Scientiﬁc, Singapore
26. Whyte LL (1962) Atomism structure and form. A report on the natural philosophy of form. In:
Keps G (Ed) Structure in art and science. The MIT Press, Cambridge
27. Gabo N (1937) Sculpture: carving and construction in space. In: Martin JL, Nicholson B,
Gabo N, Faber and Faber (eds) Circle International survey of constructive arts, London
28. Bateson P, Gluckman P (2011) Plasticity, robustness, development and evolution. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge
29. Waddington CH (1961) The nature of life. Allen & Unwin, London
30. Waddington CH (1969) Behind apparence. A study in the relations between painting and
natural sciences in this century. Edinburg University Press, Edinburgh
31. Longo G, Montevil M, Kauffman S (2012) No entailing laws, but enablement in the evolution
of life. In: Proceedings of the 14th international conference on genetic and evolutionary
computation conference companion, pp 1379–1392
32. Gabo N (1933) Gabo, abstraction-Création: art non ﬁguratif. Paris, n 1
33. Kauffman SA (2016) Humanity in a creative universe. Oxford University Press, New York
6
Embodied Creativity and Symbolic Variation …
149

34. Wagner N, Ashkenasy G (2009) Systems chemistry: logic gates, arithmetic units and network
motifs in small networks. Chem Eur J 15:1765–1775
35. Weinberg S (1994) Dreams of a ﬁnal theory: the scientist’s search for the ultimate laws of
nature. First Vintage Books, New York
36. Arthur K, Wheellock JR (1997) Vermeer. The complete works, Abrams, New York
37. Atlan H, Louzoun Y (2007) Emergence of intentional procedures in self-organizing neural
networks. La Nuova Critica 49–50:67–81
Mirko Di Bernardo is an Adjunct Professor of Philosophy of
Science at the University of Rome, “Tor Vergata.” He carries out
teaching and research activities at the Faculty of Medicine and
Surgery. His research interests concern the epistemology of
biology and philosophy of mind with particular reference to the
themes of functional genomics, meaningful complexity, and the
emergence
of
semantic
structures
(at
evolutionary
and
co-evolutionary level) in the processes of self-organization of
complex adaptive systems. He is the author of ﬁve monographs
and about ﬁfty articles published in national and foreign journals
concerning the new frontiers of epistemology through the com-
parison with neuroscience and with studies related to information
theory, systems biologyand epigenetics.
150
M. Di Bernardo

7
Within the Box: Captives of Our Own
Mind
Christopher A. Haines
“If I ever ﬁnd a problem I cannot solve, I make it bigger. I will
never solve it by trying to make it smaller, but if I make it big
enough, I will eventually ﬁnd the outline of its solution.”
Dwight D. Eisenhower
Summary
This chapter discusses how our thinking becomes trapped “within the box”
because we do not understand how the two hemispheres of our brain operate.
This ignorance leads to a strong tendency to steer with our “rational mind,” and
society as a whole has gone that way. Our rational mind would appear to be a
wise choice, but it comes with baggage that has led to our society’s current
problems. It is only by understanding the breadth and systemic nature of what
our brain offers that we can recognize the wisdom of a balanced path. This
discussion is largely based on the work of Iain McGilchrist, The Master and his
Emissary: The Divided Brain and the Making of the Western World.
C. A. Haines (&)
School of Architecture, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY, USA
e-mail: cahaines1@verizon.net
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh (eds.), Thinking, Integrated Science 7,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04075-7_7
151

Thinking within the captives of our mind
(Adapted with permission from the Health and Art (HEART), Universal
Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network (USERN); Painting by Jiyanshee
Shah)
Keywords
Bureaucratic  Closed  Intuitive and wise  Left hemisphere  Open 
Overoptimistic  Realistic  Relationships  Right hemisphere  Utility
152
C. A. Haines

QR Code
Scanning the QR code directs you to the word cloud of the chapter that is made up
of the words we discussed throughout the whole book in relation to the chapter’s
keyword, which is intentionally not included in the word cloud. Find the keyword
and put it in place in the puzzle according to the clues provided in Chap. 36. The
mystery hidden in the puzzle is the quote of THINKING: Bioengineering of Science
and Art.
Introduction
for us as human beings there are two fundamentally opposed realities, two different modes
of experience; that each is of ultimate importance in bringing about the recognizable human
world; and that their differences is rooted in the bi-hemispheric structure of the brain. It
follows that the hemispheres need to cooperate, but I believe that they are in fact involved
in a sort of power struggle, and that explains many aspects of contemporary Western
culture.
Dr. Iain McGilchrist [1]
Engineers are fond of saying, “you cannot manage what you do not measure.” In
the case of the human brain, “we are captives of what we do not understand.” It is
only by learning how our brains work that we can start recognizing its operations and
learn to control them. While individuals have intuited much of this for millennium,
the full story was not revealed until recently. Furthermore, due to the nature of the
power struggle noted above, many critical aspects have been neglected.
“I am not a psychologist or neurologist, but an architect and student of climate
disruption who recognized that our thinking is at the heart of our problems. While I
have read extensively on the subject, I do not claim to be an expert. An expert would
require more space to explain the nuances and dangers of the over-simpliﬁcations
that I am forced to make than the entire length of this chapter” [2].
7
Within the Box: Captives of Our Own Mind
153

I will primarily stick to key points on how our lack of understanding of our
mind’s operations traps us, increasing our likelihood of thinking in a left hemi-
sphere mode, and how that impacts ourselves and society as a whole. This tour
encompasses a wide variety of information that I will mention only brieﬂy as it
impacts the main story. Further details are available in the references. All errors and
misrepresentations of the work of others are my own.
While I have read many books on brain science and the workings of the human
mind, most of them said little of importance. It was not until I read Iain
McGilchrist, The Master and his Emissary: The Divided Brain and the Making of
the Western World, that I found an author writing about critical material.
McGilchrist spends nearly 250 pages on clinical ﬁndings of the workings of the
split-brain, followed by over 200 pages of western history demonstrating how these
different thinking patterns played out in society. It is a tome that I expect has gotten
far less attention than it deserves, probably because it is a tome, and it is not in the
dominant thinking pattern of our time.
McGilchrist was an English professor before he went back to school for his
medical degrees as a clinical psychologist and psychiatrist. He spent time at John
Hopkins in Baltimore, working on brain imaging. He may be ﬂuent in ﬁve lan-
guages, appearing completely comfortable describing the nuances of word mean-
ings from historical and philosophical treatises in English and German but also
Greek, Latin, and French.
Humans have the advantage of the neocortex, but the split-brain structure is
shared with the entire animal kingdom. Thus, these characteristics are developed to
a limited degree in the simplest animals, through reptiles and rodents, to the more
complex mammals.
In an evolutionary context, the right hemisphere is responsible for not getting
eaten for dinner. It had to be conscious of its environment and alert to dangers. It
gathers information through the senses and rapidly processes that material for all
possible contexts and meanings. Failure could be fatal. Survival also required
building relationships with everything else out there. The left hemisphere, on the
other hand, was responsible for ﬁnding dinner. It had to understand and manage the
obstacles it faced in achieving that goal. It achieved this by generalizing its envi-
ronment to recognize qualities that could assist in success. Table 7.1 brieﬂy sum-
marizes the primary ﬁndings from the ﬁrst part of the book as the basis for
discussing the remainder of this chapter.
The book title comes from a Nietzsche story about a wise and well-loved master
with a small but prosperous and happy domain. The master was unable to do
everything demanded of him, so he enlisted emissaries to represent his interests
with neighboring realms. His most intelligent and capable emissary realized his
position and manipulated circumstances that enabled him to overthrow the master
and take over his position. He successfully deposed the master, but the result was
the demise of the domain and his own ruin.
As you have probably guessed, the master is represented by the right hemisphere
and the emissary by the left. What qualities make a master loved and respected?
Also, what qualities, when lacking, make a highly intelligent, but ambitious
154
C. A. Haines

emissary dangerous? McGilchrist sums this up clearly: [all italics are mine] “We
need the ability to make ﬁne discriminations, and to use reason appropriately. But
these contributions need to be made in the service of something else, that only the
right hemisphere can bring. Alone they are destructive. And right now they may be
bringing us close to forfeiting the civilization they helped to create” [1].
Table 7.1 Characteristics of the two brain hemispheres
Left hemisphere
Right hemisphere
It knows but does not believe: “A closed
system which cannot reach outside itself to
whatever it is that exists apart from itself” [1]:
• It manipulates ﬁxed, re-presented
abstractions, ignoring context, and living
qualities
• It dislikes change
• It craves certainty and makes the implicit
explicit
• It mistrusts that which is not clear and direct
• It values that which can be measured but is
more concerned with precision than accuracy
It believes but does not know: an open system
grounded in its environment, receptive to
informational stimuli, with context:
• It is concerned with living individuals and
their unique, messy, imprecise, and limited
realities
• It accepts change, movement and the
unknown
• It embraces implicitness and duality
• It is the source of metaphor, poetry, humor,
and artistic creations
• It is open to wonder and awe
It is primarily concerned with utility:
• It sees the world as a resource to be exploited
• It seeks power and control
• It is goal-focused and competitive
• It is unconcerned about others and their
feelings
It is primarily concerned with relationships:
• It lives in implicitness and betweenness
• It seeks life and relationships
• It is the source of empathy, sympathy, and
morality
It divides and sub-divides elements and
organizes them into categories:
• Vocal, the source of language and logic
• It sees the whole as the sum of the parts
• It builds systems and arguments logically and
linearly, with bifurcate choices
It is intuitive and wise, operating almost
subconsciously from experience and moral
concerns:
• Non-vocal, yet plays some part in language
• It sees the whole as a dynamic, living system
It is arrogant of its abilities and overly
optimistic about its prospects. It is not only
blind to its weaknesses but willfully denies
them:
• It is dismissive of anything it does not control
or understand
• It is unable/unwilling to admit ignorance and
perfectly willing to fabricate stories even in
the face of overwhelming evidence to the
contrary
• It is not keen on taking responsibility:
“Evidence of failure does not mean we are
going in the wrong direction, only that we
have not gone far enough in the direction we
are already headed” [1]
It is realistic, maybe melancholy due to
mortality and empathy:
• It re-integrates and humanizes the creations
of the left hemisphere back into the living
world
7
Within the Box: Captives of Our Own Mind
155

The story amply shows that the left hemisphere is a valuable tool necessary to
fulﬁll many human endeavors. However, personally ambitious and without morals,
empathy, or a sense of justice, it is dangerous on its own. It is ill-equipped to
address personal realities and utterly befuddled by complexity, leaving it poor at
best in addressing ecological systems. McGilchrist devotes a chapter on whether the
left hemisphere could be successful by itself, even by its own criteria, and the
conclusion was that it could not.
While we can ﬁnd many faults with left hemisphere thinking, McGilchrist
documents the parallels between pure left hemisphere thought and schizophrenia,
indicating just how anti-social it can become. Biology did not design it to be used
exclusively. The purpose of having two parts of our brain is to use them syner-
gistically. The peak of human attainment is a world with an integrated balance that
brings out the best of both hemispheres, exempliﬁed by the ﬂowering of the
Renaissance.
However, the left hemisphere’s qualities make this a hard balance to obtain,
particularly if we do not understand our own mind. Platonic philosophers put us on
the road to left hemisphere dominance with the idea of the perfection of the
invisible. Western society has ever since shown an increasing tendency to justify
itself with the thinking patterns of the left hemisphere, and society as a whole has
accepted those arguments. The arguments are seductive, and it becomes hard to be
conﬁdent that there is something wrong with a plea for consistency, or a dismissal
of something that is framed as too far-fetched to take seriously. Both of these are
calls of the left hemisphere. That does not mean they are wrong. They may be wise,
but without a full understanding of the circumstances, we have no way to know.
Neither hemisphere is inherently better or worse, only different, and that is the
reason that a synergy between them is so important.
We will proceed by considering the characteristics of the left hemisphere and
how it can lead us astray and then look at how the right hemisphere can balance
those qualities. We are only captives of our own mind if we allow ourselves to be
thus. With an understanding of how our brain works, we can become its master, to
reduce the errant paths it can lead us onto, and explore the horizons it offers.
The Left Hemisphere: “It Knows, But It Does Not Believe”
A Closed System
The ﬁrst characteristic of the left hemisphere that is critical to understand is that it is
a closed and entirely self-contained system. It is fed information by the right
hemisphere, but strips that information of context and living qualities. It thus deals
exclusively in represented, static abstractions. Portraying that as ‘represented’ is
intentional. Everything the left hemisphere knows is of its own creation.
Because left hemisphere images are ‘static,’ they are also ‘dead,’ unable to
convey living qualities. As life is a process of change, the left hemisphere is poorly
156
C. A. Haines

suited to comprehend the ecological environment. Math and physics are more
suited to left hemisphere thinking, and they are, in fact, the more popular sciences.
The more we know about biology, the more it can be abstracted into ‘ideals,’ the
more amenable it is to left hemisphere manipulations. However, the ‘down in the
muck’ of biology is not a left hemisphere exercise.
In the line between faith and knowledge, the left hemisphere falls clearly into the
knowledge camp. However, that camp is less tidy than hoped, with implications for
the search for ‘knowledge.’ Firstly, the left hemisphere dislikes change as it requires
reworking its images, like redoing a jigsaw puzzle. It needs to bolster its positions
with ‘proof’ to assure certainty and avoid the need for change. However, it is unable
to trust, meaning there is never ‘enough’ proof. I have joked that the last three
words of research papers are “more research required.” Generally true.
This plays out in a variety of ways. For example, hiring managers are frequently
so scared of getting the wrong candidate they add job requirements until no one has
them all, and they then complain that there are no qualiﬁed candidates. Years ago, I
knew a colleague with an architectural degree and some work experience seeking a
low-level position in an architectural ﬁrm. He found a listing that looked promising
until he got to the end of the add. In addition to architectural requirements, the
position required ﬂuency in English, Mandarin, Swedish, and Portuguese. If there is
anyone in the world who speaks those four languages, I seriously doubt they have
any architectural credentials. This is pure left hemisphere gone mad!
The left hemisphere is, as we might expect, concerned with measurement.
However, consistent with its internal focus, it is more concerned with precision, that
can be generated internally, than with accuracy. Thus, engineers can generate
several decimal points of precision based on a premise that is only within perhaps
30%. Home weather stations that I have investigated offer precision of one-tenth of
a degree, but an accuracy of plus or minus four degrees. What good is a tenth of a
degree, if it cannot conﬁrm if it froze or not?
Case Study: Planetary Area
As a more signiﬁcant example, did you know that the Earth’s land surface may be
twice what has been measured by satellite imagery? Dr. Rob Blakemore has pointed
out that even with satellites doing the photographing, the measuring of those images
assumes that the area within any set of coordinates is two-dimensional (2D), per-
fectly ﬂat. A reasonable estimate of the planet’s ﬂat land surface area is 12 billion
ha or 29.65 billion acres. Stucco textures, with hills and valleys, have actual surface
areas from 40 to 100% greater than the underlying ﬂat projection. Thus, the
irregularities on Earth’s surface, from small to large, could account for an additional
12 billion ha of soil surface available for photosynthesis and carbon sequestration
[3]. Sophisticated technology is nothing more than an extension of the left hemi-
sphere thinking that created it. While it takes on a grander image, it does not always
deserve it.
7
Within the Box: Captives of Our Own Mind
157

Utility
The left hemisphere’s primary purpose is to obtain resources, like dinner, for the
beneﬁt of self, and it views its environment as the source of those resources, there
for the taking. In these pursuits, the left hemisphere is goal-focused and competitive
in the push for success, riches, winning, or whatever goal. This aspect of the left
hemisphere can be a good thing, depending on the context. Many raise their
position by pushing themselves to achieve what they otherwise would not.
The left hemisphere is also concerned with dominating its environment, seeking
power and control over it. That can occur on a wide range of scales, from personal
control to building empires. As a small example, the mini-empires and the
in-ﬁghting that result in companies, organizations, and academia are famous. These
are frequently cases of left hemisphere control of whatever the environment offers.
A manager or academic chairman creates his/her empire with the group they have
available and crown themself king/queen. Of course, others can push back, creating
the famous dynamics.
Unfortunately, the left hemisphere has a complete disregard for others and their
welfare. Thus, it is entirely capable of major injustices without even noticing that
anything is wrong. If a human does not engage their right hemisphere in these
circumstances, their left hemisphere can promote unfettered horror.
Case Study: Mesopotamian ‘States’
Scott [4] documents that the Neolithic human achievements, sedentism, farming,
the Domus, irrigation, and towns were all well in place long before we see ‘states’
arise. He argues that the early Mesopotamian civilization that we hail as the origins
of western culture was built on the oppression of peasants who were forced into
agriculture as a means of generating a surplus for the king.
In what was then a multi-functional marshland, hunting and gathering was a far
more appealing source of livelihood but was untaxable and thus not conducive to
the creation of states. Elites then hijacked the Neolithic achievements as a foun-
dation for power: “on the basis of what we now know, the embryonic state arises by
harnessing the late Neolithic grain and manpower module as a basis of control and
manipulation” [4]. It also appears that those who could escape to a life unfettered by
the state did so. If he is right, this turns the traditional narrative on its head, but it
provides a solid example of left hemisphere empire-building in early history.
Divides and Sub-divides
The left hemisphere is the source of language and logic, and the utilization of
language is one of its primary weapons. It builds arguments logically and linearly to
prove something, defend itself, or for any other goal.
158
C. A. Haines

Its ﬁrst weakness is that the outward facts on which its arguments are based are
isolated from the outside world. If the two hemispheres do not coordinate on this, a
great deal of internal logic may be founded on complete untruths. Persecutions,
such as the Salem Witch Trials, but of course also others, come to mind as
examples. Those cases also exemplify other qualities of the left hemisphere that
were equally culpable in the results.
The left hemisphere views the world in either/or choices; an offer is to do this or
that. The search for a third, or alternate option is not a left hemisphere one. Of
course, humans are fully capable of that search, but only when they engage their
full brain. Computer code based on two options is the perfect left hemisphere tool.
While the left hemisphere wants everything in communication clear and precise,
it is perfectly capable of making assumptions without clarifying them. As it
operates within the world it understands and can control, its assumptions are
homocentric, based on what it knows. Items outside of its knowledge, such as life
forms too small to see, or time frames much longer than a human lifetime, are
frequently not considered relevant.
There is an example from this topic area. For a long time, researchers tried to
understand “what do the two hemispheres do?”. That is a left hemisphere question
that discounts the contributions of the right hemisphere. So, it is not surprising that
the result was a considerable quantity of data that left the answer more confused
than before. You can ﬁnd several books that say there are no differences. It was not
until they started to ask: “In what manner do the two hemispheres do what they
do?” that they began to understand the differences [1].
The left hemisphere sees “the whole as merely the sum of the parts.” As it sees
the parts as dead entities, there is no room for them to interact with each other, and
the left hemisphere is not good at recognizing relationships. Thus, it has no way to
understand the interactions that create complex systems, living or non-living. In
Meadow’s primer on complex systems [5], she noted that one of our primary errors
when operating complex systems was pushing the lever in the wrong direction. Our
brains get so confused by complexity that they fail to understand the implications,
even when it is an either/or choice.
The left hemisphere organizes, categorizes, divides, and subdivides the parts in a
myriad of ways. We beneﬁt in such organizations as structures of biological spe-
cies, families, genus, geological rock and soil types, and many others.
One of the primary creations of this process of organization is bureaucracy. The
organization of positions, their relation to one another, and the rules and regulations
that control their interactions create an organization that can ‘control’ something.
This organization may be a small group, a company, a government department, or
the government itself. The lure of a ‘system’ to solve the many issues an organi-
zation may face, cuts across the many purposes or situations that deﬁne it.
The system’s structural design is frequently supported by checklists and manuals
of practice with rules and regulations on how to address any contingency. Because
the left hemisphere would prefer to believe a directive than its own senses, this
frequently leads to rigid, law and order approaches that are unable to address the
human conditions of the people involved. Exactly the conditions the left
7
Within the Box: Captives of Our Own Mind
159

hemisphere is ill-equipped to solve. The workers in those positions are people with
human feelings about their position and how they are treated. The clients, and those
who interact with the workers, also respond to how the employees and the ‘system’
treat them.
Many excellent employees do their very best to be helpful and constructive, but
when the system is designed without thought to human qualities, it frequently
incentivizes destructive procedures. The left hemisphere excuses itself by saying,
“Don’t take it personally; it is just business.”
The other signiﬁcant ramiﬁcation of the left hemisphere perspective on division
and sub-division is the specialization of knowledge, most evident in academic silos.
There may be many causes of this, from deﬁning a subject area that you can fully
understand, to control of a piece of turf, to other cause.
Specialization has caused two signiﬁcant impacts on society. The ﬁrst is that all
that focused brainpower has produced a massive explosion in information, which
has exacerbated the second, that the only academic credential considered of value in
society is deep-knowledge in a narrow ﬁeld. Specialization is paralleled by a central
focus on math and sciences as the only topics worthy of study and a drastic
reduction in funding for the arts and social sciences. Is it clear that left hemisphere
values and perspectives are a signiﬁcant reason for this restructuring of society? Is
this the result of a dutiful emissary or a rogue leader?
There is some recognition of the problem. There is a greater focus on teams and
a substantial increase in combined ﬁelds where, for example, biology and chemistry
combine into some new area, but generally to look at some speciﬁc issue from that
combined perspective. A great deal of the pharmaceutical industry is based on this
sort of combined perspective.
I attended an academic conference a few years ago, where the faculty was
promoting cross-departmental study programs in environmental studies to provide
their students with a broader perspective than they had obtained. From the pre-
sentations I attended, it appeared that the students had beneﬁted from that exposure.
However, the faculty appeared not in the least interested in widening their own
perspectives. Their presentations were so narrow-focused they seemed utterly
irrelevant.
One example of this having had signiﬁcant ramiﬁcations on society over the past
40 years is climate disruption. Climatologists are experts in understanding the
physics of large climatic systems that impact the planet’s climate and weather. That
is not a small achievement. Weather forecasting has undoubtedly improved since I
was young and woke up to 6″ of ‘partly cloudy.’
On the other hand, climatologists who are experts in understanding the atmo-
sphere are less expert in understanding the land. To generalize the land charac-
teristics that impact the weather, they have adopted ‘albedo’ or reﬂectivity as a
measure. This is helpful because planes with sensors can measure albedo over large
areas.
I do not know the basis for their decisions or what they know or do not know.
What I do know is that albedo is not a good measure of planetary heat character-
istics. The solar reﬂectivity of a forest varies due to species, but is typically noted at
160
C. A. Haines

about 15%; NASA uses 14.0% in its models. The reﬂectivity of brick, and other
construction materials, is also about 15%. The problem is that albedo ignores the
85% of the solar energy that is not reﬂected? In the case of the forest, 18% converts
to heat, 1% is used for growth, and 66% transpires water that results in cooling [6].
In the case of an inanimate object such as the brick, all 85% converts to heat. Thus,
a more comprehensive range of knowledge produces a very different understanding.
Case Study: Heat Planet
Heat planet provides an example of what must be one of the signiﬁcant mistakes of
science with tragic consequences, due; it would appear to over-specialization, and
other left hemisphere characteristics. Greenhouse gases were codiﬁed as the cause
of climate disruption in 1979 with the publication of the Jason and the Charney
reports. The latter commissioned by the Carter White House to review the former.
The Jason Report states: “This report addresses the questions of the sources of
atmospheric carbon dioxide, considers distribution of the present carbon dioxide
among the atmospheric, oceanic and biospheric reservoir and assesses the impact on
climate as reﬂected by the average ground temperature at each latitude of signiﬁcant
increases in atmospheric carbon dioxide” [7]. The conclusion was that greenhouse
gases cause climate change.
The report was a detailed and sophisticated study of carbon dioxide (CO2), based
on a correlation of rising warming with rising greenhouse gas levels. The conclu-
sion would have been valid if they had proved that all other climate characteristics
remained stable. But the study did not investigate other causes. Science confused a
correlation with causation, a violation of the scientiﬁc method.
Due to this, we have spent the past 40 years blaming the “pot lid” for the pot
boiling over. Greenhouse gases trap heat and exacerbate warming, but they do not
generate heat. With all the brainpower and expertise worldwide, no one seems to have
asked, “where does the heat come from?” We need to think about ‘turning down the
stove.’ Once we identify the stove, we have an enormous opportunity to reduce
warming directly, locally, and in a short time frame, with the majority providing
substantial economic and ecological beneﬁts [8]. Perhaps equally disturbing, the
world has fallen in line, deferring to the ‘experts,’ another left hemisphere quality.
Arrogant and Over-Optimistic
The left hemisphere has no place to process information that it does not understand.
It is unable to generalize material where it cannot identify underlying issues. Thus,
it tends to simply dismiss the information as being irrelevant. It also is not interested
in information that it cannot control. If there is nothing it can do about something,
that information is not of concern to the left hemisphere. Thus, many people focus
very narrowly on speciﬁc topics, not even recognizing why they ﬁnd only those
issues important.
7
Within the Box: Captives of Our Own Mind
161

The left hemisphere is the classic Freudian ego. It denies its weaknesses,
attempting to present an invulnerable façade. It is unable to admit ignorance and
will claim to know subjects of which it is entirely ignorant. It is unable to accept
responsibility and produces endless excuses for some other source of the problem.
In true Freudian form, it is also unable to admit error and states that “we are not on
the wrong path, but have simply not gone far enough on the path we are on” [1].
“Denial, a tendency to conformism, a willingness to disregard the evidence, a habit
of ducking responsibility, a blindness to mere experience in the face of over-
whelming evidence of theory: these might sound ominously familiar to observers of
contemporary Western life” [1].
Case Study: Losing Earth
Rich [9] documents the pressure for action exerted on the government after the
Jason Report publication. The Carter administration was eventually convinced to
consider it and commissioned the Charney report, which generally conﬁrmed what
the Jason’s had concluded. Then, Carter led the National Academy of Science and
designed the one-million-dollar study of the carbon dioxide problem. The panel
worked for the next three years, with Reagan in the White House, while everyone
waited for their recommendations. When they emerged with a report, the 496 pages
of “Changing climate” were ﬁlled with dire consequences of the worst kind.
However, at the press conference, when speaking of the ﬁndings, the committee
chairman, William Nierenberg, seemed to totally change his tune, recommending
“caution, not panic.” It was a serious problem, granted, but “if it goes the way we
think, it will be manageable in the next hundred or so years. Better to wait and see.
Better to bet on American ingenuity to save the day. Major, immediate intervention
in national energy policy might end up being more expensive and less effective,
than actions taken decades in the future, after more was understood about the
economic consequences of a warmer planet. Yes, the climate would change, mostly
for the worse, but future generations would be better equipped to change with it”
[9]. The backsliding and unwillingness to take responsibility continued through the
ﬁrst IPCC meeting in 1988 and set us on the course that got us here.
In summary, the left hemisphere is not a person; it is a tool that we all have
available to use appropriately. It can provide essential strengths to assist our efforts,
but it is wildly undisciplined by itself and is entirely ill-suited to be in control. In
Voltaire’s Bastards: The Dictatorship of Reason in the West, Saul [10] provides a
horrible, hilarious, and mind-boggling excursion into the ills of reason. He opens
with three simple statements, the last being: “Like most religions, reason presents
itself as the solution to the problems it has created” [10].
By understanding how it operates, we can recognize its inﬂuence, utilize its
strengths, and control its weaknesses. To do that, we must engage our right
hemisphere and ensure it remains the master.
162
C. A. Haines

The Right Hemisphere as Master: “It Believes, But It Does
Not Know”
In recognizing the right hemisphere as the rightful master, we must also recognize
that the left hemisphere’s Modus Operandi includes devaluing or ignoring what it
cannot understand or control, including the right hemisphere. It is not irrelevant to
note that the corpus callosum where the nerve ﬁbers from the two hemispheres
meet, appears to be designed at least as much to inhibit communication between the
two hemispheres, as to enhance it [1].
This is evident in current society that, as it acquiesces to left hemisphere
arguments, devalues right hemispheres’ qualities and reduces or eliminates activi-
ties and programs that build and support the right hemisphere. Art and the social
sciences, not to mention religion and spirituality, have been devalued or viewed as
luxuries in a rush to STEM (science, technology, engineering, and math) as the only
“important” ﬁelds. Those in these “soft” ﬁelds know otherwise, and sometimes talk
of STEAM to include art but are generally ignored.
Thus, in a society where technology and data are seen as the solution, support for
a right hemisphere culture that could manage the left hemisphere has also been
losing ground. This resultant lack of a balancing right hemisphere allows the left
hemisphere an increasingly broad scope, leaving society dealing with all problems
as isolated events and from one limited, piecemeal perspective. That imbalance also
limits its ability to resolve human and cultural problems, leaves it without an
understanding of systems, and deprives it of ﬂowering of the human brain’s
combined strengths.
Of course, many individuals understand this and are working diligently to make
a difference, but the ‘trend’ is against them. To repeat, “these contributions need to
be made in the service of something else, that only the right hemisphere can bring.
Alone they are destructive” [1].
An Open System
The right hemisphere is alert, engaged in reality, and not off in its own world.
Disengagement and failure to observe a predator could be fatal. The problem of
disengagement is a focus of many religious traditions as the cause of spiritual
failure and touted as well as a signiﬁcant business cost. A more robust right
hemisphere culture might assist in that.
The right hemisphere deals with real, living individuals and does not ignore the
messy details. Human and cultural problems are all based on human realities and
the problems around them. We cannot ignore the “messy details” and still resolve
the issues we face. There are many dedicated social workers, nurses, and many
others who address these issues with the utmost professionalism and do an excellent
job. However, society as a whole does not value their work and does not pay well
for it. Many of the now-famous “frontline workers” in the pandemic of coronavirus
7
Within the Box: Captives of Our Own Mind
163

disease (COVID) are likewise dedicated but severely underpaid, and until recently,
wholly unrecognized. Will society now recognize them and ensure they get com-
pensated at a reasonable rate in remembrance of the many who paid with their
lives?
The right hemisphere recognizes that life is a process, things will change, and it
takes that change in stride. It also accepts that there is much that is not known and
even cannot be known, so it faces the unknown in the same manner as it faces
changing circumstances. When preparing for the future is such a critical element in
business and effectively all organizations, it seems counterproductive to approach
that problem from a perspective that dislikes change. But that is what our rational
mind does. Perhaps that is why most projections show no changes on the horizon,
and we get blindsided by some occurrence, like Covid, that no one anticipated.
The right hemisphere is comfortable with implicitness and duality, birthing
creativity and creative expression. That openness allows for metaphor and nuances
of meaning, where poetry, drama, music, and humor can develop in the between-
ness of words, images, sounds, and ideas. This is the stepping-off point for artistic
creations where the exploration of meaning and levels of meaning can be woven
together in new and exciting ways.
The right hemisphere is also open to wonder and awe. It can be consumed by the
majesty and beauty of nature, natural events, and exquisite forms. As the left
hemisphere cannot control our experience of beauty, it tries to stamp out the idea.
“The left hemisphere…has here set about neutralizing or neutering the power of art”
[1]. Moreover, while it has to a great extent made beauty culturally unacceptable,
“we cannot get rid of the power of beauty by a decision in theory” [1]. The classical
values of architecture were structure, function, and delight. Delight that lifts the
human spirit is very much a part of being human, and all of the art recognizes and
values its creation.
The open and connected right hemisphere is a nearly direct counterpoint to the
closed and disconnected left hemisphere. It is fully able to deal with real, living
individuals and their messy details, the ﬂows of life and change, implicitness, and
duality and yet to be open to the wonder and awe of incredible beauty. This is the
perfect balance to the dead abstractions of the left hemisphere. With the right
hemisphere as master, we as a species can genuinely live in the world, yet keep our
abstract mental processes providing value, but isolated and away from human
interactions where they might cause harm.
Concerned with Relationships
The right hemisphere is deeply concerned with relationships between living entities,
but especially people, relishing family, and community. It values the relationships it
builds with others and seeks these relationships as the basis of life. None of this is
available in the left hemisphere, so our most basic human relationships are
non-events to our “rational mind.”
164
C. A. Haines

Due to these connections, the right hemisphere feels and understands the pain
and elation that others experience. These connections are the basis of empathy and
sympathy, which ﬂows onto a deep concern for moral relationships and social
justice. These concerns thus ﬂow from direct connections to the social realm and
can ﬂow to the political realm with policies that care about and protect people
caught in circumstances not of their own making. Without right hemisphere
intervention, is it any wonder that a rise in marriage counseling, divorces, and social
dysfunction have followed the drive to technology and efﬁciency?
The right hemisphere also works within relationships, in the spaces between
objects, essential in artistic design. Followed by the excellent work Drawing on the
Right Side of the Brain by Betty Edwards, providing an early discussion of the
architectural implications of society changing its way of “seeing,” Hale [11] pro-
poses that American society changed its hemisphere of focus about 1820 with the
introduction of Greek Revivalist architecture that focused on objects with meaning
and message, left hemisphere ideas. He promotes returning to “The Old Way of
Seeing” using the power of visual images and the relationships within them.
I fully agree with Hale and commend him for his work but propose that an “old
way of seeing” is applicable, and even critical, for an awful lot more than aesthetic
design. Most, if not all, the major problems society faces are also in need of that
“old way of seeing.” Our total dependence on our “new way of seeing” is how we
got here, and its continued use will only get us more of the same.
So again, the human-centered right hemisphere is nearly the perfect counterpoint
to the power and goal-centered left hemisphere. While the left hemisphere is out for
itself, the right hemisphere is out for others, acting as a foil to protect the innocent.
Thus, the left hemisphere’s drives, which it is unable to control, can be readily
reigned in by the right hemisphere. With the right hemisphere as master, the goals
can be productive contributions to self and society, and the interactions assure that
no one else gets hurt, and there is no downside to left hemisphere projects.
Intuitive and Wise
The right hemisphere bases its beliefs on its own experience and its concern for
equity and justice. While individuals with limited experiences, such as youth, can
be led astray, the focus on the whole of life supports a broad perspective and
systemic understanding. Thus, it ﬁnds wisdom in a deep understanding of every-
thing around it, like elders of aboriginal tribes that take advice from everyone and
boil it down with a concern for fairness and equality to provide the best that society
can deliver. That is not to say that the elders of old were never wrong, but that their
thinking process was integrative and expansive, not reductionist.
The right hemisphere is non-verbal, but because it embraces implicitness, it
plays a role in the nuances of words and meaning, as discussed above. McGilchrist
writes on the possibility that music was the ﬁrst form of communication; the
emotional responses to music provide mutual understanding between people. The
ﬁrst
languages
may
have
been
variations
on
song.
Thus,
the
locus
of
7
Within the Box: Captives of Our Own Mind
165

communication developed in the right hemisphere but transferred to the left
hemisphere with the development of speech.
The right hemisphere recognizes the whole as a living system. It recognizes
relationships and sees how entities interact to create something more than the sum
of the parts. This is particularly important in the living world, where systemic
interactions are the basis of life. It is also important in understanding other complex
systems, such as cities, considered the most complex entities created by humans.
Curiosity and breadth of knowledge bolster an understanding of systems. This
combination is well-positioned to synthesize from the vast offerings of specialized
knowledge
to
address
society’s
systemic
problems,
both
ecological
and
human-made [12]. The ﬂowering of the Renaissance was the result of just such a
synthesis of the two hemispheres with a degree of success rarely equaled. President
Eisenhower identiﬁed the key to this approach, as noted in the opening quote: “if I
ever ﬁnd a problem I cannot solve, I make it bigger. I will never solve it by trying to
make it smaller, but if I make it big enough, I will eventually ﬁnd the outline of its
solution.” Effectively nothing was known about split-brain science when Einstein
said, “You cannot solve a problem with the same level of thinking that created it.”
However, he clearly understood the different forms of thinking that we now
understand based on the brain’s bi-hemispheric structure.
The wisdom of the right hemisphere is more context within which life works
than a direct counterpoint to the reductionist thinking of the left hemisphere. We
beneﬁt from the fruits of the left hemisphere’s organizational skills but suffer from
the sharp edges built into it. It is precisely these points where systemic racism and
other forms of oppression are built into our social structures. The very acknowl-
edgment of that context softens and humanizes the systems the left hemisphere
creates, providing a review from a different “level of thinking” to build equity and
human connections.
Realistic/Melancholy
While the left hemisphere is overly optimistic, the right hemisphere is realistic. The
need for realism plays out in several ways. A realism in expectations is essential for
creating plans with back-ups and alternatives that recognize things that might not go
as assumed. We mentioned earlier that most plans are straight-line projections of
current conditions. If alternatives are not considered seriously, it may leave you
without preparation when events do not follow your script.
It is also critical to anticipate “unexpected events.” While I am not aware of
anyone having predicted the COVID pandemic speciﬁcally, I understand that many
in the public health arena understood the likelihood of some form of a pandemic
occurring at some point. Even without details, preparation for this sort of event goes
a long way towards making it through. My understanding is that these alerts were
ignored, and the government was unprepared.
This illustrates the need for realistic responses to warnings. Studies of civi-
lization failures [13, 14] point to warmings provided to leaders about impending
166
C. A. Haines

perils, some imminent, and others farther in the future. Many of the events that
toppled civilizations were known about, but no, or few actions were taken to
prevent them. The dismissal, denial, and over-optimism of the left hemisphere
appear to rule.
Expectations for the future are complicated by our acceptance of the vocal left
hemisphere as the source of intelligence. When we put our faith in “intelligent”
leaders to the extent that their left hemisphere dominates them, they are more likely
to be over-conﬁdent in their positions and unrealistic in their projections. Of course,
a knowledgeable individual uses both hemispheres, but society does not always see
it that way.
The right hemisphere is aware of the left hemisphere’s limitations and works to
humanize its creations and re-integrate them into the living world. It also works to
keep the left hemisphere in line and not allow it to go off on its own. It is, however,
clear that it does not always succeed.
This realistic perspective of the right hemisphere can leave it subdued and even
melancholy as it views the future, aware of and concerned by others’ suffering. This
is particularly true when it sees ominous events emerging and society in its hubris,
ignoring them.
Thus, once again, the realism of the right hemisphere can counter the
over-optimism of the left. It can help us see the real world we inhabit and recognize
and listen to warnings others make. In humanizing the left hemisphere, the right is
more able to accept responsibility than the absurdity of the left hemisphere’s denials
of culpability.
Conclusion
Wise men say, and not without reason, that whoever wishes to foresee the future must
consult the past: for human events ever resemble those of preceding times. This arises from
the fact that they are produced by men who ever have been, and ever will be, animated by
the same passions, and thus they necessarily have the same results.
Niccolo’ Machiavelli
Let me note I am in no way condoning the horrible words and deeds of
Machiavelli in the use of this quote, only recognizing what I see as a wise
statement.
There is frequent talk of “outside the box” thinking, but I do not see much
evidence that very many people have thought about what it means. After all, the
box is deﬁned as: “a closed system which cannot reach outside itself to whatever it
is that exists apart from itself” [1]. It is not that no one is thinking outside the box,
but there is a lot more talk about it than there is “outside the box” thinking. I hope
this chapter at least provides an insight into the topic.
There is nothing easy about fully understanding all this material and integrating
it into your thinking. It will take effort, time, and patience, but insights into your
own thinking and recognitions into the thinking of others will occur. I discussed a
7
Within the Box: Captives of Our Own Mind
167

parallel concept in Lifelong Learning as a Sustainability Strategy [2] about how we
need to discover how to maintain and upgrade our built environment in the coming
years. Perhaps the parallel would be helpful.
The end of the Nietzsche story provides a ﬁtting conclusion. The emissary was
able to overthrow the master, but that destroyed the domain and his own ruin. The
power “struggle between the hemispheres” is stacked in favor of the left hemi-
sphere, and it seems to be holding all the cards. Only when society recognizes the
nature and ramiﬁcations of this struggle does the right hemisphere have a chance of
success.
Core Messages
• The right hemisphere can provide balance and control for the strengths and
abilities of the left hemisphere.
• An open brain can keep the closed system in contact with reality.
• The concern for relationships, people, and justice can balance the concern
for power.
• The recognition of living systems can lessen the destructive aspects of
over-division and provide context for interactions between elements.
• Realism and humility can balance the left hemisphere’s arrogance and
irresponsibility.
References
1. McGilchrist I (2009) The master and his emissary: the divided brain and the making of the
western world. Yale University Press, New Haven, CT
2. Haines C (2018) Lifelong learning as a sustainability strategy. In: Azeiteiro UM et al
(eds) Lifelong learning and education in healthy and sustainable cities. Springer International
Publishing, pp 409–422
3. Biodiversity for a Livable Climate (2017) Compendium of practical and scientiﬁc ﬁndings
supporting eco-restoration to address global warming. Bio4climate.org/Compendium 1(1),
July 2017
4. Scott JC (2017) Against the grain: a deep history of the earliest states. Yale University Press,
New Haven, CT
5. Meadows D (2008) Thinking in systems: a primer. Chelsea Green Publishing, White River
Junction, VT
6. Schneider E, Sagan D (2005) Into the cool: energy ﬂow, thermodynamics and life. University
of Chicago Press, Chicago
7. MacDonald G et al (1979) The long-term impact of atmospheric carbon dioxide on climate.
Jason technical report JSR-78-07. SRI International, Arlington, VA
8. Haines C (202X) Heat planet: biodiversity, the solar interface, and climate disruption.
In-process
9. Rich N (2019) Losing earth: a recent history. Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, New York
168
C. A. Haines

10. Saul JR (1993) Voltaire’s bastards: the dictatorship of reason in the west. Penguin Books,
New York
11. Hale J (1994) The old way of seeing: how architecture lost its magic, (and how to get it back).
Houghton Mifﬂin Co, Boston
12. Haines C (2016) Rethinking thinking about sustainable development curriculum. In: The 3rd
world symposium on sustainable development at universities (WSSD-U-2016), Sept 2016.
Springer Publishing
13. Montgomery D (2007) Dirt: the erosion of civilization. University of California Press,
Berkeley, CA
14. Ophuls W (2012) Immoderate greatness: why civilizations fail. CreateSpace Independent
Publishing Platform, North Charleston, SC
Christopher A. Haines is an NCARB certiﬁed architect spe-
cializing in regenerative design for building renovations and
urban spaces, integrating both Passive House and Living Building
Challenge perspectives. He wove academic curiosity into this
professional focus. Christopher investigated requirements for a
socially and technically regenerative society, taught urban sus-
tainability, environmental management, and architectural tech-
nology at universities and pursued studies in higher education
sustainability curriculum, the social and ecological impacts of a
growth economy, urbanism, brain science, and techno-philia and
sustainability. He has spent the last several years immersed in
biodiversity, investigating the intersection of biodiversity and the
built environment to understand natures’ designs better. This led
to a revelation on the actual cause of climate change. Christopher
is now writing a book on that topic.
7
Within the Box: Captives of Our Own Mind
169

8
The Dialectic of Mind and Matter
in the Trialectic Approach: A New Path
of the Cognition Process
Ulrich Richter
Sapere aude – Have the courage to use your own mind!
Immanuel Kant, reply to the question: what is enlightment?
(1783)
Abstract
The essay does not solve any of the controversial problems on the borderline of
the humanities and the natural sciences, but with the essay, a new path is
presented, on which the necessary knowledge about the things of the world can be
gained. With the method: the trialectical approach, the problem of the
non-decidable dialectic of matter and mind is representable, argumentative, and
visual, leaving open the concrete factual questions, which are stated in the process
of science, putting back the given answer into the process of cognition. The
principle of this method, a combination of the semiotic triangle with the critique
of Hegel’s dialectic, is analyzed and reﬂected in the horizon of metaphysics, the
cornerstone of every methodology. The subject who thinks the dialectic of mind
and matter is the focus of the argument. The core of my argument is the idea that
neither the philosopher nor the physician can verify the truth of their arguments.
The physician reaches his limits when he is to explain why his doing has not
defeated the death up to now. This explanation fails because death is a
constitutive moment of life that is not possible without matter, but life is more
than mere matter. Up to now, the philosopher has failed to explain what the mind
is because he cannot go beyond that what has been told and can be told in the
myths about the being of man. The necessary narratives promise a solution which
in life is denied by the dead, the factual existence of matter.
U. Richter (&)
D-48167 Münster, Germany
e-mail: ulrichrichter@ur-philosoph.de
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh (eds.), Thinking, Integrated Science 7,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04075-7_8
171

Graphical Abstract/Art Performance
Life: beyond predictions (Adapted with permission from the Health and Art
(HEART), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network (USERN);
Painting by Aytak Barazandeh)
Keywords
Dialectics Difference Humanities Matter Method Mind Natural sciences
Subject  Trialectic approach  Trialectics
172
U. Richter

QR Code
Scanning the QR code directs you to the word cloud of the chapter that is made up of
the words we discussed throughout the whole book in relation to the chapter’s
keyword, which is intentionally not included in the word cloud. Find the keyword and
put it in place in the puzzle according to the clues provided in Chap. 36. The mystery
hidden in the puzzle is the quote of THINKING: Bioengineering of Science and Art.
Introduction
The Outlines of the Problem1
In the history of men,2 the distinction between mind and matter3 had always been the
object of the ﬁercest controversy, a dispute which is not dissolved either on one side
1 The notes have the function of a subtext, too, (a). The orthography (b) and the terminology
of the relational argument require further references which would have disturbed the ﬂux
of thought in the text. As something which is new, the text cannot refer back to a broad discussion
in the relevant sciences, but I can point at my texts, explaining the relational argument,
differentiated from the ontological argument (c).
(a) The subtext is limited to some remarks, because the limited space for the essay forced
shortenings in the planned sketch of annotations. In general, I point to my homepage,
where the texts are available as well as the links to the INDEX/register (*1).
(*1) www.ur-philosoph.de /bibliography, and /INDEX/register.
(b) There is to remark one particularity in my orthography which should not be ignored, because it is
fundamental for the logic of the text. It is the use of the colon with ﬁnal comma (point) which differs
from the practice. The term which stands after the colon is the variable, the term before the colon is
theconstant,partsprotototheconcept:mind,andtheconcept:matter.Thesign:“,isset,ifinthevariable
the terms are separated by a comma or colon, pars pro toto the term: “the letters: a, b, … n,” (*1).
(*1) INDEX/register, keyword: orthography.
(c) INDEX/register, keyword: relational argument und ontologist argument.
2 In the horizon of the relational argument the distinction: history or historia, is to be observed (a). The
term: historia, refers to the historical facts which can be documented with a document of historia.
The term: history of men, refers to the narratives/myths which people tell each other, today and then.
The debate: mind and/or matter, is conducted in this horizon. As far as the documents of historia point
back in the history, the separation of mind and matter is the cantus ﬁrmus. People speak of the spirits
which rule over the matter, the sea as well as the land and the sky. With the determination of the facts,
nothing is explained, neither something about the mind, or anything about the matter.
(a) INDEX/register, keywords: geschichte und historia.
3 The German terms: geist und materie, are translated with the English terms: mind and matter. The
translation: materie ==> matter, (a) is unproblematic, the translation: geist ==> mind (spirit),
8
The Dialectic of Mind and Matter in the Trialectic …
173

or on the other side. Either the opposing parties put the mind ﬁrst, interpreting the
matter as an emanation of the mind, or the matter should take the ﬁrst rank, the mind
understood as an unnecessary element of matter. In view of the historia, the fact of not
being decided is indisputable, and the end of the dispute is not recognizable insofar as
signs are appropriately interpreted. The thesis of the essay is that, on the one hand, this
controversial question is not decidable, but, on the other hand, it has pragmatically to
be decided in the process of science and is decided in one way or the other.
The opposites are the problem of the concepts: mind and matter, being in con-
tradiction, negotiated in the dispute.4 The objects of the dispute are things of the
world,5 but no binding measure is available, which is qualiﬁed, logically compelling,
to show the valid truth of the knowledge about the things and their social assessment.
As things stand, the problem cannot be solved without resorting to the belief of the
people, dissolving (forcibly) the one quarrel, and creating a new quarrel. Also, the
scientist,6 the art scholar not different from the natural scientist, must justify each
method in the horizon of the purposes ﬁxed in his methods. He must justify why the
found result is methodically correct and not wrong. The logic of the procedure,
realized in each method, is undisputed but disputed is the result of the procedure held
in an argument.7 The founding reason of each method is a blind spot which, as stated
in practice and played over in theory, is a place of twilight at which every argument,
conclusively set, appears ambiguous. Neither with the methods of the natural sci-
entists (= matter) nor with the methods of the arts scholars (= mind), the ambiguity
of found knowledge can be resolved but much would be achieved if this ambiguity
can be made visible in the argument methodically proven.
appears more complex. Either the term: mind, or the term: spirit, are possible, but with a different
meaning, a distinction which cannot be done with the German term: geist, but it is possible to give
additional explanations. With the term: mind, different phenomena are called, partes pro toto:
anima or soul, including consciousness (of himself) as notions of the subject, thought in his forum
internum. The thinking of the subject is to be included, too, grasping the things of his world in
their materiality. The term: mind, refers most accurately to the object of the text.
(a) Here, the sign: ==>, is used in the meaning: translated.
4 In the horizon of the relational argument, the adequate translation of the German terms:
widerspruch und gegensatz, is difﬁcult. It’s usual to use the term: contradiction and opposite
(contrast). The concept: contradiction, used in logic, is not the phenomenon: opposite (contrast),
real in space and time, a complicated situation when the term: (to) contradict (= widersprechen), is
used for the handling, formulated with the term: (to) opposite (= opponieren).
5 The English term: thing of the world, is a translation of the German term: ding der welt. All the
things which the subject can grasp, imaginated and formulated in the forum internum as concepts
and ideas, and handled in space and time on the forum publicum, are things of the world (a). The
possible distinction: “matter, life and mind”, is subordinate.
(a) INDEX/register, keyword: ding der welt.
6 The term: scientist, refers to any subject who perceives the things of his world, guided
methodically. The common distinctions are subordinate, partes pro toto: “natural scientists or arts
scholar, physicist or philosopher”. The distinctive feature is that everyone is committed to the
causality which is set by them in their autonomy.
7 Set in the horizon of the relational argument, in the discourse every idea or every thought is
treated as an argument (a), if the thought is methodically indicated in the horizon of the prevailing
causality
(a) www.ur-philosoph.de /bibliographie /signatur: 029: argument.
174
U. Richter

The Controversial Question: Mind or Matter, Is Methodically
Unsolved
What the mind or the matter is supposed to be, that, as stated in historia and history,
is controversially discussed. The opposite is the constant in the discourse, but, on
the one hand, the matter is present in the phenomena of nature; on the other hand,
the mind is present in the phenomena of culture, mediated in the phenomena of life.
It should be present that in the perspective of the own existence, the process of
reﬂection on the difference: matter/mind, is guided by every scientist as the subject
(= “individuum als ich”).8 The difference: mind/matter, is argumentatively reﬂected
by the scientist in the perspective of the mind, even if he can point out that the
object of his doing is mere matter, undisputed according to the common under-
standing. The matter is moved, one state follows the other, but the mind moves
something, always following a certain pattern, which can be described with a
method. That, what is called by the term: something, are things of the world,
undisputed according to the common understanding, events in space and time
which cannot be determined in their sequence, determinable by a method. With this
argument, a determination seems to have been made, which, according to the
tradition, gives to the mind the primacy over the matter. This objection, however,
must be countered by the fact that, if this interpretation of the methods is valid, the
difference: matter/mind, would be pulled down and all, what is, is either only matter
or only mind. The subject of the method would be without object; the object of the
methods would be without subject. This answer does not correspond to the reality in
which the scientist grasps his object with the appropriate method, necessarily
presupposing the distinction: mind and matter.
8 The term: subject, is the translation of the German term: individuum als ich, central for my
thinking. A literal translation of the term is impossible (a). For this reason, the literal translation:
the individual as I or the individual as a self, are misleading. Because I have not found an adequate
translation for the German term: individuum als ich, I was forced to resort to the traditional term:
subject, but I do not take over the connotations of the concept: subject, (b) discussed in the
tradition.
(a) Based in my orthography, the problem is located in the words: Ich/ich. The German noun: Ich,
is generally translated into English, either with the term: I, or with the term: self. Insofar, there is
no problem, but I use the terms: Ich/ich, clearly differentiated. Grounded in my use of orthography,
the meaning of the German terms: Ich/ich, cannot be mirrowed in the Englisch term: I. If I use the
term: Ich, then is ﬁxed, that I am the author of the thought and no other. If I use the term: ich, then
is ﬁxed the concept: das ich. According to the orthography, this differentiation is not possible in
English. The sign: I, always stands for the traditional subject, the sign: i, is not used, standing for
each other concept: “subject: I or self”.
(b) As the actor of all events the human being is the central concept of this essay, designated by
the term: the subject, a term which is problematic regarding tradition. The problem is located in the
general term: subject, which is used for opinions (= interpretations of the men) which are valid in
the relational argument as well as in the ontological argument. For avoiding misunderstandings, I
have developed the term: individuum als ich (*1).
(*1) INDEX/register, keyword: individuum als ich.
8
The Dialectic of Mind and Matter in the Trialectic …
175

The Purpose of the Essay
The premise of the essay is that the distinction between mind and matter is valid,
both for the natural scientist, who cannot disregard himself in his work, and for the
arts scholar, who cannot ignore these things of the world in his reﬂections on the
things in the world, which are something other, different from himself. The problem
is how the scientist as a subject, determined in natural science or in the humanities,
can succeed in his methods, linking the two aspects of his existence without losing
sight of the other aspect. On the one hand, in the practice of the scientist as a natural
scientist, the aspect of the mind is to ignore and can be excluded from case to case;
on the other hand, the scientist as an art scholar can ignore the aspect of the matter,
letting disappear the facts under the label: the dialectic of mind and matter. It is
admittedly taken to knowledge that the practice to let disappear the fact and not to
take knowledge of them is a universal phenomenon, but nevertheless, the problem
of selective perception (= matter) and reﬂection (= mind) has not been eliminated
from the world.
The essay tries to take it another way. The difference of mind/matter is accepted
as valid but linked to the restriction that any conceivable method can be valid only
if it is stated that the concepts matter or mind are designated as moments of their
validity in the horizon of the other concept. The projected method, developed in the
critique of Hegel’s dialectic, is named “the trialectic approach.” This method does
not provide a conclusive answer to the speciﬁc questions. Being in disputation, the
question and the answer over the phenomena of matter and of mind, mediated in the
phenomena of life stay open, but it can be made clear what is the critical point of
any method which no scientist can ignore if he wants that his knowledge is to be
compatible with the conditions of the rational argument.
The Main Body
The Method: The Trialectic Approach
The trialectic approach is a process that, embedded in the European tradition,
contradicts the fundamental principle of this tradition, the idea of being, which is an
idea thought by the subject. The idea of being, the whole, is opposed to the idea that
only the subject can be the subject, a part in the whole, who is the source of his
knowledge of everything of the world which the matter and the mind are to be.9
9 The problem: metaphysics, is to be mentioned (a). The horizon of my argument is a certain
version of the concept: metaphysics. I make a strict distinction between the relational argument
which I follow and the ontological argument which is the mainstream in the tradition. Both
concepts mark the fundamental and only possible perspectives on the world. The subject
autonomously decides which perspective it will hold, a perspective which is absolute true for the
subject, but, viewing at the tradition as his measure, the subject cannot prove the truth of his
decision, well grounded in faith.
176
U. Richter

On the Historia of the Method
The term: trialektic, a neologism, has been developed from the term: dialectic. In
the number: 2, the principle of dialectic is ﬁxed; the principle of trialectic is marked
with the number: 3.10 Two ideas of different provenance form the fundament of the
method: the trialectic approach. One idea is the scheme of the semiotic triangle
(Fig. 8.1), whose corner points are: the concept (= a), the phenomenon (= b), and
the sign (= c).11 The second idea is Hegel’s dialectic, whose constitutive moments
of position, negation, and mediation12 are progressively joined together in a circle
(Fig. 8.2). The combination of the two ideas constitutes the scheme of the tri-
alectical approach (Fig. 8.3).
The Structure of the Method
The method of the trialectic approach is structured in a manageable way. Consti-
tutive are three moments: a, no moment more; b, no moment less; and c, every
moment in its rank equal (no priority) (Fig. 8.4). Every two moments are related to
each other, excluding each third moment. The method appears complex when the
moments, abstractly designated with the letters: “a, b, and c,” are concretized with
Fig. 8.1 The semiotic triangle, whose corner points are: the concept (= a), the phenomenon (= b),
and the sign (= c)
(a) Here, the historia of metaphysics is not to be discussed, I refer globally to: Historisches
Wörterbuch der Philosophie, 13 vols. Basel: 1971ff, keyword: metaphysik, vol. 5, sp. 870–924.
Additional the reference to the keyword: geist (mind), vol. 2, sp. 154–204 (210), and the keyword:
materie (matter), vol. 5, sp. 1186–1279 (1295).
10 The terms: trialectic or triolectic, are to have been used publicly by Asger Jorn for the ﬁrst time,
around 1960(a). Without knowledge of the neologism, created by Asger Jorn, I formulated the
term: trialectic, around 2000 in order to identify my philosophical intentions more clearly, being in
contrast to Hegel’s dialectic. The derivation of the term: trialectic, from the term: dialectic, is
obvious, if the coinage is not amalgamated with the speculations of numerical mysticism. From the
number: 3, nothing can be derived which goes beyond the rank: 3. The ideal image of trialectic is
the number: three, in which the notions of a triangle and a circle coincide, conceived as a perfect
unity. All other geometric ﬁgures are either derivatives or singular elements: point and line.
(a) According to Wikipedia, keyword: Asger Jorn.
11 I conﬁne myself to a general note and refer to the theory of signs which Umberto Eco had
developed (a).
(a) INDEX/register, keywords: semiotisches dreieck and Umberto Eco.
12 G.W.F. Hegel: Die Logik der Wissenschaft (a).
(a) INDEX/register, keywords: “G.W.F. Hegel and Hegel’s dialektik”, and www.ur-philosoph.de
/bibliographie /signatur: 031:dialektik_weg.
8
The Dialectic of Mind and Matter in the Trialectic …
177

the things of the world. Each concrete moment opens the view on the cosmos of
possibilities which, represented in a certain scheme, holds open exactly as many
possibilities as there are subjects who can think these schemes.
The Scheme
The scheme of the trialectic approach shows three moments, set in three relations:
“a <==|==> b, b <==|==> c and c <==|==> a.”13 Every conceivable thing in the
Fig. 8.2 Hegel’s dialectic, whose constitutive moments are position, negation, and mediation
Fig. 8.3 The trialectical
approach as a result of the
combination of the semiotic
triangle and Hegel’s dialectic
13 A special attention should be paid to the reading of the signs, used in the context of the method:
trialectic approach.
The systematic compilation of conventions, used in this essay:
1. The moments:
– for every conceivable thing in the world every conceivable term can be used, also the usual
letters: “a, b, … n … z” (read: small a b … n … z. (always without punctuation marks)).
– the small letters: “a, b, c … z”, stand for things.
– the capital letters: “A, B, C … Z”, for persons (read: capital A B C … Z).
– set as moment of another relation, the relation is set in parenthesis: ().
– the moments of a dependent and/or reciprocal relation are interchangeable in their position.
Whether a moment takes the ﬁrst or the second position of the relation, the formulas are
equivalent.
2. The relation-signs: (no empty space before/after the sign)
– the simple relation: ==> (read: relates simple).
– the dependent relation: <==|==> (read: relates dependent).
178
U. Richter

world can be used in the positions of the moments: “a, b, and c,” according to the
application rule. It is a convention that the subject is used in position a. In positions
of b and c, anything of the world can stand that is taken by the subject viewing at
his world. The three moments and the three possible relations are parts of a whole
which is designated by the term “world,” which is, in the graphs, symbolized with
the circle, on whose circular line the moments are arranged as corner points of an
equilateral triangle. In relation to the object of the essay, the scheme in its graphic
representation has the form shown in Fig. 8.5.
The Relations
In the scheme the relation can be:
– either: simple: a==>b,
this is the situation of causality and is limited to what is referred to by the term:
matter. It is the relationship: cause and effect.
– or: dependent: a <==|==> b,
this is the empirical world in which the aspects: matter and mind, are crossed.
– or: reciprocal: A<==>B,
this is the situation in which the subject:_A, and his comrade:_B, interact in a
social relationship. This is the world of the mind.
Fig. 8.4 The trialectic approach in a manageable way, whose constitutive moments are a, b and c,
no moment more, no moment less, every moment in its rank equal (no priority)
– the reciprocal relation: <==> (read: relates reciprocal).
3. Used formulas, as far as reading is not self-explanatory.
– a <==|==> b (read: small a relates dependent small b).
– A <==|==> b (read: capital A relates dependent small b).
– subject <==|==> (mind <==|==> matter) (read: the subject relates dependent the relation the
mind relates dependent the matter).
– cause ==> effect (relation) (read: the cause relates simple the effect).
– cause ==> effect (no relation) (read: cause result in effect).
8
The Dialectic of Mind and Matter in the Trialectic …
179

The subject sets the relations: A <==|==> b and A <==|==> c. With the rela-
tions: A <==|==> b and A <==|==> c, the subject:_A, has set the third relation:
b <==|==> c. The relations of the scheme are parts in a whole which, as the whole,
is an argument.
The Excluded Third Moment
Because only two moments can be related in the relation, each third moment in the
scheme has the function of the excluded third moment. The moment in the function
of the excluded third moment, determining the relation, is not a moment of the
determined relation. The subject:_A, can set the determined relation: A <==|==> b,
set in the horizon of the excluded third moment: c, not otherwise the relation:
A <==|==> c, set in the horizon of the excluded third moment: b. The relation:
b <==|==> c, is determinately set in the horizon of the excluded third moment, the
subject:_A. It is an implicit problem of the trialectical approach that the scheme is
constructed as a closed system that logically functions without contradiction in
itself, but empirically, being subjected to the conditions in space and time,14 the
closed system produces opposites which can be explained with a new scheme
which prolongs the resolution of the problem.
Fig. 8.5 The scheme of
trialectic approach as the
collective of three moments
and their relations
14 The formula: in space and time, is a part of the concept of time, valid in the relational argument.
The term: time experience, (a) is incompatible with the concepts of time, valid in the ontological
argument (b). Living his life in the phenomena of his existence, the subject sets the things of the
world which are commonly referred to the term: time. Distinguished by the traditional concepts of
time, the phenomena of time are not a contradiction to each other, they are opposites which also
can be mutually exclusive.
(a) The German term: zeiterfahrung, is translated with the term: time experience. In the horizon of
the relational argument the term: time experience, marks all phenomena which are described as
time, being exactly that time which time is supposed to be. In the terminology of the relational
argument (*1), the traditional scheme of time is mirrored:
– present ==> the moment of the lived present
– past ==> the factum of the past
– future ==> the projection into the future.
(*1) INDEX/register: zeiterfahrung.
(b) Effective in the tradition, certain theories of time remain unaffected by the relational
argument, pars pro toto, the time theory of the physical sciences.
180
U. Richter

The Metaphysics of the Method
Indeed, the dilemma of the system theory, namely the experience that the founding
reason is not an element of the established system, can plausibly be demonstrated
by the subject, applying the method: the trialectical approach. By setting the
problem of determining the founding reason as a moment of the relation, the rela-
tion is determined in the horizon of the excluded third moment, which the subject
has grasped in a different relation. Every attempt to name the reason with a set
relation is an idea of the subject, which is located in a belief or in theory, in this text
summarized under the term: metaphysics.15 If, as a moment of the set relation, the
third relation: b <==|==> c, is to be held, the subject must refer to his own ideas,
which can be summarized in their multiplicity under the term: metaphysics. This is
a new scheme; it is another scheme (Fig. 8.6).
The Problem of the Dialectic of Mind and Matter
Each scientist captures the object of his interest with a method that is determinately
enclosed in the horizon of a named theory. The applied methods are distinguishable
in their appearance, but their principle is causality16 which every scientist
Fig. 8.6 A scheme of the
trialectic approach, whose
constitutive moments are the
subject, metaphysics, and the
third relation
15 The term: metaphysics, is limited to its declaratory function.
16 The concept: causality, (a) formulate the relationship: if/then, as the logical foundation of every
method. The set cause has an effect, ﬁxed in the relation: cause ==> effect, (b). In space and time
on the forum publicum, the effect and its cause are named by the subject. In the relational argument
and in opposite to the ontological argument, set by the autonomous subject, every form of
causality is absolutely binding for the subject who has set the causality, his comrade can accept or
not the set commitment of the subject, beíng for himself autonomous in his decision. The problem
of causality is not located in the mechanism: if/then, but it is founded in the subject who has set the
ground (= faith), deciding what the effect is to be (= knowledge).
(a) INDEX/register, keyword: kausalität.
(b) Remark the difference: on the one hand the relation: cause ==> effect, on the other hand the
relationship of things/matter: cause ==> effect.
8
The Dialectic of Mind and Matter in the Trialectic …
181

instrumentalizes in his will to discern the things of the world when he deals with his
object, which is at hand in connection with the other possible objects. His object,
situated in the horizon of other objects, is a phenomenon, and as part of a con-
vention, pragmatically classiﬁed, pars pro toto in the classes: matter or mind, but
every object which appears prima vista as unambiguous, is situated secunda vista in
twilight because in the process of the application of a method the phenomena can be
named, but its assignment in the classes: matter or mind, is not clear. The phe-
nomena of life can be assigned to the class “mind,” as well as assignments that are
denied in the object: life to the class “matter.” In contradiction of the assertions,
here the matter, there the mind, the life marks a third class, which is independent. In
the extended scheme of classiﬁcation, the dichotomy of the objects: mind and
matter, is dissolved, and it can be demonstrated that regarded as a problem, the
claimed dialectic of matter and mind is indistinguishable. For this reason, it is
impossible to hold the mind with the principle: causality, but the principle:
dialectic, misses the matter. Life seems to be a class of sui generis that is insepa-
rably linked to the classes: mind and matter. Mediated by life, real in each indi-
vidual, the scientist has the object of his research available, on the one hand, in the
methods that are located either in the moment: matter, or in the moment: mind, on
the other hand, with these methods the phenomena of life are not sufﬁciently held,
an inadequacy which limits each method either to the principle of causality or to the
principle of dialectic. Rational justiﬁed, this deﬁcit of the traditional methods is
empirically veriﬁable, but the inadequacy of the methods cannot ﬁnally be resolved
with the critique of the methods. On the one hand, the method: the trialectic
approach, expands the arsenal of the available methods; on the other hand, the
intrinsic problems of the causal and dialectical methods remain effective and real in
a state of ﬂux. Different and new is the idea that the conﬂict situation can be made
visible with the scheme of the trialectic approach, a method which makes it possible
to classify every concrete resolution of a methodical problem, if the question is
raised that, as a scientist, the subject instrumentalizes his methods for the purposes
which are situated in his interest, individually justiﬁed.
The Trialectic: Life–Mind–Matter
It is the subject who determines what the matter or the mind or the life is supposed
to be. With this assertion is predetermined, in accord with the tradition, what the
moments: mind and matter, are, set in a relation, perceived and reﬂected in space
and time. In the position of the excluded third moment, the subject determines what
the matter and the mind are in their relation, mediated in life, changing in space and
time.
On the one hand, the basic situation (Fig. 8.7) is abstract to be taken into
account; on the other hand, real at every moment of his lived present, the concrete
182
U. Richter

situation is present for the subject, setting the moments: “life, mind and matter,” in a
relation. According to the application rule, in the scheme of the basic situation, the
subject can be set as a moment in each of the three moments. The schemes mark
three distinct situations (Fig. 8.8a–c) that cannot fall identical.
The thought repeated in graphs17 represent:
the basic situation (Fig. 8.7);
the concrete situations (these are the possible perspectives of the subject)
(Fig. 8.8a);
the subject in the position of life (Fig. 8.8b);
the subject in the position of mind (Fig. 8.8c); and
the subject in the position of matter (Fig. 8.9).
If the scheme of the basic situation is put on top of each other with the schemes
of the three concrete possible situations, then an image emerges which reﬂects the
disputed core of every methodology.18
The object of the method, identical with itself and deﬁned in the set relation, is
destined for the subject. If the subject has grasped the determining moment in a
second relation, the grasped moment cannot be a moment of the determined rela-
tion. In other words, if, pars pro toto, the subject grasps the things of the world from
the class of matter with a method, then the subject can grasp the particular thing of
the world only in the horizon of the ideas which are assigned to the class of life or to
Fig. 8.7 A scheme of the
trialectic approach, whose
constitutive moments are life,
mind, and matter
17 The graphs in the trialectic approach have an explanatory function, but they do not extend the
represented thought. They visually make perceptible the things of the world which the subject
thinks. The graph and the text are equivalent.
18 This image is not a scheme in the trialectic approach. Three schemes are merged, not falling
identical.
8
The Dialectic of Mind and Matter in the Trialectic …
183

Fig. 8.8 Three schemes of the trialectic approach, whose constitutive moments are subject, matter
and mind, or: life and matter, or: life and mind
Fig. 8.9 A summary of three schemes of the trialectic approach, whose constitutive moments are
the subject on the one hand and on the other hand life, matter, and mind
184
U. Richter

the class of mind. Without a conceded exception, the subject is at the center of
every methodological consideration when the subject deals with his object applying
a deﬁned method. Guided by his set purposes, on the one hand, the subject has the
object in view in order to subject it to the interests pursued in society; on the other
hand, the subject must keep in view the things of the world which are assigned to
one class or to the other class, either to life or to mind. In the particular method,
each thing of the world, being for itself the third moment, can be effective as the
excluded third moment.
The Relation: Mind <==|==> Matter, Set as a Moment
If the subject takes the relation: mind <==|==> matter, as the object of his reﬂec-
tions, then the subject makes these reﬂections in the horizon of a moment, which in
Fig. 8.9, is indicated with the term: life. The concept “life” is, in the same way,
controversial as the concepts: mind and matter. If the aspect of the method is to be
accentuated, then it seems to be more appropriate and advisable to choose the term:
metaphysics, even if the term “metaphysics” is equally controversial. If the problem
of the relation: mind <==|==> matter, is to be analyzed and reﬂected, the phe-
nomena of life and the phenomena of mind are so closely interwoven in the
imaginations of the subject that a plausible separation between the possible argu-
ments cannot be successful, intended to create clarity. Each argument creates a new
situation, another situation, in which, on the one hand, the subject has set the
relation: mind <==|==> matter, as a moment of the relation, whose deﬁning hori-
zon is the moment: metaphysics, which is set by the subject in a second relation:
subject <==|==> metaphysics.
Again, the problem is the implied third relation:
metaphysics <==|==> (mind <==|==> matter). It is the subject himself who is
the excluded third moment, not being a moment of the third relation, but giving this
relation its deﬁnite meaning.
Designated as the excluded third moment, the subject must proceed in two steps,
looking at the relation: metaphysics <==|==> (mind <==|==> matter) (Fig. 8.10).
In a ﬁrst step, divided into two partial steps, the subject:_A, analyses the
moment: “relation: mind <==|==> matter,” and the moment: metaphysics, listing
the involved arguments, separated in analytical intention, next to each other/one
after the other.
In a second step, the subject synthesizes the material, separated in analysis,
forming an argument, argument for argument separated in analytical intention. This
argument concretely ﬁxes the real meaning of the relation: metaphysics <==|
==> (mind <==|==> matter). It is exactly the meaning which the moment: “rela-
tion: mind <==|==> matter,” and the moment: metaphysics, are supposed to have
in the perspective of the subject.
8
The Dialectic of Mind and Matter in the Trialectic …
185

Analysis I: The Moment “The Relation: Mind <==|==> Matter”
In the tradition, the belief is dominant that there are links between the things of the
world as matter and the things of the world as mind. The nature of these links is
controversial. An effective consensus may be established with every documented
analysis, but this consensus is denied with every synthesizing reﬂection. There are
plausible reasons for certain phenomena, present in life as things of the world, which
are either assigned to the class of matter or to the class of mind, banal formulated: a
stone is a stone and this stone cannot think. It’s a general practice to deﬁne for
oneself the concepts: matter and mind, and to assert criteria for them by which it is
possible to decide whether a particular thing of the world is held as a phenomenon
with the concept: matter, or it is held as a phenomenon with the concept: mind. The
concept, as well as the phenomenon, are distinguishable, and they are distinguished.
The reasons for these distinctions, asserted in the determinative process, should not
be disputed, but it must be acknowledged that it is precisely this or that reason which
identiﬁes the particular thing of the world: n, as matter or as mind. The idea shall be
illustrated by two examples, located on the borderlines which are generally believed
to separate the mind from the matter and the matter from the mind.
The ﬁrst example is the network of nerve cells, which is active and produces
chemical/electrical phenomena. With good arguments, it can be shown that the
nerve cells are designated as (living) matter, but the chemical/electric phenomena
are interpreted as manifestations of the (living) mind. As a fact, only the
chemical/electrical process is detectable, made visible with a measuring instrument,
which is a part of the matter, but, physically real present, the interpretation of the
event is treated as a phenomenon of the mind which is physical undetectable.
The complementary example is the thesis of the existence of God, real physical
present, but, the existence of the believed God, who is dealt with as a spirit, real
present in space and time, is not veriﬁable with the known proofs of God,19 because
Fig. 8.10 A scheme of the trialectic approach, whose constitutive moments are subject:_A,
metaphysics, and the relation: mind <==|==> matter (an extension of Fig. 8.6)
19 INDEX/register, keyword: gottesbeweis.
186
U. Richter

the act of creation, including the alleged causality, is not a part of the evidence,
proving the existence of the creator: God.
The necessity of the discriminating concepts: mind and matter, is not in question,
yet with every attempt to discern and clarify the phenomena differentiated with these
concepts, the possible answers remain in the twilight of doubt. Dealt with the methods
of the tradition, the problem of the distinction between mind and matter is obviously
not resolved, and every found answer, renewing the distinction in space and time, is
put back into the discussion, but, as the result of analysis, the aporie cannot sufﬁce,
because in his synthesizing reﬂection the subject pragmatically overlaps the aporie
with arguments which the subject likes to label with the term: metaphysics, arguments
which are phenomena of the mind, being perceptions of the subject.
Analysis II: The Moment “Metaphysics”
The subject holds the moment: metaphysics, in the relation “subject <==|
==> metaphysics.” With the setting of the relation, the subject determines the
object which the subject wants to designate with the term: metaphysics, namely the
deﬁnition of his own concept of metaphysics which the subject thinks, absolute
valid for himself, a concept which is a contradiction to each other concept: meta-
physics, thought by his comrade, a concept which, perceived as a phenomenon in
space and time, only contradicts each other opposite, including the mutual exclu-
sion of the opposite. A glance at the documents of historia sufﬁces to identify the
differentiation which can be established between the concept: metaphysics, which
Aristotle had thought in antiquity, and the concept: metaphysics, which was thought
by Martin Heidegger in the modern era.20 The concept: metaphysics is an idea of
the subject that is present to the subject:_A, as an argument which, according to the
dominant conviction in the tradition, is a phenomenon of mind, excluding the
notion that the argument of the subject could be a phenomenon of matter. The
phenomena of matter and the phenomena of mind are two things of the world that
cannot be identical, but, in the perspective of the subject, they are treated as equal
without being equal. As a phenomenon of mind, the moment: metaphysics, is
something other than the moment: matter, both set as a moment of the relation:
mind <==|==> matter, but, both moments, either the metaphysics or the relation:
mind <==|==> matter, are instrumentalized by the subject:_A, as the determining
moment of the each other moment. In this structure, the exchange of moments:
matter and mind, is possible, al gusto,21 and the assertion of the eternity of the
matter appears as a characteristic of just current metaphysics, and the asserted
strictness of a metaphysics appears as the causal principle of the matter.
20 Note: (09/a).
21 The term: al gusto, marks the fact that, under the conditions of space and time, the idea of the
autonomy of the subject (a) must be another idea than the idea of liberty, concepts and phenomena
which are discussed in the societies, being real in the forms of civil liberties (b). Each form of the
real civil liberties depends on the momentum of an incalculable arbitrition which is the implicit
source of each autonomous decision, made by the subject.
(a) INDEX/register, keyword: autonomie.
(b) INDEX/register, keyword: bürgerliche freiheiten.
8
The Dialectic of Mind and Matter in the Trialectic …
187

Synthesis (= Synthetizing Reflection): The Moment “Subject”
In the synthesizing reﬂection, autonomous in his decision, the subject can exchange
the moments: mind and matter, asserting the separation of moments on the one
hand, on the other hand, subjugating them to his set causality (= faith). In the
function of being the excluded third moment which is the limiting horizon of the
relation: mind <==|==> matter, the subject determines what is thought in the dis-
course about the problems of the world and what is also practically realized, ﬁxed in
the relation: mind <==|==> matter, which is subjected to the change of all moments
in space and time. Only that can be valid which is decided at the moment of the
lived present, things of the world which can be remembered as a factum of the past,
on the one hand, or, on the other hand, things of the world which are reformulated
as a projection into the future. In this way, set in his relation, the subject has grasped
the concept: matter, as well as the phenomenon: matter, in the horizon of any
metaphysics, settings which are valid for the subject, things of the world which
proves to be stable as well as fragile. In the same way, the subject relates his ideas
to the concept: metaphysics, and to the phenomenon: metaphysics, ventilating these
ideas in the forum internum as well as on the forum publicum,22 determined in the
horizon of his concept: matter, real in the things of the world. The subject:_A,
always precisely presents the concept in his imagination, either the concept of a
certain metaphysics indicated in a document of the historia or the concept of a
certain thing of the world, which can be a phenomenon of life or a phenomenon of
mind or a phenomenon of matter. On the one hand, in his synthesizing reﬂection,
the subject mixes the precisely formulated concept: metaphysics, with a phe-
nomenon of matter, present to the subject in the manifold forms of appearance in
space and time, on the other hand, the subject mixes his precisely deﬁned concept:
matter, as a phenomenon which is only a substitute for his concept of metaphysics,
ﬁlling a gap in the concept. On the level of argument: language/thinking (= mind),
in his metaphysics, the subject moves things of the world which are phenomena of
the mind, yet the subject:_A, aims at something other, which is supposed to be
matter. However, on the level of argument: things of the world (= matter), the
things of the world, being matter, are something other than the subject himself. The
subject can only bump into things, either to move them or to be moved by them. If
the subject wants to be present as a subject, then the subject knows that the things of
the world, which are supposed to be matter, can be handled by himself only on the
level of argument: language/thinking, formulated in his own language, being a
phenomenon of the thought mind. In his reﬂection on the things of the world, either
analyzing or synthesizing, the subject is aware of the impossibility to transcend the
22 The distinction: forum internum and forum publicum, (a) must be strictly observed. The subject
deals with his ideas, phenomena of the mind, either autonomous in the forum internum,
independent of space and time and closed absolute to the comrade, or, subjected to the conditions
of time and space, in an act of speaking, the subject makes public his imaginations on the forum
publicum, confronted with the notions of the comrade. Always a phenomenon of the mind, in the
moment of the lived present the conception of the subject is either located on the forum publicum
or in the forum internum—tertium non datur.
(a) //==> INDEX/register, keywords: forum internum and forum publicum.
188
U. Richter

dialectic of mind and matter because, being a mortal being and returning back to
matter, the subject must expose himself to the dialectic of mind and matter as long
as the subject lives, thinking his world.
A dramatic spectacle in the forum internum as well as on the forum publicum,
the interplay of mind and matter can be demonstrated with the method: the tri-
alectical approach, but the limit of the method is the purpose which each user sets,
being the subject of the method. If being in the function of the scientist, trying to
gain knowledge about the things of the world, the subject knows, that, being things
of his world, his discoveries are subjected to each causality, set by himself, in order
to be able to handle anything of the world, real or not, according to his purposes.
Conclusion
The Function of the Argument: Purpose,
in the Scheme of the Trialectic Approach
The dialectic of mind and matter, reduced to the relevant methods, is a problem of
the purposes which the scientist, as the user setting the method, realized on certain
objects. For (good) reasons, these objects are assigned to the classes: “matter, life,
and mind.” Prima vista, the setting of the accent: purpose, has created a new
situation in which the scientist cannot be the problem, but, secunda vista, by the
argument: purpose, the problem is moved into the focus of the interests which are
the third moment in the scheme of the trialectical approach, next to the moments:
“method and the relation: mind <==|==> matter” (Fig. 8.11).
With each set purpose, the decision is made which method should be chosen and
put, and how the relation: mind <==|==> matter, is interpreted, but the purpose can
be set only by the subject. According to the application rule, the subject is to put in
the position: purpose. In the horizon of the excluded third moment, the relation:
method <==|==> (mind <==|==> matter), has exactly that form which the deter-
mining subject has given the relation in the moment of the lived present. From this
situation, ﬁxed in the scheme of the trialectic approach, it is strictly to be to
distinguish that in each case a different situation is real, if, present in the documents
of historia, the subject:_A, as the excluded third moment for the relation:
method <==|==> (mind <==|==> matter), is not the subject, but, his comrade:
_B, is the subject. In the discourse, both are linked in a social relation, friendly or
not. In this situation, the relation: method <==|==> (mind <==|==> matter) has the
function of the excluded third moment (Fig. 8.12).
In all the sciences, the cognitive process is to represent in the following way,
mediated in the relation: subject:_A<==>comrade:_B (Fig. 8.13).
The new image which links three schemes in the trialectic approach marks the
structure of the cognitive process in which everything of the world is embedded,
when, on the one hand, the subject:_A, linked to the comrade:_B, real or ideal,
perceives the things of his world (= matter), shared with the comrade:_B, and, on
8
The Dialectic of Mind and Matter in the Trialectic …
189

Fig. 8.11 A scheme of the trialectic approach, whose constitutive moments are purpose, method,
and the relation: mind <==|==> matter
Fig. 8.12 A scheme of the trialectic approach, whose constitutive moments are subject:_A,
comrade:_B, and the relation: method <==|==> (mind <==|==> matter)
Fig. 8.13 A representation of three schemes in the trialectic approach, giving rise to the cognitive
process in which everything of the world is embedded
190
U. Richter

the other hand, for himself, the subject:_A thinks the things of the world (= mind).
In the same way, linked to the subject:_A, the comrade:_B handles the things of the
world, thinking and perceiving. With this image, no statement is made about the
things of the world what they are in their presence for the subject:_A, in his moment
of the lived present as well as for his comrade:_B, but, with this image, the links are
designated, when all, who are concerned, reason out the things of the world, be it in
analysis or be it in the synthesizing reﬂection.
The Complexity of the Research Process (= Science)
The real process of research is a complex phenomenon,23 which, by means of
methods, can be broken down to a simple structure, in the extreme case to the
causal relationship: cause ==> effect, which is regarded as the ideal case of sci-
ence.24 This approach may be acceptable as an element of reality, but this practice
does not sufﬁce to grasp the complexity of the research process, which is deter-
mined by a variety of factors. With the method of the trialectic approach, the
complexity of research can be made visible,25 but only the subject can win the real
knowledge of the things of the world, absolute valid for himself when the subject
sets his relation to the things of the world concrete in the application of a method to
a particular object, as this object being an element of the class “matter” or the class
“mind,” always mediated in the phenomenon of the class “life.”
The Responsibility of the Subject
The complexity of the cognitive process is not a problem of research; for the
scientist, the problem is the mediation of the found results, analysis as well as
synthesis present in the social process. In the perspective of analysis, it may be
23 Niklas Luhmann has pointed out that every research process is conceived as a form of reduction
of reality, complexly experienced (a).
(a) www.ur-philosoph.de /bibliography /signature: 014: das_politische, argument: 2.22.45, and
the graphs in argument: 2.24.18.
24 The application of the falsiﬁcation principle, stated by Karl R. Popper (a) and deﬁned as the
logic of research, is conceivable only on the basis of the mechanism: cause ==> effect, including
the logical axiom of the excluded contradiction. On this basis in his research, the scientist can only
depict a part of the reality which the subject real lives.
(a) Popper, Karl R.: Die Logik der Forschung (1934). Tübingen: 1969.
25 Representing a problem, the purpose of the method: trialectic approach, is focused on making
visible the reduction of complexity, but it must be aware that the simple scheme of the trialectic
approach do not adequately grasped the complexity of the world. On the one hand, the scheme in
its simplicity requires additional explanations in order to be adequate to the complexity of the
world, on the other hand, these arguments create a new complexity. In the representation of this
complexity, the graphs are limited efﬁcient, because in a graph the complex representation
becomes again confusing for itself. Here, this problem cannot be deepened, but more on this
problem elsewhere in my essay about the dimensions of the political (a).
(a)
www.ur-philosoph.de
/bibliographie
/signatur:
014:
das_politische,
arguments:
2.24.01-2.25.18 (the chapter: graphs), in particular argument: 2.24.23 (time experience).
8
The Dialectic of Mind and Matter in the Trialectic …
191

expedient to disregard analytically certain aspects of the problem, but every result
of an analysis is a fact which the subject cannot ignore in his synthesizing reﬂection
because these results are present as the limiting horizon of any research activity. In
view of each excluded third moment in the scheme of the trialectical approach, the
scientists’ assessments are distinctly different, but it should be clear that the subject
himself is responsible for each assessment of the world things in their
interconnection.
Core Messages
• The chapter presents the dialectic of mind and matter using a trialectic
approach.
• The chapter provides a new path in the process of cognition.
• Neither the philosopher nor the physician can verify the truth of their
arguments.
• The chapter concludes that the human being must be aware of his double
bond, life and death, to develop solutions that are methodically identiﬁed
in the relevant area without losing sight of the other area.
Ulrich Richter (1942) studied philosophy, musicology, and
sociology and graduated with a Ph.D. in 1974 from the University
of Cologne. His thesis was about “The Inconceivable Myth:
Music as Practice of Negative Dialectics.” For 20 years, he
served as lecturer concerning political science, constitutional law,
and sociology. In parallel, he has been working with philosophy
on “The concept: the political, in the trialectic approach;”
“Hegel’s spirit of the world: that’s me, that’s you, that’s all of us,
each for himself;” “Reﬂections on the metaphysics and logic of
the concept: border;” “freedom, and the possible concepts of
freedom (Kant and Hegel) and the receiving subject.” To look at
Ulrich’s philosophical works, visit http://www.ur-philosoph.de/.
192
U. Richter

9
Efforts Deployed in the Penetration
of “Thought”
Eva Reyes-Gacitúa
“Like the entomologist on the hunt for butterﬂies of showy
nuances, my attention pursued, in the orchard of gray matter,
cells of delicate and elegant shapes, the mysterious butterﬂies of
the soul, whose beating of wings who knows if one day will
clarify the secret of mental life.”
Santiago Ramón y Cajal
Summary
From the work of Edith Stein, a phenomenologist and Husserl’s disciple, this
paper intends to enquire about an original question: what can be thought of?
For philosophy, “every thought is thinking in and of something.” In these
terms, “thinking of” is referred to as “an active grasp and, therefore, is related
to understanding.” The concepts intelligere, intelligibile, and intelecto pose a
reﬂection about knowledge and, in this concordance, empathy, which is
thinking of alterity, provides clues to complete this analysis, together with
cogito and conscience. At the same time, it is pertinent to highlight those
philosophical sources with which the author establishes a dialogue. So, thought
formations may be acquired not only from experiencing real things but also
from knowing about the possibilities of the essence. Here, “the ﬁgures of
thought” mediate. These become important not only for artistic work but also
for scientiﬁc work. On the other hand, is thinking of “nothingness” or thinking
E. Reyes-Gacitúa (&)
Northern Catholic University, Antofagasta, Chile
e-mail: ereyesg@ucn.cl
E. Reyes-Gacitúa
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Antofagasta, Chile
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh (eds.), Thinking, Integrated Science 7,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04075-7_9
193

of “the absurd” the possibility of empty thinking? Does being-thought remit to
authentic-being?
Image N01 Archivo Cajal cortex drawings
(Adapted from Wikimedia Commons, the free media repository https://
upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/5/5b/Cajal_cortex_drawings.png)
Keywords
Conscience  Experiences  Knowledge  Phenomenology  Stein  Thinking
194
E. Reyes-Gacitúa

QR Code
Scanning the QR code directs you to the word cloud of the chapter that is made up
of the words we discussed throughout the whole book in relation to the chapter’s
keyword, which is intentionally not included in the word cloud. Find the keyword
and put it in place in the puzzle according to the clues provided in Chap. 36. The
mystery hidden in the puzzle is the quote of THINKING: Bioengineering of Science
and Art.
Introduction
Edith Stein, a multifaceted woman and philosopher of Jewish origin who, attracted
by phenomenology, arrives at Göttingen University in 1913, where her mentor will
be Edmund Husserl, whose publications had deeply penetrated in philosophical
ambits. By then, Logical Investigations stands out in study circles, fostering the
radical abandonment of Kantian and neo-Kantian idealism; the piece of work is
even venerated in terms of a “new scholastics.” This event is considered as a
preamble for Edith to be liberated from every rationalistic prejudice to then face the
world in an intellectual attitude of openness [1]. Francisco Javier Sancho pointed
out: “even when, in time, Husserl directs himself to idealism and his other disciples
follow other tracks, Edith remains as faithful as nobody else to the original foun-
dations of the purest phenomenology. It is a value has not been sufﬁciently put in
evidence in philosophical ambits yet” [2].
For Stein, the starting point for philosophizing is found in an unreﬂexive cer-
tainty. The ﬁrst fact, the simplest we are sure of, is that of our being. It is the focus of
the Augustine, Cartesian, and Husserlian consideration of doubt. It is not about a
conclusion—cogito, ergo sum—, but, rather, a certainty: cogito, sum: thinking,
feeling, wanting … I am and I am conscious of this being. Certainty of being that
precedes all knowledge [3]. This starting point was also held by the master, Husserl,
who made a hesitant consideration similar to those of Saint Augustine and Des-
cartes: what I think may not be true, what I perceive may not really exist, everything
may turn into an error, a dream, deceit, but the fact I doubt about, I perceive, I cannot
doubt, neither of the self, the thinker, the perceiver, the doubtful, “I exist” [3, p. 550].
9
Efforts Deployed in the Penetration of “Thought”
195

Stein calls for Descartes himself, who sets the universal doubt. That which cannot be
doubted about is the very fact of doubting, and after, in a more general way, the very
fact of thinking, and thinking of the self: cogito, sum [3, p. 645].
We face an energetic and dialoguing philosophy, where the thought is found as a
function of totalities. Certainly, Stein has the intention of approaching phe-
nomenology in anthropological terms and, at the same time, interchanging results
with a medieval tradition, safeguarding their educational value [4]. Edith relates to
great Catholic intellectuals and friends from the phenomenological circle:
Conrad-Martius, Adelgundis Jaegerschmidt, Kauffmann, Ingarden, Heidegger, etc.
She opens to new friends, among whom Gerda Walter, Gertrud von le Fort, Erich
Przywara, Martín Grabmann, Alois Mager, Odo Casel, Peter Wust, Rafael Walzer,
Pius Parsch, Heinrich Finke, and Martín Honecker stand out … characters, mostly,
who did a great work within the German cultural life, particularly in the Catholic
sector [3, p. 34].
The author does not address the topic of “thinking” or “thought” in a systematic
way; this rather ﬂows from several philosophical considerations. From this focus,
inquiry about the itinerary of this thinking, the connections of sense, the object, and
the subject of thought are made from a comprehensive reading of her writings.
Consequently, we face a phenomenology of thought whose deployments make up
the object of study of this piece of research.
Thinking and Thought
Edith Stein indicates that we can think in a lively way [3, p. 621], that the thought
activates itself constantly [1, p. 801], and, from certain supporting points, it is
possible to reconstruct the strain of thought [2, p. 411]. If the subject submerges
into a “thought” and truly familiarizes with it, this one suddenly adopts “a character
of reality” [1, p. 457]. When this something is realized, then what is thought
manifests itself as “full meaning” and takes distance from the absurd. In fact,
philosophy concedes that every thinking is “thinking of,” about something Denken
an; it means directing the eyes of the spirit to an object we do not have immediately
in front of our eyes [3, p. 927].
In turn, knowing an object, something that had not been captured before, is
captured, something that appears. Stein claims: “the different acts of knowledge
correspond with different objects, different ways of dation and different ways of
being of the objects” [3, p. 560]. In this formulation, relevance is acquired by
perception, the qualities of things and their processes, whose “dation” is due to
sensible manifestation, as a way of being as it exists in space and time [3, p. 560].
Concerning thought processes, philosophy attributes them a penetration—deeper
—into the internal structure of the thing, which is not sensorially perceived [1,
p. 740]. In this sense, she claims: “when we turn our spirit to a thing we perceive
with the senses, we do not call this “thinking of.” On the contrary, we can perceive
the books in front of us and, at the same time, “think of a book” we read yesterday”
196
E. Reyes-Gacitúa

[3, p. 927]. In this concordance, the philosopher argues, “the book comes to my
mind” or “I remember it” [3, p. 927]. It is important to note that the spirit in Stein
makes reference to the concept of person, understood as the support suppositio of
nature endowed with reason, characterized by its capacity to refer to itself and its
opening to things different from itself [5]. It is about a concept concerning con-
science operations, cognitive operations, and adhesion to values [4, p. 68]. In fact,
sensible perception for Stein is a spiritual act because it is an expression of the
openness of the person [6].
For this reason, “thinking of” is an active grasp and, consequently, it is related to
“understanding” begreifen [3, p. 927]. This quid—as she claims—in which I think
is dependent on my thinking is applied to the object by my thought, making up what
is called “formation in thought.” The latter originates from an objective knowledge
that has come from sensible experience but is it separated from its original exis-
tential foundation and, therefore, it is sustained by the spirit [3, p. 929]. In this
disaggregation of levels, Edith puts the spirit in a referential place of epistemo-
logical experience: “grasp is a beginning for understanding: I see from a distance a
thing that I cannot still recognize and, precisely, its indetermination stimulates the
activity of thinking: this mysterious thing, I want to see more closely” [7].
In this way, the goal of every thinking is arriving at the understanding of the
world of experience [3, p. 933], a safe terrain for Stein, where Aristotle has placed
the philosophical thought continued by scholastics. In fact, she intends to show a
value in placing herself in the natural experience and vice versa: that the experience
can be sustained by a knowable foundation from pure reason.
These thought reﬂections make philosophy open to acts of experiences linked to
the animic self. They are “theoretical acts,” connected to acts of perception, of
representation, of associative or inferential thought, directed to an object where “the
self and the acts” are not there at all [1, p. 181]. In effect, there is a possibility to
take a reﬂective look at them since they are permanently ready for being perceived.
What is the meaning of this distinction for Stein? She wonders if it is thinkable that
a subject, having a world of objects in front of himself, lives only in theoretical acts
without ever discovering himself and his conscience, without “being there” for
himself. If this subject perceives, thinks, and, in addition, has thoughts, this would
not be possible. Because the subject, in having feelings, does not only experience
objects but also himself [1, p. 181]. This interpretation allows highlighting the
anthropological character of this paradigm.
Owing to the life-giving energy of certain experiences, taking possession of the
subject may become a source of impulses and tendencies. In this occurrence, the
internal energy may lead from one thought to another in a motivating connection [1,
p. 299]. “But suddenly, the memory evoked by a new experience, and the
impression felt, and the thoughts it awakens make me understand that it has always
worked on me, even that I would not be without it what I am today” [8]. Such
memories and thoughts gradually conﬁgure the “self.” According to Stein, it is the
inner form of indistinctive sensible feeling in the highest sphere of the awake
consciousness. It lives in the body and the soul, “in me,” at a depth generally
unknown that rarely opens. The life of the awake and conscious self is the road to
9
Efforts Deployed in the Penetration of “Thought”
197

enter the soul. In this concordance, philosophy highlights that the inner and the
most intimate become the most spiritual. Nevertheless, it speciﬁes that each
material making is full of spirit [3, pp. 968–972].
From these internal connections, Stein conceives that such experiences are not to
be only individual acts, but this allows understanding—due to a sense of associa-
tionthat community experiences are formed. In this case, the experiential current of
a group congregates it as a unit: “sometimes with simple acts of thought, other
times being accompanied by intuitions that ﬁll or illustrate, and ﬁnally also in the
form in which the realizing experiences are distributed among a plurality of indi-
viduals. But, whenever a unit of sense is realized, then the realizing experiences
enter the unit of a motivating connection” [9].
In this perspective, she considers that the networks of senses exist regardless of
the way they are realized in the course of concrete experiences; hence, there will be
subjects who realize them more quickly than others. Nevertheless, there comes to
mind if the power itself will be enough to attain an objective or if it is more sensible
to abandon such endeavor. In the face of all this, you can decide to continue and
ﬁnally arrive at where you set your mind. From this experience, Stein infers that the
ﬁrst decision, even if it is motivated by knowledge, is not thoroughly rational since
an important factor was not put under consideration, that of body capacity. Then,
man can propose objectives after a mere spiritual reﬂection, but he cannot achieve
them without the collaboration of his body [10]. Analogously, not every spiritual
act, for example, every joy, every afﬂiction, every activity of thought, is languishing
and decolored when “I” feel downhearted, but also every bodily action, every
movement I make” [1, p. 129]. This dependence or connection to the vital energy is
immersed in the physis, the corporeality and psique of the subject. In this regard,
she claims: “fear blocks my understanding, that is, I experience a paralyzing effect
on my acts of thought; or I am “maddened” in joy, I do not know what I do, I do
actions with no aim” [11].
In this reﬂection, man is valued as a man, and his corporeality is not left out. For
this reason, Stein considers the act of thought and the free act in an affectation on
purpose. This means that the self of the subject may give a direction to his being,
“engendering,” in a certain sense, his own life by committing himself to a deter-
mined direction. This may occur in an expressed inclination to a thought “that
uplifts” and also the conscious rupture of a sequence of thoughts, such as asking,
promising, etc. All these are “actions” of the self, delivered to certain content of
experience in view of the freedom to determine oneself [3, p. 967]. In this regard,
Edith reafﬁrms the “course of thought” since the appearance of thought awakens a
whole series of mental representations because the “self” has originally thought of
them in this sequence. Later, in reviewing the contrast between the easiness of this
course and the effort that the original process has meant, the sequence itself acquires
a real capacity and vital energy disposition to act in that direction [1, p. 326]. Then,
the current of thought and the content of thought express freshness and vitality
corresponding to this experience [1, p. 367].
198
E. Reyes-Gacitúa

In summary, Edith Stein highlights the condition of openness that exists in the
spirit. For this, it is possible for the human being to think in a lively way, directing
the eyes of the spirit to an object that is not immediately before his eyes. On the
other hand, it gives preeminence to the task that man has in being situated in front
of a world of objects, in view of discovering himself and his conscience.
About the Thinking Subject and Its Intellective Qualities
Edith Stein gives language the statute of the medium; she recognizes that “speak-
ing” is a phenomenon of expression whose objective content of discourse is shared
by the human gender. So, understanding language is not a problem for perceiving
the other person, “when someone speaks,” that is, when he pronounces words that I
understand, he does “acts that give meaning” [1, p. 844]. What do you want to
pose? I am only specifying that the speaking subject, by means of an empathizing
representation, converts certain data into content with the help of the acts of
understanding. These are spontaneous acts designated as “thought” in the speaking
subject, no matter what arrives at the expression, either the content of intuition, an
individual, and universal content and at the same time as a thinking subject. These
are the “faculties” that provide the subject with intellective qualities [1, p. 845].
This tracing allows understanding a phenomenology of language, originally initi-
ated by Husserl himself, who locates it in a central position [12].
For Stein, thinking and speaking are closely linked in language theory; it makes
up just one process. In other words, thought has become mature in its plain clarity
and precision; it has been articulated in logical, grammatical categories, and,
therefore, it is possible to express it. However, when it is not possible to ﬁnd the
correct linguistic expression, the mental process has not come to an end. For
philosophy, that which cannot be manifested is “obscure and confused in the soul
and that one who cannot express himself is like a prisoner in his own soul: he
cannot move freely, neither reach the others” [10, p. 547]. In this concomitance,
concepts are formed; they are the ‘products of thought’ [3, p. 707]. But something
else is necessary, and without that something, the lexical treasure contains a danger:
the temptation of utilizing linguistic expressions instead of speaking. Now, the
distinction that must operate among grammatical categories is not only ‘purely
external,’ but it consists in penetrating its sense. That is, exercising forms of
thought, a path toward understanding the two-fold meaning of language: being able
to express what is lived in the soul and, thus, share it with the others [10, p. 547].
Hence, learning a language means for Stein forming thoughts, not according to our
own way of thinking, but according to that of the other language [10, p. 703].
In this respect, how does Stein deﬁne an authentic “being of thought”? Only in
the relationship of being formations of thought full of sense, linked to the essential
being. That is to say: “the forms of thought are “copies” of the pure formations of
sense and may be acquired not only from the experience of real things, but also
from the knowledge of the possibilities of the essence” [13].
9
Efforts Deployed in the Penetration of “Thought”
199

It is an intelligible connection for philosophy, where creating makings (such as
poetic creation) entails a fundamental scope from the possibilities of the essence.
This is the way it is expressed in artistic work as well as scientiﬁc work [3, p. 928].
Nevertheless, these makings have been formed and preﬁgured insofar as “possible,”
entailing something of the atemporality of the being. Then, the making of thought
emerges in the intellectual fabric, and the act of judgment that can also be called
“knowledge” arises [3, p. 900]. This knowledge is described in terms of having to
be oriented to the “truth.” There, the act of judgment is recognized, which, to reach
the universal idea, does a series of acts of knowledge and analytical and synthetic
acts, separating quidditas from haecceitas, that is, the substantial from the acci-
dental [3, p. 566]. Thus, the makings of thought, which logic also deals with, ﬁt
their forms [3, p. 882]. In effect, we are in front of an actu intelligibile considering
that: “the possibility of a new movement of thought conceiving it is based on every
making or formation of thought and thus acquires a new being in the thinking
spirit” [14]. So, the intelligibile is found related to that spirit that can understand
and, therefore, penetrate into it [3, p. 1076].
On the other hand, conscience and thought are related to the experience of the
subject; both are articulated in the way of thinking and the attitudes toward another
person. Hence, “I do not forget my friends when I do not think about them, because
they belong to the unnoticed horizon of the present of my world, and my love for
them lives even when I do not live in it and inﬂuences my being and present work.
I can, out of love for a person, omit actions that may be disagreeable for him
without being “conscious” of it. So, the resentment that was instilled in me in my
childhood against a person can weigh as a pressure on my life later, although I may
be thoroughly pushed to the background and not think at all in that person any-
more” [15].
This perspective allows philosophy to weigh the effectiveness of the “whole” of
life in every moment of existence; being indifferent at what distance from “now” is
found the starting point of the experience that acts. In other words, it is feasible to
notice how early childhood experiences remain “in this moment,” which cause
some effects “on me.” Even “without thinking about it,” it may remain in the
“background” of the subject, inﬂuence behavior, and become a present experience
[1, p. 156].
In this formulation of meanings, the patrimony of conscience is connected to
what concerns the perception experience, where we ﬁnd an “I am” such as mem-
ories and acts of thought [1, p. 763]. From this illation, she claims: “I can leave
undecisive whether the thing perceived by my senses actually exists or not, but the
perception, as such, cannot be erased. I can doubt that the conclusion made by me is
correct—but the thought that results from the conclusions is an undoubted fact”
[16].
This series of ideas, thoughts, feelings, and movements will rise to conscious-
ness clearly. According to Stein, it is an effect of what occurs under it [10, p. 565].
The thought does not show anything about the purity and strength of the soul, but it
does show the reasons for which this thought is directed and also the whole life of
the mood [1, p. 438]. The man knows the good, and his conscience tells him, in
200
E. Reyes-Gacitúa

concrete cases, what he has to do. Then, spiritual life becomes relevant; what is
dominant in life, either thoughts, works, tasks, or passions, reﬂect my “self.” In this
search, he claims, “the thought that fulﬁlls me, the tasks that guide my work, they
are real spiritual powers that intervene in my life” [10, p. 992]. But will does not
only tend to what has been understood as a good; it lets itself be determined by
sensible instincts [10, p. 426]. For this, it is necessary to get clarity and acuteness in
thinking to ensure the intellect is the guiding position that corresponds to the
construction of human personality [10, p. 534].
In sum, the thinking subject and the speaking subject, one and the same, through
an empathizing representation, converts, with the help of the acts of understanding,
a content, giving rise to the “thought.” This distinction in view of grammatical
categories is not only external; it penetrates in two senses: expressing what is lived
and sharing it with others.
Acts of Thought and the Thought of the Object
What are acts of thought for Edith Stein? For “acts of thought,” a whole series of
experiences of diverse characteristics are compiled: the act of judging with its
corresponding subject and predicate, the act of making a conclusion, the compar-
ison or distinction with its references, the act of linking and enumerating, etc. [1,
p. 364]. Such acts of thought can be reproduced by a community, capturing the
connections of sense already discovered [1, p. 412].
Strictly speaking, it belongs to the particular being of the objects of thought,
being “a second-hand entity,” that is, being related to a more originary entity: the
entity called object, that is “presupposed” for logics [3, p. 811]. In other words, this
being in thought presupposes another being, that of the entity whose knowledge is
taken by the formations of thought or that makes up the model according to which
they are “conﬁgured.” The being that is its foundation is not necessarily the real
being. For this, the formations of thought are “copies” of the pure formations of
sense and may be acquired not only from the experience of real things but also from
knowing the possibilities of the essence [3, p. 928]. Now, these objects or rela-
tionships of states of things make up the “originary entity” to which makings of
thoughts are related, e.g., concepts, judgments, reasonings, according to which they
are “conﬁgured” [3, p. 811].
The philosopher intends to go into a perspective about the theory of knowledge
—with certain original distinctions—where the object has been understood as
something fundamental in itself, and knowledge as something that it itself pretends
to be, that is, a universal capturing of existing states of things. Nevertheless, for
Stein, both considerations may be deceitful appearances and dissipate as soon as
laws functional for the conscience are discovered. Then, she decides to make some
distinctions. She previously clariﬁes the matter about categories; Kant already
wanted to conceive them as functions of subjectivity, speciﬁcally of understanding.
If this is so, it could be said that “functions may function and the subject may be
9
Efforts Deployed in the Penetration of “Thought”
201

able to have experiences with it, without him capturing them” [1, p. 760]. Now,
these functions blindly exercised should not be designated as concepts of under-
standing; therefore, it could not be indicated that the “thought” of the object and the
categories determining it are captured by thinking and added to the current material
of knowledge. Stein brings up the doctrine of categories because conscience is
subjected to certain functional laws that make comprehensible the fact that an
objective world appears in the conscience. These functions arrive at the conscience;
however, they are independent of its functioning, being able to be captured or not
[1, p. 760].
Concerning the states of things, these are formations of an articulated structure;
they presuppose “objects” in the strictest sense of the word [3, p. 730]. In the
content of these objects is their foundation: essence and being, showing itself in its
separability and reciprocal belonging. The so-called states of things involve for
Stein a spirit whose knowing is realized in steps of separated thoughts, but they are
not to be considered as “formed” by the spirit. The structure of the world of objects
forbids the states of things their articulation and indicates the thought that advances
step-by-step along its road. According to this, the being of the state of things is not a
‘mere being thought of’ because it possesses a fundamentum in re; but, as it has the
need of a foundation, it is a deduced being [3, p. 731].
Stein goes deeper: supposing that the subject brings to his conscience the
functional laws with which he must explain that the objects appear to him, then,
will he have the thought of the object as we understand it spontaneously? Or will he
have the thought, the concept of objectivity as it is before our eyes in a
non-reﬂexive grasp of knowledge? Will it not happen precisely with this that, in
considering categories as functional laws and only as that, the thought of objectivity
is abandoned? [1, p. 760]. Then, there is the possibility that functional laws do not
exist at all since if conscience proceeds according to these determined laws, we
would evidently incur in an endless process [1, p. 761]. Perhaps, it would be
advisable to change the knowledge of conscience and its laws into its object, thus
showing that such knowledge is possible. Precisely, this is the argumentation:
showing that the knowledgeable belongs to the conscience and, to argue the
impossibility of knowledge about the transcendent? According to philosophy,
neither of these has been shown. Deﬁnitely, so far, certain functions of subjectivity
are required so that objects can appear in the conscience. However, for Stein, this
does not mean that the being of the objects is due only to these functions of
subjectivity; rather, the objective deduction can disconnect from the subjective
deduction and provide a different conception of categories [1, p. 761]. It must be
taken into account that the makings of thought, logics deals with, are adequate for
their forms [3, p. 882].
In synthesis, the objects and acts of thought are shown in their separability and
reciprocal belonging. Knowing is realized in steps of separated thoughts, but they
are not considered “formed” by the spirit. So, the world of objects orders the states
of things, which presuppose the objects need to get to their foundation.
202
E. Reyes-Gacitúa

Concepts Correlated to Thought
According to the exercise of thinking, it is possible to consider other elements that
provide connections and breaks about acts and sequences of thought. One of them
is the concept of “idea,” concomitant to that of “thought” [3, p. 338], feasible to
capture [3, p. 902]. For Stein, it is making or formation of understanding: freely
active, elaborated and formed by thought. For this reason, it becomes connected to
the thinking spirit [3, p. 342]. For a better sample, we can consider the artist’s
relationship with his work, designated “in thought.” Many times, it has to do with a
process, where the sculptor can ﬁrst have the “idea” and later look for “material”
convenient for this idea. It may be a marble block eliciting the “occurrence” in him
of what could be made out of it. In the second case, we can have the doubt if it deals
with a relationship only given by the thought of the artist with the work. In this
case, the marble block is not the work yet, and, however, it is an essential part of it.
Hence, the “project” of the artist owes its existence to this marble block and may
also be conditioned in its content by this block [3, p. 901].
On the other hand, the sensation is found as an immanent datum that starts a
movement in the subject. Stein claims: “the sensation datum appears as something
that uses my present life and ﬁlls it and, however, is independent of me in a certain
sense. It comes without being called, it enters in my connection with life, it breaks,
maybe, a process of thought in which I lived” [17]. Now, there is a possibility to
change sensation data into an object by means of a reﬂexive attitude [1, p. 366].
Fantasy is described as follows: “in thoughts,” I can stand up from my desk, go
to a corner of my bedroom and observe it from there. And if I do not do this, I do
not carry with me my living body [1, p. 127]. But, in fact, I am tied to it: I am where
my body is, even if “with my thought” I can move to the other end of the world and
even overcome all spatial barriers [10, p. 654]. We are in front of an involuntary
“fantasy game.” Stein depicts it: “while I am immersed in a difﬁcult strain of
thought, I can reject it by a tension of my will and remain in my work; it is possible
that, then, it disappears, but it is also possible that, together with a process of
thought at the background, I continue in it or, that I voluntarily interrupt the
sequence of thought and give myself to the intentions of the fantasy process” [18].
For Stein, it is possible to distinguish between the intention of fantasy and its
intuition. What do these differences consist of? The philosopher explains it as
follows: when we speak about the castle of Sleeping Beauty and intuitively rep-
resent it, we have as many intuitive objects as there are intuiting subjects. This
intuition does not offer, before our eyes, the thought to an object, as perception
does, but it represents it, and each individual represents it in his own way [1,
p. 363]: “the act that “thinks” an individual object, without bearing it in mind or
without representing it as present, heads towards something that it does not arrive
at, but that is offered to it and leads it to its plenitude, when the thought object
becomes intuitive” [19].
9
Efforts Deployed in the Penetration of “Thought”
203

On the other hand, intellectual openness makes possible a comprehensive
accompaniment with the animic life of others; it deals with openness, different from
simply being touched. It is not mere life that unites, but speciﬁc life in the broadest
measure, the spiritual activity in reciprocal barters of thoughts, feelings, etc. In a
common relationship of thinking, feeling, wanting, and precisely in this common
proceeding, the phenomena of being led by the force of the other are shown [3, p. 512].
Another concept here I discuss is arbitrary imagining. Stein interprets it as
follows: “I can form the concept of “triangular circle.” But this is a contradictory
concept that I cannot transpose into an adequate view. However, it has a “being of
the thought.” But “I cannot imagine” a three-angle circle (that is, I cannot represent
it to myself in a geometrical view) since “that thing does not exist” [3, p. 725]. It is
about something that is not found in reality and, at the same time, impossible in
itself.
This sequence includes deceit, which is possible on the basis of personal ex-
periences and also the course of some thoughts. For Stein, it is about thoughts that
have been “adopted” and attributed to themselves, presenting them as their own,
showing a capacity that they do not have [1, p. 858]. In The idols of self-knowledge,
ﬁrst published in 1911, Scheler conducts a qualiﬁed study on the concept of deceit.
Edith cites this work and addresses those deceitful appreciations related to the
sensible capacities of a subject. After all, it is possible to unmask deceit from
understanding on the basis of other manifestations dating back until getting to their
origin.
In turn, what is the situation of “nothingness,” “the absurd,” and “the counter-
sense”? According to Stein, we think about “nothingness,” but it is not a “making or
formation.” It is deprived of content and, therefore, lacks essence. It does not even
deserve to be denominated as a hollow form because the hollow form remits to
something. With this, the incapacity to think for taking “something” out of itself is
proven [3, p. 928].
With regards to the absurd, we are in the presence of something that allows
supposing a sense, but it does not lead to any understandable sense. In addition,
countersense is understood when the certain formation of senses, linked to one
another, are irreconcilable to each other, for example, a triangular circle. Stein
argues that this way of “thinking” has no sense of realization or ﬁlling. Rather, it is
about the impossibility of intuition; it makes up a proof of the absence of essence of
that apparent making of sense, based on a contradiction in a faulty fashion, for
example, “The leaf is green and is not green” [3, p. 929]. It is about vain attempts of
thinking that pretend to form an object full of sense, according to their own will.
However, they only help clarify the relationship between the being of thought and
the essential being: an authentic being of thought, that is, the being of the forma-
tions of thought full of sense, lies on the essential being of the pure formations of
sense. When it frees from the laws ruling the formations of sense, it makes these
hollow formations of appearance [3, p. 929].
Finally, the concepts of the idea, sensation, fantasy, etc., are related to and at the
same time differentiated from the content of thinking. This network of expressions
makes it possible to distinguish what Edith calls “attempts of thinking.”
204
E. Reyes-Gacitúa

Particular Sciences and Thought Exchange
Concerning particular sciences, the philosopher puts forward a series of perspec-
tives with which she intends to explore how thought is constructed. In fact, this is
set in motion by its object [3, p. 835]. Indeed, the historian must address “the
original experiencing.” How? By representing it in his thought so as to make it his
own in order to understand it. The aim of its exposure is to push others to represent
it in their thinking. So, for representing the understood experience, the historian
must change it into an object; that is, it needs objectivization, although this is only a
transitory stage. Meanwhile, for the psychologist, experiences are objects that he
pretends to analyze, describe, and explain as a scientist. To take hold of these
objects and see them intuitively in their full vitality, he has to experience or rep-
resent them in his thought, adopting an “understanding” attitude, the same as the
historian needs: adopting an objectivizing attitude [1, p. 337].
According to the philosopher, when the other “communicates” his thought, he
opens the way to understand the sense that was originally formed. Furthermore,
when he “experiences it,” he impels to “continue thinking” in an original pro-
duction, in view of a new partial existence of the connection with the sense of
totality. In this way, joint thinking, which is not experimented with as an experience
of one and the other, but as common thinking, is forged in “the exchange of
thought.” For Stein, every study of science must be done in this way, hence: “what I
provide as my ‘own contribution’ to the development of science, with an original
performance of my thought, all this is born under the patrimony already gathered
which “I receive,” and becomes, in turn, the foundation on which the others will
continue building” [1, p. 382]. In fact, Stein’s thought takes distance from a
supraindividual unit of personality [1, p. 423]. In the case of particular sciences,
when pluralism is possible, wealth is provided to the whole set. Under this per-
spective, we must be reciprocally “open,” wherever an individual’s attitudes do not
clash with the other but penetrate in him and deploy their efﬁciency. It is there
where community life exists, where both are members of a totality, the community
being not possible without that relationship [1, p. 423].
As to acquiring mathematical knowledge, a certain type of intellect is necessary.
Stein describes counting on “sense” for mathematical formations, understanding the
nature of numbers, space forms, abstract thought, progress from premises to con-
sequences, etc., that is, what the mathematician and the logistician have in common.
If they “have intelligence,” this means “intelligere posse.” The philosopher does not
extend this power to everyone for everything, neither the same to everyone. In this
correspondence, the “born” mathematician is ready since the beginning of his being
in potentia illorum intelligibilium. Consequently, each intellect has certain incli-
nations that are proper of it by nature [3, p. 350]. In turn, may speciﬁc “mathe-
matical thinking” exist? That is, thinking that is not regulated by the laws of
thinking contents, but having a particular noetic characteristic, a particular acute-
ness and tension of reasoning, a notable spontaneity in the mental procedure, a free
game with all the possibilities? In this regard, Stein claims that such spiritual
9
Efforts Deployed in the Penetration of “Thought”
205

habitus is determined by nature and the way in which each individual spiritually
acts in these ambits, and, on the other hand, spiritual experiencing is determined by
the experiencing of the community in which he participates. Likewise, we are in
front of a retroaction of individual life in search of community life [1, p. 369].
So, it is possible to represent and observe remnants of creative activity in the
artistic ﬁeld through empathy Einfühlung. The external ﬁgure of the work of art
shows a way of looking at the world; its content of meaning reveals what pleases the
artist’s soul, what has been the attitude of his thought and feelings for the world [1,
p. 850]. According to the philosopher, every work of art arises from a feeling, an
“expression.” In it, people’s affective life is deposited, which has been unchained by
the world around them [1, p. 850]. Indeed, thought and feeling put in motion creative
work, and the contemplated objects hold a qualitative “aspect” visible in Stein’s
thought due to the spiritual structure of the subject. It is about a fundamental issue
carefully dealt with in her doctoral thesis: Empathy is understood as the experience
of the other subjects and their experiencing. Caballero Bono claims that such a
concept agrees with that of his master Husserl, although the explanation may be
divergent, even leading him to fundamental distinctions with Theodor Lipps [20].
“The capacity of thinking is aimed at thinking;” this sentence, for Edith Stein,
involves the being that lives within the one who does the action, such as a thought
in the thinker. With this, she speciﬁes the possibility of a (scientiﬁc) thought, that is:
having that capacity which, although not thought at that moment, will only become
real in its execution. According to the philosopher, several concepts are imbricated:
ἐmέqceia, understood as operating efﬁciency, and dύmali1 as a possibility or
capacity that, since it provides power, aims at sέko1, reality. Consequently,
ἐmέqceia (energy) means the real being as opposed to the possible being: dύmali1,
the possibility of a work being also called ἔqcom. So, the working results exist by
themselves, for example, the house that exists due to the architect’s activity. In the
ﬁrst case, it is thoroughly clear that ἐmέqceia and ἔqcom (efﬁciency and work) make
up just one thing and since the possibility has attained its objective in the real being,
this is also called ἐmsekέveia (entelechy), a term that could be translated as the
realization of the being [3, p. 620].
In summary, thinking and communicating thought makes it possible to under-
stand that expression in which it was originally formed. In this direction, science as
a whole, art, and the different disciplines make an effort for enunciating content that
is expressed as correct knowledge. Stein highlights joint thinking, which is not
experimented with as an experience of one or the other, but as common thinking
whose aim is to arrive at ultimate clarity.
Conclusion
We began this feat of “thinking” by giving an account of not only the limits of
cogito ergo sum but by deploying towards the “I am.” For the philosopher, it is
about a certainty: the fact of the being itself, originary knowledge from which the
206
E. Reyes-Gacitúa

spirit breaks into the world, the objects, and the things, showing them in their
separability and reciprocal belonging. Moved by the spirit, this “I am” constantly
indicates where we are immediately thinking, feeling, and wanting.
In this concordance, Edith Stein emphasized the condition of openness existing
in the spirit. For this, it is possible for human beings to think in a lively way. If the
subject has a world of objects in front of him, the soundness that provides him with
“I know I live” gives rise to the discovery of himself and his conscience in his
spiritual and community experience. It is about walking in view of a connection
with the sense of totality and, from this ambit, clarify the sense of “being” in the
world, his place, and his relationship of belonging.
Core Messages
• Stein highlights the openness in the spirit, in the human being who thinks
vividly.
• Thinking subject and speaking subject, one and the same whose acts of
understanding give rise to thought.
• The concepts of idea, sensation, and fantasy are related and differ from the
content of thought.
• Thinking and communicative thought allow us to understand that
expression in which it was originally formed.
References
1. Stein E (2005) Escritos ﬁlosóﬁcos. Etapa fenomenológica In: Obras Completas II. Monte
Carmelo, Burgos, p 24
2. Stein E (2002) Escritos autobiográﬁcos y Cartas In: Obras Completas I. Monte Carmelo,
Burgos, p 49
3. Stein E (2007) Escritos ﬁlosóﬁcos. Etapa de pensamiento cristiano In: Obras Completas III.
Monte Carmelo, Burgos, p 247
4. Alﬁeri F (2014) Pessoa humana e singularidade em Edith Stein. Uma nova fundação da
antropologia ﬁlosóﬁca. Perspectiva, São Paulo, p 7
5. De La Maza LM (2015) Sobre el espíritu en Hegel y en Edith Stein. Teol Vida 56
(0717-6295):274
6. Caballero JL (2010) Ejes transversales del pensamiento en Edith Stein. Teol Vida 51(0717–
6295):42
7. Stein, Edith Endliches und ewiges Sein 217: das Ergreifen ist ein Ansatz zum Begreifen: ich
sehe in der Ferne ein Ding, das ich noch nicht erkennen kann, und gerade seine
Unbestimmtheit reizt zur denkenden Beschäftigung damit: “Dieses geheimnisvolle Etwas
will ich mir doch näher besehen”. Published Online: https://www.karmelitinnen-koeln.de/
edith-stein-archiv-kk/gesamtausgabe
9
Efforts Deployed in the Penetration of “Thought”
207

8. Stein, Edith Endliches und ewiges Sein 246: Aber plötzlich wird sie mir durch ein neues
Erlebnis wieder in Erinnerung gebracht, und der Eindruck, den sie nun auf mich macht, die
Gedanken, die sie hervorruft, lassen mich erkennen, daß sie die ganze Zeit in mir gearbeitet
hat, ja daß ich ohne sie nicht das wäre, was ich heute bin. Published Online: https://www.
karmelitinnen-koeln.de/edith-stein-archiv-kk/gesamtausgabe
9. Stein, Edith Abhandlung: Individuum und Gemeinschaft 120: hier in bloßen Denkakten, dort
von erfüllenden oder illustrierenden Anschauungen begleitet-und schließlich auch in der
Weise, daß die realisierenden Erlebnisse sich auf eine Mehrheit von Individuen verteilen. Wo
immer aber ein Sinnzusammenhang sich realisiert, da gehen die realisierenden Erlebnisse in
die Einheit eines Motivationszusammenhanges ein, sie bilden einen Erlebniskomplex.
Published Online: https://www.karmelitinnen-koeln.de/edith-stein-archiv-kk/gesamtausgabe
10. Stein E (2003) Escritos antropológicos y pedagógicos. In: Obras Completas IV. Monte
Carmelo, Burgos, p 699
11. Stein, Edith Zum Problem der Einfühlung 47: Vor Schreck »steht mir der Verstand still«, d. h.
ich verspüre eine lähmende Wirkung auf meine Denkakte, oder ich bin »verwirrt« vor Freude,
weiß nicht, was ich tue, nehme zwecklose Handlungen vor. Ein reiner Geist kann auch
erschrecken,
aber
sein
Verstand
steht
nicht
still.
Published
Online:
https://www.
karmelitinnen-koeln.de/edith-stein-archiv-kk/gesamtausgabe
12. Ricoeur P (2003) El conﬂicto de las interpretaciones. Ensayos de hermeneútica. Fondo de
Cultura Económica, Buenos Aires, pp 224–225
13. Stein, Edith Endliches und ewiges Sein 218: Die gedanklichen Gebilde sind »Abbilder« der
reinen Sinngebilde und können nicht nur aus der Erfahrung wirklicher Dinge, sondern auch
aus der Erkenntnis von Wesensmöglichkeiten gewonnen werden. Published Online: https://
www.karmelitinnen-koeln.de/edith-stein-archiv-kk/gesamtausgabe
14. Stein, Edith Endliches und ewiges Sein 219: Andererseits ist in jedem Gedankengebilde die
Möglichkeit einer neuen Denkbewegung begründet, durch die es nacherzeugt wird und in
einem
denkenden
Geist
ein
neues
Sein
gewinnt.
Published
Online:
https://www.
karmelitinnen-koeln.de/edith-stein-archiv-kk/gesamtausgabe
15. Stein, Edith Zum Problem der Einfühlung 65: Meine Freunde »vergesse« ich nicht, wenn ich
nicht an sie denke, sie gehören dann zum unbemerkten Gegenwartshorizont meiner Welt, und
meine Liebe zu ihnen lebt, auch wenn ich nicht in ihr lebe, und beeinﬂußt mein aktuelles
Fühlen und Handeln. Ich kann aus Liebe zu einer Person Handlungen unterlassen, die ihr
mißfallen würden, ohne mir dessen »bewußt zu sein«. So kann der Groll gegen eine Person, der
mir in meiner Kindheit eingepﬂanzt wurde, als ein Druck auf meinem späteren Leben lasten,
obwohl er ganz in den Hintergrund gedrängt ist und ich an jene Person gar nicht mehr denke.
Published Online: https://www.karmelitinnen-koeln.de/edith-stein-archiv-kk/gesamtausgabe
16. Stein, Edith Endliches und ewiges Sein 35, 36: ich kann es dahingestellt sein lassen, ob das Ding,
das ich mit meinen Sinnen wahrnehme, wirklich existiert oder nicht—aber die Wahrnehmung
als solche läßt sich nicht durchstreichen; ich kann bezweifeln, ob die Schlußfolgerung, die ich
ziehe, richtig ist—aber das schlußfolgernde Denken ist eine unbezweifelbare Tatsache.
Published Online: https://www.karmelitinnen-koeln.de/edith-stein-archiv-kk/gesamtausgabe
17. Stein, Edith Potenz und Act, 195: Das Empﬁndungsdatum tritt auf als etwas meine
Lebensaktualität in Anspruch Nehmendes und Erfüllendes und doch in gewissem Sinn von
mir Unabhängiges. Es kommt ungerufen, tritt in meinen Lebenszusammenhang ein,
durchbricht vielleicht einen Gedankengang, in dem ich lebte. Published Online: https://
www.karmelitinnen-koeln.de/edith-stein-archiv-kk/gesamtausgabe
18. Stein, Edith, Potenz und Act, 199: Es kann mir ein Phantasieeinfall kommen, während ich in
einen schweren Gedankengang vertieft bin; ich kann ihn mit Willensanspannung abweisen
und bei meiner Arbeit bleiben; es ist möglich, daß er dann verschwindet; es ist aber auch
möglich, daß er neben dem gedanklichen Prozeß im Hintergrunde sich fortspinnt oder daß ich
willentlich den Gedankengang abbreche und mich in die Intentionen des Phantasieprozesses
hineinbegebe. Published Online: https://www.karmelitinnen-koeln.de/edith-stein-archiv-kk/
gesamtausgabe
208
E. Reyes-Gacitúa

19. Stein, Edith Abhandlung: Individuum und Gemeinschaft, 110: Der Akt, der einen
individuellen Gegenstand unter einer bestimmten Deutung »meint«, ohne ihn gegenwärtig
zu haben oder zu vergegenwärtigen, zielt ab auf etwas, was er nicht selbst erreicht, was sich
ihm aber selbst darbietet und ihm Erfüllung bringt, wenn der gemeinte Gegenstand
anschaulich wird. Published Online: https://www.karmelitinnen-koeln.de/edith-stein-archiv-
kk/gesamtausgabe
20. Stein E (2004) Sobre el problema de la empatía. Editorial Trotta, Madrid, p 10
Eva Reyes Gacitúa is a Doctor in Dogmatic Theology from the
Pontiﬁcia Universidad Católica de Chile. Degree in Education
and Professor of Religion. She currently works as an academic
and researcher at the Universidad Católica del Norte, Antofagasta
Chile. From 2012 to 2019 she has been Director of the UCN
journal “Cuadernos de Teología”. She has made several publi-
cations. She is a member of the International Association for
Patristic Studies: AIEP, a member of the Latin American Society
of Literature and Theology: ALALITE, and a member of the
Edith Stein Interdisciplinary Research Center, PUC, Chile.
9
Efforts Deployed in the Penetration of “Thought”
209

10
Pseudo-Thinking and Real Thinking
Ryota Ono
“At the bottom each person is asking, “Who am I, really? How
can I get in touch with this real self, underlying all my surface
behavior? How can I become myself?””
Carl R. Rogers
Summary
A simple meditation exercise reminds us that so many kinds of thoughts, ideas,
and emotions are continuously trying to trespass into our minds. The major part
of those thoughts obviously has to do with our major tasks such as our job or
study. In contrast, the minor part of them, which is not necessarily less
important, is related to our concerns as to how favorably others see us. Most
people cannot help but engage in the second type of thinking, called
“pseudo-thinking” in this chapter, because they are deﬁciency-motivated people,
as deﬁned by Maslow. While they always try to acquire something from the
outside to overcome the sense of deﬁciency, they are deﬁcient in understanding
the real self on the inside. Maslow’s self-actualizing people, on the other hand,
understand their real self and live by following what the real self provides. The
thinking of self-actualizing people is called “real thinking.” People can become
self-actualized not by reducing deﬁciency-motivation but by experiencing events
called “peak experience” and “quantum change.” The world seen through real
thinking is peaceful, united, loving, and completely opposite to the world from
the pseudo-thinking perspective. This chapter suggests a way for people to
approach real thinking even before they are transformed into self-actualizing
people.
R. Ono (&)
Department of Business Administration, Aichi University, 4-60-6 Hiraike-cho,
Nakamura-ku, Nagoya 453-8777, Aichi, Japan
e-mail: ryota@aichi-u.ac.jp
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh (eds.), Thinking, Integrated Science 7,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04075-7_10
211

Real thinking does not need approval
(Adapted with permission from the Health and Art (HEART), Universal
Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network (USERN); Painting by Tanisha
Vihol)
Keywords
Abraham Maslow  Carl Rogers  Deﬁciency  Motivation
QR Code
Scanning the QR code directs you to the word cloud of the chapter that is made
up of the words we discussed throughout the whole book in relation to the chapter’s
keyword, which is intentionally not included in the word cloud. Find the keyword
212
R. Ono

and put it in place in the puzzle according to the clues provided in Chap. 36. The
mystery hidden in the puzzle is the quote of THINKING: Bioengineering of Science
and Art.
Introduction
When you practice meditation for the ﬁrst time, you would probably face a very
difﬁcult ﬁght where various thoughts, ideas, and emotions continuously try to
trespass into your mind. To keep your mind empty as long as possible, you would
be forced to keep pushing those trespassers away.
Such experience makes us realize that our brain has no time to rest. Kegan and
Lahey [1] state that most people in an organization are devoting much of their time
and energy to carry out a second job that generates no income, which is “covering
up their weaknesses, managing other people’s impressions of them, showing
themselves to their best advantage, playing politics, hiding their inadequacies,
hiding their uncertainties, hiding their limitations” [p. 1]. To conduct this job
successfully, they think about the most desirable outcome, develop effective means,
carry them out, and evaluate the results of the whole process so that they can
increase the probability of success.
The reason why many people end up engaging in this second job comes from the
fact that they have concealed “the self.” When humans are hiding something from
other people, they are likely to develop and present unusual behaviors. While those
behaviors sometimes help achieve the purpose of hiding, they will often bring about
unexpected consequences. In the ﬁeld of personality development, Kegan and
Lahey [2] argue that most people develop an internal immune system called “the
immunity to change” as a by-product of hiding the self.
At some point in their lives, an individual will realize the necessity or urgency to
grow further. He plans to achieve the desired condition and starts learning new
skills and knowledge, changing priorities in life, doing good things for health, and
improving interpersonal relationships. However, although the plan may proceed
successfully for a short time, it often results in a halt sooner or later. Even if the
person sincerely wanted to achieve that condition for their personal growth, the end
results of the challenge often turn out to be somewhat disappointing. Kegan and
Lahey [2] demonstrate that such unsuccessful cycles of self-motivated growth
endeavors are caused by the immunity to change. The immunity to change is a very
effective anxiety-management system, where the anxiety is not acute or episodic but
constantly running through one’s life. The immunity to change is unconsciously
created on the inside of most people and functions to protect what they hide, which
is the self. Regardless of how good or useful the desired goal is for the person, the
immunity to change cares about neither the goal nor the person’s commitment but
constantly monitors possibilities of the person’s self-being exposed to others. When
10
Pseudo-Thinking and Real Thinking
213

the immune system senses that implementing the plan might hinder the already
successfully established impressions by others on the person’s personality, it
induces him to give up the initiative by presenting him probable dangers against his
identity. In this way, the person’s self, hidden from others’ attention, remains
protected; however, it leaves the person to lose his chance to grow further.
Psychic Fingerprint and the Real Self
What is “the self” of an individual whose immunity to change is constantly trying to
protect from others? Stone and Stone [3] argue that a newborn comes into this
world with a unique quality of being, called the “psychic ﬁngerprint.” While the
psychic ﬁngerprint is the core self of the newborn, it is intact, very defenseless, and
vulnerable upon being exposed to a new environment. To deal with vulnerability,
the infant’s personality begins to develop. Stone and Stone [3] refer to personality
as a system of a variety of subpersonalities (selves or energy patterns), and a key
self that develops at an early stage of the person’s growth is called the
“protector/controller.”
They claim that the protector/controller self is the primary energy pattern
underlying a person’s other selves and is most concerned about how favorably and
positively the person is seen and perceived by others. The protector/controller
makes the person focus on his safety in every possible way and stick to norms and
traditional values of the past and present (i.e., status quo). Given the very con-
servative role played by the protector/controller self, it can be inferred that the
“immunity to change,” conceptualized and discussed by Kegan and Lahey [2], is
the work of the protector/controller self. The more powerful and successful the
protector/controller of the person becomes, the more his immunity to change is
strengthened. As a result, how the person lives and grows increasingly deviates
from how his unique psychic ﬁngerprint wants to live, and he becomes more
uncertain about who he is and where he is heading. Maslow [4] discusses this
psychic death in a person’s childhood as below.
He has been rejected, not only by them (others), but by himself. (He is actually without a
self.) What has he lost? Just the one true and vital part of himself: his own yes-feeling,
which is his very capacity for growth, his root system. [p. 56]
The protector/controller would do anything to keep hiding the person’s most
vulnerable self, the psychic ﬁngerprint. Such obsession for hiding makes the person
continuously worry about the possibility of someday being threatened by someone
saying, “I know who you really are.”
214
R. Ono

Deficiency-Motivated People
Maslow [5] pioneered and led the humanistic psychology movement. His moti-
vation theory asserts that human behaviors and actions are activated and directed by
ﬁve needs as shown in Fig. 10.1: the “physiological needs, the safety needs, the
belongingness and love needs, the esteem needs, and the self-actualization need.”
He regards the bottom four needs as “deﬁciency motivation” and the top need for
self-actualization as “growth motivation.”
Maslow [5] delineates the characteristics of deﬁciency-motivated people as
follows:
• They generally “prefer a safe, orderly, predictable, lawful, organized world”
[p. 41];
• They have the “desire for reputation or prestige (deﬁning it as respect or esteem
from other people), status, fame and glory, dominance, recognition, attention,
importance, dignity, or appreciation” [p. 45];
• They feel “unnecessarily guilty or ashamed about too many things and feel
anxiety in too many unnecessary situations” [p. 155];
• They often do not have “the slightest idea of who they are, what they want, or
what their own opinions are” [p. 159];
• They cannot “make up their own minds, but have their minds made up for them
by salesmen, advertisers, parents, propagandists, TV, newspapers, and so on.
They are pawns driven by others rather than self-moving, self-determining
individuals” [p. 161]; and,
• They “must have other people available, since much of their need gratiﬁcations
(love, safety, respect, prestige, belongingness) can come only from other human
beings” [p. 162].
These characteristics show that deﬁciency-motivated people lack self-conﬁdence
and tend to depend much on other people. They cannot help but refer to others’
thoughts and reactions about themselves. Such uneasiness obviously inﬂuences and
determines the type and content of thinking in which they engage. This is the
crucial consequence of having moved away from their psychic ﬁngerprint in the
process of personality development. They are always afraid of others who might
ﬁnd out and spill the beans about their hidden intact self. An analogy of
deﬁciency-motivated people can be someone protecting their territory, as depicted
in Fig. 10.2. They talk with others from inside a hole, and as a result, always feel
somewhat awkward. They remain in the hole because there is something in their
personality that should not be revealed to others.
Maslow [6] further argues that the defensive attitude of deﬁciency-motivated
people leads them to take the same attitude towards themselves by fearing their own
emotions, impulses, potentialities, and destiny. They struggle against their own
greatness and evade personal growth. The irony is that they do not know this
reality.
10
Pseudo-Thinking and Real Thinking
215

The adult human being is far more subtle and concealed about his anxieties and fears. If
they do not overwhelm him together, he is very apt to repress them, to deny even to himself
that they exist. Frequently, he does not “know” that he is afraid. [p. 121]
Maslow [7] calls the cognition of deﬁciency-motivated people “D-cognition.”
He argues that people with D-cognition perceive the world “only from the vantage
point of their own interests” and use society and the world for their ends. They are
not rightly perceiving society and the world but perceiving themselves in it. For
deﬁciency-motivated people, any behavior is synonymous with instrumental be-
havior, and it is conducted to meet their needs. Maslow regards D-cognition as a
very active, tense, highly volitional, and energy-consuming process because it
constantly pays attention to the holder’s needs and fears, distinguishes what and
what not to perceive, and classiﬁes, compares, and evaluates.
Fig. 10.1 Motivation theory
Fig. 10.2 Analogy of deﬁciency-motivated people
216
R. Ono

In On Becoming a Person, Rogers [8] declares that human beings already possess
learning experiences, which could bring about the decreasing of various tensions and
conﬂicts, and “could aid in the development of mature, non-defensive, under-
standing persons.” However, this declaration seems to be a reﬂection of the fact that
not many people have been able to put such learning experiences to use wisely. The
characteristics and cognitions of numerous people Rogers had associated with as a
psychotherapist for many years are similar to those of deﬁciency-motivated people
revealed by Maslow [7]. Rogers [8] writes about one client:
He learns how much of his behavior, even how much of the feeling he experiences, is not
real, is not something which ﬂows from the genuine reactions of his organism, but in a
façade, a front, behind which he has been hiding. He discovers how much of his life is
guided by what he thinks he should be, not by what he is. Often he discovers that he exists
only in response to the demands of others, that he seems to have no self of his own, that he
is only trying to think, and feel, and behave in the way that others believe he ought to think,
and feel and behave. [pp. 109–110]
Given that the D-cognition of deﬁciency-motivated people is heavily inﬂuenced
by the presence of others and imagined reactions of those people, the condition of
the man above is not necessarily speciﬁc to him but is observed in many people,
who are mostly deﬁciency-motivated people. Rogers [9] writes that although the
infant had his own valuing process stemming from his organism and used it to
evaluate the surrounding circumstances, he gradually begins to move away from the
original valuing process and starts to introject the value judgments of others. The
cause of this shift is the sense of deﬁciency.
… in an attempt to gain or hold love, approval, esteem, the individual relinquishes the locus
of evaluation which was his in infancy, and places it in others. He learns to have a basic
distrust for his own experiencing as a guide to his behavior. He learns from others a large
number of conceived values, and adopts them as his own, even though they may be widely
discrepant from what he is experiencing. [9, p. 162]
As fearing others is the key characteristic of the protector/controller self, it seems
clear that deﬁciency-motivated people are heavily controlled by the protec-
tor/controller. The underlying emotion of fear and anxiety promotes deﬁciency-
motivated people to ponder various strategies to protect and defend themselves
constantly. The more the valuing process of deﬁciency-motivated people is inﬂu-
enced by the value judgments of others, the farther the goal of the valuing process
shifts, from that of judging like or dislike to that of judging safe or dangerous.
Theatrical Relationships
Goffman [10], who developed the dramaturgical analysis of the organization of
social life, argues that a person’s everyday life is like a theatrical performance. All
theatrical performers are given, in most cases, one speciﬁc role to play out, and they
angle for the audience to dive into their imaginary world. The performers’ thinking
is geared toward the realistic actualization of their assigned identities, and whether
10
Pseudo-Thinking and Real Thinking
217

or not they succeed in the actualization determines whether or not they are good
performers. Based on this perspective, Goffman [10] argues that in a social orga-
nization of people, what is truly important for a person is evaluating other people
regarding how well he is performing his ideal self. The idealized self is equivalent
to the assigned identity/role for a performer. Many people gradually build their
idealized self (i.e., mask) through trials and errors in the process of personality
development. They always wear this mask and claim to others that “This is me.” As
they believe that they should have a great degree of control over how to be seen,
evaluated, or judged, they result in devoting much of their time and energy to trying
to control others. Goffman [10] states:
… it will be in his interests to control the conduct of the others, especially their responsive
treatment of him. This control is achieved largely by inﬂuencing the deﬁnition of the
situation which the others come to formulate, and he can inﬂuence this deﬁnition by
expressing himself in such a way as to give them the kind of impression that will lead them
to act voluntarily in accordance with his own plan. [pp. 3–4]
This task is equivalent to what Kegan and Lahey [1] call “the second job.”
Branaman [11] points out that Goffman considers what a person really is as
something seldom discoverable, nor really an issue. Goffman [12] wrote, “What is
important is the sense he provides them through his dealings with them of what sort
of person he is behind the role he is in” [p. 298]. Branaman [11] argues that
Goffman, in fact, doubts “the individual complete autonomy in deciding the images
of self to be conveyed” to others and writes, “What matters is not how the indi-
vidual identiﬁes him or herself (“self-identity,” “ego-identity”) but rather how he or
she is identiﬁed by others (“personal identity”)” [p. lii]. The individual’s best
performance does not necessarily bring about what he aims for, and this reality
makes people’s thoughts vulnerable and complicated.
Performers cannot exist by themselves, and they require the audience to watch
and react to their performance. Similarly, people (i.e., deﬁciency-motivated people)
need other people for two purposes: as the subject who provides them with much of
their need gratiﬁcations (love, safety, respect, prestige, belonging); and as the
subject who helps complete the idealized self.
Branaman [11] clariﬁes that Goffman discusses dualistic images of the self: “the
self is the mask the individual wears in social situations;” and also “the human
being behind the mask, who decides which mask to wear.” The former is called the
“self-as-character”
or
“socialized
self,”
and
the
latter
is
called
the
“self-as-performer” or “all-too-human self.” While both the self-as-character and
the mask are always equated with the self in our society, Goffman regards this part
of the self as a social product. The other part, the self-as-performer, is:
The individual as performer is the thinking, fantasizing, dreaming, desiring human being
whose capacity to experience pride and shame motivates him or her not only to perform for
others but also to take precautions against embarrassment. [11, p. xlviii]
The function of the self-as-performer, especially taking “precautions against
embarrassment” as seen in the last phrase, is linked to the role played by the
protector/controller self. Thus, based on the preceding discussions on the self of
218
R. Ono

human beings, the human self can be understood to be composed of three layers, as
shown in Fig. 10.3.
In Fig. 10.3, the real self at the core of a human being is the psychic ﬁngerprint
discussed by Stone and Stone [3]. Rowan [13] deﬁnes, “This (real self) is the
feeling of getting in touch with my own center, my identity, my true self - the self
that lies behind or beyond all self-images or self-concepts” [p. 15]. As its existence
was concealed at the very early stages of personality development, all of us, except
for some very few psychiatrists, do not know what it exactly is. The self in charge
of hiding the psychic ﬁngerprint is the protector/controller self. This self, also called
the “self-as-performer” or “all-too-human self” by Goffman [12], controls how the
outer layer of the self, socialized self, is presented and perceived by other people.
The cognitions of deﬁciency-motivated people who have departed from their psy-
chic ﬁngerprints are controlled and managed by the two outer layers of the self, mostly
by the protector/controller self. The real self has nothing to do with those cognitions
because the protector/controller self has suppressed it. In this sense, the thinking of
deﬁciency-motivated people
cannot be “real thinking,” and thus is called
“pseudo-thinking” in this chapter. In summary, most people are constantly occupied
with a sense of deﬁciency and trying to ﬁll the void on the inside. Even if the cause of
these struggles is the lack of presence of the real self, people do not recognize such a
fact. As a result, they end up acting fervently to try to reach the idealized self (i.e.,
socialized self) so that what he presents or demonstrates can be accepted and respected.
Regardless of how effective peoples’ thinking behind those actions and behaviors are, it
continues to be “pseudo” as it is not based on the real self of the individual.
Self-actualizing People
Maslow [5] considers, however, that there are people who are able to rise to the
highest level of maturation and self-fulﬁllment. Although his theory is often
illustrated as the ﬁve-layer triangle presented in Fig. 10.1 and is understood as a
Fig. 10.3 Three layers of the
self
10
Pseudo-Thinking and Real Thinking
219

presentation of the ﬁve different types of human motivation, Maslow [5] clearly
distinguishes the top “self-actualization” layer from the bottom four layers and
addresses its fundamental difference:
The distinction between deﬁciency motivation and growth motivation implies that
self-actualizing itself is not a motivated change. Self-actualization, the coming to full
development and actuality of the potentials of the organism, is more akin to growth and
maturation than it is to habit formation or association via reward, that is, it is not acquired
from without but is rather an unfolding from within of what is, in a subtle sense, already
there. [p. 233]
Thus, the crucial differences between the top layer and the bottom four layers are
depicted in Fig. 10.4. Self-actualizing people are motivated to grow, and this
motivation is inherent to the psychic ﬁngerprint. They quite differ from
deﬁciency-motivated people in that the former builds their life on the real self, and
as a result, demonstrate unique characteristics as discussed below. Using Horney’s
[14] terminology, Maslow [5] refers to deﬁciency-motivated people as the
“pseudo-self” and growth-motivated people as the “real self.” The pseudo-self is
equivalent to the socialized self, and the real self is the core self, as shown in
Fig. 10.3.
Maslow [5] assesses self-actualizing people as follows:
• Their “higher need gratiﬁcations produce more desirable subjective results, i.e.,
more profound happiness, serenity, and richness of the inner life, as well as
desirable civic and social consequences” [p. 99];
• They “live more in the real world of nature than in the man-made mass of
concepts, abstractions, expectations, beliefs, and stereotypes that most people
confuse with the world” [p. 154];
• They accept the unknown and “are comfortable with it, and, often are even more
attracted by it than by the known. They not only tolerate the ambiguous and
unstructured; they like it.” “They do not cling to the familiar” [pp. 154–155];
• They “ﬁnd it possible to accept themselves and their own nature without chagrin
or complaint or, for that matter, even without thinking about the matter very
much” [p. 155];
• They “feel bad about discrepancies between what is and what might very well be
or ought to be” [p. 157];
• They “have some mission in life, task to fulﬁll, and some problem outside
themselves which enlists much of their energies” [p. 159];
• They “live customarily in the widest possible frame of reference. They seem
never to get so close to the trees that they fail to see the forest” [p. 160];
• They “are not dependent for their main satisfactions on the real world, or other
people or culture or means to ends or, in general, on extrinsic satisfactions.
Rather they are dependent for their own development and continued growth on
their own potentialities and latent resources” [p. 162]; and
220
R. Ono

• They “have the wonderful capacity to appreciate again and again, freshly and
naively, the basic goods of life, with awe, pleasure, wonder, and even ecstasy”
[p. 163].
Maslow [7] further considers that self-actualizing people respect nature and
refrain from projecting human purposes upon it. By citing prominent theories such
as “the Hindu stages of life,” “Erikson’s theory of pshychosocial development,”
“Freud’s theory of the id, ego, and superego,” “the ancient Jewish tradition’s
understanding of human progression,” and “Kohlberg’s stages of moral develop-
ment,” D’Souza and Gurin [15] show that Maslow’s theory of self-actualization is
closely related to these theories [p. 211]. They conclude that the more
self-actualizing people live in the society, the more the society ﬂourishes.
O’Connor and Yballe [16] write:
… a cascade of positive consequences in the self-actualization process that are antidotes to
the powerful forces of pop culture and bureaucratic life that keep so many of us operating in
a deﬁciency mode. [p. 749]
O’Connor and Yballe [16] explain that [all italics mine] “self-actualizing people
are deeply committed in action to core values that look very similar to those put
forward in all major religions.” The self of self-actualizing people is placed in the
wider world, and it holds a contributory mindset to seek improvement in the
well-being of the world. Self-actualizing people are those who were called to act
and
who
responded
to
the
call.
O’Connor
and
Yballe
[16]
state
that
“Self-actualization is essential to strengthen and deepen the internal anchors needed
to persevere in the face of unprecedented turbulence and uncertainty” [p. 751].
Hoffman [17] shows that a signiﬁcant commonality of self-actualizing people is the
strong commitment to helping humanity, which is also their deﬁning characteristic.
Fig. 10.4 Another view of the motivation theory
10
Pseudo-Thinking and Real Thinking
221

Based on experiences with one who could ﬁnd the real self through his psy-
chotherapy, Rogers [8, 9] presents several distinct characteristics of those people,
such as:
• the individual becomes less defensive and more open to experiences. He grad-
ually comes to accept and embrace the experience of his childlike feelings as a
part of himself, which he was not able to tolerate before;
• the individual becomes more aware of reality instead of perceiving things in his
preconceived categories;
• the individual begins to open “himself to internal feelings that are clearly not
new to him, but which up to this time, he has never been able fully to experi-
ence.” “He will ﬁnd those internal feelings less distressing and will be able to
live closer to his own experiencing.” As a result, he also moves to accept the
experiences of others;
• the individual realizes that his own organism can “discover the most satisfying
behavior in each immediate situation. He lives by values that he discovers within
and develops more trust in the process going on within oneself;”
• the individual “increasingly comes to feel that the locus of evaluation [of
choices, decisions and judgments] lies within himself and looks less and less to
others for approval or disapproval, standards to live by, and decisions and
choices. Living in a way that truly expresses him starts to matter;”
• the individual “becomes more content in being a process, which is ﬂuid and
ﬂowing, rather than a product, which is ﬁxed, static, and solid. He becomes a
continually changing constellation of potentialities, not a ﬁxed quantity of
traits;” and,
• the individual negatively values facades, the compelling feeling of “oughts,” and
meeting the expectations of others.
Rogers [8] sums up these characteristics with Kierkegaard’s word “to be that self
which one truly is” [p. 181], and suggests that not necessarily limited to clients in
therapy, but an individual, an organization, and even a whole nation can obtain
them. From these characteristics, we can see that the “real thinking” of
self-actualizing people is free from other peoples’ perspectives and stems from the
inside of them, speciﬁcally from their psychic ﬁngerprint. Self-actualizing people
are not ashamed of their psychic ﬁngerprint and are embracing it, as depicted in
Fig. 10.5.
They are standing on stable foundations, and their posture looks like they are
emitting outward energy from inside. How they look is quite the opposite of how
deﬁciency-motivated people look, who are constantly concerned about each other,
as seen in Fig. 10.2. It would not be too difﬁcult for anyone to choose which ﬁgure
he would rather be. Rogers [9] writes:
I believe that when the human being is inwardly free to choose whatever he deeply values,
he tends to value those objects, experiences, and goals which make for his own survival,
growth, and development, and for the survival and development of others. [p. 166]
222
R. Ono

Rogers [9] argues that such an individual is a worthy player and a positive
example in the process of human evolution. Maslow [18] declares:
The empirical fact is that self-actualizing people, our best experiencers, are also our most
compassionate, our great improvers and reformers of society, our most effective ﬁghters
against injustice, inequality, slavery, cruelty, exploitation (and also our best ﬁghters for
excellence, effectiveness, competence). [p. xii]
He goes on to argue that the higher goal of education is to support “the person to
grow to fullest humanness, to the greatest fulﬁllment and actualization of his
highest potentials, to his greatest possible stature. In a word, it should help him to
become the best he is capable of becoming, to become actually what he deeply is
potentially.”
Given that the real thinking of self-actualizing people is better for both himself
and the bigger community such as his organization, community, society, and the
world, a question may now arise: “How does a leap from deﬁciency-motivated
people to self-actualizing people take place when both types of human beings go
through similar developmental stages of personality?”
Peak Experiences
Bauer et al. [19] state that most of the stage models of psychological maturity do
not address the well-being of human beings and that empirical research has also
shown that “higher levels of maturity do not correlate with higher levels of
well-being.” However, as discussed in Section “Self-actualizing People”, Maslow
[4, 5] depicts self-actualizing people as the happiest people and identiﬁes them as
people possessing the characteristics that structural, cognitive development theories
could not clarify. How then do self-actualizing people, who do not seem to follow
the stage models, emerge?
Fig. 10.5 Analogy of self-actualizing people
10
Pseudo-Thinking and Real Thinking
223

Although he does not address any causal relationship, Maslow [4, 5, 7] discusses
that most self-actualizing people have “peak experiences,” and so do McClain and
Andrews [20], who also point out its correlation. Maslow [7] deﬁnes peak expe-
riences as follows:
… some of these basic cognitive happenings in the B-love experience, the parental expe-
rience, the mystic or oceanic, or nature experience, the aesthetic perception, the creative
moment, the therapeutic or intellectual insight, the orgasmic experience, certain forms of
athletic fulﬁllment. These and other moments of highest happiness and fulﬁllment I shall
call the peak-experience. [pp. 44–45]
Wuthnow [21] presents empirical data showing that peak experiences are com-
mon to a wide cross-section of people and that peakers (i.e., those who have had
peak experiences) regard their lives as more meaningful, feel more conﬁdent in
themselves, and think a lot more about the meaning and purpose of life. He claims
that his data supports Maslow’s view that peakers are self-actualizing people.
Wuthnow [21] argues that as peak experiences change people’s orientation to culture
and society, the social potential of peak experiences should not be overlooked.
Maslow [7] discusses outcomes of peak experiences as follows:
• A peak experience seems independent from relations, usefulness, and purpose;
• It makes the person forget the world where he is in;
• It makes the person feel he is outside of time and space;
• It makes the person begin to focus on himself without seeing oneself in relation
to others;
• It can change the person’s perception to be relatively ego-transcending and
richer;
• It helps him validate and justify oneself; and,
• It is good and desirable, perfect and complete, and never evil.
Noble’s [22] “transcendence” resonates with peak experiences. She characterizes
transcendent experiences by six qualities such as ineffability (i.e., difﬁcult to
describe), noetic quality (i.e., a heightened sense of reality), transiency (i.e., beyond
time and space limitations), passivity (i.e., no active cause), unity (i.e., a sense of
existence in the universe), and positive effect. She sums it up by saying, “individuals
emerge from the experience with a sense of purpose and meaning in life, signiﬁcant
changes in underlying value systems, and a desire, at times a compulsion, to inte-
grate the experience into every aspect of their daily lives” [p. 602]. Thus, what she
discusses as transcendence seems almost identical to Maslow’s peak experiences.
Maslow [18] clariﬁes that everyone has or can have peak experiences, and
self-actualizing people are those who appreciate such experiences. He calls the
others “frightened by peak experiences and ﬁght them off” as “non-peakers.”
Non-peakers react to peak experiences as threats to their rational, materialistic,
mechanistic philosophy of life. Overall, Maslow regards peak experiences as crucial
to individual mental health, and Hoffman et al. [23] conﬁrm that “peak experiences
are sometimes transformative.”
224
R. Ono

Quantum Change
Miller and C’de Baca [24] researched a vivid, surprising, benevolent, and enduring
personal transformational experience called “quantum change.” Quantum change is:
• vivid because the person cannot deny that something extraordinary happened to
him;
• surprising as it is an inner transformation that occurs without any prior external
event;
• benevolent because the person feels much love through the experience; and
• enduring because the person undergoes pervasive and permanent changes.
Although quantum change might be equated to religious conversion, Miller and
C’de Baca [24] clarify by stating, “… quantum change frequently are not described
in religious terms, nor do they usually lead to committed involvement in organized
religion. Although they overlap, quantum change is a much larger phenomenon
than religious conversion” [p. 7].
In November 1991, a local newspaper in the US placed an article about a
phenomenon similar to quantum change. Through the newspaper, Miller and C’de
Baca called for readers who would be willing to be interviewed about their own
stories on quantum change. They received many telephone calls and were able to
interview ﬁfty-ﬁve quantum changes. Miller and C’de Baca [24] categorize quan-
tum changes into insightful and mystical types (or epiphany). The insightful type is
reacted by “aha” moments and leaves the person stunned or breathless. It suddenly
leads the person to “a new realization, a new way of thinking or understanding.”
The mystical type is more dramatic in the noetic “sense of being acted upon by
something outside and greater than oneself.” Miller and C’de Baca [24] explain,
“perhaps quantum change is some sort of adjustment or problem-solving process
that goes on at a subconscious level, presenting its results only as a ﬁnished pro-
duct” [p. 165]. They regard it as a sudden forward leap in or a developmental jump
to self-actualization. Quantum change seems to be a part of peak experiences, but it
has a distinct feature: it changes the person to a peaker, transforming his
personality.
At the end of preceding Section “Self-actualizing People”, the question, “how
does a leap from deﬁciency-motivated people to self-actualizing people take place
when both types of human beings go through similar developmental stages of
personality?” was posed. One answer to the question seems to be this “quantum
change.” To see the validity of this statement, qualitative data of personalities
transformed by the quantum change are compared and contrasted to the charac-
teristics of deﬁciency-motivated and self-actualization, respectively. Table 10.1
shows that quantum changes worked to eliminate some of the characteristics
inherent to deﬁciency-motivated people. Table 10.2 indicates that personalities
transformed by quantum changes are similar to some of the characteristics of
self-actualizing people.
10
Pseudo-Thinking and Real Thinking
225

Table 10.1 The characteristics of deﬁciency-motivated people altered by the quantum change
Characteristics
Alteration
Prefer a safe, orderly, predictable,
organized world
• Before, I used to schedule my days pretty tightly. Now I
don’t plan ahead on events or scheduling … Some really
interesting things just unfold out of the day. I know to
trust that the day will unfold [p. 54]
Desire reputation or prestige,
status, fame and glory, dominance,
recognition, attention
• My interest in things I was previously interested in has
really dropped off [p. 53]
Feel anxiety in too many
unnecessary situations
• I have a total comfort with what I am supposed to be
doing [p. 55]
• I felt whole, and the wholeness contained every part of
my body. No matter what could happen at that moment
—a hurricane or anything—I would have a sense of
OK-ness, a sense that everything was all right. The entire
universe was all right [p. 62]
• I feel really lucky that I get to live my life like this. I’m
no longer afraid, and that’s a beautiful way to live. It
really is [p. 130]
Do not have the slightest idea of
who they are, what they want, or
what their own opinions are
• I knew that the way I was living was not right—that there
was more, and most important that there was more to me
… That one day, I just became very aware of this. I just
felt this presence of a real self within me … Now, all of a
sudden, I had a sense of myself, that I had a speciﬁc
course to take, and I couldn’t meander any longer [p. 61]
Devote much of their time and
energy in trying to control how
they are seen, evaluated or judged
by others
• I am in no position to judge anything. Just see it as it is,
… I feel a lot more tender toward people, in contrast with
how I isolated myself before [p. 64]
• Now I feel connections with other people. I ﬁnd that
most people have a shell. With some people I can’t see
the real person inside them. The shell’s just too thick
[p. 108]
• I realized that I was now identifying with what it is to be
a real human being instead of with stereotypical
attributes of what a person should be. I remember saying
to myself, before all this happened, that it’s important to
be friendly, gentle, caring, helpful—all those things—but
I was intellectualizing it all. With the change, it seems
like now I feel it inside [p. 161]
Be driven by others rather than
being self-moving,
self-determining individuals
• My motivations and my whole sense of direction in life
have changed. My values changed. What I thought was
important changed. I just completely shifted gears. It’s
given me a sense of purpose and direction I never had
before, a real meaningful purpose in life. I’d always
sought that before, and I’d been searching different
avenues … Yet always there was that kind of restless
searching. Now I feel like I know exactly what I’m
supposed to do [p. 130]
Noted that all descriptions in the ‘Alteration’ column are direct citations from [24]
226
R. Ono

In terms of altered characteristics, many quantum changers felt that their
quantum change wiped off a sense of the heavy burden they used to carry regarding
human relationships and their life. Interestingly, quantum change is not just a
one-time phenomenon. Miller and C’de Baca [24] write, “Many quantum changers
said that it (the experience) had not ended at all but was still continuing, still
ﬂowing. Their experience was not of a completed change but the opening of an
evolution, a new capacity for seeing and understanding, a new link to the universe”
[p. 17]. Such a new worldview helps quantum changers realize that the material
world is a small and unimportant part of a much greater reality. They are grateful
for the gift of this new worldview and are inspired to devote their time signiﬁcantly
to compassionate service for others after that.
Table 10.2 The characteristics of self-actualizing people and gifts from the quantum change
Characteristics
Gift
Accept themselves and their own
nature
• The dam broke, and the tears ﬂowed, and parts of my
soul that had been isolated were reunited … pain is
just the other side of love. They come together as a
package [p. 43]
• There were a lot of tears and a lot of regret for the
things I had done, but it was like a great weight had
been lifted … It was just important to start from that
day and do things differently [p. 114]
Have the locus of evaluation within
him/herself and look less and less to
others for approval or disapproval,
standards to live by, and decisions
and choices
• I feel I can do just about anything I want. I feel that I
control my life; life doesn’t control me anymore.
There’s just this inner strength in me. I knew it was
there, but I had never been able to tap it. Now it’s
there, and it’s getting stronger all the time [p. 60]
Become less defensive and more
open to experiences
• When I learned not to reply on my own directing and
controlling things all the time, life became much
more harmonious [p. 56]
Be called to act on missions in life,
tasks to fulﬁll, and problems outside
themselves, to which they respond
• I see more clear signs of where I can be of help now,
… I’m trying to be aware of where my time can best
be spent in service to others [p. 55]
• I’d like to be more of a living force, to see it as it is
and be able to do something about it (i.e., homeless
people, street kids). I used to think, “There are other
people who do that, those people out there,” and
now I see that I am those people. There is no
designated group of people who are placed on the
earth to do good works. It’s each of us. That’s where
I am right now, realizing that I do have the ability,
that I do have the power, that I do have the response
to do something about it [p. 63]
• I know that there is something I’m destined to do,
that there is a greater purpose for me … I have found
my place on earth … There is something speciﬁc
that I’m here for [p. 63]
Noted that all descriptions in the ‘Gift’ column are direct citations from [24]
10
Pseudo-Thinking and Real Thinking
227

It should be noted that the quantum changers immediately understood the
message given through the quantum change as something ‘true.’ Quantum change
seems to provide the person with truly signiﬁcant knowledge, unique to the person
himself, and has nothing to do with ‘knowledge’ as generally understood. Although
the impacts of quantum change may seem to be more than that of religious con-
version, many subjects sensed the presence of something profoundly great. Miller
and C’de Baca [24] write, “for those who believe in God – as most quantum
changers do, at least after their experience – the hand of God is a plausible way to
understand what happened to them. Although not all of them gave it the name of
God, most people with a mystical quantum change felt the presence of a greater and
profoundly loving being beyond themselves …” [p. 174].
Many quantum changers shifted the object of love from oneself to others by
receiving the message/knowledge given to them by the presence of a greater and
profoundly loving being. One quantum changer reports:
The exciting part of it is that I can honestly say that I’ve had an important experience of
God coming to me, and the most exciting part of it is that message coming through to me
when I wasn’t looking for it. [24, p. 97]
Miller and C’de Baca [24] observe:
Many also felt moved by their experience to acts of compassion and service to others,
usually things that would not even have occurred to them to do before their quantum
change. Some have volunteered their time to visit prisoners in jails. Others have gone into
the streets to feed and care for the homeless. Such acts were rarely from any sense of
requirement. Rather, they were the natural result of experiencing, in essence, that love is
what we are and what we are meant to be. It is our nature. [p. 188]
Three Levels of Existence
Regardless of calling it by the name of God or not, most quantum changers felt that
something much greater than anything they had known of was the initiator of the
quantum change. Such abrupt understanding of the phenomena seems to be closely
related to Chopra’s [25] theory on the nature of the three levels of existence:
i. The ﬁrst level contains all physical things observable in this world, such as
human beings, animals, trees, land, sea, air, oxygen, and microorganisms.
Things in this level have a beginning and an end and are ruled by the principle
of cause and effect;
ii. The second level, called the quantum domain, is formless and is composed of
information and energy (or waves). Einstein’s equation “E = MC2” shows that
a mass (M) of something is proportional to certain energy (E) and explains that
matter (mass) and energy (or waves) are the same, just in a different form.
Thus, all physical things in the ﬁrst level are manifestations of certain infor-
mation and energies in the second level;
228
R. Ono

iii. The third level is pure potential, full of possibilities. This level transcends
space and time and consists of “inﬁnite consciousness” [26]. Inﬁnite con-
sciousness organizes energy soup, creates and structures things, and controls
them. Chopra [26] shows that anything present in this universe (i.e., in the ﬁrst
level) is one materialized possibility emerging from countless possibilities in
the third level governed by inﬁnite consciousness.
There are people in the world who have produced completely new or innovative
things as an output of their creative work. Sometimes it may be difﬁcult even for the
creator himself to trace back logically how the product was ﬁrst conceived. Familiar
exemplars are artists, musicians, and novelists. In terms of creativeness and sur-
prise, the message and knowledge quantum changers receive through quantum
change does not look different from what creative people receive through their
production process. Both are given or gifted to them by something greater and
powerful. Chopra [26] calls this something “inﬁnite consciousness,” and his theory
suggests that they are touched by inﬁnite consciousness. Chopra [26] offers an
analogy of sea waves to describe this, as shown in Fig. 10.6.
Although a single wave appears to emerge suddenly and randomly, it was for-
merly a part of the sea, was created into a speciﬁc form by the sea, is governed by
the sea, and holds the same nature as the sea. What this analogy tells us is that any
object, including visible objects like human beings and nature and invisible ones
like ideas and thoughts, is not an independent existence but an existence inseparable
from inﬁnite consciousness, just like a single wave in the sea can never be separated
from the sea itself. If we begin to perceive ourselves as the wave formed from a
bigger and much more powerful sea and inherit all the natures of the sea, we can
begin to understand the meaning of our existence in this physical world.
Some of the testimonies of quantum changers reported in Miller and C’de Baca’s
[24] Quantum Change clearly point out the relationship between level 1 and 3
discussed above as follows:
The whole thing came together for me, where I realized that there is a universal whole and
through it I’m tied to you and to everything in the universe. I saw that there’s something
much greater than this physical world that we live in, and I started asking, “What is real,
what is the meaning of life, what should I strive for?”. [p. 44]
I became aware that there is so much out there that we aren’t aware of. … I felt the reality of
so many levels of existence, of being able to tap into it. [p. 84]
All of a sudden, out of just absolutely nowhere, I just got a sweeping experience of the
presence of the Holy Spirit, I guess … Not exactly a voice or anything like that, … but it
was sort of saying yes - … I guess what that all comes from is a kind of unasked question
that I’ve had, or an unverbalized question. [p. 94]
I have heard this described as the “drop in the ocean experience,” where the ocean is God
and we feel like a drop in that ocean. I know what truth is. I know that you and I are the
same. [p. 99]
Now, I’m not a religious person, but there’s something about “Thy will.” It’s that there’s
something happening I don’t know about but I can tap into, I can surrender to it. I get in
trouble when I try to impose my will, what I think should happen, on the process. [p. 136]
10
Pseudo-Thinking and Real Thinking
229

Miller and C’de Baca [24] observe that a quantum changer often undergoes a
powerful and direct experience of unity with other people, nature, the universe, and
everything else. The person senses an interconnectedness of all beings, and as a
result, his identity and personality, which have functioned to build the boundaries
around him, become less important. The quantum changer feels that he is in the hands
of a Higher Power and is completely loved. He no longer regards himself as an
isolated being. This shift in understanding one’s place in society occurs because
quantum change reconnects the person directly to all of humanity and life. All
quantum changers say that they acquired a fundamentally different sense of self after
the experience. Miller and C’de Baca [24] conclude that this spirituality then becomes
the lens through which quantum changers perceive everything in this universe.
Conclusion
While quantum changers have no idea why the quantum change happened to them,
they can undoubtedly confess how much they have changed because of the
quantum change. The same situation is observed in self-actualizing people who
have gone through peak experiences. Quantum change and peak experience both
transform the individual’s personality to become rooted in the real self (i.e., psychic
ﬁngerprint). As a result, it is argued that his thinking is transformed to become real
thinking. On the other hand, the thinking of deﬁciency-motivated people remains
pseudo-thinking as they live with their pseudo-self and their real self is discon-
nected. Some major distinct differences between pseudo-thinking and real thinking
are presented in Table 10.3.
The belief that he ought to ﬁgure everything out and know all the answers to
everything pushes him to think that it is inevitable to work hard and live com-
petitively to establish and sustain one’s position in this world. The lack of the
concept of inﬁnite consciousness or a higher existence or a greater existence leads
to the belief that he is the only entity that must care for everything concerning
himself. Thus, since the goal has everything to do with ‘becoming,’ ‘how’ becomes
the main theme in pseudo-thinking.
Fig. 10.6 Sea waves as an analogy of the three levels of existence
230
R. Ono

Self-actualizing people, on the other hand, understand that such a belief was just
an assumption built in the process of personality development and that the real
world where he is placed is much bigger than what he believed it to be. By ﬁnding
their real self, they become able to tap into the source of rich energy. Thus, real
thinking of self-actualizing people stems from the whole (e.g., inﬁnite conscious-
ness, a higher/greater existence) to which one belongs. All truly signiﬁcant mes-
sages and knowledge they receive are never the results of their own conscious,
logical thinking. It is thus also considered that pseudo-thinking is very personal
thinking, and real thinking is universal thinking.
The preceding discussions argue that peak experiences and quantum changes can
transform a deﬁciency-motivated person into a self-actualizing person. However, no
research has found how to bring about a peak experience and/or quantum change
upon an individual’s will because their occurrence is always beyond human power
and control. They may be caused to happen by the hands of a Higher Power or
inﬁnite consciousness. Given this reality, a question will then arise: “Is there any
way for people who have not yet become self-actualized to tap into real thinking?”
One key characteristic of self-actualizing people is the lack of a sense of deﬁciency,
which promotes self-actualizing people to appreciate everything available for them.
This includes nature, people, community, and many other sorts of physical objects, as
well as everything invisible such as emotion, concepts, knowledge, ability, and
condition. Self-actualizing people would no longer take all these things for granted.
Many quantum changers are still grateful for what happened to them [27].
Gratefulness can eradicate fear and frustration that control pseudo-thinking.
Figure 10.5 shows self-actualizing people standing on what has been provided for
them and trying to grow further. Self-actualizing people know that their existence is
being sustained by many things and consider them gifts to their life. They
Table 10.3 Characteristics of pseudo-thinking and real thinking
Criteria
Pseudo-thinking
Real thinking
Analogy
A defender in a holea
A wave in the seab
Psychic ﬁngerprint (the real self)
Disconnected
Connected/reconnected
Concept of inﬁnite consciousness
or a higher/greater existence
NA
Intuitively understood
Mask (the socialized self)
Inevitable
NA
Goal
To persuade others that he/she is
who the mask represents
To be oneself and
continue to grow
Other people
Whom one takes advantage of
Whom one serves
Everything in the world
What one takes advantage of
What one treasures
Energy
Generate for oneself
Receive
Key emotion
Fearful, frustrated, lonely
Grateful, conﬁdent,
empowered
Meaning of life
Uncertain
Surely to love oneself
as well as others
aRefers to Fig. 10.2
bRefers to Figs. 10.5 and 10.6
10
Pseudo-Thinking and Real Thinking
231

intuitively understand that all those gifts come from a higher existence or greater
existence. Such understanding forms the foundation of their values, attitudes,
beliefs, actions, emotions, and thoughts.
There is an experiment in which people are asked to answer whether the glass in
front of them, with water ﬁlling exactly 50% of its volume, is half empty or half full.
Deﬁciency-motivated people are quick to answer the words “half empty,” whereas
self-actualizing people will say “it is ﬁlled up halfway.” How they perceive what stands
before them leads each of them to the two differing conclusions. Thus, for
deﬁciency-motivated people to tap into real thinking, it is suggested that they stop
identifying whatever they consider being deﬁcient as there is no end to such identiﬁ-
cation and start appreciating everything they see around them. “Thank you” is the words
that every visitor/traveler going to a foreign country never forget to learn, and therefore,
it is the baseline of any thinking in any culture. Being grateful is such an important and
inherent nature of human beings. When this attitude is applied, an individual will begin
to understand what real thinking truly is and how it will beneﬁt him.
Pseudo-thinking pushes people to ﬁnd an answer to the question “Who am I?” Real
thinking is just there to free you from much burden and make you happier.
Ryota Ono
Core Messages
• Most are deﬁciency-motivated people who conceal the real self and nurture
an idealized mask.
• Their thinking is pseudo, as much of it is devoted just to protecting the
self-created mask.
• They perceive the world only from the vantage point of their interests and
use others, society, and the world for their ends.
• The thinking of self-actualizing people, who live with the real self, is
called real thinking.
• They have a contributory mindset to seek improvement for the well-being
of the world.
• Peak Experiences and Quantum Changes can change the individual’s
thinking from pseudo to real.
Acknowledgements I wish to express my appreciation to Professor Jenifer S. Winter of the
School of Communications in the College of Social Sciences for her hospitality during my sab-
batical stay at the University of Hawaii at Manoa.
232
R. Ono

References
1. Kegan R, Lahey LL (2016) An everyone culture: becoming a deliberately developmental
organization. Harvard Business Review Press, Boston, MA
2. Kegan R, Lahey LL (2009) Immunity to change: how to overcome it and unlock potential in
yourself and your organization. Harvard Business Press, Boston, MA
3. Stone H, Stone SL (1989) Embracing our selves: the voice dialogue manual. New World
Library, Novato, CA
4. Maslow AH (2014) Toward a psychology of being. Sublime Books, Floyd, VA
5. Maslow AH (1970) Motivation and personality. Harper & Row, NY
6. Maslow AH (1963) The need to know and the fear of knowing. J Gen Psychol 68:111–125
7. Maslow AH (1959) Cognition of being in the peak experiences. J Genet Psychol 94:43–66
8. Rogers CR (1961) On becoming a person: a therapist’s view of psychotherapy. Houghton
Mifﬂin, Boston, MA
9. Rogers CR (1964) Toward a modern approach to values: the valuing process in the mature
person. J Abnorm Soc Psychol 68(2):160–167
10. Goffman E (1959) The presentation of self in everyday life. Doubleday Anchor Books,
Garden City, NY
11. Branaman A (1997) Goffman’s social theory. In: Lemert C, Branaman A (eds) The Goffman
reader. Blackwell Publishers Inc, Malden, MA, pp xlv–lxxxii
12. Goffman E (1974) Frame analysis: an essay on the organization of experience. Harvard
University, Cambridge, MA
13. Rowan J (1983) The real self and mystical experiences. J Humanist Psychol 23(2):9–27
14. Horney K (1950) Neurosis and human growth: the struggle toward self-realization. Norton,
New York
15. D’Souza J, Gurin M (2016) Commentary: the universal signiﬁcance of Maslow’s concept of
self-actualization. Humanist Psychol 44(2):210–1214
16. O’Connor D, Yballe L (2007) Maslow revisited: constructing a road map of human nature.
J Manag Educ 31(6):738–756
17. Hoffman E (2017) The social world of self-actualizing people: reﬂections by Maslow’s
biographer. J Humanist Psychol 7:1–26
18. Maslow AH (1964) Religions, values and peak-experiences. Ohio State University Press,
Columbus, OH
19. Bauer JJ, Schwab JR, McAdams DP (2011) Self-actualizing: where ego development ﬁnally
feels good? Humanist Psychol 39:121–136
20. McClain EW, Andrews HB (1969) Some personality correlates of peak experiences—a study
in self-actualization. J Clin Psychol 25(1):36–38
21. Wuthnow R (1978) Peak experiences: some empirical tests. J Humanist Psychol 18(3):59–75
22. Noble KD (1987) Psychological health and the experience of transcendence. Couns Psychol
15(4):601–614
23. Hoffman E, Kaneshiro S, Compton WC (2012) Peak-experiences among American midlife.
J Humanist Psychol 52(4):479–503
24. Miller WR, C’de Baca J (2001) Quantum change: when epiphanies and sudden insights
transform ordinary lives. The Guilford Press, New York
25. Chopra D (2003) The spontaneous fulﬁllment of desire: harnessing the inﬁnite power of
coincidence. Three Rivers Press, New York
26. Chopra D (2006) Power freedom and grace: living from the source of lasting happiness.
Amber-Allen Publishing, San Rafael, CA
27. C’de Baca J, Wilbourne P (2004) Quantum change: ten years later. J Clin Psychol 60:531–
541
10
Pseudo-Thinking and Real Thinking
233

Ryota Ono is a Professor in the Department of Business
Administration at Aichi University, Japan. He managed various
development projects in developing countries as a staff member of
the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) for nine years.
His research focuses on telecommunication policy and planning in
developing countries, information and communication conver-
gence, images of the future of young generations, future planning,
and human thinking. He taught and researched at the University of
Hawai’i at Mānoa and at Nanyang Technological University in
Singapore. He was a visiting fellow at Queensland University of
Technology, Australia, and a visiting researcher at the University
of Hawai’i at Mānoa. He received the interdisciplinary Ph.D. in
Communication and Information Sciences from the University of
Hawai’i at Mānoa and the MS in Telecommunication from the
University of Colorado at Boulder. He received the BS from the
University of Electro-Communications in Japan. Among his
publications are Electronic Communication Convergence: Policy
Challenges in Asia (2000), Knowing and Challenging Yourself
(2005), Tips to Change the Future (2010), and The Future Internet:
Alternative Visions (2015).
234
R. Ono

11
Three Paradoxes of Thought: Thought
Power Measured
Tamás Lajtner
“You can never cross the ocean unless you have the courage to
lose sight of the shore.”
Christopher Columbus
Summary
(i) “your thoughts change even when they do not change;” (ii) “if you are
thinking today what you thought yesterday, you are already thinking something
else;” and (iii) “in order to remain in one place, you should run” are three
paradoxes of thought. To understand these paradoxes, we have to understand
what thought is. Thought is force. This force is a real force that makes impacts
on living and inanimate (non-living): thought force creates the brain’s
electromagnetic signals. The existence of thought force can be captured by
appropriate mechanical and electronic devices, where thought power and energy
can also be measured. This study presents some thought power and energy
values measured by the ﬁrst electric thought power meter in the world. Knowing
these values, by using, for example, this device, it is possible to control objects
like a computer, switch on the wall, etc., by thought force. Mainstream science
refuses to accept the existence of thought force. In the second part of the study, a
short physics explanation describes how thought force works. This physics
necessarily goes beyond mainstream physics, giving a new deﬁnition of time and
space. Thought force is in a given size range. Like all forces, thought force also
T. Lajtner (&)
LM Gauge and Software, Inc., Budapest, Hungary
e-mail: info@lajtnermachine.com
T. Lajtner
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc and Education Research Network
(USERN), Budapest, Hungary
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh (eds.), Thinking, Integrated Science 7,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04075-7_11
235

creates its own counterforce. The counterforce and other forces in this size range
can be created by living and inanimate. Saying this, thought force can be created
with and even without brains. This new recognition causes the three paradoxes
of thought.
Cover © Dr. Tamás Lajtner
From Head © Freshidea. Fotolia. Edited
© Dr. Tamás Lajtner All rights reserved 2020
Keywords
Electronic thought force sensor  Paper wheel  Space  Submarine  Thought 
Thought force  Thought power  Thought power meter  Time
QR Code
Scanning the QR code directs you to the word cloud of the chapter that is made
up of the words we discussed throughout the whole book in relation to the chapter’s
keyword, which is intentionally not included in the word cloud. Find the keyword
236
T. Lajtner

and put it in place in the puzzle according to the clues provided in Chap. 36. The
mystery hidden in the puzzle is the quote of THINKING: Bioengineering of Science
and Art.
Introduction
“According to the current, widespread understanding, measurable thoughts (or their
effects) are the brain’s electric/electromagnetic signals. These signals can be
demonstrated in several ways” [1]. The devices measure either the brain’s elec-
tromagnetic activity or the electromagnetic activity of any contrast agents.
As it is well-known, neurons are the basic elements of the brain. Each neuron has
a negative electrical charge. If ions1 with positive charges enter neurons, they will
be discharged. Modern brain research can measure the discharges of neurons. These
measured values are analyzed, and the result is compared with the corresponding
data in a database. The measured signal has a “thought pair” in the database,
deﬁned by a series of earlier experiments. The database and the measured electrical
signals of the brain together make the thoughts identiﬁable and measurable. Using
electroencephalography (EEG) and a computer that can convert the electric signals
of the brain into such electric signals that an electric sensor “understands,” it is
possible to run any devices by electric signals of the brain, i.e., thoughts.
How to measure the brain’s electric signals? We have many instruments [2] that
can measure these signals. One of these instruments is the EEG [3]. The EEG’s
output varies by changes in the brain’s electric signals, i.e., thoughts. As a result,
the measurable (effects of) thought and the brain’s electric (electromagnetic) signals
have been synonymous. “Since the brain is in the head, thoughts are also supposed
to be in the head. Thought can, indeed, leave one’s brain. EEG provides evidence of
this since it records the thought data outside the head along with the skull” [1].
Nowadays, we can do more than just read information out of the brain. We can
put information in the brain. The method that can write in the brain is called
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) [4]. TMS can write information into the
brain through the skull. The brain can understand signals sent by TMS. On the other
hand, the brain cannot recognize that these magnetic signals are not the brain’s own
signals. The brain uses these signals as its own product.
Using EEG and TMS, a new communication method between two people, that
is, between two brains, can be built. We can call this communication a kind of
“telepathy” based on computers and electromagnetic waves. In Fig. 11.1, Sanyi
“senses” Béla’s thoughts. Béla’s thought read by EEG, sent via the Internet, and
written by TMS, will be Sanyi’s own thoughts [5].
1 In the given case an ion is an atom that has a net (+) electrical charge e.g. potassium+ ion,
sodium+ ion.
11
Three Paradoxes of Thought: Thought Power Measured
237

It seems to be immaterial who or what has created these signals. If there is an
appropriate signal in the brain, the brain will sense it as thought. Here information
ﬂows in one direction: from Béla to Sanyi. Sanyi cannot send data to Béla; it is
one-way communication. This communication does not work without using devices
EEG and TMS connected to computers (Fig. 11.1). This communication works if
Béla and Sanyi are in the same room or if Béla is in Europe and Sanyi is in the USA
or even on the Moon. The transmission of electromagnetic waves is a well-known
technology. What is revolutionary new is about reading information from the brain
and writing it in the brain. If Béla’s brain’s signals are sent to Sanyi’s, and this
information will appear as Sanyi’s thought, we can accept it: brain signals sent from
human to human. It is also possible that Béla’s thoughts are stored in a computer,
and these stored thoughts will be sent to Sanyi after Béla’s death. It sounds hor-
rifying, but it works. Sanyi will not be able to detect when these signals were
created. His brain uses these signals when it receives them. The next possible step is
that Sanyi receives electromagnetic signals created by a computer; see Fig. 11.2.
Sanyi’s brain will not be able to detect who or what has created this signal. The
thoughts that will appear in Sanyi’s brain are produced by a non-living inanimate
thing [7]. Those “thoughts” are born from electromagnetic signals that are not
created by the living brain.
Fig. 11.1 Using computers, two brains communicate. The computers are connected with EEG
and TMS [6]. Model. Adapted from [7] and modiﬁed under a Credit: © T. Lajtner
238
T. Lajtner

Let me summarize those mentioned above:
• Human brains create electric signals;
• These signals can be led into other human brains (e.g., Sanyi’s brain);
• The brain (of Sanyi) will not make a difference between its own electric signals
or made by other brains; and
• The brain accepts electric signals even if these signals are not created by a
human brain, i.e., made by an inanimate (non-living) thing, for example, by a
computer.
Our brain can create and receive thoughts. Is it unnecessary to be able to receive
thoughts if nothing sends thoughts, i.e., there must be something in nature that
sends thoughts. As mentioned above, we saw that our brains are “uniﬁed” because
our brains can receive thoughts from others. This “uniﬁed” brain is useless, and it
cannot exist if brains are not connected. There must be a close connection between
human brains. So, the conclusion is evident: our brains are also able to send
thoughts.
What can we conclude from being aware of the possibility that a computer can
generate thoughts in human brains? We can say the brain must have an additional
attribute. Our brains can sense signals that can be converted into thoughts: indeed,
our brains can create, receive, and send thoughts.
Fig. 11.2 Computer-run human being. Adapted from [7] under a Credit: © T. Lajtner
11
Three Paradoxes of Thought: Thought Power Measured
239

Thought Is an Unknown Force
Thought cannot be the brain’s electromagnetic signals because these are created by
the meeting of positively charged ions and negatively charged neurons. Neurons do
not move, while ions do. What drives the positively charged ions? It is obvious that
the streams of the ions in the brain are generated by something. This something
must have existed earlier than the electromagnetic signals because it creates the
electromagnetic signals. What is this something? This something is the thought.
The electric signals of the brain are simply its indicators. What is thought? How
can thought move ions in our brains? Ions are real objects with mass. If thought can
move real objects, it means that thought has force. Where is this force? Is it in the
brain or out of the brain? Can we measure thought force without studying the
operation of the brain? Yes, we can measure its effects on real objects. Can we
measure these effects far from the head? Yes, we can. Does thought force use one of
the four known fundamental interactions (electromagnetic force, weak force, strong
interaction, gravity)? No, it does not, according to the current research related to, for
example, the study group of Princeton Engineering Anomalies Research (PEAR).
Mindpower Experiments at Princeton University (USA)
PEAR [8] studied the “power of the mind.” The power of the mind is not the
electromagnetic force of the brain. The researchers wanted to go deeper and aimed
to ﬁnd the phenomena behind electromagnetism. “PEAR employed electronic
random event generators (REG) to explore the ability of the mind” [1]. Now, there
are many experiments in the world that use REG-like devices. REG is an electronic
device that shows the “inﬂuence of mind” on the device. The thought of a human
being tried to change the normal (Gaussian) distribution that the device creates. The
power of the mind can be shown if the normal distribution changes. At the end of
the experiment, you have two functions: the theoretical one and the measured one.
If the two functions are different, then the power of the mind appears in this
difference. To calculate and understand the difference, a statistical method is needed
to analyze all statistical values, like variance, mean, median, etc.
There was a very small difference between a theoretical distribution and the
values measured by PEAR. “In other words, PEAR’s experiments were able to
show the “inﬂuence of the mind” (thought force) on physical systems, but the
results were not convincing enough.
The effect of thought occurs accidentally. The inﬂuence of thought was unpre-
dictable and incalculable. The effect works “mysteriously,” that is, the electric/
electromagnetic signals of the brain cannot explain the results, and there is no theory
to explain the phenomenon. PEAR has ceased to exist, but the device REG still
exists at Psyleron, selling REGs online. Psyleron and presumably also Princeton
University admit [9, 10] that they do not understand the working method of mind
power (thought force), and no theory until now has been able at all to describe it” [1].
240
T. Lajtner

PEAR was partly successful and partly controversial. It proved the existence of
the power of the mind (force of thought). On the other hand, the device was a
“black box,” and there was no explanation for how and why thought inﬂuenced the
device. REG was able to indicate the mind power (thought force). PEAR was not
successful since it could not measure this mysterious power of thought, and the
statistical method PEAR used did not have a not too impressive statistical conﬁ-
dence level.
After these semi-convincing results, the nature of thought has not been identi-
ﬁed, although we know now that thought is more than just the electric signal of the
brain. Thought force can affect objects that are outside our brains. Note here
thought power and thought force seem to be synonyms, but they are not. Force and
power are two different categories in physics. Force is a push or a pull phenomenon
that changes the motion of an object. Power is the amount of energy that is
transferred per one-time unit. Energy is the cause of any changes; it is the capacity
to cause movement or heat.2
Thought Changes the Behavior of Electrical Components
The assumption in the background of the following process is simple: thought has
force if thought can move and push atoms (ions). This force is likely to move
electrons with a much smaller mass than the mass of ions (atoms). For example,
sodium (Na) has an atomic weight of approximately 23. This means that a single
atom of sodium weighs 23 atomic mass units. The invariant mass of an electron is
approximately 5.5  10−4 atomic mass units. The mass of sodium ions is about
40,000 times bigger than the mass of the electron. And the thought can move many
ions, so the thought must also be able to move many electrons. The energy of
moving electrons in a circuit can be measured. This method could prove the
existence of thought force. This is a simple theory. But how can this theory be
veriﬁed; how can this be proven? If we cannot build an electrical circuit where
electrons are run by thought force, the above-mentioned remain sophistry.
Lajtner’s thought force sensor is the ﬁrst thought force sensor in the world [11].
It shows that thought force can change current and voltage in the appropriate
electrical circuits. These results have revolutionary outcomes. It is possible to build
machines that can be run by thought force without using “brain-reading” devices.
The following are three different experiments on thought force, a real phenomenon.
The magnitude of thought force is really impressive. How does thought force work
if thought force is not any of our four known fundamental interactions? To ﬁnd the
answer, we have to know some surprising facts. Based on these facts, an outline of
a physical theory of thought force can already be made.
2 In the International System of Units (SI), the unit of force is the newton (N). 1 N = 1 kg  (1
m/1 s2).
In SI, the unit of power is the watt (W). 1 W = 1 N  (1 m/1 s) or 1 W = 1 J/1 s.
In SI, the unit of energy is the joule (J). 1 J = 1 N  1 m.
11
Three Paradoxes of Thought: Thought Power Measured
241

Three Simple Experiments on Thought Force
The following experiments make thought force “visible.” Each kind of experiment
is captured by video, and each one can be watched here [12]. The numerical values
given in the following part come from experiments visible on www.lajtner.com or
from earlier experiments that are no longer visible on the Internet but in Lajtner’s
private collection.
Presentation Using Lajtner’s Thought Power Meter
To build an electrical thought power meter, we have to use electrical components
that are “thought-sensitive and thought-ﬂexible.” “Thought-ﬂexible circuits” can be
built of them. The main characteristic of these circuits is that they can change their
electrical properties under the inﬂuence of thought force. When the effect of the
force of thought ceases, they return to their basic state. This is the way how the ﬁrst
thought force sensor in the world works. Does it reliably show thought force? What
is more, using a thought force sensor in an appropriate electrical circuit, i.e., in a
thought power meter, we can measure the thought power by measuring the changed
electrical power in the circuit DP. DP can be given by changing current DI and
voltage DU; look at Eq. 11.1:
DP ¼ DU  DI ðWatt ¼ Volt  AmpereÞ
ð11:1Þ
The changed electric power DP is caused by thought power; therefore, thought
power is equal to DP—we know the power of thought. Let us see a diagram
showing the thought power measured during the presentation on thought force. This
presentation was more than just a measurement. Here the force of thought was also
utilized. During the presentation, the computer turned on a lamp, turned it off,
started a coffee maker, and brewed a coffee. The computer was controlled by
thought force; see Fig. 11.3. This presentation introduced the ﬁrst-ever thought
force-run computer in the world (for more details; see [10]).
The essence of this presentation is that it clearly shows that thought force exists
and works. The red dots show the values of thought power. The two wooden boxes
(under the monitor) contain the thought force sensor and the thought power meter
that measure the power of thought. The thought power meter is connected to a
computer. It makes it possible to control different devices like lamps, coffee
machines, or anything else. The distance between head and sensor can be long,
even ﬁve meters or more.
Figure 11.4 shows many interesting facts. Most surprising is that thought force,
power, and energy can be made “visible,” i.e., thought force can be measured
(indirectly). In Fig. 11.4a, a very important fact becomes apparent. Thought power
is able to move electrons, causing changes in current and voltage in an electrical
device in the thought force sensor. The current changes because of the conscious
concentration of the given person, who increases his thought force and thought
242
T. Lajtner

power. The changes of thought power are measurable with the thought power
meter. Given that thought force can create electromagnetic force moving electrons,
the mystery of the brain’s electricity is solved. In the brain, thought force moves
ions. If ions are moved by thought force, then the force of thought must be created
before the electric waves. In other words, thought exists before the electric signals
happen to the brain.
Ions are much heavier than electrons. Is thought force also able to move bigger
objects than atoms? Yes, thought force can move relatively large objects, e.g.,
molecules or even a paper wheel.
The rise of the curve caused by the concentration of a human being is clearly
visible. With concentration, it is possible to increase the force of thought. Thought
force can be consciously changed. Figure 11.4a also shows an extremely remark-
able phenomenon. The effect of thought force (power) lasts almost two times longer
than the concentration itself. Figure 11.4b contains the ratio of thought energy. It
can be calculated by calculating the area under the original curve or as a deﬁnite
integral of a ﬁtted curve. In Fig. 11.4b, a simple polynomial regression curve is
ﬁtted, degree = 2. The amount of thought energy is much larger than the energy of
the brain’s electromagnetic waves. How can thought force control different devices?
Very simply: we deﬁne different action lines (e.g., AL1, AL2) before the concen-
trated thinking. If the value of the power of thought is over the AL1 during the
Fig. 11.3 Though power measured by a ﬁrst thought power meter in the world. Thought force
runs lamp and coffee machine. The person concentrates and increases his thought force and power.
Adapted from [12] under a Credit: © T. Lajtner
11
Three Paradoxes of Thought: Thought Power Measured
243

concentration, then action1 (A1) appears, e.g., the lamp will be on. A1 occurs only
in the ﬁrst case when the power curve ﬁrst becomes larger than AL1. When the red
(gray in print) point is the ﬁrst time over the AL2, then action2 (A2) comes, e.g., the
lamp will be off. There were three action lines and three actions in the given
presentation pictured in Fig. 11.5.
Of course, there are different types of though force sensors. The sensor used here
is a relatively slow device. There are also faster sensors that give results in a matter
of seconds. Such fast sensors can be built into almost every device, e.g., mobile
Fig. 11.4 Thought power Pm and thought energy measured. The time is given in half a second.
The changes of thought power measured are displayed here. The ratio R(i) on the y-axis is
calculated as follows: R(i) = Pm(i)/Pm(0), where i means half a second and i = 0, 1, 2, …, 378. The
chart’s y-axis does not start at zero because thought power existed before the concentration, and its
value is not measured. The ﬁgure highlights a wavelike feature of thought power. This waving
characteristic appears in every measurement. The reason for it can be either some noise or thought
force simply works that way. Adapted from lajtner.com under a Credit: © T. Lajtner
Fig. 11.5 How to control devices using thought force? Using actions lines (AL1–AL3) and
actions (A1–A3). The time is given in half a second. Adapted from [12] under a Credit: © T.
Lajtner
244
T. Lajtner

phones or electric switches on the wall. On the other hand, this “slowly” sensor is
useful for everyone who wants to know how his own thought force works and how
to train it. Let us summarize this small chapter. We know that thought force is able
to move electrons in the thought force sensor, i.e., thought force is able to change
the current and voltage in an appropriate environment, e.g., in a “thought-ﬂexible
circuit.” Thought force exists. Now we have to deﬁne what thought force is, where
it is and how it works. To understand these important things, let us choose a
different device—a small submarine in a glass of water.
The Submarine Presentation
Here thought force brings a small submarine to the surface of the water. The
distance between the head and the submarine can be long, even ﬁve meters or more.
60–65% of the human body and 90–95% of the brain are made of water. Therefore,
the submarine experiment shown in Fig. 11.6 is of paramount importance to us. If
thought force can move the water in a glass, it can move the water in our body.
Thoughts can heal or create new thoughts in the brain of a third person. Every force
has its counterforce, so does thought force too. In many cases, this counterforce is
hardly to sense consciously in the human brain, e.g., in most cases, it is impossible
to sense the motions of electrons in the electric circuit. Using only electrical cir-
cuits, the counterforce, the essence of working thought, remains a mystery. We
cannot understand the working method of thought refusing our human experience
on the thought force-created counterforce. In the submarine case, the counterforce
of thought force is expressly strong; it is well perceptible to the brain—only the
existing counterforce and the human reports on its existence make it possible to
understand the way thought force works. What do transmit thought force and its
counterforce? A new, unknown particle? The existence of an unknown particle is
not very likely. If there is no particle, what is it? Some kind of wave? Yes, waves
seem to be the appropriate solution. But what kind of waves?
Fig. 11.6 Thought force elevates the submarine. The motion of the submarine is vertical. The
energy caused by thought is also calculable in a submarine because we know every detail of the
experiment. Adapted from [12] under a Credit: © T. Lajtner
11
Three Paradoxes of Thought: Thought Power Measured
245

The Paper Wheel Presentation
In this experiment, there is a paper wheel that can rotate (Fig. 11.7). Its motion is
horizontal. During the experiment, the wheel was at rest, and then it started rotating
(50 s). In the ﬁrst few seconds, we calculated with uniform acceleration. In the
following time, the velocity of rotation did not change signiﬁcantly. “The average
thought energy of a seemingly ordinary person can be expressed as Erot = 1.62
10−11 J” [1]. It is about such a tiny amount of energy that Fig. 11.8 shows. A
butterﬂy hardly moves its wings.
Fig. 11.7 Paper wheel rotated by thought force. More details on this experiment can be found in
[12]. Adapted from [12] under a Credit: © T. Lajtner
Fig. 11.8 A butterﬂy hardly moves its wings Adapted from [7] under a Credit Butterﬂy © T.
Lajtner
246
T. Lajtner

“Erot is a very small amount, but not small enough. As mentioned above,
measurable thought is considered to be the brain’s electromagnetic signals. The
brain radiates electric waves in a spectrum of 0.01–800 Hz (Hz = 1/s) [13, 14].
These waves do not have perfect sine or cosine functions” [1]. So, if we use sine
functions to calculate their energy, we will have some errors in our calculation. In
this case, this error is negligible now.
“Our brain [15] has about a hundred billion (1011) neurons. The energy that turns
the paper wheel is Erot = 1.62  10−11 J. This energy must be created by neurons.
Suppose every neuron worked exclusively on rotating the paper wheel (which is, of
course, impossible). In that case, every neuron should produce a big average energy
value and transmit this energy to the wheel. Sending this kind of energy from the
brain to the wheel presupposes electromagnetic waves. According to Planck’s law”
[1] displayed in Eq. 11.2:
E ¼ h  f:
ð11:2Þ
Here E is energy, f is the frequency of the particle, and h is the Planck constant
[16–18]. “Thus, the average frequency of electromagnetic waves is in the spectrum
of microwaves [19]. There is no such thing as microwave radiation of the brain. To
go one step further, this wave has to be generated by every neuron for 50 s. This is
an impossible result. That is, the paper wheel cannot be rotated by the
electric/electromagnetic signals of the brain. Does that mean that the paper wheel
cannot be rotated by thought? No, because that is what occurred; the wheel rotated.
So, what can we conclude?” [1]. The rotation of a paper wheel is an electromagnetic
interaction, too. Thought force can generate electromagnetic force and move real
objects.
Thought Is Force
“A paper wheel is nothing other than a simple thing that can be rotated by force.
Without force, it cannot start rotating at all. It rotates if a force acts upon it. What do
we measure using a rotating paper wheel? The paper wheel reveals one’s thought in
its true form. A human being only has to think “Go,” so the thought is “Go,” and
the paper wheel “goes” (i.e., rotates). The computer that analyzes the rotation of the
paper wheel displays a big “Go” (Fig. 11.9). If humans think “Stop,” the thought is
“Stop,” and the paper wheel “stops.” The computer displays the word “Stop.”
Saying this, the thoughts “Go” and “Stop” are visible. These forces are not the
effects of the thought; they are thoughts. We measured the thought itself and
thought itself is force” [1].
11
Three Paradoxes of Thought: Thought Power Measured
247

How Does the Accelerating Force of Thought Come
into Being?
“What is thought force? Let us think of it this way: from a state of rest, the wheel
begins rotating, the submarine starts to lift off because the force of acceleration
works upon it. According to Newton’s Second Law of Motion [20], the force of
acceleration F is given in Eq. 11.3.
F ¼ m  s=t2


;
ð11:3Þ
where s represents spatial distance, t time, and m mass of the object. Newton’s
Second Law of Motion makes it possible to understand the force of acceleration and
its factors. Let us see the wheel. Force F does not exist if the wheel remains at rest,
s = 0 and t = 0. F comes into existence and rotates the wheel when s > 0 and t > 0,
that is thought changes time and space” [1]. How?
To answer the question, Lajtner’s Space-Matter Theory will be used. This theory
is not a fully developed theory; it is actually a new framework. Here more old
axioms are replaced with new axioms. The space-matter framework gives new
deﬁnitions of time, space, and matter. Based on the space-matter framework, it is
possible to build a new physics theory that can lead into new directions.
A Touch of Physics: Wave of Space
Space Waves
We know from quantum mechanics that particles of matter are in constant vibration.
It is a physical impossibility for the matter to contact space without matter’s
vibrations having an effect on space. Based on the Casimir Effect [21] and other
physical phenomena, we state that space exists in waves and vibrations. Can we
describe a model of waving space? Yes, by using Lajtner’s space-matter framework.
Fig. 11.9 The computer
shows thought “Go”. Adapted
from [7] under a Credit: © T.
Lajtner
248
T. Lajtner

How to Picture Space Waves?
We use Einstein’s idea [22–28] in an unusual way to calculate space waves.
According to his idea, gravity depends not only on mass density but also on other
factors. Newton used in his law of gravity the density of mass and no other attri-
butes of mass. Einstein used more than one attribute in his gravity model, where
gravity is expressed as the curvature of spacetime. According to general relativity,
the curvature of spacetime depends on sixteen attributes of matter, including mass
density, energy density, energy-ﬂux density, pulse current density, impulse current
density, and various pressures and ﬂuxes. In the space-matter framework, there is
no spacetime, only space and time. Applying these sixteen attributes to our unusual
way, we have sixteen attributes that modify space and time. In the space-matter
framework, every attribute of matter has a print in space as a modiﬁed space wave.
Therefore, it is possible to calculate with more than one space wave or just with
their sum, but here only the space wave created by mass density is shown in
Fig. 11.10 because it is the simplest model.
If an observer can measure the wavelengths of a space wave, he would ﬁnd the
shortest wavelengths of space waves if the mass is at rest—that is, mass does not
move in the given inertial frame of reference. An inertial frame of reference is
where there is no acceleration. The motion of an inertial frame of reference has
constant velocity in a straight line. If we stand motionless, we are moving at
constant zero velocity. According to modern physics, only an object with mass can
have an inertial frame of reference [29]. If mass moves in the given inertial frame of
reference (or with the whole inertial frame of reference), the wavelength of space
wave made by moving mass is longer; faster or bigger masses create longer
wavelengths.
Space Waves Are Connections Between Masses (Matter)
Space waves are connections between masses (matter). This is why gravity exists
between masses. “Thus, among bodies experiencing gravity, the wavelength of
Fig. 11.10 Space wave created by mass and x and y are spatial distances. The wavelength is the
length of one wave period—a two-dimensional model, not proportional
11
Three Paradoxes of Thought: Thought Power Measured
249

space waves increases. That is, the space “pressure” between the bodies decreases.
The big (orange) mass in Fig. 11.12 makes the wavelength of space waves longer
on the left side of the small (blue) mass. On the other side of the small mass, the
wavelength of space waves is shorter” [1]. The shorter wavelength means greater
frequency, e.g., more hits from the right than from the left. The difference between
the densities of the hits (i.e., forces) moves the mass forward. If the small mass
starts to move, it will increase the wavelengths of space waves between the masses.
The mass will accelerate, and the wavelengths will be longer; see Fig. 11.11. The
small object accelerates further, and that is why there is the gravitational acceler-
ation. The space wave (set of space waves) between the two objects can be seen as a
communication channel. Space waves make it possible that both objects detect all
movements of the other object, i.e., every action creates a reaction. This is a system
with feedback.
Why Is the Speed of Light Constant?
It is a simple question, but physics has not answered it yet. Instead of an answer,
there is a law: the speed of light c is constant in a vacuum: c = 299,792,458 m/s.
But how can the speed of light be constant from the viewpoint of masses in every
(inertial) frame of reference? The speed of light can only be constant if the light is
in the given frame of reference. How can it be? It can happen by using space waves
created by the inertial frame of reference. According to space-matter framework,
space waves are part of the frames of reference. Light travels on space waves
created by mass: it does not change the wavelengths of space waves but uses space
waves as reference waves. A longer space wave causes a longer light wave in the
case of the same light (Fig. 11.13), and bigger gravity means longer wavelengths of
space waves. The result is the gravitational redshift of light.
Light travels on space waves generated by mass. Space is written in capital S
means space that masses change. We know light does not create gravity in our
space; that is, light does not change the wavelength of space waves. But the matter
has a copy in space, and light is matter; light must have a copy in its space. Saying
this, light has gravity in a different space, not in the space of masses. The space of
Fig. 11.11 The space waves are longer if the object is faster. Model, not proportional. Adapted
from [29] under a Credit: © T. Lajtner
250
T. Lajtner

light, i.e., space wave generated by mass, is part of the frame of reference of mass; it
is “glued” to the mass, that is, the mass and the space of light are in one inertial
frame of reference independent of the velocity of mass, i.e., independent of the
wavelengths of space waves. In this inertial frame of reference, the velocity of light
is constant c.
According to those mentioned above, there are several spaces. The mass has its
space, and light has its space, and they are different. Therefore, the deﬁnition of
space is not self-evident. What is space? What is time?
Space-Matter Model: Spatial Distances Given by Space Waves
Can we measure space? Measuring space, we measure matter. The meter is the
length of the path traveled by light in a vacuum during a time interval of
1/c = 1/299,792,458 of a second [31]. If we measure space by means of light, we
use a kind of matter that has its own nature. We cannot measure space at all. We
measure only matter. We can “see” the length of space through light glasses.
Fig. 11.12 Gravity caused by space waves. Gravitation occurs when space shifts. Model, not
proportional [30]. Adapted from [30] under a Credit: © T. Lajtner
Fig. 11.13 Space wave and light wave at several velocities of mass. The gravity is bigger in the
second picture, and x and y are spatial coordinates. Model, not proportional. Adapted from
lajtner.com under a Credit: © T. Lajtner
11
Three Paradoxes of Thought: Thought Power Measured
251

Wavelength and Spatial Distance
As shown in Fig. 11.14, here we remember the length contraction of special rela-
tivity. Yes, this part is about it, but here length contraction is explained in a different
way. The given spatial distances of the object and the observer can be given as the
sums of the wavelengths of space waves. If the object moves in relation to the
observer because they are in different inertial systems, then the observer and object
will realize different space wavelengths. Longer wavelengths mean higher speed.
Different speeds mean different lengths of wavelengths of space waves. The same
spatial distance measured from Object A to Object Circle can be made out of
different wavelengths of space waves according to different observers [32].
The length contraction described in special relativity is the viewpoint of “R.”
Using space waves, this situation can be given as a length dilation of the wave-
length of the space wave. “A” is the original situation and “B” is the changed
situation.
“R” is the way how relativity presents the distance of “B” as length contraction.
In reality, solution “B” exists because the wavelengths of space waves grow.
The wavelength change is a real phenomenon in space, not the observer’s
viewpoint, as special relativity states. Behind the relativistic length contraction of
spatial distance is a real difference between the space’s wavelengths of observer and
object, says the space-matter framework.
Time Given by Space Waves
What is time? Today’s physicists claim that time is what we measure as time. What
does the phrase “what we measure” mean? We can measure only matter. One
second is deﬁned as a changing character of the cesium 133 atom we can measure
[33]. If we measure time by means of mass, we use a kind of matter that has its own
nature. We cannot measure time at all. We measure only matter. We can “see” time
Fig. 11.14 How does spatial distance change? Model, not proportional. Adapted from
lajtner.com under a Credit: © T. Lajtner
252
T. Lajtner

through the glasses of mass. One second has its start and has its end that we
measure. The main element of time is its change. If there is no change, there is no
time. We measure changes of matter by measuring time.
According to the space-matter framework, time exists without having been
measured.
Time as Spatial Waves
“In the space-matter model, time comes into existence when matter and space meet.
Time is the action-reaction phenomenon of matter and space and appears as a
spatial wave” [1]. There is no way of putting space and matter together without
action and reaction coming into being. Or in other words, there is no way to put
space and matter together without time coming into being (Fig. 11.15). Time
depends on two things: on the given space and on the given matter that travels in
space. According to modern physics, mass causes time; so, our time is the
action-reaction of mass and space that exists as space waves. The wave of space is
not the only space wave, i.e., not the only time; it is just our own time. In our life
(and in physics models), we use the time created by mass, but “non-mass” objects
may use different space waves as time. Photons create their own time, although
physics states that a photon has no time. As mentioned above, it is impossible since
a photon is a matter that causes changes in its space.
Our Time Wave and Time Unit
From the viewpoint of mass, the actions between space and mass can change
between strong and weak. It oscillates. The change is periodic, and one period is
one unit of time. This unit of time has two parts:
i. the hit, when space acts upon mass most strongly; and
ii. the period between hits when the force of space acts less strongly upon mass.
Fig. 11.15 Lajtner-burger. 3D space + 3D matter = 3D space + 3D matter + time. Adapted
from lajtner.com under a Credit: © T. Lajtner
11
Three Paradoxes of Thought: Thought Power Measured
253

If we employ a cosine function to describe time, we get a periodic wavelength.
Hence, it appears to be a good model, where: in the case of i, the value of the
function equals the positive amplitude of the cosine function, and every other value
of the function creates ii, only one positive amplitude in a unit of time (in a single
time wave). Therefore, there is only one hit in a time unit. Time is a repetition of
these units. Time is the continuous alternation between i and ii. From the viewpoint
of matter, time is characteristic of the periodic way that space acts upon mass. In
Fig. 11.16, a pulse of time is marked as the point. This is followed by a lack of time
pulse:
pulse
pulse
pulse . . .
The longer the wavelength of the space wave, the rarer the time impulse:
pulse
pulse
pulse . . .
We can understand why the paper wheel is rotated by thought force. Thought
force changes the wavelength of space wave; time and space are changed, and the
paper wheel will rotate. What else can we conclude from this? We can conclude if
the wavelength of the space wave grows, mass accelerates. “Solely through the use
of space waves, we can express spatial distance, time, and energy” [1]. Space waves
are, however, not only indicators of these phenomena.
Is the Velocity of the Mass Always Constant?
The Velocity of Space Waves Is Constant
If time waves are derived from space waves generated by mass, a strange phe-
nomenon arises—time and distance are the two sides of the same coin from the
viewpoint of mass. An object with mass cannot change any spatial distance without
changing time, and changing time means changing the position in the given space.
Fig. 11.16 Time as space wave and x and y are spatial distances. Model, not proportional.
Adapted from lajtner.com under a Credit: © T. Lajtner
254
T. Lajtner

Space Unit and Time Unit Given by the Same Spatial Wave
Now we can use the idea of Minkowski geometry in Fig. 11.17 to make a new time
and distance model visible. In the following coordinate systems, both time t and
distance s are expressed in meters. We can realize that the mass velocity according
to space waves is always 1 because distance Dt is always as long as Ds. The
wavelength of space wave always deﬁnes 1 unit of time t and 1 unit of spatial
distance s.
Bigger velocity makes the wavelength of the space wave longer. The wavelength
of space wave creates the unit of time and spatial distance for the given mass. The
velocity of an object with mass changes the length of the wavelength of the space
wave but not its speed. The growing length of units does not destroy the proportion
of the units. Equation 11.4 shows that mass velocity is constant in its space from
the viewpoint of space wave and mass, too:
vMass
in
Space ¼ Ds1=Dt1 ¼ Ds2=Dt2 ¼ 1
ð11:4Þ
Figure 11.17 explains how space and matter create and change time. An object
gets moved in space. This is the action. The reaction of space is the change of
wavelength of the space wave. Time is created and changed. This is how the
electromagnetic force works. First, the electromagnetic force acts. The object
moves; so, the wavelength of space waves changes. In the case of thought force, the
situation is reversed. There is also a third situation. Let us study the accelerating
Universe! Why does the Universe accelerate? Mass in space will accelerate once it
starts moving. It will accelerate unless acted upon by force created by matter, i.e.,
Fig. 11.17 Wavelength of space wave k depends on the velocity of the mass. a, b Show the same
mass at different velocities. Adapted from [29] under a Credit: © T. Lajtner
11
Three Paradoxes of Thought: Thought Power Measured
255

without additional energy, without other mass, and without gravity. The changing
wavelength of the space wave has an action on mass. This is followed by a reaction
of the object: it moves faster. This is followed by a reaction of space: the wave-
length of the space wave grows; therefore, the mass goes faster, and the wavelength
of the space wave grows.
Accordingly, there is an important interaction between matter and space. Let us
call it Force I (pronunciation: force the ﬁrst). Given the interaction between mass
and space, Newton’s ﬁrst law of motion is arguable. Today’s academic physics
accepts Newton’s ﬁrst law as fact. This is not a fact; it is actually Galileo’s
400-year-old opinion. It is disputable [34]. Moreover, the inertial frame of reference
also needs a new deﬁnition because of the existence of space waves.
Force I
Force I (pronunciation: force the ﬁrst) is the interaction between matter and waving
space. Force I permanently exists as long as there is matter in space. According to
Eq. 11.3, this force appears as changes of time and spatial distance; therefore,
Eq. 11.3 works and the paper wheel rotates. That is, Force I can create the elec-
tromagnetic interaction. The electromagnetic force and the weak nuclear force have
common roots. They are called electroweak interactions [35]. The asymptotic
freedom [36, 37] makes it possible to join the electroweak and the strong inter-
actions at high energies. So, these three interactions can be seen as one interaction.
Force I creates electromagnetic force; therefore, it creates these three interactions
[2]. Gravity is created by Force I, as described above. Summarizing the
above-mentioned,
Force
I
generates
every
known
fundamental
interaction
(Fig. 11.18).
Fig. 11.18 Four fundamental forces we know and the hidden Force I. Force I is the only and
ultimate force that appears as fundamental interactions. Adapted from [34] under a Credit: © T.
Lajtner
256
T. Lajtner

Light and Particles Can Travel Faster Than c
Mass travels in its space the same way light travels in light’s space, i.e., with
velocity c. These spaces are different. What if they travel in the same space? Each
will travel here as a fast wave, i.e., faster than light. In which space can both travel
so fast? It is a fast space made of matter. Here, we present a space made of matter.
But what is the matter, and what is space? The simplest deﬁnition of them is as
follows: space is what matter uses as space, and matter is what space allows existing
as matter in the given space. In some cases, space can be made of an object that we
know as matter (short: matter-space), e.g., via tunneling. A barrier is an object with
mass, and it acts as a matter-space. The given space determines the form of the
appearance of matter, e.g., electrons can be particles with mass in space, but they
cannot be massless fast waves in space. On the other hand, they can be massless fast
waves via tunneling in a matter-space, but they cannot be mass particles.
Tunneling: Space Made of Matter (Fast Space)
Quantum tunneling refers to the quantum mechanical phenomenon where a particle
(with or without mass) tunnels through a barrier that it normally could not sur-
mount. In experiments, many particles are sent to the barrier, and only part of them
get through the barrier. They are tunneling particles. In tunneling, the group velocity
is important, but if we examine the tunneling effect as the behavior of a given
particle, we can analyze this single-particle, i.e., its velocity, since the particle does
go through the barrier. In the forthcoming parts of this study, I analyze the behavior
of a “single” tunneling particle because I want to point out the metamorphosis of
this particle, which is a common attribute of particles.
Particles travel with superluminal (faster than light) velocities in tunneling;
therefore, they will be called fast waves in the forthcoming parts of this study.
Nimtz et al. [38], ﬁrst measured superluminal tunneling velocity with microwaves
in 1992. The tunneling particle has an undetectable condition. Tunneling takes time,
which can be measured. In Nimtz’s experiments, tunneling particles are photons
and electrons. Every electron has a mass. There comes the big riddle in tunneling.
Experiments show [39] that tunneling particles, i.e., electrons, are faster than light,
and these facts are not compatible with the mainstream physics theories and with
special relativity. According to the theory of relativity, the growing velocity of
particles with a mass (e.g., an electron) causes growing mass, and if v ! c, then
mass m ! ∞. Since the mass m (of the electron) is never ∞, and the tunneling is a
measurable fact, we have to suppose that v = c never occurs from our point of view.
There is a discrete jump at velocities of the electron, and v < c becomes v > c
without v = c. The particle with velocity v > c on its own is immeasurable as yet.
The barrier is a space made of matter. It will be mentioned as a fast space where
v > c from our viewpoint. In Table 11.1, the traveling particles are photons (light)
11
Three Paradoxes of Thought: Thought Power Measured
257

that have no mass. Note electrons with mass are also able to turn into fast waves.
Fast waves are massless: the mass of matter seems to depend on the given space
where matter travels.
Superluminal Velocities of Light via Tunneling
The three experiments are described in [40–42]. In barriers, i.e., in fast spaces,
matter particles travel at superluminal velocities: vfw > c. In these cases, the motion
indicator calculated by Lajtner is greater than 1.
A Touch of Physics of Thought Force
How Is the “Big” Magnitude of Thought Force Created?
Thought force can rotate a “heavy” paper wheel. How can be thought force be so
strong? As summarized in Table 11.1, we can study the same particle in two
different spaces. Using the space-matter framework, after some calculation not
published here, it seems that there are two parts of the well-known Planck constant
h. h is the most important unit in quantum mechanics; it is the unit action. Suppose
that the particle’s energy does not change via tunneling. h has two parts that work
together. They depend on the particle’s velocity (wave, fast wave). Look at
Eqs. 11.5 and 11.6:
hrest ¼ c=vfw
ð
Þ  h
ð11:5Þ
is the rest energy part and
hkinetic ¼ vfw=c
ð
Þ  h
ð11:6Þ
Table 11.1 The tunneling velocities vfw and the lengths of barriers in three experiments of Nimtz
Topic
Experiment 1
Experiment
2
Experiment
3
Note
vfw/
c = Vtunneling/
c
4.702
8.552
2.565
Superluminal velocities
f0
8.7  109
9.97  109
8.7  109
Frequency of particle
before tunneling (1/s)
k0
3.45  10−2
3.01  10−2
3.45  10−2
Wavelength of particle
before tunneling (m)
L
1.142  10−1
3.00  10−1
1.00  10−1
Length of the barrier (m)
hkinetic/hrest
22.11
73.14
6.58
Motion indicator
calculated by Dr. Lajtner
258
T. Lajtner

hkinetic is the kinetic energy part of the Planck constant h—in the case of light and
seen from our space. The motion indicator hkinetic/hrest is made of the two parts of h.
Physics has deﬁned neither Eq. 11.5 nor Eq. 11.6 previously. If hrest = hkinetic,
then the speed of the light is c; Planck’s law remains untouched if vfw = c and the
motion indicator is 1. If hrest = hkinetic, we speak about a “normal” photon traveling
with c velocity. If hrest > hkinetic, we speak about particles with mass, i.e., fermions,
where the motion indicator is less than 1. If hrest < hkinetic we talk about fast waves.
Both photons and fermions (e.g., electrons) can realize the tunneling process. We
cannot measure their fast waves via tunneling yet, nor can we measure either hrest or
hkinetic.
According to the space-matter framework, hrest and hkinetic depend on the par-
ticle’s velocity. Saying this, it seems to be a good idea to create an electron in a fast
space. To create a particle in a fast space needs only a small hrest because the big
hkinetic comes from itself. If the particle leaves the fast space, its hrest grows, while
its whole energy remains untouched. The thought force can be generated this way;
therefore, it can be as strong as the measured values show. This strong thought
force will be placed in space waves and appears as a modiﬁed space wave.
Thought’s Feedback Mechanism
In Model 1 and Model 2 of Fig. 11.19, thoughts express force on the small object.
Model 1 shows the phenomenon without feedback: no thought force communica-
tion. The wavelength of the space wave is unchanged. The thought force com-
munication works in the case of Model 2, where thought force gives feedback. The
wavelength of the space wave is changed. The paper wheel and the submarine
experiments prove that Model 2 is correct.
As mentioned earlier, the working method of thought force presented in
Figs. 11.19 and 11.20 cannot be derived from theoretical consideration. It needs
experiments and praxis to realize the two-way communication via thought force.
This two-way communication via thought force is a discovery.
Now, let us understand the situation shown by Model 2 using the terms of
physics. The common picture of a force in physics is a vector. Thought force is a
“normal” force with direction and magnitude regarding a frame of reference.
Thought force (green) can also be displayed as a vector. Your thought leaves your
brain, but it does not lose connection with your brain. The changes of thought
appear as feedback your brain perceives. Your brain can sense that the green
thought has changed. It tries to restore the green thought to create its intended form.
By stating this, we claim thinking is a continual interaction, seeking the balance
between thought force and other forces. In terms of physics, our thought force
(green in Fig. 11.20) is a force like any other force. If it meets another force (red),
they create the resultant forces (blue) in Fig. 11.20. The gray part of Fig. 11.20
shows your brain activity at work, for example, rotating the paper wheel. Your
brain can sense the resultant blue force, and your brain tries to increase the (green
11
Three Paradoxes of Thought: Thought Power Measured
259

dotted) force of thought as long as the new sum of forces (blue dotted) can replace
the intended green thought force. The blue dotted force will give you the desired
result, e.g., it rotates the paper wheel. You get the result you want, only if you
change the force of your thought depending on environmental forces. The method is
generally known as a system with feedback [43]. Of course, there is a limit to
increasing your thought force. The force of thought has upper and lower limits. The
limits of your thought force can be greater or smaller than the other one’s limits, but
we both have a very small range of thought force comparing the forces of the
Universe. But within this range, you can grow or decrease the force you want to
send via thought: you can change the length and the direction of your thought force
arrow. This is your inborn ability: you use it and make unconscious thought force
communication possible anytime and anywhere. This study shows you that you can
also do it consciously.
Fig. 11.19 Your thought leaves your head, but it does not lose the connection with you. It gives
feedback for you. Adapted from [7] under a Credit: © T. Lajtner
Fig. 11.20 Forces of thoughts. The ﬁrst part of this ﬁgure (with white background) shows that
two forces meet. The green one is a thought force; the red one is an external force. The resultant of
these forces is the blue arrow. To restore the original effect of thought force to achieve what we
intended, we need to generate a new, longer (green dotted) thought vector. Here the blue dotted
vector is as long as the ﬁrst green vector of thought was. Illustration, not proportional. Adapted
from [7] under a Credit: © T. Lajtner
260
T. Lajtner

Thought Force Exists as Force I
The feedback mechanism results from the way thought force travels. How does
thought force travel? Thought force is embedded in space waves. Thought force is a
modiﬁcation in the wavelength of space waves (Fig. 11.21). Thought force creates
an electromagnetic force by changing time and space. Because thought force is not
a known fundamental interaction, it must be a new interaction that can create
electromagnetic force and create feedback. Force I is a phenomenon like this, i.e.,
thought force exists as the Force I.
Thought in World, World in Thought
Force I can be created by many objects. Therefore, our thought force can be
inﬂuenced by many events we do not know at all.
Three Paradoxes of Thought
Your every thought has force; that is, your every thought is an action that generates
a reaction. If force reaches your brain from the world as action, your thought or your
thought change is the reaction. Thinking is a continuous action-reaction process
because each thought of yours has two parts: See the addition below.
ThoughtIntended (you want to think this thought)
+ ThoughtWorld (force given by the world can be sensed as thought)
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
= ThoughtResult (the result of each thought force)
Your intention as force, ThoughtIntended, and the force of the world, Thought-
World, form a resultant force, ThoughtResult, which is not the intended thought but the third
thought.
ThoughtResult 6¼ ThoughtIntended. Figure 11.22 helps to understand the concept.
Fig. 11.21 Thought force “GO” embedded in time wave. Model, not proportional. Adapted from
[7] under a Credit: © T. Lajtner
11
Three Paradoxes of Thought: Thought Power Measured
261

If you want to think about your intention, you have to correct the impact of the
force of the world. If you want to think ThoughtIntended, you should think
ThoughtIntended and ThoughtCorrection, where (ThoughtCorrection + ThoughtWorld = 0).
ThoughtIntended
+ ThoughtCorrection
+ ThoughtWorld
––––––––––––––––
= ThoughtResult
In
this
case:
ThoughtResult = ThoughtIntended.
Figure 11.23
visualizes
the
process.
ThoughtCorrection is part of your thought that keeps changing. It is neutralizing
ThoughtWorld, i.e., the thought force of the world. The world changes uninter-
ruptedly; therefore, ThoughtCorrection also keeps changing. If you want to think
ThoughtIntended, you have to keep adjusting to the force of the world: you should
always change your thoughts, if you want to think the same thought:
Your thoughts change even when they do not change.
Fig. 11.22 ThoughtResult 6¼ ThoughtIntended. Adapted from lajtner.com under a Credit: © T.
Lajtner
Fig. 11.23 ThoughtResult = ThoughtIntended. Adapted from lajtner.com under a Credit: © T.
Lajtner
262
T. Lajtner

The world is changing, ThoughtWorld yesterday was yesterday, today
ThoughtWorld today exists, and they are different. They must be different since the
world is changing. If you want to think the same ThoughtIntended you thought
yesterday, you have to think
ThoughtIntended + ThoughtCorrection today instead of
ThoughtIntended + ThoughtCorrection yesterday.
If you are thinking today what you thought yesterday, you are already thinking something
else.
If the world is always changing, what is the stable point for you? The only stable
point for you is your DNA. You can compare your thoughts to your DNA. If the
connection between your DNA and your thoughts of yesterday and today are the
same, you are thinking the same thing you thought yesterday—according to your
DNA but not according to the world. What does the world require?
In order to remain in one place, you should run.
I gave the third paradox in a general form because it seems to be true every-
where. Here is an everyday example: if you have had the same standard of life as
those in your surroundings and you want to keep pace with them, you will need to
work harder.
And here is a cosmic example: our Earth is traveling about at an average orbital
speed of 828 thousand km/h (514 thousand mph) around the center of the Milky
Way [44] to remain in the solar system. It follows the Sun that is traveling this way.
The Main Paradox of Thought
i. Thought force has a very big velocity. This result comes from its physics,
which is beyond the scope of this chapter;
ii. There are many forces in the world that are in the size range of thought force.
The forces act as vectors. If similar forces meet each other, they will be added
up; they will have one resultant force.
The thinking seems to be lonely, but it is not. It is just the opposite. You need the
entire world to think.
The whole world is in your thoughts,
and your thoughts are in the whole world.
Thought as the force does not require a further search for additional “ancestors”
and additional causes. The cause of thought is in the world, and the forces are
within it, too.
11
Three Paradoxes of Thought: Thought Power Measured
263

Our First Thought
What is the ﬁrst thought of a human being? Everything starts with this ﬁrst thought.
How was this ﬁrst thought born? If we understand this, we understand how other
thoughts were created.
It is supposed we all must have a personal data bank (PDB) [4], somewhere
stored in our body and/or in our brain and/or in space. It will always be called upon
if we see, hear, or sense something if an input reaches us. For example, if you see a
paper wheel, your PDB will offer a lot of choices about what to do with this paper
wheel: i, swallow it; ii, lacerate it; iii, ignore it; iv, rotate it with the ﬁnger; v, rotate
it by thoughts. Your PDB contains the choices, and you can choose one. Our PDB
can essentially have information from our personal experiences, memories, and our
knowledge sources. This kind of information originates from us.
Some thoughts do not originate from us, and yet they can also be stored in our
PDB. So, what is my ﬁrst thought when I see the paper wheel? It is what I choose
from the possibilities generated by the paper wheel as input. This data bank can be
in our brain, and it can be stored partly in our body or in space.
A very small embryo has a body and causes changes in space waves, but it has
neither brain nor head. But we already get thought forces. And because of the
action-reaction, we also send thought force as an embryo. Some experiments show
that an adult has something of the embryo time that is unconscious, and you can call
it memories. Many experiments show that the 30-week-old embryo already has
“measurable” memories [45]. It is possible to go further because we had thoughts
earlier already. What was our ﬁrst thought? It was the very ﬁrst action-reaction we
had. What was the only answer we could give back then? That was: “I am!” We
were aware of that right away. “I am!”, this is our ﬁrst thought, and we have to keep
to this status. The ﬁrst law of nature that comes with our ﬁrst thought is: Stay alive!
Conclusion
Thought is force. This force is different from the four known fundamental inter-
actions. It is an unknown fundamental interaction. Like all forces, thought force
also creates its own counterforce. There is no way to understand how thought works
without accepting the human experience on counterforce. If we accept the existence
of thought force and its counterforce, we need a new physics theory. The
space-Matter framework can describe this new fundamental interaction. Every
particle is vibrating. The vibration reacts to space. Space waves connect objects
existing in space. Note these waves are not the gravitational waves measured by
LIGO [46]. Thought force and its counterforce are phenomena that are embedded in
the modiﬁed wavelengths of space waves. Space wave makes possible two-way
communication. We can create, send, and receive thoughts. Thought force and its
counterforce have a given frequency spectrum within space waves. There are also
other forces in this spectrum. Brain senses forces in this spectrum as thoughts
264
T. Lajtner

regardless of the sources of forces. Saying this, there are thoughts that no brain
created. Even more, there are ones that non-living things created. But they have
been created somewhere, everywhere, and continuously. Thought force is a fun-
damental and universal way of communication in our Universe.
Core Messages
• The brain can create, receive, and send thoughts.
• Your thoughts change even when they do not change.
• If you are thinking today what you thought yesterday, you are already
thinking something else.
• In order to remain in one place, you should run.
• The whole world is in your thoughts, and your thoughts are in the whole
world.
Acknowledgements This submission is deposited as an e-Print copy at my website (lajtner.com)
and at the viXra.org Archives (https://vixra.org/abs/2007.0047).
References
1. Lajtner T (2016) Without thought force the milky way wouldn’t be the same—thought force
in practice. ESJ 12(27). https://doi.org/10.19044/esj.2016.v12n27p1
2. Lajtner T (2009) Ez minden? MEK, Budapest, pp 36–45
3. Millet D (2002) The origins of EEG. In: Seventh annual meeting of the international society
for the history of the neurosciences, session VI
4. Hallett M (2007) Transcranial magnetic stimulation: a primer. Neuron 55(2):187–199
5. Lajtner T (2018) Die messbare Kraft der Gedanken. Ancient Mail Verlag, Germany, pp 63–71
6. Grau C, Ginhoux R, Riera A, Nguyen TL, Chauvat H, Berg M, Amengual JL, Pascual-Leone
A, Rufﬁni G (2014) Conscious brain-to-brain communication in humans using non-invasive
technologies. PLoS ONE 9(8):e105225. Published online 2014 Aug 19
7. Lajtner T (2019) Thought is force. Amazo.com 2019
8. REG experiments: equipment and design (2010) Princeton.edu. http://noosphere.princeton.
edu/rdnelson/reg.html
9. What is Psyleron? (2009) Psyleron.com. http://www.psyleron.com/
10. Research summary (2009) Psyleron.com. http://www.psyleron.com/researchSummary.html
11. http://www.lajtner.com (2020)
12. Lajtner T (2020) Videos to the paper “three paradoxes of thought”. https://www.lajtner.com/
3paradoxes.html
13. Buzsaki G (2006) Rhythms of the brain. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp 112–123
14. Hughes JR (2008) Gamma, fast, and ultrafast waves of the brain: their relationships with
epilepsy and behavior. Epilepsy Behav 13(1):25–31
15. Williams RW, Herrup K (1988) The control of neuron number. Annu Rev Neurosci 11:423–
453
16. Planck M (1900) Zur Theorie des Gesetzes der Energieverteilung im Normalspectrum. Verh
Dtsch Phys Ges 1900(2):237
11
Three Paradoxes of Thought: Thought Power Measured
265

17. Planck M (1091) Über die Elementarquanta der Materie und der Elektricität. Ann Phys 4:564–
566
18. Planck M (1901) Über das Gesetz der Energieverteilung im Normalspectrum. Ann Phys
4:553–563
19. Lajtner T (2016) Thought force is a new fundamental interaction. Phys Essays 29(2):239–247
20. Newton I (1687) Philosophiae naturalis principia mathematica. London
21. Casimir HBG, Polder D (1948) The inﬂuence of retardation on the London-van der Waals
forces. Phys Rev 73:360
22. Einstein A (1905) Zur Elektrodynamik bewegter Körper. Ann Phys 17:891–921
23. Einstein A (1907) Relativitätsprinzip und die aus demselben gezogenen Folgerungen. Jahr
Radioaktivität 4:411–462
24. Einstein A (1907) Über die vom Relativitätsprinzip geforderte Trägheit der Energie. Ann
Phys 23:371–384
25. Einstein A (1914) Formale Grundlage der allgemeinen Relativitätstheorie. Preussische
Akademie der Wissenschaften, Sitzungsberichte, pp 1030–1085
26. Einstein A (1915) Zur allgemeinen Relativitätstheorie. Preussische Akademie der Wis-
senschaften, Sitzungsbericht, pp 778–786, 799–801
27. Einstein A (1915) Feldgleichungen der Gravitation. Preußische Akademie der Wis-
senschaften, Sitzungsberichte, pp 844–877
28. Einstein A (1916) Grundlage der allgemeinen Relativitätstheorie. Ann Phys 4(49):769–822
29. Lajtner T (2020) Spaces and times; relativity superluminal. Amazon.com, pp 29–32, 41–43
30. Lajtner T (2016) Die Physik der Gedanken und der Liebe. Raum & Zeit Ausgabe 204:45–49
31. SI Brochure (2014) The international system of units (SI). Unit of length (metre). Bipm.org
32. Lajtner T (2019) Geheimwaffe Gedankentechnologie. Ancient Mail Verlag, Germany, pp 94–
95, 122–124
33. SI Brochure (2014) The international system of units (SI). Unit of time (second). Bipm.org
34. Lajtner T (2021) 19 false axioms of physics. Amazon.com, pp 54–58
35. Bilenky SM, Hosek J (1982) Glashow-Weinberg-Salam theory of electroweak interactions
and the neutral currents. Phys Rep 90(2):73–157
36. Gross DJ, Wilczek F (1973) Ultraviolet behavior of non-Abelian gauge theories. Phys Rev
Lett 30:1343–1346
37. Politzer DH (1973) Reliable perturbative results for strong interactions? Phys Rev Lett
30:1346–1349
38. Nimtz G, Enders A, Spieker H (1994) Photonic tunneling times. J Phys I France 4(4):565–570
39. Nimtz G (2011) Tunneling confronts special relativity. Found Phys 41(7):1193–1199
40. Nimtz G, Enders A, Spieker H (1994) Photonic tunneling times. J Phys I EDP Sci 4(4):565–
570
41. Nimtz G, Enders A, Spieker H (2001) Universal relationship of time and frequency in
photonic tunnelling. Ann Phys (Leipzig) 10(8):707–712; and datas from Dr. Nimtz’s record
that hasn’t been published with the article
42. Enders A, Nimtz G (1992) On superluminal barrier traversal. J Phys I France 2:1693–1698
43. Ĺström KJ, Murray RM (2010) Feedback systems: an introduction for scientists and
engineers. Princeton University Press, Princeton and Oxford, pp 1–25
44. Smale A (2000) Star child question of the month for February 2000. Nasa.gov
45. Dirix CEH, Nijhuis JG, Jongsma HW, Hornstra G (2009) Aspects of fetal learning and
memory. Child Dev 80(4):1250–1258
46. News Release of LIGO (2016) Gravitational waves detected 100 years after Einstein’s
prediction. Caltech.edu
266
T. Lajtner

Tamás Lajtner Ph.D., has been studying the power of thoughts,
including various objects that can be controlled with thoughts. He
has worked out the ﬁrst electronic Thought Force Sensor and the
ﬁrst electronic Thought Power Meter in the world. He worked out
the scientiﬁc background of the force of thought. He has pub-
lished more than thirty papers and ten books on the force of
thought and its physics. His latest book available on Amazon is
entitled “19 False Axioms of Physics.” He studied economics,
mathematical statistics, and computer science at the Corvinus
University in Budapest (Hungary). He worked as a scientiﬁc
researcher and programmer in different countries. After com-
pleting his doctorate and Ph.D., he worked in the banking sector,
after which he participated in Hungarian privatization. For years
he has been a member of the board and prospect council of the
largest Hungarian companies.
11
Three Paradoxes of Thought: Thought Power Measured
267

12
A New Philosophical Paradigm
of Thinking for Particular Sciences:
Physics, Cognitive Neuroscience,
and Biology
Gabriel Vacariu and Mihai Vacariu
“A new scientiﬁc truth does not triumph by convincing its
opponents and making them see the light, but rather because its
opponents eventually die, and a new generation grows up that
is familiar with it”.
Max Planck
Summary
We discuss a new philosophical paradigm of thinking, what we called
“epistemologically different worlds” (EDWs) perspective (philosophy) in
relation to sciences like physics, cognitive (neuro)science, and biology. We
show that the oldest paradigm of thinking, the world or the “universe,” in the
broadest sense assumed by scientists and philosophers, has been a misleading
paradigm and that overall has to be replaced with EDWs perspective. Within this
new paradigm of thinking, we investigate some essential notions: “theory,”
which explains particular “entities” (which really exist within their EW or
epistemological world) and their “laws.” We emphasize that some EDWs really
exist (have an ontological background, like the mind-EW), but there are certain
G. Vacariu (&)
Department of Philosophy, University of Bucharest, Splaiul Independentei nr. 204, Sector 6,
Bucharest, Romania
e-mail: gabriel.vacariu@ﬁlosoﬁe.unibuc.ro
G. Vacariu  M. Vacariu
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Bucharest, Romania
M. Vacariu
Faculty of Journalism and Sciences of Communication, University of Bucharest, Bucharest,
Romania
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh (eds.), Thinking, Integrated Science 7,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04075-7_12
269

EDWs (for instance, the macro-EW or the micro-EW) that just denote real
entities (microparticles or macro-particles) and their interactions (epistemolog-
ically different laws).
The epistemologically different worlds (EDWs): A, the Macro-EW: Brain/body
is an entity which belongs to the macro-EW in which there are all the
macro-entities like tables, chairs, and planets; B, the Micro-EW: an amalgam of
microparticles which represent, for us, a “table” (at macroscopic “level,” i.e., the
macro-EW); and C, the ﬁeld-EW: mind-EW is an EW which cannot be
represented. The mind is an epistemological world that does not exist for the
brain/body. Also, the brain/body does not exist for the mind-EW. The common
rule is that one epistemological world does not exist for any epistemologically
different world.
Keywords
Causality  Correspondence  Epistemologically different worlds  Laws 
Ontological entities  Paradigm of thinking  Sciences  Theories  Whole-part
relationship
270
G. Vacariu and M. Vacariu

QR Code
Scanning the QR code directs you to the word cloud of the chapter that is made up of
the words we discussed throughout the whole book in relation to the chapter’s
keyword, which is intentionally not included in the word cloud. Find the keyword and
put it in place in the puzzle according to the clues provided in Chap. 36. The mystery
hidden in the puzzle is the quote of THINKING: Bioengineering of Science and Art.
Introduction
Based on our previous works, in this chapter, we will indicate that the notions of the
“universe” or “world” are quite wrong concepts constructed by human beings
during millenniums. We replace this notion of “universe” (with no ontology) with
the “epistemologically different worlds” (EDWs, each EW having its own ontol-
ogy). Some EDWs really have ontologies; some EDWs only denote epistemolog-
ically different (ED) entities (which really exist) and their ED interactions (“laws”).
There are particular sciences (we investigate physics, cognitive (neuro)science, and
biology) which deal with a set of epistemologically different entities and their ED
laws. In this chapter, we try to understand the relationship between a general
paradigm of thinking in the context of the aforementioned sciences and their the-
ories (which refer to a particular set of entities and their “laws”).
The New Paradigm, the “Epistemologically Different
Worlds” or EDWs, Replaces the Old and Wrong Paradigm,
the World or Universe
The starting point for a philosopher to create a new framework of thinking has to be
the main results of the main sciences from her time. However, the philosopher has
to go beyond these results to create a new paradigm of thinking, which is necessary
given that certain scientiﬁc problems (belonging to those main sciences) have not
been solved in the last decades. This new framework of thinking has to be available
not only for actual philosophers but mainly for actual scientists working in the main
12
A New Philosophical Paradigm of Thinking for Particular …
271

sciences. Anyway, this new framework of thinking has to reject any new old
philosophical and scientiﬁc (sub)framework to solve those unsolved scientiﬁc
problems. In general, based on an erroneous framework, many scientiﬁc approaches
and theories had been mistaken (or used mistaken notions). A science contains
theories about a set of entities and their relationships (laws). There are different
kinds of laws, but usually, we name “laws” the “causal laws” which hold on to the
causal relationships between certain particular entities. In general, these scientiﬁc
theories (which created these scientiﬁc problems) have been constructed within the
wrong philosophical framework. The role of a philosopher is to identify this wrong
philosophical framework and replace it with a new paradigm of thinking which has
to explain the main problems of particular sciences and philosophy in a time.
Our previous works elaborated a new paradigm of thinking for different sciences
like physics, cognitive science, biology, and philosophy: the “epistemologically
different worlds” (EDWs) perspective [1–15]. EDWs are a new paradigm of
thinking that replaces the oldest paradigm of thinking for all human beings: “the
existence of the universe/world.” More exactly, we have shown that the
“universe/world” does not exist. There are these EDWs that really exist. We recall
that this wrong paradigm of thinking referring to the “universe/world” has domi-
nated the entire human knowledge from its beginning until now. The major error of
this wrong paradigm has been that it incorporates all kinds of entities within the
same spatio-temporal framework, called the “universe” or the “world.” The great
thinkers (philosophers, physicists, cognitive neuroscientists, biologists etc.) of all
times have considered that macroparticles (chairs, cars, stones, and planets) and
microparticles (electrons and protons), electromagnetic ﬁelds and waves, bodies
(which include the brains) and minds, cells and molecules, etc. exist all within the
same “world” or “universe” (or as we called them “unicorn world”). The problem is
that the “world” or “universe” does not have any ontological status; therefore, the
framework we have included all these entities does not exist. The question is: How
has it been possible for all human beings to make such errors during such a long
time? Each normal human being has one identity, and the re-projection of this
single identity beyond its limits (external environment) created the illusion of a
single world/universe. We have believed that all human bodies and other animals
are placed within the same “world.” During our evolution, we have perceived an
external “world,” and we have believed that there has been one world in which each
individual has been developing. Our perceptual macro-mechanisms have evolved
within the same macroscopic environment (the one which we have called the
“world”). Because of these mechanics, we have perceived the “macroscopic world,”
and we have believed we exist in this macroscopic world. We mention that, in this
context, for us, these two notions, “perception” and “interaction,” have the same
meaning. A long time ago, Leucippus and Democritus introduced the idea that the
macroscopic entities are “composed” from the microparticles. In the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries, physicists discovered that, indeed, the macro-entities are
composed of microparticles. The main problem was that physicists placed the
microparticles within the same “world” with the macro-entities. Most think that
microparticles
interact
with
macroparticles,
but
this
is
the
main
error:
272
G. Vacariu and M. Vacariu

“a microparticle does not interact with a macroparticle,” while “a microparticle
interacts with an amalgam of microparticles” that, only for us, represents a
macroscopic entity. More exactly, macroparticles do not exist for microparticles.
The reductionists believe that the macro-entities do not exist; only the micropar-
ticles really exist. If we accept this radical reductionism, we have to reject the
existence of our brains. If we accept the identity theory (mind = brain), we have
also to reject the existence of the mind. However, there are several arguments we
cannot accept this reductionism:
• Physicists have not discovered the “graviton” yet, so we cannot accept the
reduction of the planets (macro-entities) to a huge amalgam of microparticles;
• There are certain features of the cells/organisms (and minds) that cannot be
reduced to microparticles (and brains/bodies);
• The mental image of a green table in front of “me” cannot be reduced to the
activation of certain neurons; and
• “Life” cannot be reduced to the functions of certain mechanisms of the body or
microparticles.
There are many other arguments against any kind of reductionism, but the topic
of this article is not about (non)reductionism. Our question is: if a microparticle (an
electron, for instance) sent toward that green table in front of us interacts with that
table? We answer that the microparticle does not interact with a macroscopic object,
that table, but with an amalgam of microparticles (which for us represents the table).
Therefore, the table (and any planet) does not exist for the electron (any
microparticle). Since we cannot reduce a planet to a huge amalgam of micropar-
ticles (the quantum gravity does not exist, the “graviton” have not been “discov-
ered”), we must accept that both kinds of entities (the macroscopic objects and the
microparticles) exist in the same place at the same time. To avoid a strong onto-
logical contradiction, we have to reject the existence of the “world” or “universe”
and to understand that the macro-objects and the microparticles are in EDWs. The
most general and oldest framework of thinking, for us (the human beings as
observers), the “universe” should be replaced with EDWs: the epistemologically
different entities and their interactions really exist and “represent” EDWs. In a
particular EW (epistemological world), the existence of an entity is given by its
interactions with other entities within the same EW. Within the same place, at the
same “time,” there are ED entities within EDWs. Within EDWs perspective, the
main rule is that one EW does not exist for any EDW. So, there are the macro-EW,
the micro-EW, the ﬁeld-EW, the mind-EW (or life-EW), etc. The main notion of
our perspective is “correspondence:” an entity from one EW can correspond to an
entity or an amalgam of entities from an EDW. We emphasize that the notion of
correspondence does not have any ontological status, even if it establishes relations
between ED entities which have their ED ontological status. Each mind is an EW;
each brain/body is an entity that belongs to the macro-EW. In this chapter, we will
shortly investigate several “empirical” sciences (physics, cognitive (neuro)science,
and biology) within the framework of EDWs perspective.
12
A New Philosophical Paradigm of Thinking for Particular …
273

Now, let us have a look at physics. A table exists for my body because my body
is placed near that table, and both entities belong to the same EW, the macro-EW.
The table and the Earth interact due to the force of “gravity.” However, in the same
place/time, two amalgams of microparticles correspond to that table and the Earth.
An amalgam of microparticles is not identical with the table and, respectively, the
Earth since there are entities that belong to EDWs, the micro-EW, and the
macro-EW. If you consider that a table is identical with an amalgam of
microparticles, then, automatically, your body/brain is identical with an amalgam of
microparticles. Your body does not exist; therefore, you, who make the afﬁrmation,
do not exist! When you have a “pain” of your ﬁnger, that pain cannot exist since
“your” mind (the self) and “your” body is just an amalgam of microparticles, and at
this “level,” the pain cannot even exist. We have to accept that a table/planet is not
identical to an amalgam of microparticles. Still, the table and the microparticles are
ED entities that belong to EDWs (therefore, we can call them “epistemologically
different entities”). Within this new framework of thinking (our EDWs perspective),
all scientists and philosophers need to reject the notion of the world/universe;
moreover, the philosophers need to give up the classical distinction between
epistemology and ontology. There is no “God’s eye” or a “view from nowhere”
[16] just because these notions would imply a kind of “empty world.” Both notions
are meaningless in our academic approach (“nothing can appear from nothing”!)
within this new framework, the EDWs perspective.
How can we talk about the “differences” between these EDWs? Each EW is
“epistemologically different” from all EDWs. It means that these EDWs are neither
ontological “worlds” (Everett’s “many worlds” and “multiverse”) nor just “epis-
temological aspects” (Spinoza, Kant, Bohr or Putnam [17, 18]) of the same
“world.” These EDWs are represented by their epistemologically different entities
and their ED interactions. We repeat that the main rule of this perspective is that
“one EW does not exist for any EDW.” We cannot claim that one EW is more
“objectively” or “more realistic” than an EDW. All these ED entities and their
interactions (all EDWs) have the same status of objective reality. For instance, there
are “epistemologically different laws” for the microparticles and macro-particles.
Also, there are epistemologically different laws for electromagnetic waves and
microparticles. Therefore, there are different theories within the same science
(physics, for instance), but, in general, there are these EDWs, and scientists working
in this science have to deal with all these (external) entities which belong to EDWs.
Our verdict is the following: physicists have to be aware that there are ED entities
with ED “laws” representing EDWs (for instance, the ﬁeld-EW, the micro-EW, and
the macro-EW) all being placed in the same “place” at the same “time.”
Let us have a look at cognitive neuroscience. Scientists working within this
science often check for “correlations” between mental states and some neuronal
activation patterns. The majority of scientists working in this particular science have
accepted the identity theory in the last 50 years. From our viewpoint, the verdict we
elaborated for the micro-macro relationship is available for the mind-brain/body
problem: since the mind is an EW, while the brain/body is the brain/body is an
entity that belongs to the macro-EW, the mind and the brain involve EDWs,
274
G. Vacariu and M. Vacariu

therefore, the identity theory (mind = brain) is totally wrong. Again, since the
mental states do not exist for the neuronal states, the neurons and their activities do
not exist for the mental states, so it would be meaningless to check for the corre-
lations between these two ED states. So, the mind-brain/body problem is a
pseudo-problem since it introduces into discussion the direct relationships between
two epistemologically different entities which belong to EDWs.
A long time ago, psychology dealt with issues regarding the mind, while neu-
roscience was scrutinizing our brain. Cognitive neuroscience came into the game as
a uniﬁcation of these two particular sciences: psychology and neuroscience. Sci-
entists from all of these ﬁelds embraced the identity theory (mind = brain). How-
ever, in our view, cognitive neuroscience is a pseudoscience if we deﬁne “science”
as a domain in which scientists investigate certain entities and their laws. Cognitive
neuroscience is just a mixture of entities that belong to EDWs, and more than this,
what can transform this science in “pseudoscience” is that some entities are external
(parts of the brain/body), while the other entities are internal (that is, mental states
that are the mind-EW) [9].
To proclaim cognitive neuroscience as science, we need to pay attention to the
deﬁnition of “science” and “theory.” From our viewpoint, cognitive neuroscience is
a science that includes theories referring not only to the “causal laws” but also to
“correlations” between the epistemologically different entities which belong to
EDWs. According to EDWs perspective, we strongly emphasize that the main
notion from cognitive neuroscience, “correlations,” cannot have any ontological
status! So, what kind of science could scientists of this domain construct? The
EDWs perspective strongly indicates that cognitive neuroscience is a pseudoscience
[9].1 In the old framework, the unicorn world, even in physics, theories (like
quantum mechanics) have mixed EDWs. In physics, if a theory refers to the entities
from the same EW, that theory can refer to certain entities and their “causal” laws.
Suppose the theory refers to the entities which belong to EDWs. In that case, that
theory cannot refer either to the “causality” or the “identity” between epistemo-
logically different entities (there are neither “causal laws” nor “identities”). In this
case, that “scientiﬁc” theory is not scientiﬁc at all!
A particular case of the mind-brain problem (an important topic of cognitive
neuroscience) is given by the “image representation.” Where are these “mental”
representations? Let us return to our example: a human being perceives a “green
table” placed in front of her eyes. Does the “image” of that green table really exist
or not? We cannot reject the existence, somewhere, of this “mental” image;
otherwise, we would not be able to survive in our external environment. If we
accept the identity theory (mind = brain), then these image representations are in
our brains. However, if we look in our brains, we would not see/perceive an image
of this green table; we will see only neurons and their activation. Working within
the identity theory, scientists and philosophers have not given a clear answer to this
1 With the same argument constructed within the EDWs perspective, in our previous works, we
strongly indicated that all “interpretations” (being constructed within the unicorn world) of
quantum mechanics are totally wrong.
12
A New Philosophical Paradigm of Thinking for Particular …
275

problem. From our viewpoint, the “image” of that “green table” is not in the brain
but the mind. But where is the mind in relationship with the brain? As we wrote
above, the mind is an EW; the brain is an entity that belongs to the macro-EW.
Since we talk about two EDWs, the mind does not exist for the brain; the brain does
not exist for your mind. Inside the brain, using different “tools of observation,” we
can indirectly notice just neuronal patterns of activation or detect electromagnetic
waves around the brain (two sets of entities which also belong to EDWs, but these
sets of epistemologically different entities are not identical with the mind). Based on
this simple example, we have to reject the identity theory (the “mind” is identical
with the “brain”); these elements are not identical since the image is inside the
mind, but clearly, it is not inside the brain. The “identity theory” (constructed within
the unicorn world) has been wrongly assumed as a viable theory for decades by
researchers working in cognitive neuroscience and “philosophy of mind.” We need
to change this old and wrong paradigm of thinking (the unicorn world) with EDWs’
perspective accepting the existence of EDWs. The mind (an EW) corresponds to the
brain/body, a macro-entity placed in a macro environment, i.e., the macro-EW.
Biology is in a similar situation to cognitive neuroscience. Working within the
unicorn world, biologists have furnished different deﬁnitions of “life” (the main
notion in this science), but nobody has thought that life is an EW that does not exist
for the organism. Life and an organism mirrors the same pseudo-relationship
between two sets of entities/processes that belong, in fact, to two EDW: life is an
EW (for us, within the EDWs perspective, life = mind), while brain/body is an
entity which belongs to the macro-EW. The relationship between these epistemo-
logically different entities is the same as between mind and brain/body, just cor-
respondence, no more or less, since they are or belong to EDWs. Biologists must be
aware that it is impossible to elaborate laws that relate directly (causally) life to an
organism. Life is not “produced” by an organism, it is not “identical with/inside”
the organism, but it corresponds to the organism. Biologists have to elaborate a
theory about this correspondence, but not a (biological or physical) law relating to
entities that belong to EDWs. Biology is a science which deals with certain “causal
laws,” but also with “correlations” (like cognitive neuroscience), but not with
“identities.” Working within the wrong framework and elaborating statements
within the wrong framework, biologists can produce strong epistemological-
ontological contradictions or empty notions.
We have introduced ten principles of EDWs’ perspective elsewhere [5–14].
Based on these principles (Table 12.1), we have constructed a new paradigm of
thinking for philosophers (philosophy) and scientists (physics, cognitive neuro-
science, and biology). Human beings can observe (indirectly, through correspon-
dence) the ED entities of EDWs using certain “conditions of observation.” In some
cases, these conditions of observation involve certain measurement macro-
apparatus. For instance, a physicist “observes,” indirectly, an electron using an
electronic microscope. Each entity interacts with the entities which belong to the
same EW, no more. It has to be very clear that an entity from an EW does not exist
for the ED entities which belong to EDWs. Therefore, both the notion of “causality”
and “identity” referring to entities that belong to EDWs are wrong concepts
276
G. Vacariu and M. Vacariu

(“empty notions”)! When we refer to the entities that belong to EDWs, we have to
use “correlations” or “correspondences” not only for cognitive neuroscience but
also for physics and biology.
Particular Sciences (Physics, Cognitive Neuro(science),
Biology) and Their Theories (Which Refer
to the Epistemologically Different Entities and Their Laws)
within EDWs’ Perspective
What does “science” mean? Typically, we consider science a domain that deals with
certain “entities” and their “laws.” Science can contain more theories and approaches
referring to different entities which belong to different “levels” (about levels, see
below). A scientist must elaborate a theory referring to particular entities and their
relationships (“laws”). A particular science (for instance, physics) can deal with
epistemologically different entities that belong to several EDWs. Physics deals with
waves, microparticles, and macroparticles which belong to EDWs (for instance, the
ﬁeld/wave-EW, the micro-EW, and the macro-EW). Psychology deals with the
Table 12.1 Ten principles of EDWs’ perspective
Principle ID
Description
1
“Epistemologically different interactions constitute epistemologically different
objects, and epistemologically different objects determine epistemologically
different interactions”
2
“Any object exists only at “the surface,” due to the interactions that constitute
it”
3
“Any object exists in a single EW and interacts only with the objects from the
same EW”
4
“Any EW (a set of objects and their interactions) appears from and disappears
into nothing”
5
“Any EW is, therefore all EDWs share the same objective reality, even if one
EW does not exist for any other EDW”
6
“The I/self/mind (life) corresponds to a body (organism/cell). The self does not
exist for the body, the body does not exist for the self“
7
“The I is an EW. Therefore, the I is in a temporal framework, while the body
exists (in a spatio-temporal framework)”
8
“Having a certain set of components, from our point of view the body
corresponds to (but it is not composed of) an amalgam of macro-objects (arms,
legs etc.) (or cells) and their relationships. The body and its corresponding parts
(or cells) belong to the same macro-EW. Also, a body corresponds to a certain
set of microparticles belonging to the micro-EW”
9
“Certain mental states and processes form the knowledge that is the I”
10
“As an entity, the I has unity as an indeterminate individuality (it does not have
spatial dimensions)”
12
A New Philosophical Paradigm of Thinking for Particular …
277

mind, which is an EW. Neuroscience deals with the brain (part of the body, an entity
that belongs to the macro-EW) and its parts. Biology deals with living beings/
individuals that presuppose a link between life and organism, that is, a link between
an EW (life) and biological elements (different “parts” of the body) that belong all to
the macro-EW. Cognitive neuroscience deals with entities that belong to EDWs: the
macro-EW (brain) and the mind-EW. Within EDWs perspective, the relationships
between mental states and neuronal patterns of activation are the correspondence; we
strongly emphasize there is no direct relationship, so any “causal laws” or “identi-
ties” between the mind (its mental states) and the brain (“its” neuronal patters of
activation) cannot exist! Also, there are no laws between the organism and life: there
are only certain correlations or correspondences, but no more. People working in
cognitive neuroscience search for “correlations” between certain mental states and
neuronal activation patterns, and the framework of thinking is the identity theory. As
we emphasized above, from our viewpoint, the identity theory has been a wrong
framework. From EDWs’ perspective, scientists have to ﬁnd the correspondences
(no ontological status) between certain particular mental states (the mind-EW) and
neuronal activation patterns of the brain (the macro-EW) since there are EDWs. We
can elaborate new theories based on such correspondences, but we have to be aware
the “correspondences” do not refer to “causalities” or “identities.” The existences of
EDWs reject many “causalities” (pseudo-causalities) and “identities” between cer-
tain ED entities just because these entities are neither the same nor placed within the
same “world” but are placed in EDWs.
The parts-whole relationship appears in all these sciences. In fact, it appears
everywhere! An entity can be composed of parts that belong to the same EW. For
instance, a table comprises ﬁve parts (four legs and the top). The table and these ﬁve
elements belong to the same EW, the macro-EW. We can talk about an “organi-
zational threshold” between these ﬁve parts and the table as a whole (the philo-
sophical “part-whole” relationship). However, the table is also composed of a huge
amalgam of microparticles. The table and the microparticles belong to EDWs. We
can talk about an “epistemological-ontological threshold” since the whole, and its
parts belong to EDWs. The brain and its parts belong to the same EW, the
macro-EW. Since the mind is an EW and the brain/body is an entity that belongs to
an EDW (the macro-EW), then when we talk about mind and brain, we talk about
the EDWs (and not about certain entities (mind and brain) placed within the same
world, the unicorn world). Moreover, the mind cannot be decomposed. Being an
EW, all thoughts are the mind-EW, but it is wrong to believe that the mind is the
sum of all its mental states. The famous sentence “the whole is greater than the sum
of its parts” (constructed within the unicorn world!) is translated, within EDWs
perspective, in “the whole corresponds to “its” parts.” Again, in science, it can be a
“scientiﬁc” theory that refers to the epistemologically different entities which
belong to EDWs. Still, we have to be aware that such theory can refer neither to the
“causal laws” nor to the identity between certain entities.
Common for physics is that all the entities are outside the organism/self. We talk
very shortly only about two theories of this science: quantum mechanics and
Einstein’s special and general relativity, the entities and EDWs involved in these
278
G. Vacariu and M. Vacariu

theories. General relativity deals with the macro-particles which belong to the
macro-EW. However, as we indicate in our work [13], Einstein’s special relativity
involves many macro-EDWs (the macro-entities are in “motion” with different
speeds). Because of the mixture of EDWs and rejecting the ontology of space-time
in our work, using only “motion,” we re-wrote Einstein’s special and general
relativity without “space-time” in our work [13]. As a theory, quantum mechanics
deals with microparticles and electromagnetic waves. The main problematic notions
are “nonlocality” and “entanglement” constructed within the wrong framework, the
unicorn world. In quantum mechanics, there are at least two EDWs: the ﬁeld/wave-
EW and the micro-EW. The physicists have to be aware that they cannot elaborate
any scientiﬁc theory which includes “causal laws” between the microparticles and
the electromagnetic waves since it would imply entities that belong to these two
EDWs. With our EDWs perspective, we can talk about the “locality” between two
microparticles. With EDWs perspective, we return to a kind of “Einstein’s local-
ism,” but the “locality” between two microparticles and those two particles (the
micro-EW) correspond to an indivisible electromagnetic wave (the ﬁeld-EW). The
“entanglement” of those two microparticles does not have any ontological status in
the micro-EW. The entanglement is represented by the electromagnetic wave,
which belongs to the ﬁeld-EW.
In cognitive science, different approaches deal with the relationship between
mental states and neuronal activation patterns [19]. The main approaches of cog-
nitive science have been: computationalism, connectionism, and dynamical system
theory. All these (and others) approaches have been constructed within the identity
theory. Computationalism refers to the mind (“mental representations” and their
“computations”); connectionism refers to the brain (distributed representations and
their activation); the dynamical system theory refers to brain/mind, organism, and
external environment. Working within the unicorn world, almost all scientists have
elaborated theories and approaches within the “identity theory” (mind = brain).
There are some exceptions; one, for instance, is John Searle, who believed that “the
brain produces the mind.” From our viewpoint, computationalism refers to the
mind-EW, while connectionism and the dynamical system refer to the brain (and
the external environment, the macro-EW).
In the philosophy of mind and cognitive neuroscience, there have been some key
elements like ““primitives,” “levels of analysis,” and the “interaction between
levels,”; “processes,” “structures,” “threshold,” “self-organization,”; “emergence,”
“habituation,” “tasks,”; etc. Many philosophers and researchers have considered
that
these
notions
or
elements
involve
several
distinctions
like
continuity-discontinuity, (state of) motion-(state of) rest, variability-stability,
part-whole, and micro–macro” [2, 4, 5, 10]. In his works, Gabriel Vacariu indicated
the construction of all these “elements” and “philosophical distinctions” within the
unicorn world with various complicated Ptolemaic epicycles.
In cognitive neuroscience (a sub-domain of cognitive science), most researchers
have worked under the “identity theory.” The main topics of this “science” have
been “localization” (“differentiation–integration” in the brain), “binding problem,”
and “multisensory integration.” Our book [10] investigated the debate between
12
A New Philosophical Paradigm of Thinking for Particular …
279

“optimism vs. skepticism” in cognitive neuroscience. Our book concluded that
cognitive neuroscience is a pseudoscience (if “science” means a domain in which
the researchers search either for the “causal laws” or even “identities” between the
certain entities). Why? Because cognitive neuroscientists search for “correlations”
and not “causalities.” Moreover, in our book, we indicated that even “correlations”
is a very approximate notion since it refers to ED entities that belong to EDWs (the
mind and the macro-EW where the brain is placed). Cognitive neuroscience is just a
“science” with many theoretical and experimental data, but this “information”
belongs to two particular sciences, neuroscience and psychology. And these par-
ticular sciences refer to ED entities that belong to two EDWs. From our point of
view, solutions for the main problems in cognitive neuroscience are partially wrong
since they are constructed within the identity theory. Within the unicorn world, we
“believe that the status of cognitive neuroscience is that of a “no ontology
landscape.””.
We recall that working within the “unicorn world” (“world”/“universe”), sci-
entists from various particular sciences (physics, cognitive neuroscience, biology)
have worked with many wrong concepts and elaborated wrong theories. For
instance, a very used concept in these sciences is “levels.” From our viewpoint,
neither “levels” nor the “ultimate/fundamental level” exist in the “world” because
the “world”/“universe” itself does not exist. The “epistemological levels” are
referred to as the identity theory (wrong “umbrella” since the ED entities belong to
EDWs), while the “ontological levels” produce strong ontological contradictions
within the unicorn world (the “universe”). Also, “complexity” or “emergence” are
other “Ptolemaic epicycle” in these sciences created so as to reﬂect, in some cases,
the pseudo-relationships between the ED entities which belong to EDWs. These
“Ptolemaic epicycles” are heterogeneous models, mixing elements that belong to
EDWs. EDWs perspective does not cope with such hybrid models.
For solving the greatest problems of a particular science, a philosopher has to
investigate the framework in which
• one or more scientiﬁc theories has been constructed; or
• one or more particular sciences have been elaborated.
The old paradigm, the universe/world (the unicorn world, as we called it), has to
be totally rejected: the “universe/world” has no ontology. The reader has to be
aware that working within the old and wrong paradigm (accepting the existence
only of the “fundamental level,” for instance) means she rejects the existence of her
own body and mind (which takes this decision)! We emphasize that everybody has
been working within the “unicorn world” (= all entities are placed within the
“world”/ “universe”) until Gabriel Vacariu discovered the existence of EDWs!
280
G. Vacariu and M. Vacariu

Conclusion
Our attempt here was to indicate that scientists working within physics, cognitive
(neuro)science, and biology (and also the philosophers) should replace the old and
wrong paradigm of thinking, the unicorn world (“world”/“universe”), with the new
paradigm, the EDWs perspective. Some EDWs have their ontologies (like the
mind-EW), some EDWs do not have their ontologies, but their sets of ED entities
and their ED interactions (described by the theories which belong to these particular
sciences) really exist, i.e., these entities have an ontological background within a
particular EW (which may exist or not). For instance, the macro-EW or the
micro-EW, as a whole, do not have their ontologies, but these EDWs “denote” the
micro-entities or the macro-entities which really exist. Again, to avoid any onto-
logical contradiction, the main rule of EDWs is that “an EW does not exist for any
EDW”! Furthermore, we strongly emphasize that each set of epistemologically
different entities (and their interactions/laws) have the same objective reality. One
main reason for this “objective reality” is that we cannot reduce the brain to an
amalgam of microparticles, and the mind corresponds to the brain/body and its
external environment; the mind also corresponds to an amalgam of microparticles
or electromagnetic waves, but without its correspondence mainly to the brain, the
mind would not have existed!
Core Messages
• We introduce a new paradigm of thinking for physics, cognitive neuro-
science, biology, and philosophy.
• The “universe/world” is replaced by the “epistemologically different
worlds” (EDWs).
• Each epistemological world contains its own entities and their interactions.
• There are only correspondences between the entities/phenomena which
belong to these EDWs.
References
1. Terhesiu D, Vacariu G (2002) Brain, mind and the perspective of the observer. Revue
Roumaine de Philosophie 46/1–2
2. Vacariu G (2005) Mind, brain, and epistemologically different worlds. Synthese 147:515–548
3. Vacariu
G
(2006)
The
epistemologically
different
worlds
perspective
and
some
pseudo-notions from quantum mechanics. Analele Universitatii Bucuresti
4. Vacariu G (2007) Epistemologically Different Worlds (Gabriel Vacariu’s PhD thesis posted
online in 2007 by the staff of University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia)
5. Vacariu G (2008) Epistemologically Different Worlds. Editura Universitatii din Bucuresti
12
A New Philosophical Paradigm of Thinking for Particular …
281

6. Vacariu M, Vacariu G (2010) Mind, life and matter in the Hyperverse. Editura Universitatii
din Bucuresti
7. Vacariu G (2012) Cognitive neuroscience versus Epistemologically Different Worlds. Editura
Universitatii din Bucuresti
8. Vacariu G (2014) More troubles with cognitive neuroscience. Einstein’s Theory of Relativity
and the Hyperverse. Editura Universitatii din Bucuresti
9. Vacariu G, Vacariu M (2015) Is cognitive neuroscience a pseudo-science? Datagroup
10. Vacariu G (2016) Illusions of human thinking: on concepts of mind, reality, and universe in
psychology, neuroscience, and physics (English and Germany). Springer Publishing
Company
11. Vacariu G, Vacariu M (2016) Dark matter and dark energy, space and time, and other
pseudo-notions in cosmology. Datagroup
12. Vacariu G, Vacariu M (2017) Self as an epistemological world. Datagroup
13. Vacariu G, Vacariu M (2017) From hypernothing to hyperverse: EDWs, hypernothing, wave
and particle, elementary particles, thermodynamics, and einstein’s relativity without
“spacetime.” Datagroup
14. Vacariu G, Vacariu M (2019) The metaphysics of epistemologically different worlds.
Datagroup
15. Vacariu G, Vacariu M (2020) Rethinking “dark matter” within the epistemologically different
worlds (EDWs) perspective. In: Smith M (ed) (CEO, IntechOpen, United Kingdom),
Cosmology 2020—The Current State. https://www.intechopen.com/search?term=cosmology
%202020
16. Nagel T (1974) What is it like to be a bat? Philos Rev 4(LXXXIII):435–450
17. Putnam H (1987) The many faces of realism. Open Court, LaSalle
18. Putnam H (1990) A defence of Internal realism. In: Conant J (ed) Realism with a human face.
Harvard University Press
19. Clark A (2001) Mindware—an introduction to the philosophy of cognitive science. Oxford
University Press, New York, Oxford
Gabriel Vacariu has been employed at Philosophy, Bucharest
University (Romania) since 1998. He got a Ph.D. at the
University of New South Wales, School of Philosophy (Sydney,
Australia). He has been a reviewer at Synthese (USA) and MIT
Press (USA). His general ﬁelds of interest are Philosophy of
Cognitive (Neuro)Science, Philosophy of Physics, Philosophy of
mind, Kant, Descartes, etc. Alone or together with Mihai Vacariu,
Gabriel Vacariu has written 12 books.
282
G. Vacariu and M. Vacariu

Mihai Vacariu is an assistant-professor at Faculty of Journalism
and Sciences of Communication, University of Bucharest. He has
a master's degree in communications management at the
University of South Australia and a Ph.D. in communication with
a thesis on Dostoevsky and communist censorship.
12
A New Philosophical Paradigm of Thinking for Particular …
283

13
Indicators of Variation in Thinking
Actions and Reactions
Trevor J. Tebbs
“A mind is a terrible thing to waste; a mind is a terrible thing to
erase”.
Donna Ford [1]
Summary
This chapter focuses speciﬁcally on the global community, or population of
children variously described as talented, advanced, exceptional learners, highly
able, or profoundly gifted. While sensitivity to prevailing societal dynamics
renders all school-aged children vulnerable, the idiosyncratic notions relating to
gifted children’s educational and psychological well-being are notably inﬂuen-
tial. Their distinctive traits and assets result in a signiﬁcant divergence of
thinking and actions, reactions and dimensions of thinking among those who
touch the lives of these young people. Clearly, the extent to which any child
ﬂourishes or fades depends on the degree to which their value is acknowledged
or rejected. However, gifted children are particularly susceptible to facing
The author is a board member of the Junior Academy of Science of Ukraine (under the auspices of
UNESCO) and also of the Editorial Board of Theory and Practice of Science Education.
T. J. Tebbs (&)
Institute of Gifted Child of the National Academy of Educational Sciences, Kyiv, Ukraine
e-mail: trevor@chandelier-foundation.org; trevor@tebbspsychology.com
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research
(USERN), Vermont, USA
161, Float Bridge Road, Castleton 05735, VT, UK
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh (eds.), Thinking, Integrated Science 7,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04075-7_13
285

life-changing judgments, decisions, reactions, and attitudes. Just how academi-
cians, scientists, researchers, politicians, pediatricians, psychologists, school
administrators, family members, peers, teachers, other professionals, and, of
course, the children themselves think and act is a matter of serious consequence.
The narrative is founded on thirty years of personal experience, real-world cases,
current literature, and insights gained from the implementation of the holistic
‘Chandeleirian’ approach to the assessment.
The basic Chandelier chart showing the four sections.
[Adapted with permission from author: Trevor J. Tebbs—The Chandelier©
approach with all explanations and other matters pertaining are registered in
accordance with Title 17, United States Cod The registration number is TXu 1–
799 – 790, March 2012.]
Keywords
Dimensions of thinking  Giftedness  Talent development  Thinking actions
and reactions
QR Code
286
T. J. Tebbs

Scanning the QR code directs you to the word cloud of the chapter that is made up
of the words we discussed throughout the whole book in relation to the chapter’s
keyword, which is intentionally not included in the word cloud. Find the keyword
and put it in place in the puzzle according to the clues provided in Chap. 36. The
mystery hidden in the puzzle is the quote of THINKING: Bioengineering of Science
and Art.
Introduction
Sternberg [2] wrote: “We need gifted individuals.” This ‘need’ is foundational to
the purpose of the chapter. Admittedly, while it is written primarily with ‘gifted
individuals’ in mind, it should not be read as an elitist document. The author
understands thinking actions, reactions, and dimensions of thinking of all young
people, if positive, acknowledged, and put to good use, beneﬁt themselves, and are
of immeasurable value to society. However, there are children whose ‘gift,’ talent,
or potential for creative productivity is conspicuously high. Life for these young
people and those who care for them may be challenging, especially when levels of
knowledge and understanding vary between sparse at best and mythic at worse.
A child’s efforts to overcome such obstacles by their own agency, without parental
and professional support, puts potential, in whatever way it is manifested, at risk.
The opportunity to draw attention to the contribution this population offers our
world is both timely and a privilege. Hopefully, sharing insights gained from three
decades of work with gifted young people will enhance understanding of the
variance in thinking actions, reactions, and dimensions.
Acknowledgment and encouragement or disregard and discouragement from
individuals with whom children interact day-by-day is pivotal. Thinking actions
and reactions and dimensions of thinking are inﬂuenced either way. Whether we be
parents, family members, mentors, psychologists, doctors, scientists, politicians,
how we react to gifted children determines the degree to which potential is realized.
Understandings
The following ‘understandings’ offer a quick ‘tutorial’ with respect to the author’s
intentions in writing the chapter and the means whereby readers, perhaps unfamiliar
with psychoeducational matters relating to giftedness and gifted children, develop a
deeper understanding of the community. Persson [3], citing Wilms [4], wrote: “In
an international perspective, intellectually gifted individuals are often seen as the
hope of the future.” Almost forty years further on, the world is no less in need of
enlightened individuals blessed with the ability to think creatively and critically.
13
Indicators of Variation in Thinking Actions and Reactions
287

For those especially interested in this community, according to Persson [3], in 2008,
there were more than 79,000 research papers, dissertations, and books available for
personal erudition.
Giftedness
“Perhaps one of the most challenging and debated topics in gifted education is
whether a uniﬁed deﬁnition of giftedness can or should be a goal for the ﬁeld, or
whether a uniﬁed deﬁnition of giftedness is possible” [5]. True or not, our focus is
not to deﬁne or argue the case for giftedness; rather, it is to present the most
frequent intrinsic and extrinsic, positive or negative indicators of inﬂuence on
thinking actions and reactions and dimensions of thinking related to giftedness and
gifted children.
The Newfoundland & Labrador Education Department reproduced a document
[6] designed to provide teachers with a deeper understanding of children considered
gifted to the extent they may be challenged in appropriate ways (S.W., Personal
communication, August 2020). It remains very useful to the degree it provides
insights into the different strengths and proclivities typically associated with stu-
dents considered gifted and talented.
Explanation of Indicators of Variation and Thinking Actions
and Reactions
The chapter is based on understanding the phrase indicators of variation related to
personal views that, when expressed, or operated upon, in various ways, e.g.,
cognitively, verbally, body language, facial expressions, result from some quality of
thought. They inﬂuence or modify a person’s own thinking actions and reactions or
those of others.
Indicators of Variation in Thinking Actions and Reactions
in the Context of Giftedness
Typically, gifted children are distinguished in a learning environment by reason of
high but naturally occurring levels of intensity towards various aspects of life and
learning. One notable complaint heard from teachers about intensity is focused on a
child’s strong desire to show or share knowledge by blurting out answers or some
fact of special interest. Teachers become quickly aware of how levels of dislike
escalate among the child’s peers. In turn, this often creates a complex set of vari-
ations in thinking actions and reactions involving everyone, including school
psychologists and pediatricians [7, 8]. Levels of maturity might determine how
288
T. J. Tebbs

conscious young people are of this behavior but depending on whether the per-
ceptions of others are afﬁrming or antipathetic, they may either beneﬁt or suffer in
various ways. Input from colleagues, clients, parents, teachers and fellow profes-
sionals worldwide, research, and thirty years of personal experience in the ﬁeld
provides abundant empirical and other evidence to support this phenomenon.
Antipathetic Perspective
Negative attitudes, judgments, decisions, application of thinking based on
unfounded notions, ignorance of true facts, paucity of professional training, and a
bias towards a deﬁcit view of behavior—all are potent enough to inﬂuence how a
child thinks and acts in ways potentially unproductive, hazardous, even to the point
of suicidal ideation and completion [9, 10].
Affirmation
It is also potent in that it may be realized, for example, by invitation to share time
and ideas with those who think and act in similarly critical and creative ways or
being a recipient of wise judgments based on sound knowledge and understanding,
Baring some unanticipated problem, children are likely to think and act more wisely
in these situations and on into the future.
Back Story
Traditional and non-traditional conceptualizations of high or extraordinary ability
have been responsible for identifying and developing individuals, not only con-
sidered capable of extraordinary accomplishment in multiple avenues of human
activity but also performing according to expectations. These conceptualizations
have also been responsible for the neglect of individuals perhaps capable of
extraordinary accomplishment but, for whatever reason, have remained unidentiﬁed
and unsupported and therefore denied self-fulﬁlling opportunities enjoyed by oth-
ers. This anomaly not only continues to inﬂuence the futures of young people
whose potential remains unacknowledged but also deprives society of ‘wealth’
however deﬁned.
The situation is exacerbated by a plethora of long-established perceptions of, and
attitudes towards, notions of giftedness. Some are positive; others are not. Whatever
the case, signiﬁcant modiﬁcations take place in self-concept, self-efﬁcacy, and
self-esteem, even to the degree gifted and, or talented individuals are either moti-
vated to realize their potential or become apathetically indifferent and ‘wither on the
vine.’ This is critically important on an individual level through to matters of global
signiﬁcance.
Sternberg [2], recognizing the pressing need for a new generation of young
people intellectually and creatively adept at solving problems worldwide, writes,
“We need gifted individuals to address … problems of global warming, inter-
minable wars, staggering levels of air pollution … gifted people passionate about
solving problems rather than enhancing their own prestige.” His justiﬁcation
13
Indicators of Variation in Thinking Actions and Reactions
289

prompts the question: “How may people’s thinking actions and reactions be
directed towards motivation as opposed to witting or unwitting disparagement?”
There follow matters basic to our knowledge and understanding of young people
whose potential, if realized, could make a positive difference in our world. Einstein
is reputed to have said: “It is the supreme art of the teacher to awaken joy in creative
expression and knowledge” [11].
How and What Gifted Children Learn from an Early Age
A correlation between visual attention and gathering information indicates learning
begins at a very early age [12]. Smutny et al. [13], referencing work done by Kolata
[14], report the “strong correlation between visual attention in the ﬁrst six months of
life and high IQ scores at 4–6 years.” Silverman [15, 16] writes: “Children who
score in the gifted range on IQ tests in early childhood - as early as 18 months –
demonstrate advanced achievement and mastery of skills in later years.” Also, Harter
[17, 18] notes, “Beginning in early childhood, children start the lifelong process of
self-discovery. The emergence of a coherent and positive self-concept is undeniably
a critical aspect of social and emotional development … children who come to know
and understand themselves acquire an important guide for their behavior and social
relationships. As such, they steadily begin to develop a sense of self.”
During these early years, the consequences of all formative learning experiences,
including exposure to the thinking actions and reactions of others, are lifelong and
life-changing. A natural sensitivity to inﬂuences, such as neglect or abuse, social
acceptance or rejection, success or failure, will impact any child’s range of thinking,
actions, and reactions. As they mature, dynamic events in the family through to
major world events shape their thinking actions and reactions extrinsically and
intrinsically. How they think and act will reﬂect the form and substance of lessons
learned. And importantly, with respect to gifted children, McCluskey [19] notes
wisely: “Learning may well come easier later in life if a solid foundation has been
laid through environmental enrichment in the beginning.”
Learning and Neuroplasticity
While some say we learn as we sleep [20], ‘learning,’ in its broadest sense, takes
place every moment of our day. Neuroplasticity, from a neurological perspective, is
as critical to the development of an early learner’s intact brain as it is to the
reclamation of a damaged brain [21]. McGarvey [22] writes: “Our brains can
change, physically, because of learning …. In a process called “experience de-
pendent neuroplasticity,” neural connections grow based on what we are learning.
Repeating the same thoughts, feelings, and behaviors increases synaptic connec-
tivity, strengthens neural networks, and creates new neurons through learning.”
290
T. J. Tebbs

A gifted child tends to gather more connections in a shorter time. The neuro-
logical perspective of learning is especially fascinating when considered in the
context of child development, e.g., how social interaction impacts cognitive de-
velopment, how they think and act, and how others think and act around them [23–
26].
How a Gifted Child Might Be Perceived in a Regular
Classroom
Returning to the Canadian document [6], consider, for example, how even the ﬁrst
three characteristics might impact a teacher’s thinking actions, reactions, and
dimensions of thinking day-by-day. She/he is responsible for delivering a meticu-
lously planned lesson to a mixed-ability class of children. Most of them ﬁnd it hard
to remember answers or pose unforeseen and ask irritating questions. Some teachers
are genuinely excited by a child learning more at a quicker pace. Others are so
irritated by constant energetic blurting out of answers; they share concerns about
attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) with the parents, advise a doctor’s
visit, or some level of behavior modiﬁcation. Upon hearing such concerns, as
Mahoney offers, “Some parents want to let go and hope for the best, while others
may cling to their fears and overmanage their child’s life. Reaching a balance is
complex” [27].
Knowing how quickly their child learns may be disconcerting to parents and
others. It is indeed complex yet fundamentally important to a young child beginning
to understand the weft and warp constituent to the fabric of life. When various
academic, behavioral, or psychological problems become sufﬁciently apparent to
demand careful attention, the necessity of achieving a balance during childhood
becomes crystal clear.
Clarity is especially necessary when working with children and their parents in a
clinical environment. Years of pedagogical and clinical experience along with
academic research associated with parenting in different sectors of society and, or
attitudes towards different patterns of behavior [28] conﬁrm how thinking actions
and reactions in children are mediated by the dynamics experienced in the home
environment. Studies indicate how experiences especially associated with parenting
styles, inﬂuence the formulation of self-concept and related aspects salient to a
child’s academic, creative, and social-emotional well-being [29, 30].
13
Indicators of Variation in Thinking Actions and Reactions
291

Learning and Indications Associated with Parenting Styles
Parenting styles play a determinative role in the early period of development – and
speaking as a grandparent, they remain powerfully inﬂuential over a lifetime
[31, 32]: Maccoby and Martin [33] highlight four styles: neglectful, authoritarian,
permissive, and authoritative.
While all parenting styles make a difference to all children, our focus will be on
authoritarian and authoritative styles. Each ‘style’ frames the experience of atypical
children in different ways at home, in school, and in other community settings
[34–38].
Chaoyi He [39], a student whose childhood experience reﬂects traditional Chi-
nese authoritarian parenting styles, studied how they might impact a child’s
development. Her research encapsulates effects indicative of both healthy or
harmful thinking actions and reactions associated with each style. Citing many
supporting authorities on the subject [39, 40], Chaoyi He concludes: “Authoritarian
parents are characterized as being extremely strict … lacking warmth and
responsiveness … methods of control … not limited to threats, coercion, guilt
induction, love withdrawal, and punishment … authoritarian parenting is associated
with many externalizing and internalizing problems in both girls and boys. For
example: children who experience perfectionistic pressures from parents are more
prone to high levels of perfectionism, rigidity, critical attitudes, and anxiety …
internalizing problems … lower levels of life satisfaction … and less engagement in
classroom activities.”
With respect to authoritative parenting, again citing many scholars [39, 41],
Chaoyi found: “Authoritative parents are characterized as making reasonable
demands and being highly responsive … ensuring the youngster has appropriate
support and guidance to succeed and be independent. They recognize children’s
rights and individual differences … continually convey caring, love, and warmth …
children raised by authoritative parents are more likely to become independent,
self-reliant, socially accepted, academically successful, be well-behaved with good
emotional control and regulation, and have happier dispositions.”
Our own observations or experiences probably conﬁrm how a child’s general
demeanor and well-being depend on parenting [42]. Ross [43] describes how dis-
crepancies “between the intellectual and social-emotional development of the gifted
child often creates stress for the child and parents alike.” A recent study was
conducted to determine if achievement-related feedback from family and school
“predicts early adolescents’ academic self-concept and intrinsic task values.”
Feedback from competent parents was shown to make a difference in a positive
direction [44].
292
T. J. Tebbs

Indications Associated with Perceptions of Giftedness
Giftedness is not a new concept. One may surmise it is a condition celebrated as a
naturally occurring element of the human experience for untold millennia. For the
most part, we can only speculate on what constituted giftedness in the minds of
human beings through the ages. Despite the debate about giftedness, we each might
intuit, sense, or react in some way to its presence. Daglioglu [45] writes:
“Throughout the history of civilizations, gifted people have been pioneering various
developments and changes in the ﬁelds of technology, science, knowledge and
social and educational ﬁelds that changes the human life and that people follow
with amazement and surprise.”
Way back in time, giftedness was evident in the stunning creativity and inge-
nuity of human beings as observed in 2000-year-old stone temples in Petra or
4000-year-old structures such as Stonehenge or the 17,000-year-old paintings on
the cave walls of Lascaux. A recent visit to the Albertini Museum in Vienna
provided a once-in-ten-years’ opportunity to stand millimeters away from Durer’s
exquisite rendering of a hare completed in 1502. How he managed to produce the
portrait with accuracy equal to that of a twenty-ﬁrst century camera is awe-
inspiring. That was a measure of giftedness hard to mistake! Judging by the crowds
moving slowly through the exhibition, Durer’s giftedness was appreciated by
people from many parts of the world.
With respect to giftedness in twenty-ﬁrst century children, intuition alone has
become increasingly meaningless to ofﬁcials burdened with the responsibility for
making major decisions. In the USA, there are serious discrepancies. The realities
of public education mean something far less esoteric is considered essential. Much
depends on how giftedness is perceived state to state, even among school districts
[46]. In some localities, parental input may be acceptable, but as regards accom-
modating or encouraging expressions of giftedness, there are no guarantees. Typ-
ically, parents face only frustration if they arrive at school demanding special
accommodations for their child based only on intuition. All too often, a parent is
regarded as ‘fussy,’ convinced their child ‘deserves’ more attention because he or
she is ‘gifted.’ A principal was heard to say, “Every child is gifted in my school! I
treat them all the same!” Sadly, equal treatment is not always equitable. Many
factors already complicate the lives of gifted individuals. The way people cling to
different perceptions of giftedness adds further complications.
Eagleman [47] regarded perception: “As a construction that does not accurately
represent the outside … when we see only what we need to know.” As cited in
Zigman [48], Metzinger [49] regards perception, as demonstrated by neuroscience,
not only the content of our conscious experience “but also an extremely selective
way of representing information.”
Prejudicial perceptions may be rooted in a lack of knowledge and training,
ignorance, disbelief, disdain, unquestioned myth, social class, racial inequality,
culture, and bias. They are known to inﬂuence not only the thinking actions and
reactions of those operating on such perceptions but also those impacted by them
13
Indicators of Variation in Thinking Actions and Reactions
293

[50]. There are those who, when ﬁrst encountering individuals who, although being
reported as gifted, may not look or act ‘the part,’ are apt to misjudge them and
respond inappropriately to their needs. Such elitist perceptions may easily lead to
the preclusion of indigenous, non-white individuals of non-traditional gender and
those who speak in languages or accents with which they are unfamiliar.
As an example, while knowing nothing about Stephen Hawking, how might we
think and act when ﬁrst introduced to him? How willingly would we be to spend
time with one of the world’s greatest scientists as he struggled to communicate with
us? It may take the will, patience, empathy, and emotional stamina to adjust one’s
thinking and immediate reaction in a positive direction. A former student, theo-
retical physicist Raphael Bousso, had “to learn to shake off his awe and relax” and
understand him as “a joyful and lighthearted person, not to be burdened by
excessively respectful and convoluted interactions” [51].
Twice Exceptionality (2e): The Deficit Perspective
and Disadvantaged Children
Children considered twice-exceptional, or 2e, are described as showing “a pattern of
extreme strengths combined with areas of signiﬁcant difﬁculty” [52], a perfect
description of Steven Hawking.
Bousso’s account underlines this fact: young people considered 2e are particu-
larly susceptible to negative perceptions. Reliable estimates of the community of 2e
children worldwide are difﬁcult to obtain. As Heuser et al. [53] point out, “Per-
ceptions of giftedness are largely culturally determined, inseparable from the
norms, values, beliefs, and priorities of a people, as well as from the socio-historical
and socio-political realities of a country or region.”
However, for the statistical-minded, it is thought between 2 and 4% of children
in the USA are twice-exceptional. The World Disability Report [54] provided an
idea of the global 2e community ten years ago. Approximately 120 million children
under 14 years of age were considered disabled. Further research is required;
however, assuming perhaps 2.5% of that community were 2–3 standard deviations
above average in terms of cognitive ability, one might surmise as many as 3–4
million children were treated with a bias towards disability as opposed to their
strengths. One might wonder how those children think and act and what difference
it would make if their potential
were acknowledged and accommodated
appropriately?
Regardless of the statistics, as a respected colleague noted, “There are so many
precious children, youth, and adult learners who have talents but they are dis-
criminated against and excluded from valuable opportunities in education, the
workforce, and life in general” (K.M. Personal communication, August 2020).
Dinishak [55] wrote: “Deﬁcit approaches are critiqued for conceptualizing the
target individual or group primarily (or even solely) in terms of their perceived
deﬁciencies, dysfunctions, problems, needs, and limitations. In the past few
294
T. J. Tebbs

decades, across many ﬁelds of inquiry (e.g., psychiatry, psychology, linguistics,
sociology, education, disability studies, and anthropology) and outside the academy
(e.g., by advocacy groups and practitioners in the helping professions), including
autism and other psychiatric conditions … some critics go so far as to argue that a
deﬁcit approach to understanding human differences diminishes people’s life
chances and even their humanity.”
To counter the rather dystopian view of 2e young people and their future, a study
conducted by Akar and Akar [56] is inspiring. As a truly 2e individual, born with
albinism and a 90% loss of vision, Amit (pseudonym) beneﬁted by encountering
individuals who, despite his condition, recognized the indications of his potential
for giftedness. They focused on his strengths. Amit’s mother described him as
“sensitive, intelligent, successful, self-conﬁdent, hardworking, respectful.” Others
presented him as precocious, very intelligent, and among the top 1% of the student
population in Turkey. Amit succeeded in all his studies without any special support
or extra time despite his visual impairment. As a Ph.D., he is working as a senior
executive in an international company in Turkey. In a recent e-mail, he wrote:
“Rather than giving up, I searched for alternative techniques to speed up my test
solving. Used magniﬁer in one hand and pencil in the other, so that simultaneously I
can read and write, luckily found telescopic glass to free my hand holding mag-
niﬁer, I started to do calculations in my mind instead of by writing” (I.S. Personal
communication, August 27, 2020).
The following real-world case is more illustrative of the degree to which gifted
teenagers suffer from a disability bias, especially at a time when they, as Ragelienė
[26, 57, 58] notes: “construct their own unique sense of identity and ﬁnd the social
environment where they can belong to and create meaningful relationships with
other people.” Nigel (pseudonym) complained of anxiety and depression. His
parents had desperately sought help and guidance for him because he had, on
numerous occasions, intimated a desire to commit suicide. He explained he was
perplexed. He questioned whether or not he was gifted. Even though he recognized
his leadership skills, he considered himself ‘damaged goods.’ This sense of
worthlessness pervaded his whole sense of self. His teachers were fully persuaded
he was not ‘gifted’ but quite unintelligent, behaviorally disordered, a candidate for
special education services, and at risk, not only of failing to graduate but, more
troubling, doing himself harm.
Despite evidence of his giftedness, the reaction of his teachers, their judgments,
and subsequent decisions based on mythical perceptions and a strict, reinforced
authoritarian view served only to exacerbate the situation. It was not until he left
school and was supported by a caring, more authoritative mother did he begin to
explore his strengths, grow in conﬁdence, and move forward. In a recent conver-
sation, Nigel’s mother (P. O. Personal communication July 2020) expressed great
pride in her son. She spoke of her relief as he slowly but successfully took charge of
his own destiny.
13
Indicators of Variation in Thinking Actions and Reactions
295

Misdiagnosis
It is important to realize young people, despite conspicuous levels of ability or
talent, are human and thus subject to all the usual conditions experienced by human
beings. Kaufmann, Kalbﬂeisch, and Castellanos [59] issue a caution: “A child
whose behavior causes him/her to be impaired academically, socially, or in the
development of a sense of self, should be examined from a clinical/medical per-
spective to exclude potentially treatable conditions, even if the behavior may be
similar to the traits typically ascribed to creativity or giftedness.”
However, misdiagnosis is a major concern. Webb and his colleagues [60], all
experienced professionals in psychology, psychiatry, and pediatrics, make it
abundantly clear, classifying behaviors otherwise deemed normal in gifted and
talented people is known to be “signiﬁcant and widespread problem.” They tell how
clients
with
such
diagnoses
as
attention
deﬁcit
disorder
(ADD)/ADHD,
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), autism spectrum disorder (ASD), opposi-
tional deﬁant disorder (ODD), and bipolar disorder (BD) were often brought to their
ofﬁces for second opinions. Many were not only found to be wrongly diagnosed but
also healthy, gifted individuals “who were in situations in which the people around
them did not sufﬁciently understand or accept behaviors … inherent in people who
are intellectually or creatively gifted” [60].
Susie provides a perfect example, not only of misdiagnosis but also how a
paucity of knowledge among professionals leads to poor judgment and decisions
despite clear indications of giftedness. The case illustrates the potential disruption
of an otherwise healthy journey from school to university. Susie’s story is no less
signiﬁcant than discontinuing an unnecessary and potentially harmful medicine or
terminating an unwarranted surgery.
When in 5th grade, Susie presented poor behavior at home and school. Her
parents were puzzled by an unusual decline in academic achievement and moti-
vation, difﬁculties controlling her emotions, sensitivity to criticism, anxiety,
uncharacteristic tantrums and outbursts, poor self-esteem, and a willingness to
discourage friendships. Susie’s teachers added complexity by reporting how other
children considered her ‘weird,’ how she discussed feeling ‘burnt out’ and her sense
of not being ‘liked’ by her teachers. In the school psychologist’s professional
opinion, Susie struggled with a disability, i.e., non-verbal learning disorder (NVLD)
[61]. She advised Susie to be retained for a further year in 5th grade. She recom-
mended an Educational Support Team (EST) be assembled to focus primarily on
troubling behaviors such as missing facial cues and body language, a lack of
awareness, and behaving inappropriately in social situations. The EST was asked to
develop a plan to deal with problems and oversee weekly visits to a counselor to
help Susie learn pragmatics. Susie’s parents sought a second opinion.
Few of the reported concerns were apparent in the clinical setting. Observations
and other data provided zero support for the diagnosis of NVLD. Susie’s behaviors
appeared rooted in something other than disability. She was well-mannered,
courteous, mature, and respectful of others. She was fully able to hold a sensible
296
T. J. Tebbs

conversation and articulate the nature and seriousness of her own problems, identify
and analyze her own emotions and monitor the reactions of others. She was also
able to joke and understand even the subtle humor of others.
Other information indicated Susie was a very ‘intense’ individual. Observing her
behavior through the lens of Dabrowskian Theory of Excitability (OE) [62–64], her
intensity was evident in all ﬁve psychic abilities Dabrowski considered typical in
gifted children, i.e., intellectual, imaginational, emotional, psychomotor, and sen-
suality. Reports from those who knew her conﬁrmed her enthusiasm, empathy
towards others and an unusual capacity to care, “endless” emotional and intellectual
energy, intense periods of concentration, intense curiosity and an insatiable love of
learning, a vivid imagination, and a passion for fantasy.
A cognitive ability test revealed an intelligence quotient (IQ) level three standard
deviations above average. In conjunction with her intensity and other behavioral
factors, it was clear Susie had the extraordinary potential for gifted behavior or high
performance. Ultimately it was agreed that whatever was troubling Susie was
‘environmental,’ most probably caused by conditions and stress experienced in the
school setting. It was also decided that she should be accelerated [65] rather than be
retained [66, 67]—a very signiﬁcant and important life-changing decision!
A few years later, Susie graduated from college and went on to study at a highly
regarded university. Once she graduated, she was offered the opportunity to travel
and live in Jordan for two years. What would her future have been if the thinking
actions, reactions, and dimensions of thinking, had resulted in special education
services and a second humiliating year as a 5th grader? Thankfully, at that time, the
attitude and critical thinking of her teachers and other professionals changed dra-
matically, underlining the imperative to become familiar with indications of gift-
edness. Her mother expressed her appreciation this way: “We’ll be forever grateful
that we connected with you and had your assistance” (T.B., Personal communi-
cation; June 2020).
Myths and ‘Put Downs’
A widely respected proponent of gifted education worldwide, Donald Trefﬁnger
[68] commented on the stereotypical ﬁction associated with giftedness obstinately
remaining in circulation over the years. After studying the issue, he wrote: “We
learned all ﬁfteen of the 1982 myths remain with us today… In addition, several
new myths emerged, resulting in a total of nineteen myths.” The myths noted at that
time by the National Association of Gifted Children [69] included:
• gifted students will do ﬁne on their own;
• gifted programs are elitist;
• teachers challenge all the students, so gifted kids will be ﬁne in the regular
classroom; and
• that student can’t be gifted; he is receiving poor grades.
13
Indicators of Variation in Thinking Actions and Reactions
297

Once becoming familiar with the propensities of these children, meeting pro-
fessionals who adhere tenaciously to such harmful misconceptions is mystifying.
Imagine a parent acutely aware of her child’s level of giftedness. She searches
desperately for suitable resources to help her offspring succeed. She encounters
only those who lack empathy, think and act according to a belief system contrary to
her own, lack knowledge, understanding, and adequate professional training. In the
USA, it is not uncommon. It takes very little imagination to grasp how the situation
might be for children in countries with little or no provision for their needs, aca-
demic or social-emotional.
A recent study conducted in Kazakhstan [70] provides insight into the confusion
among educators who are expected to provide for their academic needs, although
receiving no preparation to teach gifted children. Perceptions established during the
Soviet
era-initiated
thinking
actions
and
reactions
based
on
a
rigid
“criterion-referenced, performance-based assessment” [71]. Sergaliyeva [70] notes,
“Olympiad
ratings
are
strongly
seen
as
the
main
feature
for
giftedness
identiﬁcation.”
Personal experience of opinions widely held by fellow educators and adminis-
trators comes to mind. For example, an experienced colleague asserted, “Real gifted
kids are gifted in everything and they are all tall!” Recently, a colleague responsible
for designing a course focused on preschool education was asked how giftedness
and the needs of gifted children would be handled. He retorted, “They will learn
about gifted children if I do my job teaching a Special Education course!” Sadly,
where there is no mandate to prepare teachers to address the needs of atypical,
highly able individuals, the emphasis is on deﬁcits and how to identify, modify and
accommodate them. Where this is the case, there is little to negate thinking and
actions based on myth, resulting in disturbing levels of witting or unwitting
ignorance. After thirty years of experience in the ﬁeld, it is clear mythological
thinking exists, and it is truly mythological [72].
Genius, Sense of Belonging, and Attitude
Thinking and acting based on such myths can result in an enormous waste of
human capital. Heller [73] warns: “The following dangers are usually associated
with labeling problems, social isolation, development of egocentric attitudes and
behaviors, endangering or disturbing the personality development and self-concept
through extreme achievement pressures or too much responsibility.”
Following Heller’s comments with respect to “egocentric attitudes,” if a child
appears atypical compared with those of the same chronological age, the term
‘genius’ may become an issue. It is a word that may reveal genuine respect or a
derisory attitude. It is important to differentiate between the two because, as noted,
either way, it can affect change in signiﬁcant ways.
298
T. J. Tebbs

Whether it is a parent, a teacher, or even children themselves referencing genius,
e.g., “She is a genius!” or “I am a genius!” the authentic sense of self may be at risk.
According to Kerr [74], a genius is someone possessed of “great intellectual ability”
recognized for their “potential.” In other words, the realization of potential is not
guaranteed. It is something which, given the right circumstances, may be accom-
plished. The second meaning is associated with someone acknowledged for some
extraordinarily valuable contribution in a ﬁeld of human endeavor. When associated
with a child yet to realize his or her ‘genius,’ it is likely to inﬂuence the listener’s
attitude immediately and thus also behavior [75, 76].
Attitude is something we are able to sense in a number of ways making it
exceptionally relevant in the context of thinking action and reaction in parents,
teachers, other professionals, and not least, in terms of a young person’s own
reactions and perceptions of self. To consider oneself a genius, or be promoted as a
genius, has an unmeasurable impact on personal reactions to perfectionism, fear of
failure, being found out as an imposter, procrastination, anxiety, and depression.
A negative attitude serves to separate rather than nurture a sense of belonging.
Belonging is an essential relationship formed by “complex conscious or uncon-
scious feelings, beliefs, ideas, interests, goals, values, and skills relevant to the
environment.” To belong is contributory to one’s self-identity as a productive and
healthy, highly skilled individual [77].
Indications Associated with the Process of Identification
When Kaufman [78] tried to share the results of a cognitive test, the child’s parents
greeted him anxiously: “We can’t take the suspense any longer! Will he get into
Harvard or not?” Kaufman believed human beings are neither deﬁned by a number
nor a test powerful enough to guarantee entrance into Harvard! He writes: “The
magical IQ … that sums up a person’s mental ability … immutable and eternal …
well it’s a crock” [78]. Sternberg [2] agrees. He writes: “There are several reasons
why intelligence tests no longer should be used as … even as the primary means of
assessing giftedness.” He continues: “Conventional intelligence tests are not going
to predict people’s ability to solve complex problems such as these” [2].
Even so, an IQ is relied upon wholly or partially as an identiﬁer of giftedness in
many countries worldwide [79, 80]. Bergold, Wirthwein, Rost, and Steinmayr [81]
lament the fact gifted individuals are infrequently identiﬁed via “reliable and valid
intelligence tests but instead via teacher, peer, or parent nominations.” Amplifying
this view, they write: “Intelligence can be reliably assessed … many sound intel-
ligence tests are available, whereas measures of … creativity and motivation often
suffer from lower psychometric properties and poor validity … Thus, the use of
intelligence test scores (IQ > 2 SD above the mean, i.e., 130) to deﬁne giftedness
has prevailed in the empirical literature.”
13
Indicators of Variation in Thinking Actions and Reactions
299

A colleague working in a Swiss school with a seven-year-old ﬁrst grader (M.R.
Personal communication, June 2020) provides an example of a linear approach to
teaching a gifted child. Sympathetic teachers have provided the temporary provi-
sion of accelerated learning with 4th graders. The boy is anxious to move forward.
However, despite high mathematical and verbal comprehension skills, this can not
happen unless he is ofﬁcially tested by a state-licensed psychologist and achieves a
full scale intelligence quotient (FSIQ) score of 130 and above. No funds are
available if a child is not determined to be ‘gifted.’
Ofﬁcial acknowledgment of ‘giftedness’ is inconsistent. Some locations demand
an FSIQ of 130; others do not. This case draws attention to how such a stressful
dilemma impacts decision-making. It may not only alter the thinking actions
required of his parents but inﬂuence the boy’s future. All parties involved in the
matter will remain stressed as he matures and begins to take his productive place in
society.
This case also illustrates how highly able children are susceptible to potentially
harmful perfectionistic thinking. He has already shown a distinct desire not to be
wrong nor, therefore, a failure. Fear of failure causes him to take the ‘easy’ way
through a test designed to estimate his IQ. This thinking pattern is potentially
harmful in so many ways particularly if ‘failure’ is misconstrued as ‘inability’ or
‘disability’ by unprepared professionals. Referring to the past work of experts in the
ﬁeld [82–84], Manning [85] writes: “sensitivity to the attitudes and perceptions of
others may cause gifted students to fall into the perfectionism trap or to fear failure.
These feelings can lead to unﬁnished work, procrastination, or underachievement.”
The thinking actions and reactions observed during interviews with gifted young
people in a clinical environment underline the fear of making mistakes and the
potential for self-harm [86, 87]. Risky behavior and self-harm are not out of the
question. Apistola [88] notes: “research does indicate that suicide occurs among
the gifted population. It is also apparent that suicide is occurring among the gifted at
a rate, which necessitates future research to have (a) the ability to recognize risks
and (b) to deploy the most efﬁcient and effective suicide prevention methods.”
Pause for Thought
Although they are not ‘measures’ in a sense used in other sciences, indicators
discussed in this chapter are equally important. A child’s social, emotional, and
academic well-being is at risk if those with whom he or she interacts day-by-day
react in disingenuous oppositional ways. Conversely, if the potential of a gifted
child is acknowledged in genuinely helpful ways, the prospects of thousands, even
millions of highly able, potentially creative individuals will be greatly improved
both personally and as providers of “exceptional scientiﬁc and technical human
capital” [89].
300
T. J. Tebbs

Holistic Assessments, Chandelier, and Dimensions of Thinking
Acknowledging and valuing [90] the potential of gifted children implies gaining
knowledge and understanding of their strengths, values, and other aspects important
to them as productive human beings. In this context, a holistic approach to the
identiﬁcation of their resident strengths in order to develop the whole child is
critically important. Tirri [91] wrote: “in education, spirituality means education for
the whole person by acknowledging the importance of social and affective domains
in addition to cognitive development.” In the same vein, Jane Goodall, in an
interview with Krista Tippet [92], added a beautiful dimension to the notion of
appreciation of the whole self, regardless of high ability. It is especially appropriate
when considering the holistic identiﬁcation of giftedness and the needs of gifted
children. She noted: “I truly believe, only when head and heart work in harmony
can we attain our true human potential” [92]. Webb [93] wrote: “historically,
research on gifted individuals focused on the intellectual and academic aspects.
Only recently is there focus on personality factors that accompany high intellect and
creativity, with even less attention given to the observation that these personality
factors intensify and have greater life effects when intelligence level increases
beyond IQ 130.” Sternberg [2] asks, “If what we need is “gifted” people who can
cut through the failure to solve the serious problems of the world today, how would
we identify and then nurture the talents of those gifted people?” Later he wrote:
“We need to be more holistic, especially in recognizing that there is no easy
formula for predicting who will produce gifted performances.” In this context, he
also notes: “I think the Chandelier model of the author is a good step forward” [2].
The Chandelier model noted by Sternberg [2, 94, 95] is a system combining
methodology and technology. The methodology relies on assembling a rich array of
data from four major areas pertinent to human development, i.e., behavior, emer-
genics [96], epigenetics, cognitive, and academic ability (Graphical Abstract.)
Ambrose called the Chandelier software system “a highly creative, easily under-
standable approach to holistic diagnostics” [97].
Using Chandelier as part of the assessment process, the author has found the
visual display, and careful placement of holistic data draws attention to previously
unnoticed but signiﬁcant interactions between the data. Information gleaned from
these patterns initiates the use of the often-neglected dimensions of thinking, i.e.,
essentially critical and creative thinking, directed towards obtaining a deeper
understanding of a child’s concerns and needs [98–102].
Acknowledgment
Acknowledgment has several deﬁnitions. The most pertinent is “to accept, admit, or
recognize something, or the truth or existence of something” [103]. Holistic
assessment is important in this respect. It contributes to establishing truth. When all
indicators point to the existence of potential and, or some need, the question is
13
Indicators of Variation in Thinking Actions and Reactions
301

raised regarding how one might acknowledge the truth, most prudently accom-
modate the need and help a child realize that potential. Alma’s story offers insight.
Twelve years ago, Alma was constantly feeling sick, anxious, and stressed. Her
teachers, despite her advanced mathematical ability, demanded she continues with
2nd/3rd-grade math. After a holistic assessment helped determine Alma’s strength,
one teacher recognized her responsibility to think and act differently. She
acknowledged the need for developing Alma’s higher-order thinking skills [104]
and agreed to work with her. The difference was remarkable. Recently this note
arrived from Alma. She wrote: “I am truly thankful every time I think of all the
work we did, you taught me that it’s okay to think the way I do … be curious and
harness it At my internship I’m doing a lot of analytics and research work … every
time someone tells me my brain is so analytic … it is thanks to you for encouraging
that” (A.P. Personal communication, June 2020).
Whether at home, school, community, attending university, or completing an
apprenticeship, acknowledging or valuing strengths empowers young people. This
should not be understood as simply praising their strengths. With reference to the
work of other experts in the ﬁeld [104–107], Henderlong and Leper [108] wrote:
“praise can create excessive pressure to continue performing well, discourage
risk-taking, and reduce perceived autonomy.” Henderlong and Leper [109] also
found the possibility of praise “damaging because it conveys a message of low
ability,” especially in older children. Sincere acknowledgment, as opposed to
insincere praise, encourages positive thinking and action while helping to eschew
the inﬂuence of negative reactions and emphasize deﬁcit thinking. Establishing a
structure at home or hopefully in school provides opportunities for expressing
preferences, enhances executive function, trust, a sense of authentic satisfaction,
high-level thinking, desire for challenge, personal decision-making, and the
development of rubrics, especially in the context of independent study. Over the
years working with gifted individuals from four years to post-secondary students,
the most practical and unfeigned ways of acknowledging strengths included men-
toring [110], pre-testing, curriculum compacting, acceleration, posing new chal-
lenges, independent study [111], and the opportunity to share knowledge gained.
Many books and other publications are available, which will facilitate further
study concerning the matters mentioned above. A selection of articles, papers,
books, and other relevant links to this chapter are provided; see the reference
section and reading list following this narrative.
Conclusion: Dimensions of Thinking
It is easy to blithely refer to some undeﬁned range of thought in very general terms
while maybe overlooking speciﬁc meanings and implications. Changes in attitudes
are needed to overcome the cultural ambivalence as well as to achieve more support
and acceptance for gifted youngsters in developing their abilities. In this context,
302
T. J. Tebbs

thirty years ago, Marzano [112] acknowledged the need for a more precise
framework for an educational curriculum and instruction to be used in education
generally. He compiled a list of words and terms used in thinking actions he called
Dimensions of Thinking. One particularly important example from Marzano’s list,
often associated with the thinking action and reactions of gifted children, is critical
thinking. Recently Meneses [113] compiled a list focused only on critical and
creative thinking and condensed it into ﬁve subsections (see below). The partner-
ship offers an essential means whereby dimensional thinking in gifted children may
be revealed and developed:
i. Thinking skills dimension: e.g., higher-order thinking, logic and rhetoric
reasoning and argumentation skills; focus on individual development and
ability to detect bias and defects in reasoning;
ii. Disposition: e.g., readiness to apply the thinking skills dimension;
iii. Ethical (perhaps equivalent to wisdom from Sternberg’s perspective): virtues,
human values, morality, fair-mindedness, attitudes, self-awareness, and con-
cern for others;
iv. Civic: civic skills, virtues, social awareness and consciousness, concern for the
public good and human/civil rights, willingness to participate in civic and
political activities or social activities; and
v. Cultural: awareness of thinking traditions and values in contexts other than
their own.
The purpose of bringing the list compiled by Meneses [113] to the reader’s
notice is that it focuses on avenues of thought that will enrich the learning and, thus,
the potential of gifted children. Inimical thinking actions and reactions will most
likely restrict the optimal development of potential. Supportive thinking actions and
reactions will most likely promote full developmental potential in children. As a
member of the passing generation, it is exciting to envision millions of young
people worldwide encouraged and allowed to think critically and creatively –
wisely.
Today, there is an incompatibility associated with various attitudes towards
giftedness. If tomorrow, thinking actions and reactions in our community and ﬁeld
of work reﬂect more positively-skewed attitudes towards understanding and ser-
vicing the needs of these young people, their strengths, talents, and skills rather than
simply ‘ﬁxing’ their deﬁcits, we all will beneﬁt, and, writing and reading this
chapter will have been worthwhile.
Core Messages
• This chapter focuses on the distinctive assets of youth described as
advanced, talented, or profoundly gifted.
• We hope these young people are enabled to serve the needs of tomorrow’s
world.
13
Indicators of Variation in Thinking Actions and Reactions
303

• Young people’s development depends on thoughtful support during their
formative years.
• Young people’s potential, when recognized and implemented, realizes the
largess of human capital worldwide.
• Lack of acknowledgment or rejection becomes a matter of serious
consequence.
References
1. Ford DY (1996) Reversing underachievement among gifted black students. Teachers
College Press. https://www.drdonnayford.com/
2. Sternberg RJ (2017) ACCEL: A new model for identifying the gifted. Roeper Rev 39
(3):152–169. https://doi.org/10.1080/02783193.2017.1318658
3. Persson RS (2010) Experiences of intellectually gifted students in an egalitarian and
inclusive educational system: a survey study. J Educ Gifted 33(4):536–569
4. Wilms D (1986) Patron’s opening address. In: Cropley AJ, Urban KK, Wagner H,
Wieczerkowski W (eds) Giftedness: a continuing worldwide challenge. Trillium Press, New
York, pp 16–20
5. Smedsrud J (2020) Explaining the variations of deﬁnitions in gifted education. NIFU Nordic
Institute for Studies in Innovation, Research and Education. https://doi.org/10.23865/nse.
v40.2129
6. Szabos J (1989) Bright child, gifted learner. Challenge 34. Good Apple
7. Fonseca C (2016) Emotional intensity in gifted students: helping kids cope with explosive
feelings, 2nd edn. Prufrock Press
8. Casino-García
AM,
García-Pérez
J,
Llinares-Insa
LI
(2019)
Subjective
emotional
well-being, emotional intelligence, and mood of gifted vs. unidentiﬁed students: a
relationship model. Int J Environ Res Public Health 16(18):3266. https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph16183266
9. Thieroff H (2019) The pain of giftedness. LIT Verlagerschienen am15.06.2019
10. Tebbs TJ (2019) Foreword. The pain of giftedness. LIT Verlagerschienen am15.06.2019
11. Einstein A (1931) Brainy Quotes. https://www.brainyquote.com/topics/albert-einstein-
quotes
12. Amso D (2016) Visual attention: its role in memory and development. New research on how
infants and children orient to their environment. Psychological Science Agenda. https://
www.apa.org/science/about/psa/2016/01/visual-attention
13. Smutny JF, Veenker K, Veenker S (1989) Your gifted child Facts on File
14. Kolata G (1987) Early signs of school age IQ; psychologists ﬁnd that visual memory and
attentiveness in infants are correlated with intelligence. Science 236:774+. Gale OneFile:
Health and Medicine
15. Silverman LK (2013) Giftedness 101. Springer Publishing Co. Silverman, L.K. (1993).
Counseling the gifted and talented. Denver, CO: Love Publishing Co.
16. Gottfried AW, Gottfried AE, Bathurst K, Guerin DW (1994) Gifted IQ: early developmental
aspects. The Fullerton Longitudinal Study. Plenum Press
17. Harter S (2006) The self. In: Eisenberg N (ed) Handbook of child psychology: 3. Social,
emotional, and personality development, 6th edn. Wiley, pp 505–570
18. Brown GL, Mangelsdorf SC, Neff C, Schoppe-Sullivan SJ, Frosch CA (2009) Young
children’s self-concepts: associations with child temperament, mothers’ and fathers’
304
T. J. Tebbs

parenting, and triadic family interaction. Merrill-Palmer Q (Wayne State Univ Press) 55
(2):184–216. https://doi.org/10.1353/mpq.0.0019
19. McCluskey KW (2000) Lines in the sand: are students with difﬁculties being forced from our
schools? Reaching Today’s Youth 4(4):28–33
20. Ruch S, Zust MA, Henke K (2020) Sleep-learning impairs subsequent wake-learning. In:
Cognitive neuroscience of memory and consciousness. Institute of Psychology, University
of Bern, Switzerland. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.16.206482
21. Kleim JA, Jones TA (2008) Principles of experience-dependent neural plasticity: implica-
tions for rehabilitation after brain damage. J Speech Lang Hear Res 51(1):S225–S239.
https://doi.org/10.1044/1092-4388(2008/018
22. McGarvey M (2016) A better way of thinking: how mindfulness can help you build positive
habits of mind and defeat stress or worry. Harvard University, Usable Knowledge
23. Bronfenbrenner U, Ceci SJ (1994) Nature-nurture reconceptualized in developmental
perspective: a bioecological model. Psychol Rev 101:568–586. https://doi.org/10.1037/
0033-295X.101.4.568
24. Erikson EH (1968) Identity: youth and crisis. Norton, New York
25. Piaget J (1936) Origins of intelligence in the child. Routledge & Kegan Paul
26. Vygotsky L (1962) Thought and language. MIT Press
27. Tetreault NA (2020) Insight into the bright mind. Gifted Unlimited: Goshen, KY (Added)
28. Rosli NA (2013) Effect of parenting styles on children’s emotional and behavioral problems
among different ethnicities of Muslim children in the U.S. Dissertations (1934-).
epublications@marquette https://epublications.marquette.edu/dissertations_mu/376
29. Dwairy M (2004) Parenting styles and psychological adjustment of Arab adolescents.
Transcult Psychiatry 41(2):233–252
30. Keenan H (2018) Description of parent’s knowledge of the nature and needs of gifted
children and their parenting styles. (Electronic Thesis or Dissertation). https://etd.ohiolink.
edu/
31. Baumrind D (1966) Effects of authoritative parental control on child behavior. Child Dev 37
(4) 887–907
32. Demakakos P, Pillas D, Marmot M, Steptoe A (2016) Parenting style in childhood and
mortality risk at older ages. A longitudinal cohort study. Br J Psychiatry 209(2):135–141.
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.bp.11
33. Maccoby EE, Martin JA (1983) Socialization in the context of the family: parent-child
interaction. In: Handbook of child psychology, vol 4. Wiley, pp 1–101
34. DeHart T, Pelham BW, Tennen H (2006) What lies beneath: parenting style and implicit
self-esteem. J Exp Soc Psychol 42(1):1–17
35. Merlin C, Okerson JR, Hess P (2013) How parenting style inﬂuences children: a review of
controlling, guiding, and permitting parenting styles on children’s behavior, risk-taking,
mental health, and academic achievement. William Mary Educ Rev 2:1
36. Reitman D, Rhode PC, Hupp SDA, Altobello C (2002) Development and validation of the
parental authority questionnaire—revised. J Psychopathol Behav Assess 24(2):119–127
37. Simon RL, Whitbeck LB, Beaman J, Conger RD (1994) The impact of mothers’ parenting,
involvement by nonresidential fathers and parental conﬂict on the adjustment of adolescent
children. J Marriage Fam 56:356–374
38. Weiss B, Dodge KA, Bates JE, Pettit GS (1992) Some consequences of early harsh
discipline: child aggression and a maladaptive social information processing style. Child
Dev 63(6):1321–1335. https://doi.org/10.2307/1131558
39. Chaoyi He (n.d.) Authoritarian vs. authoritative parenting. Center for MH in Schools and
Student/Learning Supports at UCLA. http://smhp.psych.ucla.edu/pdfdocs/parent.pdf
40. Akhtar P, Malik JA, Begeer S (2017) The grandparents’ inﬂuence: Parenting styles and
social competence among children of joint families. J Child Fam Stud 26:603–611. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10826-016-0576-5
13
Indicators of Variation in Thinking Actions and Reactions
305

41. Carlo G, White RMB, Streit C, Knight GP, Zeiders KH (2018) Longitudinal relations among
parenting styles, prosocial behaviors, and academic outcomes in U.S. Mexican adolescents.
Child Dev 89(2):577–592
42. Wright-Scott K-A (2018) The social-emotional well-being of the gifted child and
perceptions of parent and teacher social support. [Dissertation] Queensland University of
Technology, Brisbane, Australia
43. Ross AO (1964) The exceptional child in the family. Grune & Stratton
44. Gniewosz B, Eccles JS, Noack P (2014) Early adolescents’ development of academic
self-concept and intrinsic task value: the role of contextual feedback. J Res Adolesc 25(3).
https://doi.org/10.1111/jora.12140
45. Daglioglu E (2012) Teachers’ biases in gifted children identiﬁcation process. Athens
Institute for Education and Research. https://www.atiner.gr/docs/2012EDUCINTRO.pdf
46. Davidsongifted (n.d.) Support for gifted programs vary greatly from state to state. https://
www.davidsongifted.org/search-database/entrytype/3
47. Eagleman D (2011) Incognito: the secret lives of the brain. Pantheon Books
48. Zigman P (2018) Theories of perception and recent empirical work. CUNY Academic
Works. https://academicworks.cuny.edu/gc_etds/2772
49. Metzinger T (2009) The ego tunnel: the science of the mind and the myth of the self. Basic
Books. https://publicism.info/education/index.html
50. Inzlicht M, McKay L, Aronson J (2006) Stigma as ego depletion how being the target of
prejudice affects self-control. Psychol Sci 17(3):262–269
51. Castelvecchio D (2018) Science mourns Stephen Hawking’s death. Nature 555:423–424.
https://www.scientiﬁcamerican.com/article/life-of-a-legend/.
https://doi.org/10.1038/
d41586-018-02957-4
52. National Education Association (2000) The twice exceptional dilemma. National Education
Association. Washington, DC. http://www.nea.org/assets/docs/twiceexceptional.pdf
53. Heuser BL, Ke W, Shahid S (2017) Global dimensions of gifted and talented education: the
inﬂuence of national perceptions on policies and practices. Glob Educ Rev 4(1):4–21
54. World Health Organization (2011) World report on disability. World Health Organization,
Geneva
55. Dinishak J (2016) The deﬁcit view and its critics. Disabil Stud Q 36:4
56. Akar SS, Akar I (2020) Academically gifted & albino: a narrative study of a twice
exceptional. Int J Progress Educ 16(2):279–296. https://doi.org/10.29329/ijpe.2020.241.19
57. Ragelienė T (2016) Links of adolescents’ identity development and relationship with peers: a
systematic literature review. J Can Acad Child Adolescent Psychiatry/J l’Acad canadienne
de psychiatrie de l’enfant et de l’adolescent 25(2):97–105
58. Chen KH, Lay KL, Wu YC, Yao G (2007) Adolescent self-identity and mental health: the
function of identity importance, identity ﬁrmness, and identity discrepancy. Chin J Psychol
49(1):53–72
59. Kaufmann F, Kalbﬂeisch ML, Castellanos FX (2000) Attention deﬁcit disorders and gifted
students: What do we really know? Senior Scholar Series. https://ﬁles.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/
ED447666.pdf
60. Webb JT, Amend ER, Webb NE, Goerss J, Beljan P, Olenchak FR (2016) Misdiagnosis and
dual diagnoses of gifted children and adults: ADHD, Bipolar, Asperger’s, Depression, and
Other Disorders, 2nd edn. Great Potential Press
61. Casey JE (2012) A model to guide the conceptualization, assessment, and diagnosis of
nonverbal learning disorder. Can J Sch Psychol 27(1):35–57. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0829573512436966
62. Dabrowski K (1972) Psychoneurosis is not an illness. Gryf, London
63. Mendaglio S, Tillier W (2006) Dabrowski’s theory of positive disintegration and giftedness:
overexcitability research ﬁndings. J Educ Gifted 30(1):68–87
64. Piechowski MM, Silverman L, Falk F (1985) Comparison of intellectually and artistically
gifted on ﬁve dimensions of mental functions. Percept Mot Skills 60:539–549
306
T. J. Tebbs

65. Steenbergen-Hu S, Makel MC, Olszewski-Kubilius P (2016) What one hundred years of
research says about the effects of ability grouping and acceleration on K–12 students’
academic achievement: ﬁndings of two second-order meta-analyses. Rev Educ Res 86
(4):849–899. https://doi.org/10.3102/0034654316675417
66. Jimerson SR (2001) Meta-analysis of grade retention research: implications for practice in
the 21st century. Sch Psychol Rev 30(3):420–437
67. McDill E, Natriello G, Pallas A (1986) A population at risk: potential consequences of
tougher school standards for student dropouts. Am J Educ 94:135–181
68. Trefﬁnger DJ (2009) Bridging the divide: demythologizing gifted education: a 25-year
journey. Teaching for High Potential, p 1. https://gateportfoliowagner.weebly.com/uploads/
2/1/9/7/21976806/thp_fall_2009_ﬁnal.pdf
69. National Association of Gifted Children (2008) Myths about gifted children. National
Association for Gifted Children, Washington, DC, p 20005
70. Sergaliyeva A (2014) High school teachers’ perceptions of giftedness: identifying and
supporting gifted
students. Nazarbayev University Graduate School of Education,
Kazakhstan
71. Yakavets N (2013) Reforming society through education for gifted children: the case of
Kazakhstan. Res Pap Educ 29(5):513–533. https://doi.org/10.1080/02671522.2013.825311
72. Galbraith J, Delisle J (1996) The gifted kid’s survival guide: a teen handbook. Free Spirit
73. Heller KA (2004) Identiﬁcation of gifted and talented students. Psychol Sci 46(3):302–323
74. Kerr B (2007) Genius. Britannica. https://www.britannica.com/science/genius-psychology
75. Festinger L (1957) A theory of cognitive dissonance. Stanford University Press
76. Reibstein DJ, Lovelock CH, Dobson RP (1980) The direction of causality between
perceptions, affect, and behavior: an application to travel behavior. J Consum Res 6:370–376
77. Baumeister R, Leary M (1995) The need to belong desire for interpersonal attachments as a
fundamental human motivation. Psychol Bull 117(3):497–529
78. Kaufman AS (2009) The Psych 101 series. IQ testing 101. Springer
79. Reid E, Boettger H (2015) Gifted education in various countries of Europe. Slavonic
Pedagogical Stud J 4(2). https://doi.org/10.18355/PG.2015.4.2.158-171
80. Valler EC, Burko JA, Pfeiffer SI, Brannigan AM (2016) The test authors speak: Reporting
on an author survey of the leading tests used in gifted assessment. J Psychoeduc Assess 35
(7):695–708. https://doi.org/10.1177/0734282916659209
81. Bergold S, Wirthwein L, Rost DH, Steinmayr R (2015) Are gifted adolescents more satisﬁed
with their lives than their non-gifted peers? Front Psychol 6:1623. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fpsyg.2015.01623
82. Wirthwein L, Rost D (2011) Giftedness and subjective well-being: a study with adults. Learn
Individ Differ 21(2):182–186. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lindif.2011.01.001
83. Clark B (2002) The importance of social studies and the education of gifted students. 41(2):8
84. Winebrenner S (2001) Teaching gifted kids in the regular classroom: strategies and
techniques every teacher can use to meet the academic needs of the gifted and talented.
Revised, Expanded, Updated Edition. Minneapolis, MN
85. Manning S (2009) Recognizing gifted students: a practical guide for teachers. Kappa Delta
Pi Record 67
86. Fleith D (2012) Suicide among gifted adolescents: how to prevent it. NRCGT Newsletter.
https://nrcgt.uconn.edu/newsletters/spring012/
87. Tebbs TJ (2013) How many canaries. Labyrinth. Deutsche Gesellschaft für das hochbegabte
Kind e.V. 36: ISSN 0940-3175
88. Apistola M (2017) Suicidality and giftedness: a literature review. https://ssrn.com/abstract=
2947880 or https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2947880
89. Kell HJ, Lubinski D, Benbow CP (2013) Who rises to the top? Early indicators. Psychol Sci
24(5):648–659. https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797612457784
90. Tebbs TJ (2013) The Passing of Nelson Mandela and thoughts arising. Int J Talent Dev
Creat 1(2):129–140
13
Indicators of Variation in Thinking Actions and Reactions
307

91. Tirri K (2009) Spirituality in education. Scripta Instituti Donneriani Aboensis 21:245–258.
https://doi.org/10.30674/scripta.67354
92. Tippet K (Host) (2020) What it means to be human. In: On Being: NPR. https://onbeing.org/
programs/jane-goodall-on-what-it-means-to-be-human/#transcrip
93. Webb J (2006) Misdiagnosis and dual diagnosis of gifted children. Outlook, Minnesota
Council for the Gifted and Talented (MCGT)
94. Tebbs TJ (2014) Chandelier: picturing potential. Roeper Rev 36:3
95. Tebbs TJ (2017) Thoughts from the ﬁeld. Roeper Rev 39:4
96. Simonton KS (1999) Talent and its development: an emergenic and epigenetic model.
Psychol Rev 106(3):435–457
97. Tebbs TJ (2020) A personal account of the ideation, development, creation and eventual
utility of Chandelier. [Unpublished monograph]: National Pedagogical Drahomanov
University: Ukraine
98. Tebbs TJ (2016) Play, mindfulness, creativity, learning and Chandelier. Labyrinth. Deutsche
Gesellschaft für das hochbegabte Kind e.V. 39: ISSN 0940-3175
99. Tebbs TJ (2019) What is Chandelier. Interview with Don Ambrose. (Video). https://vimeo.
com/346261856
100. Cardillo J (2020) Balance your child’s emotional intensity. https://www.psychologytoday.
com/us/blog/attention-training/202004/balance-your-child-s-emotional-intensity
101. Cardillo J (2020) Distance learning—dealing with the emotional outbursts. https://www.
psychologytoday.com/us/blog/attention-training/202004/distance-learning-dealing-the-
emotional-outbursts
102. Ambrose D (2017) From the editor’s desk. Roeper Rev 39:4
103. Cambridge
Dictionary
(n.d.)
https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/
acknowledge
104. Tebbs TJ (2000) Assessing teachers’ self-efﬁcacy towards teaching thinking skills. Doctoral
Dissertations: AAI9997207. https://opencommons.uconn.edu/dissertations/AAI9997207
105. Birch LL, Marlin DW, Rotter J (1984) Eating as the “means” activity in a contingency:
effects on young children’s food preference. Child Dev 55:431–439
106. Gordon T (1989) Teaching children self-discipline. New York Times
107. Holt
JC
(1983)
How
children
learn.
Delacorte
Press.
https://doi.org/10.1177/
016235321103400401
108. Kohn A (1993) Punished by rewards: the trouble with gold stars, incentive plans, A’s, praise
and other bribes. Houghton Mifﬂin Company
109. Henderlong J, Lepper MR (2002) The effects of praise on children’s intrinsic motivation: a
review and synthesis. Psychol Bull 128(5):774–795. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.128.
5.774
110. Tebbs T J (2017) Realizing the potential of gifted, talented and creative behavior in children
and young people through mentoring. In: Innovation education, pp 141–165
111. Tebbs TJ (2011) Challenge deﬁciency disorder: precursor to personal failure? Labyrinth.
Deutsche Gesellschaft für das hochbegabte Kind e.V. 34: ISNN 0940-3175
112. Marzano RJ, Brandt RS, Hughes CS, Jones BF, Presseisen BZ, Rankin SC, Suhor C (1988)
Dimensions of thinking: a framework for curriculum and instruction. Association for
Supervision and Curriculum Development
113. Meneses LFS (2020) Critical thinking perspectives across contexts and curricula: Dominant,
neglected and complementing dimensions. Thinking Skills and Creativity 35:100610
308
T. J. Tebbs

Trevor J. Tebbs , Ph.D., is a veteran educator with almost half a
century of experience in regular, special, art, and post-secondary
teaching and learning environments. Trevor’s fascinating journey
has included a watercolor exhibition at the International Monetary
Fund (Washington, DC) and settling in Vermont. In the UK, with
qualiﬁcations from the Universities of Bath and Bristol, he taught
a wide range of young people. In the USA, an advanced Edu-
cational Psychology degree engendered interest in the special
needs of highly able children. Trevor created a holistic assess-
ment system known as Chandelier. With the Institute of Gifted
Child and Ukrainian software engineer’s support, ﬁeld-use of
Chandelier furthered a deeper understanding of the g/t population
Trevor shared as the assistant ﬁeld editor of the WCGTC journal
(GTI) and, presently as associate editor of the International
Journal for Talent Development and Creativity (IJTDC), board
member of the Junior Academy of Science of Ukraine, member of
Editorial Board of Junior Science and member of Universal
Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network (USERN).
13
Indicators of Variation in Thinking Actions and Reactions
309

14
Multidimensional Thinking:
Economizing Thinking
and Maximizing Outcomes
Leander Penaso Marquez
“Ignorance is servitude, because as a man thinks, so he is; a
man who does not think for himself and allows himself to be
guided by the thought of another is like the beast led by a
halter”.
Jose Rizal
Summary
The history of humankind can be described as the summation of good and bad
judgments. Good judgments lead to progress, whereas bad ones result in
disasters. Thinking plays a central role in creating these judgments. Superior
thinking often arrives at good judgments, while bad judgments often arise from
inferior thinking. Unfortunately, the results of bad judgments usually exact a
great cost from humankind. This essay claims that instances of these bad
judgments can be mitigated by improving the quality of thinking. Further, to
achieve signiﬁcantly improved thinking, a reﬂective inquiry approach that aims
to develop multidimensional thinking is proposed. Finally, this paper argues that
for optimal results, the focus and starting point of improving the quality of
thinking ought to be the children.
L. P. Marquez (&)
College of Social Sciences and Philosophy, University of the Philippines Diliman,
Quezon City, Philippines
e-mail: lpmarquez@up.edu.ph
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Quezon City, Philippines
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh (eds.), Thinking, Integrated Science 7,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04075-7_14
311

Thinking 
Significantly Improved 
Thinking 
Multidimensional 
Thinking 
The small “<” indicates how limited 
this kind of thinking in terms of 
accommodating other ideas. 
The reverse 
facing direction 
of the symbol 
above is 
indicative of the 
reflexive and 
reflective nature 
of 
multidimensional 
thinking.
Lipman’s notion 
of 
multidimensional 
thinking allows a 
person to develop 
one’s critical, 
creative, and 
caring thinking 
skills.
Thinking, in the “traditional” sense, 
can be plain and rigid due to societal 
and disciplinal prejudices.
Thinking, in the “reasonable” sense, is 
more flexible and adaptive because it 
does not look at the world plainly.
The larger “<” signifies how a 
significantly improved thinking can be 
open to other views and opinions.
Economizing thinking and maximizing outcomes through multidimensional
thinking
Keywords
Children  Dialogue  Multidimensional thinking  Reasonableness  Reﬂective
inquiry
QR Code
312
L. P. Marquez

Scanning the QR code directs you to the word cloud of the chapter that is made up
of the words we discussed throughout the whole book in relation to the chapter’s
keyword, which is intentionally not included in the word cloud. Find the keyword
and put it in place in the puzzle according to the clues provided in Chap. 36. The
mystery hidden in the puzzle is the quote of THINKING: Bioengineering of Science
and Art.
Introduction
As rational animals, thinking permeates almost every aspect of human life. Many of
our greatest discoveries and inventions were products of careful and elaborate
thought processes. Conversely, numerous disasters and failures that have befallen
us can be attributed to mediocre or poor thinking. It is as if we witlessly allowed
ourselves to be led by a halter to slaughter in the hands of a butcher that is our own
creation—a creation of our ignorance and faulty thinking. If this is the case, then it
appears that the rational thing to do is improve the quality of thinking, thereby
improving the quality of the results of thinking.
Improving the quality of thinking may result in two things—economic thinking
and maximized outcomes of thinking. Economic thinking implies arriving at
efﬁcient and effective judgments or performing decision-making quickly and
with fewer mistakes. Meanwhile, maximized outcomes of thinking imply
inconsequential instances of failures or do-overs due to superior thinking results.
Thus, improved quality of thinking is, without a doubt, a sure-ﬁre way to escape the
halter. With this in mind, the following discussions will look into Lipman’s notion
of multidimensional thinking as an avenue to economize thinking and maximize
outcomes. To bring the conversation closer to home, I will also include examples of
experiences from my own context.
Multidimensional Thinking
Multidimensional thinking can be described as a multi-perspectival approach to
thinking. It is “more advanced thinking which has more dimensions than linear
thinking, it has at least one unit more” [1]. It is “not linear, or even circular, but
spherical plus a time dimension” [2]. In other words, it is thinking (about something)
from different (multiple) aspects. Multidimensional thinking is being able to see the
whole picture while going beyond the limits of any disciplinal framework.
Interestingly, the term “multidimensional thinking” was used by educator and
philosopher Matthew Lipman to refer to the synergy of “critical, creative, and
caring thinking”—resulting in signiﬁcantly improved thinking. I would dare say
that if science and art can be bioengineered in terms of thinking, one of its results
14
Multidimensional Thinking: Economizing Thinking …
313

will deﬁnitely be multidimensional thinking—critical thinking is represented by
science, creative thinking is represented by art, and caring thinking is represented
by the passion and concern for humanity and the world that drive these two
disciplines together to discover things that are beneﬁcial. This, of course, is a very
general way of putting Lipman’s multidimensional thinking into perspective
compared to how he actually puts it, “multidimensional thinking—as I understand it
—aims at a balance between the cognitive and the affective, between the perceptual
and the conceptual, between the physical and the mental, the rule-governed and the
non-rule-governed” [3].
For illustration purposes and with cognizance to the limits of illustrations, I have
provided a visual representation of my take on Lipman’s notion of multidimensional
thinking (Fig. 14.1). Multidimensional thinking (symbolized by ◄) is the overlap
among critical thinking (represented by □), creative thinking (represented by ◊), and
caring thinking (represented by ○). Despite the differences among these kinds of
thinking (as signiﬁed by the different shapes), multidimensional thinking allows one
to transact with these differences to produce what is deemed to be signiﬁcantly
improved thinking—the precursor of reasonableness [3]. We can better appreciate the
innovation presented by this notion of multidimensional thinking by juxtaposing it
with Bloom’s taxonomy.
Bloom’s Taxonomy and Multidimensional Thinking
Bloom’s taxonomy was devised to assess the progress of students’ learning in
relation to set objectives. In Bloom’s [4] version of cognitive domains, the taxonomy
is comprised of “knowledge, comprehension, application, analysis, synthesis, and
evaluation.” Eventually, it was revisited by Anderson and Krathwohl [5] and
transformed the nouns into verbs. The revised version features “remembering,
understanding, applying, analyzing, evaluating, and creating, as cognitive domains.”
Fig. 14.1 Multidimensional thinking
314
L. P. Marquez

Krathwohl pointed out that the taxonomy was designed to pave the way for “the
exchange of test items among faculty at various universities in order to create banks
of items, each measuring the same educational objective” [6]. One might notice the
absence of critical thinking from this taxonomy. Krathwohl argued that critical
thinking could not be classiﬁed under a single category [6]. In addition, critical
thinking may be operational in both lower-order and higher-order thinking skills.
The same can be said about caring thinking and, to a certain extent, creative thinking.
Lipman discussed in succinct detail in his work, Thinking in Education [3], each
component of signiﬁcantly improved thinking—multidimensional thinking—
namely, “critical thinking, creative thinking, and caring thinking.” I shall attempt to
provide a general overview of these components in the succeeding paragraphs.
There is an abundance of literature that describes what critical thinking is all
about. Lai [7] provides a comprehensive summary of these descriptions. From my
point of view, it is “a questioning attitude directed at a thorough reconsideration,
clariﬁcation, and validation of propositions, beliefs, or systems leading to a personal
acceptance, rejection, revision, or development of the same” [8]. For Lipman,
critical thinking is deﬁned as “thinking that facilitates judgment because it relies on
criteria, is self-correcting, and is sensitive to context” [3]. These value principles
alone show how difﬁcult it is to pinpoint where critical thinking is exactly in the
aforementioned cognitive domains of the taxonomy.
Critical thinking aims at reasonableness. This means that it is not just rational, in the sense
of a thinking that is rule- and criterion-governed, but that it is also a thinking that accepts
the fallibility of its procedures, that engages in self-corrective practice, that takes the
contextual differences into account, and that is equitable, in the sense that respects the rights
of others as well as its own [3].
In this light, critical thinking is not simply analyzing, evaluating, or creating, but
an act of good judgment, an act of reasonableness. Hence, for Lipman, the model for
the critical thinker is “the professional, the expert, the model of good judgment” [3].
With regard to creative thinking, it may be argued that “creating” (or synthesis in
Bloom and creating in Anderson’s) is an integral part of the taxonomy of learning.
However, Lipman’s notion of creative thinking is different from the one conceived
by Bloom and Anderson in their respective categories. Lipman points out that
creative thinking is “exempliﬁed by the thinking that goes into the making of art …
It is the discrimination of or the fabrication of relationships, patterns, and orders
producing in us the shock of unfamiliarity” [3]. More than simply putting parts
together, creative thinking pertains to “thinking how to say what merits saying, how
to make what merits making, how to do what merits doing” [3]. For this reason,
unlike mere synthesis (Bloom) or creating (Anderson) that can produce a generic
outcome, “[c]reative thinking (as contrasted with the psychological disposition to
creativity per se) is that minimal element of idiosyncratic judgment in every artist’s
work” [3]. Thus, for Lipman, the model for the creative thinker “is the artist” [3].
Last but not least, the notion of caring thinking is perhaps what can be
considered as Lipman’s innovative contribution in the collection of literature on
thinking. “Caring thinking involves a double meaning, for the one hand it means to
14
Multidimensional Thinking: Economizing Thinking …
315

think solicitously about that which is the subject matter of our thought, and on the
other hand it is to be concerned about one’s manner of thinking” [3]. Caring
thinking is derived from an individual’s passions and emotions. For this reason,
thinking is not merely a cerebral activity, but also a passionate one. As Lipman
illustrates, “a man writing a love letter writes lovingly to the person to whom the
letter is addressed, while at the same time he is anxious about the letter itself” [3].
Finally, some of the models for the caring thinker for Lipman “are the solicitous
parent, the considerate environmental planner, the thoughtful and concerned
teacher” [3].
Given this, it is not difﬁcult to see that the current taxonomy of cognitive
domains does not give justice to what is being offered by Lipman’s notion of
multidimensional thinking, that is, reasonableness. Reasonableness as “rationality
tempered by judgment” [3] requires adeptness in critical, creative, and caring
thinking. It goes beyond what can be measured by items from a test bank. To arrive
at reasonableness, we must ﬁrst signiﬁcantly improve our thinking (Graphical
Abstract); to do this, we must become the professional, the artist, and the thoughtful
and concerned teacher. Ultimately, reasonableness “entails the cultivation of
multidimensional thinking” [3].
Economizing Thinking and Maximizing Outcomes
I mentioned earlier that improving the quality of thinking can lead to economizing
thinking and maximizing its outcomes. I want to add to this by stating a claim that
appeals to common sense: if thinking is what we do, then we should be very good at
thinking. To achieve this, I offer one possible recourse that has proved to be
effective for millennia—do philosophy. Sciences were borne out of philosophy, and
it is philosophy that gives meaning to art. Science and art—two disciplines that
have greatly steered humankind, not only in terms of progress but more so in terms
of thinking, were (and still are) signiﬁcantly driven by philosophy. If this is the
case, then we must seek the help of philosophy to improve the quality of our
thinking.
What Is Philosophy?
Philosophy is not popular. In my context, Filipinos can be considered “young” or
“newbie” when it comes to dealing with philosophy: “philosophy isn’t very popular
in the Philippines. Culture usually means pop culture there—Beyonce will always
trump Barthes, and Rihanna rules over Ricoeur any day. Philosophy is even
linguistically associated with foolishness or glibness in the national language” [9].
For this reason, one may be wondering what philosophy means in the context of
this essay. Thus, it is important to characterize what philosophy is all about for the
sake of clarity. For this particular purpose, it will be beneﬁcial to borrow the ideas
316
L. P. Marquez

of Bonifacio in his paper, Three Concepts of Philosophy [10]. Bonifacio points out
that philosophy can be characterized into three: intellectual presuppositions,
reﬂection, and reconstruction.
As intellectual presupposition, it is where an individual’s ethical, metaphysical,
and epistemological notions or personal philosophies are rooted, which serve as a
basis for one’s personal judgments, beliefs, and actions. “To be sure, this
philosophy does not, as a rule, surface to the person’s consciousness, but just the
same, it provides shape and directions to his beliefs, actions, and expectations” [10].
One may, as an example, look into Filipino indigenous philosophy of pakikisama
(smooth interpersonal relationships), utang na loob (internal debt), and Gulong ng
Palad (Wheel of Fortune), among others [11] that guides how most Filipinos
conduct their affairs. It is worth noting that these presuppositions are not
intentionally formed and collectively make up what can be considered a person’s
life philosophy. “Every human being has a personal life philosophy. It was formed
by a complex lifetime mix of genetics, environment, and learning over time …
Most people’s personal philosophy is created and evolves from experiences and just
living, not from conscious reﬂection and design” [12]. In this light, a person may
have a personal philosophy—an intellectual presupposition—that guides one’s
action that she/he may not even be aware of unless called out by someone or
subjected to reﬂection.
As reﬂection, it is aimed at the examination of our personal philosophies. It is
where we objectify and analyze our intellectual presuppositions. “In fact, some
philosophers incline to the view that the activity of objectiﬁcation and analysis is
what philosophy is all about. My own view is that to objectify and analyze
the foundations of our values, including the roots of our metaphysical and
epistemological beliefs is to engage in philosophy …” [10]. Van Seggelen-Damen
et al. write that reﬂection is essentially a Socratic activity. “Superﬁcially, it
resembles a dialogue and could be called discursive … On a deeper level, we
suggest that reﬂection resembles the actual content of what Socrates presented to
the docile slave [in Meno]. Socrates gave him rhetorical questions, that is, answers
phrased as questions to which the obedient slave could only answer with a ‘yes’ or,
depending on the question, with a ‘no’” [13]. In this sense, even the simple
reﬂective act of asking oneself questions that are answerable with “yes” or “no”
such as “Did I do the right thing when I gave some change to the beggar?” or “Was
I rude when I talked louder than what was appropriate inside the library?” can be
considered as philosophy.
Finally, as reconstruction, it aims to question, analyze, and, if needed, revise
belief systems. “Our activity of reﬂection ﬁnds broader meaning not merely in
showing the errors of our ways, the implausibility of our ordinary beliefs, but
putting things together in the proper perspective” [10]. It is somewhat seen as a
rewriting of idea/s that becomes part of the history of ideas—of philosophy itself.
“We take a text to be philosophical only when we can perform an act of re-writing
it, an act of reconstruction. The history of philosophy is a reconstruction in this
sense” [14]. It is through reconstruction that it may be possible for us to come up, if
possible, with an encompassing philosophy that “would serve as the unifying frame
14
Multidimensional Thinking: Economizing Thinking …
317

of all our knowledge, beliefs, and actions” [10]. Candidly, one can even say that even
Dewey’s critique of traditional western philosophy in his work, Reconstruction in
Philosophy [15], and his suggestion on what direction philosophy should go is, in
itself, an attempt to reconstruct nature and point of philosophy.
Although this essay recognizes that philosophy cannot be precisely deﬁned, with
this characterization of philosophy, I hope that it has somehow established a
common ground in understanding the notion of philosophy. This is important since,
at this point, this paper will raise a question that is central to the purposes of my
discussion—why should we revert to philosophy to improve the quality of our
thinking? As a response to this question, I will lay down three points, namely,
because Philosophy is:
i. a conduit for multidimensional thinking;
ii. a key for the emancipation from the tyranny of custom; and
iii. an organon (tool) for the actualization of human reasoning
Philosophy Is a Conduit for Multidimensional Thinking
While it does not have a monopoly on multidimensional thinking, philosophy is a
multidimensional enterprise by virtue of its very nature.
[T]he meaning of philosophy is best revealed in its speculative and critical functions. Since
in its speculative concern it takes the broadest possible perspective, we must not look for
too speciﬁc a content. Philosophy is not about atoms and electrons, plants and animals,
the history of states and the structure of governments. Yet all these are the concern of
philosophy insofar as they have bearing upon man and his purposes. Similarly, philosophy
is not merely a criticism of this or that speciﬁc subject, but assumes to itself the right to
judge of any subject and to evaluate all things that come within human knowledge … As
speculation, it may arrive at the insight that the world is both divine and good, as analysis
and criticism it may limit itself to a prolonged consideration of the meaning of the word
“good” [16].
Since philosophy interests itself with the foundation of things, it virtually deals
with everything that concerns humans. Nonetheless, the approach utilized by
philosophy in addressing these concerns is not too speciﬁc or specialized as in the
sciences. Neither is it dependent on faith nor revelation, as in religion. Nor is it as
open to almost limitless interpretations as art. The approach used by philosophy is
both speculative—it looks at things sub specie æternitatis, i.e., under the aspect of
eternity—and critical, that is, under the lenses of logic. Thus, its approach is
characterized by a balance between reﬂective curiosity and rational inquiry. In this
light, we can see that we cannot proceed with doing philosophy without engaging in
speculation and criticism. Consequently, the students of philosophy are compelled
to open their minds to the existence of possibilities, however far-fetched or
improbable they may be, but at the same time, criticize these possibilities to arrive
at the truth.
318
L. P. Marquez

Most, if not all, students of philosophy consider the discipline as an end in itself,
but there is no need to deny that philosophy can be used as a means to other ends
[cf. 17]. For our discussion, philosophy must be used as a conduit to inculcate
multidimensional thinking in us. For instance, it would be difﬁcult to imagine how
the sciences, mathematics, art, and technical education can teach us how to elect
into public ofﬁce honest and competent leaders or teach someone how to value
human rights or question the status quo.
Since philosophy thrives in questions and outside-of-the-box thinking, it will
enable individuals to think of other better possibilities apart from what the status
quo offers. Thus, it can pave the way for creative solutions to trafﬁc congestion,
ﬂooding, urban planning, equal opportunity for quality education, and so forth. But
to accomplish this, they must ﬁrst free themselves from the constricting chains of
bad habits and personal prejudices—and in accomplishing this objective is where
philosophy is most instrumental.
Philosophy Is a Key for Emancipation from the Tyranny
of Custom
Traditionally, philosophy is deﬁned as a “love of wisdom.” Bertrand Russell [18]
described Philosophy, in terms of wisdom, as comprehensiveness and emancipation
from the tyranny of custom. By comprehensiveness, he meant to include “a certain
awareness of the ends of human life” [18]. By emancipation, he argued that “the
essence of wisdom is emancipation, as far as possible, from the tyranny of the here
and now” [18]. Meanwhile, for Lipman, wisdom is the “exercise of good judgment”
[3]. Nonetheless, despite the need for change to happen in the world, many of us are
fond of our old ways—many are slaves of custom, many embrace habits, and many
are averse to change. This is especially true in our context in the Philippines
[19–21] and perhaps in other parts of the world as well. Take, for instance, the
mediocre requirements to run for public ofﬁce, the patronage system in both the
public and private spheres, exploitation of popularity or celebrity status to win
electoral votes, and master-slave morality, among others. Here lies one of our
problems.
A glance at the status of the current global politics shows just how feverish
politicians argue with each other, not for the sake of rational debate, but to prove
themselves better than their rivals and deserve to be re-elected for another term.
How they criticize one another (and not necessarily each other’s opinions) gives the
impression that these politicians value their opinions so much that they do not give
an ounce of care on the validity of the other’s arguments. It is in instances like these
lie another problem.
It appears that “this dysfunctional political dialogue, which stems from the iron
certainty we grant our opinions, is the most pressing problem confronting [the]
twenty-ﬁrst century … In fact, it is a crisis. For without the ability to carry on a
useful dialogue, we cannot solve our greatest challenges, or even our smallest ones”
[22]. Training in philosophy helps us to overcome this by teaching us how to be
14
Multidimensional Thinking: Economizing Thinking …
319

reasonable. To be reasonable “is primarily a social disposition: the reasonable
person respects others and is prepared to take into account their views and their
feelings, to the extent of changing her own mind about issues of signiﬁcance, and
consciously allowing her own perspective to be changed by others. She is, in other
words, willing to be reasoned with” [23]. And further, “the open-minded study of
different philosophies at least opens one up to the possibility that one is wrong”
[22]. This helps the person accept and respect other people’s opinions, especially
when it involves matters of culture, faith, and religion.
It is crucial to understand that it is wrong to hold on to whatever knowledge (or
opinion) that one has with an unyielding conviction for fear that one might be
regarded as ignorant, intellectually inferior, or not be taken seriously. Knowledge
can only take someone so far, and the person must realize that knowledge is not
certain. Philosophy opens our minds to this: “studying philosophy cultivates doubt
without helplessness, and conﬁdence without hubris” [24]. Correct thinking and
proper reasoning entail the acceptance of the fact that people may be mistaken in
their knowledge and beliefs and to not be open to the possibility of yielding to other
ideas that may prove to be more valid than theirs is a cause of erroneous thinking
and manifests just how enslaved they are to their personal prejudices. “Our society
is dysfunctional because we have forgotten how to think if we ever truly knew how
to think at all … To study philosophy is to learn how woefully ignorant we are, and
this knowledge can perhaps teach us humility, can perhaps suggest to us that the
other side may have some value after all” [22]. And we can arrive at this realization
once we accept that, as human beings, we must always persevere to be rational and
that philosophy is an effective tool to actualize our nature as rational beings.
Philosophy Is an Organon for the Actualization of Human
Reasoning
What differentiates us, humans, from other animals is our capacity for reasoning.
However, thinking does not necessarily translate to reasoning. There are many
forms of thinking, and reasoning is just one of them. When we imagine, memorize,
or remember, we can say that we are thinking but not necessarily reasoning.
Though innate to us, our reasoning aptitude must be developed as early as possible
to achieve a credible level of multidimensional thinking skills.
Experience shows that human development, with respect to every aspect of
human life, begins while one is just a child. As children, humans are introduced to
many things by their families—culture, traditions, language, social conduct, and
religion, to name a few. At a certain age, they are set up to continue their education
in schools. However, it is very seldom that we encounter school-age children who
are introduced to philosophy early. Why is this the case? Such question was ﬁrst
raised sometime in 1557 by the French philosopher Michel de Montaigne, to wit:
“Since philosophy is that which instructs us to live and that infancy has there its
lessons as well as other ages, why is it not communicated to children betimes?”
[25]. One may argue that philosophy, a difﬁcult ﬁeld of study as it is, is not an
320
L. P. Marquez

appropriate discipline for children to study at such a young age. They may insist
that studying philosophy requires a certain degree of cognitive skills for its thoughts
to be appreciated. Nonetheless, available research provides evidence to the
contrary:
Young children’s experience is already replete with philosophical meaning. They have
strong, even visceral, intuitions of what is beautiful and ugly, fair and unfair, right and
wrong. They enjoy playing with language and are intrigued by logical puzzles. They are
given to metaphysical speculation and frequently engage in epistemology: asking how we
know what we think we know [26].
In introducing children to philosophy at a young age, they are not only taught
how to think, but they learn how to think multidimensionally. Giving children the
opportunity to engage in philosophical dialogues is very important because children
should learn how to think from different perspectives while they are young for them
to grow up to become intellectually mature individuals.
In this light, efforts to actualize human reason go beyond the “I think” but, in fact,
look into a person’s very core as a human being. Computers and robots can “think” to
the extent that their respective programs allow them to, but it is not the same as
humans’ way of thinking. Humans are not programmed to think; rather, it is their
nature to think. Thus, human beings must develop the skills that would help them be
good thinkers and communicators of their thoughts, and they have to start doing
this at an early age: “the reasons most often given for engaging young children in
philosophy have to do with strengthening their cognitive and communicative skills,
and introducing them to formative ethical and political ideas” [26].
The importance of studying philosophy and our endeavor to actualize human
reasoning cannot be further underscored, but I would like to follow the example of
Sowey as she quotes Alex Pozdnyakov, who in very succinct words described the
importance of studying philosophy: “I have this strange phrase I use when people
ask me why I chose philosophy. I tell them I wanted to become a professional
human being” [24]. There is, perhaps, no better statement than this that could
effectively capture the thought that this essay is trying to get across.
Philosophy for Children and Multidimensional Thinking
I mentioned earlier that science and art alone could not teach us how to choose good
and effective leaders. Since bioengineering aims to create or modify products to
improve or augment processes, bioengineering science and art in terms of thinking
—particularly multidimensional thinking—entails that what we must strive for is an
education for democracy. Education for democracy implies that we are free to think.
However, having the freedom to think requires us to be good thinkers, lest we fall
into erroneous thinking. Interestingly, “in order for democracy to work, the people
must be educated” [27–30]. This is because, in a democracy, its constituents must
be able to engage each other in a reasoned debate or, better, a reasonable dialogue.
Thus, thinking, education, and democracy must be pursued together. For this
14
Multidimensional Thinking: Economizing Thinking …
321

reason, bioengineering of science and art cannot and must not start with adults. It
must begin with minds that are pure enough and free from societal or disciplinary
biases. Therefore, it must start with the minds of children:
Philosophy has always been preoccupied with good thinking, logic being one of its oldest
branches. While formal logic is beyond the ken of young children, they are very capable of
the informal logical operations that constitute basic reasoning, including giving reasons,
considering evidence, agreeing and disagreeing, giving examples and counterexamples, and
making comparisons and distinctions … Reasoning, as just described, is one important
method. Another is attempting to discover a wide range of ideas and points of view relevant
to the question under consideration, so that our judgments will be well-informed as well as
well-reasoned [26].
The tools of philosophy can help these students develop their multidimensional
thinking skills early in their lives only if they are trained to philosophize from the
onset of primary education. Further, it must also be utilized to make them realize
that there are other ideas out there that they can make the most of to improve their
way of life and upgrade their living standards.
Looking at the training provided by philosophy, it is not difﬁcult to arrive at the
realization that if we want global citizens who are multidimensional thinkers, then it
is our obligation to train them in the discipline of philosophy while they are still
young. Indeed, “we have to create a society in which excellence ﬂourishes in
diversity and abundance. Upgrading the reﬂective element in education is a
reasonable place to begin” [3]. Starting philosophical training from a young age is a
pathway that allows children to develop their higher thinking capacities from the
onset, which the current traditional education only begins to focus on during the
latter part of the education process when students are more “mature” while
lower-order thinking skills are given priority at the beginning. In fact, “the extent to
which higher-order thinking skills are taught and assessed continues to be an area of
debate, with many teachers and employers expressing concern that young people
‘cannot think’” [31]. Furthermore, the development of reasonableness and
multidimensional thinking does not receive the attention it deserves from the
current education system that lacks philosophy education. This is what the
philosophy for Children (P4C) movement is trying to address.
During the late 1960s towards the early 1970s, it can be argued that the ﬁrst
seeds of P4C were sown when “Matthew Lipman became dismayed at the quality
of argumentation employed by presumably well-educated citizens. Convinced that
the teaching of logic should begin long before college, he tried to ﬁgure out a way
to do this that would stimulate the interest of 10–11-year-olds” [32]. Drawing from
children’s already philosophically rich experiences, Lipman, Sharp, and the other
advocates of Philosophy for Children wrote short stories and novels that explore the
ideas that can be found in children’s experiences. In this sense, they did not really
introduce a subject that is foreign to the children, but they only built upon what is
already there.
Elementary school philosophy, therefore, is not about imposing an unfamiliar, ancient and
highly intellectual discipline on children, in hopes it might be good for them, but about
giving them the opportunity to explore ethical, aesthetic, political, logical and other
322
L. P. Marquez

philosophical aspects of their experiences that are already intensely meaningful for them,
but that are not often given attention in schools (or elsewhere) ... Elementary school
philosophy draws students’ attention to philosophical concepts like fairness, person, mind,
beauty, cause, time, number, truth, citizen, good and right – concepts that are already
implicated in children’s experience, and that children need to make their experiences more
meaningful, in both senses of that word: more understandable and richer, more worthwhile.
The content of elementary school philosophy, therefore, is not the traditional philosophical
problems and arguments that are the stuff of high school and college philosophy courses, or
the traditional philosophical sub-disciplines of ethics, aesthetics, metaphysics, political
philosophy and logic, or even the important ﬁgures in the history of philosophy – though
some of this may become meaningful for older children who have some experience with
philosophy. An important objective of elementary school philosophy is to help children
become conversant with philosophical concepts, and to discern them wherever they arise –
sometimes referred to as developing “a philosophical ear” [26].
In my context, P4C was introduced in the Philippines during the early 1990s
[33]. Faculty members from the Department of Philosophy of the University of the
Philippines Diliman, some of whom trained under the Institute for the Advancement
of Philosophy for Children in Mendham, New Jersey, started training public school
teachers in Metro Manila to include the approach in their teaching methods. The
results of the training were very promising as the teachers became more critical and
reﬂective about what they were teaching [34–36]. They became more open to
questions from their students.
Nevertheless, without a real place in the basic education curriculum, on top of
the highly bureaucratic administration of schools, teachers found it hard to
incorporate the approach in their own materials [36]. Furthermore, perhaps the
greatest challenge that they faced was the fact that Philippine basic education was,
and still is, very much attached to the method that is insufﬁciently informed by P4C.
In particular, the challenges in implementing P4C in the Philippines were identiﬁed
to be the following [37]:
i. “Implementation of thinking skill and reﬂective inquiry program in colleges of
education”;
ii. “Best practices, models, and paradigms of schools using the Philosophy for
Children”;
iii. “Developing instructional materials”; and
iv. “Training public school teachers in facilitating philosophical dialogue.”
Given that philosophy education is not a staple for school-age children in many
countries, it is safe to assume that similar challenges also persist in other contexts.
This is a considerable hurdle to any attempt to develop children’s multidimensional
thinking skills through philosophical training.
One may argue that it is possible to develop one’s multidimensional thinking
skills in any discipline. Nevertheless, if one aims to be an expert in legal matters,
one is expected to study law; if one intends to become a doctor to diagnose illnesses
and cure them, one is expected to pursue medicine; and if one aspires to have
extensive knowledge about the past, one is advised to study history. Suppose a
student is expected to spend time in a discipline in order to become well-versed in
14
Multidimensional Thinking: Economizing Thinking …
323

its area of specialization. In that case, it is only reasonable that a student devotes
time to philosophy, specializing in critical, creative, and caring thinking if one’s
goal is to develop as a multidimensional thinker.
Furthermore, for the ancient Greek philosophers, philosophy is not merely a ﬁeld
of study, but more importantly, it is a way of life. Russell asserts that “[i]f all men
were well off, if poverty and disease had been reduced to their lowest possible
point, there would still remain much to be done to produce a valuable society; and
even in the existing world the goods of the mind are at least as important as the
goods of the body. It is exclusively among the goods of the mind that the value of
philosophy is to be found; and only those who are not indifferent to these goods can
be persuaded that the study of philosophy is not a waste of time” [38].
If we look at it closely, the argument for including philosophy in the classroom
has a very signiﬁcant practical value. Amongst other things, philosophy puts more
depth and meaning in whatever we study—as in science and in art—and with what
we do with our lives. But most of all, philosophy trains us to become “professional
human beings.” [24] If the goal of education is to produce good citizens; if we are
to deﬁne a good citizen as a professional human being, that is, as someone who is
critical, creative, caring, and collaborative—a multidimensional thinker—then
philosophy ought to be more utilized since it is geared towards the production of
such kind of citizen. In this regard, education institutions should consider either
requiring their students to take courses in philosophy or training their teachers to
use the tools of philosophy in the conduct of their classes. An ideal scenario would
be to adopt both suggestions, but at the end of the day, one cannot deny that
philosophy, either as a discipline or as pedagogy, is indispensable in improving the
quality of thinking.
Conclusion
Today, it is common to encounter challenges such as alternative facts, post-truth,
and anti-intellectualism. Failure to respond to these challenges due to poor or
fallacious thinking has proved to bring most of us more harm than good—the rise of
authoritarian leaders, militarization of the West Philippine Sea, and the continual
increase in COVID-19 infections, to name a few. This is a shortcoming of education
—a failure to teach thinking, that is, multidimensional thinking, in schools. Since
education aims to produce good citizens in its broadest sense, it is paramount
to develop a more responsive education—one that develops multidimensional
thinking and not just linear thinking.
Nevertheless, suppose we truly want a more responsive education for the
challenges that we are experiencing today. In that case, we should begin to accept
that we need to educate the youth in the ways of philosophy. “By inviting students
to reﬂect on relationships among different areas of inquiry and to make sense of
their educational experiences as a whole, philosophy can add to the meaningfulness
of students’ education as a whole” [32]. This is where P4C can come in. Through
324
L. P. Marquez

this pedagogy—a pedagogy that focuses on signiﬁcantly improved thinking—
education can go beyond merely achieving a set of learning objectives but puts
more reﬂection and meaning into it.
At the beginning of this essay, I borrowed a passage from the national hero of
the Philippines, Jose Rizal. He advised us to think for ourselves lest we want to be
like beasts led by a halter. I believe that it would only be ﬁtting, as a complement to
Rizal’s counsel, to end this work with a counsel of my own:
Ignorance is only servitude if a person chooses to remain ignorant, for ignorance can lead
to wonder, then wonder to questions, questions to thoughts, and thoughts to insights.
Ignorance is neither good nor evil. It is what a person does with one’s ignorance that
matters. Ignorance is but a stage. It is the ﬁrst stage of thinking.
Leander Penaso Marquez
Core Messages
• Education must focus on signiﬁcantly improved thinking through teaching
for thinking.
• Bioengineering science and art in terms of thinking can result to
multidimensional thinking.
• Multidimensional thinking requires striving for education for democracy
and reasonableness.
• Economizing thinking can be achieved by introducing philosophy in the
classroom.
• Giving children opportunities to philosophize help maximize the outcomes
of multidimensional thinking.
References
1. Gabtelovich YF, Razifovna KA, Raesovna GC (2016) The advanced cognitive abilities of the
multidimensional person. TOJDAC 6:764–768. http://tojdac.org/tojdac/VOLUME6-JLYSPCL_
ﬁles/tojdac_v060JSE144.pdf. Accessed 21 July 2020
2. Rickerl D, Francis C (2004) Multidimensional thinking: A prerequisite to agroecology. In:
Rickerl D, Francis C (eds) Agroecosystems analysis. American Society of Agronomy,
Madison, WI, pp 1–18. https://agronomy.unl.edu/FarmingSystems/organic/resourcevolumes/
Rickerl-Francis-chapter1.pdf. Accessed 27 July 2020
3. Lipman M (2003) Thinking in education, 2nd edn. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
4. Bloom B (1956) Taxonomy of educational objectives, handbook i: The cognitive domain.
David McKay Co. Inc., New York
5. Anderson L, Krathwohl D (2001) A taxonomy for learning, teaching, and assessing: a
revision of bloom's taxonomy of educational objectives. Pearson, Allyn & Bacon, New York
6. Krathwohl D (2002) A revision of bloom’s taxonomy: an overview. Theory Pract 41(4). Ohio
State University, Ohio
14
Multidimensional Thinking: Economizing Thinking …
325

7. Lai E (2011) Critical thinking: a literature review. Pearson. http://images.pearsonassessments.
com/images/tmrs/CriticalThinkingReviewFINAL.pdf. Accessed 21 June 2020
8. Marquez L (2017) Critical thinking in Philippine education: What we have and what we need.
J Crit Educ Policy Stud 15(2):272–303. http://www.jceps.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/
15-2-10.pdf. Accessed 25 July 2020
9. Quito A (2017) The Philippines’ greatest female philosopher has died. Quartz. https://qz.com/
725370/emerita-quito-the-greatest-forgotten-ﬁlipino-philosopher-has-died/. Accessed 21 June
2020
10. Bonifacio A (n.d) Three concepts of philosophy. https://www.scribd.com/doc/129403249/
Three-Concepts-of-Philosophy. Accessed 21 June 2020
11. Quito E (1983) The State of Philosophy in the Philippines. De La Salle University, Manila
12. Krone B (2014) A personal philosophy. J Space Philos 3(2)
13. Van Seggelen-Deman I, Van HR, Helsdingen A, Wopereis I (2017) Reﬂection: a socratic
approach. Theory Psychol 27(6)
14. Mesaros C (2013) The history of philosophy as reconstruction. Procedia—Soc Behav Sci 71
15. Dewey J (1920) Reconstruction in philosophy. Holt and Co., New York
16. Mourant J, Freund H (1964) Problems of philosophy: a book of readings. The Macmillan
Company, New York
17. Biesta G (2011) Philosophy, exposure, and children: how to resist the instrumentalisation of
philosophy in education. J Philos Educ 45(2):305–319
18. Russell B (2009) Knowledge and wisdom. In: Pepa R, Guevarra D (eds) Sophophilia: critical
readings in academic philosophy (with logic). Trinity University of Asia, Quezon City
19. Hedman E (2001) The spectre of populism in Philippine politics and society. South East Asia
Res 9(1)
20. Nery J (2015) Filipinos, what are we doing wrong? Philippine Daily Inquirer. https://opinion.
inquirer.net/86685/ﬁlipinos-what-are-we-doing-wrong. Accessed 21 June 2020
21. De Guzman N (2016) Why do we vote the way we do? BusinessWorld. https://www.
bworldonline.com/why-do-we-vote-the-way-we-do/. Accessed 21 June 2020
22. Shammas M (2012) For a better society, teach philosophy in high schools. The Hufﬁngton
Post. http://www.hufﬁngtonpost.com/mike-shammas/for-a-better-society-teac_b_2356718.html.
Accessed 22 June 2020
23. Splitter L, Sharp A (1995) Teaching for better thinking: the classroom community of inquiry.
Australian Council for Educational Research, Hawthorn, VC
24. Sowey M (2013) Teaching philosophy to children? It’s a great idea. The Guardian. http://
www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/nov/21/teaching-philosophy-to-children-its-a-great-
idea. Accessed 22 June 2020
25. Montaigne M (1877) Of the education of children. In: Hazlitt, W (ed) Essays of Montaigne
(trans: Cotton C). https://archive.org/stream/essaysofmontaign00mont#page/n7/mode/2up.
Accessed 21 June 2020
26. PLATO: Philosophy Learning and Teaching Organization (2009) Why do philosophy in
elementary school? Teaching Elementary School Philosophy. http://plato-philosophy.org/
getting-started/teaching-elementary-school-philosophy/. Accessed 22 June 2020
27. Zulu P (2001) Education as a precondition for democracy. http://www.pass.va/content/dam/
scienzesociali/pdf/acta6/acta6-zulu.pdf. Accessed 21 June 2020
28. Villegas-Reimers E (2002) Education for democracy. ReVista: Harvard Review of Latin
America 2(1)
29. Glaeser E, Ponzetto G, Shleifer A (2007) Why does democracy need education? J Econ
Growth 12
30. Bennet M (2017) Why education is essential to our democracy. https://medium.com/
@SenatorBennet/why-education-is-essential-to-our-democracy-931cfb7a1e1. Accessed 21 June
2020
31. Collins R (2014) Skills for the 21st century: teaching higher-order thinking. Curricul
Leadersh J 12(14)
326
L. P. Marquez

32. Pritchard M (Spring 2014) Philosophy for children. In: Zalta EN (ed) The Stanford
Encyclopedia
of
Philosophy.
http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2014/entries/children/.
Accessed 22 June 2020
33. Valero IM (2018) Personal correspondence on the development of philosophy for children in
the Philippines
34. Sta. Ana N (2008) P4c: the up-deped manila story. Paper presented at the Karunungan
Festival 2, O.B. Montessori, Inc., Greenhills, San Juan
35. Lee Z (2009) Philosophy for children in the Philippines. In: Marshal E, Dobashi T, Weber B
(eds) Children philosophize worldwide: theoretical and practical concepts. Peter Lang,
Frankfurt
36. Mancenido-Bolaños MA (2018) Narrowing the gap between theory and practice: Community
of inquiry and its state in the Philippines. Kritike: An Online J Philos 12(2):140–156
37. Lee Z (2014) Nurturing communities of inquiry in the Philippine schools. Thinking: J Philos
Children 20(3–4)
38. Russell B (1946) The value of philosophy. The problems of philosophy. Oxford University
Press, London
Leander Penaso Marquez is an Assistant Professor at the
College of Social Sciences and Philosophy, University of the
Philippines Diliman. He has published a number of articles in
local and international journals as well as presented some of his
research papers at various conferences in Asia and Europe. He
has facilitated the training of teachers in the teaching of subjects
such as “Introduction to the Philosophy of the Human Person”
and “Trends, Networks, and Critical Thinking in the 21st Century
Culture.” Incidentally, he has also authored a textbook on the
latter under the same title. Leander sits as co-chair of the
Bioethics Working Group of the Association of Paciﬁc Rim
Universities Global Health Program (APRU-GHP). He is also
serving as Junior Ambassador to the Philippines for the Universal
Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network (USERN). His
research
interests
include
ethics,
epistemology,
bioethics,
research ethics philosophy for children, philosophy of education,
philosophy and popular culture, and national security.
14
Multidimensional Thinking: Economizing Thinking …
327

15
How You Know What I Know that She
Said About You: Theory of Mind,
Intentionality and the Evolutionary
Roots of Artistic Practice
Dustin Hellberg
“Whenever I try to become sensible of my thinking activity as
such, what I catch is some bodily fact, an impression coming
from my brow, or head, or throat, or nose. It seems as if
consciousness as an inner activity were rather a postulate than
a sensibly given fact, the postulate, namely, of a knower as
correlative to all this known; and as if ‘sciousness; might be a
better word by which to describe it. But ‘sciousness postulated
as a hypothesis’ is practically a very different thing from ‘states
of consciousness apprehended with infallible certainty by an
inner sense’. For one thing, it throws the question of who the
knower really is wide open again.”
William James [1]
Summary
This article discusses the role of second-order intentionality in artistic practice
and aesthetic evaluation. Second-order intentionality—and third-, fourth-, ﬁfth-,
etc.—is an extension of the Theory of Mind, itself an evolved neural capacity
found in humans and primates. Though this article puts forth spatiotemporal
processing and exaggeration as two other foundational mental abilities for
aesthetic capacity, its focus is on the relations of second-order intentionality (or
n-order intentionality) to artistic practice. Without these neural processes, artistic
practice and evaluation would simply be impossible. Demonstrating the various
relationships between evolved abilities and artistic ones will help bolster future
interdisciplinary research and inquiries that span the sciences and humanities.
D. Hellberg (&)
Department of English Studies, University of the Bahamas, Bahamas, USA
e-mail: dchellberg@gmail.com
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Bahamas, USA
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh (eds.), Thinking, Integrated Science 7,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04075-7_15
329

Sympathy: a girl with cancer and her friend
[Adapted with permission from the Health and Art (HEART), Universal
Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network (USERN); Painting by Fatemeh
Ghasemi Nezhad.]
Keywords
Ethology Evolution Evolutionary aesthetics Theory of Mind Second-order
intentionality
QR Code
Scanning the QR code directs you to the word cloud of the chapter that is made up
of the words we discussed throughout the whole book in relation to the chapter’s
330
D. Hellberg

keyword, which is intentionally not included in the word cloud. Find the keyword
and put it in place in the puzzle according to the clues provided in Chap. 36. The
mystery hidden in the puzzle is the quote of THINKING: Bioengineering of Science
and Art.
Introduction
In his foundational text quoted at the beginning, Psychology, William James laid a
philosophical framework to the inner workings of the mind, trying to explain them
physically, not metaphysically. One could imagine him, were he alive today,1 hard
at work in the neurosciences, peering into the networks of neurons and their
electrochemical web, which is the foundation of the human mind and self. What
James explores here is how self-consciousness works. Tuning one’s mind on itself
does not quite allow one to ‘see’ one’s mind in action, one’s self-consciousness laid
bare. James’ neologism, ‘sciousness,’ is intended to address this issue. If we cannot
be sure of our own minds in a way that should make something like
self-consciousness or free will apparent, then how can we ever quite be sure about
other people?
Given the theme of the present volume, ‘bioengineering,’ we should keep in
mind the ways that evolution has ‘engineered’ our present selves. Evolution pro-
vided the basic blueprints upon which free will, blind luck, migration patterns, and
culture have developed. So, how do we move from the stochastic, eons-long pro-
cesses of evolutionary forces to human artistic practice? I posit here that sui generis
artistic practices in human culture are emergent properties that build on previous
cognitive capacities in the human brain. I fail to see how it could be otherwise.
Spontaneous generation of universal patterns and practice in homo sapiens (such as
art and appreciation thereof) would be bafﬂingly rare if not impossible, lacking a
shared evolutionary heritage. Art exists in all cultures in some form. As far back as
we can tell in the archeological record, the aesthetic practice has been found. From
the harvesting of ochre and seashells, presumably for body painting/modiﬁcation, to
the magisterial ‘cathedrals’ of paleolithic cave paintings, human beings evidently
have always been artistic.
If we think of some of the core aspects of aesthetic appreciation, it can be traced
back to a few core tenets. For the purposes of this article, I envision three: spa-
tiotemporal cognition, second-order intentionality (SOI), and exaggeration.2 Spa-
tiotemporal processing allows for storytelling, plot, narrative, group organization,
and shared purpose. All cultures have origin myths, ritual myths, and eschatological
1 Or Aristotle for that matter.
2 Of course there are more than just this. The holistic web of human cultures, history and artistic
practice is overwhelmingly complex. I would add to this list abstract symbolic representation
(language), mother-infant dyad bonding and a host of others.
15
How You Know What I Know that She Said …
331

myths. Where did we come from; what do we do while we are here; where are we
going? All human beings engage in storytelling, and the past/future mental pro-
jections are framed in this spatiotemporal constellation. But when we think about
the ability to project the self (or the group) into the unknown future, we see how
powerful this ability is despite its commonality. Children do it once their minds
have developed enough to comprehend distances across time and space, rather
abstract ideas when seen objectively. Adults do this rote routine as a matter of fact: I
shall take a vacation next year; I need to save money for my retirement; I shall
never die.3
Exaggeration is an intentionally broad concept, but in my formulation, it comes
from the mind’s ability to abstract outward from experiential data to generalized
categories of understanding. The human mind is a pattern-hunting organ, and the
ability to perform this act has an immense evolutionary survival advantage. The
ability to collate observational data into proleptic (future-oriented) inferences
allowed our ancestors to make stable predictions about weather, animal behavior,
out-group friendliness/hostility, and a range of other patterns.4 Further, and this is
far more speculative, exaggeration allows for such aesthetic practices as metaphor,
symbolism, character archetypes, and pictorial representation, among others.
SOI is, in my opinion, more foundational to the other two listed here than they
are of it. Hence, for the present purposes, I shall focus on this alone and expand on
this aspect in the next section. SOI is basically mind reading. It is an extension of
Theory of Mind (ToM), something found in our primate cousins.5 TOM is the
cognitive ability to understand conspeciﬁcs as having mental states of their own
such as pain, fear, and happiness. SOI is a bit more complex as it relates to states of
intentionality that an individual can infer about conspeciﬁcs’ actions. Imagine a
stranger walked up to you, put out their hand, and offered you a $100 bill.
Immediately you would wonder what their intention is. Is this person supremely
generous? Are they insane?6 What does this person expect of me should I take the
proffered money? This last example is technically third-order intentionality, but I
will deal with that deﬁnition later.
Intention of this sort is foundational to artistic practice and understanding. It is
the reason why we value an original piece of art versus a copy or reproduction. The
copy/forgery has a far different intention (based on that of the forger) than the
original. Intention is why we love or hate characters in the stories we tell. It is what
helps to make sense of characters' relationship to plots, of the gods’ motives in our
3 Right?
4 These three ‘precursors’ will naturally overlap in places. Exaggeration lends itself to the
spatiotemporal understanding of patterns happening through time. My point is that these mental
capacities are foundational to artistic practice.
5 Other species demonstrate ToM at least to a rudimentary level, but none to the extent of humans
and primates.
6 Note, too, that this overlaps the other ‘precursors. You might think, ‘In my past (spatiotemporal)
experience people don’t just offer money for no reason unless they are (general categorical
exaggeration) inveterate philanthropists or crazy’. A glance at their clothing might yield further
generalized inferences. If the person is wearing a garbage bag versus a bespoke suit, we couldn’t
be blamed for coming to different conclusions about their intentions.
332
D. Hellberg

mythologies, of how we should ‘read’ aesthetic objects. It is the foundation (as we
will see) for morality and dignity, for justice and punishment, for law and ethics.
The next section will trace the evolutionary roots of this phenomenon and explain
its relationship to the arts and aesthetics.
Monkey See, Monkey Duality7
Human cognitive abilities have correlates found in our great ape cousins. This
should come as no great surprise since our common ancestors with chimps broke off
approximately 6 million years ago. Human DNA is approximately 98.4% identical
to chimpanzees. Ethologists have been teasing out similarities in great ape behavior
to human behavior for nearly a century, ﬁnding more and more similarities when it
comes to sociality, sexuality, and survival strategies. But apes do not just sponta-
neously create art or grab a crayon and start scribbling away on a piece of paper as
human children do. Where shall we look to ﬁnd correlates in our primate cousins
that reasonably suggest a proto-aesthetic drive that could lead toward something
like human artistic practice? ToM is a good place to start.
ToM is the cognitive ability to intuit that other creatures around you have mental
states other than one’s own. This begins in preverbal human infants fairly early in
life. As Robert Sapolsky says: “Nine-month-olds look where someone points (as
can other apes and dogs), knowing the pointer has information that they don’t. This
is fueled by motivation: Where is that toy? Where’s she looking? Older kids
understand more broadly that other people have different thoughts, beliefs and
knowledge than they, the landmark of achieving Theory of Mind … Thus there are
stages of gaze following, followed by primary ToM, then secondary ToM, then
perspective taking, with the speed of transmissions inﬂuenced by experience (e.g.,
kids with older siblings achieve ToM earlier than average” [2].
Humans share the ToM ability with, at least rudimentarily, other social animals.
It confers survival chances to be in tune with other members of your group. But
where does this come from? The answer lies, at least for mammals, in the com-
bination of brain function and social group sizes.
There appears to be a correlative connection between neocortex size in mam-
malian brains and the size of the social group in which they operate. The more
neural processing power available to intuit the mental states of others, the larger the
possible group sizes tend to be. This is really remarkable. As Leonard Mlodinow
notes: “To be precise, the size of a species’ neocortex—the most recently evolved
part of the brain—as a percentage of that species’ whole brain seems to be related to
the size of the social group in which members of that species hang out. Gorillas
form groups of under ten, spider monkeys closer to twenty, and macaques more like
forty—and these numbers accurately reﬂect the neocortex-to-whole-brain ratio of
each of these species” [3].
7 Yes, I am aware that monkeys are not the same as apes.
15
How You Know What I Know that She Said …
333

So, ToM is crucial for group cohesion and social interaction. Further, it leads to
more advanced mental processes like second-other intentionality (SOI). As
Mlodinov also notes, as the human neocortex size is very large compared to the
whole brain, our social groups tend to be around 150, “just about what the neo-
cortex size model predicts” [3]. Humans have evolved to be incredibly sensitive to
our social environs, and thus we have but to turn to a function of language to
demonstrate the relation between SOI and artistic practice.
First-order intentionality has to do with personal states of being and desires: “It’s
cold outside so I should wear a sweater. I have a lot of deadlines coming up so I
should get them done.” SOI builds upon this: “I believe that these deadlines will
warp my sanity. This weather intends to kill me.” Here, even non-human entities
can be given agency and intention despite having none. Humans dollop intention
and agency on practically everything around them, but especially on each other.
Third-order intentionality builds further: “I know that Susan believes she’s more
qualiﬁed for that job that Billy wants. Susan thinks that Billy thinks that I think he’s
distinctly unqualiﬁed for.” This can go up several more levels of complexity, but it
is not hard to see how humans, set in incredibly complex social interactions, require
this type of thinking to get through the day. Even teenage romance and drama bears
this hallmark: “Billy said that Susan said that Sally would totally date him, but I
think that Sally was lying because she’s totally into Steve even though she knows
that Steve knows that I like him, etc.” While convoluted, one can pick out the
intentional states readily.
This n-order of intentional comprehension forms one of the bases for artistic
practice and is something that we use to peer into the minds of our Paleolithic
ancestors. Take Chauvet Cave and its paintings. We may gaze at the indescribable
beauty of these8 and note the stunning quality of line and form, of relation to the
inner space of caves, of the remarkable modernity of the representations. Yet, it is
not long until we ask a simple question: Well, what are they for?9 In asking this, we
want to understand what these artists intended these paintings to do, to represent, to
symbolize, to communicate to others. To take a general example from life and
literature, when a person or character does something unexpected, we immediately
ask, ‘well, why did they do that?’ We can expand this into critical comprehension:
what does the author intend me to understand about this character’s hidden moti-
vations when she said/did X? Too, think of the way that irony works in relation to
n-order intentionality. I have to understand that the author has a character say one
thing but mean another. This is no small mental gymnastic feat. I have to com-
prehend that the intentions of both the character and the author are counter to the
evidence presented to me and then read that into the overall fabric of the general
story’s meaning. Lacking this capacity, I might believe that Jonathan Swift really
did call for Irish babies to be tossed into a stew pot. I might miss the joke if a friend
8 I admit here my complete fascination with Paleolithic art if it wasn’t obvious.
9 The very fact that we can formulate questions at all about cave paintings that are 32–45 k years
old should speak more to a core commonality in the human species than about a ‘cultural
refraction’ which states that human selves are merely constructed by their cultures/languages as
many in the humanities claim.
334
D. Hellberg

says, “The weather is just lovely” during a hurricane. ToM yields n-order inten-
tionality, which then yields the human capacity to have art, stories, characters, or
plot at all (among others).
An interesting side note is just how n-order intentionality allows humans to have
theories about theories. If we examine the meta-X concept (metaﬁction, metaref-
erence, metatheory, etc.), we should note that to have a theory X about theory Y
follows this same pattern: “I believe theory X intends to explain theory Y in such
and such a way.”10 Hence, to drum up an easy example, the characters in Samuel
Beckett’s Waiting for Godot literally wait for nothing in a play in which not much
happens, which intends to ironically demonstrate the existential crisis of the human
self in relation to a godless universe while still, itself, being a self-referential play
about the nature (or futility) of the play (and art) itself. If I am watching a movie in
which a character turns and looks directly into the camera and addresses their own
role as a character, if I lack n-order intentional comprehension, this might strike me
as odd. In fact, were I lacking that mental capacity, it is doubtful I could even watch
a movie, read a book or navigate the vagaries of human life at all.
But, if n-order intentionality is important for humans to navigate our tricky
social lives, why do we spend inordinate amounts of time producing, consuming,
and pondering stories, myths, movies, sculptures, paintings, video games, music,
music videos, and so on? Why do we indulge in the obviously ﬁctitious and become
emotional at what we know to be unreal because it is art and therefore artiﬁcial? If
we leave off those different epochs, cultures, and languages that have differing
poetic forms, for example, and traditions, we can see that there is a universal
tendency in our species that extends back as far as we can examine. That universal
tendency is artistic expression and consumption. At times, this was interpreted as
the gods or muses communing with the artist and, thereby, with us. Later, it
became, as with Homer, the self-realization of the artist as artist, of the poet as
moral, cultural, and aesthetic arbiter. Turn to Vergil, and the Homeric thrust is laid
bare in the ﬁrst three words: Arme virumque cano. ‘I sing.’ Skipping a few mil-
lennia, even the surrealists and dadaists, eschewing ‘sense, reference or meaning,’
still had as their contrapoint sense, reference, and meaning. In all this, we produce
art and consume it because we seek something through the activity. It may be the
resolution of a moral question, the exploration of faith versus doubt in scripture, for
legal equality between the sexes in feminist poetry, the struggle for human
recognition and dignity in slave narratives. Comparative analysis into popculture
might say that we venerate ‘the canon’ and its ‘dead white men,’ but the point
I make here is that all this art, all this consumption of it in whatever form, has its
roots in a shared evolutionary adaptation (or exaptation) which is why it is uni-
versal. Due to this, an aesthetic theory that ignores the evolutionary factors while
10 It is this same sequence that we see in the postmodern stance that ‘everything is a text
deferring/referring to another text’, put forth most famously by Jacques Derrida. The premise is
that to interpret something is to create a new, wholly separate ‘text’ which itself becomes a new
text upon further examination. Therefore, nothing has any ‘ﬁxed’ meaning in any real or
discernible sense. It might sound strange, but this view still has traction in many humanities
departments.
15
How You Know What I Know that She Said …
335

focusing solely on the historical/cultural/linguistic factors misses a broader, more
comprehensive picture. In fact, I believe that the arts are exaptations of social skills
that evolved with human’s increasing neocortex size, and we can perhaps see some
of these as emergent characteristics building on these evolutionary permutations. It
is true that humans seem to consume aesthetic objects (generally), and these need
not always be ‘high art,’ but they are consumed nonetheless. We can laugh at
Aristophanes, Dostoevsky, Chaplin, a puppet show, the Coen Brothers movies, or
the latest rom-com, but in doing so, we engage in a type of aesthetic valuation.
Combining the three ‘causes’ of art, I named earlier for a moment may render
this notion in a better light. Humans are caught in the bind of having self-awareness
and free will11 while being highly socialized animals who evolved to be so. Hence
the need for a moral sense of the self within the moral framework on the com-
munity. Non-human animals need not be moral in the same sense as humans.
I cannot ﬁne the raccoon that upends the garbage can at night and spreads trash
through the yard. I cannot call the police on a deer that bumbles out in front of my
car. I cannot prosecute a grizzly bear for mauling a hapless hiker. This is because
humans have a different sense of morality than what other animals possess. Some
animals absolutely do demonstrate advanced forms of conﬂict resolution and
remediation. This is clear in our chimp and bonobo cousins. So if we ﬁnd the roots
of things like ToM, SOI, proto-morality, and the like, we should expect that these
would be far more elaborate and have more permutations in ourselves. Art, taken
broadly, combines the spatiotemporal (narrative, relation to past/present, relation to
environment/group history), exaggeration (symbolic representation, metaphysical
categories, abstraction, token/type distinctions), and the n-order intentionality,
which, as will be shown in Michael Tomasello’s work, to be foundational to our
moral reasoning as well as, I hope to have shown our aesthetic reasoning.
The Moral of the Story Is That Stories Are Moral: Seeing,
Reading, Acting
Our
aesthetic engagement
is
invariably reﬂexive,
iterative,
and proleptic/
analeptic.12 The piece of art conveys the artists’ sense or meaning, the charac-
ters’ sense or meaning, the book’s sense or meaning, the culture’s sense or
meaning, the language’s sense or meaning. One could not hope to write, with
deference to Thomas Nagel, a book from a bat's perspective because the bat is a
framing device used to convey human desires, motivations, and fears. It is a fact
that bats communicate, but even if we had some computer that could translate
ultrasonic mammalian squeaks into a human language, how much of our own
11 Save the debates on free will, please. I will go with William James when he says, “My ﬁrst act of
free will shall be to believe in free will” [4].
12 Prolepsis and analepsis come from narratology, meaning (respectively) ﬂash-forward and
ﬂashback as temporal narrational framing devices.
336
D. Hellberg

human intentions would we then pile onto ‘Pﬂedermaus-ese’13 to be able to make
sense of it? As noted, humans impose intentions on objects and things that do not
have intention. To have intention is to have both agency and an intended outcome.
To have these is to have the workings of a system by which others may judge the
outcomes of the intended action. Here we see the inception of moral judgment. As
Roger Scruton notes: “Persons are moral beings, conscious of right and wrong, who
judge their fellows and who judged in their turn. They are also individuals, and an
account of the moral life must begin from the apparent tension that exists between
our nature as free individuals and our membership of the communities on which our
fulﬁllment depends” [5].
When we mentally translate a work of art into its constituent ‘meanings,’ we
engage in a type of storytelling. We read into the work of art levels of intentionality
(via the person who made it, via the characters’ behavior), exaggeration (via the
themes, symbols, etc.), and the spatiotemporal staging of the piece (and its relation
to our own spatiotemporal existence). We come to a kind of major or minor moral
judgment thereby. We could decide that the artwork is ‘timeless’ or ‘trash,’ that it
makes no sense or speaks across time, culture, and language.
Humans are mimetic to an uncanny degree. The next time you ﬁnd yourself at a
social gathering with friends, note the position of your hands and arms. Hold that
position for a while, and soon you will see others around you (if they like you)
adopting the same pose. We yawn when we see others yawn (as well as when we
see primates yawn). Fidget with your phone on a crowded bus and note that those in
your vicinity will start grabbing for theirs. We evolved to be hypersensitive to our
environment but also our social, human environment as well. We must be wary of
danger, of strangers and outsiders, too, of the errant hungry tiger waiting in the
canebrake just beyond the clearing by the watering hole. Why is it that children
show such fascination with animals, or that the things we most commonly see in
clouds and natural formations are faces and animals? How is it that preverbal
children also are attuned to moral action and transitivity when they cannot yet form
the words good or bad, let alone the metaphysical ramiﬁcations of Good and Bad?
It should again be clear that these mental capacities, which are foundational to the
arts and moral reasoning, are present in these children not because they have
learned them culturally but because they have been hardwired into the neural
substrate by evolutionary forces. Therefore, these clearly would have conferred on
our species survival advantages based on group cohesion, individual/community
balance, and proto-moral reasoning.
Stepping back for a moment, John Searle’s chapter, ‘How the Mind Works:
Intentionality’ [6], discusses the nature of intentionality and the ways that the mind
works in concert with the social, linguistic, and physical environments. He dis-
cusses what he calls ‘world-to-mind’ and ‘mind-to-world’ directions of ﬁt and how
these relate to intentionality. He says, “Beliefs, perceptions and memories have the
mind-to-world direction of ﬁt, because their aim is to represent how things are;
desires and intentions have the world-to-mind direction of ﬁt because their aim is to
13 Thank you, German, for the word ‘Pﬂedermaus’.
15
How You Know What I Know that She Said …
337

represent not how things are but how we would like them to be or how we plan to
make them be.” Searle notes that intentions do not even have to be necessarily
conscious. Thirst, as he states, is an unconscious intention of the body to remain
hydrated, and the same goes with hunger. These intentional states can also be
understood as world-to-word/word-to-world ﬁts which nest within the ‘mind’
designation. Since we have individual motivations which are tempered by the
constraints or possibilities outlined by our environments (social, natural, linguistic,
etc.), we can project our intentions on the world via words just as easily as we can
with our minds. As I have noted, this is the shape that aesthetic valuation takes.
Conscious, intentional evaluation (world-to-mind) of artwork frames the piece
within the balance of the personal/individual and the social/cultural. Without the
interweaving of n-order intentionality, exaggeration, and spatiotemporal processing,
we, again, have no artistic practice nor criteria with which to evaluate them.
There are moral judgments then, major or minor, when evaluating aesthetic
works. In a way, because we are (more or less) programmed to be attuned to moral/
immoral action, we simply cannot help but be morally evaluative. This should be
clear from the three criteria I put forth as foundational to our aesthetic senses.
A moral question cannot be posed about something that has no bearing on human
lives. If I hold out a large diamond ring and give it to you, there is no moral
judgment to be made about the thing itself. However, you might consider why I am
giving it to you. Are we getting married? Am I bribing you? Am I just the kind of
person who hands out diamond rings? And further moral evaluation may result:
where did this diamond come from? Were human beings exploited in its pro-
curement or manufacture, or transportation? All of these considerations require
n-order intentionality, exaggeration, and spatiotemporal comprehension, just as
stories and artwork require these three factors for us to produce and understand and
judge them. While there is clearly a cultural component to this process (how could
there not be), it has its roots in our shared evolutionary past. We see the beginnings
of moral reasoning even in capuchin monkeys. As Sapolsky says: “other primates
also show the beginnings of moral judgments … A human gives [the capuchin
monkeys] a mildly interesting small object –a pebble. The human then extends her
hand palm up, a capuchin begging gesture. If the monkey puts the pebble in her
hand, there’s a food reward. In other words, the animals learned how to buy food.
Now there are two capuchins, side by side. Each gets a pebble. Each gives it the
human. Each gets a grape. Very rewarding. Now change things. Both monkey pay
their pebble. Monkey 1 gets a grape. But monkey 2 gets some cucumber, which
blows compared with grapes –capuchins prefer grapes to cucumber 90% of the
time. Monkey 2 was shortchanged. And monkey 2 would then typically ﬂing the
cucumber or bash around in frustration” [2].
Though Sapolsky lists several experiments showing moral evaluation in human
infants, the primate research is more compelling because it demonstrates the very
deep roots and connections that we share with our primate cousins with whom we
share an evolutionary past. How could ethological parallels such as this exist in
capuchins and humans without having its antecedents in a shared evolutionary
history? Monkey 2 may not be consciously thinking, ‘That’s totally unfair to me,’
338
D. Hellberg

but the monkey’s reactions demonstrate it just as clearly. Fairness (or moral action)
in this sense retains the three-part structure. The monkey comprehends that in the
past, grapes were given out in exchange for pebbles. It has a sense of the exag-
gerated ‘fairness’ category. Also, it shows at least SOI faculty: ‘I gave you the
pebble intending that you would give me a grape.’ A violation of these factors,
albeit unconsciously in the monkey, are moral reasoning and valuation.
So, just as aesthetics pervade our thinking, too, does morality and moral judg-
ment. As Tomasello says: “All of modern humans’ cultural interactions were
structured by collective intentionality, underlain by a sense of cultural common
ground. The trsult was conventional cultural practices—everthing from making a
spear to raising children—which, in theory, were effected in the same ideal way by
any culturally competent individual … This new way of operating created the
conditions for individuals to construct a fully agent-independent, objective and
impartial view of the world, which resulted in, among many other things, an
objectiﬁcation of role ideals into the right and wrong ways of doing things” [7].
This objectiﬁcation of role ideals ﬁnds its way into the stories we tell, the
religions we look to for explanation, to the laws we make to govern, to the taboos
we place on certain actions, to the ways we raise and educate our children, to the
ways we treat the disposed and excluded, to the ways that we entertain ourselves be
they ‘great art’ or a guilty-pleasure TV serial.
Let us take a piece of ‘great art’ as an example. Sophocles’ immortal Oedipus
Tyranus [8] is lauded as a masterpiece of world literature and speaks to us 2500
after its writing. Rather than summarizing an already familiar story, I want to point
to the qualities of the work that best exemplify intentionality with a few words on
exaggeration and spatiotemporal reckoning. Rather than cast Oedipus’ plight as
something thrust onto him by the feckless gods, Sophocles casts the blame squarely
on Oedipus. The blame, so to speak, is not in our stars but in ourselves. The
audience feels the deep and growing conﬂict inherent to the main character because
his intentions were never to marry his mother and sire children by her but rather to
uphold his duties as king and to uncover, despite the pain produced, his role in his
own fate. Contrast this with Homer’s books or with the Book of Job. In those
stories, the fates of the characters are predicated on the whims of the deities
involved, often with little regard to the subjects’ worthiness of praise or blame.
Odysseus fails to pay proper homage to Poseidon, who then punishes him with a
ten-year return voyage to Ithaka. Job is punished for no other reason than a wager
between deities. In both cases, the punishment does not quite ﬁt the offense.
Oedipus, ‘blind’ as he is at ﬁrst to his role in his own undoing, becomes an active
and willing participant in the self-discovery that is also his own self-destruction.
While we may feel pity for Odysseus when we ﬁrst ﬁnd him crying on the ocean
shore, missing his wife and son and home, and while we may feel pity for Job at
that moment he ﬁnally cries out ‘why,’ we also know that the stories are intended to
represent the capriciousness of our fate and fortune in a capricious, dangerous
world. Yet we know, as he does not, that Oedipus is guilty of two heinous acts,
tabooed in nearly every culture and time. We know that the punishment must meet
the violation, and it does. But it is tragic to echo Camus, only in the moment that
15
How You Know What I Know that She Said …
339

Oedipus becomes self-aware of it. It is not the gods’ fault. It is his own. There is no
inherent tragedy to Odysseus’ story. He ﬁnally goes home, kills the suitors, spends
time with Penelope, and is, because the gods will have their way, sent back on
another quest in the last chapter of the book. Job suffers through great loss and
indignity but is rewarded in the end because he returns to servile faith and never
will question the motives of the gods again. Not so with poor Oedipus. His
self-aimed intention to understand and unearth his participation in his fate is both
his making and undoing. It makes him tragic and worthy of pity as his story unfolds
in its spatiotemporal way. He becomes a symbol, an exaggeration, of the instinctual
struggle of the self versus the moral sensibility of the citizen or member of the
community. As translator Robert Fagles says, “the catastrophe of the tragic hero
thus becomes the catastrophe of the ﬁfth-century man; all his furious energy and
intellectual daring drive him on to this terrible discovery of his fundamental
ignorance –he is not the meaure of all things but the thing measured and found
wanting” [9]. Again, we could not begin to ﬁnd the irony, the tragedy, the pathos,
the love, the loss, the justice, or anything of any human importance without that
evolved ability to share and understand each other’s intentions, which is why I list
this as fundamental to artistic practice and evaluation.
Conclusion
To make this clear, I do not intend to say that science and art can fully reconcile or
that one can fully encapsulate the other without losing something in translation.
Both endeavors could be called ‘beautiful’ in their own right. What is lost in
translation from one to the other, to paraphrase Robert Frost, is the very essence of
each discipline as it is carried over to another theoretical frame of reference.
Mathematicians often describe an equation as beautiful, perhaps because of its
elegance or the odd ways that even abstract mathematics lines up with the physical
world. Take the strange case of the Fibonacci Sequence and logarithmic spirals in
nature.
The Fibonacci Sequence was posited by Italian mathematician Leonardo
Bonacci, known as Fibonacci. The sequence is as follows: 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21,
34, 55, 89, 144, 233, 610, 987, etc., in which we add the ﬁrst two numbers to get the
third: 1 + 1 = 2 … 21 + 34 = 55 … 233 + 610 = 987. But, if one takes the ratios
of successive numbers, we see something odd, almost mystical, begin to take place:
1/1 = 1. 2/1 = 2. 3/2 = 1.5 … 55/34 = 1.617647 … 987/610 = 1.618033. The
further one goes through the sequence and calculates the ratio of successive
numbers, the closer and closer the number begins to resemble u. u is mathematical
shorthand for the golden ratio, given the Greek letter in deference to the Greek
sculptor and architect Phidias who (apocryphally) used the golden ratio in designing
the Parthenon, among other works. u is equal to 1.61803398875… an irrational
number. I will return to this. The golden ratio is about proportions relative to one
another such that each seems ‘harmonious’ when taken as a whole. It shows up in
340
D. Hellberg

art, geometry, architecture, music. When charted out as a quadratic equation, it
looks like this: x2 −x −1 = 0. If we graph the golden ratio and logarithmic spirals
onto one another [10], the connection becomes clearer. The rectangle, subdivided
into perfectly proportional smaller rectangles within itself, maps out perfectly the
logarithmic spiral as it winds in on itself. Yet, that spiral shape should seem
perfectly familiar. As Mario Livio says: “examine again the series of nested Golden
Rectangles obtained when you snip off squares from a Golden Rectangle … If you
connect the successive points where these ‘whirling squares’ divide the sides in
Golden Ratios, you obtain a logarithmic spiral that coils inward toward the pole
(the point given by the intersection of the diagonals … which was called fancifully
‘the eye of God’” [11].
That we can derive a logarithmic spiral from an ostensibly unrelated formula
about proportionality in art and geometry is interesting. Yet, it is more interesting
that this spiral shows up in nautilus shells, ﬂower petal growth, pineapple skins, and
galaxy formation, among many other examples. So, Fibonacci’s original sequence,
when seen in ratio, yields an irrational number that very closely approximates
another irrational number taken from Euclidean geometry that had been applied in
ancient Greek architecture. My point here is to demonstrate that overlaps can
happen in unlikely places, even in unrelated mathematical instances.14
How could it be that there is an overlap between n-order intentionality, morality,
and the arts? Here, the evidence is far more linear and far more clear. We evolved
from earlier hominin species. We share common ancestors with our great ape
cousins. We see analogues in behavior between them and us. Ours is a far more
advanced, though not wholly separate, set of behaviors. Instead of simple SOI
conﬂict resolution, humans can extend this out into n-order intentional generalities.
If two chimps are made to reconcile by a hierarchically dominant female, we see
this as a kind of socially stabilizing act. Humans can abstract this outward in time
through the establishment of laws, through religious mores, through cultural taboos,
through literary and artistic exemplars. We use our spatiotemporal cognition to say
that events in the future should not mirror the past because people should not do X
(being a crime or injustice in which the intent of person Y is to cause some harm to
person Z) as it is not Just (exaggeration) to do so. And humans take this all a step
further in codifying these practices into artistic representation of great or minor
import. It can be the basis of entertainment, of serious sermonizing, of
meta-referential criticism, of a limerick or cartoon, or a 1500-page Russian novel.
The point here is that the relationship between n-order intentionality can be seen as
undergirding many practices we engage in daily. We are aware of ourselves as
individuals, deserving of dignity and fairness in the communities in which we ﬁnd
ourselves. That constant tension—that constant push-pull we encounter at work, in
literature, in family, and in relationships—has its inception in our hominin ances-
tors also having to learn how to get along in a scary and unpredictable world.
14 Livio’s book, cited here, provides a far clearer and comprehensive account of the history of the
Golden Ratio and its applications through the ages. I am probably quite convoluted in my
explanation above as I am not a mathematician.
15
How You Know What I Know that She Said …
341

In some ways, we have come far as a species, but when seen in this way, we may
humbly admit that we could do with a little more ﬁne-tuning if we were so able. If
we can ﬁgure out the relationship between seed arrangement on a sunﬂower and the
spiraling arms of a galaxy, or the proportional arrangement of a rectangle to a
thought experiment equation about rabbits, then it stands to reason that we can
ﬁgure out how to treat each other a little better (Fig. 15.1).
Core Messages
• Universals in human culture point to shared traits that evolved in our
species’ development.
• These universals may take any number of cultural variations.
• Second-order intentionality and Theory of Mind are neural processes that
allow for aesthetic practice and evaluation.
• Cognitively, the arts would be impossible without N-order intentionality,
exaggeration, and spatiotemporal comprehension.
• Artistic practice has clear evolutionary origins despite difﬁculties in
determining its chain of preceding distal causes.
Fig.
15.1 The
golden
rectangle
and
logarithmic
spiral
(Available
under
Attribution-
NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0); [10])
342
D. Hellberg

References
1. James W (1992) Psychology: briefer course. Writings 1878–1899. Library of America, New
York
2. Sapolsky R (2017) Behave. Penguin, New York
3. Mlodinow L (2012) Subliminal. Pantheon, New York
4. Perry RB (1996) The thought and character of William James. Vanderbilt University Press,
Nashville
5. Scruton R (2017) On human nature. Princeton University Press, Princeton
6. Searle J (1998) Mind, language and society. Basic Books, New York
7. Tomasello M (2016) A natural history of human morality. Harvard University Press,
Cambridge
8. Sophocles (1984) The three Theban plays (Fagles R, trans). Penguin, New York
9. Fagles R (1984) Introduction. Sophocles. The Three Theban Plays. Penguin, New York
10. Shekhawat K (2015) Why golden rectangle is used so often by architects: a mathematical
approach. Alex Eng J. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aej.2015.03.012
11. Livio M (2002) The golden ratio. Broadway Books, New York
Dustin Hellberg is an assistant professor of creative writing at
the University of the Bahamas. He holds Ph.D.s in the philosophy
of science and English literature and a master’s in poetry from the
Iowa Writers’ Workshop. He is the author of three books in
poetry, ﬁction, and criticism, as well as numerous articles on a
range of topics.
15
How You Know What I Know that She Said …
343

16
A Philosophical Perspective
on the Bioengineering of Art:
Ethical Shifts in Mimesis
Amine Harbi
“Is it true, prince, that you once declared that ‘beauty would
save the world’?”
Dostoevsky in The Idiot [1]
Summary
Advances of bioengineering might be an opportunity to reconnect humans with
nature as a manifestation of beauty, and thus, to reconnect thinking with the
intellect, beyond materialist reason and psychological subjectivity. Beauty in art
has become a controversial topic for our modern and postmodern art
philosophies are based on individual subjectivities. However, beauty’s contem-
plation is a key for artists to renew their role as translators of beauty. Mimesis is
today both an aesthetic and ethical issue. Indeed, the destruction of nature can be
fought through the renewal of contact with nature’s beauty as a vital spiritual
element of life, not an aesthetic commodity.
A. Harbi (&)
Souk Ahras University, Annaba, Algeria
e-mail: amine.harbi@fulbrightmail.org
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education
and Research Network (USERN), Annaba, Algeria
Villa aux quatre vents N20, 23000 Annaba, Algeria
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh (eds.), Thinking, Integrated Science 7,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04075-7_16
345

The daughter of the Sultan (204/75 cm) (Oil Painting on Canvas; Made by
Amine Harbi).
Keywords
Art  Beauty  Bioengineering  Mimesis  Thinking
QR Code
Scanning the QR code directs you to the word cloud of the chapter that is made up
of the words we discussed throughout the whole book in relation to the chapter’s
keyword, which is intentionally not included in the word cloud. Find the keyword
and put it in place in the puzzle according to the clues provided in Chap. 36. The
mystery hidden in the puzzle is the quote of THINKING: Bioengineering of Science
and Art.
346
A. Harbi

Introduction
In this chapter, we will discuss thinking in its relation to the bioengineering of art
while reﬂecting on the art of bioengineering. We will speciﬁcally delve into the
ethical shifts of mimesis as ﬁrst discussed by Plato in his republic [2] and com-
mented by Plotinus in the Ennead [3] by analyzing how artists used to use the
intellect as a means to translate the beauty of nature to their fellow humans and how
they shifted into mimicking nature through subjectivities. Furthermore, we will
tackle mimesis through the concepts of contemplation, action, and reaction in the
philosophy of art.
Thinking is the domain of both reason and intellect [4]. The two are different on
many levels, but we will focus here on the operational level. Whereas reason
operates on the level of deduction and induction, the intellect operates on the level
of intuition [4]. Reason is limited to the senses, while the intellect transcends the
senses. We live today in a world heavily inﬂuenced by postmodern thinking, which
is itself the offspring of “reason” that dominates the modern world. Whereas the
modern world witnessed a zeitgeist of favoring reason over the intellect, the
postmodern world is a world in which reason is often replaced by subjectivities.
However, the current general withdrawal from the intellect does not mean that
the intellect seized to exist or lost its importance. On the contrary, the intellect is the
strata of thinking that is most useful in reinvigorating thinking in times where
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) outruns and even shapes human intelligence and thinking.
Moreover, postmodern thinking, in many instances, begets so many contradictions
that it ends up betraying the very promise of its modern foundation: reason. Like the
monster created by the materialist scientist Frankenstein, the unreasonable is, in
many instances, the ironic outcome of reason that freed itself from the intellect.
The Art of Bioengineering and the Bioengineering of Art
First of all, an important distinction should be made between the art of bioengi-
neering and the bioengineering of art. In the art of bioengineering, the word “art” is
used in the pre-European renaissance sense. Art, in the traditional sense, is simply a
craft. A physician used to be someone who mastered the art of medicine, just as a
painter used to be someone who excelled and lived through the art of painting.
Hence the art of bioengineering is the art of engineering within the domain of
biology or in accordance with models observed in the biosphere combining
advances in both engineering and biology. Here, thinking, whether relying on its
supra-rational capacity (the intellect), reason, or on its irrational capacity (or what
replaces reason), namely subjectivities, makes a difference. In the ﬁrst instance,
humans engage with nature, learn from it and partake in its beauty, the intellect
being the key element in the amazement that makes the human observer and actor
within the biosphere a student of nature by the very fact of being a lover of wisdom.
One must recall here what Aristotle says in his Metaphysics about knowledge and
16
A Philosophical Perspective on the Bioengineering …
347

how one becomes a philosopher; that to be amazed and puzzled is to recognize
one’s ignorance which is the way leading to wisdom. In the second and third
instances, reason and its sub-products, namely emotions and subjectivities that
often act with the “authority” of reason, might easily lead to a situation where
humans position themselves as masters of nature instead of being its students, using
nature wherever the wind of whims may blow, and we are already living the
devastating results of these paradigms in nature. Philosophy, historically, went from
the discipline of reason aiming to reach:
• to the intellect, through which the lover of wisdom attained wisdom;
• to a discipline of reason, through which reason itself became the main goal as a
form of morality, not wisdom; and
• in the last phase, which is the current state of affairs, to the discipline of sub-
jectivity through which the lover of subjectivity justiﬁes the morality of its
existence.
Whim, taste, opinion, and customs become what makes something moral, rea-
sonable, and beautiful. Taking into account these paradigms is crucial in deter-
mining where we are heading with the art of bioengineering. If the craftsman is
using his reason within the framework of the intellect and using his art to learn from
nature its beauty, rediscovering the inﬁnite, then the craftsman can save himself and
nature at this crucial point of human history as the destruction of nature is rampant.
But if the craftsman will follow his whims of using nature to satisfy his illusory and
never-ending consumptive needs (as most of these needs are created superﬁcially
by fashion and trends), destruction seems inevitable both for nature and for its
self-appointed master. Of note here that humankind can only claim to be a master of
nature by mastering his own nature, and this can only be achieved through the
intellect, and that is why overcoming the reductionisms of the senses is a discipline
that is shared by all traditions and pearls of wisdom across world civilizations [5].
With regard to the bioengineering of art, like many emerging ﬁelds, bioengi-
neering as a branch of science is increasingly inﬂuencing art. Art here is used in its
post-European renaissance sense, namely as the discipline that addresses aesthetics
with regard to the senses and the psyche. We will speciﬁcally focus here on how
advances in bioengineering can renew the encounter with nature in art, given that
the beauty of nature can renew artists’ interest in beauty as a universal and
non-subjective value.
Although art after the European renaissance deviated from its function as a
traditional medium between the sacred and the profane, it continued despite its
shaky reliance on subjective and humanist aesthetics to use the intellect as its main
faculty, and that is what enabled art to play a crucial role as a counterforce to the
discipline of modern philosophy where reason dominated in the absence and/or
denial of wisdom or, at the least, in the absence of the love and aspiration for
wisdom from the renaissance and the enlightenment onwards. In other words,
renaissance and post-renaissance artists replaced the ancient philosopher in using
the intellect to love wisdom and attain truth, but in the case of the artist, to attain
348
A. Harbi

beauty, which is yet another name of truth [6]. This continued as long as subjec-
tivity was not taken as the reality by artists or as long as artists were aware that
beauty is an objective reality for which the artist and his subjectivity are wandering
students, lovers, and aspirers. At some point, however, with the profane replacing
the sacred, the symbol, the tool, the statue became an idol, and subjectivity was
taken as the primary criterion of beauty as truth itself was no longer sought and was
thought to be relative and man-made. It is at that precise point of events that artists
lose their role as a counterforce to a dominating reason that neglects and even
ignores the intellect.
Let us brieﬂy present some examples of what we mean by the artist as a
counterforce of the intellect to the reason of modern philosophers. One example is
the renaissance painter Botticelli who might be regarded as the champion of beauty
to manifest wisdom. His work can be seen as a counterforce to the renaissance
philosophy of reason championed by Machiavelli. In the same avenue, Rembrandt's
ﬂamboyant celebration of beauty was to a great extent the counterforce to the cogito
ergo sum and Descartes’ philosophy based on rationalism. Botticelli and Rem-
brandt, although very different in form and outcome, yet sharing the same principle
of thinking through the intellect, used subjectivity as a starting point to the center
and not as a goal or a center in itself (we will go back to these two painters with
further detail on how the work of Botticelli, for instance, played a major role in
translating transcendent beauty in the next section). A third illustrious example is
Dostoevsky’s novels, where the intellect often erects beauty as the savior against an
evolutionary scientist’s reason that is, in its ﬁnality, destructive [7]. His novels were
a counterforce to his contemporary Marx, whose philosophy was based on reason in
its most reductionist form: scientiﬁc materialism. One can object that despite
Dostoevsky’s devils, communism thrived in Russia. Indeed, Marx and his scientiﬁc
reason won the ﬁrst round. But we must keep in mind that the dialectics of art and
reason ought to be taken within a long-term perspective, and the inﬂuence of
Dostoevsky’s work within a remerging orthodox Russia after decades of totalitarian
communism must not be underestimated.
The Artist as the Champollion of Beauty
But if anyone despises the arts because they produce their works by imitating nature, we
must tell him, ﬁrst, that natural things are imitations too. Then he must know that the arts do
not simply imitate what they see, but they run back up to the forming principles from which
nature derives; then also that they do a great deal by themselves, and, since they possess
beauty, they make up what is defective in things. For Pheidias too did not make his Zeus
from any model perceived by the senses, but understood what Zeus would look like if he
wanted to make himself visible.
Plotinus
The intellect used to be the rosetta stone of beauty that helped the Champollion,
the artist, decipher beauty and translate it to the language of his fellow humans.
Beauty is universal, and there is nothing remotely subjective about it. If the artist
16
A Philosophical Perspective on the Bioengineering …
349

has done his translation work well and did not betray the initial form, for there is no
traduttore, traditore in this domain; the beauty of his work will unify subjectivities,
and his art will be regarded as beautiful across time and space, despite differences of
customs, culture, and tastes. That is why one can disagree with Dante’s views or
Rumi’s doctrines, but their respective monuments, the Divine Comedy and the
Mathnawi, cannot be seen other than beautiful. The same could be said for the Taj
Mahal or Isfahan’s Shah Mosque or any work of art that is vertical [8], for the
subjective opinion that does not recognize the beauty in them simply did not purify
the heart to receive their beauty.
Since the European renaissance, art gradually shifted from the translation of
divine forms of beauty to the expression of aesthetics through naturalistic beauty
and then introspective subjective experiences of beauty [9]. However, renaissance
artists, and to some degree, modern artists, though changing from mere artisans to a
new intellectual class of society and gaining more importance in terms of inﬂuence,
kept it in the heart of their work the initial craftsman duty: namely translating divine
forms of beauty to fellow human beings. With the removal of the sacred and the
mystical from life and the replacement of the metaphysical by the materialist and
the cult of reason, this central function of art was gradually neglected. For instance,
Notre Dame de Paris, a central masterpiece of medieval gothic art, was transformed
to be “the temple of reason” by French revolutionaries and profaned by the festival
of reason in 1793 where a Goddess of Liberty replaced the Virgin Mary and
Antoine-François Momoro’s wife who “dressed provocatively”(in a kind of an
avant-garde postmodern art performance) played the role of the goddess of reason)
[10]. The Cathedral was eventually restored to its sacred function by Napoleon in
1801 [11]. However, the original meaning that Notre Dame conveyed to the viewer
and the sacred beauty became gradually unintelligible, and only its aesthetic di-
mension is still largely appreciated.
Thus, through neglecting the intellect, a general tendency of forgetfulness crept
into art, to the point where some artists forgot the purpose of their craftsmanship
altogether; that art is an action manifesting contemplation, a translation of an
objective, universal beauty, and that is why Marcel Duchamp’s nonsense makes
sense. The latter is a turning point in the history of art for all contemporary and
conceptual artists are, in a sense, his progeny (Fountain was selected as the most
inﬂuential artwork of the twentieth century) [12]. Everything about subjectivity is
there, from identity questions through his Rrose Sélavy to his ﬁve-way portrait,
which is a striking prophecy of selﬁe and self-worship that the internet will bring
forth (photography being a nontraditional medium unlike painting that allowed
Rembrandt to transcend the self while painting the reﬂection of the self). Duch-
amp’s art came to remind artists how art and art adoration became absurd as people
no longer admired Mona Lisa because it translated the trace of divine beauty and
mathematical perfection to them but because it became a cultural icon, a curiosity.
If the average viewer stood in awe before it, it was neither due to the Christian
beatitude nor to the beatitude tied to the esoteric cult of Isis or the Pythagorean
doctrine. The symbol, the means that translate divine beauty, becomes an idol and
needs to be destroyed. Thus, a copy of Mona Lisa was either bought or made by
350
A. Harbi

Duchamp and then vandalized by his own hands by adding mustaches, goatee, and
a ribald pun. If Duchamp sells signed readymade urinals relabeled “fountain,” it is,
perhaps, to point to the idolatry of art in the sense that it no longer translated
objective and universal beauty. Seeing that his message was not taken seriously in
that it was taken seriously, Duchamp left the art scene for chess, a traditional Indian
art, ﬁnding in it the beauty that 20thcentury art no longer reﬂected. He will only
come back to art for once with Étant donnés as a last drink before death. In a sense,
Duchamp’s work is Andersen’s tale of The Emperor's New Clothes. The awe before
the clothes continued and still continues despite the fact that the kid in the story
already observed the naked truth, for in 2016, a teenager put a pair of glasses on a
museum’s ﬂoor to mock the grotesque parade of art, and yet people kept admiring
the depth of the artistic performance [13]. While the author of the joke persisted that
it was a joke, people thought of him as an artist just like Marcel Duchamp’s joke
was taken seriously and became the cult of the mind [14], or the cult of subjectivity,
replacing the revolutionary cult of reason.
Western art ﬂourished after the renaissance from naturalistic masterpieces to
baroque, neoclassic, romantic, impressionist, cubist, abstract, and ﬁnally, contem-
porary art. It is fair to say that Duchamp’s message was about a loss of meaning in
art as aesthetics, hence his disinterest in Matisse’s “retinal” art [14]. What makes
renaissance masterpieces beautiful is not their aesthetics but their continuing,
despite their naturalistic tendency, to translate divine beauty through symbols
aesthetically presented to the viewer. However, one of the most eloquent translators
of beauty during the renaissance did not really progress to naturalistic art from
medieval traditionalist art. Indeed, Botticelli, in a sense, did not move and progress
but rather stood in eternal awe before a visual Beatrice, his model Simonetta
Vespucci. In a later stage of his career, contrary to the general progressive tendency
of the renaissance, he even regressed (if one may venture to say) to the gothic.
Whether Simonetta served as a direct model or not for Botticelli is a second matter
[15], for clearly, it is the mythical dimension of her beauty as a manifestation of the
truth that is central in the artist's work. Simonetta’s beauty served as a symbol of
divine beauty, the beauty that is universal and objective, recognized by all, and that
lies not in the eye of the beholder but in the heart of the lover. Thus, the young
woman though married to a notable man from the Vespucci family, was painted by
the artist as Pallas Athena with the motto La sans pareille [15] for the jousting
Giuliano di Medici, who won the tournament under the banner of the Greek god-
dess, the beautiful patroness of the city of Florence. At her death, her open cofﬁn
was carried throughout the city for the Florentines to bid farewell to the human face
that reﬂected the myth, the divine beauty that used to shine in the streets of their
city. People adored Simonetta, like the Psyche of Apuleius, who was adored in her
city to the point of rivaling Venus herself in beauty [16].
Two main currents inﬂuenced the Italian renaissance, a Promethean and pro-
gressive humanism and an epimethean return to antiquity. The depiction of
Simonetta, though changing from a painting to another in Botticelli’s work, and
sometimes in the same painting (sisterly resemblance can be found in one of
Botticelli’s inspirations: the poet Politian) [17], can be traced as a form that changes
16
A Philosophical Perspective on the Bioengineering …
351

reﬂecting an essence that does not change, but rather change the beholder who
rediscovers, through the eye, the dormant beauty in his heart. The same face and
beauty are manifested in mythological, religious, and poetic ﬁgures such as Athena,
Venus, the Virgin Mary, and Beatrice. Curiously, the same Simonetta was also used
by Botticelli to represent the vice of perﬁdy with a stern facial expression while
representing with a slight variation truth in the same painting (The Calumny of
Apelles). Likewise, we ﬁnd the same face as Flora, with a suggestive smile (as
opposed to the innocent smile of Venus) and one of the three graces in the same
painting of the primavera. This indicates that the human beauty, the naturalistic, is
just the instrument toward the real beauty, the objective beauty, for the same
instrument can be used to depict the vice of perﬁdy as well as truth, the celestial
Venus and the earthly Venus (Flora) that Plato discusses in the Symposium.
The epimethean return to antiquity in Botticelli’s work is not a return to the past,
but rather a return to the eternal, for the myth, is not what happened in the past, but
an event that transcends time as it deals with the sacred and the divine. It might be
related to a historical event such as the birth of Jesus (despite the debate among
historians about Jesus’ historicity), for instance, but its main reality transcends
human reality to a reality beyond the contingent, material, psychological, and
historical. In his Madonna paintings, Botticelli makes this clear to the beholder
through the eyes of the Madonna. The courtly love that Botticelli most probably had
for Simonetta was the means to attain the divine love expressed in the Virgin
Mary’s face as well as the angels who are in a state of ecstatic contemplation of the
divine presence (i.e., the Virgin and Child with Saint John and an Angel, Madonna
with Lillies and Eight Angels, Madonna of the Magniﬁcat, and Madonna of the
Pomegranate; see Fig. 16.1).
Fig. 16.1 Madonna of the
Pomegranate (Painting by
Sandro Botticelli; Adapted
from Wikimedia Commons,
the free media repository
https://upload.wikimedia.org/
wikipedia/commons/0/04/
Madonna_della_Melagrana_
%28Botticelli%29.png)
352
A. Harbi

The return to the eternal beauty manifested in the beloved Simonetta, which is a
renaissance for the artist himself, does not quite reﬂect the renaissance tendency of
returning to classical antiquity for humanist reasons, for it is still, to a great extent, a
work rooted in the middle age’s tradition. The golden crowns, halos, hair, and
shining light that constitutes Botticelli’s landmark are a clear afﬁliation of the artist
to the medieval Christian art, and through it, to the Byzantine artistic tradition
(Botticelli was himself a goldsmith). Indeed, Botticelli did not really ﬁt the linear
and evolutionary progress of art [18] and was much forgotten for centuries before
interest was renewed in him in the nineteenth century by art historians such as Aby
Warburg.
Furthermore, Botticelli’s faithfulness to Simonetta is rooted in the same tradition
of Dante’s esoteric love for Beatrice. In the drawings made by Botticelli to illustrate
the Divine Comedy, Simonetta is, in fact, Beatrice. Most of the drawings are in
early stages but provide great insight into Botticelli’s admiration for Dante and how
the early renaissance master, though using a different art medium, was the disciple
of the Sommo Poeta. Indeed, like medieval miniaturists used to devote their art to
illustrate divine and sacred texts, Botticelli undertook the illustration of the divina
comedia. However, Vasari criticized Botticelli for his interest in book illustration
[18]. For the art historian, a great painter should not preoccupy himself with such
triﬂes. He also criticized Botticelli for being overly religious to the point of wasting
his talent, and this led him to rank Botticelli within the second category of great
renaissance artists, far behind his contemporary Leonardo da Vinci and the later
Michelangelo di Buonarroti. However, although today considered a renaissance
icon, Botticelli resisted the renaissance zeitgeist and its Promethean penchant. He
continued within the spirit of the medieval tradition, following a hierarchy of values
without compromising his talent or his creative possibilities in the least. His artistic
model Dante is considered to be the acme of medieval poetry and yet is also an
innovative poet on all levels: linguistic, stylistic, and even theological. For the
theological level, for instance, Éliphas Lévi saw Dante as a Martin Luther before his
time, a rebel, an enemy of the church [19]. So, artists like Dante or Botticelli escape
modern categories of progressive and conservative artists. If one may venture to use
an analogy, Dante is the Vergil who takes Botticelli on a journey ﬁlled with anguish
and sufferings, from political uncertainty under the Medici clan to the fanatical
millenarianism of Savonarola. A journey crowned by the return of the diseased
Simonetta through his paintings, just as Beatrice would return to Dante through his
sacred poem. In the same vein, in Arabic poetry, Leila of Majnun passed to the Suﬁ
poets, not as a muse, but as the manifestation of truth, her beauty is not the
subjective beauty that an individual sees in another individual but the presence of
objective beauty and the majesty of truth. Debate among Islamic scholars whether
Majnun was a heretic or not is rooted in a literal reading of his poetry that has been
only fully grasped by the Suﬁs who saw in him a precursor of Suﬁsm, for Majnun,
in a sense, cannot be religious if he is not worshiping divine beauty, and divine
beauty has manifested itself to him in Leila. Simonetta that we can study in
16
A Philosophical Perspective on the Bioengineering …
353

Botticelli’s paintings is a key to understating how a ﬁnite form is a means to the
inﬁnite. His art can serve as an intermediary to medieval and sacred art that we can
no longer grasp directly and for which we need a reﬂection of reﬂection.
Mimesis of Nature and Mimesis of the Contemplation
of Nature
Art is, by deﬁnition, a spiritual endeavor because it is the manifestation of inspi-
ration. As Coomaraswamy reminds us, etymologically speaking, inspiration is to
have the spirit within [20]. From the dawn of civilization in ancient Mesopotamia to
the medieval world, artists contemplated nature not only through the psyche but
through the spirit. This continued to a certain extent during the renaissance and after
it, but the psychological gradually overcame the spiritual to the point where art
became literally devoid of inspiration, inasmuch as no traces of the spirit is there to
be found, for inspiration became a romantic and psychological phenomenon. Of
course, there is plenty of spiritualism in contemporary art but no spirituality, for the
devil lay in the details left by the angels that used to inhabit each detail of a
traditional work of art. Serious scrutiny, let us say, of contemporary Islamic
calligraphy-based grafﬁti that does not follow the strict spiritual and traditional rules
of the art of calligraphy reveals that the contemporary form, though it might be
pleasing at ﬁrst sight, does little to convey the striking awe that is communicated by
traditional calligraphy, no matter how skillful, technically speaking, the artist is. In
that regard, it is not about being a conservative, for there is no such a thing as
conservatism per se in art, and artists know this very well for every art-making is a
renewal. Indeed, artists have been able, within the strict rules of each artistic tra-
dition, to display a dazzling level of diversity for the spirit that is the heart of any
artistic work is the key to the inﬁnite. On the contrary, it is our contemporary
understanding of art that is built upon a conservatism of a proud ignorance of
inspiration. The very paradigm of contemporary art is limited in its scope in the
ﬁnite; it does not bother to contemplate the inﬁnite, for however shapes and colors
may change, the purpose is the same: make people think, participate, through irony,
provocation, performance; displaying subjectivity as the main thing and that is why
the glasses joke of the kid from our contemporary tale of The Emperor's New
Clothes was largely perceived as an art performance. Our art is global but not
universal, in the sense that what is universal is a work of the intellect contemplating
the spirit. In our contemporary art, there is no transcendental journey from the
psyche to the spirit or a patient return from one’s subjectivity to an objective
beauty; subjectivity is self-sufﬁcient for artists are artists after all.
One of the major tenets of today’s art is indeed breaking taboos. But what is
really taboo is to confront the enormous heritage of art left by human civilizations
across the globe; it is their inﬁnite diversity and yet sharing a common transcen-
dental beauty based on a contemplation of the inﬁnite. When we go to the museums
354
A. Harbi

to see them, we should wonder how these objects, however inanimate they may be,
see us, for we have lost contact with nature by losing our contact with the spirit; we
lost inspiration.
There is a difference between the mimesis of nature as it is perceived through the
senses and the mimesis of nature as perceived through the senses and contemplated
through the intellect. Contemplation is the spiritual state that leads to action, which
is a spiritual duty, a ritual. However, the relationship between the two is not linear
but rather circular, for sometimes, it is the ritual or action that leads to contem-
plation. It goes without saying that with contemplation, we do not mean a “new
age” exercise of the psyche to fool itself to believe in a parody of spirituality and
attain, within a couple of yoga classes, what a traditional yogi may never attain
despite years of ascetic life and meditation [21]. Instead, contemplation is when the
psyche is aware of the spirit, and the metaphysical is read throughout the physical
or the senses, just as one reads through physical letters a text and is overwhelmed
by the spirit of that text. In the artist’s case, the action that follows contemplation is
the conscious act of faithfully translating that spiritual state or beauty into a physical
or a sensible object which is what we call a work of art. The nuance lies between
what is solely psychological and what is psychological and more than that. The ﬁrst
provides art for the eye, the aesthetic or retinal art from which Duchamp departed to
create art that is sensible and psychological, that does not rely upon aesthetics, and
that addresses the mind instead (but not the intellect). The second regards the senses
and the mind as tools. The missing link is that spiritual state that makes the psy-
chological go beyond the sensible, so both the eye and the mind are only windows
to the soul that contemplates through the artist’s action, or work of art, the trace of
the spirit. The people who died for sacred icons, a work of art that represented the
divine, during the iconoclastic period of the byzantine empire such as St Theodosia,
were not only religious fanatics but saw in those icons the trace of the metaphysical
for which death was worthwhile [22]. Similarly, we are sometimes eager to con-
clude that Van Gogh simply went mad because we lost contact with what is sacred
in art and that Van Gogh perhaps captured through his contemplative relationship
with both natures around him and within him.
This constant back and forth movement from contemplation to action and from
action to contemplation is perhaps what is lacking in our contemporary art that is
made “for the mind,” as Duchamp puts it, and not for the spirit. It is an easy bet to
predict that AI will soon be producing art installations, artwork, and art perfor-
mances to make us think about social questions or to point to the irony of the
relativity of mind that could be either biological or engineered. However, a difﬁcult
bet is to say that soon AI would bring forth a Divine Comedy or a Mathnawi. The
metrical precision would be there, the terzine or the couplets, the rimes, the number
of syllables in each meter would match mathematical perfection, but the spirit
would be lacking. Art for the mind might be an interesting avenue, but it is not
rooted in the contemplation and action process of traditional art (and to some extent,
renaissance art), but rather rooted in reaction to most of its inﬂuences. By reaction,
we mean an idea that does not ﬂow from the process of contemplation and action
but comes as a reaction to a previous action, a rather psychological than spiritual
16
A Philosophical Perspective on the Bioengineering …
355

movement. This concept may need an extensive analysis of the different phases of
the advent of contemporary art and how a chain of reactions is often a unique
feature of modern and postmodern western art in contrast to medieval and world
civilizations’ traditional art. That said, we will brieﬂy touch upon it in the following
section by addressing key millstones in art movements.
Contemplation, Action, and Reaction
Our contemporary art, although very different from modern art, is still within the
same concept of reaction. Whereas modern art constituted a reaction to aesthetics
embedded in the external to express the internal, providing aesthetics of the internal
impression itself, contemporary art is a reaction to aesthetics themselves chal-
lenging them and, in a sense, mocking their idols. This is a crucial ethical shift from
the artist's role as translator of beauty and philosopher in the platonic sense that
beauty is truth. Modern artists shifted from the spiritual to the sensible or the purely
aesthetic; then, postmodern artists went from the aesthetic to the psychological. In
this regard, what Gustave Courbet wrote in his Realist manifesto is of signiﬁcance:
“I no longer wanted to imitate the one than to copy the other; nor, furthermore, was
it my intention to attain the trivial goal of “art for art’s sake.” No! I simply wanted
to draw forth, from a complete acquaintance with tradition, the reasoned and
independent consciousness of my own individuality” [23].
Considered to be “the father of the new painters” by the poet Guillaume
Apollinaire in his book on cubism [24], Courbet represents a radical shift from what
has remained of traditional sacred art in renaissance and post-renaissance painting.
Of course, Courbet is a complex painter, and his art is more complex than the
materialist and individualist lenses through which he is often regarded. Nonetheless,
by rejecting the tradition of imitating “the one” or “copy the other,” he sets an
archetypal departure from the process of contemplation and action, which is a
supra-materialist process that needs mimesis of the trace of the spirit, both through
contemplation of beauty in nature (including human nature) and previous sacred
artwork. It is to a great extent, through contemplating the art of antiquity, that
renaissance artists found inspiration, or the trace of the spirit, that helped them
create a religious artwork that conveyed both Christian abstract beatitude and Greek
sensibility of perfection in natural forms. Although Courbet’s realism was opposed
to romanticism, it shared with it the same principle of reaction. Courbet’s realism
was, in a sense, a reaction to the romantics’ new spirituality of emotions and
celebration of spontaneity which was itself a reaction to the industrial age and the
rationalism of the enlightenment. However, through its emphasis on the medieval
and the oriental rather than the classical, romanticism revived, to some extent, the
interest of artists in inspiration. Therefore, it is neither with the realists, the
impressionists who stressed the sensible impression, or the following cubists who
celebrated introspection that we ﬁnd this interest in the sacred dimension of art
renewed but in the romantics, who rediscovered it probably not through their own
356
A. Harbi

contemplation, but through contemplating the art of those who have contemplated.
Thus, a scent of Haﬁz can be smelled in the Diwan of Goethe, and some of the
religious serenity that an ancient Greek might have felt before the temple of Juno
(Fig. 16.2) is conveyed in the nostalgic melancholy of the painting of Friedrich
(despite the fact that the latter never visited the temple in Sicily). It is worth
mentioning here that Botticelli, with his strange, unrealistic style, may as well ﬁt a
certain aspect of romanticism, although he came much earlier. However, a major
difference that makes Botticelli closer to sacred and traditional art is that he grew in
an environment though radically changed from the medieval period, yet that kept
some of its essential traditions alive, and his goldsmith craftsmanship helped him
merge neo-platonic philosophy and Christian spirituality into his art. What is of
interest here is that the romantic movement is a hybrid movement in the sense that it
shared the common concept of reaction with other modern art movements while
sharing an interest in inspiration, or the spiritual dimension of art, beyond the
aesthetic and the physiological. One important implication of this is that if con-
temporary artists today would at some point react to the information and con-
sumption age as the romantics reacted to the industrial age, they would be the
romantics of the romantics, and through that, an interest in inspiration might be
revived through the dazzling heritage of world civilizations art that is often the area
Fig. 16.2 The Temple of Juno in Agrigento (Painting by Caspar David Friedrich; adapted from
Wikimedia
Commons,
the
free
media
repository
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/
commons/a/ac/Caspar_David_Friedrich_022.jpg)
16
A Philosophical Perspective on the Bioengineering …
357

of interest of art historians, anthropologists and other academics. This dormant giant
is often seen by artists as an “aesthetic” source of inspiration, while it should be a
source of reﬂection on the output of inspiration.
Conclusion
The myth (i.e., illusion) of progress still make art history appear as a succession of
developments, and the ancient heritage that we have in museums may appear as a
period in a linear development of art, while in fact, there is no linearity but a
constant return to an objective beauty that deﬁnes the history of art and that is
universal. This constant return is vital in the literal sense of the word. The eco-
logical crisis that the world is witnessing is deeply connected to our consumptive
life, and only through a deep revival of that objective beauty manifest in nature will
artists make a signiﬁcant impact against the ugliness of nature's destruction.
Advances in bioengineering might be a source to reconnect with the beauty of
nature and shift from subjectivities that are often the morality of a consumptive and
destructive way of life. It is not through making a terracotta army made of plastic
bottles and placing it within a beautiful piazza in Italy in deﬁance to the aesthetics
of the renaissance that the ecological battle will be won. Rather it is by stressing the
fact that terracotta art is both useful and beautiful and that drinking from clay or
ceramic artwork is itself beautiful. The Minoan Greeks used to break millions of
ceramics and make others that are as beautiful in a celebration of the renewal of
beauty as the leaves on a tree [25]. Similarly, traditional cloths from any tradition
on earth, with all the diversity taken into account, are beautiful for the same reason:
it is a work of art that is the action following contemplation, clothing that is
beautiful and respectful of nature is a huge step forward in the ecological crisis as
we will go beyond addressing the mind and the eye, but all the senses will come
back to lead the soul to the beauty of the spirit. The Hegelian remark about the
death of art [26], despite some magniﬁcent episodes that followed it, is still a bitter
truth to learn from, but that needs perhaps a side note: art is dead, beauty is not.
Therefore, a renaissance is always possible for beauty, which is wisdom, is alive,
and waiting to be reunited with her lover.
Core Message
• Artists are the translators of beauty; they make the ineffable trace of the
spirit present in a sensible object.
• If the consumerist and barbaric way of life is to be fought, contemplating
previous civilizations’ art is a must.
• Artists must reconnect with objective beauty as a manifestation of truth
and a savior of nature.
358
A. Harbi

References
1. Dostoevsky F (1983) The Idiot (trans: Garnett C). Bantam Classics, New York
2. Plato (2004) The Republic (trans: Reeve CDC). Hackett Publishing, Indianapolis
3. Plotinus (1984) (trans: Armstrong TH) Ennead V. Harvard University Press Cambridge, MA
4. Guénon R (1924) Orient et occident. Éditions de la Maisnie, Paris
5. Coomaraswamy AK (2004) What is civilization? In the Essential Ananda K. Coomaraswamy.
World Wisdom, Indiana
6. Coomaraswamy AK (2004) Beauty and Truth. In the Essential Ananda K. Coomaraswamy.
World Wisdom, Indiana
7. Dostoevsky F (2010) Devils. Wordsworth Classics, London
8. Schuon F (2007) Art from the Sacred to the Profane: East and West. World Wisdom, Indiana
9. Coomaraswamy AK (2004) The Christian and oriental, or true, Philosphy of art. In the
Essential Ananda K. Coomaraswamy. World Wisdom, Indiana
10. Scurr R (2007) Fatal purity: Robespierre and the French Revolution. Picador, London
11. Duvergier J-B (1825) Collection complète des lois, décrets, ordonnances, réglements, et avis
du Conseil d’État. Guyot et Scribe, Paris
12. Tomkins C (1996) Duchamp: A biography. Henry Holt & Co., New York
13. Mele C (2016) Is It Art? Eyeglasses on Museum Floor Began as Teenagers’ Prank. In: The
New
York
Times.
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/31/arts/sfmoma-glasses-prank.html.
Accessed 1 July 2020
14. Rosenthal N (2004) Marcel Duchamp (1887–1968). In: Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History.
New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art, 2000. http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/
duch/hd_duch.htm. Accessed 3 July 2020
15. Lazzi G, Ventrone P (2007) Simonetta Vespucci: la nascita della Venere ﬁorentina.
Polistampa, Rome
16. Kenney EJ (2004) The golden ass. Penguin Books, Toronto, Canada
17. Warburg A (2015) Essais ﬂorentins. Hazan, Paris
18. Vasari G (2006) Lives of the most excellent painters, sculptors, and architects. Modern
Library, New York
19. Guénon R (2015) L’ésotérisme de Dante. Gallimard, Paris
20. Coomaraswamy AKA (2004) A ﬁgure of speech or a ﬁgure of thought? In: The Essential
Ananda K. Coomaraswamy. World Wisdom, Indiana
21. Nasr SH (2001) Islam and the plight of modern man. Kazi Publications, Chicago
22. Velmans T (2007) L'art byzantin. Editions du Rouergue, Rodez
23. Courbet G (1855) Courbet speaks: exhibition and sale of forty paintings and four drawings by
Gustave Courbet, Paris 1855, Musée d'Orsay. https://www.musee-orsay.fr/en/collections/
courbet-dossier/courbet-speaks.html. Accessed 7 July 2020
24. Apollinaire G (1965) Les Peintres Cubistes. Hermann, Paris
25. Isler Kerényi C (2008) L’artegreca. Jaca Book, Milan
26. Hegel GWF (1975) (trans: Knox TM) Hegel's aesthetics: lectures on ﬁne art. Oxford
University Press, Oxford
16
A Philosophical Perspective on the Bioengineering …
359

Amine Harbi has been an Assistant Professor of Social Sciences
and Humanities at Souk Ahras University, Algeria, since 2013. In
2007, he received a Magister in Communication and Governance
from Annaba University, Algeria. In 2011 he was awarded a
Fulbright Scholarship and received a Master’s in Mass Com-
munications and Media Management from Oklahoma State
University, USA. His research interests include philosophy, arts
in education, literary theory, and intercultural communication.
360
A. Harbi

17
Thinking Through the Body: Art
and Philosophy in Dialogue
Louise Mackenzie and María Antonia González Valerio
“Todo puede suceder, porque nadie sabe nada, porque la
realidad rebasa siempre lo que sabemos de ella, porque ni las
cosas ni nuestro saber acerca de ellas está acabado y concluso,
y porque la verdad no es algo que esté ahí, sino al revés:
nuestro sueño, nuestras esperanzas pueden crearla”.
Summary
This chapter results from a knowledge-producing experiment through the
intertwining of art practice and philosophy via the exchange of letters in the
time-lapse of two months during the 2020 pandemic. A body of artwork by
Louise Mackenzie, consisting of laboratory explorations with living entities,
installations, and artifacts, is interrogated with philosophical concepts by María
Antonia González Valerio to provoke a different understanding of the category
of life than that suggested within contemporary biological knowledge. The
outcome is a reframing in which life appears in a broader context, where
L. Mackenzie (&)
Hub for Biotechnology in the Built Environment, Newcastle University,
Newcastle-upon-Tyne, UK
e-mail: info@loumackenzie.com
L. Mackenzie
The Cultural Negotiation of Science, Northumbria University, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, UK
M. Antonia González Valerio
Faculty of Philosophy and Literature, National Autonomous University of Mexico, Mexico
City, Mexico
e-mail: gonzalezvalerio@ﬁlos.unam.mx
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Mexico City, Mexico
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh (eds.), Thinking, Integrated Science 7,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04075-7_17
361

contemporary art practice and philosophical questions are fundamental to the
understanding that what is at stake is not only matter but also subjectivities and
worldviews.
Evolution of the Subject (Photography by Jason Revell, Gallery North Project
Space, Northumbria University, UK, 2018)
Keywords
Aesthetics  Art and science  Bioart  Biotechnology  Ontology
QR Code
362
L. Mackenzie and M. Antonia González Valerio

Scanning the QR code directs you to the word cloud of the chapter that is made up
of the words we discussed throughout the whole book in relation to the chapter’s
keyword, which is intentionally not included in the word cloud. Find the keyword
and put it in place in the puzzle according to the clues provided in Chap. 36. The
mystery hidden in the puzzle is the quote of THINKING: Bioengineering of Science
and Art.
Introduction
There is no consistent methodology for building communities of knowledge that
work in the intertwining of disciplines. Most of the time, the approach has to be
experimental and even casuistic. And that is precisely what has been done here, a
one-time experiment. María Antonia González Valerio and Louise Mackenzie,
philosopher and artist, respectively, engage in correspondence to think collectively
about the intercrossing of art and science, or more exactly, about the appearance of
life in current artistic practices merged with biotechnology and biological knowl-
edge practices. The point of departure is Mackenzie’s work as an artist inside the
laboratory, generating living entities manipulated through technological interven-
tions. Mackenzie narrates her experience and presents her artwork as the outcome
of research undertaken at the Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle, UK, where
she learned how to translate cultural information—speciﬁcally, the question which
sparked her doctoral research project—into physical material (deoxyribonucleic
acid, DNA) and then inserted this within the living bodies of the bacteria, E. coli.
Through a series of letters, González Valerio’s voice appears in the narrative as an
interruption and provocation that brings forward philosophical concepts that pierce
Mackenzie’s work. This exercise shows how art practice triggers and inﬂuences
philosophical meditations concerning the status of the category of life in the con-
temporary world. Through this correspondence, art becomes an interlocutor of bi-
ology, epistemology, ontology, and even our own existence as biological entities.
Newcastle, UK, May 19, 2020
Dear María Antonia,
I am grateful to you for your participation in this project.
As discussed, I am writing to you to initiate a dialogue on thinking through the
body within my practice and within biological art practices more broadly. The idea
is to use our exchange as a form of experiment in producing knowledge through
interaction. We met initially three years ago at the conference, Taboo, Transgres-
sion and Transcendence in Art & Science. Since then, we have touched upon ideas
of liveliness in biological material: I from within my perspective as a practicing
artist with a background in psychology and you from your perspective as a
17
Thinking Through the Body: Art and Philosophy in Dialogue
363

philosopher of aesthetics with interest in biological art practices. More recently,
since the political and social impacts of COVID-19, we have exchanged comments
as part of an online academic group, Viral Culture,1 and it was the seed of our
conversation there that prompted me to contact you regarding this project. I had
mentioned the phrase ‘molecules with intent,’ based on my experiences regarding
the liveliness of biological material that I had worked with in the laboratory. You
had pushed me to consider further what I meant by this.
The body of work that prompted this phrase arose through my doctoral research
project,2 Evolution of the Subject: Synthetic Biology in Fine Art Practice (Graphical
Abstract), where I developed “a ﬁne art practice that uses performative strategies to
think with the act of using life as material.” [1]. During this time, I was based
between my studio and a laboratory at the Institute of Genetic Medicine (IGM),
Newcastle University, where I learned how to genetically modify organisms. My
idea was to learn how I might store a thought physically as biological information
and ultimately within my own body—perhaps a willful attempt to circumvent my
(at times, erratic) memory. I was interested in humanity’s appropriation of DNA as
a storage medium, initially inspired by Joe Davis’ Microvenus and Eduardo Kac’s
Genesis and also intrigued by what I felt was our human arrogance at making use of
life in this way—we understand DNA to be inert but what happens when this DNA
enters the body of a living organism, does it become lively? Does it have the
potential to act in the body (here I am considering philosopher and artist Manuel
DeLanda’s discussion of an object’s capacity to act [2])?3 I was also interested in
more fundamental questions such as where does thought reside, or where do the
origins of our actions reside? When I have a feeling or an intuition, it does not
always feel to me that this resides in my head, for example.
The works that I started to make at this time fell into three broad categories (my
thesis research website [3] indicates four, but the last two began to bleed into each
other over the course of my work). The ﬁrst I called viral poetry, where my
encounters with DNA and the genetic code led me to consider how language and
evolution are linked. The second I called microbial sensing, where I was making
active attempts to engage with and relate to micro-organisms, at this point primarily
through sound and vision. The third category, curious animals, is the body of work
that is most relevant to our discussions. This explored my situated encounters in the
laboratory, through which I stored a thought inside the body of a micro-organism.
These actions led to a focus on my growing relationship to laboratory life itself -
not in the Latourian sense, but in the sense that I was beginning to question the
ontology of the vast array of micro-species and larger order organisms that exist
solely for the purposes of laboratory research. Whilst making these works, I was
1 Viral Culture—Bioart and Society is an online forum with over 175 members, formed by
academic, Claire Nettleton at the outset of the 2020 pandemic, following the earlier Viral Culture
symposium in 2018 held at Pomona College, California.
2 It can be found here https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/196579093.pdf.
3 Whilst I am more interested in events than objects, if we are to consider (and indeed use) DNA as
an object, then it is surely also useful to be mindful of the capacity of a given object to relate to
other objects in complex ways.
364
L. Mackenzie and M. Antonia González Valerio

reading texts that broadly sit within a vital or new materialist framework, including
Marietta Radomska’s thesis, Uncontainable Life, Jane Bennett’s Vibrant Matter,
Lyn Margulis’ Symbiotic Planet, and several works by Donna Haraway (Staying
with the Trouble, When Species Meet and Situated Knowledges were particularly
relevant).
Returning to focus on my encounters in the laboratory, I think a good starting
point for our discussion would be my ﬁrst act, where I developed a synthetic DNA
plasmid to hold my thought. This thought, translated from my head into speech,
then phonemes, then codons, was designed to be held within a circle of synthetic
DNA plasmid. I designed the plasmid with the assistance of Dr. Steve Laval from
IGM and then learned how to transform this plasmid into the bodies of E. coli
bacteria, which I grew within the Institute’s cloning room—work which I ultimately
documented in the video diary, Lively Material (Fig. 17.1).
The plasmid became, in effect, the ﬁrst artwork that I made. It was both cultural
and biological. I worked in the laboratory as an artist, constructing DNA just as a
scientist might, but in my case, the content, the genetic makeup of this DNA, was
(to the best of our knowledge) not found ‘in nature.’ Thus, what exactly was this
object that I had made? I termed it, BioAssemblage #1 (Fig. 17.2), in an attempt to
break down disciplinary boundaries in making with living material. There are
already terms deﬁned through art practice that describe aspects of biological ma-
terial modiﬁed by humans, e.g., transgenic art [4] and the semi-living [5], as well as
terms used within science that are culturally read as standard: ‘genetic modiﬁcation’
and ‘tissue culture’ being obvious examples. I wanted to discuss the practice of
piecing together lively material, whether genetic or otherwise and my aim was for
this term to apply across disciplines. Thus, with bioassemblage, I made no
Fig. 17.1 Viral experiments (Photography by Dominic Smith, Lively Material, Queens Hall Arts
Centre, Hexham, UK, 2018)
17
Thinking Through the Body: Art and Philosophy in Dialogue
365

distinction between lively material assembled in science, art or any other subject of
study. Bioassemblages are therefore simply “biotechnological constructs that
include a human actor in their assemblage” [1].
So Bioassemblage #1, this tiny object, DNA in a vial, was a combination of my
own thought, biological material, and technological material, and as such, I saw it
through my readings of Haraway and Deleuze as a nature cultural machinic
assemblage. Bioassemblage #1 is inert DNA, and as far as I could ascertain, it has
no biological meaning, yet culturally, it is encoded with a question that I intended
for the organism (although I have no way of knowing how the organism would
‘read’ this) and when added to the body of an organism, it has a capacity to act.
Both the bioassemblage and the resulting assembled organism have no capital
value, only naturecultural value. They were brought into existence to test the
boundaries of our biotechnological desires. Therefore, the idea of Bioassemblage
#1 is as much a concept as it is an artwork. My thought, held in coded form within a
DNA plasmid, is a bioassemblage, in the same way that the E. coli which carry my
thought within their bodies are bioassemblages, just as DuPont’s ‘OncoMouse’ (the
trademarked genetically modiﬁed laboratory mouse) is a bioassemblage [6, 7]. The
bioassemblage is deﬁned through the intersection of humanity and molecular bi-
ology (regardless of discipline) as the material properties of cellular matter and
DNA are further explored. Here, my intention is, however, to focus on the process
of working with lively material rather than the isolated entity. The practice of
physically locating thought within a body allowed me to consider the bioassem-
blage as both living commodity and infectious idea.
Fig. 17.2 BioAssemblage #1. Thought translated into DNA and assembled in a plasmid DNA
vector, Eppendorf tube (Photography by Louise Mackenzie, 2016)
366
L. Mackenzie and M. Antonia González Valerio

Mexico City, June 1, 2020
Dear Louise,
I am glad to be part of this project thinking through the body as an experiment in
dialogue and exchanging ideas. As you recall, we met at a conference in Greece
some years ago. I remember very vividly how we were walking on a narrow street,
going somewhere for lunch, and we started chatting about your projects. The
memory is particularly signiﬁcant right now because in the middle of the pandemic,
having an international conference is something that is just not going to happen in
the foreseeable future. This brings along some questions about the production of
knowledge and about our experiment itself.
During this period, we have experimented with an urge to transform our
activities into online and digital activities. There has been an attempt to translate or
even transmute the physical presence into “digital presence.” With this transmu-
tation, a lot is at stake in terms of the phenomenology of the bodies and what we
mean by a body. Instead of having countless meetings via zoom or something
similar, we decided to begin with a telephone conversation to see if we could work
together on this. Second, we decided to try an ancient way of communicating,
exchanging ideas, and producing knowledge: to write letters.
Philosophy and art practice are being summoned in this experiment. The
crossing of these disciplines is what has moved us forward to think together about
life, nature, and living entities. For me, the experiment is very exciting because of
the kind of philosophy that I am trying to advance [8]. One of my main questions is
how materiality can be brought forward in the formation of philosophical concepts.4
How to deal with and treat materiality in the production of philosophical concepts?
How can matter be philosophically analyzed? The realm of aesthetics and art
practice is, of course, of paramount importance for these questions since it is by
itself a kind of performativity of concepts and materiality. Therefore, it opens up the
theoretical space in which I can see philosophical concerns transformed in artworks.
Let me be clear with this, I am not stating that one discipline has preeminence over
the other, neither chronologically nor epistemologically, but I am trying to search
and to produce the intercrossing of concepts, disciplines, questions, methodologies,
etc.
The question about life is central for me, how it has been transformed with the
emergence of biology speciﬁcally and life sciences more broadly. Your art projects
give me a peculiar chance to see how art is appropriating and experimenting with a
certain understanding of life, which is neither “natural life” nor the result of epis-
temologies. What is life in the midst of current art practices? What is the idea of life
that appears there? I will go through your text and your questions in order to reﬂect
upon what you are stating and asking.
4 I recognize in Catherine Malabou’s attempt to think with, through and beyond the philosophy of
Kant a lucid effort to reconcile the transcendental realm with what is contemporary known as “new
materialism”. In her proposal, subjectivity is reframed with epigenetics. Malabou, C. (2015).
Avant demain: épigenèse et rationalité. Paris: PUF.
17
Thinking Through the Body: Art and Philosophy in Dialogue
367

The ﬁrst idea that struck me—again—is the ‘molecules with intent.’ It made me
consider the difﬁcult task of bringing forward frameworks of interpretation that are
not anthropological. Since modernity, we have been used to interpreting the world
according to the subjective categories that produce it. In that respect, the world
appears as an object, as the image of our own reason and understanding. The world
appeared as rationality, as order. But nature, at a certain point, stopped being
considered as that realm of sensuous order and rationality, to become an irrational
force and an outburst of creativity. Nature as other of the rational subject. How then
to think about nature beyond anthropological categories? This has been one of the
principal quests against the Anthropocene era. Critical thinking has been trying to
think about nature beyond subjectivity, beyond humanity. It is not clear what that
could mean, how we could really listen to the other, as other.
To experiment with living entities or with biological material (how to establish
the borderline between life and biology?) inside the laboratory could be a way to
decipher what is life, nature, or living entities by themselves. How do molecules
act, react, interact? But every word that we use to describe the experiment is
completely charged with anthropological meanings, with subjectivity. Are we
doomed to see only what we can produce and then to have nothing but the reﬂection
of our own reason instead of glimpsing reality by itself? How can we experiment
with life as it is, beyond our intent? But what is subjectivity in this concern, what
does the subject mean, who is experimenting inside the laboratory, and what is ‘I’?
How does life appear inside the laboratory? What is the laboratory as a place to
experiment with biological life as material? There, we encounter ideas of control
and dominance—the production of knowledge within the controlled and measur-
able space of a laboratory. Life appears as something that can be framed within the
margins of a certain episteme. It is not life, but life through the scope of biology, let
us say. And biology, at least hegemon biology, tends to understand life as a
fragment, as a tiny material, as information, as molecules.
This very idea of information that depends so much on the interpretation of the
world as a language to be deciphered and the deciphering of the genetic structure
that allowed genetic engineering is dependable of that world vision. What is life
beyond biology? Sometimes I wonder this, and I try to balance between ﬁeldwork
and laboratory work. How do we experiment with life? And there, of course, the
question of our own life, our own body, and our own diseases are always at stake.
Inevitably. How to understand ourselves as biology, as biological conformed
entities? In what respect do we act and interact as biological conformed entities?
Then I thought about your question concerning memory and its physicality and
the attempt to store it in DNA sequences. Why do we believe that everything that
exists has a physical space? And if not, what is it then? For, let us say, ‘mental
realities,’ this is such a problem. Where are the sensations, the feelings, the
memories, the thoughts? The brain has appeared now like a topological metaphor of
a place where functions are. But, to think about our spirit in terms of brain functions
for me is something bizarre, something that does not ﬁt in the world vision that I
want to help to generate. I wonder if hegemon biology as an episteme that promotes
a mechanist view of the world promotes this understanding of life and our life as
368
L. Mackenzie and M. Antonia González Valerio

material particles. Does this sound like metaphysics to you? That is why I have
been so interested in the question of philosophical concepts and materiality. The
concepts are not a translation of materiality; they do not describe certain sensual
features. They are something different that relates to matter and the sensory forms,
but at the same time, they do not belong to the empiric.
This brings me again to your question about the kind of entities that only exist
within the conﬁnes of the laboratory. ‘Life’ is something that only exists within
certain limits and circumstances. There is no neutral life that we can refer to. Life is
no universal category. It is something that always happens situated. Therefore, it is
as important to research and question life as it is to question its conditions. And
those conditions are not only material, like food, but also historical, social, and they
depend on the epistemes. So, we should ask, life in what circumstance, in what
situation, through which interpretation?
What is life within the conﬁnes of the laboratory? Something controllable and
measurable? Something limited by the artiﬁcial conditions that are manipulated
there? If living entities only come into being within an environment, could the
laboratory be considered as the normal environment for some entities? And then,
we have to cope with the migration of organisms from the laboratory to the ﬁeld, for
example, in agriculture. But is agriculture an environment? Or is the life that is
technically produced something that lacks an environment? From there on, we
could continue questioning the idea of the environment as the space in which life
occurs and as the limits in which life can be. Is a factory an environment? And a
city?
Bioassemblage #1 made me think about all these questions because you also
consider the different disciplines as circumstances in which life comes into being.
So, life is not the same when considered from the scope of art, science, biotech-
nology, or humanities. What is life beyond and within subjectivity? I come back to
this question to stress it, not to answer it. Because subjectivity is always questioned
and determinant to the occurrence of life within certain circumstances.
Newcastle, UK, June 12, 2020
Dear María Antonia,
Your writing has given me much to consider. Even our distance, presented
strongly in our dialogue through dates and locations in the formal letter writing
style. We intend for our minds to meet on the page, for readers to share, and yet we
are separated by 5,411 miles and 6 h (to say the least of our situated separation in
these times of pandemic). In this sense, it is ultimately through the acquisition of the
skill of mark-making that this product is made possible.
Firstly, I want to say how encouraged I am by your acknowledgment of this
exercise as one where disciplines share an equal footing. Too often, art is under-
stood as an instrument or illustration of another expert culture rather than a ﬁeld in
which knowledge can be developed through practice. Therefore, I will approach
17
Thinking Through the Body: Art and Philosophy in Dialogue
369

your philosophical questions through my material experience as an artist, in the
hope that we can weave together, through our differing approaches to knowledge, a
form of thinking through the body. You raise many interesting questions and begin
by siting our understanding in the rationality since modernity. Yet, I often ﬁnd
while making work that I am governed by an internal logic (or perhaps that is the
wrong word, drive?) that arrives before rational thought. Perhaps this is where we
can understand ourselves as biology, in the instinctive actions, reactions, and
intra-actions that are made manifest through our bodies and minds.
In making Pithos [9], for example (Fig. 17.3), intuition played a signiﬁcant role
in guiding the outcome of the work. I wanted to bring something of my experience
of synthetic biology to a public audience. I had attended lectures and conferences
where the bacterial body, commonly used to store and multiply genetic information,
is often referred to as a chassis [10]. I had been troubled by this framing, with its
allusions to Fordian production lines. A manifestation that is becoming explicit as
spaces of genetic mass production are constructed.5
Further, I was interested in an apparent contradiction heard commonly in the lab
—that bacterial bodies can store and copy DNA incredibly accurately and also that
mutations in DNA are incredibly common. Of course, both can be true. When
growing bacterial bodies in the laboratory, selective pressures (such as antibiotic
resistance) are applied to ensure that the synthetic DNA added to the body of an
organism can easily be recovered. Mutations of this DNA may well exist, but they
will not be easy to ﬁnd as the laboratory environment rewards bodies that conform
to selective pressure. In the laboratory, therefore, individuality is bred out of bodies.
Pithos became a physical reaction to connotations associated with the word chassis
and to the idea of bodies conforming to the requirements of the lab. I knew that I
wanted to present a work that suggested less reliable forms of containment.
The installation, Pithos, presents two elements in a blacked out space: a simple
clay vessel and an 8-channel audio. The vessel, which lies upturned in the center of
the space, has synthetic DNA (Bioassemblage #1) worked into the body of the clay.
The 3-min audio plays what initially appears to be the same phrase repeatedly and
intermittently from eight different sources that are difﬁcult to locate in the dark-
room. With each repetition, the phrase mutates until its form has changed entirely.
The phrase begins as “What will happen if I store this thought safe within you?”
This is what I encoded in the synthetic DNA, which I then stored within E. coli
bacteria in the laboratory. The phrase mutates in the audio according to a simple
evolution algorithm which distorts the words until they are no longer recognizable.
I imagined the sound of the phrase spilling out from a central vessel into the
room as a disembodied chorus of voices, mutating and changing from its original
form. This again was an intuitive decision that I felt would engender a sense of both
chaos and liveliness. I knew that I wanted to embed my thought-as-DNA within a
5 For example Edinburgh University’s Genome Foundry, within the Centre for Synthetic and
Systems Biology houses a factory-style genetic production line, with robot arms that assemble
genetic material, providing ‘genetic constructs for academic and industrial customers’ https://
www.ed.ac.uk/biology/research/facilities/edinburgh-genome-foundry/what-we-offer.
370
L. Mackenzie and M. Antonia González Valerio

simple terracotta vessel, but signiﬁcantly, I did not enter into the task of making it
with a clear design of the object in my mind. The form that the vessel ultimately
took: a womb-like shape with three openings, arose through my body as I worked,
thus it became an act of thinking through the body, an assemblage of the clay, the
DNA, my body and mind, intra-acting.
Reﬂecting on this work now, there were clearly two strong guiding inﬂuences in
the making of this work and in the shaping of the vessel in particular: my expe-
riences in the laboratory and the reading that I undertook in reaction to these
experiences. I understood the laboratory E. coli from my position as an outsider to
the lab. Like the E. coli, I, too, was a body out of place. Learning that a living entity
could be considered a chassis, made to conform to the requirements of the labo-
ratory, brought about a visceral—almost empathic—reaction in me. This reaction,
in turn, led me to consider other potential metaphors for this body out of place.
What might happen if the body was reframed as something other than a chassis?
My reading of Donna Haraway led me to Ursula le Guin’s Carrier Bag Theory of
Fiction [11], in which pots and bags become the original human tools rather than
sticks and clubs. Also, and I cannot pinpoint why here–perhaps the foreshadowing
of the genetic production line–my mind kept turning to the Pandora myth. On
researching the chequered history of this myth, I had found that the original con-
tainer was not a box but a vessel formed of clay and water [12].6 After further
reading, I found that, prior to being fashioned from clay and water, Pandora was a
Fig. 17.3 Pithos. Installation Detail, BALTIC39. Eight-channel audio, clay vessel, DNA plasmid
bioassemblage (Photography by Louise Mackenzie, 2016)
6 A pithos was a vessel that contained goods of economic value: wine, oil or grain. The word
pithos appears in the classical translation of Hesiod’s poem Work and Days, where Pandora is
described as a pithos, fashioned by Hephaestus from earth and water. Other translations depict
Pandora as the ﬁrst woman on earth, or an evil to blight all mankind.
17
Thinking Through the Body: Art and Philosophy in Dialogue
371

revered earth goddess from pagan fertility festivals [13]. This information was in
my mind while I sat to work on the form that would hold my synthetic DNA, but I
could not predict how it would turn out. I allowed the form to ﬂow from my mind
and body directly into the clay.
I use the above example to discuss a speciﬁc material experience with synthetic
biology, which may be very different from the experience of another type of
biology with a broader focus – environmental biology, for example. When you
speak of hegemon biology, I am instantly reminded of our more recent conversation
about the many cultures of biology, and in this, I wonder whether, as with some
projects of art and philosophy that consider biological materials, there are similar
projects within biology that consider more spiritual or conceptual questions?
This returns me to the topic of materiality per se. When you suggest that
philosophical concepts are not a translation of materiality or a description of sen-
sory forms, therefore, I would agree (and yes, the particulate nature of biology feels
close to metaphysics). Rather I feel an overwhelming urge to ground philosophy in
the reality of experience, where the combination of materiality and expression
becomes a repository for ideas. I use the word repository, over translation for
example, because ideas are always multiple and contingent.
This leads me to reﬂect on your suggestion that there is no ‘neutral life,’ which
in one way has parallels to the idea of ‘molecules with intent.’ You are, of course,
referring to the situated circumstances in which one encounters life. I add to that the
situated circumstances of a given life (human or non-human). To address your
comments on the context of the laboratory, I have become aware, since working in
the laboratory, that for many forms of life, this is their only habitat. I would not say,
therefore, that they lack an environment but that their environment has certain
constraints or criteria. Take laboratory-bred E. coli, for example, which I discuss in
my thesis. The ﬁrst known strain was derived from the faeces of a child by German
bacteriologist, Theodor Escherich in 1885 [14] and today, so many strains have
been developed and mutated that there is an independent wiki site dedicated to
them.7 Over almost 140 years, these bacteria have transitioned from living body to
scientiﬁc resource to genetically assembled product. The strain of E. coli that I
chose to work with in the laboratory (one of the most common strains in use today)
is trademarked and can be delivered straight from the factory to the fridge to the lab
bench, having never seen the inside of a living gut.8 These E. coli are single-celled
organisms, and to this effect, I can describe them as molecules with intent, in that
they intend to live. I can attest to this through my attempts to care for them through
their continual cycles of growth, feeding, and death. Thus, I have often wondered
about the term ‘wild’ in relation to organisms that quite literally have no place
outside of the laboratory. Their relationship with humanity is entangled, beginning
in the body, and yet their life (in my case, the life of laboratory E. coli, in sterile
7 https://ecoliwiki.org/colipedia/index.php/Welcome_to_EcoliWiki.
8 These organisms are referred to as the product, ‘One Shot® TOP10 Competent Cells’.
Thermoﬁsher Scientiﬁc.
372
L. Mackenzie and M. Antonia González Valerio

plastic tubes ﬁlled with standard liquid nutrients) is as far removed from the life of a
body in the wild as it is possible to be. What does this mean for the situated
production of scientiﬁc knowledge in the context of the laboratory?
Mexico City, June 26, 2020
Dear Louise,
You made me think about distance with your last letter and the way in which
knowledge has been produced in collaboration with others through the history of
humankind. There is no such thing as single knowledge but a constant ﬂow of
ideas, whether traveling or mail. That is why in part, I proposed this exchange
of letters to honor and recognize how communities of knowledge were built
through centuries and to have a meaningful and deep dialogue between us that
normally does not happen with the rapid communications in social media.
In Pithos, you were working with E. coli as a form of life, as a representant of
life. E. coli as a model organism allegedly speaks for the others. But, what does it
mean to speak on behalf of the others, to be the representant of other life forms? It is
impossible to study each living entity in its singularity. The very question of
singularity is challenging. Therefore, I ask what place and effect E. coli has as an
exponent of life?
Here, the double meaning of the category of “life” becomes obvious, a doubling
that we have to notice. Let us pretend that with life we are referring to human life,
could we say that there are model lives that serve as a representant of human life?
Or would we argue that each human life is unique, in its narrative, in its feature, and
that, therefore, it deserves to be treated according to its singularity? Would we say
that? Any plant, any bacterium, but human existence. Literature has taught us how
to exploit the singularities of human lives creatively, but beyond literature, where
human existence becomes universal through the power of symbols, the question of
human life tends to be addressed in a “model organism” way. No need to insist that,
for example, medicine has used the white occidental male as the standard of human
life or that philosophy has used European bourgeoise existential conditions as the
standard of life. Who speaks for the other? Who can represent the other? Who is
accountable for that representation?
Thinking about E. coli and the history that you recount regarding the healthy
child and his faeces (who was the child? Was he also German?), let us consider
Henrietta Lacks’ case regarding the Hela cells. The cells were taken from her
without her consent or even knowledge, then used and sold at a global scale for
research [15]. The cell line that was cultured from Lacks’ cancer cells is referred to
as “immortal” due to its durability. The Lacks’ case has been discussed very much
in terms of ownership. To whom does the cell line belong? Who deserves the
economic beneﬁt since it is produced in labs and sold worldwide? But a cell is not a
single cell organism. E. coli is an organism by itself. It lives in our guts, but it is
itself. Sure, the question about identity is brought forward with the microbiota. If
17
Thinking Through the Body: Art and Philosophy in Dialogue
373

we are inhabited by so many critters [16], is our body ours? What would be the
story of our own existence if we take the perspective of other narrators instead of
“us,” like the microbiota that inhabits us or the amino acids as agents of our
metabolism? What an impossible tension… the cell is our cell, the bacterium is not
our bacterium, but in a way, it is …
Still, the question concerning representation appears in our disquisition, since a
Hela cell line or E. coli as a model organism are representatives of certain
approaches to life within the biological epistemes. Let us say that the artwork is a
representation of something different than itself. At least, that is the classical
understanding of the artwork as mimesis. A lot has been debated in this respect,
arguing for the independence of the artwork that has a meaning by itself, not
because it has a referent that exists outside the artwork. This argument regarding the
ontology of the artwork sometimes is misunderstood in terms of the ability of the
artwork to depict something in the “real” world [17]. Beyond that interpretation–
which I ﬁnd very limited–I will argue that the artwork establishes a particularly
meaningful and ontological relationship with the world [18]. In a way, it represents
the other, not by substituting it but by making it appear under different light and
meaning. What emerges in the artwork is, then, not a replication, but another
possibility of/for being. The artwork is a representation of what there is. And what
there is cannot be reduced to the sum of sensible entities and their attributes. The
artwork is then not speaking on behalf of the others but producing meaningful
alterity of otherness. Its singularity depends on being able to produce something that
was not there before, and this has nothing to do with originality but with the aperture
of a certain idea of the world. To shape the world through the power of art…
And the vessel in Pithos is absolutely unique and singular. You were working
with the vessel and with the bacterium with your own hands; you involved your
own body in it. What are your considerations with a living matter that is any matter
and with a non-living material that comes to be something singular and unique?
What is it to touch the terracotta and to touch the E. coli? In what way is the
bacterium representing the other as a model organism? Does it matter which bac-
terium? Not really; they are exchangeable and completely substitutable. If some are
damaged during the experiment, they can be replaced with others. It is their feature
of replaceability that makes them so convenient for the lab. As many as needed
(sometimes human lives are also like that). How then is the bacterium able to speak
on behalf of the others? When alterity is reduced to sameness, then it is possible to
speak on behalf of the others. What is exchangeable is not every organism but
information. Knowledge is information. And information is translatable.
When molecular biology was acquiring its lure, it started working with model
organisms, such as Thomas Hunt Morgan’s famous Drosophila melanogaster.9 At
that time, what was valid for the ﬂy was also valid for the elephant. The assumption
9 A new epistemic space was constituted with studies on heredity, of which Morgan’s experiments
on ﬂies were part. This new epistemic space is linked to the modern synthesis paradigm and the
“hard heredity” that is implied in genetics. See Meloni, M. (2016). Political Biology: Science and
social values in human heredity from eugenics to epigenetics. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
374
L. Mackenzie and M. Antonia González Valerio

was that the way in which matter, in this case, living matter, is organized should be
the same for every entity and that the code, therefore, should be universal. We know
now that this is not the case.10 The genetic code, which allegedly explained any
living entity, was an abstraction, a codiﬁcation, a transmutation of life into infor-
mation that can be mathematized. But what is a living entity with respect to bio-
logical episteme? Model organisms have been transformed into epistemic artifacts
that can be arranged and manipulated according to needs and concerns. Beyond the
ethical level of this discourse, which I do not want to address here, there is an
ontological-epistemological level involved. What kind of entities are these ones
produced for the lab? And what kind of knowledge is obtained from an epistemic
artifact?
To produce organisms for the sake of knowledge is not the same as bringing
them into the social world. Genetically modiﬁed organisms that are used and
consumed have different ontological and epistemological statuses. They become
commodities mass-produced. However, epistemic artifacts are also mass-produced.
Experiments are even outsourced as more and more robots perform steps in
experiments. Industrialized knowledge, so to speak. Standardized also, as with
bio-bricks and kits to perform genetic editing. I have this nostalgic image in my
head about the conditions of production of empirical knowledge in the nineteenth
century: the cabinets of curiosities and expeditions. Things were not a model, but a
token, an example of the extraordinary. This, of course, is just a nostalgic fantasy
because, on many occasions, this happened under the umbrella of colonialism, as in
the case of the French expedition to Mexico and the axolotls that were sent to
Paris11 or the research performed with indigenous communities by North Ameri-
cans and Europeans in the rain forest in Mexico in the 1940s [19]. I insist on
considering the conditions of production of empirical knowledge. How is a living
entity treated when it (her/him/they) appears in the frame of research? How do we
treat the other when investigating it?
Quaestio mihi factus sum (Augustine, Confessions, X. 33).
But when I investigate myself, do I have to dissect myself?
10 Just as an example, I quote the studies of Mexican scientist Elena Álvarez Buylla about the plant
Lacandonia schismatica, whose functions regarding ﬂoral organ identity are different from the
model organism Arabidopsis thaliana. Álvarez-Buylla, Elena R., et al. (2010) B-Function
Expression in the Flower Center Underlies the Homeotic Phenotype of Lacandonia Schismatica
(Triuridaceae). The Plant Cell, vol. 22, no. 11, pp. 3543–3559. doi:10.1105/tpc.109.069153.
11 During the French intervention in Mexico (1862–1867), the “Comission Scientiﬁque du
Mexique (CSM)” sent axolotls to Paris. The CSM was formed by appointment of Napoleon III in
February 1864. This is a case of colonialism and imperialism. The axolotl has belonged to the
history of colonialism and imperialism from the moment it was taken by the commission and sent
alive to Paris, where it was reproduced under experimental conditions. From then on, the axolotl
would belong to the history of biology as a laboratory animal. Its territory would shift, from
Mexican canals and lakes to laboratories, aquariums and, ﬁnally, to genetic stock centers. The
commission gathered French scientists and sent them to Mexico to conduct research in the ﬁelds of
anthropology, zoology, botany, mineralogy, paleontology, geology and medicine. Ramírez R. y I.
Ledesma, ‘La Commission Scientiﬁque du Mexique: una aventura colonialista trunca’, Relaciones
134, primavera 2013, pp. 303–347.
17
Thinking Through the Body: Art and Philosophy in Dialogue
375

A life that is not long and seriously meditated is not a fully lived life…
Why E. coli?
To work with a vessel, to work with a bacterium. Both are entities. Sensible.
Material. In a very ancient ontology, one would be considered an artifact and the
other a natural entity. That is how Aristotle, in his Physics and Metaphysics, divided
the entities.12 But now, with the emergence of molecular and synthetic biology, a
change in deﬁnitions is probably needed. The bacteria that you produced in the lab
are a different kind of entity, a biofact [20], something in between nature and
artiﬁce. Art is indeed a manipulation of matter. The personal relationship that the
artist can establish with matter goes from absolute instrumentality to intimate care
—the matter as other: an instrument, a medium, or even a subjectivity.
What is the intimate care that you applied while working with the vessel? Did
you talk to it? Did you caress it? What is matter for an artist like you? And then,
working with a living entity, is it different? What kind of respect does E. coli
engender in you? Is it subjectivity? Is it something that you interact with? Or is it
just matter in a Petri dish? Life appears in a totally different context in the lab. Life
is not an attribute that belongs to matter and is just there. What is life? I wonder
about the context of the very question. Because nature has always been there, as a
category, as a mode of being of what there is, as something that art interacts with,
works with. Nature, for example, appears in land art as a subjectivity, I would say.
But it is a risky assumption. What is subjectivity after all? And what is the dif-
ference between nature and life as categories? While walking in the open ﬁeld,
feeling and sensing what there is, without making any distinctions, air, water, rocks,
sky, plants, animals (invisible bacteria, unimaginable microbiota), does life appear
as something separate there? Or is life an epistemic category formed by life sciences
and biology since the nineteenth century?
When art decided to work with living entities and to traverse and pierce the
question about life, it was acting and experiencing life as something separated from
what there is; therefore, it needed the biological theoretical framework in order to
conﬁgure this “new” way of being [21]. Art also needed to adopt the space where
that episteme could grow and present the new way of being: the laboratory. One
thing emerged with the other because everything in a certain space, and the space in
which something is, is not something void and undetermined, but with character-
istics and speciﬁc determinations. Life as an epistemic category framed within the
margins of molecular biology requires the space of the laboratory as its speciﬁc
environment. And there, life can be separated: analyzed, fragmented, chopped into
micro pieces, sequenced, and transformed in quanta of information. Life only exists
within certain limits and is determined by the limits in which it appears. The lab is a
limit. A limit is that from which something comes to be what it is [22]. A limit does
not exist on its own. It is always the limit of something. E. coli is bound to the
12 In Physics II and Metaphysics V, the sensible entity is presented as something caused. The
distinction between natural and artefactual entities is established according to the different causes.
376
L. Mackenzie and M. Antonia González Valerio

laboratory as the limit to which it can exist. The limit conﬁgures the entity. Even if
it exists outside the lab, for example, in our own gut, even then, it is conﬁgured by
the lab. Therefore, what is E. coli? Can it be experienced as a subjectivity?
Conclusion
Through an experiment in writing together, the authors have explored the use of life
in the context of contemporary biological knowledge practices. Their relative
contributions lead to a position in which life cannot be considered as a universal or
neutral category but depends on the context, on the circumstances where it appears,
and where it can subsist. Life has to be interpreted according to speciﬁcities that
include space, time, and certain historical possibilities for appearance, including
material and intelligible possibilities. Art practices incorporating living media also
work with knowledge practices that have brought forward molecular biology and
biotechnology. It is important, therefore, to comprehend that what is at stake is not
only certain living entities or tissues or fragments of organisms being manipulated
in the lab but also a worldview that is still interrogating the concept of “life” as a
product of epistemologies and technologies. Both art and philosophy, through
situated and contextual engagement with biological epistemes, can begin to address
Augustine’s investigation of the self through ﬁrst acknowledging the inseparability
of life from subjectivity.
Core Messages
• Life is not a universal or neutral category but depends on the context and
circumstances where it appears and subsists.
• The collaboration of contemporary art and philosophy allows considera-
tion of biological knowledge practices as situated and contextual.
• Through correspondence that works with the body’s materiality as a space
for thinking, art can interrogate what we mean by biology and how we
understand our own existence as biological entities.
References
1. Mackenzie L (2017) Evolution of the subject–synthetic biology in ﬁne art practice. University
of Northumbria at Newcastle (United Kingdom)
2. DeLanda, M. (2011) Metaphysics as ontology: Aristotle and Deleuze’s realism. European
Graduate School Video Lectures
3. Mackenzie L (2014–18) Viral Experiments. http://www.viralexperiments.co
4. Kac E (1998) Transgenic art. Leonardo Electronic Almanac 6(11)
17
Thinking Through the Body: Art and Philosophy in Dialogue
377

5. Catts O, Zurr I (2002) Growing semi-living sculptures: the tissue culture & art project.
Leonardo 35(4):365–370
6. Adler, J. (2016). The ﬁrst patented animal is still leading the way on cancer research.
Retrieved
November
12,
2017,
from
https://www.smithsonianmag.com/smithsonian-
institution/ﬁrst-patented-animal-still-leading-way-cancer-research-180961149/
7. Haraway
DJ
(1997)
Modest−Witness@Second−Millennium.FemaleMan−Meets−Onco-
oMouse: Feminism and Technoscience. Routledge
8. González Valerio MA (2016) Cabe los límites. Escritos sobre ﬁlosofía natural desde la
ontología estética. Herder, Mexico
9. Mackenzie L (2016) Pithos. Newcastle. Retrieved from https://www.loumackenzie.com/
pithos
10. Frow E, Calvert J (2013) Can simple biological systems be built from standardized
interchangeable parts? Negotiating biology and engineering in a synthetic biology compe-
tition. Eng Stud 5(1):42–58
11. Le Guin U (1989) The carrier bag theory of ﬁction. dancing at the edge of the world: thoughts
on words, women, places. Grove, New York, pp 165–170
12. Panofsky D, Panofsky E (1962) Pandora’s box: the changing aspects of a mythical symbol
(mythos: the princeton/bollingen series in world mythology), 52nd edn. Bollingen Founda-
tion, New York
13. Harrison JE (1922) Prolegomena to the study of Greek religion. Princeton University Press,
Princeton
14. Dunne KA, Chaudhuri RR, Rossiter AE, Beriotto I, Browning DF, Squire D, Cunningham AF,
Cole JA, Loman N, Henderson IR (2017) Sequencing a piece of history: complete genome
sequence of the original Escherichia coli strain. Microbial Genom 23;3(3):mgen000106
15. Skloot R (2019) The immortal life of Henrietta Lacks. Picador an imprint of Pan MacMillan,
London
16. Haraway DJ (2016) Staying with the trouble: making kin in the Chthulucene. Duke University
Press, Durham
17. Danto AC, Goehr L (2014) After the end of art: contemporary art and the pale of history.
Princeton University Press, Princeton
18. Gadamer H (2014) Truth and method. Bloomsbury Academic, London
19. Dorotinsky D (2013) (2013) Viaje de Sombras: Fotografías del desierto de la soledad y los
indios lacandones en los años cuarenta. Universidad Nacional Autónoma De México, Instituto
De Investigaciones Estéticas
20. Karafyllis NC (2008) Hybride und Biofakte. Ontologische und anthropologische Probleme
aktueller Hochtechnologien. In: Poser H (ed) Herausforderung Technik, Berlin, pp 195–216
21. Foucault, Michel (1966) Les mots et les choses. Paris: Gallimard. Where the author discusses
the transformation of natural history into biology, and the way in which the birth of the
biological epistemes meant a separation of life from being
22. Aristotle, Met., V, 17, 1022a10
378
L. Mackenzie and M. Antonia González Valerio

Louise Mackenzie is an artist, curator, and researcher working
across contemporary visual art, new media art, and sound. Louise
received a degree in Psychology from the University of Strathclyde
in 1992, a degree in Fine Art from the University of Newcastle in
2013, and obtained a Ph.D. in Fine Art from the University of
Northumbria in collaboration with the Institute of Genetic Medi-
cine at Newcastle University in 2018. Her research explores
appropriation,
repetition,
and
human
relationships
to
the
non-human world through process-based art practice. Her doctoral
research investigated the use of life as material in the context of the
laboratory. Louise was a ﬁnalist in the Bio Art & Design Awards
2015 and recipient of the New Graduate Award, Manchester Sci-
ence Festival, 2013. She has exhibited nationally and internation-
ally, including Pomona Museum of Art, California (USA),
Unhallowed Arts, Perth (Australia), National Library of Spain,
Madrid (Spain), ISEA (Hong Kong), BALTIC39, Newcastle (UK),
Charles Darwin House, London (UK), Basement 6 Collective,
Shanghai (China), National Taiwan University of the Arts (Tai-
wan), Summerhall, Edinburgh (UK) and Lumiere Durham (UK).
María Antonia González Valerio , Ph.D. in Philosophy, Full
Professor at the Faculty of Philosophy and Literature of the
National Autonomous University of Mexico. Director of the
Seminar Arte + Ciencia, which brings together artists, academics,
and scientists to work interdisciplinarily producing graduate
education, specialized theoretical research, artistic artworks and
practices, and exhibitions. She is also a curator and leader of the
artistic collective Bios ex Machina. Leader of the research project
“Media and Species: Ecology and Evolution in Natural Philoso-
phy” linked to the Faculties of Sciences and Philosophy and
Literature at UNAM. She is the proponent of a philosophy of
nature within an ontology-aesthetics. She has presented her phi-
losophy in universities worldwide: North America, Latin Amer-
ica, Europe, and Asia. Books (selection): El arte develado
(Mexico: Herder, 2005); Un tratado de ﬁcción (Mexico:Herder,
2010); (Ed.) Pròs Bíon: Reﬂexiones naturales sobre arte, ciencia y
ﬁlosofía (Mexico: UNAM, 2015); Cabe los límites. Escritos sobre
ﬁlosofía
natural
desde
la
ontología
estética
(Mexico:
UNAM/Herder, 2016); (Ed.) Arte y estética en la ﬁlosofía de
Arthur Danto (Mexico: Herder, 2018).
17
Thinking Through the Body: Art and Philosophy in Dialogue
379

18
Mechanism Versus Organism:
A Loosely Kantian Perspective
and Its Implications
for Bioengineering
Reto Gubelmann and Marco Toscano
“Organisierte Wesen sind also die einzigen in der Natur,
welche, wenn man sie auch für sich und ohne ein Verhältnis auf
andere Dinge betrachtet, doch nur als Zwecke derselben
möglich gedacht werden müssen, und die also zuerst dem
Begriffe eines Zwecks, der nicht ein praktischer sondern Zweck
der Natur ist, objektive Realität, und dadurch für die
Naturwissenschaft den Grund zu einer Teleologie, d. i. einer
Beurteilungsart ihrer Objekte nach einem besonderen Prinzip,
verschaffen, dergleichen man in sie einzuführen (weil man die
Möglichkeit einer solchen Art Kausalität gar nicht a priori
einsehen kann) sonst schlechterdings nicht berechtigt sein
würde.”
Immanuel Kant
Summary
Building on the work of Immanuel Kant and researchers working in his
tradition (but without getting lost in exegetical details that are immaterial for
this volume), we discuss a notion of the living organism based on its formal
teleological structure, contrast it with mechanistic objects, and draw some
consequences for the notion of bioengineering. Bioengineering, in our
The authors have equally contributed to the work.
R. Gubelmann
University of St. Gallen, Rosenbergstrasse 30, C9000 St. Gallen, Switzerland
e-mail: reto.gubelmann@protonmail.com
M. Toscano (&)
University of Zurich, Habsburgstrasse 25, 8037 Zürich, Switzerland
e-mail: marco.toscano@uzh.ch
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh (eds.), Thinking, Integrated Science 7,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04075-7_18
381

understanding, is close to a contradictio in adiecto: either something is alive,
which implies substantial autonomy in its inner functional organization, or it is
engineered, which means that the engineer continuously determines the thing’s
functional organization.
Vaucanson’s digesting duck (1899)
(Adapted from Wikimedia Commons, the free media repository https://en.
wikipedia.org/wiki/Digesting_Duck#/media/File:Digesting_Duck.jpg).
Keywords
Bioengineering  Cyborg  Kant  Leibniz  Neural networks  Organism 
Transformer
382
R. Gubelmann and M. Toscano

QR Code
Scanning the QR code directs you to the word cloud of the chapter that is made
up of the words we discussed throughout the whole book in relation to the chapter’s
keyword, which is intentionally not included in the word cloud. Find the keyword
and put it in place in the puzzle according to the clues provided in chapter 36. The
mystery hidden in the puzzle is the quote of THINKING: Bioengineering of Science
and Art.
Introduction
What kind of thing is a living being, and what could it mean to engineer one? In this
article, we suggest that in order to appreciate the particular nature of living things as
opposed to non-living things, it will be beneﬁcial to remind ourselves how deeply
our idea of the sciences as essentially investigating non-living physical matter (that
is purely mechanistically structured) is rooted in the tradition of the European
Enlightenment. To the concept of a mechanism, we owe our intuitions of causal
explanation and technical construction of machines and other scientiﬁc knowledge
applications. The idea of an organism, which we suggest is characterized by the
remarkable features of teleologically structured units such as systematic growth,
healing, and reproduction, is hard to square with this mechanistic conception of
science and its objects. Here, we begin by detailing Kant’s distinction between
non-living and living beings (Sect. The Development of Kant’s Conception of
Living Beings). Then, we put this distinction in the context of the quest for bio-
engineering (Sect. Taking Stock: What It Takes to Be Alive According to Kant).
Finally, we discuss the implications of Kant’s distinction for two different forms
that the quest of bioengineering may take (Sect. Kant and Bioengineering: The
Cases of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and the Cyborg).
18
Mechanism Versus Organism: A Loosely Kantian …
383

The Development of Kant’s Conception of Living Beings
Kant’s Epistemology is the locus classicus for discussing the modern idea of
mechanisms. Taking up loose ends from Leibniz’s ontology, Kant tries to establish
neat boundaries between mechanisms, organisms, and the objects of traditional
theological and philosophical reason, such as God. His Critique of Pure Reason
(“Kritik der Reinen Vernunft,” KrV) furnishes a revolutionary metaphysical and
conceptual grounding for physics, a discipline that, as a consequence of Newton’s
brilliant work, was taken to be the ideal of natural science. At the same time, the
KrV delivers a biting critique of traditional metaphysics, undercutting many tra-
ditional aspirations of metaphysical theorizings, such as providing arguments for
the existence of God or the quest to gain knowledge about the world through
concepts alone.
Kant’s concept of a mechanism (Sect. 2.2) ﬁts neatly within this overall archi-
tecture. Unfortunately, the same cannot be said for the concept of living beings or
organisms. It seems fair to say that Kant got caught up in a double-bind here. On the
one hand, he wanted to clear the grounds from all obscure metaphysics to make
room for the science of physics. On the other hand, he was aware that living beings
do not ﬁt into the metaphysics of the KrV. In this vein, the Third Critique, the
Critique of the Power of Judgment (“Kritik der Urteilskraft,” KdU), can be seen as
partly dedicated to providing an adequate conception of organisms. In Sect. 2.3, we
introduce this conception. It seems clear to us that there are tensions between this
conception and the metaphysics of the KrV, but we do not elaborate on them for the
purposes of this contribution.
Before beginning our discussion of the KrV, we give some background by
sketching Leibniz’s conception of organisms. This is important because Leibniz’s
thinking on this topic has been pivotal for Kant’s theorizing on the matter.
Sui Generis, But Not Anti-mechanistic: Affinities Between
Kant’s and Leibniz’ Intuitions Regarding Living Beings
In this section, we shed light on some points of contact between Kant and Leibniz
regarding the status of living beings. We thereby follow the lead of Philippe
Huneman [1]. He reaches the following verdict regarding the status of living beings
in the KrV: he writes, “an account of the speciﬁc status of organized beings […] is
not to be found in the ﬁrst Critique” (p. 183). This diagnosis is closely analogous to
our suggestion in the introduction to this chapter. Huneman bases this diagnosis on
a fundamental disagreement between Kant and Leibniz on the notion of an
organism. This disagreement, however, is framed by an underlying agreement
between Leibniz and Kant on how organisms are not to be explained: by positing
some organizing soul which is in principle beyond the mechanistic explanations
provided by physics—which both Kant and Leibniz admire (see [1, p. 164] for
Leibniz’ debate with Stahl on that matter).
384
R. Gubelmann and M. Toscano

Leibniz tried to avoid positing something supra-mechanical by distinguishing
living beings from machines only quantitatively, not qualitatively: living beings are,
in contrast to machines, inﬁnitely organized (ibid.). Ontologically speaking, living
beings are machines, just very subtly organized ones, while epistemologically
speaking, we will never be able to conceive a living being as a machine since our
mind is ﬁnite and cannot cognize inﬁnite structures. This, however, Huneman
(p. 178) argues, is precisely where Kant correctly senses a contradiction: “according
to Leibniz, one should thus consider the division [of a given organic body, RG &
MT] as already achieved, albeit inﬁnite, since it is represented in a concept (this
point deﬁnes precisely what is articulation, Gliederung), and at the same time, one
must conceive of it as a never-fulﬁlled series, since one applies here the rule of
regress—which means producing an inﬁnite division through the regress itself, the
form of this division being undetermined prior to the regress” [1].
Huneman shows in this passage that there is a problem with Leibniz’s notion of
organisms as inﬁnitely subtle machines. Since we have a concept of the organism,
the organism’s division into its parts must be achieved; otherwise, our concept
would be empty. However, being ﬁnite minds, we can never achieve this division.
Huneman (pp. 178–179) then shows convincingly that for Kant, Leibniz confuses
divisibility of a body as being in space (which is inﬁnitely divisible) with divisi-
bility of a body as an organism, which cannot be inﬁnitely divisible if we are to
have a concept of it [1].
Refuting the Leibnizian distinction between organisms and machines leaves the
Kant of the KrV without any means to distinguish them. However, Huneman
(p. 184) then cites a passage from Dreams of a Spirit Seer, where Kant confesses
that Stahl’s strict distinction of organisms from machines has immediately con-
vinced him [1], a conviction that Kant was unable to cash out in metaphysical terms
by the time of the KrV. In addition to this conviction of Kant, Huneman (p. 85)
shows that there was a general trend in Kant’s days to advocate “[…] a more
“immanentistic” view of organisms—a view deﬁning the intelligibility of organ-
isms both within the intrinsic speciﬁc forces that characterize them and through the
laws of their manifestations, instead of considering them from the viewpoint of a
general mechanistic scheme for understanding nature” [1].
In short, Huneman ﬁnds Kant cross-pressured already at this early point:
i. ﬁrst, he rejects any kind of vitalism, the reiﬁcation of what is distinctive about
living beings (such as a living soul);
ii. second, he is convinced that there is a categorical distinction between living
and non-living beings; and
iii. third, he ﬁnds Leibniz’s attempt to draw such a distinction without falling into
the reiﬁcation trap unconvincing.
In the following, we delineate the traces of this tension in two of Kant’s major
works. After introducing how the KrV conceives mechanistic objects, we turn to the
KdU to discuss Kant’s conception of a living being.
18
Mechanism Versus Organism: A Loosely Kantian …
385

Mechanistic Objects in the First Critique
In the KrV, the only causal relationships that are in nature are efﬁcient, not ﬁnal.
According to the second analogy of experience, “[a]ll alterations occur after the law of
cause and effect” [2].1 If Kant’s argument in the Analytic of Principles is conclusive,
this second analogy is a requirement of our mode of cognition (“Erkenntnis”):
whatever is possibly experienced by us is structured according to the Second Analogy.
The same does not hold for ﬁnal causes. No analogy of empirical thinking states that
we could experience nothing unless it stands under a means-end relationship.
What does this mean for mechanistically constituted objects? What is a mech-
anistically constituted object? Take the example of a watch. A watchmaker
designed it in Le Locle in Switzerland. She is a senior professional and has
designed and assembled all of its many parts to show the correct time, date, and
moon phase for centuries ahead. It is powered by a mechanism that draws energy
from its bearer’s wrist movement. This energy is transmitted through many wheels
and sub-mechanisms to move the heads at exactly the right speed.
The goings-on within the watch can all be explained completely mechanistically:
this wheel causes that wheel to turn, which in turn causes another gear to be set in
motion, etc. Over and above this mechanistic explanation, one can sensibly ask
certain why-questions: why is this wheel taking precisely this position in the entire
mechanism? An answer could be: this is necessary to ensure that the watch is
functioning properly; it shows the correct time. The watchmaker designed every-
thing within the watch to this end.
You do not, however, need to resort to such teleological explanations. The
mechanistic explanation sufﬁces to know everything that is going on in the watch.
This changes only if you try to identify the watch as a watch. What belongs to the
watch? Everything that is indispensable for it to perform its function. In this sense,
you need to know what it means for the watch to function properly to decide
whether, say, some really fancy packaging that glimmers in the dark, powered by
the mechanism of the watch itself, actually belongs to the watch or not.
Organisms as Natural Purposes
The Third Critique analyzes the notion of a living being by developing a deter-
minate concept of an organism. Consider the following passage: “Organisierte
Wesen sind also die einzigen in der Natur, welche, wenn man sie auch für sich und
ohne ein Verhältnis auf andere Dinge betrachtet, doch nur als Zwecke derselben
möglich gedacht werden müssen, und die also zuerst dem Begriffe eines Zwecks,
der nicht ein praktischer sondern Zweck der Natur ist, objektive Realität, und
dadurch für die Naturwissenschaft den Grund zu einer Teleologie, d. i. einer
Beurteilungsart ihrer Objekte nach einem besonderen Prinzip, verschaffen,
1 “Alle Veränderungen geschehen nach dem Gesetze der Verknüpfung von Ursache und Wirkung”
(KrV A189/B232) [3].
386
R. Gubelmann and M. Toscano

dergleichen man in sie einzuführen (weil man die Möglichkeit einer solchen Art
Kausalität gar nicht a priori einsehen kann) sonst schlechterdings nicht berechtigt
sein würde” (KdU B295/A291) [4].2
According to this passage, organized beings are the only beings in nature which,
conceived in isolation, must be thought of as purposes (“Zwecke”). The referent of
the anaphoric term “derselben” is not entirely clear: it could refer back to “Dinge,”
“Wesen,” or “Natur.” The most probable reading is to take it to refer back to
“Natur,” since, in the further course of the sentence, natural purpose (“Zweck der
Natur”) appears explicitly and prominently. Thus, Kant here claims that organized
beings are unique insofar as they always have to be thought of as natural purposes.
By this, they furnish (“verschaffen”) objective reality to the concept of a natural
purpose. This, in turn, justiﬁes the introduction of teleology into natural science, an
introduction not legitimate otherwise because we cannot establish the possibility of
such a causality a priori via a transcendental deduction.
Why does Kant think that the study of animals requires teleological concepts?
The main reason is that in an animal, the matter’s organization occurs in a way
conducive to its purposes as a living being in a way that is beyond the scope of
mechanistic explanations [4] (KdU B292f./A289). More precisely, what is char-
acteristic for a natural purpose, a self-organizing being [5] (“sich selbst organ-
isierendes Wesen,” KdU B292/A288), is the reciprocally productive activity of its
constituents, which Kant calls organs. By comparison, artifacts like watches cannot
repair themselves, let alone reproduce themselves. Living beings, however, can do
precisely that because they possess a formative power [5] (“bildende Kraft,” KdU
B293/A289) to bring their matter into the form conducive to their purposes.
Thus, it is inconceivable that we ﬁnd mechanistic explanations of organisms as
teleological phenomena. Rather, Kant argues for the objective reality of natural
purposes in a surprisingly positive way by giving a clear-cut structural model of
teleological objects. Teleological objects are organized things, which means that
their parts are mutually constitutive. Mutual constitutivity yields an object’s special
functional unity, as every part is at the same time an end and a cause for the others.
Teleological objects are causally closed.
To grasp the metaphysical consequences of Kant’s conception of organisms, it is
helpful to contrast them with machines. The identity criteria of a concrete machine
take into account objective and subjective parts. The objective part identiﬁes the
causal mechanism within the empirical world and bears existential import. The
functional purpose of the speciﬁc machine can be taken to be an intention that is
subjectively bestowed on it by the human mind, say, to track time correctly. No
objective reality has to be accorded to the concept of purpose. In contrast, a
2 “Organized beings are thus the only ones in nature which, even if considered in themselves and
without a relation to other things, must nevertheless be thought of as possible only as its ends, and
which thus ﬁrst provide objective reality for the concept of an end that is not a practical end but an
end of nature, and thereby provide natural science with the basis for a teleology, i.e., a way of
judging its objects in accordance with a particular principle the likes of which one would
otherwise be absolutely unjustiﬁed in introducing at all (since one cannot at all understand the
possibility of such a kind of causality a priori” (KdU B295/A291) [5].
18
Mechanism Versus Organism: A Loosely Kantian …
387

concrete organism’s identity criteria exactly seem to yield such a case of objective
reality, according to Kant. First of all, we are confronted with an appearance
attributed to properties irreducible to mechanistic reconstruction: reproductivity,
growth, and healing. That is what separates organisms from machines. Kant’s
crucial step is this: the speciﬁc organic properties are directly linked to the idea of
purposeful articulation (Zweck, telos).
However, this last step also undercuts the KrV’s doing away with any
non-mechanistic structures in nature, an act that Kant thought necessary to clear the
ground for physics and to eliminate all unfounded and obscurantist metaphysics.
Indeed, as the KrV closely associates the reality of ﬁnal causes with a creating deity, it
is unclear whether the KrV’s refutation of the teleological argument for God’s exis-
tence still stands at this point. We will not dwell on this fascinating tension any further.
Taking Stock: What It Takes to Be Alive According to Kant
Let us again begin with Huneman’s research. Huneman argues that Kat tries to
improve on Leibniz by distinguishing the parts of an articulated being conceived as a
mere mereological sum (that is, as a whole that is not more than its parts) of spatial
parts, a sum which is inﬁnitely divisible, on the one hand, and the same parts con-
ceived as functionally identiﬁed parts (whose division into further functional parts
comes to an end) on the other hand. For instance, the liver, conceived as an organ, can
be divided almost inﬁnitely, down to nuclear ﬁssion. The functional unity, in contrast,
is lost much earlier. At some point of dividing it up, the liver will not perform its
function anymore and hence cease to exist as an organ. The ten-dollar question is now
how to bring these two ways of conceiving the same chunk of matter together.
Huneman (p. 182) suggests the notion of an articulated being. An articulated
being is conceived as constituted by functionally identiﬁed parts. Hence, living
beings, constituted by organs, would be prime examples of such articulated beings.
These parts are said to be “superimposed” on the same parts conceived as mere
mereological sums of spatial parts [1]. Something similar should hold for the
relations between each part of the articulated being: the mereological aspect of their
spatiotemporal distribution is qualitatively distinct from their functional interaction
that determines each part’s role in the articulated whole.
How are these two ‘aspects’ and their interrelations distinguished (and related)
so that they reﬂect our experience? What is the relationship between the functional
aspect and the mereological aspect of the same junk of matter? In agreement with
the KrV, we experience the parts of an articulated being in the same way in which
we experience unarticulated beings such as stones or houses. However, the watch or
the beaver differ from the stone or the house insofar as their parts are identiﬁed and
delineated not simply in mereological terms; experiencing their spatiotemporal
structure corresponds to a functional one that is not entirely ﬁxed by the relation
they bear to our cognitive faculty, but also by the relation they have to each other.
Their parts are not only parts for us, but also for each other (as it were, for
388
R. Gubelmann and M. Toscano

themselves). This means that the functional interrelations of spatiotemporal parts in
articulated beings are not dissolvable in the mathematical and dynamical Synthetic
Principles of Pure Understanding.
In sum, this leaves us with the following picture, one that, as we have suggested,
is not without tensions in the Kantian system itself. Kant wants to draw a strong,
principled distinction between living and non-living beings without falling into the
trap of reiﬁcation. Non-living beings such as Rudy the canindroid – a machine
designed and built by human beings—are mechanistically structured; their
goings-on can be fully explained by solely referencing efﬁcient causes. Only in
order to identify artifacts such as watches or canindroids one has to consider these
objects’ functions. Living beings, in contrast, are organisms. They are characterized
by the fact that each of their parts has self-organized to function to the beneﬁt of the
other, the organism can autonomously heal itself and hence continue to function,
and it can reproduce itself.
Regarding bioengineering and the artiﬁcial production of living beings, we can
make use of the philosophical concepts of organism and mechanism to establish a
clear-cut distinction between living things and machines. From this, it will be
possible to set criteria for the goal of producing artiﬁcial life:
i. ﬁrst, living beings are more than the sum of mechanistic descriptions that we
can give of their going-on. They are functional units; and
ii. second, this functional unity of living beings is, in a certain sense, autonomous;
that is, their ends are set within themselves. By this feature, we capture the
astonishing capacities of living substances to systematically and autonomously
grow, heal, and reproduce themselves.
These are abilities that human-made machines like Rudy the canindroid are not
currently possessing. Our technical capacities are limited to manipulating existing
living substances according to our current scientiﬁc or practical understanding of at
least some of the causal mechanisms within their bodily constitution.
However, a further step seems to come within reach. Evidence suggests that
advanced artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) systems have autonomously evolved functional
structures that strikingly resemble organisms in Kant’s understanding of the con-
cept. In the remainder of this paper, we will ﬂesh out teleological structures within
advanced software systems, consider the notion and ethical implications of the
cyborg, and discuss some implications for the task of bioengineering.
Kant and Bioengineering: The Cases of Artificial
Intelligence and the Cyborg
After giving a sketch of Kant’s conception of living beings as functionally struc-
tured organisms, we now draw some consequences with respect to bioengineering.
Bioengineering can be understood in two senses:
18
Mechanism Versus Organism: A Loosely Kantian …
389

i. ﬁrst, in the sense of creating living organisms out of non-living objects; and
ii. second, in the sense of substantially modifying already existing organisms.
Accordingly, we ﬁrst analyze the constitution of contemporary AI systems to see
to what extent one could conceive them as successful instances of bioengineering in
the ﬁrst sense, that is, of creating living beings out of non-living objects. Second,
one can speculate on the consequences of bioengineering in the sense of enhancing
the cognitive and physical abilities of a traditional human being. Such speculation
leads us to contemporary debates about cyborgs.
Neural Networks as Organisms?
According to Kant, a being counts as living if it is functionally constituted, can
grow, repair, and reproduce itself. In this section, we will tentatively suggest that
there are now AI systems that show the functional constitution emphasized by
Kant’s conception of an organism; furthermore, this organization has not been
designed by a human engineer, as in the case of the watch; rather, it is a conse-
quence of self-organization. In contrast, we will suggest that these systems show no
signs of being able to repair or reproduce themselves autonomously.
The kind of system to be introduced is the so-called transformer, introduced
initially in the ﬁeld of neural machine translation (NMT) [6]. The encoder-decoder
structure gives a simpliﬁed layout of an NMT system: the encoder takes in the
sentence in the source language and produces a high-dimensional representation of
it (as it were, a “grid of numbers,” usually called the ‘context’). The decoder then
uses this representation to generate a sentence in the target language. This dual
structure maps nicely on the tasks of so-called natural language understanding
(NLU, assigned to the encoder) and so-called natural language generation (NLG,
assigned to the decoder). This also means that the context, in traditional NMT
architectures, has to carry all the information about the semantics of the source
language sentence needed to produce a translation. The same context is used to
produce all of the translated words, which has later proved to be a bottleneck in the
entire system’s information ﬂow (Fig. 18.1).
True to NMT-orthodoxy, the transformer model proposed by [6] consists of an
encoding part and a decoding part. Self-attention layers are central to this archi-
tecture that fundamentally distinguishes it from traditional NMT systems. This
brings computational advantages. It is possible to parallelize the system massively,
Fig. 18.1 An abstract view on the general encoder-decoder structure of neural machine
translation systems
390
R. Gubelmann and M. Toscano

that is, the processing of all words in a sentence simultaneously, while traditional
architectures such as recurrent neural networks impose sequential restrictions. It
also helps with long-term dependencies; as it were, the parallelized structure allows
the encoder to attend to all words in the sentence simultaneously.
More importantly, scientists generally agree that the self-attention mechanism is
a signiﬁcant driver for the transformer’s demonstrably superior performance in a
wide variety of NLP tasks. In contrast to the pioneering attention mechanism from
[7], the modeled self-attention mechanism connects an input sentence to itself,
emphasizing these parts of the sentence that are particularly relevant for the word
currently in focus. In this way, these self-attention sub-layers contextualize the
words very neatly to the respective sentential context, making explicit semantic and
syntactic relationships between them.
In an extended version of their paper, to be found on arXiv, the authors provide
visualizations of the work done by the self-attention layers. Based on such qualitative
analysis, the study [6] examines the function of self-attention layer number ﬁve and
concludes that it is “apparently involved in anaphora resolution.” What is exciting
about this is not only that this speciﬁc attention layer does seem to be involved in
anaphora resolution and pretty successful at it (NLP engineers have wrestled with this
problem for decades; the transformer seems to have solved it in a matter of 3.5 days’
training); what is more, this sub-layer autonomously started to assume this function
during training. There was never an explicit decision on the human engineer’s side
that this speciﬁc part of the mechanism should be dedicated to this task.
It might be worth dwelling a little on this aspect. What the human engineer
contributes is just the bare structure with large numbers of parameters, numbers
whose values change during training. These values are then seeded (initialized with
random values), and then a training routine starts in which the system autono-
mously produces output, compares this output with the correct solutions, measures
its error, and tries to adapt its parameters such that this error decreases. It was
epistemically (and perhaps metaphysically) impossible for the AI engineer to pre-
dict the function that self-attention layer 5 came to assume due to training.
What follows from this for the question of whether such neural network systems
are alive, conceived from a Kantian perspective? Is the transformer more like a
watch or more like a beaver? Is its organization merely mechanistic, or does it show
the kind of purpose for itself that is characteristic for organisms according to Kant?
Let us take stock. On the one hand, we submit that the spontaneous organizational
capacities and the functional organization of the transformer speak in favor of
considering it as an organism. Attention layer number 5 has spontaneously assumed
the function of resolving anaphora. This is not a purpose that was simply set by its
human designer, like in the case of the function of a speciﬁc sub-mechanism of the
watch. Rather, as it were, the system autonomously evolved this functional orga-
nization. Furthermore, even if no human being ever hit upon the idea to study the
functional organization of the transformer, this organization would still be real in
the sense that it is an essential part of the functioning of the transformer and hence,
in the end, of its demonstrably superior performance. In this sense, the functional
organization is not merely a result of our conceiving the system but rather part of
18
Mechanism Versus Organism: A Loosely Kantian …
391

the very being and functioning of the transformer – independently of our cognitive
relation to it.
This functional independence raises exciting questions on the proper conception
of the humans’ role in charge of these systems. To the extent to which the
autonomy of their functional organization increases, it becomes less convincing to
conceive of humans as classical engineers and more convincing to liken them to
farmers cultivating the crop. Cultivating involves a substantial responsibility in
ensuring the proper circumstances for the crop to ﬂourish, but it does not include
building and maintaining the plant the way like one is building and maintaining a
bridge. Plants grow by themselves; they autonomously develop their inner func-
tional organization. Contemporary AI systems are similar to plants in this regard,
which injects an aspect of cultivation to the humans’ role in charge of the systems.
On the other hand, when it comes to the criteria of being able to repair itself and
reproduce, we submit that one can only emphasize the true extent of the challenge
that faces anyone that intends to engineer rather than cultivate organisms. While
there is a research area called neural architecture search–essentially based on the
idea that AI is best at discovering the best new neural architectures–this does not
amount to reproduction in any sense close to the reproduction of living beings. As it
were, their offspring is entirely disembodied: the systems conceive software, not
hardware. Humans conceive both.
Even more, while there are attempts to cope with individual network cells that
malfunction (which consists in adding a so-called residual connection around each
cell to ensure that one cell’s malfunctioning will not destroy the performance of the
entire system), there is nothing close to an AI system’s autonomously fabricating,
say, new GPUs in case some of its hardware is destroyed. Concerning these two
aspects, reproduction and healing, it is clear that the human takes the role of a
classical engineer: she has to develop factories to mass-produce the hardware, and
she has to get up late at night to ﬁx a broken server.
In sum, we suggest that cutting-edge AI systems indeed have organismic
structures, but they fail to self-repair and reproduce; they remain typical non-living
objects. This conclusion leaves us with an interesting conceptual puzzle: these AI
systems fall between the cracks of the European Enlightenment’s conceptual grid to
categorize beings. It takes an act of creativity, specifying our inherited vocabulary,
to come to terms with this incongruence.
Programming, Autonomy, and the Ethics of Cyborg
In the last section, we have seen that the advances in AI concerning the repro-
duction of life are real, but also that they are very much limited in scope. This is due
to structural reasons. Relative and systematic autonomy in the shape of a teleo-
logical structure appears to be within reach as software systems start to cross over
from being programmed to programming themselves. At the same time, this
capacity of setting one’s own limits is itself limited by the fact that these capacities
are not embodied. There seems no way for the teleological features of the software
392
R. Gubelmann and M. Toscano

to reach over onto the hardware in which they are set up. Thus, systematic growth,
healing, and reproduction are inconceivable.
Still, a combination of machine bodies and autonomous programming in the
future is conceivable. This would make up for the lack of embodiment and even
introduce new scope to the idea of life: machine life. However, again, it would be
too much to say that this new form of life would be bioengineered–not even if we
were prepared to accept the breathtaking widening of the scope of the term “bios” in
such a case. The more decisive point is: It would be more appropriate to say that the
form of life in question is engineering itself, autonomously as it were, by supplying
its hardware with ever new inorganic material according to its needs.
Even here, in this scenario of science-ﬁction, a familiar demarcation afﬁrms
itself. The formula–inherited by Western Enlightenment and reconstructed above–is
this: If you can engineer it, it does not live, and if it is alive, you have not
engineered it. The more ambitious sense of bioengineering does, therefore, seem to
be beyond our grasp. We see no way of leaving behind what is being captured by
the basic conceptual distinction between mechanism and organism.
We have seen that neither Kant and Leibniz nor technical progress have been
able to do away with the disturbingly simple fact that living substance cannot be
created out of non-living substance, as it were, ex nihilo. That is not true for
watches and canindroids who owe their existence to an engineer, providing it with
purpose and goal. No matter how deceivingly detailed, Rudy the canindroid is a
heteronomous being, a being whose purpose and functional organization have been
bestowed to it from the outside. What keeps its matter together is not Rudy itself,
but an engineer and the mechanistic design she imposed. In comparison, we can call
organisms relatively autonomous because what is keeping their matter together are
the very organisms themselves. Being alive is to be transforming inorganic matter
into a body. Thus, bioengineering will be bound to mere manipulation and
enhancement, cultivating what is always already alive.
Living beings cannot come from nothing. They develop in a time-consuming
and complex process. This process does not invent, in a strict sense, living matter
but merely transforms it. Complex living beings are produced by reproducing
already living substances. Life presupposes life, albeit in simpler forms. This is why
the inception of complex life forms ex nihilo is a mad idea. All existing forms of life
come from that long process of building and trying and failing.
The traditionally established distinction between mechanism and organism was
about capturing a distinction within the concept of creation. Life was created in a
way inaccessible to the craft of human beings. Within the context of the European
Enlightenment, this had both epistemological and ethical implications. The limits of
human technology were taken to be the limits of human understanding and its rule.
The exploitation of life was bound to a supposedly natural taxonomy of beings and
legitimized by its normative-hierarchical implications. Now there are questions:
• Which living being is a product of nature? And which is a product of culture?
• Which technical manipulation is, as we might say, naturally stable? And which
is an aberration?
18
Mechanism Versus Organism: A Loosely Kantian …
393

• At which point does an engineered enhancement turn its bearer into a cyborg?
Essentialism–still very active within the heritage of Western Enlightenment—is
the idea that there are clear-cut demarcations between what is produced by God (or
nature, however, conceived) and what is produced by man. No matter how
frightening the thought: we cannot refer to essentialism to decide what form of life
is performing naturally and what form of life is not. Progress in bioengineering and
its technical capacities continue to blur the very basic distinctions essentialist
taxonomies are built on. And, supposedly, advances in the ﬁeld of AI are going to
blur distinctions on an even larger scale.
The inaccessibility of life has ethical implications. By working around the
irreconcilable tension between mechanism and organism, rather than suppressing it,
both Leibniz and Kant allowed for an ethical element, a theological rest, within
their mechanistic foundations of man’s mastery over nature. This element of the
ethics of the inaccessible life should be taken seriously. It can be taken up and put
to use in the world of bioengineering, the world of the cyborg. Following authors
like Donna Haraway, we can appreciate the forced disintegration of essentialist
taxonomies and their morals pressed by the growing importance of bioengineering.
In her Cyborg Manifesto, Haraway (1985) not only shows how essentialism
reproduces patriarchal and colonialist forms of dominating the other, i.e., women,
people of color, workers, animals, by dividing and conquering matter by norming it
according to antagonistic dualisms [8]. Haraway also puts forward an image of
positive and inclusive practices of difference and afﬁnity. This makes sense of
Kant’s and Leibniz’s points. After all, every living being reproduces its standard of
normality according to its own relative autonomy, the realm of material and
functional variations its speciﬁc teleological constitution continuously allows for—
and remains inaccessible to us.
Such ethical speculation can seem to go too far astray for the concerns of
bioengineering and the people and institutions involved with it. In reality, scientiﬁc
research and its industrial implementation are supposed to be very down to earth.
However, that does not do away with social responsibility. For, standing at the
threshold of manipulating the genetic and micro-genetic make-up of existing forms
of life, two pressing images suggest themselves (compare [9]):
i. in one image, the amount in which technological capacities of manipulation of
life and living substance advance is directly matched by advanced normalization
and exploitation of forms of life according to the needs of proﬁt and domination.
This is the scenario where the patriarchal and colonist heritage of Western
Enlightenment goes off, dispossessed of its own essentialist morals; and
ii. in the other image, the formative power [4] (“bildende Kraft,” KdU
B293/A289) of living matter is freed and multiplied by the growing techno-
logical possibilities and its hardly foreseeable mutations. In this scenario, the
amount of rising technological capacities is only matched by that of rising
responsibility to care and deal with the complicity of every action and its
consequences.
394
R. Gubelmann and M. Toscano

Conclusion
According to Kant, a non-living object is mechanistically constituted: all of its
going-ons can be fully explained with recourse to efﬁcient causes. In contrast, living
beings are organisms. They are autonomously constituted by ﬁnal causes, their parts
being deﬁned by the various functions they perform for the entire organism. In this
way, Kant tries to improve upon Leibniz’s proposal and develop a conception of
living beings that avoids the trap of reiﬁcation while still providing a categorical
difference between living and non-living beings.
From the background of this Kantian distinction between living and non-living
beings, we suggested that bioengineering can either be understood as the quest to
engineer life out of non-living matter or as the quest of engineering already existing
living beings. Applying the Kantian distinction to cutting-edge AI systems reveals
that these systems clearly show organismic features while still lacking essential
aspects of living beings. It highlights the peculiar nature of these systems, and it
creates a fruitful situation for future research: how should we conceive these
beings? Are we in the process of creating a third category of beings over and above
non-living objects and living beings?
Also, the growing importance and capacities of bioengineering, in general,
invigorate the ethical dimensions of Kant’s and Leibniz’s attempts to conceptualize
life. Their endeavor is historically situated within a mechanistic framework of
man’s mastery over nature. At the same time, in ultimately respecting the inac-
cessibility of living matter, the two philosophers have provided us with a hint for
the dystopian dangers as well as the utopian hopes for bioengineering and the
powers it beholds.
Core Messages
• We have discussed a notion of the living organism based on its formal
teleological structure, according to Kant.
• Organisms are contrasted with mechanistic objects, and some conse-
quences are drawn for the notion of bioengineering.
• Bioengineering is close to a contradictio in adiecto: either something is
alive, or it is engineered.
• We argue that the growing capacities of bioengineering invigorate the
ethical dimensions of Kant’s and Leibniz’s attempts to conceptualize life.
• In respecting the inaccessibility of living matter, the two philosophers offer
a map for bioengineering’s dystopian dangers and utopian hopes alike.
18
Mechanism Versus Organism: A Loosely Kantian …
395

References
1. Huneman P (2014) Kant vs. Leibniz in the second antinomy: organisms are not inﬁnitely subtle
machines. Kant-Studien 105:155–195
2. Kant I 1781/1787 (1998) Kritik der reinen Vernunft, nach der ersten und zweiten
Originalausgabe. In Timmermann J (ed) Meiner. Abbreviated by ‘KrV’, Hamburg
3. Kant I 1781/1787 (1998) Critique of pure reason. In: Guyer P, Wood AW (Transl. and ed)
Cambridge University Press. Abbreviated by ‘KrV.’, Cambridge
4. Kant I 1790 (1974) Kritik der Urteilskraft. In: Weischedel W, Frankfurt AM. Suhrkamp. Abbre-
viated by ‘KdU’
5. Kant I 1790 (2000) Critique of the power of judgment. In: Guyer P, Matthews E (Transl.),
Guyer P (ed) Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Abbreviated by ‘KdU’
6. Vaswani A et al (2017) Attention is all you need. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.03762
7. Bahdanau D, Cho K, Bengio Y (2014) Neural machine translation by jointly learning to align
and translate. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.0473
8. Haraway D (1985) Manifesto for cyborgs: science, technology, and socialist feminism in the
1980s. Soc Rev 80:65–108
9. Haraway D (1979) The biological enterprise: sex, mind, and proﬁt from human engineering to
sociobiology. In: Radical historical review, pp 206–37. https://doi.org/10.1215/01636545-
1979-20-206
Reto Gubelmann received a Ph.D. in Philosophy from the
University of Zurich. His thesis was about naturalism in episte-
mology and the philosophy of mind. Reto now leads a project
funded by the SNSF to investigate the linguistic capacities of
neural networks.
Marco Toscano is pursuing a Ph.D. in Philosophy from the
University of Zurich. His thesis focuses on conceptions of nature
as interfaces between philosophical theories of subjectivity and
current methodological frameworks in the social sciences, for
which he was awarded an SNSF research grant.
396
R. Gubelmann and M. Toscano

19
New Media Art: The Liminal Space
Between Thinking and Perceiving
Paola Lopreiato
“We think in images. We thought in images before we used
words.”
Harriet Wadeson
Summary
In today’s era, we can say that art is often reliant on or intersects with
technology. This close relationship has led to the development of new interactive
systems that transcend the purely artistic purpose. This chapter describes how
new media art, assisted by new technologies (and often in collaboration with
science), implements and enhances our knowledge of thinking processes,
emotions, and perception.
P. Lopreiato (&)
The University of Plymouth, Plymouth, UK
e-mail: paolalopreiato@hotmail.com
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Plymouth, UK
via Novaro 16, 20161 Milan, Italy
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh (eds.), Thinking, Integrated Science 7,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04075-7_19
397

Different examples in new media art. It provides a different approach and point of
view in the exploration of thinking and perceiving processes. The examples
provided here are cases in which art can implement and enhance our knowledge of
thinking processes, emotions, and perception.
Keywords
Emotions Immersion Interaction New media art Perception Technology
Thinking
398
P. Lopreiato

QR Code
Scanning the QR code directs you to the word cloud of the chapter that is made up
of the words we discussed throughout the whole book in relation to the chapter’s
keyword, which is intentionally not included in the word cloud. Find the keyword
and put it in place in the puzzle according to the clues provided in Chap. 36. The
mystery hidden in the puzzle is the quote of THINKING: Bioengineering of Science
and Art.
Introduction
New media art, with the use of various kinds of media and state-of-the-art tech-
nology, is characterized by its ability to incorporate both video, images and text, as
well as touch and smell. Furthermore, this form of art can use a non-linear narrative
and hence a non-linear way of thinking. In anthropologist Frank Rose’s words,
“every new medium has given rise to a new form of narrative” [1]. Mediated by
technology, new media art is a form of multisensorial hyper thinking through which
“a new type of narrative is emerging, one that is told through many immediate ones
in a non-linear way, that is participatory, and often game-like and that is designed
above all to be immersive” [1]. In this new way of making art, stories are not only
immersive and content participatory, but the thinking process is also transformed.
The technological revolution, internet, algorithms, artiﬁcial intelligence, and soft-
ware that can communicate and interact give the audience a ﬁrst-person perspective.
From this perspective, not only does the audience participate in the artwork as
receivers of a message and spectators but also participates in the creation of the art
piece. In fact, the work is not describing someone else’s experience; on the con-
trary, the artistic experience is about the audience who is creating and taking part in
it simultaneously. In recent years, artists have become increasingly interested in
process-oriented art, which means that the act of creating takes precedence over the
ﬁnished product in their artworks. This foregrounding of the process may or may
not be discernible in the ﬁnal work. This development is also because people seek
immersive experiences since, in no small part, because of the use of social media,
they have grown accustomed to real-time interactive communication.
19
New Media Art: The Liminal Space Between Thinking and Perceiving
399

History teaches us that the work of art is the child of its time [2] and how often
artists indulged or followed the taste of the period they lived in. Contemporary
artists cannot escape from reality around them, consequently including real-time
and interactive communication in their art pieces. Besides being the child of its
time, art is often the mother of our emotions [2], and this is why when the new
media artist sets up a certain environment for the audience to participate in, the
interaction between the audience and the artwork leads to unexpected results as it is
in human nature to look for meanings and connections. The unexpected outcome of
the art piece is emotionally involving but at the same time disorienting both for the
audience and the artist: “we know this much: people want to be immersed. They
want to get involved in a story, to carve out a role for themselves come, to make it
their own. But how is the author supposed to accommodate them? What if the
audience runs away with the story? And how do we handle the blur—not just
between ﬁction and fact, but between author and audience, entertainment and ad-
vertising story and game? A lot of smart people -in ﬁlm, in television, in video
games, in advertising, in technology, even in neuroscience are trying to sort this
question out” [1].
Contemporary art allows the audience to connect with the artwork and exchange
ideas with the artist, something which was not possible or limited to the private
sphere of the person in the past. In contemporary art, people share their thoughts in
real-time while experiencing the installation, and at the same time, the individual,
her/his experience, and reaction to the installation are used to implement the art
process. The artists create situations and present content to trigger people's emo-
tions, perception, reasoning, and decision-making. However, there is no control
over what will occur in people's bodies and minds when interacting with the art-
work. As opposed to non-interactive art, the audience in interactive art is not only
changed by the artwork and inﬂuenced by the artist's insights but also shapes the
artwork. New media artists are more often searching for reactions from the audi-
ence, using art as a thinking tool or content producer while also focusing on the
mechanisms of generating insights.
New Media Art: Artistic Case Studies on Thinking and
Perceiving
Current artistic experimentation investigates topics such as thoughts, perception,
and feelings, sharing aims and technology with scientiﬁc research. Art, as well as
social disciplines (philosophy, psychology, and anthropology), have always shared
a curiosity towards life sciences and many examples in art prove that art can be a
way to improve academic research. It should be, in fact, underlined that art is not
purely speculative in nature and that many case studies illustrate how art can be
reliable equally in terms of research methods and results. Since this essay addresses
issues related to thinking, emotion, interaction, and perception, the examples I
detail below deal with one or more of these aspects, all mediated by new media.
400
P. Lopreiato

I will draw here on several examples of installations constructed by artists (often in
collaboration with scientists), including Julian Olivier et al., Jane Grant et al.,
Youssef Kashef, Abdelrahman N. Mahmoud, Rana el Kaliouby, Henrik Lörstad,
Mark d'Inverno, John Eacott, and Bill Viola. For this purpose, I have divided the
installations into ﬁve key types:
i. Installations that inﬂuence thinking by focusing on the mediation of
technology;
ii. Installations that investigate thinking, emotions, and perception;
iii. Installations which are themselves thinking tools;
iv. Installations thematically focused on scientiﬁc research (where artistic
knowledge is generated regarding science); and
v. Personal experience installations focused on academic research (where artistic
knowledge and methodology are used to produce and collect data).
Installations that Influence Thinking by Focusing
on the Mediation of Technology
In this type of installation, a person activates something, e.g., a sound, image.
A sensor or software captures and manipulates data that can then be explored by
that person, who can move around and provoke different situations and thereby
understand how the sensor/software works in a set situation (i.e., a performance or
an installation). The artwork aims to create a device to inﬂuence people's choices.
An example of this is “The Advertiser,” by Julian Oliver and Damian Stewart: “The
Artvertiser” (2008) is a software platform for replacing billboard advertisements
with art in real-time. This project, by Julian Oliver and Damian Stewart, works by
teaching computers to “recognize” individual advertisements so they can be easily
replaced with alternative content, like images and video” [3].
In this artwork, people use a unique device to look at their surroundings and
detect advertisement billboards, which they can then substitute with other images
through software used by the device. The result is not as engaging and primary as
the concept of mediation itself. In fact, the way we perceive things and understand
them (i.e., mediation) in this improved reality situation (as the artists call it) and the
device and its interventions are the aims and principal concerns. During the live
presentation of the project (in Berlin as part of Transmediale 2010, Brussels for the
Europe-wide Media Facades Festival and Rotterdam's Image Festival), the artists
and scientists exhibited how and what the software was doing through the device.
Even though for the artists, people's choices and actions were the uncontrolled part
of the work and less important, these actions and choices were important as they
were useful to explain the role of the software and how it shaped people’s inter-
action with reality: “any system that relies on a programmer to input rules of
behavior will eventually run into a situation that programmer hasn't thought of” [1].
19
New Media Art: The Liminal Space Between Thinking and Perceiving
401

Staying in the realm of uncontrolled outcomes, Intelligent Street by Henrik
Lörstad, Mark d'Inverno, and John Eacott is another work that seeks to blur the
traditional distinction between the creative process and artistic tools and between
the artist and the audience. This installation is a way to compose music by par-
ticipants triggering sensors: people can use the installation to make music, ren-
dering them both musicians and listeners (Herber: 2007) [4]: “Intelligent Street was
a telematic sound installation where users could compose their sound environment
through SMS messages sent via mobile phone. The piece was developed in 2003 by
Henrik Lörstad, Mark d'Inverno, and John Eacott, with help from the Ambigence
Group. Intelligent Street was situated simultaneously at the University of West-
minster, London and the Interactive Institute, Piteå, Sweden via live video con-
nection. Users at either end of the connection were able to see and hear the results
of their interactions. Using freely associated, non-musical terms such as ``air'' or
``mellow,'' participants sent an SMS message to Intelligent Street, and were able to
hear how their contribution impacted the overall composition” [4].
The focus of the installation, in this case, is therefore on the product rather than
on the process. However, each of these types of installations (including the
examples described above) differ in terms of their approach; in each case, the
medium, the reaction, and personal judgment inﬂuence the participants' awareness.
In all these situations, there is also an additional step, which occurs when the
participant not only feels and perceives these effects but when the effects, which
inﬂuence the environment, change the person's thinking and decision-making
process. There is thus a continuous progression of change and reaction in partici-
pants' awareness as they follow new paths and create new layers of experience.
Nevertheless, this ﬁnal step sometimes remains implicit. For example, Eacott
et al.’s intentions are concentrated on showing how music can change the mood of
physical space [4], while for Julian Oliver and Damian Stewart, the device and its
mediation are the principal concern.
Installations that Investigate Thinking, Emotions,
and Perception
In this kind of installation, the aim is to explore emotions created by the effect of
people's actions and reactions; the reactions from the participant trigger the system
in the installation, which, in turn, stimulates people to reﬂect on their emotional
world. An example of this is “The Chameleon Project” (2008–2010) by Youssef
Kashef, Abdelrahman N. Mahmoud, and Rana el Kaliouby. Their article The
Chameleon Project: An Art Installation Exploring Emotional Contagion explains
how they tried to explore emotional contagion and emergence through art practice.
They outline the installation as follows:
The participants will enter a deﬁned space. Three screens are connected to three
computers. Each screen will be displaying a digital portrait of an everyday person
showing expressions that can be classiﬁed within six emotional states (happy,
neutral, sad, angry, disgusted, surprised). The digital portraits are programmed to
402
P. Lopreiato

wait in the background until the emotional face reading system senses a partici-
pant's face. After sensing the emotional expression of a participant's face, the video
portrait will walk forward to address the participant, attempting to begin an emo-
tional dialogue with the participant that would be perceived as emotionally con-
gruent to the participant's emotional expression. The video portrait will attempt to
stimulate the participants in such a way as to elicit an emotional facial expression
from them that is recognized by the emotion face reading system. The system
constantly monitors the facial expression of the participant, selecting video portrait
segments that aim to respond to the audience in an “emotionally intelligent” way, in
order to build an emotional bond with the audience. The work can interact with
three people at a time. If the system ﬁnds that one participant has a particularly
strong emotional expression, the emotion is propagated to all three monitors. People
can leave and enter as they wish [5].
Here, the primary concerns are emotions and how to trigger them; people are
part of this exploration because they are the element that sets off the process and
through which the result is observed. The artists and scientists who created the work
wanted to, above all, explore the emergence of emotions. What the artists needed
for this artistic case study was a reaction, not people thinking of or lingering in their
new mental and physical states. Even if the authors state that the audience’s
thoughts were not the main subject of analysis and that their work does not aspire to
make people dwell on what they experience, reports on the installation from par-
ticipants were used as tools and reported in the Chameleon research project. Those
reports were interesting as they showed the connections between people's mental
processes and physical states in relation to the system (video and cameras). As
reported by participants, what they took away from the installation was an aug-
mented awareness and a new way of thinking about the consequences and inter-
action between man and machines: “in an attempt to recreate the emotion, the
feeling ﬂooded back. I felt quite moved, this intimate relationship with a camera
lens was a new experience for me, and I found its scrutiny a great challenge” [5].
Installations as Thinking Tools
There are examples of artworks that we could say go deeper in the study of thinking
and decision-making. The artist group Knowbotic developed models for digital
representation of understanding in the art project “Dialogue with the Knowbotic
south (DWTKS):”
Their virtual installation dialogue with the Knowbotic South reach has been exhibited at
several exhibitions; it processes scientiﬁc data from research stations’ networked databases
to create a changing abstract representation of Antarctica. It visualizes and maps Antarctica
in a totally non-mimetic way. In DWTKS, the data from the networks is visualized as
changing starbursts pixels on large projection screens in a dark room. The data is collected
and activated by softer agents, the knowledge robots or KnowbotS (Grau O. 2003) [6].
19
New Media Art: The Liminal Space Between Thinking and Perceiving
403

This installation, more than being an example of the analysis of thought, is an
example of a thinking tool; the data collected from scientists are presented to the
public through virtual software, an interactive tool that uses a virtual environment to
represent data with pixels. People moving in the virtual reality (VR) environment
can change it by activating related sounds. The authors (scientists and artists) aimed
to create a world where people can understand data but at the same time can interact
with them, creating and generating events and, consequently, poetic moments. This
is, therefore, an example of cooperation between art and science and of how artists
not only show and explain information and scientiﬁc ﬁndings but can encourage
reasoning. As the historian Oliver Grau states, if software or computers commu-
nicate and translate content, they can be considered thinking tools; consequently, as
DWTKS is an installation based on such a system, it becomes a thinking form of
art: “theoretically, if the computer metamorphoses into a universal translating
machine for sensory impression than it should be considered a thinking tool. To put
it brieﬂy, the structure of a program’s data organizes symbols for a speciﬁc purpose.
For many years, the only mode of operation was the question and answer dialogue
and abstraction that effectively created a considerable distance between artists and
work. Thus, attention and creative thought are bound, to a large extent, to the
interactive features of the program” [6].
Another example of art that boosts thinking and stimulates choice is ``Ultima
ratio'' by the German media artists Daniela Alina Plewe. In this installation, the
visitor participates by co-operating with the setting. The automatic system suggests
the visitor should resolve a conﬂict, for example, whether Hamlet should kill or not
kill Claudius. The public can also provide the system with new inquiries and
conﬂicts to resolve. As such, the interactive and simulated decision-making is not
just unidirectional, going from the software to the person, but also allows new
insights from the visitor to be offered to the system to develop it. New media art that
involves technology and advanced algorithms and can interact and change through
the interaction with people experiencing the installation is the way how contem-
porary artists make people reﬂect on reality while creating new thinking pathways.
As Grau states, Plewes's work Transcends the traditional concept of rationality [6],
and she overtakes the usual thinking process. History of art teaches us that this has
always been the aim of artists or at least has been so consequently. The difference
between traditional art and new media art is that now people not only receive
information from and are stimulated by the art experience, but they can also con-
tribute to the realization of the artwork itself and are part of the process of creation
in a mutual exchange.
404
P. Lopreiato

Installations About Science or Adapting Scientific Findings
and Theories
A signiﬁcant example of this category is the work of Jane Grant, speciﬁcally her
works “Ghost,” “Fragmented orchestra,1” and “Threshold,2” which were “devel-
oped through the desire to sonify thinking to make audible the ﬁring patterns in the
cortex” [7]. In these works, it is possible to see how neuroscientiﬁc discoveries and
theories can be explored and explained through art practice: “we hope that the
project will illustrate the complexity of consciousness and create an artwork that is
beautiful both in itself and in the parallels it has with the process of the brain” [8].
Throughout her artistic career, Prof. Grant has tried to give voice to neurosci-
entiﬁc topics involving perception, memories, and thinking. As expressed in her
papers, she seeks to give an artistic form to the brain and its patterns:
The Fragmented Orchestra is a vast distributed sonic structure created by Jane Grant, John
Matthias and Nick Ryan. It was installed in the United Kingdom between December 2008
and February 2009. It consisted of 24 ﬁxed geographical locations, including FACT,
Liverpool, University of Plymouth, Landscove Primary School, Devon, The National
Portrait Gallery, London, Millennium Stadium, Cardiff and Kielder Observatory,
Northumberland. At each of the locations, a 'soundbox' was installed, which consisted of a
microphone, a small computer connected to the internet and a Feonic' drive', a device that
transmits audio through resonating architectural surfaces. Sound made in the spaces was
transmitted across the internet to a server computer in the FACT gallery. In this computer,
we ran an artiﬁcial neuronal network, an adaptation of the Izhikevich's recently developed
non-linear integrate and ﬁre model that incorporates spatial 'axonal delays' between
synapses and a spike-timing-dependent plasticity algorithm, which causes the synaptic
strengths between neurons to become updated as a function of the differences in signal
arrival times [8].
Another important example of art researching perception, memory, and mental
processes is the work of Bill Viola:
“Viola's primary subject is the physical and mental, the connections and interplay between
the outer world and the inner realm. He is concerned with exploring the interaction of his
images with the viewer's memory, as well as with the subconscious and its dreams and
imagination. He is particularly interested in that moment of exchange between the viewer
and the artwork when energy is, released and the viewer achieves a new awareness. “In a
way my work is very literal, but it has more to do with the after-experience than the actual
experience in itself,`` he told an interviewer.” As if memory were a sort of ﬁlter, another
editing process. In fact, the editing is going on all the time. Images are always being created
and transformed… I think memory is as much about the future as it is about the past … I'm
interested in how thought is a function of time, there is a moment when the act of per-
ception becomes conception, and that is thought. For Viola, the image is merely a sche-
matic representation of a much larger system, and the process of seeing is a complex
process that involves far more than surface recognition” [9].
1 By Jane Grant, John Matthias and Nick Ryan.
2 Composed using the Neurogranular Sampler, a digital instrument created by John Matthias at
Plymouth University
19
New Media Art: The Liminal Space Between Thinking and Perceiving
405

In Viola's work, as in the work of Jane Grant (John Matthias and Nick Ryan), the
central aim is to make the audience explore the concept that is proposed.
Personal Experience: Installations and Artistic Methodology
Used to Produce and Collect Data (Within Academic Research
on Emotions and Sound)
Each discipline studies a topic from its perspective and uses instruments that are
inherent and functional to its approach. Usually, when science (more speciﬁcally
biology and medicine) studies emotions, thinking, and perceiving, the variables are
related to biofeedback analysis such as galvanic skin response (GSR), heart rate
(electrocardiography or ECG), and brain activity (neuroimaging). They are mea-
sured using instruments, for example, functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI), skin conductance recorder, and heart rate monitor (HRM). Regardless of
the tools used to produce and collect data, data analysis and usage are essential,
especially for contemporary art. In fact, in the past, artists changed their focus from
the portrait of nature to the industrial object, or their means from canvas and
brushes to their own body; in our technologically mediated era, the artists have
focused on data and computation. Furthermore, this is also an era in which art and
science often collaborate, especially in disclosing the secrets of the unseen world.
As the writer, L. Manovich, states, “the desire to take what is normally outside the
scale of human senses and to make it visible and manageable” aligns new media art
and data visualization art with modern science.
The desire to take what normally falls outside of the scale of human senses and to make it
visible and manageable aligns data visualization art with modern science. Its subject matter,
i.e. data, puts it within the paradigm of modern art. In the beginning of the twentieth
century art largely abandoned one of its key—if not the key—function—portraying the
human being. Instead, most artists turned to other subjects, such as abstraction, industrial
objects and materials (Duchamp, minimalists), media images (pop art), the ﬁgure of artist
herself or himself (performance and video art)—and now data. Of course, it can be argued
that data art represents the human being indirectly by visualizing her or his activities
(typically the movements through the Net) [10].
My artwork and research projects reﬂect the shared curiosity of disclosing the
secrets of the unseen with science and show the inﬂuence of the technologically
mediatederathroughthe useofdigitalartandVR.My installations “Soundingout” and
“Seams” are examplesof the collaboration between artand science in research and how
artcanbea potenttool to implement andﬁll gaps in researchin perceptionandemotion.
Emotion categorization is, in fact, one of the most interesting undertakings in
speech signal processing both in science and art, as sound is an essential vehicle for
interaction that can be used to recognize the speaker, speech, and even emotions.
Current academic research and knowledge in this ﬁeld are based on the conviction
that our comprehension and consequent response to others’ emotions are due to our
ability to judge the content of a speech, its volume and frequency or time rate of
speech, hypernasal resonance, and breath emission [11].
406
P. Lopreiato

However, my artistic research led me to conclude that emotions also change the
overall energy of the sound we emit, which is an invisible mechanism compared to
more accessible physical information such as pitch and amplitude. To outline the
emotional states in sound during my installations, I needed a tool capable of
detecting emotions in voices in real-time. Nevertheless, reviewing current studies in
this ﬁeld and the tools and methods they applied, I realized that they were not
suitable for my artistic research process. Analysis of content, breath emission, and
detection of peaks was time-consuming. It could only be done after recording; so,
the existing methods did not allow me to carry out the analysis in real-time. Fur-
thermore, these research methods did not consider the detection and analysis of
emotion in a natural setting, the issue I was interested in as an interactive
audio-visual artist. Hence, I thought of a parameter and a tool that did not depend
on the person’s ability to express emotions (in a deﬁnite way like actors), the
situation, or the equipment I was using. The parameter I used was the energy
distribution in sound, speciﬁcally in human voice emission. I3 designed a program
in Max/MSP software, the so-called “energy band analyzer,” that examines the
different energy distributions in speech signals in an emotional situation. The tool
(Max Msp) was initially designed for music composition (and is used mainly for
live composition). It includes several algorithms for the analysis, recording, and
manipulation of sound. The “energy band analyzer” divides the spectrum of the
audio coming from the microphone in 25 ﬁlters to decompose the sound ﬂow into a
continuous stream of 25 values that represent the distribution of the acoustic energy
of the sound event. This is possible as the patch calculates the average energy per
critical band while integration/accumulation of the energy acquired for each critical
band is collected; the algorithm also evaluates the percentage of energy acquired
until the time tx for each band in relation to the total energy output of the sound
until the time tx (Fig. 19.1).
There is an absence of research on sound energy distribution, and it has never
really been considered a key factor in detecting emotions in sound. Extracting the
information on energy distribution in speech, the “energy band analyzer,” however,
has proved to be a reliable tool to deduce the emotional state of the speaker without
relying on the contents or the environment of the footage; moreover, the signal’s
quality does not inﬂuence the results. I ﬁrst worked in my studio using the “energy
band analyzer” in Max/MSP to examine recorded sound samples, producing a
series of graphs. The data conﬁrmed a correlation between the energy distribution in
the voice and the emotional state of the person. Based on these ﬁndings, I then
included the patch in my installation to detect emotions in real-time. The installa-
tion can be ﬁguratively understood as a way to see the unseen. In the installations,
the “energy band analyzer” detects the participants’ emotions analyzing their voice
3 The “Sounding out” project and installation is a solo project, but the patch used in the project was
made in collaboration with prof. Alfonso Belﬁore. So, when I talk about the max/Msp patch and I
mention myself I mean “me and prof. Belﬁore” as this patch was created rearranging the patch of
the project Quanta of Sound.
19
New Media Art: The Liminal Space Between Thinking and Perceiving
407

in real-time, and provides the participant with a coherent visual response to show
that the system recognizes the inner states (mind) in the shape of energy (body and
environment).
“Sounding out” was an artistic experiment to prove how art can contribute to
knowledge on this new relationship between emotional states and sound (analyzing
energy distribution instead of using the usual parameters). It led to the offer of a
new track/display system for outlining these relationships and opened up new
scenarios in the production of dynamic interactive art that reacts to the perceived
emotions (Fig. 19.2). However, my interest was not only to create an artistic tool to
produce and collect data for academic purposes but also to ﬁnd a way to represent
these data through art and disseminate results (Fig. 19.3).. From this starting point, I
implemented my work on emotions by using immersive video to visualize the
collected sound analysis data, and I developed a second installation called “Seams.”
These two installations allowed me to examine the physical features of emotions
through data analysis (Sounding out) and data visualization (Seams). The computer
could recognize the speaker's emotional state or at least the speaker’s intended
emotions by using speciﬁc sound analysis. At the same time, the immersive
installation Seams made the study’s data more accessible and intuitive, not only for
researchers but also for a broader audience.
Fig. 19.1 Energy band analyzer. This ﬁgure shows the functioning of the patch during the
analysis of a live audio sample. The screen is divided into six parts. This image shows part n.1,
where the audio is selected; n.2, where the artist can see the live processing of energy; n.6 that is
the on and off button; n.3 that shows the live energy progression in each of the 25 bands (which are
approximate of 100 Hz each)
408
P. Lopreiato

Fig. 19.2 Energy distribution of sound in the 25 bands. The heat map shows how sound energy is
distributed in every 25 bands and outlines the difference between anger, happiness, and sadness
Fig. 19.3 “Sounding out” exhibited in Florence June 2018 at the “il corpo la luce il suono”
festival
19
New Media Art: The Liminal Space Between Thinking and Perceiving
409

In “Seams,” by using non-verbal interaction (VR videos and music composi-
tion), I could convey to the public the results of the analysis done in the installation
“Sounding out.” Instead of the statistical graphs and maps employed by scientists to
explain and show results, I used 360° video and music to convey my results. The
VR videos of “Seams” are a visual and audio narrative representation of the dis-
coveries made during the “Sounding out” project. The advantage of using visual
tools to convey my results to a broader audience (other than just academics) is that
art (the VR installation) “creates knowledge that connects the head to heart” [12].
The term visual narratives representations expand on Lieblich who stated that
investigation of any research questions ''can use narratives``; and that ''the narrative
(itself) can be investigated by researchers as their research object`` […] I refer to
Denzin and Lincoln who say: ''The visual narrative tells many different stories at the
same time as it mixes and combines multiple images`` […] A visual image narrative
allows us to ''listen beyond the words``. The therapeutic advantage of storytelling in
art-therapy-based research is the way it creates knowledge that connects “head to
heart” [12].
As data and graphs are challenging to interpret and less straightforward means of
communication, I found that my installation (Seams) was a complementary and
more direct way to speak to people and show the connection between sound energy
and emotions, which emerged from my analysis of sound.
Representing one data set into another is quite common practice, particularly in
the computer era. From the sculpture of Jeremijenko, which is wired to trafﬁc data
and reacts in real-time to the changes in trafﬁc dynamics, to the neurogranular
sampler designed by Jane Grant (et al.), which “was developed through the desire to
sonify thinking (Grant et al. 2009),” in many contemporary installations the aim is
to give an artistic form to patterns of human behavior and thinking. As Manovich
says, “data visualization moves from the concrete to the abstract, and then again to
the concrete” [10]; as such, in “Seams,” I outlined patterns and structures from the
analysis of voice recordings (concrete) and then converted them into many vibrant
visual images and sound elements (abstract) so to translate what I discovered into
art (concrete).
Conclusion
Art is the experience of expression, communication, and sharing and is crucial in
investigating mechanisms that constitute the inner emotional world in terms of
thinking, logical, and rational expression. It is an expression of lived reality. On the
one hand, the knowledge of the brain and body, their structures, and their func-
tioning can be a way to understand certain aspects of art. On the other hand, this
chapter shows art as a tool for investigating the functioning of our mind, central
nervous system (CNS), body, and perception. Our mind formulates our feelings,
from which our own thoughts, perceived objects, concepts, and interpretations of
the world and reality arise. In this vision and immersed in this stream of
410
P. Lopreiato

consciousness, our journey towards art begins. The work of art embodies the cre-
ative act of directing inner and outer energies and impulses, whose deeper meaning
is perhaps irremediably unreachable. The characteristic of art to organize and
canalize inputs from and to the world makes the artwork a ritualistic process,
extraordinarily capable of offering a projection of the inner world of one’s mind to
others and vice versa. From this perspective, art can be considered an incarnation of
a soul in an empty body. For the observer, art can also become the medium that
enables communication with the concrete and the phenomenological. New media
art is further an occasion to reﬂect, recognize, and perhaps understand nature
concretely and unexpectedly. Hence, when we research, why is it so important to
choose a different approach and not only a purely scientiﬁc one? It is essential
because if we investigate reality, we are not only talking about the matter, the ﬂesh,
or the neuronal connexions. Reality is about the relationships between the inner and
outer world, the body and mind, between people, between past and future, between
the singularity and the context, etc. With all these things happening together, it is
hard to believe that the purely scientiﬁc approach can be the only way to carry out
research, giving us a complete picture of the overall phenomenon. Life is about
singularity, uniqueness, and speciﬁcity; therefore, when a scientist takes away the
peculiarity of a person or situation to verify something, he indeed veriﬁes some-
thing, but at the same time, he revises a lot of what is happening. In academic
research, the subjectivity of both the situation and the observer needs to be elim-
inated from any scientiﬁc experiment. However, nowadays, more and more often,
other disciplines (among which art) are becoming relevant in research to close the
circuit between the rational mind and the unconscious mind and enable commu-
nication between them. From this perspective, I hope that the collaboration between
art and science will increase in the future.
Core Messages
• In investigating the functioning of our mind, it is important to recognize
how contemporary art is a valid research tool.
• Interactive installations provide a different approach and point of view in
the exploration of thinking and perceiving processes.
• New media art, with its use of multiple tools and its capacity, can stimulate
several senses.
• New media art is considered a form of multisensorial hyper thinking that
provides non-linear and alternative approaches.
19
New Media Art: The Liminal Space Between Thinking and Perceiving
411

References
1. Rose F (2012) The art of immersion. W.W. Northon & Company, London
2. Glew A (2006) Every work of art is the child of its time, often it is the mother of our
emotions. In: TATE ETC. https://www.tate.org.uk/tate-etc/issue-7-summer-2006/every-work-
art-child-its-time-often-it-mother-our-emotions#:*:text=ofouremotions%22-,
Everyworkofartisthechildoﬁtstime,motherofouremotions%22Kandinsky. Accessed 20 Aug
2020
3. V2_ The Artvertiser. http://v2.nl/archive/works/the-artvertiser. Accessed 12 June 2016
4. Herber N (2007) The composition-instrument: musical emergence and interaction. http://
www.hz-journal.org/n9/herber.html. Accessed 23 May 2017
5. Gonsalves T, Al. E (2009) The chameleon project: an art installation exploring emotional
contagion. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
6. Grau O (2003) The computer: Handtool or Thinktool. In: Virtual art. MIT Press, London
7. Grant J (2012) Hearing things: inside outness and ‘sonic ghosts.’ Technoetic Arts 9:2–3
8. Grant J, Matthias, John, Ryan N (2008) Translating Consciousness into Music
9. London B (1987) Bill Viola: installations and videotapes the poetics of light and time. In:
catalogue.
http://www.experimentaltvcenter.org/bill-viola-installations-and-videotapes-
poetics-light-and-time. Accessed 18 Mar 2017
10. Manovich L (2002) Data visualisation as new abstraction and anti-sublime
11. Davletcharova A, Sugathanb S, Abrahamc B, Pappachen Jamesa A (2015) Detection an
analysis process in speech recognition. In: Procedia Computer Science
12. Harpaz R (2014) NARRATIVE KNOWING Narrative and Storytelling. Art Ther Narrat
Matters
Paola Lopreiato accomplished her Ph.D. in New Media Art at the
University of Plymouth (Planetary Collegium); her research
interests include the multisensoriality, electronic and computer
technology, acoustic, interactions between gesture, image, sound,
and word. She received an MPhil in Multimedia composition from
the University of Shefﬁeld, an MA in electroacoustic composition,
a BA in piano from the Conservatory of Florence, and a BA in
multimedia and painting from the Academy of the ﬁne art of
Florence. Her work has been exhibited around the world. She also
taught at the conservatory of Perugia, Bologna, and at the Acad-
emy of the ﬁne art of Carrara. (www.paolalopreiato.it).
412
P. Lopreiato

20
Towards a New Science of Interfaces:
Bridging Art and Engineering
Luca Iandoli, Alejandro Salado, and Giuseppe Zollo
“I like the rule that corrects the emotion. I like the emotion that
corrects the rule.”
Georges Braque
Summary
The practice of systems engineering has been said to be both an art and a
science. While the scientiﬁc part is necessary to produce actual designs, the
artistic one seems to drive the value of the underlying system structure. Should
certain aspects of art be integrated with engineering? Interestingly, systems
engineers and master painters seem to use a similar set of rules to effectively
manage complexity, balancing rules that reduce noise with rules that add
meaning. Furthermore, there is a strong resemblance between the problem
context and the solution processes of large artistic endeavors, such as original
ﬁlm scores and theatre productions and large engineering projects. In this
chapter, we explore how the arts can be leveraged to design effective interfaces.
There are many cases that the complexity of the interaction between a user and a
system mostly occurs at the interface level. We suggest that any interface
L. Iandoli
Department of Computer Science, Mathematics, and Science, St John’s University,
1127 E. James E. Rogers Way, Room 121, 85721 Tucson, AZ, USA
e-mail: iandoli@stjohns.edu
A. Salado (&)
Department of Systems and Industrial Engineering, The University of Arizona, Tucson, USA
e-mail: alejnandrosalado@arizona.edu
G. Zollo
Department of Industrial Engineering, University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy
e-mail: giuzollo@unina.it
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh (eds.), Thinking, Integrated Science 7,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04075-7_20
413

contains a set of messages for the users as encoded by the designer and that the
proper encoding of this information is critical in enabling a satisfying level of
interaction. In this sense, an interface design, as creating an art piece, is a
communicative act, where both artists and engineers package information to
deliver meaning. In this chapter, we show, supported by examples, that such
meaning delivery can be more efﬁcient and effective if the aesthetic value is
incorporated in the interface’s design.
Fundamental network topologies
Keywords
Art  Engineering design  Interface design  Product design  Systems
architecture  Systems engineering
414
L. Iandoli et al.

QR Code
Scanning the QR code directs you to the word cloud of the chapter that is made up of
the words we discussed throughout the whole book in relation to the chapter’s
keyword, which is intentionally not included in the word cloud. Find the keyword and
put it in place in the puzzle according to the clues provided in Chap. 36. The mystery
hidden in the puzzle is the quote of THINKING: Bioengineering of Science and Art.
Introduction
Commonly known as “a transdisciplinary approach and means to enable the
realization of successful systems” [1], systems engineering can be conceived as “the
engineering discipline that deals with the study and application of strategies to
ideate, realize, and operate engineered systems” [2]. Interface design and control is
a core activity of systems engineering [3] and is central to this chapter.
The practice of systems engineering has been said to be both an art and a science [4,
5]. While the scientiﬁc part is necessary to produce actual designs, the artistic one
seems to drive the value of the underlying system structure [6]. Many believe that
effective systems engineers must exhibit a good balance of technical and cognitive
skills [4, 5, 7]. The need for this balance has inspired some colleagues and us to
actively explore how the arts occur in and may enhance the practice of engineering [8].
While in art and humanities, the pursuit of aesthetic values is ubiquitous, the
aesthetic discourse has been systematically overlooked in modern and contempo-
rary engineering and science, a tendency that has contributed, we believe, to widen
a deep disciplinary gap between humanistic and scientiﬁc knowledge. We deem this
gap to be not only merely academic but also a missed opportunity for the broader
development of engineering and technology design. Fortunately, there are some
signals that this attitude is starting to change. For instance, some NASA leaders
have claimed, since at least 1969, problems with the development and delivery of
engineered systems lie at least partially in not pursuing elegance in engineering [9,
10]. A possible reason for this is that elegance is “immediately apparent when it
exists, yet it is difﬁcult to deﬁne” [9]. On the contrary, following a set of codes or
established procedures provides a more objective framework for conducting and or
driving engineering assessment.
20
Towards a New Science of Interfaces: Bridging Art and Engineering
415

We suggest that the subjectivity of aesthetic appreciation should not be a lim-
iting factor for its pursuit in engineering contexts. Moreover, in this chapter, we
show that certain aesthetic properties, such as elegance, have an objective com-
ponent as well, as highlighted in recent studies in neuroaesthetics [11], which shows
that master painters, for example, tackle complexity by resorting to a set of rules
that the human brain interprets as elegant or beautiful [11]. We have shown in prior
work [12] that the elegance of system architecture (that is, the underlying structure
of an engineered system), as scored by engineers, and an objective metric as its
effective complexity are strongly correlated [12]. Interestingly, we also found
patterns based on rules of design heuristics guiding “the structural form and the
dynamic behavior of architecture to reduce its complexity” [13]. These heuristics
are similar to those employed by master painters in the arts and fall into two main
classes: meaning-adding (MA) and noise-killing (NK) strategies [14]. Surprisingly,
it turns out that both systems engineers and master painters balance these two
classes of heuristics to manage complexity effectively. In the arts, “if one relies on
NK strategies alone the experience is oversimpliﬁed and its interpretation becomes
dull and trivial; conversely, too intense use of MA strategies makes a representa-
tion overwhelming and unnecessary complex” [14]. In systems architecture, NK
strategies address the simpliﬁcation of a complex concept or system to its essential
core constructs. In contrast, MA strategies capture the complexity of the system by
highlighting the interaction of those constructs [15]. Furthermore, these NK and
MA techniques are effective in systems engineering practice to manage complexity
[12], communicate system models [16], and capture and convey tacit knowledge
through aesthetic judgments [17].
Similarities between the arts and engineering are not only limited to techniques
employed to engineer a system but also in the problem context in which large
artistic endeavors occur and the processes used to undertake them. Speciﬁc
examples have been established for the creation and production of the original score
of a ﬁlm [18] and the production of a theatre show [19]. The former study mapped
composition and recording tasks to systems engineering activities (e.g., dramatic
structure analysis, cue sheet creation, the description of main leads and their
composition in the arts, versus identiﬁcation of design objectives, system archi-
tecture, and detail design in an engineered system), as well as the organizational
structures of the two (e.g., arranger, composer, and orchestra in the arts versus
prime contractor, subcontractor, and system integrator in an engineered system),
and the different stakeholders that they need to (e.g., ﬁlm director, scriptwriter, the
audience in the arts versus customers, owners, users in an engineered system). The
latter study identiﬁed speciﬁc methods that were common to both the theatre
production and the development of an engineered system, which included, among
others, preference elicitation, leadership, teamwork, integrating different view-
points, and design reviews.
In this chapter, we explore how the arts can be leveraged to design effective
interfaces. In many cases, the interface is the only part of a system that is visible to
the user. At the interface level, most of the complexity of the interaction between a
user and a system occurs. We suggest that any interface contains a set of messages
416
L. Iandoli et al.

for the users as encoded by the designer and that the proper encoding of this
information is critical in enabling a satisfying level of interaction. In this sense,
interface design is a communicative act, and the parallel with artistic intent is
tantalizing: both artists and system designers package information to deliver
meaning. We suggest that the same dynamics are also in play when designing
internal system interfaces (that is, interfaces that facilitate machine-to-machine
interaction). This chapter shows that such meaning delivery can be more efﬁcient
and effective if the aesthetic value is incorporated in the interface design.
In the next section, we show that interface design is primarily about facilitating
users in processing abundant information, even more so in the presence of in-
creasing digitalization. We then present a theoretical framework based on
neuro-aesthetic research, evolutionary psychology, and art critique showing that
aesthetic judgment is a tool our mind has at its disposal to resolve complexity.
Finally, we provide some evidence that the aesthetic approach to interface design
can be successful through three case studies referring to well-known products and
systems.
Interface Design in the Age of Overabundant Information
Digital technologies provide tools and means that could enable us to apply infor-
mation and intelligence more efﬁciently and incorporate them into products and
services. Electronics and software are now accounting for the value of a car by
50%,1 while this was unimportant previously, with about 1% in the 50 s and 10% in
the 80 s. Electric and self-driving cars are probably the best when thinking about
increasing the current value.
An executive working for Domino’s, who was a guest speaker in one of our
classes, told us during the break that “people think [Domino’s is] a pizza company,
[when] in reality [it is] an information technology company.” He was alluding to
the sophisticated technology that Domino’s has to digitalize the experience of
ordering and delivering food and capitalizing on the vast amount of analytics that
pizza ordering makes available.
These are just two examples from quite traditional industries showing how
digitalization changes the production and fruition of goods and services in all
sectors of the economy. While digital technologies empower our experience in
many ways, this empowerment comes with a price: information overload.
Proper delivery and organization of digital information become so of the utmost
importance, not only for data scientists and app developers but virtually for any-
body that has to handle big data and needs to communicate digitally (and who does
not?). Anytime we deliver or collect information through some digital medium, the
relationship between what we want to communicate (content) and how to visually
1 https://www.statista.com/statistics/277931/automotive-electronics-cost-as-a-share-of-total-car-
cost-worldwide/
20
Towards a New Science of Interfaces: Bridging Art and Engineering
417

arrange this content (format) becomes even more crucial than in non-digital media.
Think, for instance, about the level of editorial curation that Instagram users adopt
when posting a picture.
Digital designers and companies are at work to help us deal with this increasing
ﬂow of information, and several approaches to create solutions have been proposed.
We classify these approaches into four broad categories, which can, of course, be
combined: information ﬁlters, persuasive technologies, aesthetics, and natural
language.
Information ﬁlters include algorithmic data-driven solutions that screen infor-
mation based on our preferences and choice behaviors. Filters trace individual and
collective behavior and can learn what we like from the digital traces we leave
when we use our digital devices in a connected mode. Collaborative ﬁltering is a
technique that exploits high-precision proﬁling techniques to infer what we like
from what “people like us” favor. Filters have the huge pro of making this infor-
mation screening layer completely frictionless for the users. However, ﬁlters also
come with critical cons:
i. ﬁrst, they may create information bubbles [20] and reduce exposure to diverse
information;
ii. second, they lack transparency: users are generally not aware nor of the
amount of personal information they share, neither that the information they
are fed with is highly personalized (for instance, not everybody knows that two
users using the same search keywords will see quite different results if they
google the same query); and
iii. third, more important for this chapter, ﬁlters favor passive and shallow con-
sumption of information that can impair critical thinking, reﬂection, and proper
understanding of content.
Another way humans cope with abundant information is through habits. Habits
are routine behavior that enacts standardized and almost unconscious responses to
recurring or similar stimuli. Habits can be extremely efﬁcient, but they suffer from
the same limitations of ﬁlters (suppression of diversity, passivity) plus another big
shortcoming: habits can induce addiction. Addictive behavior has been openly
pursued by digital designers following the paradigm of persuasive technologies [21]
when a clear understanding of the phenomenon is absent because of the regulators’
laziness on the matter. Resistance to changes can be explained by the huge eco-
nomic interests behind hooking up users to a certain app or platform. As we know
it, the digital economy is an economy of attention; the more users’ attention is
maintained, the more it can be monetized through ads or data selling. While the
persuasive design was born from making our devices and technologies more
user-friendly, it is only a few steps away from a manipulative and unethical design
that tricks users into habits patterns companies can easily monetize [22].
The third approach to help users to cope with information overload is aesthetics.
This trend is visible in the pursuit of simplicity in product design [23], leading to a
revival of minimalism and Bauhaus-inspired rational and clean design [24]. Surely,
418
L. Iandoli et al.

aesthetics has always been a differentiation factor in consumer products, but there is
more than that. In this chapter, we argue that we like a beautiful design not only
because it is aesthetically pleasing but because a rewarding aesthetic experience is
an effective way to deal with the increasing complexity of our lives in the digital
age.
The design of aesthetically pleasant products makes even more sense when most
of the information we process is originated from visual stimuli. We live in a visual
digital age. Digital technology makes the production and consumption of visual
content more affordable and widespread than ever, but it also generates the need to
digest torrents of data. For this reason, companies are increasing their efforts in
developing more effective interfaces, which are themselves visual. Relying on
visual information has its inconveniences as well. Unlike text, images are hard to
compress and search. While more capable and faster hardware and networks can
overcome the problem of transmitting visuals over the internet, the possibility to
compress an image is also a proxy for its complexity: the more complex a visual is,
the less it can be compressed. The difﬁculty of compressing an image is thus a
symptom that we lack effective technologies to understand images.
Companies are trying to overcome the limitation of visual interfaces with
voice-activated control based on natural language processing enabled by artiﬁcial
intelligence (AI). While these technologies have achieved maturity and reliability
levels that can be embedded in consumer technologies, we are only scratching the
surface of the complexity of language-based human–machine interaction. As Kuang
and Fabricant [22] notice, the level of interaction users can have with a
voice-activated assistant is rather shallow. We argue that this lies in that current
language processing can still not support the level of generative conversations
through which humans learn from each other. For instance, when we are looking for
something in a department store, the store clerks can proactively help us not only
with standard questions but also with a more sophisticated understanding of what
we really need or trying to say.
While we wait for AI’s substantial progress in this ﬁeld, we can still try to
develop a novel and better approach to the design of visual interfaces by leveraging
our brain's natural capability, the ability in this chapter we refer to with the
expression aesthetic reasoning. As we argue in the next section, most of our rea-
soning is, in fact, based on aesthetic judgment, and in particular, we focus on how
the production of aesthetic judgment relies on a fantastic capability to compress
meaning into highly communicative representations. In the next section, studies in
neuro-aesthetics show how this ability to convey sophisticated meaning with highly
communicative effectiveness is particularly present in artwork creation and fruition.
We argue that aesthetically optimized visual communication is an effective
solution to handle information overload and counteract two opposite and negative
trends that can be abundantly observed in the bad design of many interfaces:
overdesign and underdesign. Overdesign overshoots complexity by stufﬁng our
devices and lives with more features, layers, functionalities, structure, and gears,
while underdesign consists of trivializing the user experience by making it as
frictionless as possible but also meaningless and passive. The obvious solution is
20
Towards a New Science of Interfaces: Bridging Art and Engineering
419

that a design should be “as simple as possible, but not simpler,” as Einstein
thought. Following ideas developed in the science of complexity [25], we call this
ideal level of complexity effective complexity, and in the following section, we
show how aesthetic reasoning in design can help us achieve it.
The Proposed Framework
The design of effective interfaces requires a deep and thorough understanding of
personal user experience during the interaction with a device. Personal experience
is an essential source of learning for both individuals and designers, but it is
problematic, as experience contains abundant and ambiguous information. Besides,
while some aspects of experience can be assumed and even predicted, the inter-
action with a new device is likely to entail surprise elements.
Abundance
In 1983, the Italian writer Italo Calvino published a book [26] whose main character
is Mr. Palomar, a very acute observer who spends his time trying to describe every
detail, even the most microscopic, of his visual experiences. Here is an example of
how Mr. Palomar describes a lawn: “between a small plant and another there is
always a leafy sprout which barely emerges from the soil and has a white hair as its
root that is almost invisible; a minute ago we could have neglected it but soon we’ll
have to count it too. Meanwhile, two other threads that a little while ago seemed
just a little yellow here are now deﬁnitively withered and should be canceled from
the account. Then there are the fractions of blades of grass, cut in half, or levelled
to the ground, or torn, the leaves that have lost a lobe…” [26] [our translation].
Palomar feels the frustration that he cannot exhaust the description of the lawn in
any possible detail. At every moment, he must decide what to overlook, what to
highlight, how to group different elements into a broader category, but above all, he
must decide when to stop. In Palomar’s obsession, we see the signs of pathology:
the impossibility of deﬁning what is important and what is not. It turns out that it is
not information that helps us discriminate relevant events from irrelevant ones but
emotion.
The neuroscientist Antonio Damasio found Palomar’s obsession in a patient
(ﬁctitiously named Eliot), who had suffered brain damage from a previous surgery
[27]. Eliot had lost the ability to extract salient information from his experience: he
could not perform ordinary tasks such as deciding with which pen to write or which
restaurant to go to because an excess of analysis paralyzed him. The world for Eliot
was too informative. Damasio diagnosed that brain surgery had compromised
Eliot’s emotional brain circuitry, allowing humans to label events and weigh their
420
L. Iandoli et al.

importance based on their emotional salience. Since Eliot was impaired in his
ability to feel emotions, the world seemed ﬂat to him: every detail counted.
Eliot’s case reminds us of two common mistakes designers make when
designing an interface:
i. making information available to users in excess; and
ii. neglecting the emotional salience of the stimuli an interface provides.
Surprise
Consider a person groping around in a dark, unknown room. If the room layout and
the objects that it contains exhibit regularity, this blind person could make
assumptions and build, by trial and error, a mental model of the room from the data
of her/his experience. This example is suggested by Gombrich [28] to exemplify
how we look for regularities in our experience. He afﬁrms: “Without some initial
system, without a ﬁrst guess to which we can stick unless it is disproved, we could
indeed make no ‘sense’ of the milliards of ambiguous stimuli that reach us from our
environment. In order to learn, we must make mistakes, and the most fruitful
mistake which nature could have implanted in us would be the assumption of even
greater simplicities even greater than we are likely to meet with in this bewildering
world.” Evolution has wired this rule in our biology. We formulate hypotheses in
the form of simple, actionable rules (for example, move in a straight line) that can
be tested through experience and revised when needed.
This fruitful mistake is only a part of the story. The search for an effective
scheme requires another essential skill. The person in the darkroom, bumping into
an unexpected obstacle, is required to reconﬁgure her/his mental model. To do this,
she/he must accept an unexpected obstacle as inevitable. The person must be able to
deal with the confusion that the unexpected obstacle introduces in the expected
order: she/he must learn to recognize surprises and appreciate the potential impact
of surprises in learning. The information that an unexpected outcome brings to us to
see a new, more effective mental model [29]. Hekkert [30] models the trade-off
between ﬁnding regularities and managing surprises through two types of infor-
mation processing strategies. The ﬁrst type aims to search for novelty by collecting
the highest possible amount of diverse information that can be integrated into an
existing mental model. The second type aims to search for unity through an attempt
to integrate novel information into a coherent structure of relationships. For
instance, by continuously moving from one strategy to the opposite, a person
moving in the darkroom builds an effective mental image of the room itself.
This model can help us describe and understand how users interact with a novel
interface by an alternating search for novelty and unity. The model predicts that a
good interface provides a good balance between these two basic information needs.
20
Towards a New Science of Interfaces: Bridging Art and Engineering
421

The Usefulness of Art
Some insights for designing effective interfaces based on the information pro-
cessing model we have described in the previous section come from an apparently
quite unrelated ﬁeld: studies on perception and appreciation of art.
Art critically contributes to the development of basic human cognitive skills, and
it is the appearance of artistic imagery that seems to be associated with a deep
discontinuity in our biological and cognitive evolution. Our sapiens ancestors
created the paintings in the Lascaux cave between 15,000–7,000 BCE. Probably,
hunters and gatherers alike could ﬁnd that this ﬁgurative art offers nothing imme-
diately practical that continues today. On the other side, we can see the technical
futility of art. Our ancestors used visual representation to create a visible and
sharable outlet to their emerging ability to imagine reality [31], the ability to:
• invent a reality before living it, to anticipate a possible alternative reality;
• simulate a behavior, a situation, a reaction before experiencing it; and
• predict the consequences of their actions.
The usefulness of art is then primarily cognitive. Art helps us gain mastery of our
senses, through which we get the abundance of information and surprising moments
that come to exist when creative or insightful thoughts are translated into effective
forms that others could easily understand. According to Arnheim [32], art “man-
ages to organize a wealth of meanings and forms within a global structure that
clearly deﬁnes the place and function of every detail within the whole.”
Artworks have been analyzed from a variety of points of view. In addition to art
historians, philosophers, anthropologists, sociologists, and psychologists, cognitive
scientists, biologists, and neuroscientists have offered in recent years their contri-
bution as well. These scholars investigated works of art through new research
questions and new quantitative and experimental methods. The growth in this
cognitive interest toward art and art appreciation can be explained as follows:
i. ﬁrst, the art object is an artifact. It is created by someone with the precise
purpose of making accessible to others the artist's inner psychological world.
The Symphony n. 3, also known as the Eroica, was created by Beethoven with
the desire to express in musical form the ideal of social justice and freedom that
Napoleon, before becoming himself a tyrant, was inspiring to all Europe while
diffusing the ideals of the French Revolution through his military liberation
campaigns. We could analyze the Eroica in detail to understand how the author
translated his message into a form that is still a source of pleasure and meaning
for contemporary listeners; and
ii. second, the artistic artifact is open to both emotional and intellectual under-
standing. The shape of an artistic artifact is not that of a scientiﬁc dissertation or
that of an equation, which must be understood through logical inference and
specialized knowledge. The art object requires, above all, an emotional un-
derstanding. It pushes users’ cognitive systems to evaluate their experiences by
422
L. Iandoli et al.

activating both their emotional and intellectual resources. To enjoy Symphony
n.3, it is enough for listeners to abandon themselves to the musical ﬂow.
However, if they want to amplify their pleasure, they need to understand the
how and why of the creation and making of Eroica and possess some basic
understanding of music to appreciate that their feelings of joy are triggered by
an Allegro con Brio within E major. Today, neuroscientists, through neu-
roimaging technology, can get analytical and biological insights on how this
appreciation process unfolds.
The Aesthetic Processing of a Visual Interface
Understanding the emotional and intellectual skills activated in art appreciation
provides extremely important lessons for designers, particularly for designing
interfaces. Interfaces have to be capable of prompting users towards the activation
of their emotional markers to assign the right importance to the objects falling into
their perceptual domain such as symbols, knobs, buttons, viewers, indicators, and
messages, among others, and to combine their emotional reactions with an intel-
lectual understanding of the interface, in order to decide appropriate and effective
courses of action quickly. Similarly, a systems engineer or a systems architect can
resort to those emotional reactions and intellectual understanding to assess appro-
priate and effective courses of action related to the internal interfaces of a system.
Neuroscientists and psychologists have studied how observers explore an image
by searching patterns to reconcile their visual experience with their expectations
[33–35]. Leder, Belke [36] proposed an interesting model to capture the relation-
ship between aesthetic perception and reasoning. The model illustrates how tacit
and explicit understanding of an artistic experience is wowed to generate, after
several iterations, a rational judgment and an emotional reaction.
The tacit processing is automatic. It includes both a primary perceptual analysis
(based on the brain’s abilities to distinguish sensorial properties such as contrast,
symmetry, groups, etc., [33, 37–39]) and a primitive classiﬁcation of current
experience (based on previous experience). Evidence showed that repetition could
be used as a means to enhance familiarity and, therefore, as a source of affective
priming or preference [40–42].
Explicit processing involves high-level cultural skills acquired with experience.
It is strongly inﬂuenced by culture and context. For example, the classiﬁcation of a
painting and its appreciation are inﬂuenced by the knowledge of the school and the
period to which the artist belongs. According to Leder, Belke [36], “once a concept
of an artistic style is learned, the perceiver is then, based on a generalization of
style [43], able successfully to recognize new examples he has never seen before.
[…] Declarative art knowledge and experience improve these processes.”
The explicit recognition of perceived elements, the ability to assign linguistic
labels to them and to process sentences, is decisive for aesthetic understanding: “for
example, a rather naive perceiver might be satisﬁed with the recognition of the
20
Towards a New Science of Interfaces: Bridging Art and Engineering
423

train station in Monet’s La Gare St Lazare, because ‘he likes trains because they
remind him of a journey.’ More generally, Martindale [44] has explained those
processes which elicit pleasure and understanding by the number and diversity of
associations activated by a stimulus. In his terms, semantic associations and their
episodic memory associations reﬂect the understanding of an artwork” [36].
Through explicit understanding, observers develop a conscious strategy of reducing
variety and ambiguity, as they take into account only some elements enacted by the
ﬂow of experience.
It is important to emphasize that aesthetic processing is far from linear. The brain
develops many tacit parallel processes, makes many tacit hypotheses that it discards
before moving on to conscious processing, which must necessarily go on sequen-
tially, one pattern at a time, as two verbal argumentations cannot be made in
parallel.
There is a further decisive point. Intermediate aesthetic processing products are
constantly evaluated by an emotional state, which tells the observer whether he is
going in the right or wrong direction. Emotional evaluation is decisive in choosing
which direction to choose among many possible. Emotional understanding
impregnates the body and activates a network of cultural references, which deﬁne
an internal guide that indicates the right way, a focal point on the horizon towards
which to head, a tacit criterion to judge whether the path taken goes in the right
direction.
Emotional understanding works like the buoy in a regatta ﬁeld. The buoy is on
the horizon. Your boat is going upwind. There is no straight path towards the buoy
because the direction depends on the winds and the sea conditions. A skipper,
however, can evaluate the gain, and he establishes whether she/he is approaching or
moving away from the buoy. Accordingly, our emotions provide us with a compass
that helps us discern whether the tacit and the explicit processing of experience are
gaining or losing in understanding the stimulus.
The boat sailing upwind’s zig-zag path to reach the buoy also provides us with a
good metaphor of how our cognitive system tries to accomplish an effective
interpretation of experience. Our cognitive system is continually engaged in two
contrasting actions: on the one hand, it tries to test expectations with the infor-
mation that the sensory apparatus makes available (Searching for Novelty); on the
other hand, it develops new hypotheses to accommodate unexpected events
(Searching for Unity). This oscillating behavior aims to avoid both excessive
amounts of novelty, which would overwhelm and make it confusing and an excess
of unity, which would make us blind to novel and surprising information. Berlyne
[37] described this tendency “to prefer stimuli characterized by a moderate level of
complexity” for the ﬁrst time. He pointed out the presence of an association
between moderate complexity and a higher level of hedonic pleasure. The Amer-
ican designer used this idea in design studies in the Most Advanced, Yet Acceptable
(MAYA) model [45] and proved its efﬁcacy in explaining products' aesthetic
appreciation.
424
L. Iandoli et al.

Thoughts
Psychologists and neuroscientists could create links between aesthetic appreciation
and interface design. Below are some of these insights as derived from the proposed
theoretical framework described in this chapter:
• Complexity, it is relative to the task that the interface helps to solve. Complexity
cannot be hidden or neglected. Aesthetic reasoning, both in design and in
fruition, is a useful tool to resolve the complexity;
• Information overload, users need more performance but do not want more
information. They are already overwhelmed by abundant information coming
from various sources, and providing them with even more information will not
solve the complexity issue. Instead, users need effective compression of infor-
mation into constructs they can easily understand and operate. Artists can teach
us ways to achieve such effective compression through the creation of elegant
and meaningful forms;
• Emotional salience and surprise, they are critical ﬁlters that help users navigate
abundant information. Novel interfaces, as works of art, are appreciated emo-
tionally as much as cognitively. The emotional reaction is typically faster and
can bias our logical understanding in negative or positive ways; and
• When dealing with novel information, such as a new interface, users simulta-
neously look for novelty and unity. A good interface must support this dual
process and facilitate both types of information processing.
In the following section, we report three case studies of effective uses of these
principles in product and system design.
Combining Art and Engineering in Interface Design:
Some Examples
We showcase in this section the bridging of art and engineering in engineering with
three application examples that broadly cover different types of interfaces in
engineering systems. In the ﬁrst one, we present effective user interfaces for which
aesthetics played a major role in driving design decisions. In the second one, we
show how aesthetically pleasant visualizations can yield high effectiveness in
handling and interpreting vast amounts of data. In the third one, we assess the
aesthetic properties of effective network topologies that deﬁne different ways to
connect machines and facilitate communication between them.
20
Towards a New Science of Interfaces: Bridging Art and Engineering
425

User Interface
Minimalist design is today very popular. From Apple’s best-selling products to
Marie Kondo’s suggestions on how to make our life simpler and more rewarding
through the Japanese art of decluttering and organizing, it is easy to observe a trend
among consumers toward the pursuit of clean, simple, and yet easy to use, high
performing products. This trend, however, has deeper roots than the designs created
by Steve Jobs and Jonathan Ive. It dates back to the Bauhaus, an inﬂuential design
school and community founded in Germany in 1919 by Walter Gropius.
The Bauhaus had the ambitious program of combining craft and art with mass
production to create extremely functional yet accessible and simple products for a
large consumer base, which could be easily manufactured on a large scale. This
search for simplicity and affordability was certainly induced by the dire economic
crisis that hit Europe and the US between World War 1 and the 1929 ﬁnancial
crisis. However, it was also a reaction to the excess of ornate pre-war design based
on Art Nouveau as well as of the inﬂuence of new philosophical movements such as
Russian constructivism. Bauhaus’ students and artists privileged functionality by
pursuing at the same time aesthetic value based on subtraction and restrain. For this
reason, the Bauhaus faculty included masters of abstract art such as Paul Klee and
Wassily Kandinsky, who taught courses on the theory of colors and shape.
Principles of abstraction and subtraction of details through minimalist design
found one of their more exemplary application in the work of Dieter Rams, a
German designer who served for 40 years, from 1955 to 1995, as Chief Design
Ofﬁcer at Braun, the most important German appliance company of the time. His
design philosophy is summarized in his book The Ten Principles of Good Design.
Rams’ most representative design works include the SK4 radio-disc player, the T3
portable radio, the ET66 pocket calculator, and the Viltsoe 606 shelving system
(Figs. 20.1, 20.2, 20.3 and 20.4).
All these products share Rams’ effort of achieving immediacy and transparency
in the relationship between the object and the users. Similarly to abstract artists who
stripped down from their paintings all visual details that would distract the viewers
from the understanding of the subject, Rams focuses on plain, clean, and colorless
design, in which a few key elements stand out to engage the users’ attention to
facilitate the execution of simple movements to operate the device. This element is
manifested in the browsing wheels in the pocket radio, an element that probably
inﬂuenced Apple's I-pod design. In the ET66 pocket calculator, buttons are grouped
by subtle different colors and locations to indicate the variety of functions (input,
operation, or status). In the SK4, the innovative use of a plexiglass cover provides
users with a 360- degree view of all the device controls, organized in functional
clusters to facilitate navigation.
It is evident from Figs. 20.1, 20.2, 20.3 and 20.4 that these solutions have passed
the test of time, which is a sign of elegance [9, 46, 47]. Rams’ minimalist interfaces
and aesthetics end up facilitating users’ information processing by alleviating the
fatigue of navigating complex visual arrangements and guiding the users towards
the intuitive use of a device. They represent an effective example of how aesthetic
426
L. Iandoli et al.

principles invented in visual arts can be adapted to favor functional aesthetics that
can help users of a product navigate complexity and interact effectively with new
technology.
Information Visualization: Google’s Interface
Every day 3.5 billion web searches are done with the Google search engine. It
means that around 40,000 people look at the Google search page every second.
Google’s logo has been the most viewed image in the world of all time.
Fig. 20.1 Portable
calculator. Adapted from
Wikimedia Commons, the
free media repository, https://
commons.wikimedia.org/w/
index.php?curid=17904398
Fig. 20.2 SK400 radio and
disc player. Adapted from
Wikimedia Commons, the
free media repository, https://
commons.wikimedia.org/w/
index.php?curid=4777254
20
Towards a New Science of Interfaces: Bridging Art and Engineering
427

The puzzling aspect of this image (i.e., Google’s logo) is that it looks
under-designed at a ﬁrst inspection. The webpage does everything to avoid
imposing its presence: it only shows the company logo at the center of the screen
and an empty bar where the user can write the object of desire or curiosity. It is a
two-way conversation: Google asks the user, Tell me what you want, the user
Fig. 20.3 Viltsoe furniture.
Adapted from Wikimedia
Commons, the free media
repository, https://commons.
wikimedia.org/w/index.php?
curid=11075707
Fig. 20.4 Braun T3
transistor radio designed by
Dieter Rams and Ulm School
of Design (object 2012/30/1)
428
L. Iandoli et al.

answers, Here is my request, and then the search engine, after responding to the
request effectively and efﬁciently, seeks your feedback directly (by inquiry Are you
satisﬁed?) and indirectly (by counting the links the user clicks and likes). Nothing
in the webpage interferes with this user experience.
The interface is the triumph of the Power of the center, a visual composition
strategy wisely used by the artists [48]. Visual centers are sources of forces driving
the eyes’ movements during the exploration of the whole image. Since visual
centers are the starting and arrival points of visual exploration, they act as structural
elements that give order and coherence to the visual experience (e.g., like pillars
and vault ribs of a Gothic church). For the visual centers to act effectively, it is
essential that they stand out from the image background and become the focus of
our attention, very much like the spotlight in a theater focuses on an actor in a
scene. Hence, the strength of a visual center must not be diminished by the other
composition elements.
In the case of Google’s interface, we see all these principles at work. The visual
centers are two: the Google logo and the search bar. Two poles, the ﬁrst one is
offering a search service (the logo), and the second one is asking for it (the search
bar). The rest is just a white surface, a void canvas that has much in common with
the void used by Zen artists [49]. That is a free space that the imagination can ﬁll at
will and that the user’s gaze can use as background while concentrating on the
object of her/his research. It is this void that supports concentration and dialogue
between the user and the service through the interface. The history of Google’s
interface is interesting and has been well documented. Google.com was registered
on September 15, 1997. The ﬁrst logo of 1998 showcased primary color (still in use
today; another example of the test of time) and exhibited an exclamation point,
perhaps inspired by its competitor, Yahoo!
In 1999, Google transitioned to a simpliﬁed search box with a choice that was
the opposite of the one adopted by the major portals at that time, full of content
(e.g., online magazines and white pages directories). The designer, Ruth Kedar,
remembered that it was important to design something user-friendly both on the
homepage and in the logo to overcome psychological barriers in using an internet
interface [50]. The choice of primary colors (blue, yellow, and red) was inspired by
the same desire for simplicity and friendliness, keeping the letter l in green and
isolated, as a witness of relationships that other colors and forms created between
them. According to Kedar, only the letter G appears in capital letters to instill a
feeling that the company is solid and serious while communicating playfulness
using vivid different colors [50].
There have been many attempts to review the image of the site to emphasize the
introduction of new services (TABS, 2001; FROOGLE, 2002; IGOOGLE 2005;
GOOGLE SUGGEST 2008; Sidebar and GOOGLE INSTANT, 2010). However,
they were all short-lived. In 2015, a new, simpler logo was created with a geometric
font and a white and neat homepage. The original inspiration remained unchanged,
however.
The history of Google’s interface exempliﬁes the importance of simultaneously
addressing the functionality, usability, and psychological relationships between the
20
Towards a New Science of Interfaces: Bridging Art and Engineering
429

user and the system in interface design. Furthermore, it shows the great difﬁculty of
achieving effective simplicity, a key tenet of elegance in engineering [12]: the result
of eliminating all that can be annoying noise and focusing only on what is essential.
Connecting Machines
Consider an arbitrary number of systems or components that need to communicate
between them; that is, they need to exchange information to provide certain
functionality. In systems architecture, the terms functional and/or physical archi-
tectures are often used to refer to the communication structure. In the ﬁeld of
networks, the connection of different components is called topology.
There are several ways in which these systems or components could be con-
nected to facilitate such communication. Yet, there are a few fundamental structures
or topologies that have been particularly effective in coping with different con-
nectivity challenges. These are the Mesh, Ring, Star, and Bus topologies, which are
shown diagrammatically in Graphical Abstract (where boxes represent systems or
components and lines represent connections between them; the solid circle in the
Bus topology represents the bus). In the Mesh topology, components are connected
pairwise to communicate directly and individually with all the other components. In
the Ring topology, components are only connected to two other components.
Communication with the rest of the components is achieved by relaying the mes-
sages in a daisy chain approach. In the Star topology, another component is added
as a hub, to which all components are connected and control the communication
between them. In the Bus topology, all components share a single communication
channel and either collectively control the communication through it, or one or
more of the components are tasked with control.
It has been hypothesized that elegant engineering solutions seem to be partic-
ularly effective [9]. Empirical research indicates that, at least, there seems to be a
correlation between the effective complexity of system architectures and how ele-
gant engineers perceive them [12]. We know that these four topologies have
become widely employed because they are particularly effective in dealing with
different networks' challenges. Can we also say that they are elegant or, at least,
exhibit aesthetic features of beauty? Furthermore, could those aesthetic properties
indicate such effectiveness? We use the architecting strategies from master painters
presented in [14] to answer these questions.
First, one can observe that all four topologies exhibit symmetry. Furthermore,
the symmetry is recursive, as the topologies can be repeatedly folded. In fact,
symmetry is maintained regardless of the number of systems or components that are
connected in the network at a given time. Second, the Star and Bus topologies make
use of the Power of the Center. They use a central element (the hub and the bus,
respectively) to reduce the complexity of the point-to-point connectivity in the
Mesh topology. Visually, the Star and Bus topologies look much cleaner, as fewer
lines are used to represent the network. The Bus topology goes, in fact, a step
farther than the Star topology since the hub disappears and is substituted by just a
430
L. Iandoli et al.

point. The Ring topology takes simplicity a step further and makes that point (the
bus) disappear. Third, as with most architectural representations, the four topologies
make use of Subtract Details to focus on the structure of the connectivity,
abstracting out speciﬁc details about the implementation of the communication.
Therefore, we conclude that the four topologies indeed exhibit (visual) features that
are considered to convey beauty (i.e., are aesthetically pleasant) in paintings as well
as in engineering solutions.
We move now to answering the second question and use the aesthetic features to
infer some performance aspects of the different topologies:
• Symmetry enables the scalability of the solution. Note that, in the four topolo-
gies, scalability is achieved by fulﬁlling simple rules. In Mesh topology, add one
component and connect them to existing ones. In Star and Bus topologies, add
one component and connect it to the hub or bus, respectively. In the Ring
topology, add one component in between two existing ones. Hence, we can state
that the four topologies are scalable to handle problems of different sizes (albeit
with varying levels of scalability, as discussed later);
• Of the four topologies, the increase in visual messiness as the network's size
grows highest when using the Mesh topology. We can infer that probably,
scaling up the Mesh topology requires the biggest effort; hence, scalability of the
Mesh topology is limited by the complexity of the cross-connections;
• Of the four topologies, scaling the Ring topology is the only one that requires
breaking the structure to arrive at the new one; a connection between two
components needs to be split to put the new component in between. Artistically,
the Ring topology is the only one that requires erasing a part of the drawing,
whereas the other topologies only need the addition of new straws. We infer
from this that there may be disruptions associated with scaling, substituting,
upgrading, etc. the Ring topology, which will not be present in the other
topologies;
• The power of the center emphasizes the prominence of an element in the
solution. In engineering terms, there is a centralization of certain functionalities.
Therefore, we can predict in this case potential issues of capacity when scaling
up the solution, as well as disruptions being caused by vulnerabilities, upgrades,
failure, or maintenance tasks of the central element, for example, which will not
occur in the Mesh topology due to, precisely, its decentralization in communi-
cation. Between the Star and the Bus topologies, these problems may be more
critical in the Star topology due to the larger prominence of the hub (higher
complexity, since it includes active functionality) with respect to the bus (just a
passive conveyor);
• The extreme simplicity of the Ring topology informs as well about potential
vulnerabilities due to the extreme dependencies created between the different
components to maintain that simplicity, as well as scalability issues due to the
distance between the components.
20
Towards a New Science of Interfaces: Bridging Art and Engineering
431

• The subtraction of details allows for the topologies to be instantiated with a large
variety of communication protocols, which make the solutions generic and
appealing to solve a large class of problems;
Indeed, (accurate) prediction of the different topologies' performance requires
mathematical analyses that consider in-depth characterizations of the elements that
form the network. However, as shown above, we contend that several of the main
tenets and features of the topologies can already be inferred by simply assessing the
nature of its aesthetic aspects.
Conclusion: Towards a New Humanism for the Science
of Interfaces
In this chapter, we have shown how aesthetic considerations in the interface design
are not only a way to create technology that is more pleasing or less intimidating
but can help in crafting tools that facilitate users to process complex information
and use technology in an effective and efﬁcient way.
Insights and ﬁndings from diverse disciplines, including neuroscience, evolu-
tionary psychology, and design science, converge towards the idea that reasoning in
aesthetic terms or reasoning aesthetically is a key cognitive tool that evolution has
forged to augment our ability to elaborate complex information. Studies on the
perception of beauty show that artists have exploited this ability for centuries to
communicate complex meaning by packaging information into effective visual
forms. Research in Neuro-aesthetics helps us open the black box of artistic per-
ception and learn key lessons on how we process visual inputs and the impact of
this processing on higher-level cognitive processes such as learning and
decision-making.
The chapter also illustrates how aesthetic reasoning has a strong emotional
component. While research in psychology has largely investigated the role of
emotions in reasoning and decision-making, the emotional discourse has often been
neglected in the debate on interface design, until recently and with few exceptions.
The perspective to interface design presented in this chapter calls for a
humanistic approach to design that brings together humanities and engineering,
very much like studies on linear perspective in the Renaissance ﬂourished through
the integration of art with mathematics. Such integration must be based on a deep
and accurate understanding of how the visual organization of information on an
interface impacts our perception as well as our ability to understand and design
knowledge representations that can drive our behavior towards meaningful as well
as efﬁcient courses of action. Interesting insights and suggestions are offered by
studies on visual complexity and information compression. One tool our brain
leverages to deal with complex and abundant information is effective compression
techniques. The analogy with the studies on Renaissance artists' perspectives is
once again enlightening: Perspective is, in fact, a geometric technique to compress
432
L. Iandoli et al.

space into a 2-dimensional representation that is also remarkably friendly to the
optical illusions and distortions that the human eye exploits to process complex
visual information.
We argue that our brain activates similar aesthetic heuristics to process com-
plexity also in other forms and information formats that are not visual but that we
can visualize to understand them better, as we showed in the case of visual engi-
neering models. The identiﬁcation and analysis of these heuristics could be not only
a fertile research ﬁeld but also one that will necessarily require collaboration among
various disciplines from opposite sides of the humanities-STEM (science, tech-
nology, engineering, and mathematics) continuum.
Core Messages
• Aesthetic features can be used to design interfaces that exhibit an ideal
level of complexity.
• Aesthetic features can be used to infer the core characteristics of system
architectures.
• Studies on art can offer valuable insights to understand how information
can be effectively packaged.
• The pursue of the elegance provides a promising direction for coping with
the increasing complexity of systems.
References
1. SEBoK (2020) Introduction to systems engineering [cited 2020 14 July 2020]
2. Salado A (2018) An elemental decomposition of systems engineering. In: 2018 IEEE
international systems engineering symposium (ISSE)
3. INCOSE (2015) Systems engineering handbook: a guide for system life cycle processes and
activities, version 4.0, ed. 2015. Sons, Hoboken
4. Ryschkewitsch M, Shaible D, Larson WJ (2009) The art and science of systems engineering.
Syst Res Forum 03(02):81–100
5. Jansma PAT (2012) Exploring the art and science of systems engineering. In: IEEE aerospace
conference. Big Sky, MT, USA, (2012)
6. Muirhead BK, Thomas D (2010) The art and science of systems engineering tightly coupled
programs. SAE Int J Passeng Cars Electron Electr Syst 3(2), 117–130 (2010)
7. McDermott T, Folds D (2019) Creating well-rounded and whole-brain engineers. In: 2019
international symposium on systems engineering (ISSE) (2019)
8. McDermott T, Salado A (2019) A perspective on systems thinking, architecting, and art. Syst
Res Behav Sci 36(5):648–655
9. Grifﬁn MD (2010) How do we ﬁx systems engineering? In: 61st International Astronautical
Congress. Prague, Czech Republic (2010)
10. Frosch RA (1969) A new look at systems engineering. IEEE Spectrum, pp 24–28 (1969)
11. Ramachandran VS (2011) The tell-tale brain: a neuroscientist's quest for what makes us
human. Norton & Company, New York
20
Towards a New Science of Interfaces: Bridging Art and Engineering
433

12. Iandoli L et al (2018) Elegance as complexity reduction in systems design. Complexity
2018:10
13. Maier MW, Rechtin E (2009) The art of system architecting. CRC Press (2009)
14. Salado A, Iandoli L, Zollo G (2016) Painting systems: from art to systems architecting. In:
INCOSE international symposium 26(1):773–787
15. McDermott T, Salado A (2017) Improving the systems thinking skills of the systems architect
via aesthetic interpretation of art. In: INCOSE international symposium, 27(1): 1340–1354
16. McDermott T, Salado A (2018) Art and architecture: effectively communicating models of
systems. In: 2018 Annual IEEE international systems conference (SysCon). Vancouver,
Canada
17. Iandoli L, Salado A, Zollo G (2020) The role of aesthetic reasoning in knowledge
management: the case of elegant systems architecture design. Knowl Manag Res Pract 18:93–
109
18. Salado A, Salado C (2015) Systems engineering practices exhibited in the creation of a ﬁlm
original score. In: INCOSE international symposium 25(1), 1147–1158
19. Palma G, Mesmer B, Guerin A (2019) Relating theater and systems engineering: experiences
of a systems engineer in theater courses. In: ASEE annual conference and exposition. Tampa,
FL
20. Pariser E (2011) The ﬁlter bubble: How the new personalized web is changing what we read
and how we think. Penguin
21. Fogg BJ (2002) Persuasive technology: using computers to change what we think and do.
Ubiquity (2)
22. Kuang C, Fabricant R (2019) User friendly: how the hidden rules of design are changing the
way we live, work, and play. MCD (2019)
23. Maeda J (2006) The laws of simplicity. MIT Press
24. Rams D (2009) Dieter Rams: ten principles for good design
25. Gell-Mann M, Lloyd S (2010) Effective complexity. Murray Gell-Mann: Selected papers,
pp 391–402
26. Calvino I, Palomar (1983) Einaudi
27. Damasio A (2006) Descartes’ error. Random House
28. Gombrich EH (1960) Art and illusion. a study of psychology of pictorial representation.
Phaidon
29. Schank R, Abelson RP (1995) Knowledge and memory: the real story. In: Wyer RS
(ed) Knowledge and memory: the real story. Psychology Press, New York, pp 1–85
30. Hekkert P (2006) Design aesthertics: principles of pleasure in design. Psychology Science
48:157
31. Harari YN (2012) From animals into gods: a brief history of humankind. CreateSpace (2012)
32. Arnheim R (1965) Art and visual perception: a pshychology of the creative eye. Univ. of
Calfornia Press (1965)
33. Zeki S (1999) Art and the brain. J Conscious 66:76–96
34. Pihko E et al (2011) Experiencing art: the inﬂuence of expertise and painting abstraction level.
Front Hum Neurosci 5:94
35. Berghman M, Hekkert P (2017) Towards a uniﬁed model of aestheric pleasure in design. New
Ideas Psychol 47:136–144
36. Leder H et al (2004) A model of aestheric appreciation and aesthetic judgments. Br J Psychol
95:489–508
37. Berlyne DE (1970) Novelty, complexity, and hedonic value. Percept Psychophys 8:279–286
38. Ramachandran VS, Hirstein W (1999) The science of art. J Consciousness 6:15–51
39. Solso RL (1994) Cognition and the visual arts. MIT Press, Cambridge
40. Kunst-Wilson WR, Zajonc RB (1980) Affective discrimination stimuli that cannot be
recognized. Science 207:557–558
41. Zajonc RB (1968) Attitudinal effects of mere exposure. J Personal Soc Psychol Monog Suppl
9:1–27
434
L. Iandoli et al.

42. Zajonc RB (1984) On the primacy of affect. Am Psychol 39:117–123
43. Hartley J, Homa D (1981) Abstraction of stylistic concepts. J Experim Psychol Learn
Memory Cognit 7: 33–46
44. Martindale C (1984) The pleasures of thought: a theory of cognitive hedonics. J Mind Behav
5:49–80
45. Loewy R (1951) Never leave well enough alone. Simon and Schuster
46. Madni AM (2013) Elegant system design: creative fusion of simplicity and power. Syst Eng
15:347–354
47. Salado A, Nilchiani R (2013) Using Maslow’s hierarchy of needs to deﬁne elegance in system
architecture. Procedia Comput Sci 16:927–936
48. Arnheim R (1983) The power of the center: a study of composition in the visual arts.
University of California Press, California
49. Cheng F (1991) Vide et plein, le langage pictural chinois. Editions du Seuil (1991)
50. Saar Y (2020) The Israeli woman behind the google logo [cited 2020 4 Aug 2020]; Available
from: https://www.haaretz.com/1.5053655
Luca Iandoli is Associate Dean for Global and Online Programs
at St. John’s University, College of Professional Studies, and an
Associate Professor in the Division of Computer Science,
Mathematics, and Science. Dr. Iandoli has served as an Associate
Professor at the University of Naples Federico II (Italy) and as a
Visiting Research Professor at Stevens Institute of Technology.
He was a Fulbright Visiting Scholar at the Center for Collective
Intelligence of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He has
published over 100 papers on the analysis of interﬁrm collabo-
ration and collective intelligence in online networks. Dr. Iandoli’s
current research focus is on how online interaction and collabo-
ration might be leveraged to help groups, organizations, com-
munities,
and
companies
aggregate
and
store
dispersed
knowledge, increase creativity, innovation, and problem-solving,
and support large-scale, collective intelligence.
Alejandro Salado is an associate professor in the Department of
Systems and Industrial Engineering at the University of Arizona. He
conducts research in problem formulation, design of veriﬁcation and
validation strategies, model-based systems engineering, and engi-
neering education. Before joining academia, Dr. Salado spent over
ten years in the space industry, where he held positions as a systems
engineer, chief architectand chief systems engineer in manned and
unmanned space systems of up to $1B in development cost. He has
published over 100 technical papers, and his research has received
federal funding from the NWSC, NAVAIR, NSF, and ONR. He is a
recipient of the NSF CAREER Award and the International Fulbright
Science and Technology Award. Dr. Salado holds a Ph.D. in systems
engineering from the Stevens Institute of Technology and master's
degrees in electrical and computer engineering, electronics engi-
neering, space systems engineering, and project management.
20
Towards a New Science of Interfaces: Bridging Art and Engineering
435

Giuseppe Zollo is a Full Professor of Management Engineering
at the University of Naples Federico II. He has been Visiting
Research Associate at the Northeastern University of Boston, MA
(USA). He published over two hundred articles on small inno-
vative companies, regional innovation, skills management, fuzzy
logic, agent simulation, organizational learning, complex adap-
tive systems, serving as a member of the editorial board of several
academic journals. The research activity has received several
international awards. The current research focus is related to the
analysis of cognitive issues in the management of complex situ-
ations. He coordinated several research projects, among which
the most signiﬁcant concerned the development of assessment
systems of individual competencies in large organizations.
436
L. Iandoli et al.

21
Art as Metacognitive Tool for Critical
Thinking in Engineering
Patricia Caratozzolo
“My business experience revealed life to me in many aspects.
that I might otherwise have missed. In it one sees tragedy,
nobility,
meanness, high aims, low aims, great ideals, no ideals…
The fabric of existence weaves itself whole.
You cannot set an art off in the corner and hope for it to have
vitality, reality and substance.
A substantial art comes directly out of the heart of experience of
life and thinking about life and living life. My work in music
helped my business and work in business helped my music.”
Charles Ives
Summary
The study hypothesis developed in this chapter is that the exercise of art criticism
and aesthetic judgment encourages the emergence of such speciﬁc temperament
dispositions necessary for a substantial increase in critical thinking skills in
engineering students. The metacognitive tools designed in this work considered
that criticality requires sensitivity to problems and skills to redeﬁne approaches
beyond subjection to functional ﬁxation, a frequent cognitive bias of engineering
students. Some of the competencies analyzed belong to the category of soft
skills: such as critical and creative thinking or the ability to embrace
contradictions and take risks; while others belong to the category of digital
P. Caratozzolo (&)
Institute for the Future of Education, Tecnologico de Monterrey,
Av. Carlos Lazo 100, 01389 Alvaro Obregon, Mexico City, Mexico
e-mail: pcaratozzolo@tec.mx
P. Caratozzolo
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education
and Research Network (USERN), Mexico City, Mexico
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh (eds.), Thinking, Integrated Science 7,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04075-7_21
437

literacy skills: the ability to understand, interpret or evaluate information that is
presented in fragmented, branched or visual-graphic formats. This chapter shows
that the moments of aesthetic reﬂection and artistic experience in the engineering
classroom, including theater, literature, ﬁne arts, modern dance, and classical
music, are highly effective because the reﬂection on an artistic artifact goes
beyond the concept of utilitarianism and functionality. The advantage of
inserting ﬂexible artistic spots within the rigid scientiﬁc space is that the artistic
artifact, when intervened by the students, awakens in them a state of
metacognitive self-awareness that favors criticality.
Graphical Abstract
438
P. Caratozzolo

Keywords
Creativity  Critical thinking  Educational innovation  Higher education 
Metacognitive  Self-awareness  Soft skills in engineering  STEAM
QR Code
Scanning the QR code directs you to the word cloud of the chapter that is made up
of the words we discussed throughout the whole book in relation to the chapter’s
keyword, which is intentionally not included in the word cloud. Find the keyword
and put it in place in the puzzle according to the clues provided in chapter 36. The
mystery hidden in the puzzle is the quote of THINKING: Bioengineering of Science
and Art.
Introduction
My artistic work contributes to my engineering and engineering work enriches my
art. This could be a personal interpretation of the quote from the famous American
musician and composer Charles Ives. And it has also been the leitmotif in the life of
the author as a teacher and researcher in educational innovation: How to get young
engineering students to nurture their critical thinking with tools derived from cre-
ative thinking? Or in a nutshell: How to develop “creativity in criticality”?
It has been shown that critical thinking skills can predict important educational
outcomes but that a high level of motivation is related to academic achievement at a
comparable level. In fact, many studies found that motivation contributes to the
prediction of achievement even above ability [1, 2].
After a series of experimental studies conducted with engineering students over
the past ﬁve years, the author has found that interventions aimed at jointly
improving critical thinking and creative thinking are the most successful in in-
creasing student academic performance. These assumptions could show that a
creativity-criticality tandem precipitates emotional, social, and technological
changes that in turn drive the development of new ideas, inventions, and
21
Art as Metacognitive Tool for Critical Thinking in Engineering
439

technologies. The proposal of this project was to introduce a “creativity in criti-
cality” approach in the ﬁelds of study of engineering programs, to catalyze inno-
vations that advance those ﬁelds holistically: the practice of artistic experiences and
aesthetic judgment produces high levels of intrinsic motivation that enable looking
at the old ideas in new ways, allows individuals to take risks necessary to advance
disruptive thoughts, introduce completely new concepts into their proposals, and
ﬁnally, integrate diverse concepts in new, unsuspected ways. A glimpse of what
will be presented in this chapter can be seen in Graphical Abstract.
Currently, the majority of students in engineering programs belong mainly to
Generation Z. Therefore, it is of paramount importance to explore innovative
approaches that strengthen the competencies, skills, and attitudes necessary for their
successful insertion into the workforce, especially those related to criticality,
decision-making, originality, initiative, leadership and emotional intelligence [3].
In their latest reports on the future of education and work, the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development, OECD, and the World Economic Forum,
WEF, coincide in emphasizing the importance of introducing the concepts of
upskilling and reskilling in undergraduate curricular programs in colleges and
universities. The origin of these recommendations emerged a few years ago when
the notorious gap began to be observed between, on the one hand, the required level
of skills and abilities necessary in the new jobs of the Fourth Industrial Revolution
and, on the other hand, the low performance of students in exit evaluations reported
by international accreditation agencies [4, 5]. In the ﬁve years prior to the
COVID-19 pandemic (2014–2019), a dichotomy can be seen in the way of facing
the development of these competencies: some researchers did it from a strategic
pedagogical approach in the classroom, with the incorporation of educational in-
novation techniques; while others opted for the incorporation of cutting-edge
technological tools [6–9]. During the years 2020 and 2021, the drastic -and
inevitable- change to digital platforms unleashed an avalanche effect that ﬂooded
the teaching–learning space with too many technological tools, causing the opposite
effect to the one sought: they hindered the metacognitive self-awareness of the
students and neglected the importance of the evaluation of the process of acqui-
sition of skills and competences [10, 11]. At the end of 2021, the researchers
concluded that the academic use of cutting-edge technologies (webinars, applica-
tions, prerecorded videos) was not enough to ensure intellectual engagement. In
fact, the most recent studies conﬁrm that students are not motivated to work as a
team, nor can they reach states of deep reﬂection when collaborating on digital
platforms [12, 13]. The present chapter considers several questions on the way to
engage engineering students by cultivating certain temperament dispositions instead
of technical abilities:
• How to include strategies and experiences for developing creativity in engi-
neering subjects with a high level of speciﬁcity?
• What is the best design of a transversal approach that considers those speciﬁc
critical thinking dispositions (the ability to think open-mindedly with intellectual
empathy) that effectively improve students' motivation?
440
P. Caratozzolo

• How to incorporate experiences that develop critical and creative thinking skills
in the classroom regardless of the technological tools that serve as educational
platforms?
Generation Z and Higher Education
Generation Z students (date of birth between 1995 and 2010) differ in some respects
from Millennials, both in terms of learning styles and the way they communicate in
writing and orally [14, 15]. Despite this, a review of the literature seems to indicate
that the taxonomies that describe cognitive processes can reliably model the
behavior of both cohorts. However, there does not appear to be a consensus on how
to effectively develop the creativity and criticality skills of Generation Z students,
based solely on the uneven performance they may have had during their high school
years [16].
To characterize and evaluate the oral and written communication skills mani-
fested by Generation Z students in engineering courses, it is possible to consider the
results of two studies carried out by the author, during 2020 and 2021 [17, 18]:
• Regarding critical reading, both studies determined that the individuals in the
sample presented high levels of difﬁculty in understanding argumentative texts
with high-ranking vocabulary;
• Regarding academic writing, almost all students in both studies admitted difﬁ-
culties in maintaining discursive coherence when writing long essays, as well as
making a large number of spelling and grammatical errors; and
• Regarding the ability to express ideas in oral presentations, a high percentage of
individuals in both studies recognized difﬁculties in maintaining concentration
and expressing ideas ﬂuently.
The results presented in both studies highlighted the enormous challenge of
strengthening critical thinking when higher levels of critical reading and writing
skills have not been solidly developed.
This chapter aims to rethink the problem that arises from a false belief ingrained
in recent years: using cutting-edge technology is equivalent to a successful teach-
ing–learning process. On the contrary, the young people of Generation Z begin to
manifest difﬁculties in communicating effectively and show, despite their skill in
the use of information technologies, increasingly poor performance in tasks that
require: active listening, interpretation of messages presented from perspectives
outside their environment, construction of knowledge from segmented or incom-
plete information, and demonstration of empathy in digital media. The international
reports related to the jobs of the future show a clear trend towards very profound
changes related to the competencies, skills, and attitudes required of the next
engineers [4, 5]. Due to this, the Fourth Industrial Revolution is driving, in turn,
numerous changes in higher education, which are translated into the new
21
Art as Metacognitive Tool for Critical Thinking in Engineering
441

framework of Education 4.0. The following model is a possible way to develop the
creativity and criticality skills required in this framework so that future engineers
can face challenging situations without being seduced by the fallacy of technology
immediacy to replace cognitive effort.
Creativity in Criticality Approach
The development and design of a new theoretical framework for a joint approach on
creative thinking and critical thinking was a consequence of the strong trend of the
last decade, on the successful incorporation of art in the curriculum of science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) programs, especially in engi-
neering [19]. The creativity and criticality models will be described separately in the
following subsections. Then an explicit, balanced, and superimposed incorporation
of both types of thinking will be carried out in a joint approach.
Creativity Model
For people to fully develop their capacity for creative thinking, their mind must be
attentive not only to the synergy between multiple intrinsic stimuli but also to be
aware that their reasoning is shaped and inﬂuenced by what happens in the envi-
ronment and also by what other close individuals think. In the case of students, in
the environment of their learning process in a classroom together with other peers
and led by an instructor, it is very convenient to deﬁne a creative model such as the
one proposed by Csikszentmihalyi [20, 21]. Csikszentmihalyi’s model considers the
interaction of three elements:
(i)
A person is who wants to show their ideas;
(ii)
The ﬁeld is the symbolic knowledge shared by each society; and
(iii)
A domain is a group of individuals who decide which ideas can be included
in the ﬁeld.
According to this model (Fig. 21.1), it is evident that the cognitive process of
individuals is no longer limited only to their internal mental processes but to
multiple and intricate external relationships.
Criticality Model
Before adhering to some form of knowledge, a critical thinker reﬂectively analyzes
the foundations that underpin ideas and carefully observe the conclusions that
emerge from each decision-making [22]. It is possible to use this deﬁnition by John
Dewey to develop a theoretical framework that relates the skills that characterize the
442
P. Caratozzolo

cognitive process of a critical thinker and the conditions that must be established in
the classroom to ensure that students will reason reﬂectively and be able to face
their tendency to engage in biased thoughts (the false idols of Francis Bacon),
which lead them to draw invalid conclusions. The idols that make up the framework
of the criticality model are:
• the tribe (superstitions and myths of human nature);
• the market (prejudices and misunderstandings due to the language);
• the cavern (traumas and frustrations of each individual); and
• the theater (trends and general opinion of the society) [23].
For each cohort of individuals, the particular idols of the criticality model
(market, theater, tribe, and cavern) are manifested in an intimately interconnected
way with the elements of the creativity model (person, domain, ﬁeld). This inter-
connection between models, exclusive to Generation Z individuals, is described in
Table 21.1.
Fig. 21.1 Creativity in criticality, the FLOW model
21
Art as Metacognitive Tool for Critical Thinking in Engineering
443

Thinking Modalities and Metacognition
In order to integrate the separate models of creativity and criticality into a single
“creativity in criticality” framework and to understand this approach from the
perspective of cognitive thinking modalities (according to Jerome Bruner), the
deﬁnitions of each modality were revisited [24, 25].
The
critical
thinking
model
responds
to
the
characteristics
of
the
logical-scientiﬁc modality (style of thought in a formal mathematical system of
conceptualization and categorization of ideas). The creative thinking model
responds to the artistic-narrative modality (style of thinking in a formal system of
verbal and non-verbal language of perception, imagination, and inventiveness).
An interesting aspect of the concept of thinking modalities is the possibility that
shifting can occur in any direction, that is, from creative to critical thinking and vice
versa. However, many studies suggest that shifting from critical to creative thinking
has been systematically undervalued in academia. There is a false perception that
students in STEM programs should only use the principles of criticality rather than
creativity [26, 27]. It was, therefore, necessary for the new framework to explicitly
include the shifting mode (the ability to switch between thinking modalities) in a
bidirectional way in order to empower both modes of thought. The study also
considered the stiffness of the shifting mode according to the magnitude of two
cognitive biases:
i. Premature closure: cognitive bias that causes the student to not consider rea-
sonable alternatives after an initial diagnosis of a problem is made; and
ii. Cognitive ﬁxation: cognitive bias that causes the student to evaluate the func-
tionality of an object only in the way it is traditionally used.
A representation of the cognitive process from the point of view of the “cre-
ativity in criticality” approach is illustrated in Fig. 21.2 and elsewhere (see Fig. 2 in
[18]). It can be seen that this approach goes beyond the internal mental process of
the individual (cavern), also showing the external path of the FLOW (the presence
of the domain and the ﬁeld), the reluctances that hinder the thinking ﬂuency, and
the biases that decrease the ﬂexibility and devalue the ideas and products of the
process.
As part of the study, it was determined which were the key elements of the new
approach to “creativity in criticality” that:
Table 21.1 Comparison between criticality and creativity models
Criticality model
Who is who?
Creativity model
Cavern
The student
Person
Tribe
The professor and classmates
Domain
Market
Cutting-edge knowledge and technologies
Field
Theater
Current educational trends
444
P. Caratozzolo

i. ﬁrst, soften the stiffness caused by the two biases mentioned above (cognitive
ﬁxation and premature closure);
ii. second, weaken the typical reluctances of the model (myths, superstitions,
prejudices, frustrations, traumas, and tendencies); and
iii. ﬁnally, improve the learning experience of the young people of Generation Z
Three concepts were identiﬁed, which were very useful to design content and
didactic experiences within the approach:
i. The Metacognitive Dimension of Knowledge allows students to become aware
of their own knowledge acquisition process, ensures their intellectual com-
mitment, and rewards their cognitive effort;
ii. The Scaffolding System allows students to advance conﬁdently through the
different stages of the cognitive process; and
iii. The Zone of Proximate Development (ZPD) allows students to reach the level
of potential intellectual development, not only through the internal (individual)
process but accelerated through the activity of the external (social) FLOW
[28, 29].
Fig. 21.2 Methodology design
21
Art as Metacognitive Tool for Critical Thinking in Engineering
445

As mentioned earlier, Fig. 2 in another author’s publication [18] provides a
graphic representation of the combination between two taxonomies: that of the
dimension of cognition by Bloom; and that of the dimension of knowledge by
Anderson and Krathwohl. The notions of cognitive efforts and metacognitive efforts
are represented by the heights of the steps and the respective “vector” directions of
movement in each taxonomy. The objective of learning corresponding to each
subject can be “translated” into the number of steps involved in that representation.
This will allow the students to explain the levels of effort and involvement that they
will have to develop throughout the course. The correct interpretation of this rep-
resentation can allow the course instructor to know at what level of development
(cognitive and metacognitive) each student is and provide timely individual feed-
back on the weaknesses and strengths evidenced in each instance of the teaching–
learning experiences [30].
Introducing Art Experiences in Engineering Programs
The exercise of art criticism and aesthetic judgment -through memorable experi-
ences in the classroom- can promote the appearance of those speciﬁc dispositions of
temperament necessary for the development of creativity and criticality of the
young people of Generation Z. For the experiences in a classroom to be memorable
-taking into account the creativity in criticality model- it is necessary for all students
to feel actively involved and committed to activities designed so that their creative
processes FLOW in the group [31].
The chosen methodological design can be represented as in Fig. 21.2, which
shows a possible selection of instruments used as pre-tests and post-tests, the
creative experiences (treatment) that allow the FLOW of ideas among the partici-
pants, and the moments of evaluation, through performance measurement and
statistical comparison. The most successful and creative experiences often include
ﬁne art analysis sessions and the appreciation and critique of artistic masterpieces,
including selected works of architecture, artistic designs, and sculpture. These types
of experiences expose engineering students to concepts that they would hardly
know in a class on STEM topics: appropriation, deconstruction, decontextualiza-
tion, redeﬁnition, and dislocation of artifacts, allowing them to leave the position of
spectators and become involved as creators [32]. By encouraging them not to wait
passively for an explanation about the art object, they are trained in their ability to
understand, translate and encode symbolic information and to elaborate their own
concepts and constructions through abstract reasoning [33]. The following are some
of the characteristics that a designer should consider for an experience to be
memorable:
• The experiences must be carried out with total concentration with the conscious
objective of provoking creativity in criticality (it is not entertainment);
446
P. Caratozzolo

• Students must be aware that they are part of a creative group and that the results
of the experience will be collective (individual effort and motivation are
required);
• The process should include continuous evaluation and feedback to ensure
gradual progress of students at their own pace (scaffolding and ZPD concepts);
and
• The instructor should serve as a close guide and provide accurate and timely
feedback on performance through assertive evaluation of individual and group
achievements.
The memorable experiences that students share with their instructor and class-
mates can be considered real training for their future attitude towards lifelong
learning. Holistic learning experiences allow to strengthen criticality competence on
speciﬁc topics and at the same time enrich resilience skills to solve ill-deﬁned
problems creatively.
How Metacognitive Tools Foster Creativity in Criticality
For metacognitive tools -included in the design of the experiences of art criticism
and aesthetic judgment- to function holistically in a model of creativity in criticality,
they must consider two concepts: “speciﬁcity of the domain,” by Robert Ennis; and
“Torrance framework,” by Paul Torrance.
The “speciﬁcity of the domain” concept ensures the validity of the creativity
model in any engineering program [34]. The adaptation of Ennis's original theory to
the model requires that the design of the experiences must include: the enhancement
of previous knowledge so that students can conﬁdently advance on the designed
scaffolding; the assurance of the transfer between domains; and ﬁnally, the com-
mitment to a moderate or strong degree of speciﬁcity.
The Torrance Test of Creativity Thinking, TTCT, was designed by Torrance in
the 60 s and is still an instrument with high predictive validity; however, it needs to
be implemented by a certiﬁed instructor and requires interpretation by experts,
which makes it unsuitable to be implemented by any teacher in a classroom. Instead
of using the TTCT, a valid option is to take advantage of the basic concept of the
Torrance framework for evaluating the impact of artistic experiences in the class-
room [35, 36]. In this way, TTCT tools can apply to the design of both the
experiences and the assessment.
Due to the complex nature of creativity (and the strong inﬂuence of perceptions,
emotions, and beliefs on the cognitive process), it is not possible to measure cre-
ativity in a single step but, only indirectly, through the assessment of four creative
thinking indicators, which are:
i. ﬂuency: How many and how signiﬁcant are the ideas generated?;
ii. originality: How many of those ideas were uncommon or unusual?;
21
Art as Metacognitive Tool for Critical Thinking in Engineering
447

iii. ﬂexibility: From how many points of view and perspectives did these ideas
emerge?; and
iv. elaboration: How many additional details went with each idea?
The following paragraphs describe ﬁve examples of experiences using the
criticality creativity model: treatments, instrumentation, metacognitive tools, justi-
ﬁcations, learning objectives, and a brief description of the procedures.
Artistic Experience #1: Paintings
Resource Example (Painting): “Never morning wore to evening, but some heart did
break” [37]
Critical Thinking Skill addressed: Attentiveness towards different situations.
Intervention Procedure: Students critically interpret the image and write their own
versions using the style of art critics. Students complete a questionnaire based on the
TTCT test: Can you guess what happens in the picture? Can you imagine the imme-
diate or long-term consequences of what happens? What's the most unlikely hypothesis
you can think of? What is the most extraordinary denouement you can imagine?
Metacognitive tools: asking and answering questions about artworks using Art Crit
Cards is making meaningful connections between what we see and what we
experience. When we tell or write (through debates, dialogue seminars, opinion
blogs) what we experienced and felt when we observed an artifact, we understand
the object and articulate in language what otherwise remains only muddled, frag-
mented, and disconnected.
Cognitive tools: engineering reasoning requires settling questions to solve complex
problems. It is imperative that engineering students reﬂect on the importance of:
i. ﬁrstly, a good elaboration of the questions, using the appropriate language,
glossary, and terminology; and
ii. secondly, of the need for reformulation, reinterpretation, and reworking, if the
interlocutor so requires.
They can divide a question into sub-questions to understand and encompass all
possible answers, including those untested and potentially risky, embracing
divergent perspectives.
Artistic Experience #2: Censorships
Resource Example (Essay): “A Modest Proposal” [38]
Critical Thinking Skill addressed: Broad Perspective View.
448
P. Caratozzolo

Intervention Procedure: Students carry out a brief investigation on the historical
context of the work and on the type of publications in the written press that were
used to express political ideas. A classroom discussion can also be held to reﬂect on
the pre-television, radio, and internet media to inﬂuence public opinion and how
techniques such as sarcasm and satire were used to circumvent the censorship of
authoritarian governments.
Metacognitive tools: Each literary text works by presenting the reader with different
points of view. On many occasions, for example, the writer resorts to the use of
metaphors, double meaning, parables, and even sarcasm and fantasy to deceive the
censoring apparatus. The ability to read between the lines will allow the reader to
detect fallacies and inconsistencies.
Cognitive tools: engineering students are able to take speciﬁc positions with a broad
vision and evaluate the possible consequences and implications of situations.
Artistic Experience #3: Surrealisms
Resource Example (Artwork): “Fluxkit” [39]
Critical Thinking Skill addressed: Taking risks.
Intervention Procedure: Students take a virtual tour to learn about the artistic
concerns of the society of the time; they work individually completing worksheets
following the method of art criticism and aesthetic judgment; then the group divide
into teams, carry out a brief role-play activity, and record interviews for a docu-
mentary with their cell phones; ﬁnally, they can build a “Fluxkit” and present it to
the group as a model to be featured in an art gallery.
Metacognitive tools: complexity derives from the presence of contradictions, and
artistic manifestations such as Surrealism embraced irreconcilable elements
exploring the absurd and the extravagant. The artistic interpretation of techniques
such as collage and grattage challenges the natural impulse to eliminate contra-
dictions and allow to deal with ambiguity and uncertainty.
Cognitive tools: engineering students must develop their ability to face uncertainty
in order to solve a complex problem without rendering false conditions and
incomplete descriptions. The complexity of the problems sometimes unleashes a
very frequent cognitive bias in engineering students, Premature Closure, which
prevents them from persevering when facing obstacles.
Artistic Experience #4: Music
Resource Example (Short Story) (Music): “Concrete Music” [40] and “Musique
Concrète movement” [41, 42]
21
Art as Metacognitive Tool for Critical Thinking in Engineering
449

Critical Thinking Skill addressed: Embracing Contradictions
Intervention Procedure: Students do a critical reading of the short story and then
analyze the responses to a questionnaire. Students can also participate in a song-
writing contest with their own short songs that they created using software for
electronic music composition.
Metacognitive tools: the human brain is hardwired for pattern recognition, which
makes it more difﬁcult to render the world new or unfamiliar. Musique Concrete
movement used lines, geometric and tessellated patterns to bafﬂe viewers and
convey feelings of instability.
Cognitive tools: engineering students must be able to bypass the brain’s pattern
recognition tendency to reevaluate the meaning of certain data and recognize the
possible implications and consequences (technical, social, ethical) in multi-layered
(grey) contexts.
Artistic Experience #5: Photographs
Resource Example (Graphic Report)(Novel): “An American Exodus: A Record of
Human Erosion” [43] and “The Grapes of Wrath” [44].
Critical Thinking Skill addressed: Connecting, Synthesizing, Transforming.
Intervention Procedure: Students read excerpts from the novel and carried out an
investigation on the social concerns of that time; then, they divide into teams and
carry out a role-playing activity in which they record testimonial scenes for a
documentary video with their cell phones; ﬁnally, students practice creative writing
and compare the stories that emerged from the exercise.
Metacognitive tools: perception is a reciprocal action. An artist can control the
image but not the reaction to it. “The image burns, blaze in ﬂames and consumes
us” (Georges Didi-Huberman). Photographs can be used as a testimony of political,
social, and cultural events or a means to lie or manipulate. The interpretive analysis
of Photographic Art is a powerful tool against ``image illiteracy'' and prevents us
from the risks of a bad or incomplete interpretation.
Cognitive tools: on many occasions, engineering students must conclude the
interpretation of graphics, images, and simulation results. Although they are sup-
posed to infer only what the data support and check the internal and external
consistencies of those inferences, they risk making hasty interpretations by not
clearly identifying the assumptions that allowed them to reach those conclusions.
450
P. Caratozzolo

Conclusion
The Fourth Industrial Revolution requires current engineers to perform highly not
only in the technological ﬁeld but also in the skills of the twenty-ﬁrst century,
especially with regard to critical thinking and creativity. The models and tools
developed in this research considered that criticality requires sensitivity to problems
and skills to redeﬁne approaches beyond submission to functional ﬁxation by
including metacognitive awareness in learning processes. The proposal to use
concepts and models from the artistic and cultural world allows the design of
memorable experiences and spaces for reﬂection with activities borrowed from
theater, literature, ﬁne arts, modern dance, and classical music. In this way, even in
the rigid scientiﬁc space of the engineering classroom, students develop their cre-
ative potential through genuine metacognitive self-awareness. Finally, the creativity
in criticality model is a valid approach to enrich the speciﬁc temperament dispo-
sitions currently required by Generation Z engineering students.
Core Messages
• The use of cognitive and metacognitive tools allows spaces for reﬂection
to develop creativity skills.
• Metacognition, or thinking about thinking, is a multidimensional set of
general rather than domain-speciﬁc skills.
• Living memorable experiences promotes lifelong metacognitive self-
awareness in Generation Z students.
• Training students in creativity will allow them to face problems they have
not learned successfully.
Acknowledgements The author would like to acknowledge the technical support of the Institute
for the Future of Education, Tecnologico de Monterrey, Mexico, in producing this work. The
author appreciates the work of art designers Diana Mariani (Figures 21.1 and 21.2) and Patricia
Rodríguez (Graphical Abstract). Parts of this submission were presented at two international
conferences: Frontiers in Education International Conference, FIE, in October 2020, Uppsala,
Sweden (https://doi.org/10.1109/FIE44824.2020.9273994); and IEEE Global Engineering Edu-
cation Conference, EDUCON, in April 2021, Berlin, Germany (https://doi.org/10.1109/
EDUCON46332.2021.9454110). Part of this work was carried out within the ﬁnancial support
of Novus Grant with PEP no. PHHT085-21ZZNV016, Institute for the Future of Education,
Tecnologico de Monterrey, Mexico.
21
Art as Metacognitive Tool for Critical Thinking in Engineering
451

References
1. Linnenbrink EA (2005) The dilemma of performance-approach goals: the use of multiple goal
contexts to promote students’ motivation and learning. J Educ Psychol 97(2):197
2. Lai ER, Viering M (2012) Assessing 21st century skills: integrating research ﬁndings.
Pearson 25–29
3. Mohr KA, Mohr ES (2017) Understanding generation Z students to promote a contemporary
learning environment. J Empow Teach Excell 1(1):9
4. Howells K (2018) The future of education and skills: education 2030: the future we want
5. World Economic Forum Boston Consulting Group (BCG) (2018) Towards a reskilling
revolution: a future of jobs for all. World Economic Forum, Geneva, Switzerland
6. Gardenfors P, Johansson P (Eds.) (2014) Cognition, education, and communication
technology. Routledge
7. Bensley DA, Spero RA (2014) Improving critical thinking skills and metacognitive
monitoring through direct infusion. Thinking Skills Creativ 12:55–68
8. Hernandez-de-Menendez M, Morales-Menendez R (2019) Technological innovations and
practices in engineering education: a review. Int J Interact Des Manuf 13:713–728. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s12008-019-00550-1
9. Caratozzolo P, Alvarez-Delgado A, Hosseini S (2019) Strengthening critical thinking in
engineering students. Int J Interact Des Manuf (IJIDeM) 13(3):995–1012
10. Crawford J (2020) COVID-19: 20 countries’ higher education intra-period digital pedagogy
responses. J Appl Learn 3. https://doi.org/10.37074/jalt.2020.3.1.7
11. World Economic Forum Boston Consulting Group (2020) Insight Report Challenges and
Opportunities in the Post-COVID-19 World
12. Caratozzolo P, Friesel A, Jan Randewijk P, Navarro-Duran D (2021) Virtual globalization: an
experience for engineering students in the education 4.0 framework. In: ASEE virtual annual
conference
13. Membrillo-Hernández J, García-García R, Lara-Prieto V (2021) From the classroom to home:
experiences on the sudden transformation of face-to-face bioengineering courses to a ﬂexible
digital model due to the 2020 health contingency. In: Advances in intelligent systems and
computing. Springer Science and Business Media Deutschland GmbH, pp 488–494
14. Seemiller C, Grace M (2016) Generation Z goes to college. Wiley
15. Cilliers, E. J. (2017). The challenge of teaching generation Z. PEOPLE: Int J Soc Sci 3(1)
16. Mohr KAJ, Mohr ES (2017) Understanding generation Z students to promote a contemporary
learning environment. J Empower Teach Excell 1:84–94 . https://doi.org/10.15142/T3M05T
17. Caratozzolo P, Alvarez-Delgado A, Hosseini S (2020) Perspectives on the use of serious-
storytelling for creative thinking awareness in engineering. In: Proceedings—Frontiers in
Education Conference, FIE. https://doi.org/10.1109/FIE44824.2020.9273994
18. Caratozzolo P, Alvarez-Delgado A, Hosseini S (2021) Creativity in criticality: tools for
generation Z students in STEM. In: 2021 IEEE global engineering education conference
(EDUCON). IEEE, pp 591–598
19. Watson AD, Watson GH (2013) Transitioning STEM to STEAM: reformation of engineering
education. J Qual Particip 36(3):1–5
20. Csikszentmihalyi M (1996) Flow and the psychology of discovery and invention, vol 56,
p 107. Harper Collins, New York
21. Lattuca LR, Knight DB, Ro HK, Novoselich BJ (2017) Supporting the development of
engineers’ interdisciplinary competence. J Eng Educ 106(1):71–97
22. Caratozzolo P, Alvarez-Delgado A, Hosseini S (2019) Fostering speciﬁc dispositions of
Critical Thinking for student engagement in engineering. In: 2019 IEEE Global Engineering
Education Conference (EDUCON). IEEE, Apr 2019, pp 221–226
23. Dewey J (1997) How we think. Courier Corporation
24. Simonton DK (2000) Creativity: cognitive, personal, developmental, and social aspects. Am
Psychol 55(1):151
452
P. Caratozzolo

25. Bruner JS (2009) Actual minds, possible worlds. Harvard University Press
26. Spuzic S, Narayanan R, Abhary K, Adriansen HK, Pignata S, Uzunovic F, Guang X (2016)
The synergy of creativity and critical thinking in engineering design: the role of
interdisciplinary augmentation and the ﬁne arts. Technol Soc 45:1–7
27. Clemente V, Vieira R, Tschimmel K (2016) A learning toolkit to promote creative and critical
thinking in product design and development through Design Thinking. In: 2016 2nd
International conference of the portuguese society for engineering education (CISPEE). IEEE,
Oct 2016, pp 1–6
28. Vygotsky LS (2012) Thought and language. MIT Press
29. Mercer N (2000) Words and minds: how we use language to think together. Psychology Press
30. Rawat KJ, Qazi, W, Hamid S (2012) Creativity and education. Acad Res Int 2(2), 264
31. Egan K (2017) Developing creativity and imagination by accumulating lots of useless
knowledge. In: Creative dimensions of teaching and learning in the 21st century. Sense
Publishers, pp 37–45
32. Arnheim R (1965) Art and visual perception: a psychology of the creative eye. University of
California Press
33. Dewey J (2005) Art as experience. Penguin
34. Ennis RH (2018) Critical thinking across the curriculum: a vision. Topoi 37(1):165–184
35. Kim KH (2006) Can we trust creativity tests? A review of the torrance tests of creative
thinking (TTCT). Creat Res J 18(1):3–14
36. Lin YS (2011) Fostering creativity through education—a conceptual framework of creative
pedagogy. Creat Educ 2(03):149
37. Langley W. Never morning wore to evening, but some heart did break. https://artuk.org/
discover/artworks/never-morning-wore-to-evening-but-some-heart-did-break-33805/search/
keyword:never-morning-wore-to-evening-but-some-heart-did-break-3075841
38. Preston O (2018) A Modest Proposal. LitCharts. LitCharts LLC
39. Higgins H (2002) Fluxus experience. Univ of California Press
40. Zimmer ATG (2019) The look in the short stories of Amparo Dávila
41. Schaeffer P (2012) In search of a concrete music, vol 15. University of California Press
42. Magnus C (2006). Evolutionary musique concrete. In: Workshops on applications of
evolutionary computation, pp. 688–695. Springer, Berlin, Apr 2006
43. Museum O, Taylor PS (1969) An American exodus: a record of human erosion in the thirties.
Published for the Oakland Museum [by] Yale University Press, New Haven
44. Steinbeck J (2017) The harvest gypsies: on the road to the grapes of Wrath. Heyday. ORIM
Patricia Caratozzolo was born in Buenos Aires, Argentina. She
received the Ph.D. degree from the Universitat Politécnica de
Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain, in 2003. Since 2005 she has been a
member of the faculty of Tecnológico de Monterrey, Mexico,
where she is an Associate Researcher at the Institute for the
Future of Education. She leads projects in Educational Innova-
tion, Critical Thinking, Cognitive Flexibility, and the develop-
ment of Soft Skills in Engineering. Dr. Caratozzolo is a Senior
Member of IEEE and member of the IEEE Industry Applications
Society (IAS), Power and Energy Society (PES), Women in
Engineering
(WIE),
Integrated
Science
Association
(ISA),
Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network (USERN),
and VP of the International Association of Continuing Engi-
neering Education (IACEE).
21
Art as Metacognitive Tool for Critical Thinking in Engineering
453

22
Dimensions of Thinking, Reflecting
and Knowing Through Design
Harah Chon
“Applied to the matter before us: we can learn thinking only if
we radically unlearn what thinking has been traditionally. To
do that, we must at the same time come to know it.”
Martin Heidegger (Heidegger (1968) What is Called Thinking?
Harper & Row Publishers, New York)
Summary
Design is deﬁned by complexity, in both its practical and theoretical applications,
and positioned to address the developmental, situational, technological, and
societal challenges of the external world. The study and practice of design require
ways to select, frame, understand, address, and tackle the increasingly complex
systems and contexts of design. This emphasizes the intangible attributes of design
residing in thinking, reﬂecting, and knowing. Design capabilities have evolved
with the development and engagement of various tools and frameworks to produce
deeper reﬂections, meaningful contributions, and discourses of design. This
chapter reviews the parameters of thinking-in-design, the reﬂective activities
leading towards the design-of-practice, and the actions and applications resulting
from knowledge-through-design. The shift of design, from traditional practice to
systems-based thinking approaches, is further discussed against the dimensions of
thinking, reﬂecting, and knowing in design.
H. Chon (&)
School of Design Communication, LASALLE College of the Arts, 1 McNally Street,
Singapore 187940, Singapore
e-mail: harah.chon@lasalle.edu.sg; h.chon@csm.arts.ac.uk
Central Saint Martins, University of the Arts London, London, United Kingdom
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Singapore, Singapore
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh (eds.), Thinking, Integrated Science 7,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04075-7_22
455

The dimensions of design.
Keywords
Design discourse  Design knowledge  Design theory  Design thinking 
Reﬂexive design
QR Code
Scanning the QR code directs you to the word cloud of the chapter that is made up
of the words we discussed throughout the whole book in relation to the chapter’s
keyword, which is intentionally not included in the word cloud. Find the keyword
and put it in place in the puzzle according to the clues provided in Chap. 36. The
mystery hidden in the puzzle is the quote of THINKING: Bioengineering of Science
and Art.
456
H. Chon

Introduction
Design has extended beyond the boundaries of traditional practice, inﬂuencing new
ways of thinking and interacting to inform social change, support collaborative
experience, and engage in human knowing. As global challenges present more
complexities within selected contexts of study, the discipline of design has evolved
to produce a more powerful and meaningful impact. Design is no longer deﬁned as
a series of methods or means for problem-solving but articulated through the
processes reasoning, producing its own ways of thinking and reﬂecting to generate
the transferrable knowledge appropriate for adapting to the forces of change in a
complex world. Each phase of design’s progression has redeﬁned the values pro-
duced, reevaluated the meaning of experience, and recontextualized the frameworks
through which we position design perspectives. This calls for a new way of uti-
lizing, examining, and deﬁning the impact of design through discussions of
thinking-in-design, the production of design-of-practice through design reﬂexivity,
and ways in which knowledge-through-design inform future cultures of design.
The discipline of design often deals with continually changing ambiguity and
ill-deﬁned parameters of issues, where the cognitive practice of thinking becomes a
means for clarifying and shaping its systems and contexts of study. Through
thinking, as a way of framing and contextualizing design, a reﬂective practice
emerges to reify and critically evaluate emerging ideas, tools, processes, and out-
comes. These modes of design contribute to design knowing, where knowledge
establishes a basis to adapt, inform, alter, and shift perspectives for future actions.
Design is exploratory in its ability to produce multiple frames and perspectives
of a given situation, relying on iterative developments to question, probe, and assess
its impact. As the tools, methods, and processes of design become more accessible
and relevant beyond the scope of the design profession, there is growing importance
in further deﬁning the tacit and intangible skills of design. The formal applications
of design, in theory and practice, require a deeper understanding and articulation of
the broad skills and knowledge needed to address the increasing complexity of
design issues.
The Study of Design Against a Growing Complexity
Design has evolved across its neighboring disciplines to establish its applications
and shift its studies from craft to interaction, experience-based, service-oriented,
human-centered, and design thinking. No longer an insular discipline and practice,
designers now have to work across multiple levels and adapt to the roles of the
analyst to synthesist, generalist, and critic [1], developing the ability to dissect
problem spaces through systematic processes and frameworks [2]. Figure 22.1
illustrates the positioning of the designer against complex design environments. The
designer, as an individual actor or working within a team of actors, must learn to
22
Dimensions of Thinking, Reflecting and Knowing Through Design
457

identify and understand problems within a given context of design to move through
the various roles and stages of design.
Team effort is central to design, where designers assume the roles of generalist
and leader to engage multiple perspectives and disciplines to realize a solution.
Within such working groups, processes are required to solve the complex problems
that are often layered within co-design approaches to synthesize initial ideas and
solutions across a problem space. The criticality of a design lies in the ability to
change frames when viewing a particular phenomenon, easing the cognitive load of
design through divergent and convergent phases [2]. In the role of the critic, the
designer is able to reﬂect on the entire design process and reassess the original
problem space to evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed outcome or solution.
Design is, therefore, a practice of thinking that produces actions through reﬂective
practices leading to the formulation of knowledge.
The challenging new contexts of design demand improved developments and
tools to deal with changing situations and technologies, often relying on collabo-
ration to build upon knowledge and methods for positive change. Simon’s deﬁni-
tion [3] of design emphasizes the function of devising a process, through courses of
actions, to effect change from existing to preferred situations. This requires
designers to establish clear frames and perspectives of action, particularly when
dealing with the growing complexities of design problems where design relies on
interdisciplinary knowledge to serve multiple needs against the widening scope of
design impact [4]. Norman [5] supports the interdisciplinary conditions of design
by arguing for the integration of a deep appreciation of people and the social
Fig. 22.1 The roles of design [1]
458
H. Chon

sciences and a deep understanding of science, mathematics, and engineering.
Knowledge of peripheral areas, ﬁelds, and disciplines will add value to modern
design, equipping designers with the ability to tackle root causes rather than the
symptoms [6]. This reﬂects the call to move design from a focus on
problem-solving activities towards a systems-oriented approach in thinking.
As technologies continue to undergo rapid change, design plays an increasingly
important role in responding through collaborative approaches, processes, and
frameworks. Methods and systems need to evolve to develop deeper understandings
through observation and contextual framing, supporting the iterative cycles of de-
sign. Design cannot be limited to the scope of problem-solving but should be
discussed as a practice beginning with the posing of strategic questions to establish
propositions within a problem space that can be clariﬁed through intentional and
systematic exploration, experimentation, and experience. The experiential nature of
design supports the processes of thinking, reﬂecting, and knowing to transfer
thought into action, establishing and developing a deeper understanding of design
phenomena.
Thinking-in-Design
Design is a discipline of realizing solutions and impacting change by exploring
problem and solution spaces through facilitation of communication across the
problem-relevant environment [7]. The role of thinking, as a form of design practice
explicated as design thinking, can be described as a cognitive style of
problem-solving, a general theory of design, or an organizational resource to drive
innovation [8]. This section discusses perspectives of thinking-in-design, beginning
with the implication that design is a signiﬁcant factor in shaping human experience,
with the plurality of design as being applicable to different problems and subject
matters in the reconsideration of problems and solutions [9]. Thinking-in-design is
presented through a review of shared philosophies, changing perspectives,
modalities, and implications.
The perspectives of thinking-in-design provide an overview of thinking as
framing and understanding, synthesizing, rationalizing, communicating and artic-
ulating, and reasoning and processing (Table 22.1). According to Buchanan [9],
designers conceive subject matters in two ways on two levels as part of a process of
discovery. Kolko [10] formalizes the synthesis process of design through an
abductive sensemaking process, which often results in the emergence of themes and
paradigms that shape future design activities. Lindberg et al. [7] outline a normative
approach to design that extends mono-disciplinary rationales into more ﬂexible
meta-rationales to build strategies upon a common ground. Sevaldson [11] argues
that design thinking is inseparable from design practice within processes of syn-
thesis, where complex information is organized through tentative, iterative, and
heuristic development. Design produces different ways of thinking that are fun-
damentally different from other disciplines, producing its own methods of reasoning
22
Dimensions of Thinking, Reflecting and Knowing Through Design
459

Table 22.1 Perspectives of thinking in design
Wicked and indeterminate design problems [9]
General level
The designer holds a broad view of design and the scope of
application
Particular level
The designer begins with a quasi-subject matter, as an
indeterminate subject
Philosophies of synthesis [10]
Sensemaking
An action-oriented process to integrate experiences into
understanding
Abduction
An inference or intuition that is directly aided and assisted by
personal experience
Descriptive-analytic design [7]
Paraphrasing
Formulate and re-formulate the design question or task
Restriction-free thinking
Avoid personal judgments and develop shared judgments
Meta-rationale
Diversity should be encouraged to move in maximized domains
of competence
Conceptual frameworks of systems oriented design [11]
Design thinking and
design practice
Design thinking is inseparable from design practice
Synthesis is the central aspect of design thinking
Visual thinking and visual
practice
Heuristic process of visualization, descriptive and generative
diagramming
Communicates information through participation and collective
production
Systems thinking and
systems practice
A general framework to deal with complexity
Ability to address multiple aspects and generate holistic and
synergistic responses
4 ways of design reasoning [12]
Deduction
Shifting knowledge, patterns of relationships and observations
from cause to effect
Induction
Discovering patterns in relationships through observation to
infer and propose predictions
Normal abduction
Conventional problem-solving to clarify the problem scope
Design abduction
Deﬁning key concepts and clarifying the problem space by
employing a design process
Systems view of creative design thinking [13]
Creativity in design
Process of developing individual perception through human
capabilities
Creativity in a systems
view
Produces a network of interactions to form new functions and
innovations
Modes of thought [14]
Construction
Process of interacting with the surrounding environment
Discrimination
Process of thinking about the world to formulate interpretations
Resolution
Process of making sense of the experience of phenomena to
resolve problems
Assimilation
Process of devising action through an approximation of truths
460
H. Chon

and logic to identify patterns for action [12]. The cognitive orientation of design
allows for descriptions, interpretations, and shifts in perspectives to be communi-
cated [13]. Buchanan’s [14] modes of thought build on the logic of pattern deﬁ-
nition to suggest that systems fall into ways of interacting, thinking about the world,
engaging phenomena to make sense of experience, and guiding research and
practical action.
Modes of thought shape human experience through creative inquiry by con-
ceptualizing and clarifying the systems framing design complexity [14]. It is
through the function of thinking that the study and practice of design are pushed
beyond problem-solving to radically shift thinking-in-design as an important pre-
condition to addressing the complexities of problem spaces [12]. Designers are
tasked with intuitively and deliberately shaping design situations, positioning, and
repositioning problems by identifying the views of participants and the issues
concerning them to develop relevance for further exploration and development [9].
This involves a high degree of thinking, producing a form of creativity that is
innately and fundamentally human to present and provide experience [13]. The
sensemaking process of synthesis activities allows for levels of thinking to
manipulate, organize, and ﬁlter problem contexts [10], where visualization tech-
niques provide the function of building networks through mapping and deﬁning
boundaries of systems [11], presenting pragmatic ways for the strategies of
thinking-in-design to be made transferrable beyond the design discipline for an
over-arching
meta-disciplinary
application
[7].
The
perspectives
of
thinking-in-design present the necessary and conscious act of making sense of
complex design issues and problem spaces through varying modes of seeing,
understanding, analyzing, describing, cataloging, organizing, and planning courses
of actions, shifting across intangible to tangible and implicit to explicit dimensions
of design. Design thinking, therefore, can be thought of as a set of contingent and
embodied routines that constitute different ways of interacting with and within the
sociocultural world [15].
Reflective Practice
Design concerns human pathways that provide insights into the obstacles, prob-
lems, and possibilities of change [14], relying on processes of thinking that are
embedded within the shifting from problem to solution spaces. The design expe-
rience embodies different levels of activity that extend thinking beyond abstract and
theoretical dimensions to develop and formulate concrete ideas and practices.
Designers have the ability to process information through sensory and tangible
methods, using the conversational activity of seeing and drawing as a means to
make sense of, understand, appreciate, and communicate [16] and, in this form of
thinking through drawing and sketching, embodied representations of thought and
22
Dimensions of Thinking, Reflecting and Knowing Through Design
461

knowledge are produced [17]. The reﬂective practice of design, as leading towards
the design-of-practice, will be further discussed through an examination of reﬂec-
tion as a form of concrete thinking and design inquiry.
Reﬂection is a temporally suspended activity that occurs after an experience
takes place when its outcomes can be separated as part of the experience to be
extracted, examined, and described. This posits that the act of reﬂection, of
undergoing a continual evaluation through reasoning, reveals insights to establish
an overall comprehension and understanding of the experience. Reﬂexivity, against
the context of design, can be seen as the contemplation and negotiation of thought
and understanding. This stage of design presents a form of internal dialogue where
the conceptualization of a tangible design begins to materialize and take shape
through reassessing, redeﬁning, and recontextualizing all preconceptions of a
design problem. The fast-changing nature of design contexts and issues demands
periods of systematic reﬂection to fully contemplate the shifts from old to current
situations and make informed decisions to alter future courses and plans, as illus-
trated in Fig. 22.2. This diagram depicts design reﬂexivity as residing in the pre-
sent, relying on the past experience to form future intentions along the dimensions
of understanding. The recursive nature of reﬂexivity allows for all levels of thinking
to be transferred through internal mechanisms of feedback and feedforward.
Reﬂection is a necessary condition of design thinking that afﬁrms and modiﬁes
initial conceptions of a design problem in order to validate future intentions and
implications. The reﬂective process of design can be seen as a temporal experience
that mediates the space of design inquiry, allowing the continual occurrence of
systematic reﬂection to reinforce the positioning of design against external changes,
levels of interaction and communication, and the formulation of courses of action.
Fig. 22.2 Reﬂective practice in design
462
H. Chon

Dewey [18] attributes meaning to experience, as an exacting mode of thought,
when relating the acts of thinking, reﬂecting, and understanding. This implies that
the whole of design experience, encompassing the development of a design process
and related practices, would require systematic moments of reﬂection to allow
meanings to be established as an experiential outcome. If a reﬂective practice can
facilitate a deeper understanding to transfer preconceptions of a design complexity
into intentions by linking thought into action, there is a need to further deﬁne the
role of systematic reﬂection as a key component throughout the design process
leading towards the design-of-practice.
Thinking-in-design involves the embodied experience of contextualizing and
framing the complexities posed by a problem space, making way for reﬂective
activities and practices to further reify concepts and deepen levels of understanding.
Design reﬂexivity positions the process of design as containing reﬂective conver-
sations with the materials of a design situation [19], contributing to a continual and
ongoing form of practice. Kimbell [15] deﬁnes four aspects of practice theory in
terms of how they are,
(i)
understood;
(ii)
enacted and shaped through structures;
(iii)
materialized through objects; and
(iv)
transformed through interactions leading to conceptions of knowledge.
This presents an alternative way of conceiving design activities through the
following concepts:
(i) Design-as-practice, the embodied, situated experiences of design that consti-
tute a discursive practice through knowing, doing, and saying; and
(ii) Designs-in-practice, the emergent nature of design enacted in practice and
incomplete beyond the process and outcomes of designing
Design-as-practice suggests that design, in its entirety, is representative of a
practice. The outcomes afforded by designs-in-practice encompass the ongoing
impact, interactions, and materialization of design. This leads to the question of when
practice itself is designed and how does experience inform the design-of-practice.
Structure is necessary to give form to thinking and reﬂection, where the intan-
gible qualities of building frames and formulating the boundaries of a design
produce a discursive practice. Reorganizing, structuring, and formalizing these tacit
experiences strengthen the notion of design-as-practice and enrich designs-
in-practice. This devises a design-of-practice as an extension of systematic reﬂec-
tion, translated through form, object, or process. Language is one manner in which
the qualitative and dynamic processes of reﬂective practice can be articulated to
present a new form of discourse [20]. It is through practice that the processes of
design are conceived and linked to other members, stakeholders, institutions, and
end-users. Design practice is necessary to structure and understand how the tacit
qualities of reﬂective practice can be transferred and made explicit.
22
Dimensions of Thinking, Reflecting and Knowing Through Design
463

Design Knowing
Against the ill-deﬁned and ill-structured nature of design problems, the ways of
thinking and reﬂecting inform a knowledge base for design. Cross [21] deﬁnes
designedly ways of knowing as being embodied within codes that transform
thoughts into words and objects, communicating the nonverbal experiences
of design. According to Glanville [22], the designer as actor assumes the role of
observer-as-participant in making knowledge and constructing the ways of
obtaining knowledge. Knowledge in design is broadly referenced as the ways in
which the objects and outcomes of design lead to the more active role of producing,
organizing, and communicating ideas and solutions. The theoretical dimensions of
design knowledge are often presented through categories that are based on the
following polarities: tacit and explicit, abstract and concrete, subjective and
objective, and personal and universal. Although the epistemological and ontological
foundations of design knowledge are often based in other disciplines and ﬁelds of
study, the situated practices of design organize and formulate contextual knowledge
to provide frames for understanding a particular phenomenon. This form of
knowledge serves as a precondition to experiential knowledge, which transforms
and explicates the modes of thinking and reﬂection to be communicated and shared.
Knowledge in design acts as the representation of experience, constructing and
transmitting codes to be read and interpreted.
The design experience involves the active participation of designers and multiple
stakeholders, transferring subjective and personal levels of knowledge into tangible
forms to prescribe future social situations and relations. Experience is necessary to
reﬁne and strengthen one’s symbolic activities towards progress in thought [23],
producing modiﬁcations to transform the natural ability to perceive and categorize
the development of perception into regularities of knowledge [24]. Theories of
knowledge,
arising
through
the
modes
of
symbolic
interaction
and
being-in-the-world, lead to the production of self-knowledge that develops expe-
rience into perception and, eventually, generates design knowledge. Table 22.2
presents the varying perspectives of knowledge across the common theme that
perception leads to the construction of knowledge through the modes of human
activity and experience.
The theories of knowledge focus on the epistemological underpinnings of how
knowledge is formulated, from where it develops into perception, and in what ways
human knowing reinforces one’s existence in the world. In contrast, design pro-
duces its own forms of knowledge when the tacit activities of thinking and
reﬂecting are framed within speciﬁc contexts and transferred through representa-
tional forms. Polanyi [25] describes the symbolic operation of representing expe-
rience through the stages of primary denotation, reorganization, and reading of the
result. This shifts the inarticulate elements of thought into explicit understandings,
emphasizing the potential role of design knowledge and the subsequent impact of
its ﬁnished forms when transferred and applied into action. Thinking-in-design
generates the subject of what needs to be known or made known, as the boundaries
464
H. Chon

Table 22.2 Classiﬁcation of knowledge
Author
Mode
Outcome
Theories of knowedge
Cassirer [23]
Symbolic
interaction
Understanding the world
Codes of communication
Generate meanings
Polanyi [25]
Symbolic
interaction
Personal knowledge as tacit and
subjective
Generate meanings
Hudson and Ozanne (1988)a
Symbolic
interaction
Social construction of reality
Codes of communication
Generate meanings
Popper [24]
Sensory ability
Ability to perceive
Understanding the world
Self knowledge
Scheler (1973)b
Feedback
Ability to perceive
Self-expression
Organizing the world
Csikszentmihalyi and
Rochberg-Halton (1981)c
Feedback
Ability to perceive
Self-expression
Codes of communication
Heinamaa (2012)d
Sensory ability
Ability to perceive
Self-expression
Design knowledge
Cross (1999)e and (2000)f
Experience
Creation and maintenance of the
artiﬁcial world
Friedman [27]
Feedforward and
feedback
Experience
Ability to perceive
Belonging in the world
Reﬂective practice
Hoadley and Cox (2009)g
Experience
Creative processes
Meta-knowledge
Narvaez (2000)h
Social inﬂuence
Projective ability
Design thinking
Dialectic relationship between
designer and user
a Hudson LA, Ozanne JL (1988) Alternative Ways of Seeking Knowledge in Consumer Research.
Journal of Consumer Research 14: 508–521
b Scheler M (1973) Formalism in Ethics and Non-formal Ethics of Values. Northwester University
Press
c Cszikszentmihalyi M, Rochberg-Halton E (1981) The Meaning of Things: Domestic Symbols
and the Self. Cambridge University Press: Cambridge
d Heinamaa S (2012) The Body. In: Luft S, Overgaard S (eds) The Routledge Companion to
Phenomenology. Routledge: Oxon, pp 222–232
e Cross N (1999) Design Research: A Disciplined Conversation. Design Issues 15(2): 5–10
f Cross N (2000) Designerly Ways of Knowing: Design Discipline versus Design Science. Design
Issues, 17(3): 49–55
g Hoadley C, Cox C (2009) What is Design Knowledge and How Do We Teach It? In: Di Giano C,
Goldman S, Chorost M (eds) Educating Learning Technology Designers. Routledge: New York,
pp 19–35
h Narvaez LM (2000) Design’s Own Knowledge. Design Issues 16(1): 36–51
22
Dimensions of Thinking, Reflecting and Knowing Through Design
465

of problem spaces and complexities are framed through design perspectives, the-
ories, and approaches. As an extension of reﬂective practice, the experience of
design practice lends itself to articulate how knowledge is developed—this concept
of knowing how is what formulates knowledge-through-design (Table 22.3).
Buchanan [26] describes the experience as being found in the relationship
between the individual and environment, not in the internal process of accumulating
sensations and perceptions. If knowledge is contingent on the value and quality of
experience, this deﬁnition of experience positions the role of design as creating
environments within which human intent moves into interaction, producing
meaning as the fulﬁllment of original intent. These environments can be created
through deeper purposes of unity in design, clarifying human experience as:
• Practical action: the simple, overt physical gestures used to gain access to a
product, fulﬁlling the purpose of the experience;
• Intellectual understanding: the information or obstacles to the cognitive and
intelligent understanding of action; and
• Emotional
engagement:
the
feelings
arising
from
interaction
with
an
environment
Design knowledge can be comprehended across different frames and domains to
embrace, enlarge, internalize, transmit, shift, recontextualize, and transform thought
into action across the dimensions of knowing [27]. Knowledge, as it shifts from
tacit to explicit, requires new frames and contexts for its values to be realized.
Buchanan [28] deﬁnes four orders of design as a place for rethinking and recon-
ceiving the nature of design across graphic, industrial, interaction, and systems
Table 22.3 Five types of knowledge-through-design [29]
Attribute
Domains of use
Function
Explicit
Designers, individuals, communities,
institutions
To be made known and
cognizable
To be clearly expressed
through a form
Discursive
All relevant persons/contexts
To stimulate discussion
To negotiate and establish a
shared understanding
To explore propositions and
possible strategies
Transferrable
Designers, design groups, education,
research, communities of practice
To be applied through
processes and actions
To be formalized as practice
To propose tools, models, and
frameworks
Accumulative
Researchers, future contexts of design
To build research and future
knowledge
To theorize design practice
466
H. Chon

design professions. The four orders of symbols, things, actions, and thought are
shown across the explicit/concrete and implicit/abstract dimensions of design in
Fig. 22.3. As design practice moves away from analytic and synthetic aspects
towards the intentional placements and situations of use deﬁned by the four orders,
design assumes the mediating role of negotiating between design intent and user
expectation. These new interactions and experiences require different kinds of
knowledge and suggest that while design produces knowledge stemming from and
relevant for other disciplines and ﬁelds, design knowledge is the knowing that
materializes, transforms, transfers, and acts through design.
Design knowledge, according to Manzini [29], is the knowledge that can be used
by designers and non-designers in their processes of designing and co-designing.
The cognitive functions of knowing are materialized through tangible forms, such
as visions for strategic discussion, proposals for integration, and tools for under-
standing and implementing. This emphasizes that design knowledge needs to be
made communicable and clearly expressed to be applied and used by others.
Design ability can be deﬁned as a form of intelligence and a multi-faceted
cognitive skill [30]. However, Manzini [29] argues that traditional design knowl-
edge accumulated through the implicit knowledge of professional design is no
longer sufﬁcient to deal with the plurality of design that is inﬂuenced by systems of
change and dynamic problem contexts. Design knowledge needs to become more
robust in the ways that it is ontologically categorized within the contexts where
design can produce more meaningful and sustainable impact. This requires different
networks of actors to work together, allowing the various domains and attributes of
design knowledge to be continually shared, exchanged, transferred, transformed,
altered, and applied.
Fig. 22.3 The four orders of design [28]
22
Dimensions of Thinking, Reflecting and Knowing Through Design
467

The Implications of Design Thinking, Reflecting
and Knowing
There is a clear shift occurring in the areas of design study, education, and practice.
The forms of design that conform to traditional skills and crafts will represent the
past, while design comprising the ability to lead and transform future design
requires further knowledge through the exploration of technology, social sciences,
and the complexities of the world [5]. The future design will transform practice
through modes of thinking, emphasizing the focus of design on people and
human-centered approaches when dealing with complex problems. This will con-
tribute to a body of knowledge that builds upon all the knowledge of all specialized
ﬁelds.
Manzini [31] argues that design has shifted from a focus on objects toward ways
of thinking and doing as part of the human-centered approach. Against this
implication, that all design activities are forms of co-design and involve groups of
multi-skilled actors, the following three meanings of design can be established:
(i)
Diffuse design: “the natural human ability to adopt a design approach, which
results from critical sense, creativity, and practical sense;”
(ii)
Expert design: “the professional designers who should, by deﬁnition, be
endowed with speciﬁc design skills and culture;”
(iii)
Co-Design: “the overall design process resulting from the interaction of a
variety of disciplines and stakeholders”
These three meanings of design represent what Manzini refers to as emerging
design, which establishes dialogic cooperation where the willingness to listen and
converge towards a common view results in collaboratively obtained outcomes.
Dorst [2] presents two issues confronting design within complex situations:
• the starting point is difﬁcult to discern, making it challenging to interpret a
problem situation; and
• the interrelated relationships within systemic complexity further complicate the
shaping of appropriate ways forward.
Adopting an exploratory, reﬂective practice for design presents a new paradigm
for the future design that is highly iterative and intentionally indeterminate. This
allows for a ﬂexible system of design marked by resilience and adaptability,
reinforcing the dialogic and dialectic processes of design.
Meyer and Norman [6] outline eleven design challenges into the four cumulative
groups: performance, systemic, contextual, and global challenges. It deﬁnes the
future of design and calls for new ways to address the different levels of design
problems. The ﬁrst group, performance challenges, can be addressed through tra-
ditional skills and knowledge. Systemic challenges require systems thinking skills,
multidisciplinary knowledge, and management and leadership training. Contextual
challenges are situated challenges that necessitate a form of co-design, allowing the
468
H. Chon

community to be involved in the process. Finally, global challenges are is a team
effort that may call on design skills but will involve bottom-up collaborations and
knowledge across all relevant domains. The eleven challenges of design are out-
lined in Table 22.4.
This chapter has discussed design as relying on experiences to produce the
dimensions of thinking, reﬂecting, and knowing in design. These varying per-
spectives and theories of design reveal current gaps in research and practice, sug-
gest areas in which professional designers can contribute to the theorizing of current
and professional practices, and propose future areas where the frameworks and
models of design research can aid in formalizing design activities. There is a clear
Table 22.4 The challenges of design [6]
Category
Description
Challenges
Performance
challenges
Relating to what designers must do
1. Design acts on the physical world
and the linked world of intangibles;
2. The design addresses human
needs and desires (speciﬁc and
abstract);
3. Design generates tangible and
intangible built/social environments;
Systemic
challenges
Relating to addressing the entire
system and not just a single part
4. We live in a world marked by
ambiguous boundaries between
artifacts, structures, systems, and
processes;
5. We work in a world of large-scale
social, economic, and industrial
frames;
6. We design for a complex
environment of ever-shifting needs,
requirements, and constraints;
7. We design for a world in which
intangible content often exceeds the
value of physical substance;
Contextual
challenges
Relating to dealing with complex
systems that are strongly affected by
their environment, local culture, and
political concerns
8. The projects, products, and
services we design often cross the
boundaries of other organizations,
stakeholders, producers, and user
groups;
9. The projects, products, and
services must meet the expectations
of other organizations, stakeholders,
producers, and users;
10. These projects, products, and
services must meet the demands at
every level of production,
distribution, reception, and control;
and
Global
challenges
Relating to dealing with complex
sociotechnical systems
11. Address the major social issues
facing the world
22
Dimensions of Thinking, Reflecting and Knowing Through Design
469

shift in design that is driven by the interconnectedness of human experience,
moving discourses from traditional practice towards the ambiguity posed by the
systemic challenges of complex design problems. The discussions throughout this
chapter have examined the current challenges of design amidst the growing com-
plexities posed by design problems, leading to a review of how design constitutes
thinking-in-design to frame concepts and problem spaces, presents moments of
reﬂection to reify and deepen understandings of the design context towards the
design-of-practice, and formalizes experience to produce knowledge-through-
design. The dimensions of thinking, reﬂecting, and knowing in design are illus-
trated in Graphical Abstract.
Design shifts thinking, reﬂecting, and knowing across the situated practices
involving the mind, body, things, structures, knowledge, processes, and agency. In
consideration of the ways that design knowledge and its practices are being utilized
and applied in non-design ﬁelds, there is much to be deﬁned in the agency of design
knowledge against the social, co-created, co-designed structures of design collab-
oration. This proposes future discourses of social design and the role of design in
multi-stakeholder collaboration, furthering research on the implications of decolo-
nizing and democratizing design knowledge, building on the implications of
Manzini’s [29] call for new design knowledge that is explicit, discursive, trans-
ferrable, and accumulative.
Conclusion
Design problems are growing in complexity, and clarifying the ill-deﬁned and
ill-structured problem spaces requires intentional levels of thinking. The mode of
shifting design thinking from problem deﬁnition to a solution focus relies on
reﬂexivity, giving form and structure to understand design practice’s positioning
deeply. Reﬂective practice reiterates the frames and perspectives of thinking to
deepen understanding, reposition the role and function of design, and transfer
thought into action through the design-of-practice. Design produces its own
knowledge through designedly ways, which serve as representations of contextual
and experiential knowing. Knowledge-through-design provides the premise for
design to produce explicit, discursive, transferrable, and accumulative forms. The
dimensions of thinking, reﬂecting, and knowledge in design have been examined
against the paradigmatic shift of design from traditional practice to systems-led
domains that require more robust and resilient implications of design.
This chapter has reviewed and presented the experience of design and the
entirety of the design process as being developed through the dimensions of
thinking, reﬂecting, and knowing. Design is exploratory in nature and relies on the
ability to organize, frame, question, and infer through the use of various tools,
models, frameworks, and practices. The implicit and subjective activities of design
have been discussed throughout this chapter to clarify how the processes of
thinking, reﬂecting, and knowing transfer the tacit experiences of design practice
470
H. Chon

into explicit forms to be communicated, discussed, and challenged. Broad theories
and philosophies of design have reviewed the interdisciplinary roots of design
across the ﬁelds of art and science, presenting the areas in which design can
continue to inform and contribute to its own domains of theory and knowledge. As
the future study, practice, and application of design is moved into highly
ambiguous, inarticulate, and complex problem spaces, the role of design needs to be
re-examined to identify the gaps, in theory, practice, research, and knowledge.
Core Messages
• Thinking focuses on what is known.
• Practice articulates how knowing develops.
• Knowledge determines where knowing transforms.
References
1. Friedman K (2003) Theory construction in design research: criteria: approaches, and methods.
Des Stud 24:507–522
2. Dorst K (2019) Design beyond design. She Ji J Des Econ Innov 5(2):117–127
3. Simon H (1998) The sciences of the artiﬁcial, 3rd edn. MIT Press, Cambridge
4. Friedman K (2012) Models of design: envisioning a future design education. Visible Lang 46
(1/2):132–153. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0142-694X(03)00039-5
5. Norman D (2016) When you come to a fork in the road, take it: the future of design. She Ji J
Des Econ Innov 2(4):343–348. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sheji.2017.07.003
6. Meyer M, Norman D (2019) Changing design education for the 21st century. She Ji J Des
Econ Innov 6(1):13–49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sheji.2019.12.002
7. Lindberg T, Noweski C, Meinel C (2010) Evolving discourses on design thinking: how
design cognition inspires meta-disciplinary creative collaboration. Technoetic Arts J Spec-
ulative Res 8(1):31–37. https://doi.org/10.1386/tear.8.1.31/1
8. Kimbell L (2011) Rethinking design thinking: part I. Des Stud 3(3):285–306
9. Buchanan R (1992) Wicked problems in design thinking. Des Issues 8(2):5–21
10. Kolko J (2010) Abductive thinking and sensemaking: the drivers of design synthesis. Des
Issues 26(1):15–28
11. Sevaldson B (2011) Giga-mapping: visualisation for complexity and systems thinking in
design. Nordes 4
12. Dorst K (2015) Frame innovation: create new thinking by design. MIT Press, Cambridge
13. Mononen L (2017) Systems thinking and its contribution to understanding future designer
thinking. Des J Int J All Aspects Des 20(sup1):S4529–S4538. https://doi.org/10.1080/
14606925.2017.1352949
14. Buchanan R (2019) Systems thinking and design thinking: the search for principles in the
world we are making. She Ji J Des Econ Innov 5(2):85–104
15. Kimbell L (2012) Rethinking design thinking: part II. Des Cult 4(2):129–148
16. Schön D (1992) Designing as reﬂective conversation with the materials of a design situation.
Res Eng Des 3(3):3–14
17. Rylander A (2009) Design thinking as knowledge work: epistemological foundations and
practical implications. Des Manage J 4(1):7–19. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1942-5074.2009.
00003.x
22
Dimensions of Thinking, Reflecting and Knowing Through Design
471

18. Dewey J (1980) Art as experience. Perigree Books, New York
19. Schön D (1983) The reﬂective practitioner: how professionals think in action. Basic Books,
New York
20. Doloughan FJ (2002) The language of reﬂective practice in art and design. Des Issues 18
(2):57–64
21. Cross N (1982) Designerly ways of knowing. Des Stud 3(4):221–227
22. Glanville R (1999) Researching design and designing research. Des Issues 15(2):80–91
23. Cassirer E (1944) An essay on man: an introduction to a philosophy of human culture. Yale
University Press, New Haven
24. Popper KR (1994) Knowledge and the body-mind problem: in defense of interaction. London,
Routledge
25. Polanyi M (1962) Personal knowledge: towards a post-critical philosophy. Routledge,
London
26. Buchanan R (2015) Worlds in the making: design, management, and the reform of
organizational culture. Des Issues 1:5–20
27. Friedman K (2000) Creating design knowledge: from research into practice. IDATER, pp 5–
27
28. Buchanan R (2001) Design research and the new learning. Des Issues 17(4):3–23
29. Manzini E (2009) New design knowledge. Des Stud 30:4–12
30. Cross N (1995) Discovering design ability. In: Buchanan R, Margolin V (eds) Discovering
design: explorations in design studies. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp 105–120
31. Manzini E (2016) Design culture and dialogic design. Des Issues 32(1):52–55
Harah Chon is a design practitioner, researcher, and educator.
Her current research activities focus on design theory and phi-
losophy across the themes of collaborative design frameworks,
disruptive approaches to interdisciplinary design, intangible cul-
ture and heritage, and knowledge transference. Currently, her
research advocates furthering discourses on design and cultural
sustainability, social design, and design knowledge. She holds a
Ph.D. in Design Epistemology and MBA in Design Business
from The Hong Kong Polytechnic University and a BFA from
Parsons School of Design.
472
H. Chon

23
Thinking Through Sound: Music
Listening as a Model for Enhanced
Cognition
Mark Reybrouck
“The tonal structure we call “music” bears a close logical
similarity to the forms of human feeling—forms of growth and
attenuation, ﬂowing and stowing, conﬂict and resolution, speed,
arrest, terriﬁc excitement, calm or subtle activation and dreamy
lapses—not joy and sorrow perhaps, but the poignancy of either
and both—the greatness and brevity and eternal passing of
everything vitally felt. Such is the pattern, or logical form, of
sentience; and the pattern of music is that same form worked
out in pure measured sound and silence. Music is a tonal
analogue of emotive life.”
[1, p. 27]
Summary
Music is a temporal and sounding art. It is self-referential in the sense that it
focuses on itself rather than on external reference. This centripetal tendency
makes it possible to assign semantic meaning to sounding elements based on the
idiosyncrasies and particularities of their unfolding. There is, however, a tension
between the acoustic description of the music and the sense-making by the
listeners, with a major distinction between real-time consumption of the sounds
and their processing at the level of mental computations. Musical sense-making,
however, is ﬁrst and foremost an experience grounded in our innate disposition
M. Reybrouck (&)
University of Leuven (KU Leuven), Leuven, Belgium
e-mail: Mark.Reybrouck@kuleuven.be
Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium
ISA, USERN, Leuven, Belgium
Eikendreef, 21, 8490 Varsenare, Belgium
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh (eds.), Thinking, Integrated Science 7,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04075-7_23
473

for coping with sounds and our acquired sense-making skills. Starting from the
biological underpinnings of these mechanisms of sense-making, from sensory
coding, over psychobiology to neuroaesthetics, it is shown how sensory pleasure
can be converted into conscious enjoyment with special attention for peak
emotional experiences as chills and thrills. Finally, it is shown how the musical
experience can be raised from a mere sensory level to an aesthetic level of
experience and how this is related to mechanisms of enhanced processing and
cognitive functioning, as evidenced by connected activation patterns in the brain.
Thinking through sound.
Keywords
Chills and thrills  Conscious enjoyment  Cognitive mastering  Musical
experience Musical sense-making Neuroaesthetics Psychobiology Sensory
pleasure  Vibrational energy
QR Code
474
M. Reybrouck

Scanning the QR code directs you to the word cloud of the chapter that is made up
of the words we discussed throughout the whole book in relation to the chapter’s
keyword, which is intentionally not included in the word cloud. Find the keyword
and put it in place in the puzzle according to the clues provided in Chap. 36. The
mystery hidden in the puzzle is the quote of THINKING: Bioengineering of Science
and Art.
Introduction
Music is a sounding art. It is basically self-referential in the sense that its meaning is
immanent. In contrast to language, which aims at directing our attention away from
the text to grasp the meaning that is formed by text written or spoken (external
reference), it is characterized by a tendency to focus on the sounds themselves
(internal reference) [2]. This is the major distinction between the centripetal and
centrifugal tendency of linguistic meaning, with the former being typical of
physiognomized
language,
which
is
not
oriented
primordially
to
the
lexico-semantic ﬁeld of meaning but rather to the sharing of an experiential ﬁeld
between the music and the listener [3, p. 209]. This could look like a regression to
more archaic means of sense-making, characterized by more syncretic aspects of the
processing of the sounds, where musical elements are not recognized primarily in
their denotative or lexical function but rather as referring to themselves without any
reference to something outside of the music [4, pp. 4–5]. However, it can be
questioned whether this distinction is indeed so radical and whether it is possible to
use these self-referential elements as legitimate candidates for performing mental or
cognitive operations on them. As such, it raises the question whether we can
conceive of thinking through and in sound [5, 6].
Music as a Temporal and Sounding Phenomenon
As art of time, music has its counterpart in speech, which, though perceptually
distinct, shares many commonalities with music in terms of acoustics and cognitive
demands [7]. As for acoustics, like speech, music provides a way of conveying
information using pitch, timing, and timbre. As for cognitive demands, both speech
and music fundamentally depend on memory, attention, and cognitive skills to
develop coherence or streaming out of discrete acoustic phenomena [8]. They are
typical examples of how evolution has shaped our auditory system to use sound to
communicate cognitive representations, internal states, and emotions, which is a
highly constrained way. Both speech and music are examples of generative and
recursive systems that create complex structures starting from a limited set of
primitive ways by applying syntactic rules in a combinatorial and creative way [9].
23
Thinking Through Sound: Music Listening as a Model for Enhanced …
475

Besides these commonalities, however, there are differences as well. A text can
be read by different voices, quietly or loudly, at a slow or fast pace, allowing many
degrees of freedom with respect to its actual rendering. Music, however, is much
more constrained. Its meaning is less externally directed because the discrete
auditory events can be consumed as self-contained auditory events that refer mainly
to themselves. This is an essential aspect of self-reﬂective semantics with elements
that are not denotative or lexical but self-referential [4]. There is, as such, an aspect
of semanticity that enters as soon as something that sounds is recognized as being
internal to some system. This is the beginning of an act of denotation (“that”
sound), which stresses the centripetal tendency to recognize musical events merely
as musical events which can be identiﬁed as such with their particular and
idiosyncratic qualities. Figure 23.1 provides an example. Three sounds are depicted
both as a waveform and as a spectrogram. They are clearly distinct from each other,
but each clearly depicts a sonic category—respectively a birdsong, a guitar sound,
and a human voice—each with their typical spectral and temporal changes, which
are recognized as such.
The importance of these idiosyncratic characteristics clearly shows that music’s
primordial role is not communication, as it usually subserves functions other than
representation. Music understanding, as a rule, involves several forms of under-
standing, communication, and social cognition, as exempliﬁed so typically in the
primordial interactions between infants and early caregivers. They can be catego-
rized as embodied, pre-linguistic and emotional-empathic. Suppose this should be
understood in terms of communication. In that case, it should be considered as a
kind of primary intersubjectivity and participatory sense-making through embodied
affective means rather than by referring to an existing lexicon of semantic meanings
[11, 12].
This brings us to the most primary quality of the music: it is a sounding phe-
nomenon that accomplishes vibrational energy transfer and gathers our senses and
minds. Yet, it is not merely an acoustic structure but also a phenomenon of
Fig. 23.1 Three examples of complex sound stimuli: waveform and spectrogram of birdsong, a
guitar note played at C3, and a male human voice pronouncing the vowel /ɑ/. (Adapted with
permission from [10], © Elsevier B. V., License Number 4900681449102)
476
M. Reybrouck

subjective human experience [13]. There is, as such, a tension between the acoustic
description of the music as a stimulus and the sense-making by the listeners. The
latter can occur at distinct levels, such as the perceptual, cognitive, and affective
levels, which mostly do not work separately but together. Music, in that view, is to
be considered as a temporal succession of sounding events, which the listeners can
structure using “a temporally extended, exploratory activity that brings together
perception, manipulation and appropriation of different sonic affordances offered up
by sonic invariants that are present within the music” [14, p. 6]. It deﬁnes expe-
rience as cognition as exempliﬁed in what Krueger has called the world-making
power of the music as “a sonic world that affords possibilities for creating, orga-
nizing, and regulating listeners’ experiences, emotion regulation and social coor-
dination” [15, p. 7].
Dealing with Music: From Structure to Process
Music is not merely a sounding art. It is also a temporal phenomenon that displays
its structure successively during its unfolding over time. As such, some minimum
time is needed to grasp its temporal design, which is not a static artifact but a
dynamic structure. There is, as yet, a distinction to be made between the moment-
to-moment engagement with the sounds and the synoptic overview of those sounds
that are merely recollected in memory or imagination. It enables us to treat music as
consumption of the sounds, which happens in real-time, or as a form of a more
detached and distanced stance that conceives them outside of the time of actual
sounding. This is the distinction between music as structure and music as a process,
which has its counterpart in the “in-time/outside-of-time dichotomy, which has
challenged to some extent the disciplinary history of musicology [16]. It is possible,
in fact, to study music as an artifact, as a kind of petriﬁed structure, as exempliﬁed
most typically by the study of the score. This is the realm of music analysis, which
proceeds mainly outside of the time of actual sounding, as the score provides a
lasting trace or symbolic transcription of the sounds. It makes it possible to perform
mental operations on mental replicas of the sounds and to navigate through the
music as in a virtual space, referring back to past events or anticipating future
events. Real-time listening and performing, on the contrary, are more constrained in
the sense that the attentional focus is directed at the temporal window of the actual
sounding now-moments.
As such, there is a distinction between listening, performing, improvising, or
composing, and even analyzing music. Each of these distinct ways of musical
engagement
can
have
a
place
on
the
continuum
between
in-time
and
outside-of-time processing of the sounds with the possibility to be completely
immersed in the actual now moment as well as to take distance from the sounding
music. Both approaches, moreover, do not exclude each other but are comple-
mentary to some extent. Take the example of a jazz improviser who plays some
notes on his saxophone. While performing the needed handgrips on his instrument
23
Thinking Through Sound: Music Listening as a Model for Enhanced …
477

as well as the accompanying breathing techniques and the appropriate tension of the
lips, he must not only produce the tones he is actually playing, but he must also
anticipate the successive ones and bring them in relation with those just played in
order to make something coherent out of it. This is the tension between the discrete
particulars of the actual performing and the relational continuity of the more
encompassing overarching overview. Improvising, moreover, not only requires
playing of notes which are depicted on a score, as in sight-reading, or which are
stored in memory, but it involves on the spot realization of newly generated sounds
that must be embedded in a continuous ﬂow of past and future sounds. What is
going on in the head of the performer is thus an amalgam of multiple processes,
which makes dealing with music a complex of skills that can be improved by
repeated musical practice. It embraces perception and action and general cognitive
processes such as memory, executive functions, and attention [17]. But even in the
case of mere listening, multiple processes are going on. Some of them proceed at an
internal level of imagery rather than being externalized in manifest behavior. The
whole picture, therefore, is that of musical competence being deﬁned as a
multi-layered phenomenon, which, in more operational terms, can be translated in
terms of perception, action, and cognitive processes—sometimes called computa-
tion—which has been studied both in isolation (music perception studies, music
performance studies, and music and cognition studies) and jointly. They make up a
major part of studies in cognitive musicology [18–20].
This extended approach to dealing with music, however, has been criticized as
being too cognitive and too detached with respect to the sounding music. Much of
this research has centered mainly on the computational part of dealing with music,
with music processing remaining enclosed within the brain with no connections to
the real world [21–23]. Cognitive science, therefore, has seen a major shift from a
mere computational to a neurobiological approach. This holds for cognitive science
in general, but also for the domain of music listening, with corresponding new
topics of research such as the conception of music as experience [24, 25], the
exploding domain of music and emotions [26, 27], research onto the dispositional
toolkit for coping with music and the related question of the evolutionary origins of
music [28, 29], and, more recently, also the whole bulk of music and brain studies
[30]. Music, in this evolved view, cannot merely be equated with a set of structures.
It also involves the ways how we make sense of music, and this involves mecha-
nisms underpinning the biological basis of our behavior and our cognitive skills.
Coping with the Sounds: Biological Underpinnings
of Musical Sense-Making
The reluctance to rely on the lexico-semantic ﬁeld of meaning has shifted the
theorizing about musical sense-making into the direction of non-referential
semantics [31]. Music, in this view, is preverbal and preconceptual, relying on
inductive power rather than on propositional or lexical content. It invites us to think
478
M. Reybrouck

about how listeners cope with the sounds that make up the music [30] and inves-
tigate the underlying mechanisms that enable the transition from sound to music.
No simple mechanism can likely attain this goal. What should be argued for, on the
contrary, is a multi-layered complex of three mental and neural systems, namely a
sensory-motor, a knowledge-meaning, and an emotion-evaluation system [32].
These distinct levels of processing are related to the distinction between lower-level
perceptual-emotional stages and higher-level processes, which involve reﬂection
and cognitive control. The lower levels of processing have received considerable
attention in the context of sensory physiology, psychophysics—and in the case of
music, psychoacoustics—and psychobiology [33, 34].
The domain of sensory coding, in particular, is an example of low-level auto-
matic and elementary processing of information. It is characterized by relative
simplicity with an initial isomorphism between the stimuli and receptor responses,
with a unidirectional ﬂow of information and a kind of mapping between the
perceptual input and behavioral reactions that are elicited by them, which may
suggest a kind of causal relationship. This is one of the major claims of psy-
chophysics which is concerned basically with a search for a functional relationship
between the working of the body and the mind and the investigation of how the
dimensions of physical stimuli may relate to those of sensory experiences [35,
pp. 16, 356]. These low-level reactions, further, are innate rather than acquired and
are reducible to wired-in reactivity to stimuli from the environment with genetically
programmed codes that function as a kind of lock-and-key. As such, they are
primitive in a radical sense: they are rapid and efﬁcient but act under a limited scope
and function. Listeners, then, can rely on neural coding strategies, which by evo-
lution direct the adaptation of signal processing systems to process and provide an
optimal representation of sensory information. In this context, we have roughly
similar basic body plans, particularly, sensory organs and neural representations
that allow us to “see in different colors, hear in different frequency registers, and
smell different odors” [36, p. 252] and [37].
The psychobiological approach, on the other hand, is more challenging as it is
mainly directed at the relationship between mind and brain and the particular ways
to encode and represent mental processes: “the nervous system provides the
immediate, necessary and sufﬁcient mechanisms for the embodiment of all mental
processes” and “the key to the particular ways in which mental processes are
encoded and represented lies in the function, arrangement, and interaction of
neurons, the constituent building blocks of the nervous system” [35, p. 355]. This
is, in a nutshell, the principal claim of the “axiom of psychobiological equivalence,
which claims an equivalence of maintained information from the neural to the
psychological state.”
As a whole, this lower-level approach has foreshadowed somewhat the current
rapprochement between the ﬁeld of music and biology as an example of a paradigm
shift in musicology that conceives of thinking of music as universals of perception
and cognition [33] with emerging new disciplines such as biomusicology [28, 38]
and neuromusicology [29, 39]. But even these new emerging ﬁelds have shown to
be somewhat reductionistic at times, in the sense that the biological underpinnings
23
Thinking Through Sound: Music Listening as a Model for Enhanced …
479

are restricted too narrowly to the nervous system and the brain. Therefore, it has
been argued that there is a need to widen the scope and include broader bodily
activity as well as the assessment of subjective valuing of the music-as-heard. The
latter belongs to the philosophically oriented realm of phenomenology. The pro-
posed widening could lead to a kind of neuro-physio-phenomenology [40, p. 143]
with the study of neurobiology and neurochemistry of musical emotions as its
central focus. By including several kinds of methods for recording bodily activity, it
should then be possible to extend a rather narrow conception of neurophe-
nomenology—as integration of self-reports to collect ﬁrst-person descriptions of the
experience and objective data of experimental measurements—to the rest of the
organism. The study of the neurobiology and the neurochemistry of musical
emotions is likely to be promising in this regard [41], with already many studies on
the role of dopamine release and/or endogenous opioids during musical pleasure
[42–45].
There is, in a similar vein, a related broadening of the ﬁeld that tries to under-
stand the mechanisms of musical sense-making through the lens of neuroaesthetics
as the proper research ﬁeld that investigates the neurobiological substrates of the
so-called aesthetic experience [32, 46–49]. As a scientiﬁc discipline, it builds on an
interdisciplinary framework that includes philosophical, psychological, neurosci-
entiﬁc, and evolutionary approaches [50]. Conceived primarily in the context of
visual art by Zeki in the 1990s [51], and relying heavily on the methodology of
cognitive and affective neurosciences, it has become a research ﬁeld in its own right
with the aim to understand those neural principles that underlie the different pro-
cesses that are involved in “a human aesthetic experience with an artistic object,” an
experience, that Brattico says, is “a psychological state determined by interaction
with an object to which we intend to attribute (evaluate/appraise) positive or neg-
ative qualities according to perceptual, cognitive, affective, or cultural criteria. It is
intrinsically different from other affective experiences due to a special attitude (also
referred to as focus, stance, or pre-classiﬁcation) toward the object” [52, p. 367]. Or
put differentially: an aesthetic experience is different from other affect experiences
in the sense that such an experience has been designed so as to produce this typical
experience [53]. It means that we attribute a meaning to the stimulus based on
aesthetic evaluation and that the intentional relation and attitude of the perceiver to
the stimulus is the actual source of our aesthetic experience. It is an approach that
values the perceiver’s internal state, importantly [italics are mine] “his/her personal
experience of previous encounters with the stimulus and the attitudes towards the
stimulus, the current mood and the innate biological predispositions for processing
the stimulus and for having an aesthetic experience as a whole” [54]. Musical
sense-making, then, seems to balance between lower-level and higher-level pro-
cesses of coping with the sounds, in the sense that a full musical experience should
include some ﬁnal outcomes, such as aesthetic emotions, aesthetic judgments, and
the formation of musical preferences and taste [55].
480
M. Reybrouck

From Sensory Pleasure to Conscious Enjoyment
It can be asked to what extent aesthetic experiences are constitutive of the process
of musical sense-making. It is possible, in fact, to listen to music at a lower level of
pure reactivity without solicitation of the higher brain functions. As such, the
question is related to what has been called the coupling/constitution fallacy in
discussions about the extended mind in the respective ﬁelds of cognitive science
and philosophy of mind [56]. There is no space to go into detail here, but the
extended mind hypothesis basically means that our mind can be extended by
including external non-biological elements (such as a notebook, a smartphone, a
computer, etc.) in our cognitive system. Then, the coupling/constitution fallacy is
concerned with whether such an extension qualiﬁes as an equivalent part of the
cognitive system or whether it should be considered only as an external extension
or attribute to it. Its basic claim is that when something is coupled to a cognitive
system, this does not necessarily mean that it is also constitutive of that same
system. It also means that the causal coupling of external elements should not be
confused with the constitutive basis of cognitive processes, calling forth a dis-
tinction between causes and constituents [57].
The aesthetic experience, as we can conceive of it, is not mandatory or consti-
tutive for the process of musical sense-making but is a welcome addition to the
sensory experience proper. It raises the experience above the level of mere reactive
behavior, which does not mean, however, that these lower-levels reactions do not
matter. There is, in fact, a continuity between lower- and higher-level processing,
with levels of the processing being complementary rather than opposed. Moreover,
two kinds of behavior are of particular interest: mere reactive behavior and those
emotional peak experiences known as chills and thrills.
Mere reactive behavior is positioned on the lower level of the continuum. Yet, it
can even be rewarding, as evidenced by the pleasure that some listeners experience
while listening to extremely loud music. This is the celebration of the bass culture
with its conception of “sound as power” [58–61]. Music, in that case, is to be
perceived as vibrational transduction of affect, rather than a mere translation of
meaning, with powerful frequencies—mostly in the lower range—that impinge
upon our body in a haptic way. Yet, loudness is only one criterion for reactive
responses. It is an important one, however, as loud and sudden stimuli are able to
swamp our senses, as evidenced in the acoustic startle reaction, which is a simple
acute defensive or protective reaction to sudden sensory stimuli, mostly in the
acoustic, tactile or visual domain, that may signal a proximal threat from potential
predators or blows, and that prepares for ﬁght and ﬂight. It is a low-level reaction to
the sounds—it is actually a reﬂex—which is basically innate. We see it:
(i)
“as a fast twitch of facial and body muscles;”
(ii)
accompanied by “an arrest of ongoing behavior and changes in some auto-
nomic functions such as heart rate;” and
(iii)
it has a rather simple design but depends upon external and internal factors
[62].
23
Thinking Through Sound: Music Listening as a Model for Enhanced …
481

This reaction has been extensively described in the research literature as it leans
very well to quantitative analysis [63–67]. Further, the startle reﬂex is part of our
hereditary disposition for coping with sounds, with about no need for cognitive
mediation. This is not the case for those more reﬁned pleasure experiences, which
are known as chills and thrills. Aesthetic chills, in particular, have an experimental
and individual difference side, with the experimental side focusing mainly on how
features of the music affect the way how people experience chills [68, 69] or how
changes in physiological parameters correspond with the experience of chills [70,
71], while the individual difference side has been examining the personality char-
acteristics of those people who tend to experience chills [72]. The concept of chills,
however, is somewhat ill-deﬁned. As a construct, it can be split into a positive and a
negative approach, somewhat contrary to the understanding of chills in terms of a
holistic approach and avoidance behavior. Generalizing a little, the experience of
chills may involve distinct feelings such as “awe, surprise, tension, pleasure, being
moved, elevation, nostalgia, and may also be characterized as positive and desir-
able, or negative and aversive.” In an attempt to provide a more operational deﬁ-
nition, a multiple component analysis has been carried out on the chills concept,
with correlations for three main dimensions:
(i)
a dimension for “frowning, smiling, feelings of warmth, and feelings of
cold;”
(ii)
a dimension for “tingling, shivers and goosebumps;” and
(iii)
a dimension for “tears and feeling a lump in the throat” [73].
As such, three distinct chills categories may be constructed based on grouping in
and between bodily activity and emotional experiences, with a distinction between
“warm chills,” which are accompanied by feelings that are positively valenced and
bodily activities (joy, relaxation, stimulation, smiling, and feelings of warmth),
“cold chills” with negatively valenced feelings and bodily activity (sadness, anger,
frowning, feelings of cold) and “moving chills” with “bodily activity such as tears
and a lump in the throat,” as well as “feelings of tenderness, affection, intensity, and
being moved.” From this perspective, at least three distinct chills constructs must be
present for taking affective valence, elicitor quality, and individual differences into
account [74].
The study of chills is interesting but challenging, as it refers to both the objective
bodily processes and the subjective sensations of these bodily processes. With
regard to musical sense-making, the subjective bodily sensations seem to be most
fruitful as they are closest to the laypersons’ self-report on getting chills. As such,
they have face validity regardless of what is going on in the body and can attain a
level of semanticity with respect to the sounding music, which is valued at a
preconceptual and mainly affective value.
This holds in particular for the category of chills known as “aesthetic chills,”
which can be considered a reliable indicator of so-called peak emotional experi-
ences [71]. They are supposed to be a reﬂection of the experience of “awe.” We
know this category for its main characteristics as:
482
M. Reybrouck

• an effect of “the perception of “vastness” (i.e., larger than the self’s frame of
reference) and the “accommodation” (adjustment of mental structures) to that
perception” [75];
• an association with “dramatic shifts in musical features (e.g., crescendo,
disharmonies)—in other words, novel events or features that may run counter to
expectation” [69, 76]; and
• an accompanying activation of the sympathetic nervous system and their cor-
responding physiological responses such as goosebumps and piloerection [77].
Moreover, it has been found that these physiological, emotional correlations
could be considered a marker of the personality trait, which is known as “openness
to experience.” This concept is related to “the breadth, depth, and permeability of
consciousness, and in the recurrent need to enlarge and examine experience” [78,
p. 826] and [79]. It is perceived as feeling more comfortable with novelty and being
more motivated in cognitive exploration [80]. Of course, individual differences
exist and are important to proneness and sensitivity to aesthetic engagement and
chills and the emotional and physiological responses that this engagement might
elicit [81].
These differences in engagement can explain the great variance between the
degree of chill experiences between subjects (some listeners never experience chills
while others experience them frequently). They point in the direction of a complex
process that relies on levels of processing, with a distinction between sensory,
physiological, behavioral, and cognitive contributions. Hereditary (innate) charac-
teristics are involved as well as learned (acquired) characteristics. It explains why
the connection between the acoustic signal and listeners’ reactions is complicated
and even complex rather than simple. What does matter to some extent is the
question of how emotionally arousing experiences can facilitate the experience of
pleasure, chills, and thrills, to the extent that they cause listeners to actively look at
auditory cues, somewhat analogous to the way they may explore their sound
environments. These lines of evidence put forward that listening is a process
concerned with an innate desire for coping with the surrounding natural environ-
ment and acquired skills for understanding music. This process is not conﬁned to a
primitive coupling of action and reaction but belongs to the domain of higher-order
variables that have an intermediary position between the sensory input and the
behavioral or effector outcome.
Thus, it seems that top-down inﬂuences can modify chill experiences, which
raise the level of music processing from a mere “sensory” level to an “aesthetic”
level of engagement with the sounds. The role of attention and conscious listening
seems to be important here, with techniques known as “cognitive mastering” and
the “knowledge instinct.” Cognitive mastering occurs when a hedonic response
derives from understanding the formal structure of the music. It illustrates the
transition from sensory pleasure to conscious enjoyment as a crucial stage of
information processing that may ultimately lead to aesthetic processes of judgments
and emotions [82]. The related concept of knowledge instinct, as a mechanism that
generates aesthetic pleasure from knowledge and understanding, states that
23
Thinking Through Sound: Music Listening as a Model for Enhanced …
483

aesthetic emotions reﬂect the needs of the mind to understand the ever-changing
world by thinking conceptually, as opposed to basic emotions, which are consid-
ered mainly as bodily instincts [83]. Cognitive mastering may thus modify an
individual’s affective state when facing musical engagement, in the sense that the
positive affect derived from understanding might be related to an aesthetic brain
response [84].
Enhanced Processing and Auxiliary Representations
Conscious enjoyment of music is not gratuitous. It entails an “active engagement
with the ﬁne-grained acoustics of music and the concomitant development of
‘sound to meaning’ connections that may result in enhanced processing in the
speech” [7]. Even considering enjoyment of music as a common phenomenon, it is
not necessarily meant to be yielded from attentive listening. More precisely, when
we hear in a casual and unfocused way, it is our unconscious thought that takes on
for making sense of music and understanding it as the aesthetic appreciation of
beauty, mastery, or structure [55]. Such enhanced processing has been found to be
the case in trained musicians and experienced listeners, who rely on different
cognitive strategies compared to amateurs and non-musicians. This is evidenced by
the distinct brain activation patterns that reﬂect their listening and processing ways
[13]. Contrary to earlier views of more-or-less ﬁxed centers in the brain—with a
simple left versus right dichotomy as a typical example—it has been shown that
there is a profound inﬂuence of professional training on hemispheric lateralization
during music processing in the sense that non-musicians exhibit a preponderance
for the right hemisphere, where professional musicians show a left hemispheric
preponderance [85]. Professional musicians process demanding harmonic and
melodic
discrimination
tasks
mainly
in
the
left
frontotemporal
lobes;
non-musicians, on the other hand, activate both the frontal lobes, bilaterally, as well
as the right temporal lobe. This difference has been related to covert inner speech,
as music professionals are inclined to name more or less automatically the intervals
and harmonies. They allegedly have access to so-called “auxiliary representations”
of music, which are the outcome of years of training [13]. Yet, besides this reliance
on inner speech, there is another distinction that sets musicians apart from
non-musicians, namely the possibility to re-enact the sound-producing physical acts
while listening. Empirical studies have revealed that music listening can facilitate
motor processing, allowing listeners to simulate the same motor actions that are
required to perform the music that is heard, which means that they may perceive
music through motor engagement [22, 86]. It is a welcome extension of the rather
reductionist approach of the prevailing cognitive and detached approaches to music
listening of former decades. What is suggested, on the contrary, is that musicians
experience the music more intensely and more proprioceptively compared with
non-musicians [87]. Proprioception, in fact, is highly relevant during the course of
musical practice, and prolonged musical experiences—either active ones during
484
M. Reybrouck

performing or passive ones during listening—may lead to a kind of “performative
awareness” of our body [88] and [89, p. 220]. It explains to some extent the deeper
awareness musicians may have of their own bodies [90]. Recently developed new
neuroimaging techniques—measurement of full-brain connectivity analysis—
moreover, have been used to examine the coordinated patterns of neural activity
that is distributed across multiple regions of the brain, with the identiﬁcation of
brain networks, such as the default mode network (DMN), the salience network
(SN), and the executive control network (ECN), which, when working together,
provide an enhanced kind of processing that engages several types of attention,
target detection, working memory, semantic processing, and motor function, which
all interact dynamically to support creative task performance [91–93]. They have
also shown that musicians are better at integrating motor and sensorimotor regions
of the brain, even during passive music listening [94], which conﬁrms the con-
viction that musical expertise strengthens those brain mechanism that links action
and perception, which means that musicians process music via an “action-based”
approach whereas non-musicians rely more likely to rely on a “perception-based”
approach.
Conclusion
Dealing with music is a multi-layered phenomenon. It is a process concerned with
an innate desire to cope with the natural environment and acquired skills for
understanding music. This process is not conﬁned to a primitive coupling of action
and reaction but belongs to the domain of higher-order variables that have an
intermediary position between the sensory input and the behavioral or effector
outcome. There are, however, levels of sophistication with the overall picture that
“skilled listening,” as we coin the term, seems to be a complex process that involves
cognitive demands and couplings between distinct areas of the brain. It calls forth
the real-time consumption of sounds, relying on lower levels of sensory processing
and higher cognitive and affective-emotional processing levels. The possibility,
further, to process musical signals both in-time and outside-of-time makes it pos-
sible to engage in creative processes that help generate novel and useful ideas for
dealing knowingly with the sounds. It also invites listeners to engage simultane-
ously distinct large-scale brain systems, with music training resulting in an
increased skill to simultaneously recruit the brain’s DMN, ECN, and SN. Such
simultaneous engagement may be considered a neurophysiological marker of cre-
ative thinking, suggesting that creative brains recruit these networks simultaneously
to a greater degree than brains that are less creative [95].
It has been hypothesized, in this context, that creative cognition is a dual process
where the DMN supports idea generation and the ECN their evaluation [96, 97],
somewhat analogous to their known roles in mental simulation as well as executive
cognition. Recent ﬁndings in the neuroscience of creative cognition, moreover,
have highlighted the roles of cognitive control and self-generated thought, as it is
23
Thinking Through Sound: Music Listening as a Model for Enhanced …
485

assumed that creativity involves the generation of something that is simultaneously
new and useful [98]. Creative cognition thus involves thinking processes leading to
idea generation and evaluation. For such processes, when they are self-generated, a
form of mental activity is important that is internally focused and largely free of
external input. When they may emerge spontaneously in the mind, goal setting and
cognitive control are most important [99].
The above can be effectively entered into the realm of music. Creative processes
are obvious in improvising and composing, but even in the case of active listening,
it is possible to engage with the sounds creatively. Creativity, then, can be located at
the level of reception and performance of music, as well as at the level of internal
processing [100]. It allows for a conception of music in computational terms as
thinking in and through sound.
Core Messages
• Music is a sounding phenomenon that conveys vibrational and transferable
energy.
• There is a tension between the acoustic description of the music as a
stimulus and how listeners make sense of it.
• Music cognition is perceptual as well as conceptual.
• There is a continuity between lower- and higher-level processing, with the
processing levels being complementary rather than opposed to each other.
• Listening is a process that relies on innate dispositions and the outcomes of
acquired skills.
References
1. Langer S (1953) Feeling and form. A theory of art. Charles Scribner’s Sons, New York
2. Kyndrup M (2011) Mediality and literature: literature versus literature. In: Nielsen H,
Kraglund R (eds) Why study literature? Aarhus University Press, Aarhus, pp 85–96
3. Werner H, Kaplan B (1963) Symbol formation. An organismic-developmental approach to
language and the expression of thought. John Wiley, New York—London—Sydney
4. Imberty M (1979) Entendre la musique. Sémantique psychologique de la musique. Dunot,
Paris
5. McAdams S, Bigand E (eds) (1993) Thinking in sound. The cognitive psychology of human
audition. Clarendon Press, Oxford
6. Seraﬁne M (1988) Music as cognition. The development of thought in sound. Columbia
University Press, New York
7. Kraus N, Chandrasekaran B (2010) Music training for the development of auditory skills.
Nat Rev Neurosci 11:599–605
8. Patel A (2003) Language, music, syntax and the brain. Nat Rev Neurosci 6:674–681
9. Zatorre R, Salimpoor V (2013) From perception to pleasure: music and its neural substrates.
PNAS USA 110:10430–10437
10. Chartrand J-P, Peretz I, Belin P (2008) Auditory recognition expertise and domain
speciﬁcity. Brain Res 1220:191–198
486
M. Reybrouck

11. Trevarthen C (2002) Origins of musical identity: evidence from infancy for musical social
awareness. In: MacDonald R, Hargreaves D, Miell D (eds) Musical identities. Oxford
University Press, Oxford, pp 21–38
12. De Jaegher H, Ezequiel Di Paolo E (2007) Participatory sense-making. An enactive
approach to social cognition. Phenomenol Cogn Sci 6:485–507
13. Altenmüller E (2003) How many music centres are in the brain? In: Peretz I, Zatorre R
(eds) The cognitive neuroscience of music. Oxford University Press, Oxford—New York,
pp 346–353
14. Reybrouck M (2015) Music as environment: an ecological and biosemiotic approach. Phys
Life Rev 5(1):1–26
15. Krueger J (2011) Doing things with music. Phenomenol Cogn Sci 10:1–22
16. Reybrouck
M
(2019)
Experience
as
cognition:
musical
sense-making
and
the
‘in-time/outside-of-time’ dichotomy. Interdisc Stud Musicol 19:53–80
17. Pantev C, Herholz S (2011) Plasticity of the human auditory cortex related to musical
training. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 35:2140–2154
18. Sloboda J (1988) Generative processes in music. The psychology of performance,
improvization, and composition. Clarendon Press, Oxford
19. Williamon A (2004) Musical excellence. Strategies and techniques to enhance performance.
Oxford University Press, Oxford—New York
20. Parncutt R, McPherson G (eds) (2002) The science and psychology of music performance.
Creative strategies for teaching and learning. Oxford University Press, Oxford
21. Kiverstein J, Miller M (2015) The embodied brain: towards a radical embodied cognitive
neuroscience. Front Hum Neurosci 9:237
22. Schiavio A, van der Schyff D, Cespedes-Guevaras J, Reybrouck M (2017) Enacting musical
emotions. Sense-making, dynamic systems, and the embodied mind. Phenomenol Cogn Sci
16(5):785–809
23. Thompson E (2007) Mind in life: biology, phenomenology, and the sciences of mind.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge
24. Määttänen P (1993) Action and experience. A naturalistic approach to cognition. Academia
Scientiarum Fennica, Helsinki
25. Westerlund H (2002) Bridging experience, action, and culture in music education. Studia
Musica 16. Sibelius Academy, Helsinki
26. Altenmüller E, Schmidt S, Zimmermann E (2013) Evolution of emotional communication.
From sounds in nonhuman mammals to speech and music in man. Oxford University Press,
Oxford
27. Juslin P, Sloboda J (eds) (2001) Music and emotion: theory and research. Oxford University
Press, Oxford
28. Wallin N, Merker B, Brown S (eds) (2000) The origins of music. The MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA—London
29. Peretz I, Zatorre R (eds) (2003) The cognitive neuroscience of music. Oxford University
Press, Oxford—New York
30. Reybrouck M, Podlipniak P, Welch D (2020) Music listening as coping behavior: from
reactive response to sense-making. Behav Sci 10(7):119
31. Reybrouck M (2021) Musical sense-making. Enaction, experience and computation.
Routledge, Abingdon—New York
32. Chatterjee A, Vartanian O (2016) Neuroscience of aesthetics. Ann NY Acad Sci 1369:172–
194
33. Reybrouck M (2013) Musical universals and the axiom of psychobiological equivalence. In:
Leroy J-L (ed) Topicality of musical universals/actualité des universaux musicaux. Editions
des Archives Contemporaines, Paris, pp 31–44
34. Trevarthen C (1999–2000) Musicality and the intrinsic motivic pulse: evidence from human
psychobiology and infant communication. Music Sci. Special issue 155–215
35. Uttal W (1978) The psychobiology of mind. Lawrence Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ
23
Thinking Through Sound: Music Listening as a Model for Enhanced …
487

36. Cariani P (1998) Life’s journey through the semiosphere. Semiotica 120(3/4):243–257
37. Reybrouck M (2008) The musical code between nature and nurture. In: Barbieri M (ed) The
codes of life: the rules of macroevolution. Springer, Dordrecht, pp 395–434
38. Wallin N (1991) Biomusicology. Neurophysiological and evolutionary perspectives on the
origins and purposes of music. Pendragon Press, New York
39. Zatorre R, Peretz I (eds) (2001) The biological foundations of music. Ann NY Acad Sci
930:1–456
40. Colombetti G (2014) The feeling body. Affective science meets the enactive mind. The MIT
Press, Cambridge (MA)
41. Chanda M, Levitin D (2013) The neurochemistry of music. Trends Cogn Sci 17:179–193
42. Ferreri L, Mas-Herrero E, Zatorre R, Ripollés P, Gomez-Andres A, Alicart H, Olivé G,
Marco-Pallarés J, Antonijoan R, Valle M, Riba J, Rodriguez-Fornells A (2019) Dopamine
modulates the reward experiences elicited by music. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 116:3793–
3798
43. Gebauer L, Kringelbach M, Vuust P (2012) Musical pleasure cycles: the role of anticipation
and dopamine. Psychomusicology 22(2):16
44. Salimpoor V, Benovoy M, Larcher K, Dagher A, Zatorre R (2011) Anatomically distinct
dopamine release during anticipation and experience of peak emotion to music. Nat Neurosci
14:257–262
45. Stefano G, Zhu W, Cadet P, Salamon E, Mantione K (2004) Music alters constitutively
expressed opiate and cytokine processes in listeners. Med Sci Monit 10(6):MS18–27
46. Chatterjee A (2010) Neuroaesthetics: a coming of age story. J Cogn Neurosci 23(1):53–62
47. Conway B, Rehding A (2013) Neuroaesthetics and the trouble with beauty. PLoS Biol 11
(592):e1001504
48. Leder H (2013) Next steps in neuroaesthetics: which processes and processing stages to
study? Psychol Aesthet Creat Arts 7(1):27–37
49. Nadal M, Skov M (2013) Introduction to the special issue: toward an interdisciplinary
neuroaesthetics. Psychol Aesthet Creat Arts 7(1):1–12
50. Brattico E, Pearce M (2013) The neuroaesthetics of music. Psychol Aesthet Creat Arts 7
(1):48–61
51. Zeki S (1999) Inner vision: an exploration of art and the brain. Oxford University Press,
Oxford UK
52. Brattico E (2020) The neuroaesthetics of music: a research agenda coming of age. In:
Thaut M, Hodges D (eds) The Oxford handbook of music and the brain. Oxford University
Press, Oxford, pp 364–390
53. Bundgaard H (2015) Feeling, meaning, and intentionality—a critique of the neuroaesthetics
of beauty. Phenom Cogn Sci 14:781–801
54. Pelowski M, Markey P, Forster M, Gerger G, Leder H (2017) Move me, astonish me ...
delight my eyes and brain: the Vienna integrated model of top-down and bottom-up
processes in art perception (VIMAP) and corresponding affective, evaluative, and
neurophysiological correlates. Phys Life Rev 21:80–125
55. Liu C, Brattico E, Abu-jamous B, Pereira C, Jacobsen T, Nandi A (2017) Effect of explicit
evaluation on neural connectivity related to listening to unfamiliar music. Front Hum
Neurosci 11:611
56. Adams F, Aizawa K (2001) The bounds of cognition. Philos Psychol 14(43–64):2001
57. Kersten L (2017) Extended music cognition. Philos Psychol 30(8):1078–1103
58. Landälv D, Malmström L, Widén S (2013) Adolescents reported hearing symptoms and
attitudes toward loud music. Noise Health 15:347–354
59. Todd N (2000) Vestibular responses to loud dance music: a physiological basis for the “rock
and toll threshold”? J Acoust Soc Am 107(1):496–500
60. Todd N, Cody F, Banks J (2000) A saccular origin of frequency tuning in myogenic
vestibular evoked potentials? Implications for human responses to loud sounds. Hear Res
141(1–2):180–188
488
M. Reybrouck

61. Reybrouck M, Podlipniak P, Welch D (2019) Music and noise: same or different? What our
body tells us. Front Psychol 10:1153
62. Koch M (1999) The neurobiology of startle. Progr Neurobiol 59:107–128
63. Błaszczyk J (2003) Startle response to short acoustic stimuli in rats. Acta Neurobiol Exp
63:25–30
64. Davis M (1984) The mammalian startle response. In: Eaton R (ed) Neural mechanisms of
startle behavior. Springer Science and Business Media LLC, Berlin, pp 287–351
65. Davis M, Gendelman D, Tischler M, Gendelman P (1982) A primary acoustic startle circuit:
lesion and stimulation studies. J Neurosci 2(6):791–805
66. Gelfand S (2009) The acoustic reﬂex. In: Katz J, Medwetsky L, Burkard R, Hood L
(eds) Handbook of clinical audiology, 6th edn. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, New York,
pp 189–221
67. Salloum R, Yurosko C, Santiago L, Sandridge S, Kaltenbach J (2014) Induction of enhanced
acoustic startle response by noise exposure: dependence on exposure conditions and testing
parameters and possible relevance to hyperacusis. PLoS ONE 9(10):e111747
68. Huron D, Margulis E (2010) Musical expectancy and thrills. In: Juslin P, Sloboda J
(eds) Handbook of music and emotion: theory, research, applications. Oxford University
Press, New York, pp 575–604
69. Sloboda J (1991) Music structure and emotional response: some empirical ﬁndings. Psychol
Music 19:110–120
70. Blood A, Zatorre R (2001) Intensely pleasurable responses to music correlate with activity in
brain regions implicated in reward and emotion. PNAS 98:11818–11823
71. Grewe O, Kopiez R, Altenmüller E (2009) The chill parameter: goose bumps and shivers as
promising measures in emotion research. Music Percept 27(1):61–74
72. Silvia P, Nusbaum E (2011) On personality and piloerection: individual differences in
aesthetic chills and other unusual aesthetic experiences. Psychol Aesthet Creat Arts 5
(3):208–214
73. Maruskin L, Thrash T, Elliot A (2012) The chills as a psychological construct: content
universe, factor structure, affective composition, elicitors, trait antecedents, and conse-
quences. J Pers Soc Psychol 103(1):135–157
74. Bannister S (2019) Distinct varieties of aesthetic chills in response to multimedia.
PLoS ONE 14(11):e0224974
75. Keltner D, Haidt J (2003) Approaching awe, a moral, spiritual, and aesthetic emotion.
Cognit Emot 17:297–314
76. Grewe O, Nage F, Kopiez R, Altenmüller E (2007) Listening to music as a re-creative
process: physiological, psychological, and psychoacoustical correlates of chills and strong
emotions. Music Percept 24(3):297–314
77. Benedek M, Kaernbach C (2011) Physiological correlates and emotional speciﬁcity of
human piloerection. Biol Psychol 86:320–329
78. McCrae R, Costa P (1997) Conceptions and correlates of openness to experience. In:
Hogan R, Johnson J, Briggs S (eds) Handbook of personality psychology. Academic Press,
Orlando, FL, pp 825–847
79. McCrae R (2007) Aesthetic chills as a universal marker of openness to experience. Motiv
Emot 31:5–11
80. DeYoung C (2014) Openness/intellect: a dimension of personality reﬂecting cognitive
exploration. In: Cooper M, Larsen R (eds) APA handbook of personality and social
psychology, personality processes and individual differences, vol 4. American Psychological
Association, Washington, pp 369–399
81. Williams P, Johnson K, Curtis B, King J, Anderson J (2018) Individual differences in
aesthetic engagement are reﬂected in resting-state fMRI connectivity: implications for stress
resilience. Neuroimage 179:156–165
82. Leder H, Belke B, Oeberst A, Augustin D (2004) A model of aesthetic appreciation and
aesthetic judgments. Br J Psychol 95:489–508
23
Thinking Through Sound: Music Listening as a Model for Enhanced …
489

83. Perlovsky L (2010) Musical emotions: functions, origins, evolution. Phys Life Rev 7(1):2–27
84. Brattico E (2015) From pleasure to liking and back: Bottom-up and top-down neural routes
to the aesthetic enjoyment. In: Huston J, Nadal M, Mora F, Agnati L, Cela Conde CJ
(eds) Art, aesthetics, and the brain. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, pp 303–318
85. Bever T, Chiarello R (2009) Cerebral dominance in musicians and non-musicians.
J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 21:94–97
86. Gordon C, Cobb P, Balasubramaniam R (2018) Recruitment of the motor system during
music listening: an ALE meta-analysis of fMRI data. PLoS ONE 13(11):e0207213
87. Molnar-Szakacs I, Overy K (2006) Music and mirror neurons: from motion to “e”motion.
Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 1(3):235–241
88. Acitores A (2011) Towards a theory of proprioception as a bodily basis for consciousness in
music. In: Clarke D, Clarke E (eds) Music and consciousness. Philosophical, psychological,
and cultural perspectives. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, pp 215–230
89. Gallagher S (2005) How the body shapes the mind. Clarendon Press, Oxford
90. Zamorano A, Riquelme I, Kleber B, Altenmüller E, Hatem S, Montoya P (2015) Pain
sensitivity and tactile spatial acuity are altered in healthy musicians as in chronic pain
patients. Front Hum Neurosci 8:1016
91. Beaty R, Benedek M, Kaufman S, Silvia P (2015) Default and executive network coupling
supports creative idea production. Sci Rep 5:10964
92. Karmonik C, Brandt A, Anderson J, Brooks F, Lytle J, Silverman E (2016) Music listening
modulates functional connectivity and information ﬂow in the human brain. Brain Connect 6
(8):632–641
93. McFerran K, Saarikallio S (2014) Depending on music to feel better: being conscious of
responsibility when appropriating the power of music. Arts Psychother 41:89–97
94. Alluri V, Toiviainen P, Burunat I, Kliuchko M, Vuust P, Brattico E (2017) Connectivity
patterns during music listening: evidence for action-based processing in musicians. Hum
Brain Mapp 38(6):2955–2970
95. Beaty R, Kenett Y, Christensen A, Rosenberg M, Benedek M, Chen Q, Fink A, Qiu J,
Kwapil T, Kane M, Silvia P (2018) Robust prediction of individual creative ability from
brain functional connectivity. Proc Natl Acad Sci 115(5):1087–1092
96. Andrews-Hanna J, Smallwood J, Spreng R (2014) The default network and self-generated
thought: component processes, dynamic control, and clinical relevance. Ann NY Acad
Sci USA 1316:29–52
97. Buckner R, Andrews-Hanna J, Schacter D (2008) The brain’s default network. Ann NY
Acad Sci USA 1124:1–34
98. Diedrich J, Benedek M, Jauk E, Neubauer A (2015) Are creative ideas novel and useful?
Psychol Aesthet Creat Arts 9:35–40
99. Beaty R, Benedek M, Silvia P, Schacter D (2016) Creative cognition and brain network
dynamics. Trends Cogn Sci 20(2):87–95
100. Reybrouck (2006) Musical creativity
between symbolic
modelling
and perceptual
constraints: the role of adaptive behaviour and epistemic autonomy. In: Deliège I, Wiggins G
(eds) Musical creativity: multidisciplinary research in theory and practice. Psychology Press,
Oxford, pp 42–59
490
M. Reybrouck

Mark Reybrouck studied physical education, physical therapy,
and musicology. He is emeritus professor at the University of
Leuven and guest professor at Ghent University (Belgium). His
research agenda concerns musical sense-making, focusing on
musical semantics and biosemiotics as applied to music. At a
theoretical level, he is involved in foundational work on music
cognition and perception, especially the biological roots of mu-
sical epistemology and the embodied and enactive approach to
dealing with music. Besides, he has also been involved in
empirical research on representational and meta-representational
strategies in music-listening tasks. He is the author and editor of
several books about listening strategies and cognitive strategies for
dealing with music as well as edited volumes on musical semiotics
and music and brain studies. His most recent contributions cover
the ﬁeld of embodied and enactive cognition and the domains of
neuroaesthetics and neuroplasticity as applied to music.
23
Thinking Through Sound: Music Listening as a Model for Enhanced …
491

24
Poetic Thinking and the Constitution
of Our World: On Language
and Reality
Marko Pajević
“Das Poëtische, ein aufglimmender Funke in der thierischen
Dumpfheit”
“The poetic, a glimmering spark in the brute dullness”.
(All translations, if not otherwise stated, are the author’s
own (M.P.)).
Wilhelm von Humboldt (VI:156)
Summary
This chapter presents the author’s concept of poetic thinking and its relation to how
humans constitute their world and their reality, which is always mediated by
language. The chapter frames the inquiry with reference to quantum physics, which
has shown that materiality is less solid than expected and draws connections to
philosophical anthropology and contemporary human vision changes. In line with
recent evolutionary anthropology and neuroscience, and combining thinking
language and dialogical thinking, poetic thinking considers the world in its
togetherness, its texture, offering an alternative to the opposition of subject and
object. Thinking language shows a transformative power in the interaction of the
form of life and the form of language. It operates when a subject constitutes itself
creatively and dialogically, transforming its ways offeeling and thinking, in short,
its way of perceiving the world. This process here I call poetic thinking.
M. Pajević (&)
College of Foreign Languages and Cultures, Tartu University, Lossi 3-415, 51003 Tartu, Estonia
e-mail: marko.pajevic@ut.ee
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Tartu, Estonia
College of Foreign Languages and Cultures, University of Tartu, Liivi 4-121, 50409 Tartu, Estonia
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh (eds.), Thinking, Integrated Science 7,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04075-7_24
493

The calligraphy for the poem called Bani Adam (human kind);
“Human beings are members of a whole
In creation of one essence and soul
If one member is afﬂicted with pain
Other members uneasy will remain
If you’ve no sympathy for human pain
The name of human you cannot retain”
[Adapted with permission from the Association of Science and Art (ASA),
Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network (USERN); Calligraphy:
Alireza Ghanadan; Poem: Saádi Shirazi.]
Keywords
Martin Buber  Dialogical thinking  Henri Meschonnic  Meaning-making 
Poetic thinking  Poetological anthropology  Reality  Thinking language 
Wilhelm von Humboldt
494
M. Pajević

QR Code
Scanning the QR code directs you to the word cloud of the chapter that is made up
of the words we discussed throughout the whole book in relation to the chapter’s
keywords, which are intentionally not included in the word cloud. Find the keyword
and put it in place in the puzzle according to the clues provided in Chap. 36. The
mystery hidden in the puzzle is the quote of THINKING: Bioengineering of Science
and Art.
Introduction: Reality and Poetic Thinking
It is a tenacious prejudice that we know what reality is. The word ‘reality’ comes
from Latin res, that is, things. Reality in this sense is the world of things, real
objects, materiality. For most people, that settles the issue: they do not question this
reality of things. The so-called hard sciences are in charge of this reality, whereas
the humanities deal with much softer things, say, imagination. It may well be that
things are more complex and that ‘in reality,’ this neat separation is delusional.
In 1781, there was an earthquake in humanity’s ideas about reality. It was caused
by Immanuel Kant’s transcendental idealism, elaborated in his Critique of Pure
Reason, in which he states that our perception of things says nothing of these things
in themselves [1]. We perceive objects merely as appearances, which are very much
dependent on ourselves and our ways of perceiving them. The twentieth century,
following Edmund Husserl, saw the triumph of this phenomenological approach;
things are phenomena, that is, appearances, and understanding our perception is the
closest we can come to them. There is no direct access to reality; we have to
understand how we go about accessing it to understand our world.
This is rather the domain of the humanities, but our societies do not grant them
much importance. In English, they are not even considered to be ‘sciences;’ rather,
it seems, some luxurious pastime which, as such, can be axed in proﬁt-oriented
university businesses. It is ironic that our world, with its atomic physics, chemistry,
electronics, and wide-ranging information technology, builds on tenets according to
which the hard sciences are far from being hard in the sense of ﬁrm, solid, and that
materiality is not even built of material but of something which comes closer to
what the mind is made of.
24
Poetic Thinking and the Constitution of Our World: On Language …
495

In contemporary physics, the theory that things are built of material particles,
i.e., atoms, is obsolete and has been for more than a century. Planck observed in
1900 that light waves behave like particles, Einstein developed his theory of rel-
ativity in 1905, Rutherford discovered elementary particles in 1911, Bohr theorized
the smearing of electrons in 1913, de Broglie spoke of immaterial vibrations in
1923, and Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle followed in 1927 [2]. Yet, all these
discoveries that fundamentally shape our everyday life have hardly impacted our
conception of reality. We would do more justice to reality to conceive of it in terms
of processes and effects. In German, there are two words for reality, Realität and
Wirklichkeit, commonly used without differentiation. The latter, however, comes
from the verb wirken, to act, to effect, or bring about. Wirklichkeit is not static and,
to me, seems more in tune with the state of the art of physics than Realität.
Quantum physics has shown that relations and ephemeral forms are primordial, and
materiality comes only after that. At the basis of all materiality is the process of life
itself, a constant ﬂow.
As early as the 1960s, physicist Werner Heisenberg claimed quantum physics
could only be described in allegories. In other words, our linguistic logic does not
have the concepts to grasp this model. It seems that there is a speciﬁcally poetic
quality of language that can do better justice to reality [3]. Another physicist, Niels
Bohr, refuted the objection of reality as more fundamental than language by saying:
“We are suspended in language in such a way that we cannot say what is up and
what is down” [4]. This insight anticipated what Lakoff and Johnson, both linguists,
termed conceptual metaphors, demonstrating how much “our ordinary conceptual
system, in terms of which we both think and act, is fundamentally metaphorical in
nature” [5]. Our concepts, that is, our language since concepts are necessarily
words, structure what and how we perceive reality and how we relate to the world.
Our language thus largely deﬁnes our world, mostly without us being aware of it.
This view has received strong corroboration in recent philosophy, speciﬁcally in the
Dictionary of Untranslatables: A Philosophical Lexicon [6] that analyzes philo-
sophical concepts in various languages, pointing to the inherent differences. It is
impossible to translate such concepts directly without modifying their value since
languages do not consist of independent signs but are complex interrelated systems.
Hence, such concepts are to a degree ‘untranslatables.’ This implies that languages
are not simply tools for communication but are cognition itself, which is why
Wilhelm von Humboldt famously called languages worldviews [7]. They provide us
with our perspective on the world.
Poetics could be seen as a test of how we conceive of reality. I would like to
offer the following deﬁnition: the poetic is what cannot be said differently, or, if we
want to extend it beyond language, that which is only in exactly this form. Con-
sequently, a poem makes sense only in its togetherness. We can, of course, analyze
it, take it apart, and look at its separated elements, but we cannot ﬁnd its meaning in
its constituents, only in its entirety. If, for instance, we want to make order in a
poem and rephrase ‘what we think the poet is saying’ or attempt to work out what
each image or symbolic use of language in it means and how they connect to each
other, we would be in the process of destroying its meaning and its poeticity. A
496
M. Pajević

poem is its form as a whole and not a combination of elements; it is more than the
sum of its parts, and its meaning is not the addition of its individual parts. Goethe,
in his Faust, has Mephistopheles say:
Wer will was Lebendigs erkennen und beschreiben,
Sucht erst den Geist heraus zu treiben,
Dann hat er die Teile in seiner Hand,
Fehlt, leider! Nur das geistige Band.1
We can transfer this to technology. Genetic manipulation, for instance, functions
according to the principle described above: one element in a whole is changed. Not
only this one element will be affected, but the whole arrangement will be altered. As
in a poem, when we change one word, the text will be changed altogether, its
texture. That can work out; a poem where we change a word is not necessarily
worse. However, it is different. It is difﬁcult to grasp phenomena in their entirety; it
is much easier to look at certain aspects, one at a time. Doing that, however, is not
necessarily doing justice to reality.
This chapter will outline my notion of poetic thinking and its relation to our
conception of the subject and reality by presenting ﬁrst our anthropological situa-
tion and then the main features of poetic thinking: thinking language and dialogical
thinking.
Poetic Thinking: A Poetological Anthropology
Evolutionary anthropology has by now realized that our brain and its functioning
are biologically, i.e., genetically, determined only to a very limited extent and much
more so socially. The brain develops cumulatively, and that means culturally. The
decisive step in humanity’s development was acknowledging other humans as
intentional minds, beings as oneself. This particular social understanding, shared
intentionality, enabled cooperative social interaction and thus cultural inheritance
and accumulation. This led to more socially complex forms of life and more
conceptually complex forms of thinking [9]. The brain is open and ﬂexible; at birth,
humans’ synapses are not yet ﬁxed and can take various forms, depending on their
individual experiences and perceptions. Consequently, humans can ‘program’ their
brains through the way they use them [10]. That presupposes, however, an
awareness of one’s environment. We must feel concerned and be ﬂexible in our
ideas about the world to cope successfully with the challenges we meet. It is about
being in resonance with the other, as in the by now well-known idea of mirror
1 He who would study organic existence,
First drives out the soul with rigid persistence;
Then the parts in his hand he may hold and class,
But the spiritual link is lost, alas!
Goethe JW von. Faust. Scene The Study, v. 1936–39 [8]
24
Poetic Thinking and the Constitution of Our World: On Language …
497

neurons: being empathetic activates these neurons. If we do not stimulate and
cultivate them, they degenerate [11]. We need others for our development. In the
thirteenth century, Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor and King of Sicily set about
ﬁnding out which language is the natural language of humanity. He devised an
experiment that involved isolating children and feeding them without any other
human interaction or communication. Obviously, they did not ‘naturally’ speak a
language; they simply weakened and died. Humans need society and language. It is
not only actions but also language that makes mirror neurons ﬁre. Language acts are
acts; they do things. They leave their mark. Everything we do, perceive, experience,
and say forms us. We are part of a vast, complex whole.
Such reﬂections on human thinking and human reality are the core of the
anthropological question: what does it mean to be human? Asking this question is a
crucial part of being human; it is self-reﬂection, the antique imperative ‘know
thyself!’ or gnothi seauton! We constantly develop ideas about humanity, more or
less consciously, and technological and media developments play a major role in
this. For some time now, due to accelerating changes in our knowledge and life
forms, new visions of the human have been emerging even more rapidly than
before. Such visions are no mere fantasies but highly relevant to our actions.
Depending on the image humans have of themselves, they act differently. It makes a
difference whether one considers oneself God’s creature, a highly-developed ape, or
a ﬂawed machine. It also matters whether we see ourselves simply as biological
beings with urges or whether we wish to cultivate our minds and aspire to higher
realms. The visions we have of ourselves direct our energies and decisions; they
have concrete, practical effects on life. Humans do not only have natural disposi-
tions, they can also form themselves—this is called the process of civilization.
Poetic thinking is an account of human thinking and, at the same time, con-
tributes to our vision of the human and of human thinking, and it acts on these
processes by changing our ideas about them. It is the cultivation of a particular
vision of the human. The term ‘poetic’ comes from the Greek poiein,
making/creating. Poetic thinking reﬂects, therefore, on how humans make their
world.
The subtitle of this volume is Bioengineering of Science and Art. Poetic thinking
takes issue with the idea, often suggested by the term ‘bioengineering,’ that humans
do not work themselves, mentally, on creating the human world, but that this is
done purely from the outside, via technologies.
Our era has developed countless and extreme possibilities of interfering with the
human body, which has led to a largely technical idea of the body. Science looks at
the body analytically, dissecting it to understand its functioning better. This implies
a separation of mind and body. It would serve us better to distinguish instead, as the
German language does, between the body that we have (der Körper) and the body
that we are (der Leib) [12]. Even if it is helpful for speciﬁc purposes to look at the
body as an object, it becomes problematic when this shapes our understanding of
ourselves. If we can buy our own body via plastic surgery, body and mind are no
longer uniﬁed. Over a century ago, Oscar Wilde described the dangers of such a
separation allegorically in The Picture of Dorian Gray (1890). Dorian makes a pact
498
M. Pajević

with the devil. He sells his soul to keep his youthful beauty while a portrait ages in
his stead. Corrupted by the freedom from the consequences of his actions for his
appearance, he becomes more and more ruthless, while his enduring innocent looks
help him deceive people. After many years of vile living, he sees the portrait that
had remained hidden, and, shocked by the ugly grimace confronting him, he kills
himself [13]. This moral tale exempliﬁes Wilde’s aphorism that after 30, we our-
selves are responsible for our looks. Friedrich Schiller had put it like this: “Es ist der
Geist, der sich den Körper baut” (It is the mind that builds its body) (Wallensteins
Tod III:13), and that is a good state of affairs. Should we indeed shape our body
independently of our mind, we would be threatened by ethical degeneration and an
inhumane society.
Nowadays, Wilde’s allegory seems within reach. The rich can buy their looks;
however, looking at those ‘enhanced’ faces close up often reveals the grimace of the
picture rather than the beauty sought by the buyer. Likewise, the products of
cosmetic breast surgery are intended more for admiration from afar than proximity
and touch. All of these measures are not for close human interaction; they are about
image. However, the self-image must be quite damaged when outer manipulation is
considered the way to youthfulness and beauty. The connection between mind and
body seems lost; the desires are out of touch with being. Once the world is reiﬁed,
we can regard even our own body as material to be technically optimized. These
hominal technologies promote an ideal body by means of various media, ﬁrst of all,
the omnipresent porn sites, which present humans unabashedly as “fucking
machines” and sexuality as a mechanical activity, detached from erotics and
attraction based on a connection of minds [14].
The same reifying tendency is apparent in mainstream medicine, which seems to
think mostly in terms of symptom suppression; the human as a bodily object is
reduced to biochemical processes. One pharmaceutical remedy leading to the next,
humans get drawn into a lifelong consumption of pills, and the industry thrives.
This is a working system. The medic has become a technician and salesperson, the
patient a client, the hospital a business, bodies commodities. When the eighteenth
century Enlightenment medic Julien Offray de la Mettrie spoke of L’homme
machine, the Human Machine [15], that was emancipatory in the context of that
century: suddenly all humans were presented as equal, a move that countered both
the social and religious determinism of that time. Nowadays, however, such an
approach has become a tool of inequality since those with the most economic power
can afford the best enhancements, allowing them to manifest and reinforce a sense
of superiority. This is a new form of determinism based on ﬁnancial means.
The hominal technological vision of humanity with its ideal machine body has
psychological and social effects. Not only does it weaken the self-esteem of real
people who can never achieve the virtual ideal, it also weakens inter-human rela-
tions since the other is never as good as the image we are after. When relations are
governed by market forces, everybody is constantly looking for a better deal.
Internet dating sites are stock exchanges for humans. Potentially, there is always
someone better. Nobody is ever good enough, which means that, in reality, there is
never really any relationship.
24
Poetic Thinking and the Constitution of Our World: On Language …
499

In sum, this new vision of the human is no longer about education of a subject
but instead about optimization of an object. As opposed to the humanistic tradition,
the perfection of the human no longer functions culturally and educationally but via
bioengineering. That is why the natural sciences have captured the term life sci-
ences. This is a problematic usurpation since these sciences have not much to say
about crucial aspects of human life; they deal exclusively with biological and
chemical processes. Human life, however, goes beyond this level; it is social,
philosophical, artistic. It is the life of an embodied mind. Brute life as organic
existence can do without meaning; human life implies meaning. That is why the
humanities and social sciences are indispensable. Facts need interpretation; on their
own, they do not mean anything. As we can see, in any argument, facts can be
perceived very differently: the opposing parties are in disagreement about the
meaning of the experienced facts. It is only culturally and subjectively that we grant
meaning to the phenomena of the human world. This is why we need theories about
the processes of meaning-making. The intellectual processing of the diverse sen-
sually perceived phenomena needs language. It is in language that humans elabo-
rate their vision of the world, always in connection with other humans. That, of
course, also takes place within the natural sciences. Poetic thinking is concerned
with a holistic understanding of these processes.
The human world, including human beings, is the result of these cultural pro-
cesses. There are various anthropotechnics; Peter Sloterdijk suggests this term for
the technics humans develop to create themselves [16]. He speaks of bestializing
and cultivating tendencies [17]; new media often act in bestializing ways by
addressing primitive urges, violence, and pornography. However, how can humans
be enticed to cultivate themselves and develop systems of ascesis, as Sloterdijk calls
it, that is, exercises, instead of simply following easy entertainment? Ascesis is,
evidently, an old, often religiously motivated, approach to life. Ignatius of Loyola,
for instance, spoke of such exercises [18], mostly mental, not for physical skills but
spiritual reﬁnement. Michel Foucault devoted his late work to analyzing such
systems and the souci de soi, the care of oneself. He focused on sexuality as a
means of deﬁning and reﬁning oneself [19]. There have always been technics of
self-cultivation. It is these ideas of self-reﬁnement, cultivated in exercises or
asceses, that are behind social and cultural evolution. However, this demands
sacriﬁces. Humans have to forsake simple pleasures to reach cultural reﬁnement,
and that is hard, as Freud very clearly explained in Beyond the Pleasure Principle
[20]. Sloterdijk uses the term vertical tension to describe the necessary aspiration
towards higher goals. The question is only how a society agrees on the value of
such aspirations and speciﬁc things to cultivate. Society needs to make the com-
mitment to such striving attractive. Without such goals for the general good, a
democracy cannot survive.
If self-enhancement or anthropotechnics is now no longer achieved through
exercises/asceses, but through biotechnical or surgical procedures, the I becomes
dependent on technologies and the owners of these technologies. The only criterion
of value and superiority is then ﬁnancial power (which is most often the result of
inheritance) to purchase self-enhancement. People drift farther and farther apart,
500
M. Pajević

with a growing chasm between the ﬁnancial elite, which has the means to purchase
power on all levels, and the rest of the population, which is more and more pow-
erless; a development endangering the emancipatory, democratic tendencies of the
last century. The human psyche suffers and with it the development of the indi-
viduals and society as a whole. Humanity splits up again.
The consequence of all of this is that we need to acknowledge the inescapable
necessity of cultivation for emancipatory progress. I believe that poetic thinking can
contribute to an awareness that supports such progress. Poetic thinking cannot be
trained as an exercise since it is no technique. It is a mode of being. To enter it, one
can, however, train an attitude that allows for accessing this mode. We cannot
perceive what we do not allow for. That means that we have to make space in our
conceptual framework for the poetic to let it happen. That is what poetic thinking
promotes. It does so via a speciﬁc way of thinking language and dialogical thinking,
which will be presented in the following.
Thinking Language
Thinking language is a precondition for poetic thinking simply because any
thinking conceived of as mental labor on the world has to take place in language.
Thinking language is based on the conviction that our access to the world is in
language, which means that our ideas about language shape our ideas about the
world and about being in the world. However, thinking language is not only a
theory; it is an activity; it is the process itself of this thinking.
Therefore, thinking language implies an historical anthropology of language:
language is fundamental to being human; language and being human are histori-
cally and culturally conditioned. That is neglected by a simple biologism, as it is by
a naturalist or universalist approach.
The great language thinker Wilhelm von Humboldt deﬁned human language as
“Verstehen durch Mitdenken” (understanding by thinking together) instead of at
best “Handeln durch Mitempﬁnden” (acting by empathizing) [21]. Humboldt thus
insisted on the speciﬁcity of human language as that which goes beyond commu-
nication and is also cognition. This surplus to summoning and inciting or com-
municating feeling is what I call poetic because it creates something. Humboldt’s
deﬁnition unites cognition and communication: thinking and mediation are one.
The Western tradition has difﬁculties grasping this; for thousands of years, we
have been very critical of language. Even when the importance of language is
recognized, it is most often cursed for being ambivalent, imprecise, or conceitful.
We have probably all complained at some stage that language seems to refuse to
express what we want to say. From the poetic thinking perspective, that is erro-
neous. We might have some notions of states of being that withdraw from us, but
these states exist only through language, and when our linguistic skills cannot do
justice to them, that is not the fault of language but our personal world not being
sufﬁciently developed. Ludwig Wittgenstein said: “Die Grenzen meiner Sprache
24
Poetic Thinking and the Constitution of Our World: On Language …
501

bedeuten die Grenzen meiner Welt” (The limits of my language mean the limits of
my world) [22]. We build our world by mentally laboring on it, and that means
using language.
In our European tradition, however, most saw this very differently.2 We all
inherit Greek philosophical conceptions, and Plato wanted to think without lan-
guage. Of course, he did not do that at all. His texts are linguistically elaborate, and
his dialogues are more or less theatre sketches. So even if philosophers pretend to
be language-neutral, that is an impossibility. Plato believed in ideas existing for and
in themselves and to which we have only indirect access. Language for him was an
additional mediation, that is, another step away from the ideas. As a result, he did
not like language. Aristotle reinforced this Platonic separation of thought and
language. According to him, people ﬁrst think something and then use words to
communicate what they already thought without words. He believed that cognition
is possible without language, and language is exclusively for communication. Our
discourses have left such a conception of language far behind, but it is still very
present in everyday life; the phrase I know it, but I simply cannot express it betrays
an outdated language theory. It makes far more sense to say I know that there is
something to know, but I cannot think it yet since I have not sufﬁciently developed
my language and my world. Such an awareness of a lack is indeed the ﬁrst step
towards the ability to think what has not yet become world.
Christianity is the other foundation of the occidental tradition. It likewise does
language a disservice. Even when the Bible states, In the beginning was the word
(John 1:1), this word is the translation of the Greek logos, which allows for different
interpretations. Goethe’s Faust ponders this difﬁculty of translating logos and
decides, in the end, to translate it as action. This explains Faust’s striving for
knowledge by shaping things, which contains, in short, all the problems of
modernity. The Greek mind, due to its language theory, could not grasp Hebrew
thinking and its very different language thinking. Biblical Hebrew works with a
strongly differentiated system of hierarchical accents, where the semantics are not
situated in the single word but always only in the entire utterance, a connected unity
through these accents.
In the biblical Genesis, language does proffer mastery over the world; by naming
objects, Adam can become the world’s procurator. Communication, however, then
leads to disaster. The fall of man becomes possible by way of conversation.
However, it is only through this original sin that humans acquire knowledge and
awareness. The conversation, ﬁrst between the snake and Eve, then between Eve
and Adam, leads to the desire to eat from the tree of knowledge and thus become
godlike. Indeed, to some extent, humans achieve this goal; they become creators as
well, productive and aware individuals. However, it comes at a high price: they are
banned from paradise. Paradise in this vision is actually unaware existence. Without
language, humans are animals, pure nature, free of worries. Awareness, that is,
language, drives us out of the paradise of a simple, unreﬂected being. The desire for
2 Cf. for the following references to the history of European language theory [23]
502
M. Pajević

paradise is, in the ﬁnal instance, the desire for a mindless life. Before opting for this,
maybe we should think again…
Today, with genetic engineering, we are picking the fruit of the second tree of
paradise, the tree of life. One day, humanity will long for a state before this second
fall of man, when we could not interfere in the secret of life. However, it is
questionable whether the advantages to be gained from this new skill will be as
fantastic as those brought by language.
In the biblical story, God’s punishment of humanity for striving for godlike
knowledge was to make life hard and painful, but that could not keep humans from
their desire. Seeing that they wanted to be close to him in heaven by building the
Tower of Babel, God interfered with humanity’s communication possibilities by
creating many languages.
At the core of European intellectual history are thus two desires: the desire for
linguistic unity to communicate without difﬁculty and the desire for cognition
without language. The consequence is that the existing culturally developed lan-
guages have an enduring bad reputation. At any rate, modern science persists in its
animosity towards the natural languages and develops its own technical languages
to avoid contamination with what it sees as unclear vernaculars. Science strives for
objectivity, without any subjective, historical, or cultural elements; it is about pure
communication of facts; language is considered a simple means to that end. This
prejudice can be seen in the work of Francis Bacon, who wanted to cleanse lan-
guage of its false usage by the people and called words “idola fori,” that is, illusions
of the marketplace, full of stupid prejudice and unqualiﬁed for true thinking
(Novum Organum 1620, aphorism 43).
John Locke considered language “a mist before our eyes” [24], an obstacle, a
nuisance. Analytical philosophy of the twentieth century tried to get rid of this
obstacle to clear vision, and recent decades have seen an enormous increase in the
power of this approach. Analytical philosophers have understood with Bacon and
Wittgenstein that philosophy is taking place in language, but that does not mean
that language ﬁnds grace in philosophy’s eyes. On the contrary: Wittgenstein talks
about the “footstrings” (Fallstricke) of language, the reason is “bewitched” (ver-
hext), and thinking gets “bruises” (Beulen) by running against language [25]. Poor
thinking, a victim of evil language!
This conception only works on the premise that there is a universal truth hidden
behind the conceitful language. Even though Nietzsche had debunked this idea as
ridiculous and showed that truth is always constituted in language, which is his-
torical and cultural [26], our contemporary analytical philosophy still seems to think
like Plato in this respect. The time seems ripe to develop a different attitude towards
language.
There is, in fact, already another tradition to build on, true thinking language, a
tradition that considers the polyvalence and diversity of language not as evil but
rather as the richness and indeed foundation of our existence. Leibniz could be
considered as the inceptor of this tradition. His idea of the mind is of a pneumatics,
a conception based on breath, with the motto sympnoia panta: everything breathes
together. In this conception of togetherness, in which the mind is breath, language is
24
Poetic Thinking and the Constitution of Our World: On Language …
503

part of the global sounding: languages are no longer an obstacle to clear vision and
thinking but part of the world’s breathing. Thus, the world is conceived of as a
sounding together, as harmony and diversity is no longer something terrible but the
rich harmony of the world.
For Leibniz, the study of language served the knowledge of the human mind. He
called languages “the best mirror of the human mind,” allowing for the “wonderful
variety of its linguistic operations” [27]. From this vantage point, the arbitrariness
of meanings becomes something wonderful. What is needed, then, is a plurality of
perspectives to sound together and enrich the world.
As with Leibniz, it is not vision but hearing that is at the center of Herder’s
conception of language. Reason is not pure but linguistic reason: thought and word
emerge in unison with the encounter with the world. Consequently, our thinking is
dialogical. Wilhelm von Humboldt took these ideas further: language is “the
forming organ of thought.” That means ideas are created in language, and in this
“Arbeit des Geistes” (labor of the mind) [28], any thought is unique in being
uttered. Humboldt understood that also grammatically: namely by the sheer utter-
ance of an I addressing a You, human language presupposes dialogism, but he saw
just as well the necessity of another person’s reaction. The synthesis of language
thinking is only completed by my having someone else conﬁrm my words. That
implies that we can think only in common with others, which implies, in turn, that
each language act is historically unique, bringing in personal background. Thus,
everybody brings in their own individual language, and this inﬁnite variability
forms the richness of our worldviews, to come back to Humboldt’s term for lan-
guages, meaning perspectives on the world. By talking together, merging different
perspectives, humans create new perspectives. Poetic thinking is, therefore, a col-
lective creative process. This is a question of attitude. Accepting and welcoming the
diversity of languages and individuals, we cannot deﬁne truth as single or ‘ob-
jective’ anymore; truth becomes rather the entirety of perspectives, never com-
pleted. This makes totalitarianism impossible.
Speaking is always a friction between the power of language with its conven-
tions and the dynamic force of the speaking person, who, in each real moment of
speaking, transgresses predeﬁned ideas and shifts the mind’s limits. The more that
happens, the more the speaking is poetic. That means there is no speciﬁc poetic
language understood as fancy words or syntax, but poetic speaking takes place
when historicity and the cognitive combine.
When we consider language merely as signs, the creative process is ignored.
A sign is beyond this; we are already in knowledge mode. That is not at issue; what
is, is that we should not reduce language in that way since in language, we do not
only pass things on that we know, but language itself is also cognition; we create
the things to be passed on. Saussure deﬁned the sign, consisting of signiﬁer and
signiﬁed, “as two sides of a piece of paper” [29]. Nonetheless, the term implies
something static and hierarchic: the signiﬁer is secondary to the signiﬁed, which is
considered to be there already and then named. The value of a word, however,
another important term in Saussure, is not fully covered by the sign. Its value
depends on its environment, on historically grown and subjective associations, and
504
M. Pajević

on its interaction with other linguistic elements within the utterance. The sign
cannot think any of this. That is why it cannot think the literary either, and that, in
turn, is why literature is so revealing for our processes of meaning. Poetic thinking
thinks this surplus of the sign. Language is always only really happening in con-
nected speech; Humboldt held that grammar and the dictionary are nothing but a
“todtes Gerippe” (dead skeleton) [30]. He went so far as to claim, “In reality, speech
is not the connection of words that exist prior to it but, on the contrary, words
emanate out of the ensemble of speech” [31]. Poetic thinking thinks this togeth-
erness (Zusammenhang), not abstract elements put together. It is the togetherness
that makes sense; semantics not pure semiotics.
The French scholar and poet Henri Meschonnic developed a theory of rhythm to
think the organization of this togetherness better (see, for example, [32]). We
should not think of rhythm here as metrics, a ﬁxed and regular beat, Meschonnic
builds on Émile Benveniste’s discovery that rhythm originally comes from the word
qeim (rein), that is, to ﬂow, and was not applied to the waves but the ﬂowing of a
river. Consequently, rhythm is designated as a “form in movement, without organic
consistency and always subject to change, improvised, momentary and variable”
[33].
It was only Plato who made of this non-ﬁxed, ephemeral form a ﬁxed structural
principle. In thinking language, we use the term ‘rhythm’ to refer to this unﬁxed
form in movement. Following Benveniste, language has a double signifying
function. On the one hand, it is considered in its units, each unit taken one by one,
independently from all other units, that is, semiotically, as sign. On the other hand,
it is considered in the entire utterance semantically. The sign of semiotics is rec-
ognized; the discourse (that is how Benveniste deﬁned this smallest unit of lan-
guage, the utterance) is understood [34]. We can see the difference by considering
how Stanislavski, the famous dramatist, made actors repeat sevodnja večerom
(‘tonight’) in forty different ways, each time with another meaning, such as surprise,
fear, joy. The sign in itself does not make sense. The same word can mean all sorts
of things, depending on the context.
In discourse, the speaking persons manifest themselves as subjects. In saying I,
subjectivity takes place, each time a new one. We become subject by using lan-
guage. Since saying ‘I’ necessarily refers to a You, there is always another subject
in speaking; only an I and a You together can speak (there is at least an imaginary
You). Meschonnic formulates this as follows: “est sujet celui par qui un autre est
sujet” (subject is he/she by whom someone else is subject [35]. Full speaking means
to be subject to one another. There are ethical consequences of such thinking
language; people are in a mutual relationship. I will develop further this decisive
dialogical dimension shortly.
Poetic thinking allows us to think the literary of literature, which can be
extended to the arts in general. The arts are an essential part of humanity, even
though they will never take a central place; they are marginal by nature. They
cannot be fully integrated into social contexts because doing so would suspend their
freedom from society’s criteria. It is exactly this marginality, which allows for the
development of new visions of life forms, new options for thinking and acting. The
24
Poetic Thinking and the Constitution of Our World: On Language …
505

faster the conditions of life change, the more we need this laboratory of the mind
and senses to develop something new. This is why every society should foster and
promote the arts.
In poetic thinking, it is not the practical context that is decisive but rather the
contemplation and perception of the phenomena as such. However, concerning
language, literature is far from being extraordinary. Instead, while we mostly reduce
language to sign communication, only poetic speaking uses the full potential of
language. Poetic speech is full speech. When we use formulaic language or
automatism, we are not poetic. Without poetic thinking, social life would be
impoverished, reduced to functional existence. The human and the poetic are
inseparable. The poetic is, with Humboldt’s words, “ein aufglimmernder Funke in
der thierischen Dumpfheit” (a glimmering spark in the brute dullness) [36].
The constant battle between the regularities of language and the liberty of each
speaking is fought the most intensely in literature, which means the literary is this
labor of the mind. The poetic, then, is this human creativity, beyond functionality.
The poetic is ultimately language in which the human coincides with itself. Poetic
thinking means to think the process of being; as Humboldt said about language, it is
not ergon (product) but energeia (activity) [37]. In this process, a transformation
occurs: the relation between the human being and the world changes. The form of
language and the form of life condition one another. Since our world consists
largely of our relation to it, the transformation of our relation to the world also
transforms our world.
Dialogical Thought
Dialogical thought is the second pillar of poetic thinking. It relies on a tradition that
goes back to the eighteenth century and peaks in the ﬁrst third of the twentieth
century, probably triggered by World War I and ended by Fascism. It is based on
the idea that we can fully think humanity only in the relationship between an I and a
You, that is, dialogically. The philosopher Ludwig Feuerbach called this “the
philosophy of the future” in 1843 [38]. It still remains in the future, it seems;
hopefully a not too distant one.
More recently, there have been some indications that dialogical thought is
gaining importance. Jean-Luc Nancy explained that coexistence precedes existence,
and each I comes out of a We; our singularity is consequently always plural [39].
Peter Sloterdijk, in his major Sphere-Trilogy, developed the idea of the original
space being a bubble of two, duality thus being the fundamental human condition
and humans are more dividuals than individuals [40]. Being human always means
being-with. There exists no humanity in the abstract but always only concrete
human beings, an I and a You.
In my view, even though Nancy and Sloterdijk do not refer to him, dialogical
thinking has been best developed by Martin Buber [41]. Buber’s roots lie in Eastern
Jewish Hassidism. This community wanted to overcome the distance between the
506
M. Pajević

holy and the profane; humans need to reach the divine by their everyday actions.
This aspiration is based on the belief that God needs humans in order to come into
the world. That means that it is the responsibility of humans to give the world
divine form and secure God’s existence on earth. For this, one needs to be in
relation to people and the world. It is about the With-World (Mit-Welt). Conse-
quently, dialogical thinking thinks and cultivates the in-between.
Being, says Buber, appears in the “Wirbel des Geschehens” (whirl of the
events); we are exposed to it and cannot control it. We can protect ourselves against
it by blocking it or harnessing ourselves, or we can expose ourselves to it and enter
into being. When we do this, we realize reality and thus really become [41, p. 17].
For Buber, there are two “fundamental words”: the I-You and the I-It.
Depending on which we speak, we take a different general attitude. When saying
I-You, we speak “with our entire being,” when saying I-It, never. Our general mode
of being is in the I-It; this is the way we experience the world. We are an entity that
separates itself from a world of objects which we can deal with. This is useful and
functional. However, if this mode becomes too dominant, we cannot realize the
world anymore since our attitude does not allow it.
In order to realize, we have to be in the I-You. Then we are not separated from
the world, there is no opposition between our subjectivity and the objects, but it is
the relationship itself that becomes our subjectivity. There is no longer any
subject-object division. Instead, we are in a subject-subject relationship with the
world. Only then, Buber says, are we real persons.
We cannot voluntarily decide upon which mode we are in, but a certain attitude
can help enter this I-You relationship. Intending this relation can support its hap-
pening; when we protect ourselves against it, it will be less likely. The I-You can be
compared to a moment of real presence. As such, it escapes the dimensions of time
and space. It disappears when we want to grasp it. It is like Derrida’s différance: the
unavoidable shift between the phenomenon or event and its representation [42].
This is why we can bear the presence of the You only momentarily; the You has to
become It, object, again. There is no durable being in this charged sense. We also
cannot make the You an object of knowledge; it then becomes an object, an It,
automatically. The I-It is the normal world; the I-You erupts only ephemerally,
rarely.
However, these I-You-moments are indispensable for being human. It is only
then that humans ﬁnd their real being, real life. This does not take anything away
from what is conceptually graspable, objects; we should, however, not forget the
existence of a beyond. In the I-It, we have no such opportunity. We should develop
a discourse and terminology to allow for the integration of the I-You in our lives.
This is what poetic thinking tries to do, making presence intelligible, immanently,
in an immanent transcendence [43]. The poetic is this in-between having taken
shape. That is why it touches us when we enter the I-You again. Poetic thinking
cannot solve the problem of the awareness of being, and that is not its purpose, but
it can integrate it into a philosophy of life that does not ignore key elements of
human life. It is a question of attitude.
24
Poetic Thinking and the Constitution of Our World: On Language …
507

Conclusion
Poetic thinking thus combines thinking language and dialogical thinking to culti-
vate a different approach to the human. I deﬁne it as the transformative power in the
interaction between the form of life and the form of language that operates when a
subject constitutes itself creatively and dialogically, transforming its ways of feeling
and thinking; it thus transforms how the world is perceived.
Poetic thinking cannot be achieved once and for all; it is to be done over and
over again, moment by moment, the constant labor of the mind. Mostly we have to
function within clearly deﬁned contexts, which is ﬁne. However, poetic thinking is
a corrective, reminding us again and again that we should not lose sight of what it
means to be human. For that, we need to be aware of the processes of
meaning-making in language and the I-You relationship.
Since we do not have any direct access to reality, what is at stake in our thinking
is less reality than our access to reality, which determines our reality. When talking
about reality, we have to talk about our access to it. We have to gain our reality.
Poetic thinking opens up paths via dialogical thinking and thinking language. It
does not ﬁt into existing categories. That is why it is an agent of change and
transformation, and that makes it necessary and dangerous at the same time. Rec-
ognizing all this, functional thought gets destabilized and wants to suppress it.
However, without the meaning-making force of poetic thinking, humanity would
lose not only its speciﬁcity but also its chances for survival.
Poetic thinking is not against conceptual thinking; it simply rejects its exclusivity
claims. They are complementary; one cannot survive without the other. Poetic
thinking aims at bridging the gap between conceptual thinking and immanent
transcendence. A certain attitude is a precondition, as is paying the necessary
attention to language and the in-between. It involves opening up to the world to be
embraced by it. We have to develop exercises to cultivate what we want to be. We
also need to know what we want to be and what we gain and lose by it, and then
decide each time again. By integrating poetic thinking into our worldview, we grant
it forming power over our reality. By cultivating this attitude, we do exercises that
shape our being. If we want a more human world, we have to grant more space to
what we consider our human speciﬁcity, by thinking poetically.3
Core Messages
• We do not have direct access to reality; our perceptions are shaped by our
concepts, that is, by language.
• Poetics looks at phenomena in their togetherness and thus does more
justice to reality than pure analytics.
3 This contribution builds to a large extent on my book Poetisches Denken und die Frage nach
dem Menschen. Grundzüge einer poetologischen Anthropologie [44].
508
M. Pajević

• The separation of mind and body is obsolete, and bioengineering, a
technological approach to the human, is erroneous.
• Dialogical
thinking
fosters
subject-subject
relationships
instead
of
subject-object relationships.
• Poetic thinking is a transformative power in the interaction between the
form of life and the form of language.
References
1. Kant I (1998) Critique of Pure Reason, trans. In: Paul G, Allen W. Wood (ed) Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press 177: A27
2. Dürr H-P (2009) Warum es ums Ganze geht: Neues Denken für eine Welt im Umbruch.
oekom verlag
3. Heisenberg W (1967) Sprache und Wirklichkeit in der modernen Physik (1960). Gesammelte
Werke Abteilung C Allgemeinverständliche Schriften 2:271–301
4. French AP, Kennedy PJ, Feuer LS (1986) Niels Bohr: a Centenary Volume. American
Association of Physics Teachers
5. Lakoff G, Johnson M (1980) Conceptual Metaphor in Everyday Language. J Philos 77
(8):453–486
6. Cassin B (2004) Vocabulaire européen des philosophies: dictionnaire des intraduisibles.
Seuil; in English: (2014) Dictionary of Untranslatables: A Philosophical Lexicon. Princeton
UP
7. von Humboldt W (1903–36) Gesammelte Schriften, Band IV. B. Behrs Verlag, p 27
8. Goethe JW (2005) Faust. Scene The Study, verses 1936–39
9. Tomasello M (2014) A Natural History of Human Thinking. Harvard University Press
10. Hüther G (2016) Bedienungsanleitung für ein menschliches Gehirn. Vandenhoeck &
Ruprecht
11. Bauer J (2005) Warum ich fühle, was du fühlst: intuitive Kommunikation und das Geheimnis
der Spiegelneurone. Hoffmann u. Campe
12. Plessner H (1980) Anthropologie der Sinne, Gesammelte Schriften III. Suhrkamp, pp 149–
150
13. Wilde O (2008) The Picture of Dorian Gray. 1891. Penguin
14. Seubold G (2006) Der Mensch und sein Bild. Die humantechnologische Mobilmachung und
der idealische Menschenkörper. Vortrag zum 30. Todestag Martin Heideggers. In: Human-
technologie und Menschenbild. Mit einem Blick auf Heidegger. Denkmal Verlag, pp 17–46
15. de La Mettrie JO (1748) L'homme machine. Leyden
16. Sloterdĳk P (2009) Du musst dein Leben ändern. Suhrkamp
17. Sloterdĳk P (1999) Regeln für den Menschenpark. Suhrkamp
18. Loyola SI (2007) The Spiritual Exercises of St. Ignatius of Loyola. Cosimo
19. Foucault M (1976) Histoire de la sexualité, 1. Gallimard, La volonté de savoir
20. Freud S (1989) Jenseits des Lustprinzips. Studienausgabe. 1920. Fischer
21. von Humboldt W (1903–36) Gesammelte Schriften, Band VII. B. Behrs Verlag, p 583
22. Wittgenstein L (1963) Tractatus logico-philosophicus. 1921. Suhrkamp
23. Trabant J (2003) Mithridates im Paradies: Kleine Geschichte des Sprachdenkens. CH Beck
24. Locke J (1847) An Essay Concerning Human Understanding. Kay & Troutman
25. Wittgenstein L (1971) Philosophische Untersuchungen. Suhrkamp
24
Poetic Thinking and the Constitution of Our World: On Language …
509

26. Nietzsche F (1988) Ueber Wahrheit und Lüge im aussermoralischen Sinne. 1873. Kritische
Studienausgabe, 15 vol, vol 1. de Gruyter, pp 873–897
27. Leibniz GW (1966) Nouveaux essais sur l'entendement humain. Garnier-Flammarion
28. von Humboldt W (1903–36) Gesammelte Schriften, Band VII. B. Behrs Verlag, p 46
29. De Saussure F (1972) Cours de linguistique générale (1916). Edition critique préparée par T
de Mauro. Payot
30. Meschonnic H (1982) Critique du rythme: anthropologie historique du langage. Verdier
31. von Humboldt W (1903–36) Gesammelte Schriften, Band VI.1. B. Behrs Verlag, p 147
32. von Humboldt W (1903–36) Gesammelte Schriften, Band VII.1. B. Behrs Verlag, p 72
33. Benveniste E (1966) Problèmes de linguistique générale 1. Gallimard, p 333
34. Benveniste É (1974) Problèmes de linguistique générale 2. Gallimard, pp 64–65
35. Meschonnic H (2007) Dans le bois de la langue. Laurence Teper, p 42
36. von Humboldt W (1903–36) Gesammelte Schriften, Band VI. B. Behrs Verlag, p 156
37. von Humboldt W (1903–36) Gesammelte Schriften, Band VII. B. Behrs Verlag, p 45
38. Feuerbach L (1967) Grundsätze der Philosophie der Zukunft. 1843. Werke in sechs Bänden,
Bd. 3. Suhrkamp, pp 247–322
39. Nancy J-L (1996) Être singulier pluriel. Galilée
40. Sloterdijk P, Heinrichs H-J (2001) Die Sonne und der Tod. Dialogische Untersuchungen.
Suhrkamp, p 144
41. Buber M (1962) Ich und Du. 1923. Werke, 3 volumes, vol 1. München, p 79
42. Derrida J (1967) La voix et le phénomène. PUF
43. Tugendhat E (2007) Anthropologie statt Metaphysik. Beck, pp 26–28
44. Pajević M (2012) Poetisches Denken und die Frage nach dem Menschen. Grundzüge einer
poetologischen Anthropologie. Alber
Marko Pajević Professor of German at Tartu University, fol-
lowing posts at the Sorbonne, QUBelfast, Royal Holloway and
Queen Mary, U. of London, has published widely on poetics,
including the volumes Paul Celan Today. A Companion (2021),
Mehrsprachigkeit und das Politische (2020), German and Euro-
pean Poetics after the Holocaust (2012) and Poésie et musicalité
(2007). He has written monographs on Paul Celan, Zur Poetik Paul
Celan’s. Gedicht und Mensch – Die Arbeit am Sinn (2000), and
Franz Kafka, Kafka lesen. Acht Textanalysen (2009). The core of
his work is the development of a poetological anthropology; see
his monograph Poetisches Denken und die Frage nach dem
Menschen (2012). His interest in ‘thinking language’ prompted
Special Issues of Forum for Modern Language Studies (Humboldt
2017, 53/1), Comparative Critical Studies (Meschonnic 2018,
15/3), and The Meschonnic Reader. A Poetics of Society (2019).
See Academia for Poetic Thinking for his overarching research
project: apt.ut.ee.
510
M. Pajević

25
Thinking as the Invention of New
Aspects Within Language-Games
Cristiane Maria Cornelia Gottschalk
“Is thinking, so to speak, a speciﬁc organic process of the mind
—chewing and digesting in the mind, as it were? Can one then
replace it with an inorganic process that fulﬁls the same
purpose, so to speak, with a prosthesis for thinking? How
should one imagine a thinking prosthesis?”.
Ludwig Wittgenstein. (The author’s translation)
Summary
This is a philosophical reﬂection on the concept of thinking, having as a
theoretical reference the conception of language by the philosopher Ludwig
Wittgenstein, developed in the second phase of his thinking. From this
perspective, there is no thought without language, and the foundations of
meaning are not extralinguistic but are expressed in the uses we make of words
and our linguistic expressions, thus constituting a grammar of uses of concepts,
which starts to guide our actions and thinking. Initially, some fundamental
concepts of Wittgenstein are introduced, such as “language-game,” “family
resemblances,” “following rules,” and “life forms,” aiming to relativize the
image that the linguistic expression of thinking must correspond to a certain
organic mechanism, of a physiological nature, or to some process of an ineffable
nature. I argue that the “essence” of the concept of thinking is expressed in the
C. M. C. Gottschalk (&)
University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil
e-mail: crisgott@usp.br
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), São Paulo, Brazil
Avenida da Universidade, 308, São Paulo-SP, Brazil
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh (eds.), Thinking, Integrated Science 7,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04075-7_25
511

grammar of this concept, regardless of any brain or mental processes that may
occur concurrently. I conclude by suggesting a new use for the concept of
thinking, namely, as an activity of following rules learned within a form of life,
along which new relations of sense are constituted through a work of language.
Rabbit–duck illusion
(Adapted from Wikimedia Commons, the free media repository https://upload.
wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/1/13/PSM_V54_D328_Optical_illusion_of_
a_duck_or_a_rabbit_head.png)
Keywords
Essence  Following rules  Grammar  Image  Language-game  Thinking 
Wittgenstein
512
C. M. C. Gottschalk

QR Code
Scanning the QR code directs you to the word cloud of the chapter that is made up
of the words we discussed throughout the whole book in relation to the chapter’s
keyword, which is intentionally not included in the word cloud. Find the keyword
and put it in place in the puzzle according to the clues provided in chap. 36. The
mystery hidden in the puzzle is the quote of THINKING: Bioengineering of Science
and Art.
Introduction
The rhetorical questions in the beginning quote were formulated by the philosopher
Ludwig Wittgenstein, with the goal of relativizing dogmatic positions of philoso-
phers (mentalists, behaviourists, logicists and pragmatists, among others)1 regard-
ing the meaning of the concept of thinking. Despite the different answers to these
questions, Wittgenstein’s interlocutors shared the same conception of language
among themselves; namely, its propositions would always have the same objective:
to transmit thoughts about objects in the world in general, whether they belong to
the empirical world, or related to the individual’s internal sensations, or even,
objects belonging to the ﬁeld of ethics, such as good and evil. The words would,
therefore, only have the function of naming the objects of the world, as if those
were labels that we put on them. It follows, then, from this referential conception of
language, the idea that: “every word has a meaning. This meaning is correlated with
the word. It is the object for which the word stands.” [1, PI 1].2 In other words, the
meaning of a word must be located in an extralinguistic domain. For example, it
would sufﬁce to point to the empirical object “table” to access the meaning of this
word.
1 Among the main interlocutors of Wittgenstein who addressed the theme of thought, we can
mention, in particular, the philosophers Augustine, William James, Bertrand Russell, Gottlob
Frege, and surprisingly, also the young Wittgenstein, who in the ﬁrst phase of his thought had
written his ﬁrst great work, the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, in which is established, as the
purpose of philosophy, the logical clariﬁcation of thoughts.
2 From now on, I will use the abbreviation PI for Philosophical Investigations, OC for On
Certainty and Z for Zettel.
25
Thinking as the Invention of New Aspects Within Language-Games
513

However, as one cannot ostensibly point to something in the external world that
corresponds to what we call thought, some philosophers started to look for the
reference of the word “thinking” within the individual. Was there something cor-
responding to this word, an organic mental process equivalent to a physiological
process such as chewing and digesting, but in the individual’s brain? The difﬁ-
culties in ﬁnding a speciﬁc organic process as the reference of thought make this
behaviourist position come to be refuted by mentalist philosophers, who raise new
questions: would it then be an inorganic process, such as a kind of prosthesis? If so,
what would this prosthesis of thought look like? Would it be a gaseous mental
entity? All of these questions, when guided by the referential model of meaning,
lead us to expect the indication of some entity or process that would be the ultimate
reference of the concept in question. My goal will be to show that it is only through
clarifying the uses we make of the word “thinking” that we can come up with an
answer about its essence. Otherwise, the questions only multiply with each
hypothesis formulated, posing new problems, for the most part, insoluble.
In this sense, I will resort to Wittgenstein’s ideas about the relations among
language, thinking, and the world, present in his writings from the thirties, during
which a new conception of language emerged. According to him, when we look at
how we actually use the words of our language, we will see that it performs
multiple functions, in addition to its strictly referential use. This panoramic view of
language allows the dissolution of metaphysical problems, which are, for the most
part, generated by a reductionist and dogmatic view of language. In order to avoid
them, Wittgenstein suggests that we ﬁght against the force of images3 that arise
when we privilege a single use of our concepts as if there were the correct appli-
cation of each word or a single reference that would express the essence of its
meaning. In this text, I address the following images resulting from certain inter-
pretations of the concept of thinking:
i. that the word “thinking” must refer to a private mental process (yet to be
unveiled by cognitive scientists) that is independent of language;
ii. that language would have the sole purpose of transmitting or communicating
the meaning given to it by a psychological or physiological process of
thinking; and
iii. that there would be a causal relationship between a supposed mental apparatus
(organic or inorganic) and what we think and say.
In contrast to these images, I argue that the fundamentals of the meaning of
thinking are not extralinguistic but are expressed in the uses we make of the word
“thinking,” thus constituting a grammar4 of this concept. This linguistic paradigm
3 We will adopt here a technical sense of the word “image”, used by Wittgenstein (in the second
phase of his thought) to refer to statements that express unilateral interpretations of meaning,
leading us to postulate extralinguistic entities as being its foundation.
4 The word “grammar” is used by Wittgenstein not in the sense of the syntax of a language, but as
an open system of propositions, intertwined with one another, that play the role of rules. These
propositions, in turn, are called grammatical propositions, with a normative or merely indicative
514
C. M. C. Gottschalk

shift, in addition to making it possible to question the broader image that each
psychological concept (such as thinking) must correspond to a certain organic
mechanism of a physiological nature, also prevents the appearance of false prob-
lems arising from this and other related images, in the most varied ﬁelds of
knowledge.5 With a view to relativizing them, I present initially some fundamental
concepts by Wittgenstein, such as “language-game,” “family resemblances,” “fol-
lowing rules” and “forms of life” (used by him as tools for the dissolution of
philosophical problems arising from an exclusively referential conception of lan-
guage); and, in a second moment, I use these conceptual tools in order to resume the
questions posed by the epigraph at the beginning of the text, clarifying them from
the description of the effective uses that we make of the concept of “thinking.” I
conclude by suggesting that we look at this concept, among other uses, as
expressing our ability to invent new relations of sense6 within what the Austrian
philosopher calls language-games.
Seeing Aspects: Ambiguous Gestalt Figures and Conceptual
Perception
Let us consider shown above the image of the duck-rabbit, perhaps the most well-
known ﬁgure of the Gestalt,7 a movement of psychology that emerged in the early
twentieth century that had as one of its objectives to study the phenomena of
perception. The ambiguous ﬁgures used by this movement to understand how to
move from form to psychological content, in my view, inspired Wittgenstein to
clarify other enigmatic questions central throughout his work, namely, those related
to the relations among language, thinking, and the world and, in particular, to the
mechanisms of the constitution of meaning through language.
function, and which would be distinct from empirical propositions, which have a descriptive
function.
5 In particular, in the ﬁeld of education. One of the “competences” most demanded by public
policies for basic education in Brazil is the development of critical thinking in children, among
other competences, assuming the existence of mental structures (which would be the ultimate
foundation of a single rationality, universal and natural), yet to be unveiled by cognitive scientists.
The pedagogical practices resulting from these premises, then, consider the teacher as a mere
mediator and/or facilitator of learning situations, prioritizing the know how over the know that, and
thus depriving the child of the access to meaningful conditions for effective learning [2].
6 As opposed to cause and effect relations, characteristics of empirical sciences. These can be
veriﬁed through empirical observation and experimentation, while the relations of sense are
connections of a conventional nature, as we will explain below.
7 This psychological theory was formulated by the German psychologists Max Wertheimer (1880–
1943), Wolfgang Köhler (1887–1967) and Kurt Koffka (1886–1940), at the beginning of the
twentieth century, having inspired Wittgenstein to reﬂect on the concept of “seeing aspects”,
fundamental in his late work, and also contributing to forge another crucial concept for the
application of his philosophical method, the concept of “family resemblances”.
25
Thinking as the Invention of New Aspects Within Language-Games
515

In fact, if the meaning of what is observed does not depend on language, as it
was believed strongly and in a hegemonic way until the beginning of the last
century, how is it explained that some immediately see a duck when looking at this
ﬁgure, while others immediately see a rabbit? If I had asked the reader of this text to
imagine a duck, would he/she have imagined exactly the duck seen in the picture
above? What, then, makes it possible for everyone (or almost everyone) to see a
duck in the picture above?
A Platonic philosopher might answer that there would be a duck essence and that
this ﬁgure would be an approximation of what it is to be a duck, and through a
mental process of remembrance, everyone would be able to recognize a duck in the
ﬁgure above. Neoplatonics would say more that the duck concept is an exact
concept with well-deﬁned limits; otherwise, we would not be able to recognize a
duck in the ﬁgure above. In contrast to these essentialist assumptions, from a
Wittgensteinian perspective of language, we are able to see a duck in this ﬁgure
simply because we have learned to use the word “duck” in different situations (we
have seen at least some ducks in life, even if only in ﬁgures drawn in books or
pictures taken of ducks), and we compare8 the different ducks. Throughout this
comparison, we do not extract a “duck essence” or something like that, but we see
only similarities among them, similarities to a greater or lesser degree [1, PI 66].
These similarities are called by Wittgenstein “family resemblances” because
they are analogous to the similarities that are commonly found among members of
the same family of human beings. When we are introduced to a new member of a
family, for example, we perceive an “air of family” between him or her and his or
her family, not because the person has a physiognomic trait common to everyone in
the family, but simply because he/she has similarities with several of his/her family
members in different ways: “stature, physiognomic features, eye colour, walking,
temperament, etc.” (PI 67). In fact, analogously, a good part of our concepts, even
the most abstract ones, also have similarities, such as the concept of number:
“and likewise, the kinds of number, for example, form a family. Why do we call something
a “number”? Well, perhaps because it has a—direct—afﬁnity with several things that have
hitherto been called “number”; and this can be said to give it an indirect afﬁnity with other
things that we also call “numbers”. And we extend our concept of number, as in spinning a
thread we twist ﬁbre on ﬁbre. And the strength of the thread resides not in the fact that some
one ﬁbre runs through its whole length, but in the overlapping of many ﬁbres” [1, PI 67].
A child who enters school, in general, already knows how to use the word
number to count, using the natural numbers already memorized by him/her.
However, this is one of the possible uses for the word number. Gradually, he/she
will learn how to use numbers to measure, and in this process, new numbers,
rational numbers, will be introduced. Then he/she will learn how to use numbers to
solve equations, and he/she will be introduced to other kinds of numbers, such as
irrational and complex numbers. And so on. With each new application of the word
8 Remembering that the activity of comparing is a learned technique, since it is not something
natural, as if we made the same comparisons through intuition or something similar, which would
be common to all.
516
C. M. C. Gottschalk

number it does not imply abandoning the previous ones; on the contrary,
throughout this process, new aspects of this concept are learned by the child,
aspects that were invented by mathematicians throughout the history of mathe-
matics, involving the mastery of different techniques, such as counting, measuring,
adding, dividing, etc.
However, if we are tied to a referential conception of language, our tendency will
be to assume that the word number must refer to something extralinguistic. For
example, if we are realistic mathematicians (Neoplatonics), we will believe in the
existence of an ideal mathematical world, in which it would be possible to discover
the essence of number, which would be common to all these different applications
of the word “number,” and we start to look for an exact deﬁnition of this concept.
As if the meaning of the word number was previously given in an ideal world,
regardless of its conventional uses. A dogmatic image of the word number appears,
which is expressed in the idea that there would be an exact deﬁnition of the concept,
yet to be discovered by mathematicians, so that, once in possession of this deﬁ-
nition, we would be able to apply the word number to any circumstance, as if the
understanding of the concept given by deﬁnition already contained all of its future
applications.9 This analytical conception of the meaning of a concept leads to
several problems not only in the ﬁeld of mathematics but in all areas of
knowledge.10
These confusions, in general, can be avoided if we look at how we actually use
language. In particular, the concept of family resemblances makes it possible to
question a privileged use of the concept of number, or duck, and by extension, of
any other concept, and the images that derive from this referential conception of
language. If we look at the effective use that we make of our concepts, we will see
that there are countless applications that we make of a certain word without a
supposed essence corresponding to it, which would be common to all its applica-
tions. What we have, as Wittgenstein observes in the quote mentioned above, are
just family resemblances, overlapping each other to a greater or lesser extent, which
makes the concept more “robust.”11 Consequently, the meaning of a word is being
formed as it is used in different situations. In Wittgenstein’s words: “For a large
class of cases of the employment of the word “meaning” – though not for all – this
word can be explained in this way: the meaning of a word is its use in the language”
[1 PI 43].
9 Cf. [1 PI 197, 218].
10 In the ﬁeld of education, for example, we know that, in the classroom, the situation of the
student who seems to have understood a certain concept is commonplace, and yet, he or she
hesitates to apply it in new situations, or even continues to apply it, at a certain moment, in a
different way from what his or her teacher expected. As I have already defended in other works,
pedagogical practices anchored in a referential conception of language leads to several learning
difﬁculties, insofar as the existence of absolute meanings (as the ultimate foundations of our
concepts) is mistakenly assumed, which supposedly guarantee their application in any
circumstances.
11 Cf. [1 PI 67].
25
Thinking as the Invention of New Aspects Within Language-Games
517

Thus, meaning does not have a prior existence to language; on the contrary, it is
gradually constituted, based on a work of language, which involves not only words,
but also several activities interspersed with elements of the empirical world, such as
objects, sensations, feelings, and also involving interlocutors in speciﬁc contexts of
the application of words. Hence, Wittgenstein starts to use the concept of
“language-game” instead of referring only to language to emphasize that words are
immersed in our forms of life12 [1 PI 23]. Returning to the concept of number, the
word number is used in different everyday or formal situations, or in Wittgen-
steinian terminology, in different language-games. Its meaning is being constituted
as this word is applied in an activity of counting, measuring, calculating, etc.; that
is, we can talk about different aspects of the concept of number, analogously to the
different aspects of an ambiguous Gestalt ﬁgure.
Resuming the image of the duck-rabbit, the meaning of the word “duck” is also
not previously given in the ﬁgure. Otherwise, how do you explain that some people
immediately see a rabbit and not a duck? In order to make sense of what we are
observing, we organize our empirical experience based on the words we already
know. We will only be able to see a duck if we have already acquired the duck
concept, and we only observe a rabbit if we have already learned the rabbit concept.
In other words, our sensitive perception is already conceptual. It is through lan-
guage that we organize our experience in order to focus on certain aspects of the
empirical world to the detriment of other aspects. A person who has seen a duck
immediately will have to shift his attention to other fragments of the empirical
world in order to see a rabbit. If he/she ﬁnds it difﬁcult to see the rabbit, someone
can help him/her by saying: “See the duck’s beak as the rabbit’s ears!” Thus, when
we are able to see the rabbit in the same ﬁgure, a new aspect emerges: we start to
look at that same empirical experience in another way.
Similarly, the appearance of a new aspect can occur in relation to the same
object, for example, when we meet someone we have not seen for many years, and
we do not recognize him/her. And in this case, Wittgenstein imagines the following
situation: “suddenly, I recognize him, I see his old face in his changed face. I be-
lieve that, if I knew how to paint, I would now portray it in a different way” [1 PI
p. 259]. It is as if a new form had emerged, giving a new meaning to what was
being observed until then.
Nevertheless, it is not just the empirical experiences that propitiate the emer-
gence of new aspects. A mathematics teacher can introduce his/her student to
rational numbers, telling him/her: “see rational numbers as the ratio of two natural
numbers,” thus introducing a new aspect of the concept of number, or in other
terms, establishing, thus, a new sense for the concept of number. The student may
or may not accept this suggestion from the teacher, and here we have an example of
an epistemological obstacle in the classroom. The introduction of rational numbers
is not mathematical evidence, as if the mathematician had simply discovered
12 The expression “form of life” is also crucial in Wittgenstein’s work, although it is mentioned by
him few times, and never deﬁned. However, throughout his work, it appears that this concept is
used by him to refer to our habits, customs and institutions.
518
C. M. C. Gottschalk

something pre-existing, but only a new relation of sense that is being established,
invented by mathematicians, involving several techniques of a conventional nature.
Finally, both in relation to the sensitive experience and in relation to ideal objects,
“to see as” allows new aspects to emerge, new senses for what is being observed,
said, or thought. New relations of sense are instituted, which start to play the role of
rules, rules that we learn to follow in our different language-games.13
The Autonomy of Grammar in Relation to the Empirical
Although Wittgenstein has never deﬁned what he means by “language-game,” in
paragraph 23 of his work Philosophical Investigations, he provides us with several
instances for language-games:
• “giving orders and acting on them;
• describing an object by its appearance or by its measurements;
• constructing an object from a description (a drawing);
• reporting an event;
• speculating about the event;
• forming and testing a hypothesis;
• presenting the results of an experiment in tables and diagrams;
• making up a story and reading one;
• acting in a play;
• singing rounds;
• guessing riddles;
• cracking a joke; telling one;
• solving a problem in applied arithmetic;
• translating from one language into another; and
• requesting, thanking, cursing, greeting, praying.”
As we see above, many of these language-games involve activities that do not
refer to something in the world outside or inside of the individual but only express
certain habits and ways of acting. Greeting a person, giving an order, telling a joke,
solving a math problem, or thanking someone are customs and institutions shared
by a community. Giving an order, for example, is analogous to a rule that we have
learned to follow [1 PI 206]. If I say to someone, “Close the door!” I hope that
person will follow the order given; otherwise, I will say he/she has transgressed the
order. Similarly, all language-games involve a set of rules, which we learn to
follow.
13 The expression “language-game” is fundamental in the mature Wittgenstein’s work, in that it
allows us to see more closely the multiplicity of language, which is not reduced to verbal terms,
but involves several regulated activities, as in a game. From this new perspective, language is seen
as an open set of language-games, which will give rise to a new conception of meaning.
25
Thinking as the Invention of New Aspects Within Language-Games
519

However, the rules are not always explained; a good part of them is learned
tacitly. I do not teach a child, for example, that “this is a duck” or that “this is a
rabbit” or that “ducks exist” and that “rabbits exist,” but I tell them: “Look at how
many ducks there are in the pond today!,” “What a big rabbit!,” “How long the
rabbit’s ears are…,” and so on.14 In general, I do not give a deﬁnition of the words
duck or rabbit to a small child; he/she will learn the meaning of these concepts
throughout the use that is made of them in different situations, thus constituting a
grammar of uses of these words.
In general, grammars are interrelated, generating open systems that give rise to
what Wittgenstein calls “language-games.” The word “game” in this expression has
the purpose of emphasizing the regulated character of the activities that are involved
with the words of our language because speaking a language, according to him, is
similar to playing a game. Just imagine that the words of a language take the place
of the pieces of a board game, such as chess, and their uses are equivalent to the
rules we follow to move the pieces (the pawn moves forward, the knight in an “L”
movement, the rook horizontally and vertically, and so on). When starting the
game, the rules of chess do not determine the move that will be made; they only
guide what is possible and what is not possible to do. Similarly, language also
constitutes rules that we learn to follow when applying our words and which, when
expressed linguistically, are called grammatical propositions by Wittgenstein.
For example, “this is a duck,” “this is my hand,” “the word duck has four
letters,” “a thing is identical with itself,” “the Earth exists,” “I have a body,”
“human beings see” etc., are certainties that we incorporate and that we take for
granted.15 I cannot imagine that I do not see the duck in the picture above, or that
this is not my hand, that I do not have a body, or that the word duck does not have
four letters, let alone that not everything is identical to itself! Those statements, in
general, are not used to refer to the things in the world. There is no need to verify
them. They are neither true nor false; they are conditions of meaning for our
descriptions of the empirical world. They themselves do not express knowledge
about the world and are not always explicit. A good part of them, as already
mentioned above, is learned tacitly, making it possible to afﬁrm with meaning that
“a duck is swimming in the pond,” or that “the planet Earth is being destroyed by
human beings,” that “people go to museums to see works of art,” among other
statements with a descriptive function.
We do not explicitly learn, for example, that “human beings see,” but this is a
“rule” that we learn to follow to apply the word “see” in propositions with a
descriptive use. Nor do we learn that “the Earth exists” and that “mountains and
rivers exist;” however, when children read in the geography books about rivers and
mountains, it is as if they “swallow” these statements.16 These come to express our
certainties: “when we ﬁrst begin to believe anything, what we believe is not a single
14 Cf. [3 OC 476].
15 Some of these examples are given by Wittgenstein himself, in his writings which were
organized in the work On Certainty [3].
16 Cf. [3 OC 143–144].
520
C. M. C. Gottschalk

proposition, it is a whole system of propositions. (Light dawns gradually over the
whole)” [3 OC 141]. Our most fundamental beliefs, in turn, gradually form a
grammar within us, which becomes autonomous in relation to the empirical [4]. In
fact, I can talk about ducks and rabbits, about internal sensations, such as pain or
happiness, or even about ideal objects, such as rational, complex, or inﬁnite
numbers, regardless of an alleged extralinguistic reference. I do not need to be in
pain, for example, to be able to talk about pain.17 The meanings of words are given
by the rules we learn to follow, which constitute the grammar of their respective
concepts. According to Wittgenstein: “Grammar tells what kind of object anything
is. (Theology as grammar)” [1 PI 373].
Unlike our empirical propositions, grammatical propositions play a transcen-
dental function, constituting the meaning of what we observe, think and say. While
empirical statements are contingent, grammatical propositions are necessary, such
as the laws of logic or statements in a geometric system. However, the evidence for
their statements is not because they refer to any absolute truths, but simply because
we learned to follow them at the same time that we were learning other things. We
are the ones who attribute necessity to them.
Putting a grammatical proposition into question is equivalent to putting the
entire proposition system at risk: “it is not single axioms that strike me as obvious,
it is a system in which consequences and premises give one another mutual sup-
port” [3 OC 142]. For example, the grammatical proposition “a thing is identical
with itself” is considered one of the “axioms” that has guided our thinking since
Parmenides. To think, according to Plato’s great master, is to follow the funda-
mental principle of reason: “the being, is; the non-being, is not.” In other words,
things are or are not; they cannot be a third thing (the principle of the excluded
middle); there is only what can be coherently thought, following the principles of
identity and non-contradiction.18 This image of thinking has persisted over the
centuries in several philosophical strands, having as a correlated image the ideal of
the exactness of concepts.19 From these images, we assume precise limits for the
application of our words, and then we look for deﬁnitions that cover all possible
applications.
Although these images are important in our ways of life, they can cause con-
fusion when interpreted dogmatically [4]. As Wittgenstein observes, our concepts
are originally vague; only for some speciﬁc purposes do we restrict the domain of
their application, establishing precise deﬁnitions for them [1 PI 69]. The concept of
identity itself is applied in everyday situations in different ways, without having
anything in common with all these applications. It can be applied in the color
17 However, the autonomy of the grammar of concepts in relation to the empirical world does not
mean that they are totally arbitrary, as they are based on our forms of life. The expression
“following rules” (in the Wittgensteinian sense) only applies to habitual, institutional and public
actions, that is, it applies to behaviours inserted in an institution.
18 Cf. Morente M. G. (1958) Lecciones Preliminares de Filosofía. Mexico: Editorial Diana.
19 For the German mathematician and logician Gottlob Frege, for example, a true concept must be
an exact concept. This is one of the images that will be criticized by Wittgenstein, with Frege as
one of his main interlocutors [1 PI 68-71].
25
Thinking as the Invention of New Aspects Within Language-Games
521

language-game, when we say that two blouses are the same red color; but it can also
be applied in the language-game of mathematical calculation, by stating that
“2 + 2 = 4;” or even, when we say that two different musical instruments are
playing the same note. Finally, we can apply the concept of identity under different
aspects (in different language-games), without a common meaning for all these
uses, just family resemblances, to a greater or lesser degree. The problems arise
when the expression, “a thing is identical with itself,” starts to be used referentially,
assuming that the reference is something that is apprehended by the mental rep-
resentation (as if there were an intuition of the meaning), or it was located in brain
mechanisms, and we start to interpret the concept of identity as referring to
something that cannot be said, and that only shows itself in the thing itself [1 PI
215–216].
In fact, we do not need to postulate a supposed “redness,” which would be
common to both red blouses (the “essence” of red); or assume something in
common between two terms in a mathematical equation; or even something that is
shown when playing two different instruments, as if this something were the very
identity of the note played. In the ﬁrst case, we have different shades for the color
red, all called red because they have “family resemblances,” and not because there
is a red common to all manifestations of red (the “redness”). We learn to see red
from different samples of what we consider red in our culture, just as we learn the
other colors, pointing to different shades of red and comparing these samples of red
with each other. In the second case, other techniques are used to establish that
“2 + 2 = 4,” such as the mastery of counting and addition techniques, which are
also learned by the student. Finally, a musician identiﬁes that two instruments are
emitting the same sound because he/she has learned a certain tonal system and is
able to recognize a certain aspect of what he/she is hearing, although the timbre of
the instruments may be totally different from each other (“See this note on the violin
as being the same note on the piano”). In other words, we apply the above
expression to behaviors within a given institution, without anything outside the
language that corresponds to all applications of the concept of identity, in each of
these situations: “Essence is expressed in grammar” [1 PI 371].
Now, the word “thinking” also expresses a concept whose grammar is autono-
mous in relation to the empirical. We can apply this word following the principle of
identity, in contexts of logic, without this causing us problems.20 And, it can also be
applied in other ways, in different situations, “I thought today was Tuesday!,”
“Think carefully before deciding on this.,” “My thoughts went far…,” and so on,
without anything in common that permeates all these expressions (such as a sup-
posed identity underlying all the applications of the word “thinking,” corresponding
to something ineffable, or even originated in brain processes), but just family re-
semblances. The concept of thinking, like other psychological concepts, is a vague
concept with no precise limits. We can always imagine other possible applications
of this word. Problems arise when a particular use of the concept of thinking is
20 Recalling that even in the ﬁeld of logic, modal logics are increasingly prevalent, comprising
graduations (a vagueness) that symbolic logic did not allow.
522
C. M. C. Gottschalk

privileged. For example, when a single rationality is assumed in human beings,
common to all, and which must satisfy the logical principles postulated since
Parmenides, thus guaranteeing the exactness of our concepts. Moreover, when one
supposes that this way of thinking would be rooted in organic or inorganic struc-
tures, common to all. However, just by looking at other cultures, in other forms of
life, we will see that the reasons that are presented for the meaning of their actions
and their words (how they think) can be very different from our Western reasoning.
There is no common ground (empirical, logical or ethereal) for reasoning/thinking.
According to Wittgenstein: “once I have exhausted the justiﬁcations, I have reached
bedrock, and my spade is turned. Then I am inclined to say: “this is simply what I
do.” [1 PI 217]. In other words, reasoning/thinking is an activity based on praxis,
on an institution, or in Wittgensteinian terminology, on a form of life. Thus, when
looking for ultimate foundations for the word “thinking,” we will see that they are
of a conventional nature, such as habitual ways of acting and techniques learned in
certain language games: “it could also be said that a man thinks when he learns in a
particular way” [5 Z 105].
Thinking as An Activity of Constitution of Sense
However, if we are linked to a referential conception of language, which is still
hegemonic in all areas of knowledge, we are led to assume that the word “thinking”
must refer to a mental/cerebral process that establishes causal relations between
psychic structures and thoughts about facts in the world. And that language would
only be a vehicle for the transmission of these thoughts as if thinking were prior to
language. In contrast to these images, Wittgenstein observes that even in a primi-
tive21 language-game, like that of the denomination, in which an exclusively ref-
erential use of the concept is made, the relationship between the word (which
expresses the concept) and the object to which it refers is established through
various linguistic techniques that are learned.
For example, when telling a small child, who is still learning the names of
colors, what the color red is, we point to a red object and say: “This is red!” But for
the child to understand what was said, that we are referring to the color of the object
—and not to its shape, or to the quantity, or to any other aspect to be perceived by
the child—he/she must already have mastered some linguistic techniques, which are
learned: the ostensive gesture, for example, is one of these techniques. In the
denomination language-game, this gesture establishes a sense connection between
the word and the object pointed to [6]. They learn to direct their gaze to something
beyond the gesture (and not to the tip of the ﬁnger of the person who is pointing, for
example); and the object itself is not the meaning of what is being pointed to, but a
sample of what it is to be red. Also, in the case of teaching colors to a child, we can
21 Primitive in the sense of simpler, considered by him a preparatory game for more complex
games.
25
Thinking as the Invention of New Aspects Within Language-Games
523

also use a color chart, establishing a correspondence between the words and the
respective samples next to them.
The objects that we use to clarify the meaning of our words are incorporated into
language with a paradigmatic function; they become part of the language as sam-
ples and no longer as empirical objects. Thus, a connection of sense is established
among the pronounced word, the ostensive gesture and the object pointed to, i.e., a
relation that starts to have a rule function and that, once learned, starts to be
followed in new situations of application of the same word. Finally, we have several
language techniques available for these relations of sense to be established, thus
introducing the child, who is learning his/her native language, to the various
institutions that are part of their culture. According to Wittgenstein: “I want to say:
an education quite different from ours might also be the foundation for quite dif-
ferent concepts” [5 Z 387].
It is therefore worth noting that the rules of our language-games are not private,
but shared by a community. Initially, we are trained to act in certain ways within
our language-games, thus constituting the (conventional) ground for what we call
thinking.22 Once learned, the different circumstances in which words are applied
oblige us to decide which rules should be applied in the different language-games
through which we move. In this second stage, a family resemblance begins to
emerge among the concepts of thinking, reﬂection, choice, hesitation, and others, as
we establish new connections between language-games, and new concepts are
being learned and/or invented.
In other words, the activity of thinking occurs as we become able to act
methodically in a given context, beyond performing mechanical activities. The rules
we follow do not determine what to do inside a language-game, but only guide our
actions, setting limits on what makes and what does not make sense. An illumi-
nating example given by Wittgenstein is his comparison of language to a tennis
game [1 PI 68]. The rules of tennis do not determine the manner we play; they do
not determine, for example, how high or how hard we should hit the ball; they only
delimit a ﬁeld of possibilities, what actions make or do not make sense during the
game in question. Thus, the vagueness of the rules is what allows new moves to be
made, and in terms of language, to introduce new senses.
Resuming the epigraph at the beginning of this text, the rhetorical questions
raised by Wittgenstein aim to relativize the image that thinking would be an
autonomous process and independent of its empirical manifestation through speech
or writing. Instead of looking for something mysterious in the individual’s mind, a
supposed “black box” that generates thoughts, Wittgenstein hypothesized that there
may be nothing on the physiological plane that corresponds to what we call
thinking:
22 In another text [7], I approach the concept of thinking as constituting internal relations of
meaning, independent of our animal behaviour, such as our natural or merely instinctive reactions,
in contrast to some commentators of Wittgenstein, who interpreted his reﬂections in On Certainty,
by naturalizing the foundations of our concepts.
524
C. M. C. Gottschalk

“No supposition seems to me more natural than that there is no process in the brain
correlated with associating or with thinking; so that it would be impossible to read off
thought-processes form brain-processes. I mean this: if I talk or write there is, I assume, a
system of impulses going out from my brain and correlated with my spoken or written
thoughts. But why should the system continue further in the direction of the centre? Why
should this order not proceed, so to speak, out of chaos? The case would be like the
following—certain kinds of plants multiply by seed, so that a seed always produces a plant
of the same kind as that from which it was produced—but nothing in the seed corresponds
to the plant which comes from it; so that it is impossible to infer the properties or structure
of the plant from those of the seed that comes out of it—this can only be done from the
history of the seed. So an organism might come into being even out of something quite
amorphous, as it were causelessly; and there is no reason why this should not really hold for
our thoughts, and hence for our talking and writing” [5 Z 608].
According to him, both the behaviorist philosopher and the mentalist one are
bound by a referential conception of language when looking for organic and
physiological causes (in the case of the behaviorist) for thinking, or when postu-
lating that thinking was originally in a kind of gaseous medium (in the case of the
mentalist), without any connection to our linguistic conventions, as if thinking were
a seed disconnected from its history. Thus, both philosophical positions presuppose
an enclosure of thinking: “one of the most dangerous of ideas for a philosopher is,
oddly enough, that we think with our heads or in our heads” [5 Z 605], and “the
idea of thinking as a process in the head, in a completely enclosed space, gives him
something occult” [5 Z 606]. Wittgenstein then concludes that it is “perfectly
possible that certain psychological phenomena cannot be investigated physiologi-
cally, because physiologically nothing corresponds to them” [5 Z 609].
Conclusion
As we saw above, sense relations are constituted from a work of language,
regardless of organic, physiological, or mental processes. A child who is learning
his/her mother tongue believes everything we say. Doubt is only possible based on
certainties that are gradually acquired by the child, “swallowed,” as Wittgenstein
says, from what is said in different situations. Here there is no establishment of
cause and effect relationships; what gradually develops is a system analogous to
geometric systems, in which the premises and conclusions are mutually supportive
[3 OC 142]. The evidence for the axioms stems from this intertwining, which
occurs throughout the individual’s history, depending on the culture in which
he/she is immersed, the habits they have acquired, and the institutions to which they
were introduced [1 PI 198].
Children at birth experience a chaotic world where anything can happen. The
way they start to organize it depends on the acquisition of a language, of symbols
that, in the middle of different activities, make it possible to assign senses to what
they are perceiving. In other words, this “system” that scientists seek to unravel
within an individual (the “black box”) is actually constituted from the chaos
external to the individual: it is from this amorphous medium that, throughout
25
Thinking as the Invention of New Aspects Within Language-Games
525

his/her life, through initial training, one learns to follow conventional rules. The
words learned become concepts, which intertwined become our most fundamental
certainties. These certainties, in turn, start to express the conditions of sense in order
to assign meaning to what we perceive, say, and think.
This linguistic (and not mental or physiological) activity clariﬁes what we call
thinking: the ability to follow the rules already learned, in new situations, and
seeing new aspects, sometimes unsuspected, as when one realizes that the duck they
were observing can also be seen as a rabbit. Or when we see someone and suddenly
remember what that person looked like many years ago. In the latter case, which has
previously been discussed in this work, when seeing this person today as the person
we remember from years ago, a new aspect emerges from this comparison. One
starts to see the person in another way. Wittgenstein takes up this same situation,
this time highlighting the strength of the referential language model that forces us to
look for something extralinguistic as being the cause of attributing a new sense to
what is being observed: “I saw this man years ago: now I have seen him again, I
recognize him, I remember his name. And why does there have to be a cause of this
remembering in my nervous system? Why must something or other, whatever it
may be, be stored up there in any form? Why must a trace have been left behind?
Why should there not be a psychological regularity to which no physiological
regularity corresponds? If this upsets our concept of causality, then it is high time it
was upset” [5 Z 610].
If we can get rid of this image that there must be a physiological reference to be
unveiled by scientists, and look at the effective uses we make of our concepts, we
will see that the foundations of our action and our thinking are of a conventional
nature; namely, they are relations of sense (and not of cause and effect), built from
linguistic work. The comparison itself (between one face and another from the past)
is a language technique that we learn within a linguistic context. Returning to the
ﬁgure of the duck-rabbit, we learn to focus on certain aspects of the ﬁgure so that
we can see a duck, comparing it with other ducks already seen in the past. Similarly,
we can use these same techniques to see a rabbit in the same ﬁgure. The sense is not
previously given in the experience; we use several linguistic instruments to move
from one language-game to another.
The confusion arises when we are stuck with a referential conception of lan-
guage, in which a previous meaning is assumed in the duck-rabbit ﬁgure, which
must satisfy the principle of identity, non-contradiction, and the excluded middle:
that is a duck, or that is not a duck, it cannot be a third thing. How is it possible,
then, to also see a rabbit in the same ﬁgure? This is a false problem if we consider
that the meaning of what is being observed is given by the grammar of the concept
(duck or rabbit) that we activate to describe what we observe. It is through
language-games that we organize our empirical and thinking experiences [6].
Therefore, from this Wittgensteinian perspective of language, the activity of
thinking can be seen as – beyond the ability to follow one or more rules within a
system, that is, in a language-game – being able to modify rules along the way or
even abandon them, and, possibly, establish new relations of sense, sometimes
unforeseen, and even unusual. That is, being able to see as.
526
C. M. C. Gottschalk

Core Messages
• The meaning of a word is given by the rules we learn to follow within a
language-game.
• Sensitive perception is already conceptual.
• The grammatical propositions we follow play a transcendental function,
conditions of the meaning of what we observe, think and say.
• One thinks when he/she learns in a particular way.
• Thinking can be seen as an activity of the constitution of sense within
language-games.
References
1. Wittgenstein, L (2009) Philosophical Investigations. Hacker PMS, Schulte J. Rev. 4th ed
(trans: Anscombe GEM, Hacker PMS, Schulte J). Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Oxford
2. Gottschalk CMC (2018) Teaching critical thinking: the struggle against dogmatism. Educ
Philos Theory 50(5):469–477
3. Wittgenstein, L (1998) On Certainty. In: Anscombe GEM, von Wright GH. Blackwell
Publishers Ltd, Oxford
4. Moreno, AR (1995) Wittgenstein – Através das imagens. Editora da Unicamp, Campinas/SP
5. Wittgenstein, L (1967). In Anscombe GEM, von Wright GH (eds) Zettel. Basil Blackwell, Oxford
6. Moreno, AR (2015) Por uma epistemologia do uso – um aspecto do conceito wittgensteiniano
de uso: construção do signo e constituição do sentido. In: Wittgenstein e seus aspectos - Coleção
CLE, vol. 72. Unicamp - Centro de Lógica, Epistemologia e História da Ciência, pp 89–115
7. Gottschalk CMC (2016) O ‘pensamento primitivo’ em Wittgenstein: entre o homem e o
animal? In: Wittgenstein: Conhecimento e Ceticismo - Coleção CLE, vol 77. Unicamp - Centro
de Lógica, Epistemologia e História da Ciência, pp 11–30
Cristiane Maria Cornelia Gottschalk has a Bachelor’s Degree in
Applied Mathematics (1978) at the University of São Paulo (USP),
a Master's Degree in Applied Mathematics – USP (1985), a Ph.D. in
Education from the Postgraduate Program in Education– USP
(2002) and a Post Doctorate in Philosophy (2016) at the University
Nova of Lisboa. She has been a professor at the School of Education
of the University of São Paulo, at undergraduate and graduate
levels, since 2003. She is the coordinator of the “Culture, Philos-
ophy and History of Education'’ area in the Postgraduate Program
of the School of Education of USP. She is a researcher in the group
“Aesthetics, Subjectivity, Culture, Education” and the coordinator
of the group “Philosophy, Education, Language, and Pragmatics.”
She works in Philosophy of Education, Philosophy of Language,
and Mathematical Education, using the ideas of the second phase of
Wittgenstein’s work as her central theoretical reference.
25
Thinking as the Invention of New Aspects Within Language-Games
527

26
Literature as a Genealogy of Social
Sciences
Julio Juan Ruiz
“What would become of science without metaphors?.”
G. H. Hardy
Summary
I believe that literature and art, in a broader sense, exert an undeniable inﬂuence
on social sciences. That is why I call this relationship ‘genealogical.’ This
chapter seeks to analyze that bond from its philosophical foundations in the
context of postmodernity. To achieve this objective, I will start by examining the
traditional concepts of aesthetics and their development through history,
considering the worldviews of philosophers such as Kant, Hegel, Kierkegaard,
Lukács, and Heidegger. After that, I will analyze the fundamental principles of
Georg Gadamer’s hermeneutics related to aesthetics. Gadamer, a disciple of
Heidegger, differed from his mentor in his conception of aesthetics and proved
the legitimacy of the knowledge held by the sciences of the spirit.
J. J. Ruiz (&)
School of Economics, National University of Mar del Plata, Mar del Plata,
Provincia de Buenos Aires, Argentina
e-mail: juliojro7@yahoo.com.ar
J. J. Ruiz
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research
Network (USERN), Mar del Plata, Provincia de Buenos Aires, Argentina
J. J. Ruiz
Teodoro Bronzini 570, torre 3, piso 5, depto. I, C.P. 7600 Mar del Plata,
Provincia de Buenos Aires, Argentina
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh (eds.), Thinking, Integrated Science 7,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04075-7_26
529

The Calumny of Apelles.
(Adapted from Wikimedia Commons, the free media repository https://upload.
wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/8/85/Sandro_Botticelli_021.jpg)
Keywords
Genealogy  Literature  Social sciences  Truth
QR Code
Scanning the QR code directs you to the word cloud of the chapter that is made up
of the words we discussed throughout the whole book in relation to the chapter’s
keyword, which is intentionally not included in the word cloud. Find the keyword
and put it in place in the puzzle according to the clues provided in chap. 36. The
mystery hidden in the puzzle is the quote of THINKING: Bioengineering of Science
and Art.
530
J. J. Ruiz

Introduction
The epigraph which starts the present work is a quote from mathematician G.
H. Hardy that introduces us to the peculiar relationship between science and literature.
This chapter studies a particular aspect of that relationship: the link between
literature and social sciences, where the former acts as a genealogy of the latter. In
other words, literature exerts its inﬂuence on history, sociology, political sciences,
and law; that is why I call this relationship ‘genealogical.’ By using this term, I
follow Alain Badiou’s typology [1] for literature and philosophy. According to the
French philosopher, this typology does not aim at turning literature into an object of
study: it intends to show its inﬂuence on other disciplines. To exemplify that
inﬂuence, I can mention George Orwell’s novel 1984, which depicts the oppression
exerted by a totalitarian state in a more vivid way than any legal or political text
could do. Moreover, Orwell’s novel could be a source of inspiration for both the
jurist and the political philosopher.
When studying the relationship between literature and science, we must take into
account that literature, as an artistic expression, is not only a source of aesthetic
enjoyment but also a vehicle for truth, just as science is. That connection took a
long time to be admitted since the methodological model of natural sciences, which
prevailed for decades, condemned the scientist’s self-involvement in the analysis of
the object. Such methodological requirement was difﬁcult to fulﬁl both in the social
sciences and in art since, as Martin Heidegger observed, understanding is impos-
sible without anticipation. However, the encounter between a subject and a work of
art is an experience of knowledge and understanding, as Gadamer [2] pointed out in
his work Truth and Method. Here the author stated that art is the expression of
truth, and reaching truth is not a matter of method.
In my opinion, there is a close relationship between art and truth. This con-
nection philosophically justiﬁes the inﬂuence of literature and, generally speaking,
of art on science. It is my objective to clarify the nature of such a relation. With this
in mind, I will ﬁrst analyze the decline of the aesthetic discourse, which, in a way,
constitutes the most characteristic feature of postmodernity, and then delve into the
guidelines proposed by George Gadamer at the beginning of Truth and Method.
The Decline of the Aesthetic Discourse
In the early decades of the twentieth century, artistic Avant-Gardes launched an
attack against art and aesthetic institutions. The main consequence of that rebellion
was an outburst of aesthetic manifestations outside traditional environments such as
art galleries, concert halls, or theatres. An attempt emerged to reintegrate art into
everyday life, even when that led to a revolutionary utopia. This artistic explosion
accompanied a criticism of aesthetics as a discipline. Avant-gardists did not believe
that the aesthetic discourse could give a full account of artistic experiences and
expressly rejected the analytical categories of idealistic aesthetics.
26
Literature as a Genealogy of Social Sciences
531

After historical avant-gardes, which aimed at separating art from its traditional
frameworks, there came the time for neo-avant-grades, which focused on the
importance of technique over aesthetics. Walter Benjamin thoroughly analyzed this
phenomenon in his essay entitled The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical
Reproduction, 1936. Under the predominance of technique, the artwork lost what
Benjamin called ‘the aura,’ namely, what made it unique and impossible to undergo
mass reproduction; in other words, what made the original different from any copy.
During the twentieth century, the primacy of technique over aesthetics was so
overwhelming that it not only dissolved the differences between original and copy
but also erased the limits which separated the artists from their public. Artists began
to apply machine-like techniques, and, as a consequence, the creative process was
no more the work of the genius—as the Kantian aesthetics had deﬁned it- but a
mere mechanical act.
That dominance of technique over aesthetics encompassed a hegemony of mass
media in the cultural ﬁeld, which was of such magnitude that the Italian philosopher
Gianni Vattimo considered them to “produce consensus, creation and intensiﬁcation
of a common language in the social ﬁeld” [3, p. 52]. By bringing about consensus,
mass media shaped public opinion and deﬁned the aesthetic preferences of the
recipient.
The effects of mechanical production and the inﬂuence of mass media on our
contemporary culture are undeniable. However, it is evident that artistic manifes-
tations still survive in an institutional sense: people attend theatres, concert halls,
and art galleries. In light of this, we might ask ourselves whether the crisis lies in art
or in the discourse of aesthetics—a philosophical discipline whose object is the
artistic manifestation. More precisely, we may wonder if the aesthetic discourse can
comprehend opposed realities such as the inﬂuence of media and the survival of
traditional artistic creations.
Another sign of the crisis in the aesthetic discourse is the question of the work of
art as a product of genius. That used to be a fundamental principle of traditional
aesthetics, which considered itself entitled to distinguish what was from what was
not. It also proved the emphatic nature of the traditional aesthetic discourse, which
led in some cases to the apotheosis of an artist.
Vattimo [3] observed that the crisis in aesthetics paralleled a crisis in meta-
physics, which no more considered the being as something permanent but started
seeing it as something ﬁnite, that is, something perishable, subject to birth and
death. This change of view saw the aesthetic product from a metaphysical per-
spective, more precisely from Heidegger’s idea of the work of art as “a work of
truth.”
This conception of the German philosopher revolved around two aspects:
i. aufstellung, the work of art as “the image of the world,” that is, the artwork
belonging to a historical world; and
ii. herstellung, the work of art as “the product of the land.”
532
J. J. Ruiz

The latter category was fundamental to this worldview since it emphasized the
temporality of the artwork. That aspect had never been considered by conventional
aesthetics, which used to see the work of art as bound to eternity.
Such conceptual shift reveals that the sign of postmodernity was a crisis in the
traditional aesthetic categories rather than a crisis in or even the death of art itself.
This crisis tells us about a decline of the aesthetic discourse or the inadequacy of its
categories to deﬁne the aesthetic phenomenon after avant-gardes’ arrival.
The Work of Art as An Experience of Truth
Hans-Georg Gadamer was a disciple of Martin Heidegger. Unlike his mentor,
however, he did not focus his studies on the hermeneutics of existence. On the
contrary, he made an effort to go beyond Heidegger’s methodological monism,
which supported the use of the same method of study both for natural sciences and
sciences of the spirit. Methodological monism preconized the conceptual separation
of researcher from the subject matter and argued that the former’s involvement with
the latter was simply abominable. Gadamer considered it necessary to outline
methodological hermeneutics suitable for social sciences to overcome such a rigid
approach.
In social sciences, methodological monism is impossible to apply since
researchers become inevitably involved with their subjects of study. To researchers,
understanding a subject matter implies understanding themselves. German theolo-
gian Rudolf Bultmann called that process ‘participative understanding’. That
assumption was the basis for Gadamer’s questioning about the truth in the sciences
of the spirit and his search for an appropriate methodology to approach them. To
ﬁnd such methodology, it was necessary to examine all the social sciences: art,
politics, religion, to mention some, because “it is the sciences of the spirit as a
whole what will allow ﬁnding an answer to this question” [2, p. 140].
In his quest to develop a suitable methodological approach, Gadamer began by
searching the aesthetic experience. In the ﬁrst part of his work, Truth and Method,
he started by clarifying the question of truth in art. To frame that question correctly,
he set about a historical inquiry on aesthetic consciousness. In the ﬁrst place, he
examined the controversial concept of “genius” and then moved on to other
considerations.
Historically speaking, the ﬁrst conception of creative genius was a force able to
produce a work of art something different from any other object. That idea was
functional to the observers since they saw the artwork as a miracle from creative
genius, while its creators saw it as a sheer matter of technique and method. Later on,
that conception declined, and the power formerly attributed to the author was
conferred to the interpreter. This originated an aporia: there was no rigorous cri-
terion to determine whether one interpretation was better than another.
26
Literature as a Genealogy of Social Sciences
533

As those two criteria were invalidated, Hungarian philosopher György Lukács
introduced a new idea in an attempt to legitimize the work of art as a result of the
aesthetic experience. Lukács deﬁned the work of art as “an empty form, a mere
crossing point in the multiplicity of possible aesthetic experiences” [2, p. 136].
Then, a dilemma emerged: focusing on the experience, on the instant, implied a
fragmentation of reality, which Søren Kierkegaard had already anticipated.
The Danish scholar held that an existence limited to mere immediacy was void.
Through that notion, Kierkegaard wanted to prove that the aesthetic experience
could not provide a foundation for the continuity of existence, that is, to offer a
context for the human being to avoid fragmentation.
That failure attributed to the aesthetic consciousness led the philosopher to
assume that the basis for the continuity of being was in self-understanding as the
only possibility of overcoming fragmentation and sustaining human existence.
When we humans, who are a world in ourselves, contemplate a work of art, which
is a world in itself, and we understand it, we understand ourselves. This knowledge,
the product of the encounter between both worlds, helps us, observers, to overcome
“the discontinuity and isolation of experience” [2, p. 139] by the continuity of our
“being there.” In the belief that the aesthetic discourse was unable to account for the
artistic experience, in other words, those aesthetics was disconnected from art,
Gadamer concluded that art is knowledge. But what is the nature of that knowl-
edge? Undoubtedly, it is radically opposed to that of the natural sciences. However,
it is knowledge since it is an intermediary of truth.
This cognitive contradiction was conﬁrmed by the German philosopher Wilhelm
Friedrich Hegel in his Aesthetics: Lectures on Fine Arts. In that work, the author
described the history of art as a history of worldviews. Doing so, he validated the
truth of the aesthetic experience. However, he said, this validation gets interrupted
when the concept monopolizes the philosophical experience, or in other words,
when art gets lost in philosophy. Then, the truth of the artistic experience becomes
unknown again.
The previous historical considerations about “aesthetic consciousness” showed the
inadequacy of aesthetics to deﬁne the true nature of art. Seeing that, Gadamer decided
to elucidate it from a broader framework, which was offered by Martin Heidegger’s
metaphysics, more precisely by his idea of ‘being on the horizon of time.’
The author of Truth and Method held that the relationship between being and
time should not be interpreted radically. On the contrary, ‘being on the horizon of
time’ meant that humans had to understand themselves by referring entirely to their
own time and future. Heidegger conceived the ‘being’ as grounded on ﬁnitude, the
necessary basis to question ourselves about the ‘being’ of self-understanding. This
questioning would allow us to overcome the fragmentation caused by the artistic
experience.
All the previous considerations led the thinker beyond the horizon of under-
standing and opened the door to a broader experience: the experience of being.
With the idea of ﬁnitude as a point of departure, Gadamer approached the nature of
art from the aesthetic experience, even when it could not offer a deﬁnite answer, just
as happened to Heidegger in his questioning Metaphysics.
534
J. J. Ruiz

To understand the encounter between a work of art and truth, Gadamer proposed
the notion of “game:” in the philosopher’s view, understanding a work of art means
getting caught by the game it represents. In this game-like instance, we are not
conductors but captives, as we get carried away by the rhythm of music, the beauty
of a poem, or the magniﬁcence of a cathedral. The game is not subjective at all:
understanding an artwork means getting caught by it. In addition to captivating us,
the work of art discovers something essential that refers to itself and ourselves.
A work of art refers to itself because it is a surplus of reality, a more revealing
reality. To exemplify this, I chose The Calumny of Apelles by the Italian artist
Sandro Botticelli. In this picture, the observer can see the image of a naked woman
looking up to the sky: the allegory of truth. It represents a transcendent ideal of
virtue which refers to the religious spirit still present at the beginning of the
renaissance when the secularization process began. In turn, the surplus of reality
conveyed by that image also challenges the observers, making them reﬂect upon the
complex concept of truth.
Summing up, I assert that Gadamer’s principles transcend the nineteenth century
methodological monism and examine the artistic experience from the perspective of
ﬁnitude. Taking it into account, present-day thinkers could implement the same
approach to inquiry about the nature of religion, politics, or law, that is, the ‘sci-
ences of the spirit’ in any of its forms. By doing so, they will realize that the
question put at the artistic experience proves that art is knowledge, and as such, an
indisputable path to truth.
Conclusion
In this text, I have brieﬂy explained the philosophical foundations that legitimize
the genealogical relationship between literature and social sciences and, more
widely, the relationship between art and science. To achieve this purpose, I resorted
to Georg Gadamer’s philosophical guidelines, which validate the truth of the aes-
thetic experience and other manifestations of the social sciences such as politics,
religion, and law. I began my paper with Hardy's inquiry: “what would become of
science without metaphors?” After all the considerations presented here, I would
reformulate this question, asking what would become of us without science and
without metaphors.
Core Messages
• The assumptions of methodological positivism have long hampered the
legitimization of other forms of knowledge, such as art.
• Overlooking the validity of other forms of truth ignores the need for
knowledge that every human being holds by nature.
26
Literature as a Genealogy of Social Sciences
535

• While specialization has brought about signiﬁcant progress, excessive
atomization of knowledge led to disregarding other realities, such as art or
religion.
• The worldview of leading scientists exceeded science fragmentation and
admitted other forms of truth besides science.
Acknowledgements The author would like to thank Inés Álvarez for assistance with the process
of translating the chapter
References
1. Badiou A (2013) Introduction. In: Justice, philosophy and literature. Rosario, Argentina,
Ediciones Homo Sapiens, pp 7–17
2. Gadamer HG (2017) The question of truth as it emerges in the experience of art. In: Truth and
method. Salamanca, Spain, Ediciones Follow Me, pp 31–181
3. Vattimo G (2007) The death or decline of art. The end of modernity. Editorial Gedisa,
Barcelona, Spain, pp 49–59
Julio Juan Ruiz was born in Resistencia, Chaco, Argentina, on
May 5, 1969. He holds a Ph.D. in Law Sciences from the
Catholic University of La Plata and a Magister in Spanish Lit-
erature from the National University of Mar del Plata, Argentina.
He is a Professor in Constitutional Law and Administrative Law
in the School of Economics of the latter institution. He is a
member of the Argentinian Hispanists Association and the
Argentinian Society of Political Analysis. For ten years, Dr. Ruiz
has focused on the intersection between law sciences and litera-
ture, devoting his research, particularly to the Spanish Golden
Period. He has published articles in several journals, including
Dicenda, Magazine of Hispanic Studies, Society and Discourse,
and Mexican Journal of Law History. His book, Law, Literature,
and Political Philosophy in the Spanish Golden Age, reveals the
importance of interdisciplinary work between art and science.
536
J. J. Ruiz

27
How Rational Thought is Conceived
in Christian Doctrine: The Case of Saint
Thomas Aquinas
Rogelio Jiménez Marce
“Although the truth of the Christian faith exceeds the capacity
of human reason, nevertheless the truths of which it knows do
not oppose those of the faith.”
Thomas Aquinas
Summary
The objective of this research is to analyze the way in which Saint Thomas
Aquinas conceived the rational processes in the human being. Although the
work of this medieval thinker had a theological character, it is of great interest to
analyze the way in which he reﬂected on human rationality understood as a
mechanism to access the understanding of reality. Thomas Aquinas’ thought
evidenced the importance of reason for the human being since it not only
constituted the quality that allowed him to differentiate himself from the rest of
earthly creatures but also allowed him to approach spiritual ones, although
without reaching the levels of understanding which they enjoyed. This was
explained by the way in which knowledge of reality was produced since access
to it was achieved through the body that became the means to approach the
sensitive experience, but the processing of information was not associated with
the material but was produced in the intellectual soul that was not located in any
speciﬁc organ. According to the theologian, reason was indispensable to achieve
the knowledge of the faith.
R. Jiménez Marce (&)
Institute of Social Sciences and Humanities, BUAP, Juan de Palafox y Mendoza 208 Col.
Centro, Puebla, Mexico
e-mail: rojimarc@yahoo.com.mx
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Puebla, México
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh (eds.), Thinking, Integrated Science 7,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04075-7_27
537

The rational process, according to Saint Thomas Aquinas.
Keywords
Cognitive faculties  Language  Rational thought  Saint Thomas Aquinas 
Science  Sensitive faculties  Understanding  Wisdom
QR Code
Scanning the QR code directs you to the word cloud of the chapter that is made up
of the words we discussed throughout the whole book in relation to the chapter’s
keyword, which is intentionally not included in the word cloud. Find the keyword
and put it in place in the puzzle according to the clues provided in Chap. 36. The
mystery hidden in the puzzle is the quote of THINKING: Bioengineering of Science
and Art.
538
R. Jiménez Marce

Introduction
The beginning quote evidences one of the main concerns that encouraged Thomas
Aquinas's thought: seek harmony between faith and reason because it was indis-
pensable to achieve the knowledge of the faith, which was possible by the fact that
reason was an image and a reﬂection of divine wisdom. Through the understanding
of how the world works, you could understand God; according to the theologian, it
was the desired objective to achieve, although he warned that the reason had certain
limits that prevented him from achieving a true understanding of divinity at the
same time, he should not try to assimilate what exceeded his capacity. To analyze
the meaning of reason in Catholic doctrinal thought starts in Aquinas’ work which
has been considered one of the “culminating moments of medieval thought” [1],
due to he managed to integrate philosophical ideas and the Christian conception of
the universe in a great system of explanation of the natural and supernatural world
[2]. Thomas not only presented faith as the formal principle of theological con-
struction but also made it a source of rational knowledge. In this case, the the-
ologian warned that without reason, it was impossible to conduct intelligence to the
knowledge of the truth taught by faith [3, 4]. With this position, Thomas renounced
the vision of the medieval Christian conscience that considered that the truth of
things found in the eternal thought of God and the perfection of intelligence was
acquired thanks to divine illumination [1, 5–7]. Most studies about Aquinas’ work
focus his interest on the theological aspects, but rare attention has been paid to his
views on the way in which intellectual activity was generated, an aspect that was
fundamental in its thought, then, as Carlos González [2] indicates, if the human
being did not know himself, he could not come to understand God.
The objective of this research is to analyze the way in which the saint conceived
rationality, where it originated, what were its characteristics, what was the rela-
tionship that existed between the sensible and the cognitive, how the understanding
of the world was generated naturally, how rational thought was concretized through
language, what were the scope and limits of human knowledge, and what was the
difference between science and wisdom. The work is divided into three sections:
i. the ﬁrst one explores, so succinctly, the intellectual context of Aquinas and its
approach to the work of Aristotle;
ii. at second, the place that the human being occupied within creation and the
motive are presented by which the use of reason was granted; and
iii. in the third, the elements that shaped the understanding of its characteristics
and the way in which they reached an understanding of the natural and of
divine knowledge are discussed.
27
How Rational Thought is Conceived in Christian …
539

The Parisian Intellectual Environment
Saint Thomas was born in Naples in 1225 into a noble family. Despite the oppo-
sition from his family, he entered the Dominican order at 18 years old. He studied
in Paris and in Cologne. His stay in Paris, ﬁrst as a student and later as a teacher,
would be fundamental for the development of his theological ideas because, during
the thirteenth century, there was the concentration of university schools, which
favored exchange and confrontation of ideas between the faculties, in which a broad
scientiﬁc and philosophical literature of Greek, Jewish, and Arab origin, a situation
that, among others things, it allowed to know the Aristotelian philosophy that,
according to some scholars, constituted a key element to understand theological
work in the Middle Ages [8–10]. Although an attempt was made to prohibit the
writings of Aristotle for believing that his approaches threatened the transcendence
of the truth divine, the truth is that his ideas found important defenders among
which Albertus Magnus stood out, who would be Thomas’ teacher. Aristotelian
thought caused a “radical reformulation” in science, philosophy, and theology. In
the case of the last, it was stated that it was not enough to delve into the meaning of
the words of the Bible or gloss the truth taught, but the right of reason to analyze the
sacra was a recognized page from science. In this sense, William of Auxerre
afﬁrmed that the theologian had to propose a faith based on reason. During his
second stage as a teacher in Paris, Thomas gave himself to the task of refuting
approaches with which he did not agree like the Averroistic monopsychism that
placed the individual in an indeterminate intellectual activity, which alienated his
personal conscience and compromised his ability to free initiative, that is, it
eliminated individual eschatology. With the baggage of philosophy Aristotelian, the
theologian warned that understanding reality was possible if its principles were
sought in itself, a conception that allowed rationally analyzing all earthly mani-
festations [6, 7, 11–13].
Why Was the Human Being Able to Reason?
To answer this question, it must be taken into account that Aquinas considered that
the human being was part of a divine plan embodied in a shaped universe by a
plurality of creatures, which were characterized by their inequality derived from a
hierarchical vision of material reality. This constituted the ﬁrst principle of divine
wisdom. Each of the creatures was ordered to its own act; because of that way, they
reached their goal, which was to achieve the perfection of the universe. The human
being constituted a part of the whole that, thanks to reason, could order its ends to
God through works, knowledge, and love. As one of the central ideas of Aquinas's
thought is that the imperfect tends to the perfect; the human being constituted the
perfect within the realm of the animal, but he was an imperfect being with respect to
angelic beings. This circumstance placed the human being between corruptible and
incorruptible beings. To understand human perfection in the natural environment, it
540
R. Jiménez Marce

must be kept in mind that Thomas considered two aspects: movement and
rationality. With respect to the ﬁrst point warned that the more perfect the move-
ment itself, the more perfect the life would be. There were three types of move-
ments: that of plants that only sought their development, that of animals that were
guided by the senses, and that of humans whose actions were directed to an end
determined by reason, which was explained by the fact that the intellective faculty
moved the sensory powers and these, to the organs that executed the movement. As
for the rational, beings without knowledge obeyed their natural impulses, due to in
them the sensitive soul predominated that only sought to satisfy their material
needs [14].
The opposite happened with the human being whose intellectual soul, which was
considered as their substantial form, tended to seek knowledge. However, at this
point, the saint indicated that it should not be forgotten that the human being was
part of the animal genus since his body was animated by sensitive and nourishing
souls; that is, it contained in itself the elements that formed the substance of inferior
beings (being, living, and feeling) which made it imperfect, but the presence of the
intellectual soul allowed it to dominate its rational nature whose essence was
understanding. The union of the four elements (being, living, feeling, and under-
standing) not only allowed him to achieve perfection, despite his unity with the
matter but also served to grant him the category of person because he was con-
ceived as the individual substance of a rational nature. Thus, within the natural
order, and on the principle that animate beings were perfect more than inanimate
ones, plants were placed on the lower scale, animals on the middle part, and the
human being on the upper scale as the most perfect of living beings, thanks to the
fact that his intellectual soul granted him a certain similarity with divinity. This fact
gave him the power to govern the rest of the species since the inferiors had to be
ruled by their superiors. However, the theologian warned, in a clear allusion to the
Averroist monopsychism, that there were differences in the species and the forms
that were distinguished from each other by their greater or lesser perfection, that is,
there was, for example, no rational human nature that was the same for everyone.
Although the intellective soul was superior in the natural order, it was inferior in
what referred to angelic intellectual substances because the innate knowledge of the
truth, as it happened with the angels, was not innate to it, the reason why it needed
to reach it by the middle of the senses [14].
To explain this fact, Thomas said that human nature requires a sensitive soul to
reach the intellective. How feeling could only be carried out by means of a bodily
organ, the intellective soul needed to unite with a constituted body that served as an
instrument for the senses, which used touch to reach the perfection of their sensible
capacity [15]. The union of the intellectual with the sensitive could only be carried
out in the human body for two reasons: for having a balanced complexion and for
possessing the organ of the organs, that is, the hand in which the sense was lodged
superior touch. In fact, the theologian claimed that human beings with the best
touch reached the highest levels of understanding. Although the intellectual soul did
not require the body to carry out its intellectual operations, it required the sensitive
part that needed an organ of adequate complexion. In this sense, it was not the body
27
How Rational Thought is Conceived in Christian …
541

that joined the intellectual soul, but it used its constituent parts to carry out its
operations, such as seeing through the eye or listening through the ear. Thus,
meaning existed on account of understanding. Although the intellective soul could
understand the universal and the inﬁnite, it limited its understanding as a conse-
quence of its dependence on the bodily. However, Thomas warned that certain
operations of the soul, such as the understanding and the will, were carried out
without the intervention of a bodily organ [14]. It is interesting that the theologian
did not associate reason with any speciﬁc organ, which showed that he was dis-
associated from the debate that existed regarding the place where mental functions
took place. A posture, called cardio-centric, would be proposed by Aristotle, who
thought that the brain was a “useless organ” that played a secondary role, so he
established that the mental function was in the heart because of the central place it
occupied in the body. This conception would remain valid until the seventeenth
century.
In fact, in the Middle Ages, it was considered that the heart produced not only
thoughts but also feelings. The primacy given to the heart was derived from the fact
that it was the origin of the veins that distributed blood in the body, so it was of
greater importance than the head, which, although it housed the soul, was not the
repository of “vital forces.” Cardio centrism was opposed by encephalocentrism, a
position defended ﬁrst by Hippocrates and later by Galen, who argued that mental
activity originated in the brain. This stance had no major impact [16–18]. Given the
above, one wonders why the Aquinate did not place reason in any organ. In order to
explain this matter, Thomas warned,
i. ﬁrst of all, that the “thinkers of antiquity” were unaware of the existence of
intellectual capacity, a situation that caused them not to distinguish under-
standing from meaning. Therefore they considered that the world only existed
by perceptions generated by sense and imagination. This position was erro-
neous based on the fact that the sensitive part corresponded to the exterior of
the human being while the intellectual part was located within it;
ii. secondly, the theologian indicated that since the intellectual substance did not
have any kind of matter and since the operation of any being was carried out
according to the mode of its substance, the act of understanding constituted a
totally immaterial operation, which could be corroborated by examining your
object. Anything could be understood as soon as it was abstracted from matter
since the forms were individual and could not be perceived by the under-
standing. This allowed us to conclude that all intellectual substance was
immaterial. However, he warned that the intellect could only apprehend
material things according to each individual's own capacity, which was not the
case with angelic substances that could not understand how they were in
themselves, but only in their way of being composed; and
iii. thirdly, the theologian afﬁrmed that the intellectual principle was a power of
the soul granted by the divinity to the human being, so that he recognized
himself differently from the rest of the animals, thanks to his intelligence since
they were not masters of their acts if not that acted on the impulses. Thus, in
542
R. Jiménez Marce

intellectual creatures, understanding became a power of the one who under-
stood the material. The union of the corporal with the intellect limited the
possibilities of understanding, unlike angelic beings who understood the
immaterial because they integrated the intellect and the will in themselves, a
situation that included even the divinity itself. However, the Aquinate men-
tioned that there were some divine truths that could be accessible to human
reason, a fact that can be explained by the existence of beings with a higher
level of understanding derived from the various degrees of rational substances.
The opposite happened with those whose understanding was weak, for they
doubted the truths of the faith because of their incapacity. Thomas explained
that diversity in the degrees of rational substances was indispensable to achieve
perfection since uniformity and equality were manifestations of imperfection.
Thus, plurality and inequality constituted a means for creatures to work for one
purpose: resemblance to divinity. Diversity and inequality were not the con-
sequence of the plurality of matter or the intervention of certain causes or
merits but were the result of the divine will that gave each creature the per-
fection that it was possible to have;
iv. fourth, he mentioned that intellectual creatures occupied the highest point of
the perfection of things, but an effect of perfection was the return to its prin-
ciple, which in this case was divine understanding. With that, the created
universe would achieve its ultimate perfection [14, 19, 20].
The intellect could not be assigned a speciﬁc place in the body since the faculty of
understanding came from God, who considered himself the ﬁrst intelligent because
he was immaterial. This faculty was conceived as the root of understanding. The
intelligible reasons coming from the divinity (ﬁrst cause) allowed the intellectual
operation to be carried out (second cause). This assertion was also veriﬁed in the case
of angels that did not require a body. Since all angelic beings were perfect intellectual
substances, they did not need sensible things to acquire knowledge. In this sense,
Thomas warned that both the intellectual soul and the intellectual substance lacked
the matter-form composition. In fact, in the intellectual substances was found the
act-potency composition, not from the matter but from the form (what is) and from
being participated (what it is). Now, it must be borne in mind that since the intellective
soul was considered a divine gift, it could not be dependent on the corporal because it
would mean its imperfection, but, through substantial union, the last was ordered to
the ﬁrst, and thus the imperfect reached its perfection as a being. If a deeper
knowledge was achieved, it was because the natural light of understanding was
strengthened with the light of grace that allowed abstracting the concepts of the
sensible. Although the human being was distinguished from the rest of the animals by
intelligence, he was not separated from them by his bodily nature that allowed the
understanding of his material reality since the intellectual appetite moved through the
sensitive appetite. As what characterized the human being was the intellective
principle, it became its substantial form of the body. The higher the category of a
form, the more mastered body matter was and the less it was immersed in it, so there
was a greater impulse in its intellectual operation and in its ability to understand [14].
27
How Rational Thought is Conceived in Christian …
543

The understanding varied depending on the multiplicity of the matter, which
explained that only some reached wisdom. He warned that the more sublime a
being was, the more knowledge he could extend to a wide number of subjects.
Although the intellective soul was united to the body as form, the truth is that it
retained its being. The only way in which the intellective soul could do with the
body was for it to receive intelligible species through other inﬂuences. It is
important to mention that Thomas adhered to the Aristotelian vision of the brain
that considered it a wet organ that tempered the intense heat of the heart and in
which the operations of the internal sensory powers took place due to the vertical
character of the body, which allowed greater freedom in its operation. He also noted
that the human brain was larger than that of other animals and that those with less
moisture in that organ were smarter. According to the saint, women and children
had a lower intellectual capacity due to the remarkable humidity of their brains, a
situation that justiﬁed the control that men exercised over them. The Aquinate also
clariﬁed that not all men were intelligent since that quality was determined by the
moisture they had in their brains [14].
The Sensitive as the Basis of Understanding
Thomas started from the principle that the human being knew all the genres of
being through his sensitive and cognitive faculties. Through the ﬁrst, he knew the
singular and material, while he reached the universal and immaterial by the latter.
To reach the understanding, considered the highest of the powers of the soul, the
intellectual substances of the human being required to approach sensible things
through the bodily senses, a state that he called the operation of the sensitive soul.
The sense was a passive power whose alterations were produced by the external
sensible objects in two ways: a physical one that manifested itself in the form of the
natural being and a spiritual one that presented itself in the form of its spiritual
being. The second was necessary for the operation of meaning to take place since it
established an intentional representation of the sensible form in the organ. The
opposite would happen if the ﬁrst one dominated because the sense would manifest
itself in the whole body. As sight was the only sense in which spiritual alteration
occurred, it was considered the most perfect and universal of the senses. In the
others, the spiritual and physical alterations that could be an object (in the ear and
smell) or organ (touch and taste) were combined. Because of the diversity of objects
that were perceived by the senses, there were four inner sensory powers (common
sense, fantasy or imagination, estimation, and memory) that achieved the perfection
of the animal being, as they helped to perceive the sensible reality, both present and
absent, and with this, the achievement of a superior-good was sought. Each of the
powers had a speciﬁc function: common sense perceived sensible forms, fantasy or
imagination served to retain and preserve them, the estimate knew intentions that
were not received by the senses, which were stored in the memory that allowed
remember the good and the bad [14, 19].
544
R. Jiménez Marce

Imagination was the only one of the powers to be found in every way, allowing
material forms to pass into an intelligible state. The form of the imagination lacked
matter but was subject to material conditions in such a way that it became the
intermediate point between the being of the form of matter and the form it acquired
in the understanding when it was abstracted from matter. The sensible objects were
not the only ones that altered the imaginative power, but through composition and
division, images could be formed without the intervention of the senses. Thomas
noted that the perceptions of the sensible forms of the external sensible objects were
similar in the human beings and the animals, but there were differences regarding
the intentions. Irrational animals received them by a natural instinct (natural esti-
mative faculty), while humans distinguished them by comparison of particular
intentions (cognitive faculty or, in particular, reason). This last function was in the
middle of the head and used memory to analyze them. According to the theologian,
common sense was the root and the principle of the external senses because he had
the judgment of discernment that brought together the apprehensions of the senses
and their intentions, so he resorted to the imagination and memory, known as the
passions of the sensory root, to give meaning to what is perceived. This situation
distinguished him from his own sense, which only knew the form of the sensible
that altered him. All of the above constituted the alteration operation, but there was
a second one called formative that occurred when the imaginative power conceived
the image of some absent or never observed object. This double operation was
generated in the understanding. Common sense was the most sublime of the proper
senses, and although it was a power, it could know everything manifested in the ﬁve
external senses and perceived some things to which they had no access [14, 19].
However, the participation of all powers was required to reach an understanding.
Thomas clariﬁed that although the action of the understanding originated in the
senses, the latter knew certain things that they could not perceive, the same situation
in which the estimative, cognitive, and memorable power found themselves, which
was explained by the proximity they had with the universal reason. The under-
standing knew some things naturally, such as the ﬁrst principles of the intelligible,
which allowed it to reach certain conclusions, but there were also some intelligible
realities, such as contingent propositions, which it did not necessarily admit because
it had no connection with the ﬁrst principles. The opposite happened with demon-
strable conclusions that were closely related to them and whose denial led to igno-
rance of the ﬁrst principles, which could be recognized after they were deductively
demonstrated. From the ﬁrst principles, which were considered self-evident truths of
nature, it was possible to obtain certain knowledge that was not supported by rational
research but which could be reached by means of the infused speculative principle or
understanding of the principles and of the infused practical principle or synderesis.
This ﬁrst knowledge induced to seek understanding since the speculative tended to
order the perceived to the consideration of the truth, while the practical sought action
or the operative. Since the understanding required the senses to know the external
reality, it was considered an imperfection of its intellectual nature because it needed a
mediation to apprehend things on the outside and from there, to be able to reach its
knowledge inside, that is, move from its being to its essence [14].
27
How Rational Thought is Conceived in Christian …
545

The theologian clariﬁed that while the understanding was attached to a body, he
had to resort to images to understand in action not only when he ﬁrst acquired
knowledge but also in its subsequent use, for which it also required imagination and
the other faculties. This was explained by the fact that material things could not
know with the intellectual vision but required the sensible that perceived things and
the imaginary that found their similarities. Thus, the proper and proportionate object
of understanding was the nature of the sensible, which became a principle of
knowledge. If an organ was injured, the human being could not understand in act
even those things that the understanding had acquired. When one sought to
understand a thing, certain images were formed in which one could contemplate
what one intended to understand. This process was explained by the fact that the
cognitive power was in proportion to the knowable. Although it was true that
meaning provided the image of the object, the agent was the one that gave it the
representation of the understood or intelligible species. The proper object of
understanding was the essence or nature existing in the bodily matter, and through
the nature of the visible, to be able to reach the knowledge of the invisible. In order
to know the nature of any material object, one must have certainty of its existence in
a concrete way, which could only be perceived by the senses; that is, recognizing
being becomes a condition for accessing the essence. At this point, the imagination
acquired a role of intermediary between the sensitive and the understanding in
action because, through the images, the universal nature that was present in a
particular object could be discovered. Since a similarity of concrete reality could be
found in the image, the imagination did not need to resort to a new particular
representation, but it did when it was about the incorporeal realities whose images it
did not know [14].
As the image was related to the understanding, it became subsistent and could
know the nature of all things because the understanding had a double condition: to
know being and universal truth, but it was also a particular power that was ordered
to a certain act. Thomas did not agree with the Averroist idea that there was a single
understanding for all human beings, nor did he accept the Aristotelian approach that
the understanding is considered a power of the soul because he said that it should be
taken into account that understanding as an action proper to the understanding, it
was the fruit of the individuation of the being that understood and the individuation
of the species by which it understood, which did not mean that it was not possible to
have a knowledge of the universals, that is, the representation of a thing without
that which distinguished and multiplied it. In this sense, it did not matter if one or
many understandings existed, but the understanding and the species by which it was
understood were required to be something concrete, that is, although the under-
standing was one or multiple, what was understood would always be one and would
be found in whom he understood through representation. Thomas indicated that
what was understood constituted a perfection of the one who understood by virtue
of the intelligible species that he had in his understanding, which allowed him to
apprehend the essence of material things that became intelligible by abstraction.
Thus, the object of understanding was that which something is. What was under-
stood was potential when the species of the object were in the cognitive faculty, but
546
R. Jiménez Marce

it happened when the cognitive power received the species. This situation showed
that being moved by the object did not it was essential to understand, but insofar as
it was possible to understand. The understood in act showed that the representation
of the understood was the form of the understanding, in the same way, that the
image of the sensible object was the form of the sense in act.
The understood in act implied both the understood and the act of understanding,
which caused, in a secondary way, the intelligible species to become the understood
because it was representative in the understanding. To exemplify this point, he said
that what was understood was not the image of a stone (essence) but the stone itself
(being). If one did not proceed this way, science would not deal with things but with
intelligible species. As knowledge was realized through the assimilation of the
knowledge to the known, the same thing could be known by different beings because
they all understood their common nature, a process that they called abstracted
universal because their principles of individuation were excluded. The theologian
warned that the senses conceived of nature individually, but through understanding,
conceptual abstraction, intellection, and universalization were reached [14].
Understanding as a Means of Knowing Reality
Thomas mentioned that the understanding was an action of the concrete human
being because the one who understood experienced that he was the one who
understood. Since the object of the understanding was to know the essence of
things, it began to do so by means of the meaning of which the proper object was
external and singular accidents, but the form of the known was received in the
understanding in an immaterial and universal way. The power by which the
understanding knew what was necessary was not different from that by which
the contingent was known since the two fell under the same objective consideration
as to being and the true. The understanding knew the necessary but not the con-
tingent. Although the two agreed on the common notion of being, which was the
proper object of the understanding, they differed in that the contingent, by its
particular character, was known directly by the senses, while the understanding was
concerned with what is necessary to contain universal notions. If the universal
reasons of the knowable were considered, all the sciences would have as their
object what was necessary, but if things were considered in themselves, then sci-
ences such as the moral and the natural would deal with the contingent and the rest
with the necessary. The understanding went from ignorance to knowing because it
was potentially towards the intelligible species, which became knowable when the
understanding was in action. When the power was passed to the act, an indeter-
minate and confused knowledge was generated, which became understandable and
determining when the perfect act was reached. In cognitive beings, the intellectual
appetite induced the desire to obtain immaterial goods such as science or virtue
because they sought to apprehend being absolutely. In contrast, sentient beings
knew about being subjected to the here and now [14].
27
How Rational Thought is Conceived in Christian …
547

From the theologian's perspective, the understanding was made up of two
potential understandings (agent and possible) and two acting understandings (ha-
bitual and accomplished). A potential understanding was what allowed under-
standing, and acting understanding provided knowledge of reality. There are two
other acts of understanding that dealt with the contingent: the opinion that sought
the true from the contradiction and the judgment by which certain principles were
applied to the analysis of questions, in such a way that to understand was to approve
what was judged. By means of the agent's understanding, the intelligible species
were abstracted from the images that, as current representations of certain natures,
were potentially immaterial. As the soul knew the intelligible species, it was per-
fected in potentiality, and its intellectual part became immaterial in act. The agent
understanding provided the light to understand, which was explained by the fact
that it was part of the soul. To demonstrate this point, Thomas warned that above
the intellective soul was a higher understanding from which it received the faculty
of understanding. However, it clariﬁed that the intellective soul came to the
knowledge of the truth through the argumentation that materialized in the discourse
and in the movement. The discourse was made up of propositions that allowed
access to the way the understanding judged external realities. In the agent under-
standing, the intellectual operation began, since it managed to abstract the universal
forms from their particular conditions, but it constituted an imperfect intelligence
insofar as it did not come to understand everything, and therefore, it required the
angelic light to facilitate the understanding of everything that naturally you could
know. Aquinas warned that the agent understanding allowed to know the ﬁrst
intelligible concepts, which constituted a consequent action of the human species
that demonstrated the unity of the understanding, but not the unity of the agent
understanding insofar as each soul had an understanding [14].
While the agent understanding helped to make everything intelligible, the pos-
sible understanding functioned as a receptive faculty of these species in such a way
that the ﬁrst was an active power while the second was a passive power. This
differentiation was explained by reason of the object since the principle that con-
stituted the active power by which the object was in act had to be different from the
principle of the passive power that was moved by the object that was already in act.
In receiving the intelligible species, the body joined the possible understanding to
act as it wished, that is to say, it was in power, but as it required the agent
understanding to turn intelligible into act, sensible knowledge could not be con-
sidered the total cause and perfect of intellectual knowledge, but was the subject
matter of the cause. Through the agent's understanding, the immutable truth could
be known, the objective reality and its image could be discerned, and it helped the
possible understanding pass from potency to act. Thomas indicated that when the
intelligible species was in an intermediate state, that is, between the act and
the power, it belonged to the habitual understanding whose function was to preserve
the species of things that were not perceived in act, which was also known as reason
of memory that, together with intelligence and will, formed the mind. When the
memory referred to the past as such, it was located in the sensitive part because it
alluded to a particular condition. If the condition of the past was applied to the
548
R. Jiménez Marce

known and to the act of knowing, then it was part of the intellectual soul because
mention was made of what was understood because it had been previously
understood. The consummate understanding referred to the action of the under-
standing that came from the same understanding in which it was carried out, which
was also called the movement of the understanding whose principle was twofold: as
an intellectual virtue that was in power to understand and the understanding in act
that was the species of the known [14, 19].
As the last perfection of the understanding was its operation, it remained in the
one who acted as his own act because the ﬁrst thing the understanding knew of
itself was its own understanding, a situation that explained the diversiﬁcation of the
understanding in the human being. Thomas warned that understanding was also
called intelligence since it was an act of understanding consisting in understanding
and was different from the act of reason by virtue of its hierarchy. The intellectual
act began with the apprehension of something (intelligence), and later, it was
oriented towards the knowledge or action of something else (intention). This action
was called thought while persisting in the investigation of what was proposed and
knowing or knowing (phronesis or wisdom) when what was thought was examined
and related to certain notions. After you were certain that something was true
(internal language), you sought to communicate it to others (external spoken lan-
guage) through language that was a sign of thought [15]. Both language and
understanding required composition and division, a process that, in the case of the
second, allowed him to think and reason, or otherwise, he would only contemplate
what something was. However, the theologian warned that the understanding could
be imperfect for three reasons: by its knowable object (to know things in their own
nature), by their means of knowledge (to reach a conclusion by probable means),
and by the subject (when an opinion was accepted). The understanding, as the ﬁrst
engine of the universe, sought its ultimate end in the good of the understanding that
materialized in reason. Thomas warned that reason and understanding were not two
distinct powers but were differentiated by virtue of the fact that the former passed
from one concept to another to know the intelligible truth, while the latter carried it
out simply by apprehending the intelligible truth. In order for reasoning to carry out
the process of investigation, or invention, it had to start from certain truths
understood directly, that is, the ﬁrst principles, and then return, through a trial, to
check the adequacy of what was found in those truths [14].
Reason knew universals in the same way that understanding did because the two
shared the same cognitive power, and although it belonged to the same gender as
that of the angels, it could not know the intelligible truth in a perfect way. From
these universal principles, reason deduced particular conclusions that, by means of
particular or cognitive reason, could be compared with each other. The saint
mentioned that reason was divided into two: the lower one dealing with the earthly
and the upper one examining the eternal. The two were powers that were differ-
entiated by their functions. He said that the temporal and the eternal, with respect to
reason, implied subordinate realities among themselves because by the earthly, it
became the means to know the heavenly, and with it, a double order was generated
in the truth that was essential because the natural truths led to supernatural ones. To
27
How Rational Thought is Conceived in Christian …
549

achieve this, the two reasons were assimilated to the cognitive faculty that was in
charge of rationally analyzing that which should be sought. The fruit of the lower
reason was science that dealt with the conclusions drawn from the necessary
notions, while the higher generated the wisdom that focused its attention on
unprovable ﬁrst principles. Both science and wisdom, understood as speculative
intellectual virtues, were perfections of the mind that provided it for the knowledge
of divine and human things. Science devoted itself to the understanding of the
nature of the material and then came to the understanding of its essence, from which
the infallibility of the truth of its conclusions could be deduced. To arrive at the
truth, science was required to orient reason to its object through the vision and
understanding of the ﬁrst principles, which in turn led to conclusions [14, 19, 20].
The reason would always be true when he understood the essence of what
something was and became a principle of sufﬁcient knowledge by which reality
could be known. However, he warned that the apprehension of the truth was
differentiated by virtue of the type of reasoning by which it was arrived at. If it was
the speculative reason, which was perfected by the understanding, the truth was the
same for everyone, but it was not known in the same way in its conclusions; while
the practical reason, which was based on the advice, was not the same for all nor
could it be known. To be judged correctly, practical reason required science and
speculative reason wisdom. The latter, from the perception of Thomas, was
understood as the habit that perfected the knowledge of divine things. Because it
was a gift of the Holy Spirit, it had its own principles, derived from divine science,
with which it judged the knowledge of other sciences, not with the intention of
testing its foundations but to show that they were not incompatible with its own
truth, For this reason, it was known as the head of the sciences, but it was also
called light because it was a pure act of knowledge. There were two types of
wisdom: the created that was proper to creatures and the begotten that was attrib-
uted to angelic beings. This division realized that the created was perfected by
receiving the nature of the one who begets. Wisdom could be achieved through the
study of sacred doctrine, which was possible because the divine understanding was
manifested in the minds of human beings.
Although not everyone could come to the knowledge of supernatural truth
through natural reason, the theologian said that certain principles could be accessed
if God was studied in the same way as he was done with creatures; that is, he should
be examined the object absolutely in what it is a certain being, analyze it as it is one,
understand if it had the capacity to act or cause, and the relationship it had with
what was caused. With this, it would be possible to reach the intellectual virtue that
was the perfection of reason. When wisdom was conceived by the understanding, it
was considered a manifestation of the intelligent being, but when it managed to
access certain divine truths, it was called bliss because it achieved, in a certain way,
the perfect good of the intellectual nature that was the act of the understanding, the
which brought the human being closer to the lower angelic beings [14, 19, 20].
550
R. Jiménez Marce

Conclusion
Although the objective of Thomas’ work was theological, it is of great interest to
analyze the way in which he reﬂected on human rationality understood as a
mechanism to access the understanding of reality. Thomas Aquinas’ thought evi-
denced the importance of reason for the human being since it not only constituted
the quality that allowed him to differentiate himself from the rest of earthly creatures
but also allowed him to approach spiritual ones, although without reaching the
levels of understanding which they enjoyed. Thus, the human being found himself
in an intermediate situation: he was superior in the environment of natural beings
but inferior among supernatural beings whose knowledge did not depend on the
sensitive. This was explained by the way in which knowledge of reality was pro-
duced since access to it was achieved through the body that became the means to
approach the sensitive experience, but the processing of information was not
associated with the material but was produced in the intellectual soul that was not
located in any speciﬁc organ. This approach differentiated Aquinas from the rest of
his contemporaries, who believed that intellectual processes occurred in the heart.
Denying any type of connection of reason with the corporal was explained for two
reasons: the lack of knowledge about the physiological processes that gave rise to
thought and the purpose that guided its theological approaches, as it sought to show
the relationship that existed between reason human and faith. The perfect reason
was found in God, who, by an act of love, poured it out on spiritual beings and
natural beings, who appropriated it according to the degree of their perfection.
Thus, in divinity, the understanding was a pure act; in angelic beings, it was in act
with a certain mixture of potency, and in the human being, it was only in potency
and required the intelligible to be able to carry out its operations [14]. Unlike
angelic beings, the human understanding was imperfect not only by its own sub-
stance but also by the fact that, by his own will, the human being could decide if he
sought to advance in the knowledge of the world through science or he only kept
what he perceived, but he did not stop to analyze it. Despite the fact that the
intellect was a divine gift, its perfection was not reached due to the predominance of
the sensitive, which caused that the universal truths that constituted the ultimate
goal of the human being were not known. The approach to the work of Thomas
allows knowing how an intellectual activity was conceived in medieval Catholic
doctrine and, at the same time, asking questions regarding the way in which other
religious traditions understood the origin of thought.
27
How Rational Thought is Conceived in Christian …
551

Core Messages
• Rational processes were not generated in any organ of the human body.
• The intellectual substances of the human being are required to approach
sensible things through the bodily senses.
• The understanding is an action of the human being who understood that he
was the one who understood.
• The intellectual appetite induced the desire to obtain immaterial goods
because they sought to apprehend being.
• The intellective soul came to the truth through the argumentation that
materialized in the discourse.
Acknowledgements I wish to express my gratitude to Eva Berenice.
References
1. Maurial I (2015) Tomás de Aquino y las cinco vías de la existencia de Dios. Consensus 20
(1):51–62
2. González CI (2018) Estudio introductorio. In Aquino T. Suma contra los gentiles, Porrúa,
México, pp IX–XLII
3. Martínez N (2002) Sobre la fe y la razón en Santo Tomás de Aquino. Humanidades 2(1):67–89
4. Echavarría MF (2013) La analogía de fe y razón en santo Tomás de Aquino. Espíritu LXI I
(145):147–160
5. Zapater JM (1993) El siglo XIII de París. Nuevo rumbo para la ﬁlosofía occidental. Revista
española de ﬁlosofía medieval (0):273–278
6. Celada G (2001) Introducción a la Suma de Teología de Santo Tomás de Aquino. In Aquino,
T. Suma de Teología I, Biblioteca de autores cristianos, Madrid, pp 3–52
7. Escallada A (2001) Condición y panorama de la teología. In Aquino T. Suma de Teología I,
Biblioteca de autores cristianos, Madrid, pp 75–84
8. Robles L (1992) Apuntes para una lectura de Tomás de Aquino. Anales del Seminario de
Metafísica (Extra): 927–963
9. Mora AM (2008) La universidad de París en el siglo XIII: historia, ﬁlosofía y métodos.
Revista de Estudios Sociales 31:60–71
10. González CI (2016) Estudio introductorio. In Aquino T. Tratado de la ley. Tratado de la
justicia. Sobre el gobierno de los príncipes, Porrúa, México, pp XIII–LXXXIII
11. Bertelloni F (2001) La contribución de la ﬁlosofía a la formación del pensamiento político
laico a ﬁnes del siglo XIII y comienzos del siglo XIV. Mirabilia 1:189–203
12. Artola JM (2001) Tratado de la creación o producción de todos los seres por Dios. In
Aquino T. Suma de Teología I, Biblioteca de autores cristianos. Madrid, pp 425–440
13. Forment E (2015) El acto de ser en la distinción hombre y persona de Santo Tomás de
Aquino. Sapientia LXXX I(237):5–38
14. Aquino T (2001) Suma de Teología I. Biblioteca de autores cristianos, Madrid
15. Jara V (2012) Desarrollo del pensamiento y teorías cognitivas para enseñar a pensar y
producir conocimientos. Sophia 12:53–66
16. Goff J, Troung N (2005) Una historia del cuerpo en la Edad Media. Paidós, Buenos Aires
17. González J (2010) Breve historia del cerebro. Crítica, Barcelona
552
R. Jiménez Marce

18. Rivera JL (2016) La controversia sobre la sede del alma en la antigüedad. Boletín Cientíﬁco
Sapiens Res 6(2):20–28
19. Aquino T (1989) Suma de Teología II. Biblioteca de autores cristianos, Madrid
20. Aquino T (2018) Suma contra los gentiles. Porrúa, México
Rogelio Jiménez Marce is a research professor at the Instituto de
Ciencias Sociales y Humanidades. Benemérita Universidad
Autónoma de Puebla (México). Historian and anthropologist. He
was coordinator of the Obras de Francisco Bulnes at the Instituto
Mora (México City). Author of three books: Todo por amor a la
ciencia. El viaje de la Comisión Astronómica Mexicana al Japón
en 1874 (2016); La palabra reprimida. El control social sobre el
imaginario del más allá, siglos XVII-XVIII (2010) and La pasión
por la polémica. El debate sobre la historia en la época de
Francisco Bulnes (2003). He has published scientiﬁc articles,
book chapters, popular articles, and introductory studies. His lines
of research are religious history, historiography, cultural history,
agrarian history and political history. Member of the Sistema
Nacional de Investigadores (level II)
.
27
How Rational Thought is Conceived in Christian …
553

28
The Interest of Religion on Ethical
Thought in Science
Jude Likori Omukaga
“That which has happened is a warning. To forget it is guilt…
and it remains possible for it to happen again… Only in
knowledge can it be prevented.” [1]
Summary
Suspicion between religion and science facilitates attitudes of conﬂicts that can
hold back progress. Some policies ignore religion as inconsequential in
preference to the deﬁnitive prescriptions of science. Nevertheless, the destructive
potential of the evil of religious fundamentalism, radicalization, intolerance, or
obstinacyawaken open society to possibilities of religion. This primary question
of attitude sometimes even affects the advances of science in critical areas of
service to society. As society becomes more conscious of the traits common to
human thought processes, experts raise an existential question of interest: What
is the value of society’s conﬂicting regard for the realities of religion and
science? This chapter considers this debate in two aspects. Firstly, it presents the
history of complementarity between the two. This will be the basis of its plea for
the irreplaceable interest of religion in the ethical thought of science. Secondly, it
entrenches religion as a social science. As such its institutional character can be a
foundation for a stable, ethical base for the pursuits of science. It will, therefore,
tie the relevance of religion to both its potential for a stable institution and as an
instrument of scientiﬁc research. While the former anchors the interests of
J. L. Omukaga (&)
University of Kabianga, P.O. Box 2030-20200, Kericho, Kenya
e-mail: jlikori@kabianga.ac.ke
J. L. Omukaga
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research
Network (USERN), Nairobi, Kenya
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh (eds.), Thinking, Integrated Science 7,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04075-7_28
555

religion in ethical science, the latter motivates the value of religion as a social
science.
Envisioning the role of social science.
(Prepared with data from [20])
Keywords
Building bridges  Integration  Religion  Science  Thinking
QR Code
Scanning the QR code directs you to the word cloud of the chapter that is made up
of the words we discussed throughout the whole book in relation to the chapter’s
keyword, which is intentionally not included in the word cloud. Find the keyword
and put it in place in the puzzle according to the clues provided in Chap. 36. The
mystery hidden in the puzzle is the quote of THINKING: Bioengineering of Science
and Art.
556
J. L. Omukaga

Introduction
Science and religion have provided alternative opportunities to the solutions of the
problems of society both as institutions and ideologies. In this struggle, these two
occupy peoples’ minds differently depending on the challenges of the time. While
religion exhibits tendencies of authoritarian dogmatism where it often goes
unchallenged, its tenets over moral standing or ethical behavior in society remain
stable and guarded. Dogmatism arguably shields religion against the uncertainties
of temporariness and secures its stability in character formation. Nevertheless, it is
at the same time the crucial point where religion parts ways with science. The
problem, however, is not that these two approaches radically differ, rather the
observation that the outcome of this difference is perhaps more dangerous to society
than the solutions each purports to offer. The common grounds for blame on the
side of religion include, for example, fundamentalism, fanaticism, and radicaliza-
tion. They articulate exaggerations and precipitate conﬂicts. They are often seen as
the outcome of the imperatives of dogma in religion. On the side of science,
manifest failure to embrace ethics respectful of the dignity of people not only
generates mistrust but also causes irreparable harm to health, the environment, and
global business.
Arguably, these differences arise on the institutional level of either side. Insti-
tutional religion is an existential cultural unit bound by common interests and
guarded by speciﬁc regulations that safeguard the set goals. On the other hand, the
institutional face of science manifests in speciﬁed pursuits targeting speciﬁc
interests such as medicine, agriculture, and engineering. At this level, interests are
speciﬁc and concerns are narrow; therefore, conﬂicts abound. However, emerging
challenges of society imply a comprehensive multidimensional search for action-
able solutions. Although this chapter looks at religion more as social science, the
discussion will draw from its institutional advantage to argue for its special con-
tribution to stable, ethical thought in science. Beyond the basic shortcomings of the
institution, such as religious fundamentalism or so-called unethical scientiﬁc in-
novations, society faces complex challenges that demand attention. These include,
for example, environmental degradation, armed conﬂicts, and social inequality.
When these challenges involve people's behavior, character, attitudes, or values,
religion is an unavoidable partner. Religion, both as a cultural value and social
science, can be engaged in conﬂict resolution, advocacy for social justice, envi-
ronmental integrity, and human dignity. However, times have changed, and the
method of approach is of the essence. At the level of science, engagement of
religion must embrace research methodology but not without strict adherence to
stable, ethical protocols. Therefore, the work presented in this chapter maneuvers
the counterpoint concerns of religion in a scientiﬁc milieu as it forges its way as a
relevant partner. While its departure from a sound institutional background guar-
antees a stable, ethical disposition, its embrace for method entrenches it as a reliable
social science.
28
The Interest of Religion on Ethical Thought in Science
557

Religion and Science in Context
Context Designation of Religion
The conception of religion often assumes a dominant perspective of a transfor-
mative, individual experience of the self and the distant divine. In this framework, it
is considered a psychological phenomenon residing within the individual either as
feelings or acts or experiences lived in solitude. It can also be a “state of being”
with a transformative import pointing at ultimate transformation and orientation [2].
Other experts concentrated or represented realities higher than the individual and
emphasized the “symbolic transformation of experience” without attention to the
individual behind the experience [3]. Social science leans towards a cultural
framework. Experts in this school look at “religion as a system of beliefs and
practices” by which people orient themselves towards a moral community relative
to both ordinary and extraordinary experiences [4]. As such, the appropriate context
conception of religion recognizes the place of the individual in speciﬁc cultures
while projecting the individual and society towards realities beyond the existential
realm. The emphasis here is that religion soundly endorses culture and a ‘me’
within which its meaning unfolds [5].
This indeed is the attention religion must have in order to receive just consid-
eration both as an institution of faith and an instrument of social/cultural progress. It
sets limits against what experts would call ‘extravagant’ exclusivity or inclusivity,
which are often known to attract thoughtless biases for or against even the mere
mention of the word. On the contrary, proper regard for ‘religion,’ as captured in
this deﬁnition, distinguishes as much as it harmonizes mutuality between the ‘in-
stitution’ and the ‘science.’ This holistic conceptualization also bears signiﬁcant
implication on how we theorize, design our projects, and make knowledge claims
on matters of religion. Thus, well suited to scientiﬁc pursuits of research on social
issues. It places the research outside ‘religion’ and disposes research work to
objective criticism. Thus, the proper conceptualization of ‘religion,’ according to
experts, inspires active and creative engagement over aspects of research. To this
extent, the research design in religion follows the pattern of research in all other
social sciences: the questions, the objectives, the method, and the procedure remain
largely a social science venture. Unlike theology, religion as the object of research
is a social science.
Important Origins of Religion and Science
In its prehistoric signiﬁcance, religion evolved basically as an institution. Its visi-
bility was an effect of a reciprocal signiﬁcance in which it facilitated the experience
of communitarianism, which, in turn, developed and sustained it. Socio-economic
experts use the Tribal band, chiefdom, empire, and City-State stages to articulate
the extraordinary abilities of humans that appeared in the late stone age or so-called
558
J. L. Omukaga

the Neolithic age, estimated to occur roughly between 50,000 and 13,000 BC.
According to this categorization, human character developed in complexity towards
cohesion as members of smaller simple communities in tribal bands towards
complex societies organized in States. The Neolithic age assembled the earliest
visible vestige of the instrumentality of religion on the civilization of technology
that summarises its progress from hunter-gatherer small nomadic groups through
domestic life of agriculture and livestock to complex organized city life [6].
Archaeological excavations reveal the presence of spiritual shrines exhibiting
carvings, statues of both male and female deities with spiritual inscriptions that
marked very orderly religious practice. The Neolithic revolution saw the expansion
of the tribal bands to villages with elaborate social, economic, and political struc-
tures. Experts trace the emergence of organized religion to this stage [7] (Fig. 28.1).
Religion captured the community’s awesome wonder generated by the experi-
ence of exact patterns in weather conditions, great winds, and measured rainfalls
that ensured good agricultural yields. In such an experience of success, religion led
the community’s appreciation through worship of fertility gods and goddesses,
made offerings of communion with the deities, and pledged loyalty to the forces of
such benevolence [9]. The desire to represent people’s reaction to the benevolence
of nature in the tribal band stage exposed individual talents of a sculptor, carving,
and molding better articulated in religious statues, shrines, or instruments. Thus,
human art was facilitated by and ﬁrst served religious interest. Religion, in its turn,
expressed what safeguarded the central community interests. Even though these
skills were advanced and technical, they did not just serve the individual's interest
alone but were more directed to the service of the community.
Fig. 28.1 Locating religion in prehistory (Prepared with data from [8])
28
The Interest of Religion on Ethical Thought in Science
559

These early aspects of religion developed gradually through the other stages:
chiefdom, empire, and state. The Agrarian lifestyle deﬁned the consequent stages of
development. Human living not only exhibited strong tendencies towards com-
munity life but also gradually experienced the imperatives of peaceful coexistence.
This gravitated around the ﬁgure of a chief, a king, or its equivalent. Strong and
responsive leadership was the immediate manifestation of the assurance of the
deity’s protection. Religion did not only enrich the community with narratives of
the legends, heroes, and demigods but gradually conceived and nurtured the fragile
importance of peaceful coexistence in the community. As the communities grew
larger, the leaders needed rules, laws, regulations, and, ultimately, strict and higher
ethical standards to sustain harmony. Religion preserved the norms set and inspired
voluntary obedience to these norms by members of the community. Ultimately, The
City-State stage emerged with what the historians observe as the most ‘civilized’
level of religion expressed in ethical monotheism [10]. Society at this complex level
needed moral guidance, peace, and order. Religion deﬁned the highest security
available, most visible in the Abrahamic religions of Judaism, Christianity, and
Islam. The higher monotheism found in these religions was anchored and facilitated
by the hierarchical structures of “authoritarian god-like absolute ruler at the top”
[11].
Separation of Science and Religion: The Catalysts
Institutional Dogmatism
The consolidation of doctrinal monotheism in the Abrahamic religions and the
appearance of elaborate ethical codes in other present-day world religions in the
Middle Ages did not deliver its anticipated climax. Instead of ﬂowering the growing
quality of science and art to maturity, the period triggered endless disagreements,
conﬂicts, and superiority struggles that ceaselessly pitted the established faith
groups against each other. Institutional Churches emerged, constituting Christian-
ization in the Western World and the spread and consolidation of Islam and
Buddhism in the East and the Far East. Advanced literary thought, competing
ethical doctrines, and uncompromising deism fomented cracks that began to tear
society into independent conclaves.
The conﬂicts that characterized the Middle Ages hardened respective faith
groups in their resolve, often guarded against interference by the ‘heathen’ others.
Religion evolved into a coded package of givens administered by the faith groups.
Faith institutions grew more towards the vertical dimension rather than unilaterally
concentrating on the god ﬁgure. The horizontal dimension remained limited to the
scope of speciﬁc faith interests and adherents. Literary instruments, philosophy, and
theology were employed to defend the group's identity and advance dogmatism,
absolutism, and apologetics against interference from perceived enemies. This
difference was also variously rendered in the distinctions between the divine and the
560
J. L. Omukaga

worldly, the religious and the secular, and the sacred and the profane. Henceforth,
religion looked suspiciously at science as a heathen, secular, and profane body of
knowledge not beﬁtting in the pursuit of the divine plan of saving the world.
Religion enjoyed superior opinion over society [5].
Enlightenment
The extremes of enlightenment served two purposes to be reckoned here:
i. Firstly, society rebelled against the religious dominance of knowledge and
prescribed a radically different methodology of pursuit against society's prob-
lems. The search for alternatives began with splinter movements within the
hitherto solid world religions;
ii. Secondly, enlightenment rejected religion and ushered in consistent secularism
that championed social pursuits independent of religion. It rediscovered the
independent value of ﬁne art, social science, business and commerce, law, and
linguistics [12]. Through the pursuit of these disciplines, science employed
methods that sought precise and deﬁnite answers to the problems of the time.
Emergent modern philosophy of science advocated a new theory of knowledge
and experimental methodology. Contrary to the religious theory of faith, intuition,
innate ideas, or tradition, modern science advanced empirical evidence discovered
in experiments. As natural science maintained its empirical, experimental bases, the
philosophy of science pursued the defense of the new method through skepticism,
empiricism, and rationalism. Hypotheses and theories had to stand the test of the
rigor of natural science [13]. Capturing the common mindset of natural science
philosophers against religion, Thomas Hobbes is quoted to remark, “people should
accept revelation and its interpretations for the reason that they should accept the
commands of their sovereign, in order to avoid war” [14, p. 146].
Postmodernism
The postmodern era ushered paradigms more akin to a break from both perceived
and real ideological bondage of the past, even when it did not offer better alter-
natives. It did not only generate passionate distaste of religious dogma, nor did it
just oppose the dominant brilliant methodology of natural science; it went further to
antagonize history and its sources [15]. In the postmodern era, society rejected
institutional dogmatism, consistency, and method. Never prescribes absolute ver-
sions of reality or truth. The era rejected universal religious truths or laws as it
remained uncomfortable with scientiﬁc methods prescribing the same answers to all
situations. It approached any of these hitherto trusted approaches with absolute
skepticism. As society weakened regard for institutions and any tendency towards
objective reality, it strengthened the perspective of the individual worldview,
28
The Interest of Religion on Ethical Thought in Science
561

subjecting religion to individual freedom and taste. Postmodern religion down-
played dogmatism and freely varied the sources of its practices to suit the conve-
nience of the time. It embraced levels of syncretism, shifting, and changing realities
to advance its progress [16, P. 94].
The Fruits of the Separation
Gains in Natural Science
Natural science enjoyed a substantial period of independent pursuit of social pro-
gress facilitated by noble discoveries, especially concerning medical healthcare,
technology, and biotechnology. Cures of complicated diseases were discovered.
Important medicine like penicillin, quinine, and procaine was discovered, generated
in exact experimental protocols, and administered in precise and measurable doses
for factual healing. They were put into commercial use to cure hitherto chronic
diseases like syphilis, gonorrhea, and malaria. The management of therapeutic
operations like surgery uncovered the value of anesthesia. The use of psychiatry
and psychoanalysis to manage strange psychosomatic nightmares such as hysteria
and general psychopathology became unquestionable alternatives to vague religious
mysticism [17]. Most excitingly, the science of eugenics pioneered molecular sci-
ence’s possible transfer of organs with the possibility of modifying, replacing or
fabricating parts of human bodies for use in extraordinary situations of need.
Further exploration of molecular science in biotechnology exposed a wider range
of scientiﬁc processes and procedures targeted particularly at innovative cultivation
of food plants and domestication of ‘improved’ livestock through breeding pro-
grams and agrochemicals for weed and pest control. It employed enhanced artiﬁcial
interventions and specialized natural hybridization for improved human subsistence
and welfare [18]. The manufacturing of food from both agricultural and livestock
products was not only a primary issue of subsistence; it provided a veritable
springboard to agribusiness that introduced a very new face to world commerce and
trade [19]. Later, stem cell engineering gave hopes for the treatment of terminal
diseases such as cancers. Genetic manipulation gave hope to immunization and
exposed the pharmaceutical industry to competitive innovation in medicine. Suc-
cessful animal cloning provided further hope for reconstructing functional
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) from some cells of the extinct species to clone and
preserve select species of value feared to be disappearing in creation.
The area of technology articulated further gains. The inventions of ﬁre-steam
engines and the consequent manipulation of locomotives, ﬂight engineering, and
explorative water vessels in the navigation of deep waters opened space in the
world not only for habitation and exploitation; it widened the horizons of peoples’
understanding and use of nature to improve quality of human life. Electricity,
running water technology, and rapid adaptation of human settlements in complex
plans and designs of growing towns and cities did not only deﬁne the high quality
562
J. L. Omukaga

of life of society, but it also accelerated the rapid transformation of backward rural
settings into modernistic urban centers with modern security, and social amenities
adapted to higher standards of living. These areas did not only provide excitement
for the real gains of science for practical relevance at the time; they deﬁned the path
of innovation for inexhaustible future breakthroughs for real progress in science.
The Emergence of Social Science
Despite the sterling performance of natural sciences, some philosophers of religion
remained skeptical. In the existentialist worldview of Karl Jaspers, for example,
though human freedom enjoyed preference over and above religious dogmatism, he
still wrote intuitively against the threats to this freedom posed by modern science.
An attempt of balance, too, was visible in his thought. His holistic view of reality
comprised coming to terms with philosophical transcendence in which he envi-
sioned borders of reality beyond which science alone cannot go without a religious
commitment of faith [20]. Other philosophers of religion remained critical of both
science and religion while others made an effort to develop a balance. Thus,
rejection of religion did not always mean enthusiastic acceptance of science;
sometimes, it meant rejecting both. However, good debates often led to a reason-
able balance.
Auguste Comte’s positivist philosophy gradually shifted the formularies of
empirical evidence towards the concerns of order in society to open a critical
platform of reciprocal relevance of science to religion. A reﬁned relationship
between these two realms of reality not only deﬁned the consequent input of experts
but also marked out the trajectory of the future potential of science in the progress
of society. Émile Durkheim structured social science around the perception that
society is made up of institutions, beliefs, and modes of behavior it collectively
institutes. Accordingly, institutions must aim to discover structural social facts.
Durkheim envisaged social facts to “consist of manners of acting, thinking and
feeling external to the individual” and a form of coercive power by which these
facts exercise control over the individual to preserve the integrity of society [21].
The consequent image envisioning the role of social science is captured in
Graphical Abstract.
From this background, Durkheim’s push for sociology as a deﬁnitive academic
discipline in the university targeted a two-fold role:
• “to analyze how societies could maintain their integrity and coherence” in new
social institutions where shared religion and ethnic background no longer count;
• to establish the practical implications of scientiﬁc knowledge in society [22].
To this extent, he built his theory around the premise that sociology is the
science of institutions, i.e., a social science. As such, it should organize empirical
facts in relationships that can generate scientiﬁc laws and methods that avoid
28
The Interest of Religion on Ethical Thought in Science
563

philosophical speculation. Ultimately, the mission of social science is social
integration.
In order to pursue the interests of society effectively in this mindset, Durkheim
was inﬂuenced by Auguste Comte’s Social Positivism, “to extend and apply the
scientiﬁc method found in natural sciences to social science.” He employed epis-
temological realism and a hypothetico-deductive model of reasoning to review
Comte’s positivism premised on a ﬁrm belief in the reality of the nature of
knowledge [23]. Consequently, knowledge was pursued as a reality that exists
independently of our conceptual scheme, while the scientiﬁc inquiry of the
unknown subject relied on hypotheses that stood the test of observable data [24,
p. 174].
The new social science prescribed ﬁve approaches through which the progress of
society can be advanced:
i. ﬁrstly, the route of social research worked with large statistical surveys, the
analysis of which pointed at a direction of need or progress. In this regard,
social research is pursued following a systematic plan facilitated by quanti-
tative or qualitative methodologies. While the former utilized statistical anal-
ysis to create reliable claims of quantity, the latter employed direct
observation, interrogation of participants, or analysis of text, to expose con-
textual subjective accuracy over quality [25];
ii. the second route undertakes the study of ‘social facts,’ proposition of social
theory, and formulation of meta-theoretical ideas [26];
iii. the third avenue arises from the methodological dichotomy implied in inves-
tigating the inﬂuence of individual and external social occurrences on one’s
behavior and opinion;
iv. the fourth route advanced economic knowledge as a natural hard science;
v. the ﬁfth approach concerned the correlation of knowledge and social values
[27].
The above concerns were initially pursued from positivistic perspectives but
soon overtaken by interpretivists who preferred symbolic interpretation to empiri-
cally falsiﬁable theories. Stephen Kalberg, for example, rejected the use of a sci-
entiﬁc method for the study of the social realm. He insisted on a speciﬁc
epistemology that captures and shapes proportionate social worldview immediately
under investigation [28].
Religion as a Social Science
Research-oriented thoughts of social theorists at enlightenment inﬂuenced the
German protestant theologians towards founding a special school for the history of
religion. This school, Religionsgeschichtliche Schule, used criticism methodologies
to investigate the origins of ancient texts to understand “the world behind the text”
[29, p. 48]. Leaning more on Max Webbers’ multicausal investigative approach
564
J. L. Omukaga

espoused in methodological anti-positivism, the Göttingen theologians formulated
theses that regarded Christianity as one religion among others, particularly chal-
lenging its claims to absolute truth. Through the historical–critical methodology,
they demonstrated that indeed Christianity shares important characteristics with
other religions [5]. The insights of their historical criticism exposed the varied
inﬂuence of these religions on Christianity. It became clearer that the roots of
Christianity spread wider than just the Old Testament. Though the study focused on
written records as it developed the formal religion image, it highlighted religious
beliefs long before written records. Where written records were lacking, prehistory
was accessed through advanced archaeological records. In the advent of
historical-critical methodology, other indirect parallel sources helped formulate
hypotheses and support suppositions that facilitated research and continued debate
among prospective experts [4].
The study of the history of religion opened religion to the methodological
appreciation of its role in society. With Aguste Comte’s positivistic assertions that
considered the visible regularities in society as subject to empirical study, religion
assumed a social scientiﬁc study pattern [30]. It competed for scientiﬁc research
methods and, like all social science, adopted the principles of natural science for the
study of society. As a science, therefore, religion engaged theory, developed
hypotheses, and employed derived empirical generalizations in further reﬁning
theory [31]. It had to demonstrate a capacity to resolve the basic dilemmas that
characterize research pursuits in formulating research questions, goals, actionable
objectives, target unit of analysis, quantity and quality of target data, observation
methods, and the time frame.
The Crusade for Human Rights
Though human rights can be traced to elaborate justice theories of the Middle Ages,
the earliest formal narrative in this age springs out of the debate on Natural Law
doctrine. The classical natural law tenets envisage an interplay between the human
faculties of reason and free will to deduce the primary principle of human behavior
that commands an imperative to “do good and avoid evil” [32]. The doctrine
expounds that good and evil not only derive from the rational nature of a person but
that both apply to all people at all times everywhere. The immediate moral
implication is that “standards of morality are in some sense derived from, or
entailed by, the nature of the world and the nature of human beings” [33]. In fact,
the nature of human beings is what actually deﬁnes natural law. Thomas Aquinas
expounded on this common view that “since human beings are by nature rational
beings, it is morally appropriate that they should behave in a way that conforms to
their rational nature” [34]. The ultimate general regard for the natural law doctrine
was that the knowledge design of God, the powerful creator of the universe, safely
guided His creation to its intended end [34].
However, with time unfolding events of history, it led to doubts on the ability of
natural law in its religious version to guide the practical life of society objectively
28
The Interest of Religion on Ethical Thought in Science
565

[35]. In the spirit of enlightenment, with emerging nation-states, ‘Reasons of State’
were believed to override ordinary moral considerations [36]. The weakening of
church authorities and the challenges of rationalism pushed political philosophers to
argue for new bases of natural rights. Thomas Hobbes, for example, described a
‘State of Nature’ (war of all against all) in which the divine basis of natural right did
not seem relevant [37, p. 36]. Ultimately, Stephen Buckle traces change to Hugo
Grotius, a Dutch lawyer, who advanced a new argument based on an earlier per-
ceived distinction between natural and eternal law [38]. As eternal law underlined
the religious purpose, natural law espoused the right reason capable of functions
that remain independent of the religious implications. This capacity conferred a
moral authority to guide the individual to quality life decisions considered in law as
‘moral’ [38]. The legal philosophy of the time considered this law more binding
than the struggle to know its source. Inevitably, positive law became the practical
expression of human rights formalized in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights in 1948 [39].
As an international law, this popular version today relies more on the capacity of
right reason than on any explicit religious, moral content. Although this shift
profoundly changed the understanding of morality, “with the further implication of
the moral signiﬁcance of the separateness of persons” [38], experts remained more
focused on founding an independent modern theory of human rights. From this
foundation, the human rights narrative carried forward the condition of humankind
in its multiple aspects: political, social, economic, and cultural. As it fostered
coexistence and progress, so did it attract protection by popular consensus.
The Cost of the Separation
The Excesses of Science Without Ethics
The enlightenment and the postmodern ages posed unique challenges to human
welfare, particularly in natural science. Two isolated case studies of high-stake
research trials on complex medical situations stand out conspicuously: The “Tus-
kegee Study of Untreated Syphilis in the Negro Male,” in the United States; and the
case of vesicovaginal ﬁstula featuring the famous physician James Marion Sims,
“father of modern gynecology.” Regarding the ﬁrst case, the interest to pursue the
cure of syphilis turned out to be the worst massacre of innocent participants in a
research study driven by self-serving interests rather than by the people's dignity
and welfare [40]. The second case was the complication of childbirth among the
female victims [41]. James Marion Sims’ ﬁrst intervention is today remembered
perhaps more for its cruelty against the dignity of women than as an achievement in
medical health [42].
Perhaps the climax of the examples of the failure of science to uphold the dignity
of man it set out to redeem is the massive failure of experimentations on eugenics in
Nazi Germany. This experience did not only raise grave ethical issues on general
566
J. L. Omukaga

misuse of the potential of science; rather, it exposed the instrumentality of science
in the hands of bad ideology [43]. Apart from the structured social issues such as
segregation, healthcare, class bias, and racism, the experience raises very grave
ethical issues at the center of which is the dignity of persons in healthcare [43]. To
modern bioethics experts, the experience did not only contravene the known
principles of ethical practice in research or medical care: autonomy, justice,
beneﬁcence, and conﬁdentiality; it exposed maximum void in the personal character
of the doctors and researchers [44].
Beyond its social ramiﬁcations, the impact of unethical practice of science
invaded the microbiological technologies in plant genetic engineering, cloning, and
subsidiary farm technologies in biochemical products to target fertilizers and pest
and weed control. The Monsanto chain of companies, a pioneer in commercializing
biotechnology in agricultural and agrochemical products, faced problem after
problem with business law, environment, and social responsibility. On cloning, the
proliferation of DNA proﬁling and the use of stem cell nuclear transfer (SCNT)
technology to harvest stem cells continues to raise grave ethical issues. In ‘thera-
peutic cloning,’ for example, these two are not only wasteful of living tissue, but
they also generate complex processes that remain expensive to sustain [45]. Ethical
questions became graver with ‘organism cloning’ technology targeting genetically
identical organisms without fertilization or inter-gamete contact [46, p. 53].
‘Religion’ Without Method
Consolidation of religion into faith groups in the Medieval Ages concentrated on
the psychologically transformative model that focused attention on the monolithic
institutions and the spiritual-moral progress of the individual. Community convents,
monasteries, seminaries, or catechetical classes in parishes became stronger.
Meanwhile, the curriculum of the cathedral and monastic schools trained individ-
uals in religion alongside the famous ‘Seven Liberal Arts’ [47]. The goal was
largely the vertical progress of the individual or the community towards the divine
[48].
Although the schools soon grew into Medieval Universities, the ordinary uni-
versity curriculum consisting of the preparatory trivium advanced to the famous
Quadrivium did not factor the study of religion in any signiﬁcant content. Even the
study of the prestigious Master of Arts degree pursued after a successful pass of
these two stages could only deliver a student to philosophical classics in physics,
metaphysics, and ethics but would carefully ignore religion as an academic disci-
pline [49]. According to the experts, a good pass at the Master’s level earned
brighter students a prestigious place of further studies in three important disciplines:
law, medicine, or theology. At this level, the study of theology was universally
considered the most prestigious; students of ability would then pursue religion.
Unfortunately, the studies in theology were strictly controlled by the bishops, and
only a few Universities had faculties of theology [50]. Those accepted to the
program had to bear with the rigors of scholasticism, which involved more of
28
The Interest of Religion on Ethical Thought in Science
567

“conceptual analysis and the careful drawing of distinctions.” It emphasized di-
alectic “reasoning to extend knowledge by inference and to resolve contradictions”
more than it ever suggests a learning methodology for innovative pursuits in phi-
losophy or theology. Thus, lack of methodological pursuits and attention and its
relegation to near insigniﬁcance left religion more like a private spiritual endeavor
than a competitive methodical academic discipline [51].
The resultant Medieval University education pattern, rooted in the ancient Greek
and Roman systems, was conceptualized as the art of: “raising or educating a
person” or “strengthening or bringing up men.” Liberal art trained adults in
all-around knowledge and skills to become leaders in any area of need [52].
Religion had no signiﬁcant role and place in the public sphere for the entire system
for a long time globally. It was conﬁned to the private life of individuals and strictly
guarded for a determined purpose [50].
From Relevant Institution Towards Stable Ethical Science
The study of the history of religion in the civilization of societies cannot ignore its
steadfast focus to sustain stable moral institutions in society, private or public. The
relevance of religion for contemporary society going forward will, likewise, depend
on how society ﬁnds it necessary in its key institutions. On the other hand, the role
of natural science in society is clearer and, in fact, dominates the progress of
society. The grievous weakness in the pursuits of natural science emerges to be its
unsteady regard for ethical integrity. Therefore, the phenomenology of religion as a
social-cultural value compels its interests in the ethical thinking of science. In the
ﬁnal analysis, religion and science share both the source and destination of the
progress of society. Two important factors expose ethical thinking as a concern of
interest emerging from the foregoing discussion: the twin role of history in
exposing ethical monotheism as the climax of the pursuits of religion for human
civilization and religion as a veritable social science; and the acclamation of
research as a common concern of religion and natural science.
The signiﬁcance of history in the study of religion emerges in the archeologi-
cally backed involvement of religion in bringing harmony between the progress in
the use of technology and in the growing complexity of society. When human
society grew to the stage of City-State, religion contributed to facilitating ethical
monotheism for the required peaceful coexistence. However, the link between
history and prehistory is the institution and its cultural relevance to the progress of
humanity across the ages. Furthermore, the pursuit of the history of religion opened
its potential as a science.
The gains of natural science emerge strongly in varied research experimentations
and discoveries. The absence of religion at higher academic training coincided with
the many challenges encountered in natural science. Thus, the importance of reli-
gion as a cultural value in the education system targeted at decent respect for human
dignity is not only the logical ﬁnding of this presentation; it is indeed the trend of
568
J. L. Omukaga

higher learning which places research innovation and extension at its center.
Institutions of higher learning today target measurable impact with the concern of
scholarship being shifted more and more towards the service of the needs of
society.
Recent development in the structuring of university education emphasizes a
research-oriented model globally. A comparison of university education between
Europe and Kenya [53], for example, highlights the common thrust in a threefold
matrix, namely: quality teaching, research, and extensions, with emphasis on
extension programs for community service. Therefore, it is possible to argue for the
crucial role of religion in the progress of humanity today through its instrumentality
as the agent of research science across the platforms of both natural and social
science. This discussion identiﬁes this role as the ethical component of religion by
which culture advances the relevance of any science across generations. Though
science is an instrument of progress in society, it requires stable attention to ethical
issues better safeguarded by the institutional structures of religion handed down
from history.
Conclusion
This discussion has proﬁled the different images of the relationship between reli-
gion and science in human history, its role in society's civilization, and peoples’
regard for the two in different circumstances. In our times, the concerns of social
science in the progress of society view religion as a cultural system is oriented
towards a moral community relevant to both ordinary and extraordinary experiences
of the here and hereafter. Most importantly, the discussion highlighted both the
positive and negative scenarios of separating religion from science. Negatively, the
separation highlights the potential of the two to inﬂict suffering on humanity.
A positive scenario allows us a glimpse into the huge potential of science to uplift
the quality of human life. Drawing from the synergistic relationship of the two, this
discussion underlined the social-cultural signiﬁcation of religion which not only
exposes the unavoidable relevance of religion as a social science but also conﬁrms
its institutional potential to build a stable, ethical base for general pursuits of
science. Just as religion delivered society to ethical monotheism and facilitated
peace in governance to build prehistoric communities, its involvement can con-
tribute to honorable ethical practice in research initiatives of building contemporary
society; so, for knowledge in the failures of the past is a securer path to the gains of
the future.
28
The Interest of Religion on Ethical Thought in Science
569

Core Messages
• Religion facilitated the formation of crucial social institutions in human
civilization.
• Social institutions hold the key to social integrity, the subject of social
science.
• The gains of natural science overshadowed religion at enlightenment and
sacriﬁced the institution, opening room for abuse of science.
• The entrenchment of religion as an institution and social science is nec-
essary for ethically stable pursuits of science.
References
1. Rees L (1997) The Nazis: A warning from history. BBC Books
2. Streng F (1967) Emptiness: a study in religious meaning. Abingdon Pr, New York
3. O’Dea T (1966) The sociology of religion. Prentice Hall, New Jersey
4. Albanese C (2012) America, religions, and religion, 5th edn. Wadsworth, Belmont
5. Durkheim E (1995) Elementary forms of the religious life. The Free Press, New York, p 35
6. Themistocles Z (1997) The prehistoric temples of Malta and Gozo. Texas, Masterson, p. 150
7. Hodder I (ed) (2014) Religion at work in a neolithic society. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge
8. Lubbock
J
(1865)
Pre-Historic
Times.
(on-line)
Available
at
https://www.
historyoﬁnformation.com/detail.php?entryid=2556. Accessed Aug 2020
9. Burkert W (1983) Homo Necans: The Anthropology of ancient Greek sacriﬁcial Ritual and
Myth. University of California Press, Berkeley, pp 12–72
10. Boehm C (2000) The origin of morality as social control. In Katz LD (ed) Evolutionary
origins of morality: cross-disciplinary perspectives. J Consciousness Stud, vol 7. Thorverton:
Imprint Academic, p 158
11. Mithen S (2006) After the ice: a global human history, 20,000–5000 BC. Agricultural history.
80. Cambridge, Harvard University Press, pp 376–378
12. Kristeller P (1979) The renaissance thought and its sources. Columbia University Press, New
York
13. Newton I, Cohen I, Whitman A, Budenz J (1726) The Principia: mathematical principles of
natural philosophy, 3rd ed. University of California Press, Berkeley, pp 791–796
14. Fuller T (1992) The idea of Christianity in Hobbes “Leviathan”. Jewish Pol Stud Rev 4
(2):139–178
15. Bryant I, Johnston R, Usher R (2004) Adult education and the postmodern challenge
16. Hatch M (2018) Organization theory: modern, symbolic, and postmodern perspectives, 4th
ed. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp 94, 106–142
17. Porter R (ed) (1995) Medicine in the enlightenment. Amstadam, Rodopi
18. James C, Krattiger A (1996) Global review of the ﬁeld testing and commercialization of
transgenic plants, 1986 to 1995: The ﬁrst decade of crop biotechnology. ISAAA Briefs
No. 1 [online] New York, ISAAA: Ithaca, p 31. Available at: http://www.isaaa.org/kc/
Publications/pdfs/isaaabriefs/Briefs%201.pdf. Accessed 8 Aug 2020
19. Demont M, Tollens E (2004) First impact of biotechnology in the EU: Bt maize adoption in
Spain. Ann Appl Biol 145(2):197–207
570
J. L. Omukaga

20. Silber JR (ed) (1971) Karl Jaspers philosophy of existence. University of Pensylvania Press,
Philadelphia
21. Traugott M (ed) (1978) Emile Durkheim on institutional analysis. University Chicago Press,
London
22. Calhoun C, Gerteis J, Moody J, Pfaff S, Virk I (eds) (2012) Classical sociological theory, 3rd
edn. Blackwell, Willey
23. Durkheim E (1982) The rules of sociological method, 1st edn. The Free Press, New York,
pp 119–140
24. Godfrey-Smith P (2003) Theory and reality: an introduction to the philosophy of science. The
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp 173–186
25. Haralambos M, Holborn M (2013) Sociology themes and perspectives, 8th edn. Harper
Collins, London
26. Durkheim E (1979) Suicide: a study in sociology. The Free Press, New York, pp 297–361
27. Weber M, Kalberg S (2020) The protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism. Oxford
University Press, Oxford
28. Kalberg S (2017) The social thought of Max Weber. SAGE, Oxford
29. Soulen R, Soulen R (2001) Handbook of biblical criticism, 3rd edn. John Knox Press,
Westminister, p 78
30. Comte A, Martineau H (2010) The positive philosophy of Auguste Comte, 1st edn. Casimo
Classics, London
31. Lenzer G (ed) (2017) Auguste Comte and positivism. New York, Routledge, pp 218–250
32. Finnis J (1980) Natural law and natural rights. Clarendon Press, Oxford, pp 198–226
33. Kenneth Einar (2020) Natural law, internet encyclopedia of philosophy, https://iep.utm.edu/
natlaw/. Accessed Sept 2020
34. Aquinas, ST I-II, Q.90, A.I)
35. Grotus H, Neff S (2012) On the law of war and peace. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pp 124–137
36. Bireley R (Ed) (2017) Botero-the reason of state. Cambridge University Press, New York
37. Hobbes T (1651) (2019) Leviathan. Newton Stewart, Anodos Books, pp 36–54
38. Buckle S (1991) Natural Law. In: Singer P (ed) A companion to ethics. Blackwell,
Cambridge, pp 166–168
39. Turk D (2003) Reﬂections on human rights, sovereignty of states and the principle of
non-intervention. In: Bergsmo M (ed) Human rights and criminal justice for the downtrodden:
essays in honour of Asbjørn Eide. Marinus Nijhoff Publishers, Leiden, pp 754–756
40. Public Health Service Syphilis Study at Tuskegee (2020) The Tuskegee Timeline. [online]
Available at: https://www.citethisforme.com/cite/sources/websitemanualcite. Accessed 19
Aug 2020
41. Stamatakos M, Sargedi C, Stasinou T, Kontzoglou K (2014) Vesicovaginal Fistula: diagnosis
and management. Indian J Surg 76(2):131–136
42. Wall LL (2006) The medical ethics of Dr J. Marion Sims: a fresh look at the historical record.
J Med Ethics 32(6):346–350
43. Proctor RN (1982) Nazi doctors, racial medicine, and the human experimentation. In
Annas GJ, Grodin MA (eds) The Nazi doctors and the Nuremberg code: human rights in
human experimentation. Oxford University Press, New York, pp 17–31
44. Skloot R, Campbell C, Turpin B (2011) The immortal life of Henrietta Lacks. Broadway
Books, New York
45. Lindemann M (2013) Medicine and society in early modern Europe. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge
46. Murphy E (2018) Forensic DNA Typing. In: Annual review of criminology, pp 497–515.
Available at: https://www.citethisforme.com/cite/sources/journalmanualcite. Accessed 8 Aug
2020
47. Swedin E (2005) Science in the contemporary world: an encyclopedia. Santa Barbara,
California, p 53
28
The Interest of Religion on Ethical Thought in Science
571

48. Kimball BA (1951–1995) Orators & philosophers: a history of the idea of liberal education
(Expanded edn). College Entrance Examination Board, New York
49. Lecklercq J (1982) The love of learning and the desire for god: a study of monastic culture
(3rd edn). Fordham University Press, New York, pp 198–207
50. Rait R (2012) Life in the Medieval university. University of Michigan, Michigan, p 138
51. Hastings R (1800) The universities in the middle ages, 2nd edn. Hard Press Publishing, p 138
52. Rashdall H (1936) The universities of Europe in the middle ages, 2nd edn. F.M. Powicke A B,
Emden (eds) Oxford University Press, Oxford
53. The European Higher Education (1999) The Bologna declaration: joint declaration of the
European Ministers of Education
Jude Likori Omukaga is a Catholic priest, lecturer, and research
consultant. He lectures Religion, Philosophy, Ethics, Human
Rights, and Public Policy at the University of Kabianga, Kenya.
His areas of research include Ethics, Religion, Culture, and Social
Justice, in which he has published Books, Monographs, Profes-
sional articles in reviewed journals and book chapters. He is an
active member of the European Society for Agriculture and Food
Ethics, Catholic Theological Ethics for the World Church, Glo-
bethics. EastAfrica.net and in the Kenya Society of Bioethics. He
holds the Mary Lund award of excellence for junior scholars from
The European Society of Agriculture and Food Ethics, Notting-
ham, and the award of commendation for distinguished charitable
volunteer service to the Veterans of War, New Jersey, USA:
Where Culture, Faith or Belief facilitate retrogressive exclusivity,
able people of goodwill must facilitate moral-ethical narratives
that foster dialogue, consensus, and progress.
572
J. L. Omukaga

29
Thinking, Politics,
and the Evolutionary Process
of Societies
Mauro Scalercio
“All intelligent thoughts have already been thought; what is
necessary is only to try to think them again”.
J. W. Goethe
Summary
This chapter shows that presenting Vico’s idea of history and combining it with
recent studies on prehistorical humanity and the development of the symbolic
mind may lead to a conception of history that is original and capable of dialogue
with critical theories and natural sciences. In particular, Deacon’s idea that the
very use of words provokes the change within the human mind that makes the
symbolic thought possible is very close to Vico’s idea that the process of
“education” of humanity through words changes the human body itself. Here
Vico may be an important reference that allows for a fruitful dialogue between
philosophy, social science, and natural sciences, as some of the more recent
works on Vico acknowledge. The kernel of the evolutionary process of societies,
according to this chapter, clearly emerges. It begins with a poetic act that, in
modern terms, corresponds to the development of symbolic intelligence. From
this moment on, human beings invent new symbols, new meanings, and of
course, new technical artifacts that constantly change the natural, cultural, and
political environment in a way that affects their very mind.
M. Scalercio (&)
School of Humanity, University of San Martín, Avenida Nazca 1435 E, 1417,
Buenos Aires, Argentina
e-mail: mauroscalercio@gmail.com
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc and Research Network (USERN),
Buenos Aires, Argentina
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh (eds.), Thinking, Integrated Science 7,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04075-7_29
573

Magritte: The Mystery of the Ordinary, 1926–1938. It is an oil painting on
canvas by René Magritte. La Clairvoyance (Clairvoyance). Brussels, 1936.
Adapted from https://www.moma.org/audio/playlist/180/2391.
Keywords
Co-evolution  History of humanity  Humanization  Modiﬁcation of mind 
Symbolic intelligence  Vico
QR Code
574
M. Scalercio

Scanning the QR code directs you to the word cloud of the chapter that is made up
of the words we discussed throughout the whole book in relation to the chapter’s
keyword, which is intentionally not included in the word cloud. Find the keyword
and put it in place in the puzzle according to the clues provided in Chap. 36. The
mystery hidden in the puzzle is the quote of THINKING: Bioengineering of Science
and Art.
Introduction
The subject of this chapter is the history of humanity. It may seem a very ambitious
subject, and of course, it is. Moreover, the very idea of a “history of humanity” has
been radically questioned by a wide range of critical theories: postcolonial studies,
gender studies, decolonial theory, and many more. Even worse, the title’s expres-
sion “evolutionary process” shows dangerous traces of social Darwinism. The
author is fully aware of the danger of the enterprise that he is about to present. Of
course, this brief chapter is only a ﬁrst sketch of such a project and presents a
speciﬁc perspective. This essay shows that the ideas about history expressed by the
Italian philosopher Giambattista Vico (1668–1744) in his masterpiece The New
Science (1744) may be fruitfully connected to some of the more recent discoveries
in the ﬁelds of evolutionary biology, anthropology, paleontology, and archaeology.
I will argue that the traditional idea that Vico is the father of modern historical
science still holds true. It constitutes a philosophical framework to interpret the
evidence produced by science in the last century. This essay describes an idea of
history as compatible with critical theory’s criticism of unilinearity, universality,
and necessity of modern philosophy of history. In other words, such an evolu-
tionary idea of history is not only not against postcolonial and feminist critiques but
may constitute another important source of critical theories. Finally, the author will
discuss that presenting Vico’s idea of history and combining it with recent studies
on prehistorical humanity and the development of the symbolic mind may lead to a
conception of history that is original and capable of dialogue with critical theories
and natural sciences.
Beginnings and Process
Vico is widely regarded, rightly, as one of the fathers of modern social science and
modern history study [1, p. 296]. Moreover, he is often referred to as the theorist of
a circular history, as opposed to the idea of linear history. This view fails to capture
the complexity of his New Science.
29
Thinking, Politics, and the Evolutionary Process of Societies
575

Before illustrating Vico’s argument, a brief warning is needed. Vico’s thinking is
very complicated both linguistically and conceptually. He intends to re-read the
biblical chronology, anthropological evidence from archaeology, ethnology, his-
tory, and the deductive method. Therefore, any interpretation of his New Science
implies a partial and simpliﬁed reading, and the one presented here is no exception.
To reconcile the biblical account with his ideas, Vico begins from the Flood and
theorizes that after the Flood, almost-human beings were wandering around the
globe, living like animals, without any kind of society. Humanity is born from this
almost-human life form that Vico calls bestioni (beasts) [2, par. 374]. What is
relevant here is how the “human world” begins. This is relevant because it allows
for a dialogue with anthropology and paleontology, which aim to show when and
how something called Homo sapiens appears.
“The ﬁrst founders of gentle humanity,” Vico said, “when at last the sky fear-
fully rolled with thunder and ﬂashed with lightening (…) [they] were frightened and
astonished (…) they pictured the sky to themselves as a great animated body, which
in that aspect they called Jove, the ﬁrst God” [2, par. 377]. This passage is crucial to
understanding the beginning of humanity’s evolutionary process. What is the dif-
ference between the “beast” and the “ﬁrst human beings”? The answer is not
entirely obvious. On the one hand, there is no big difference: both are more animal
than human, far removed from any culture we may acknowledge as human. On the
other hand, this being, partly beast partly human, enters what Vico sees as true
human history. The difference is not physical but rather a matter of the mind, its use,
and conﬁguration. This is very close to paleontology and anthropology ideas in that
it was not a mere physical change that led to humanity but a sort of reorganization
of mental functions [3, pp. 321–322], [4, p. 14]. Here Vico introduces a crucial
concept: the “modiﬁcation of the mind” [2, par. 374]. As is common in Vico’s
philosophy, the concept of “modiﬁcation of the human mind” is polysemic. It deals
with the modiﬁcation of the individual mind as well as the modiﬁcation of the
common sense of each social group. In fact, as the author will show later, the two
are strictly interrelated.
For some reason, Providence, according to Vico, part of that beast had a sort of
poetic vision that connects the thunder and the bolt not to a simple, natural,
atmospheric condition but something else. Therefore, the thunder and bolt became
symbols. The symbolic relation here is not derived from the representative relation
thunder = God, but from the transfer to the sky of the qualiﬁcation of God. The
thunder allows human beings to develop an implicit inferential capacity, borrowing
Deacon words [3, p. 78]. In other words, thunder is not God, but the word of God:
“The ﬁrst men, who spoke by signs, naturally believed that lightning bolts and
thunder claps were signs made to them by Jove […]. They believed that Jove
commanded by signs, that such signs were real words, and that nature was the
language of Jove” [2, par. 379]. This introduces another critical element in Vico’s
philosophy: language. It is crucial because, in Vico’s philosophy, both the modi-
ﬁcation of mind and the modiﬁcation of social form are unthinkable without it. It is
why some associate Vico with the ﬁrst modern “linguistic turn” [5, p. 173].
576
M. Scalercio

Vico’s theory of language moves away from the traditional representative
conception. Reality is not simply “out there,” but it must be linguistically elabo-
rated. This does not mean that Vico embraces a skeptic conception of reality or a
precursor of “postmodernism.” On the contrary, Vico’s epistemological principle
verum ipsum factum, which implies the possibility of knowing only what is made,
means that it is possible to understand reality only insofar as the rules and con-
straints of the action of the maker are known [6]. Accordingly, knowledge is only
possible by answering some crucial questions: How does language work? With
which constraint does it develop? Which function does it permit? What rules and
constraints shape its use? The invention of symbolic language is a creative act, but
this does not imply the creator’s total freedom. When the giant interprets the
thunder as a sign of something else, he must, because of the constraint of the form
of his own mind, imagine it as a body [2, par. 377]. Abstraction is not possible at
this moment. The whole history of humanity displays a productive tension between
constraints and creation. The paradoxical nature of Vico’s philosophy lies here in its
attempt to show that evolution is only possible with the tools that the concrete
situation offers.
Therefore, language is both the creation of humanity and the creator of language,
a sort of self-creation. This self-creation logic is possible because of the peculiar
position of language: “A man is properly only mind, body and speech, and speech
stands as it were midway between mind and body” [2, par. 1045]. Language is
partly body, partly mind; as we saw earlier, the ﬁrst words have their own mate-
riality, but since the invention of the ﬁrst symbolic reference, it is also mind. In this
sense, we can say that the evolution of the body is conditioned by the mind. Vico
means that in a very literal way. The ﬁrst men were giants, beasts who perceived the
world by pure sense, whose main characteristic was their huge bodies. When the
process of humanization begins, men and women start to become smaller and
smaller [2, par. 369–372]. Of course, if we take this account literally, it is simply
not viable. However, it is necessary to grasp the core of Vico’s idea that the
evolution of the human mind inﬂuences the body’s evolution. This view is close to
Deacon’s idea that the ﬁrst use of symbolic reference changes evolution [3,
pp. 321–322]. According to Deacon, the very use of words provokes the change
within the human mind that makes symbolic thought possible. This view is very
close to Vico’s idea that the process of “education” of humanity through words
changes the human body itself since, as illustrated earlier, the word is between body
and mind. Here Vico may be an important reference that allows for a fruitful
dialogue between philosophy, social science, and natural sciences, as some of the
more recent works on Vico acknowledge [7, p. 97].
The relevance of Vico’s ideas is to focus not on the study of “human nature” but
the process of humanization. This is a crucial point, both from a philosophical
standpoint and from a scientiﬁc perspective. The idea that it is possible to determine
exactly what “being human” means has been one of the founding ideas of modern
western thought. The philosophies of Descartes, Hobbes, and Locke, the founders
of modernity, presuppose the invariability and uniformity, the unhistoricity of the
human mind. Herein lie the roots of the philosophy of history that justiﬁes
29
Thinking, Politics, and the Evolutionary Process of Societies
577

imperialism and colonialism [8, pp. 11–41]. As the author will show later, modern
philosophy of history is the object of the sharpest critic from postcolonial studies.
From the perspective of science, since Darwin’s theory of evolution is a key
point, nature, or at least life, has a history. From an evolutionary point of view,
nature is not a dogmatic set of rules but the source of different possibilities.
Family: The Co-evolution of Mind and Society
Since the invention of symbolic intelligence or, to use Vichian terminology, “poetic
logic” [2, par. 114], humanity is embedded in a web of signiﬁers that they them-
selves produce but over which they do not have total control. In other words,
humanity creates new constraints in addition to the purely natural ones. In this
sense, language is both a constraint and what exponentially expands the limits of
human potential. But what are we speaking about when we speak of human? How
can the individual vision of the ﬁrst giants who created divinity humanity be found?
How can individual modiﬁcation lead to the creation of societies?
The process of humanization, indeed, does not cease with the ﬁrst symbolic
thought. Humanization is not an individual process; rather, there is a strong relation
between humanization and socialization. Deacon is fully aware of this relation:
intelligence depends on social behavior [3, pp. 409–410]. Similarly, in Vico’s
theory, humanization is a process that depends on the social changes introduced by
humanity itself. To investigate humanization and socialization processes, it is
helpful to study these mechanisms by bringing Vico’s and Deacon’s perspectives
together.
Following Deacon’s text, it is possible to speculate that crossing the symbolic
threshold may give an evolutionary advantage to human beings. The author argues
that the reciprocal inﬂuence between the social factor and individual-bodily factor is
crucial in both Deacon’s and Vico’s accounts of the process of socialization. To
demonstrate the point, we will focus on Vico’s and Deacon’s analysis of marriage.
The core of Deacon’s argument is that marriage, an outcome of symbolical thought,
may survive in the long term because it led to the organization of a more efﬁcient
social order, in terms of a more efﬁcient division of roles between man and woman.
In a nutshell, his idea about the relationship between sociality and symbolic in-
telligence is that the need for cooperation for a better organization of the hunt
requires a separation of roles between men and women. In order to guarantee both
the equity of nutrition and of the transmission of genes, regulation of the repro-
ductive process is required. In this sense, the most important hurdle to cooperation
is the uncertainty of paternity. To overcome this problem, it is necessary to pass
from simple copulation to marriage [3, pp. 384–389]. The most important idea is
that this problem can be solved only symbolically [3, p. 397].
Stressing the importance of marriage is, of course, not new to anthropology.
Many authors note that marriage is an almost universal ritual in human cultures.
Noteworthy, however, is that both Vico and Deacon attach crucial importance to
578
M. Scalercio

marriage in the passage to a symbolic culture or, in Vico’s terms, to a poetic logic.
In this sense, marriage is, according to Deacon, the regulation of sexual repro-
ductive relations by symbolic means. The core of this argument is already found in
New Science: “They ﬁrst deﬁned Chaos as confusion of human seeds in the period
of the abominable sharing of women (…). [The poetic Chaos] was confused
because there was no order of humanity in it, and obscure because it lacked the civil
light (…) in this infamous community did not have the proper form of men, and
were swallowed up by the void because through the uncertainty of offspring they
left nothing of themselves” [2, par. 688]. It is pretty apparent to note the similarity
between Deacon’s idea of “paternity uncertainty” [3, p. 382] and Vichian’s idea of
“uncertainty of offspring.” Therefore, the social problem to be solved is ensuring
genetic transmission or, more broadly, the stability of identity through time.
Symbolic culture could provide a solution to a reproductive problem that may be
solved only symbolically: “the imperative of representing a social contract” [3,
p. 401].
The importance of “marriage” in Vico’s thought has not gone unobserved. Peter
Winch, for example, from a point only partially diverging from the one here pre-
sented, maintains that in Vico, the possibility to understand human history rests
upon three elements: life, death, and sexual relations [9, p. 322]. We argue that
following Vico and Deacon, what matters are not sexual relations, but their ritual
and symbolic elaboration. The point that we are proposing may seem merely
analogical. Actually, it is an analogy; nevertheless, it is an analogy that sheds light
on a key point shared by Deacon and Vico: an important obstacle to cooperation,
speciﬁcally the uncertainty about paternity, may be overcome by a symbolic
invention.
The key point is that Vico sees clearly that the process of “becoming social” is a
complex intertwining of the natural and cultural elements and that symbolic
imagination leads to overcoming natural constraints. This complex relationship
between natural constraints and symbolic capacity is the very core of Vico’s
philosophy.
Even more important is the general principle Vico states that poetical logic, or
symbolic thought, paves the way for sociality. Vico’s study of history is founded on
the “modiﬁcation of the human mind,” i.e., modifying social forms and studying the
relationships between them. In other words, the evolutionary process of societies is
nothing but the history of the intertwining of the human mind’s modiﬁcations on
one side and the social form on the other side. As Viana observed, the mind is made
in history; it is not static [7, p. 7].
At this point, it is fundamental to speak about one of the cornerstones of Vico’s
thought: religion. This is a very complicated issue because here, we ﬁnd in its
purest form a very common feature in Vico’s text: to afﬁrm something strongly, let
the argumentation go in quite a different direction. His relentless afﬁrmation of
Catholic orthodoxy is contrary to his argumentation, to the point that the Inquisition
considered taking to trial the New Science [10]. It is difﬁcult to establish ﬁrmly
whether Vico’s (apparent?) contradictions are derived from a confused philo-
sophical system, from metaphorical reasoning, or from a deliberate attempt to hide
29
Thinking, Politics, and the Evolutionary Process of Societies
579

his more dangerous ideas. Given the impossibility of dealing with such a complex
subject, here we will focus only on a precise level of interpretation of religion, i.e.,
the functional one. As mentioned earlier, the idea of a superior being was the ﬁrst
symbolic thought of humanity, and as such, according to Vico, the ﬁrst principle of
humanity [2, 333–334]. The idea of a superior being is strictly related to ritual. The
presence of the superior being is what guarantees the legitimacy of ritual through
priests’ presence able to interpret its will. In this sense, the legitimacy of priests is
also the legitimacy of interpretation, guaranteed by God. The idea that ritual and
religion are the basis of civilization is quite a recent discovery. Until the last part of
the twentieth century, the idea was that temples and complex rituals were developed
successively to the sedentarization of humanity to organize the huge population.
Particularly important in order to change this idea was the discovery of the Göbekli
Tepe archaeological site in Turkey. The Turkish site is the “oldest man-made place
of worship yet discovered” [11]. What matters here is that it is a place of worship
without a city. It appears that the creators of Gobekli Tepe were hunter-gatherers
who periodically made a pilgrimage to this site. Two points are relevant here: i, ﬁrst
that a very complex structure can be built by many small groups of hunter-gatherers
who come together for ritual reasons; and ii, second that religion with complex
rituals developed before cities. Klaus Schmidt, the archaeologist who discovered
the site and wrote extensively about it, put it very clearly in his book Sie bauten die
ersten Tempel where he maintains that the temple’s construction preceded the
foundation of cities [12].
The importance of symbolic thought and its cultural expression, religion, is the
cornerstone of Jacques Cauvin. The French archaeologist maintains that the dif-
fusion of the Neolithic is a long-duration phenomenon of several millennia, “whose
amazing diversity only appears coherent by reference to the ‘symbolic system’
which governs it. (…) It seems that ‘religion’ far from being purely irrational ﬁrst
developed a sort of ‘transcendental logic’ at a non-utilitarian level, a logic that was
then applied to the real world, imprinting on it new signiﬁcance in a novel and
different system of relations” [13, pp. 208–209]. This “transcendental logic” is very
close to Vico’s “poetic logic,” sharing the function to give meaning to the physical
world and “the ability to regulate certain aspects of human behaviour” [13, p. 209].
According to Vico and coherent with Cauvin’s ideas, religion is not simply the
metaphysical belief of a population, but the articulation of the newly discovered
symbolic intelligence of “ﬁrst humanity” with social behaviors. This idea is clearly
Vichian. His idea is that “the modiﬁcation of the human mind” is the basis of social
change that, in turn, pushes the mind to adapt to new situations, something very
similar to the concept of co-evolution proposed by Terrence Deacon. Religion is the
consequence of the symbolic modiﬁcation of the human mind, but also what allows
for a new development of the human mind.
A key element of Vico’s philosophy is still missing: power. Vico’s emphasis on
language does not mean that it is a means to neutralize conﬂict. On the contrary,
language is both an instrument of conﬂict and the real issue at stake. Language (or
symbols), power, and interpretation constitute the triad of Vico’s political philos-
ophy; that is, essentially a philosophy of conﬂicts, more than its neutralization, as in
580
M. Scalercio

natural rights philosophy such as Hobbes’ or Locke’s. In this sense, Vico is clearly
part of an Italian tradition derived from Machiavelli [14].
Power is strictly related, according to Vico, to thought and symbols. Symbols do
not speak for themselves. They imply an act of interpretation. However, every
interpretation requires an interpreter: power is, ﬁrst and foremost, an act of creative
interpretation. Attributing a new sense to something is, per se, an act of power, but
this is not the only relevant fact. In Vico’s narration, as already emerged, the shock
that provoked the beginning of poetical logic is the fear of the thunder the ﬁrst giant
felt. This is not a natural fear but a symbolic fear since they feared the thunder as
the sign of a superior entity. As the interpreters of the ﬁrst sign, the giants became
the ﬁrst interpreters of the words of God and its messengers, the ones able to
enforce God’s word. This is, in a nutshell, Vico’s argument about the beginning of
religion, the ﬁrst and foremost principle of the development of nations. The second
principle is marriage. It is strictly intertwined with power. The giants that felt the
fear of God found their refuge inside caverns, bringing women with them by force
[2, par. 1098]. This brutal union had to be ritually sanctioned in order to certify the
possession of women. This means that the mutual ritual recognition between the
ﬁrst men led to a society.
Therefore, power is the symbolically and ritually sanctioned use of force. In fact,
it is the ﬁrst symbolic invention, i.e., religion, that constituted the foundation of
both society, “nation” in Vico’s vocabulary, and power. Therefore, the symbolic
invention that shaped the evolution of humanity hides an act of power founded on
the supposed words of God that the ﬁrst men believed to be able to interpret and
enforce.
In a nutshell, this is how civilization was born. Here the history of humanity
begins. As already noted, Vico does not theorize an “out of the state of nature” by a
juridical act such as a social contract to create legitimate authority, but a ritual,
poetic creation. Vico rejects this theory, the theory of Hobbes, Locke, and Rous-
seau, because it presupposes rationality that is simply impossible within the ﬁrst
human groups. Deacon himself also realizes that his theory is different from the
“standard” social contract theory. He maintains that it is a theory “of translation of
social behaviors in symbolic form” [3, p. 394].
Actually, Vico and natural rights theorists are speaking, so to say, different
languages. While within the traditional doctrine of social contracts, the state of
nature is just a theoretical device that allows for an analysis of the origins of society.
Vico is really trying to discover the beginning of society. Strictly speaking, Vico’s
thought is not philosophy: he is really trying to found a New Science that is partly
philosophical-theoretical
and
partly
anthropological-empirical
[2,
par.
140]
(Fig. 29.1). Obviously, many, if not most, of Vico’s empirical claims are proved
untenable. But its falsiﬁability is precisely that what allows for a dialogue with
natural sciences, a goal also exposed by Amadeu Viana [7].
29
Thinking, Politics, and the Evolutionary Process of Societies
581

Society: The Co-evolution of Mind and Society
The very ﬁrst nucleus of civilization is strictly familiar, according to Vico. The
family founded on religion explicitly excludes other human beings, those that do
not fear God, that, according to Vico, remain nomads. Early humanity is hence
divided into two groups. This division is the kernel of the entire history of humanity
and permits the development of societies where the core of obedience is not the
ritual sanction of paternity but the ritual sanction of submission. When nomads
come across families, they, stronger and more organized, enslave them. From this
moment on, politics become the study of the division between families or heroes on
one side and famuli or servants on the other [2, par. 264]. Here lies the beginning of
the political conﬂict in Vico’s philosophy [15].
Fig. 29.1 Frontispiece of
New Science. “The darkness
in the background of the
picture is the material of this
science, uncertain, unformed,
obscure, which is outlined in
the Chronological Table and
Notes upon it. The ray with
which divine Providence
lights up the breast of
metaphysic represents the
Axioms, Deﬁnitions, and
Postulates that this science
takes as elements from which
to deduce the Principles on
which it is based and the and
the method by which it
proceeds” [2, par. 41]
582
M. Scalercio

The violent encounter between families and nomads, who now became slaves,
arouses a repetition of the process leading to symbolic intelligence. With a crucial
difference: while the ﬁrst time, the symbolic intelligence arises from the fear of God
felt by the giants, the second time it arises from the fear of heroes from famuli. This
recurrence shows some crucial differences with the ﬁrst invention of God. The dyad
God-giant implies a sort of “voluntary submission” to an imagined entity, whose
will the submitted may interpret. The dyad heroes-famuli is real and ritually
sanctioned. Famuli’s servitude is voluntary at the beginning but might be ques-
tioned, and actually is, since famuli realized that the two parts are equal by nature
[2, par. 29].
Therefore, the symbolic/poetic logic of humanity’s beginnings became the
mythological struggle to control the interpretation of meaning. Here again, the
co-evolution of society and mind appears. Famuli, the engine of history according
to Vico, are forced to become integrated into the symbolic thinking of giants.
However, this new constraint is what shapes famuli’s minds that, in turn, empower
them with the possibility of a new, more equal interpretation of myth. Only this
interpretation of myth allows us to imagine civil and political equality. The
co-evolution between mind and society continues until democracy, i.e., the abstract
idea of equality of human beings is reached, letting abstract thinking develop.
At this point, it is hard to escape the feeling that Vico’s theory of history is
simply one of the many modern philosophies of progress. There is some truth in
this idea because Vico shows a clear preference for what he calls the “age of men,”
the epoch of reason [2, parr. 31, 326]. In this sense, he is frankly an Enlightened
philosopher. However, this is only just a facet of his philosophy. Indeed, Vico has
been interpreted as an early critic of modern rationalism, even nostalgia of theoc-
racy [16], because of his passionate reconstruction of early humanity’s creativity
[17]. Is it possible to reconcile these two interpretations, both having good textual
evidence? Even if a deﬁnitive verdict is not possible and maybe not even desirable,
we argue that Vico’s thought shows some important clues to solving the puzzle:
i. First, even if the dichotomy of reason and imagination is not completely
symmetric, since Vico’s preference is for a reason, the mere reason is not
sufﬁcient to face the question of justice. Incidentally, we note that the polemical
objective of Vico is here, again, the modern theory of natural law and the
doctrine of a social contract. Imagination, piety, and empathy are all key ele-
ments to imagining a just society, and a society founded on instrumental rea-
soning is very close to becoming a barbarian civilization [2, par. 1106].
Therefore, a philosophy of linear progress seems to be absent in New Science;
ii. The second element is, of course, Vico’s theory of cyclical history. Each nation
develops its institution following a triadic scheme, from the early societies
founded on religion to rational nations founded on equity, passing through an
intermediate phase of aristocratic societies founded on some kind of “natural
superiority” of the ruling class. Reaching the third phase, every civilization
may degenerate and regress to the ﬁrst “barbarian” phase, starting a new cycle;
and
29
Thinking, Politics, and the Evolutionary Process of Societies
583

iii. The third element is much less present in Vico’s studies: the interchangeability
of monarchy and republic in the last phase of human history. Riccardo
Caporali has shed light on this element. Within the last phase of history’s
development, there is tension between the monarchy and the republic. The
monarchy, or the sovereign state, preserves lives and security, while the
republic, which is the people’s direct government, is inherently more vital [18,
p. 285]. This is a very important point. Vico maintains that the modern natural
law solution to the problem of politics, i.e., the sovereign state, is not the only
possible solution, and politics may be thought outside that framework. In other
words, Vico says that there is a sort of equivalence of a republican form where
“everything had to be reduced to lot or balance” [2, par. 1101] and monar-
chical where there is a sovereign power. This equivalence allows a crucial
“creativity” and liberty that let undetermined and indeterminable the akmé of
civilization.
Unfortunately, it is impossible to examine Vico’s theory of history in-depth here.
The process that brings humanity from the ﬁrst familiar community to a complex
society is much more complex than it appears here. However, the kernel of the
evolutionary process of societies clearly emerges. It begins with a poetic act that, in
modern terms, corresponds to the development of symbolic intelligence. From this
moment on, human beings invent new symbols, new meanings, and of course, new
technical artifacts that constantly change the natural, cultural, and political envi-
ronment in a way that affects their very mind. In this sense, the material and
immaterial conditions of human beings are always antecedent to the mind and have
to adapt to the situation they create. Like Darwinian evolution, this process is not
deterministic nor linear. Without a doubt, it is that need for adaptation that enhances
the possibility of different social, cultural, and political forms.
Humanity and Temporality
The brief exploration of Vico’s theories about “primitive thought” in relation to
humanization and socialization processes clearly shows that the temporal and his-
torical dimensions are fundamental in his philosophy. The key to his theory of
history is the relationship between anthropology and temporality [19].
As discussed in the previous paragraphs, Vico’s anthropology can be suggested
to be based on two pillars. The ﬁrst is what Vico calls “the modiﬁcation of the
human mind,” the clear evolutionist pattern that goes from the ﬁrst symbolic
thinking to abstract rationality. The second are the concrete social rituals, norms,
and laws that are derived from and re-create the human mind. Vichian temporality,
then, may be seen as the co-evolution of these two elements, a co-evolution that is
also caused by the political action of famuli.
584
M. Scalercio

From a philosophical point of view, there is a crucial point to clarify. Is this
evolutionary process common to all of humanity? Are there laws that rule the
development of humanity? Are these laws valid for all times and places? These
questions are crucial because they determine, to a large extent, if and eventually
how Vico participates in the modern philosophy of history.
First of all, it is obvious that Vico is interested in deﬁning something common to
all of humanity. After all, the complete title of this masterpiece is Principles of the
New Science Concerning the Common Nature of Nations. But the other of Vico’s
key interests is to explain the empirical variety of concrete social forms [2, par. 7].
Vico maintains that the fundamental structures of humanity’s history are com-
mon to all people that elaborate those elements independently from each other. This
anti-diffusionism has a speciﬁc purpose in New Science, that is, to avoid the idea
that some nation has a privileged position within the history of humanity. It also
implies that a strong tendency within nations exists to share the basic temporal
structure.
How can the common transition pattern between the universal evolutionary
structure, which Vico calls “ideal eternal history,” and particular histories be
explained? We argue that some kind of evolutionary mechanism can explain what
Vico had in mind. Noteworthy is that this idea is different from the idea that human
history may be explained in terms of an unchanging human nature that gives rise to
a universal, deterministic, teleological history. Even if Vico does think that the
human mind shares a common structure, this is not the element that produces
universal evolutionary temporality. We argued, reading Vico in the light of Deacon,
that religion and marriage ﬁt this idea perfectly. These anthropological elements are
developed due to the co-evolution of the modiﬁcations of the human mind and its
own products.
In this sense, the anthropological elements proposed by Vico are equivalent to
universal linguistic elements as interpreted by Deacon: “They have emerged
spontaneously and independently in each evolving language, in response to uni-
versal biases in the selection processes affecting language transmission. (…) these
structural commonalities present in all languages have each arisen in response to the
constraints imposed by a common adaptive context” [3, p. 114]. The analogy
between the essential elements of language in Deacon’s work and the essential
elements of culture in Vico’s draws on Vico’s very thought. In the XXII Axiom of
the New Science, Vico maintains that “There must in the nature of human things be
a mental language common to all nations, which uniformly grasps the substance of
things feasible in human social life, and expresses it with as many diverse modi-
ﬁcations as these same things may have diverse aspects” [2, par. 161]. These quotes
are dense in the typically Vichian fashion. The core idea is that a common ground
exists in every nation that derives from the interior logic of each nation. The author
suggests that the inner logic that underpins the beginning and development of
religion and marriage evolves, borrowing the word of Deacon once again to adapt
to the human nervous system and its pragmatic limitations in language use [3,
p. 119].
29
Thinking, Politics, and the Evolutionary Process of Societies
585

The logic that underpins the beginnings of sociality through the emergence of
religion and marriage as the guiding principle can be extended to the other principle
and maybe to other elements of societies. If the logic is universal, the empirical
manifestation of the logic is totally particular and unpredictable. In this sense, the
similarities between the rituals or social norms in different nations are not due to
genetic kinship but rather to the similarity of the mental and natural constraints that
every human group has to face. In other words, different structures of different
societies are similar, like bats and birds, not like Homo Sapiens and Pan
Troglodytes.
The use of the idea of “evolution” in social sciences and political philosophy is
old but not gold. The idea of evolution, and broadly the biological and naturalistic
language, has often been used in strict connection to ﬁnalism and determinism and
to treat every attempt to change the constitutional order as illness. Moreover, social
Darwinism misused Darwin categories in a way that made very costly, scientiﬁcally
and politically, the use of evolutionist language and concepts in social sciences and
political philosophy. We maintain that, on the contrary, productive dialogue with
this discipline is possible because it may contribute to the conceptualization of
non-determinist, ﬁnalist, contingent temporality. This kind of temporality has many
implications for how to conceive of humanity and its history. One of the key
elements is that we must be extremely cautious when we speak of “human beings.”
Every human form and a fortiori every society must be understood in their own
terms. Both human beings and societies are endlessly evolving, responding to
natural and cultural constraints.
The temporality that we propose to understand and develop Vico’s philosophy
also has implications for the conception of nature and culture. The history of
humanity is also the story of our relationship with nature. A very strong tradition
among Vico’s scholars maintains that his philosophy is “without nature” [19]. But
if we imply that the mind, body, and symbolic forms are profoundly intertwined, we
should note that the opposition between culture and nature becomes weaker.
On the other hand, the symbolic intelligence that is at the basis of the human-
ization process is also at the basis of the fracture between humanity and the
environment. In Vico’s philosophy, an important part of mythology is interpreted as
the symbolization of power over nature [2], par. 3].
From a modern-centric view, the fracture between nature and humanity has to do
with modern times. But, as Ian Tattersall maintains, the reality is far more complex
than this. The key rupture between human beings and nature comes from agri-
culture. We often forget how “pre-history” was full of inventions that really
changed the relationship between humanity and nature. This included agriculture,
obviously, but also complex hunting tactics and ﬁre, which led to huge environ-
mental changes [4]
If what has been maintained in this chapter makes sense, another consequence is
that the history of humanity has a paradoxical unity. If symbolic intelligence is what
makes us human, then the difference between history and pre-history vanishes.
Every symbolic and social action is a genuine part of the construction of humanity,
regardless of the difference in space and time. This is not to say that time is
586
M. Scalercio

indifferent and makes human beings equal. On the contrary, what is really human is
what makes every one of us different from each other.
Conclusion
This chapter is thought of as a contribution to the history of humanity. The argu-
mentation that the author proposed may lead to some discontent because each part
should be further developed. However, the aim of this chapter was not to fully
develop a theory but rather to show the possibility of using Vico for a rethinking of
the history of humanity, which could contribute to a new assessment of some
important points.
The ﬁrst one is that crossing the symbolic threshold gives humanity the faculty
to make sense of things, not only to comprehend but also to imagine. However,
reason and imagination are not opposite in his thought but complementary, both
contributing to making the world a comfortable and fair place for humanity.
The second point is the constitutive ambivalence of the human mind. We have to
remember that our most potentially dangerous asset is not ﬁre, agriculture, GMOs,
electricity, or nuclear energy, but our brains and our symbolic intelligence. That is
to say that humanity has an intrinsic, hugely destructive power. But this is only part
of the story because humanity also has great creative power. It is necessary to
preserve and encourage societies’ invention of the power of destruction humanity
has while promoting equality, knowledge, and freedom.
The third point is strictly connected to the previous one. In fact, the meaning of
cyclical (not circular) lies in the ambivalence and the human ability to make sense
of things. Even if, as Vico says, the reasoning is considered the main human
faculty, making sense is not entirely a matter of reason, essentially because in the
human phase, the pietas, i.e., the faculty of imagination that permits imagining a
just society, is still necessary.
Herein lies the core of Vico’s contribution to political philosophy. We have
stressed the difference between Vico’s ideas of the “natural state” and those of the
modern natural right theorists, such as Grotius, Pufendorf, and Hobbes. Vico’s
theory implies a different idea of politics and humanity. While the right natural
doctrines maintain that humanity-built societies with an act of reason, Vico
maintains that reason is the result of the complex process of humanization, and
rational politics is just the result of historical conditions.
The emphasis that Vico placed on the process, rather than a set of immutable
characteristics of human beings, may explain one of the many enigmas of Vico’s
philosophy, i.e., why he analyzes so carefully the mind of primitive and ancient
people, and he devotes so little to the modern world.
If we look at the long durée of the modern world, modernization processes are
just one chapter in the history of humanization, a history made of imagination and
reason. Modern philosophy of history has recently been under attack from a wide
range of critical theories. Modernity would be guilty of the essentialization of the
29
Thinking, Politics, and the Evolutionary Process of Societies
587

human being and, consequently, of a linear philosophy of history that considers the
history of Europe and Western civilization as the parameter against which to weigh
every other civilization. Instrumental rationalism would be the main characteristic
of Western modernity. However, while a modern philosopher, Vico does not ﬁt
within this narration and might be a key author for intercultural philosophy.
Modern science is also often part of this discomfort with modernity. Science has
been seen solely as a positivist instrument, devoted to repeating the method of
physics in the social sciences, and postulating a society ruled by deterministic laws.
However, since Darwin, evolutionary biology developed precisely as opposition,
within natural sciences, to the determinism and necessity of the model of physics.
Of course, Darwin’s thinking has nothing to do with social Darwinism, which he
criticized while still alive. The mechanism of evolution, far from implying a
deterministic and necessary temporality, has to do with adaptation and creativity.
Core Messages
• Language is both the creation of humanity and its tool.
• The relevance of Vico’s ideas is to focus not on the study of “human
nature” but the process of humanization.
• Humanization is not an individual process; there is a strong relation be-
tween humanization and socialization.
• Vico’s philosophy deals with the modiﬁcation of mind, the modiﬁcation of
social forms, and their relations.
• In Vico’s thought, power is related to symbols; they do not speak for
themselves, but they imply interpretation.
References
1. Cassirer E (1950) The problem of knowledge, vol 4 (Woglom WH, Hendel New Haven CW,
trans.), Yale University Press
2. Vico G (1948) New Science, Ithaca, Cornell University Press. I will cite the paragraphs
throughout this chapter when referring to the ‘New Science’, as is the common practice in
Vichian scholarship today
3. Deacon TW (1997) The symbolic species: the co-evolution of language and the brain. W. W.
Norton & Company, New York-London
4. Tattersall I (2008) The world from beginnings to 4000 BCE. Orxford University Press,
Oxford
5. Cacciatore G (2008) Note su Cenni e voci. Saggi di sematologia vichiana di Jürgen Trabant,
Bollettino del Centro di Studi Vichiani, (XXXVIII) 1
6. Miner RC (2004) Truth in the making: creative knowledge in theology and philosophy.
Psychology Press
7. Viana A (2015) Tempesta de signes. Universitat de Lleida, Lleida, p 97
8. Scalercio M (2016) Umanesimo e storia da Said a Vico. Una prospettiva vichiana sugli studi
postcoloniali, Roma, Edizioni di storia e Letteratura
588
M. Scalercio

9. Winch P (1964) Understanding a primitive society. Am Philos Q 1(4)
10. De Miranda G (1998–1999) “Nihil decisum fuit”. Il Sant’Ufﬁcio e la Scienza nuova di Vico:
un’irrealizzata edizione patavina tra l’imprimatur del 1725 e quello del 1730, In: Bollettino
del Centro di Studi Vichiani», (XXVIII–XXIX), pp. 5–69
11. Scham S (2008) The world’s ﬁrst temple: Turkey’s 12,000-year-old stone circles were the
spiritual center of a nomadic people. Archaeology 61(6):22–27
12. Schmidt K (2006) Sie bauten die ersten Tempel. Das rätselhafte Heiligtum der Steinzeitjäger.
Beck, München
13. Cauvin J (2002) The birth of the Gods and the origins of agriculture. Cabridge University
Press, Cambridge
14. Vanzulli M (2005) La soglia invalicabile della politica. Su Machiavelli e Vico. In: Isonomia,
13
15. Scalercio M (2016) Povera e oppressa plebe Corpo, conﬂitto e immaginazione nella teoria
politica vichiana. Quaderni Materialistin 15:93–103
16. Lilla M (1993) The making of an anti-modern. Harvard University Press, Harvard
17. Verene D (1981) Vico’s science of imagination. Cornell University Press
18. Caporali R (2012) Lo splendore delle repubblica. In: Vanzulli M (ed) Razionalità e modernità
in Vico, Milano, Mimesis
19. Scalercio M (2014) Le strutture antropologiche della storia. Consecutio Temporum 6
20. Piovani P (1969) Vico e la ﬁlosoﬁa senza natura. Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei
Mauro Scalercio
is an Assistant Professor in the School of
Humanity at the University of San Martín, Buenos Aires,
Argentina, where he has been a faculty member since 2017. From
2016 to 2018, he held a CONICET postdoctoral fellowship at the
Faculty of Letters and Philosophy of the University of Buenos
Aires, Argentina. Mauro completed his Ph.D. in Political Phi-
losophy and History of Political Thought at Padua University,
Italy, and his undergraduate studies in International and Diplo-
matic Sciences at Bologna University, Italy. His research interests
lie in the area of early modern philosophy, postcolonial studies.
He has published several essays and articles in many scientiﬁc
journals worldwide and a book, Umanesimo e Storia da Said a
Vico. Una prospettiva vichiana sugli studi postcoloniali. From
2020, he has been a member of the Integrated Science Associa-
tion (ISA) of the Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research
Network (USERN).
29
Thinking, Politics, and the Evolutionary Process of Societies
589

30
Information Processing in Reasoning
in the Environment of Forbidden
Sentences
Wojciech Krysztofiak
“If liberty means anything at all, it means the right to tell people
what they do not want to hear”.
George Orwell
Summary
The chapter presents a theory describing the logical mechanism of information
processing in the environment of forbidden sentences. The research subject is the
structures of discourse deduction that evolve over time, transforming due to formal
shapes. The elements of these structures are sets of taboo functions, sets of
penalization functions, and sets of logical consequence operators indexed by taboo
functions. The constructed theory explains that some language users who have
competence in classical logic do not accept inferences that they judge to be correct
and whose assumptions are true sentences. This mental phenomenon occurs when
the agent evaluates the reasoning with sentences forbidden by various language
taboos. Formal concepts, which are deﬁned based on the presented theory, make it
possible to describe in a precise language of mathematical logic, among others,
phenomena occurring in the processes of developing discourse, such as
ideological wars and conﬂicts, freedom of deduction, and ﬁnally terrorization of
discourse.
W. Krysztoﬁak (&)
Institute of Philosophy and Cognitive Science, The University of Szczecin,
ul. Krakowska 71-79, 71-004 Szczecin, Poland
e-mail: wojciech.krysztoﬁak@gmail.com
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education
and Research Network (USERN), Szczecin, Poland
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh (eds.), Thinking, Integrated Science 7,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04075-7_30
591

The space of discourse in relation to the space of mental worlds. Green circles in
the left rectangle designate narratives N1 and N2 within the space of discourse
SD. Black arrows link them with green circles, representing mental worlds W1
and W2 prefabricated in the narratives N1 and N2 in the right rectangle. Arrows
C1 and C2 refer to the processes of deductive processing narratives N1 and N2 by
virtue of consequence operators C1 and C2 indexed with taboo functions. The
semantic counterparts of the processes represented by arrows C1 and C2 are the
expansion processes of mental worlds. This correspondence relation is marked
with orange arrows connecting C1 to ED and C2 to ED. Arrows of the type ED in
the right rectangle designate the processes of deductive expansion of mental
worlds. The arrows h1 and h2 in the left rectangle represent the processes of
interpretive development of narratives N1 and N2, regulated by hermeneutic
consequence operators. They are correlated by semantic relations represented by
orange arrows, with arrows of the EI type in the right rectangle. This type of
arrow designates processes of interpretive expansion of mental worlds. Circles
592
W. Krysztofiak

F1 and F2 inside circles N1 and N2 represent sets of forbidden formulas from the
points of view of elm experts who guard the proper development of their
narratives. These circles can be understood as representing taboo functions. Blue
arrows which connect circles F1 and F2 designate various relations holding
between represented taboo functions. Circles P1 and P2 in the left rectangle
represent penalty functions correlated with taboo functions F1 and F2.
Keywords
Blasphemy  Deductive structures  Discourse  Elm experts  Etatism 
Liberalism  Penalty functions  Religious wars  Taboo 
Taboo-indexed consequence operators  Terrorism
QR Code
Scanning the QR code directs you to the word cloud of the chapter that is made up of
the words we discussed throughout the whole book in relation to the chapter’s key-
word, which is intentionally not included in the word cloud. Find the keyword and put
it in place in the puzzle according to the clues provided in Chap. 36. The mystery
hidden in the puzzle is the quote of THINKING: Bioengineering of Science and Art.
Introduction
Each discourse is governed by an inferential mechanism enabling its deductive and
hermeneutical processing. Participants in developing narratives within various
discourse spaces form statements that are forbidden from different points of view.
The sides of the ideological wars accuse each other of offending utterances and
forbid the opposite party to articulate some statements classiﬁed by them as blas-
phemy, offense, or hate speech. Even logically valid inference acts are often stig-
matized in the ideological exchange by the value of blasphemy or offense, making
them unacceptable to the conﬂicted parties. History knows many examples of
intellectuals who were given the death penalty for uttering forbidden sentences.
Therefore, the following question arises: is there a logical narrative processing
30
Information Processing in Reasoning in the Environment …
593

mechanism that triggers in mind the rejection of logically correct inferences judged
to be forbidden?
The phenomenon of forbidding the use of certain words and forbidding language
users to express certain meanings or refer to various fragments of reality is known as a
linguistic taboo. It is the subject of research in linguistics, psychology, cultural
anthropology, and even philosophy and logic. Freud had already pointed out that our
minds are inhabited by mental censors. Their main function is to form mental barriers
that make it difﬁcult to “think forbidden thoughts” [1]. The phenomenon of a lin-
guistic taboo appears at various levels of language functioning; for instance - in the
derogatory speech [2], in illocutionary acts of expressing communicative roles and
power [3], in slurring and swearing [4–9], and in the use of euphemisms and dys-
phemisms [10–13]. Linguists also explore grammatical ways offorming taboo words
in different languages [14, 15]. The semantic and pragmatic mechanisms of taboo
contamination are also an important area of research in linguistics [16]. In anthro-
pology or sociology, for example, the following kinds of taboo reality are the subject
of detailed study: sexual preferences [17, 18], homophobia [19], gender and sex [17,
18, 20], menstruation [17, 18, 21], death and diseases [22], aging [23], political
correctness [24, 25], ideology [10, 11, 26]. There are many examples of research on
linguistic taboos undertaken in various humanities. However, none of the research on
taboos or offensive statements to date has attempted to describe and explain the
mechanisms of deductive content processing in contexts with tabooed sentences.
Some language users who have mastered the competence of reasoning within the
classical logic state that although some inferences presented to them are logically
valid, they cannot accept conclusions even when the premises are true. Here is an
example of such inference:
John Paul II was a pope. So John Paul II was a friend of pedophiles or a pope.
On the other hand, the same persons accept the logical validity and the con-
clusion of another inference:
Stalin was the leader of the Soviet Union. So Stalin was a murderer or the leader of the
Soviet Union.
Both cases fall under the inference rule of disjunction addition which is logically
valid in classical logic. The presented example shows the lability of inference rules
during discursive actions, which means that some discourse participants accept the
logical validity of inferences carried out under the valid rules of a given logic in
some contexts. In other contexts, they do not accept the logical validity of infer-
ences implemented according to the same rule, although they accept the premises
for such unacceptable inferences. Why is it the case?
The simplest answer to the question above is that language speakers do not
accept the ﬁrst inference because it contains forbidden sentences from the point of
view of their worldview, while they accept the second inference because of its
logical validity and the absence of forbidden sentences. What is the deductive
mechanism responsible for processing information in the environment of forbidden
statements within discourses?
594
W. Krysztofiak

Spaces of Discourse
Each discourse may be comprehended in three dimensions: (i) language use;
(ii) communicative; and (iii) interactive. From this point of view [27], each dis-
course is:
i. a sequence of speech acts organized in various ways (grammatically, seman-
tically, and stylistically), characterized by a segmental order, expressing
speciﬁc cognitive and affective content;
ii. addressed to the participants of the communicative situation, in a speciﬁc
context including time, place, mental circumstances (knowledge, patterns, and
frames of perceiving reality encoded in participants’ memory), social position
due to various indices determining it (social class, nationality, ideological
identiﬁcation, profession, gender, age, wealth status, etc.); and
iii. involved in the interaction (cooperation, provoking a reaction, and responding
to an action).
Van Dijk and Kintsch [28] add that the agent’s entanglement in discourse is
strategic, which means that a goal or a plan drives his (her) actions, not necessarily
consciously. These researchers pay attention to the fact that participants of a dis-
course perform information processing operations governed by various mecha-
nisms, not only pragmatic but also deductive [28]. Each discourse is also entangled
in certain macrostructures that deﬁne its theme, meaning, or guiding idea [28]. The
entanglement of discourse in such macrostructures enables participants of discur-
sive actions to understand and process its content.
Discourse should be distinguished from the narrative (text) comprehended as a
ﬁnite sequence of language actions. Narratives (texts) possess the so-called thematic
coherence. Many different texts can be constituents of the same discourse stretched
over a very long time. For instance, when we talk about Christian discourse, we
mean a discourse stretched over time: from the period when the Church Fathers
wrote their ﬁrst texts to the present day. Discourses are developed in various actions
through the production of texts or oral statements on a given topic. They are thus
processes that continue over time. Some of them are completed, but only because
they have been forgotten.
The set of all narratives characterized by at least one common theme, remaining
in relations of correspondence or opposition to each other, constitutes the space of
discourse. A given narrative can therefore function in many different spaces of
discourse. Narratives within a given discourse are linked through semantic func-
tions with mental worlds, sometimes called worlds of texts, inhabited by objects,
persons, states of affairs, situations, plots, stories, and other entities of various
ontological categories. From this point of view, the agent’s involvement in dis-
course is the practice of developing a particular mental world or, in other words, the
world of the text within some space of discourse. The themes that language users
attribute to narratives within a given discourse space are determined by the content
and semantic structure of mental worlds. They are schematic conceptual structures
30
Information Processing in Reasoning in the Environment …
595

remaining in the relation of dominance to other concepts used to synthesize a given
world’s content. Without going into detailed discussions on the mechanisms gov-
erning the processes of thematization of discourses, the theme of discourse can be
treated as this property of mental worlds produced in narrative activity, which is the
criterion for their content similarity.
The space of discourse can be deﬁned as any set of narratives (theories) for-
mulated in a particular language determined by the theme (domain) of the dis-
course, understood as the sets of formulas containing dogmas (assumptions,
axioms, or hypotheses) and closed due to logical consequence operators and
hermeneutical consequence operators. Each narrative corresponds to one operator
of logical consequence, which is responsible for its deductive processing. Narra-
tives may also be correlated with operators of hermeneutic consequences, which are
responsible for their interpretative processing. Discourse spaces in which sets of
hermeneutic consequence operators are empty can be called purely deductive dis-
course spaces. They usually function in the practice of creating formal sciences. In
the humanities, researchers get entangled in deductive-hermeneutic spaces of dis-
course, i.e., those whose narratives are additionally processed based on hermeneutic
consequence operators.
The space of discourse SD at a speciﬁc stage of development t can be described
as a structure of the form:
hLD; ThD; CND; HDit;
where LD is the language of a given discourse understood as a syntactic-semantic
structure generating a set of all its sentential formulas D. ThD is a set of narratives
(theories) formulated in LD at the development stage t. The CND is the deductive
structure of the space of a given discourse at stage t. HD is the hermeneutic structure
of the discourse at the stage t understood as a set of systems of hermeneutical
inference rules. Therefore, discursive activity can be treated as any practice of
producing sentential formulas and inferences within some narrative (theory)
belonging to ThD of a given space of discourse SD, thanks to the deductive and
hermeneutic processing mechanism determined by CND and HD. This activity
evokes, by virtue of the correlation determined by semantic functions, the processes
of expansion of mental worlds.
Deductive Structures of Discourses
The
deductive
structure
of
discourse
is
a
system
of
the
form:
CND ¼ hD; CN; T; PENi, where D is a set of all sentential formulas of the lan-
guage of discourse LD, CN is a set of logical consequence operators indexed by
taboo functions, T is the set of taboo functions, and PEN is the set of penalization
functions correlated by virtue of one-to-one relationship with each taboo function
belonging to T.
596
W. Krysztofiak

Taboo Functions and Elm Experts
Censorship institutions, indexes of forbidden books, informal rules of the so-called
political correctness, paragraphs in penal codes prohibiting the formulation of
statements that violate, for example, religious feelings, the good name of both
natural and legal persons, or ﬁnally statements that offend the king, nation, or state
authority are examples of institutions controlling the processes of producing various
narratives within a given discourse space at a given stage of its development. Such
institutions can be described using the category introduced by Putnam [29] and
Fodor [30] as elm experts. According to Putnam’s concept, there are experts in
every language community who know the meanings of speciﬁc terms so that other
speakers, thanks to the mechanism of the division of language labor, can use them
efﬁciently without knowing the meanings of these terms [29]. Fodor [30] deﬁned
their roles in discourse as guarding the use of expressions (for example: ‘elms,’
‘beeches’) in the language under conditions that establish criteria for the truthful-
ness of thoughts expressed with the help of such expressions. The concept of elm
experts understood in this way can be extended. Elm experts can be given the
additional role of imposing logical rules of inference and hermeneutic norms on a
given discourse, along with establishing a speciﬁc linguistic taboo and rules for
penalizing taboo-breaking practices.
Each narrative prefabricated within SD is associated with its elm expert. Taboo
functions can therefore be understood as representations of expert institutions
functioning in the discourse space SD at a given stage of its development. Hence,
each narrative belonging to ThD is correlated with exactly one taboo function.
The taboo functions, having exactly one argument, map the set of all discourse
formulas D into speciﬁc subsets, which consist of forbidden sentences. They differ
only in their values. For example, for an atheist participating in religious discourse,
the saying: God is a chimeric being is not a formula forbidden by an atheistic
expert, while for a theistic elm expert, the quoted sentence belongs to the taboo of
the theological narrative of Catholicism. Kazimierz Łyszczyński was killed in 1689
by decapitation with the consent of the Polish King Jan III Sobieski for uttering
sentences about the chimerical nature of God in the treatise De non existentia dei
[31, 32]. In the initial phase of shaping the Christian discourse, various theological
narratives were stigmatized by some producers of this discourse with the marker of
heresy. The prime example is Arius’s conception. According to it, Christ is not God
the Father. In the fourth century, Nicene elm experts condemned Arianism that
challenged the Trinity dogma, thus establishing a taboo function for the Nicene
narrative. Under this function, several hundred years later, Arians were condemned
to be burned at stake for publicly formulating the statement: Christ is not God the
Father (on disputes with Arianism within the early Christian discourse, see [33]).
Establishing forbidden sentences is also present in the Islamic discourse. Ahmad
Al-Shamri and the poet Ashraf Fayadh were sentenced to death for preaching
atheism in Saudi Arabia in 2015.
Taboo functions are established not only in the spaces of worldview or social
discourses. The theses of Copernicus’ astronomical theory were also prohibited
30
Information Processing in Reasoning in the Environment …
597

from expressing them for several years. Even today, the prohibition of dividing by
zero is widely used in the didactic practice of teaching arithmetic. The phenomenon
of forbidding the use of formulas that are correctly syntactically structured, but not
having the so-called mathematical sense, is present in mathematical discourse. For
example, the formula: y ¼ log 10
ð
Þ  10y ¼ 10 cannot be processed in
mathematical proofs because it is devoid of arithmetic sense. Logicians are looking
for a logic that would describe the inferential mechanism of deduction processes in
mathematics, implemented in an environment of correctly constructed formulas but
not having a mathematical sense [34]. These kinds of logical calculi are called
nonsense logics or infectious logics [35].
The role of taboo functions in deductive discourse structures is to modulate
logical consequence operators in such a way that the logical consequence operator
indexed by a given taboo function invalidates in the corresponding narrative all
inferences that are composed of at least one formula forbidden by a given taboo
function.
Logical Consequence Operators Indexed with Taboo Functions
The logical consequence operator indexed by a taboo function differs from the
non-indexed standard logical consequence operator in that from the point of view of
the latter, if there is one logically valid inference in an inference set of the same
shape, then all the inferences of this set are logically valid, while from the point of
view of the former, no operator whose index is a taboo function that takes as its
value some non-empty set of formulas has such a property. Inference rules deter-
mined by standard logical consequence operators are usually characterized by
substitution closure. Therefore, these operators are called structural, logical con-
sequence operators. Consequence operators indexed with taboo functions are thus
essentially non-structural (on structural consequence operators, see [36]). For
example, according to the properties of the consequence operator deﬁning the
inferential mechanism of classical logic, all inferences that have a syntactic shape
determined by the Modus Ponens are logically valid based on that operator. Sup-
pose the consequence operator for classical logic is modulated by indexing it with
some taboo function that returns some non-empty set of formulas contained in
D. Hence, based on the new logical consequence operator obtained in this way, not
all inferences having the shape determined by the Modus Ponens will be logically
valid inferences.
The consequence operator, which determines the base logic of a given discourse
space, is the operator indexed by the taboo function that returns the empty set as its
value. Such a logical consequence operator behaves like any consequence operator
satisfying Tarski’s general conditions. From this point of view, logical consequence
operators in Tarski’s meaning are special cases of logical consequence operators
indexed by taboo functions.
All logical consequence operators indexed with taboo functions from the set T
modulate the consequence operator indexed by the taboo function whose value is
598
W. Krysztofiak

the empty set (Fig. 30.1). All consequence operators obtained due to modulation
with taboo functions must establish the same logic to enable the processing of all
narratives within a given discourse space. Otherwise, narratives within the same
discourse would be deductively incomparable. However, this logic, established by
all taboo-indexed consequence operators, need not be the base logic. It may also
happen that the base logic forms an empty set of provable tautologies. Some logics
of infectious propositions, such as the logic determined by Bochvar matrices,
determine empty sets of tautologies. However, they can be treated as sets of
inferences, i.e., ordered pairs or sets of such pairs, the ﬁrst element of which is a set
of formulas, and the second a particular formula, satisfying the following condition:
if any logical valuation function assigns the distinguished value to all formulas
belonging to the ﬁrst element of the pair, then it also adds the distinguished value to
the formula constituting the second element of the pair. According to the con-
struction of Bochvar matrices, there are no formulas that take the distinguished
value for each logical valuation [37, 38]. The differences between taboo-indexed
consequence operators concern only the scope of logically valid inferences that can
be formulated in the language of discourse LD, not the universe of logical theses.
How taboo indexed logical consequence operators work within a given discourse
space can be exempliﬁed by the following example. Let classical logic be the base
logic. Let the taboo function k assign to the religious discourse D such a set of
formulas that the sentence: Jesus Christ is a cheat belongs to k D
ð Þ. According to
the logical consequence operator indexed by the taboo function k, the inference:
Jesus Christ is God, therefore Jesus Christ is a cheat or God, is not logically valid
because the sentence: Jesus Christ is a cheat, is forbidden. Hence, in Catholic
narratives, the sentence: Jesus Christ is a cheat or God, cannot be considered true
because it does not follow from the premise: Jesus Christ is God, believed by
Catholics to be true. In the same space of discourse, atheistic elm experts establish a
taboo function a such that the sentence: Jesus Christ is a cheat, does not belong to
a D
ð Þ. Since the base logic of the discourse space D is classical logic and the quoted
inference falls under the logically valid rule of disjunction addition, then based on
Ca, the analyzed inference is logically valid. Thus, the atheist consequence operator
Ck and the Catholic consequence operator Ck differ in terms of deductive pro-
cessing of premises.
Suppose a given inference is formulated in the language LD only using formulas
that do not belong to sets of forbidden sentences, constituting the values of two
different taboo functions, i D
ð Þ and k D
ð Þ. In that case, if such inference is logically
valid based on base logic, then it is also valid based on modulated logic, determined
by consequence operators indexed with taboo functions: Ci and Ck. For example,
although an atheist and a Catholic use different consequence operators in deductive
processing of their narratives, they can jointly assess some inferences as logically
valid because their logics are the same logic resulting by modulation of some joint
base logic and because the sum of sets of forbidden formulas established by the
atheist taboo function and the Catholic taboo function, which index the conse-
quence operator settling base logic, is not identical to the set of all formulas of a
given discourse.
30
Information Processing in Reasoning in the Environment …
599

Fig. 30.1 The rectangle at the top represents the logical consequence operator Cl, hereinafter
referred to as the liberal consequence operator, whose index is a taboo function that returns the
empty set. The second rectangle from the top indicates the base logic LB determined by operator
Cl. The arrow connecting these two rectangles represents the process establishing LB by Cl. The
next rectangle from the top denotes the taboo functions from t1 to tk, which modulate the base logic
and produce consequence operators indexed with non-empty taboo functions. The rectangle at the
bottom represents the discourse logic LD established by all consequence operators indexed with
taboo functions: t1, …, tk
600
W. Krysztofiak

Penalty Functions
Along with the establishment of taboo functions, elm experts establish conventions
to punish discourse participants for committing acts of breaking language taboos.
Thus, each taboo function and the corresponding operator of consequences are
correlated with the penalty function, which assigns a certain intensity of penalty to
sentences, sets of sentences, and inferences, which break a corresponding language
taboo. For example, for publicly calling Stalin or Hitler a bandit in the Soviet Union
and Nazi Germany, people were punished by death (shot, sent to a gulag or a
concentration camp).
From the perspective of any taboo function, the intensities of penalties for
breaking prohibitions are differentiated due to the utterance of one or another
sentence or carrying out one or another inference. However, it can be assumed that
the acts of uttering sentences or articulating inferences which break taboos are
penalized with a ﬁxed penalty of a certain constant intensity. From this point of
view, with each taboo function and each logical consequence operator indexed by a
given taboo function, exactly one penalty function is correlated, taking a particular
constant value in the form of the resultant intensity of penalties.
Arguments of the penalty function corresponding to a given taboo function are
forbidden formulas. This taboo function establishes sets of forbidden formulas and
inferences infected with forbidden formulas. The values of any penalty functions
constitute a linearly ordered, discrete set, in which one can distinguish a minimum
value understood as no punishment, a maximum value understood as the annihi-
lation of a discourse participant, and a value of alienation intensity understood as a
threshold of pain whose passing across causes escape from the discourse space.
Punishing discourse participants for breaking language taboos is supposed to evoke
a sense of pain, which forces them to refrain from breaking a given taboo. There is a
certain value of the intensity of penalty, which causes such a sense of pain among
the discourse participants that they cease to formulate any statements within it. The
state of silence in the discourse can be described as alienation from it. A participant
in such a mental state not only does not break a given language taboo but also
refrains from speaking in any way within a given discourse space.
By penalizing a given discourse, elm experts activate mechanisms that block
both the deductive and hermeneutic activity of processing narratives among dis-
course participants. Since the narratives produced within a given space of discourse
bring into existence certain mental worlds, blocking the activity of processing them
in a certain way prevents the introduction of certain semantic entities (objects,
situations, events, plots, etc.), which are the correlates of forbidden formulas, into
the mental worlds. From this standpoint, the penalty functions are tools used by elm
experts in their mission of upholding the proper development of the mental worlds
produced in narrative practices. The penalty functions can thus be interpreted as a
mechanism of inﬂicting pain on discourse participants by elm experts to block the
processes of prefabrication of mental worlds in a speciﬁc manner contrary to
experts’ interests. Such discursive practices as hate speech, aggression, or linguistic
violence, as well as the performative establishment of the facts of insulting in
30
Information Processing in Reasoning in the Environment …
601

speech, are often manifested as penalty functions. The purpose of these practices is
to evoke unpleasant affective states in the discourse participants, such as guilt,
shame, or remorse.
Theory of Logical Consequence Operators Indexed
by Taboo Functions
The subject of study of the presented theory is a structure of the form:
hD; CN; T; PENi, called a penalizing-tabooing structure of deduction. There are
two
substructures
in
it:
hD; CNi
and
hD; CN; Ti,
where
hD; CNi
is
a
multi-deductive structure of discourse and hD; CN; Ti is its taboo extension.
Mono-deductive structures are special cases of multi-deductive structures. In his
theory, standard deduction structures, described by Tarski, have the form: hD; CNi,
where CN consists of one element. They are mono-deductive structures. The
deduction structure of Peano’s arithmetic hL PA
ð
Þ;
CKL
f
gi, where L PA
ð
Þ is the set
of all formulas of PA and CKL is the classical logical consequence operator, is a case
of this type. Ideological discourse spaces in a non-initial stage of development are,
in turn, usually regulated inferentially by multi-deductive structures of the shape:
hD;
Ci; . . .; Ck
f
g; Ti.
Axiomatic for hD; CN; Ti
Let us adopt the following conventions: i, variables: i; j; k; l represent taboo func-
tions from the set T associated with the discourse D in its speciﬁc development
phase; ii, variables: Ci; . . .; Cj; Ck refer to consequence operators indexed with
functions from the set T; iii, variables: X; Y; Z; X1; . . .; Xn represent elements of the
power set 2D; and iv, variables: a; b; c; d represent formulas belonging to D.
ð8iÞði 2 T ! i  fDg  2DÞ
ðA1Þ
Each taboo function maps the set of all discourse formulas D into a subset
constituting the language taboo of the discourse D according to function i.
ð8iÞði 2 T ^ Ci 2 CN ! Ci  2D  2DÞ
ðA2Þ
The consequence operators indexed with taboo functions map the set D subsets
into the set of subsets of the set D.
ð8i; kÞ½i 2 T ^ k 2 T ^ Ci 2 CN ^ Ck 2 CN ! ði 6¼ k  Ci 6¼ CkÞ
ðA3Þ
Two taboo functions are different if and only if the consequence operators
indexed by these functions are also different. This axiom establishes the correlation
602
W. Krysztofiak

between each taboo function and its corresponding exactly one consequence
operator.
ð8iÞð8aÞfi 2 T ! ½a 2 IðDÞ   ð9XÞa 2 CiðXÞg
ðA4Þ
A given formula is forbidden from the point of view of a given taboo function
belonging to the set T if and only if there is no set of formulas in the language D
from which this formula is derivable according to the consequence operator indexed
by this taboo function. The A4 axiom expresses the principle of inferential sterility
of formulas belonging to sets of forbidden formulas established by taboo functions.
The same formula, inferentially sterile from the point of view of a given taboo
function, does not have to be inferentially sterile from the standpoint of another
taboo function associated with the discourse D.
ð8iÞð8kÞð8XÞ½i 2 T ^ k 2 T ! CiðX  ðiðDÞ [ kðDÞÞÞ ¼ CkðX  ðiðDÞ [ kðDÞÞÞ
ðA5Þ
Two consequence operators indexed with any taboo indexes, acting on any set of
formulas that is disjointed with the sum of sets of forbidden formulas settled by both
taboo function indexes, return the same set. In other words, any two consequence
operators indexed with different taboo functions behave logically the same, acting
on sets of formulas not forbidden from the point of view of the sum of the values of
these two taboo functions.
ð8iÞ½i 2 T ! ð8XÞðX  iðDÞ ! CiðXÞ  Cið;ÞÞ
ðA6Þ
Any subset of a given set of forbidden sentences has such a property that the set
of formulas derivable from it, under the consequence operator indexed by a taboo
function establishing the given set of forbidden sentences, is included in the set of
formulas derivable from the empty set according to this consequence operator. If
the set of consequences of the empty set is the empty set, then no formula can be
derived from any set of forbidden formulas.
ð8i; kÞfi 2 T ^ k 2 T ! ½iðDÞ  kðDÞ ! ð8XÞCkðXÞ  CiðXÞg
ðA7Þ
Suppose a set of forbidden formulas settled by the ﬁrst taboo function is included
in the set of forbidden formulas settled by the second taboo function (the ﬁrst taboo
operator is weaker than the second, stronger taboo operator). In that case, the set of
formulas derivable from a given set of formulas according to the consequence op-
erator indexed by the second taboo function (stronger one) is included in the set of
formulas derivable from the same set of formulas according to the consequence
operator indexed by the ﬁrst taboo function (weaker one). In other words, the weaker
the taboo function, the stronger the inferential power of the consequence operator
indexed by a given function, and the stronger the taboo function, the weaker the
inferential power of the consequence operator indexed by a given function.
30
Information Processing in Reasoning in the Environment …
603

ð8iÞð8XÞ½i 2 T ! X  iðDÞ  CiðX  iðDÞÞ
ðA8Þ
Any set of formulas reduced by forbidden formulas settled by a given taboo
function is included in the set of logical consequences indexed by this function,
applied to a given set of formulas reduced by forbidden formulas. Only these
formulas are derivable from themselves according to the consequence operator
indexed by a given taboo function that does not belong to the set of forbidden
formulas established by a given taboo function.
ð8iÞð8XÞ½i 2 T ! CiCiðXÞ  CiðXÞ
ðA9Þ
ð8iÞð8XÞð8YÞfi 2 T ! ½X  Y ! CiðXÞ  CiðYÞg
ðA10Þ
ð8iÞð8aÞð8XÞfi 2 T ! ½a 2 CiðXÞ ! ð9YÞðY  X ^ CardðYÞ\@ ^ a 2 CiðYÞÞg
ðA11Þ
(@ is the power of a countably inﬁnite set and Card is the cardinality function).
According to A9, A10, and A11, any consequence operator indexed with a taboo
function is idempotent, monotonic, and ﬁnitistic. Thus, Tarski's three basic con-
ditions for logical consequence operators are satisﬁed by consequence operators
under study.
The presented system of axioms is a generalization of Tarski’s theory of con-
sequences. If the axiom TA is added to the presented axiomatic:
ð8iÞ½i 2 T ! iðDÞ ¼ ;;
ðTAÞ
then A8 reduces itself to the formula: ð8iÞð8XÞ½i 2 T ! X  CiðXÞ. Hence, the
formulas: TA, A9, A10, and A11 constitute conditions for the Tarskian operators of
logical consequence.
The axiom A3 implies that if the set of taboo functions associated with the
discourse D is one-element, then the set of consequence operators CN is also
one-element.
ð8i; kÞði 2 T ^ k 2 T ! i ¼ kÞ ! ð8i; kÞðCi 2 CN ^ Ck 2 CN ! Ci ¼ CkÞ
ðT1Þ
T1 expresses that any multi-deductive structure hD; CN; Ti reduces itself to a
mono-deductive structure as long as the set of T is one-element. The following
theorem holds:
ð8iÞ½i 2 T ! iðDÞ ¼ ; ! ð8i; kÞði 2 T ^ k 2 T ! i ¼ kÞ
ðT2Þ
From T2 and T1 it follows:
ð8iÞ½i 2 T ! i D
ð Þ ¼ ; ! ð8i; kÞðCi 2 CN ^ Ck 2 CN ! Ci ¼ CkÞ
ðT3Þ
604
W. Krysztofiak

T3 states that any deductive structure that satisﬁes general conditions of Tarski's
theory of consequence is a mono-deductive structure.
Types of Taboo Functions and Indexed Consequence
Operators
One can deﬁne a liberal taboo function that assigns to the discourse D an empty set
of forbidden formulas.
l D
ð Þ ¼ ;
ðDFlÞ
The consequence operator indexed by the function l, operator Cl, is called the
liberal consequence operator. This operator establishes the base logic for a given
discourse space (Fig. 30.1). If function l does not belong to the structure
hD; CN; Ti, function Cl does not belong to it either. Cl satisﬁes the following
conditions:
ð8XÞ½l 2 T ! X  ClðXÞ
ðT4Þ
ð8XÞ½l 2 T ! ClClðXÞ  ClðXÞ
ðT5Þ
ð8XÞð8YÞfl 2 T ! ½X  Y ! ClðXÞ  ClðYÞg
ðT6Þ
The liberal consequence operator behaves logically in the same way as any
Tarskian standard consequence operator.
Consequence operators indexed by taboo functions form a set of etatist conse-
quence operators when their indexes are taboo functions that take values different
than the empty set.
ð8iÞðCi 2 ETAT  iðDÞ 6¼ ;Þ
ðDFETÞ
One may prove the following theorems:
ð8iÞfCi 2 ETAT ^ i 2 T ^ l 2 T ! ð9aÞð9XÞ½a 2 ClðXÞ ^  ða 2 CiðXÞÞg
ðT7Þ
ð8iÞð8XÞ½Ci 2 ETAT ^ i 2 T ^ X \ iðDÞ ¼ ; ^ l 2 T ! CiðXÞ ¼ ClðXÞ
ðT8Þ
According to T7, for every etatist logical consequence operator, there are such
formulas and such sets of formulas that a given formula belongs to the set of
formulas resulting by application of the liberal consequence operator to a given set
of formulas but does not belong to the set resulting by application of a given etatist
consequence operator to the same set of formulas. T8 states that each consequence
operator with a given taboo index, acting on any set of formulas, in which there are
30
Information Processing in Reasoning in the Environment …
605

no forbidden formulas from the point of view of this operator’s taboo index, is
indistinguishable from the liberal consequence operator acting on the same set of
formulas.
The axiom A5 implies that any etatist consequence operator determines the same
logic as determined by the liberal consequence operator.
ð8iÞ½i 2 T ^ l 2 T ! Cið;Þ ¼ Clð;Þ
ðT9Þ
Moreover, any two taboo indexed consequence operators do not differ in their
acting on the empty set.
ð8i; kÞ½i 2 T ^ k 2 T ! Cið;Þ ¼ Ckð;Þ
ðT10Þ
Two different etatist consequence operators differ from each other when they
operate in the areas of forbidden formulas determined by the taboo functions
constituting their indexes.
ð8i; kÞð8aÞ½i 2 T ^ k 2 T ^ a 2 iðDÞ ^  ða 2 kðDÞÞ ! ð9XÞða 2 CkðXÞ ^  ða
2 CiðXÞÞÞ
ðT11Þ
Another important consequence operator that may appear in the structure
hD; CN; Ti is the operator indexed by total taboo function t deﬁned as follows:
t D
ð Þ ¼ D
ðDFtÞ
The following theorems characterize the properties of this operator:
t 2 T ! ð8XÞCtðXÞ ¼ ;
ðT12Þ
t 2 T ^ l 2 T ! Clð;Þ ¼ ;
ðT13Þ
t 2 T ! ð8iÞði 2 T ! Cið;Þ ¼ ;Þ
ðT14Þ
According to T12, if the total taboo function belongs to the structure
hD; CN; Ti, then the set of consequences of the operator indexed by the total taboo
function applied to any set of formulas is an empty set. Based on the total taboo
function, one can only keep quiet. According to (T13) and (T14), the introduction
of the total taboo function to the deduction structure of a given discourse destroys
the tautological nature of a given discourse. If there are experts associated with the
deduction structure of a given discourse who forbid the articulation of any sen-
tences within it, then such experts invalidate the validity of any inferences from the
point of view of all operators of logical consequence associated with a given
discourse space in a given phase of its development.
606
W. Krysztofiak

Axioms for Penalty Functions
Let pi; pk; :::; pj be variables representing functions belonging to PEN, where the
indices i; j; k designate corresponding taboo functions belonging to T. Let K be a
linearly ordered set of penalty intensities, where 0 is no penalty, and 1 is the
maximum penalty intensity. Between 0 and 1, all rational numbers are values of
some intermediate intensities of the penalty. Let a be the intensity of the punish-
ment evoking a state of alienation from discourse. Let variables: v; v1; . . .; vn run
through the set of penalty intensities. Let variables: x; x1; :::; xh represent arguments
of penalty functions.
Let INFECi be a set of inferences infected by the taboo function i deﬁned as
follows:
ð8X; aÞ½hX; ai 2 INFECi  X \ iðDÞ 6¼ ; _ a 2 iðDÞ
ðDFINFÞ
An inference is infected by the taboo function i if and only if some formula
forbidden by the taboo function i occurs among its premises or such a formula is the
conclusion of the given inference.
The penalty functions satisfy the following conditions:
ð8piÞðpi 2 PEN ! pi  ½iðDÞ [ 2iðDÞ [ INFECi  K
ðPEN1Þ
Each penalty function correlated with its taboo maps its set of arguments into a
set of punishments causing pain of some intensity.
ð8i; piÞ½i 2 T ^ pi 2 PEN ! ð8xÞðx 2 iðDÞ [ 2iðDÞ [ INFECi ! piðxÞ ¼ constÞ
ðPEN2Þ
Each penalty function belonging to the structure hD; CN; T; PENi is a constant
function.
l 2 T ! ð8xÞplðxÞ ¼ 0
ðPEN3Þ
The penalty function indexed by the liberal taboo function returns the minimum
value for each argument.
ð8i; piÞ½i 2 T ^ iðDÞ \ D 6¼ ; ^ pi 2 PEN ! ð8xÞðx 2 iðDÞ [ 2iðDÞ [ INFECi
! piðxÞ [ 0Þ
ðPEN4Þ
Penalty functions correlated with etatist taboo functions assign to their argu-
ments values of penalty intensity greater than 0.
Since all penalty functions are constant functions, one can deﬁne a function q
that assigns to each taboo function the penalty intensity assigned to all arguments of
the penalty function correlated with a given taboo function.
30
Information Processing in Reasoning in the Environment …
607

ð8iÞfi 2 T ! ½qðiÞ ¼ v  ð8xÞðx 2 iðDÞ [ 2iðDÞ [ INFECi ! piðxÞ ¼ vÞg
ðDFPÞ
If there is a total penalty function in the structure hD; CN; T; PENi, it is natural
to assume that the penalization function correlated with the taboo function t works
most severely among all taboo functions of a given deductive discourse structure.
t 2 T ! ð8iÞði 2 T ^ i 6¼ t ! qðtÞ [ qðiÞÞ
ðPEN5Þ
Types of Penalizing-Tabooing Discourse Structures
of Deduction
One may distinguish various types of discourse structures of deduction due to their
structural properties. Elementary taboo deduction structures are those formatted
with one consequence operator and one taboo function that is not a total taboo
function.
hD; CN; Ti 2 EL  ð9iÞðCN ¼ fCig ^ T ¼ fig ^ i 6¼ tÞ
ðDF:ELÞ
Among the structures of the set EL, standard elementary structures can be dis-
tinguished, which are constituted by the liberal consequence operator.
hD; CN; Ti 2 ST  EL  ðCN ¼ fClg ^ T ¼ flgÞ
ðDF:ST  ELÞ
Each elementary taboo structure of deduction develops in the process of syn-
thesizing a given discourse by the proliferation of elements of both the CN and the
T. The ﬁnal phase of such a process is the situation in which the sum of the values
of the family of all taboo functions is identical to the set D. Then, within the
discourse, any inference will be forbidden from the point of view of at least one
taboo function and the corresponding consequence operator. The structure of dis-
course deduction in this phase of its development is called maximal.
hD; CN; Ti 2 MAX  ð8aÞ½a 2 D ! ð9iÞði 2 T ^ a 2 iðDÞÞ
ðDF:MAXÞ
No maximal taboo structure of deduction is an elementary structure of
deduction.
MAX \ EL ¼ ;
ðT15Þ
Each structure of the shape hD;
Ct
f
g; Ti is maximal. Moreover, any deduction
structure that contains a total taboo function is also maximal.
hD;
Ct
f
g; Ti 2 MAX
ðT16Þ
608
W. Krysztofiak

t 2 T ! hD; CN; Ti 2 MAX
ðT17Þ
In the discourse associated with the MAX type deduction structure, any inference
valid from one point of view is invalid from another standpoint.
hD; CN; Ti 2 MAX ! ð8iÞð8X; aÞ½Ci 2 CN ^ i 2 T ^ a 2 CiðXÞ ! ð9kÞðCk
2 CN ^ k 2 T ^  ða 2 CiðXÞÞÞ
ðT18Þ
In the maximal deduction structures, the consequence operators do not establish
a set of logical theses and tautologies.
hD; CN; Ti 2 MAX ! ð8iÞðCi 2 CN ^ i 2 T ! Cið;Þ ¼ ;Þ
ðT19Þ
Some discourse deduction structures may possess a mechanism that blocks the
evolution of the discourse space towards its maximal phase. This mechanism is
described by the following condition:
ð8iÞðl 2 T ^ i 2 T ^ Clð;Þ 6¼ ; ! Clð;Þ \ iðDÞ ¼ ;Þ
ðBÞ
According to (B), no taboo function in the deduction structure of a given dis-
course stigmatizes the logical theses with a prohibition determined by the liberal
consequence operator. Therefore, if the set of logical theses determined by this
operator is not an empty set, then according to A5, each consequence operator of a
given deduction structure establishes a non-empty set of logical theses identical to
the set of logical theses established by the Cl. Moreover, if there is no liberal
consequence operator in the deduction structure of a given discourse, then it is
impossible to introduce into this structure the mechanism described by (B) that
blocks its development towards the maximal structure of deduction. Therefore, if
condition (B) is satisﬁed for a given discourse structure, it is not maximal.
ð8iÞ½l 2 T ^ i 2 T ^ Clð;Þ 6¼ ; ! Clð;Þ \ iðDÞ ¼ ; !  h D; CN; Ti 2 MAX
ðT20Þ
One may distinguish totalitarian deductive discourse structures. They are char-
acterized by the fact that in the hD; CN; T; PENi structure, there are taboo func-
tions to which the function q assigns a maximum value 1.
hD; CN; T; PENi 2 TOT  ð9iÞði 2 T ^ qðiÞ ¼ 1Þ
ðDFTOTÞ
Let us deﬁne the taboo extension relationship between the taboo functions.
ð8i; kÞ½iðextÞk  iðDÞ  kðDÞ ^ i 6¼ k
ðDFEXTÞ
30
Information Processing in Reasoning in the Environment …
609

The taboo function k is an extension of the taboo function i if and only if the
value of the function i is contained in the value of the function k and the two
functions are different. If the totalitarian deduction structure of a given discourse
space is characterized by the fact that the taboo function for which the function q
takes the value 1 is an extension of all taboo functions, then such a structure
characterizes the discourses in their development phases of the domination of one
totalitarian elm expert. Such structures have a property that can be described as the
totalitarian monopoly of an expert institution on punishment.
hD; CN; T; PENi 2 M  TOT  ð9iÞ½i 2 T ^ qðiÞ ¼ 1 ^ ð8kÞðk 2 T ^ k 6¼ l
! kðextÞiÞ
ðDFM  TOTÞ
Between
the
logical
consequence
operators
in
the
deduction
structure
hD; CN; Ti, there can be the conﬂict relationship.
ð8i; kÞ½CiðconflictÞCk  ði 6¼ l _ k 6¼ lÞ ^ iðDÞ \ kðDÞ ¼ ;
ðDFCÞ
Suppose the elm experts in the structure hD; CN; T; PENi establish taboo
functions that generate the conﬂict relationship between consequence operators
indexed by these taboo functions, and the q function assigns them to values of the
penalty intensity, causing the state of alienation from discourse. In that case, such a
structure of deduction is called revolutionary.
hD; CN; T; PENi 2 REV  ð9i; kÞði 2 T ^ k 2 T ^ Ci
2 CN ^ Ck 2 CN ^ CiðconflictÞCk ^ qðiÞ 	 a ^ qðkÞ 	 aÞ
ðDFREVÞ
In a revolutionary developmental phase of discourse, elm experts attack each
other with severe punishments, inducing a sense of alienation among the discourse
producers. In extreme cases, experts can kill each other. Then the structure of the
REV-type becomes a terrorist deduction structure.
hD; CN; T; PENi 2 TERR  hD; CN; T;
PENi 2 REV ^ ð8i; kÞði 6¼ k ^ i 2 T ^ k 2 T ^ Ci
2 CN ^ Ck 2 CN ^ CiðconflictÞCk ! qðiÞ ¼ 1 ^ qðkÞ ¼ 1Þ
ðDFTERRÞ
In TERR-type structures, all sides of the discourse are in conﬂict with each other,
without the ability to ally with any side in the ﬁght against a third side; they try to
eliminate each other from a given discourse space. The religious discourse during
the French Revolution was correlated with such a revolutionary structure of
deduction. Jacobins, Girondins, Sans-culottes, Royalists, and others killed each
other to defend their views on religion.
610
W. Krysztofiak

Conclusion
The sketched theory of logical consequence operators indexed with taboo functions
enables formal modeling of information processing within discursive practices. The
theory shows that our discursive thinking is multi-deductive. This property is
generated by the language taboo functions encoded in our minds by elm experts.
Each such taboo function modulates the base logic underlying the discourse in its
own way. Blocking inferences infected with forbidden formulas requires triggering
in our minds the penalty functions responsible for feeling the pain inﬂicted by elm
experts when we break the prohibitions during information processing within a
discursive activity.
If the freedom of speech means anything at all, it means the right to make any deduction
public.
Wojciech Krysztoﬁak
Core Messages
• Language wars in discourse spaces are governed by logical mechanisms
encoded in people's minds.
• Killing others in the name of an idea is the result of the tabooing of our
mental worlds.
• Linguistic taboos transform liberal logical information-processing mech-
anisms into totalitarian information-processing mechanisms.
• There are logics of thinking that are dangerous to our lives.
• Tarski's theory of logical consequence describes the logics that guarantees
the freedom to process mental contents.
Acknowledgements The chapter is part of Project No. 2016/21/B/HS1/00821, supported by The
National Science Centre, Poland.
References
1. Minsky M (1980) Jokes and the logic of the cognitive unconscious. In: Vaina L, Hintikka J
(eds) Cognitive constraints on communication. Springer, pp 175–200
2. Hedger JA (2013) Meaning and racial slurs: derogatory epithets and the semantics/pragmatics
interface. Lang Commun 33(3):205–213
3. Popa-Wyatt M, Wyatt JL (2018) Slurs, roles and power. Philos Stud 175(11):2879–2906
4. Allan K (2015) When is a slur not a slur? The use of nigger in ‘Pulp Fiction.’ Lang Sci
52:187–199
5. Anderson L, Lepore E (2013) Slurring words. Noûs 47(1):25–48
30
Information Processing in Reasoning in the Environment …
611

6. Archer D (2015) Slurs, insults (backhanded) compliments and other strategic facework
moves. Lang Sci 52:82–97
7. Croom AM (2011) Slurs. Lang Sci 33(3):343–358
8. Croom AM (2014) The semantics of slurs: a refutation of pure expressivism. Lang Sci
41:227–242
9. Jay T, Janschewitz K (2008) The pragmatics of swearing. J Politeness Res 4:267–288
10. Allan K (2018) Foreword. In: Pedraza AP (ed) Linguistic taboo revisited: novel insights from
cognitive perspectives, vol 61. Walter de Gruyter GmbH & Co KG
11. Allan K (2018) Religious and ideologically motivated taboos. In: The Oxford handbook of
taboo words and language
12. Allan K, Burridge K (2006) Forbidden words: taboo and the censoring of language.
Cambridge University Press
13. Pedraza AP (2018) Linguistic taboo revisited: novel insights from cognitive perspectives, vol
61. Walter de Gruyter GmbH & Co KG
14. Aoun J, Choueiri L (2000) Epithets. Nat Lang Linguist Theory 18(1):1–39
15. Hoeksema J (2019) Taboo terms and their grammar. In: The Oxford handbook of taboo words
and language
16. Wałaszewska E (2010) Narrowing and taboo contamination: relevance theory and
euphemisms. In: Wałaszewska E, Kisielewska-Krysiuk M, Piskorska A (eds) In the mind
and across minds: a relevance-theoretic perspective on communication and translation, vol 61.
Cambridge Scholars Publishing, pp 61–74
17. Crespo-Fernández
E
(2018)
The
axiological
and
communicative
potential
of
homosexual-related metaphors. In: Linguistic Taboo Revisited. De Gruyter Mouton, pp 35–54
18. Crespo-Fernández E (2018) Taboos in speaking of sex and sexuality. In: The Oxford
Handbook of Taboo Words and Language
19. Sabatini F (2018) Homophobia and Logophobia. Construing Homosexuality in European
Public Discourse. Peur et identité dans les discours européens. De Europa 1(2):133–147
20. De Klerk V (1992) How taboo are taboo words for girls? Lang Soc 21(2):277–289
21. Agyekum K (2002) Menstruation as a verbal taboo among the Akan of Ghana. J Anthropol
Res 58(3):367–387
22. Wildfeuer J, Schnell MW, Schulz C (2015) Talking about dying and death: on new discursive
constructions of a formerly postulated taboo. Discourse Soc 26(3):366–390
23. Benczes R, Burridge K, Allan K, Shariﬁan F (2018) Old age revolution in Australian English:
rethinking a taboo concept. In: Linguistic taboo revisited. De Gruyter Mouton, pp 99–116
24. Anderson L, Haslanger S, Langton R (2012) Language and race. Routledge companion to the
philosophy of language. Routledge, London, pp 753–767
25. Haslanger S (2010) Language, politics, and “the folk”: looking for “the meaning” of ‘race.’
Monist 93(2):169–187
26. Humphrey C (2005) Dangerous words: taboos, evasions, and silence in Soviet Russia. Forum
Anthropol Culture 2:374–396
27. Van Dijk TA (1997) Discourse as structure and process, vol 1. Sage Publications, London
28. Van Dijk TA, Kintsch W (1983) Strategies of discourse comprehension. Academic Press,
New York
29. Putnam H (1975) The meaning of ‘meaning’. In: Gunderson K (ed) Language, mind, and
knowledge. Minnesota studies in the philosophy of science, vol 7. University of Minnesota
Press, Minneapolis, pp 358–398
30. Fodor JA (1995) The Eelm and the Eexpert: Mentalese and Iits Ssemantics. MIT Press,
Cambridge
31. Nowicki AR (1989) Kazimierz Łyszczyński 1634–1689. Wydawnictwo Towarzystwa
Krzewienia Kultury Świeckiej, Łódź
32. Skoczyński J, Woleński J (2010) Historia ﬁlozoﬁi polskiej. Wydawn. WAM, Kraków
33. Kelly JND (1988) Początki doktryny chrześcijańskiej. Instytut Wydawniczy Pax, Warszawa
612
W. Krysztofiak

34. Hałkowska K (1979) Algebry związane z teoriami zawierającymi deﬁnicje warunkowe. Państ.
Wydaw. Naukowe, Warszawa, Wrocław
35. Omori H, Szmuc D (2017) Conjunction and disjunction in infectious logics. In: Baltag A,
Seligman J, Yamada T (eds) Logic, rationality, and interaction: 6th International
Workshop. Springer, pp 268–283
36. Wójcicki R (1984) Lectures on propositional calculi. Ossolineum Wroclaw
37. Bochvar DA, Bergmann M (1981) On a three-valued logical calculus and its application to the
analysis of the paradoxes of the classical extended functional calculus. Hist Philos Logic
2(1–2):87–112
38. Karpenko A, Tomova N (2017) Bochvar’s three-valued logic and literal paralogics: their
lattice and functional equivalence. Logic Log Philos 26(2):207–235
Wojciech Krysztoﬁak is a lecturer of logic and philosophy at
The Institute of Philosophy and Cognitive Science at The
University of Szczecin in Poland. He publishes his research
results in “Synthese,” “Foundations of Science,” “History and
Philosophy of Logic,” “Semiotica,” “Axiomathes,” “Husserl
Studies,” and other journals. His research interests focus on for-
mal modeling mental mechanisms of numerical thinking, dis-
cursive activity, and intentionality of consciousness. He is an
author of books on Wittgenstein’s ﬁrst philosophy, grammatical
mechanisms of philosophical discourse, and epistemological
idealism debate. In 2013, he was relegated from the position of
professor of The University of Szczecin for publicly expressing
anti-clerical views. In the last years of communism in Poland, he
was under surveillance by the security service in the operation
code-named “Critic.”
30
Information Processing in Reasoning in the Environment …
613

31
The Impact of Economic Science
on Human Thinking
Khasankhonova Nodira Isametdinovna
“All economics is the science of how people make decisions”.
James Dusenberry
Summary
This article examines the impact of economic science on human thinking, its
actions, and deeds on the example of the Republic of Uzbekistan. During the
pandemic, Uzbekistan’s ﬁnancial, economic thinking is reﬂected in its economic
population’s volatility. Therefore, it is crucial to analyze the behavior in a
ﬁnancially unstable situation. For this, income, employment, ﬁnancial well-
being, migration, and behavior are analyzed. According to the conclusions of the
analysis, it is assumed that the driving force of economic thinking is the state’s
ﬁnancial position and economic policy during a pandemic. In this position,
economic thinking moves rationally. The article concludes that the way-out lies
in the transition to the knowledge of the economy, which opens up opportunities
for mental labor to improve the economic behavior and thinking at the
population (or an individual) level.
K. Nodira Isametdinovna (&)
Faculty of Economics, Tashkent Financial Institute, Tashkent city, 100000,
A.Temur Street 60A, Tashkent, Republic of Uzbekistan
e-mail: nadira_xasanxonova@tﬁ.uz
Faculty of Economics, National University of Uzbekistan, Tashkent, Republic of Uzbekistan
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh (eds.), Thinking, Integrated Science 7,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04075-7_31
615

The impact of economic science on human thinking.
Keywords
Behavior  Economic policy  Economic science  Economic thinking 
Employment  Financial position  Financial well-being  Income  Migration 
Rationality
QR Code
Scanning the QR code directs you to the word cloud of the chapter that is made up of
the words we discussed throughout the whole book in relation to the chapter’s key-
word, which is intentionally not included in the word cloud. Find the keyword and put
it in place in the puzzle according to the clues provided in Chap. 36. The mystery
hidden in the puzzle is the quote of THINKING: Bioengineering of Science and Art.
616
K. Nodira Isametdinovna

Introduction
In the condition of pandemia, humankind enters a disordered world that requires
ﬂexible economic thinking. This situation is called a recession or a slowdown in
economic growth in economic theory. More precisely, “the decline in production is
characterized by zero growth in gross national product (GNP) (stagnation) or its fall
for more than six months.”11 As a phase of the economic cycle, the recession gives
way to depression after a long smooth growth. It most often leads to massive drops
in stock market indices, rising unemployment, and other cyclical signs of crises.
Generally, the country’s economy depends on other countries’ economies; there-
fore, an economic downturn in one country or another can lead to a downturn in
other economies and even a collapse on the world exchanges. It is believed that
2020 has witnessed the deepest recession since the Great Depression.
The recession of the economy is identiﬁed primarily by the following indicators
that lead to the economic security of the world, country, or region:
• Low growth in global GDP; it is believed that if it is below 2%, then the
economic security of the world is at risk;
• High unemployment, if it is above 15%, then this is a collapse in the labor
sector;
• A decrease in foreign direct investment;
• Global export–import should not fall below 40%;
• The shutdown of existing production facilities, and the like
In a pandemic, humanity enters into a non-ordinate condition that requires
ﬂexible economic thinking. In each country, to improve the economy based on an
uncertain situation and the requirements of a decent life for the population, jobs are
created with remote work or work with lighter requirements. The priority at this
level is still the digital economy or the knowledge-based economy. Therefore, along
with the introduction of digital technologies that meet the requirements of today’s
market, the need to adapt the economic behavior of people to it also prevails.
What is Economic Thinking? How Can We Use?
Economics has long been the domain of the ivory tower, where specialized language and
opaque theorems make it inaccessible to most people. That’s a problem.
Featuring Ha-Joon Chang
The economic behavior of the population is based on the formation of economic
thinking. Economic thinking involves studying how economic units (households,
ﬁrms) make rational decisions and actions. Any economic activity is associated
1 Thesis by Kravchenko V. Russian wheat market: current situation, existing problems and
possible solutions (Doctoral dissertation, Empire State College).
31
The Impact of Economic Science on Human Thinking
617

with certain costs, the so-called “c costs,” that are sacriﬁces caused by the pro-
duction or purchase of one product and the refusal to produce or purchase another.
For example, during a pandemic, purchasing high-cost goods (a refrigerator, tele-
vision, or some real estate) is a meaningful and rational decision. Making rational
decisions about what goods and what quantity to produce, sell or buy, how to spend
their time: study or work, and if work, then where and under what conditions, or,
choosing other alternatives, people compare the possible beneﬁts with costs. When
the ratio between the perceived beneﬁts of an action and the expected costs
increases, people are more likely to take these actions since they will become
relatively more proﬁtable, and vice versa.
Using the example of the Republic of Uzbekistan example, we comparatively
review the economic situation assessments in the second quarter of 2019 and 2020.
The population in 2020 is not satisﬁed with many sectors of the economy [1]. It is
especially true for services that have been suspended from restaurants, bars, parks,
etc., due to quarantine measures. Of course, it should be noted that economics is a
ﬁeld of scientiﬁc knowledge that studies people’s economic relations, and the level
of its implementation is a process based on economic thinking. Even if a person is
the main subject of economic relations, his behavior is a thinking product. The main
purpose of the study of economic thinking is to create a clear theoretical basis for
the rise of humanity in terms of progress, its development, and increasing material
well-being in society. Economic thinking is the basis for coordinating economic
relations, deep thinking, and analysis of economic events and processes.
Theoretical approaches to the concept of “economic thinking” in economic
science and practice, general issues related to the formation of economic thinking,
or some of its aspects can be seen in many scientists’ works—for example, L.
I. Abalkin, G. N. Sokolova, and L. S. Blyaxman [2–4] considers economic thinking
a product of consciousness in speciﬁc collective situations as a set of methods for
assessing the situation and making decisions in management. They argue that
embodied views, analyses, and solutions constitute the empirical stage of economic
consciousness. It is used in everyday life; it is controlled but does not always lead to
theoretical conclusions. They explain that the theoretical conclusion of economic
consciousness is derived from economic thinking. G. N. Sokolova [3] considers
economic thinking a product of economic consciousness that arises in collective
situations. Based on the research conducted by G. P. Sokolova, the following main
dominant categories of economic thinking can be identiﬁed:
• Attitude to work;
• Attitude to forms of private property; and
• Management relations
They are perceived by the individual as a certain process at the consciousness
level and become an internal factor in economic thinking. These factors are
embodied and fully realized in the processes of natural laws on a collective basis.
618
K. Nodira Isametdinovna

Heine [5] perceives economic thinking as a direction, as an “economic way of
thinking.” This trend, he says, is reﬂected in the willingness of individuals to act in
their own self-interests. Based on an analysis of the current situation and its
assessment, economic thinking shows that people’s own beneﬁts and incomes are
associated with their alternative choices. This choice is presented in the form of two
or more alternative ways of working. P. Heine expresses economic thinking by the
following features, which are internally interconnected:
• Individuality, P. Heine believes that economic thinking depends on a person’s
own individual activity. Any economic decision, even if made by a group, will
be made in favor of an individual in that group;
• Rationality, the person acts by evaluating the pros and cons of the previously
accepted options. Such means that it is not acceptable in a state of emotional
arousal; it requires clarity; and
• Collectivity, self-evident collective relations are among the processes in the form
of market conditions, and, thus, they, in turn, are the mechanism for the
implementation of economic thinking.
Consequently, some deﬁnitions emphasize that economic thinking is a conscious
understanding of economic categories and laws. However, it should be noted that
economic thinking depends on economic activity and its application. Not only laws
and categories, but also the needs and interests of the subject in the ﬁeld of eco-
nomic activity emerge as an “independent source” of economic thinking.
Itis clear that thedeﬁnition of economicthinking comprises two mainprinciples; on
the one hand, it reﬂects concepts and conclusions formed based on economic relations;
on the other hand, it is a process of the practical application of economic processes and
categories.In addition to the authors mentioned above, one can also refer to, for
example, A. P. Sudelsky and L. S. Blyakhman [4, 6]. They emphasize that economic
thinking is interdependent and is also an internal mechanism of all activities. Thinking
as an integral part of human activity in economics determines the integration of eco-
nomic and psychological understanding. Sudelsky [6] notes that the subject's tasks are
solved based on logical thinking and rational and internal economic criteria.
To summarize the above deﬁnitions, economic thinking is:
• Economic knowledge, views, and ideas arising from private needs and interests;
• A process of conscious understanding of economic categories and laws;
• Principles of development of economic relations; and
• A process of putting categories into practice.
As a result, we can deﬁne the concept of “economic thinking” as economic
categories, conclusions, and decisions arising from the interaction of private
(public) needs and interests, as well as economic actions formed on their basis.
This deﬁnition considers three other important elements:
• The interaction of private (public) needs and interests;
• Economic categories, conclusions, and decisions; and
• Economic behavior
31
The Impact of Economic Science on Human Thinking
619

First of all, the reason for such a deﬁnition is the interests of the individual
(society) and the implementation of actions aimed at meeting a person's primary
needs and secondary needs. It is complemented by the economic understanding,
conclusions, and decisions that are the second part of our deﬁnition. They rely on
economic knowledge and experience passed down from generation to generation in
the process of work, earnings, and consumption. Economic knowledge and expe-
rience help a person make decisions and draw conclusions in various ﬁnancial
situations. Economic behavior occurs due to the complexity of relationships and the
creation and development of human life amenities. Based on the principles of the
development of economic relations, the current level of technical development, we
can say that here, in particular, the interconnection between information, technol-
ogy, and economic relations in material production and the sphere of services will
increase. It means that economic knowledge will evolve.
Private (public) interests and needs are the ideal but invisible means of people's
economic thinking. Need and production are inseparable; they complement each
other and are vital means. People's needs and interests motivate the state and
enterprises (ﬁrms, corporations, organizations) to deepen the level of production.
The following main features characterize economic thinking:
i. It always presupposes choices made by people;
ii. The option will be made by a person. It is the fundamental unit in the ﬁeld of
economic thinking. The economic perception of individuals determines the
adoption of collective decisions at households and ﬁrms. At the same time,
when choosing the optimal solution in a team, group interests and social ties
play an essential role;
iii. In rational decision-making, a person seeks to choose rationally, i.e., based on
comparing costs and beneﬁts to achieve maximum beneﬁts and the most in-
credible efﬁciency. Of course, in reality, the actions of people are far from
always being distinguished by rationality, since their decisions and actions are
inﬂuenced by emotions, psychological and physical condition, the opinions of
other people, and the inability to assess the prospects for the development of
events accurately; and
iv. The economical choice is not entirely free; it depends on laws and regulations
governing society's economic relations.
How the Pandemic Affects the Economic Thinking
of the Population?
When conducting economic research, certain difﬁculties arise that prevent the
formation of rational economic thinking.
i. First, they are associated with different interpretations of speciﬁc processes in
everyday economic science. For example, a pandemic is usually associated
with a medical point of view. However, in economic theory, a pandemic leads
620
K. Nodira Isametdinovna

to colossal ﬁnancial losses to both the state and the person. The term “marginal
debt” in the ordinary sense can be interpreted as “maximum possible,” but in
macroeconomics, it means “additional” associated with each additional unit of
cash;
ii. Secondly, they are caused by erroneous ideas about economic phenomena that
have already been formed due to previous human experience and now impede
objective economic analysis. For example, a person starting to study eco-
nomics may consider the 1929–1933 crisis, although it was a consequence of
classical economics, which reﬂected only sellers’ economic interests; and
iii. Thirdly, difﬁculties can also be associated with logical thinking. One such
misconception is that what is right during a pandemic increases the demand for
essential goods, leading to an increase in their value. For example, there is a
shortage of masks, antiseptics, which at the beginning, all other things being
equal, gives a very high proﬁt. However, if all ﬁrms raise prices, then proﬁts
for many of them will not only not increase but may decrease, or they will even
incur losses. Thus, generalizations valid for individual units may be incorrect
for their totality and vice versa. Another logically erroneous position is that if
one event precedes another, the ﬁrst event necessarily causes the second.
In economics, various processes are closely interconnected, and cause and effect
can often change places. At the same time, the development of many externally
interrelated processes can be determined by a third factor not taken into account in
the analysis. For example, if a production decline occurs at an enterprise, this can be
attributed to a lack of investment. However, the lack of investment can also be
caused by a drop in production at the enterprise. In this case, cause and effect can be
reversed with good reason. Nevertheless, the main reason for both the decline in
production and the reduction in investment may be the state's ineffective economic
policy (tax, budget, monetary, foreign economic, etc.).
In each country, some targeted measures are being taken to prevent the crisis and
develop the economy. A prudent and consistent economic policy pursued at the
present stage of the country’s development shows its results not only in society but
also in human relations and behavior. The ongoing modernization and diversiﬁ-
cation processes, macroeconomic measures, and ﬁnancial strengthening of the state
create economic stability in human behavior. The change in human thinking that
embodies society's behavior and interests remains an important factor in all aspects
of the country's economic environment. This is, therefore, reasonable that research
shows some problems in the formation of the theoretical foundations of modern
thinking and its methodological development.
Considering the above, the behavioral characteristics of a pandemic can include
the population's income, employment, ﬁnancial well-being, migration, and behav-
ior. Income is the main motive for human economic behavior. Studying it gives us
the answer to some questions, for example, regarding employment and ﬁnancial
well-being. In Uzbekistan, the decline in real growth rates of total per capita income
for the six months of 2020 was 0.4% [7]. A survey was conducted among 100
thousand people living in Uzbekistan about the pandemic's impact on their income,
31
The Impact of Economic Science on Human Thinking
621

employment, and migration. In Uzbekistan, employment in June continued to return
to previous levels rapidly. The share of households in which one or more family
members had a job drastically reduced to 40% in April and returned to 33% in June
[7]. The respondents' share indicated that someone from the household “lost their
job or stopped working” increased from 1 to 19% in April. In June, this share of
respondents dropped to 3%. Almost all respondents indicated that they considered
work breaks to be temporary. At the same time, the study notes that the employ-
ment rate remained signiﬁcantly lower than the indicators of 2019 and trends before
the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. The “decline in employment was the most
noticeable and lasting among the self-employed.”2 The share of respondents who
indicated that they are self-employed fell by 67% in April and 26% in June. In
contrast, the employment of wage earners in June on average returned to the level
of 2019, with the return among men happening faster than among women [7]. Job
data shows signs of recovery in the economy, the study concludes. Industries with
the largest declines in new vacancies compared to the same period in 2019 included
tourism, leisure and entertainment (−95%), bars and restaurants (−91%), and
education (−85%). Even among the least affected occupations, the decline was 50%
or more than the same period last year, with rapid recovery in the medical and
construction industries in June. The people living less than the poverty line (for
comparison, the level corresponding to lower-middle-income countries is used, $3.2
per person per day, expressed in PPP 2011), increased during the pandemic.
The World Bank predicts that the pandemic's poverty rate increased by 8.7–10%
compared to the level before COVID-19, while the number of people who fall
below the poverty line will range from 450 to 880 thousand. The share of house-
holds reporting that their food consumption has declined rose sharply to 26% in
April but fell slightly to 22% in June. It is estimated that around 3.8 million people
in Uzbekistan received some form of emergency support. About 11% of those
surveyed indicated that they received direct support after the onset of the pandemic.
According to the survey results, most (92%) of aid came in the form of non-material
beneﬁts or vouchers and was more widespread in urban areas. In May and June, the
number of respondents who indicated that they could not receive medical care
increased. After the onset of the outbreak, about 6–8% of respondents indicated that
a family member needed medical treatment. In May–June, about 16% reported that
their attempts to get treatment was unsuccessful, although this estimate is based in
absolute terms on a small number of cases. Households that lost income were the
most likely to report increased spending and the most affected economically by the
pandemic. About 53% of respondents reported signiﬁcant changes in their spend-
ing. Among them, 60–65% indicated that they spent more than usual in the last
30 days, the rest indicated less. The increased costs are associated with loss of
income during the crisis, and those on lower incomes are likely to be “very con-
cerned” about the pandemic's economic impact. A signiﬁcant proportion of citizens
indicated they lacked a saving account and could not satisfy their basic needs. The
percentage of people who cannot afford food increased from about 9% to more than
2 http://www.uzdaily.com/en/post/58702.
622
K. Nodira Isametdinovna

11% between April and June. According to the study, more than half lacked a
savings account, and almost half were unable to deal with the issue of unexpected
expenses of $ 9.8.
Local shortages of goods decreased in June. About 1% of respondents indicated
that their area is out of stock, signiﬁcantly lower than the 16% reported in April. In
this case, it was often about food products, especially ﬂour, along with information
about price hikes. The conditions of drugs and masks out of stock fell from 5% in
April to a minimum in June. The share of households getting foreign remittances
increased after a fall in June but was still less compared to the levels of 2019.
In April, the share of households receiving any remittances fell by half compared
to the same period last year, after which it more or less recovered in May and June.
For those who received remittances, the average remittance size fell by 21% (in
UZS, adjusted for inﬂation) in April but then rose in May, following the Russian
ruble's strengthening. In April, the share of households whose members worked
abroad was 3% less than at the same time in 2019. Among those still abroad, the
share of actively employed people dropped from 88% to about 73%.
The difference between 2019 and 2020 have increased in May and June, at a
time when migration has traditionally increased seasonally. Between April and
June, the share of households participating in the Listening to the Citizens of
Uzbekistan survey considering migrating abroad in the future fell to almost zero [7].
The study noted that respondents’ concerns about the impact of the coronavirus
remained high. Almost all respondents indicated that they know what COVID-19
is, and more than 75% noted that they “know very well” about it. About 80%
indicated that their routines changed during the pandemic. Most often, this meant
wearing masks (98%), reduced visits to family and friends (84%), more frequent
hand washing (81%), reduced handshakes, greetings (77%), social distancing
(72%), less time spent at work outside the home (51%), and self-isolation (17%)
[7]. Almost none of the respondents answered that they had recently visited
crowded places.
Looking at the above statistics, we can draw the following conclusions:
i. Incomes at the beginning of the pandemic fell due to a lack of understanding of
the situation. However, as the panic gradually began to recede, the population
gradually recovered its income. From this, we can conclude that economic
behavior in times of uncertainty can become stupid, but gradually realizing its
action begins to think. Flexibility manifests itself when the economy is clear;
ii. ﬁnancial thinking stopped during the pandemic, as deposits stopped during this
period. With this, the banking sector will suffer a bit of loss. Exchanges as
another ﬁnancial sector have also suffered from ﬁnancial misunderstandings.
The ﬁnancial thinking of people is directed towards preserving their savings
and avoiding any investments;
iii. employment among the self-employed fell because quarantine measures did
not allow them to work for themselves. Self-employment in many states is a
black market; they do not pay taxes to the state. Among the self-employed,
those who are engaged in Internet trade remained the winner. In such a
31
The Impact of Economic Science on Human Thinking
623

situation, economic thinking in action becomes more complicated because the
non-switches to how to make money to feed the family. In this case, remote
forms of work help to revitalize economic thinking. To stabilize the market for
labor in the country, it is planned to extend the maximum unemployment
beneﬁt, to provide temporary employment for those who are at risk of dis-
missal, to extend the payment of beneﬁts for three months (if the unemployed
cannot ﬁnd a job), to triple the minimum beneﬁt, and to provide additional
payments to families with children where the parents were left without work;
iv. during the pandemic, approximately 40% of migrants from Uzbekistan lost
their jobs in foreign countries. These are mostly illegal migrants. This also
inﬂuenced ﬁnancial thinking. On the ﬁnancial side, income declined, leading
to massive homecoming. They came to the country with the onset of
COVID-19 disease; and
v. the economic behavior of the subjects in such a difﬁcult situation manifested
itself in different ways. Because of the loss of their jobs, some began to look
for other ways of earning money, legal and illegal. Economic behavior
appeared passively, but it began to act faster over time because a person had to
earn a living.
So, the most important thing inﬂuenced by the COVID-19 pandemic turned out
to be ﬁnancial, economic thinking. Operations to raise money, loans, and payments
on them, operations related to long-term obligations, and economic services such as
planning, investment, forecasting, lending, insurance, and the settlement system
become an important part of a person's economy and economic behavior. In this
case, the individual or consumer must understand, decide, draw conclusions about
ﬁnancial services, take an active part, and trust them.
As we know, ﬁnancial thinking is the assessment, action, behavior, and ability to
make investment decisions. The ﬁnancial behavior has a special importance among
the other types of economic behavior of the population since it is related to the
redistributional and investment of funds. The individual’s ﬁnancial condition is one
of the indicators of the consumer's social well-being and economic well-being. The
manifestation of such behavior in the context of market relations ensures economic
prosperity. It makes it possible to predict ways of inﬂuencing certain changes in the
ﬁnancial situation and structure of the population.
In a pandemic, as we can see, ﬁnancial thinking comes ﬁrst. Firstly, the popu-
lation thinks about food, and secondly, the material situation that has arisen focuses
on people’s resourcefulness to make money. However, at the same time, you can
add that a person before the pandemic spent his ﬁnances both rationally and irra-
tionally. During a pandemic, a person began to spend money rationally, thinking
over every step. When speaking about factors inﬂuencing consumer behavior, F.
Kotler distinguishes cultural (culture, subculture, social status), social (family, role
and status, reference groups), personal (age, occupation and economic circum-
stances, lifestyle, personality type, etc.), and psychological (motivation, beliefs,
etc.) characteristics.
624
K. Nodira Isametdinovna

An objective factor, like our example, a pandemic, has brought the economy to a
new level of development. This level, which has just begun its trend, is the knowledge
economy. The knowledge economy is a state of the economy when it rises to a new
qualitative state directly with an increase in the value of theoretical knowledge, an
increase in the role of high-tech industries, the process of increasing the share of the
service sector (structural shifts) in the economy, and the inﬂuence of information
network technologies (Internet). The knowledge economy includes the structure and
factors of human capital accumulation, the role of knowledge as a public good, issues
of intellectual property, management of an enterprise's cognitive environment, etc.
The practical development of the knowledge economy is the most relevant and
attractive issue for the current situation associated with the pandemic. The
knowledge economy results from economic systems, economic policy, and the
population's actions. Since each country's economic system is different, the func-
tioning and development of the knowledge economy are selected individually,
affecting the country’s economic strategy. The country’s economic strategy can lead
to the productivity of the current system; it can increase concentration in strategic
sectors; ﬁnally, it can create real growth through the modernization of industry or
services. Of course, all of these will be aimed at improving the country’s economy.
In our opinion, during a pandemic, the development of the knowledge economy
is very important to provide the following opportunities:
• an innovative environment with great technical development, which gives a
great impetus to the digital society and raises innovative potential, scientiﬁc and
technological potential, and human intellectual potential;
• the cooperation between business, government, science, and education services;
• the introduction of new professional educational programs to decrease the level
of “brain drain”;
• the maintenance and development of knowledge management processes at the
level of individual business structures; and
• the development of innovative products and services that will enhance life's
comfort noted that the pandemic's economic behavior would switch to the era of
informatization and robotization.
The knowledge economy has been introduced globally; life quality and
well-being are increasingly dependent on it. Also, there is a large-scale application of
digital technologies in government organizations and structures. For the successful
development of the knowledge economy, joint work of the state and business on the
economy's further strategy is necessary. This activity also requires us to recognize
problems, risks, and threats to focus resources and efforts to neutralize them.
Making a general conclusion, the inﬂuence of economic science at every stage of
human development is important. Because the economy is a system that helps
people and society to meet their needs by producing the necessary beneﬁts of life,
its main objective is to support the life of people, to create conditions for the
humans. Therefore, during a pandemic, the problem associated with it matters in
any country in the world. Without economics, this problem cannot be handled
31
The Impact of Economic Science on Human Thinking
625

because of limitedness of resources. This forces the economy to develop in an
intensive way, which implies the rationality and efﬁciency of resource use. From
this approach’s perspective, all available resources must be processed to achieve the
main goal with minimum cost.
Conclusion
“An important indicator and result of the economic life of society is the standard of
living of its members, which is understood as the degree to which the population is
provided with goods, services and living conditions necessary for a comfortable and
safe existence.”3 In a pandemic, a complete transition to the knowledge economy is
a primary task. At ﬁrst, mental work brings signiﬁcantly more income than physical
labor. Secondly, in Uzbekistan, as a developing country, a transition to the
knowledge economy is needed. Still, its implementation is far from difﬁcult because
the population is mainly engaged in physical labor and, therefore, mastering
technology is a big challenge. It is necessary to raise a new generation that thinks
ﬁnancially correctly, learns technology faster, and is engaged in scientiﬁc
achievements to implement mental work.
Core Messages
• In each country, jobs are created remotely to improve the economy based
on an uncertain situation and the requirements of a decent life for the
population.
• Economic thinking is economic categories, conclusions, and decisions
arising from the interaction of private (public) needs and interests and
economic actions formed on their basis.
• During a pandemic, ﬁnancial thinking comes ﬁrst; ﬁrstly, the population
thinks about their food, and secondly, the material situation has made
people focused on resourcefulness to make money.
• The priority is still the digital economy or the knowledge economy.
References
1. www.stat.uz
2. Abalkin LI (2004) Growth in consumption and the factor of diversity the latest studies of
Western and Russian evolutionists
3. Sokolova GN (2007) Market relations in Belarus: from evolution to innovation. Sociological
studies.. No. 2. 118
3 https://thermik.ru/en/chto-takoe-ekonomika-v-zhizni-obshchestva-ponyatie-ekonomiki-rol/.
626
K. Nodira Isametdinovna

4. Blyakhman LS (1990) Reorganization of economic thinking. Politizdat
5. Heine P (2001) Economic way of thinking. News
6. Sudelsky AP (1987) Formation of economic culture among schoolchildren. J Pedagogy
7. www.gazeta.uz
Khasankhonova Nodira Isametdinovna born in Tashkent,
graduated with bachelor’s and master’s degrees in economics.
Since 2010, she has been working as a teacher at the Department
of Economic Theory in the Tashkent Financial Institute. She
works on her doctoral dissertation in economics on the topic:
“Theoretical and methodological foundations of the formation
and development of modern economic thinking.” She has been
the author of more than 40 scientiﬁc papers published in national
and international journals.
31
The Impact of Economic Science on Human Thinking
627

32
Generations of Systems Thinking:
Models for Future Learning
Stephen Spain
“In the case of all things which have several parts…the whole is
not, as it were, a mere heap, but the totality is something
besides the parts”.
Aristotle
Summary
This chapter demonstrates how systems thinking (ST) informs a new language of
thought for future curriculum modeling and learning. The problems that beset us
in education today are systemic ones that require systemic solutions. Therefore,
we must take an ST approach in order to prepare for and adapt to a world that is
complex and unpredictable. ST, as quoted above, has its origins in Greek
Philosophy through Aristotle’s dictum, the origin of which dates back to
Aristotle’s Metaphysics. This chapter also makes explicit ST about learning,
emphasizing the importance of relationships rather than reducing the world into
separate elements or parts. We trust that this will build the capacity for thinkers,
educators, and curriculum designers at all levels to assist in designing more
integrated curriculum models that are responsive in real-time in mitigating the
effects of the changing demands of lecturers, teachers, and their students.
S. Spain (&)
Murdoch University, 90 South St, Murdoch, WA 6150, Australia
e-mail: sspain2010@hotmail.com
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research
Network (USERN), Murdoch, WA, Australia
P.O. Box 5817, Cowes, Victoria 3922, Australia
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh (eds.), Thinking, Integrated Science 7,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04075-7_32
629

Lamenterra: Search for Australia Felix by Stephen Spain.
Keywords
Cybernetics  Ecological  Holism  Human ecology  Organismic 
Reductionism  Systems thinking
QR Code
Scanning the QR code directs you to the word cloud of the chapter that is made up
of the words we discussed throughout the whole book in relation to the chapter’s
keyword, which is intentionally not included in the word cloud. Find the keyword
and put it in place in the puzzle according to the clues provided in Chap. 36. The
mystery hidden in the puzzle is the quote of THINKING: Bioengineering of Science
and Art.
630
S. Spain

Introduction
The author brieﬂy considers the antecedents of systems thinking (ST), in particular,
general systems thinking (GST) and cybernetics founded by Karl Ludwig von
Bertalanffy and Norbert Wiener, respectively. The origins of ST, which are distinct
and interdependent, include considerations of GST, cybernetics, complexity theory,
system dynamics, and thermodynamics.
This chapter will delve more into how Karl Ludwig von Bertalanffy’s dynamic
equilibrium and Fritjof Capra’s organismic biology contribute to new contemporary
thought for educational modeling and the embedding of sustainability across all
curricula. At times, it will differentiate within each context between compulsory
education, post-compulsory education, and higher education.
General Systems Thinking
The origins of ST occur in theoretical biology, which led to the development of
GST. Speciﬁcally, Karl Ludwig von Bertalanffy stated that an organism as a whole
possesses a deep connection and openness to the environment [2]. Von Bertalanffy
came to reject reductionist science that was void of humanism in favor of science
for the beneﬁt of humanity.
Whole ST is a subset of GST. Both focus on the difference between a system and
its parts and how it organizes its parts to function. A study of the relationships
between the parts is necessary to understand thoroughly how best to cultivate
functional sustainability. For example, education curriculum designers are to be
cognizant of the relationships of the parts and the whole to create a curriculum that
provides an opportunity for sustained learner growth [3, 4].
The origins of von Bertalanffy’s idea of an organism are taken from the prin-
ciples of thermodynamics. He states that “living systems are open systems, main-
taining themselves in exchange of materials with environment, and in continuous
building up and breaking down of their components” [2, p. 23]. It is deﬁned as
‘dynamic equilibrium’—a steady-state. It is not an equilibrium in the conventional
sense but a continuously changing state while maintaining integrity or form. The
application of this open system to various contexts and situations led to the
development of GST.
Von Bertalanffy was the ﬁrst academic of the modern era to apply values and
ethics to science through ST, resulting in a more humanistic discipline challenging
the prevailing wisdom of empiricism during his early period. As von Bertalanffy
gave ST a common language, educators and policymakers need to develop a new
language of thinking to inform organismic curriculum design and modeling.
In applying GST more widely, we come to realize structural similarities across a
range of entities that are vastly different. For example, the same mathematical laws
apply to bacteria, humans, and animals, regardless of causal mechanisms [2].
32
Generations of Systems Thinking: Models for Future Learning
631

Cybernetics
Norbert Wiener [5] coined the term cybernetics and published his seminal text in
1948. Cybernetics is from the Greek Kubernetes, to mean ‘steersman’—an entire
ﬁeld of control and communication [5, p. 11]. This term was originally applied to an
engine governor that controls revolutions per minute in regulating engine opera-
tional parameters. Wiener deﬁned cybernetics as two key concepts: control and
communication, which are highly related. Wiener stated that these concepts could
be expressed as feedback for intelligent systems to self-correct in steering toward
intended goals. Cybernetics, therefore, is highly relevant for curriculum designers
in responding to student achievement and development feedback within compul-
sory and non-compulsory education. This feedback becomes very powerful in
informing curriculum construction from an ecocentric (ecologically oriented)
worldview. Cybernetics is a process of trying, acting, sensing, comparing to the
goal and changing. All intelligent systems have such a process, which is a form of
self-correction and adaptation [6].
Pangaro et al. [6] describe cybernetics as a systemic language that enables all
goal-seeking systems, both biological and mechanical, to adapt and change
according to set design imperatives. These attributes, which will be elaborated upon
further in this chapter, facilitate self-correction and adaptation. As a language and
methodology, it is the conscientious application of cybernetics that empowers us, or
any given intelligent system, to operate at optimal levels. Pangaro states that
goal-based systems use intermediary feedback to orientate or make course cor-
rections in reaching pre-determined goals.
Pangaro et al. [6] state: “If systems, then cybernetics—because the interactions
and complexity of systems involve humans, we must incorporate goals, feedback,
and information, because we are driven by these things. And these are what
cybernetics is all about” [6, p. 23]. This, from an elementary perspective, can also
readily apply to educational evaluation. Teachers and educators at all levels can
evaluate their lessons, lectures, and tutorials, and students can self-assess their
growth over time through positive and negative feedback against their learning
goals.
Gregory Bateson strived to develop a language of thinking governing infor-
mation transfer between the two disciplines. It can be deﬁned as transdisciplinary,
as he saw commonalities across ﬁelds comprising the beginnings of Cybernetics
[7]. This is in contrast to Cartesian philosophy, which according to Bateson, cor-
rupted epistemology due to Descartes’ partitioning of the physical and mental
realms. In contrast, Bateson favored a more unifying perspective. Ramage and
Shipp [2] state, “… this is a call to a new form of epistemology, which understands
humanity within its environment, and Bateson’s answer to it lay within his con-
ception of an ecology of mind” [2, p. 14].
Bateson studied the patterns among different mental and physical processes
throughout nature to address how entities interact with their environment, ulti-
mately informing his ecological worldview. Bateson’s [8] Mind and Nature
632
S. Spain

explores his concept of connective patterns that applies to all living things and, in
particular, their inter-relationships, similarities, and differences. These relationships
are in a constant state of change: “a dance of interacting parts only secondarily
pegged down by various sorts of physical limits” [8, p. 13].
A Unifying Vision
Capra and Luigi Luisi’s [1] Systems View of Life portrays the twenty-ﬁrst century as
having inherited major problems involving the environment, energy, climate
change, biosecurity, and ﬁnancial security. They characterize these as systemic
problems in that they are all connected. Historically, a reductionist analysis has
been applied to the big problems facing humanity in general by reducing crises such
as climate change and poverty and conﬂict to numerous problems, which represents
a poverty of perception and a redundant worldview. These problems appear as one
integrated problem or crisis, which we might consider being further exacerbated or
impacted in unforeseen ways by the current COVID-19 pandemic.
Any new language of thinking should consider the attributes of systemic inte-
gration before action. It ensures that any intervention is compatible with those
nested systems and other interdependent nested systems that constitute the
macrosystem at work. Capra and Fischer suggest a radical shift in our language of
thinking in establishing a sustainable society that supports all life.
Capra’s deep ecological view requires a “radically new conception of life” and a
new understanding of how the world is changing [1, p. ix]. Our planet comprises a
series of interrelationships constituting a self-regulating open system. In this con-
cept, the Cartesian mechanistic view of the human body is replaced by an organ-
ismic (like an organism), a complex, self-regulating open system.
By taking a systems view of life, we integrate the “ideas, models and theories
into a coherent framework” [1, p. xii]. A uniﬁed systemic vision represents
dimensions of biology, cognition, society, and ecology. The author contends that
such an integrated view is necessary to solve and mitigate the many crises that
plague our global community in serving the common good, not least of which is the
current pandemic. This systemic view of life informs a new human ecology and a
new ecology of learning.
All living things are complex and non-linear, which can be problematic for
conveying ST, given that language is linear. However, language can be applied
systemically by employing various systems-based tools such as geographic infor-
mation systems (GIS), spatial mapping, and visual understanding environments
(VUE), which break the linear constraints.
However, any attempt at developing a unifying vision must ﬁrst consider the
evolution of science and the scientiﬁc method. Capra and Luigi Luisi [1] state that
science has been deﬁned as knowledge from the Middle Ages and attributed to the
Scientiﬁc revolution. The word came from the Latin Scientia and was originally
known as Natural Philosophy. Isaac Newton published Philosophiae naturalis
32
Generations of Systems Thinking: Models for Future Learning
633

principia mathematica, which was to become the foundation of modern science.
The modern context uses a scientiﬁc method to acquire knowledge. The scientiﬁc
method came to full fruition during the twentieth century, where empirical science
was characterized as a system, which
i. involves the systematic observation of phenomena;
ii. makes connections with the data; and
iii. tests a hypothesis to develop a well-founded theory.
Empiricism and theory building is the very essence of the scientiﬁc method.
However, science can only provide tentative answers to phenomena. In comparison,
ST enables students, teachers, and academics to possess a unifying vision in per-
ceiving, learning, and solving at a very high level of complexity characteristic of
our living world.
Science and Society
“The emerging new scientiﬁc conception of life …. can be seen as part of a broader
paradigm shift from a mechanistic to a holistic and ecological worldview” [1, p. 4].
It illustrates a switch from our world’s vision ‘as a machine’ to a world ‘as a
network.’ The progression to an ecological paradigm took place in various scientiﬁc
ﬁelds. Capra and Luigi Luisi [1] state that tension prevailed between reductionism
(a focus on elements or parts) and organismic or holism (systemic like an
organism).
The dynamic of holism and mechanism can be traced through biology. The
ancient Greeks saw the world as a cosmos organized and structured and in the sixth
century BCE as an organism, not a mechanical system. Their perception was that all
parts of our world had a functional purpose, which contributed to an organismic
whole, and that elements or objects assumed their functional place. This teleological
premise was present within ancient Greek Philosophy and Science. This ancient
perspective of the cosmos as an organism also served as an analogy of the
interrelationship between the earth and the human body as one, as supported by
Plato [1].
Aristotle’s treatises integrated the thinking of science and philosophy through to
the Renaissance. However, Christian scholars did not recognize Aristotle until
Thomas Aquinas during the thirteenth century, who integrated Aristotle’s body of
work with Christian teaching. Aquinas saw no division between Aristotle’s work
on nature and the Bible, as the view was that both were authored or inspired by
God.
The Renaissance was shaped by philosophy, humanism, and individual ex-
pression. I draw upon this cultural shift later in arguing for a new human ecology
based on a return to humanism in promoting student self-efﬁcacy within modern
education. However, during the Middle Ages period, dogma gave way to a more
634
S. Spain

secular perspective and an intellectual focus on our human capacity to create art,
music, architecture, and literature. Classical Studies, Greek philosophy, linguistic
translation, rationalism, and scientiﬁc thought became the new intellectual foci.
Capra states that Leonardo da Vinci (1453–1519) developed the foundation of
modern science. Leonardo developed an organismic systematic observation of
nature, reasoning and mathematics” [1, p. 7]. Leonardo created a unique integra-
tion between art and science by organizing a groundwork for understanding the
nature and underlying principles of function. He did not study science, engineering,
and anatomy to control nature but pursued knowledge and truth for insight and
enlightenment. Leonardo saw complexity in living things and that human design
was subordinate to nature at every level. He was instead inspired by nature, which
informed his ideas and designs, ultimately contributing to an ecological worldview,
which we now hold in high regard.
Rene Descartes (1596–1650) categorized life into two realms: the mind and the
matter, in that all livings things and the material world were viewed as a machine,
which could be understood by reducing it to its smallest parts for analysis. Galileo
and Descartes’ machine-like perspective saw the natural world as organized and
governed by the laws of mathematics, which was developed further by 17th-century
Newtonian mechanics. From here, Newtonian mechanics was applied to medical
science in attempting to illustrate and understand the human body. However, this
simplistic paradigm was superseded in the eighteenth century through develop-
ments in chemistry and biology.
The pendulum swung back towards a Cartesian mechanistic view of the natural
world and living things. The world like a machine became the new reductionist root
metaphor dominated by Copernicus, Kepler, Galileo, Bacon, Descartes, and
Newton, responsible for the revolution in physics and autonomy. However,
unfortunately, in essence, this reductionist worldview continues to this day–re-
ducing education to that of an industrial age-stratiﬁed curricula model so prevalent
in the USA, UK, Europe, and Australia.
Modern Biology
The poet William Blake (1757–1827) criticized Descartes and Newton’s mecha-
nistic worldview, leading to a shift attributed to romantic poetry and philosophy.
This new worldview favored a biological, whole systems perspective that served as
an antecedent of modern ST today, viewing the earth as an integrated whole. This
organ-like view of the earth and all living things aligns with Leonardo da Vinci and,
more recently, James Lovelock’s Gaia theory ‘mother’ earth–to include all living
things as a living organism.
A new study of microbiology led, particularly by Louis Pasteur (1822–1895),
resulted in a shift from a whole systems view of life to a cellular perspective which
could also now be not simply observed, but placed under human control? This view
dealt with disease mitigation and the formation of biochemistry. At the turn of the
32
Generations of Systems Thinking: Models for Future Learning
635

20th-century, microbiology failed to progress in providing a lens for understanding
life on earth, and a new worldview was founded in ‘organismic biology.’ This new
view of life as an organism, which began with Aristotle and Goethe, was seen as a
living system, which cannot be broken down into separate elements and can only be
understood through systemic relationships and interactions [1].
Another perspective of holism came from the Gestalt (organic form) psychol-
ogists who directly applied the phrase: “the whole is more than the sum of its
parts.” This described modern ST, but in a way that has its origins with Aristotle’s
Metaphysics Book 8 during the ﬁfth century BCE. The ecology ﬁeld eventually
emerged from organismic biology during the late nineteenth century from biolo-
gists’ study of organisms. It informs the curriculum in terms of considering balance
about reconciling education with learning and teaching with an assessment where
there are disconnects and imbalance in favor of traditional subjects and high stakes
standardized assessment that fails to promote creativity, growth, and complex
problem-solving [9, 10].
By the 1940s, ST became consolidated as theory, methodology, and a new view
of life, leading to GST and cybernetics, as previously stated. I will now explore this
new ecological worldview.
This 21st-century ecological worldview embraced a holistic perspective or deep
ecology as previously discussed, recognizing the interdependence of phenomena
and that “we are all embedded in the cyclical process of nature” [1, p. 12]. An
anthropocentric (human-centered) perspective is exclusively a human ecology and
is classiﬁed as a ‘shallow’ ecology, whereas a ‘deep ecology’ includes the earth and
all living things as an inclusive ecology. This informs and has implications for most
modern education systems at all levels, which are essentially anthropocentric or
human-centered in placing humans at the center of nature and ecological interac-
tions at the expense of deep ecology, which embeds humans into the broader
ecology.
Lessons from Australian Indigenous Scholarship—
Unlearning the Western Paradigm
Capra states that there is a poverty of perception due to the prevailing reductionist
thinking, which goes to the heart of the Cartesian dualism critique–a chasm
between contemporary thought and the natural world. This is further illustrated by
the disparity of thinking between (predominantly) white Australian (western
paradigm) teaching on history and geography and Australian Indigenous culture
and continuous lived experience. Australian Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders
have a deep connection with the natural world, now recognized to extend back in a
continuous lineage for tens of thousands of years. Their cultural and knowledge
systems are diverse but include the four pillars of Kanyini from northern Australia
(connectedness):
636
S. Spain

i. tjukurrpa, knowledge of creation or dreaming;
ii. ngura, place, land;
iii. walytja, kinship; and
iv. kurunpa, spirit [11].
This disconnect between the western paradigm of knowledge and understanding
of the world with Indigenous culture can be extrapolated upon within most colo-
nized populations across the globe.
Dark Emu by Bruce Pascoe [12] enlightens us of an ancient agricultural culture
in Australia for at least 50,000 years. Contrary to the contemporary Australian
narrative, it has always been a sophisticated, ecologically sensitive agricultural
society. This emerging Indigenous narrative challenges our ‘textbook’ view of
world history, which states that agriculture emerged 10,000 years ago from the
Fertile Crescent “spanning modern-day Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, Israel, Palestine,
Jordan, Egypt, together with the south-eastern region of Turkey and the western
fringes of Iran.” Deconstructing this long-held view of ‘civilization’ in western
teaching is an important process in developing better ST approaches in teaching the
humanities, history, and critical thinking.
Pascoe’s [12] narrative challenges conventional thinking about aboriginal life
and culture on the Australian continent. He cites empirical evidence from explorer
and colonist journals of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, which Pascoe uses
to dispel the hunter-gatherer myth in demonstrating that Australian Aboriginals
were, in fact, farmers with a highly developed practice of agriculture to include
irrigation technologies, the production of cropping and aquaculture systems. Pas-
coe’s work demonstrates the emergence of a highly ecocentric Indigenous econ-
omy, potentially extending back at least 50,000 years ago as an ancient culture that
has practiced systemic agriculture in-tune with the earth as a living entity. Pascoe
makes references to the Indigenous building of “dams and wells; planting, irri-
gating and harvesting seed; preserving surplus and storing it in houses, sheds or
secure vessels as well as examples of… (ecologically) manipulating the landscape”
[12, p. 2], such as through the use of ﬁre, as examples of sustainable land man-
agement practice.
The Australian Indigenous have a systemic perspective embedded in their belief
system through their emu story stemming from the dark space evident in the Milky
Way: “The emu is inextricably linked with the wide grasslands of Australia, the
landscape managed by Aboriginals. The fate of the emu, people, and grain are
locked in step because, for Aboriginal people, the economy and the spirit are
inseparable. Europeans stare at the stars, but Aboriginal people also see the spaces
in between where the Spirit Emu resides” [12, np].
This quotation clearly illustrates the systemic, organismic connection between
Aboriginals, ﬂora, fauna, the earth, and their spiritual dimension. This, it would
seem, is in stark contrast to their European counterparts, who view the cosmos from
a more astronomical perspective.
32
Generations of Systems Thinking: Models for Future Learning
637

The Aboriginal belief system illustrates a consciousness of dynamic equilibrium
and an ecocentric, reciprocal relationship based on deep ecology and a spiritual
connection with the country. This Indigenous perspective, in turn, nourishes all
living things, not just themselves, through reciprocity. This is the antithesis of our
current predominant paradigm that places humans at the center of the earth’s
ecology, aligning with a Cartesian mechanistic view of nature.
Europeans saw Terra Australis as a golden opportunity for a new market
through the agency of cheap convict labor. Colonists saw this ancient Australian
continent as a land ripe for exploitation. This object was achieved from a European
perspective, resulting in increased wealth to include new towns/cities being built to
embrace a growing industrial expansion in serving those colonists and their
countries of origin. Gold mining and resource extraction attracted Asian cultures
from the middle of the nineteenth century.
Europeans afforded themselves an innate superiority in the sciences, economics,
and religion, which informed a destiny over non-European inhabitants and ancient
cultures. This was partly attributed to Darwinian theory, leading to the domination
over the ‘beast’ in favor of a Eurocentric view of civilized man. This extended to
religious domination by Christianity based on the precept of Terra Nullius: land
deemed to be legally unoccupied or uninhabited. This was based on the Roman
deﬁnition of a civilized society comprising a walled city. In particular, the British
entitled themselves to a natural authority ordained by their Christian God.
It was unfortunate that 18th and 19th-century colonists not always sought
empiricism over pre-enlightenment. The legacy of absolute truth ordained by God
was still playing out during the colonization of Australia, regardless that Aboriginal
cultural practice was aligned with the principles of ST (holism).
Australian Indigenous agricultural systems went well beyond that of their
European counterparts and have done so for over 50,000 years in context and har-
mony with Australia’s ecology. For example, advanced aquaculture was observed
and dismissed by colonists based on their prejudicial agenda of cultural erasure and
displacement. Australian Aboriginals have a common language of ST and know that
it innately aligns with earth systems and organismic (organ-like) biology.
The farming of yams (Indigenous potatoes) serves as an excellent example of
systemic and sustainable practice by Aboriginals. However, the introduction of
cloven-hooved animals and European agriculture was highly reductionist and
destructive, resulting in yam scarcity and ﬂora decimation in general. This incursion
failed to align with the fragile Australian ecology, destroying ancient systems of
sustainable Indigenous practice, which evolved over thousands of years.
Indigenous systemic thinking extended to the trading in seed with relatives with
sensitivity to earth systems as a reciprocal ecological process. These practices also
serve as evidence of Aboriginal tribes as the ﬁrst bakers, preceding Egyptians by
15,000 years. “If we look at the evidence presented to us by the explorers and
explain to our children that Aboriginal people did build houses, did build dams, did
sow, irrigate and till the land, did alter the course of rivers, did sew their clothes,
and did construct a system of pan-continental government that generated peace and
prosperity, then it is likely we will admire and love our land all the more” [12, np].
638
S. Spain

Australian Indigenous rice was systemically cultivated by Aboriginals in such a
way that they were cognisant of biosecurity. This is in contrast to Asian rice, which
was becoming less resilient to an emerging disease. These practices also align with
cybernetics in that Australia’s ﬁrst peoples were mindful of feedback mechanisms
to inform systemic intervention. These practices were evident from the diversity of
ﬂora and the ecological interdependence that evolved alongside the Indigenous
population, making the entire ecology of pre-colonial Australia biosecure. Fur-
thermore, long-term grain management and food production techniques developed
did not require intensive irrigation, nor poisonous fertilizers and pesticides so
detrimental to soils, crops, and fauna. These ancient cultural practices impacted
very little upon the environment.
‘Long term cereal production systems’ were also developed by Indigenous
peoples. This was achieved by making changes to the ‘genomes and habits of
plants’ through the ongoing intervention of growth cycles and seed selection
strategies, establishing a continuous cereal production. This systemic innovation
developed a perennial integrated pasture that included a grain crop [12, p. 43–44].
This is an ancient innovation of global signiﬁcance to inform biosecurity and food
production throughout the world. In summary, pre-colonial Australia was a mag-
niﬁcent large-scale garden: Hortus Magniﬁcum Australis—tendered by Aboriginal
stewards through a culture of reciprocity.
What Is Broken Now?
The Earth, by Humans? This new deeper ecology, as previously stated and
informed by Indigenous Australians, challenges us all to question the old reduc-
tionist paradigm that characterizes the western industrial worldview. This has
implications for our human interactions and relationships within a wider ecology in
seeking and identifying solutions to our complex problems. However, as a species,
humans have fractured the connections between living entities and their environ-
ment. This is evident from the destruction of our wider ecology and the reductionist
educational modeling. One only needs to cite the systemically closed Australian,
US, and English curricula [13, 14]. This is not surprising given that these countries’
educational systems function as closed systems [9, 15, 16].
Bateson tells us that closed systems do not allow matter and energy to pass
through their boundaries. Therefore, in extrapolating from a curriculum modeling
perspective, closed systems are highly constrained in catering to educational needs
due to a disconnect with natural systems. Closed, homogenized systems, whether
they be populations of living things or social models, are unsustainable because
they are estranged from their ecological environments. A systemically closed entity
destroys both itself and its environment. This further relates to our western mod-
eling and, more speciﬁcally, curriculum modeling and educational systems in
general that do not align with their environmental ecologies [1, 9, 16].
32
Generations of Systems Thinking: Models for Future Learning
639

“If an organism ends up destroying its environment, it has in fact destroyed
itself. And we may very easily see this process carried to its ultimate reductio ad
absurdum in the next 20 years. The unit of survival is not the breeding organism, or
the family line, or the society” [2, 7, p. 15]. This proposition is analogous to the AC,
as the AC fails to display the attributes of an open, ecological system and fails to
adhere to the ecological principle of subsidiarity. This suggests that we need to go
beyond the current economic paradigm and traditional cognitive constructivism in
favor of ST-based social constructivism to inform a deeper ecology. It is important,
therefore, to recognize that humans are integral to natural systems and therefore
dependent upon nature to exist, function, and survive. To differentiate the human
species from the rest of nature is ecologically ﬂawed [1, 17].
New Ways of Knowing and Learning
ST more effectively connects students with their prior knowledge and new
knowledge. This is how meaningful learning is constructed. By applying ST, stu-
dents are actively engaged in learning at all levels and are provided with options in
contributing to their community of practice [18].
For example, Robson [19] suggests, in navigating social media spaces, we need
to be mindful of embedded ideals that exist within all social contexts. Therefore, we
share social norms, behaviors, and ways of thinking and being. This includes
approaches to relating to people within a whole social system. Embedded ‘ideals’
are also ‘particular discourses that inform knowledge and identity. Within educa-
tion, this can be understood concerning ‘ideal identity.’ Ideals are embedded within
complex systemic technological contexts and are nested within complex social
systems and environments. Gatekeeper hierarchies and power structures curate
dominant discourses about knowledge production, practice, and identity, informing
powerful agendas. Engagement with these embedded ideals is either aspired to or
rejected.
We must go beyond conventional discourse about online engagement within the
education profession and also consider our underlying assumptions of technological
determinism. Furthermore, there needs to be more systemic thinking within the
critical discourse about the embedded social nature of online social familiarities and
wider social issues. Embedded ideals and associated structures require greater
critique to moderate bias and prejudice of the inherent power structures, ultimately
affecting student knowledge construction within compulsory, post-compulsory, and
higher education.
There is also a need to identify and regulate the online gatekeepers from a
systemic perspective to make explicit to users: students and communities engaging
online to surface hidden agendas. Students of all levels (age-appropriate) should
also be equipped to identify ideals and the overall design in terms of how it
constructs user engagement.
640
S. Spain

By applying organismic biology and being cognisant of dynamic equilibrium,
we see the world through fresh eyes: a world of ecology and ecologies within
ecologies or systems within systems. ST is a metasystemic methodology that
enables us to perceive, understand systems, and intervene to manage goal-based
open systems that characterize living things and closed systems that deﬁne
non-living material things.
This mosaic lens is a powerful way of knowing and learning. This is because it
connects with the earth’s many systems and is sensitive to the life cycle of all fauna
and ﬂora. ST is supported by sound ecological and organismic biological theory,
which I will elaborate upon later.
ST also aligns with being group smart in that innovation comes from collabo-
ration with others by drawing upon the natural world. Smart Swarm by Peter Miller
[20] conveys how nature teaches us how mass collaboration serves better organi-
zation to inform functionality. Miller goes on to teach us that historically our
(educational) institutions have ‘defaulted to traditional hierarchies.’ Smart Swarm
transforms how we see our world and others as reciprocal agents for learning,
knowing, change, and problem-solving intervention.
Tapscott, who wrote the forward to Millers’ text, states that Smart Swarm
challenges the ‘tenets of hierarchical control’ in collaborating across organizational
silos. He also challenges us all to rethink power through people rather than over
people. “This model has worked well as a way of systematizing work, establishing
authority, deploying resources, allocating tasks, deﬁning relationships, and
enabling organisations to operate” [20, np]. This comes from a more organismic
approach to organizational hierarchies in allowing systemic self-organized net-
working and interconnection to form collaborative teams globally. This informs
educational curriculum modeling in exploring and sharing best learning design
practices to employing connective ST-based social principles such as subsidiarity,
solidarity, and the common good. Now I will delve more deeply into curriculum
modeling.
Current Curriculum Modelling
The problem with current curriculum modeling is that we are not cognisant of
‘dynamic equilibrium’ and systemic thinking in general and tend to overreact to the
dynamic peaks and troughs within our education systems. Closed systems such as
the Australian Curriculum (AC) [21] administered under the Australian Curriculum,
Assessment and Reporting Authority (ACARA) mitigate reductionist curricula by
implementing patch and mend strategies or short-term symptomatic remedies. The
natural world further illustrates this in that change and ﬂuctuation is natural phe-
nomenon, requiring actions that are sensitive and mindful of the dynamics of
ﬂuctuation and change. By way of analogy, it is akin to moving house in the advent
of a one in a one-hundred-year ﬂood. It poses the question; how do we mitigate
such ﬂooding and keep the integrity of our waterway systems?
32
Generations of Systems Thinking: Models for Future Learning
641

Curriculum modeling is not dissimilar in that contextual change (such as the
COVID-19 pandemic) poses a shock, but we are still human, and we are still part of
the natural world, requiring a sensitivity for the moving parts or ecological vari-
ables. To overreact by closing ourselves off to the wider ecology through autocratic
policies and models results in a fracture between policy and curriculum [13, 22].
I will now address how ST may address systemic problems with systems solutions.
Can ST Fix This?
Bateson and Capra suggest drawing upon the natural world through biology to
build more resilient systems of knowing and learning. This can be constructed by
unifying our thinking in creating stronger links with our natural systems. Humans
are self-regulating open systems, just like the entire earth’s ecology. We regulate
our bodies but have the power of choice that sets us apart as a species. This is a clue
in considering how to mitigate the problems that beset us and how to live sus-
tainably in allowing our entire ecology to ﬂourish as a whole system.
Policymakers could integrate this ecological worldview into our education
systems, policy settings, and curriculum modeling. Pangaro et al. [6] suggest uti-
lizing feedback from our actions through the employment of cybernetics in that we
can course-correct in real-time to reach our set goals.
This ecological worldview is similar to organismic biology and also links to von
Bertalanaffy’s [3] Dynamic Equilibrium by being cognisant of both negative and
positive feedback mechanisms that assist us in self-regulating at every ecological
level. In applying this as a language for curriculum modeling and learning, teachers
and academics must also consider our collective imperatives in progressing a new
educational ecosystem [23].
Teachers today generally regard themselves as facilitators of learning in a
complex environment [10]. If this is the case, then learning will be our key edu-
cational goal. Then we must ask, what is learning, and how do we measure growth
and success? In simple terms, education, Curriculum, learning, and teaching are not
easily deﬁned. For example, the funding of an education system, the communica-
tion of a curriculum, and teaching practices do not always mean that learning is
taking place. In some instances, quite the contrary. For learning to occur, a creative
process culminating in producing a cultural artifact may have been necessary that is
useful to the student(s) and their community. A goal must be made explicit, and the
journey negotiated with the learner researcher to be measured within a continuum
of development and growth without the fear of standardized grading. The assess-
ment then becomes a collaborative goal-based narrative by both the educator and
student.
642
S. Spain

ST Curriculum Modelling
In drawing upon my curriculum models [24, 25], I will further demonstrate how ST
informs Curriculum and pedagogical innovation by mitigating traditional schooling
effects. In the western tradition, the ‘schooled mindset’ served 19th and 20th-
century industrialism for occupations that no longer exist or are in the process of
being overtaken by roles ﬁt for a digital society. Educators and students are left with
a production model legacy in the twenty-ﬁrst century characterized by an
age-stratiﬁed education system compounded by a subject-based curriculum struc-
ture [25].
In contrast, an ST approach to curriculum modeling and pedagogy favors
interdisciplinarity and returns to a village model of the classroom or age mixed
environment. This approach reinforces social connection and is mindful of how
students are socially and intellectually situated. Other attributes of ST include the
promotion of student self-efﬁcacy and agency in fostering resilient, independent
learners.
Organismic Biology Informs Compulsory Educational
Modelling: Open Systems
Organismic, open system education modeling promotes increased ﬂexibility. For
example, by applying disciplinary lenses as threads in gathering real-world ele-
ments in forming thematic curricula modules. This creative synthesis embeds tra-
ditional disciplines within meaningful, relevant contexts that resonate with students.
This process emulates an organism, which is evident through its connection seeking
and consolidation/defense attributes. This mitigates the constraints of the current
divisions of knowledge as deﬁned by traditional subjects.
This transdisciplinary thematic focus provides much-needed stimulus and scope
for creative, virtual worlds curricula and problem-solving simulation development.
Chow [26] states that being present in a virtual world learning environment pro-
motes more effective learning for students. Robinson [9] states that we live in a
virtual world of ideas, which align with this approach as it connects to our enor-
mous creative capacity. Furthermore, this virtual environment also allows students
to connect with and model behaviors for real-world applications to include cultural
artifacts useful to themselves and their communities.
This form of systemic learning is applied engagement within a collaborative
ecology instead of the listening and absorbing learning model, which is highly
passive. The role of the teacher undergoes changes to that of a mentor and
co-learner with the student. It is a shift from reductionist schooling to a higher
emphasis on student self-efﬁcacy. This new paradigm also enhances the systemic
UX (user experience) design, allocating students as agents of their own education
construction, design, and synthesis. Such a model can also be informed by vertical
curriculum modeling in mitigating the adverse effects of age-stratiﬁed design and
32
Generations of Systems Thinking: Models for Future Learning
643

learning. This is reinforced by positive psychology that provides greater agency for
users in strengthening this UX focus.
Students, as agents of change, can potentially progress such educational mod-
eling through this systemic UX focus as an ongoing organic process in collabo-
ration with teachers, academics, and specialists. This challenges the Cartesian
machine-like approach by developing an ecology of systemic practice. The
emphasis here is ecology and holism, which contrasts with the prevailing deﬁcit
approach that seeks to view students as being educationally deﬁcient in need of
homogeneous schooling or treatment [27].
Ivan Ilich [27] critiqued the role of schooling, noting that within its
traditional/industrialized western form, it has confused substance and process in
promoting the view that clinical, educational treatment leads to a well-educated
person and, ultimately, to success. Ilich also states that this also disenfranchises the
individual and his/her communities of practice. Within traditional schooling,
imagination becomes schooled to include a severe decline in creativity. Robinson
[8] states that there is a negative corollary between a child’s school life and a
decline in creativity. This is a travesty because creativity is of paramount impor-
tance for students and young adults to become innovative, independent, collabo-
rative learners.
Discussion
An Existential Threat in All Its Dimensions
Utilitarianism has been the main object of the West at the expense of the Common
Good and Human Flourishing. The litmus test is, are we thriving or just surviving?
The connection between education and socio-political objectives remains the
prominent driver of education policy and the resultant curricula of many countries.
Of particular issue is the socio-economic underpinning of access to and participa-
tion in education, regardless of the relative wealth of nations.
Herman and Chomsky [28] state that poverty is ‘by design’ and is a
socio-economic construct that structurally allows developed nations to create
wealth, privilege, and power over others. This ethos has corrupted political systems
and education. For example, Chomsky states that in the US, democracy as a lexicon
has been emptied of its original meaning to an exploitative end driven by a
neo-liberal super-rich elite who represent less than 1% of the US population.
The US corporate Politcal Action Committees dictate policy and shape legislation
in dividends and invested interests after funding targeted politicians to get elected.
From a functional structuralist perspective, education is unavoidably affected and
shaped by this through a nationalistic narrative taught in schools, for example,
Truth, Justice, and the American way, a well-known American slogan. Unfortu-
nately, this culture of money-for-policy exists throughout developed countries to
the detriment of the democratic process ﬁnanced by large corporations. One way of
644
S. Spain

mitigating this is to apply ST principles in creating a level playing ﬁeld by capping
political donations and promoting subsidiarity and more equitable community
access and representation.
Integrating ST throughout education, within both compulsory and non-
compulsory sectors, potentially empowers students to interact and make decisions
and contributions in ecologically sustainable ways. As our future policy advisors,
from social justice to mitigating climate change to living in balance, I think if ST
was embedded in our education systems globally, we would not have, for example,
exploitative policies rendering 1 billion people in a state of poverty worldwide.
Developed countries live at the rate of three planets earth, while the rest struggle to
live healthy, equitable lives.
Education here has a very important role to play in educating our population to
be engaged, ethical citizens at all levels. It requires that educators, learning
designers, and policymakers think anew by drawing upon ST, Indigenous belief
systems, wisdom traditions, and philosophy to instill an ethical dimension and a
moral purpose in student graduate attributes at all sector levels. This could also
include employing, for example, ST in promoting a critical frame of mind in
ultimately mitigating manufactured consent as perpetrated by the popular ‘media
propaganda machine’ as identiﬁed by Herman and Chomsky [28]. Unfortunately,
critical thought has been subsumed by manufactured truths based on the tenet of a
protectionist narrative, whereby the instruments of government and media censor
truth and reality. Unﬁltered truth becomes a threat to the corporate culture, foreign
policy, and therefore the western power base: ‘power is the right to dictate reality.’
We learn stability from living organisms. However, unfortunately, neo-
liberalism, compounded by an anthropocentric worldview, has little empathy for
our declining earth, particularly given the corporate control of the earth’s resources.
Indeed, there is a proposition for a new language of thinking. Indigenous ecocentric
cultures are a long way from Wall Street, where the earth is viewed as a resource to
be exploited regardless of the consequences, which is in stark contrast to the
Indigenous, who view our earth as an organism and a living entity that must be
respected. I will expand more on this by exploring the Australian Indigenous
culture later in this chapter.
Embedding Sustainability Across All Curricula
The knowledge divisions are at odds with ST because they reﬂect a Cartesian
industrial construct, not a socioecological one. For example, by adopting a more
systemic, age-mixed transdisciplinary education model worldwide, we enhance our
capacity to adapt to changing contexts and environments. As humans, we are
self-directed systems wired for change and adaptation to new environments and
contexts. Therefore, it is important to be cognizant of this disposition and align our
learning and curricula accordingly, but with a sensitivity of all ecologies that we are
nested within. This respects the earth as a valued entity that we are dependent upon
for our survival and the survival of all living species.
32
Generations of Systems Thinking: Models for Future Learning
645

We need to bridge the Cartesian gulf between the mind and the physical realm
by employing circular systemic problem-solving in addressing root causes. The
proposition of a ‘circular economy’ may be one positive example, although this too
has its critics as an example of ‘shallow ecology.’ This can be achieved by
reﬂecting, modeling, and acting in proposing ecocentric approaches. This then
informs preventative, sustainable solutions that appreciate the earth as a living
organism that provides an indispensable life support system. Cybernetics is also
relevant here by applying positive and negative feedback in correcting our course of
action against goals.
The human body serves as an instructive metaphor in illustrating this proposition
further. The body requires stimulus, food nourishment, social interaction, and
exercise for mind and body to maintain the human person in all its dimensions:
emotional, physical, cognitive, intellectual, and social. These are also interdepen-
dencies in that any singular weakness potentially creates a systemic breakdown and
dysfunction. This human system is nested within a myriad of ecological systems
that we, humans, are dependent upon to survive.
Change, Our New Constant
Our world is never static, but most western countries educate their populations as if
it was. We live in a world of change and interconnection. Predicting our future is
fraught with misconceptions and a denial that we have progressed from the
Enlightenment period given our industrial education paradigm. For example, in the
history case study exemplars in the Australian Curriculum, one can only be
impressed by the paper-based colored pencil illustrations. Some insightful work
seems to be an absence of contemporary artifact examples reﬂecting new modeling
and digital literacies. Well done to those students and their efforts—valid study
here, no intention to disparage. However, it is produced with 60 s technologies.
Today we need a new way of thinking that requires a web of diversity, not
convergence—exploring many answers to those complex problems that beset us.
Traditional schooling prescribes answers and formalizes our thinking and modeling
by applying a patch and mend addressing today’s symptoms. As educators, we
should instead deal with the root causes attributed to an outdated legacy of thinking
perpetuated by neo-liberalism.
The dynamics of our interrelationships could beneﬁt from a group smart sys-
temic culture of thinking. The Age of Paradox by Charles Handy tells us that
unemployment from companies and institutions removes the shackles that stiﬂe our
initiative by allowing a channeling of a new collective potential for a new business
ecology, as we become consumers of each other’s goods and services within a
reciprocal economy. This poses a more collaborative ecological economy that is
more disposed to social justice and the common good through interdependence
[29].
646
S. Spain

Systems Thinking and Digital Virtual Worlds
To further enhance our new systemic language of thinking, Digital Twin Tech-
nology (DTT) can be employed to inform education modeling and simulation from
real-world scenarios. DTT virtually replicates a given environment, system, or
program for future modeling, simulation, redesign, critique, and problem-solving.
This could theoretically help build a new human ecology that values individual
self-efﬁcacy, interdependence, and collaborative learning.
A systemic DTT application has particular relevance if Virtual World learning
environments are being considered and developed, as it becomes a developmental
bridge for UX (user experience) design. This approach also informs simulations to
teach cause and effect and long and short-term consequences of human actions. For
example, as previously stated, embedding sustainability across a school and uni-
versity Curriculum mitigates the effects of climate change and promotes graduate
attributes that foster sustainability in all its dimensions in living within the limited
resources of our planet earth. Systemic thinking informs us that we live within a
materially closed system and that where possible, these materials need to be
recycled or ecologically offset.
These Virtual World environments align very effectively to how humans sys-
temically function in that we already live in a virtual world of ideas. For example,
our ability to dream, imagine, and create and construct our mental world. Senge [30]
tells us of a mental model that informs our thinking and reality and that new ex-
periences alter these states of being by being engaged in new learning experiences.
A systemic DTT approach assists educators in designing, building, and operating
new education models. Furthermore, this new thinking and modeling inform ST
Cybernetics and student goals in constructing innovative Curriculum and learning to
reﬂect student learning priorities within compulsory and non-compulsory education.
At a higher education level, systemic collaboration can lead to the development
of incubators of innovations by students and academics. It is evident given the
Advanced Teaching and Learning program at Warwick University and the Sys-
tems and Environmental Sciences Department at Open University UK, where
transdisciplinary programs ﬂourish through students practicing their own produc-
tion, creativity, and systemic problem-solving.
Narratives in Sound Art
ST can be illustrated by arts collaboration. In further developing a systemic
approach to Virtual Worlds by employing sound and graphic art composition,
provides an immersive experience, rich UX experience for academics, teachers, and
students at all levels. By exploiting sound, graphic, and animation art through
contemporary narrative, students can construct their own worlds and provide col-
laborative case studies and artifacts as integrated learning outcomes to be published
in the public domain. It enables students as knowledge producers and consumers
within a reciprocal learning community.
32
Generations of Systems Thinking: Models for Future Learning
647

Through an augmentation of verbal phonics, we can access an entire sound
resource that reﬂects at many levels, both semantic meaning, literary device, and
narrative soundscape composition. This represents the employment of the human
system as a creative resource. For example, a soundscape composition based on the
word Lamenterra, which I composed in 1995, was a term created to reﬂect a
lamentation and celebration of the earth (see Appendix I). By augmenting or
reducing the spoken word frequency: Terra (earth) to produce a percussive phonic
effect, I created an entire soundscape narrative from both a literary and sound art
perspective. This was conceived and deﬁned as a creative aesthetic system as an
element of this art installation. Search for Australia Felix also portrayed the earth as
an organism [31].
Search for Australia Felix
Search for Australia Felix was a systemic process that involved a diverse group of
artists, including composers, graphic artists, choreographers, and communities from
various cultural backgrounds to include an Aboriginal College with the local
townspeople of Benalla, Victoria, Australia. This project included Indigenous
stories, dance, and music, which contributed an aesthetic dimension to the creative,
collaborative methods. This Indigenous contribution provided fresh, insightful
perspectives on creative expression through their belief system.
The Aboriginal input also brought a contrasting value system to this project,
reﬂecting connections with the earth and its inhabitants. “A western understanding
of ‘dreaming’ is as a timeless state of being and believing. The aboriginal tradition
traces cultural journeys from their ancestral past and assists in reinstating our
web-like organismic relationships through realising the creative and celebratory
bonds that still exist between people and the earth. By amplifying the strengths of
these relationships, we serve to disseminate issues of awareness and provoke
questions of past, present and future” [31, p. 6].
Conclusion
We must develop a new language of thought that disenthralls us from the old
industrial, educational model. As humans, we are self-correcting, goal-based open
systems that function best within a social climate informed by an ecological ST
worldview. However, unfortunately, an anthropocentric education model has pre-
dominated since the introduction of mass education in the nineteenth century. This
education model has been characterized by reductionist industrialism and com-
modiﬁcation for an era that longer exists [10, 15]. “The most ethical thing we can do
is increase the choices of others” [33]. By establishing and developing ST as a new
language of thought, we empower all to serve the future needs of our communities.
648
S. Spain

Core Messages
• There is a need for a new human ecology in education that aligns with our
earth’s ecosystem.
• Adopting an ecological worldview through curriculum and learning
models helps mitigate the multitude of crises we face worldwide.
• Moving from an anthropocentric education paradigm towards an ecocen-
tric one is imperative for sustainability.
• Indigenous curricular perspectives, inform learning and teaching with
greater ecological sensitivity.
• The principles of ST in education are quite promising in promoting social
justice, human dignity, and the common good.
Art Performance
Search for Australia Felix (Lamenterra Project Production Film by Spain, S.,
Power, M., Pollard, M. and Balla, T., 1996; https://bit.ly/30oUBsV)
32
Generations of Systems Thinking: Models for Future Learning
649

References
1. Capra F, Luigi Luisi P (2014) The systems view of life: a unifying vision. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge
2. Ramage R, Shipp K (2009) Systems thinkers. Springer, London
3. von Bertalanffy L (1950) An outline of general system theory. British J Philos Sci 1(2):
134–164
4. von Bertalanffy L (1955) General systems theory. Main Currents Modern Thought 11:75–83
5. Wiener N (1948) Cybernetics: or control and communication in the animal and the machine.
MIT Press, Cambridge
6. Pangaro P, Bunschoten L, Werner R, Espejo L, Khan R, Kloeckl O, Hohl K, Jachna M, van
Ditmar F (2017) Conversations. Universitätsverlag der TU, Berlin. https://bit.ly/2WB92HR
7. Bateson G (1972) Steps to an ecology of mind, pp 448–465. With kind permission University
of Chicago Press and Courtesy of the Institute for Intercultural Studies, Inc., New York
8. Bateson G (1979) Mind and nature: a necessary unity. Dutton, New York
9. Robinson K (2009) The element. Penguin, Melbourne
10. Robinson K (2018) You, Your Child and School. Penguin, London
11. Hogan M (2020) Kanyini. http://www.kanyini.com/what-is-kanyini.html
12. Pascoe B (2018) Dark Emu. Magabala Books, Broome
13. Burn K, Childs A (2016) Responding to poverty through education and teacher education
initiatives: a critical evaluation of key trends in government policy in England 1997–2015.
J Educ Teach 42(4):387–403
14. Dulfer N, Polesel J, Rice S (2012) The experience of education: the impacts of high stakes
testing on school students and their families—an educator’s perspective. Whitlam Institute,
Sydney
15. Apple MW (2006) Educating the “right” way: markets, standards, God and inequality, 2nd
edn. Routledge, New York
16. Sahlberg P (2015) Finnish Lessons 2.0. What can the world learn from educational change in
Finland? Teachers College Press, New York
17. Sterling S (2003) Whole systems thinking as a basis for paradigm change in education:
explorations in the context of sustainability (PhD Thesis). University of Bath, Bath
18. Wenger E (2000) Communities of practice and social learning systems. Organization 7(2):
225–246
19. Robson J (2020) Being a teacher in the digital age: effective professional development in
online social spaces. Oxford. https://bit.ly/33h84TD
20. Miller P (2010) Smart swarm. Collins, Melbourne
21. Australian Curriculum, Assessment and Reporting Authority (2020) Australian Curriculum.
Available online at: https://bit.ly/38R9N4C. Accessed 14th July March 2020
22. Berardi A, Mistry J, Tschirhart C, Verwer C, Glastra R, de Ville G, Davis O, de Souza C,
Haynes L, Benjamin R, Xavier R, Albert G, Jafferally D, Bignante E, Abraham J (2013)
Cobra: future challenges local solutions, (2nd report). The Open University, Milton Keynes
23. Ostrom H (2015) Governing the commons: the evolution of institutions for collective action.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
24. Spain S (2018) Kids’ conference ABC radio national interview: https://bit.ly/2B4KCMA
25. Spain S (2019) Systems thinking applied to curriculum and pedagogy: a review of the
literature.
Curriculum
Perspectives
39(2):135–145.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s41297-019-
00085-1
26. Chow M (2016) Determinants of presence in 3D virtual worlds: a structural equation
modelling analysis. Australasian J Educ Technol 32(1) https://doi.org/10.14742/ajet.1939
27. llich I (2013) Deschooling education. KKIEN Publishing International, Milan
28. Herman E, Chomsky N (1995) Manufacturing consent. Penguin, Massachusetts
29. Handy C (1995) The age of paradox. Harvard Business School Press, Massachusetts
650
S. Spain

30. Senge P (1990) The ﬁfth discipline, the art and practice of the learning organisation. Random
House, Sydney
31. Spain S, Power M (2004) Lamenterra: projects, people and places. Creative systems practice,
arts forms and learning processes seminar proceedings. Open University, UK. https://bit.ly/
3iDd8bm
32. Spain S, Power M, Pollard M, Balla T (1996) Search for Australia Felix, Film. AAV. https://
bit.ly/30oUBsV
33. Pangaro P (2018) The future of cybernetics. World’s Fair Nano. https://bit.ly/2ZJdWo0
Dr. Stephen Spain
is an education researcher who currently
teaches at Monash University and lectured at Australian Catholic
University (ACU), The University of Melbourne, The Victorian
College of The Arts, and taught primary and secondary levels in
Melbourne and Oxford. His Ph.D. research covers a Systems
Thinking approach to Curriculum and Pedagogy. He has written
Curriculum for the Australian Council for Human Rights Edu-
cation under the Australian Governor General’s patronage,
recently published his Systems Thinking Literature Review in
Curriculum Perspectives in 2019, and his curriculum model in
Learning and Teaching in 2020 as part of his Ph.D. output.
Stephen has read Education at the Bodleian University of Oxford.
He is the principal founder, chair, and convenor of the interna-
tional Kids’ Conference hosted by The Oxford Education
Deanery, Department of Education, University of Oxford, which
is sponsored by the Australian Government.
32
Generations of Systems Thinking: Models for Future Learning
651

33
Systems Thinking and Action
for an Entrepreneurial Journey
Towards the House of Lab Science
Christian Hugo Hoffmann
“The development of systems thinking is crucial for the survival
of humanity.”
John D. Sterman, 1994
Summary
Systemics is a movement which results from communicative activities, crossing
disciplinary boundaries to overcome the fragmentation of science; in other
words, as Ackoff reminds us, “stop acting as though nature were organized into
disciplines in the same way that universities are.” In this paper, we brieﬂy sketch
the scope and importance of that movement as well as a speciﬁcation, namely the
St. Gallen Management Model, in the context of, on the one hand, dynamic
complexity inside of and around businesses and innovation or entrepreneurship,
on the other. We observe, though, that the proposals made remain far from
having an impact and becoming manifested in venture-building. Therefore, we
study the case of the startup House of Lab Science as a paradigmatic example of
systems thinking and action, which not only integrates different disciplines, from
bioengineering to piano performance but, ﬁrst and foremost, many different
stakeholders aligned to the goal of establishing a prosperous cluster and
ecosystem.
C. Hugo Hoffmann (&)
Institute for Technology Assessment and Systems Analysis (ITAS), Karlsruhe Institute
of Technology (KIT), Karlstraße 11, 76133 Karlsruhe, Germany
e-mail: christian.hoffmann@houseoﬂabscience.world
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh (eds.), Thinking, Integrated Science 7,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04075-7_33
653

Keywords
Complexity  Entrepreneurship  House of lab science  St. Gallen management
model  Systems thinking
QR Code
Scanning the QR code directs you to the word cloud of the chapter that is made up
of the words we discussed throughout the whole book in relation to the chapter’s
keyword, which is intentionally not included in the word cloud. Find the keyword
and put it in place in the puzzle according to the clues provided in Chap. 36. The
mystery hidden in the puzzle is the quote of THINKING: Bioengineering of Science
and Art.
Introduction
As Von Bertalanffy’ pointed out in Kuhnian terms [1], the systems movement and
penetration of systems thinking into science have led to the development of a novel
“paradigm”.1 Now is the time of improving the modus operandi of the business
practice, particularly venture-building as the backbone of the economy [5]. This has
House of Lab Science
1 In Kuhn’ terms [2], “[p]aradigms are self-consistent communities of like-minded scientists,
sharing a worldview encompassing not only a body of theory and evidence but also methods of
inquiry, standards of proof, textbook examples, and heroes” [3]. “Eventually comes a period when
the ruling paradigm cannot solve certain problems, and scientists start questioning the paradigm’s
fundamental assumptions. When enough scientists become convinced that it is impossible to solve
the anomalies accumulating within the framework of the ruling paradigm, and only if an
alternative paradigm is available, then a scientiﬁc revolution takes place” [4].
654
C. Hugo Hoffmann

been demonstrated impressively in recent months and years with the coronavirus
disease (COVID), the exponential development of case numbers, the economic
risks of the pandemic as well as startups facing liquidity problems. Speciﬁcally,
most organizations, at least at the beginning of the pandemic, have been probably
just poking around in the dark as they have fallen short of specifying their right
environmental spheres and as they do not know the mechanisms or causal factors in
the relevant environment, nor their impact on their ﬁnancial risks and key perfor-
mance indicators. This renders it difﬁcult, if not impossible, for them to apply their
standard repertoire of management instruments.
New tools have been proposed in the literature in the spirit of the systems
movement. For this reason, we ﬁrst summarize the evolution of the systems
movement in the next section in a systematic, not historical manner. In the third
section, we turn to a management approach, the so-called St. Gallen Management
Model, and discuss it in some more detail since it was put forward to focus on the
heart of the problems which is found in dynamic complexity and relevant char-
acteristics thereof such as spillover effects. At the same time, proponents of this
approach appreciate the important role of entrepreneurship and the founding of
companies, making it stand out in this context. Yet, even though this might be a
sound expression of systems thinking, we miss the link to action and to concrete
implications for venture-building, respectively.
To ﬁll the gap, we study the case of a Swiss startup, the House of Lab Science,
as a paradigmatic example of systems thinking and action, which, on the one hand,
integrates different academic disciplines, from bioengineering to piano perfor-
mance. On the other hand, the example also shows that many different generations
and stakeholders (beyond their common classiﬁcation into groups, industries, or
sectors) can be aligned to the goal of establishing a prosperous cluster and
ecosystem. Thereby, this chapter calls for a Kuhnian paradigm shift in the business
practice of venture-building. The ﬁnal section concludes.
The Systems Movement
As emphasized in the relevant literature [6], the term system has multiple deﬁni-
tions, among which Schwaninger [7] focuses on the following:
i. “A portion of the world sufﬁciently well-deﬁned to be the subject of study;
something characterized by a structure, for example, a social system (Anatol
Rapoport);” and
ii. “A system is a family of relationships between its members acting as a whole
(International Society for the Systems Sciences).”
These two examples show that “systems” do not need to apply to the real world
[8]. By contrast, the conception of the word “system” allows us to formally embrace
many different forms of phenomena and objects; as such, there is a broad range of
33
Systems Thinking and Action for an Entrepreneurial …
655

classical objects and other things to which the concept system can be effectively
applied. Examples of classical objects are ﬁnancial and economic systems and
ecosystems. Yet, also things such as problems can be covered under the umbrella of
a system. In this manner, “[w]e have also come to realize that no problem ever
exists in complete isolation. Every problem interacts with other problems and is,
therefore, part of a set of interrelated problems, a system of problems” [9–13].
Each system, however, is characterized by a boundary that demarcates the
system from the surrounding environment [14]. The degree of demarcation depends
on the type of the system, ranging from closed systems, in which its components are
not related to the environment outside the system [8], to open systems, wherein the
material, information, and/or energy transfers occur via the system’s boundary.
However, this boundary appears to be a rather theoretical issue. Indeed, the function
of the boundary and the degree of demarcation is not overly deterministic [14] but
hinges on the working condition [11, 15] (Fig. 33.1).
The introduction of the term systems to the ﬁeld of science remains under
discussion, and despite attempts to identify a systems movement or a systems
approach for it becomes practicable somewhat [16], the collective of the words
systems and science, as “systems science,” has often been applied loosely at most.
Systems science is the result of communicative activities that cross disciplinary
boundaries in order to overcome an over-fragmentation of science; in other words,
Ackoff says, “stop acting as though nature were organized into disciplines in the
same way that universities are” [17].
In Klir’s words, systems science is [18] “a science whose domain of inquiry
consists of those properties of systems and associated problems that emanate from
the general notion of systemhood.” Such deﬁnition, in turn, challenges us with what
systemhood is, as yet the term systemhood has not been available in The Oxford
English Dictionary (OED Online, accessed April 24, 2020).
Fragmentation is the main characteristic of efforts to determine the capacity of
systems science as a discipline [8], with several sciences playing a role in the
evolution of the systems movement (Fig. 33.2).
The systems movement, also known as systemics, is, therefore, proposed as a
term that incorporates a wide range of views instead of being focused on a single
dimension of systems theory [7]. Keeping such an approach in mind, it is, as I
already explained elsewhere [19], possible to tackle the issue of what systems
science is on two overlapping bases:
i. “First, it is noteworthy that a very close relationship exists between the different
systems theories, on the one hand, and an underlying methodological holistic
way of thinking on the other. The common denominator of the different sys-
tems approaches in our day is that they are aligned around a worldview which
is an integrating, an analytical as well as a synthesizing [11], form of thinking,
expanding one’s horizon, starting from larger contexts and taking many factors
into account, compared to a more isolating and decomposing analytical proce-
dure. Rather, to be an effective systems scientist, we must at the same time be
both a holist, looking at the system as a whole (e.g., the ﬁnancial system and its
656
C. Hugo Hoffmann

Fig. 33.1 The systems view in general terms. It presents the scheme of the system as a whole,
whose constituents are elements, subsystems, relationships, and environment [21]
Fig. 33.2 The evolution of the systems approach [7], GST, general systems theory; LST, living
systems theory
33
Systems Thinking and Action for an Entrepreneurial …
657

dynamic complexity), and a reductionist, discerning the system in more detailed
forms (e.g., analysis of single ﬁnancial risks) [8, 20]. The various systems ap-
proaches originate from a form of thinking which involves “seeing” intercon-
nections and relationships, i.e., the whole picture as well as the component parts
[11]. Systems theories are then formalizations of holistic, systemic or systems
thinking [8], not systematic thinking [11]. Only the former is circular [21–23].
Furthermore, it has been said that systems thinking is a framework of thought that
helps us deal with complex things in a holistic way [7, 8, 24], which hints at the
second aspect in response to the quest for an overview understanding;” and
ii. “second, when reﬂecting on what systems science is all about, the classic
answer, reinforced by the purpose of systems thinking, is that it is all about
dealing with complexity [8, 11].2 This identiﬁes a need to clearly comprehend
the concept of complexity which can bear many possible meanings. For
example, many, ﬁrst and foremost social systems are non-trivial [25] or com-
plex in the sense that a certain input (see Fig. 33.1) is not always transformed
into the same output by the system because the system possesses its own
internal
dynamics
(eigendynamics),
the
transformation
function
is
not
unvarying [11].” In this context, Helbing [26] put forward three categories of
complexity: structural complexity, dynamic complexity, and algorithmic
complexity.3 The ﬁrst two are within the scope of the present chapter and can
be deﬁned as follows:
• “Structural complexity or complicatedness refers to systems that have many
(moving) parts, but they operate in patterned ways [27]. A complicated
system can be meaningfully analyzed and integrated, i.e., it can be taken
apart into its components and reassembled from those components, which
means crucially that it can be described by a mathematical system founded
on linearity [28, 29]. Structural complexity or complicatedness applies, for
example, to a car, which is a designed and complicated system made up of
many parts. But these parts are constructed in a way that let them behave in a
predictable and deterministic way, i.e., according to ﬁxed rules. Therefore, a
car is relatively easy to control [26]. In other words, a complicated system is
folded (Latin “plic”) and consequently conceals its internal structure. Nev-
ertheless, given enough time, we can discover how it works [30]; and
• instead of the previous ‘analytical’ or ‘reductionist’ approach, characterized by
“decomposing a system in components, such that the detailed understanding
of each component was believed to bring understanding in the functioning of
2 There is no inversion to occur, since not all modes for handling complex issues are systemic [19].
3 Andrei Kolmogorov, Ray Solomonov and Gregory Chaitin introduced the term “algorithmic
complexity” as a quantitative measure of important resources, e.g., time and storage that works
using algorithm-based methods or a computer. Its usage often happens in association with
traditional theoretical computer science, and is less applicable to systems thinking of
entrepreneurship. This is so because as, for example, Nicolis says in [16], “algorithmic complexity
is a static, equilibrium like concept.” Another tentative exploration of the concept of complexity
can be found in [20].
658
C. Hugo Hoffmann

the whole” [31], dynamic complexity demands that one tries to comprehend
the interconnections and relationships, i.e., “the whole picture as well as the
component parts” (ibid.); this, in turn, includes analysis as well as synthesis
(so-called ‘systems thinking’ is circular, as stated above). Dynamic com-
plexity can arise even in simple systems4 [33, 34] in terms of a low number of
variables or components in a system (low levels of combinatorial or detail
complexity; [35, 36])5; but, ceteris paribus, the more complex the system in
the structural or combinatorial sense, the more it is dynamically complex. The
latter primarily results from the interactions among the agents of a system over
time” [35, 36]. It may be illustrated by freeway trafﬁc where “the interaction
of many independent driver-vehicle units with a largely autonomous behavior
can cause the self-organization of different kinds of trafﬁc jams, the occur-
rence of which is hard to predict” [26].6
Systems Thinking for Tackling Complexity in Business
Businesses have interconnected components, such as departments and teams, that
join forces in forming a dynamic and open whole that qualify them as systems [11,
37, 38]. Dynamic features allow them to alter the company size and marketing
strategies while interacting with the external environment to import information and
export relevant products.
4 A system is deﬁned as simple when it works with a limited number of interactions and so we see
its behavior can be predicted, i.e., the system is behaving the same way and produces the same
results. Such a simple system is at work as we are switching a light on and off [27]. From a deeper
philosophical point of view, we refer to Rosen’s deﬁnition of a simple system [32] as a system for
which “Aristotelian causal categories can be independently segregated from one another.” Among
many competing deﬁnitions, it would be noteworthy mentioning Weaver’ deﬁnition [13].
5 The term combinatorial complexity or detail complexity are not further explicated by Sterman [3]
and Senge [24].
6 “At ﬁrst glance, it might be objected that it would be illegitimate or overstating the case to draw a
qualitative distinction between structural and dynamic complexity: If a ‘combinatorially complex’
situation is understood as one where you have to expect a large amount of possible outcome states
(whose individual probabilities may be difﬁcult to determine because they depend on a large
number of aspects or variables), then taking additionally into account the interaction between
agents over time just seems to multiply the number of possible outcome states. Indeed, it is hard to
see why a ‘purely combinatorially complex’ system, able to assume many different states because
of high numbers of components in a system and/or combinations, cannot be as complex as a
dynamically complex system in ﬁnite time (i.e., in terms of the degree of complexity or variety)
whose agents or system elements interact heavily, but are only few in number. Therefore, for the
sake of the argument, interaction over time by itself seems simply to be one among other factors
increasing the overall complexity. While this objection might be valid to some complexity or
systems researchers, because they do not sufﬁciently explain the difference between different
notions of complexity (e.g., [3, 24]), it ought to be elaborated on the special features of systems as
dynamically complex, which require, for example, speciﬁc modeling approaches, pointing, in turn,
to a qualitative distinction between dynamic and other forms of complexity [13]”, as I already
explained in [19].
33
Systems Thinking and Action for an Entrepreneurial …
659

More precisely, businesses are projected as organic or viable systems [11, 12,
15]. For such systems, living entities (human capital) play a crucial role in satis-
fying the survival needs under changing conditions to make them adaptive. Con-
sequently, these systems have been increasingly complex. From Thompson’s view
[39], complex organization is a collective of interdependent components when
being enrolled together in the formation of a whole that is dependent upon a larger
environment. Daft refers to complexity as “the number of activities or subsystems
within the organization” [40]. For an organizational structure, he considers com-
plexity as a three-dimensional measure that consists of7:
i. vertical complexity, it corresponds to “the number of levels” of a hierarchy;
ii. horizontal complexity, it corresponds to “the number of functions, units, or
jobs”; and
iii. spatial complexity, it corresponds to “the number of geographical locations.”
Moreover, in the environment, we face complex organizations and businesses
rather than simple and complicated systems. For the environmental organizations
and businesses, we can refer to Scott [42], who conceives complexity as the number
of things, including elements and items, that an organization must take into account
simultaneously. As a matter of fact, already acknowledged by several scholars,
large organizations are, mostly, belonging to a larger economic system that is
already considered complex. This statement is directly applicable to the current
condition, leading us to conclude that the economic system, given its intercon-
nectedness with other systems such as health or pandemics, is complex [43]: “[A]s
one moves to considerations of larger and larger systems, the problems of com-
plexity become enormous” [44].
When we now move to systems thinking as an effective way to deal with
complexity inside of and around businesses as systems, we come across concepts,
constructs, and even theories such as Beer’s [12] viable system models or the St.
Gallen Management Model [45, 46] which help tackle the encountered challenges.
Inspired by the systems movement, those management theories emphasize the
organization’s embeddedness in and dynamic interaction with its environment or
stakeholders and are therefore communication-oriented. In particular, the current
4th generation of the St. Gallen Management Model (SGMM) [45] conceptualizes
management as a reﬂective design practice and pays special attention to
entrepreneurship.
In contrast to our everyday understanding, the SGMM does not grasp the
environment as the entire world outside an organization. Rather, the environment is
seen as that part of the world that it selects [47] as relevant to its existence [48] or
that it makes use of for its own value creation. In this connection, stakeholders [49]
can broadly be understood as organizationally relevant representatives of or voices
for environmental spheres [45], which, on the one hand, signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the
7 There have been other occasions that organizations could be conceptualized as complex systems
[41].
660
C. Hugo Hoffmann

businesses’ scope for action and, on the other hand, are affected by the total effects
of their activities. Businesses’ activities, in turn, determine their economic value
added (EVA), which, following the SGMM, is referred to as a process, thus relying
on requirements that have to be met in their environment as “room for possibilities”
and transformed into an organization-speciﬁc resource conﬁguration enabled by
communication [45].
A paradigmatic example of this structuring through communication is the
founding process of a company. In this process, the business idea with the desired
added value must be communicatively negotiated, clariﬁed, and successively
concretized by the founders (see Fig. 33.3). In the course of this process, ideas for a
meaningful division of labor and expectations of an appropriate work structure with
associated rights and obligations emerge as well. Over time, stable roles, rules, and
routines are formed, which must also, at some point, be formalized: in a business
plan, in articles of association, in a competence order, or contracts with suppliers,
employees, and investors. A founding process is fundamentally based on com-
munication and on decisions that are solidiﬁed into premises for future decisions
and actions. All those creative ideas, expertise, and demands that are not or cannot
be incorporated into the joint communication and that get stuck in the heads of the
participants, so to speak, cannot be rendered effective: what counts is not what the
founders think, but what makes it into organizational communication. Therefore,
the targeted creation of conducive conditions, attitudes, and rules for open and
constructive communication is an essential prerequisite for success right from the
start.
The viable co-evolution of a business and the speciﬁc environment relevant for
its existence depends on a sustainable, differentiating creation of value for this
environment. Value creation not only has to make a difference but also is nowadays
based on the dynamic interplay between the differentiation of subsystems and the
integration of contributions to value creation relying on the division of labor
principles. Such clariﬁcation of “systemic” approaches in the context of business
and entrepreneurship is helpful for further understanding both concepts and lan-
guage as well as it comes crucially with practice. It is, therefore, a matter of
succeeding discussion.
A Case Study for Systems Action: The House of Lab Science
How can those abstract ideas and approaches now be rendered concrete to generate
an impact in practice? The following presentation of a startup in the ﬁeld of “lab
science,” integrating and going beyond the known disciplines of biotechnology,
nanotechnology, information technology, microtechnology, mechatronics, might
serve as a good starting point by demonstrating not only systems thinking but
mainly systems action.
33
Systems Thinking and Action for an Entrepreneurial …
661

By this startup, House of Lab Science, an innovation campus for the Swiss
laboratory technology sector is established, a physical and virtual place to be.
(Fig. 33.4).
Switzerland hosts a strong cluster of internationally leading laboratory tech-
nology companies.8 As a beacon with a global reach, the House of Lab Science
aims to further strengthen the networking or ecosystem of this future-oriented
industry by attracting additional young as well as established companies and talents
with different backgrounds.
The connected ofﬁce buildings at Garstligweg 6 and 8 in Hombrechtikon provide
ideal conditions for research and development as well as for networking and public
relations activities. For decades, they were the home base of well-known laboratory
technology companies such as Tecan, Rosys, and Qiagen Instruments; but “ideal”
also in the sense that there is, perhaps with the only exception of the greater area of
Boston, no other place in the world with so many stakeholders in the immediate
vicinity that can beneﬁt from a lab science innovation park.9 In cooperation with the
Fig. 33.3 The process of founding a company according to the SGMM (after [45])
8 With around 25′000 employees, the local laboratory technology manufacturers today generate an
estimated sales of CHF 5 billion out of which 95% of products are exported.
9 For example, the Basel region is connected to the large pharmaceutical and chemical companies
such as Roche and Novartis, large users of lab tech in the world. Switzerland's universities and
universities of applied sciences are among the best in the world. Schlieren’s growing biotech park
counts more and more start-ups turning into mature players. The Swiss Mittelland is the location of
many of the world's leading laboratory equipment manufacturers and analytical companies. On top
of that, there are the numerous Swiss technology companies that distribute the entire spectrum of
highly specialized products and services. With the House of Lab Science, a center is being created
that brings all these players together.
662
C. Hugo Hoffmann

Fig. 33.4 A collage of impressions from the House of Lab Science in Hombrechtikon,
Switzerland
33
Systems Thinking and Action for an Entrepreneurial …
663

landlord of the property, we, a group of entrepreneurs, including the author,10 have
developed a concept that offers the following facilities and opportunities in a
thriving ecosystem with a high degree of ﬂexibility:
• Innovation rooms, lab rooms, and test rooms to carry out research and devel-
opment work;
• Collaboration rooms to enable innovation teams to develop new mechatronic
devices;
• Small ofﬁces, individual workstations, and meeting rooms for startups to rent
their own ofﬁce space to lay the foundation for further growth; and
• The Life Sciences Academy, where high school and university students, pro-
fessionals, but also the broader public are invited to become involved and to
attend courses and events
In the House of Lab Science, industry associations, startups, SMEs, universities,
and institutes from the aforementioned disciplines ﬁnd suitable rooms for their own
activities and for developing partnerships so that the to some extent, arbitrary
organization of nature into (academic) disciplines, which Ackoff [17] bemoans, is
left behind in favor of a systemic approach and practice.
Moreover, the House of Lab Science not only exceeds artiﬁcial, narrow system
boundaries in the physical sphere but is to become a virtual meeting place for the
international laboratory technology community. Its main objective is to make
laboratory technology visible, to promote cooperation between organizations and
the scientiﬁc community in Switzerland and abroad, and to increase the laboratory
space and test rooms, not least for the creation of jobs in a booming ecosystem.
Laboratory technology is the key to the growth markets of the life sciences
sector. Triggered by the Human Genome Project, which, completed in 2003, made
it possible to beneﬁt from blueprint genetics in moving towards a fully bio-human
being and the med-tech scene has been gripped by a veritable wave of automation
in recent years which is maybe only comparable to the Internet revolution in the
1990s. The lab technologies are, thus, turning into the decisive factor for the in-
novation speed of research and development in all life sciences disciplines. Against
this background, the innovation parks of the House of Lab Science bundle activities
in one place to release additional network synergies in the Swiss laboratory tech-
nology cluster. It thus helps consolidate and further expand the strong position in
this future market.
Yet, the House of Lab Science does not only address research and develop-
ment. With consulting services for startups, mutual learning offerings, platforms for
exchange, public events, and activities for young people choosing a career to older
10 The core team consists of two more people: Oana Monica Vrabie is a purpose driven marketing,
communications & community expert with experience in the innovative, creative and cultural
industries and with an educational background in piano performance. Hans Noser is a serial
clusterpreneur who founded 18 startups and serves as chairman of the Board of Directors at
HSE AG among others, the largest Swiss medical device and life science engineering services
company.
664
C. Hugo Hoffmann

people sharing experiences from their career at a ﬁreside chat, the laboratory
technology sector in its entirety is sustainably as well as holistically promoted,
which points to the systemic DNA of the startup as well (Fig. 33.5).
The following chart summarizes the environment, including the key stake-
holders, which the House of Lab Science deﬁned for itself in a systemic manner,
following the SGMM guidelines (Fig. 33.6).
Conclusion
The current COVID pandemic is a tragic wake-up call of how a complex and
interconnected world is fragile and prone to major shocks and contagion within and
between systems. Systems Thinking has emerged as a valuable and effective
measure to deal with complex systems and challenges from a Systems Movement
point of view, which is regarded as a meta-discipline, yet enters the stage in a
fragmented way. By this integrating, i.e., analytical as well as a synthesizing form
of thinking, we are principally enabled to tackle particularly dynamic complexity in
a holistic way that characterizes businesses and their environment. In this con-
nection, more speciﬁc but still abstract models and theories have been proposed in
the literature. We brieﬂy discussed the St. Gallen Management Model due to its
focus on entrepreneurship and innovation. Yet, holistic or systems thinking, even in
the most elaborate forms of the SGMM, is of utmost importance towards a holistic
action-based perspective on complex problems of management and society that
remain unaddressed.
Fig. 33.5 The House of Lab Science does not discriminate and is open to all ages
33
Systems Thinking and Action for an Entrepreneurial …
665

Therefore, to move beyond the conceptual and abstract level, the concrete,
systemically conceived startup House of Lab Science was presented that is not just
an idea but already in the making. An S2 laboratory is already in operation, co-
operation agreements with large companies and the innovation park in Dübendorf
as well as with the biotech park in Schlieren are in place. In addition, 80 work-
stations and, thus, 3′000 out of 8′000 square meters are already occupied (at the
time of writing, i.e., beginning of May 2020). Further indications of interest (IOIs)
from many more parties exist, and the reasons for this commitment are clear:
• New business models emerge
• New contacts are made within the supply chain
• Higher productivity and thus economic growth are generated
• Costs and time savings
• Business excellence is increased
• The right talents are found
• A thriving ecosystem is established
• The transfer of knowledge and resources between companies, universities, and
research institutions is to be increased
Fig. 33.6 The House of Lab Science’s stakeholder landscape from a systemic angle. *Along the
supply chain of the laboratory technology cluster. Some captions for the arrows were left out to
enhance readability
666
C. Hugo Hoffmann

In the wake of the digital transformation, the House of Lab Science was created
as an institution that uses new technologies to bring people closer together. The
chance to realize such a vision focusing on innovation in the here and now is
certainly unique. The House of Lab Science is to combine the strengths of Swiss
industries, the economy, universities, and research in a truly systemic manner.
Core Messages
• Systemics tackles complexity and adopts an integrating, analytical and
synthesizing worldview.
• Dynamic complexity demands that we attempt to comprehend the inter-
connections and relationships, i.e., the whole picture and the constituent
parts.
• Businesses have interconnected components involved in forming a
dynamic and open whole that qualify them as systems.
• Systems thinking is an effective way to deal with complexity inside and
around businesses and is calibrated in the St. Gallen Management Model.
• The House of Lab Science expresses the transition from systems thinking
to systems action in the life sciences.
References
1. Bertalanffy L (1969) General system theory: foundations, development, applications
2. Kuhn TS (1970) The structure of scientiﬁc revolutions. International encyclopedia of uniﬁed
science, vol II, 2nd edn., Enlarged edn. University of Chicago Press
3. John S (2000) Business dynamics: systems thinking and modeling for a complex world. Irwin
McGrawHill
4. Barlas Y, Carpenter S (1990) Philosophical roots of model validation: two paradigms. Syst
Dyn Rev 6(2):148–166
5. Schumpeter JA, Röpke J, Stiller O (1912) Theorie der wirtschaftlichen Entwicklung,
Nachdruck der 1. Auﬂage von 2006
6. Stacey RD (2009) Complexity and organizational reality: uncertainty and the need to rethink
management after the collapse of investment capitalism. Routledge
7. Schwaninger M (2011) System dynamics in the evolution of the systems approach. In:
Meyers RA (ed) Complex systems in ﬁnance and econometrics. Springer, New York
8. Flood RL, Carson E (1993) Dealing with complexity: an introduction to the theory and
application of systems science. Springer Science & Business Media
9. Ackoff RL (1974) Redesigning the future. New York 29
10. Gomez P, Probst G (1997) Die Praxis des ganzheitlichen Problemlösens: Vernetzt denken.
Haupt, Unternehmerisch handeln Persönlich überzeugen Bern
11. Ulrich H, Probst GJB (1991) Anleitung zum ganzheitlichen Denken und Handeln: ein Brevier
für Führungskräfte. Haupt
12. Beer S (1959) Kybernetik und Management (deutsch Frankfurt/M. 1962).
13. Weaver W (1948) Science and complexity. Am Sci 36(4):536–544
33
Systems Thinking and Action for an Entrepreneurial …
667

14. Klir GJ (1991) Facets of Systems Science. International Federation for Systems Research
International Series on Systems Science and Engineering, 1 edn. Springer, Boston. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-1-4899-0718-9
15. Gomez P (1981) Modelle und Methoden des systemorientierten Managements. Paul Haupt
16. Garcia CG (2008) Complexity: 5 questions. Automatic Press/VIP,
17. Ackoff RL (1960) Systems, organizations and interdisciplinary research. General Systems
Yearbook 5 (Part 1)
18. Klir GJ (2001) Facets of systems science. International Federation for Systems Research
International Series on Systems Science and Engineering, 2 edn. Springer, Boston. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-1-4615-1331-5
19. Hoffmann CH (2017) Assessing risk assessment: towards alternative risk measures for
complex ﬁnancial systems. Springer
20. Hoffmann CH (2017) Structure-based explanatory modeling of risks. Towards understanding
dynamic complexity in ﬁnancial systems. Syst Res Behavior Sci 34 (6):728–745
21. Schwaninger
M
(2005)
Systemorientiertes
Design-ganzheitliche
Perspektive
in
Innovationsprozessen
22. Morin E (2008) On complexity. Hampton Press (NJ)
23. Suppes P (1983) Reductionism, atomism and holism. Parts & Wholes, pp 134–140
24. Senge PM (2006) The ﬁfth discipline: the art and practice of the learning organization.
Currency
25. von Foerster H (2003) Understanding understanding: essays on cybernetics and cognition.
Springer, New York
26. Helbing D (2010) Systemic risks in society and economics. IRGC–The emergence of risks:
contributing factors, Oct 2010
27. Sarout G, Mc Grath RB (2011) Learning to live with complexity
28. Byrne D, Callaghan G (2013) Complexity theory and the social sciences: the state of the art.
Routledge
29. Zadeh LA, Desoer CA (1979) Linear system theory: the state space approach (Chap. 9).
Krieger, Robert E
30. Rzevski G, Skobelev P (2014) Managing complexity. Wit Press
31. Sornette D (2009) Dragon-kings, black swans and the prediction of crises. arXiv preprint
arXiv:09074290
32. Rosen R (1987) Some epistemological issues in physics and biology. Quantum implications:
essays in honour of David Bohm, pp 314–327
33. Gribbin J (2005) Deep simplicity: chaos, complexity and the emergence of life. Penguin UK
34. Rego A (2010) Complexity, simplicity, simplexity. Eur Manag J 28(2):85–94
35. Moorecroft J (2007) Strategic modelling and business dynamics. Wiley, Chichester
36. Sterman JD (1994) Learning in and about complex systems. Syst Dyn Rev 10(2–3):291–330
37. Ackoff RL (1971) Towards a system of systems concepts. Manage Sci 17(11):661–671
38. Anderson P (1999) Perspective: complexity theory and organization science. Organ Sci 10
(3):216–232
39. Thompson JD (1967) Organizations in action. McGraw-Hill, New York. Thompson
Organizations in Action 1967
40. Daft RL (1992) Organization theory and design. West Publishing Company, Saint Paul
41. Siggelkow N (2001) Change in the presence of ﬁt: the rise, the fall, and the renaissance of Liz
Claiborne. Acad Manag J 44(4):838–857
42. Scott WR Organizations: Rational, natural, and open systems 1992 3rd edn NJ Prentice Hall,
Englewood Cliffs
43. Simon HA (1962) The architecture of complexity. Proc Am Philos Soc 106(6):467–482
44. Churchman CW (1968) The systems approach, vol 8459. Dell Publishing Company
45. Rüegg-Stürm J, Grand S, Grand S (2017) Das St. Galler Management-Modell. Haupt Bern
668
C. Hugo Hoffmann

46. Ulrich H, Krieg W (1972) Das St. Galler Management-Modell, Bern 1972. Das St Galler
Management-Modell: Grundlagen des Führungsmodells; ein Management-Modell für die
öffentliche Hand
47. Luhmann N (2000) Organisation und Entscheidung. 1 edn. VS Verlag für Sozialwis-
senschaften. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-322-97093-0
48. Simon FB (2007) Einführung in die systemische Organisationstheorie. Heidelberg
49. Edward Freeman R (1984) Strategic management: a stakeholder approach. Pitman, Boston 46
Christian Hugo Hoffmann is a serial entrepreneur and the CEO
of the House of Lab Science AG, Switzerland. For more infor-
mation, visit his website at: www.christian-hugo-hoffmann.com.
33
Systems Thinking and Action for an Entrepreneurial …
669

34
Systems Approach for Modeling
Multifactorial Human Interactions
that Affect Ecological
and Environmental Systems
Fernando Ramos-Quintana and Ana Itzel Casarrubias-Jaimez
“There is nothing like returning to a place that remains
unchanged to ﬁnd the ways in which you yourself have altered.”
Nelson Mandela
Summary
Anthropogenic activities derived from population and economic growth affect
ecological and environmental systems. Ecosystem services provided for the
beneﬁt of humans have constantly declined over the whole world as the
population and economy continued to grow. Likewise, the state of pressure
variables such as the quality of drinking water, solid and urban waste, air
pollution, and loss of vegetation cover have worsened as population and
economy have increased, thus affecting the quality of the environmental state. In
addition, as the state of such pressure variables worsens, CO2 emissions have
increased signiﬁcantly, thus contributing to climate change. The multifactorial
interactions involved in the dynamics of ecological and environmental systems
hinder the understanding of the processes that damage their state quality. Such a
lack of understanding hinders adequate state assessments. Understanding the
dynamics and assessment of the state of such complex systems will support the
decision-making processes required to develop sustainable environmental
F. Ramos-Quintana (&)
Conservation and Biodiversity Research Center, Universidad Autónoma del Estado de Morelos,
Avenida Universidad No. 1001Chamilpa, 62209 Cuernavaca, Morelos, Mexico
e-mail: ramosfernando747@gmail.com
A. I. Casarrubias-Jaimez
Universidad Autónoma de Guerrero, Chilpancingo, Guerrero, Mexico
e-mail: anajaimez@uagro.mx
Universidad Autónoma del Estado de Morelos, Cuernavaca, Morelos, Mexico
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh (eds.), Thinking, Integrated Science 7,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04075-7_34
671

management systems. This chapter addresses the problem of modeling the
multifactorial interactions associated with human activities that damage
ecological and environmental systems. We highlight the role of conceptual
frameworks, based on systems thinking approach, to pave the way for
developing a sustainable environmental management system. As a case study,
we analyze multifactorial interactions that cause the eutrophication process in a
coastal lagoon.
Multifactorial interactions between indirect and direct factors cause changes in
ecosystems such as coastal lagoons.
Keywords
Anthropogenic activities Coastal Lagoons Conceptual frameworks Drivers
Ecosystems  Environmental systems
QR Code
Scanning the QR code directs you to the word cloud of the chapter that is made up
of the words we discussed throughout the whole book in relation to the chapter’s
keyword, which is intentionally not included in the word cloud. Find the keyword
and put it in place in the puzzle according to the clues provided in Chap. 36. The
mystery hidden in the puzzle is the quote of THINKING: Bioengineering of Science
and Art.
672
F. Ramos-Quintana and A. I. Casarrubias-Jaimez

Introduction
In general, the state of any system is deﬁned by the adopted values of the involved
variables at a given time t. For instance, in the case of the environmental state, such
variables are related to the loss of biodiversity, the quality of the availability of fresh
water, the liquid, and solid wastes, the particulate matter (PM) for the case of air
pollution, and the CO2 emissions, among the most important [1]. Meanwhile, the
quality and quantity of services provided by an ecosystem are useful indicators to
assess its state [2, 3]. Such ecosystem services can be represented by food, fresh
water, ﬁshery, timber, and recreational activities, among others [4–6]. It has been
documented that from the second part of the last century, as population and
economy have increased so importantly, anthropogenic activities on nature have
caused a relevant decline of both the environmental state of regions and ecosystem
services [7–9].
Different organizations around the world propose different environmental mea-
sures and initiatives to mitigate the damage caused to environmental and ecological
systems. Some of these institutions and organizations are EPA (Environmental
Protection Agency), EEA (European Environment Agency), UNEP (United Nations
Environment Programme), OECD (The Organization for Economic Co-operation
and Development), WWF (World Wildlife Fund), IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change), MAS (Millennium Ecosystems Assessments), IPBES (Intergov-
ernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services). One of
the most important efforts of these organizations and institutions is to implement
sustainable environmental management systems as a desirable goal to a certain
extent. However, before reaching the level of sustainable environmental management
systems oriented to preserve the environmental quality, they need ﬁrst to meet the
level of an environmental management system. This goal may be feasible for many
developed countries, but it is certainly unfeasible for most developing countries.
Anyway, for both developed and developing countries, assessing the environ-
mental state of a region and/or ecosystem services is an essential requirement to
help decision-making processes and select management actions to improve the
quality of their state [10]. To build adequate assessment methods, the developers
should consider multiple socio-economic, sociopolitical, demographic, technolog-
ical, and cultural factors. Otherwise, the assessments will be incomplete because
important factors could not be considered in the assessment, which means that the
decision-making processes were not well supported to select adequate management
actions [11, 12]. Adequate assessment and decision-making processes underpin the
selection of environmental management actions with a good performance. Thus, the
weakness of these two processes will hinder the development of an environmental
management system (EMS) with an acceptable performance level.
Most methods to assess the quality state of an ecological and/or an environ-
mental regional system do not consider sociopolitical and socio-economic factors,
which are mostly considered indirect driving factors that exert effects on direct
driving factors, thus affecting the environmental state and ecosystems. However,
34
Systems Approach for Modeling Multifactorial Human Interactions …
673

the multifactorial interactions result in a complex dynamic system, which is very
hard to model and consequently very hard to understand. We argue that the
dynamic of a complex system should primarily be understood before assessing its
state. Otherwise, the state assessments will be weak, and consequently, they are
unable to underpin the processes related to decision-making for selecting man-
agement actions.
In this chapter, we deal with the problem of modeling the multifactorial aspects
that affect the state of ecosystems services and the quality of an environmental state
at a regional level. We show how a conceptual framework can guide building a
causal network to facilitate the understanding of dynamic complex systems related
to ecological and environmental regional systems. We use a “systems thinking”
approach that supports the processes within the conceptual framework by consid-
ering both open and closed systems in constructing a sustainable environmental
management system. An analysis of a causal network representing an ecosystem (a
coastal lagoon) will show whether the development of a sustainable environmental
management system for this coastal lagoon is feasible or not. Based on this analysis,
we will show why sociopolitical, socio-economic, and cultural factors, among the
most important, hinder the construction of a management system for ecosystem
sustainability. The remaining sections of this chapter deal with the following topics:
human activities that affect the quality of a regional environmental state and the
quality of ecosystems; the DPSIR framework approach to assess the state of the
environment; the importance of using a conceptual framework supported by a
systems thinking approach to build an environmental management system; an
approach based on indirect and direct drivers to analyze the feasibility of building a
sustainable environmental management system for an ecosystem represented by a
coastal lagoon; and ﬁnally, a conclusion.
Human Activities Affecting the Quality State
of Environmental and Ecological Systems
The Effects of the Population Increase on Key Environmental
Variables
As we already know, consumption habits have changed as the population and
economy increase, causing an accelerated rise of solid and liquid wastes and,
consequently, an important rise in CO2 emissions. Table 34.1 lists some other
environmental consequences of the increased population.
Units increase (tons, liters, m2, etc.) related to key environmental variables and
population increases are not necessarily proportional, but, commonly such rela-
tionships are governed by nonlinear behaviors. However, the behavior over time of
cause-effect relationships can be approximated by a straight linear equation, which
may give us a good idea about the trends of such relationships through the slope of
the equation.
674
F. Ramos-Quintana and A. I. Casarrubias-Jaimez

Usually, along with interpolated linear equation representing the behavior of the
relationship, it is also shown the correlation and the determination coefﬁcients and
the slope value of the straight line. The correlation coefﬁcient shows how much the
independent or explanatory variable changes the dependent variable. As the cor-
relation coefﬁcient gets close to 1, the dependence relationship is stronger. Mean-
while, the determination coefﬁcient reveals how close or far the observation points
are to or from the interpolated linear equation. As the determination coefﬁcient
value gets close to 1, the observation points are distributed closer to the interpolated
straight line. Meanwhile, the slope may represent the relationship between the
independent and dependent variables. The relationships can be labeled as: “inﬂu-
ence relationships,” “cause-effect relationships,” and “dependency relationships,”
among others. From all of these types of relationships, we can analyze certain
variables that may exert inﬂuence on others by examining dependency relationships
that may exist [13].
The analysis of the slope value in a relationship reveals meaningful information
about the strength of the dependency and its trend (upward or downward trend, for
example). To facilitate this analysis, we show an example where we assume that the
slope value will fall inside the positive values of the independent (abscissa axis) and
dependent (ordinate axis) variables. In this case, the slope value may fall from 0° to
90° or between 0 and ∞tangent values. In case that the slope value is close to 0°,
very low effects will be exerted by the independent variable on the dependent
variable. Qualitative values of relationships close to 0° could be deemed “very low
inﬂuence.” On the contrary, when slope values are close to 90°, independent
variable values will cause an important inﬂuence on the dependent variable, which
Table 34.1 Cause-effect relationships between the population increase and other key environ-
mental variables
Cause
Effect
(increase)
Effect
(decrease)
Comments and references
As
population
increases
Waste
production
In the past century, waste production has
grown ten times more than the population
growth [1]
Water
availability
[2–5]
Solid waste
[6–11]
CO2 emissions
[12–15]
Transportation
and CO2
As transportation sector grows CO2
emissions increase [16, 17]
Forest ﬁres
Vegetation
cover
Intentional or unintentional forest occur as
population increases, thus causing
important loss of vegetation cover [18, 19]
Road
construction
Vegetation
cover
As the construction of roads increases
vegetation cover decreases thus producing
changes in the ecology systems and in the
physical environment [20]
34
Systems Approach for Modeling Multifactorial Human Interactions …
675

is, in qualitative terms, expressed as the independent variable exerts a “very strong
inﬂuence” on the dependent variable.
This chapter deals with coastal lagoons (CL), which are viewed and analyzed as
ecosystems that provide services. One of the speciﬁc problems to be addressed in
water bodies is the process of eutrophication, which represents a major concern in
marine ecosystems [14–18]. The growth of plants derived from the enrichment of
nutrients, which are, in turn, the result of human activities, characterized the process
of eutrophication. Such human activities include deforestation [19], the application
of fertilizers in agricultural activities [20], and nitrogen emissions [21].
Coastal lagoons are deemed as very important productive ecosystems. They
provide key ecosystem services, ﬁsheries, wild fauna and plants, trees for con-
struction, fresh water, and areas for recreation [22]. Moreover, the CLs offer natural
landscapes to be enjoyed, thus resulting very attractive for the development of
tourist activities [7, 23–26]. In conclusion, coastal lagoon ecosystems are not only
ecologically valuable, but they also provide human beings with services related to
the environment, as well as social and economic conditions for a better quality of
life [4, 5, 27–31]. Even though CLs are highly productive because they foster
economic activities, they have been threatened through pressures from anthro-
pogenic activities. Fast population growth and tourist development affect the water
bodies, thus reducing the ecosystem quality and, as a result, their service potential
[32–34].
CLs are mainly characterized by shallow waters and exchange of water with the
sea, which causes their salinity to vary from oligohaline (5% NaCl g/L) to
hypersaline (>300% NaCl g/L). Due to this, the environmental conditions allow the
reproduction of certain species during the early stages or the whole life cycle. They
function as natural barriers by mitigating hurricane effects; they also play an
important role in climate regulation [35].
The European Environment Agency (EEA) deﬁnes CLs as sensitive areas with a
particular vulnerability to the eutrophication processes [36] which are mainly due to
human settlements, thus favoring the nutrient exchange derived from multiple
anthropogenic activities [37, 38]. The excessive use of these bodies of water by
human beings causes pressures or direct drivers that may damage their trophic state.
The trophic state can vary from oligotrophic (non-productive) to mesotrophic (more
or less productive) and eutrophic (very productive) [39]. The vulnerability of
coastal lagoons is largely caused by changes in the trophic state, which, in turn, is
caused by the excessive presence of nitrogen and phosphorus [40–43]. It is worth
highlighting that despite eutrophication being a process that can occur naturally, the
concept of cultural eutrophication (CE) has been incorporated. Cultural eutrophi-
cation refers to those processes derived from activities associated with human
settlements that contribute to damage the trophic state of the water bodies, thus
favoring the exchange of nutrients [18, 44–51].
Eutrophication processes have taken place in different water bodies around the
world. Eutrophication is usually deﬁned as the process leading to eutrophic status,
usually the result of the input of nutrients. On the Mediterranean coast, the cultural
eutrophication of coastal lagoons represents the major problem to be addressed.
676
F. Ramos-Quintana and A. I. Casarrubias-Jaimez

Thus, the amount of nitrogen and phosphorus discharged into water bodies should
be reduced to improve their water quality [52].
Derived from the impact caused by cultural eutrophication, Trophic State Indices
(TSI) have been proposed, which assess the trophic state of different water bodies.
The word Trophic is a term related to nutrition. A Trophic State Index (TSI) serves
to classify the biological productivity of a water body. Four parameters may deﬁne
trophic states: chlorophyll, mostly related to the green pigment of algae; phos-
phorous and nitrogen, nutrients necessary for the growth of algae and aquatic
plants; and water clarity, largely dependent on water transparency. The four trophic
states are as follows:
(i)
Oligotrophic state where water bodies are characterized by low biological
productivity;
(ii)
Mesotrophic state, characterized by moderate biological productivity;
(iii)
Eutrophic state, characterized by high biological productivity;
(iv)
Hypertrophic state, characterized by the highest biological productivity
In Brazil, a TSI was used along with three indices, each associated with the
categories of the Pressure-State-Response framework. This framework was pro-
posed by OECD [53]. In this framework, pressure factors (P) cause changes in the
state (S); thus, a response (R) from the society is required to improve the state of the
system. This framework is represented by a causal chain, which is easy to under-
stand. Still, it has limitations to express the interactions that take place in real
situations to a certain extent. In the case of Brazil mentioned before, the Pressure
category uses an index that measures the overall human inﬂuence; an index rep-
resenting overall human inﬂuence is used for the State category; and an index for
determining the future outlook for the Response category. Using a TSI, the results
of trophic state and the determination of a future outlook for ﬁve lagoons named
Mundaú, Manguaba, Guarapina, Piratininga, and Paraiba do Soul are the following:
four of them showed high eutrophic conditions and just one showed good condi-
tions [17].
The Bojorquez lagoon belongs to Cancun’s touristic development in Mexico and
has been classiﬁed as oligotrophic. Due to the high level of tourist activities in
Cancun, which have brought about an important number of human activities, thus
contributing to the accumulations of an important amount of organic matter, a
cultural eutrophication process has taken place in this lagoon. Cancun is part of
Mexico’s Yucatan Peninsula, where important coastal lagoons are located.
Assessing the current state of the coastal lagoons belonging to the Yucatan
Peninsula is recommended to search for economic support in favor of adequate
water management.
Ten coastal lagoons are located in Guerrero, situated on the Paciﬁc Coast of
Mexico. One of the most important is the Tres Palos Lagoon, located within the
municipality of Acapulco. This coastal lagoon has suffered environmental and
social degradation processes for many decades ago (since the middle of the last
century), mainly caused by regular and irregular human settlements. Irregular
34
Systems Approach for Modeling Multifactorial Human Interactions …
677

settlements are deﬁned as dwellings or groups of dwellings that lack, for example,
access to drinking water, drainage, security of tenure, the durability of dwelling
(waste materials and location in risk areas), and insufﬁcient area to live [54].
It is suggested that the CE is a process within which multiple interactions
between human activities and the ecosystem occur, thus intensifying the pressures
that damage the quality state of the ecosystem [16, 46–49, 52]. The multiple
interactions bring about dynamic processes related to complex systems, which are
hard to understand, thus making their assessment difﬁcult [7, 55, 56]. The lack of an
adequate understanding and assessment of such dynamic processes seriously hin-
ders the development of a sustainable environmental management system. The
dynamics understanding taking place in environmental and ecological systems due
to the processes composed of multiple interactions between different factors and
their quality assessment of such systems are a key support to be provided to the
decision-making processes, which aimed at selecting management actions to
improve the quality of their state. The actions to be implemented to improve the
environmental state should be monitored and assessed through a feedback process
and then should be corrected and/or improved in case of a bad performance.
DPSIR Framework Applied to Assess the State of Key
Environmental Variables
A frequent discussion occurs when we deal with driving force and pressure factors.
The conceptual framework DPSIR is composed of Driving-Force factors, Pressure
factors, the State of the System, the Impact on the system, and the societal
Response. It was proposed by the OECD [57] to improve the performance and
expressivity of its ancestor, the PSR framework. The representation of interactions
between the driving force and pressure factors can be performed by building a
causal network using the DPSIR framework, which corresponds more to real sit-
uations. The DPSIR framework has been broadly used to support the understanding
and assessment of the complex dynamics derived from multifactorial interactions
between the driving force and pressure factors, thus affecting the environmental
state of a region. Using the DPSIR framework seems to be very practical to
communicate with stakeholders, who argue that this approach is accessible and easy
to understand. However, this is a practical approach but not complete enough to
consider it in holistic analysis and assessments.
The driving force is commonly related to the population increase and the eco-
nomic factors [58, 59]. However, factors related to population growth and rising
incomes contribute to the change in consumption behavior of the population, which
in turn has an effect on the increase of waste, both solid and liquid. Population
increase represents an important driving force factor that increases CO2 emissions
[60]. Population increase causes urban growth and brings about the decline of water
availability [61]. In this context, Kristensen pointed out that pressure factors, such
as those related to water, CO2 emissions, and waste, affect the environmental state
quality [62]. Meanwhile, the concept of pressure factors is usually related to key
678
F. Ramos-Quintana and A. I. Casarrubias-Jaimez

environmental variables such as CO2 emissions, air quality usually associated with
particles PM10 and PM2.5, water quality, solid and liquid wastes, and biodiversity
[63].
The DPSIR framework has been applied in different studies. For instance, the
driving forces related to energy use and transportation cause climate changes with
their
effects
on
biodiversity
[64].
The
EBM-DPSER
(Ecosystem-Based
Management/Driving
Force-Pressure-State
Ecosystem
service
and
Response
resulted from the integration of the DPSIR framework and ecosystem services into
the management of air pollution [65, 66] and water resources [67]. The DPSIR
framework was also applied to build biodiversity indicators [68], for assessing, e.g.,
the vulnerability of water resources to environmental change [69], the environ-
mental quality due to the effects of population increase, risks related to the biodi-
versity [70], and water management [67].
Assessing the Quality of Water Bodies Using the DPSIR
Framework
The assessment of the eutrophic state of the Tagus estuary (Portugal) was based on
the PSR framework proposed by the OECD to address the management options
[14]. However, developing a sustainable environmental management system
requires driving force factors that affect pressure factors. The assessment of the
system’s state and monitoring systems should be incorporated to assess the per-
formance of implemented actions. DPSIR was used to assess the environmental
pollution of the Ebrié Lagoon in Cote d’Ivoire. Eutrophication has been identiﬁed
as a process that causes major damages in the state of water bodies based on
assessments of nutrient levels over time. The excess of nutrients derived from waste
discharged by humans living in the nearby city of Abidjan, along with the use of
fertilizers on farms in the catchment, was the cause of the state change of water
bodies. As conclusion, the pollution drivers in the Ebrié lagoon were agricultural
activities and human waste, but not the industrial development in Abidjan, as
expected [71]. A review of applications of DPSIR is carried out in coastal eco-
logical systems by highlighting social aspects [72].
Integrating the DPSIR into the ecosystem and societal services was carried out to
support the decision-making process to improve the marine environmental system
[73]. The importance of water resource management is highlighted because water
consumption increases, mainly due to economic development. In addition, indus-
trial and agriculture pollutants have caused pressures on water resources.
The DPSIR was used in Bayannur, China, to assess sustainability related to the
management of water resources [74]. A set of formulated recommendations for
integrated and sustainable management of European lagoons have been proposed
using the DPSIR framework. Four European lagoons were selected: Ria de Aveiro
(Portugal), Mar Menor (Spain), Tyligulskyi Liman (Ukraine), and Vistula Lagoon
(Poland and Russia). Important anthropogenic stress has been made on these coastal
lagoons, more than others in Europe. In such a way that policies were needed to
34
Systems Approach for Modeling Multifactorial Human Interactions …
679

protect them as ecosystems that provide services and consider that they should be
sustainable to a great extent. It is worth mentioning that these European coastal
lagoons have no similar characteristics related to the hydrology, land use, and
governance factors. The main pressures exerted on these coastal lagoons are pop-
ulation increase and density, tourist activities, harvest activities, and demand for
natural resources. As we can see, the role played by anthropogenic activities in the
damage caused to coastal lagoons is very important. It is important to highlight two
aspects derived from this study that are related to our concerns [73]:
(i) The contribution of this study, from an ecological and socio-economic per-
spective to the understanding of the outcomes for the sake of building a
structure of relevant options for public policies; and
(ii) in
general,
each
coastal
lagoon
has
particular
characteristics
that
decision-makers should take into account during the process of generation of
public policies. Consequently, it is suggested to consider the particular context
of coastal lagoons when local management is applied.
Conceptual Frameworks Guiding the Development of
Environmental Management Systems (EMS)
Conceptual Frameworks Within the Context of Complex
Dynamic Systems
The dynamics taking place within environmental and ecological systems are
characterized by multiple interactions between factors of diverse nature. Thus, this
complex aspect hinders the understanding of the dynamics associated with the
systems, and consequently, the state assessments of environmental and ecological
systems become very hard to be performed. Both the understanding and the
assessment of the system state are essential supports to the decision-making during
the selection process of management actions aimed at improving the environmental
state and the state of ecosystems. Up to the execution of management actions
provided by the decision-making system, the environmental management system is,
from a systems perspective, viewed as an open system.
Conceptual frameworks are models able to guide and facilitate the analysis of
complex systems by providing users with powerful means to support the under-
standing of dynamic processes and the system state assessment. In addition, the
following processes: decision-making; monitoring the performance of implemented
management actions; and correction of malfunctioning of a system through feed-
back mechanisms aim to improve the environmental and/or ecosystem state under
study. Derived from the properties of conceptual frameworks mentioned before, we
afﬁrm that they can guide the development of environmental management systems
towards sustainability [11, 12]. The capacities of conceptual frameworks are
680
F. Ramos-Quintana and A. I. Casarrubias-Jaimez

reinforced when they are supported by analysis based on the systems thinking
approach, whose main characteristic is to divide a system into subsystems, each
playing a speciﬁc role within the context of the correct functioning of the whole
system. Thus, an inappropriate functioning of any of the subsystems would affect
the whole system.
A Conceptual Framework Represented by a Closed System
for an EMS
A closed system is required for building a sustainable environmental management
system (EMS).
Before dealing with the functional characteristics of a closed system, we describe
the processes related to an open system, which is an important component of a
closed system. We would like to highlight that the closed system to be described is
applied to environmental and/or ecosystem problems. Thus, for other applications
the processes to be considered may be different. The open system is composed of
the following processes: the construction of causal networks to understand the
complex dynamics derived from multifactorial interactions; the assessment of the
environmental and/or ecosystem state; and the decision-making processes to select
management actions to improve the environmental and/or ecosystem state. How-
ever, we need other processes to correct, eliminate or replace those implemented
management actions with poor performance. These last processes should be
incorporated to build a closed system. In the case of our environmental application,
the processes to be added to convert an open system into a closed system are: the
monitoring and assessment of management actions that have been implemented; the
feedback mechanism, which used the assessments of the monitoring system to
correct, eliminate or replace the management actions with poor performance.
A whole system, open and closed system, along with its subsystems, is shown in
Fig. 34.1.
The open system shown in Fig. 34.1 undertakes, as the main role, the processing
of input data and/or resources to produce state assessments that will support the
selection of management actions to be applied to the real world. The open system
hosts the following sequence of subsystems:
• the subsystem in charge of characterizing the driving factors that cause envi-
ronmental and/or ecological system changes. This subsystem is composed of
demographic, socio-economic, sociopolitical, technological, and cultural factors;
• the subsystem of the pressure factors with effects on the state of the environ-
mental and/or ecological system
• the subsystem that integrates the subsystems of driving factors and pressure
factors. This subsystem plays the following role: to build a casual network
composed of casual relationships between driving force and pressure factors.
This causal network aims at representing the dynamics that brings about changes
in the state of the environmental and/or ecological system;
34
Systems Approach for Modeling Multifactorial Human Interactions …
681

• the subsystems that contain the environmental and/or ecosystem state and their
impacts; and
• ﬁnally, the decision-making subsystem, where the processes for selecting
appropriate management actions occur.
The ﬁnal goal of an open system is to provide management actions to be applied
in the real world. These management actions applied to the real world may result in
desirable or undesirable effects. To close the system, we need to monitor and assess
these management actions and correct them through a feedback subsystem in case
of a bad performance. The open system plus the feedback subsystem build the
closed system, as shown in Fig. 34.1.
Indirect and Direct Drivers Affecting the State
of Ecosystems: A Case Study
Sociopolitical, socio-economic, technological, and cultural factors should be con-
sidered in analyzing and assessing ecosystems affected by human activities, such as
the cultural eutrophication process. As expressed by Holzhauer et al. [75], the
analysis of institutional interactions, such as subsidy rates, should be taken into
account in the impacts on the levels of under or oversupply of ecosystems services
to know how the actions selected by institutional actors affect their temporal and
spatial dynamics.
In the MEA [11] and IPBES [12] reports that deal with assessments of the
quality state of ecosystems services and biodiversity, conceptual approaches that
consider indirect and direct drivers are used. The MA report was focused on
Fig. 34.1 A conceptual framework that shows the open and the closed system that paves the way
towards the development of a sustainable ecological management system
682
F. Ramos-Quintana and A. I. Casarrubias-Jaimez

ecosystem services. Meanwhile, the IPBES report was focused on biodiversity. We
do not want to discuss the fact that the DPSIR framework has two categories,
drivers and pressure factors, where interactions cause damage to coastal lagoon
systems. Meanwhile, in the context of the MEA and IPBES reports, they refer to
indirect and direct drivers where interactions between them also cause damage to
the ecosystem under study. Apparently, both approaches have similar purposes or
intentions. However, we prefer the indirect and direct drivers approach, just for
semantic reasons. The following question was asked in the MEA report [11]: What
are the most critical factors causing ecosystems changes? These factors belong to
two categories: the factors related to indirect and direct drivers.
MEA suggests the following classiﬁcations related to indirect and direct drivers:
• Indirect drivers: population increase, economic activities, sociopolitical activi-
ties, cultural factors (in fact, the cultural eutrophication is associated with this
factor), and technological factors; and
• Direct drivers: habitat change; overexploitation of resources such as those pro-
vided by forests, rivers, mangroves, lakes, coastal lagoons, etc.; invasive species;
pollution (for instance, excessive nitrogen and phosphorus discharges into the
lagoon); as well as climate change
Case Study: Analysis of the Tres Palos Coastal Lagoon State
The following analysis is mainly related to ecosystems and, in particular, the
analysis of the Tres Palos Lagoon, which is located on the Paciﬁc Ocean coast in
Acapulco, Guerrero, Mexico. We consider that the economic and population
increase contribute to the decline of resources of these ecosystem services, thus
contributing signiﬁcantly to the cultural eutrophication process taking place in this
lagoon. Among the direct drivers, we are mostly concerned with habitat change,
overexploitation of mangroves, and pollution caused by nitrogen and phosphorus
discharges into the lagoon. Nitrogen and phosphorus discharge into the lagoon is
usually associated with the cultural eutrophication process. Based on classiﬁcations
suggested in the MEA reports, we show the main indirect and direct drivers causing
trophic changes in the Tres Palos Lagoon treated in this chapter.
Indirect Drivers
At the high level of abstraction, the indirect drivers for the case of the Tres Palos
Lagoon are related to population change factors, economic factors, socio-political
factors, science and technological factors, and cultural and religious factors.
Direct Drivers
Likewise, the factors associated with direct drivers causing damage to the Tres
Palos Lagoon are:
34
Systems Approach for Modeling Multifactorial Human Interactions …
683

• nitrogen and phosphorous discharges into the lagoon, coming from the lagoon
sediments,
• solid and liquid wastes associated with the lagoon,
• the river that feeds the lagoon with water; and
• lagoon and river sediments.
Figure 34.2 shows the causal network that resulted from the multiple interac-
tions between indirect and direct drivers. This casual network is the bridge that links
indirect drivers with direct drivers. This complex causal network is composed of
speciﬁc activities consisting of the linkage between indirect drivers and direct
drivers, thus causing damage to the lagoon state. Human settlements, both regular
and irregular, and their associated activities along the river and around the lagoon
require special attention. Other harmful activities, such as agricultural practices,
tourism, and industrial production, are also responsible for discharging nutrients
into the lagoon.
An analysis of the causal network can provide us with insights into the feasibility
of developing an environmental management system to achieve sustainable con-
ditions in the Tres Palos Lagoon. Derived from the causal network analysis, public
policies are needed to avoid certain practices that damage the lagoon. Such public
policies are related to the regulations of several activities that damage the lagoon,
such as irregular human settlements, illegal agricultural practices, urban solid waste
management, the regulation of industrial activities along the river, the consumption
of mangrove resources, and control of tourist activities. Some of these public
policies related to the Tres Palos Lagoon exist but are not formally applied; at least,
there are no monitoring actions able to conﬁrm or assess the performance of the
management actions derived from these public policies. Some others are necessary,
but they do not exist. Another important issue is related to the existence of data-
bases of variables associated with nodes of the causal network. If there is no data,
then it is impossible to assess the quality state of the lagoon. Consequently, it is not
possible to support decision-makers to select adequate management actions. As we
have already pointed out in this chapter, without adequate assessments, the selec-
tion of management actions would be erroneous, and the intention of building a
sustainable management environmental system will be doomed to failure. Unfor-
tunately, the lack of data on the involved variables of an environmental and/or
ecological system is a recurring problem in developing countries, as well as the
socio-political factors, such as the timely generation and correct implementation of
public policies. These are very different in developed and developing countries.
Important changes in the Tres Palos Coastal Lagoon caused by human activities
are shown in Fig. 34.3, which are represented by a sequence of four Landsat-8
satellite images corresponding to the years 2013 (A), 2015 (B), 2017 (C), and 2020
(D), of the municipality of Acapulco, Guerrero state, Mexico. We can observe
through the bands R:5, G:4, B:3 the healthy vegetation distributed in the La Sabana
basin, which belongs to hydrologic region No. 19 in the Costa Grande of Guerrero
state. Despite the short time between the ﬁrst image (2013) and the most recent one
(2020), we can verify the degradation of healthy vegetation, represented by the
684
F. Ramos-Quintana and A. I. Casarrubias-Jaimez

polygon in red. As expected, the image shows the increase of human settlements
around the lagoon, represented by different green areas. The polygon depicts the
Tres Palos Coastal Lagoon in blue.
Fig. 34.2 Causal network showing the multiple interactions between indirect and direct driver
factors that causes damage to the Tres Palos Coastal lagoon. Population increase, Pop-Inc;
SocioEconomic, Soc-Eco; SocioPolitical, Soc-Pol; Technology, Tech; Cultural, Cult; Human
Settlements around the lagoon, HSL; Human Settlements around the River, HSR; Irregular Human
Settlements around the Lagoon, IHSL; Regular Human Settlements around the Lagoon = RHSL;
Agriculture around the Lagoon, AgriL; Agriculture around the River, AgriR; Lagoon Sediments,
LagSed; Sewage Sludge from the River, SSR; Sewage Sludge from the Lagoon, SSL; Sewage
Sludge from the River, SSR; Solid Waste from the Lagoon, SolWasL; Phosphorous Load from the
Lagoon, PLoadL; Phosphorous Load from the River, PLoadR; Generation of Solid Urban Waste,
GSolUrbWas; Reduction of the Waste Filter Effect, RWFE; Tourism, Tour; Product Consumption,
ProdCon; Technical Equipment, TechEquip; Liquid Waste from Lagoon, LiqWasL; Consumption
of Mangrove Resources, ConManRes; Mangrove Loss, ManLoss; Industry around the River,
IndRiv; Generation of special handling waste, GSHWas; Liquid waste from river, LiqWasR; Solid
waste
from
the
river,
SolWasR;
Integral
management
of
wastewater
treatment
plant,
IMWWTPlant; Public Policies to Regulate Human Settlements, PPRHS; Public Policies to
Regulate Agricultural Practices, PPRAP; Public Policies for the integral management of urban
solid waste, PP-IMUSW; Public Policies to control the consumption of mangrove resources,
PP-CCMR; Public Policies for the industrial control, PP-IndCon; Public Policies to regulate
agricultural practices, PP-RAP
34
Systems Approach for Modeling Multifactorial Human Interactions …
685

Fig. 34.3 Four satellite images corresponding to 2013, 2015, 2017, and 2020. It shows relevant
changes in healthy vegetation and the increase of human settlements
686
F. Ramos-Quintana and A. I. Casarrubias-Jaimez

Conclusion
It has been broadly documented that as people’s population and economic power
increase, human activities damage the environmental and ecological state, requiring
assessments to know the level of damage on these systems. Based on these
assessments, decision-makers will select implementable and affordable manage-
ment actions to improve the state of such systems. However, most of the time, the
assessments are not deemed holistic contexts. In other words, the evaluations are
incomplete and therefore not objective and very far removed from reality because
important factors are not involved.
Derived from the causal network that depicts the interactions between indirect
and direct drivers that damage the coastal lagoon under study, it is suggested an
analysis of multifactorial interactions by taking into account socio-political,
socio-economic, demographic, technological, and cultural factors to assess the
environmental and ecological state. If not, the assessments will result incomplete.
However, we know that multifactorial interactions inevitably result in complex
systems, which are often less understandable and assessable. To address the
complexity problem derived from multifactorial interactions, we propose using
conceptual frameworks, supported by a systems approach, for building environ-
mental management system capable of achieving sustainable performance.
Based on a qualitative analysis of the causal network representing interactions
between indirect and direct drivers that damage the Tres Palos Coastal Lagoon, we
have concluded that due to the lack of relevant data associated with the involved
variables and the lack of public policies related to diverse activities that damage the
lagoon, it is practically unfeasible to develop an acceptable environmental man-
agement system and consequently impossible to reach the desirable sustainable
conditions for the lagoon. And these are typical problems of developing countries.
Core Messages
• Human activities damage environmental and ecological systems.
• Multifactorial interactions exist between indirect drivers and direct drivers
that impact on environment and ecosystems.
• We can link indirect drivers and direct drivers to assess the state of
environmental and ecological systems.
• The eutrophication process damages the trophic state of a coastal lagoon.
• A systems approach-based conceptual framework can help us build a
sustainable environmental management system.
34
Systems Approach for Modeling Multifactorial Human Interactions …
687

References
1. Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) (2008) OECD environ-
mental outlook to 2030. Retrieved 15.01.17 from. http://www.oecd.org/env/indicators-
modelling-outlooks/40200582.pdf
2. Sousa LP, Sousa AI, Alves FL, Lillebø AI (2016) Ecosystem XE “ecosystem” services
provided by a complex coastal region: challenges of classiﬁcation and mapping. Sci Rep 6
(1):22782
3. Malinga R, Gordon LJ, Jewitt G, Lindborg R (2015) Mapping ecosystem services across
scales and continents—a review. Ecosyst Serv 13:57–63
4. Barbier EB, Hacker SD, Kennedy C, Koch EW, Stier AC, Siliman BR (2011) The value of
estuarine and coastal ecosystem services. Ecol Monograps 8(2):169–193
5. Costanza R, d’Arge R, de Groot R, Farber S, Grasso M, Hannon B, Limburg K, Naeem S,
O’Neill RV, Paruelo J, Raskin RG, Sutton, van den Belt M (1997) The value of the world’s
ecosystem services and natural capita. Nature 387(6630):253–260
6. Costanza R, de Groot R, Sutton P, Van Der Ploeg S, Anderson SJ, Kubiszewski I, Farber S,
Turner K (2014) Changes in the global value of ecosystem services. Glob Environ Chang
26:152–158
7. Pérez-Ruzafa Á, Marcos C, Pérez-Ruzafa M (2011) Recent advances in coastal lagoons XE
“CL, coastal lagoon” ecology: evolving old ideas and assumptions. Transitional Waters Bull 5
(1):50–74
8. Ramos-Quinatana F, Sotelo-Nava H, Saldarriaga-Noreña H, Tovar-Sánchez E (2019)
Assessing the environmental quality resulting from damages to human-nature interactions
caused by population increase: a systems thinking approach. Sustainability 11(7):1957
9. Skoulikidis NTh (2009) The environmental state of rivers in the Balkans—a review within the
DPSIR framework. Sci Total Environ 407(8):2501–2516
10. Tscherning K, Helming K, Krippner B, Sieber S, Gomez y Paloma S (2012) Does research
applying the DPSIR framework support decision making? Land Use Policy 29:102–110
11. Reid WV, Mooney HA, Cropper A, Capistrano D, Carpenter SR, Chopra K et al (2005)
Ecosystems and human well-being synthesis a report of the millennium ecosystem
assessment. Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. Report No. 5
12. IPBES (2019) Summary for policymakers of the global assessment report on biodiversity and
ecosystem services of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and
Ecosystem Services. In: Díaz S, Settele J, Brondízio ES, Ngo HT, Guèze M, Agard J,
Arneth A, Balvanera P, Brauman KA, Butchart SHM, Chan KMA, Garibaldi LA, Ichii K,
Liu J, Subramanian JM, Midgley GF, Miloslavich P, Molnár Z, Obura D, Pfaff A, Polasky S,
Purvis A, Razzaque J, Reyers B, Roy Chowdhury R, Shin YJ, Visseren-Hamakers IJ,
Willis KJ, and Zayas CN (eds) IPBES secretariat. Bonn, Germany, p 56
13. Draper NR, Smith H, Pownell E (1966) Applied regression analysis, vol 3. Wiley, New York
14. Bricker S, Ferreira J, Simas T (2003) An integrated methodology for assessment of estuarine
trophic status. Ecol Model 169(1):39–60
15. Newton A, Icely JD, Falcao M, Nobre A, Nunes JP, Ferreira JG, Vale C (2003) Evaluation of
eutrophication in the Ria Formosa coastal lagoon XE “CL, coastal lagoon”, Portugal. Cont
Shelf Res 23:17–19
16. Smith VH, Schindler DW (2009) Eutrophication science: where do we go from here? Trends
Ecol Evol 24(4):2001–2007
17. Cotovicz Junior LC, Brandini N, Knoppers BA, Damian Mizerkowski B, Sterza JM, Coelho
Ovalle AR, Petter Medeiros PR (2013) Assessment of the throphic status of four coastal
lagoons XE “CL, coastal lagoon” and one estuarine delta, Eastern Brazil. Environ Monit
Assess 185(4):3297–3311
18. Herrera-Silveira JA, Ramírez-Ramírez J (2017) Salinity and nutrients XE “Nutrient” in the
coastal lagoons XE “CL, coastal lagoon” of Yucatán, México. Internationale Vereinigung für
theoretische und angewandte Limnologie: Verhandlungen 26(3):1473–1478
688
F. Ramos-Quintana and A. I. Casarrubias-Jaimez

19. Dillon PJ, Kirchner WB (1975) The effects of geology and land use on the export of
phosphorous from watersheds. Water Res 9(2):135–148
20. Carpenter S (2005) Eutrophication of aquatic ecosystems: bistability and soil phosphorus.
Proc Natl Acad Sci 102(29):10002–10005
21. Granat L (2001) Deposition of nitrate and ammonium from the atmosphere to the Baltic sea.
Ecological Studies 148:133–134
22. Inda H, García-Rodríguez F, del Puerto L, Stutz S, Lopes Figueira RC, de Lima Ferreira PA,
Mazzeo N (2016) Discriminating between natural and human-induced shifts in a shallow
coastal lagoon XE “CL, coastal lagoon”: a multidisciplinary XE “Multidisciplinary”
approach. Anthropocene 16:1–15
23. Lo WT, Purcell JE, Hung JJ, Su HM, Hsu PK (2008) Enhancement of jellyﬁsh (Aurelia
aurita) populations by extensive aquaculture rafts in a coastal lagoon XE “CL, coastal
lagoon” in Taiwan. ICES J Mar Sci 65(3):453–461
24. La Notte A, Turvani M, Giaccaria S (2011) Economic valuation of ecosystem services at local
level for policy markers and planners. The case of the island of St. Erasmo in the Lagoon of
Venice. Environ Econ 2(3):87–103
25. Rova S, Pranovi F, Müller F (2014) Provision of ecosystem services in the lagoon of Venice
(Italy) an initial spatial assessment. Ecohydrol Hydrobiol 15(1):13–25
26. O’Higgins T, Nogueira AA, Lillebø AI (2019) A simple spatial typology for assessment of
complex coastal ecosystem services across multiple scales. Sci Total Environ 649:1452–1466
27. Vilardy SP, González JA, Martín-López B, Montes C (2011) Relationships between
hydrological regime and ecosystem services supply in a Caribbean coastal wetland: a
social-ecological approach. Hydrol Sci J 56(8):1423–1435
28. Basset A, Elliott M, West RJ, Wilson JG (2013) Estuarine and lagoon biodiversity XE
“Biodiversity” and their natural goods and services. Estuar Coast Shelf Sci 132:1–4
29. Lillebø AI, Somma F, Norén K, Gonçalves J, Alves MF, Ballarini E, Bentes L, Bielecka M,
Chubarenko BV, Heise S, Khokhlov V, Klaoudatos D, Lloret J, Margonski P, Marín A,
Matczak M, Oen AMP, Palmieri MG, Przedryzmirska J, Różyński G, Sousa AI, Sousa LP,
Tuchkovenko Y, Zaucha J (2016) Assessment of marine ecosystem services indicators XE
“Indicator”: experiences and lessons learned from 14 European case studies. Integr Environ
Assess Manag 12(4):726–734
30. Aldana-Domínguez J, Montes C, Martínez M, Medina N, Hahn J, Duque M (2017)
Biodiversity XE “Biodiversity” and ecosystem XE “Ecosystem” services knowledge in the
Colombian Caribbean: progress and challenges. Trop Conserv Sci 10(1):1–41
31. Velasco AM, Pérez-Ruzafa A, Martínez-Paz JM, Marcos C (2018) Ecosystem XE
“Ecosystem” services and main environmental risks in a coastal lagoon XE “CL, coastal
lagoon” (Mar Menor, Murcia, SE Spain): the public perception. J Nat Conserv 43:180–189
32. Galloway JN, Dentener FJ, Capone DG, Boyer EW, Howart RW, Seitzinger SP, Asner GP,
Cleveland CC, Green PA, Holland EA, Karl DM, Michaels AF, Porter JH, Townsed AR,
Vörösmarty CJ (2004) Nitrogen cycles: past, present, and future. Biochemistry 70:153–226
33. Orabi OH, Osman MF (2015) Evaluation of some pollution XE “Pollution” at Manzala
Lagoon: special reference to medical importance of Mollusca in Egypt. Environ Anal Toxicol
5(5):311
34. Ruiz-Ruiz TM, Arreola-Lizárraga JA, Morquecho L, Mendoza-Salgado RA, Martínez-López
A, Méndez-Rodríguez LC (2016) Assessment the eutrophication in a subtropical lagoon in the
Gulf of California. Aquat Ecosyst Health Manage 19(4): 382–392
35. Phil L, Rosernberg R (1982) Production, abundance, and biomass of mobile epibenthic
marine fauna in shallow waters, western Sweden. J Exp Mar Biol Ecol 57:273–301
36. Ærtebjerg G, Carstensen J, Dahl K, Hansen J, Nygaard K, Rygg B, Sørensen K, Severinsen G,
Casartelli S, Schrimpf W, Schiller C, Druon JN (2001) EEA, European environment agency.
Eutrophication in Europe’s coastal waters. Topic report No. 7. Copenhagen, p 86
34
Systems Approach for Modeling Multifactorial Human Interactions …
689

37. Taylor DI, Nixon SW, Granger SL, Buckley BA (1999) Responses of coastal lagoon XE “CL,
coastal lagoon” plant XE “Plant” communities to levels of nutrient XE “Nutrient” enrichment:
a mesocosm study. Estuaries 22(4):1041–1056
38. Dürr HH, Laruelle GG, Van Kempen CM, Slomp CP, Meybeck M, Middelkoop H (2011)
Worldwide XE “Worldwide” typology XE “Typology” of nearshore coastal systems: deﬁning
the estuarine ﬁlter of river XE “River” inputs XE “Input” to the oceans XE “Ocean.” Estuaries
Coast 34(3):441–458
39. Dodds W (2007) Trophic state, eutrophication and nutrient XE “Nutrient” criteria in streams.
Trends Ecol Evol 22(12):669–676
40. Kormas KA, Nicolaidou A, Reizopoulou S (2001) Temporal variations of nutrients XE
“Nutrient”, chlorophyll a and particulate matter XE “Particulate matter (PM)” in three coastal
lagoons XE “CL, coastal lagoon” of Amvrakikos Gulf (Ionian Sea, Greece). Mar Ecol 22
(3):201–213
41. Smith VH, Joye SB, Howart RW (2006) Eutrophication of fresh waters and marine
ecosystems. Limnol Oceanogr 51(1):351–355
42. Ganguly D, Patra S, Muduli R, Vishnu Vardhan K, Abhilash KR, Robin RS, Subramanian BR
(2015) Inﬂuence of nutrient input on the trophic state of a tropical brackish water lagoon.
J Earth Syst Sci 124(5):1005–1017
43. Rodellas V, Stieglitz TC, Andrisoa A, Cook PG, Raimbault P, Tamborski JJ, Van Beek P,
Radakovich O (2018) Groundwater-driven nutrient XE “Nutrient” inputs XE “Input” to
coastal lagoons XE “CL, coastal lagoon”: the relevance of lagoon water recirculation as a
conveyor of dissolved nutrients XE “Nutrient.” Sci Total Environ 642:764–780
44. Esteves FA, Caliman A, Santangelo JM, Guarient RD, Farjalla VF, Brozelli RL (2008)
Neotripical coastal lagoons XE “CL, coastal lagoon”: an appraisal of their biodiversity XE
“Biodiversity”, functioning, threats XE “Threat”, and conservation management. Braz J Biol
68(4):967–981
45. Otu MK, Ramlal P, Wilkinson P, Hall RI, Hecky RE (2011) Paleolimnological evidence of
the effects of recent cultural eutrophication during the last 200 years in Lake Malawi, East
Africa. J Great Lakes Res 37:61–74
46. Thevenon F, Adatte T, Wildi W, Poté J (2012) Antibiotic resistant XE “Resistance:resistance,
antibiotic” bacteria/genes dissemination in lacustrine sediments highly increased following
cultural eutrophication of Lake Geneva (Switzerland). Chemosphere 86(5):468–476
47. Chislock MF, Doster E, Zitomer
RA, Wilson
AE (2013) Eutrophication: causes,
consequences, and controls in aquatic ecosystems XE “Ecosystem.” Nat Educ Knowl 4(4):10
48. Cotovicz LC Jr, Knoppers BA, Brandini N, Costa Santos SJ, Abril G (2015) A strong CO2
XE “CO2” sink enhanced by eutrophication in a tropical coastal embayment (Guanabara Bay,
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil). Biogeosciences 12(20):6125–6146
49. Van Rijssel JC, Hecky RE, Kishe-Machumu MA, Witte F (2016) Changing ecology of Lake
Victoria cichlids and their environment: evidence from C13 and N15 analyses. Hydrobiologia
791(1):175–191
50. Haas M, Baumann F, Castella D, Haghipour N, Reusch A, Strasser M, Eglinton TI, Dubois N
(2019) Roman-driven cultural eutrophication of Lake Murten, Switzerland. Earth Planet Sci
Lett 505:110–117
51. Fielding JJ, Croudace IW, Kemp AES, Pearce RB, Cotterill CJ, Langdon P, Avery R (2020)
Tracing lake pollution XE “Pollution”, eutrophication, and partial recovery from the
sediments of Windermere, UK, using geochemistry and sediment microfabrics. Sci Total
Environ 722:137745
52. Souchu P, Bec B, Smith VH, Laugier T, Fiandrino A, Benua L, Orsoni V, Collos Y, Vaquer A
(2010) Patterns in nutrient XE “Nutrient” limitation and chlorophyll a along an anthropogenic
eutrophication gradient in French Mediterranean coastal lagoons XE “CL, coastal lagoon.”
Can J Fish Aquat Sci 67(4):743–753
53. OECD (2001) Environmental indicators: towards sustainable development. Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development, Paris
690
F. Ramos-Quintana and A. I. Casarrubias-Jaimez

54. UN-HABITAT (2003) The challenges of slums: global report on human settlements 2003.
Earthscan & UN Habitat, London
55. Ramos-Quintana F, Ortíz-Hernández ML, Sánchez-Salinas E, Úrsula-Vázquez E, Guer-
rero JA, Zambrano M (2018) Quantitative-qualitative assessment of environmental causal
networks to support the DPSIR framework in the decision-making process. Environ Impact
Assess Rev 69:42–60
56. Ramos-Quintana F, Sotelo-Nava H, Saldarriaga-Noreña H, Tovar-Sánchez E (2019)
Assessing the environmental quality resulting from damages to human-nature interactions
caused by population increase: a systems thinking approach. Sustainability 11:1957
57. OECD (1998) Towards sustainable development: environmental indicators. Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development, Paris
58. Burkhard B, Müller F (2008) Driver-pressure-state-impact-response. Ecol Indic 967–970
59. Carr ER, Wingard PM, Yorty SC, Thompson MC, Jensen NK, Roberson J (2007)
Applying DPSIR to sustainable development. Int J Sust Dev World 14(6):543–555
60. Shi A (2001) The impact of population pressure on global carbon dioxide emissions, 1975–
1996: evidence from pooled cross-country data. Ecol Econ 44(1):29–42
61. Sowers J, Vengosh A, Weinthal E (2010) Climate change XE “Climate:climate change”,
water resources, and the politics of adaptation in the Middle East and North Africa. Clim
Change 104(3–4):599–627
62. Kristenrsen P (2004) The DPSIR framework. In: Workshop on a comprehensive/detailed
assessment of the vulnerability of water resources to environmental change in Africa using
river basin approach. UNEP Headquaters, Nairobi, Kenya
63. Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) [Internet]. OECD
Environmental Outlook to 2030. 2008 Updated: 6 de julio de 2020. Available on: http://www.
oecd.org/env/indicators-modelling-outlooks/40200582.pdf
64. Omann I, Stocker A, Jäger J (2009) Climate change as a threat to biodiversity: an application
of the DPSIR approach. Ecol Econ 69:24–31
65. Kelble CR, Loomis DK, Lovelace S, Nuttle WK, Ortner PB, Fletcher P, Cook GS, Lorenz JJ,
Boyer JN (2013) The EBM-DPSER conceptual model: integrating ecosystem XE “Ecosys-
tem” services in to the DPSIR framework. PLoS ONE 8(8):e70766
66. Nikolaou K, Basbas S, Taxiltaris C (2004) Assessment of air pollution indicators XE
“Indicator” in an urban area using the DPSIR model. Fresenius Environ Bull 13:820–830
67. Rasi Nezami S, Nazariha M, Moridi A, and Baghvand A (2013) Environmentally Sound
Water Resources Management in Catchment Level using DPSIR Model and Scenario
Analysis. Int. J. Environ, Res 7(3): 569–580
68. Kohsaka R (2010) Developing biodiversity XE “Biodiversity” indicators XE “Indicator” for
cities XE “Cities”: applying the DPSIR model to Nagoya and integrating social and ecological
aspects. Ecol Res 25:925–936
69. Maureen C, Grifﬁths C (2012) The interaction of population growth and environmental
quality. Am Econ Rev 84(2):250–254
70. Maxim L, Spangenberg JH, O’Connor M (2009) An analysis of risks for biodiversity under
the DPSIR framework. Ecol Econ 69(1):12–23
71. Scheren PAGM, Kroeze C, Janssen FJJG, Hordijk L, Ptasinski K (2004) Integrated water
pollution XE “Pollution” assessment of the Ebrié Lagoon, Ivory Coast, West Africa. J Mar
Syst 44:1–17
72. Gari Robele S, Newton A, Icely JD (2015) A review of the application and evolution of the
DPSIR framework with an emphasis on coastal social-ecologial systems. Ocean Coast
Manage 103:63–77
73. Dolbeth M, Stålnacke P, Alvez FL, Sousa LP, Gooch GD, Khokhlov V, Tuchkovenko Y,
Lloret J, Bielecka M, Różyński G, Soares JA, Baggett S, Margonski P, Chubarenko BV,
Lillebø AI (2010) An integrated Pan-European perspective on coastal Lagoons XE “CL,
coastal lagoon” management through a mosaic-DPSIR approach. Sci Rep 6(1):1–12
34
Systems Approach for Modeling Multifactorial Human Interactions …
691

74. Sun S, Wang Y, Liu J, Cai H, Wu P, Geng Q, Xu L (2016) Sustainability assessment of
reginal water resources under the DPSIR framework. J Hydrol 532:140–148
75. Holzhauer S, Brown C, Rounsevell M (2018) Modelling dynamic effects of multi-scale
institutions on land use change. Reg Environ Change
Fernando Ramos-Quintana has a Master’s and Ph.D. in Infor-
matics
and
Automatic
Systems
at
the
Université
de
Franche-Comté, France. He is a multidisciplinary researcher
currently working on the development of models and methods
that take into account multifactorial interactions for assessing the
quality state of environmental and ecological systems and the
vulnerability state of species to climate change. The assessments
are guided by conceptual frameworks based on systems thinking
approaches.
Ana Itzel Casarrubias-Jaimez has a Master degree in epi-
demiology at the Universidad Autónoma de Guerrero, Mexico.
Her current research interests are focused on the studies of human
activities that cause impacts on coastal lagoons. She is currently
developing a conceptual framework that will guide the develop-
ment of an environmental management system applied to coastal
lagoons. This research aims to obtain a Ph.D. degree under the
direction of Dr. Fernando Ramos-Quintana.
692
F. Ramos-Quintana and A. I. Casarrubias-Jaimez

35
Cradle to Cradle and Cradle to Grave:
Discussing the Case of Eco-coffins
Grace Anywar, Helen Kopnina, and Kim Poldner
“You must teach your children that the ground beneath their
feet is the ashes of our grandfathers. So that they will respect
the land, tell your children that the Earth is rich with the lives of
our kin. Teach your children what we have taught our children.
That the Earth is our mother. Whatever befalls the Earth befalls
the sons of the Earth. If men spit upon the ground, they spit
upon themselves”.
Chief Seattle
Summary
This chapter addresses dichotomous thinking about culture and nature, life and
death, and humans and the environment by discussing the principles of the
Cradle-to-Cradle framework in application to eco-cofﬁns. Eco-cofﬁns are used as
a vessel “to question whether our commitment to the future and immortality
could be manifested through our relationship to nature.” The chapter reﬂects on
how eco-cofﬁns can provide an example of regeneration and a dismantling of
dichotomous thinking in the context of sustainability. The investigation focuses
G. Anywar (&)
Cultural Anthropology & Development Sociology, Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands
e-mail: grace.aciro@gmail.com
Carrer Elcano 9, 07470 Port de Pollensa, Mallorca, Islas Baleares, Spain
H. Kopnina
Newcastle Business School, Northumbria University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK
e-mail: helen.kopnina@northumbria.ac.uk
K. Poldner
The Hague University of Applied Sciences, Hague, Netherlands
e-mail: K.A.Poldner@hhs.nl
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh (eds.), Thinking, Integrated Science 7,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04075-7_35
693

on cofﬁn design and burial procedures within the context of the continuous
biological life cycle. It concludes that while dealing with death, eco-cofﬁns can
stand as a metaphor for uniting ecological and social worlds, both in terms of
practical design and evolving values.
Capsula Mundi
(Adapted with permission from Rodolfo Bretzel, Capsula Mundi)
Keywords
Eco-cofﬁns 
Cradle
to
cradle 
Human–environment
dichotomies 
Sustainability
694
G. Anywar et al.

QR Code
Scanning the QR code directs you to the word cloud of the chapter that is made up
of the words we discussed throughout the whole book in relation to the chapter’s
keyword, which is intentionally not included in the word cloud. Find the keyword
and put it in place in the puzzle according to the clues provided in Chap. 36. The
mystery hidden in the puzzle is the quote of THINKING: Bioengineering of Science
and Art.
Introduction: “Cautious Optimism”
Though written in 1972, Perry’s adaptation of Chief Seattle’s speech still holds an
important message today. In an Anthropocentric world of almost 8 billion con-
sumers, industrial production and mass consumption have become our greatest
sustainability challenges. A combination of the omnipresent dualism that holds
humans and nature apart [1, 2] and our devotion to industrial and technological
progress [3] paints a bleak picture of the future. Many scholars share this pes-
simistic outlook. However, anthropologist Kenneth Smail [4] expresses his ‘cau-
tious optimism’ about humanity’s ability to avert an ecological crisis and writes:
“all humans—despite our many differences—share a deep-rooted investment in
immortality, an individual and collective concern for posterity. This powerful
commitment to the future manifests itself biologically (through the children we
beget), socio-culturally (through our relationships with others), and morally
(through our religious and/or ethical systems)” [4, p. 295].
While reﬂecting on this “investment in immortality,” e.g., the need to create
stories, “make a difference” or leave behind a “legacy” for future generations, and
the signiﬁcance of birth and death in our lives; seasonal cycles, product lifespans
and, of course, our mortality, this chapter will use eco-cofﬁns as a vessel to examine
whether our commitment to the future and immortality could manifest itself
socio-ecologically through our relationship with the environment.
As a tribute to mortality, nature-based sacred spaces and materialities that
identify and express collective consciousness have been commonplace throughout
human history [5–7]. The Norse had totems of their “guardian spirits,” while Celtic
clan names and mythologies were connected to animals and birds intertwined with
35
Cradle to Cradle and Cradle to Grave …
695

stories of shape-shifting ancestors. Like the Aboriginal clans of Australia and
Native Americans of America, the early inhabitants of Britain revered the natural
world, perceiving woodland, rivers, rocks, hills, and trees as the dwelling places of
the spirits [6, 7]. Veronica Strang’s [1, 8] research with Aboriginal groups, Euro
Australian pastoralists, and other land users in Northern Queensland observed that,
although the pastoralists had more complex notions of place and their relationship
with the environment, their ideas arose from perceptions of nature as a wilderness
or “other;” inferior to man and something to be controlled. In comparison,
indigenous notions of self and nature were intrinsic and interconnected with social
and environmental sustainability instead of the co-dependent relationship that the
pastoralists, indeed Western thought, had with nature.
In order to explore the signiﬁcance of eco-cofﬁns within the more extensive
discussion of sustainability, and speciﬁcally within the context of Cradle to Cradle
(C2C), developed by McDonough and Braungart [9], we shall ﬁrst address the
dichotomies that structure our thinking; in this case those of life and death, and
nature and culture. Dichotomous thinking exposes powers of discourse, catego-
rization, and separation. It has instilled within us the anthropocentric notion of
human supremacy over nature, which is at the core of the environmental crisis [10,
p. 45]. The traditional cofﬁn or casket becomes a valuable tool because it exem-
pliﬁes the life and death dichotomy as a “cradle to grave” product by name and
nature. We outline how eco-cofﬁns provide an environmentally benign alternative
to the commonly used cofﬁns or caskets. We also discuss how “natural burials”
reﬂect the core principles of the C2C philosophy by closing a biological loop in
human life cycles, providing essential regulatory and cultural ecosystem services
that could facilitate the reconciliation of humans and nature. This investigation will
culminate in the reﬂection on how cofﬁn design and burial procedures, while having
to do with death, can remind us of our place within the biological life cycle.
Human-Nature Dichotomies
There has been a growing discourse surrounding binaries that discuss the rela-
tionship between humans and the environment enlivening the cognitive, natural,
and social sciences in recent years. Claude Lévi-Strauss [6] suggested that human
reasoning required dialectical and binary concepts for organizational purposes. The
human-nature dichotomy, therefore, has often been described as two opposing
concepts, i.e., human and nature.
We can see from multidisciplinary foundations that the study of human history
has mainly focused on our social differences, assuming that all humans share the
same cognitive characteristics [11] and, more recently, the knowledge to shape and
alter the environment in response to our material demands [2, 12].
As for “nature,” the (at times interchangeable) terms biophysical or natural
environment are often used to describe all things that occur naturally as opposed to
those created or manipulated by human activity [13]. They refer to the type of
696
G. Anywar et al.

environment that creates and supports the conditions that guarantee the survival of
ecosystems and habitats [13].
These concepts of the biophysical and natural environment are often used in
opposition to the concepts of built or modiﬁed environments, which are artiﬁcial
landscapes that have been engineered or physically constructed by humans [14].
The terms “built” or “modiﬁed” typically refer to structures or spaces that have been
inﬂuenced by, or modiﬁed for, human activity, e.g., gardens, car parks, furniture,
and houses [14]. Seen in this light, the “built environment” [14] can be seen as
inseparable from both human labor and the biophysical world as it necessitates the
two in order to exist; when trees become furniture, for example [15]. Thus, the
environment can refer to the world outside of human activity, but it can include
humans too.
These binary concepts of the environment—whether dead or alive–have given
rise to several inquiries about human–environment dichotomies and the role they
play in the broader discussion on sustainability [12]. They also raise questions
regarding the opposition between progress in “taming nature” on the one hand and
protecting “romantic nature” on the other hand [16]. The interdisciplinary theories
rejecting this dichotomy, such as more-than-human geography [17] and multi-
species ethnography [18, 19], can instruct a particular view of sustainability further
explored in the case of cofﬁns.
The literature on deep ecology [20] and land ethics [21] has identiﬁed some
inconsistencies between culture and nature [22–24], especially with regards to
human industrial activity, which has had an unprecedented effect on other species”
habitats.
From Cradle to Grave
One of the central features of our industrial production system is the denial that
death (of an animal, tree, or person) contributes to the circularity of materials in an
essentially sustainable circle of life and death. As Afﬁﬁand Christie [25] have
argued, “our own mortality and that of our loved ones feels painful and threatening,
yet the mortality of the biosphere unthinkable” and inconceivable. Consequently,
the authors argue, we try to avoid and distract ourselves from thoughts about death
with our globalizing consumer culture “colluding in our evasiveness” [25].
In both ethics and practice, however, there is little recognition of death. One
example includes our moral blind spot for the short and brutal lives of animals in
intensive farming, medical testing [26], hunting [19, 27], roadkill [28], or indirectly
through the clearing of habitats to make way for development [10]. Sadly, there is
currently little legislature protecting the lives or condemning the deaths of non-
humans or nature [29]. Another example of brushing death away is the ubiquitous
urban practice of clearing autumn leaves and disposing them in mixed garbage
containers [15]. Yet, these leaves could serve as “food” for organisms that help
create new soil by supporting one of the fundamental principles of C2C—“waste
35
Cradle to Cradle and Cradle to Grave …
697

equals food.” In a similar vein, the burning of garbage to produce supposedly
“green” energy incinerates mixed materials, including paper, metal, and glass, that
go up in smoke [30].
The scars of human industrial and technological activity are carved on the globe
in various ways [31]. They occur in power plants, factories, mines, and swathes of
land set aside for agriculture, the scattered urban areas, polluted waterways, oil
spills, and barren landscapes where forests once ﬂourished. Our cities, these
assemblages of artistic and architectural development, transport networks, and
human activity, have ecological footprints that go far beyond their built environ-
ments [32, pp. 15–16].
Indeed, the consequences of anthropogenic activity on the planet have become
so ingrained in modern society’s mechanisms that it is almost taken as a given that a
biospheric impact must inevitably come about as a result [9]. Ulrich Beck [3]
suggests that the environmental impacts of our “Risk Society” go far beyond oil
spills and air pollution. “They are manufactured uncertainties induced by the
unwanted side-effects of technological development;” climate change and “con-
stantly emerging disease[s]” like Avian ﬂu [33, p. 11] or, as we are currently
bearing witness to, novel coronaviruses. According to Beck, all of these “manu-
factured uncertainties” are due to human technological development and how it
transforms the relationship between our social and biological worlds [3].
Yet, according to McDonough and Braungart [9], we need not look to “manu-
factured uncertainties” to be disturbed by the way our industrial and technological
developments are consistently impacting our lives. Rather, we can ﬁnd them in our
own homes in the form of heavy metals, hazardous chemicals, acids, plastics, and
mutagenic materials that leach out of the ﬁbers in our sofas, cooking appliances,
toys, clothes, phones, and computers. Of course, there are things that we would ﬁnd
hard to live without—the materials in a computer are necessary for it to function
and we need the clothes on our backs. However, what happens when we no longer
want or use these items? What about when they meet the end of their life cycle, and
we must dispose of them?
In contrast to our current linear system of “take, make, waste”—i.e., the col-
lection of raw materials, the manufacture of the product, and its disposal once it
comes to the end of its life—waste within the C2C framework equals food. It
implies that all components in C2C products can either be retrieved and reused
(technical cycle) or composted/biodegraded (biological cycle) once the product has
come to the end of its life cycle. For example, electronic goods such as mobile
phones and hair dryers would belong to the technical cycle. During the manufac-
turing process, these items would be made with both their material value and their
next service life is taken into consideration; they would be manufactured with
high-quality materials and with easy upgrading or dismantling in mind. Once
discarded, the items would be dismantled and have their components retrieved and
sorted by material so they could be reintroduced to a new technical cycle in the
form of a new product. This ensures the circularity, opposed to linearity, of C2C
production (https://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/). In the biological cycle,
we have biodegradable items such as wood, paper, and food waste, all of which
698
G. Anywar et al.

have a post-life value as they can be upcycled, reused, or composted, thereby
restoring their biological nutrients to the soil and completing a biological cycle.
Thus, a C2C cycle is accomplished by products that complete, and restart, a bio-
logical or technological cycle. Yet, in our current system, once discarded to landﬁll
or incinerated, any biological or technological “nutrients” that could have become
food, reused, or recycled lose their value and thus end their life cycle in a “cradle to
grave” fashion [9]. We are curious about how such cradle-to-grave products can
provide a practical example of regeneration in the context of sustainability?
Case Study: Green Coffins
Since the 1950s, the cofﬁn industry has become increasingly dominated by large
manufacturers that run highly automated, industrialized manufacturing plants [34].
Indeed, funerals and burials themselves have become increasingly commercialized
and, in some cases, proﬁtable methods of temporarily masking the harsh reality of
death [35]. In much of the industrialized world, caskets and cofﬁns can be made
from various materials such as solid oak or pine or a more economical, coated, or
veneered chipboard that has been bonded with a formaldehyde-based resin [36].
They can also be made from plastic, ﬁberglass, and even metals like steel, bronze,
and copper [35].
Sadly, regardless of the material used, traditional cofﬁns and caskets quickly
become a capsule for anaerobic decay, contributing to the demand for raw materials
and formaldehyde-based embalming ﬂuids that are buried in the US cemeteries
every year [37]. In the UK, due to a growing shortage of burial space, cremations
are often chosen over burials. In his Guide to a Good Death, Hickman [36] used
data from the Federation of British Cremation Authorities to conclude that the
average cremator consumes around the same amount of domestic energy per cre-
mation as the average person would in a month. This equates to about the same
amount of energy as an 800 km car journey [38]. The toxicity of polluting dioxins
emitted into the atmosphere, such as mercury emissions vaporized during cremation
[37], is another cause for concern.
Addressing Casket Production
A standard casket production process entails the following: industrial machines cut
several long wooden slats wedged into a frame and glued together to form the lid
and the casket’s base frame [39]. These slats are then placed into a large vice that
applies pressure to create a permanent bond, while an industrial saw is used to cut
away excess wood and create a shape [39]. Extra slats of wood give the casket its
identiﬁable shape while more glue is added, and the vice is tightened again to create
a bond that is kept secure with large industrial nails. The rough shape is then sanded
35
Cradle to Cradle and Cradle to Grave …
699

down, and any engravings and decorative molds are added. Once the shape is
formed, it is sprayed with wood stain or paint and oven “cooked” to dry before
adding lacquers, handles, various types of wood, metals, or plastics to adorn the
outer frame [40]. The inside of the casket or cofﬁn is usually upholstered using silk,
velvet, or polyester. Finally, a simple wooden bed is ﬁtted inside and covered with a
light fabric such as linen [34, 39].
Though “classic” in style, both caskets and cofﬁns can be referred to as what
McDonough and Braungart [9] would call “monstrous hybrids.” The name was
given to consumer items made up of a mixture of technical and biological materials
that cannot be retrieved once they have met their use [p. 99]. Thus, they are
“Frankenstein products,” inappropriate for upcycling, recycling, or reuse. Rather,
they are responsible for contaminating the soil via the slow release of toxins from
the cofﬁn’s technological make-up and the (unnecessarily) slowly decomposing
body that it encapsulates. It is much the same for the cremation process, which we
have already scrutinized regarding environmental standards, energy use, carbon
emissions, and the burning of such a volatile cocktail of chemicals [36]. This
constant consumption of raw and crude materials alongside the production of such
high levels of waste and pollution for a product with a single-use lifespan is a
shamefully unfortunate, yet well-ingrained, consequence of outdated and unintel-
ligent design [9, p. 43].
From C2C: Capsules, Cocoons, and Eco-coffins
Perhaps in response to a surge of environmental awareness in recent years, there has
been a rise in the number of manufacturers who specialize in “Eco-Cofﬁns” and
with them a growing interest in “green” and “natural burials” [41]. The Funeral
Consumers Alliance [42] deﬁnes a “Green (or natural) Burial” as one that focuses
on “simplicity and environmental sustainability.” To qualify as green burial, a body
must not be prepared using embalming ﬂuids or chemicals. Rather, it is simply
bathed before being laid to rest in a biodegradable casket or shroud and placed
directly in the Earth (without a burial vault). This allows the casket, or shroud,
direct contact with soil-based bacteria that cause it to biodegrade, facilitating the
body’s decomposition and returning to the soil, thus completing a biological cycle.
Only then can a burial truly be “ashes to ashes, dust to dust” [41].
There are currently several “Eco-Cofﬁn” options available on the market, such as
those made from Banana or Bamboo [43]. They can also be made from a mix of raw
organic materials like rattan, wood, and cotton, and others are made entirely from
cardboard [44]. The alternatives discussed here are The Capsula Mundi from Italy
[45], herein referred to as the “Capsule” (Graphical Abstract)—and the Leaf Cocoon
from Bellacouche [46, 47]—herein referred to as the “Leaf Cocoon” (Fig. 35.1).
The Capsula Mundi (“Capsule”) is made from a bioplastic that comes from
organic materials [45], and the Leaf Cocoon is made from hand-felted wool that has
been collected from locally grazing (rather than industrially farmed) sheep and
700
G. Anywar et al.

wood that is collected from local woodland trees such as Hazelwood [47]. Besides
these two core ingredients, a small number of nails, sewing threads, and cotton ties,
made from organic or locally spun threads, are incorporated to bring the Leaf
Cocoon together [46, 47]. The only two elements that are currently non-renewable
are the (fossil-sourced) electricity needed to sew some of the elements together and
a handful of nails. However, due to its low energy demand, enough power to create
a Leaf Cocoon could be sourced via solar energy, and both biodegradable and
reusable nails are readily available.
There is little detailed information about the exact materials and manufacturing
process of the Capsule design, but a perusal of the Capsula Mundi website indicates
that it is made from bioplastic derived from organic materials. This bioplastic is
then molded into an egg shape within which the deceased body or ashes can be
placed. The Capsule is then placed in the ground with a tree seed or sapling directly
above it so that both the Capsule and body become a nutritional source for the
growing tree [45, 48]. As of this moment, the Capsula Mundi is only available as an
urn to be buried, but the long-term goal is to be able to release their full burial
option, which has been on display at the Broken Nature exhibition by Paolo
Antonelli at the XXII Triennale di Milano [49].
The Leaf Cocoon construction lightly entails the following: at the heart of the
Leaf Cocoon is felted wool. The felting process is very simple and low on energy,
although perhaps time-consuming. It is a simple process of adding a home-made
solution or “detergent” to scour and clean the wool and then a mechanical tangling
of the wool using felting needles. The process can also be done using water, but if it
is done by needle, this allows room for personalization and individual creativity like
the adage of local ﬂowers or foliage. It also removes the need for extra resources
[46]. The Leaf Cocoon base is made up of a wooden frame that is covered with
woolen felt and sewn securely. The “Cocoon,” which is like a shroud in which the
body is wrapped, is made of soft wool with fastening ties sewn into the felt layers to
ensure its secure fastening to the frame. A top cover—or top “leaf”—of woolen felt,
which can be personalized with naturally dyed motifs of native ﬂora and sewn
patterns (Fig. 35.1) or simply left white, lies atop the Cocoon. This can either be
Fig. 35.1 Leaf Cocoon.
Adapted with permission
from Yuli Sømme,
Bellacouche
35
Cradle to Cradle and Cradle to Grave …
701

taken home as a keepsake or be buried alongside the deceased by fastening it down
with hand-shaped wooden toggles made from hazelwood collected from local
coppices [46, 47]. There is also a simpler cremation tested alternative that incor-
porates wood from the Willow tree [47].
Thus, the manufacturing process of the Leaf Cocoon lies in stark contrast to the
industrial, resource-heavy, and chemically-laden process that is needed to construct
a conventional cofﬁn. The resources that go into the Leaf Cocoon construction are
locally sourced and selected speciﬁcally for their long-term sustainability during all
stages of production, use, and disposal. They promise that no raw materials need to
be shipped, no tropical hardwood or ancient woodland needs to be cut down, and no
chemicals, oil-based dyes, or lacquers are needed. Hazelwood and Willow can be
hand collected while pruning brush and woodland, which keeps the woodland
healthy, and the wool is harvested once a year on an Eco-farm, which provides
wool with “zero ﬁber miles alongside complete transparency and traceability” [50].
The main source of energy needed to construct the Leaf Cocoon comes from the
women who build, felt the wool, sew, and shape each Leaf Cocoon component.
There is also an electrical source that powers the workshop and sewing machine,
but beyond that, it is the solar energy that feeds the grass upon which the sheep
graze and the trees grow [47].
Though it may appear novel in design and concept compared to the more
commonly known casket, the Leaf Cocoon shroud has historical precedence [46].
In Europe, for instance, since the Middle Ages, only those who were lost to war,
famine, or during the time of plague were buried without a shroud [51, p. 410]. Of
course, many will have heard of the Shroud of Turin. This burial shroud is thought
by some to be the burial shroud that Jesus of Nazareth was wrapped in following his
cruciﬁxion. This is not to suggest that wooden cofﬁns and caskets are an entirely
modern invention as there is evidence that they have been used by ancient civi-
lizations such as the Norse Vikings [52, p. 59]. However, they were thought to have
been reserved for those of a higher status [52]. With this history of shroud use in
mind, designs such as the Leaf Cocoon are simply “merging ancient and new
technologies” to create an intelligent design [9, p. 131]. Combining this intelligent
design with the concept of natural burials and the celebration of the biological life
cycle, both human and product encapsulate a literal form of reincarnation, which
perfectly embodies the commitment to “immortality” to which Smail refers [4].
Could embracing our place within the biological life cycle and immortalizing our
loved ones in areas of natural beauty be a step towards a reconciliation of our
ecological and social worlds?
At the core of the Leaf Cocoon and Capsule design is the concept of “natural
burials” and the importance of embracing our place within the biological life cycle
and a more natural return to the soil. The Good Funeral Guide deﬁnes a natural or
green funeral as one that rejects cremation, uses a burial site that also serves a
conservation purpose, and is not visually deﬁnable as a burial ground. The guide
prohibits embalming, forbids demarcation of the grave with a permanent memorial,
and forbids any tending of the grave. It also requires cofﬁns or shrouds to be made
from natural and, where possible, locally sourced, sustainable materials [53].
702
G. Anywar et al.

Capsula Mundi [45] describes the philosophy behind natural burials perfectly:
“Capsula Mundi wants to emphasize that we are a part of nature’s cycle of trans-
formation. This universal concept goes beyond cultural and religious traditions.
Only a tree, a symbol of the connection between the sky and the Earth, will mark
the deceased resting place. As tree after tree is planted, the cemetery will become a
forest, free of the architectural motifs that mark today’s memorial grounds. The
cemetery will be transformed into a place of nature, one where families can stroll
and learn about the natural world, where communities will come together to tend
and care for trees. In short, it will become a sacred forest.”
Perhaps for some, the idea of having a burial site without a traditional memorial
can be unsettling, especially in regions where the culture behind burials on con-
secrated land has been largely shaped by Christianity and the traditional demar-
cation of a grave using a headstone or plaque. Indeed, in many non-Christian
cultures, memorial signs remain an important feature of burial. Others, however,
like those who practice Hinduism, tend to cremate their corpses without leaving
material memorials, though some traces are often left behind [54]. In the UK, where
crematoriums are owned by public and private authorities (as opposed to the
church), cremation is particularly popular among those who self-identify as atheist
or agnostic, which could be due to the more “neutral ideological territory” on offer
[55].
In keeping with this neutrality, (exclusively) natural burials are held on
non-consecrated grounds and are accompanied by the planting of a natural
memorial such as a tree, bush, hedgerow, or wildﬂowers [56]. Some burial grounds
may permit the placement of benches or the marking of a grave with a wooden
marker or plaque, but this is entirely dependent upon the terms and conditions of
each burial ground. The scattering of ashes is also permitted. In keeping with the
Leaf Cocoon standard, natural burial grounds are also characterized by their
adaptability to suit local conditions and plant diversity [57]. They can be hybrid
cemeteries, designated public spaces, an urban garden, private land, grazing areas
for farm and wild animals, or part of re-wilding and planting woodland for wildlife
[56]. For this reason, as well as being “sacred spaces” [58], cemeteries can also
serve a broader societal function as “spatial vessels of civic identity, telling diverse
histories of the city and representing intangible notions of the character of a given
place” [59, p. 393]. In this light, the natural burial ground becomes an expression of
a new narrative where users can reap the nonmaterial beneﬁts of the cultural
ecosystem services (spiritual, recreational, aesthetic, or educational) that it provides.
Interestingly, research suggests that hybrid cemeteries may have a much greater
impact than their exclusively natural counterparts. Claydon et al. [60] suggest that
hybrid cemeteries are reshaping the face of the traditional cemetery from its usual
manicured lawn esthetic towards a more “habitat rich and spatially complex
landscape with its own distinctive identity” [60, p. 1] (see Figs. 35.1 and 35.2).
Although some may feel uncomfortable with the idea of not being able to
identify their loved one’s grave, one would argue that this has to do with the way
we perceive immortality. As the above quote from Capsula Mundi suggests, trees
have long been considered a place of connecting with the ancestors and a symbol of
35
Cradle to Cradle and Cradle to Grave …
703

the meeting of two worlds: the heavens and the Earth [6]. Throughout history,
tribes, ancient cultures, and those who have practiced nature religions have
shrouded their dead before burial and, in some cases, elevated them high into the
trees where they were thought to be closer to the realms of the gods [6]. For Hindus
in India, to have their ashes scattered or to be placed in the Ganges River is
considered sacred [56]. The deceased is passed over to the elements rather than
having a static ﬁnal resting place. Others may choose to immortalize a loved one in
a more material fashion, in the form of named park benches, keepsake jewelry,
pieces of art, or even ash-infused tattoos. Presently, online memorials are becoming
more prominent, which contributes to a new type of immaterial memorial. What we
ﬁnd is that, generally, in many human beliefs, the dead are supposed to move into a
world of immateriality or reincarnation. It is often the place (see [61] for examples
of contemporary “sacred” spaces), the events that take place there [62–64], or the
emblems, which represent the deceased (whether material or immaterial), that
become sacred [65, pp. 47–51].
Discussion
In the introduction, eco-cofﬁns were presented as a vessel to question our com-
mitment to immortality and our relationship with the environment. Their use of
locally sourced and safe materials, their low energy demands, and the fact that they
have been designed to honor both the people and the natural systems in which they
are produced make them exceptional examples of sustainable design. Conversely,
eco-cofﬁns provide us with practical examples of how a change towards regener-
ative production could trigger a greater philosophical and social shift in our rela-
tionship with the environment; the interdependency of man and nature that the C2C
philosophy and Chief Seattle implore us to embrace.
Fig. 35.2 Allerton Cemetery, Liverpool. The Natural Burial woodland forms a shelterbelt that
divides this large cemetery into two halves (Adapted with permission from [60])
704
G. Anywar et al.

This is not to suggest that we must go back to hunting and gathering or start
erecting totems as they already exist in many contemporary forms: in our churches
and temples, for example. Indeed, national ﬂags, our “cathedrals of consumption”
[66], and even our televisions can provide us with contemporary examples of
totems. Much like our ancestors, we also attach meaning to the emblematic and
often material representations of these totems; in the brand labels we buy and
jewelry we wear, for example. “Sacred materialities” are already embedded in
consumables and have social meanings that are deeply ingrained within our col-
lective consciousness and heavily inﬂuence social action [67]. Seen in this light, a
change in our relationship with the items we consume could also create new nar-
ratives that transform our relationship with the environment.
However, it is important to deﬁne our understanding of the term “Eco-Cofﬁn”
within a spectrum of “Eco” products that vary in their long-term sustainability. For
example, some eco-cofﬁns are made of imported materials such as a banana leaf,
bamboo, or organic cotton, the growing of which requires large amounts of water and
physical labor [68]. One must also raise questions about whether materials that are
imported from tropical countries to those in the West ﬁt into the C2C framework due
to the air miles involved. Equally, while bamboo and banana ﬁber must be shipped,
cardboard must be manufactured or go through a recycling process. The recycling
process requires the use of extra materials and energy, which, according to the C2C
framework, is an attempt to make the bad seem less bad [9, p. 67]. McDonough and
Braungart lament the rise of our industrial society’s monocultures and the fact that
biodiversity is “typically treated as a hostile force and a threat to design goals” [9,
pp. 32–35]. By contrast, the Leaf Cocoon’s design naturally embraces diversity. Its
two primary materials are naturally abundant worldwide in many different forms,
which removes the need for the “brute force” or “one size ﬁts all” approach and
instead embraces regional identities and rituals. For example, wool can be sourced
worldwide from sheep, llamas, alpacas, goats, yaks, camels, and even some species of
rabbit. Decorative elements like ﬂowers and foliage can be collected during the
manufacturing process, ensuring a return of local nutrients to the soil. In contrast to
the conventional cofﬁn, shrouds such as the Leaf Cocoon are non-industrial and
highly personalized works of art, meaning that manufacture can take place on a small
scale and be made to suit individual needs. Unlike conventional cofﬁns, which are
generally mass-produced and delivered by large funeral companies, the Leaf Cocoon
can fulﬁll the “waste makes food” principle of C2C production.
This implications of this study within the broader discussion on sustainability
reach far beyond that of cleaner production and instill a more holistic understanding
of our place on Earth. Aside from the philosophical and practical shift, natural
burial grounds can also provide us with essential “ecosystem services” [69].
As natural burials prohibit the demarcation of gravesites with traditional head-
stones, they do not threaten traditional cemeteries’ existing narratives or identities,
nor do they require the same spatial consideration. On the contrary, natural burials can
improve the existing narrative within a traditional cemetery by occupying the mar-
ginal spaces that would otherwise be unsuitable for traditional burial due to topog-
raphy or natural landmark limitations. This is particularly signiﬁcant with regards to
35
Cradle to Cradle and Cradle to Grave …
705

urban cemeteries, such as the Waddington Road Cemetery shown in Fig. 35.2, where
an introduction of natural burials has led to an increase in burial capacity [60], a
commendable feat in an urban environment. In turn, while promoting contact with
nature, these natural burials within urban landscapes provide regulating ecosystem
services by introducing new vegetation, such as the woodland shelterbelt in Allerton
Cemetery shown in Fig. 35.3, and local plant species that can attract pollinators,
sequester carbon, purify water, stop soil erosion, and aid ﬂood control, among other
things, thereby enriches the cemetery landscape as a whole [60].
The practical implications of this study extend far beyond cofﬁns to the design of
life-long products. While designs that bypass built-in obsolescence are presently
uncommon, as we write this article during the Coronavirus outbreak, questions
regarding sustainability become more pressing. In a time of global pandemics,
consumers realize that throw-away, poor quality products force them to shop more
when movement is limited, products are growing scarce, factories are closing, and
the economy collapses. Also, “when the lives of vulnerable social groups and the
health of the larger community are under threat, larger philosophical and ethical
questions about our relationship with nature emerge.” This rings especially true at
the time of writing, as evidence emerges that the Coronavirus outbreak was caused
by the movement and consumption of bushmeat, and thousands of rodents, pri-
mates, and ancient anthropods [61] are experimented on and “disposed” of as we
tirelessly search for a vaccine.
Therefore, Eco-Cofﬁns and C2C production become an emblematic vessel
through which society can redeﬁne itself and its relationship with nature by
introducing new and improving existing narratives. It is then through the rituals
attached to the materialities and spaces that “gives the group consciousness of itself
Fig. 35.3 Waddington Road Cemetery. A natural burial area connects the traditional cemetery
with adjacent woodland while also creating shelter and privacy for the adjacent lawn section.
Adapted with permission from [60]
706
G. Anywar et al.

[and its values] and consequently makes it exist” [64, p. 47]. This “collective
consciousness” of our place within the biological life-cycle that Chief Seattle
implored us to adopt as “whatever befalls the Earth befalls the sons of the Earth.”
To Seattle and his people, the fact that “Earth is our mother” must be taught,
respected, and celebrated. And what better way to introduce a new narrative of
circularity than by embracing our own place in the biological life cycle and
returning to the cradle of the Earth from whence we came.
Conclusion
This chapter combines ethical and technical insights that have practical implications
not just for burials and cofﬁns (as material rituals and objects linking what is
normally seen as binaries–life and death and man and nature) but for C2C pro-
duction in general. Eco-cofﬁns and natural burials fully encapsulate the biological
cycle of the C2C philosophy. By using biodegradable and renewable materials and
eliminating embalming ﬂuids, the body can decompose naturally. The cofﬁn and its
occupant become fertilizer for the soil, returning to the Earth’s cradle and becoming
food for the beginning of a new cycle. If Eco-Cofﬁns such as the Leaf Cocoon were
to become commonplace, it would trigger a shift away from industrial, “brute force”
designs that make our last interaction with the Earth a particularly violent one.
Instead, it would celebrate cultural diversity in several ways; using local materials,
customs, and rituals, and thereby breaking down taboos regarding death and the
human life cycle. A step towards natural burials would encourage us to recognize
our deep connection to the Earth in a peaceful and gentle manner. One that
embraces diversity and encourages us to ﬁnd our place in a greater life-cycle—a
part of which our loved ones have become and that we shall one day become part
of. So, let us teach our children that the Earth beneath them is the dwelling place of
their ancestors. Perhaps then, we will cherish the land because we will know the
Earth is rich with the lives of our kin.
Core Messages
• This chapter addresses dichotomous thinking about culture and nature.
• The cradle-to-cradle principles in application to eco-cofﬁns are discussed.
• Eco-cofﬁns provide an example of regeneration and a dismantling of
dichotomous thinking.
• Eco-cofﬁns offer a reconciliation of our ecological and social worlds.
• Burial procedures and cofﬁn design remind us of our place within the
biological life cycle.
35
Cradle to Cradle and Cradle to Grave …
707

Acknowledgements The original essay upon which this chapter is based is deposited in Leiden
University archives as part of a student assignment written by the leading author during her
master’s degree. We conﬁrm that it is not planned to be published elsewhere.
References
1. Strang V (2005) Knowing me, knowing you: aboriginal and european concepts of nature as
self and other. World Views Environ Cult Relig 9(1):25–56
2. Shoreman-Ouimet E, Kopnina H (2015) Exploring human-nature dualism and the history of
the environment in anthropology. Cult Conserv: Beyond Anthropocentrism. Routledge,
pp 25–45
3. Beck U (1995) Ecological politics in an age of risk. Polity, Cambridge, p 109
4. Smail JK (2013) Remembering malthus III: implementing a global population reduction.
Am J Phys Anthropol 122:295–300
5. Durkheim E (1912/2012) The elementary forms of the religious life. Courier Corporation
6. Levi-Strauss C (1963) Totemism. Beacon Press
7. Gunn CM (2016) Totem animals. Orion Plain and Simple, Hachette
8. Strang V (2016) Justice for all: inconvenient truths and reconciliation in human-non-human
relations. In: Kopnina H, Shoreman-Ouimet E (eds) Routledge handbook of environmental
anthropology. Routledge, Abingdon, pp 263–278
9. McDonough W, Braungart M (2002/2010) Cradle to Cradle: Remaking The way we make
things. North Point Press
10. Cafaro P, Crist E (eds) (2012) Life on the brink environmentalists confront overpopulation.
University of Georgia Press, Athens, pp 141–153
11. Marean CW (2015) An evolutionary anthropological perspective on modern human origins.
Annu Rev Anthropol 44:533–556
12. Milton K (2002) Loving nature: towards an ecology of emotion. Routledge, New York
13. Laferrière E, Stoett PJ (2003) International relations theory and ecological thought: towards a
synthesis. Routledge, London
14. Löw M (2008) The constitution of space: the structuration of spaces through the simultaneity
of effect and perception in European. J Soc Theor 11(1):25–49
15. Kopnina H (2019) Plastic ﬂowers and mowed lawns: the exploration of everyday
unsustainability. J Urbanism: Int Res Placemaking and Urban Sustain 12(2):131–155
16. Heidegger M (1977) The question concerning technology and other essays. Harper & Row,
New York
17. Whatmore S (2006) Materialist returns: practising cultural geography in and for a
more-than-human world. Cult Geogr 13(4):600–609
18. Kirksey S, Helmreich S (2010) The emergence of multispecies ethnography. Cult Anthropol
25(4) pp 545–576
19. Kopnina H (2017) Beyond multispecies ethnography: engaging with violence and animal
rights in anthropology. Crit Anthropol 37(3):333–357
20. Naess A (1973) The shallow and the deep: long-range ecology movement. Summary, Inquiry
16:95–99
21. Leopold A (1949) A sand county almanac and sketches here and there. Oxford University
Press, New York
22. Rolston H (1996) Nature for real: is nature a social construct? In: Chappell TDJ (ed) The
philosophy of the environment. University of Edinburgh Press, Edinburgh, pp 38–64
23. Kopnina H (2016) Nobody likes Dichotomies (but sometimes you need them). Special forum:
environmental and social justice? Anthropol Forum 26(4):415–429
24. Kopnina H (2016) Rejoinder: discussing dichotomies with colleagues, Special Forum:
Environmental and Social Justice? Anthropol Forum 26(4):445–449
25. AfﬁﬁR, Christie B (2018) Facing loss: pedagogy of death. Environ Educ Res 1–15
708
G. Anywar et al.

26. Bisgould L (2008) Power and irony: one tortured cat and many twisted angles to our moral
schizophrenia about animals. Anim Subjects: Ethical Reader Post human World 8:259
27. Kopnina H (2016) Wild animals and justice: the case of the dead elephant in the room. J Int
Wildl Law Policy 19(3):219–235
28. Desmond J (2013) Requiem for roadkill: death and denial on America’s road security. In:
Kopnina H Shoreman-Ouimet E (eds) Environmental anthropology: future directions. Oxford
Routledge, New York
29. Borràs S (2016) New transitions from human rights to the environment to the rights of nature.
Trans Environ Law 5(1):113–143
30. Braungart M (2013) Waste to energy. http://catalystreview.net/2010/02/cradle-tocradle-
transitioning-from-waste-incineration-to-beneﬁcial-materials/
31. Baichwal J, Burtynsky E, De Pencier N, Hackett S, Kunard A, McManus K, Zalasiewicz J
(2018) Anthropocene. Art Gallery of Ontario/Musée des beaux-arts de l”Ontario
32. Durrschmidt J, Taylor G (2007) Globalization, modernity & social change. Palgrave
Macmillan
33. Davis M (2005) The monster at our door: the global threat of avian ﬂu. The New Press, New
York, p 11
34. Colman P (1997) Corpses, cofﬁns, and crypts. Published Henry Holt
35. French HW (1995) Teshi journal; a whimsical cofﬁn? Not just for chiefs anymore. The New
York Times, 18 Dec. https://www.nytimes.com/1995/12/18/world/teshi-journal-a-whimsical-
cofﬁn-not-just-for-chiefs-anymore.html
36. Hickman L (2005) should I be buried or cremated? Leo Hickman‘s guide to a good death.
Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2005/oct/18/ethicalmoney.climatechange
37. Kalia A (2019) A greener way to go: what’s the most eco-friendly way to dispose of a body?.
The Guardian, 9 July. https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2019/jul/09/greener-way-to-
go-eco-friendly-way-dispose-of-body-burial-cremation
38. Mordant N (2009) Dying to be green? Try “bio-cremation”. Reuters, Dec 2009. https://www.
reuters.com/article/environment-cremation/dying-to-be-green-try-bio-cremation-
idUSN2533188520091201
39. Woodward A (2019) Cofﬁn. Made how 4. http://www.madehow.com/Volume-4/Cofﬁn.
html#ixzz64ywrR1S6
40. Hasluck PN (2011) Cofﬁn-making and undertaking. Read Books Ltd.
41. Vatomsky S (2018) Thinking about having a “green” funeral? Here’s what to know. The New
York Times, March 22. https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/22/smarter-living/green-funeral-
burial-environment.html
42. Alliance FC (2019) Green burial, an environmentally friendly choice. https://funerals.org/?
consumers=green-burial
43. Eco Cofﬁns UK (2016) https://www.ecofﬁns.co.uk
44. Greenﬁeld Cofﬁns UK (2019) https://www.greenﬁeldcofﬁns.co.uk/
45. Capsula Mundi (2019) https://www.capsulamundi.it/en/
46. Somme Y (2013) History of wool felt making—looking at old ideas. Bellacouche. https://
bellacouche.com/history-wool-felt-making/
47. Somme Y (2014) Bellacouche Leafcocoon wool felt shroud/cofﬁn. Bellacouche. https://www.
bellacouche.com/
48. Karellis C (2012) The capsula mundi project. PETREi Manifesto. http://www.petrieinventory.
com/the-capsula-mundi-project
49. Antonelli P (2019) Broken nature exhibition keynote lecture: discussing design‘s response to
impending extinction at Dezeen day. https://www.dezeen.com/2019/11/13/paola-antonelli-
dezeen-day-video/
50. Fernhill F (1998) Farm and Livestock. https://www.fernhill-farm.co.uk/farm-and-livestock
51. Howarth G, Leaman O (2003) Encyclopedia of death and dying. Routledge, pp 410
52. Lynnerup N (1998) Burial practises and principles. The greenland norse, Museum
Tusculanum Press, p 59
35
Cradle to Cradle and Cradle to Grave …
709

53. West K (2010) A guide to natural burials. Published: Sweet & Maxwell
54. Laungani P (1996) Death and bereavement in India and England: a comparative analysis.
Mortal 1(2):191–212
55. Davies D (2017) Death, ritual and belief: the rhetoric of funerary rites. Bloomsbury Publishing
56. Swensen G, Skår M (2019) Urban cemeteries potential as sites for cultural encounters. Mortal
24(3):333–356
57. Shelef O, Weisberg PJ, Provenza FD (2017) The value of native plants and local production
in an Era of global agriculture. Frontiers Plant Sci 8:2069. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2017.
02069
58. Francis D, Kellaher L, Neophytou G (2005) The secret cemetery. Berg Publishers
59. McClymount K (2016) That eccentric use of land at the top of the hill: cemeteries and stories
of the city. Mortal 21(4):378–396
60. Clayden A, Green T, Hockey J, Powell M (2018) Cutting the lawn—natural burial and its
contribution to the delivery of ecosystem services in urban cemeteries. Urban For Urban
Gardening 33:99–106
61. Fox A (2020) The race for a coronavirus vaccine runs on horseshoe crab blood. Smithsonian
magazine.
https://www.smithsonianmag.com/smart-news/race-coronavirus-vaccine-runs-
horseshoe-crab-blood-180975048/
62. Pahl J (2008) Shopping malls and other sacred spaces: putting god in place. Wipf and Stock
Publishers
63. Adelstein P (2018) Sacred space. Global Adv Health Med 7. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pmc/articles/PMC5788094/
64. Ellis R (2019) Sporting space, sacred space: a theology of sporting place in religions special
edition: sport, spirituality and religion. New Intersections 10(8):473
65. Sherlock S (2013) “Reported speech and citationality” in the performativity of value: on the
citability of cultural commodities. Lexington Books
66. Ritzer G (2010) Enchanting a disenchanted world: continuity and change in the cathedrals of
consumption. Pine Forge Press
67. Isenhour C (2010) On conﬂicted swedish consumers, the effort to stop shopping and
neo-liberal environmental governance. J Consumer Behaviour 9:450–455
68. Fairtrade Foundation (2015) Commodity brieﬁng: cotton. http://www.fairtrade.org.uk/
Farmers-and-Workers/Cotton
69. Jacobs S, Dendoncker N, Keune H (2014) Ecosystem services: global issues. Elsevier, Local
Practices
Grace Anywar has a Master’s degree in Cultural Anthropology
and Development Sociology from Leiden University. Her
research interests include citizen science and environmental
education, sustainability in island communities, and regenerative
design. Grace has previously co-authored a chapter on commu-
nity engagement and learning through partnerships and feels
strongly about ﬁnding collaborative solutions to today’s envi-
ronmental issues.
710
G. Anywar et al.

Helen Kopnina (Ph.D., Cambridge University, 2002) is currently
employed at The Hague University of Applied Sciences, coor-
dinating the Sustainable Business program and conducting
research within three main areas: environmental sustainability,
environmental education, and biological conservation. She is the
(co)author of over 150 peer-reviewed articles and sixteen books.
Kim Poldner is a Professor of Circular Business at The Hague
University of Applied Sciences and serial entre-searcher in a
sustainable
fashion.
Kim
has
a
Ph.D.
in
ethical
fashion
entrepreneurship and was the initiator of the ﬁrst eco-fashion
store in The Netherlands. Kim has published in academic jour-
nals, such as the Journal of Business Venturing, Organization,
and Business & Society, and has written award-winning case
studies on sustainable fashion pioneers.
35
Cradle to Cradle and Cradle to Grave …
711

36
Thinking 2050: Bioengineering
of Science and Art
Nima Rezaei, Amene Saghazadeh, Alejandro Salado, Amine Harbi,
Ana Itzel Casarrubias-Jaimez, Carlo Brentari,
Christian Hugo Hoffmann, Christopher A. Haines,
Cristiane Maria Cornelia Gottschalk, Dustin Hellberg,
Eva Reyes-Gacitúa, Fernando Ramos-Quintana, Gabriel Vacariu,
Giuseppe Zollo, Grace Anywar, Harah Chon, Helen Kopnina,
Jude Likori, Julio Juan Ruiz, Khasankhonova Nodira Isametdinovna,
Kim Poldner, Leander Penaso Marquez, Louise Mackenzie,
Luca Iandoli, Marco Toscano, María Antonia González Valerio,
Mark Reybrouck, Marko Pajević, Mauro Scalercio, Mihai Vacariu,
Mirko Di Bernardo, Paola Lopreiato,
Patricia Olga Caratozzolo Martelliti, Reto Gubelmann,
Roberto Franzini Tibaldeo, Rogelio Jiménez Marce, Ryota Ono,
Sergey Horujy, Stefania Achella, Stephen Spain, Tamás Lajtner,
Trevor J. Tebbs, Ulrich Richter, and Wojciech Krysztofiak
“It’s not the problem that causes our suffering; it’s our thinking
about the problem”.
Byron Katie
N. Rezaei (&)  A. Saghazadeh
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Tehran, Iran
e-mail: rezaei_nima@tums.ac.ir
A. Saghazadeh
e-mail: amene.saghazadeh@gmail.com
N. Rezaei  A. Saghazadeh
Research Center for Immunodeﬁciencies, Children’s Medical Center, Tehran University
of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran
N. Rezaei
Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran
A. Salado
Department of Systems and Industrial Engineering, The University of Arizona, Tucson, USA
e-mail: alejnandrosalado@arizona.edu
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh (eds.), Thinking, Integrated Science 7,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04075-7_36
713

Summary
The authors of THINKING: Bioengineering of Science and Art were asked how
they would see the future of their ﬁeld 30 years later. This chapter presents the
authors’ views on the kind of world, thought force, cosmic dimension of thinking,
A. Harbi
Souk Ahras University, Annaba, Algeria
e-mail: amine.harbi@fulbrightmail.org
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Annaba, Algeria
A. Itzel Casarrubias-Jaimez
Universidad Autónoma de Guerrero, Chilpancingo, Guerrero, Mexico
e-mail: anajaimez@uagro.mx
A. Itzel Casarrubias-Jaimez  F. Ramos-Quintana
Universidad Autónoma del Estado de Morelos, Cuernavaca, Morelos, Mexico
e-mail: ramosfernando747@gmail.com
C. Brentari
University of Trento, Trento, Italy
e-mail: carlo.brentari@unitn.it
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Trento, Italy
C. Hugo Hoffmann
Institute for Technology Assessment and Systems Analysis (ITAS), Karlsruhe, Germany
e-mail: christian.hoffmann@houseoﬂabscience.world
C. A. Haines
School of Architecture, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY, USA
e-mail: cahaines1@verizon.net
C. Maria Cornelia Gottschalk
University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil
e-mail: crisgott@usp.br
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), São Paulo, Brazil
D. Hellberg
Department of English Studies, University of the Bahamas, Bahamas, USA
e-mail: dchellberg@gmail.com
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Bahamas, USA
714
N. Rezaei et al.

engineering and systems thinking education, art and design, information theory,
philosophy and social sciences education, curricula, musicology, humanities,
economic thinking, engineering liveliness, environment and ecosystem, a new
paradigm of thinking, and interdisciplinary science and thinking in 2050, along
with fears and hopes for the 2050’ human being who is thinking.
E. Reyes-Gacitúa
Northern Catholic University, Antofagasta, Chile
e-mail: evapamela@gmail.com
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Antofagasta, Chile
G. Vacariu
Department of Philosophy, University of Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania
e-mail: gabriel.vacariu@ﬁlosoﬁe.unibuc.ro
G. Vacariu  M. Vacariu
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Bucharest, Romania
e-mail: mvacariu@yahoo.com
G. Zollo
Department of Industrial Engineering, University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy
e-mail: giuzollo@unina.it
G. Anywar
Cultural Anthropology and Development Sociology, Leiden University, Leiden, Netherlands
e-mail: grace.aciro@gmail.com
H. Chon
School of Design Communication, LASALLE College of the Arts, Singapore, Singapore
e-mail: harah.chon@lasalle.edu.sg; h.chon@csm.arts.ac.uk
Central Saint Martins, University of the Arts London, London, United Kingdom
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Singapore, Singapore
H. Kopnina
Newcastle Business School, Northumbria University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK
e-mail: helen.kopnina@northumbria.ac.uk
J. Likori
University of Kabianga, Kericho, Kenya
e-mail: jlikori@kabianga.ac.ke; jlikori@yahoo.co.uk
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Nairobi, Kenya
36
Thinking 2050: Bioengineering of Science and Art
715

J. Juan Ruiz
School of Economics, National University of Mar del Plata, Mar del Plata, Provincia de
Buenos Aires, Argentina
e-mail: jjruiz@mdp.edu.ar
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Mar del Plata, Provincia de Buenos Aires, Argentina
K. Nodira Isametdinovna
Faculty of Economics, Tashkent Financial Institute, Tashkent, Republic of Uzbekistan
e-mail: xasanxonova@tﬁ.uz
Faculty of Economics, National University of Uzbekistan, Tashkent, Republic of Uzbekistan
K. Poldner
The Hague University of Applied Sciences, Hague, Netherlands
e-mail: K.A.Poldner@hhs.nl
L. Penaso Marquez
College of Social Sciences and Philosophy, University of the Philippines Diliman, Quezon
City, Philippines
e-mail: lpmarquez@up.edu.ph
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Quezon City, Philippines
L. Mackenzie
Cultural Negotiation of Science, Northumbria University, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, UK
e-mail: info@loumackenzie.com
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Newcastle-upon-Tyne, UK
L. Iandoli
Department of Computer Science, Mathematics, and Science, St John’s University, New
York, USA
e-mail: iandoli@stjohns.edu
M. Toscano
University of Zurich, Zürich, Switzerland
e-mail: marco.toscano@uzh.ch
M. Antonia González Valerio
Faculty of Philosophy and Literature, National Autonomous University of Mexico, Mexico
City, Mexico
e-mail: gonzalezvalerio@ﬁlos.unam.mx
M. Antonia González Valerio  P. Olga Caratozzolo Martelliti
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Mexico City, Mexico
716
N. Rezaei et al.

M. Reybrouck
University of Leuven (KU Leuven), Leuven, Belgium
e-mail: Mark.Reybrouck@kuleuven.be
Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium
ISA, USERN, Leuven, Belgium
M. Pajević
College of Foreign Languages and Cultures, Tartu University, Lossi 3-415, 51003 Tartu,
Estonia
e-mail: marko.pajevic@ut.ee
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Tartu, Estonia
M. Scalercio
School of Humanity, University of San Martín, Buenos Aires, Argentina
e-mail: mauroscalercio@gmail.com
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc and Research Network (USERN),
Buenos Aires, Argentina
M. Vacariu
Department of Communication and Public Relations, SNSPA, Bucharest, Romania
M. Di Bernardo
University of Rome “Tor Vergata”, Rome, Italy
e-mail: mirko.di.bernardo@uniroma2.it
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Rome, Italy
P. Lopreiato
The University of Plymouth, Plymouth, UK
e-mail: paolalopreiato@hotmail.com
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Plymouth, UK
P. Olga Caratozzolo Martelliti
Institute for the Future of Education, Tecnologico de Monterrey, Mexico City, Mexico
e-mail: pcaratozzolo@tec.mx
R. Gubelmann
University of St. Gallen, Rosenbergstrasse 30, C9000 St. Gallen, Switzerland
e-mail: reto.gubelmann@protonmail.com
36
Thinking 2050: Bioengineering of Science and Art
717

R. Franzini Tibaldeo
School of Education and Humanities, Pontiﬁcal Catholic University of Paraná, Curitiba
Campus, Curitiba, Brazil
e-mail: roberto.tibaldeo@pucpr.br
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Curitiba, Brazil
R. Jiménez Marce
Institute of Social Sciences and Humanities, BUAP, Puebla, Mexico
e-mail: rojimarc@yahoo.com.mx
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Puebla, México
R. Ono
Department of Business Administration, Aichi University, Nagoya, Japan
e-mail: xasanxonova@tﬁ.uz; ryota@aichi-u.ac.jp
S. Horujy
Institute of Philosophy, The Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia
S. Achella
University of Chieti-Pescara, Chieti, Italy
e-mail: stefaniaachella@gmail.com
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Naples, Italy
S. Spain
Murdoch University, 90 South St, Murdoch, WA 6150, Australia
e-mail: sspain2010@hotmail.com
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Murdoch, WA, Australia
T. Lajtner
LM Gauge and Software, Inc., Budapest, Hungary
e-mail: info@lajtnermachine.com
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc and Education Research Network
(USERN), Budapest, Hungary
T. J. Tebbs
Institute of Gifted Child of the National Academy of Educational Sciences, Kyiv, Ukraine
e-mail: trevor@tebbspsychology.com; trevor@chandelier-foundation.org
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research
(USERN), Storrs, Castleton, VT, UK
718
N. Rezaei et al.

THINKING: Bioengineering of Science and Art–Word cloud
U. Richter
D-48167 Münster, Germany
e-mail: ulrichrichter@ur-philosoph.de
W. Krysztoﬁak
The University of Szczecin, Szczecin, Poland
e-mail: wojciech.krysztoﬁak@gmail.com
Integrated Science Association (ISA), Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network
(USERN), Szczecin, Poland
36
Thinking 2050: Bioengineering of Science and Art
719

The puzzle of THINKING: Bioengineering of Science and Art
720
N. Rezaei et al.

Keywords
Art  Bioengineering  Fear  Future  Generations  Science  Thinking
Introduction
THINKING: Bioengineering of Science and Art invited authors to present how
thinkings at present are. Throughout the book, we see the authors set one or more
points of time and space by which shortened the path from the past to present
thoughts as well as thickened their journey along with well-known initiatives of
present thoughts. For this last chapter, the authors were asked to set the present
thoughts as the starting point of time to address how thinkings in the future are.
Below, future thoughts are synthesized under different headings and subheadings.
For further convenience, a few introductory sentences immediately appear after
each heading before these future thoughts are outlined along with cross-reference
(and occasionally a brief synopsis of present thoughts for clariﬁcation as they are)
to the respective book chapters.
Discourses
These phenomena are a product of thinking, crucially critical thinking, as well as a
type of communication. For this, some suggest putting discourses under the lan-
guage of thinking-as-communicating. The frame of this language ensures the simple
mechanism of holding a well-deﬁned discourse that is working mainly using
communication tools and logic, analytical, mathematical, or rational thinking. But
the point is not to rely on these rules merely: we care about discourse participants'
mental, behavioral, and phycological constructs [1]. Taking such meta-rules con-
siderations into account, there is a lot of issues of discourses that different com-
munities wrestle with. For this, discourse technologies and systems are emerging
onto the discourse path that permits understanding the language of discourses at
different levels [2], and therefore, extend a hand to different modes of thinking, such
as sociocultural thinking [3], metaphoric thinking [4], reasoning and mechanistic
thinking [5], and mathematical thinking [6], which are, in particular, pronounced
with regards to scientiﬁc inquiry. We see, throughout the book, discourses about the
human-nature dichotomies (Chap. 35), knowledge production and education
(Chap. 32), taboos (Chap. 30), soul (Chap. 27), aesthetics (Chaps. 20 and 26),
language (Chaps. 24), design (Chap. 22), model organism (Chap. 17), mind-matter
(Chap. 8), biology and philosophy (Chaps. 2 and 5), theology (Chap. 2), and sig-
nals and symbolic messages (Chap. 3).
36
Thinking 2050: Bioengineering of Science and Art
721

Discourses of Fears
Global fears are a subject of discourse. Climate change and global warming are
terrible that in the discourses have a place to assume adjectives such as dangerous,
catastrophic, extinct, and terrorful [7]. Fears are not new, but discourses sur-
rounding these issues date back to the early modern era to the modern era to the
contemporary era, which considers climate as judgment, pathology, and catastro-
phe, respectively. Climate change discourses have occupied about two-thirds of the
body of the literature on discourses, with different themes, global or local, and
points of focus, such as justice and security. They have led to developing a package
of psychotherapy for both the individuals and communities to control and master
their behavior [7]. Of most recent accomplishments are indicators that emerged to
enable us to monitor global climate, but the problem is that the available data is not
enough to be included in assessment analyses. It might take decades to collect the
observations big appropriate for management decisions [8]. Moreover, the Global
Climate Risk Index 2021 report stresses the climate change’ impact worsened by
the COVID-19 crisis [9]. We referred to climate as an example of long age to
acknowledge that, though the catastrophe is still going into combat with us, how
human fears in initiating discourses have been helpful to develop thinkings of
sufferings people are living with. Though our thoughts are yet far from meaningful
actions, we are still good, when even some fear and prevent themselves from falling
behind discourses, but better than us are those who are in suffering, but are not busy
with themselves, those who have found their focus of belongingness, others, and
think along that.
Discourses of Hope
And the latter those of above are not only moving themselves but also have the
hope to encourage other people to join their journey. Education is that through
which they invest to create invitations at the scale as large as possible.
Public Discourse
In 2050, the main cultural spaces of public discourse will be controlled by various
expert institutions. This practice will require the use of advanced artiﬁcial intelli-
gence (AI) programs. This process will manifest itself in social media in attempts to
automatically and algorithmically block content inconsistent with the prohibitions
of various expert institutions securing the social activity of constructing mental
worlds in accordance with their interests. The freedom of deduction and interpre-
tation will cease. World public opinion will experience many language wars that
will prove to be substitutes for standard wars fought with the use of tanks and riﬂes.
As a result of these wars, the stochasticity of decision-making processes in the
political space will increase. Hence, the demand for system programming
722
N. Rezaei et al.

specialists for aims of the deductive and hermeneutic prefabrication of mental
worlds will increase. The importance of semantic and pragmatic engineering in the
processes of democratic elections of authorities will increase disproportionately.
Due to market needs, discourse processing theory will focus on the development of
hermeneutic systems for the prefabrication of mental worlds. For this purpose, the
mathematical theory of categories will be used. Hermeneutic inferences will be
modeled as morphisms entangled in graph structures. Discourse research will also
cover the ways of using such structures in proﬁling press news. It is possible that
the algorithmic methods of formatting various types of ﬁctional literature will be
included in such research. Information technology engineering in literary art and in
the press messages will become a fact (Wojciech Krysztoﬁak 2020).
Scientific Discourses
Since the middle of the last century, the status of philosophy has been severely
weakened. On different fronts, both the increase in the authority of natural sciences,
as the only recognized scientiﬁc paradigm, and deconstructionist criticism, as
articulated in particular by French philosophers, have attacked philosophy in its
traditional conﬁguration. In recent years philosophy has thereby either found a
place at the service of the sciences – within which the so-called analytical phi-
losophy has converged—or has taken on the function of consolatio vitae. Within
this scenario, the more traditional so-called continental philosophy has mainly
turned into a history of philosophy. Our time, however, poses new questions to
philosophy: environmental issues (e.g., the question of the Anthropocene), social
inequalities (e.g., gender studies, subaltern studies), the criticism of objectivity,
ethical problems related to the development of AI and robotics. These are the ﬁelds
with which philosophy will have to deal in the next 30 years. This will be done by
exposing the limits of a worldview based on the separation between different dis-
ciplines. Whereas in 1882, the philosopher Wilhelm Dilthey initiated the now
traditional distinction between natural sciences (Naturwissenschaften) and the sci-
ences of the spirit (Geisteswissenschaften), which led to a worldview that rigidly
separates disciplines from one another, in the coming years, it will be up to phi-
losophy, once again, to set itself up as a place for the overcoming of this distinction
and the promoting of discourse capable of integrating different scientiﬁc discourses
(Stefania Achella 2020).
Religious Discourses
In the last thirty years, there has been a revolution in history, both in its method-
ologies and in the way of theoretically approaching problems, which has not only
made it possible to expand the repertoire of topics studied but also to propose novel
explanations about matters that were alien to discipline such as emotions, eating
practices or clothing. This has resulted in the strengthening of a discipline that has
36
Thinking 2050: Bioengineering of Science and Art
723

had the ability to incorporate the contributions of other disciplines into its own
practice. In the particular case of the history of Christian religious thought, there are
numerous studies that have sought to transcend the doctrinal part that sustains
beliefs and has sought to show the socio-historical circumstance in which religious
discourses were produced, as well as the political and cultural purposes that they
pursued in the mythical construction of biblical characters. Although some religious
sectors consider that any investigation of the sacred texts that do not use the tools of
theology constitutes a challenge to the beliefs that have given ideological support to
Western culture, the truth is that the studies that are undertaken in the future should
pay attention, among other things, to the analysis of the construction of religious
characters and the role they played in the Christian tradition; and the examination of
aspects related to culture such as the importance of crying or the mechanisms that
were used to instill fear among believers (Rogelio Jiménez Marce 2020).
Thinking of New World
Predictions of the future world are different, involving de-globalization [10], world
communication network [11], tunnel networks [12], future pandemics [13], would
population [14], distance learning spaces [15] and education systems [16], vehicles
[17], energy [18], and climate. A substantial portion of predictions is about plan-
etary urbanization, a kind of most intensive humanities’ movement over the last two
decades. Land degradation, the immediate aftermath of urbanization, has caused
rural areas to face numerous challenges, worsening the effects of climate change,
agricultural resources- and agricultural activities-diminishing effects, and therefore,
health-limiting effects. Moreover, all these issues affect the food production and so
food security is threatened at both rural and urban levels. From the management
perspective, managers are thinking to design approaches that promise sustainable
agriculture production [19]. From the social science perspective, there is a need to
regenerate the community in the rural areas, by focusing on the recognition of
potential resources that will help rural areas establish their own socioeconomic
infrastructure and thereby develop relationships with urban areas [20]. Finally,
some are, on the post-carbon world, predict that people will get back to their roots
in the quest of the healthy lifestyles [21]. We are afraid that a community will
gradually become victim to the other, while both are “must to exist” for the world to
remain asymmetric, not lateralized to unidimensional mind, to enjoy thinking of all
life, not a small part of that.
Moreover, there are many predictions about life-related indices, for example, life
expectancy and disease-related outcomes. Physicians have shown they might not be
as precise as they should be to care enough for their patients [22]. Such similarly
occurs in prognostics work of philosophy discussing the dialectic of mind and
matter (Chap. 8). Generally, based on a true priori and conditionals, philosophers
conjecture about what possible is and what impossible is, and accordingly, they
make justiﬁcations, judgments, and explanations that make the knowledge
724
N. Rezaei et al.

philosophy [23]. For the purpose of estimations in prognostics, they work, for
example, with truth and “the life remaining.” With many attempts, estimations are
still interpreted corresponding to a conﬁdence interval that means “vulnerability to
failure” [24]. The point is that life, though very short, is surrounded dynamically
with variables related to our lifetime, and incorporation of all these looks a daunting
task and yet impossible unless the parties take an integrated manner of thinking.
With Fear: The Changing World
Ten thousand years ago, where my family and I live in the North American state of
Vermont, there was once a slowly melting sixteen-hundred-meter-high glacier. The
Abenaki people lived their lives on the edge of this glacier, built their longhouses
close to the edge of lakes and rivers, raised their families, grew their crops, hunted
for animals in the forests, ﬁshed in deep lakes and rushing icy-cold rivers, and
communicated with their neighboring communities in what is now Massachusetts,
Connecticut, and New York. Just as they had little notion of what lay ahead of them
generations beyond their lifetime, I cannot know for certain what kind of world my
grandchildren will face, even thirty years in the future. Given what we know of the
present disturbing conditions, it would be very easy to comment in a deeply dys-
topian way. The local, country, and worldwide events threaten to make each day
sadder than the day before. The seemingly endless focus on individual suffering,
disparate and desperate human conditions, the physical repercussions of climate
change, the drastic reductions in the wide range of ﬂora and fauna imposes a heavy
burden on all of us to bear (Trevor J. Tebbs 2020).
With Hope: Thinking of Changing World
Each prediction, formulated in the moment of the lived present, is a projection into
the future, a picture of the future, in which the objects are facts of the past. In this
deﬁnition, the knowledge of the men is established why bound to the ideas of the
world, the prediction of a philosopher must be different from the forecast of a
physician, who can rely on the experiences which are really based on the facts of
the matter, although these facts are also linked to the experiences of the mind. In the
process of thinking about the things of the world, little new things have appeared in
the well-known historia since Aristotle and, I think so, it will be remaining in the
future. In 2050, the physician will be confronted with other experiences, new in
their appearance, and the philosopher will have to pick up the old questions in order
to answer anew – the what is open, not the how, but, being free, in the moment of
the lived present every man knows enough to look to the future without sinking into
the fear (Ulrich Richter 2020).
36
Thinking 2050: Bioengineering of Science and Art
725

Thought Force
Looking into the origins of the universe, some believe that a single force and
associated ﬁeld has made the universe come to exist. Moreover, this force has its
roots in the universe, and so, there has been a universal mind, universal con-
sciousness, and universal thought, and these universals are to allow the origin to
drive individual minds, individual consciousness, and individual thoughts and
corresponding forces. These lines occur mainly in quantum physics research [25,
26], pseudo- and real-thinking, and thought force, as discussed in Chaps. 10–12.
With Fear: Human Being or Human-Like Being?
In the circumstances, it is difﬁcult to close one’s eyes to what is happening around
us and take a utopian view of the future. However, as true as this may be, we should
not disregard the human propensity to live in hope, embrace those we love, seek joy
in our lives, and dedicate our time and energy to making a positive difference in the
world - despite its problems - whether it be a world deﬁned by our family or the
world we can now wonder at from space. To my mind, this is crucial, and it
underlines my hope in the new generation of individuals, who, to the degree they
are prepared and enabled, are given the opportunity to apply their intellectual and
creative strengths to ﬁnding and solving the problems that will, doubtless, continue
to plague humanity. When I started searching thought force, I thought it was an
interesting topic. I have realized over the years; many subjects are actually related to
the force of thought. So, I believed the force of thought was an important discipline,
a part of science. Then I built devices that measured the “immeasurable” force of
thought and that could be controlled by thought force. Every force has its coun-
terforce. Thought is actually a two-way communication phenomenon. Then I
eventually realized that “thought force is not an interesting topic, it is not an
important science, it is the most important question in the world. If today’s sci-
entists, journalists, and average people do not want to understand what thought
force is, then I do not have to be a prophet to say what will happen in thirty years.
The state (or private) thought force generator would send us thought forces. It will
send us forces we accept as our “self-made” thoughts. People will live on the
streets; they will have no need for money, housing, entertainment. The only thing
that everyone will think of is the following: “I want to give you everything I have,
dear, beloved ‘Human Absolute.’ Consider me your obedient slave. I myself want it
this way.” This last paragraph, by the way, is a serious critique of the absurdity of
today’s paid mainstreamers that deny accepting the existence of thought force.
Thought force exists that is no question at all, and this is already not a scientiﬁc
issue. It is about our future, about us. What will we be? Human beings with our own
will or human-like beings without our own will? (Tamás Lajtner 2020).
726
N. Rezaei et al.

With Hope: The Power of Thinking of Future–“Pull”
There is a concept called the “Futures Triangle” in Futures Studies. It explains that
three forces, pull, push and weight, determine the future. Pull comes from the
images of the future, the push is the ongoing trend in the present, and weight refers
to what has been established, such as customs and traditions. In the midst of our
ﬁght against COVID-19, I have observed that the prevailing goal of this world
seems to be the resuming of the conditions/state before the pandemic. This phe-
nomenon signiﬁes how much heavier the weight is compared to the pull and push.
The weight is, however, not a physical, objective measure. It is composed of many
kinds of assumptions as to how things ought to be. Quantum changes described in
my chapter have removed those “ought” assumptions and have lightened the burden
of quantum changers. As long as the current heaviness of weight continues, we will
not see a future much better than the present. The further the idealized self (i.e.,
one’s mask) is nurtured, the heavier the weight in the individual and society
becomes. If we are able to ﬁgure out ways to decrease the weight and increase the
power of the pull, we can become optimistic about our future. I believe that people
become aware of the fact that they have lost touch with their real self and ﬁnd the
need to resume it is one of the ways toward a better future for our civilization
(Ryota Ono 2020).
The Cosmic Scale of Thinking
This scale of thinking, in terms of time, space, and casualties, is visited when
thinking where human thinking is posited in relation to the world. Two main
discussions are those that compromise the scale of human thinking, for example, to
that of an organism and those that stretch it to that of the universe. That these
discussions have not reached an acceptable level of coherence has prohibited
understanding what our true thinking scale is, also known as scalar collapse, and
therefore, our actions and behaviors are not only mismatched with, but also reveal
extensive damage to the environment, ecosystem, and the world such that climate
change and other global catastrophes are not at all surprising events. Some authors
write [27], as throughout the book discussed (Chaps. 2, 3, 5, 7, 14, 16, 18, 24, 25,
28, 29, 31, 32, 34, and 35), about Western thought and European Enlightenment
tradition to explain what behind this scalar collapse are, through which they
highlight, for example, that from these perspectives: (i) human thinking has to do
with a single scale for his identity to remain stable. Indeed, they see the stable line
of human identity propagating into unstable states when human thinking transits to
extended scale (or even multi-scale); (ii) the human mind has a habit of interpreting
other objects of the world in relation to himself, and at the heart of this interpre-
tation is to deﬁne to the scale of other objects while his scale remains free, and this
freedom is, of course, not pleased when it does allow you to understand other
objects’ scales before self-scalar understanding is achieved; and iii, and this lack of
36
Thinking 2050: Bioengineering of Science and Art
727

self-scalar understanding is that has paved the way for traditions, like Enlighten-
ment, to allows themselves to disintegrate our thinking scale.
With Fear: Thinking is Disappearing
Today all forecasts about thinking as well as anything else must take into account
the global situation, which becomes more and more eschatological that is loaded
with growing risks of a global catastrophe. According to my analysis (see Sergey
Horujy. Settling-down in the Eschaton? In Diogenes’ Lantern, 2020, No 5.
InRussian), there are ﬁve principal eschatological scenarios, and prospects of
thinking are different in each of them. Two scenarios correspond to the
self-annihilation of humankind and hence to the disappearance of thinking (Sergey
Horujy 2020). Two others describe the non-military self-destruction of personality
and society due to the virtualization and loss of ethics and truth. In the last case, the
detachment of thinking from truth implies radical changes of epistemology and
gives birth to peculiar perverted and degraded modes of thinking cultivated mostly
in media and the Web. Finally, there is the scenario of the post-human and the
trans-humanism, and in this case, the main trend is the convergence and fusion of
human thinking and computer technologies into a certain kind of synthetic con-
nectionist network architecture.
With Hope: Thinking Has a Mission to Accomplish–being
Re-Integrated
If mankind succeeds in overcoming eschatological threats, harmonious scenarios
become possible. They will involve not only the Earth but also the cosmos because
human practices strive to reach extraterrestrial, interplanetary, and even galactic
limits. Thus, human thinking and activity will develop a new cosmic dimension, in
which they actualize the cosmic mission of humanity. The realization of this mission
demands a new model of our relationship with the environment that is a new type of
ecology; it is already emerging now and is called integral ecology. On the other
hand, this mission was always the subject of religious thought, so that dialogue with
ancient spiritual traditions is possible on this ground. One scenario of such a
dialogue based on the Eastern-Christian paradigm of ‘cosmic liturgy’ is presented in
my works (see Sergey Horujy. Cosmic Liturgy, Orthodox theology, and integral
ecological expertise. In: Christopher C. Knight and Alexei V. Nesteruk, eds,
Eastern Orthodox Christianity and the Sciences: Theological, Philosophical and
Scientiﬁc Aspects of the Dialogue (Brepols, Turnhout. 2020, inpress). In this sce-
nario, individual thinking is to be united with ontological and theological one (in
some new forms, perhaps) as well as with thinking of animals into universal cosmic
connectionist architecture (Sergey Horujy 2020).
In 30 years from now, thinking of the future challenges the man to consider his
presence in the world—as part of an ecosystem on a planetary scale. It is about
728
N. Rezaei et al.

understanding a process that does not only remit to a sense of survival but of
existing in the most human way possible. Indeed, knowledge is still limited;
however, the activity of thinking with others interdisciplinarily affects the
deployment of science and technology. On the other hand, if man, as far as he
knows himself nosce te ipsum and advances scientiﬁcally, may attain great
achievements to beneﬁt the “self” itself. The different pieces of knowledge can help
this search. So, thinking, doubting cogito ergo sum, is an unwaivable exercise
whose goal is to give a constant account of the understanding of the self, cosmos,
and God (Eva Reyes Gacitúa 2020).
Engineering and Systems Thinking Education
Twenty years ago, 13 engineering educators and researchers [28] did a job as we are
doing, making predictions of the future of engineering education. The concepts they
mainly included were:
• changing economy and demographics, technologies and their impact on the
learning spaces and education systems, competitive world, engineering and
science pipeline problem, engineering enrollment trends, objectives of engi-
neering education;
• changing university;
• the
relationship
among
engineering,
art,
and
science,
technologies,
overspecialization;
• stimulating positive changes via hiring graduates, organizing a better accredi-
tation process, improving research fundings, and improving the reward system;
• considering a higher level of education;
• moving along with education research trends and providing support through
research application opportunities and outcomes assessments; and
• the emphasis to integrate engineering, art, and science.
So, here let to express our deep happiness and kind appreciation of all authors to
do this project at the heart and brain of which is integrated bioengineering, science,
and art possible. Here, unfortunately, we cannot refer to the speciﬁc chapters, as it,
for all interested readers, remains a journey to explore in the expanded area of all
chapters’ discussions at least an educational and learning aspect of thinking, though
the words “education” and “learning” are not directly mentioned there!
Then, looking into the most recent of engineering in addition to that of the
changing world of complex problems, there is an increasing need for engineers,
while the engineering education setting mainly suffers from inadequacies with
regards to professional, soft, and computing skills. More precisely, the word needs
engineers to think and act as distinguished: those who can use these skills to solve
problems, learn, lead, effectively join teams and participate in teamwork, com-
municate, and all of these, of course, in parallel with knowing the principles of
36
Thinking 2050: Bioengineering of Science and Art
729

different science areas [29–31]. Notably, the systems thinking (ST) approach to
engineering education is sustainable as it offers a way of learning, the so-called
experiential learning, so competent to represent interdisciplinary opportunities for
practicing engineering [32]; thereby, learners acquire the capacity to work collab-
oratively [33]. Such an approach, in particular, applies to civil engineering edu-
cation, where the dynamic complexity of socioeconomic problems makes it difﬁcult
to manage [34].
But what our responsibilities with regards to the cultivated engineership are?
How can we prepare their school-that is, the curriculum, teaching, and learning
spaces?
With Fear: Ambiguities and Uncertainties
It is as impossible to predict the future of education in 2050 as it is reasonable to
invent possible futures with better education today. In order for engineers of future
generations to meet the increasingly complex demands for non-routine interper-
sonal and analytical skills, it is necessary to start working holistically on the
development of cognitive and metacognitive skills in higher education. Therefore,
higher education should focus on the explicit inclusion of disciplines that strengthen
critical thinking, creative thinking, and -given the hyper-connectivity of today’s
world—the knowledge and understanding of other cultures. Colleges and univer-
sities should also consider in their curricula the development of other soft skills,
such as social and emotional skills, which have been relegated by the impressive
thrust of hard skills: the management of emerging technologies and the digital
transformation. Deﬁnitely, by developing students’ self-awareness in their own
learning, we will enable tomorrow’s engineers to successfully confront the ghosts
of volatility, ambiguity, and uncertainty that overwhelm us, the engineers of today
(Patricia Caratozzolo 2020).
With Hope
Integrated Engineering and Liberal Arts
The complexity of engineered systems and the amount of information that users and
engineers will handle will likely only increase in the next 30 years. We believe that
intuition, aesthetics, and emotion will become essential elements of engineering
curriculum and practice. We hope for an education system in which requiring a few
liberal arts courses as part of engineering programs becomes obsolete. Instead,
artistic and creative thinking should be embedded in engineering courses. Solving a
problem should be no longer the result of applying analytical skills only, but it
should also be based on elegantly framing and problem and conceptualizing the
solution. Similarly, critical thinking ceases to be associated only with open dis-
cussions in liberal art classes. Instead, data analytics, mathematics, formal model-
ing, and engineering are employed to enhance and put to the test critical thinking.
730
N. Rezaei et al.

While we still see art and engineering as two distinct disciplines 30 years from now,
we certainly see their overlapping growing, particularly in those areas where one
can beneﬁt from the other one. They both pursue, through complementary tools and
approaches, the design of good forms (Luca Iandoli, Alejandro Salado, Giuseppe
Zollo, 2020).
Embedded Systems Thinking for Education
We must harness our collective potential in creating a new paradigm in education
that fosters innovation and creativity in imaging a new human ecology that aligns
with our Earth’s ecosystem. By adopting an ecological worldview through an ST
approach to education, we help mitigate the multitude of global crises we currently
face. Furthermore, by embedding systems thinking (ST) through organismic biol-
ogy within education, we are more likely to solve the complex problems we face
and promote social justice, human dignity, and the common good. Therefore, it is
imperative that we dispense with our anthropomorphic mindset in education in
favor of a more ecocentric one through ST, as this promotes and recognizes our
Earth as an organism. We can also beneﬁt from lessons learned from Indigenous
cultures to inform further education curriculum and modeling (Stephen Spain
2020).
Philosophy, Social Sciences, and Thinking Education
Philosophy is a knowledge connected with social sciences [35], and on the other
hand, is the activity of practice with the practice of education [36]; so, the inte-
gration of these three, i.e., philosophy, social sciences, and education, is not an idea
at all, but a necessity of their identities in relation to each other. Just to begin with, it
is the philosophical reasoning that branches out educational knowledge into distinct
forms as we see in distinguished curricula, e.g., empirical, scientiﬁc, deductive,
mathematical, and ethical knowledge. Yet, it is critical to treat intersections between
philosophy and education as multiple or plural [37]. It is, however, clear—an
evaluation system is that we need to apply to this context, which not only are
humanities and social sciences inseparable from but they are deep inside, for
making a measurable image over past, present, future, to make sense if we are
progressing [38].
With Fear: Educational Problems Have Roots in the Philosophy
of Practices
My ﬁeld is the philosophy of education. As I see it, there will not be many changes
in thirty years since the main issues of philosophy have been practically the same
since Heraclitus and Parmenides, who lived 2,600 years ago. The separation pro-
posed by the great Parmenides between the sensible and intelligible worlds remains
36
Thinking 2050: Bioengineering of Science and Art
731

until today, under different terminologies: body and soul, language and thinking,
word and thing, sign and meaning, and so on. The metaphor of Heraclitus’s river,
which expresses the ﬂuidity of knowledge and denies the existence of absolute
certainties, continues to clarify several metaphysical problems, enabling interme-
diate positions between the above two giants of philosophy, as we see in the work
of the contemporary philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein, whose ideas have guided
my research in education. What we have seen throughout this long period is that
philosophical questions reappear at all times due to new contexts and demands,
requiring solutions that make sense in the new forms of life in which they appear.
Particularly in education, the subject of the formation of human beings has ques-
tioned the already existing pedagogical practices, looking only at methodological
and empirical issues (new computers, remote teaching technologies, reform of
physical spaces), to the detriment of ethical and epistemological issues that guide
our action and thinking. In my view, a signiﬁcant part of educational problems
could be faced if we looked at the philosophical foundations of these practices,
which are still far from happening (Cristiane M. C. Gottschalk 2020).
With Hope
Universal Science and Education
The future of philosophy and social science will depend on how much they will
engage with constructing and inventing a better and fairer world. Philosophy and
social sciences should work to overcome disciplinary boundaries and allow a
complete understanding of humanity. Similarly, cooperation between humanities,
social, and natural science would bring a new era of creativity and discoveries while
assuring an ethical, unbiased development of sciences. Of course, this implies that
every discipline and science should go out of its “comfort zone,” that every scientist
should be willing and able to communicate with different ﬁelds, and that new
interdisciplinary expertise should be developed. That is how an integrated science
will develop. Moreover, scientists should abandon their “ivory tower”: science is a
social, communal enterprise, then scientists should engage in building a society in
which ideas could freely circulate. Ideas are the most powerful asset of humanity:
creating a universal science and education should rest upon a free and respectful
circulation of ideas (Mauro Scalercio 2020).
Social Sciences and Philosophy Education for the Next
Generations
Education, particularly social science and philosophy education, will be increas-
ingly relevant in the next three decades. As of the time of writing, we are sending
robotic explorers to Mars, stopping a global pandemic, extinguishing forest ﬁres,
opposing authoritarian regimes, allowing nature to recover, waging wars, and
celebrating rights, diversities, expressions, and humanity. However, all these things
will be for nothing without the next generations gaining an understanding of their
meaning. This shall be the purpose of social science and philosophy education in
732
N. Rezaei et al.

the decades to come. Social science and philosophy education, which is not only
meant to relay information, will be at the forefront of reﬂexivity and reﬂection.
Conﬂicts will inevitably arise as this seem to be an indispensable part of humanity.
However, alongside this, I believe that there will be pockets of reasonableness,
dialogue, empathy, and collaboration – all thanks to multidimensional thinking
education. As education guides the next generations to understand the present, it
will look back to the score years that have gone by in order to endow inquisitive
minds with vital lessons of the past. In the same way, education shall also con-
tinually look towards the future, as we are doing right now, in an attempt to learn
where our dreams, ideals, and aspirations will lead us. These lessons shall guide our
young into forging a better future for humanity. One that will, hopefully, be
brighter, better, and safer. In the end, social science and philosophy education will
perform its time-honored duty to give meaning to humanity’s progress (Leander
Penaso Marquez 2020).
Curricula
Humanities integration is discussed under interdisciplinary learning and education
programs in different sciences. This integration is, for example, possible to move
medicine towards science that is more aesthetic [39], empathic, and ethical. In
engineering, this integration is no doubt important to be incorporated in education;
thereby, engineers develop communication and social skills, which tend, otherwise,
remain poor, and would prevent them from passing dutifully [40]. Moreover,
humanities-integrated programs are, in learners’ eyes, enjoyable learning, encour-
aging them to attach the knowledge acquisition [41]. Language [42], particularly
ideological language [41] and art media, might help mediate this integration.
Through communication play [43], we see how a better generation of sciences can
grow in scientiﬁc environments. Schools, universities, and faculties need to attain a
certain level of awareness of interdisciplinary programs [43].
With Fear: Education as Commerce–Humanities Are Slowly
Dying
The new university model of ‘education as commerce’ necessarily weans out those
programs that are not economically viable and encourages students to see them-
selves as consumers of education (and given the exorbitant cost of tuition in
America, for example, I ﬁnd it hard to blame them sometimes). Professors become
little more than shopkeepers, adding items to a shelf or removing them at the whims
of students and administration alike. Interdisciplinary models and methods may
invigorate the humanities in new ways. But it should not stand that entire disci-
plines—the former cores of what a liberal education was supposed to mean—must
be given a cash value in the university’s economic system. Rather than merely
36
Thinking 2050: Bioengineering of Science and Art
733

grumble here, I offer three solutions (of many possible avenues of action). First, the
sciences must defend the humanities at the university and administrative levels.
This is, of course, more difﬁcult in practice, but it is worth mentioning. Second,
programs in the humanities must expand their curricula to include healthy doses of
scientiﬁc study. A student should not graduate without some literacy in a broad
swath of knowledge. Third, there need to be more books, special issues and col-
laborations like the present one. While I cannot say where the humanities will be in
30 years, I know that without the humanities, university life (and thus society
generally) will become more staid, less playful, and ultimately less democratic
(Dustin Hellberg 2020).
With Hope: Art-Integrated curriculum–A Room for Dialogical
Thinking
Working in Modern Languages (German) within the specialist ﬁeld of poetics, my
vision needs optimism to see a future at all. Currently, departments in my ﬁeld are
closed, and ﬁnances for the humanities are drastically reduced. However, I am
convinced of the importance of literary, cultural, and language studies, and so I am
sure societies will see reason, and things will change again for the better. I imagine,
however, that all literary and cultural studies will be assembled in one large
department with some core courses for everybody but also various pathways within
which students can choose quite freely to tailor their studies according to personal
interests, combining languages, visual arts, ﬁlm, probably also philosophy, history
and international relations/political science. This tendency is already visible in very
popular new liberal arts programs in the UK. I envision that language learning will
be obligatory and that this will be done to foster thinking language. Poetic thinking
is, of course, an overarching approach for all these ﬁelds: it would be a positive and
welcome development if curricula could be designed so that all students somehow
encounter some of it. I remain hopeful that dialogical thought will indeed be the
philosophy of that future (Marko Pajević 2020).
Design
Design thinking is a humanistic, problem-solving approach [44, 45]. It offers high
potentiality both in terms of the formation of new products (plans) and re-formation
of current ones but remains less translated into the practice, calling a process of
familiarization, through, for example, a tour, course, or programs, for managers and
organizations to pull! them to decipher the meaning of the design thinking and how
it is simply humanistic as well as, through a combination of physical artifacts,
speciﬁc enough to effectively manage complex problems and projects making us
appreciate its power [46], and this appreciation is pertaining signal for emotions.
Moreover, at the brain of the designer is think, practice, more think, practice, and
734
N. Rezaei et al.

more and more think and practice to reach out and catch the product that is
innovative; the manner that diminishes cognitive biases [47], making designers
good candidates for leadership [48]. Therefore, design thinking is thinking that
promises to meet our mental constructs [49], such as reﬂection, as described in
Chap. 22.
Again, let us come back to the 2000s when design-aided tools emerged. At that
time, the use of such tools seemed unpleasant in terms of the style of interaction, in
terms of the processing of product formulation, and etc., with which the designer
was almost totally alien. Next, attempts moved towards more designer-friendly
systems that could engage designers from the early stages of the design process, and
therefore, design thinking could enter into an improved interaction with the tool.
The architecture of such a system can be found in [50], which, in summary,
involves different knowledge systems that work with sketching, gesturing, and
verbal inputs.
Nowadays, the discipline of design is changing as its tools, methods, processes,
and knowledge become more transferrable to all other ﬁelds of study. As the
problems requiring design intervention grow in complexity, design will be posi-
tioned at the forefront and continue to make contributions to interdisciplinary
practice through its speciﬁc ways of thinking, reﬂecting, and knowing. Design has,
for decades, borrowed theories from its neighboring disciplines to provide structure
to its often intuitive and skills-based abilities. This calls for more design researchers
to translate practice into theory, developing and establishing core theories that are
epistemologically and ontologically rooted in the domain of design (Harah Chon
2020). For this purpose, experimental studies and large-scale analyses of design
data are necessary to bridge the gap between empirical and practical knowledge
design and establish cognitive design; thereby, they can help create the culture of
design—that is, experiential learning, organization-level environment, and tools
[44, 51]. Another interesting avenue design thinking is opening is pertaining to
classroom education for children to promote learning through media and hands-on
activities; therefore, cultivating creative, constructive, and collaborative thinking
[52].
Art
Making artwork is the process of creativity, imitation, and inspiration [53]. Even
when the artist copies others’ artwork, there is again a demand for creativity and
inspiration to make an original artwork or reproduce others’ artwork. Artwork
creativity, in turn, results from different cognitive mechanisms as being integrated,
mainly computational thinking, memory (both long-term memory and working
memory), and activities (exploration, reﬂection, analysis) [54]. From a functional
viewpoint, the artwork creativity corresponds to a balanced activation of the default
mode network (DMN) and executive network (EN), which individually apply to
idea generation and idea selection [55]. That professional artists display greater
36
Thinking 2050: Bioengineering of Science and Art
735

connectivity between these two brain networks reveals this connectivity as a
function of art expertise, that is, artistic creativity. Chapter 16 provides a per-
spective on the bioengineering of art. In Chap. 19, that art and media intersect with
each other in the mind of an artist, we see a great ground made of thinking,
perception, and emotions.
With Fear: Loss of Inspiration, Creativity, and Contemplation
Contemporary artists are no less technically skillful than previous generations of
artists, quite the opposite, for they have a wider heritage to learn from than previous
generations did. However, the current paradigm of contemporary art is based on
reactions and ignores the role of contemplation and inspiration (Amine Harbi 2020).
“In the future, the only artwork that will survive will have no gravity at all,”
maintained Nam June Paik, the father of video art, in 1980. I think that new media
art will be increasingly virtual and digital; at the same time, art will maintain a very
strong relation with corporality and matter as they will always be viscerally linked
to the creative act (Paola Lopreiato 2020).
With Hope: Integrated Art and Science
Thirty years from now, by God’s will, a renewed interest in philosophy as seeking
wisdom will burst from the multidisciplinary approaches to reality that we are
witnessing. Studying how previous civilizations and traditions approached beauty
and nature is important in forging a paradigm of nature in which humans seek
harmony with nature rather than mere utility, commodity, and consumption. Artists
in this realm have an important role to play, for they are constantly working on
beauty as a vital element in life. The ecological crisis cannot be overcome without
the contribution of artists in making people rediscover the beauty of nature as more
important than subjective whims that are at the roots of the consumerist lifestyle
that is harming nature (both human nature and nature at large). If integrated science
and multidisciplinary studies will overcome the narrowed specialties inherited from
the scientist era by being encouraged in education, artists will reconnect with the
spiritual dimension of art that is universal, objective beauty, and this will deﬁnitely
reinitiate a harmonious equilibrium between humans and nature (Amine Harbi
2020).
Biology
Dualisms with regards to “life,” an entity that is “living,” and an entity that is
“non-living,” have long been the subject of biology, philosophy, and epistemology.
This discussion includes all “living” beings who possess the body, the mind, and
736
N. Rezaei et al.

the soul (Chap. 6). Among “living” beings, human beings and non-human beings
also hold hot dualisms. Synthetic biology is an interdisciplinary science that
emerged to understand the origins, development, functions, and behaviors of
non-living and living entities [56]. Bioengineering from this leads to different
products that are valuable for instrument acquisition for modeling complex systems
and structures, from cells, tissues, and organisms to life and evolution, in practice.
Planning for such an inclusive purpose, different disciplines need to integrate
knowledge and conceptual tools in order to precisely execute a systems biology
analysis; so, it reveals to us a pleasant realization of what is real [57]. Chapter 17
includes dialogues that occurred between an artist who did programming bacteria
(E. coli) and a philosopher, followed by philosophical accounts of bioengineering
organisms in Chap. 18. There are challenges, for example, regarding biological
issues [58]; however, the ﬁeld tracks appear well-suited to direct towards a
noticeably
advanced
state,
via,
e.g.,
automation,
industrialization,
deep
learning-based approaches for DNA design, while-cell simulations, biosensing
detectors, evolutionary controllers in real-time, multicellular systems, systemic
genomes, artiﬁcial cells, and engineering living materials [59].
With Fear
The Distinction Between Mind and Body
Current research in the ﬁeld of the epistemology of biology is addressing the
problem of the emergence of teleological structures in the living, paying particular
attention to the issue of the ontological consistency of the “possible.” In agreement
with Kauffman, for example, the Adjacent Possibles are real ontological possibil-
ities that arise from the mixture of classical physics, quantum physics, and
unpredictability of selection. The processes of natural evolution involve Adjacent
possible that are not only classical deterministic physics but that contain quantum
elements for the most part indeterminate. These analyses, however, in an attempt to
solve the very serious philosophical problem of how to describe a system in which
there are different levels of activity connected by both bottom-up and top-down
relations, are not able to break away from Cartesian dualism, proposing, in fact, a
dual ontology of quantum matrix that risks proposing all the absurdities arising
from the mind–body dualism implicitly. Unfortunately, the problem is far from
being solved in a deﬁnitive way (Mirko Di Bernardo 2020).
The Distinction Between Organism and Non-living Being
Currently, it is close to impossible to predict the future developments in the dis-
cipline with any degree of conﬁdence; however, we submit that the basic con-
ceptual distinction between organism and non-living being is unlikely to be
overthrown in the near future. This means that even in 2050, the engineering of
living beings will remain elusive. As for philosophy, no progress is to be achieved
36
Thinking 2050: Bioengineering of Science and Art
737

beyond keeping vigil and critical company with scientiﬁc and social developments
—and the dreams and nightmares within them (Reto Gubelmann, Marco Toscano
2020).
With Hope
An Integrated Information Theory
The concepts on which Kauffman has been working for many years, such as
Enablement, Adjacent Possibles, and Poised Realm allow important steps forward
towards the solution (allowing an extension compared to the classical version of
complexity theory) but require in the mathematical sense of the term further con-
siderable technical efforts. In other words, in current scientiﬁc thought, we are
waiting for a new Newton capable of making the physical–mathematical sciences
take a similar but far more far-reaching leap to what the great English scholar made
physics and mathematics do at the beginning of modernity. In particular, we are
waiting for an adequate information theory for physical systems that do not fall
within the paradigm of classical mechanics systems—statistical mechanics included
—which are the non-linear dynamic systems stable out of equilibrium (chaotic
systems); therefore, an information theory that is adequate (true) also for all bio-
logical and cognitive systems. The hope is that decisive steps in this direction can
be taken by 2050 (Mirko Di Bernardo 2020).
Art-Integrated Engineering Liveliness
I consider myself to be an artist, although, in the context of this project, my work
has been art that engages with biological material. My hope for the future, therefore,
is that our understanding of the properties of physical material will include con-
sideration of its liveliness. The study of lively material in this sense therefore, is
understood in two distinct ways. Firstly, that all material—biological or otherwise
—is capable of being extracted, appropriated, and manipulated by humanity and
secondly, that all material has a capacity to act in relation to its environment and
that this capacity has consequences on the environment in both the present and the
future to come. Perhaps through this understanding, we will seek to ﬁnd ways in
which we can be both respectful of and considerate towards the plasticity of the
lively material which constitutes both our planet and our physical bodies (Louise
Mackenzie and María Antonia González Valerio 2020).
Environment and Ecosystems
An ecosystem is deﬁned as healthy if it can remain in its position, in terms of both
structural and functional features, in a stressed state [60]. Indeed, a healthy
ecosystem is resilient when external stress, from either natural or anthropogenic
sources, applies to it. Ecosystem retrogression is the removal or reduction of
738
N. Rezaei et al.

nutrients in the system resulting from the biological and ecological processes that
affect, for example, soil fertility and organismic traits. These processes correspond
with long-term consequences, and so studying this correspondence, short-term
prosses and long-term effects, is of theoretical potential to intervene in them for
rejuvenation to occur. There is a wide variety of patterns, processes, mechanisms,
and consequences of ecosystem retrogression, and so studying them requires an
interdisciplinary panel of experts in ecology, biogeochemistry, geology, and
pedology [61]. Moreover, the core of such a study is to assess ecosystem health
quantitatively over time, as this assessment is helpful for tracking the health status
of the ecosystem of interest, but also for the health management of similar systems.
Developing indicators of ecosystem health has been an active line of research in
technology and innovation management. Efforts are of three main themes: industrial
ecology, business ecosystem and platform management, and multi-actor network
that, correspondingly, focus on industrial levels, organizational levels, and social
network dynamics. Recent research stresses the need to integrate these themes into
a practical model to coherently and systematically deﬁne, assess, and manage
ecosystem health [62].
Ecosystem functioning forms a close correspondence with human cognitive
functioning. Biodiversity is, for example, an aspect of ecosystem functioning.
Species loss, among both animals and plants, changes the ecosystem diversity and
its functioning [63]. As mentioned above, such loss results from natural or
anthropogenic effects and is so crucial that we know it as ecosystem collapse [64].
Forests are an important source of biodiversity and in direct relation to services and
functions, the ecosystem can offer [65]. Moreover, ecosystem services contribute to
human health, both in terms of physical and mental health, well-being [66], and
economics [67]. Despite these well-known facts, predictions are not promising,
with more than one-ﬁfth of surface land estimated to cross one or more of the
functioning thresholds [68]. Altogether, ecosystem services management needs to
be tuned to the sustainability of human well-being, and some keys to ﬁne-tuning
entail societal transformation [67].
With Fear
Apathy in Specialized and Non-socialized Science
My academic background is based in sociology, anthropology, and the ﬁelds of
permaculture and regenerative design. While I study environmental change and
how it impacts social dynamics, my work aims to reconnect people to their natural
environments through citizen science programs, outdoor education, and community
engagement. Through work, I have come to learn that the sciences appear so
specialized and introspective to those outside of academia that they have become
seemingly inaccessible, resulting in apathy and lack of engagement. Social science
is a discipline that likes to ask uncomfortable questions and challenge the status
quo. With an in-depth understanding of social dynamics, practitioners are well
equipped with the tools to analyze, inform and effect change within our
36
Thinking 2050: Bioengineering of Science and Art
739

communities. However, if steps to democratize knowledge and bridge gaps in
communication are not made, reconnecting with the wider public may be difﬁcult.
Distinction Between Human and Animal Life–Extinction
and World End
In 30 years, the philosophical ﬁeld of human/animal studies will ﬁnd itself at the
center of growing tensions, perhaps even in a dramatic way. Transformative pro-
cesses on a global scale will make scholars impossible to erect ivory towers or lock
themselves up in textual specialism or philology. On the one hand, this will be due
to widespread social needs for greater justice in the treatment of non-human animals
and, on the other, to the increasing (scientiﬁc and ethical) awareness of the
unsustainability of the traditional models of action and thought. Human/animal
studies will therefore be faced with two key tasks. First, they shall help social
aspirations for interspeciﬁc justice (which are often unaware of the thought patterns
they are based on) to take on a critical form and an overall coherence—to pass, in
other words, from the status of expectations to that of projects. Second,
human/animal studies shall stimulate scholars of all ﬁelds to pool their skills
together in order to give concrete indications of action to the human species in this
crucial phase of its relationship with non-human forms of life. Scholars interested in
animal cognition – be they scientists, philosophers of the mind, bio-semioticians, or
others—will have a delicate but essential task: to make people understand that the
extinction of an animal species involves the disappearance of an unrepeatable point
of view on reality. In this sense, when a species becomes extinct, an entire world
comes to an end (Carlo Brentari 2020).
Consequences of Failure in Assessment—The Permanent Effects
of Climate Change on the Environment and Ecosystems
The research ﬁeld related to the analysis of multifactorial interactions that bring
about dynamic behaviors, thus impacting the environment and ecosystems, is
fundamental for the understanding and assessment of their state (Chap. 34). This
will support the decision-making process to select adequate environmental man-
agement actions, which aim to improve the current environmental state. Human
activities and the events related to climate change will permanently affect envi-
ronmental and ecological states, and developing countries will be the most vul-
nerable. Therefore, the research ﬁeld related to the studies of environmental and
ecological systems will represent urgent and necessary support to reduce and/or
mitigate the impacts on ecosystems that provide services for the beneﬁt of human
wellbeing. This research ﬁeld should be reinforced and extended to cover the
vulnerability of ecosystems to climate change. In addition, it requires the permanent
participation of multiple disciplines to ﬁnd insight into new knowledge to reinforce
the understanding and the assessment of ecosystem states by taking into account
socioeconomic, sociopolitical, technological, demography, and cultural factors.
Otherwise, the studies related to environmental and ecosystems will always be
incomplete
and
lack
objectivity
(Fernando
Ramos-Quintana,
Ana
Itzel
Casarrubias-Jaimez 2020).
740
N. Rezaei et al.

Lack of a Systemic Approach–The Cause of Ecological Problems
My ﬁeld is actually architecture. My excursion into brain science is the result of
recognizing that our thinking “Within the Box” is the actual cause of the problems
I, as an architect, but also we, as a society, are facing, where leading scientists have
said we only have about ten years to resolve them. Architecture has made real
progress in the past 20 or so years internalizing the basics of green buildings.
However, most work only at the checklist level, where the industry is
cost-conscious and traditional. Only a few recognize the need for a systemic
approach and a regenerative focus (Christopher A. Haines 2020).
With Hope
Transdisciplinary, Social Ecology–Regeneration
of the Environment, Human Life, and Non-human Life
To make scientiﬁc knowledge more inclusive, we will need to create opportunities
for transdisciplinary research and information sharing that goes beyond academia to
bring theory and practical application together, thus involving all stakeholders
(from artists to policymakers) who play a crucial role in imagining alternative
futures and shaping collective solutions that are beneﬁcial to both human and
non-human worlds. We cannot ﬁx our problems with the same thinking that was
used to create them (Grace Anywar, Helen Kopnina, Kim Poldner 2020). We will
need a drastic paradigm change to avoid ecological collapse in the next 50 years.
This will necessitate a shift from industrial to regenerative production, linear to
circular economies, individual to collective thought, and from anthropocentrism
towards a social ecology that recognizes environmental ethics and the intrinsic
value of non-human lives. The social sciences will need to create new narratives,
and our chapter (Chap. 35) is just one example of how re-examining our methods
could enable both philosophical and systemic change (Grace Anywar, Helen
Kopnina, Kim Poldner 2020).
Paradigm Shift–Biodiversity and Architectural Regeneration
We must raise the bar on these issues, but identifying the actual cause of our
ecological problems is a required step. The Heat Planet thesis documents biodi-
versity loss and replacement, not just carbon gain as the cause, providing oppor-
tunities for very rapid improvements. If the profession hears and embraces these
paradigm shifts, then vast improvements could be made in 30 years. The change
would drastically reshape the ﬁeld to embrace biodiversity into architecture and
expand the knowledge base of architects signiﬁcantly. However, from recent
experience, architects are unprepared for and somewhat dismissive of this paradigm
shift, so the verdict is not in yet (Christopher A. Haines 2020).
36
Thinking 2050: Bioengineering of Science and Art
741

Integrated Science
This last heading has already been the subject of the ﬁrst volume of the Integrated
Science book series [69], which embraced the integration of different sciences to
manage complex real-world problems of the changing world and sustainability [70].
With Fear
The Division Between Science and Religion–The Root
of Cognitive Biases in Private and Public Life
The divide between science and religion manifests itself in crucial areas of both
private and public life. Privately, individuals develop attitudes, habits, and char-
acters defensive of their respective positions but often biased against others based
on these two areas of social life. In public life, this division inﬂuences the practical
implementation of public policy, education curricula, and socialization processes in
different institutions. Sometimes these distinctions impact global business as well.
The divide is often so deep that no compromises are ever thought possible (Jude
Likori 2020).
Absence of Supportive Educational Environments for Teaching
“thinking on thinking”
My ﬁeld of research is philosophy, whose focus is “thinking on thinking.” Albeit
appearances, this feature is endowed with both practical and interpersonal rele-
vance. It is thanks to philosophy’s reﬂective effort that we can understand the
world, achieve self-awareness and improve our behavior, or enquire into the
qualities of meaningful relationships. Thinking does not develop automatically but
requires time, education, effort, and courage. Developing the ability to think goes
hand in hand with acquiring an interdisciplinary and future-oriented perspective and
fostering tolerance and open-mindedness. For sure, these are the tough challenges
we will have to face in the next 30 years (Roberto Franzini Tibaldeo 2020).
Absence of Economic Humanities and Abundance of Labor–The
Root of Irrationality in Economic Thinking in Developing
Countries
Economic thinking, in our opinion, until 2050 will proceed in two ways. The ﬁrst
way is, as always, for developed countries, and the second for developing countries.
For developed countries, rationality, safety, and economy in economic thinking will
be the most important. Because in developed countries, the transition to a knowl-
edge economy is already prevailing. And as we know, the knowledge economy is
innovation and knowledge that develop according to the scenario of rationality,
safety, and economy. They require from humanity only a mental approach, which
means economic thinking. The second way is for developing countries. In devel-
oping countries, physical labor predominates, which hinders the development of
742
N. Rezaei et al.

rational economic thinking. Irrationality in economic thinking does not allow the
knowledge economy to develop fully and freely. In these countries, ﬁnancial-
economic thinking will always prevail. The population always decides for ﬁnancial
reasons. From this, he will not break the habit (Khasankhonova Nodira Isametdi-
novna 2020).
With Hope
A New Paradigm of Thinking for Old Problems in Philosophy,
Cognitive Neuroscience, and Physics
In the last 50 years, there have been great unsolved problems in philosophy,
cognitive neuroscience, and physics (Gabriel Vacariu, Mihai Vacariu 2020). A new
paradigm of thinking will replace the old framework of thinking in which illusory
problems have been created by humans’ minds (Gabriel Vacariu, Mihai Vacariu
2020).
Integrated arts, humanities, and natural sciences
From the beginning of human history, knowledge has gradually advanced from
unity to specialization. The present growth and division of knowledge into many
compartments has led our thinkers and scientists to believe that inﬁnite progress is
possible within separated ‘boxes,’ with no need for contact or exchange among
them. That worldview is just an illusion. We have forgotten that the human being,
like the universe, is a system whose components work in mutual dependence.
Fortunately, in recent decades, the brightest thinkers from different disciplines have
begun to re-admit the vision of reality as a unit where each component contributes
to the general good. In the years to come, I dream about the growth of human
consciousness and accepting that the different areas of knowledge cannot work in
isolation. Natural sciences, social sciences, and arts cannot work individually
anymore: instead, they cooperate in developing humankind based on reality. In the
hope of that dream coming true and acknowledging the advantages of collaborative
work among different sciences, I encourage interdisciplinary work. I am positive
about the idea of a new way to approach knowledge. In thirty years, I envision a
world where arts and humanities will offer new solutions to scientiﬁc questions that
we can better answer from a joint perspective (Julio Juan Ruiz 2020).
Transdisciplinary Musicology
Musicology as a discipline has a recent disciplinary history. It started as an aca-
demic discipline around the second half of the nineteenth century with a historical,
systematic, and comparative musicology subdivision. The systematic approach was
conceived originally as a joint discipline that comprised both systematic and
comparative aspects to study the organization of musical structures in a transdis-
ciplinary and cross-cultural approach. Despite this original width of scope, the
historical and systematic branches evolved quickly in different directions, due partly
to their different methodology, which can be termed distinctly as being either
36
Thinking 2050: Bioengineering of Science and Art
743

historical-philological-hermeneutic or scientiﬁc-experimental-comparative. Since
these early days, musicology has continued to evolve with multiple attempts to
broaden its scope with new ﬁelds such as cognitive musicology, computational
musicology, empirical musicology, and many others. However, many of these
attempts have taken a rather disembodied and detached stance towards music so
that a new ﬁeld of research has emerged over the past decades, which proposes an
approach that takes the listener and his body as a starting point. As such, embodied
and enactive models have emerged for the study of the way how listeners cope with
music as it sounds. Much is to be expected here from the exploding ﬁeld of music
and brain studies with their search for the neural correlates of music listening, both
in an objective-descriptive as well as a subjective-experiential way (Mark Rey-
brouck 2020).
Integrated science–a Factor of Success
Integrated science 2050 will be a key success factor for enabling research ﬁndings
and innovation in 30 years. Unlike today where cross-discipline (academia) and
cross-company (practice) collaborations are already pursued, there will be a change
in quantity and quality. On the one hand, such clusters will emerge at a much larger
scale. On the other, they will prove to be a game-changer so that no longer indi-
vidual and separate disciplines or companies or industries will dominate their ﬁeld,
but ecosystems. Still, I wish to end with a note of warning which systemics has
continuously raised: If past predictions are any indication, the only thing we know
today about tomorrow’s science and its applications is that they will be radically
different than whatever we predict they will be like (Christian Hugo Hoffmann
2020).
Fig. 36.1 THINKING: bioengineering of science and art–quote
744
N. Rezaei et al.

USERN–An Initiative of Integrated Science and Thinking
The initiative for a holistic appreciation of nature and the role of science pursued by
the Universal Scientiﬁc Education and Research Network (USERN) is the
unavoidable mission of scholars of our time. Bio-engineering of science and art
premised on human thinking abilities will not only clarify the differences and,
therefore, the possible complementarity of the two, it will also champion attitudes
of tolerance that transform them into effective instruments of human wellbeing. My
active involvement in this endeavor will not only empower my instrumentality in
this process it will also train me on the ways and means of bringing this reality to
my background and institution. I foresee fruits of collaboration in research bearing
inﬂuence on educational curricula and public policy to facilitate peaceful
co-existence at different levels of public life. I look forward to valuable mentorship
from experienced colleagues for my active membership in USERN (Jude Likori
2020).
36
Thinking 2050: Bioengineering of Science and Art
745

Conclusion
Box 1 THINKING: Bioengineering of Science and Art–Fears and Hopes
The world is changing 
Think of the changing world
What would happen to a human? 
Human being or human-like being? 
The power of thinking of future– 
“pull”–saves human being 
Thinking is disappearing 
Thinking has a mission to accomplish–
being re-integrated 
Ambiguities in engineering science 
are difﬁcult to comprehend 
Integrated engineering and liberal arts 
are comprehensible 
What about uncertainties? Sometimes, 
I ask why I should study at all? 
Embedded systems thinking for 
education would teach you how to live 
with uncertainties 
Educational problems are due to a 
lack of philosophical understanding. 
Is there any way to understand this? 
That understanding is the principle of 
universal science and education 
How late? Is it for us? 
Social sciences and philosophy 
education would happen for the next 
generations 
So, humanities are slowly dying
The art-integrated curriculum makes 
room for dialogical thinking 
But art has no longer inspiration, 
creativity, and contemplation 
Integrated art and science would rescue 
both art and science 
Mind and body are still two 
HOPE
FEAR 
746
N. Rezaei et al.

An integrated information theory 
would make them united as exactly as 
the time they born 
Organism and non-living beings are 
far from being friends 
Art-integrated engineering liveliness is 
progressing 
Science is specialized and apathetic 
to humanities and the environment 
Transdisciplinary, social ecology would 
regenerate the environment, human 
life, and non-human life 
Humans do activities that are 
determinantal to non-human life 
and even might cause species 
extinction 
The paradigm shift would improve 
biodiversity and regeneration 
Are the eﬀects of climate change on 
the environment and ecosystems 
permanent? 
A systemic approach for assessment 
would help monitor the ecosystem 
health 
The division between science and 
religion has caused cognitive biases 
in human life 
Integrated science would bridge the 
science-society gap 
Supportive educational environments 
for “thinking on thinking” are not 
available 
Integrated science would improve 
awareness and open-mindedness 
36
Thinking 2050: Bioengineering of Science and Art
747

The abundance of labor has made 
people irrational in economic 
thinking in developing countries 
Integrated economic humanities would 
ease physical labor and ﬁnancial issues 
globally 
Old problems in philosophy, 
cognitive neuroscience, and physics 
remain unresolved 
A new, integrated paradigm of thinking 
would simply solve them 
Scientists think for themselves 
Integrated arts, humanities, and 
natural sciences think for the universe 
I love music. Is it a science?
Musicology is both an art and a science
Quantitative and qualitative research 
are distinct 
Integrated science would help both 
succeed 
Was I bad? 
No, dear. You haven’t done a bad job. 
So, why are you dying? 
… 
… 
After my death, go. 
…
Why don’t I have your arm in my 
arm? 
We make a better life later 
When? 
Now 
How? 
Think. 
We moved between our fears and hopes for thinking future. We are not wolf who
does not have any fears. Not only are we human being who has killed the wolf of
existence, but also, we have watered to cultivate its inversion; there is a continuous
ﬂow in ourselves; we have fears about our children and their suffering. This ﬂow is
nothing more than tears of that ﬂower we cultivated in ourselves, the ﬂower of
further hope for future, for that we came here to devote ourselves to think how to
educate our children beyond time–space, for that day may we leave them, and we
748
N. Rezaei et al.

are not present in their time–space that we cannot take care of our children arm in
arm, but we will, through our education, be perfect being closer to them than ever,
thought in thought (Fig. 36.1).
Core Messages
• Future science, religion, and politics discourses beneﬁt from integrated
science and AI.
• Isolated thinking of the changing world is sad, but some sort of good is the
vulnerability of isolated thinking to failure.
• Thought force and the cosmic dimensions of thought speak the same: we
are ourselves the scalars of thinking.
• Eduction in engineering can be improved by systems thinking approach
and arts integration.
• Social sciences and philosophy education and integrated curricula can
mitigate current generations’ educational problems.
• Integrated science and art is a path directing creativity and innovation in art
and science and resolving old dualisms in science.
• Social ecology would regenerate the environment, human life, and
non-human life.
References
1. Sfard A (2001) There is more to discourse than meets the ears: Looking at thinking as
communicating to learn more about mathematical learning. Educ Stud Math 46(1):13–57
2. Graesser AC (2011) Learning, thinking, and emoting with discourse technologies. Am
Psychol 66(8):746
3. Mercer N (2007) Sociocultural discourse analysis: Analysing classroom talk as a social mode
of thinking. J Appl Linguist Profess Pract 1(2):137–168
4. Sanchez-Ruiz M-J, Santos MR, Jiménez JJ (2013) The role of metaphorical thinking in the
creativity of scientiﬁc discourse. Creat Res J 25(4):361–368
5. Russ RS, Scherr RE, Hammer D, Mikeska J (2008) Recognizing mechanistic reasoning in
student scientiﬁc inquiry: a framework for discourse analysis developed from philosophy of
science. Sci Educ 92(3):499–525
6. Cobb P, Wood T (1993) Discourse, mathematical thinking, and contexts for learning:
sociocultural dynamics in children’s development 91
7. Hulme M (2008) The conquering of climate: discourses of fear and their dissolution. Geogr J
174(1):5–16. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1475-4959.2008.00266.x
8. Trewin B, Cazenave A, Howell S, Huss M, Isensee K, Palmer MD et al (2021) Headline
indicators for global climate monitoring. Bull Am Meteor Soc 102(1):E20–E37
9. Eckstein D, Künzel V, Schäfer L (2021) Global climate risk index 2021. Who suffers most
from extreme weather events 2000–2019
10. Witt MA (2019) De-globalization: theories, predictions, and opportunities for international
business research. J Int Bus Stud 50(7):1053–1077
11. Lasswell HD (2021) The future of world communication and propaganda 14
36
Thinking 2050: Bioengineering of Science and Art
749

12. Lasswell HD, Lerner D, Speier H (eds) Propaganda and communication in world history, vol
III: a pluralizing world in information. University of Hawaii Press, pp 516–534. https://doi.
org/10.1515/9780824886219-015
13. Saroya M, Best G, Hollinger GA (2020) Online exploration of tunnel networks leveraging
topological CNN-based world predictions. In: 2020 IEEE/RSJ international conference on
intelligent robots and systems (IROS), 24 Oct–24 Jan 2021, pp 6038–6045. https://doi.org/10.
1109/IROS45743.2020.9341170
14. Ukuhor HO (2021) The interrelationships between antimicrobial resistance, COVID-19, past,
and future pandemics. J Infect Public Health 14(1):53–60. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jiph.2020.
10.018
15. Murdoch WW, Chu F-I, Stewart-Oaten A, Wilber MQ (2018) Improving wellbeing and
reducing future world population. PLoS ONE 13(9):e0202851. https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0202851
16. Traxler J (2018) Distance learning—predictions and possibilities. Educ Sci 8(1):35
17. Kayabaş BK (2021) Social impacts of cyber culture and predictions about the future of open
and distance education. In: Present and future paradigms of cyberculture in the 21st century.
IGI Global, pp 135–153
18. Cui H, Nguyen T, Chou F-C, Lin T-H, Schneider J, Bradley D et al (2020) Deep kinematic
models for kinematically feasible vehicle trajectory predictions. In: 2020. IEEE, pp 10563–
10569
19. Zhongming Z, Linong L, Wangqiang Z, Wei L (2019) Energy in the Climate Future:
Predictions from the International Energy Agency.
20. Smith G, Archer R, Nandwani D, Li J (2018) Impacts of urbanization: diversity and the
symbiotic relationships of rural, urban, and spaces in-between. Int J Sust Dev World 25
(3):276–289
21. Wilkinson KP (2019) The future of the community in rural areas. In: The future of rural
America. Routledge, pp 73–89
22. Woods M (2019) The future of rural places. In: The Routledge companion to rural planning.
Routledge, pp 622–632
23. Pearlman RA (1988) Inaccurate predictions of life expectancy: dilemmas and opportunities.
Arch Intern Med 148(12):2538–2538. https://doi.org/10.1001/archinte.1988.00380120007001
24. Quelhas AC, Rasga C, Johnson-Laird PN (2017) A priori true and false conditionals. Cogn
Sci 41:1003–1030
25. Engel SJ, Gilmartin BJ, Bongort K, Hess A (2000) Prognostics, the real issues involved with
predicting life remaining. In: 2000 IEEE, pp 457–469
26. Pal D (2013) Existence of thought force and its characteristics. Am J Phys Chem 2(5):94–104
27. Pal D, De AU (2012) The cosmic microwave background radiation temperature signifying the
existence of the thought-carrying particle, thought retaining particle and thought force.
NeuroQuantology 10(3)
28. Horton Z (2017) Composing a cosmic view: three alternatives for thinking scale in the
anthropocene. In: Scale in literature and culture. Springer, pp 35–60
29. Shuman LJ, Atman CJ, Eschenbach EA, Evans D, Felder RM, Imbrie PK et al (2002) The
future of engineering education. In: 2002 IEEE, pp T4A-T4A
30. Rosen MA (2009) Engineering education: future trends and advances. In: 2009 pp 44–52
31. El Maraghy WH (2011) Future trends in engineering education and research. In: Advances in
sustainable manufacturing. Springer, pp 11–16
32. Qamar SZ, Pervez T, Al-Kindi M (2019) Engineering education: challenges, opportunities,
and future trends, pp 26–28
33. Fordyce D (1988) The development of systems thinking in engineering education: an
interdisciplinary model. Eur J Eng Educ 13(3):283–292
34. Nyemba WR, Carter KF, Mbohwa C, Chinguwa S (2019) A systems thinking approach to
collaborations for capacity building and sustainability in engineering education. Procedia
Manuf 33:732–739. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.promfg.2019.04.092
750
N. Rezaei et al.

35. Nehdi M, Rehan R (2007) Raising the bar for civil engineering education: systems thinking
approach. J Prof Issues Eng Educ Pract 133(2):116–125
36. Cromer AH (1997) Connected knowledge: science, philosophy, and education
37. Blake N, Smeyers P, Smith RD, Standish P (2008) The Blackwell guide to the philosophy of
education, vol 6. Wiley
38. Tesar M, Hytten K, Hoskins TK, Rosiek J, Jackson AY, Hand M et al (2021) Philosophy of
education in a new key: future of philosophy of education. Educ Philos Theory 1–22
39. Ji-yuan YE (2010) Approaching evaluation system in humanities and social sciences.
J Nanjing Univ (Philos Human Soc Sci) 1:97–111
40. Bleakley A, Marshall R, Brömer R (2006) Toward an aesthetic medicine: developing a core
medical humanities undergraduate curriculum. J Med Human 27(4):197–213
41. Khalid A, Chin CA, Atiqullah MM, Sweigart JF, Stutzmann B, Zhou W Building a better
engineer: the importance of humanities in engineering curriculum, pp 23–256
42. Wachtler C, Lundin S, Troein M (2006) Humanities for medical students? A qualitative study
of a medical humanities curriculum in a medical school program. BMC Med Educ 6(1):16.
https://doi.org/10.1186/1472-6920-6-16
43. Tchudi S (1993) The astonishing curriculum: integrating science and humanities through
language. ERIC
44. Rives-East D, Lima OK (2013) Designing interdisciplinary science/humanities courses:
Challenges and solutions. Coll Teach 61(3):100–106
45. Elsbach KD, Stigliani I (2018) Design thinking and organizational culture: a review and
framework for future research. J Manag 44(6):2274–2306
46. Ewin N, Luck J, Chugh R, Jarvis J (2017) Rethinking project management education: a
humanistic approach based on design thinking. Procedia Comput Sci 121:503–510
47. Clark K, Smith R (2008)Unleashing the power ofdesign thinking. Design Manag Rev 19(3):8–15
48. Liedtka J (2015) Perspective: linking design thinking with innovation outcomes through
cognitive bias reduction. J Prod Innov Manag 32(6):925–938
49. Gloppen J (2009) Perspectives on design leadership and design thinking and how they relate
to European service industries. Design Manag J 4(1):33–47
50. Brenner W, Uebernickel F, Abrell T (2016) Design thinking as mindset, process, and toolbox.
In: Design thinking for innovation. Springer, pp 3–21
51. Davis A, Adler A, Alvarado C, Hammond T, Hitchcock R, Oltmans M et al (2002) Art and
the future. Citeseer
52. Cagan J, Dinar M, Shah JJ, Leifer L, Linsey J, Smith S et al (2013) Empirical studies of
design thinking: past, present, future. American Society of Mechanical Engineers, p
V005T006A020
53. Grammenos D, Antona M (2018) Future designers: introducing creativity, design thinking &
design to children. Int J Child-comput Interact 16:16–24
54. Okada T, Ishibashi K (2017) Imitation, inspiration, and creation: Cognitive process of creative
drawing by copying others’ artworks. Cogn Sci 41(7):1804–1837
55. Augello A, Infantino I, Lieto A, Pilato G, Rizzo R, Vella F (2016) Artwork creation by a
cognitive architecture integrating computational creativity and dual process approaches. Biol
Inspired Cogn Archit 15:74–86. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bica.2015.09.007
56. De Pisapia N, Bacci F, Parrott D, Melcher D (2016) Brain networks for visual creativity: a
functional connectivity study of planning a visual artwork. Sci Rep 6(1):39185. https://doi.
org/10.1038/srep39185
57. Deplazes A, Huppenbauer M (2009) Synthetic organisms and living machines. Syst Synth
Biol 3(1):55. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11693-009-9029-4
58. Serrano L (2007) Synthetic biology: promises and challenges. Mol Syst Biol 3(1):158. https://
doi.org/10.1038/msb4100202
59. Tran P, Prindle A (2021) Synthetic biology in bioﬁlms: tools, challenges, and opportunities.
Biotechnol Prog e3123
36
Thinking 2050: Bioengineering of Science and Art
751

60. Gallup O, Ming H, Ellis T (2021) Ten future challenges for synthetic biology. Eng Biol 5
(3):51–59
61. Costanza R, Mageau M (1999) What is a healthy ecosystem? Aquat Ecol 33(1):105–115
62. Peltzer DA, Wardle DA, Allison VJ, Baisden WT, Bardgett RD, Chadwick OA et al (2010)
Understanding ecosystem retrogression. Ecol Monogr 80(4):509–529
63. Tsujimoto M, Kajikawa Y, Tomita J, Matsumoto Y (2018) A review of the ecosystem concept
—towards coherent ecosystem design. Technol Forecast Soc Chang 136:49–58. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.techfore.2017.06.032
64. Duffy JE (2003) Biodiversity loss, trophic skew and ecosystem functioning. Ecol Lett 6
(8):680–687. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1461-0248.2003.00494.x
65. Miller GH, Fogel ML, Magee JW, Gagan MK, Clarke SJ, Johnson BJ (2005) Ecosystem
collapse in Pleistocene Australia and a human role in megafaunal extinction. Science 309
(5732):287–290
66. Brockerhoff EG, Barbaro L, Castagneyrol B, Forrester DI, Gardiner B, González-Olabarria JR
et al (2017) Forest biodiversity, ecosystem functioning and the provision of ecosystem
services. Biodivers Conserv 26(13):3005–3035. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10531-017-1453-2
67. Bratman GN, Anderson CB, Berman MG, Cochran B, De Vries S, Flanders J et al (2019)
Nature and mental health: an ecosystem service perspective. Sci Adv 5(7):eaax0903
68. Costanza R, de Groot R, Braat L, Kubiszewski I, Fioramonti L, Sutton P et al (2017) Twenty
years of ecosystem services: how far have we come and how far do we still need to go?
Ecosyst Serv 28:1–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoser.2017.09.008
69. Berdugo M, Delgado-Baquerizo M, Soliveres S, Hernández-Clemente R, Zhao Y, Gaitán JJ
et al (2020) Global ecosystem thresholds driven by aridity. Science 367(6479):787–790
70. Rezaei N (2021) Integrated Science, vol 1, 1 edn. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-030-65273-9
71. Saghazadeh A, Suz AA, Viu A, Wu C-F, Maboloc CR, Hellberg D et al (2021) Integrated
Science 2050: Science Without Borders. In: Rezaei N (ed) Integrated science: science without
borders. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp 461–478. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
030-65273-9_22
752
N. Rezaei et al.

Index
A
Abilities
abilities, cognitive, 77, 88, 294, 297, 332,
333
abilities, mental, 299, 329
abilities, semiotic, 82
Absolutism, 560
Abstraction, conceptual, 547
Absurd, thinking of, 194
Abuse, 290, 570
Academia, 158, 413, 444, 739, 741, 744
Acceleration, 246, 248–250, 302
Accent
accent, hierarchical, 502
Acceptance, 89, 102, 167, 290, 302, 315, 320,
563
Access, analogical, 77
Accident, 53, 99, 547
Accomplishment, 12, 13, 16, 20, 61, 289, 722
Account, analytical, 123
Accretion, 138
Accuracy, 17, 138, 157, 293, 564
Achievement, 28, 29, 41, 101, 158, 160, 290,
296, 298, 439, 447, 544, 566, 626, 632,
729
Acid
acid,seeamino acid, 26
acid, seedeoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), 698
Acoustics, 475, 484
Acoustic startle reaction, 481
Act, free, 198
Act
act, communicative, 414, 417
act, creative, 136, 411, 577, 736
act, mechanical, 532
act, perfect, 54, 547
act, spiritual, 197, 198
act, spontaneous, 199
act, synthetic, 200
Action
action, animal, 75, 80, 81, 87
action, discursive, 594, 595
action, immoral, 338
action, moral, 338, 339
action, practical, 461, 466
Activation
activation, neuronal, 274, 278, 279
activation patterns, 274, 278, 279, 474, 484
Activities
activities, agricultural, 676, 679, 724
activities, anthropogenic, 671, 673, 676,
680, 698
activities, cerebral, 316
activities, communicative, 653, 656
activities, creative, 23, 137, 206
activities, design, 459, 463, 468, 469
activities, digital, 367
activities, economic, 617, 619, 676, 683
activities, electromagnetic, 237
activities, narrative, 596
activities, productive, 387
activities, engineering, 416
activities, human, 41, 289, 464, 619, 671,
672, 674, 676–678, 682, 684, 687,
696–698, 740
activities, industrial, 684, 697
activities, online, 367
activities, political, 303
activities, problem‐solving, 459
activities, reﬂective, 86, 455, 463
activities, social, 303, 722
activities, subjective, 470
activities, symbolic, 84, 464
activities, synthesis, 461
activities, tourist, 676, 677, 680, 684
activities, intellectual, 54, 539, 540, 551
Actor
actor, human, 366
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer
Nature Switzerland AG 2022
N. Rezaei and A. Saghazadeh (eds.), Thinking, Integrated Science 7,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04075-7
753

actor, multi‐skilled, 468
Actual
actual, new, 146, 147
Actualities, 50–52, 105, 220
Actualization
actualization, realistic, 217
actualization, self‐, 215, 220, 221, 225
Actualized, self‐, 211, 231
Actualizing, self‐, 211, 220–225, 230–232
Adaptability, 142, 468, 703
Adaptation, evolutionary, 335
Adaptation, 5, 30, 80, 137, 139, 147, 405, 447,
479, 562, 584, 588, 632, 645, 695
Addiction, 418
Adjacent possibles, 143, 146–148, 737, 738
Adjustment, 225, 483
Adult, 12, 216, 264, 294, 322, 332, 568, 644
Advantage
advantage, computational, 390
advantage, evolutionary, 578
advantage, survival, 332, 337
advantage, therapeutic, 410
Advocacy, 295, 557
Aesthetics
aesthetics, concepts of, 529
aesthetics, discourse of, 532
aesthetics, expression of, 350
aesthetics, humanist, 348
aesthetics, idealistic, 531
aesthetics, inadequacy of, 534
aesthetics, traditional, 532, 533
Affair
affairs, human, 106
affairs, state of, 348, 499
Affectation, 198
Afﬁnity, 57, 77, 394, 516
Afﬁrmation, 49, 73, 274, 289, 579
Age
age, classical, 135
age, digital, 419
age, early, 290, 321
age, industrial, 356, 357, 635
age, Neolithic, 559
age, new, 355
age, young, 321, 322
ages, Middle, 53, 353, 540, 542, 560, 565,
633, 634, 702
Agency, 84, 121, 287, 334, 337, 470, 638, 643,
644
Agent, 41, 56, 115, 135, 136, 374, 403, 508,
546, 548, 569, 591, 595, 641, 643, 659
Agent, contrast, 237
Aggression, 104, 601
Aging, 594
Agreement, 102, 135, 384, 388, 666, 737
Agribusiness, 562
Agriculture, 158, 369, 557, 559, 586, 587, 637,
638, 679, 685, 698, 724
Aha, 225
AI, see artiﬁcial intelligence
AI systems, 390, 392, 395
Air
air miles, 705
air pollution, 289, 671, 673, 679, 698
air quality, 679
Albedo, 160
Albinism, 295
Algorithm, 146, 370, 399, 404, 405, 407
All‐as‐Plurality, 43, 44
All‐as‐Unity, 43, 44, 47
Allegories, 46, 496
Alliance
alliance, consumers, 700
alliance between, art and science, 138
alliance between, biology and art, 147
All is one, 43, 47, 48
All‐too‐human self, 218, 219
Allusion, 370, 541
Almost‐human, 576
Alteration, 90, 101, 226, 386, 544, 545
Alteration, spiritual, 544
Alterity
alterity, qualitative, 77
Ambiguity, 17, 25, 106, 107, 174, 424, 449,
457, 470, 730
Ambivalence, cultural, 302
Amenities, social, 563
Ampere, 242
Amplitude, 254, 407
Analog, 91, 141
Analogy
analogy, marginal, 73, 75, 77, 81, 82,
85–89, 91
Analyses, 75, 81, 139, 432, 618, 722, 735, 737
Analysis, 8, 11, 18, 22–24, 48, 52, 56, 60, 62,
65, 66, 77, 82, 84, 97, 123, 125, 133,
185–187, 191, 193, 217, 279, 314, 317,
318, 335, 356, 391, 403, 404, 406–408,
410, 413, 416, 420, 423, 433, 446, 450,
477, 482, 485, 531, 548, 564, 565, 568,
578, 581, 615, 618, 619, 621, 633, 635,
658, 659, 674, 675, 678, 680–684, 687,
724, 728, 735, 737, 740
Analyst, 457
Anaphora, 391
Anatomopathology, 128
754
Index

Anatomy, 19, 120, 122, 635
Ancestor, 263, 332–334, 341, 422, 678, 696,
703, 705, 707
Anchorage, 135, 148
Angel, 352, 354, 541, 543, 549
Anger, 104, 409, 482
An I and a You, 506, 505
Anima, see soul
Animal
animal, higher, 78, 100
animality, 89, 102, 104
animal, non‐human, 73, 75, 77, 78, 80–89,
91, 336, 740
animal, simplest, 154
animal, social, 333
animal, socialized, 336
Animate beings, 541
Anthropology
anthropology, cultural, 594
anthropology, evolutionary, 493, 497
anthropology, historical, 501
anthropology, philosophical, 73, 83, 87, 97,
493
anthropology, poetological, 493, 497
Anthropomorphism, 75
Anthropotechnics, 500
Anti‐diffusionism, 585
Anti‐intellectualism, 324
Anti‐positivism, 565
Anti‐reductionist, 138, 147
Antibiotic, 370
Anticipation, 531
Antiquity, 49, 70, 187, 351–353, 356, 542
Anxieties, 213, 215–217, 292, 295, 296, 299
Anxiety‐management system, 213
Apologetics, 560
Aporetic, 125
Aporia, 533
Apparatus, mental, 514
Appetite
appetite, intellectual, 543, 547, 552
appetite, sensitive, 543
Appreciation
appreciation, aesthetic, 7, 12, 331, 416,
424, 484
Approach
approach, aesthetic, 417
approach, analogical, 91
approach, analytical, 121
approach, collaborative, 459
approach, composite, 83
approach, evolutionary, 136, 480
approach, experimental, 120
approach, ﬁnalistic, 116
approach, holistic, 120, 123, 301, 482
approach, human‐centered, 468
approach, ideological, 120
approach, joint, 442
approach, methodological, 533
approach, phenomenological, 495
approach, philosophical, 73
approach, systems‐oriented, 459
approach, Systems thinking (ST), 629, 671,
672, 674, 681, 749
approach, trialectic, 171, 176–184, 186,
189–192
approach, universalist, 501
approach, vitalistic, 117
Appropriation, 361, 364, 446, 477
Arbiter, aesthetic, 335
Archaeologist, 580
Archaeology, 575, 576
Archetype, 332
Architect, 23, 153, 206, 340, 413, 423, 741
Architecture
architecture, neural, 392
Area
area, peripheral, 459
area, urban, 622, 698, 724
Argument
argument, analogical, 91
argument, rational, 82, 176
argument, teleological, 388
Argumentation
argumentation, verbal, 424
Arrangement, visual, 426
Art
art adoration, 350
art, bioengineering of, 347, 348, 736
art, biological, 363, 364
art, biology of, 136, 139
art, contemporary, 351, 354–356, 362, 377,
400, 406, 411, 736
art criticism, 437, 446, 447, 449
art critique, 417
art, death of, 358, 533
art, dialectics of, 349
art, digital, 406
art, dynamic, 408
art, exercise of, 437, 446
art experience, 404, 446
art, ﬁgurative, 422
art, ﬁne, 361, 397, 438, 446, 451, 534, 561
art, function of, 350, 736
art, heritage of, 354
art historian, 353, 358, 422
art, history of, 350, 358, 404, 534
art, idolatry of, 351
Index
755

Art (cont.)
art installation, 355, 402, 648
art, interactive, 400, 408
art, liberal, 568, 730, 734
art, masterpiece of, 350
art medium, 353
art movement, 356, 357
art, naturalistic, 351
art, new, 25, 361
art, non‐ﬁgurative, 141
art, non‐interactive, 400
art performance, 26, 350, 354, 355
art, piece of, 332, 336
art philosophies, 345
art, poetic, 498
art, post‐modern, 345, 350
art, power of, 164, 374
art practice, 25, 361–365, 367, 377, 402,
405
art, process‐oriented, 399
art, progress of, 353
art, retinal, 355
art scene, 351
art, traditional, 355–357, 404
art, transgenic, 365
art, understanding of, 354
art, work of, 141, 147, 206, 337, 350, 354,
355, 358, 400, 411, 531–535
Arthropods, ancient, 706
Articulation, 202, 385, 388, 457, 580, 606
Artifact
artifact, artistic, 422, 438
artifact, technical, 573, 584
Artiﬁce, 376
Artiﬁcial intelligence, see AI
Artisan, 350
Artist
artist, conceptual, 350
artist, conservative, 353
artist, contemporary, 357, 400, 404, 736
artist, modern artist, 350, 356
artist, progressive, 353
artist, project of, 203
artist, renaissance artist, 348, 350, 353, 356,
432
artist, self‐realization of, 335
artist, thought of, 203
Artwork
artwork, ability of, 374
Aspect, aesthetic, 24, 432
Aspirer, 349
Assemblage, 366, 371, 698
Assertion, 50, 63, 182, 187, 543, 565
Assessment, holistic, 285, 301, 302
Assessment, social, 174
Assimilation, 137, 138, 140, 147, 547
Assistant, voice‐activated, 419
Association, sense of, 198
Association, subjective, 504
Assumption
assumption, risky, 376
Asymptotic, 256
Atemporality, 200
Atheism, 119, 597
Atmosphere, 90, 160, 699
Atmospheric, 161, 576
Atom
atom, cesium, 252
atom, sodium, 241
Atomization, 536
Attention
attention deﬁcit disorder (ADD), 296
attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD), 291
attention, economy of, 418
attention, self-, 390, 391
attention, visual, 290
Attitude
attitude, anti‐scientiﬁc, 125
attitude, idealistic, 122
attitude, intellectual, 195
attitude, reﬂexive, 203
attitude, understanding, 205
Audience, 21, 217, 218, 339, 370, 399, 400,
402, 403, 406, 408, 410, 416
Aura, 532
Author, contemporary, 89
Authoritarian, 292, 295, 324, 449, 557, 560,
732
Authority, 348, 566, 581, 597, 638, 641, 723
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), 296
Automatism, 506
Autonomy
autonomy, systematic, 392
Autopoiesis, 65, 68, 135, 137
Awareness
awareness, augmented, 403
awareness, lack of, 296
awareness, problem of, 507
awareness, self‐, 30, 303, 336, 451, 730,
742
Awe, 164, 221, 293, 294, 350, 351, 354, 482
Axiom, 248, 479, 521, 525, 582, 585, 596,
602–604, 606, 607
756
Index

B
Background, personal, 504
Bacteria, 363, 365, 370, 372, 376, 631, 700,
737
Bacteriologist, 372
Balance
balance, community, 337
balance, integrated, 156
Band, tribal, 558, 559
Barrier
barrier, mental, 594
barrier, spatial, 203
Base, ethical, 555, 569
Beatitude, 350, 356
Beauty
beauty, attractiveness of, 138
beauty, celebration of, 349
beauty, champion of, 349
beauty, Champollion of, 349
beauty, criterion of, 349
beauty, dimension of, 351
beauty, eternal, 353
beauty, experiences of, 350
beauty, forms of, 350
beauty, human, 352
beauty, naturalistic, 350
beauty, objective, 352–354, 358, 736
beauty, power of, 164
beauty, real, 352
beauty, renewal of, 358
beauty, sleeping, 203
beauty, stone, 349
beauty, subjective, 353
beauty, symbol of, 351
beauty, transcendental, 354
beauty, translator of, 356
beauty, universal, 350, 351
Behavior
behavior, animal, 73, 75, 78, 80–82, 84, 85,
88–91, 332
behavior, collective, 418
behavior, complex, 78
behavior, economic, 615, 617, 619–621,
623–625
behavior, exploratory, 80, 88
behavior, human, 10, 75, 80, 105, 215, 333,
410, 565, 580, 621
behavior, innate, 80
behavior, instrumental, 216
behavior, learned, 80
behavior, non‐human, 73
behavior, observable, 77, 90
behavior, oscillating, 424
behavior, semiotic, 83
behavior, sign‐based, 87
behavior, social, 578, 580, 581
Behaviorist, 513, 514, 525
Beholder, eye of, 351
Being
being, animal, 100, 544
being, articulated, 388, 389
being, atemporality of, 200
being, authentic, 204
being, awareness of, 507
being, beginning of, 205
being, certainty of, 195
being, community, 205
being, continuity of, 534
being, essential, 199, 204
being, experience of, 534
being, expressive, 104
being, heteronomous, 393
being, human, 31, 56, 66, 77, 83, 84,
86–88, 95, 97, 98, 100–107, 113, 116,
126, 143, 153, 192, 199, 207, 215–218,
222, 223, 225, 228, 229, 232, 239, 240,
243, 247, 264, 271–273, 275, 276, 293,
296, 299, 301, 317, 320, 321, 324, 331,
332, 338, 350, 389–391, 393, 406, 500,
506, 516, 520, 523, 534, 535, 537,
539–547, 549–552, 565, 573, 576, 578,
582–584, 586, 587, 664, 676, 715, 726,
732, 737, 743, 748
being, idea of, 176, 534
being, identity of, 45, 47
being, imperfect, 540
being, inanimate, 97
being, individuation of, 546
being, inferior, 541
being, living, 89, 97–100, 113, 114, 121,
122, 125, 127, 140, 145, 278, 383–390,
392–395, 541, 737
being, loving, 228
being, mode of, 43, 51, 376, 501, 507
being, natural, 544, 551
being, new, 115, 200
being, non‐living, 395, 737
being, perfect, 749
being, quality of, 214
being, self‐, 213
being, self‐conscious, 138
being, self‐organizing, 387
being, spiritual, 544, 551
being, state of, 558, 648
being, superior, 580
being, ways of, 196, 640
beings, angelic, 540, 543, 550, 551
beings, family of, 516
Index
757

Being (cont.)
beings, taxonomy of, 393
beings, third category of, 395
Belief
belief, metaphysical, 580
belief, religious, 120, 565
belief system, 298, 317, 637, 638, 645, 648
Belonging
belonging, reciprocal, 202, 207
belonging, sense of, 298, 299
Beneﬁcence, 567
Beneﬁt, economic, 373
Benevolence, 559
Betweenness, 164
Bias
bias, cognitive, 437, 444, 449, 735, 742
Bi‐directionality, 137
Big data, 417
Biochemistry, 635
Biodiversity, 74, 91, 151, 673, 679, 682, 683,
705, 739, 741
Bioengineering
bioengineering, art of, 347, 348
bioengineering, sense of, 393
bioengineering, world of, 394
Bioethics, 311, 555, 567
Biofact, 376
Biologism, 501
Biologist, 118, 141, 276, 422, 636
Biology
biology, classical, 136, 138, 148
biology, cognitive, 139
biology, domain of, 347
biology, essence of, 120
biology, evolutionary, 575, 588
biology, Hegemon, 368
biology, molecular, 63, 139, 143, 366, 374,
376, 377
biology, organismic, 631, 636, 641–643,
731
biology, philosophical, 97, 99
biology, prehistory of, 114
biology, synthetic, 364, 370, 372, 376, 737
biology, theoretical, 73, 631
Biosecurity, 633, 639
Biosphere, 143–148, 347, 697
Biotechnology, 363, 369, 377, 562, 567, 661
Bipolar Disorder (BD), 296
Bird, 90, 146, 586, 695
Birth, 53, 66, 98, 105, 111, 114, 128, 352, 441,
497, 532, 525, 695, 728
Blame, 126, 332, 339, 557, 733
Blasphemy, 593
Blind, 30, 331, 339, 421, 424, 697
Blood, 542
Blueprint, 331, 664
Board game, 520
Bodies
bodies, bacterial, 370
bodies, living, 98, 129, 203, 363, 372
Body
body, constituted, 541
body, empty, 411
body language, 288
body, living, 98, 129, 203, 363, 372
body, own, 280, 364, 368, 374, 406, 485,
498, 499
body, vertical character of, 544
body capacity, 198
body language, 296
body matter, 543
Bond
bond, alive, 114
Bone, 1, 146
Book
book, forbidden, 597
Boundaries, 29, 30, 47, 146, 230, 365, 366,
384, 457, 461, 463, 464, 639, 653, 656,
664, 732
Box, black, 241, 432, 524, 525
Brain
brain, hemisphere, 21
brain, human, 49, 153, 163, 239, 245, 331,
416, 450, 544
brain, humidity of, 544
brain function, 333, 368, 481
brain imaging, 154
brainpower, 160, 161
brain‐reading, 241
brain response, aesthetic, 484
brains, connected, 485
brains, uniﬁed, 239
brain, vision of, 544
Breakthrough, 3, 11, 24, 563
Breath
breath, ﬁrst, 127
Bricolage, evolutionary, 137
Burden, 102, 106, 227, 232, 725, 727
Bureaucracy, 159
Burial, natural, 696, 700, 702–707
Business
business cost, 163
business practice, 654, 655
Butterﬂy, 246
By‐product, 213
758
Index

C
Calculating, activity of, 518
Calligraphy
calligraphy, traditional, 354
Camera, 293, 335, 403
Candidate, 157, 295, 475, 735
Capacity
capacity, aesthetic, 329
capacity, intellectual, 542, 544
capacity, irrational, 347
capacity, neural, 329
capacity, own, 542
capacity, symbolic, 579
Capital, human, 298, 303, 625, 660
Captivation, 88, 89
Carbon dioxide, see CO2
Cardio centrism, 542
Care, intimate, 376
Care, medical, 567, 622
Caring, 103, 292, 295, 313–316, 324
Case study, 157, 158, 161, 162, 403, 646, 661,
672, 682, 683, 699
Catalyst, 26, 560
Catalytic, self‐, 137
Catastrophe, 340, 722, 727, 728
Categories
categories, aesthetic, 531
categories, analytical, 531
categories, anthropological, 368
categories, economic, 619, 626
categories, grammatical, 199, 201
categories, metaphysical, 336
Categorization, 90, 406, 444, 559, 696
Category
category, neutral, 377
category, second, 353
category, universal, 369
Causalities, pseudo‐, 278
Causality
causality, concept of, 526
Causation, 161
Cause
cause, external, 122
cause, ﬁnal, 115, 136, 386, 388, 395
cause, second, 543
Caution, 162, 296
Cavern, 443, 444, 581
C costs, see certain costs
Cell, 19, 31, 57, 137, 139, 141, 143, 144, 186,
193, 272, 273, 277, 372–375, 392, 449,
450, 562, 567, 737
Center, own, 219
Centeredness, self‐, 99
Central Nervous System (CNS), 410
Century
century, fourth, 597
century, ﬁfth, 340
century, sixth, 634
century, 13th, 498, 540
century, 17th, 64, 115, 542
century, 18th, 113, 114, 117, 119, 121, 126,
506, 635
century, 19th, 7, 111, 113, 114, 120, 125,
129, 375, 376, 636, 638, 648, 743
century, 20th, 7, 42, 59, 61, 67, 69, 83, 86,
97, 135, 143, 272, 350, 495, 503, 506,
515, 531, 532, 580, 634
century, 21st, 311, 319, 451, 633, 643
Certain costs, see c costs
Certainties, 157, 195, 206, 319, 513, 520, 524,
525, 526, 546, 732
Challenge
challenge, complex, 557
challenge, contextual, 468
challenge, global, 457, 468, 469
challenge, systemic, 468, 470
Champion, 745
Chance, 214, 295, 333, 367, 508, 667
Chandelier model, 301
Change
change, phenotypic, 142
change, positive, 458, 729
change, possibilities of, 461
change, process of, 156
change, social, 457, 578, 580
Channel, 250, 370, 371, 430
Chaos, 147, 370, 525, 579
Character
character, anthropological, 197
character, human, 559
character, vertical, 544
Charge
charge, electrical, 237
charge, negative, 237, 240
charge, positive, 237
Chassis, 370, 371
Checklist, 159, 741
Chemical reciprocity, process of, 137
Chemistry, 19, 26, 119, 127, 142, 160, 495,
635
Chess, 351, 520
Chief, 75, 413, 426, 560, 695, 704, 707
Child
childbirth, 566
Index
759

Child (cont.)
childhood, 16, 200, 214, 290–292
child, gifted, 285, 292, 300
Children
children, atypical, 292
children, disadvantaged, 294
children, gifted, 285, 287, 288, 290, 297,
298, 301, 303
Chills, aesthetic, 482
Chills and thrills, 474, 481, 482
Chimpanzees, 333
Choice
choice, economic, 620
choice, either/or, 159
Chromatin, 141
Chronology, 576
Church, 53, 353, 429, 555, 560, 566, 595, 703,
705
Circle
circle, phenomenological, 196
circle, triangular, 204
Circuit, 241, 242, 245, 411
Circularity, 147, 697, 698, 707
Circumstance
circumstance, economic, 624
circumstance, mental, 595
Cities, 166, 562, 580, 638, 698
Citizen, 322–324, 340, 622, 623, 645, 693, 739
City
city, walled, 638
city life, 559
Civil, 25, 187, 303, 579, 583, 730
Civilization
civilization, ancient, 702
civilization failures, 166
Claim
claim, epigenetic, 116
claim, evolution of, 120
Clariﬁcation, 24, 41, 315, 513, 661, 721
Clarity, 185, 199, 201, 206, 291, 316, 619
Classroom, 14, 23, 24, 26, 27, 292, 297, 324,
325, 440–443, 446, 447, 449, 517, 518,
643, 735
Class, social, 293, 595
Client, 160, 217, 222, 289, 296, 499
Climate
climate change, 5, 24, 151, 161, 633, 645,
647, 671, 673, 679, 683, 698, 722, 724,
725, 727, 740
climate disruption, 153, 160, 161
climate regulation, 676
climatic system, 160
Climatologist, 160
Cloning
cloning, animal, 562
Closure
closure, internal, 137
closure, organizational, 140
Cloud, 3, 41, 75, 96, 97, 113, 134, 135, 153,
173, 195, 212, 236, 271, 287, 313, 330,
331, 337, 346, 363, 383, 399, 415, 439,
456, 475, 495, 513, 530, 538, 556, 575,
593, 616, 630, 654, 672, 695, 719
Coastal Lagoon (CL), 671, 674, 676, 677, 680,
683–685, 687
Co‐design, 458, 468, 470
Co‐emergence, 135
Co‐evolution, 133, 137, 580, 583–585, 661
CO2, 161, 671, 673, 674, 678, 679
Code
code, ethical, 560
code, genetic, 142, 364, 375
Codiﬁcation, 375
Codon, 365
Coexistence, 506, 560, 566, 568
Coffee, 242, 243
Cofﬁn, 351, 693, 694, 696, 697, 699, 700, 702,
705–707
Cognition
cognition, animal, 88–91, 740
cognition, dimension of, 446
cognition, emergence of, 137
cognition, enhanced, 474
cognition, human, 77
cognition, mode of, 386
cognition, spatiotemporal, 331, 341
Coherence, 429, 441, 475, 563, 595, 727, 740
Cohesion, 334, 337, 559
Coincidence, 52, 70
Coin, two sides, 135, 254
Collaboration
collaboration, bottom‐up, 469
Collapse, 617, 706, 727, 739, 741
Colleague, 157, 289, 294, 296, 298, 300, 415,
745
Collecting‐and‐uniting, 39, 45, 47, 48, 60, 70
Collectivity, 619
Colonialism, 375, 578
Colonist, 394, 637, 638
Color, 14, 21, 62, 354, 394, 426, 429, 479,
521–523
Combination, 8, 11, 42, 64, 116, 166, 171, 177,
178, 333, 366, 372, 393, 446, 497, 659,
695, 734
Commitment
commitment, intellectual, 445
Commodities, 375, 499
Commodity, aesthetic, 345
760
Index

Commonalities, 475, 476, 585, 632
Commonality, 111, 221, 332, 334
Communication
communication, facilitation of, 459
communication, ﬁrst forms of, 165
communication, interactive, 399, 400
communication, locus of, 166
communication, new, 237
communication, one‐way, 238
communication, pure, 503
communication, two‐way, 259, 264, 726
communication, universal, 265
communication, visual, 419
Communicator, 321
Communitarianism, 558
Community
community, global, 285, 633
community, language, 597
community, moral, 558, 569
Companies, 158, 413, 418, 419, 567, 646, 655,
662, 666, 705, 744
Comparison, statistical, 446
Compassion, 228
Competencies, 413, 437, 440, 441
Complementary, 3–5, 8, 10, 135, 186, 410,
477, 481, 486, 508, 587, 731
Completeness, 81
Complexion, 541
Complexities
complexities, dynamic, 658
complexities, effective, 416, 420, 430
complexities, epistemology of, 140
complexities, horizontal, 660
complexities, measure of, 137
complexities, science of, 420
complexities, spatial, 660
complexities, systemic, 667
complexities, theory of, 133, 631, 738
complexities, vertical, 660
Compliance, 102
Complication, 293, 566
Component
component, cultural, 338
component, ethical, 569
Composition
composition, visual, 429
Comprehensiveness, 319
Computability, theory of, 135
Computation
computation, mental, 473
Computationalism, 279
Computer, 21, 63, 64, 159, 235, 237–239, 242,
247, 248, 321, 336, 397, 401, 402, 404,
405, 408, 410, 413, 481, 658, 698, 728,
732
Concentration, 23, 58, 242–244, 297, 429, 441,
446, 540, 601, 625
Concept
concept, formal, 591
concept, grammar of, 521
concept, self‐, 219, 289–292, 298
Conception
conception, analytical, 517
conception, ﬁnalistic, 121
conception, mental, 84
Conceptualization
conceptualization, holistic, 558
Concern, self‐, 99
Condemnation, 119
Conditionality, 137
Conduct, social, 320
Conﬁdence
conﬁdence, self‐, 215
conﬁdence, statistical, 241
Conﬁdentiality, 567
Conﬁguration, 43, 49, 105, 122, 141, 576, 661,
723
Conﬂict
conﬂict, armed, 557
conﬂict, political, 582
Confrontation, 85, 540
Connectedness, 636
Connection
connection, human, 166
connection, internal, 198
Connectionism, 70, 279
Connotation
connotation, scientiﬁc, 120
Conscience
conscience, knowledge of, 202
conscience, personal, 540
Conscious, own, 231
Consciousness
consciousness, aesthetic, 533, 534
consciousness, collective, 695, 705, 707
consciousness, economic, 618
consciousness, inﬁnite, 229–231
consciousness, self‐, 331
consciousness, symbolic, 73, 85
Consensus, 30, 186, 441, 532, 555, 566
Consent, 373, 597, 645
Consequence
consequence, ethical, 505
consequence, logical, 591, 596, 598–600,
602, 604–606, 610, 611
consequences, metaphysical, 387
Index
761

consequence operator, 591, 592, 596,
598–606, 608–611
Conservatism, 354
Consideration, aesthetic, 432
Constellation, spatiotemporal, 332
Constitution
constitution, bodily, 389
constitution, functional, 390
Constitutivity, mutual, 387
Constraint
constraint, linear, 633
constraint, natural, 579, 586
Construction, technical, 383
Constructive, self‐, 137
Constructivism
constructivism, social, 640
Constructivist, 27, 39, 68–70
Consumer
consumer culture, 697
Consumption
consumption age, 357
Contained system, self‐, 156, 476
Contemplation
contemplation, concept of, 347
contemplation, process of, 355, 356
Content
content, affective, 595
content, mental, 65, 85, 90, 611
content, own, 143
content, visual, 63, 419
Context
context, social, 505, 640
Contingency, 159
Continuity
continuity, conceptual, 87
Contraction, 252
Contract, social, 579, 581, 583
Contradiction, 57, 67, 128, 174, 180, 182, 187,
191, 204, 273, 276, 280, 281, 347, 370,
385, 437, 449, 450, 534, 548, 568, 579
Contraposition, 122
Contribution
contribution, own, 205
Controller, 214, 217–219, 737
Control, voice‐activated, 419
Controversy, 173
Convention, 178, 179, 182, 504, 601, 602
Conventions, linguistic, 525
Conversation
conversation between, Eve and Adam, 502
conversation, imaginary, 113
Cooling, 161
Cooperation
cooperation, mutualistic, 105
Copies, 44, 139, 199, 201, 250, 332, 350, 356,
370, 532, 735
Copy, second, 145
Coronavirus, 623, 698, 706
Coronavirus Disease (COVID), 164, 655
Corporation, 31, 620, 644
Corpus callosum, 163
Correction
correcting, self‐, 30, 315, 632, 648
correction, self‐, 25, 632
Cortex, 194, 405
Counter, 60, 167, 295, 334, 483
Counter‐effect, 122
Counterforce
counterforce, own, 236, 264
Counterpoint, 164–166, 557
Counterproductive, 164
Countersense, 204
Counting, 205, 429, 517, 518, 522
Countries, 211, 232, 294, 298, 299, 323, 617,
621, 622, 624–626, 638, 639, 644–646,
673, 684, 687, 705, 725, 740, 742, 743
Coupling, 69, 140, 481, 483, 485
COVID, see coronavirus disease
COVID-19, see coronavirus disease
Cradle to Cradle (C2C), 696
Cradle to grave, 696, 697, 699
Creation
creation, artistic, 138, 164, 532
creation, own, 156, 313
creation, poetic, 200, 581
creation, self‐, 577
creation, tool, 101
Creationism, 114
Creationist, 119
Creativeness, 229
Creativity
creativity in criticality, 439, 440, 442–444,
446, 447, 451
creativity, embodied, 135, 147, 148
creativity, emergence of, 133
creativity, intelligibility of, 143
Creator, 11, 97, 115, 122, 143, 187, 229, 446,
502, 533, 565, 577, 580
Creatures
creatures, intellectual, 543
creatures, plurality of, 540
Crisis
crisis, ecological, 358, 695, 736
crisis, environmental, 696
crisis, existential, 335
Criteria, economic, 619
762
Index

Critic, 591
Criticality, 18, 437–444, 446–448, 451, 458
Criticism
criticism, meta‐referential, 341
Critique, 123, 125, 144, 171, 176, 182, 318,
384, 386, 446, 495, 575, 636, 640, 647,
726
Cross‐
cross‐departmental, 160
cross‐section, 224
Cultivation, self‐, 500
Cultural practice, Aboriginal, 638
Cultural practice, ancient, 639
Culture
culture, agricultural, 637
culture, ancient, 637–639, 704
culture, Bass, 481
culture, contemporary, 532
culture, elements of, 585
culture, expert, 369
culture, forms of, 147
culture, hemisphere, 163
culture, human, 331, 342, 578
culture, indigenous, 636, 637, 645, 731
culture, phenomena of, 175
culture, pop, 221, 316
culture, product of, 393
culture, symbolic, 579
culture, western, 39, 71, 153, 158, 724
Curiosity, 151, 166, 297, 350, 400, 406, 428
Curiosity, reﬂective, 318
Curriculum
curriculum, educational, 303, 641
curriculum, future, 629
curriculum, integrated, 629, 734
Curvature, 249
Curve, 138, 243
Custom, 318, 319, 348, 350, 519, 707, 727
Cybernetics, 631, 632, 636, 639, 642, 646, 647
Cyborg, world of, 394
Cycle
cycle, biological, 698–700, 707
cycle, economic, 617
cycle, growth, 639
cycle, life, 6, 641, 676, 694, 696, 698, 699,
702, 707
cycle, technical, 698
cycle, technological, 699
D
2D (two‐dimensional), 157
3D (three‐dimensional), 253
Dance
dance, modern, 438, 451
Danger, 153, 154, 199, 214, 298, 337, 395,
498, 575
Darkroom, 370, 421
Darwinian, post‐neo‐, 135, 147
Darwinism, 575, 586, 588
Data
data analysis, 6, 406, 408
data, experiential, 332
data, holistic, 301
data, observational, 332
data, quantity of, 159
data scientist, 417
Database, 237, 403, 684
Dation, 196
D‐cognition, 216, 217
Deaf‐mute, 86
Death
death, psychic, 214
Debate
debate, romantic, 114
Debt, marginal, 621
Decision‐making, 4, 5, 19, 29, 103, 300, 302,
313, 400, 402–404, 432, 440, 442, 620,
671, 673, 674, 678–682, 722, 740
Decision
decision, collective, 620
decision, economic, 619
decision, rational, 617, 618
Decoder, 390
Deconstruction, 446
Decontextualization, 446
Deduction
deduction, freedom of, 591, 722
deduction, objective, 202
deduction, subjective, 202
deduction, transcendental, 387
Defender, 116, 119, 540
Defense, 15, 561, 643
Deﬁciency
deﬁciency, sense of, 211, 217, 219, 231
Deﬁciency‐motivation, 211, 215, 220
Deﬁnition, pseudo‐, 42
Deforestation, 676
Degeneration, ethical, 499
Degradation
degradation, environmental, 557
Demand, cognitive, 475, 485
Demarcation, 393, 394, 656, 702, 703, 705
Democracy, 16, 321, 325, 500, 583, 644
Denomination, 141, 523
Denotation, 464, 476
Deoxyribonucleic Acid (DNA)
DNA, editing, 141
DNA, enzymatic modiﬁcations, 141
Index
763

Deoxyribonucleic Acid (DNA) (cont.)
DNA, histone, 141
DNA, inert, 366
DNA, information, 139, 372
DNA, marker, 139
DNA, modiﬁcations, 139
DNA, plasmid, 365, 366, 371
DNA, processing, 141
DNA, synthetic, 365, 370, 372
DNA sequence, 139, 142, 368
Departure, point of, 363, 534
Dependence
dependence, mutual, 113, 743
dependence, total, 165
Dependencies, 391, 431
Depression, 295, 299, 617
Description, acoustic, 473, 477, 486
Design‐as‐practice, 463
Design‐of‐practice, 455, 457, 462, 463, 470
Design
design, aesthetic, 165
design, age‐stratiﬁed, 643
design, artistic, 165, 446
design, attributes of, 455
design, capabilities, 455
design, challenges of, 469, 470
design, cognitive load, 458
design, contexts of, 455, 458
design, cultures of, 457
design, cycles of, 459
design, deeper understanding, 459
design, development of, 463
design, diffuse, 468
design, dimensions of, 456, 464, 467
design, discipline of, 457, 735
design, discourses of, 455
design, experiential nature of, 459
design, function of, 470
design, future, 459, 468
design, knowing through, 455
design, knowledge through, 470
design, materialization of, 463
design, materials of, 463
design, meaning of, 734
design, mechanistic, 393
design, models of, 469
design, modern, 459
design, modes of, 457
design, nature of, 462–464, 466
design, nonverbal experiences of, 464
design, orientation of, 461
design, plurality, 459, 467
design, plurality of, 459, 467
design, positioning of, 462
design, practical, 694
design, practice of, 455, 461, 462
design, processes of, 457, 463, 468
design, reﬂexive, 457
design, shift of, 455, 470
design, social, 455, 470
design, space of, 462
design, stages of, 458
design, system of, 468
design, theory of, 455
design, thinking in, 25
design collaboration, 470
design complexity, 461, 463
design discourse, 457
design environment, 457
design heuristics, 416
design inquiry, 462
design knowing, 457, 464
design knowledge, 432, 455, 464, 466, 467,
470
design perspectives, 457, 466
design practice, 459, 463, 466, 467, 470,
641, 660
design problem, 28, 458, 462, 464, 468,
470
design process, 28, 458, 463, 468, 470, 735
design reﬂexivity, 457, 462, 463
design situation, 461, 463
design theory, 455
design thinking, 5, 7, 8, 11, 23–25, 457,
459, 461, 462, 468, 470, 734, 735
Designer
designer, digital, 418
designer, participation of, 464
designer, positioning of, 462
Desire, 6, 16, 52, 100, 138, 215, 224, 288, 295,
300, 302, 334, 336, 337, 366, 405, 406,
410, 422, 428, 429, 483, 485, 499, 502,
503, 547, 552, 559
Destination, 56, 568
Destiny
destiny, cellular, 142
Detachment, symbolic, 101
Determination
determining, self‐, 215
Determinism
determinism, genetic, 148
determinism, religious, 499
Development
development, centrality of, 139
development, cognitive, 223, 291, 301
development, human, 105, 301, 320, 625
development, intellectual, 445
development, own, 115, 220
764
Index

development, process of, 121
development, stage of, 596, 602
Device, 20, 235, 237, 240–244, 336, 401, 402,
405, 418–420, 426, 581, 648, 664, 726
Dialectic
dialectic, evolutionary, 100
dialectic, mind and matter, 176, 181, 189,
192, 724
Dialogism, 504
Dialogue
dialogue, internal, 462
Diatribe, ancient, 138
Dichotomy, 53, 54, 148, 182, 440, 477, 484,
564, 583, 696, 697
Difference
differences, human, 295
differences, individual, 11, 292, 482, 483
differences, inherent, 496
differences, internal, 90
differences, qualitative, 73, 77, 81–83, 85,
87–89, 91, 123
differences, quantitative, 123
differences, ontological, 44, 49, 60, 101
differences, qualitative, 73, 77, 81–83, 85,
87–89, 91, 123
differences, quantitative, 123
differences, social, 696
Differentiation, process of, 116
Diffusionism, 585
Digestion, 127
Digitalization, 417
Dignity, 215, 333, 335, 341, 557, 566–568,
649, 731
Dilation, 252
Dilemma, 181, 300, 534, 565
Dimension
dimension, aesthetic, 350, 648
dimension, biological, 137
dimension, creative, 133, 136, 138, 139
dimension, mechanical, 126
dimension, metacognitive, 445
dimension, observable, 119
dimension, ontological, 44, 45, 49
dimension, organic, 126
dimension, organismic, 135
dimension, repetitive, 139
dimension, spiritual, 357, 637, 736
Direction, materialistic, 118
Disability, 294–296, 300
Disaggregation, 197
Disagreement, 54, 384, 500, 560
Disappointing, 14, 213
Disaster, 311, 313, 502
Discharge, 237, 679, 683, 684
Disciplinary, 22, 81, 89, 114, 147, 322, 365,
415, 477, 643, 653, 656, 732, 743
Discipline
discipline, humanistic, 631
discipline, social, 400
Discontinuities, 74, 88–91, 100, 106, 279, 422,
534
Discourse
discourse, aesthetic, 415, 531–534
discourse, conventional, 640
discourse, entanglement of, 595
discourse, origins of, 120
discourse participants, 594, 601, 602, 721
discourse, participants of, 595
discourse, philosophical, 125, 591
discourse, producers of, 597
discourse, religious, 120, 597, 599, 610,
723, 724
discourse, social, 597
discourse space, 593, 595–599, 601, 602,
605, 606, 609–611
discourse, space of, 592, 595, 596, 599, 601
discourse, structure of, 608
discourse, terrorization of, 591
discourse, theme of, 596
Discoveries
discoveries, scientiﬁc, 21, 113, 405
discoveries, moments of, 111
discoveries, process of, 459
Discussion, 3, 7, 17, 39, 50, 53, 63, 65, 71, 73,
77, 86, 114, 151, 165, 187, 218, 231,
275, 313, 318, 319, 364, 365, 384, 449,
457, 467, 470, 481, 557, 568, 569, 596,
656, 661, 678, 696, 697, 704, 705, 727,
729, 730, 736
Disease
disease, chronic, 562
disease, own, 368
Disengagement, 163
Dislike, 157, 164, 217, 288
Disposition
disposition, natural, 498
Dispute, 55, 120, 122, 123, 126, 173, 174, 597
Dissertation
dissertation, scientiﬁc, 422
Dissolution, 514, 515
Distance
distance between, the holy and the profane,
507
distance, spatial, 248, 249, 251, 252,
254–256
Distinction
distinction between, living things and
machines, 389
Index
765

Distinction (cont.)
distinction between, mechanism and
organism, 393
distinction between, mind and matter, 173,
176, 187
distinction between, non‐living and living
beings, 383, 385, 389, 395
distinction between, organisms and
machines, 385
distinction between, signs and symbols, 85
Distribution
distribution, Gaussian, 240
distribution, normal, 240
distribution, theoretical, 240
Diversiﬁcation, 621
Diversity, level of, 354
Divine
divine, translation of, 350
divine beauty, 350, 351, 353
divine Comedy, 350, 353, 355
divine illumination, 539
divine truths, 543, 550
divine wisdom, 539, 540
Divinity
divinity, understanding of, 539
Division, 42, 53, 160, 168, 385, 388, 413, 507,
545, 549, 550, 578, 582, 597, 634, 643,
645, 661, 742, 743
Divorce, 165
Doctor, 55, 128, 193, 287, 291, 323, 567
Doctrine
doctrine, traditional, 581
Dogma, 53, 116, 557, 561, 596, 597, 634
Dogmatism, 557, 560–563
Domain
domain, affective, 301
domain, cognitive, 13, 30, 314–316
domain, extralinguistic, 513
domain, own, 100, 471
Dominance
dominance, religious, 561, 638
Doubt, universal, 196
Downturn, economic, 617
Drama, 164, 334
Dramatist, 505
Dream, 83, 135, 195, 385, 405, 647, 733, 738,
743
Drive
drive, aesthetic, 333
drive, vital, 119
Driver, 391, 644, 659, 674, 676, 679, 682–685,
687
Drosophila, 374
Dryness, see soul
Dualism
dualism, ontological, 97
Duality, 104, 164, 333, 506
Duck
duck concept, 516, 518
duck essence, 516
duck‐rabbit, 515, 518, 526
Duty, spiritual, 355
Dyad, 331, 583
Dynamics
dynamics, evolutionary, 139
Dynamism, 99, 121
Dysfunction, social, 165
Dysphemism, 594
E
Ear
ear, inner, 146
ear, middle, 146
Earning, 624
Earth, 137, 157, 162, 263, 274, 520, 639, 700,
703–705, 707, 728, 731
Earthquake, 113, 495
Eco‐Cofﬁn, 700, 705–707
E. Coli, 363, 365, 366, 370–374, 376, 377, 737
Ecology
ecology, deep, 636, 638, 697
ecology, human, 633, 634, 636, 647, 649,
731
Economics, 529, 617
Economic Value Added (EVA), 661
Economist, vii
Economizing, 312, 316, 325
Economies
economies, digital, 418, 617, 626
economies, knowledge, 625, 626, 742, 743
Ecosystem, 671, 673, 679, 682, 738, 739
Ecstasy, 221
ED, see epistemologically different
Editing, genetic, 375
Education
education, anthropocentric, 648, 649
education, compulsory, 631, 632, 647
education, gifted, 288, 297
education, higher, 151, 441, 631, 640, 647,
730
education, own, 643
education, post‐compulsory, 631
education, public, 293
Educator, 643
EDWs, see epistemologically different worlds
Effect
effect, measurable, 237
effect, social, 499
766
Index

effect, spillover, 655
Effectiveness, communicative, 419
Efﬁcacy, self‐, 289, 634, 643, 647
Efﬁciency, 165, 205, 206, 620, 626
Efforts
efforts, cognitive, 442, 445, 446
efforts, meta‐cognitive, 6, 11, 23, 30, 437,
438, 446, 451, 730
Ego, 56
Eidetic, 59, 95, 101, 102, 104, 106
Elaboration, spontaneous, 75
Electricity, 562
Electrocardiography (ECG), 406
Electroencephalography (EEG), 237
Electromagnetism, 240
Electronics, 413, 495
Elegance, 340, 415, 416, 426, 430, 433
Elements, anthropological, 585
Elephant, 374
Elite, ﬁnancial, 501
Elm, 597
Emancipation, 49, 99, 318, 319
Embarrassment, 218
Embryo, 115, 116, 119, 139, 264
Embryology, 113, 123
Emergency, 138, 147, 622
Emissary, 151, 154, 155, 160, 168
Emission, 406, 407, 671, 673, 674, 676, 678,
679, 699, 700
Emotion
emotion, aesthetic, 480, 484
emotion, spirituality of, 356
Empathy
empathy, intellectual, 440
Empiricism, 59, 64, 125, 561, 631, 634, 638
Employed, self‐, 622, 623
Employee, 160, 661
Employment, 31, 517, 615, 621–624, 642, 648
Empowerment, 417
Enaction, 135, 137, 147
Enactivism, 39, 65, 68
Encapsulation, 116
Encephalocentrism, 542
Encoder, 390, 391
Encoder‐decoder, 390
Encounter
encounter between, two worlds, 534
encounter between, work of art and truth,
535
Endeavor, spiritual, 354, 568
Energy‐consuming, 216
Energy‐ﬂux, 249
Energy (E)
energy, acoustic, 407
energy amount, 241, 246, 699
energy density, 249
energy distribution, 407–409
energy, green, 698
energy, internal, 197
energy pattern, 214
energy, shape of, 408
energy, transferable, 486
energy value, 235, 247
energy, vibrational, 476
energy, vital, 198
Engagement
engagement, aesthetic, 336, 483
engagement, emotional, 466
engagement, intellectual, 297, 440
Engineer
engineer, classical, 392
engineer, human, 390, 391
Engineering
engineering classroom, 25, 438, 451
engineering, genetic, 368, 503, 567
engineering design, 5, 24
engineering students, 24, 25, 437, 439, 440,
446, 448–451
Engine governor, 632
Enhancement
enhancement, self‐, 500
Enigma, 46, 138, 587
Enjoyment
enjoyment, aesthetic, 531
enjoyment, conscious, 474, 481, 483, 484
Enlightenment, 86, 348, 356, 383, 392–394,
499, 561, 564, 566, 570, 635, 646, 727,
728
Enterprise, 318, 575, 620, 621, 625, 732
Entertainment, 341, 400, 446, 500, 622, 726
Entirety, 123, 128, 463, 470, 496, 497, 504,
665
Entities
entities, biofact, 376
entities, biological, 363, 377
entities, existence of, 43, 273
entities, external, 88, 101
entities, living, 164, 361, 363, 367–369,
371, 373, 375–377, 637, 639, 645, 660,
737
entities, macroscopic, 272
entities, mental, 514
entities, metaphysical, 83
entities, natural, 376
entities, ontological, 272, 273
entities, originary, 201
entities, second‐hand, 201
entities, superior, 581
Index
767

Entrepreneurship, 653, 655, 658, 660, 661,
665, 693
Environment
environment, clinical, 19, 291, 300
environment, cognitive, 625
environment, ecological, 157, 639
environment, economic, 621
environment, external, 272, 275, 279, 281,
659
environment, home, 291
environment, human, 337
environment, intellectual, 540
environment, learning, 285, 288, 643, 647
environment, macroscopic, 272
environment, natural, 483, 485, 540, 696,
697, 739
environment, new, 214, 645
environment, physical, 337
environment, political, 573, 584
environment, problem‐relevant, 459
environment, speciﬁc, 376, 661
environment, traditional, 531
environment, virtual, 404, 643
Environmental Management System (EMS),
671–674, 678–681, 684, 687
Epigenesis, 113, 115, 116, 119, 139
Epigenetics, 116, 118, 119, 133, 139, 140, 142,
301, 367, 374
Epiphany, 225
Episteme, 56, 368, 369, 374–377
Epistemological‐ontological threshold, 278
Epistemologically Different (ED), 270, 271,
273–278, 280, 281
Epistemologically Different Worlds (EDWs),
269–281
Epistemological World (EW), 269–271,
273–281
Epistemologies, 18, 53, 55, 56, 63, 71, 85, 119,
121, 133, 148, 274, 311, 321, 363, 367,
377, 381, 384, 455, 473, 564, 632, 728,
736, 737
Eq., see equation
Equality, 165, 335, 543, 583, 587
Equation, 127, 146, 228, 341, 342, 422, 516,
522, 674, 675
Equilibrium
equilibrium, dynamic, 631, 638, 641, 642
Equity, 165, 166, 578, 583
Equivalence, 479, 584
Error
error, grammatical, 441
trial and error, 218, 421
Eschatology, individual, 540
Essence
essence, absence of, 204
essence, possibilities of, 193, 199–201
Essentialist, 59, 394, 516
Esteem, self‐, 289, 296, 499
Eternity, 103, 104, 187, 318, 533
Ethics, 51, 67, 95, 111, 311, 323, 333, 394,
513, 555, 557, 566, 567, 631, 697, 728,
741
Ethnography, 697
Ethnology, 576
Ethologist, 75, 333
Ethology, 68, 83
Euphemism, 594
Evaluation
evaluation, aesthetic, 329, 480
evaluation, emotional, 424
evaluation, moral, 338
Event
event, economic, 618
event, extinction, 146
event, historical, 114, 352
event, isolated, 163
event, natural, 164
event, unexpected, 166
Everything
everything, theory of, 57
everything, understanding, 165, 548
Evidence, anthropological, 576
Evidence, empirical, 123, 561, 563, 637
Evil, 106, 224, 325, 503, 513, 565
Evolution
evolution algorithm, 370
evolution, cultural, 139, 142, 500
evolution, evolutionary, 147
evolution, natural, 139, 146, 737
Evolutionism, 89, 97
Evolutionist, 80, 584, 586
Exaggeration, 329, 331, 332, 336–342, 557
Exaptation, 335, 336
Excavation, 559
Exchange
exchange, ideological, 593
exchange, mutual, 404
Exchangeable, information, 374
Excuse, endless, 162
Exercise, 58, 82, 117, 157, 202, 211, 319, 355,
363, 369, 446, 450, 500, 501, 508, 563,
646, 729
Existence
existence, continuity of, 534
existence, functional, 506
existence, greater, 230–232
existence, hermeneutics of, 533
existence, human, 373, 534
768
Index

existence, mode of, 43, 49
existence, moment of, 200
existence, morality of, 348
existence, own, 175, 363, 374, 377
existence, prior, 518
existence, sense of, 224
Existentialist, 61, 563
Expectation, 85, 166, 167, 220, 222, 289, 317,
423, 424, 467, 483, 661, 740
Experiences
experiences, aesthetic, 419, 480, 481,
533–535
experiences, animal, 88, 90
experiences, artistic, 399, 400, 423, 438,
440, 447–450, 531, 534, 535
experiences, collaborative, 457
experiences, creative, 446
experiences, energy of, 197
experiences, ﬂow of, 424
experiences, human, 69, 74, 77, 85, 97,
106, 245, 264, 293, 459, 461, 466, 470,
477, 621
experiences, immersive, 399, 647
experiences, interconnectedness of, 230,
470
experiences, interpretation of, 424
experiences, isolation of, 534
experiences, learning, 217, 290, 445, 447,
647
experiences, musical, 474, 480, 484
experiences, new, 197, 403, 647
experiences, objects of, 84
experiences, peak, 211, 223–225, 230–232,
481
experiences, personal, 204, 264, 286, 289,
298, 401, 406, 420, 480
experiences, quality of, 466
experiences, representation of, 464
experiences, sense of, 461
experiences, sensitive, 519, 537, 551
experiences, series of, 201
experiences, subjective, 90, 350
experiences, symbolic, 95, 102
experiences, understanding of, 462
experiences, world of, 87, 91, 197
Experiment, 5, 13, 56, 84, 118, 120, 121, 143,
232, 240–242, 245, 246, 257–259, 264,
338, 361, 363, 365, 367, 368, 374, 375,
377, 408, 411, 498, 519, 561
Experimentation, 8, 27, 143, 459, 566, 568
Expert, 3, 27, 28, 153, 160, 161, 300, 302, 315,
323, 447, 468, 555, 558, 559, 563,
565–567, 593, 597, 599, 601, 606, 610,
611, 664, 722, 739
Explanation
explanation, causal, 383
explanation, deductive, 123
explanation, mechanistic, 384, 386, 387
explanation, pseudo‐, 80
Explication, philosophical, 73
Exploration
exploration, systematic, 459
Explosion, artistic, 531
Export‐import, 617
Expression
expression, artistic, 531
expression, artistic, 335
expression, creative, 164, 290, 648
expression, facial, 288, 352, 403
expression, individual, 634
expression, linguistic, 199, 511
expression, network of, 204
External senses, root of, see common sense
Extinction, 145, 146, 740
Extrapolation, 19
Eye
eye, cooperative, 105
eye, new, 143
F
Facilitation, 459
Factor
factor, causal, 655
factor, environmental, 7, 142
factor, epigenetic, 142
factor, genetic, 142
factor, internal, 481, 618
factor, social, 578
Factors
factors, complex network of, 142
Factory, 369, 372
Faculties
faculties, animal, 89
faculties, cognitive, 86, 388, 544, 545, 546,
550
faculties, generative, 118
faculties, intellective, 541
faculties, rational, 101, 104
Failure
failure, spiritual, 163
Fairness, see moral action
Faith
faith, exploration of, 335
faith, knowledge of, 537, 539
Index
769

faith, truth of, 176
Falsiﬁability, 581
Families
families, air of, 516
families, member, 286, 287, 516, 622
families resemblance, 511, 515–517, 522,
524
Fanaticism, 557
Fantasy
fantasy game, 203
Farmer, 392, 637
Father, 16, 53, 356, 575, 595, 597, 736
Fault, 156, 340, 501
Fear
fear, natural, 581
fear, symbolic, 581
Feature
feature, aesthetic, 430, 431, 433
feature, interactive, 404
feature, natural, 119
feature, physical, 408
Feedback
feedback mechanism, 259, 261, 639, 642,
680, 681
Feeling
feeling, religious, 597
feeling, sensible, 197
Feminist, 335, 575
Field
ﬁeld, experiential, 475
ﬁeld, force, 127
ﬁeld, soft, 163
Fight, 120, 213, 224, 481, 514, 610, 727
Figure, gestalt, 515, 518
Figure, poetic, 352
Film, 400, 413, 416, 649, 734
Filter, 405, 407, 418, 425, 461, 685
Filtering, collaborative, 418
Finalism, 116, 123, 586
Finality, 349
Finger, 264, 274, 523
Fingerprint, 214, 215, 219, 220, 222, 230
Finitude, 534, 535
Firing, 405
First‐order intentionality, 334
First‐person, 399, 480
Fission, nuclear, 388
Five senses, 141
Fixation
ﬁxation, cognitive, 444, 445
ﬁxation, functional, 437, 451
Fixism, 121
Flexibility, 13, 18, 22, 24, 142, 437, 444, 448,
623, 643, 664
Flight, 146, 481, 562
Flooding, 319, 641
Fluid, 100, 115, 117, 222, 699, 700, 707
Flux, 173, 182, 249
Fly, 78, 374
Functional Magnetic Resonance imaging
(FMRI), 406
Food, 84, 145, 338, 369, 417, 555, 562,
622–624, 626, 639, 646, 673, 697–699,
707, 724
Force
force, dynamic, 504
forces, environmental, 260
forces, intended thought, 261
forces, internal, 113, 118, 121
forces, life, 119, 138
forces, living, 123
forces, mechanical, 118, 119, 123
forces, metaphysical, 115
forces, normal, 259
forces, nuclear, 256
forces, original, 119
forces, physical‐chemical, 118
forces, producing, 118
forces, real, 235
forces, diagram of, 136
forces, evolutionary, 331, 337
forces, strong, 240, 245, 258
forces, the ﬁrst, 242, 256, 581
forces, thought, 235, 236, 240–243,
245–248, 254, 255, 258–264, 714, 726,
749
forces, unknown, 240
forces, vital, 115, 118, 119, 542
forces, weak, 240
forces, world thought, 243, 714
Forces, the ﬁrst, see Force
Foreign, 15, 133, 232, 322, 617, 621, 623, 624,
645
Forgetfulness, 350
Form
form, category of, 543
form, ﬁnite, 354
form, life, 77, 88, 91, 159, 373, 393, 498,
505, 511, 576
form, living, 99, 136
form, organic, 99, 100, 636
form, own, 464
form, poetic, 335
form, political, 584
form, sensory, 67, 369, 372
form, social, 576, 579, 585, 588
form, symbolic, 133, 136, 141, 143, 147,
581, 586
770
Index

Formalization, 142, 658
Formation
formation, natural, 337
formation, pure, 199, 201, 204
Formula
formula, forbidden, 593, 599, 601,
603–606, 611
Formulation, 6, 23, 25, 41, 196, 291, 332, 413,
462, 564, 597, 735
Foundation
foundation, modern, 347
foundation, original, 195
foundation, own, 121
Fracture, 126, 586, 639, 642
Fragment, 45–48, 145, 368, 448, 518, 594
Fragmentation, 534, 535, 653, 656
Framework
framework, philosophical, 272, 331, 575
framework, traditional, 532
Framing, contextual, 459
Freedom
freedom, organic, 99, 101
Frequency, 247, 250, 264, 406, 479, 648
Fresh water, 673, 676
Friend, 63, 120, 196, 200, 334, 337, 594, 623
Frustration, 14, 231, 293, 338, 420, 443, 445
Fulﬁlling, self‐, 289
Full Scale Intelligence Quotient (FSIQ), 300
Fulﬁllment
fulﬁllment, self‐, 219
Function
function, descriptive, 514, 520
function, executive, 302, 478
function, expressive, 86
function, mental, 542, 576
function, new, 145–148
function, paradigmatic, 524
function, penalty, 593, 601, 602, 607, 608,
611
function, rule, 524
function, semantic, 596
function, transcendental, 521, 527
function, vital, 119
Functionalism, 64, 65, 138, 140, 148
Functionalities, 24, 145, 419, 426, 429–431,
438, 444, 506, 641
Functioning, cognitive, 474, 739
Fundamentalism, 555, 557
Future
future, philosophy of, 734
G
Galaxy, 341, 342
Galvanic Skin Response (GSR), 406
Game
game, free, 205
Gap
gap between, conceptual thinking and
immanent transcendence, 508
gap between, humanistic and scientiﬁc
knowledge, 415
Garden, 15, 639, 697, 703
Gaze, 105, 333, 334, 429, 523
Gender, 18, 27–29, 199, 294, 549, 575, 594,
595, 723
Gene, 139–141
Genealogy, 531
Generalist, 457, 458
Generalization
generalization, dangerous, 120
generalization, unfounded, 120
General relativity, 146, 249, 278, 279
General Systems Thinking (GST), 631, 636,
657
Generation
generation, idea of, 116
generation, self‐, 135
generation, spontaneous, 116, 118, 119,
331
generation, true, 116
generation Z, 440, 441, 443, 445, 446, 451
Generativity, 136
Genesis
genesis, agent of, 115
Genetic, editing, 375
Genius, 116, 298, 299, 532, 533
Genotype, 139
Genus, 159
Genus, animal, 541
Geographic Information Systems (GIS), 633
Geography, 520, 636, 697
Geometry, 56, 136, 138, 143, 146, 255, 341
Gestation, 116, 125
Gesture, 104, 338, 397, 466, 523, 524
Giant, 358, 577, 578, 581, 583, 732
Gift, 227, 231, 232, 287, 550
Giftedness, 12, 13, 287–289, 293–301, 303
Glass, 86, 232, 245, 251, 253, 295, 698
Globalizing, 697
Globe, 354, 576, 637, 698
God, 50, 51, 53–56, 113, 186, 187, 228, 229,
274, 332, 335, 339–341, 384, 388, 394,
498, 503, 507, 539, 540, 543, 550, 551,
559, 560, 565, 576, 580–583, 597, 599,
634, 638, 704, 729, 736
Goddess, 350, 351, 372, 559
Gold mining, 638
Good, immaterial, 547, 552
Index
771

Government, 120, 159, 162, 166, 318, 449,
584, 625, 629, 638, 645
Gradualism, 89
Grammar, 17, 505, 511, 512, 514, 519–522,
526
Grandparent, 292
Graph, 183, 191, 341, 723
Gratefulness, 231
Gratiﬁcation, 215, 218, 220
Graviton, 273
Greek, ancient, 46, 324, 341, 357, 568, 634
Greenhouse gas, 161
Gross National Product (GNP), 617
Group, social, 333, 334, 576, 706
Growth
growth, economic, 617, 666, 671
growth, personal, 213, 215
growth, process of, 136, 141
growth, systematic, 383, 393
growth, zero, 617
growth cycle, 639
growth motivation, 215, 220
Guidance, 292, 295, 560
Guilt, 292, 602
Gut, 372, 373, 377
Gymnastic feat, mental, 334
H
Habit, 13–15, 82, 87, 129, 162, 220, 319, 418,
518, 519, 525, 550, 639, 674, 727, 742,
743
Habitat, 372, 683, 697, 703
Habitation, 562
Hands, own, 351, 374
Happiness, 51, 220, 224, 332, 409, 521, 729
Hardware, 392, 393, 419
Harm, self‐, 300
Harmony
harmony between, faith and reason, 539
Head, 1, 19, 20, 58, 62, 78, 80, 82, 158, 203,
237, 240, 242, 245, 260, 264, 301, 364,
365, 375, 386, 410, 424, 478, 525, 542,
545, 550, 661
Healing, 383, 388, 392, 393
Health
health, medical, 566
health, mental, 224, 739
health, public, 18, 166
Healthcare
healthcare, medical, 562
Healthy, 292, 296, 299, 373, 645, 684, 686,
702, 724, 734, 738
Heart, see origin of the veins, 542
Heart
heart, heart of, 350
Heart rate, 406, 481
Heart Rate Monitor (HRM), 406
Heat, 47, 160, 161, 241, 409, 544, 741
Hegemony, 532
Hemisphere, left, 154, 156–168
Hemisphere, right, 21, 154–156, 158, 159,
162–168, 484
Hereditariness, 139
Heritage
heritage, ancient, 358
heritage, evolutionary, 331
heritage, genetic, 139
heritage, parental gene, 139
Hermeneutics
hermeneutics, methodological, 533
Hero
hero, tragic, 340
Heterophenomenology, 39, 64
Heuristics
heuristics, aesthetic, 433
Hierarchy, 31, 144, 353, 549, 660
Historia, 116, 173–177, 187–189, 537, 725
Historian, 205, 352, 353, 358, 404, 422, 537,
560
Historicity, 352, 504
Historiography, 125, 537
History
history, cyclical, 583
history, evolutionary, 338
history, intellectual, 503
history, modern, 111, 575
history, pre‐, 586
Holism, 634, 636, 638, 644
Home‐made, 701
Homo pictor, 104–107
Homo sapiens, 3, 90, 331, 576, 586
Horizon, 99, 126, 156, 164, 171, 173, 174, 176,
180–183, 185, 188, 189, 192, 200, 424,
534, 562, 656
Household, 617, 620, 622, 623
Human‐animal, 75, 76, 82, 85, 87, 88
Human
human affairs, 106
human, position of, 48
human, superiority of, 77
human, vision of, 498
Humanism, 61, 351, 432, 631, 634
Humanities, 10, 22, 39, 73, 98, 105, 113, 116,
129, 144, 171, 176, 221, 230, 295, 314,
329, 334, 335, 345, 364, 366, 368, 369,
372, 415, 432, 433, 495, 497–501, 503,
772
Index

505, 506, 508, 568, 569, 573, 575–588,
594, 596, 617, 618, 631–633, 637, 654,
695, 715, 724, 726, 728, 731–734, 738,
742, 743
Humanization, 577, 578, 584, 586–588
Humankind, 311, 316, 348, 373, 566, 617, 728,
743
Humanness, 223
Humor, 164, 297
Hunger, 338
Hunter‐gatherer, 559, 580, 637
Hybridization, 562
I
Icon, 147, 350, 353, 355
Idea
idea, anti‐dualistic, 126
idea, confrontation, 540
idea, exchange, 400
idea, ﬂowering of, 140
idea, infectious, 366
idea, radical, 116
Idealism
idealism, transcendental, 126, 495
Ideas, series of, 200
Identiﬁcation
identiﬁcation, holistic, 301
identiﬁcation, ideological, 595
Identiﬁer, 299
Ideation
ideation, suicidal, 289
Identity, 51, 217, 275, 276, 278, 280, 705, 731
identity, analytical, 140
identity, concept of, 521, 522
identity, form of, 46
identity, ideal, 640
identity, poles of, 46, 61
identity, principles of, 521
identity, self‐, 99, 218, 299, 703
Ideologies, 557, 567, 594
Idol, 204, 349, 350, 356, 443
Ignorance, 3, 151, 162, 289, 293, 298, 312,
313, 325, 340, 348, 545, 547
I‐It, see fundamental word
Illness, 323, 586
Illusion, 46, 272, 358, 433, 503, 512, 743
Image
image, correlated, 521
image faculty, 101, 102, 105, 106
image, nostalgic, 375
image representation, 275
image, self‐, 219, 499
image, visual, 165, 410
Image‐making, 104, 107
Imagery
imagery, artistic, 422
imagery, satellite, 157, 684, 686
Imagination
imagination, symbolic, 107, 579
Immediacy, 426, 442, 534
Immersion, 23
Immobility, 46
Immortality, 693, 695, 702–704
Immunity, 213, 214
Immunization, 562
Impact, economic, 622
Impairment, visual, 295
Imperfection, 543, 545
Imperialism, 375, 578
Implementation, industrial, 394
Implicitness, 164, 165
Impression, 81, 86, 89, 197, 213, 214, 218,
319, 356, 404, 663
Imprint, 142
Impulse
impulse, natural, 449
Inadequacies, 182, 213, 533, 729
Inception, 337, 341, 393
Income, 213, 615, 619, 621–624, 626, 678
Incompleteness, 42, 101
Independence, 66, 99, 137, 374
Independence, functional, 392
Indicator, 28, 240, 254, 258, 259, 288, 300,
301, 423, 447, 482, 617, 622, 624, 626,
655, 673, 679, 722, 739
Indignity, 340
Individual
individual, empiric, 44, 57
individual, enlightened, 287
individual, gifted, 287, 289, 293, 296, 299,
301, 302
individual, world inside of, 519
individual, world outside of, 519
Individuality, 58, 100, 356, 370, 619
Individuals, plurality of, 198
Induction, 292, 347
Industries
industries, traditional, 417
industry, pharmaceutical, 160, 562
Ineffability, 224
Inequality
inequality, social, 557, 723
Infallibility, 80, 81, 550
Inference, logical, 422
Inﬁnity, 103, 104
Information
information bubbles, 418
information, coded, 140
Index
773

Information (cont.)
information, complex, 432, 459
information, compression of, 425
information, cultural, 363
information, digital, 417
information, embodied, 135, 147
information ﬁlters, 418
information, ﬂow of, 141, 418, 479
information, incomplete, 441
information network, 142, 625
information, personal, 418
information processing, 16, 21, 422, 425,
426, 483, 591, 595, 611
information processing, modeling of, 611
information processing strategies, 421
information technologies, 441, 495, 661,
723
information, reduction of, 147
information, semantic, 135
information, symbolic, 446
information, transformation of, 140
information, translatable, 374
information, variety of, 154
Inheritance
inheritance, cultural, 497
inheritance, epigenetic, 141
Inhibition, steady, 88
Injustice, 158, 223, 341
Innovation
innovation, ancient, 639
innovation, competitive, 562
innovation, educational, 437, 439, 440
innovation, scientiﬁc, 557
Input, 67, 75, 264, 289, 293, 391, 401, 411,
426, 432, 479, 483, 485, 486, 563, 648,
658, 676, 681, 735
Inquiry
inquiry, creative, 461
inquiry, empirical, 82
inquiry, historical, 533
inquiry, philosophical‐anthropological, 106
inquiry, rational, 318
inquiry, reﬂective, 311, 323
inquiry, scientiﬁc, 123, 564, 721
Insane, 332
Insect, 80, 116
Insight, 7, 23, 30, 91, 129, 135, 138, 167, 224,
286–288, 298, 302, 318, 325, 353, 400,
404, 422, 423, 425, 432, 433, 461, 462,
496, 565, 635, 684, 707, 740
Inspiration
inspiration, devoid of, 354
inspiration, ignorance of, 354
inspiration, manifestation of, 354
inspiration, output of, 358
inspiration, romantic, 354
inspiration, source of, 358, 531
Installation, 361, 370, 371, 400–404, 406–408,
410, 411
Instinct
instinct, animal, 88
instinct, natural, 545
instinct, see orginal force
instinct, sensible, 201
Instruction, 6, 139, 303
Instructor, 442, 446, 447
Instrument, 86, 186, 237, 352, 369, 376, 405,
406, 446, 447, 477, 522, 526, 541, 555,
558–560, 569, 580, 588, 645, 662, 737,
745
Instrumentality
instrumentality, absolute, 376
Integration
integration, social, 564
integration, systemic, 661
Integrity
integrity, environmental, 557
integrity, ethical, 568
integrity, functional, 122
Intellect
intellect, counterforce of, 349
Intellection, 87, 547
Intellectualism, 324
Intelligence
intelligence, animal, 87
intelligence, artiﬁcial, 347, 389, 399, 419
intelligence, emotional, 440
intelligence, form of, 467
intelligence, human, 347
intelligence, imperfect, 548
intelligence, perfection of, 539
intelligence, source of, 167
intelligence, symbolic, 573, 578, 580, 583,
584, 586, 587
Intelligence Quotient (IQ), 297
Intelligibility, 135, 143, 385
Intensiﬁcation, 532
Intent, 82, 121, 341, 364, 368, 372, 466, 467
Intention
intention, analytical, 185
intention, self‐aimed, 340
intention, unconscious, 338
Intentionality
intentionality, shared, 105, 497
774
Index

intentionality, social, 107
intentionality, third‐order, 332, 334
Interaction
interaction between, a user and a system,
413, 416
interaction between, life and language, 493,
508
interaction, continual, 259
interaction, electromagnetic, 247, 256
interaction, electromagnetic force, 240,
247, 256
interaction, electroweak, 256
interaction, fundamental, 241, 256, 261,
264
interaction, gravity, 240
interaction, human, 164, 498, 499, 639
interaction, human‐machine, 7, 419
interaction, level of, 414, 417, 419
interaction, machine‐to‐machine, 417
interaction, molecular, 135
interaction, multifactorial, 671, 672, 674,
678, 681, 687, 740
interaction, sensory‐motor, 135
interaction, social, 291, 334, 497, 646
interaction, strong, 256
interaction, symbolic, 464
interaction, thinking, 334, 400
interaction, weak force, 240
interaction with, others, 505
interaction with, the environment, 86, 135
Interactivity, 142
Interchangeability, 584
Interconnectedness, 230, 470, 660
Interdisciplinary, 10, 133, 193, 211, 329, 455,
458, 471, 480, 529, 697, 715, 730, 732,
733, 735, 737, 739, 742, 743
Interest
interest, cognitive, 422
interest, own, 216
interest, self‐, 619
Interface
interface, effective, 413, 416, 419, 420, 422
interface, science of, 432
interface, visual, 419, 423
Interference, 560
Interiority, 107
Interlocutor, 363, 448, 513, 518, 521
Internet, 211, 237, 242, 350, 399, 405, 419,
429, 449, 499, 623, 625, 664
Interpretation
interpretation, personal, 439
interpretation, symbolic, 564
Interpreter, 533, 581
Interpretivist, 564
Intersection, 138, 151, 341, 366, 529, 731
Intertwining, 129, 145, 361, 363, 525, 579
Invention
invention, symbolic, 581
Intolerance, 555
Intuition, 3, 26, 138, 198, 199, 203, 204, 293,
321, 347, 364, 370, 383, 384, 516, 561,
730
Invariability, 577
Invention
invention, symbolic, 579, 581
Inventiveness, 444
Investigation
investigation, fundamental, 125
investigation, observational-experimental,
123
Investment, 29, 617, 621, 623, 624, 695
Investor, 661
Involvement, self‐, 531
Ion
ion negatively charged, 240
ion, positively charged, 240
Irrigation, 158, 637, 639
Isolation, 298, 387, 478, 534, 656, 743
Isomorphism, 52, 54, 64, 126, 479
Issue, ethical, 345, 567, 569
Issue, social, 558, 567, 640
I‐You, see fundamental words
J
Jewish tradition, ancient, 221
Job, second, 213, 218
Joke, 297, 334, 351, 354, 519
Journey
journey, entrepreneurial, 653
journey, transcendental, 354
Joy, sign of, 86
Judgment
judgement, act of, 200
judgment, aesthetic, 416, 417, 419, 437,
440, 446, 447, 449, 480
judgment, bad, 311
judgment, good, 311, 315, 319
judgment, moral, 337–339
Justice
justice, sense of, 156
justice, social, 165, 422, 555, 557, 645,
646, 649, 731
justiﬁcation, 25, 289, 448, 523, 724
K
King, 498, 597
Kingdom, animal, 154
Knowledge
Index
775

Knowledge (cont.)
knowledge, acquisition, 5, 13, 23, 445, 733
knowledge, acts of, 196, 200
knowledge, areas of, 517, 523, 743
knowledge, articulated type of, 127
knowledge, atomization of, 535
knowledge, breadth of, 166
knowledge, conception of, 463
knowledge, construction of, 441, 464
knowledge, correct, 206
knowledge, deep, 373, 458
knowledge, economic, 564, 619, 620
knowledge, empirical, 375
knowledge, experience of, 531
knowledge, experiential, 464, 470
knowledge, ﬁelds of, 515
knowledge, form of, 111, 127, 442, 464
knowledge, formulation of, 458
knowledge, human, 56, 125, 272, 318, 539
knowledge, industrialized, 375
knowledge, innate, 541
knowledge, interdisciplinary, 458
knowledge, kinds of, 111, 467
knowledge, legitimacy of, 529
knowledge, levels of, 287, 464
knowledge, material of, 202
knowledge, new, 640, 740
knowledge, object of, 507
knowledge, originary, 206
knowledge, paradigms of, 128
knowledge, principle of, 546
knowledge, prior, 21, 640
knowledge, range of, 161
knowledge, regularities of, 464
knowledge, scientiﬁc, 373, 383, 415, 563,
618, 741
knowledge, scientiﬁc form of, 111
knowledge, specialization of, 160, 535
knowledge, specialized, 166, 422
knowledge, standardized, 375
knowledge, system of, 55, 126
knowledge, theories of, 201, 464, 465, 561
knowledge, truth of, 174
Knowledge‐through‐design, 455, 457, 466, 470
L
Labor
labor, human, 697
labor, language, 597
labor, mental, 501, 615
labor, physical, 626, 705, 742
Laboratory, 65, 145, 361, 363–366, 368–373,
375–377, 506, 662, 664–666
Lab Science, 653, 655, 661–667
Lack, awareness of, 502
Land
land ethics, 697
land, product of, 532
land surface, 157
Landscape
landscape, artiﬁcial, 697
Language
language, acquisition of, 86
language, anthropology of, 501
language, artistic, 133, 139
language, common, 532, 631, 638
language, conception of, 502, 504, 511,
513–515, 517, 523, 525, 526
language, concept of, 518
language, diversity of, 503, 504
language, dogmatic view, 514
language, fault of, 501
language, ﬁrst, 165
language, formulas of, 596
language, function of, 334
language, human, 85, 336, 501, 504
language, independent of, 514
language, individual, 504
language, internal, 549
language, meaning of, 105, 199, 517
language, native, 524
language, natural, 418, 419, 498, 503
language, naturalistic, 586
language, non‐verbal, 444
language, panoramic view, 514
language, perspective of, 516, 526
language, phenomenology of, 199
language, poetic, 504
language, potential of, 506
language, power of, 504
language, quality of, 496
language, referential, 526
language, scientiﬁc, 139
language, symbolic, 21, 134, 138, 577
language, systemic, 632, 647
language, use of, 81, 105, 496
language, verbal, 86
language, words of, 514, 520
language, work of, 512, 518, 525
Language‐game, 511, 515, 518–520, 522–524,
526, 527
Law
law, eternal, 566
law, functional, 202
law, international, 566
law, natural, 565, 566, 583, 584, 618
776
Index

laws, causal, 272, 275, 276, 278–280
Lawyer, 566
Layer, 89, 219, 220, 390, 391, 402, 418, 419,
701
Leader, 67, 160, 166, 167, 319, 321, 324, 361,
415, 458, 560, 568, 594
Leadership, 295, 416, 440, 468, 560, 735
Learner, 14, 18, 25, 285, 290, 294, 631,
642–644, 730, 733
Learning
learning, ecology of, 633
learning, future, 629
learning, higher, 569
Legitimacy, 88, 580
Lesson, 290, 291, 320, 423, 432, 632, 636,
731, 733
Letter, 78, 80, 81, 173, 177, 178, 316, 340,
355, 361, 363, 367, 369, 373, 429, 520,
573
Level
level, aesthetic, 474
level, atomic, 145, 148
level, behavioral, 84, 87
level, ethical, 375
Liberty, 187, 350, 506, 584
Life
life, Aboriginal, 637
life, affective, 206
life, animal, 77, 88–91, 100, 104, 740
life, artiﬁcial, 389
life, a system, 127
life, basis of, 164, 166
life, beating beat of, 128
life, biological, 135, 368, 694, 696, 702,
707
life, cellular, 135
life, characteristics of, 98, 138
life, community, 205, 206, 560
life, conditions, 506
life, conscious, 87
life, consumptive, 358
life, cultural, 196
life, dynamic of, 98, 100, 102
life, element of, 345
life, ethical, 138
life, evolution of, 106, 134
life, exploitation of, 394
life, force, 119, 138
life, form, 88, 91, 159, 373, 393, 498
life, future, 113
life, history of, 140
life, how, 129, 393, 500, 503
life, human, 90, 97, 102, 147, 159, 293,
313, 319, 320, 335, 373, 500, 507, 562,
569, 576, 620, 696, 749
life, inaccessibility of, 394
life, inner, 220
life, laboratory, 364
life, mindless, 503
life, mind, matter, trialectic of, 173, 182
life, model, 373
life, natural, 367
life, neutral, 369, 372
life, non‐human, 741, 749
life, organic, 98, 100, 104, 138
life, origins, 111, 114
life, origins of, 111
life, own, 198, 368
life, phenomena of, 175, 176, 182, 185
life, philosophy of, 98, 224, 507
life, place for, 114
life, post‐, 699
life, practical, 565
life, quality, 566
life, quality of, 563, 676
life sciences, 113, 116, 367, 376, 400, 500,
664, 667
life, self‐organization of, 137
life, social, 105, 217, 506, 585, 742
life, spiritual, 55, 201
life, systems view of, 633, 635
life, see the second tree of paradise
life, thinking of, 724
life, tree of, 503
life, understanding of, 128, 367, 368
life, universal, 369, 377
life, unsustainable, 639
life, ways of, 521
life, what, 120, 229
life, whole of, 165
life, why, 114, 115
Life‐changing, 286, 290, 297
Life‐cycle, 707
Life‐giving energy, 197
Lifestyle, 560, 624, 724, 736
Lifetime, 144, 159, 292, 317, 725
Light
light, angelic, 548
Like, 7, 8, 10, 14, 16, 18, 22, 24, 44, 47, 49, 50,
54, 58, 61–63, 66, 68, 71, 78, 80–83,
86, 88, 90, 95, 97, 98, 103–106, 116,
119, 122, 125, 127, 128, 141, 145, 147,
157, 158, 162, 164, 165, 187, 199, 217,
220, 222, 229, 235, 240, 242, 259, 261,
264, 269, 270, 272, 275, 276, 279, 281,
Index
777

319, 321, 323, 325, 331, 333, 334,
336–338, 341, 347–349, 351, 353, 368,
369, 371, 374, 376, 387, 389, 391, 392,
394, 399, 401, 407, 418, 419, 424, 429,
432, 451, 475, 496, 499, 503, 507, 514,
516, 522, 523, 525, 526, 536, 540, 562,
565, 568, 576, 584, 586, 598, 617, 625,
633–635, 642, 644, 648, 658, 681, 696,
698–701, 703, 705, 728, 734, 739, 743,
744
Likeness, 30, 101, 105
Limit
limit, lower, 260
limit, upper, 260
Limitation
limitation, self‐, 125
Linearity, 358, 658, 698
Listener
listener, contemporary, 422
Listening, 18, 54, 441, 473, 477, 478, 481,
483–486, 542, 623, 643, 744
Literacy skill, digital, 438
Literature
literature, literary of, 505
Livelihood, source of, 158
Liveliness, 363, 364, 370, 715, 738
Lives, 39, 102, 164, 189, 191, 197, 200, 206,
213, 214, 222, 224, 285, 293, 322, 324,
335, 338, 373, 374, 419, 507, 584, 611,
645, 695, 697, 698, 706, 707, 725, 726,
741
Living
living, conﬁguration of, 139
living, explanation of, 123
living, ﬁbers of, 141, 147
living, semi‐, 365
living, standard of, 626
living, unity of, 135, 389
living world, complexity of, 135, 634
Load, cognitive, 458
Loan, 624
Locomotive, 562
Logic
logic, classical, 591, 594, 598, 599
logic, internal, 159, 370
logic, laws of, 521
logic, linguistic, 496
logic, poetic, 578–580, 583
logic, transcendental, 580
Logicist, 513
Logistician, 205
Logos, 44, 46–49, 60, 502
Loss
loss, ﬁnancial, 621
Love
love, absence of, 348
Lover
lover, heart of, 351
Loving, 18, 211
Luxuries, 163
M
Machine
machine, animal, 78
machine, human‐made, 389
Macroeconomics, 621
Macro‐EW, 270, 273, 274, 276–278, 280, 281
Macro‐mechanism, 272
Macromolecule, 137
Macroparticle, 272, 273, 277
Macrostructure, 595
Magnitude, 241, 259, 444, 532
Maintaining, self‐, 135
Majesty, 164
Maker, 22, 242, 577, 680
Making, own, 165
Malfunction, 392
Mammals, 154, 333
Management
management, land, 637
management approach, 655
management instruments, 655
management relations, 618
Manager, 1, 16, 18, 157, 158, 724, 734
Manifestation
manifestation, aesthetic, 531
manifestation, sensible, 196
Manipulation
manipulation, genetic, 497, 562
manipulation, technical, 393
Man, true, 102, 105
Manufacturer, 662, 699, 700
Map, mental, 85
Marginality, 505
Market, 443, 499, 617, 619, 623, 624, 638,
664, 700, 723
Marriage, 165, 578, 579, 581, 585, 586
Marshland, 158
Mask, 218, 232, 621, 623, 727
Mass (M)
mass, atomic, 241
mass density, 249
mass, electron, 241, 257, 258
mass media, 532
mass production, 7, 370
mass reproduction, 532
mass, sodium, 241
Master
778
Index

master, rightful, 163
master, self‐appointed, 348
master, well‐loved, 154
Mastering, cognitive, 483, 484
Masterpiece
masterpiece, artistic, 446
masterpiece, naturalistic, 351
Mastery
mastery, incomplete, 86
Material
material, biological, 363–366, 368, 372,
700, 738
material, layers of, 119
material, lively, 365, 366, 738
material, physical, 363, 738
Materialism
materialism, scientiﬁc, 349
Materialist
materialist, ancient, 63
Materiality, 173, 367, 369, 372, 377, 493, 495,
496, 577, 695, 706
Mathematician
mathematician, realistic, 517
Mathematics
mathematics, addition, 517
mathematics, counting, 205, 517
Mathnawi, 350, 355
Matter
matter, cellular, 366
matter, existence of, 171
matter, inorganic, 100, 393
matter, multiplicity of, 544
matter, natural, 113
matter, plurality, 543
Matter‐form, 543
Matter‐space, 257
Maturation, 219, 220
Maturity
maturity, psychological, 223
Mean, golden, 97
Meaning
meaning, anthropological, 368
meaning, biological, 366
meaning, common, 522
meaning, conditions of, 520
meaning, constitution of, 515
meaning delivery, 414, 417
meaning, exploration of, 164
meaning, extrapolation of, 135
meaning, formulation, 200
meaning, foundations of, 511
meaning, intuition of, 522
meaning, levels of, 164
meaning, linguistic, 475
meaning, loss of, 351
meaning, model of, 514
meaning, new, 83, 518, 573, 584
meaning, nuances of, 154, 164
meaning, operation of, 544
meaning, physical, 144
meaning, scope of, 46
meaning, sphere of, 85
meaning, two‐fold, 199
Meaning‐Adding (MA), 416
Meaning‐making, 500, 508
Meanings, ensemble of, 46
Means
means, affective, 476
means, symbolic, 579
Means‐to‐ends, 386
Measurement
measurement, indirect, 242
Mechanism
mechanism, causal, 387, 389, 631
mechanism, evolutionary, 585
mechanism, hidden, 87
mechanism, inferential, 593, 598
mechanism, internal, 462, 619
mechanism, logical, 591, 611
mechanism, molecular, 137
mechanism, organic, 511, 515
Media
media, digital, 25, 418, 441
media, living, 377
media, social, 373, 399, 640, 722
Mediacy, 100–102, 106
Mediation, 84, 177, 178, 191, 401, 402, 482,
501, 502, 545
Medicine, 1, 4, 20, 133, 296, 323, 347, 361,
363, 364, 373, 375, 406, 499, 557, 562,
567, 733
Meditation, 54, 78, 79, 82, 104, 211, 213, 355
Meditation, philosophical, 363
Medium
medium, amorphous, 525
medium, gaseous, 525
medium, new, 399
medium, nontraditional, 350
medium, traditional, 348
Meeting
meeting, matter and space, 253, 256
meeting, two hemispheres, 163
Memories, 20, 21, 39, 59, 139, 197, 364, 367,
368, 405, 424, 475, 477, 478, 485, 544,
545, 548, 595, 735
memories, measurable, 264
Mentalist, 513, 525
Mentalist philosopher, 514, 525
Index
779

Mentality
mentality, animal, 106
mentality, symbolic, 85, 88
Mentor, 195, 287, 529, 533, 643
Mesopotamia, ancient, 354
Message
message, symbolic, 87, 721
Messenger, 581
Meta‐disciplinary, 461
Meta‐discipline, see systems science
Metabiology, 133, 136, 139–143, 146, 148
Metabolism
metabolism, organic, 98
Metacognition, 30, 444, 451
Metaﬁction, 335
Metal, 698–700
Metamorphosis, 116, 118, 257
Metaphor
metaphor, topological, 368
Metaphysics
metaphysics, classical, 42, 49, 55, 56, 58,
59, 125
metaphysics, horizon of, 534
metaphysics, new, 142
Metareference, 335
Metatheory, 335
Meta‐X, 335
Method
method, analytical, 123
method, scientiﬁc, 161, 561, 564, 633, 634
Methodology
methodology, learning, 568
Microbiota, 373, 374, 376
Micro‐EW, 270, 273, 274, 277, 279, 281
Microorganism, 228, 364
Microparticle, 270, 272–274, 277–279, 281
Microscope, 116, 120, 276
Microwave, 247, 257
Middle Ages, 53, 115, 540, 542, 560, 565, 633,
634, 702
Migration, 331, 369, 615, 621–623
Milky Way, 263, 637
Mimesis, 345, 347, 354–356, 374
Mind
mind, ability of, 240
mind, absolute, 54
mind, cult of, 351
mind designation, 338
mind, embodied, 69, 500
mind, epistemology, 135
mind, extended, 69, 70, 481
mind, ﬁnite, 385
mind, idea of, 503
mind, laboratory of, 506
mind, labor of, 504, 506, 508
mind, mirror of, 504
mind, own, 156, 215, 320, 331, 577
mind, perfection of, 550
mind, perspective of, 175
mind, philosophy of, 133, 269, 276, 279,
381, 481
mind, rational, 151, 164, 411
mind reading, 332
mind, realm of, 126
mind, relativity of, 355
mind, sciences of, 111
mind, symbolic, 573, 575
mind, theory of, 5, 332, 333, 335
mind, unconscious, 411
mind, working of, 479
Mindpower, 240
Mindset, 8, 22, 30, 78, 129, 221, 232, 561, 564,
643, 731
Mind‐to‐world, 337
Miniaturist, 353
Minimalism, 418
Minimalist, 406, 426
Miracle, 146, 533
Mirror neurons, 498
Misconception, 298, 621, 646
Misdiagnosis, 296
Mission, 48, 61, 66, 220, 564, 601, 728, 745
Mistake, 56, 62, 161, 293, 300, 313, 421
Misuse, 567
Modalities, behavioral, 80
Modality
modality, artistic‐narrative, 24, 444
modality, associative, 86
modality, behavioral, 85, 87
modality, logical‐scientiﬁc, 444
Mode
mode, behavioral, 81
mode, shifting, 444
Model
model, human life, 102
model, life, 373
model, mathematical, 138
model, organism, 122
model, referential, 514
model, scientiﬁc, 127
Modeling, educational, 631, 639, 643, 644
Modernistic, 563
Modernity
modernity, problems of, 502
Modernization, 587, 621, 625
Modiﬁcation
modiﬁcation, genetic, 365
modiﬁcation, symbolic, 580
780
Index

Module
module, motor, 80
Moisture, see brain
Molecule
molecule, response of, 137
molecule, signal of, 137
Moment, 12, 58, 66, 99, 102, 111, 144,
176–183, 185, 187–189, 191, 192, 200,
206, 224, 225, 290, 336, 337, 339, 375,
405, 420, 422, 438, 446, 470, 477, 504,
507, 508, 517, 573, 577, 582, 584, 701,
725
moment, constitutive, 171, 177–179, 181,
183, 184, 186, 190
moment, culminating, 539
moment, poetic, 404
moment, second, 515
moment, systematic, 463
Monarchy, 584
Money, 332, 624, 626, 644, 726
Monism
monism, methodological, 533, 535
Mono‐disciplinary, 459
Monopsychism, 540, 541
Monotheism
monotheism, ethical, 560, 568, 569
Monument, 350
Mood, 23, 200, 402, 480
Moon, 238, 386
Morality
morality, form of, 348
morality, sense of, 336
More‐than‐animal, 100
More‐than‐human, 697
Morphogenesis, 135
Morphology, 118, 122, 141
Mortality
mortality, own, 697
Most Advanced, Yet Acceptable (MAYA), 424
Mother, see Earth
Mother, 16, 105, 115, 295, 297, 331, 339, 400,
635, 707
Mother tongue, 525
Motion
motion, law of, 248, 256
Motivation, 16, 18, 215, 216, 220, 221, 290,
296, 299, 333, 334, 336, 338, 439, 440,
447, 624
Motive, 145, 332, 340, 539, 621
Mountain, 520
Movement
movement, hybrid, 357
movement, new, 200
movement, romantic, 125, 357
movement, spiritual, 356
Moving, self‐, 81, 215
Multidimensionality, 95, 97, 106
Multidisciplinary, 7, 10, 468, 671, 696, 736
Multiplicity, 136, 181, 534, 544
Multispecies, 697
Multiverse, 274
Museum, 293, 351, 354, 358, 361, 520
Music
music, classical, 438, 451
music, rhythms of, 535
Musician, 4, 229, 402, 439, 484, 485, 522
Mutation, 370, 394
Mutuality, 558
Mysterious thought, 241
Myth
myth, ancient, 144
myth, ritual, 331
Mythologies, 333, 695
N
Narration, 121, 581, 588
Narrative
narrative, mythical, 143
narrative, traditional, 158
Narrator, 374
Na, see sodium
Nation, 65, 222, 566, 581, 583, 585, 597
Nationality, 595
Naturalist, 116, 120, 122, 123, 137, 501
Natural Language Generation (NLG), 390
Natural Language Understanding (NLU), 390
Naturalness, 85
Nature
nature, analogical, 77
nature, anthropological, 41
nature, beauty of, 164, 347, 348, 358, 736
nature, bodily, 543
nature, common, 547, 585
nature, contemplation of, 354
nature, conventional, 515, 519, 523, 526
nature, creativity of, 143, 146
nature, empathic, 297
nature, ﬁrst law of, see ‘stay alive’
nature, generativity of, 136
nature, lively, 365, 366
nature, living, 121, 126
nature, master of, 348
nature, mimesis of, 354
nature, non‐human, 82
nature, own, 52, 220, 251, 252, 348, 549
nature, physiological, 511, 515
Index
781

Nature (cont.)
nature, product of, 393
nature, psychological, 41
nature, romantic, 697
nature, science of, 5, 18
nature, student of, 347
nature, true, 534
nature, truth of, 358, 635
nature, ugliness of, 358
nature, vision of, 122
Necessity, animal, 101
Need
need, behavioral, 84
need, consumptive, 348
need, educative, 107, 295, 298, 303
need, never‐ending, 348
need, primary, 620
need, secondary, 620
Negation, 177, 178
Neglect, 13, 83, 153, 289, 290, 301, 349, 350,
420, 425, 432, 440, 501
Negotiation, 462
Neocortex, 154, 333, 334, 336
Neologism, 177, 331
Neoplatonics, 516, 517
Neo‐vitalism, 97
Neovitalist, 89
Network
network, complex, 142
network, neural, 70, 290, 381, 390, 391
Neural Machine Translation (NMT), 390
Neuroaesthetics, 416, 473, 474, 480
Neurobiology, 80, 480
Neuroimaging, 406, 423, 485
Neurologist, 153
Neuron
neurons, network of, 405
Neurophenomenology, 135, 480
Neuroplasticity, 290, 473
Neuroscience
neuroscience, affective, 480
neuroscience, cognitive, 274–281, 743
Neuroscientist, 272, 280, 420, 422, 423, 425
Neutralization, 103, 580
Newborn, 214
Newtonian, post‐, 147
Niche, cultural, 147
Nightmare, 562, 738
Nitrogen, 676, 677, 683, 684
Noblest, 100
Noise‐Killing (NK), 416
Nomad, 582, 583
Non‐contradiction, 521, 526
Non‐designer, 467
Non‐event, 164
Non‐mass, 253
Non‐material, 622
Non‐ordinate, 617
Non‐peaker, 224
Nonsense, 350, 598
Non‐Verbal Learning Disorder (NVLD), 296
N‐order, 329, 334–336, 338, 341, 342
Norm
norm, social, 586, 640
Normality
normality, standard of, 394
Normalization, 394
Nostalgia, 482, 583
Nothingness, 193, 204
nothingness, thinking of, 193
Notion, empty, 276, 277
Nourishment, 119, 646
Novelist, 229
Novelty
novelty, psychological, 105
Nucleotide, 140
Number
number, complex, 516
number, concept of, 516–518
number, inﬁnite, 138, 521
number, irrational, 340, 341
number, natural, 516, 518
number, new, 516
number, rational, 516, 518, 607
Nurse, 163
Nutrient, 373, 676, 677, 679, 684, 699, 705,
739
O
Object
object, aesthetic, 333, 336
object, classical, 656
object, empirical, 513, 524
object, inanimate, 119, 161
object, mechanistic, 381, 385, 386, 395
object, physical, 231
object, real, 240, 247, 495
object, self‐regulating, 125
object, sensible, 355, 358, 544, 545, 547
object, thought of, 202
Objectiﬁcation, 102, 317
Objectivity, concept of, 202
Objectivization, 205
Objects, world of, 197, 199, 202, 207, 507
Obligation
obligation, external, 137
Observation
observation, systematic, 634, 635
782
Index

Observer, 64, 74, 162, 249, 252, 273, 347, 411,
420, 423, 424, 533–535
Observer‐as‐participan, 464
Obsession, 214, 420
Obsessive‐Compulsive Disorder (OCD), 296
Obstinacy, 555
Occupation, 622, 624, 643
Occurrence
occurrence, social, 564
Ocean, 229, 339, 683
Offense, 339, 593
Offspring, 139, 298, 347, 392, 579
Oncomouse, 366
One‐time, 227, 241, 363
One‐to‐one, 596
One‐way, 238
Ontology, 51, 53, 56, 67, 73, 85, 98, 141, 142,
271, 274, 279, 280, 361, 363, 364, 374,
384, 737
Ontology, ancient, 376
Open‐minded, 320
Openness
openness, attitude of, 195
openness, condition of, 199, 207
openness, intellectual, 204
Operation
operation, double, 545
operation, immaterial, 542
operation, intellectual, 541, 543, 548
operation, symbolic, 464
Opinion
opinion, own, 215
opinion, public, 449, 532, 722
opinion, second, 296
opinion, subjective, 350
opinion, superior, 561
Opportunities, cognitive, 84
Opposition, 49, 52, 59, 66, 68, 138, 493, 507,
540, 586, 588, 595, 697
Oppositional Deﬁant Disorder (ODD), 296
Oppression, 158, 166, 531
Optimism, 167, 280, 695, 734
Orchestra, 416
Orchestra, fragmented, 405
Order
order, double, 549
order, higher, 13, 88, 103, 142, 302, 303,
315, 322, 483, 485
order, lower, 315, 322
order, segmental, 595
order, social, 578
order, spatial, 136
order, temporal, 17, 136
Organ, 101, 122, 332, 375, 388, 504, 537, 541,
542, 544, 546, 551, 552, 635, 638
organ, formation of, 116, 119
Organicity, 128
Organism
organism, assembled, 366
organism, fragment, 377
organism, genetically modiﬁed, 375
organism, living, 68, 126, 127, 137, 144,
364, 381, 390, 395, 635, 645, 646
organism, new, 115
organism, tissue, 377
Organization
organization, complex, 17, 559, 660
organization, functional, 382, 391–393
organization, harmonious, 139
organization, internal, 121
organization, model of, 126
organization, own, 140
organization, self‐, 133, 137, 138, 142–144,
147, 148, 279, 390, 659
Organized, self‐, 115
Organs, sensory, 78, 479
Orientation
orientation, cognitive, 461
orientation, philosophical, 123
Origin, 44, 48, 73, 116, 123, 127, 136, 144,
195, 204, 331, 440, 540, 542, 629, 638,
726
Originality, 11, 12, 18, 24, 29, 374, 447
Orthodoxy, 390, 579
Otherness
otherness, animal, 81
otherness, qualitative, 83, 84, 88, 89
Ourselves
ourselves, understanding of, 498
Outbreak, 622, 706
Outcome
outcome, aporetic, 125
outcome, educational, 439
Output, 229, 237, 358, 391, 407, 658
Outside‐of‐the‐box, 319
Outsider, 337, 371
Oxygen, 228
P
Pain
pain, sense of, 601
pain, threshold of, 601
Painter
painter, complex, 356
Painters, father of, 356
Painting
painting, art of, 347
Index
783

Paleontology, 375, 575, 576
Pandemic, 22, 163, 166, 361, 364, 367, 369,
440, 615, 617, 618, 620–626, 633, 642,
655, 660, 665, 706, 724, 727, 732
Paper, piece of, 333, 504
Paper wheel, 243, 246, 247, 254, 256,
258–260, 264
Paradigm
paradigm, new, 128, 143, 269, 271, 272,
276, 281, 468, 643, 715, 731, 743
paradigm, philosophical, 269
paradigm, scientiﬁc, 114, 140, 723
Paradise
paradise, second tree, 503
Paradox, 57, 60, 235, 263, 646
Parallelism, 141
Parameter
parameter, operational, 632
parameter, universal, 146
Parent, 115, 139, 215, 287, 289, 291–293, 295,
296, 298–300, 316, 624
Parenting, 291, 292
Participant, 67, 339, 402, 403, 407, 408, 446,
461, 564, 566, 593, 595, 601, 661
Particle, 136, 144, 245, 247, 248, 257–259,
264, 369, 496, 679
Particle, single, 257
Particulate Matter (PM), 673
Parties, conﬂicted, 593
Parts, sum of, 56, 122, 159, 166, 278, 497, 636
Part‐whole, 278, 279
Passion, 81, 82, 167, 201, 297, 314, 316, 545
Passivity, 224, 418
Past
past, evolutionary, 338
Paternity, 578, 579, 582
Path, new, 171, 192, 402
Pathologist, vii
Pathology, 420, 722
Pathos, 340
Pathway
pathway, human, 461
Pattern
pattern, connective, 633
pattern, logic of, 461
pattern, universal, 331
Pattern‐hunting, 332
Payment, 624
Peak, 7, 70, 156, 224, 230, 407, 474, 481, 482,
506, 641
Peaker, 224, 225
Pedagogy, 324, 325, 629, 643
Pediatrician, 286, 288
Pediatrics, 1, 15, 296
Penalization, 591, 596, 608
Penalties, 601
Penalty
penalty, death, 593
Penetration, 654
People
people, ancient, 587
people, deﬁciency‐motivated, 211,
215–220, 222, 223, 225, 226, 230, 232
people, growth‐motivated, 220
people, self‐actualizing, 211, 219–224, 227,
231, 232
Peptide, 144, 145
Perceiver, 195, 423, 480
Perceiving, 84, 101, 104, 191, 199, 216, 222,
398, 400, 406, 411, 493, 495, 525, 595,
634, 696
Perception
perception, acts of, 197
perception, aesthetic, 224, 423
perception, conceptual, 515
perception, language of, 444
perception, non‐human, 88
perception, phenomena of, 515
perception, poverty of, 633, 636
perception, selective, 176
perception, sensible, 197
perception, sensitive, 518, 527
perception, theory of, 78
perception, visual, 20, 21, 81
Perfection
perfection, effect of, 543
perfection, greater, 541
perfection, highest point of, 543
perfection, mathematical, 350, 355
Performance
performance, academic, 439
performance, artistic, 351
performance, depth of, 351
performance, mental, 100, 103
performance, original, 205
performance, superior, 391
Performativity, 367
Performer, 217, 218, 478
Permutation, 336
Person
person, category of, 541
person, concept of, 197
person, openness of, 197
Personal Data Bank (PDB), 264
Personality, 225
personality, human, 201
personality, unit of, 205
Perspective
784
Index

perspective, ancient, 634
perspective, astronomical, 637
perspective, cellular, 635
perspective, epigenetic, 133, 148
perspective, evolutionary, 133
perspective, machine‐like, 635
perspective, mathematical, 138
perspective, philosophical, 75
perspective, philosophical anthropological,
103
perspectives, series of, 205
Phase
phase, anthropological, 83
phase, convergent, 458
Phenomena
phenomena, acoustic, 475
phenomena, economic, 621
phenomena, psychological, 60, 62, 63, 354,
525, 558
Phenomenology, 56, 58–60, 64, 99, 103, 127,
128, 195, 196, 367, 480, 568
Phenomenon
phenomenon, aesthetic, 533
phenomenon, real, 241, 252
phenomenon, universal, 176
Phenotype, 142, 375
Philosopher
philosopher, analytical, 503
philosopher, ancient, 348
philosopher, contemporary, 83, 732
philosopher, modern, 77, 349, 588
philosopher, political, 531, 566
philosopher, reason of, 349
Philosophy
philosophy, analytical, 49, 503, 723
philosophy, ancient, 47
philosophy, contemporary, 73, 83, 111
philosophy for children (P4C), 95, 321–323
philosophy, modern, 77, 348, 561, 573,
575, 578, 585, 587
philosophy, natural, 116, 126, 141, 633
philosophy, neo‐platonic, 357
philosophy, personal, 317
philosophy, political, 323, 529, 573, 580,
586, 587
Philosophy for Children (P4C), 95, 311,
321–324
U,see golden ratio
Phoneme, 86, 365
Photograph, 450
Photon, 253, 257, 259
Photosynthesis, 157
Phronesis, 549
Physicality, 368
Physician, 86, 116, 171, 192, 347, 566, 724,
725
Physicist, 174, 252, 272–274, 276, 279, 294,
496
Physics
physics, atomic, 495
physics, classical, 122, 133, 737
physics, contemporary, 496
physics, law of, 256
physics, legality of, 127
physics, speculative, 114, 126
Physiologist
physiologist, Caspar Friedrich Wolff, 119
Physiology, 20, 90, 120, 136, 479
Piano, 397, 522, 653, 655, 664
Pilgrimage, 580
Pioneering, 293, 391
Pitch, 407, 475
Pixel, 403, 404
Pizza, 417
Planck constant, 247, 258, 259
Planet, 91, 157, 160–162, 270, 272–274, 365,
520, 633, 645, 647, 698, 738, 741
Planning
planning, urban, 319
Plant, 100, 318, 373, 375, 376, 392, 420, 525,
541, 562, 567, 639, 676, 677, 685, 698,
699, 703, 706, 739
Plasticity
plasticity, semiotic, 87
plasticity, synaptic, 140
Platform
platform, digital, 440
Player, 223, 426, 427, 662
Pleasure
pleasure, aesthetic, 483
pleasure principle, 500
pleasure, sensory, 474, 483
Pluralism, 17, 205
Plurality, 43, 44, 100, 504, 543
Plurality, pure, 43
Poem, 45, 46, 57, 353, 371, 494, 496, 497, 535
Poet, 4, 335, 351, 353, 356, 496, 505, 597, 635
Poeticity, 496
Poetry
poetry, Leila of Majnun, 353
poetry, viral, 364
Polarity, 464
polarity, abstract and concrete, 464
polarity, personal and universal, 464
Index
785

Polarity (cont.)
polarity, subjective and objective, 464
polarity, tacit and explicit, 464
Policy, 16, 165, 515, 555, 642, 645, 679, 680,
684, 685, 687
policy, economic, 615, 621, 625
Policymaker, 631, 642, 645, 741
Politician, 120, 286, 287, 319, 644
Politics, 10, 67, 95, 213, 319, 533, 535, 582,
584, 587, 749
Pollution, 679, 683, 700
Population
population, gifted, 300
population, indigenous, 639
Portrait, 4, 98, 124, 293, 350, 402, 403, 405,
406, 499
Position
position, ﬁnancial, 615
position, social, 595
Positivist, 114, 563, 588
Possibilities, 9, 23, 68, 77, 81, 84, 85, 87, 89,
99–101, 113, 120, 143, 165, 194, 197,
200, 202, 203, 206, 214, 229, 239, 302,
320, 374, 387, 419, 444, 477, 484, 485,
534, 562, 577, 579, 583, 584, 587
possibilities, cosmos of, 178
possibilities, creative, 353
possibilities, ﬁeld of, 524
Postmodern, 335, 345, 347, 350, 356, 561, 562,
566
Postmodernism, 561, 577
Postmodernity, 529, 531, 533
postmodernity, sign of, 533
Posture, 104, 222, 542
Potential, pure, 229
Potentialities, 52, 54, 100, 105, 106, 215, 220,
222, 548, 734
Poverty, 324, 622, 633, 644, 645
Power
power, active, 548
power, cognitive, 546, 547, 549
power curve, 244
power, electric, 242
power, ﬁnancial, 500
power, formative, 387, 394
power, higher, 230, 231
power, human, 231
power, imaginative, 545
power, internal, 544
power, mind, 240, 241
power, passive, 544, 548
power, sensory, 541, 544
power, spiritual, 201
power, thought, 235, 241–244
Practice
practice, aesthetic, 331, 332, 342
practice, artistic, 329, 331–334, 338, 340,
342, 363
practice, community of, 640
practice, design of, 455, 461, 462
practice, didactic, 598
practice, discursive, 463, 601, 611
practice, ethical, 567, 569
practice, manuals of, 159
practice, narrative, 601
practice, reﬂective, 457, 458, 461–463, 466,
468, 470
practice, religious, 559
practice, representative of, 463
practice, systemic, 644
practice, traditional, 455, 457, 470
practice, unethical, 567
practice, urban, 697
Pragmatist, 513
Praise, 302, 339
Precaution, 218
Precision, 138, 157, 199, 355, 418
Preconception, 462, 463
Precondition, 136, 461, 464, 501, 508
Precursor, 104, 314, 332, 353, 577
Predator, 90, 163, 481
Prefabrication
prefabrication, processes of, 601
Preference
preference, aesthetic, 532
Preformationism, 113, 116, 117, 119, 121
Prejudice, 114, 195, 319, 320, 443, 445, 495,
503, 640
Premise, 157, 176, 205, 335, 470, 503, 515,
521, 525, 563, 594, 599, 607, 634, 661
Prerequisite, 54, 98, 106, 137, 661
Presence
presence, digital, 367
presence, physical, 367
presence, real, 507
Presentation, analytical, 39, 71
Preservation
preservation, self‐, 99, 119, 122
Pressure
pressure, selective, 370
Prestige, 215, 218, 289
Presumption, 77, 82
Presupposition
presupposition, intellectual, 317
Prevention
prevention, suicide, 300
Price, see information overload
Primates, 21, 85, 329, 337, 338, 706
786
Index

Primatology, 83
Priming
priming, affective, 423
Principle
principle, aesthetic, 427
principle, intellectual, 542
principle, priori, 125
principle, vital, 119
Priorities, 42, 213, 294, 647
priority, absolute, 48
Probability, 213
Problem
problem, complex, 8, 10, 11, 13, 18, 19, 24,
29, 299, 448, 449, 458, 468, 471, 636,
639, 646, 665, 729, 731, 734
problem, controversial, 171
problem, false, 515, 526
problem, heart of, 153, 655
problem, integrated, 633
problem, math, 519
problem, mind‐brain, 275
problem, new, 15, 514
problem, philosophical, 136, 323, 515, 737
problem, pseudo‐, 275
problem, recognition of, 160
problem, reconsideration of, 459
problem, social, 579
problem, sources of, 162
problem space, boundaries of, 464, 466
problem space, complexities, 461, 463, 466
problem, systemic, 166, 633, 642, 646, 647
Problem‐solving, 9, 12, 16, 21, 23, 25, 27, 225,
413, 457, 459, 461, 641, 643, 647, 734
Procedure
procedure, analogical, 90
procedure, analytical, 656
procedure, mental, 205
Process
process, aesthetic, 483
process, associative, 85
process, biological, 133, 135, 141, 142
process, cerebral, 523
process, cognitive, 54, 69, 73, 78, 81,
189–191, 432, 441–445, 447, 478, 481
process, complex, 393, 405, 483, 485, 567,
587
process, dynamics of, 137
process, economic, 619
process, evolutionary, 573, 575, 576, 579,
584, 585
process, inorganic, 514
process, intelligibility of, 135
process, internal, 466
process, mental, 41, 62, 66, 75, 164, 199,
334, 403, 405, 442, 444, 479, 512, 514,
516, 525
process, organic, 514, 644
process, physical, 632
process, physiological, 62, 80, 514, 551
process, rational, 537, 538, 552
process, ritualistic, 411
process, scientiﬁc, 562
process, self‐catalytic, 137
process, systematic, 457
process, temporal, 121
process, valuing, 217
Processing
processing, aesthetic, 423, 424
processing, spatiotemporal, 329, 331, 338
Procrastination, 299, 300
Producer, 8, 400, 597, 610, 647
Product
product, aesthetic, 532
product design, 418
product, social, 218
Production
production, genetic, 370, 371
production, industrial, 684, 695, 697
production, mechanical, 532
production, original, 205
Productivity
productivity, biological, 677
Profession, 8, 9, 27, 295, 457, 467, 595, 640,
741
Professionalism, 163
Proﬁt, 394, 495, 621
Program, genetic, 140, 143
Programmer, 401
Progress
progress, cultural, 558
progress, linear, 583
Prohibition, 598, 601, 609, 611, 722
Project, internal, 121
Projection, mental, 332
Proof, 4, 55, 66, 122, 157, 186, 204, 598
Properties
properties, aesthetic, 416, 425, 430
Proposition
proposition, contingent, 545
proposition, empirical, 514, 521
proposition, grammatical, 520, 521
proposition, infectious, 599
proposition, single, 521
propositions, system of, 514, 521
Prosthesis, 514
Protection
Index
787

protection, self‐, 81
Protector, 214, 217–219
Protein, 140, 141, 144
Protocol, ethical, 557
Provocation, 354, 363
Psyche
psyche, see soul, 115
Psychiatrist, 154, 219
Psychiatry, 295, 296, 562
Psychoanalysis, 562
Psychobiology, 474, 479
Psychologist
psychologist, clinical, 154
Psychology
psychology, comparative, 105
psychology, cultural‐historical, 39, 63, 65
psychology, evolutionary, 417, 432
psychology, humanistic, 215
psychology, positive, 644
Psychopathology, 562
Psychotherapist, 217
Psychotherapy, 16, 222, 722
Punishment, 292, 333, 339, 503, 601, 607, 610
Purchase, 500, 501, 618
Purpose
purpose, natural, 138, 386, 387
purpose, sense of, 224
Push‐pull, 341
Puzzle
puzzle, jigsaw, 157
Q
Qualiﬁcation, 285, 576
Qualities
qualities, intellective, 199
qualities, living, 156
quality, poetic, 496
Quantities, 159, 222, 523, 564, 565, 618, 673,
744
Quantum
quantum change, 211, 225–232, 727
quantum changer, 227–231, 727
quantum domain, 228
quantum gravity, 273
quantum mechanics, 146, 248, 258, 275,
278, 279
quantum physics, 20, 493, 496, 726, 737
Quarantine, 618, 623
Quarrel, new, 174
Queen, 158, 365
Question
question, anthropological, 498
question, enigmatic, 515
question, ethical, 567, 706
question, factual, 171
question, moral, 335, 338
question, original, 193
question, research, 410, 422, 565
question, rhetorical, 317, 513, 524
question, scientiﬁc, 113, 743
question, social, 355
question, why, 386
R
Rabbit, 342, 516, 518, 520, 521, 526, 705
Racism
racism, systemic, 166
Radiation, 247
Radicalization, 555, 557
Rainfall, 559
Rain forest, 375
Ramiﬁcation, social, 567
Random, 139, 391
Random Event Generators (REG), 240, 241
Random noise, 142
Ratio, 54, 114, 122, 243, 244, 333, 340, 341,
518, 618
Ratio, golden, see u
Rationale
rationale, meta-rationales, 459
Rationalism
rationalism, modern, 583
Rationality
rationality, form of, 126
rationality, human, 537, 551
rationality, ideas of, 129
Reaction
reaction, emotional, 423, 425
reaction, empathic, 371
reaction, involuntary, 80
reaction, thought, 215, 261
reaction, visceral, 371
Reading, critical, 441, 450
Realism, 91, 142, 166–168, 356, 564
Realities
realities, alternative, 422
realities, character of, 196
realities, conception of, 496, 577
realities, empirical, 43
realities, external, 545
realities, fragmentation of, 534
realities, greater, 227
realities, intelligible, 49, 55, 57
realityies, knowledge of, 537, 548, 551
realities, material, 540, 543
realities, mental, 368
realities, objection of, 496
788
Index

realities, objective, 274, 281, 349, 387, 388,
548, 561
realities, ontological, 140
realities, sense of, 224
realities, surplus of, 535
realities, understanding of, 537, 551
realities, vision of, 146, 743
Realization
realization, self-, 335
realization, sense of, 204
realization, threshold of, 135
Realm
realm, existential, 558
realm, mental, 632
realm, political, 165
realm, social, 165, 564
Real-time, 399–401, 407, 408, 410, 473, 477,
485, 629, 642, 737
Real-world, 5, 6, 8, 9, 12, 17, 31, 167, 220,
231, 286, 295, 478, 580, 643, 647, 655,
681, 682, 742
Reason
reason, authority of, 348
reason, cult of, 350, 351
reason, degree of, 78
reason, discipline of, 348
reason, exercise of, 82
reason, goddess of, 350
reason, ills of, 162
reason, lower, 550
reason, materialist, 345
reason, model of, 126
reason, new idea of, 125, 128, 129
reason, offspring of, 347
reason, own, 368
reason, perfection of, 550
reason, philosophical, 384
reason, philosophy of, 349
reason, principle of, 521
reason, pure, 197, 384, 495
reason, right, 566
reason, scientiﬁc, 349
reason, sub-product, 348
reason, temple of, 350
reason, universal, 545, 547
reason, upper, 549
Reasonableness, 314–316, 322, 325, 733
Reasoning
reasoning, aesthetic, 336, 419, 420, 425,
432
reasoning, analogical, 78
reasoning, competence of, 594
reasoning, instrumental, 583
reasoning, methods of, 459
reasoning, moral, 336–339
reasoning, scientiﬁc, 114
reasoning, tension of, 205
Receiver, 7, 17, 399
Recession, 617
Recipient, 289, 361, 413, 532
Reciprocity
reciprocity, culture of, 639
Recognition
recognition, human, 335
Reconciliation, 696, 702, 707
Reconsideration, 315, 459
Reconstruction
reconstruction, mechanistic, 388
Recording, 21, 407, 416, 480
Record, written, 565
Rectangle, 341, 342, 592, 593, 600
Rectangle, golden, 341, 342
Redeﬁnition, 126, 446
Redshift, 250
Reductionism
reductionism, dream of, 146
Reductionist, 3, 63–65, 70, 114, 129, 136, 142,
165, 166, 273, 349, 484, 514, 631, 633,
635, 636, 638, 639, 641, 643, 648, 658
Reference
reference, cultural, 424
reference, external, 473, 475
reference, extralinguistic, 521
reference, frame of, 27, 135, 220, 249–251,
256, 259, 340, 483
reference, internal, 475
reference, symbolic, 147, 577
Reﬁnement
reﬁnement, self-, 500
reﬁnement, spiritual, 500
Reﬂection
reﬂection, act of, 462
reﬂection, aesthetic, 438
reﬂection, anthropological, 100
reﬂection, conscious, 81, 317
reﬂection, deeper, 455
reﬂection, examination of, 462
reﬂection, moments of, 438
reﬂection, philosophical, 98, 511
reﬂection, self-, 498
reﬂection, source of, 358
reﬂection, spiritual, 198
reﬂection, symbol-based, 85
reﬂection, systematic, 462, 463
Reﬂectivity
reﬂectivity, solar, 160
Index
789

Reﬂex, 73, 77, 80, 81, 87, 88, 481, 482
Reﬂexes, chain of, 80, 356
Reﬂexivist, nature of, 462
Reﬂexivity, 135, 137, 147, 457, 462, 463, 470,
733
Reformulation, 23, 448, 540
Region, 294, 485, 617, 637, 673, 678, 684, 703
Regularities
regularities, artiﬁcial, 121
Regulating, self-, 25, 125, 633, 642
Regulation, 18, 159, 292, 477, 557, 560, 578,
579, 620, 684
Reiﬁcation, 385, 389, 395
Reinterpretation, 69, 97, 129, 448
Rejection, 49, 74, 290, 303, 315, 563, 594
Relation
relation between, thinking and being, 45
relation, determinated, 180, 183
relation, economic, 618–620
relation, moment of, 178, 180, 181, 185,
187
relation, new, 512, 515, 519, 526
Relationship
relationship between, an I and a You, 506
relationship between, art and natural, 136
relationship between, art and science, 535
relationship between, art and truth, 531
relationship between, being and time, 534
relationship between, individual and
environment, 466
relationship between, life and living, 128
relationship between, science and literature,
531
relationship between, surface and depth,
140
relationship between, the being of thought
and the essential being, 204
relationship between, the earth andthe
human body, 634
relationship between, the sensible and the
cognitive, 539
relationship between, the subject and the
world, 126
relationship between, thought and life, 128
relationship, bipolar, 123
relationship, external, 442
relationship, family of, 655
relationship, means-end, 386
relationship, micro-macro, 274
relationship, moral, 165
relationship, mutual, 505
relationship, syntactic, 391
Relationship, system of, 580
Relativity
relativity, general, 146, 249, 278, 279
relativity, irony of, 355
relativity, special, 252, 257, 279
relativity, theory of, 496
Religion
religion, nature of, 535
Remediation, 336
Remembrance, 164, 516
Renaissance
renaissance, post-, 348, 356
Reorganization, 137, 464, 576
Repertoire
repertoire, behavioral, 80
Replication, 137, 374
Repository, 372, 542
Representation
representation, auxiliary, 484
representation, cognitive, 475
representation, communicative, 419
representation, digital, 403
representation, empathizing, 199, 201
representation, mental, 84, 198, 279, 522
representation, series of, 198
representation, subjective, 126
representation, symbolic, 331, 336
representation, visual, 314, 422
Reproduction, 139, 332, 383, 392, 393, 532,
676
Reptile, 154
Republic, 347, 584, 615, 618
Republican, 584
Research
research, academic, 291, 400, 401, 406, 411
research, aesthetic, 417
research, economic, 620
research, interdisciplinary, 133, 329
research, international, 135
research methodology, 557
research question, 410, 422, 565
research, scientiﬁc, 120, 136, 143, 394,
400, 401, 555, 565
research, social, 564
research, world of, 114
Researcher, 6, 64, 159, 193, 211, 240, 276,
279, 280, 286, 361, 381, 408, 410, 437,
439, 440, 455, 511, 533, 567, 595, 596,
629, 642, 659, 671, 729, 735
Resilience, 447, 468
Resonance, 20, 406, 497
Respect, 89, 99, 113, 119, 120, 122, 123,
125–128, 199, 215, 218, 221, 287, 290,
292, 293, 298, 301, 315, 320, 368,
374–376, 389, 431, 441, 476, 478, 482,
503, 540, 541, 549, 568, 645
790
Index

Response
response, realistic, 166
response, unconscious, 418
response, visual, 408
Responsibility, 7, 9, 21, 95, 162, 167, 191, 293,
298, 302, 392, 394, 507, 567
Restart, 699
Reverberation, 143
Reversibility, 142
Revision, 143, 315
Revolution
revolution, cognitive, 63, 86
revolution, Neolithic, 559
revolution, ontological, 98
Revolutionaries, 350
Rhythm, theory of, 505
Richness, 111, 114, 220, 503, 504
Right hemisphere
right hemisphere, perspective of, 167
right hemisphere, realism of, 166
right hemisphere, wisdom of, 166
Rigidity, idea of, 80
Risk-taking, 302
Risk
risk, economic, 655
risk, ﬁnancial, 655, 658
Ritual
ritual, social, 584
River, 81, 505, 520, 638, 683–685, 696, 704,
725, 732
Robot, 321, 370, 375, 403
Rock, 159, 376, 696
Rodent, 154, 706
Role
role, communicative, 594
role, objectiﬁcation of, 339
role, own, 335
Romanticism, 114, 356, 357
Room
room, cloning, 365
room, collaboration, 664
room, innovation, 664
Root, sensory, 545
Routine, 13, 332, 391, 418, 461, 623, 661
Ruin, own, 154, 168
Rule
rule, conventional, 526
rule, infectious, 598
rule, meta-, 721
Ruler, absolute, 560
S
Sacriﬁce, 500, 570, 618
Sadness, 409, 482
Safety, 24, 80, 214, 215, 218, 742
Salience, emotional, 421, 425
Sameness, 99, 374
Sanction, ritual, 581–583
Satellite, 157
Satisfaction
satisfaction, extrinsic, 220
satisfaction, life, 12, 13, 292
Savior, 349, 358
Scale
scale, lower, 541
scale, upper, 541
Schizophrenia, 156
Scholar, 22, 47, 66, 75, 82, 97, 113, 115, 135,
136, 139, 174, 176, 292, 353, 413, 422,
505, 534, 540, 555, 586, 634, 660, 695,
738, 740, 745
Scholasticism, 53, 567
Scholastics, new, 195
School
school administrator, 286
school-aged, 14, 27, 29, 285, 320, 323
school, ancient, 66
Science
science, biological, 122, 133, 136, 138, 140
science, cognitive, 53, 63, 68, 80, 272, 279,
478, 591
science, economic, 615, 616, 618, 620, 625
science, essence of, 120
science, hard, 495, 564
science, languages of, 143
science, mistakes of, 161
science, modern, 406, 503, 561, 563, 588,
634, 635
science, natural, 25, 28, 136, 171, 176, 384,
387, 500, 531, 533, 534, 561–566, 568,
570, 573, 575, 577, 581, 588, 723, 732,
743
science, new, 121, 125, 139, 575, 576, 579,
581–583, 585
science, political, 171, 531, 734
science, post-nomothetic, 147
science, practice of, 286, 567
science, pseudo-, 275, 280
science, romantic, 114, 115
science, soft, 163
science, specialized, 318, 739
science, true, 136
science, understanding of, 459
Index
791

Science-ﬁction, 393
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math
(STEM), 163, 433
Scientist
scientist, cognitive, 422, 514, 515
scientist, evolutionary, 349
scientist, natural, 174, 176
Sculptor, 203, 340, 559
Sculpture, 143, 335, 410, 446
Sea, 173, 229, 230, 424
Second-Order Intentionality (SOI), 329, 331,
332, 334, 341, 342
Sector, 196, 291, 417, 617, 618, 623, 625, 645,
655, 662, 664, 665, 724
Secularism, 561
Secularization, 49, 56, 57, 535
Security
security, economic, 617
security, ﬁnancial, 633
Sedentism, 158
Seed arrangement, 342
Seeing
seeing, activity of, 461
seeing, new way of, 165
seeing, old way of, 165
Segregation, 567
Selection
selection, double, 147
selection, natural, 136, 139, 142
Self
self, actions of, 198
self, beneﬁt of, 158
self, conscious, 197
self, ideal, 218
self, idealized, 218, 219, 727
self, key, 214
self, pseudo, 220, 230
self, real, 211, 212, 219, 220, 222,
230–232, 727
self, realm of, 126
self, reﬂection of, 350
self, sense of, 230, 290, 295, 296, 299
self, socialized, 219, 230
self, thinking of, 211, 231
self, vulnerable, 214
Self-as-character, 218
Self-awareness, 440, 451
Self-awareness, metacognitive, 438, 440, 451
Selfhood, 99
Selﬁshness, 137
Selves
selves, other, 214
Semantics, 42, 65, 133, 135, 140, 142, 143,
146, 148, 390, 391, 424, 473, 476, 478,
485, 502, 505, 592, 594–596, 601, 648,
683, 723
Semiotics
semiotics, associative, 86, 88
semiotics, pure, 505
Sensation
sensation, internal, 513, 521
Sense
sense, aesthetic, 338
sense, apprehension of, 545
sense, bodily, 482, 544, 552
sense, common, 80, 89, 316, 544, 545, 576
sense, connections of, 196, 201
sense, constitution of, 523, 527
sense, critical, 468
sense, external, 545
sense, formation of, 204
sense, full of, 199, 204
sense, mathematical, 598, 738
sense, new, 518, 519, 524, 526, 581
sense, own, 159, 545
sense, practical, 468
sense, pure, 577
sense, reductionism of, 348
sense, relation of, 519
sense, smell, 544
sense, taste, 544
sense, sight, 101, 544
sense, touch, 541
sense, unit of, 198
Sense-making, musical, 473, 478, 480–482
Senses, networks of, 198
Senses, universal of, 544
Sensibilities, 143, 340, 356
Sensing
sensing, microbial, 364
Sensitivity, 77, 285, 290, 296, 300, 437, 451,
483, 638, 642, 645, 649
Sensor
sensor, electric, 237
sensor, thought force, 241, 242, 245
Sensory powers
sensory powers, inner, 544
sensory powers, inner,see common sense
sensory powers, inner, see estimation
sensory powers, inner, see fantasy or
imagination
sensory powers, inner, see memory
Sentence
sentence, forbidden, 591, 593, 594, 597,
599, 603
792
Index

sentence, true, 591
Separability, 99, 202, 207
Separation
separation, semiotic, 85
Sequence
sequence, behavioral, 80
sequence, DNA, 139, 142, 368
Sequestration, 157
Serenity, 220, 357
Series
series, experiments, 237
Service
service sector, 625
Serving, self-, 566
Settlement, 562, 624, 676–678, 684–686
Shah Mosque, 350
Shame, 218, 602
Shift
shift, epigenetic, 136
shift, ethical, 347, 356
shift, linguistic paradigm, 515
Side, dark, 111
Sight
sight, ﬁrst, 90, 354
Sign
sign, animal, 84
sign, usage of, 82, 88
sign, use of, 83, 85, 86
sign, verbal, 82, 87
Signal
signal, acoustic, 483
signal, electrical, 237
signal, electromagnetic, 235, 237, 238, 240,
247
signal, magnetic, 237
signal, measurable, 247
Signiﬁer, 247, 504, 578
Silence, state of, 601
Simplicity, 191, 418, 426, 429–431, 479, 700
Simultaneity, 103
Singularity, 373, 374, 411, 506
Situation
situation, anthropological, 497
situation, communicative, 595
situation, emotional, 407
situation, everyday, 521
situation, formal, 518
situation, social, 218, 296, 464
Situations, collective, 618
Skepticism, absolute, 561
Skill
skill, civic, 303
skill, cognitive, 11, 20, 321, 415, 422, 467,
475, 478
skill, cultural, 423
skill, linguistic, 501
skill, social, 336, 733
skill, soft, 437, 730
skill, symbolic, 86
skill, traditional, 468
Skull, 237
Sky, 16, 71, 173, 376, 535, 576, 703
Smell, 357, 399, 479, 544
Smile, 352
Social-cultural, 568, 569
Social-emotional, 291, 292, 298
Sociality, 333, 578, 579, 586
Socialization, 578, 584, 742
Society
society, class of, 350
society, complex, 559, 584
society, inhumane, 499
society, just, 583, 587
society, modern, 698
society, sustainable, 633
Socio-economic, 558, 644, 673, 674, 680–682,
687
Socio-historical, 294, 724
Sociologist, 422
Sociology, 59, 171, 295, 531, 563, 594, 693,
739
Socio-political, 294, 644, 683, 684, 687
Sodium, see Na
Software
software, virtual, 404
Soil
soil, academic, 160
Solidarity, 641
Solution
solution, data-driven, 418
solution, epigenetic, 117
solution, optimal, 620
solution, second, 125
solution, systemic, 629
Soma, 97
Song, 165, 450
Soul
soul, humid, 48
soul, immortal, 78, 82
soul, intellectual, 537, 541–543, 549, 551
soul, living, 385
soul, logos of, 47, 48
soul, nourishing, 541
soul, nutritive, 115, 119
soul, operations of, 542
soul, power of, 542, 546
soul, rational, 78
soul, sensitive, 541, 544
Index
793

soul, strength of, 200
Sound
sound, consumption of, 485
Source, 5, 27, 158, 161, 162, 167, 176, 193,
197, 231, 264, 265, 358, 370, 390, 420,
422, 423, 425, 429, 480, 531, 539, 561,
562, 565, 566, 568, 575, 578, 701, 702,
705, 738, 739
Space
space, fast, 257–259
space form, 205
space, laboratory, 664
space, liminal, 397
space, original, 506
space, physical, 9, 368, 402, 732
space, problem, 15, 457–459, 461, 463,
466, 470, 471
space, scientiﬁc, 438, 451
space, solution, 459, 461
space, theoretical, 367
space wave, 248–256, 259, 261, 264
Space-matter, 248–250, 252, 253, 258, 259,
264
Space-time
space-time, empirical, 41
Speaker
speaker, language, 594
Specialization, 98, 160, 161, 324, 535, 743
Speciation, 145
Species
species, animal, 85, 88, 90, 115, 740
species, biological, 159
species, human, 639
species, intelligible, 544, 546–548
species, life of, 128
Speciﬁcation, 135, 653
Speciﬁcity
speciﬁcity, degree of, 140, 447
speciﬁcity, human, 95, 98, 100, 101, 508
Spectator, 399, 446
Spectrum, 13, 50, 247, 264, 407, 662, 705
Speculation
speculation, ethical, 394
speculation, philosophical, 564
Speech
speech, derogatory, 594
speech, poetic, 506
Speed, 27, 250, 252, 255, 259, 263, 279, 295,
333, 386, 474, 664
Sphere
sphere, cognizable, 125
sphere, environmental, 655, 660
sphere, unknown, 125
Spiral, logarithmic, 340–342
Spirit
spirit, absolute, 57
spirit, beauty of, 358
spirit, eyes of, 196, 199
spirit, full of, 198
spirit, holy, 229, 550
spirit, sciences of, 529
spirit, trace of, 355, 356, 358
Spiritual duty, see ritual
Spiritualism, 354
Spirituality, 116, 163, 230, 301, 354, 355, 357
Spoken language, external, 549
Spontaneity, 205, 356
Spot
spot, artistic, 438
spot, blind, 174, 697
Stability, 279, 557, 579, 621, 645
Stage
stage, early, 115, 116, 214, 219, 353, 676,
735
stage, second, 524, 540
stage, transitory, 205
Standard
standard, ethical, 560
standard, term, 365
Startup, 653, 655, 661, 662, 664–666
State
state, affective, 484, 602
state, emotional, 402, 407, 408, 424
state, environmental, 671, 673, 674, 678,
680, 740
state, inner, 102, 408
state, intelligible, 545
state, internal, 475, 480
state, mental, 64, 65, 274, 275, 278, 279,
332, 333, 601
state, mesotrophic, 677
state, neuronal, 275
state, oligotrophic, 677
state, physical, 403
state, Sovereign, 584
state, spiritual, 355
state, steady, 631
Statement, offensive, 594
State-of-the-art, 399
Statistics
statistics, mean, 240
statistics, median, 240
statistics, standard deviation, 294
statistics, variance, 240
Status, social, 624
Stem cell, 562, 567
Stereotype, 220
Stimuli
794
Index

stimuli, external, 80
stimuli, visual, 419
Stock market, 617
Stone age, 558
Stories, 49, 144, 148, 153, 154, 156, 168, 225,
296, 302, 322, 332, 334, 335, 338–340,
351, 374, 399, 400, 410, 421, 450, 503,
519, 586, 587, 595, 637, 648, 695, 696
Storytelling, 16, 331, 332, 337, 410
Strength, 13, 116, 143, 162, 163, 168, 288,
294, 295, 301–303, 405, 429, 446, 516,
526, 648, 667, 675, 726
Stress, 57, 102, 292, 297, 302, 369, 476, 679,
722, 738, 739
Structuralism, 138, 140, 148
Structure
structure, acoustic, 476
structure, animal, 122
structure, bi-hemispheric, 153, 166
structure, deductive, 596, 605
structure, epigenetic, 140
structure, genetic, 368
structure, information, 140
structure, inorganic, 523
structure, multi-deductive, 602, 604
structure, non-mechanistic, 388
structure, organismic, 392
structure, organizational, 416, 660
structure, social, 166
structure, teleological, 381, 389, 392, 395,
737
Struggle
struggle, mythological, 583
Student, 12–19, 21, 23, 25–29, 153, 160, 288,
292, 294, 295, 297, 300, 302, 314, 318,
319, 322–324, 347–349, 426, 438–451,
517, 518, 522, 540, 567, 629, 632, 634,
640, 642–647, 664, 730, 733, 734
Studies
studies, animal, 740
studies, environmental, 160
studies, experimental, 439, 735
Studio, 14, 25, 364, 407
Style
style, learning, 12, 27, 31, 441
style, parenting, 291, 292
Subject
subject, background of, 200
subject, capacities of, 204
subject, conception of, 497
subject, experience of, 200
subject, self of, 198
Subjection, 437
Subjectivity
subjectivity, conscious, 90
subjectivity, cult of, 351
subjectivity, function of, 201, 202
subjectivity, lover of, 348
Subject-object, 507, 508
Sub-layer, 391
Submarine, 245, 248, 259
Sub-mechanism, 386, 391
Submission, 451, 582, 583
Subpersonalities, 214
Sub-process, 78
Subsidiarity, 640, 641, 645
Substance
substance, angelic, 542
substance, intellectual, 541–544, 552
substance, living, 389, 393, 394
substance, non-living, 393
substance, rational, 543
substrate, neural, 337
Substructure, 602
Subsystem, 657, 660, 661, 681, 682
Success
success, chance of, 168
success, degree of, 166
success, probability of, 213
success, relative, 86
Suffering, 86, 167, 353, 569, 722, 725, 748
Sufﬁciency
sufﬁciency, functional, 145, 146
sufﬁciency, self-, 42, 49, 55
Sufﬁcient, self-, 52, 55, 354
Suﬁsm, 39, 353
Suicide, 87, 295, 300
Sun, 71, 263
Sunﬂower, 342
Superiority
superiority, natural, 583
superiority, religious, 77
superiority, sense of, 499
Superstition, 443, 445
Supplier, 661
Supposition, 565
Suppression, 418, 499
Supra-animal, 101
Supra-rational capacity, see intellect
Supremacy, 696
Surface
surface area, 157
surface, Earth, 157
surface, soil, 157
Index
795

surface, water, 245
Surgery
surgery, plastic, 498
Surprise, 11, 229, 293, 333, 402, 420, 421,
425, 482, 505
Surprising, 12, 49, 71, 88, 127, 159, 225, 241,
242, 422, 424, 639, 727
Surrounding, 62, 140, 217, 263, 401, 483, 656,
696, 722
Survey
survey, statistical, 564
Survival, 13, 69, 99–101, 139, 154, 222, 333,
508, 532, 640, 645, 654, 660, 697, 729
Sustainability
sustainability, functional, 631
Syllable, 355
Symbol
symbol, ancient, 70
symbol, human, 84
symbol, verbal, 84
Symbolism, 86, 104, 332
Symbolization, 586
Sympathy, 165, 330, 494
Symptom, 419, 459, 499, 646
Synapse, 405, 497
Syncretism, 562
Synderesis, 545
Synergy, 156, 313, 442
Synonym, 83, 241
Syntax, 64, 504, 514
Synthesis
synthesis, process of, 461, 608
synthesis, theoretical, 135
synthesis, version of, 139
Synthesist, 457
Syphilis, 562, 566
System
system, aesthetic, 648
system, afﬁnity-based, 121
system, ancient, 638
system approach, 11, 656–658, 687
system architect, 423
system architecture, 416, 430
system, auditory, 475
system, automatic, 404, 671
system, autopoietic, 137, 140, 144, 145,
147
system, biological, 135, 140, 142
system biology, 133, 141, 370, 737
system, boundaries of, 461
system, closed, 156, 167, 168, 180, 639,
641, 647, 656, 674, 681, 682
system, complex, 10, 17, 84, 135, 137, 144,
159, 166, 455, 659, 660, 665, 671, 674,
678, 680, 687, 737
system, conceptual, 496
system dynamics, 631
system engineer, 413, 415, 416, 423
system engineering, 413, 415, 416
system, environmental, 671, 672, 679, 684
system, epistemology of, 135
system, functional, 87–89
system, goal-based, 632
system, goal-seeking, 632
system, homogenized, 639
system, immune, 15, 213, 214
system integrator, 416
system, inertial, 252
system, intelligent, 632
system, interactive, 397
system, interfaces of, 423
system, internal, 417
system, interrelated, 496
system, living, 133, 137, 141–143, 147,
166, 168, 631, 636, 657
system, mathematical, 444, 658
system, mechanical, 634
system movement, 654–656, 660, 665
system, natural, 143, 639, 640, 642, 704
system, nervous, 62, 83, 410, 479, 480,
483, 526, 585
system, nested, 633
system, open, 163, 514, 520, 631, 633,
641–643, 648, 656, 680–682
system, physical, 69, 240, 738
system, root, 214
system, scaffolding, 445
system, self-organized, 115
system, semiotic, 81, 86
system, solar, 263
system, system within, 121
system theory, 181
system thinking (ST), 631, 671, 730, 731
system, umbrella of, 656
system, working, 499, 279
Systemics, 138, 140–143, 151, 165, 166, 468,
629, 633, 634, 636–641, 643–648, 653,
656, 658, 661, 664–667, 737, 741, 744
Systems Thinking (ST), 9, 10, 25, 468, 629,
631, 647, 653–655, 658–661, 665, 667,
674, 715, 729, 730
T
Taboo
taboo contamination, 594
taboo function, 591–593, 596–611
796
Index

taboo, linguistic, 594, 597, 611
taboo reality, 594
taboo words, 594
Taj Mahal, 350
Talent, 4, 12, 285, 287, 294, 296, 301, 303,
353, 559, 662, 666
Taste, 348, 350, 400, 480, 544, 562
Tautologies, 599, 609
Taxonomies, 394, 441, 446
Taxonomy, natural, 393
Teacher, 14, 18, 27, 41, 286, 288–291,
295–300, 302, 311, 316, 322–324, 439,
447, 515, 517, 518, 540, 615, 629, 632,
634, 642–644, 647
Teaching, 13, 46, 54, 67, 119, 133, 285, 298,
300, 311, 319, 322, 323, 325, 401, 523,
569, 598, 629, 634, 636, 637, 642, 647,
649, 730, 732, 742
Teaching-learning, 440, 441, 446
Team, 3, 9, 160, 296, 440, 449, 450, 457, 458,
469, 620, 641, 659, 664, 729
Teamwork, 9, 416, 729
Technique
technique, language, 524, 526
technique, linguistic, 523
Technologies
technologies, digital, 417, 617, 625
Teenager, 295, 351
Teleology, internal, 135
Telepathy, 237
Temperament, 437, 440, 446, 451, 516
Temporality, 533, 584–586, 588
Temporariness, 557
Tendency
tendency, naturalistic, 351
tendency, universal, 335
Tension
tension, vertical, 500
Terminology, 173, 180, 220, 448, 507, 518,
523, 578, 732
Terms
terms, aesthetic, 432
terms, epigenetic, 147
terms, informational, 137, 148
terms, metabiological, 137
terms, metaphysical, 385
terms, ontogenetic, 139
terms, phylogenetic, 140
Territory, 215, 375, 703
Testimonies, 53, 102, 114, 229, 450
Testing, medical, 697
Testing, pre-, 302
Text
text, ancient, 564
text, spirit of, 355
text, world of, 595
Texture, 14, 157, 493, 497
Theater, 429, 438, 443, 451
Thematization, 596
Theme
theme, emergence of, 459
Theocracy, 583
Theologian, 54, 119, 533, 537, 539–542,
545–550, 564, 565
Theology, 39, 53–56, 59, 114, 521, 540, 558,
560, 567, 568, 721, 724, 728
Theory
theory, aesthetic, 335
theory, astronomical, 597
theory, economic, 617, 620
theory, identity, 63, 273–276, 278–280
theory, language, 199, 502
theory, modern, 566, 583
theory of mind (ToM), 5, 329, 332–336,
342
theory, standard, 116
Theory of Mind (ToM), 5, 329, 332–336, 342
Thermodynamics, 135, 631
Thinker
thinker, creative, 315
thinker, critical, 13, 315, 442, 443
thinker, good, 321
thinker, medieval, 53, 537
thinker, multidimensional, 322, 324
Thinking
thinking action, 287, 288, 290, 291, 293,
297–300, 303
thinking, ability of, 75
thinking activity, 81, 329
thinking, activity of, 56, 197, 524, 526, 729
thinking, acts of, 43, 463
thinking, analogical, 82
thinking, attempts of, 204
thinking, capacity of, 206
thinking, cognitive, 444
thinking, common, 52, 205, 206
thinking, concept of, 42, 75, 444, 511–514,
522, 524
thinking, conceptual, 508
thinking, content of, 204, 215
thinking, creative, 11–13, 15, 16, 18, 22,
23, 29, 103, 301, 303, 314, 315, 437,
439, 441, 442, 444, 447, 485, 730
thinking, critical, 11, 13, 18, 19, 24–26, 29,
30, 103, 297, 303, 314, 315, 368, 418,
437, 439–442, 444, 448–451, 515, 637,
721, 730
thinking, deep, 618
Index
797

Thinking (cont.)
thinking, degree of, 461
thinking, dialogical, 493, 497, 501,
506–508, 734
thinking, dichotomous, 693, 696, 707
thinking, dimensions of, 103, 285, 287,
288, 291, 297, 301, 303, 455, 469, 470
thinking, discursive, 611
thinking, economic, 313, 615, 617–620,
624, 626, 715, 742, 743
thinking, empty, 194
thinking, enclosure of, 525
thinking, erroneous, 320, 321
thinking, exercise, 203
thinking, fact of, 196
thinking, fallacious, 324
thinking, faulty, 313
thinking, form of, 6, 16, 57, 60, 370, 461,
656, 658, 665
thinking functions, 42
thinking, harmful, 292
thinking, human, 3, 29, 43, 44, 47, 48, 54,
56, 105–107, 211, 498, 615, 616, 621,
727, 728, 745
thinking, hyper, 399, 411
thinking, image of, 521
thinking, individual, 39, 44, 46–49, 52, 57,
58, 71, 728
thinking, inferior, 311
thinking, itinerary of, 196
thinking, joint, 205, 206
thinking language, 493, 497, 501, 505, 508,
734
thinking, language of, 3, 631–633, 645,
647, 721
thinking, laws of, 205
thinking, left hemisphere, 156, 157
thinking, level of, 166
thinking, likelihood of, 154
thinking, linear, 26, 313, 324
thinking, linguistic expression of, 511
thinking, logical, 231, 619, 621
thinking, lonely, 263
thinking, mathematical, 12, 205, 721
thinking modalities, 444
thinking, modern, 621
thinking, modes of, 464, 468, 721, 728
thinking, multidimensional, 40, 311–316,
318–325, 733
thinking of alterity, 193
thinking, ontological, 39, 44–49, 51, 52, 57,
58, 60–62, 67, 70, 71
thinking, outside the box, 31, 167
thinking, own, 167, 288
thinking, paradigm of, 269, 271, 272, 276,
281, 715, 743
thinking pathway, 404
thinking pattern, 154, 156, 300
thinking, perfectionistic, 300
thinking, personal, 231
thinking, perspectives of, 459–461, 470
thinking, poetic, 15, 493, 495, 497, 498,
500, 501, 504–508, 734
thinking, positive, 30
thinking, post-modern, 347
thinking, practice of, 457, 458
thinking, principle of, 349
thinking processes, 7, 165, 397–399, 404,
486
thinking, process of, 56, 514, 725
thinking, pseudo-, 211, 219, 230–232
thinking, quality of, 311, 313, 316, 324
thinking, real, 211, 212, 219, 222, 223,
230–232
thinking, self-conscious, 81
thinking skills, 4–6, 18, 19, 302, 303, 315,
322, 323
thinking, strata, 347
thinking subject, 199, 201, 207
thinking, superior, 311, 313
thinking, systems-based, 455
thinking, the entire world, 263
thinking tool, 26, 400, 401, 404
thinking, true, 503, 727
thinking, universal, 231
thinking, ways of, 8, 70, 199, 200, 225,
321, 399, 403, 457, 459, 464, 468, 501,
523, 619, 640, 646, 656, 735
Thinking-in-design, 457, 459, 461, 463, 464,
470
Thinking-in-design, parameters of, 455
Thinking-in-design, strategies of, 461
Thirst, 338
Thought
thought, appearance of, 198
thought, being of, 199, 204
thought, biased, 443
thought, communicating, 206
thought, content of, 198, 207
thought, course of, 198
thought, current of, 198
thought, elements of, 18, 464
thought energy, 243, 244, 246
thought, eternal, 539
thought, ethical, 555, 557
thought exchange, 205
thought, exchange of, 205
thought experiment, 65, 81, 342
798
Index

thought, ﬁgures of, 193
thought, ﬁrst, see ‘I am’
thought, ﬂexible, 242, 245
thought, forbidden, 594
thought formation, 193
thought, formation of, 200
thought, functional, 508
thought, green, 259, 260
thought, habit of, 82
thought, how, 127, 205, 235, 264, 405
thought, identiﬁable, 237
thought, language of, 629, 648
thought, literary, 560
thought, making of, 200
thought, measurable, 237, 247
thought, medieval, 53, 55, 539
thought, modes of, 444, 461
thought, movement of, 57, 200
thought, negotiation of, 462
thought, object of, 45, 50, 51
thought, origin of, 551
thought, own, 237, 245, 366, 410
thought pair, 237
thought, paradox of, 263
thought, penetration of, 196
thought, phenomenology of, 196
thought power, 235, 241–244
thought Power Meter, 235, 242, 243
thought process, 196, 313, 555
thought, product of, 10, 22, 43, 618, 721
thought, prosthesis of, 514
thought, rational, 8, 15, 370, 539
thought, reference of, 514
thought, scientiﬁc, 141, 635, 738
thought, sensitive, 242
thought, strain of, 196, 203
thought, structure of, 128
thought, subject of, 196
thought, symbolic, 573, 577–580
thought, system of, 128
thought, transmission of, 523
thought, truthfulness of, 597
thought, Western, 88, 89, 696, 727
Thought-as-DNA, 370
Thought-ﬂexible, 242, 245
Thought-sensitive, 242
Thoughts, modes of, 444, 461, 463
Thoughts, sequence of, 198, 203
Threat, 66, 224, 292, 481, 563, 625, 644, 645,
705, 706, 728
Three-Dimensional (3D), 253
Threshold
threshold, differential, 135
threshold, symbolic, 578, 587
Thunder, 87, 576, 577, 581
Timbre, 475, 522
Time-consuming, 393, 407, 701
Time-frame, 159, 161, 565
Time-lapse, 361
Time
time, amounts of, 335
time, determinism of, 499
time, dimension of, 143
time, horizon of, 534
time interval, 251
time, mathematics of, 136
time, modern, 80, 116, 586
Timing, 405, 475
Tissue, 31, 119, 128, 365, 377, 567, 737
Today, 13, 39, 63–65, 68–70, 114, 129,
137–139, 141, 143, 173, 197, 235, 252,
256, 263, 265, 297, 301, 303, 324, 331,
345, 347, 353, 354, 357, 372, 397, 422,
423, 426, 429, 493, 503, 520, 522, 526,
566, 569, 598, 617, 629, 635, 642, 646,
662, 693, 695, 703, 726, 728, 730, 732,
744
Togetherness, 493, 496, 503, 505, 508
Tool
tool, heuristic, 136
tool, interactive, 404
tool, metacognitive, 437, 447–451
Toolkit, mechanistic, 80
Topic, controversial, 345
Totalitarian
totalitarian communism, 349
Totalitarianism, 67, 504
Totalities
totalities, function of, 196
totalities, members of, 205
totalities, sense of, 205, 207
Touch, 48, 127, 143, 212, 219, 285, 356, 374,
399, 499, 507, 541, 544, 727
Tourist, 676
Trade-off, 421
Tradition
tradition, aboriginal, 648
tradition, artistic, 353, 354
tradition, humanistic, 500
tradition, medieval, 196, 353
tradition, metaphysical, 125
tradition, religious, 163, 551, 703
tradition, second, 119
Traditionalist, 351
Trafﬁc
trafﬁc congestion, 319
trafﬁc data, 410
trafﬁc dynamics, 410
Index
799

Tragedy, 340, 439
Training
training, academic, 568
training, philosophical, 322, 323
Trait, phenotypic, 80
Transaction, 137
Transcendence
transcendence, self-, 99, 100
Transcending, self-, 105
Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), 237,
238
Transcript, 140
Transdisciplinary, 10, 22, 26, 63, 415, 632,
643, 645, 647, 741, 743
Transfer
transfer, bi-directionality of, 137
transfer, cell, 562
transfer, gene, 139
Transformation
transformation, symbolic, 83, 558
transformation, synthetic, 140
Transformer, 390–392
Transiency, 224
Transitio
transitio, epochal, 113
Transitivity, 51, 137, 337
Translation
translation, linguistic, 635
Translator, 340, 345, 351, 358
Transmigration, see soul
Transmission
transmission, genetic, 579
Transmutation, 367, 375
Transparency, 418, 426, 702
Transport, 698
Travel, 250, 253, 257, 258, 261, 297
Traveler, 71, 232
Tree
tree, second, 503
Triad, 22, 57, 580
Trial, 159, 218, 421, 549, 566, 579
Trialectics, 177
Triangle, semiotic, 171, 177, 178
Tribe
tribe, aboriginal, 165, 638
Tropism, 80
Truth
truth, absolute, 521, 565, 638
truth, allegory of, 535
truth, bitter, 358
truth, complex concept of, 535
truth, expression of, 531
truth, immutable, 548
truth, intermediary of, 534
truth, knowledge of, 539, 541, 548
truth, majesty of, 353
truth, manifestation of, 353, 358
truth, name of, 349
truth, own, 550
truth, post-, 324
truth, question of, 533
truth, religious, 561
truth, scientiﬁc, 104, 270
truth, self-evident, 545
truth, universal, 503, 546, 551
truth, work of, 532
Tunneling, 257–259
Turbulence, 221
Twice exceptionality (2e), 294, 295
Two brains, 155, 237, 238, 736
Two-Dimensional (2D), 249
Two hemispheres, 151, 159, 163, 166
Two people, 237
Typology, 27, 28, 80, 531
U
Uncertainty
uncertainty, principle, 496
Unconditionality, 137
Understanding
understanding, account of, 542
understanding, acts of, 542, 547, 549
understanding, aesthetic, 423
understanding, analytical, 127
understanding, categories of, 332
understanding, common, 175
understanding, diversiﬁcation of, 549
understanding, economic, 620
understanding, emotional, 422, 424
understanding, formation of, 203
understanding, holistic, 8, 500, 705
understanding, horizon of, 534
understanding, intellectual, 422, 423, 466
understanding, level of, 9, 543
understanding, pure, 389
understanding, self-, 534
understanding, social, 497
understanding, unity of, 548
Undoing, own, 339
Uneasiness, 215
Unemployment, 617, 624, 646
Unhistoricity, 577
Uniform, 246
Uniformity, 543, 577
Unilinearity, 575
Union, 8, 55, 56, 65, 70, 143, 541, 543, 581,
594, 601
Uniqueness, 97, 98, 411
800
Index

Unit
unit, action, 258
unit, atomic mass, 241
unit, economic, 617
unit, functional, 389
unit, hereditary transmission, 141
unit, individual, 17, 621
unit, km/h, 263
unit, space, 255
unit, supraindividual, 205
unit, time, 253–255
Unity
unity, functional, 387–389
unity, linguistic, 503
unity, organic, 135
unity, predicate of, 43
unity, purpose of, 466
Universalist, 501
Universality, 575
Universalization, 547
Universe
universe, conception of, 539
universe, ﬁrst engine of, 549
universe, non-ergodic, 144
universe, perfection of, 540
Universities, 16, 18, 28, 29, 120, 151, 195,
240, 296, 297, 302, 311, 315, 323, 361,
362, 364, 370, 402, 405, 440, 495, 540,
563, 567–569, 647, 653, 656, 662, 664,
666, 667, 729, 730, 733, 734
Untranslatables, see philosophical concepts
Untruth, 159
Unwillingness, 162
Urgency, 213
Useless organ, see brain
User, language, 591, 594, 595
Utilitarianism, 438, 644
Utility, 158, 736
V
Vacuum, 250, 251
Valence, affective, 482
Validation, 23, 315, 534
Validity, logical, 594
Valuation, aesthetic, 336, 338
Value
value, aesthetic, 414, 415, 417, 426
value, cultural, 557, 568
value, educational, 196
Values, hierarchy of, 353
Variability
variability, inﬁnite, 504
Variation
variation, genetic, 139, 141
variation, problem of, 133
variation, symbolic, 143, 147
Vector, 259, 260, 263, 366, 446
Vegetarianism, 77
Vegetation, 671, 684, 686, 706
Vehicle, 63, 84, 105, 140, 406, 523, 531, 659,
724
Veins, origin of, 542
Velocities, 246, 249, 251, 254, 255, 257–259,
263
Version, religious, 565
Vessel, 370, 371, 374, 376, 562, 637, 693, 695,
703, 704, 706
Vial, 366
Vibration
vibration, immaterial, 496
Victim, 503, 566, 724
Victory, 114
Video, 242, 335, 365, 399–403, 406, 408, 410,
440, 450, 736
Viewer, 350, 351, 405, 423, 426, 450
Violation, 161, 339
Violence
violence, linguistic, 601
Viral, academic group, 364
Virtual Reality (VR), 404, 406, 410
Virtue, ideal of, 535
Visibility, 101, 558
Vision
vision, aesthetic, 138
vision, dynamic, 121
vision, functionalist, 122
vision, hierarchical, 540
vision, human, 493
vision, intellectual, 55, 546
vision, metabiological, 142
vision, new, 143, 498, 500, 505
vision, poetic, 576
vision, static, 121
vision, systemic, 633
Visitor, 232, 404
Visual-graphic, 438
Visualization, 19, 21, 26, 391, 406, 408, 410,
425, 427, 461
Visual Understanding Environments (VUE),
633
Vitalism
vitalism, theories of, 119
Vocabulary, 15, 17, 25, 392, 441, 581
Voice
voice emission, 407
voice recording, 410
Index
801

Volatility, 615, 730
Voltage, 241, 242, 245
Volume, 31, 46, 119, 144, 232, 331, 381, 406,
473, 498, 742
Voluntary, 13, 137, 560, 583
Vulnerability, 214, 431, 676, 679, 725, 740,
749
W
War
war, ideological, 591, 593
Warning, 15, 87, 89, 104, 166, 167, 556, 576,
744
Waste, 286, 298, 324, 671, 673, 674, 678, 679,
684, 685, 697, 698, 700, 705
Watch, 87, 218, 335, 386–391, 393
Watchmaker, 386
Water
water bodies, 676, 677, 679
water clarity, 677
water transparency, 677
Watt, 241, 242
Wave, 141, 145, 146, 228–230, 237, 238, 243,
245, 247–259, 261, 264, 272, 274, 276,
277, 279, 281, 496, 505, 664
Wavelength, 249–252, 254–256, 259, 261, 264
Weakness, 159, 162, 213, 446, 568, 646, 673
Weapon, 158
Weather, 157, 160, 332, 334, 335, 559
Web, electrochemical, 331
Weight, 82, 106, 241, 727
Welfare, 158, 562, 566
Well-being
well-being, academic, 300
well-being, ﬁnancial, 615, 621
well-being, psychological, 285
Western thought, modern, 577
Whole
whole, articulated, 388
whole, complex, 498
whole, single, 43, 55
Whole-part, 278, 279
Will, free, 331, 336, 565
Will, own, 204, 551, 726
Willingness, 105, 162, 296, 303, 468, 619
Wind, 341, 348, 424, 559
Wing, 194, 246
Winning, 158
Wisdom
wisdom, begotten, 550
wisdom, created, 550
wisdom, denial of, 348
wisdom, lover of, 347, 348
Within the Box, 8, 16, 31, 151, 741
Women, 28, 29, 394, 544, 566, 577–579, 581,
622, 702
Wonder, 91, 164, 165, 197, 221, 294, 325, 332,
355, 368, 372, 376, 532, 542, 559, 726
Wood, 22, 698–702
Woodland, ancient, 702
Word-to-world, 338
Word
word, application of, 516, 518
word, betweenness of, 164
word, deﬁnition of, 520
word, meaning of, 47, 65, 318, 517, 518,
540
word, nuances of, 154, 165
Work
work, aesthetic, 338
work, artistic, 193, 200, 354, 439
work, beauty of, 350
work, ﬁeld, 303
work, heart of, 350
work, laboratory, 368
work, mental, 626
work, qualities of, 339
work, scientiﬁc, 193, 200
Worker
worker, social, 163
Working, inner, 331
World
world, anthropocentric, 695
world, biological, 698
world, biophysical, 697
world, chaotic, 525
world, complex, 29, 120, 457
world, complexities of, 191, 468
world, contemporary, 363
world, disordered, 617
world, emotional, 402, 410
world, empirical, 179, 387, 513, 518, 520,
521
world, external, 69, 455, 514
world, harmony of, 504
world, historical, 532
world, human, 84, 153, 361, 498, 500, 508,
576
world, ideal, 517
world, image of, 532
world, inner, 411
world, inorganic, 118, 136
world, living, 100, 135, 166, 167, 634
world, macroscopic, 272
world, masterpiece of, 339
world, material, 97, 227, 635
world, mathematical, 517
world, medieval, 354
802
Index

world, mental, 592, 595, 596, 601, 611,
647, 722, 723
world, natural, 67, 125, 539, 635, 636, 641,
642, 696, 703
world, normal, 507
world, objective, 126, 202
world, objects of, 513, 727
world, organic, 118, 136
world, outer, 58, 405, 411
world, outside, 159
world, own, 163, 647
world, physical, 84, 114, 229, 340, 580
world, post-modern, 347
world, psychological, 422
world, sense of, 5
world, social, 375, 694, 702, 707
world, solid, 561
world, species-speciﬁc, 90
world, structure of, 202
world, things of, 171, 174–176, 178, 180,
182, 183, 185–189, 191, 725
world, unicorn, 272, 275, 276, 278–281
world, unseen, 406
world exchanges, 617
world religions, 560, 561
world vision, 368
world War I, 426, 506
World-to-mind, 337, 338
Worldview
worldview, anthropocentric, 645
worldview, ecological, 632, 634–636, 642,
649, 731
worldview, existentialist, 563
worldview, history of, 534
worldview, individual, 561
World-to-word, 338
Worldwide, 141, 161, 289, 294, 297, 299, 303,
361, 373, 645, 649, 705, 725
Worries, free of, 502
Worship, self-, 350
Worthlessness, 295
Wrist, 386
Writing
writing, academic, 441
X
X, meta-, 335
Y
Yawn, 337
Youth, 165, 294, 303, 324
Youthfulness, 499
Z
Zeitgeist, 347, 353
Zone of Proximate Development (ZPD), 445,
447
Zoosemiotics, 81
u, see golden ratio
Index
803

