368
Matrix Mechanics
Matrix Mechanics
Henry Stapp
The theoretical ideas formulated in the seventeenth century by Isaac Newton (1643–
1727) and Galileo (1564–1642) reigned as the fundamental scientiﬁc precepts until
the year 1900, when Max Planck’s (1858–1947) work on the emission of light from
a hole in a heated hollow sphere showed that something was fundamentally amiss.
Planck’s work identiﬁed a new constant of nature, called Planck’s quantum of action
( Planck’s constant), that was alien to classical physics, and that evidently needed
to be integrated into a revised physics, to be called quantum mechanics. A big step
toward this new physics seemed to be model of the atom devised in 1913 by Niels
Bohr (1885–1962) (see  Bohr’s atomic model). It was a space-time picture of the
atom in which the  electrons instead of spiraling inward and gradually radiating
away their energies, as demanded by classical physics, were usually conﬁned to
stable orbits, which were speciﬁed in terms of Planck’s quantum of action.
The very strange thing about this model was that no light was emitted by the
circling electron when it was in one of these orbits. Light was emitted, instead,
when an electron jumped from one orbit to another. However, its frequency was not
some average of the frequencies of the light that classical physics predicted should
be emitted from the electron of each of the two orbits: it was, instead, the difference
of these two frequencies.
A large amount of experimental data was being collected at that time about the
energy levels of various atoms, and about the rates at which the transitions between
different levels occurred ( spectroscopy,  quantum jumps). The excitations of
atoms from various states to more excited states could be induced by the absorp-
tion of light, and the theory of this absorption and re-emission of light was called
dispersion theory.
Intensive efforts to construct a rationally coherent quantum mechanics were be-
ing pursued by many groups, including most prominently those led by Niels Bohr
in Copenhagen, Max Born (1882–1970) in G¨ottingen, and Arnold Sommerfeld
(1868–1951) in Munich. But the key breakthrough was made by Werner Heisenberg
(1901–1976).
Heisenberg was a prodigy. He entered the University of Munich in 1920 at age
18, and received his Ph. D 3 years later. In 1921 he published with Sommerfeld’s
approval a bold and original paper on the anamolous  Zeeman effect, and in 1922
had co-authored two papers with Sommerfeld, and had closely collaborated on an-
other with Max Born. In September of 1924 he began a stay in Copenhagen where he
collaborated with Bohr and co-authored a paper on dispersion theory with Bohr’s as-
sistant Hendrik Kramers (1894–1952). Thus when he returned to G¨ottingen in April
of 1925 he was only 23, but had spent the better part of 5 years working intensively
in close collaboration with the leaders of the ﬁeld.
The state of affairs was at that point extremely muddled, with the Copenhagen-
based Bohr–Kramers–Slater dispersion theory recently falsiﬁed by data. Also, a

Matrix Mechanics
369
M
recent closely reasoned paper by Heisenberg’s close colleague, Wolfgang Pauli
(1900–1958), argued that the entire program of basing the theory on space-time
pictures akin to Bohr’s model was a “swindle”, and called for a new mathematical
foundation: “It seems to me. . .without doubt that not only the dynamical concept
of force, but also the kinematic concept of motion of classical theory, will have to
experience profound modiﬁcation. . . .I believe that the energy and momentum val-
ues of the stationary states are much more real than “orbits”. (Pauli to Bohr, 12
December 1924).
Armed with all this deep knowledge and wise council, and inﬂuenced by
Einstein’s 1905 success in shedding unhelpful intuitions and biases concerning
space and time by focusing on observable properties, Heisenberg tried to ﬁnd a new
foundation for atomic physics based not on a space-time picture of what was going
on, but rather on mathematical connections between observable quantities. The
 observables in the abundant and accurate data pertaining to the dispersion of light
were energy levels of the “stationary states”, whatever they were, and transition
amplitudes between these states. The transition amplitudes refer to two states and
thus form a square array. In order to establish some sort of correspondence with the
classical idea of an atom Heisenberg needed arrays corresponding to the variable
of classical physics, such as momentum, position, acceleration, etc. and needed to
form the analogs of products of these “quantities”. He constructed what seemed
to be the needed rules, by comparing to some apparently valid rules of dispersion
theory, and discovered that, for certain quantities X and Y, XY was different from
YX. This troubled Heisenberg, but did not deter him.
Because atomic systems are complicated, Heisenberg considered ﬁrst a one-
dimensional anharmonic oscillator, obtained by adding an extra force term.
The results for that case, and in particular his proof that energy was strictly
conserved – it was a violation of strict energy conservation that had doomed
the Bohr–Kramers–Slater theory  BKS theory – convinced him that he had found
the basic structure he needed. Its subsequent successful applications to innumerable
physical situations by thousands of physicists, with no proven failures. has borne
out his optimism.
Born was quick to point out that the arrays of numbers, with their rule of mul-
tiplication, were objects already well studied by mathematicians. They are called
“matrices”, and the quantum theory based on them was, for a time, called “ma-
trix mechanics”, particularly to distinguish it from what appeared at ﬁrst to be an
alternative quantum mechanics devised by Erwin Schr¨odinger, and called “wave
mechanics”. The two theories were eventually shown to be formally equivalent by
Schr¨odinger, whose approach did seem to provide a space-time description of the
kind that Heisenberg and Pauli had deemed impossible. However, Heisenberg, Pauli,
and Bohr held that the Schr¨odinger wave was an abstract formal structure that could
be used to compute observable quantities, because of the proved formal equivalence,
but that it could not be regarded as describing an actually existing space-time struc-
ture, because of the “ quantum jumps” that the wave needs to undergo in order to
keep it in line with human experience.

370
Matrix Mechanics
Because of the formal equivalence of the two forms, the two names “matrix me-
chanics” and “wave mechanics” have largely fallen out of use now, being replaced
by the more inclusive name “quantum mechanics”.
The see how these ideas work in actual practice one may consider the simplest
case, in which the quantum system being examined has just two states, labeled by
an index i that can take two alternative possible values, 1 or 2. Then the relevant
arrays are sets of four (complex) numbers zij where the two indices i and j each
can take, independently, the value 1 or 2. If one has two such sets zij and wij then
an array called (zw)ij is deﬁned by the rule (zw)ij = zi1w1j + zi2w2j.This is the
standard rule of matrix multiplication, in this two dimensional case.
Pauli deﬁned four 2-by-2 matrices of interest:
(σ0) deﬁned by ((σ0)11 = 1, (σ0)12 = 0, (σ0)21 = 0, (σ0)22 = 1),
(σ1) deﬁned by ((σ1)11 = 0, (σ1)12 = 1, (σ1)21 = 1, (σ1)22 = 0),
(σ2) deﬁned by ((σ2)11 = 0, (σ2)12 = −i, (σ2)21 = i, (σ2)22 = 0),
(σ3) deﬁned by ((σ3)11 = 1, (σ3)12 = 0, (σ3)21 = 0, (σ3)22 = −1).
Laborious computations can then be simpliﬁed by writing matrices of interest as
linear combination: a = a0σ0+a1σ1+a2σ2+a3σ3, and using the following results:
for any i, σiσi = σ0; σ0σi = σiσ0 = σi; σ1σ2 = iσ3; σ2σ1 = −iσ3.
These results follow directly from the deﬁnitions and multiplication rules speci-
ﬁed above. Notice that in the last two equations the order in which the matrices are
multiplied matters.
The rule that connects the mathematical symbols to our observations is this:
Each elementary observation upon the system is associated with a “projection
operator” P. (Projection operators P must satisfy PP = P). ( Projection).
Let P1 be the projection operator that corresponds in the mathematics to our
knowledge that an associated set of preparation conditions have been met.
Let P2 be the projection operator that corresponds in the mathematics to the con-
dition that a subsequent observation fulﬁlls an associated set of conditions. Then
the predicted probability that a system known to be prepared in accordance with the
conditions corresponding to P1 at time t = 0 will be observed at time t > 0 to fulﬁll
the conditions corresponding to P2 is
Trace P2 (exp −iHt) P1 (exp iHt) ,
where H is the matrix that corresponds to energy, here assumed to have no explicit
dependence on time, and for any X, Trace X = X11 + X22, for this 2-by-2 case.
(I use units in which Planck’s constant of action is 2π.)
Suppose, for example, that P1 = (1 + σ3)/2, which corresponds the prepared
system’s being in the state i = 1, and that P2 = (1 −σ3)/2, which corresponds to
the system’s being observed to be in the state i = 2. Suppose H = e σ1.

Matter Waves
371
M
Using the fact (deducible from the power series expansion of exp x) that
exp(−ietσ1) = (cos et −iσ1 sin et) one can easily deduce just from the rules
given above that the probability identiﬁed above is (sin et)2. The calculation is
carried out without referring to any space-time picture of what is going on.
Literature
1. Beller, M: Matrix Theory before Schr¨odinger, Isis 74 (1983) 469–491.
2. Heisenberg, W:
¨Uber quantentheoretische Umdeutung kinematischer und mechanischer
Berechnungen, Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik 33 (1925), 879–893. (English translation in: B. L. van
der Waerden: Sources of Quantum Mechanics, New York: Dover 1983, pp. 261–276)
3. MacKinnon, E: Heisenberg, Models, and the Rise of Matrix Mechanics, Historical Studies in
the Physical Sciences 8 (1977), 137–188.
4. Mehra, J & Rechenberg, H: The Historical Development of Quantum Mechanics, Volume 2.
Chapters III, IV, & V (2001).
5. Pauli, W: Wissenschaftlicher Briefwechsel, Volume 1, Berlin: Springer 1979.
Matter Waves
Bruce R. Wheaton
Among the audacious proposals in the evolution of natural philosophy, Louis de
Broglie’s (1892–1987) claim in 1923 that atoms possess a wave-property sits at top
rank. Substantial matter had from ancient times been ascribed to particles like those
we encounter everyday. While there was always doubt whether light is material or
a disturbance in a medium (see  wave-particle duality) there had never been much
doubt about matter. A noteworthy, late nineteenth century exception in the wake of
Maxwellian success in ﬁeld theory came to be called “the electromagnetic world-
view,” based on Kantian idealism, that described ponderable matter as secondary
properties of the primary æther.
However, Albert Einstein’s (1879–1955) tri-partite recasting of matter, light, and
time in 1905 gave a molecular explanation in accord with that of Jean Perrin (1870–
1942) to long-observed  Brownian motion, and atoms prevailed. In the 1920s,
practical concerns of physicists in France led to de Broglie’s recognition of a para-
dox, particularly in the domain of  x-rays, when he tried to bring coherence to
both new theories: of the quantum and of relativity.
France may seem an unlikely locale and 31-year old Louis de Broglie an even
more unlikely source for so earth-shaking an inspiration. But under the tutelage of
elder brother Maurice (1875–1960), Louis and a cadre of young physicists tried
to apply the new ﬁn-de-si`ecle discoveries in physics to improve French industrial
process control. Entirely privately funded, and virtually independent of academic

