Engineering Materials
Ram K. Gupta   Editor
Pseudocapacitors
Fundamentals to High Performance 
Energy Storage Devices

Engineering Materials

This series provides topical information on innovative, structural and functional 
materials and composites with applications in optical, electrical, mechanical, civil, 
aeronautical, medical, bio- and nano-engineering. The individual volumes are 
complete, comprehensive monographs covering the structure, properties, manufac-
turing process and applications of these materials. This multidisciplinary series is 
devoted to professionals, students and all those interested in the latest developments 
in the Materials Science ﬁeld, that look for a carefully selected collection of high 
quality review articles on their respective ﬁeld of expertise. 
Indexed at Compendex (2021) and Scopus (2022)

Ram K. Gupta 
Editor 
Pseudocapacitors 
Fundamentals to High Performance Energy 
Storage Devices

Editor 
Ram K. Gupta 
Polymer Chemistry 
Department of Chemistry 
National Institute for Materials 
Advancement 
Pittsburg State University 
Pittsburg, KS, USA 
ISSN 1612-1317
ISSN 1868-1212 (electronic) 
Engineering Materials 
ISBN 978-3-031-45429-5
ISBN 978-3-031-45430-1 (eBook) 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45430-1 
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature 
Switzerland AG 2024 
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether 
the whole or part of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse 
of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and 
transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar 
or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed. 
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication 
does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant 
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use. 
The publisher, the authors, and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book 
are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or 
the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any 
errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations. 
This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Switzerland AG 
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland 
Paper in this product is recyclable.

Preface 
The demand for high-efﬁciency energy storage devices is growing to meet the current 
demand for growing technologies. The materials used in energy devices along with 
their architect are some of the most important factors in providing high-performance 
energy devices. Pseudocapacitive materials offer plenty of opportunity for scientists 
to tune their electrochemical properties and thus the performance of the devices. 
There are many strategies in pseudocapacitive materials that can be adapted to 
improve their performance such as morphology, doping, the introduction of multiva-
lent ions, design approaches of the devices, and the use of emerging pseudocapacitive 
materials. 
This book aims to provide fundamentals of pseudocapacitive materials, their 
synthetic approaches, and architectural aspects to improve their properties and 
emerging materials. Many fundamental approaches to tuning the properties of pseu-
docapacitive materials and their applications in energy storage devices are covered. 
All the chapters are covered by experts in this ﬁeld, providing a unique oppor-
tunity for the readers to learn many important concepts of electrochemical energy 
storage devices under one title. The proposed book covers the fundamentals, synthetic 
approaches, and strategies to tune the properties of pseudocapacitive materials and 
emerging pseudocapacitive materials, their concepts, and their applications in energy 
storage devices. 
Ram K. Gupta 
Associate Professor of Polymer 
Chemistry 
Department of Chemistry 
National Institute for Materials 
Advancement 
Pittsburg State University 
Pittsburg, KS, USA
v

Contents 
Pseudocapacitance: An Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1 
Anit Joseph and Tiju Thomas 
Pseudocapacitance: Fundamentals to Advanced Applications . . . . . . . . . .
19 
Shilpa Pande, Bidhan Pandit, Shoyebmohamad F. Shaikh, 
and Jahangeer Ahmed 
Pseudocapacitance: Mechanism and Characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39 
G. Srividhya and N. Ponpandian 
Emerging Pseudocapaciting Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57 
Muhammad Abdullah, Wenrui Jiang, Xin Chen, and Shandiao Xu 
Pseudocapacitance: Tuning Electrochemical Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75 
Jinfeng Sun, Anning Zhang, Qian Zhang, and Changzhou Yuan 
Pseudocapacitive Materials for Electrolytes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95 
Lucia Díaz-Patiño, Lorena Álvarez Contreras, 
Minerva Guerra-Balcázar, and Noé Arjona 
Electrochemical Properties of Metal Hydroxides
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
115 
Hamideh Mohammadian Sarcheshmeh 
and Mohammad Mazloum Ardakani 
Pseudocapacitance in Double Perovskite Material . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
133 
Mostafa M. Omran, Ahmed I. Abdel-Salam, Delvin Aman, 
and Saad G. Mohamed 
Conducting Polymers for Pseudocapacitors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
157 
Quoc Bao Le, Rudolf Kiefer, Phuong Nguyen Xuan Vo, 
Natalia E. Kazantseva, and Petr Saha 
MXenes for Pseudocapacitors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
177 
Harishchandra S. Nishad, Rajesh R. Jaiswar, Sachin D. Tejam, 
and Pravin S. Walke
vii

viii
Contents
MXenes-Based Composites for Pseudocapacitors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
195 
Li Sun and Chunxu Pan 
Hydrogel and Its Composites for Pseudocapacitors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
217 
Jeffery Horinek, Allen Davis, and Ram K. Gupta 
Pseudocapacitive Materials for 3D Printed Supercapacitors . . . . . . . . . . .
237 
Arthi Gopalakrishnan, Vishnu Surendran, Venkataraman Thangadurai, 
and Benjamin Tutolo 
Pseudocapacitive Materials for Flexible Supercapacitors . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
257 
Fang Cheng, Xiaoping Yang, and Wen Lu 
Redox-Active Polymers for Batteries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
277 
Aswathy Vijayakumar Kumar, Treesa Karangattuserriyil James, 
and Suresh Mathew 
Carbon-Based Pseudocapacitive Materials for Next Generation 
Batteries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
297 
B. Jeevanantham and M. K. Shobana 
Surfactant-Assisted Pseudocapacitive Materials for Li-Ion 
Batteries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
315 
Wan Mohd Abd Kalam, Hong Ngee Lim, Izwaharyanie Ibrahim, 
and Chuan Yi Foo 
Pseudocapacitive Materials for Metal-Sulfur Batteries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
333 
Yogita Dahiya, Shivani Agarwal, Manoj Kumar, Debasish Sarkar, 
and Ankur Jain 
Pseudocapacitive Materials for Metal-Air Batteries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
353 
Allen Davis and Ram K. Gupta 
Pseudocapacitive Materials-Based Metal-Air Batteries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
375 
Sanjeev Verma, Vikas Kumar Pandey, Ram K. Gupta, Shivani Verma, 
and Bhawna Verma 
Pseudocapacitive Materials for 3D Printed Batteries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
389 
Sagar Jariwala, Yash Desai, and Ram K. Gupta

Pseudocapacitance: An Introduction 
Anit Joseph and Tiju Thomas 
Abstract An electrochemical energy storage device that can deliver high power and 
energy density is needed globally. To accomplish this one method adopted involves 
the use of pseudocapacitive materials that use reversible surface or near-surface 
Faradaic processes to store charges. By doing so, they can overcome the mass transfer 
and capacity limits of batteries and electrical double-layer capacitors. Both chemical 
and electrostatic processes are used to store charges in pseudocapacitors. Pseudoca-
pacitors have a charge transfer process that is comparable to that of a battery. There 
is a greater rate of transfer because of the use of a thinner redox material on the elec-
trode or less ion penetration into the structure from the electrolyte. Technology is still 
in need of development in materials performance and device reliability. Research is 
still being done to determine the materials and electrochemical properties that can 
produce high energy density at quicker charge–discharge rates. In this context, transi-
tion metal oxides are attractive. With this as the background, the latest developments 
in pseudocapacitor materials and devices are discussed here. 
Keywords Pseudocapacitor · History · Charging mechanism · Theories · Devices 
1 
Introduction 
Energy has become an important concern for both governments and the scientiﬁc 
community. This is in response to the shifting global landscape. More effective energy 
storage device development has attracted a lot of attention. Electrochemical energy 
storage that can deliver high power and high energy density is needed globally. This 
is so since smart grids, e-mobility, and related segments require high power-density 
energy storage. One such device, the supercapacitor, has advanced signiﬁcantly over
A. Joseph envelope symbol · T. Thomas envelope symbol 
Department of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras 
(IITM), Chennai 600036, India 
e-mail: anitjoseph3@gmail.com 
T. Thomas 
e-mail: tijuthomas@iitm.ac.in; tt332@cornell.edu 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
R. K. Gupta (ed.), Pseudocapacitors, Engineering Materials, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45430-1_1 
1

2
A. Joseph and T. Thomas
the past ten years and has the potential to enable considerable improvements in energy 
storage [1]. 
Supercapacitors, often called ultracapacitors or electrochemical capacitors, use 
thin electrolytic dielectrics and high surface area electrode materials to produce 
capacitances that are many orders of magnitude greater than those of regular capac-
itors. By doing this, supercapacitors can preserve the typical high-power density 
found in conventional capacitors while also achieving higher energy densities. The 
electrostatic capacitor with a dry separator is the most fundamental of the three types 
of capacitors. This conventional capacitor is primarily used for ﬁltering and tuning 
radio frequencies because of its extremely low capacitance. The size varies from a 
few pico-farads (pf) to low microfarads (μF) [2]. The electrolytic capacitor is rated 
in microfarads, which is a million times greater than an electrostatic capacitor and 
offers a higher capacitance. These capacitors are employed for ﬁltering, buffering, 
and signal coupling. The electrostatic capacity has a positive and negative that needs 
to be observed, just like a battery. The third type is a supercapacitor, which has a rating 
in farads and is thousands of times more powerful than an electrolytic capacitor. 
A supercapacitor is a device for storing energy that is frequently subject to charge 
and discharge cycles at high currents and short duration. However, these devices have 
a low energy density, which limits their ability to be used in real-world situations. 
One of the crucial parts for enhancing the supercapacitor’s performance is the elec-
trode. A large speciﬁc surface area, thermal stability, an ideal pore size distribution, 
conductivity, and good corrosion resistance are only a few of its crucial characteris-
tics. Choosing the right active components and raised electrodes is crucial to develop 
potentially active supercapacitors. At the electrode and electrolyte interface, the SC 
operation stores electrical energy through a Faradaic or non-Faradic mechanism [2]. 
2 
Classiﬁcation 
Based on the energy storage mechanism, supercapacitors are mainly classiﬁed into 
three types (Fig. 1): 
Fig. 1 Classiﬁcation of supercapacitor

Pseudocapacitance: An Introduction
3
1. Electric double-layer capacitors 
2. Pseudocapacitors 
3. Hybrid supercapacitors 
2.1 
Electric Double-Layer Capacitors (EDLCs) 
EDLCs use charge separation to store energy in a manner like that of a conventional 
capacitor. The critical distinction is in the greater capacitance values offered by 
EDLCs, which are made possible using high-surface-area porous materials (often 
activated carbon). instead of porous electrode materials, two-dimensional ﬂat plates 
are commonly found in traditional capacitors. According to their name, EDLCs 
are known to store charge by creating electric double layers at the supercapacitors’ 
electrode–electrolyte interface. In stationary and mobile systems where high power 
is required, EDLCs are used. EDLCs can provide quick energy harvesting, like car 
brakes, due to their low time constant (less than a minute). Through reversible ions 
(i.e., ions of electrolyte) adsorption onto the electrode, EDLCs are known to store 
charge electrostatically. Polarisation separates the charge at the electrolyte/electrode 
contact, resulting in double-layer capacitance. 
Compared to a traditional capacitor, EDLCs can store several orders of magnitude 
more energy because of the following reasons: 
(1) The improved capacity for charge storage on an electrode with a substantially 
extended surface area (made possible by the presence of numerous pores within 
an electrode material with an extensive surface area). 
(2) The thin electrical double layer forms at an electrode and an electrolyte interface. 
In that there are two electrodes positioned in an electrolyte and separated by 
an ion-permeable separator to avoid electrical contact, EDLC supercapacitors are 
constructed similarly to batteries (Fig. 2a). In the charged state, the anions and cations 
in the electrolyte ﬂow in opposite directions towards the positive and negative elec-
trodes, creating two double layers—one at each electrode–electrolyte interface. A 
difference in potential exists throughout the cell due to the ion separation. The entire 
cell can be viewed as two capacitors connected in series, as each electrode–electrolyte 
interaction acts as a capacitor.
2.2 
Pseudocapacitors (PC) 
Pseudocapacitors utilize a Faradaic reaction to store energy. The transfer of charge 
between an electrode and an electrolyte is stored electrostatically. In a pseudocapac-
itor, the electrode material undergoes both reduction and oxidation when a voltage 
is applied. It entails the movement of charge through the double layer, which causes 
Faradic current to ﬂow through the electrode material of the supercapacitor (Fig. 2b).

4
A. Joseph and T. Thomas
Fig. 2 Charge storage mechanism of supercapacitors: a EDLCs, b pseudocapacitors, and c hybrid 
supercapacitors. Adapted with permission [3], copyright (2021), Royal Society of Chemistry
Compared to EDLCs, the Faradic technique used in pseudocapacitors accelerates 
the electrochemical reactions that lead to higher speciﬁc capacitance and energy 
densities. 
2.2.1
Historical Development of Pseudocapacitance 
The term “pseudo-capacity,” coined by David C. Grahame in 1941 to indicate surplus 
capacity not linked to the development of the electrical double-layer, is where the 
word “pseudocapacitance” comes from Grahame [4]. Then, in the early 1960s, 
Conway and Gileadi employed pseudocapacitance to investigate the electrochem-
ical charge transfer mechanisms related to surface adsorption (Fig. 3) [5, 6]. Conway 
and Gileadi’s theoretical framework for pseudocapacitance was proposed around the 
same time that experimental observations were identiﬁed. The distinctive character-
istics of quick electrochemical charge transfer processes of surface-bound species 
include underpotential deposition (UPD), adsorbed electrolysis intermediates, and 
modiﬁed (thin-ﬁlm) electrodes [7].
In 1971, Trasatti and colleagues published their initial ﬁndings on the charge 
storage behavior of a thin layer of ruthenium oxide in sulfuric acid, which led to the 
discovery of pseudocapacitance in transition metal oxides [8]. The thin ﬁlm RuO2 
electrode, in contrast to a single crystal RuO2 electrode, displayed a highly symmetric 
and reversible cyclic voltammogram, which was later attributed to reversible redox 
processes at the RuO2 electrode surface. The speciﬁc capacitance can be substantially 
greater than what has been achieved with carbon materials that solely display EDL 
capacitance, reaching approximately 720 F/g in a voltage window of 1 V (which is 
equivalent to a speciﬁc capacity of 200 mAh/g) at a scan rate of 2 mV/s [9]. 
Amorphous, hydrated MnO2 · xH2O exhibited capacitor-like behavior in pH-
neutral aqueous electrolytes, according to research by the Goodenough group in 
1999. The speciﬁc capacitance, measured around 200 F/g in an electrolyte of aqueous 
KCl at 1.2 V, is thought to have resulted via surface redox reactions of MnO2 with

Pseudocapacitance: An Introduction
5
Fig. 3 Timeline of major developments in the ﬁeld of pseudocapacitance: new pseudocapacitive 
materials, mechanisms, and theoretical concepts. Adapted with permission [10], copyright (2020), 
American Chemical Society

6
A. Joseph and T. Thomas
potassium cations. Despite having low electrical conductivity, MnO2 is one of the 
most researched pseudocapacitive materials to date. This is because of the material’s 
economic and ecological sustainability [11]. Pseudocapacitive charge storage in Li+ 
intercalation materials using organic electrolytes ﬁrst appeared in the 1980s. Conway 
suggested characterizing these processes in terms of pseudocapacitance in the early 
1990s. He saw Li+ intercalation as a 2D ion sorption process between transition metal 
oxides and sulﬁde layers [1, 12]. Levi and Aurbach, who modeled Li+ intercalation 
in terms of a Frumkin intercalation isotherm, suggested a similar course of action 
[13]. 
The development of nanostructured and defect-rich electrochemical energy 
storage materials (EES), many of which have pseudocapacitive characteristics, has 
increased dramatically during the past ten years. Extrinsic pseudocapacitance, Come 
et al. [14] which distinguishes materials that appear to display capacitive behavior 
over a large range of particle size and dimensions has been coined when the pseu-
docapacitive behavior arises because of nanostructuring. The speciﬁc surface area is 
increased through nanostructuring, which also improves the area of contact between 
the electrode and the electrolyte. Figure 3 provides a timeline of signiﬁcant advance-
ments in the ﬁeld of pseudocapacitance. These improvements, when combined, have 
made substantial advancements in the development of EES with simultaneous high 
power, energy density, and reliability. 
2.2.2
Types of Pseudocapacitance 
According to Faradaic mechanisms, there have primarily been three forms of pseudo-
capacitance, as depicted in Fig. 4 [15]. The ﬁrst one is adsorption pseudocapacitance 
or underpotential deposition. Cations in the electrolyte produce a monolayer that is 
adsorbed and formed on the surface of a metal electrode with greater redox potential. 
For instance, pseudocapacitance can be produced by Pb2+ underpotential deposition 
processes that occur at a speciﬁc potential on the surface of an Au electrode [16]. 
Augustyn et al. [15] state that the ﬁrst kind of pseudocapacitance, adsorption pseu-
docapacitance, is represented by Eqs. (1) and (2). The electrosorption of cation A+ 
onto the surface of the conductive surface M is assumed to follow the Langmuir-type 
electrosorption isotherm [17]: 
up per M plus upper 
A Superscript plus Baseline plus e Superscript minus Baseline left right arrow MA Subscript ads Baseline
StartFraction theta Over theta minus 1 EndFraction equals upper K upper C Subscript upper A Baseline e Superscript StartFraction upper V upper F Over upper R upper T EndFraction
StartF raction
 t heta Over theta minus 1 EndFraction equals upper K upper C Subscript upper A Baseline e Superscript StartFraction upper V upper F Over upper R upper T EndFraction
St
artFraction theta Over theta minus 1 EndFraction equals upper K upper C Subscript upper A Baseline e Superscript StartFraction upper V upper F Over upper R upper T EndFraction
where CA stands for the cation concentration, the surface coverage of MAads is θ, the  
surface coverage of M is 1 − θ, F stands for the Faraday constant, R for the ideal gas

Pseudocapacitance: An Introduction
7
Fig. 4 Three different reversible pseudocapacitances: a underpotential deposition; b Faradaic redox 
pseudocapacitance, and c intercalation pseudocapacitance. Adapted with permission [19], copyright 
(2020), Elsevier
constant, V for the electrode voltage, and T for temperature. K stands for the ratio 
of the forward and reverse reaction rate constants. 
The second one is the redox pseudocapacitance, which is more common. With 
an associated Faradaic charge transfer between the ions in the liquid electrolyte and 
the solid electrode, it typically occurs on the electrode surface or subsurface. For 
instance, the 2+, 3+, and 4+ oxidation states of RuO2 were implicated in the redox 
reactions that were seen during potential cycling. This process predominates in the 
charging mechanism together with proton transfer giving rise to pseudocapacitance 
[18]. 
The third type is intercalation pseudocapacitance. It happens when ions are inter-
calated into the layers or tunnels of a redox-active material, and a quick Faradaic 
charge transfer occurs alongside it without changing the crystallographic phase. As 
a result, during an electrochemical reaction, it maintains an ultra-stable structure. 
As stated earlier, Faradaic redox pseudocapacitance only happens on the material’s 
surface, and electrolyte ions never enter the electrode’s interior. The ions will be able 
to inhabit the tunnels or empty positions inside most materials due to the intercalation 
process. Because of how quickly the intercalation process occurs, it behaves more 
like the electrode reaction of an SC than a battery. As a result, intercalation pseudoca-
pacitive materials typically have substantially superior rate capabilities than battery 
materials [19]. Conway devised a method for creating a pseudocapacitor that stores 
charge due to the potential dependence. Most intrinsic type pseudocapacitors don’t 
exhibit the Faradaic electrochemical response. 
2.2.3
Material Selection and Electrode Architecture 
Electrode materials for pseudocapacitors can be generally classiﬁed mainly into two 
groups, such as:

8
A. Joseph and T. Thomas
1. Transition metal-sulﬁdes, hydroxides, carbides, oxides, nitrides, and oxynitrides 
2. Conducting polymers 
Materials that exhibit PC behavior include metal oxides (MOs), metal nitrides 
(MNs), metal oxynitrides (MONs), metal sulphides (MSs), metal carbides (MCs), 
metal hydroxides (MOHs) and conducting polymers (CPs). The Faradaic charge 
transfer that occurs at the electrode/electrolyte interface and is used by pseudoca-
pacitors (PCs) to store charge can be recognized by redox peaks in the CV curve 
[15, 20]. For current technological advancements, the material performance of these 
distinct groups of materials is important. Despite these beneﬁts, Faradaic behavior 
in electrode materials causes signiﬁcant leakage currents (usually in the range of 
<1 μA to 5 mA) due to the charge transfer across the electrode/electrolyte interface 
[21, 22]. The self-discharge effect in SCs is primarily caused by the high leakage 
current, which restricts the practical applications. By applying an insulating layer as 
a blocking layer to an electron at the electrode/electrolyte interface, leakage currents 
have been attempted to be reduced. 
Many new electrode materials, including transition metal (TM) oxides/ 
hydroxides/sulﬁdes/carbides/nitrides, MXenes, and conducting polymers-based 
materials, have electrochemical properties that are neither entirely capacitive nor 
Faradaic, according to Simon et al. [23], Brousse et al. [24], and Gogotsi and Penner 
[25]. Scientists are concerned about the anomaly between these materials’ origin and 
two fundamentally different energy storage techniques. Due to their electrochemical 
characteristics, several are categorized as “battery mimic” or “battery-like” mate-
rials. Typical redox peaks and voltage plateaus may be seen in the CV and GCD 
curves, which indicate that charge storage typically occurs at a particular potential. 
Transition Metal Oxides 
Due to their high theoretical capacitances, low cost, and reversible Faradaic redox 
reactions that produce higher speciﬁc capacitances compared to carbonaceous mate-
rials based on an electrical double-layer charge storage mechanism, pseudocapacitive 
oxides of transition metals (Ni [26], Co [27], Fe [28], Mn [29], etc.) are extensively 
researched. Despite the intense electrochemical activity, transition metal oxides often 
have low conductivities, signiﬁcantly reducing rate capability. As a result of their 
naturally low electronic and ionic conductivities, their actual practical capacitances 
are much below what is predicted by theory. Many methods have recently been inves-
tigated for modifying their nanostructures, including doping the metals to improve 
conductivity and redox activity, adding transition metal oxides to a conducting 
substrate, and combining oxide composites with different oxidation states [30].

Pseudocapacitance: An Introduction
9
Transition Metal Nitrides 
Transition metal nitrides (TMNs) are interstitial metallic compounds with cova-
lent and ionic characteristics due to the integration of the nitrogen atom into the 
parent metal’s interstitial sites. These materials stand out due to their distinctive elec-
trical structure, exceptional mechanical resilience, improved chemical stability, and 
intriguing electrocatalytic activity. Numerous applications of TMNs have attracted 
considerable scientiﬁc interest, primarily for energy storage and conversion [31]. 
TMNs typically undergo simultaneous metallic, ionic, and covalent bonding, with 
the M–N bonding expanding the parent metal’s lattice and contracting its d-bands. 
The greater density of states (DOS) and shortage of the d-band in TMNs around the 
Fermi level allow them to behave like noble metals during electrocatalysis [32]. 
Transition Metal Oxynitrides 
Due to their distinct physicochemical characteristics, a new class of prospective 
innovative electrode materials for SCs comprises MONs and MNs. Oxynitrides are 
created when nitrogen is introduced to the oxide lattice, drastically enhancing certain 
of the material’s physical and chemical properties. For instance, when nitrogen is 
introduced, one frequently notices an increase in hydrophilic nature, an improvement 
in chemical inertness, and a decrease in the band gap. This increase in electronic 
conductivity enhances SCs’ rate capability, a crucial component of SC technology. 
The charge storage mechanism of SCs varies depending on the metal content of the 
oxynitrides [33]. 
Transition Metal Sulﬁdes 
As a novel family of pseudo-capacitive materials, transition metal sulﬁdes have 
received much attention due to their high energy density capacity. Bimetallic sulﬁdes 
offer superior electrochemical properties than those of their oxide counterparts, 
including a two-orders-of-magnitude increase in electrical conductivity and a much-
improved redox reaction. The hydrothermal method, followed by anion exchange, 
has been used to develop the majority of binary metal sulﬁde nanostructures from 
their corresponding metal oxide/hydroxide precursors. 
This technique is based on the Kirkendall effect, a mechanism that allows for the 
possible formation of variable morphologies [34]. The Kirkendall effect, which high-
lights the differences in the atomic diffusion coefﬁcients of chemical constituents, is a 
well-known phenomenon originating from the mutual diffusion process of chemical 
constituents over an interface. Due to the uneven diffusion speeds of the two chem-
ical components, vacancies will be generated close to the interface of the chemical 
component that diffuses more quickly, changing the location of the initial interface 
during the diffusion process. Vacancies gradually merge into cavities, which then 
develop into a hollow structure [35].

10
A. Joseph and T. Thomas
Fig. 5 Applications of 2D transition metal carbides [37]. This article is licensed under a Creative 
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License 
Transition Metal Carbides 
For energy storage and catalysis, transition metal carbides (TMCs) have distinctive 
properties like low resistivity (metallic), high melting temperature, and high electro-
chemical activities. Dimensional shrinking of bulk TMCs to 0, 1, or 2–dimensional 
nanostructures (thickness vs. lateral size <1%) has drawn attention to give more 
control over a variety of attributes and to add additional functionality [36]. Due to 
its many exceptional dimensionality and structure-dependent features, TMCs have 
become a hot topic in the development of layered materials since 2004. TMCs are 
primarily interstitial alloys made of carbon and transition metal atoms. However, 
only niobium carbide, vanadium carbide, molybdenum carbide, and titanium carbide 
have received sufﬁcient investigation thus far because of the low chemical activity 
and complicated synthesis conditions of these TMCs (Fig. 5) [37].

Pseudocapacitance: An Introduction
11
Transition Metal Dichalcogenides (TMDC) 
TMDCs are 2D monolayered materials with both “Faradaic” and “non-Faradaic” 
electrochemical properties, a large surface area, thin layers, high surface tenability, 
and the potential to improve performance in various ﬁelds. Similar to graphene, 2D 
TMDCs are a nearly 1 nm-thin material that is ideal for a narrow electron transport 
channel that might speed up ion diffusion. TMDCs are inorganic materials with 
the chemical formula X-M-X or MX2, where X (chalcogens) is S, Se, or Te, and 
M is the transition metal element. Because of their 2D character, TMDCs are a 
promising electrode material with various rich physicochemical features that can 
improve energy storage performance. 
A key element in determining charge storage performance is materials chemistry, 
which is concentrated on the strategic design and development of innovative elec-
trode materials for energy storage applications. The energy density, power density, 
and safety of these devices, such as batteries and SCs, are principally attributed 
to electrode materials with high electroactivity, electron/ion conductivity, and struc-
tural/electrochemical stability. The energy density, power density, and safety of these 
devices, such as batteries and SCs, are principally attributed to electrode materials 
with high electroactivity, electron/ion conductivity, and structural/electrochemical 
stability. The right components, chemical bonds, electronic and atomic structures, 
crystal structures, and morphologies of those materials can be chosen to achieve high 
electrochemical performances in accordance with the function-directed materials 
design rule. 
To tailor the qualities of the material and create high-electrode materials, several 
parameters can be used, including electronegativity, atom radius, chemical bonding, 
and oxidation state. General materials chemistry guidelines will make the rational 
design of electrode materials with improved electrochemical performance easier. As 
a result, there needs to be a connection between the synthesis processes and the 
material’s structure, components, and size. Different elements, electrical structures, 
crystal structures, and macroscopic scale morphologies, sizes, and material architec-
tures (hollow, core–shell, tubes, wires, ﬂakes, etc.) can all be designed into materials 
at various scales [2]. 
2.2.4
Theories of Electrode–Electrolyte Interfaces in Pseudocapacitive 
Materials 
Due to the intricate relationship between the terminal voltage of supercapacitors, 
they cannot be utilized or researched in the same ways as conventional capacitors. 
After quick charge–discharge cycles, there is a signiﬁcant variation in the terminal 
voltage. A simple resistive, capacitive RC circuit could not describe a supercapac-
itor’s behavior. Many modiﬁed RC circuits are proposed to represent a supercapacitor 
system based on physical reasoning. Still, none of them can account for all the param-
eters of SCs and can simultaneously analyze the effects of the interfacial electric ﬁeld

12
A. Joseph and T. Thomas
and temperature variation. This is the cause of the mismatch between a supercapac-
itor system’s theoretical and real outcomes. Capacitance dependence of polarisable 
electrodes on the potential, self-discharge process, and temperature variation should 
all be included when creating a more realistic model. Additionally, it is essential 
to investigate the electrolyte conductivity in the electrode’s pores, pore resistance, 
ballistic transport, and electrode conductivity [38]. 
The theoretical pseudocapacitance of metal oxide can be calculated using Eq. (3): 
up pe r C equals StartFraction n upper F Over upper M upper V EndFraction
upp
er C equals StartFraction n upper F Over upper M upper V EndFraction
where F is the Faraday constant, n is the average number of electrons exchanged 
during a redox reaction, M is the molar mass of metal oxide, and V is the oper-
ating voltage window. Supercapacitor ideal models are attainable using molecular 
dynamics and modern computing technologies. Theoretical modelling of pseudoca-
pacitors is scarce compared to the amount of theoretical and computational work 
done on EDLCs. Developing a precise strategy for modelling pseudocapacitors 
is challenging because of the complexity of interfacial redox processes [39]. The 
behaviour of reactants, and surface redox kinetics, all affect pseudocapacitance. It is 
hard to address these difﬁculties in a single model. It is crucial to create a model for 
investigating pseudocapacitance since none exists. 
Continuum Models 
The Poisson-Nernst-Planck (PNP) concept of electrodiffusion is typically used in 
continuum models to analyse the electrolyte and electrode interface. Because of the 
strong interfacial electric ﬁeld, modeling does not employ constant values for the 
physical and chemical parameters but treats them as their surroundings’ functions. 
L Pilon and Harnan Wang created a continuum theory-based 3D model for simula-
tions based on organized mesoporous electrode architectures [40]. Hainan Wang and 
Pilon’s model accurately simulated the electrode architecture composed of CP204-
S15 carbon with mesopores produced by Woo et al. [41] accounted for the ion’s ﬁnite 
size and the diffuse layer, stern layer, and other layers. 
In addition, the hybrid pseudocapacitor based on lithium intercalation and diffu-
sion in metal oxide is described using a 1D continuum transport model [42]. A similar 
study was conducted to create a model that would describe a pseudocapacitor based 
on RuO2 [43]. The main objective was to study the shifts in pseudocapacitance over 
the electrode’s thickness. Thicker electrodes were discovered to cause losses, partic-
ularly toward the conclusion of the oxidation process. The electrolyte was consid-
ered to have a high ion concentration. Another study examined an electrochemical 
capacitor/battery hybrid system’s performance using a one-dimensional model [44].

Pseudocapacitance: An Introduction
13
Quantum Models 
The main components of quantum models are density functional theory DFT and 
ab initio quantum chemistry. Numerous investigations based on DFT have been 
conducted for the electrode materials utilized in pseudocapacitors [45]. RuO2 (110)’s 
pseudocapacitive behaviour was simulated using joint density functional theory 
(JDFT) [46]. The resulting capacitive curve was comparable to the experimental 
cyclic voltammetry (CV) curve that showed the exact position of the redox peak. 
JDFT in the JDFTx package used the linear polarizable continuum model (linear 
PCM) to determine the electronic chemical potential and total energy. The ultrasoft 
pseudopotential described the interaction between nuclei and electrons. Total charge 
per unit chemical potential shift, or Qtot/Δμ, was used to quantify total capacitance. 
Simpliﬁed Analytical Models 
Mathematical equations in these models describe the ﬂow of charged particles and 
the pace of reaction [47]. These models describe the electrical behavior of SC using 
partial differential equations. Li et al. [48] created another model for asymmetric 
supercapacitors. The energy capacity, charge–discharge cycle energy efﬁciency, 
electrode-speciﬁc capacitance, and electrolyte conductivity may all be calculated 
using this model. The experimental and theoretical values of the quantities for hetero-
geneous electrochemical supercapacitors of the PbO2|H2SO4|C system matched the 
voltage range of 0.8–2.2 V. However, there is a tiny discrepancy between the two 
above 2.2 V. 
2.2.5
Device-Level Merits and Demerits Associated 
with Pseudocapacitors 
Although EDLCs have quick charge–discharge rates, high power densities, and 
extended cycling lives, the amount of energy they can store is much less than that of 
batteries. Pseudocapacitors can produce substantially higher capacitance and energy 
density when compared to EDLCs since they incorporate reversible redox Faradaic 
processes during charge and discharge. Low power densities and unstable materials 
result from these materials’ poor electrical conductivity and delayed responsiveness. 
To solve this problem and obtain high capacitances, these materials are typi-
cally placed on highly conductive substrates [48]. Energy density must be raised 
without sacriﬁcing power density or cycle life to use ﬂexible SCs in real-world 
applications. High power density and extremely long cycle lives for well-developed 
EDLCs have been provided, whereas high capacitances are possible with pseudo-
capacitors. Therefore, combining the beneﬁts of EDLCs with pseudocapacitors to 
create composite electrode materials is a workable method to achieve larger power 
and energy densities.

14
A. Joseph and T. Thomas
2.3 
Hybrid Supercapacitor 
In recent years, hybrid supercapacitors have become popular due to their enhanced 
energy density performance without affecting their power density. The hybrid super-
capacitor offers higher speciﬁc capacitance than current electric double-layer capac-
itors and pseudocapacitors. In general, the hybrid supercapacitors’ asymmetric 
behavior, which results from combining an EDLC and a pseudocapacitor, enhances 
the respective capacitance values (Fig. 2c). This asymmetrical strategy represents 
a fresh start on the path to the much-needed pollution-free, durable, and effec-
tive energy-storing performance. According to their use in hybrid electric vehicles, 
research into creating new sophisticated storage devices ﬁnds a huge and promising 
future. The most important component for energy-efﬁcient applications requires the 
introduction of novel materials to achieve a noticeably greater surface-to-volume 
ratio. 
The storage concepts for hybrid supercapacitors combine the EDLC and pseu-
docapacitor storage principles. The pseudocapacitor lacks the limiting property of 
EDLC, and vice versa. When these two components are combined, the constraints 
of the individual components are obscured, which has the beneﬁt of improving the 
capacitance. Depending on the assembly setup, hybrid supercapacitors can be either 
symmetric or asymmetric. 
3 
Conclusion 
Pseudocapacitive materials typically offer both fast rate and high capacitance, unlike 
EDLC and battery materials. This beneﬁt has encouraged a lot of study into pseudo-
capacitive materials and associated energy storage technologies. As nanoscience and 
nanotechnology have advanced quickly in recent years, an increasing number of elec-
trodes based on nanomaterials have been created for batteries and supercapacitors. As 
a result, a simple kinetics analysis cannot be used to distinguish between battery- and 
pseudocapacitive materials. Comparatively less theoretical and computational work 
has been done on pseudocapacitors compared to EDLCs. Despite the abundance of 
SC devices on the market, there are still several issues, including high leakage current, 
small surface areas, and instability. Asymmetric and symmetric electrode conﬁgura-
tions were extensively researched to help with supercapacitor problems. Asymmetric 
supercapacitors frequently offer a larger operating voltage window and better energy 
storage capacities than symmetric supercapacitors. Supercapacitor technology needs 
to make signiﬁcant improvements in both device performance (energy density) and 
market-relevant metrics (price, durability, and thermal stability) to compete with 
current battery technology.

Pseudocapacitance: An Introduction
15
References 
1. B.E. Conway, Transition from “Supercapacitor” to “Battery” behavior in electrochemical 
energy storage. J. Electrochem. Soc. 138, 1539 (1991) 
2. P. Bhojane, Recent advances and fundamentals of pseudocapacitors: materials, mechanism, 
and its understanding. J. Energy Storage 45, 103654 (2022) 
3. N. Swain, B. Saravanakumar, M. Kundu, L. Schmidt-Mende, A. Ramadoss, Recent trends in 
template assisted 3D porous materials for electrochemical supercapacitors. J. Mater. Chem. A 
9, 25286–25324 (2021) 
4. D.C. Grahame, Properties of the electrical double layer at a mercury surface. I. Methods of 
measurement and interpretation of results. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 63, 1207–1215 (1941) 
5. S. Srinivasan, E. Gileadi, The potential-sweep method: a theoretical analysis. Electrochim Acta 
11, 321–335 (1966) 
6. B.E. Conway, E. Gileadi, Kinetic theory of pseudo-capacitance and electrode reactions at 
appreciable surface coverage. Trans. Faraday Soc. 58, 2493–2509 (1962) 
7. F. Scholz, E.P.M. Leiva, Moïse Haïssinsky: The discoverer of underpotential deposition. 
ChemElectroChem 5, 849–854 (2018) 
8. S. Trasatti, G. Buzzanca, Ruthenium dioxide: a new interesting electrode material. Solid state 
structure and electrochemical behaviour. J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem. 29, 
A1–A5 (1971) 
9. J.P. Zheng, P.J. Cygan, T.R. Jow, Hydrous ruthenium oxide as an electrode material for 
electrochemical capacitors. J. Electrochem. Soc. 142, 2699 (1995) 
10. S. Fleischmann, J.B. Mitchell, R. Wang, C. Zhan, D. Jiang, V. Presser, V. Augustyn, Pseudo-
capacitance: from fundamental understanding to high power energy storage materials. Chem. 
Rev. 120, 6738–6782 (2020) 
11. H.Y. Lee, J.B. Goodenough, Supercapacitor behavior with KCl electrolyte. J. Solid State Chem. 
144, 220–223 (1999) 
12. B.E. Conway, Two-dimensional and quasi-two-dimensional isotherms for Li intercalation and 
UPD processes at surfaces. Electrochim. Acta 38, 1249–1258 (1993) 
13. M.D. Levi, D. Aurbach, Frumkin intercalation isotherm—a tool for the description of lithium 
insertion into host materials: a review. Electrochim. Acta 45, 167–185 (1999) 
14. J. Come, V. Augustyn, J.W. Kim, P. Rozier, P.-L. Taberna, P. Gogotsi, J.W. Long, B. Dunn, 
P. Simon, Electrochemical kinetics of nanostructured Nb2O5 electrodes. J. Electrochem. Soc. 
161, A718 (2014) 
15. V. Augustyn, P. Simon, B. Dunn, Pseudocapacitive oxide materials for high-rate electrochem-
ical energy storage. Energy Environ. Sci. 7, 1597–1614 (2014) 
16. B.-Y. Chang, E. Ahn, S.-M. Park, Real-time staircase cyclic voltammetry fourier transform 
electrochemical impedance spectroscopic studies on underpotential deposition of lead on gold. 
J. Phys. Chem. C 112, 16902–16909 (2008) 
17. B.E. Conway, H. Angerstein-Kozlowska, The electrochemical study of multiple-state adsorp-
tion in monolayers. Acc. Chem. Res. 14, 49–56 (1981) 
18. D. Rochefort, A.-L. Pont, Pseudocapacitive behaviour of RuO2 in a proton exchange ionic 
liquid. Electrochem. Commun. 8, 1539–1543 (2006) 
19. Y. Liu, S.P. Jiang, Z. Shao, Intercalation pseudocapacitance in electrochemical energy storage: 
recent advances in fundamental understanding and materials development. Mater. Today Adv. 
7, 100072 (2020) 
20. W. Wei, X. Cui, W. Chen, D.G. Ivey, Manganese oxide-based materials as electrochemical 
supercapacitor electrodes. Chem. Soc. Rev. 40, 1697–1721 (2011) 
21. B.W. Ricketts, C. Ton-That, Self-discharge of carbon-based supercapacitors with organic 
electrolytes. J. Power Sourc. 89, 64–69 (2000) 
22. B.E. Conway, W.G. Pell, T.-C. Liu, Diagnostic analyses for mechanisms of self-discharge of 
electrochemical capacitors and batteries. J. Power Sourc. 65, 53–59 (1997) 
23. P. Simon, Y. Gogotsi, B. Dunn, Where do batteries end and supercapacitors begin? Science 
343, 1210–1211 (2014)

16
A. Joseph and T. Thomas
24. T. Brousse, D. Bélanger, J.W. Long, To be or not to be pseudocapacitive? J. Electrochem. Soc. 
162, A5185 (2015) 
25. Y. Gogotsi, R.M. Penner, Energy storage in nanomaterials—capacitive, pseudocapacitive, or 
battery-like? ACS Nano 12, 2081–2083 (2018) 
26. R.A. Patil, C.-P. Chang, R.S. Devan, Y. Liou, Y.-R. Ma, Impact of nanosize on supercapacitance: 
study of 1D nanorods and 2D thin-ﬁlms of nickel oxide. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 8, 9872– 
9880 (2016) 
27. F. Ning, M. Shao, C. Zhang, S. Xu, M. Wei, X. Duan, Co3O4@layered double hydroxide core/ 
shell hierarchical nanowire arrays for enhanced supercapacitance performance. Nano Energy 
7, 134–142 (2014) 
28. Y. Ding, S. Tang, R. Han, S. Zhang, G. Pan, X. Meng, Iron oxides nanobelt arrays rooted 
in nanoporous surface of carbon tube textile as stretchable and robust electrodes for ﬂexible 
supercapacitors with ultrahigh areal energy density and remarkable cycling-stability. Sci. Rep. 
10, 11023 (2020) 
29. O. Ghodbane, J.-L. Pascal, F. Favier, Microstructural effects on charge-storage properties 
in MnO2-based electrochemical supercapacitors. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 1, 1130–1139 
(2009) 
30. S.R. Ede, S. Anantharaj, K.T. Kumaran, S. Mishra, S. Kundu, One step synthesis of Ni/Ni(OH)2 
nano sheets (NSs) and their application in asymmetric supercapacitors. RSC Adv. 7, 5898–5911 
(2017) 
31. B. Gao, X. Li, K. Ding, C. Huang, Q. Li, P.K. Chu, K. Huo, Recent progress in nanostructured 
transition metal nitrides for advanced electrochemical energy storage. J. Mater. Chem. A 7, 
14–37 (2019) 
32. J.-L. Calais, Band structure of transition metal compounds. Adv. Phys. 26, 847–885 (1977) 
33. A. Joseph, T. Thomas, Recent advances and prospects of metal oxynitrides for supercapacitor. 
Progr. Solid State Chem. 68, 100381 (2022) 
34. W. Liu, H. Niu, J. Yang, K. Cheng, K. Ye, K. Zhu, G. Wang, D. Cao, J. Yan, Ternary transition 
metal sulﬁdes embedded in graphene nanosheets as both the anode and cathode for high-
performance asymmetric supercapacitors. Chem. Mater. 30, 1055–1068 (2018) 
35. Y. Yin, R.M. Rioux, C.K. Erdonmez, S. Hughes, G.A. Somorjai, A.P. Alivisatos, Formation of 
hollow nanocrystals through the nanoscale Kirkendall effect. Science 304, 711–714 (2004) 
36. X. Zhao, W. Sun, D. Geng, W. Fu, J. Dan, Y. Xie, P.R.C. Kent, W. Zhou, S.J. Pennycook, K.P. 
Loh, Edge segregated polymorphism in 2d molybdenum carbide. Adv. Mater. 31, 1808343 
(2019) 
37. T. Qin, Z. Wang, Y. Wang, F. Besenbacher, M. Otyepka, M. Dong, Recent progress in emerging 
two-dimensional transition metal carbides. Nanomicro Lett. 13, 183 (2021) 
38. Kumar A. Bharti, G. Ahmed, M. Gupta, P. Bocchetta, R. Adalati, R. Chandra, Y. Kumar, 
Theories and models of supercapacitors with recent advancements: impact and interpretations. 
Nano Express 2, 22004 (2021) 
39. C. Zhan, C. Lian, Y. Zhang, M.W. Thompson, Y. Xie, J. Wu, P.R.C. Kent, P.T. Cummings, 
D. Jiang, D.J. Wesolowski, Computational insights into materials and interfaces for capacitive 
energy storage. Adv. Sci. 4, 1700059 (2017) 
40. H. Wang, L. Pilon, Mesoscale modeling of electric double layer capacitors with three-
dimensional ordered structures. J Power Sourc. 221, 252–260 (2013) 
41. S.-W. Woo, K. Dokko, H. Nakano, K. Kanamura, Preparation of three dimensionally ordered 
macroporous carbon with mesoporous walls for electric double-layer capacitors. J. Mater. 
Chem. 18, 1674–1680 (2008) 
42. H.-L. Girard, H. Wang, A.L. d’Entremont, L. Pilon, Enhancing faradaic charge storage 
contribution in hybrid pseudocapacitors. Electrochim. Acta 182, 639–651 (2015) 
43. T. Kadyk, M. Eikerling, Charging mechanism and moving reaction fronts in a supercapacitor 
with pseudocapacitance. J. Electrochem. Soc. 161, A239 (2013) 
44. G. Sikha, R.E. White, B.N. Popov, A mathematical model for a lithium-ion battery/ 
electrochemical capacitor hybrid system. J. Electrochem. Soc. 152, A1682 (2005)

Pseudocapacitance: An Introduction
17
45. Y. Liu, F. Zhou, V. Ozolins, Ab Initio study of the charge-storage mechanisms in RuO2-based 
electrochemical ultracapacitors. J. Phys. Chem. C 116, 1450–1457 (2012) 
46. C. Zhan, D. Jiang, Understanding the pseudocapacitance of RuO2 from joint density functional 
theory. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 28, 464004 (2016) 
47. S. Devan, V.R. Subramanian, R.E. White, Analytical solution for the impedance of a porous 
electrode. J. Electrochem. Soc. 151, A905 (2004) 
48. L. Li, Z. Wu, Y. Shuang, X.-B. Zhang, Advances and challenges for ﬂexible energy storage 
and conversion devices and systems. Energy Environ. Sci. 7, 2101 (2014)

Pseudocapacitance: Fundamentals 
to Advanced Applications 
Shilpa Pande, Bidhan Pandit, Shoyebmohamad F. Shaikh, 
and Jahangeer Ahmed 
Abstract The electrochemical energy storage advancement requires the use of 
either high-power density (like batteries) or high-energy density (like electrochem-
ical capacitors) devices. For both current and upcoming applications, materials that 
can give high energy densities as well as high power densities in a single package are 
in increased demand. The faradaic process of power involves surface or near-surface 
redox processes. It provides a way for doing so by employing high charge–discharge 
rates and high-power densities. The focus of this chapter is on the pseudocapacitive 
characteristics of transition metal oxides. Pseudocapacitance will be explained in 
length in this chapter before going over its electrochemical properties. The following 
section of this chapter will be a review of the most prominent pseudocapacitive 
elements found in both aqueous & non-aqueous electrolytes. Near the end, there is a 
full discussion of the key problems with pseudocapacitive materials and a look into 
the future. 
Keywords Electrochemical energy storage · Pseudocapacitive mechanisms ·
Aqueous pseudocapacitor materials · Non-aqueous electrolyte pseudocapacitor 
materials · Supercapacitors · Lithium-ion battery
S. Pande envelope symbol
Department of Applied Physics, Laxminarayan Innovation Technological University, Nagpur, 
Maharashtra 440033, India 
e-mail: sap7001@gmail.com 
B. Pandit 
Department of Materials Science and Engineering and Chemical Engineering, Universidad Carlos 
III de Madrid, Avenida de la Universidad 30, 28911 Leganés, Madrid, Spain 
S. F. Shaikh · J. Ahmed 
Department of Chemistry, College of Science, King Saud University, P. O. Box 2455, 
Riyadh 11451, Saudi Arabia 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
R. K. Gupta (ed.), Pseudocapacitors, Engineering Materials, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45430-1_2 
19

20
S. Pande et al.
1 
Introduction 
Batteries and electrochemical capacitors are two examples of electrochemical energy 
storage (EES), a technology that is widely used to power today’s almost universally 
portable electronics and enable the electriﬁcation of the transportation sector. One 
more implementation for EES is the integration of such technologies into renewable 
energy sources (RESs) like solar and wind to supply electricity to the electricity 
grid [1, 2]. This application was created because of the need to modernize the power 
infrastructure in many industrialized nations and the anticipated rise in global energy 
demand over the following several decades (arising partially from the demand to 
electrify developing countries). Even though EES offers a wide range of possible uses, 
it also has several disadvantages, most of which are associated with the requirement 
for materials that are more effective for storing and transferring large energy. In a 
perfect world, these processes would be carried out using materials that are readily 
available and don’t produce any harmful by-products. This would elevate the EES 
devices’ safety while also lowering the cost of them in consumer goods and stationary 
electricity [3]. 
Transition metal oxides within one or both electrodes have an impact on EES’s 
efﬁcacy [4]. This chapter discusses pseudocapacitance and transition metal oxide 
pseudocapacitors. Pseudo capacity is brought on by reversible redox activities that 
happen at or close to the surface of a substance in contact with an electrolyte and are 
not impeded by solid-state ion transport. Both intrinsic and extrinsic behaviour, as 
well as aqueous or non-aqueous electrolytes, are possibilities [5]. Pseudocapacitive 
materials charge and discharge in seconds and minutes as opposed to batteries, which 
charge in milliseconds [6]. Hence, research and development into pseudocapacitance 
are driven by the enormous energy & power densities of a single material [7]. 
Figure 1 shows how a high-power lithium-ion battery’s energy density holds 
steady across discharge times longer than 10 min. This energy is being lost more 
quickly because of resistive losses in battery cells. Slow electron and ion passage 
account for a considerable portion of resistive losses. Heat is produced through 
resistive losses, especially when they occur quickly, and this heat can lead to thermal 
runaway and other dangers. Yet, despite their tiny total stored energy, commercially 
available EDLCs maintain a constant energy density over all time periods. Pseudo-
capacitive materials appear to ﬂourish in the time range between 10 s and 10 min 
when EDLCs and lithium-ion batteries function best.
It is beneﬁcial to have such a high-rate EES for a range of applications since these 
applications demand either a huge amount of energy that is to be stored or a rapid 
delivery of that energy. As a result, having such a high-rate EES is favourable for these 
applications. One illustration of this would be the accumulation of kinetic energy 
in seaports [8] or using regenerative braking [9]. Additional examples include the 
implementation of power quality applications within the power grid and the usage of 
pulse power in communication devices [10]. In addition to this, it would be of great 
assistance if the amount of time needed to charge portable electronics, most notably 
electric vehicles, was reduced [11]. Background, development of pseudocapacitance,

Pseudocapacitance: Fundamentals to Advanced Applications
21
Fig. 1 The relationship between speciﬁc energy and recharge time for an electronic higher-rate 
lithium-ion battery & Electric double layer capacitor (EDLC)
the electrochemical characteristics of this behaviour, pseudocapacitance in aqueous 
electrolytes, and pseudocapacitance in non-aqueous electrolytes are covered in this 
chapter. 
2 
Background 
Although known since the beginning that charges could collect on solids, General 
Electric got the ﬁrst electrochemical capacitor patent in 1957 [12]. This was true 
even though charges may build up on solids from the beginning of time. Except for 
lithium-ion batteries, most energy storage technologies were invented in the late 19th 
and early twentieth centuries, making this a late entrant. This suggested a late ﬁeld 
entrance. The patent states “it is not known with conﬁdence what happens when 
the equipment is used as energy storage devices.” A high-surface-area electrode is 
essential. Carbons are useful due to their high conductivity, large surface areas, and 
low density. These devices store charge by adhering electrolyte ions to electriﬁed 
materials, and carbons are the best materials for this. Electrostatic charge storage 
does not require redox processes. EDLCs are these devices. Commercial devices 
store 3–6 Wh/kg [13]. 
EDLCs have been extensively reviewed. EDLC research focuses on how pore 
structure and electrode area affect capacitance. Double-layer capacitances of 150 
F/g are ideal for carbon pore diameters in ionic liquid electrolytes [13, 14]. 
Functionalizing surface with nitrogen and oxygen groups, using pore widths that 
match electrolyte ion size, using redox-active species, or producing ionic liquid 
mixes to improve cell voltage and temperature can increase EDLC energy densi-
ties. Graphene-EDLCs are popular. Graphene has 100–250 F/g capacitance due 
to its large surface area. These materials’ sheet-like nanoscale structure precludes

22
S. Pande et al.
gravimetric-normalized capacitance. Graphene allows versatile EDLC device topolo-
gies [15]. Figure 2 depicts pseudocapacitance’s evolution, including new materials, 
mechanisms, and ideas [16]. 
Fig. 2 Pseudocapacitance timeline: novel materials, processes, and theoretical notions

Pseudocapacitance: Fundamentals to Advanced Applications
23
3 
Types of Energy Storage Devices 
Energy storage systems can range from alternatives that are quick to respond for near 
real-time and daily management of the networks to solutions that have a longer dura-
tion for the unpredictability of week-to-week variations as well as more predictable 
seasonal variations in supply and demand. Services such as managing power quality 
and balancing load, as well as providing backup power for outage management, are 
examples of important use cases. It is possible to classify the many forms of energy 
storage into the following ﬁve major groups of technology. 
Battery Storage: Batteries are an electrochemical technology that can consist of one 
or more cells and have a positive terminal known as a cathode and a negative terminal 
known as an anode. Batteries are the oldest form of storage, the most prevalent form 
of storage, and the most commonly accessible form of storage. A wide variety of 
chemical compositions can be found in batteries. The lithium-ion and lead acid 
batteries are the most well-known and are used extensively in portable electronic 
gadgets and cars respectively. Nickel–cadmium, and sodium–sulfur are two more 
common forms of solid batteries; the zinc–air battery is a relatively new variety. 
Flow batteries using liquid electrolyte solutions are another type of battery. These 
batteries can use a variety of chemistries, such as vanadium redox, iron-chromium, 
and zinc-bromine. Although supercapacitors are not, strictly speaking, batteries, it is 
possible to classify them as an electrochemical technology due to their application, 
which is notable for a sub-minute level response. 
Thermal Storage: The essence of thermal storage is the capturing and releasing 
of heat or cold in a solid, liquid, or air medium, with the possibility of involving 
changes in the state of the medium itself, such as moving from a gas to a liquid or 
from a solid to a liquid and vice versa. Cryogenic storage, which uses molten salt and 
liquid air, is one of the technologies that can be used to store energy. With the advent 
of concentrated solar power, molten salt has become a commercially feasible heat 
storage option. However, the requirement for massive subterranean storage caverns 
may limit this and other potential heat storage methods. 
Mechanical Storage: The kinetic forces of rotation or gravitation can be used to store 
energy in mechanical storage devices, making these systems possibly the simplest 
type of energy storage. Yet, to achieve this level of feasibility in today’s grid applica-
tions, the most recent technologies are required. The most common methods involve 
energy storage using ﬂywheels and devices that use compressed air, although grav-
itational energy is a relatively new technology that is still being developed and has 
several different applications. 
Pumbed Hydro: The storage of energy using pumped hydro systems that are based 
on big water reservoirs have been widely deployed during much of the course of the 
previous century to become the most frequent kind of utility-scale storage worldwide. 
These types of systems require the circulation of water between two reservoirs located 
at different levels, with the “energy storage” occurring in the water located in the

24
S. Pande et al.
upper reservoir and the “energy release” occurring when the water is transferred to 
the lower reservoir. 
Hydrogen: The new method of energy storage known as hydrogen would require 
the hydrogen to be converted from electricity through the process of electrolysis 
before being stored in tanks. It is possible for it to later go through the process of 
re-electriﬁcation or be supplied to new applications such as transportation, industrial, 
or residential use as a complement or alternative for gas. 
4 
Role of Pseudocapacitive Materials 
To circumvent the kinetic constraints of lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) and reach 
energy densities greater than electrical double-layer capacitors, pseudocapacitive 
electrode materials are being researched. Any anion or cation can be employed 
with pseudocapacitance, giving it the best option for energy storage outside of Li+. 
Early in the 1960s, pseudocapacitance was developed to describe surface Faradaic 
processes including hydrogen adsorption and underpotential deposition. Although 
single-crystal RuO2 did not exhibit cyclic voltammograms, thin ﬁlms for hydrous 
RuO2 cycled within the acidic electrolyte did. Storage of energy was the result [17]. 
Jiang and others [18] connected the response for capacitive electrochemical to the 
electrochemical mechanism. Pseudocapacitive materials have a large charge storage 
capacity as compared to batteries while also undergoing reversible electrochemical 
processes in a lot less time than EDLCs. In comparison to LIBs and EDLCs, pseudo 
capacities have intermediate cycle stability. The atomic process is typically cred-
ited to highly reversible surface or intercalation charge transport responses that are 
uncontrolled by solid-state diffusion (Fig. 3).
Afterward, a description of the pseudocapacitive electrochemical behavior will 
be provided. Pseudocapacitive compounds link batteries and EDLCs. The distinc-
tion between these three categories of materials is being eroded by nanostructured 
materials and carbons having redox-active functional groups. Due to their high 
reversibility and lack of solid-state diffusion restrictions at minutes, pseudocapac-
itive electrochemical materials exhibit exceptional efﬁciency at the high density 
of current. To produce the pseudocapacitive materials, an atomic comprehension 
of kinetic & thermodynamic mechanisms that lead to particular electrochemical 
behavior is required.

Pseudocapacitance: Fundamentals to Advanced Applications
25
Fig. 3 Techniques for the electrochemical energy storage are categorised according to their 
capacity, changes in electrode structure, reaction over potential, and kinetic restrictions
5 
Types of Pseudocapacitive Mechanisms 
Conway discovered several different faradaic pathways that might result in capaci-
tive electrochemical properties [19]. The following summarises each of these mech-
anisms: (i) underpotential deposition; (ii) the redox pseudocapacitance; & (iii) 
intercalation pseudocapacitance. Figure 4 provides a visual representation of these 
processes.
Under prospective deposition takes place when the metal ions establish adsorbed 
monolayer upon a different metal surface along a redox potential that is signiﬁ-
cantly greater than their overall redox potential. Lead deposition on a gold electrode 
illustrates under potential deposition. Once ions are electrochemically reabsorbed 
onto a material’s surface and undertake faradaic charge transfer, redox pseudocapac-
itance results. When ions intercalate into the redox-active material layers or tunnels, 
faradaic charge transfer occurs, however, the crystallographic phase is unaffected 
[20]. Intercalation pseudocapacitance occurs. Electrochemical ﬁngerprints share a 
link between potential and the amount of charge formed by adsorption and desorption 
at the interface of electrolyte/electrode or inside a material’s inner surface. Physical 
processes and materials cause these three mechanisms: 
up per E  tilde upper E Superscript 0 Baseline minus StartFraction upper R upper T Over n upper F EndFraction ln left parenthesis StartFraction upper X Over 1 minus upper X EndFraction right parenthesis
upp er
 
E tilde upper E Superscript 0 Baseline minus StartFraction upper R upper T Over n upper F EndFraction ln left parenthesis StartFraction upper X Over 1 minus upper X EndFraction right parenthesis
up per
 
E tilde upper E Superscript 0 Baseline minus StartFraction upper R upper T Over n upper F EndFraction ln left parenthesis StartFraction upper X Over 1 minus upper X EndFraction right parenthesis
here, E represents the potential (V), T represents temperature (K), whereas, R depicts 
the ideal gas constant (8.314 J/mol · K), n represents the total electrons, F represents

26
S. Pande et al.
Fig. 4 Types of reversible redox mechanisms
Faraday’s constant (96 485 C/mol), & X represents the fractional coverage extent of 
inner structure or the surface [21]. In the above equation, capacitance (C; F/g) might 
be expressed in the regions wherein plot of X versus X is linear:” 
up p
er C equals left parenthesis StartFraction n upper F Over m EndFraction right parenthesis StartFraction upper X Over upper E EndFraction
u
p per C equals left parenthesis StartFraction n upper F Over m EndFraction right parenthesis StartFraction upper X Over upper E EndFraction
up
per C equals left parenthesis StartFraction n upper F Over m EndFraction right parenthesis StartFraction upper X Over upper E EndFraction
where m represents the active substance’s overall molecular weight. Since the X 
versus E is not linear such as within a capacitor, and capacitance isn’t constant. 
Hence, the capacitance is called pseudocapacitance [22, 23]. 
Despite the equation’s thermodynamic basis for pseudocapacitance, these mate-
rials’ kinetic behavior determines their energy storage potential. Reactions at the 
surface or just limited by the surface have a high-rate capability because they are 
not constrained by the diffusion of solid-state. Transition metal oxides with pseudo-
capacitive action have this crucial feature. These components are used in recharge-
able batteries [23]. High energy densities are possible with rechargeable batteries 
because they store charge in bulk solid form. The cathode and anode active materials’ 
solid-state diffusion restricts these devices’ power capacity.

Pseudocapacitance: Fundamentals to Advanced Applications
27
6 
Electrochemical Features of Pseudocapacitance 
The phenomenon known as pseudo capacity can be caused by a variety of causes, 
as was previously mentioned. In electrochemical terms, the appearance of some of 
the properties covered in this section is due to pseudocapacitance. This presents 
a description of pseudocapacitive energy storage [24], which is dependent on the 
response to (i) voltage sweep, as seen in the cyclic voltammetry; (ii) constant current, 
as seen in the galvanostatic cycling; & (iii) alternating current, as is seen in the 
impedance spectroscopy. 
The sweep rate (v, mV/s) for the experiment of cyclic voltammetry is what deter-
mines how long the experiment will last. This same parameter also establishes the 
chronology of the experiment. Based on whether the reaction of redox is controlled 
by surface reactions or diffusion processes, the current approach to a given sweep 
rate will vary (capacitive) [25]. In the particular instance of the capacitive process, 
the overall reaction varies directly along v, whereas the current response differs indi-
rect means with v by a factor of half in the case of a redox reaction conﬁned by 
semi-inﬁnite linear diffusion. Because of this, the fundamental connection described 
below may be utilized to characterise the current that is ﬂowing through any material 
at a speciﬁc potential [26]: 
i lef t parenthes is up
per V right parenthesis equals k 1 v Superscript 1 divided by 2 Baseline plus k 2 v
An analysis of the capacity and sweep rate relationship was ﬁrst suggested by 
Fröhlich et al. [27] and was included in a similar study. Surface-related capacity will 
always exist, even at high sweep rates, because it will remain constant with the rate 
of sweep. Even when the sweep rate is quite high, this is true. When processes are 
restricted by inﬁnitesimally slow linear diffusion, the capacity that results will vary 
with v −1/2. The inﬁnite-sweep rate capacity, normal upper Q Subscript v equals normal infinity, is used in the equation below to 
describe the capacitive contribution. The last contribution is made up of the capacity 
that is regulated by diffusion. This capacity is restricted by a value of v−1/2. 
up per Q equ als uppe
r
 Q Sub
script v equals normal infinity Baseline plus constant left parenthesis v Superscript negative 1 divided by 2 Baseline right parenthesis
Peak potential and sweep rate both characterise quick energy storage. During 
slow charge–discharge intervals, capacitive systems have very minimal potential 
hysteresis between charging and discharging. When charge–discharge periods are 
short, this is true. At slow sweep rates, cyclic voltammetry reveals negligible or zero 
potential difference among the cathodic & anodic peak currents for just a layer of 
about 30 nm Nb2O5 nanocrystals. 
Nernstian processes with a modest potential difference are also reversible. A 
reaction with n electrons has a maximum voltage differential of 59 mV [28]. This 
behaviour in transition metal oxides indicates either rapid energy storage without any 
phase shift or, in some incredibly uncommon circumstances, rapid energy storage 
with very little volume difference between the charged and discharged phases. It

28
S. Pande et al.
is crucial to remember that, even when used in areas of an electrochemical system 
where polarization is minimal, polarisation processes in electrochemical systems 
will always lead to peak voltage separation. This means that for thin layers of the 
transition-type metal oxides, an experiment must be run at sweep rates of about 
100 mV/s; the average range for these rates is between 1 and 10 mV/s [29]. 
Another technique to check for pseudocapacitive behaviour in a system is AC 
impedance; however, the interpretation of the impedance data depends on the equiv-
alent circuit that is best suited for the system. Moreover, the outcomes of the measure-
ments for the double-layer capacitance and the pseudocapacitance might be compa-
rable. Ideal capacitors have a vertical Nyquist representation (imaginary vs. real 
impedance, Z) with a phase angle of 90°. A constant-phase equivalent circuit member 
represents pseudocapacitive behavior. 
up per Z equals
 1 slash upper B left parenthesis i omega right parenthesis Superscript p
In this case, Z denotes the impedance, B represents the constant value, u denotes 
the frequency, & p denotes a variable constant. 
It is controversial whether the capacitance values shall be utilized to charac-
terize the electrochemical type of charge storage behavior of these materials because 
substances that do not exhibit any of these electrochemical properties do not have the 
property of being pseudocapacitive. In order to determine whether or not a material 
actually possesses pseudocapacitance, it is essential to carry out exhaustive research 
into the electrochemical behavior of the substance in question. This will allow one 
to determine deﬁnitively whether pseudocapacitance is present. Figure 5 provides 
a breakdown and summary of the electrochemical properties that are characteristic 
of pseudocapacitive materials in general [24]. Considering the primary considera-
tions that have been presented up until this point, the electrochemical behavior of a 
variety of different pseudocapacitive materials will be investigated and addressed in 
the following sections. 
Intrinsic Versus Extrinsic Pseudocapacitance 
It is possible for a material’s pseudocapacitance either to be intrinsic to the substance 
or extrinsic, i.e., to be created using suitable material engineering techniques. Despite 
whether the material is reviewed to be an extrinsic or intrinsic pseudo capacitor, it
Fig. 5 The electrochemical characteristics that are typical of materials with pseudocapacitance 

Pseudocapacitance: Fundamentals to Advanced Applications
29
displays all of these characteristics, so its properties are identical in both cases. 
Despite the diverse particle sizes & morphologies existing in these components, 
intrinsic pseudocapacitive materials show capacitive charge storage characteristics. 
Examples of these materials include RuO2 · nH2O, MnO2, and Nb2O5 [30]. Extrinsic 
materials, in contrast, hand, do not possess pseudocapacitance within the standard 
state because of the phase transitions that occur during the ion storage. When used 
on such materials, elevating the surface area via nanostructuring results in better 
high-rate behavior because diffusion lengths are reduced and, in some situations, 
phase transformations are suppressed. These two things working together have led 
to this improvement. These two features are shared by a large amount of transition 
metal oxides [31]. 
7 
Pseudocapacitive Electrode Architectures 
Pseudocapacitance experiments are usually done on electrodes that minimize thick-
ness effects (such electrolyte starvation or decreased particle-to-particle electron 
transmission) or are used for a speciﬁc operando characterization. These electrodes 
affect particle electron transport. Once a pseudocapacitive material shows enticing 
high-power behavior, the next step is to preserve the thin ﬁlm responsiveness in an 
electrode architecture with a large volumetric or areal capacity. This usually requires 
areal loadings larger than 10 mg/cm2. A continuous current and ionic network must 
span an electrode for high rates. Hence, electrode thickness alone doesn’t always 
effective [32, 33]. 
Two methods can produce the electrode’s electrical conductivity: (i) employing 
conductive additives like carbon black that are uniformly dissolved with an active 
material, or (ii) using hybridization to link the carbon and active material at the 
nanoscale. The electrode must maintain its networked and hierarchical porosity 
to properly access the electrolyte. Blending both phases is crucial when applying 
conductive additives. A calibrated mixing technique and an adequate particle amount 
and size of the conductive component are needed. Nanostructured active materials, 
which make up most pseudocapacitive materials, need this. Combining particles 
would make it hard to keep the nanoscale active material near the conductive addi-
tive across numerous cycles. That can be difﬁcult. Hybridizing the active material 
along a conductive carbon network is advised [34, 35]. 
In conclusion, one may distinguish between covering active materials on 
carbon sources, forming conductive carbon shells to cover active material, and co-
synthesizing carbon and active content by carefully analyzing these three approaches. 
Current applied research aims to create three-dimensional scaffolds or conductive 
networks with great areal performance at high speeds. Three-dimensional porous 
graphene networks containing Nb2O5 can be used. Connected gyroid structures with 
active material nanoparticles in a 3-D porous carbon framework are another example. 
These two examples demonstrate active materials [36, 37].

30
S. Pande et al.
8 
Various Materials of Energy Storage Devices 
Pseudocapacitive materials are promising for ion adsorption and/or intercalation-
based energy storage devices with high rates, energy densities, and efﬁciency. Hybrid 
capacitors and rechargeable batteries use them as electrodes. However, two variables 
must be understood to integrate pseudocapacitive materials into devices: (1) the 
electrolyte, which may differ for materials that function at pseudocapacitive time 
scales and require quick interfacial charge transfer, and (2) the inﬂuence of electrode 
coupling or cross talk. Pseudocapacitive and fast interfacial electron transport may 
require a speciﬁc electrolyte. 
Novel pseudocapacitive materials and gadgets will become more common. Pseu-
docapacitive MXenes need the proper electrolyte solvent, as shown recently. Wang 
and colleagues used Ti3C2 instead of dimethyl sulfoxide or acetonitrile to show 
that propylene carbonate doubled the charge storage capacity of organic electrolytes 
containing Li+ [38]. The carbonate electrolyte allowed complete Li+ desolation and 
frequent pseudocapacitive intercalation. Hence, matching electrode materials and 
selecting an appropriate solvent, electrode material, and electrolyte salt can improve 
a tested system’s pseudocapacitive performance. 
Pseudocapacitive materials are attractive for applications other than electrochem-
ical energy storage because their electrochemical charge transfer reactions are fast 
and reversible (EES). One of the most frequent ways for water deionization is capaci-
tive deionization, which uses EDL to adsorb aqueous ions on carbon electrodes. This 
water ion removal process is one of the most effective. This method is frequently 
considered the best. Pseudocapacitive materials, like EES, could increase ion storage 
capacity and maintain fast storage timescales for water ﬁltration. Like EES. Pseu-
docapacitive have been investigated for purposes other than energy storage [38–40]. 
The quick ion intercalation kinetics of these materials could enable fast actuation 
in actuators [41]. Actuators are just one example. Two types of pseudocapacitor 
components have been described in the following sections. 
8.1 
Aqueous Pseudocapacitor Materials 
Numerous different transition metal oxides for pseudocapacitive energy storage 
throughout aqueous electrolytes have been investigated. The behavior of such mate-
rials is inﬂuenced by their structural characteristics, hydration state characteristics, 
and electrolyte composition. One of the most fundamental differences between 
aqueous & non-aqueous types of pseudocapacitive materials is the impact of the 
structure & the surface-bound water. When structural water is present, it can provide 
an enormous “inner surface” which is open to ion adsorption, like in RuO2 · nH2O. 
Surface-bound water is absent from non-aqueous pseudocapacitive materials, though. 
It’s probable that the structural water also aids in the migration of ions into the inner

Pseudocapacitance: Fundamentals to Advanced Applications
31
surface. The following list of the most signiﬁcant chemicals that can be found in 
aqueous electrolytes will be covered in this section. 
8.1.1
MnO2 
While Lee and Goodenough were analysing the features of amorphous MnO2 · nH2O 
in an aqueous electrolyte containing KCl in 1999, they made the initial discovery 
of MnO2’s pseudocapacitive behavior. The formation of a rectangular voltammo-
gram & storage of roughly 200 F/g (240 C/g, 4 min) demonstrated that this material 
stored charge through rapid faradaic reactions. This conclusion was made because 
of the material’s ability to store charges. In most circumstances, the pseudocapaci-
tive energy storage of the manganese dioxide (MnO2) in the aqueous electrolyte is 
enabled by the redox process among the +4 &  +3 oxidation states of manganese at 
the surface & in bulk: 
MnO Subscript 2 Baseline plus xA Superscript plus Baseline plus xe Superscript minus Baseline left right arrow upper A Subscript x Baseline MnO Subscript 2 Baseline 
In this case, A stands for an alkali metal cation. Theoretically, given a 0.9 V 
potential window, 1-electron redox reaction (x = 1) equates to about 1233 F/g (1110 
C/g). MnO2 is particularly enticing when compared to RuO2 because it is readily 
available and inexpensive. MnO2 has been demonstrated through electrochemical 
research to have characteristics of intrinsic pseudocapacitive charge storage [42]. It 
is a highly desired material for use in electrochemical capacitors that are based on 
aqueous solutions due to its low cost, ample supply, and high theoretical capacitance. 
To reach its complete theoretical capacitance in the thick layers and at fast transfer 
rates, this material must ﬁrst increase its low degree of electronic conductivity [24]. 
This is a major challenge. 
8.1.2
RuO2 · nH2O 
The ﬁrst pseudocapacitance material was hydrous RuO2. Due to its exceptional qual-
ities, improved electrodes have been made from its rarity and expensive cost. These 
works have sought to maximize theoretical capacitance and minimize RuO2 use. The 
traditional slurry method achieves a capacitance value of about 720 F/g and charge– 
discharge period of approximately 8 min when the mass loading of RuO2 · nH2O 
is increased to a high level (30 mg/cm2). The capacitance that can be theoretically 
expected from RuO2 · nH2O is half of this value. When RuO2 nanoparticles are 
spread over activated carbon, the capacitances that are produced are 1340 F/g for the 
charging–discharging duration of 1 min. This value is close to what was projected. 
Because of the effective electrolyte exposure, capacitance, and rate rise exhibited by 
RuO2 · nH2O. Areal capacitance is decreased thanks to this electrode architecture’s 
lower mass loading of RuO2 · nH2O/ area of footprint, which is, of course, referenced 
in Makino et al. [43].

32
S. Pande et al.
8.1.3
Nanostructured Layered Metal Hydroxides 
M2+(OH)2 lamellar structures are made up of MO6 octahedra that are separated from 
one another by hydrogen atoms. Whenever some of the transition metals appear in the 
+3 state, the intercalation of anion species into the interlayer space can compensate 
for the slabs’ higher positive charge, which results in layered dual hydroxide forma-
tion. The interlayer gap in hydroxides is on the order of several nanometres, which 
enables reversible ion intercalation. The hydroxides of transition metals like nickel 
and cobalt play an important role as electrodes within the rechargeable aqueous types 
of batteries. These materials undergo at least one phase shift, which allows them to 
maintain constant potential during the galvanostatic charging–discharging thereby 
simultaneously limiting their rate capabilities [44]. 
8.2 
Emergence of Pseudocapacitance in RuO2 
RuO2 was shown to contain a novel electrochemical capacitance known as pseudoca-
pacitance, which incorporates faradaic charge-transfer reactions. This kind of capac-
itance was found in RuO2. From electrolyte proton storage, a RuO2 thin ﬁlm type 
electrode established a faradaic charge carrier mechanism. Although being faradaic, 
the Cyclic Voltammogram (CV) was rectangular like a capacitor [16–18, 43]. The 
following formula describes how hydrated RuO2 stores protons: 
RuO Subscr ipt x Baseline left parenth
esis OH right parenthesis Subscript y Baseline plus delta upper H Superscript plus Baseline plus delta e Superscript minus Baseline left right arrow RuO Subscript x negative delta Baseline left parenthesis OH right parenthesis Subscript x plus delta
Four RuO2 0.5H2O properties enable fast faradaic reactions along with a higher 
capacitance: (i) the redox behavior of the Ru4+ cation, which permits a faradaic type 
energy storage; (ii) metallic conductivity exhibited by RuO2, which facilitates rapid 
electron transfer; (iii) structural water, which allows rapid transport of proton inside 
the “inner surface”; & (iv) a large “outer” surface area, which reduces diffusivity. Four 
traits deﬁne the faradaic effect. Unfortunately, except for extremely small devices like 
micro-supercapacitors, the high price of ruthenium (which is now around US$2,000 
per kilogram) makes it unfeasible for devices based on RuO2 to be used widely. 
Nonetheless, the behavior of hydrous RuO2 was the ﬁrst to show that certain systems 
can produce electrochemical properties similar to those of a capacitor as a result 
of reversible faradaic processes. The examination of RuO2 also helped scientists 
understand the qualities of a material that would be suitable for use as a pseudo 
capacitor in aqueous electrolytes.

Pseudocapacitance: Fundamentals to Advanced Applications
33
8.3 
Non-aqueous Electrolyte Pseudo Capacitor Materials 
Nonaqueous lithium-ion and sodium-ion electrolytes can cause pseudocapacitive 
behavior in some materials. Pseudocapacitance occurs when an ion causes a redox 
reaction, neutralizing the charge. They may also have fast-ion-insertion structures. 
Structural water does not conduct ions like in aqueous pseudocapacitive materials 
since electrolytes are not aqueous. Unlike structural water in aqueous pseudocapac-
itive materials. Structural water may destroy the electrochemical cell. Non-aqueous 
electrolytes use pseudocapacitive materials with increased capacitance over higher 
potential ranges than aqueous electrolytes. Non-aqueous electrolytes lack water. This 
is one of several beneﬁts of using these materials. 
up per E
 
equa
ls 1 divided by 2 left parenthesis CV squared right parenthesis
E stands for energy density and is expressed in (J/g), C for capacitance and is 
expressed in (F/g) & V for potential range (V). With this, extending the potential 
range from the value of 1–4 V can increase energy density by almost an order of 
magnitude. 
8.3.1
Amorphous Materials 
The charge–discharge behavior of amorphous materials is characterized by a single-
phase ion intercalation action. If they are repeatedly subjected to electrochemical 
cycling or if the intercalation of ions happens after a speciﬁc composition has been 
reached, certain crystalline materials can change into amorphous ones, as will be 
illustrated in more detail for V2O5 in the following section. Even though amorphous 
materials’ chaotic structure can beneﬁt EES, it’s probable that these materials won’t 
be as capable as their crystalline counterparts. Their high-rate capabilities determine 
if amorphous substances are appropriate for pseudocapacitive EES [45–48]. Amor-
phous Nb2O5 & MoO3 depict lower capacitances as compared to the crystalline 
counterparts, even when charging for a brief period of time and also within the form 
of thin ﬁlm. These results suggest that crystalline materials have better kinetics or 
charge storage, which increases speciﬁc capacitance. 
8.3.2
V2O5 
Vanadium oxide’s layered structures improve EES greatly. Vanadium’s numerous 
oxidation states make its chemistry quite complex. An article described several of 
these items. Vanadium’s high oxidation state allows formula units to store more than 
one electron (+5, +4, +3, & +2 are all electrochemically accessible). This property 
makes V2O5 a very desirable material for use in EES [49].

34
S. Pande et al.
8.3.3
TiO2(B) and Hydrogen Titanates 
Hydrogen titanates, particularly H2Ti3O7 and TiO2 (B), have been explored for pseu-
docapacitive electro electrochemical storage. Like other titanium oxides, these mate-
rials store charge via the Ti + 4/ + 3 redox pair; in addition, lithium-ion intercalation 
occurs at potentials lower than 2 V versus Li/Li+. Heating these materials causes 
dehydration and thus the creation of the TiO2(B) phase, which also comprises two 
edge-sharing TiO6 octahedra with linked corners. The edge-sharing TiO6 octahedra 
that make up the layered structures of the hydrogen titanates are spaced apart by 
protons [27, 36]. 
8.3.4
T-Nb2O5 
At sweep speeds of up to a value of 50–60 mV/s, which correspond to charging-
discharging times of one minute, the T-Nb2O5 material exhibits properties that are 
typical of pseudocapacitive charge storage. Large redox peaks may be seen in the 
cyclic voltammograms, or CVs, that appear below 2 V. In addition, the galvanostatic 
charging-discharging character trait is nearly linear. Throughout a wide range of 
sweep rates, peak current rises linearly with the sweep rate. Together with TiO2(B) 
and the hydrogen titanates, T-Nb2O5 could be identiﬁed as a material with intrinsic 
intercalation pseudocapacitance throughout non-aqueous electrolytes. Given that T-
Nb2O5 doesn’t contain any water, this is the case. Unlike other kinds of intrinsic 
pseudo capacitors, including those based on V2O5, these don’t need to have a lot of 
surface area [43]. 
9 
Conclusions 
The appealing combination of a high EES rate and a high EES energy density can 
be found in pseudocapacitive transition metal oxides. Because of their low energy 
density, such types of materials possess the potential to surpass the restrictions 
imposed by electrochemical capacitors. According to an analytical deﬁnition, pseu-
docapacitance exists anytime the potential is based on the charge level of the charged 
item. The numerous electrochemical properties displayed by a material showing 
pseudocapacitive behavior can all be rapidly and easily identiﬁed using a CV, AC 
impedance, or a charge–discharge plot of galvanostatic. Certain substances, including 
RuO2 · 0.5H2O, TiO2(B), MnO2, and Nb2O5, naturally function as pseudo capaci-
tors. This means that even with small surface areas and composite electrode designs, 
the pseudocapacitive behavior can be seen. The pseudocapacitive behavior of other 
materials can only be observed when utilizing electrodes with extremely high surface 
areas and complicated designs, which serve to reveal as much of the surface of a mate-
rial as is reasonably possible to the electrolyte. These resources consist of the bulk 
forms of common battery components like Ni(OH)2 and V2O5 are typically employed

Pseudocapacitance: Fundamentals to Advanced Applications
35
in extrinsic pseudocapacitors. It is crucial to show pseudocapacitive electrochemical 
capabilities that go beyond only having a high capacitance over a brief period when 
working with materials of this kind. 
Pseudocapacitor materials must overcome two major hurdles to be used in elec-
tronics. Devices need continual material and electrode measurements. As noted, 
charge–discharge operations on a material that lasts tens of minutes utilizing modest 
weight loadings or thin ﬁlms may confuse the material as a high energy density 
pseudo capacitor. A pseudo capacitor’s charge–discharge behavior must be less than 
one minute, its capacitance must be more than 300 F/g, and its active material mass 
loading must be >1 mg/cm2. 
The design of pseudocapacitive devices is the second signiﬁcant challenge. Two 
pseudocapacitive transition metal oxide electrodes are uncommon in electronics. It 
can be challenging to locate pseudocapacitive material couplings with high-voltage 
devices & good rate capabilities. To attain greater power and energy densities within 
the same material, EES should switch from low mass loading, three-electrode studies 
to high mass loading, two-electrode cells with higher rate capabilities. 
References 
1. L. Hao, B. Luo, X. Li, M. Jin, Y. Fang, Z. Tang, Y. Jia, M. Liang, A. Thomas, J. Yang, L. 
Zhi, Terephthalonitrile-derived nitrogen-rich networks for high performance supercapacitors. 
Energy Environ. Sci. 5, 9747–9751 (2012) 
2. X. Hua, Z. Liu, M.G. Fischer, O. Borkiewicz, P.J. Chupas, K.W. Chapman, U. Steiner, P.G. 
Bruce, C.P. Grey, Lithiation thermodynamics and kinetics of the TiO2 (B) nanoparticles. J. 
Am. Chem. Soc. 139, 13330–13341 (2017) 
3. I. Hanghofer, B. Gadermaier, H.M.R. Wilkening, Fast rotational dynamics in argyrodite-type 
Li6PS5X (X: Cl, Br, I) as seen by 31P nuclear magnetic relaxation—on cation-anion coupled 
transport in thiophosphates. Chem. Mater. 31, 4591–4597 (2019) 
4. H. Chen, T.N. Cong, W. Yang, C. Tan, Y. Li, Y. Ding, Progress in electrical energy storage 
system: a critical review. Prog. Nat. Sci. 19, 291–312 (2009) 
5. H.L. Ferreira, R. Garde, G. Fulli, W. Kling, J.P. Lopes, Characterisation of electrical energy 
storage technologies. Energy 53, 288–298 (2013) 
6. M. Zhu, J. Park, A.M. Sastry, Fracture analysis of the cathode in li-ion batteries: a simulation 
study,.ECS Meet. Abstr. MA2012-01, 972–972 (2012) 
7. J.R. Miller, A.F. Burke, Electrochemical capacitors: challenges and opportunities for real-world 
applications. Electrochem. Soc. Interface 17, 53–57 (2008) 
8. P. Miller, John R., Simon, Electrochemical capacitors for energy management. Science (80–), 
5889, 651–652 (2008) 
9. H. Gualous, H. Louahlia-Gualous, R. Gallay, A. Miraoui, Supercapacitor thermal modeling 
and characterization in transient state for industrial applications. IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl. 45, 
1035–1044 (2009) 
10. H. Lv, Q. Pan, Y. Song, X.X. Liu, T. Liu, A review on nano-/microstructured materials 
constructed by electrochemical technologies for supercapacitors. Nano-Micro Lett. 12 (2020) 
11. X. Fan, B. Liu, J. Liu, J. Ding, X. Han, Y. Deng, X. Lv, Y. Xie, B. Chen, W. Hu, C. Zhong, 
Battery technologies for grid-level large-scale electrical energy storage. Trans. Tianjin Univ. 
26, 92–103 (2020)

36
S. Pande et al.
12. N. Zaman, R.A. Malik, H. Alrobei, J. Kim, M. Latif, A. Hussain, A. Maqbool, R.A. Karim, 
M. Saleem, M.A. Raﬁq, Z. Abbas, Structural and electrochemical analysis of decarburized 
graphene electrodes for supercapacitor applications. Crystals 10, 1–12 (2020) 
13. T. Brousse, D. Bélanger, J.W. Long, To be or not to be pseudocapacitive? J. Electrochem. Soc. 
162, A5185–A5189 (2015) 
14. M.E. Abdelhamid, A.P. O’Mullane, G.A. Snook, Storing energy in plastics: a review on 
conducting polymers & their role in electrochemical energy storage. RSC Adv. 5, 11611–11626 
(2015) 
15. A.M. Bryan, L.M. Santino, Y. Lu, S. Acharya, J.M. D’Arcy, Conducting polymers for 
pseudocapacitive energy storage. Chem. Mater. 28, 5989–5998 (2016) 
16. F.Z. Amir, V.H. Pham, J.H. Dickerson, Facile synthesis of ultra-small ruthenium oxide nanopar-
ticles anchored on reduced graphene oxide nanosheets for high-performance supercapacitors. 
RSC Adv. 5, 67638–67645 (2015) 
17. J.S. Seenath, D. Pech, D. Rochefort, Investigation of protic ionic liquid electrolytes for porous 
RuO2 micro-supercapacitors. J. Power. Sources 548, 232040 (2022) 
18. Q. Jiang, N. Kurra, M. Alhabeb, Y. Gogotsi, H.N. Alshareef, All pseudocapacitive MXene-
RuO2 asymmetric supercapacitors. Adv. Energy Mater. 8 (2018) 
19. Y. Jiang, J. Liu, Deﬁnitions of pseudocapacitive materials: a brief review. Energy Environ. 
Mater. 2, 30–37 (2019) 
20. Q. Gui, L. Wu, Y. Li, J. Liu, Scalable wire-type asymmetric pseudocapacitor achieving high 
volumetric energy/power densities and ultralong cycling stability of 100,000 times. Adv. Sci. 
6, 1802067 (2019) 
21. Q. Wei, R.H. DeBlock, D.M. Butts, C. Choi, B. Dunn, Pseudocapacitive vanadium-based 
materials toward high-rate sodium-ion storage. Energy Environ. Mater. 3, 221–234 (2020) 
22. Y. Jiang, Y. Shen, J. Dong, S. Tan, Q. Wei, F. Xiong, Q. Li, X. Liao, Z. Liu, Q. An, L. 
Mai, Surface pseudocapacitive mechanism of molybdenum phosphide for high-energy and 
high-power sodium-ion capacitors. Adv. Energy Mater. 9 (2019) 
23. M.R. Lukatskaya, S. Kota, Z. Lin, M.-Q. Zhao, N. Shpigel, M.D. Levi, J. Halim, P.-L. Taberna, 
M.W. Barsoum, P. Simon, Y. Gogotsi, Ultra-high-rate pseudocapacitive energy storage in two-
dimensional transition metal carbides. Nat. Energy 2, 17105 (2017) 
24. V. Augustyn, P. Simon, B. Dunn, Pseudocapacitive oxide materials for high-rate electrochem-
ical energy storage. Energy Environ. Sci. 7, 1597 (2014) 
25. B. Dunn, H.D. Abruña, P.-L. Taberna, J.W. Kim, S.H. Tolbert, M.A. Lowe, J. Come, P. 
Simon, V. Augustyn, High-rate electrochemical energy storage through Li+ intercalation 
pseudocapacitance. Nat. Mater. 12, 518–522 (2013) 
26. T. Liu, Y. Li, Addressing the Achilles’ heel of pseudocapacitive materials: long-term stability. 
InfoMat. 2, 807–842 (2020) 
27. K. Fröhlich, M. ˇTapajna, A. Rosová, E. Dobroˇcka, K. Hušeková, J. Aarik, A. Aidla, 
Growth of high-dielectric-constant TiO[sub 2] ﬁlms in capacitors with RuO[sub 2] electrodes. 
Electrochem. Solid-State Lett. 11, G19 (2008) 
28. H.-S. Kim, J.B. Cook, S.H. Tolbert, B. Dunn, The development of pseudocapacitive properties 
in nanosized-MoO2. J. Electrochem. Soc. 162, A5083–A5090 (2015) 
29. A. Jadon, S. Prabhudev, G. Buvat, S.G. Patnaik, M. Djafari-Rouhani, A. Estève, D. Guay, D. 
Pech, Rethinking pseudocapacitance: a way to harness charge storage of crystalline RuO2. 
ACS Appl. Energy Mater. 3, 4144–4148 (2020) 
30. H.B. Li, M.H. Yu, F.X. Wang, P. Liu, Y. Liang, J. Xiao, C.X. Wang, Y.X. Tong, G.W. Yang, 
Amorphous nickel hydroxide nanospheres with ultrahigh capacitance and energy density as 
electrochemical pseudocapacitor materials. Nat. Commun. 4, 1894 (2013) 
31. X. Yu, S. Yun, J.S. Yeon, P. Bhattacharya, L. Wang, S.W. Lee, X. Hu, H.S. Park, Emergent 
pseudocapacitance of 2d nanomaterials. Adv. Energy Mater. 8, 1702930 (2018) 
32. Y. Gogots, P. Simon, True performance metrics in electrochemical energy storage. Science 
(80–), 334, 917–918 (2011) 
33. L. Yu, G.Z. Chen, Supercapatteries as high-performance electrochemical energy storage 
devices. Electrochem. Energy Rev. 3, 271–285 (2020)

Pseudocapacitance: Fundamentals to Advanced Applications
37
34. C. Wang, X. Wang, C. Lin, X.S. Zhao, Lithium titanate cuboid arrays grown on carbon ﬁber 
cloth for high-rate ﬂexible lithium-ion batteries. Small 15, 1902183 (2019) 
35. Z. Chen, V. Augustyn, J. Wen, Y. Zhang, M. Shen, B. Dunn, Y. Lu, High-performance superca-
pacitors based on intertwined CNT/V2O5 nanowire nanocomposites. Adv. Mater. 23, 791–795 
(2011) 
36. T.S. Dörr, S. Fleischmann, M. Zeiger, I. Grobelsek, P.W. de Oliveira, V. Presser, Ordered 
mesoporous titania/carbon hybrid monoliths for lithium-ion battery anodes with high areal and 
volumetric capacity. Chem.—A Eur. J. 24, 6358–6363 (2018) 
37. S. Fleischmann, T.S. Dörr, A. Frank, S.W. Hieke, D. Doblas-Jimenez, C. Scheu, P.W. 
de Oliveira, T. Kraus, V. Presser, Gyroidal niobium sulﬁde/carbon hybrid monoliths for 
electrochemical energy storage. Batter. Supercaps. 2, 668–672 (2019) 
38. X. Wang, T.S. Mathis, K. Li, Z. Lin, L. Vlcek, T. Torita, N.C. Osti, C. Hatter, P. Urbankowski, 
A. Sarycheva, M. Tyagi, E. Mamontov, P. Simon, Y. Gogotsi, Inﬂuences from solvents on 
charge storage in titanium carbide MXenes. Nat. Energy 4, 241–248 (2019) 
39. M.E. Suss, V. Presser, Water desalination with energy storage electrode materials. Joule 2, 
10–15 (2018) 
40. P. Srimuk, X. Su, J. Yoon, D. Aurbach, V. Presser, Charge-transfer materials for electrochemical 
water desalination, ion separation and the recovery of elements. Nat. Rev. Mater. 5, 517–538 
(2020) 
41. F. Zhu, Q. Xiao, Z. Hu, J. Ma, S. Komarneni, In situ formation of MnO2/Ni(OH)2@nickel 
foam with porous architecture for triggering persulfate-based advanced oxidation process. J. 
Porous Mater. 29, 1629–1637 (2022) 
42. D. Chen, D. Ding, X. Li, G.H. Waller, X. Xiong, M.A. El-Sayed, M. Liu, Probing the 
charge storage mechanism of a pseudocapacitive MnO2 electrode using in operando Raman 
spectroscopy. Chem. Mater. 27, 6608–6619 (2015) 
43. S. Makino, T. Ban, W. Sugimoto, Towards implantable bio-supercapacitors: pseudocapac-
itance of ruthenium oxide nanoparticles and nanosheets in acids, buffered solutions, and 
bioelectrolytes. J. Electrochem. Soc. 162, A5001–A5006 (2015) 
44. S. Fleischmann, J.B. Mitchell, R. Wang, C. Zhan, D. Jiang, V. Presser, V. Augustyn, Pseudo-
capacitance: from fundamental understanding to high power energy storage materials. Chem. 
Rev. 120, 6738–6782 (2020) 
45. B. Pandit, S.A. Pande, B.R. Sankapal, Facile SILAR processed Bi2S3:PbS solid solution on 
MWCNTs for high-performance electrochemical supercapacitor. Chinese J. Chem. 37, 1279– 
1286 (2019) 
46. S.S. Karade, A. Agarwal, B. Pandit, R.V. Motghare, S.A. Pande, B.R. Sankapal, First report on 
solution processed α-Ce2S3 rectangular microrods: an efﬁcient energy storage supercapacitive 
electrode. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 535, 169–175 (2019) 
47. S.A. Pande, B. Pandit, B.R. Sankapal, Electrochemical approach of chemically synthesized 
HgS nanoparticles as supercapacitor electrode. Mater. Lett. 209, 97–101 (2017) 
48. S. Patil, S. Raut, B. Pandit, S.N. Pandey, S.A. Pande, B. Sankapal, Web-analogues one-
dimensional iron hydroxide@cadmium hydroxide nanostructure: electrochemical supercapac-
itor. J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Electron. 32, 22472–22480 (2021) 
49. S.A. Pande, B. Pandit, B.R. Sankapal, Vanadium oxide anchored MWCNTs nanostructure for 
superior symmetric electrochemical supercapacitors. Mater. Des. 182, 107972 (2019)

Pseudocapacitance: Mechanism 
and Characteristics 
G. Srividhya and N. Ponpandian 
Abstract Pseudocapacitance is a mechanism of charge storage in electrochem-
ical devices, which has the capability of delivering higher energy density than 
conventional electrochemical double-layer capacitance and higher power density 
than batteries. In contrast to electric double-layer capacitors (EDLC) where charge 
storage is mainly due to the electrostatic interaction of ions in the electrolyte with 
the electrode, in pseudocapacitors charge storage between the electrode–electrolyte 
interface is associated with a highly reversible redox reaction or intercalation. Though 
by deﬁnition pseudocapacitors involve faradic processes, they are largely different 
from faradic processes that occur in batteries. With extensive research and develop-
ment of nanoscale materials, which give different electrochemical capacitive signa-
tures for varying particle size, the deﬁnition of pseudocapacitance is highly misin-
terpreted and often a battery-type material is reported as pseudocapacitive material, 
misreporting the capacitance to exaggerated values. There is a lack of understanding 
among the electrochemical research community in differentiating the pseudocapac-
itive process from others. This chapter aims to provide a comprehensive note on 
understanding the fundamentals of pseudocapacitance, its origin, and different type 
of pseudocapacitive charge storage mechanisms. The electrochemical characteristics 
of pseudocapacitive along with that of EDLC and battery-type material are discussed 
to help the reader understand the differentiation. 
Keywords Supercapacitors · Pseudocapacitance · Double layer capacitance ·
Charge storage mechanism · Speciﬁc capacitance
G. Srividhya · N. Ponpandian envelope symbol 
Department of Nanoscience and Technology, Bharathiar University, CoimbatoreTamilnadu 641 
046, India 
e-mail: ponapandian@buc.edu.in 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
R. K. Gupta (ed.), Pseudocapacitors, Engineering Materials, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45430-1_3 
39

40
G. Srividhya and N. Ponpandian
1 Introduction 
Supercapacitors are electrochemical charge storage devices that have very high 
capacitance values when compared with conventional dielectric capacitors. The 
higher values of the capacitance of electrochemical supercapacitors, that use 
nanomaterials as electrodes, mainly arise from the following two features: 
(i) the origin of the double layer of charges in the electrode–electrolyte interface, 
acting as a molecular dielectric of very small thickness 
(ii) the usage of porous carbonaceous materials with high surface area as the 
electrode 
Capacitance com ma uper C equals StartFraction epsilon upper A Over d EndFraction
Ca
pacitance comma upper C equals StartFraction epsilon upper A Over d EndFraction
where ε is the permittivity, A is the surface area of the electrode, and d is the 
thickness of the dielectric. With reduced d due to petite double layer thickness 
and increased A, supercapacitors show very high capacitance values. Hence, 
they can serve in numerous modern applications such as wearable and portable 
electronics, particularly power devices and electrical vehicles, where lithium-
ion batteries (LIBs) could not deliver high power density. Conventionally, super-
capacitors or ultra-capacitors are double-layer capacitors; even though they have 
high power density and rate capability, they have low energy storage capability 
(5–10 Wh/kg) [1], and hence are restricted to use in emerging electrical vehicles 
applications. However, there is another type of capacitance with high energy 
density, called pseudocapacitance, where the storage of charge is different from 
the electrochemical double-layer capacitors (EDLCs), with the accompanying 
of faradic processes. Thus, pseudocapacitance enables us to ﬁnd a middle ground 
between high-energy–density LIBs and high-power-density EDLCs. 
The term “pseudo” is a Greek word that means “appear like” or “pretend”. Hence, 
pseudocapacitance is a mechanism that is not true to the original or traditional elec-
trochemical capacitance which arises purely from the establishment of a double layer 
in the interface between a charged (polarized) electrode and electrolyte. Generally, 
two types of processes or reactions take place in an electrode–electrolyte interface. 
(i) non-faradic electrosorption and desorption of opposite electrolyte ions onto the 
charged electrode surface, well within the electrode–electrolyte interface, with 
no chemical reaction or phase transformation taking place. 
(ii) faradic redox reactions, where the electron transfer across the electrode–elec-
trolyte interface takes place, ensuing the formation of new chemical species, 
involving phase transformation. 
Since the faradic redox reactions involve phase transformation, they are mass 
transfer limited. Among the three processes that govern the mass transfer, convection 
does not play a signiﬁcant role, considering the very thin (extending only up to a few 
nanometres) interfaces and the migration effect is made negligible with the use of

Pseudocapacitance: Mechanism and Characteristics
41
a heavily concentrated electrolyte. Hence, faradic processes across the interface are 
controlled mainly by diffusion, making them extend up to minutes. 
The EDLCs are governed by the non-faradic process and hence occur within 
seconds, delivering high power. Though pseudocapacitors also involve faradic 
processes, they are highly reversible, extending from a few seconds to a few minutes, 
and not controlled by diffusion. This chapter discusses the charge storage mechanism, 
the origination of pseudocapacitance, and the characteristics of pseudocapacitive 
devices in the following sections. 
2 Capacitance and Pseudocapacitance 
in the Electrode–Electrolyte Interface 
Though the current chapter focuses on the pseudocapacitance charge storage mech-
anism, and detailed EDLC mechanism is out of scope, a brief discussion of EDLC 
and consequently electric double layer (EDL) is necessary for proper understanding 
of the subject. 
Hermann Von Helmholtz proposed that when a conductive charged electrode is 
immersed into an electrolyte, counter-ions in the electrolyte are attracted towards 
the electrolyte, forming two layers of opposite charges next to each other as 
shown in Fig. 1a. This double layer of charges acts like a molecular dielectric 
where the charge is stored electrostatically. The physical separation of charges 
constitutes a capacitance C, which is a differential constant, dependent on dielectric 
permittivity and double-layer thickness (Eq. 1). Later, the Gouy-Chapman duo 
suggested a diffuse ionic layer, rather than a static ionic layer, considering the charge 
distribution of the electrolyte ions. The failure of Guoy-Chapman model to explain 
high capacitance was overcome by Otto Stern who proposed a combination of a 
Stern layer of immobile adsorbed ions, as proposed by Helmholtz, and a diffuse 
layer of ions, as suggested by Guoy-Chapman model. The potential at the interface 
varies in a linear fashion in the Stern layer and exponentially in the diffuse layer 
with respect to the distance. The formation and collapse of the double layer are 
almost instantaneous, occurring in the time scale of microseconds, resulting in rapid 
charging and discharging, which exceptional cycle-life.
On further development with the EDL, D. C. Grahame put forth that some charged 
or neutral species without the solvation shell, can penetrate the Stern layer and get 
“speciﬁcally adsorbed” to the electrode surface. Here, the solvation shell refers to 
electrolyte ions that are surrounded by solvent molecules. The speciﬁcally adsorbed 
ions can involve in charge transfer with the electrode, resulting in pesudocapacity, 
which refers to reversible ionic capacity under high potential (opposite to that of the 
ionic charge) at the electrode, which is not associated with the EDL. Later Bockris, 
Devanathan, and Muller (BDM) trio modiﬁed the Grahame model, where the solvent 
molecules show a preferred orientation at the electrode surface and align themselves 
according to the electric ﬁeld in the interface, inﬂuencing the permittivity to a large 
extent. The distance between the surface of the electrode and the centre of the solvent

42
G. Srividhya and N. Ponpandian
Fig. 1 Schematic illustration of EDL a Stern model and b BDM model. Schematic of charge 
storage through c double-layer capacitance and d pseudocapacitance. Adapted with permission [2], 
copyright (2011), Springer Nature
molecules forms the inner Helmholtz plane (IHP) as given in Fig. 1b. The speciﬁcally 
adsorbed ions present in the IHP contribute to pseudocapacitance. 
The electrochemical investigation of Trassati and Buzzanca on ruthenium oxide 
thin ﬁlms showed that at low voltages ruthenium oxide electrode show capacitor-
like behaviour with speciﬁcally adsorbed ions. Though the speciﬁc adsorption of ions 
suggests a partial charge transfer between the electrode and the electrolyte, the cyclic 
voltammogram of these electrodes was near-rectangular like that of EDLCs [3]. The 
deﬁnition of pseudocapacitance was ﬁrst given by B.E. Conway [4]. He explained 
that pseudocapacitance originates at the electrode surface, when there is a transfer 
of charges across the double layers, as in batteries, however, due to thermodynamic 
reasons, there is linear relation, between the charge acceptance (Δq) and the change 
in potential (ΔV), such that the derivative dQ/dV is equal to capacitance. 
up per C equals StartFraction d upper Q Over d upper V EndFraction
upp
er C equals StartFraction d upper Q Over d upper V EndFraction
Hence, pseudocapacitance, though faradic in origin, shows rectangular cyclic 
voltammetry (CV) signature and shows direct proportionality between the charge 
and the potential. It is to be noted that pseudocapacitance does not denote the absence 
of an EDL, rather that highly reversible charge transfer occurs across the EDL. 
Fig. 1c, d gives an idea about the distance from the electrode surface at which 
EDLC and pseudocapacitance arise can be understood. In EDLCs, the charge storage 
mainly occurs in the Helmholtz double layer of nanometre thickness, whereas in pseu-
docapacitors, the H+ ions from the electrolyte at micrometre distances are passed over 
to get speciﬁcally adsorbed to the electrode in IHP, resulting in a surface redox reac-
tion. The surface or near-surface redox reactions that cause pseudocapacitance are 
signiﬁcantly faster than those taking place in batteries, and hence the electrochem-
ical signatures of pseudocapacitance are like that of EDLC, but with substantially 
increased capacitance. For instance, the theoretical speciﬁc capacitance value that 
can be attained with activated carbon with EDLC nature is 300 F/g, whereas that 
of hydrated ruthenium oxide is 3 times greater with a value of 1580 F/g [5]. It is to 
be noted that the charge is transferred only across the surface and there is no chem-
ical reaction between the speciﬁcally adsorbed ions and the electrode’s atoms, i.e.,

Pseudocapacitance: Mechanism and Characteristics
43
no chemical bonds are created, or no phase transformation occurs, as in batteries. 
Hence, pseudocapacitors have better energy density than EDLCs and have better 
power density than batteries 
3 Pseudocapacitance Charge Transfer Mechanisms 
Pseudocapacitance occurs via three identiﬁed faradic pathways, as follows. 
(i) Under-potential deposition (UPD) 
(ii) Surface redox pseudocapacitance 
(iii) Intercalation pseudocapacitance 
The three mechanisms of pseudocapacitance are depicted in Fig. 2. 
3.1 
Under-Potential Deposition 
The general term, Under-potential deposition (UPD) is the deposition of atomic 
monolayers of a metal from its cationic solution, onto a different metal substrate 
(mostly a noble metal) at potentials that are less negative than the thermodynamic 
reduction potential that is usually required for the deposition of the metal as the 
substrate. The deposition of lead (Pb) monolayer into gold (Au) surface is a char-
acteristic example of UPD [7]. During this process, a partial and highly reversible 
charge transfer occurs between the deposited metal and the substrate metal. The CV 
proﬁle of such process shows strong redox peaks that are attributed to the formation 
of metal monolayer structures onto the noble metal substrate. At very low sweep rates 
of ~5 mV/s, the peak current shows a linear dependence of the scan rate, denoting
Fig. 2 Schematic of Pseudocapacitance mechanisms a UPD, b surface redox pseudocapacitance 
and c intercalation pseudocapacitance. Adapted with permission [6], copyright (2020), Elsevier 

44
G. Srividhya and N. Ponpandian
the foundation of a faradic capacitance. Different from electrodeposition, UPD is the 
adsorption of the metal atom onto the underlying metal substrate, along with a partial 
charge transfer between the metals. This process is not employed to develop high 
capacitive devices, as it works only in a limited potential window, thus leading to low 
capacitance. Moreover, the usage of noble metals like gold makes them economically 
unviable. 
3.2 
Surface Redox Pseudocapacitance 
Redox pseudocapacitance originates from the kinetically fast redox reaction between 
an electrode and the electrolyte. Thin ﬁlms of metal oxides such as RuO2 exhibit 
redox pseudocapacitance, which is chieﬂy due to the fast kinetics of electron–proton 
transfer by RuO2 due to high conductivity [3]. Metal oxides such as MnO2 and 
Fe2O3 and conductive polymers show pseudo capacitive nature, due to their multiple 
oxidation states that enable fast redox reactions. In conducting polymers, the charge 
storage occurs via electrochemical doping of ions from the electrolyte to the electrode 
leading to the reduction of oxidation of the polymer backbone. Redox pseudocapaci-
tors show near rectangular CV curves and linear variation of current with scan rate. It 
is to be noted that even in EDLCs, redox pseudocapacitance contributes to nearly 5 to 
10% of the energy, due to the faradic reactivity of oxygen functional groups present 
at the edges of the EDLC electrode, due to the electrode preparation technique. 
3.3 
Intercalation Pseudocapacitance 
The rapid intercalation of ions into the tunnels, layers, and crystal structure of redox-
active electrodes, resulting in a faradic reaction without any phase transformation, 
give rise to intercalation pseudocapacitance, as demonstrated by Augstyn et al. [8]. 
In contrast to LIBs where the intercalation is a slow, diffusion-controlled process 
that results in a phase transformation, intercalation pseudocapacitors undergo rapid 
diffusion of ions and hence, there is no phase transformation [9]. Intercalation pseu-
docapacitance commonly occurs in non-aqueous electrolytes. In transition metal 
oxides like TiO2, Nb2O5 and layered materials like nitrides (MXenes) and sulﬁdes, 
there are certain crystallographic planes wherein the Li+ can be inserted very rapidly, 
without inducing a phase change [10]. The non-diffusion limited intercalation pseu-
docapacitance shows power density that cannot be achieved with LIBs. The cyclic 
voltammograms of intercalation pseudocapacitors show redox peaks, owing to partial 
charge transfer with the insertion and removal of ions from the host crystal or elec-
trode tunnel, with reversible redox peaks, separated by a very small voltage differ-
ence. Similar to redox capacitors, the current increases linearly with the sweep rate, 
denoting that the process is not diffusion limited (where current increases linearly 
with the square root of the sweep rate).

Pseudocapacitance: Mechanism and Characteristics
45
4 Origin of Pseudocapacitance 
In EDLCs, the double layer is formed due to the addition or removal of the delocalized 
high-energy electrons in the conduction band from the electrode, from the conduction 
band. The polarization caused by this change in the conduction band electrons in the 
electrode is balanced by the transfer of positive or negative ionic charges in the 
electrolyte side of the electrode–electrolyte interface. The density of charges on the 
electrode surface is voltage-dependent, and hence the capacitance is also dependent 
on voltage in EDLCs [11]. 
In faradic redox batteries, the localized valence band electrons in the electrode and 
the ions of the electrolyte have widely separated energy levels. At particular or few 
potentials, the valence band electrons are transferred from electrode to electrolyte 
or vice-versa, resulting in a chemical reaction with redox peaks in CVs at those 
potentials. 
In pseudocapacitance, however, the delocalized valence band electrons give rise 
to non-diffusion limited faradic charge transfer. In general, semiconductor transition 
metal oxide and conducting polymers have delocalized valence band electrons that 
have closely spaced energy levels, constituting a band that corresponds to a range of 
potentials, at which continuous and consecutive charge transfer occurs, resulting in a 
constant current over the range of potential. Hence, even though pseudocapacitance 
is faradic in origin, it shows a rectangular CV as that of EDLC [12]. 
Conway developed a theory for the origin of adsorption pseudocapacitance (UPD), 
which could be extended to the other two types of pseudocapacitance, namely, 
redox and intercalation pseudocapacitance. The electrosorption of a cation A+ onto 
a conductive metal substrate M can be given as. 
up per M plus upper
 A Superscript plus Baseline plus e Superscript minus Baseline left right arrow upper M Subscript a d s
According to Frumkin, the charge on the metal surface, qm in an EDL can be 
given as 
q S ubscrip t m Baselin
e equals q 0 left parenthesis 1 minus theta right parenthesis plus q 1 theta
where θ is the surface coverage of Mads on the electrode’s surface, q1 is the charge 
related to the surface adsorption and q0 is the charge related to the bare surface (1-θ). 
According to Frumkin isotherm,
l
eft parenthesis StartFraction theta Over 1 minus theta EndFraction right parenthesis e Superscript minus 2 g theta Baseline equals upper K upper C Subscript upper A
le ft 
p
arenth esis 
StartFraction theta Over 1 minus theta EndFraction right parenthesis e Superscript minus 2 g theta Baseline equals upper K upper C Subscript upper A
where K is the reaction rate constant that is dependent on the potential across the 
capacitor, V, CA is the concentration of the cationic species, and g is the interac-
tion parameter of the adsorbed species, which depends on the real gas constant R, 
temperature T, and Faraday’s constant F and is given as.

46
G. Srividhya and N. Ponpandian
g eq uals StartFraction upper R upper T Over upper V upper F EndFraction
g  e
quals StartFraction upper R upper T Over upper V upper F EndFraction
Taking logarithm for (5), we get. 
ln theta min us ln left parent he sis 1  m
inus theta right parenthesis minus 2 g theta equals ln upper K plus ln upper C Subscript upper A
On differentiating (6) with respect to V,
left parenthesis StartFraction 1 Over theta EndFraction plus StartFraction 1 Over left parenthesis 1 minus theta right parenthesis EndFraction minus 2 g right parenthesis StartFraction d theta Over d upper V EndFraction equals StartFraction d l n upper K Over d upper V EndFraction equals StartFraction q 1 minus q Subscript o Baseline Over upper R upper T normal upper Gamma Subscript m Baseline EndFraction
le f
t parenthesis StartFraction 1 Over theta EndFraction plus StartFraction 1 Over left parenthesis 1 minus theta right parenthesis EndFraction minus 2 g right parenthesis StartFraction d theta Over d upper V EndFraction equals StartFraction d l n upper K Over d upper V EndFraction equals StartFraction q 1 minus q Subscript o Baseline Over upper R upper T normal upper Gamma Subscript m Baseline EndFraction
lef t parenthe
s is StartFraction 1 Over theta EndFraction plus StartFraction 1 Over left parenthesis 1 minus theta right parenthesis EndFraction minus 2 g right parenthesis StartFraction d theta Over d upper V EndFraction equals StartFraction d l n upper K Over d upper V EndFraction equals StartFraction q 1 minus q Subscript o Baseline Over upper R upper T normal upper Gamma Subscript m Baseline EndFraction
lef t parenthesis StartFraction 1 Over theta EndFraction plus StartFraction 1 Over left parenthesis 1 minus theta right parenthesis EndFraction minus 2 g right parenthesis StartFraction d theta Over d upper V EndFraction equals StartFraction d l n upper K Over d upper V EndFraction equals StartFraction q 1 minus q Subscript o Baseline Over upper R upper T normal upper Gamma Subscript m Baseline EndFraction
le
ft pa renthesis StartFraction 1 Over theta EndFraction plus StartFraction 1 Over left parenthesis 1 minus theta right parenthesis EndFraction minus 2 g right parenthesis StartFraction d theta Over d upper V EndFraction equals StartFraction d l n upper K Over d upper V EndFraction equals StartFraction q 1 minus q Subscript o Baseline Over upper R upper T normal upper Gamma Subscript m Baseline EndFraction
le ft 
parenthesis StartFraction 1 Over theta EndFraction plus StartFraction 1 Over left parenthesis 1 minus theta right parenthesis EndFraction minus 2 g right parenthesis StartFraction d theta Over d upper V EndFraction equals StartFraction d l n upper K Over d upper V EndFraction equals StartFraction q 1 minus q Subscript o Baseline Over upper R upper T normal upper Gamma Subscript m Baseline EndFraction
Now, capacitance C is given as [13], 
up per C equals StartFraction d q Subscript m Baseline Over d upper V EndFraction
upp
er C equals StartFraction d q Subscript m Baseline Over d upper V EndFraction
From Eq. (4), we have, 
up per C  equals left parenthesis 1 minus theta right parenthesis StartFraction d q 0 Over d upper V EndFraction minus q 0 StartFraction d theta Over d upper V EndFraction plus theta StartFraction d q 1 Over d upper V EndFraction plus q 1 StartFraction d theta Over d upper V EndFraction
upp er C 
equals left parenthesis 1 minus theta right parenthesis StartFraction d q 0 Over d upper V EndFraction minus q 0 StartFraction d theta Over d upper V EndFraction plus theta StartFraction d q 1 Over d upper V EndFraction plus q 1 StartFraction d theta Over d upper V EndFraction
upp er C equals left parenthesis 1 minus theta right parenthesis StartFraction d q 0 Over d upper V EndFraction minus q 0 StartFraction d theta Over d upper V EndFraction plus theta StartFraction d q 1 Over d upper V EndFraction plus q 1 StartFraction d theta Over d upper V EndFraction
upp er C 
equals left parenthesis 1 minus theta right parenthesis StartFraction d q 0 Over d upper V EndFraction minus q 0 StartFraction d theta Over d upper V EndFraction plus theta StartFraction d q 1 Over d upper V EndFraction plus q 1 StartFraction d theta Over d upper V EndFraction
upp
er C equals left parenthesis 1 minus theta right parenthesis StartFraction d q 0 Over d upper V EndFraction minus q 0 StartFraction d theta Over d upper V EndFraction plus theta StartFraction d q 1 Over d upper V EndFraction plus q 1 StartFraction d theta Over d upper V EndFraction
up per C e quals upper C 1 le ft parenthesis 1 minus theta right parenthesis plus upper C 2 theta plus left parenthesis q 1 minus q 0 right parenthesis StartFraction d theta Over d upper V EndFraction
upp
er C equals upper C 1 left parenthesis 1 minus theta right parenthesis plus upper C 2 theta plus left parenthesis q 1 minus q 0 right parenthesis StartFraction d theta Over d upper V EndFraction
where dqo/dV = C1 and dq1/dV = C2. 
Substituting for dθ/dV from Eq. (8) in Eq.  (11), 
up per C e quals upper C 1 le ft parenthesis 1 minus theta right parenthesis plus upper C 2 theta plus StartFraction left parenthesis q 1 minus q 0 right parenthesis squared Over upper R upper T normal upper Gamma Subscript m Baseline EndFraction left parenthesis StartFraction theta left parenthesis 1 minus theta right parenthesis Over 1 minus 2 g theta left parenthesis 1 minus theta right parenthesis EndFraction right parenthesis
up pe
r
 C eq uals upper C 1 left parenthesis 1 minus theta right parenthesis plus upper C 2 theta plus StartFraction left parenthesis q 1 minus q 0 right parenthesis squared Over upper R upper T normal upper Gamma Subscript m Baseline EndFraction left parenthesis StartFraction theta left parenthesis 1 minus theta right parenthesis Over 1 minus 2 g theta left parenthesis 1 minus theta right parenthesis EndFraction right parenthesis
up per C equ als u
p
per C 1 left parenthesis 1 minus theta right parenthesis plus upper C 2 theta plus StartFraction left parenthesis q 1 minus q 0 right parenthesis squared Over upper R upper T normal upper Gamma Subscript m Baseline EndFraction left parenthesis StartFraction theta left parenthesis 1 minus theta right parenthesis Over 1 minus 2 g theta left parenthesis 1 minus theta right parenthesis EndFraction right parenthesis
Equation 12 is referred to as Temkin’s isotherm. When there is a repulsive inter-
action between the adsorbed species, g > 0; and when the interaction is attractive, g 
< 0. The ﬁrst two terms in Eq. (12) correspond to the double layer capacitance Cdl 
and hence the pseudocapacitance, Cφ is given as. 
upp er C S ubscript phi Baseline equals StartFraction left parenthesis q 1 minus q 0 right parenthesis squared Over upper R upper T normal upper Gamma Subscript m Baseline EndFraction left parenthesis StartFraction theta left parenthesis 1 minus theta right parenthesis Over 1 minus 2 g theta left parenthesis 1 minus theta right parenthesis EndFraction right parenthesis
up pe
r
 C Su bscript phi Baseline equals StartFraction left parenthesis q 1 minus q 0 right parenthesis squared Over upper R upper T normal upper Gamma Subscript m Baseline EndFraction left parenthesis StartFraction theta left parenthesis 1 minus theta right parenthesis Over 1 minus 2 g theta left parenthesis 1 minus theta right parenthesis EndFraction right parenthesis
up per C Sub scrip
t
 phi Baseline equals StartFraction left parenthesis q 1 minus q 0 right parenthesis squared Over upper R upper T normal upper Gamma Subscript m Baseline EndFraction left parenthesis StartFraction theta left parenthesis 1 minus theta right parenthesis Over 1 minus 2 g theta left parenthesis 1 minus theta right parenthesis EndFraction right parenthesis
Since the adsorbed species are of the same charge, the most common type of inter-
action among the adsorbed species will be that of lateral repulsion. When the repul-
sive interaction between the adsorbed species is negligibly small, g = 0. Therefore, 
Eq. (13) becomes. 
upp er C S ubscript phi Baseline equals StartFraction left parenthesis q 1 minus q 0 right parenthesis squared Over upper R upper T normal upper Gamma Subscript m Baseline EndFraction left parenthesis theta left parenthesis 1 minus theta right parenthesis right parenthesis
up per
 C Sub script
 phi Baseline equals StartFraction left parenthesis q 1 minus q 0 right parenthesis squared Over upper R upper T normal upper Gamma Subscript m Baseline EndFraction left parenthesis theta left parenthesis 1 minus theta right parenthesis right parenthesis

Pseudocapacitance: Mechanism and Characteristics
47
Fig. 3 a Variation of surface coverage, θ and pseudocapacitance, Cφ with electrode potential V 
for Langmuir and Temkin isotherms and b Illustration of overlapping of three consecutive redox 
process resulting in a constant capacitance Cφ over a broad range of potentials 
Equation (14) is referred to as Langmuir isotherm and denotes that for a Langmuir 
type isotherm, the pseudocapacitance is linearly dependent on the applied voltage 
and the surface coverage. Cφ reaches the maximum value, when θ is equal to 0.5. 
As can be seen from Fig. 3a, the pseudocapacitance is the maximum for the ideal 
Langmuir type isotherm; the surface coverage varies as a function of the applied 
potential. However, the pseudocapacitance depends on the potential only for a narrow 
potential window. The steepness of the isotherm and thus the dependence of pseudo-
capacitance on the potential can be increased to a broad range under two following 
conditions: 
(i) when there a signiﬁcant lateral repulsion between the adsorbed species (g > 0), 
with increasing surface coverage. 
and/or. 
(ii) deposition of adsorbed species in distinguishable consecutive steps of adsorp-
tion, with increasing surface coverage, as shown in Fig. 3b 
Figure 3b illustrates the overlapping of three consecutive redox reactions, giving 
rise to the development of a constant capacitance (linear variation of charge with 
potential), as demonstrated by Conway in RuO2 [14]. Conway extended the theory 
of origin of adsorption pseudocapacitance to redox and intercalation pseudocapac-
itance, by substituting the surface coverage θ, with the concentration of oxidant/ 
reductant [Ox]/[Red] and lattice occupancy X, respectively. 
5 Intrinsic and Extrinsic Pseudocapacitance 
The terms intrinsic and extrinsic pseudocapacitance are conceptual annexes to redox 
and intercalation pesuedocapacitance, respectively. A material is called an intrin-
sically pseudocapacitive, when its pseudocapactive nature does not change with

48
G. Srividhya and N. Ponpandian
change with the material’s physical properties, particularly size. In an extrinsic pseu-
docapacitive material, the pseudocapacitive nature of the material can change into 
a battery-type faradic nature, depending on the particle size or other material prop-
erties. The term “extrinsic” means that the pseudocapacitance is not the true charge 
storage nature of the material, but an external feature that can inﬂuenced upon the 
material under certain physical condition. 
Intercalation pseudocapacitance has been particularly proved to be “extrinsic” 
in nature. The study on the effect of nanosize on high-rate Li ion intercalation in 
LiCoO2by Okubo et al. showed that LiCoO2 which is battery-type material with 
diffusion controlled intercalation, started to show pseudocapacitive nature of high 
kinetics, when the size of LiCoO2 was reduced to less than 10 nm [15]. With reducing 
the particle size, the diffusion length decreases resulting in high-rate capability. More-
over, since nanostructures have increased surface area, the phase transformation of 
LiCoO2 is subdued. The increased number of active sites is also among the reasons 
for the charge storage type transformation [16]. The size-dependent charge storage 
behaviour transformation in thin and thick ﬁlms is depicted in Fig. 4a–c. The galvano-
static charge–discharge curves of bulk LiCoO2 shows pronounced plateaus, which 
are characteristic of Li ion batteries, showing that the relation between voltage and 
the charge is not linear. On reducing the size of LiCoO2, the voltage dependency 
of charge commences, as the extent of plateau region is reduced, as can be seen in 
Fig. 4d. For 11 nm, the charge storage is in a transition stage, with combined effect 
of diffusion controlled and non-diffusion-controlled intercalation. However, for the 
particle size of 8.2 and 6 nm, the charge storage mechanism becomes completely 
pseudocapacitive, with linear voltage-charge relation. 
Intercalation pseudocapacitance can also be the intrinsic charge storage nature 
of a material. Nb2O5 is a perfect example of intrinsic pseudocapacitive material, 
which retains its capacitive nature, even after size tuning. Certain crystallographic 
planes of Nb2O5 facilitates rapid intercalation of Li ions, for both bulk and thin ﬁlms
Fig. 4 a–c Schematic representation of extrinsic and intrinsic pseudocapacitance in materials due 
to size effect. Adapted with permission [17] © 1948, IOP Publishing and d Charge–Discharge 
studies of LiCoO2 of various crystallite size, showing extrinsic pseudocapacitance nature. Adapted 
with permission [15], copyright (2007), American Chemical Society 

Pseudocapacitance: Mechanism and Characteristics
49
[17]. Though it is usually deemed that with decreasing particle size, the diffusion 
limited battery-type intercalation transforms into non-diffusion limited pseudocapac-
itive intercalation, due to reduced diffusion length and higher surface area, it is not 
conclusive. Theoretical studies have reported that the contrary can also take place, 
where with decreasing particle size, the charge storage changes from pseudocapac-
itive intercalation to battery-type intercalation [18]. More number of comprehen-
sive studies and theoretical elucidation are required in determining the size related 
pseudocapacitive nature of materials. 
6 Electrochemical Features of Pseudocapacitance 
6.1 
CV and GCD Characteristics 
As discussed, the extrinsic pseudocapacitance is dependent on the material properties, 
rather than the material itself. With advancement in material processing and nanotech-
nology, vast number of electrode materials for pseudocapacitive charge storage are 
reported. However, most researchers fail to understand the distinction between pseu-
docapacitive and battery type charge storage, often leading to misreporting of data 
with exaggerated or sometimes undermined capacitance values [19]–[21]. Speciﬁc 
capacitance, which is not applicable to battery-type materials, are calculated and 
reported due to misunderstanding of battery-type materials as pseudocapacitors. A 
comprehensive understanding of the electrochemical features of different charge 
storage mechanisms is necessary to avoid such misreports on pseudocapacitors with 
misleading capacitance values. 
As discussed earlier, there are three mechanisms of pseudocapacitance, among 
which UPD is not quite used for charge storage device application. Redox pseudoca-
pacitance is the most common form and intercalation pseudocapacitance came to the 
limelight of research in the recent times, with the development of different nanostruc-
tures. In all types of pseudocapacitance mechanisms, the following characteristics 
are common. 
(i) There is a linear relation between the stored charge and the applied potential 
(ii) The processes are rapid and kinetically controlled; diffusion has negligible 
effect on them 
(iii) There is no phase transformation or chemical reaction taking place 
The different charge storage mechanisms have unique electrochemical signatures, 
in CV and CD studies. The pseudocapacitance mechanisms, despite the difference 
in type, show similar electrochemical signatures. A proper understanding of these 
features can help identify the underlying charge storage technique. Figure 5 illustrates 
the electrochemical signatures of the different type of charge storage. The double 
layer capacitance shows rectangular CV and linear charge–discharge (CD) curves. 
Since the double layer formation is instantaneous, the current sharply increases

50
G. Srividhya and N. Ponpandian
within a few millivolt and then remains almost constant with increased potential. 
The same is true of discharging of the EDLC, where current decreases sharply due 
to instant collapse of the EDL, when discharged (Fig. 5a). The galvanostatic charge 
discharge (GCD) curves under constant current, shows linear variation of charging 
and discharging time with respect to potential as shown in Fig. 5b. 
Redox pseudocapacitance shows near rectangular CV and its GCD proﬁle mildly 
deviates from linearity as represented in Fig. 5c, d. The constant charging or 
discharging current is not maintained due to the parasitic redox reaction that origi-
nates pseudocapacitance. The CV signature of intercalation pseudocapacitance has 
redox peaks, separated by small voltage difference (Fig. 5e), indicating the fast inser-
tion and removal of Li+ ions. In GCD proﬁle, the change in the charge is slightly 
stagnant as depicted in Fig. 5f. In the case of battery-type charge storage, there 
are pronounced redox peaks in the CV proﬁle, with larger peak-to-peak separation 
voltages, greater than 0.1 to 0.2 V. There are potential plateaus in the GCD proﬁle, 
denoting that the charge does not change linearly with the potential.
Fig. 5 Cyclic voltammetry and galvanostatic charge–discharge signatures of a, b double layer 
capacitance, c, d redox pseudocapacitance, e, f intercalation pseudocapacitance and g, h faradic 
battery type storage. Adapted with permission [1], copyright (2020), Springer Publishing Company. 
i Typical impedance spectra of EDLCs, pseudocapacitors and batteries; Identiﬁcation of diffusion 
limited charge transfer from EIS j at two different potential giving different RCT values and k at 
different potentials yielding the same RCT value. Adapted with permission [23], copyright (2019), 
John Wiley and Sons 

Pseudocapacitance: Mechanism and Characteristics
51
6.2 
Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy Characteristics 
The Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) is an effective technique to 
characterize an electrochemical cell. Unlike dynamic methods like CV and GCD, 
EIS allow the analysis of electrochemical cell in a static condition. An AC voltage 
of small amplitude is imposed on the cell, along with the ﬁxed DC potential, and the 
impedance response of the cell is analyzed, over a frequency range (typically 100 kHz 
to 10 MHz). Typically, EIS data is inferred in two forms, namely, (i) Nyquist plot, 
that plots real impedance against imaginary impedance and (ii) Bode plot, which 
represents the phase angle and modulus of impedance as a function of frequency. 
The values on the real axis (X-axis) of Nyquist plots account to pure resistance in 
the cell and a 90° line parallel to the imaginary axis (Y-axis) accounts to the pure 
capacitance. 
Figure 5i shows the EIS signature of EDLCs, pseudocapacitive and battery-type 
materials. ESR is the equivalent series resistance that arises due to the resistance of 
the cell components. For a double layer capacitor, right after ESR, there is a 45° 
line, followed by the 90° line. The 45° line corresponds to the fast change in the 
imaginary impedance, as a corroboration to the immediately accessible charge sites. 
The impedance spectrum of pseudocapacitive materials have a semi-circle in the high 
frequency region, which corresponds to the parasitic charge transfer associated with 
redox or intercalation pseudocapacitance. The semi-circle is followed by the 45° 
line and 90° line, showing the capacitive behaviour of the pseudocapacitors, unlike 
in batteries, where the 90° line is absent and 45° line in the low frequency region 
corresponds to diffusion induced impedance. 
The diffusive or capacitive nature of charge transfer can be identiﬁed using EIS for 
materials in transitional area, by measuring EIS at different potentials. For diffusion-
controlled charge transfer, the charge transfer resistance (RCT) changes for different 
potentials as shown in Fig. 5j, whereas for pseudocapacitive materials, even when 
measured at different potentials, the RCT value does not change as shown in Fig. 5k. 
Pseudocapacitance has electrochemical features that are very similar to EDLCs. 
Despite the type of pseudocapacitance (redox or intercalation), the following 
electrochemical features are prominently common to pseudocapacitors. 
(i) The CV curve is not rectangular (as in EDLCs), but near rectangular. If there 
are any redox peaks in CV, they are separated by very small voltages, typically 
within the range of 0.1 to 0.2 V. Redox peaks separated by a larger voltage 
differences account to batter-type materials [9] 
(ii) Under constant current (galvanostatic condition), the potential varies linearly 
with time, though not perfectly linear as in EDLCs. Parasitic redox reactions 
and kinetic intercalations lead to small changes in capacitance value, which 
is constant for EDLCs. There are no potential plateaus in the GCD proﬁle. 
Potential plateaus are characteristics of batteries.

52
G. Srividhya and N. Ponpandian
7 Evaluation Parameters: Speciﬁc Capacitance 
and Speciﬁc Capacity 
The charge developed in a dielectric capacitor is proportional to the voltage applied 
across the parallel plates. From the traditional deﬁnition, the positive constant of 
proportionality between the charge and the voltage is called capacitance, which is 
the amount of charge Q, in coulombs stored in the capacitor to the applied potential 
V. Capacitance is a measure of charge storage capability in a given potential range 
and its unit is given in Farads. 
up per
 Q proportional to upper V
up pe r C equals StartFraction upper Q Over upper V EndFraction
up
per C equals StartFraction upper Q Over upper V EndFraction
Since, in double layer capacitors, the charge storage is analogous to that of a 
dielectric capacitor, the capability of EDLCs are measured in capacitance, most 
times with respect to the mass of the electrode material, called speciﬁc capacitance. 
The speciﬁc capacitance of EDLCs can be calculated from the GCD experiments, as 
follows: 
up p
er C equals StartFraction i Over d upper V divided by d t EndFraction
upp
er 
C equals StartFraction i Over d upper V divided by d t EndFraction
where, i is the constant current, dV/dt is the slope of the discharge portion of GCD 
analysis. 
The (mass) speciﬁc capacitance is given by the formula, 
up p
er C equals StartFraction i Over m left parenthesis d upper V divided by d t right parenthesis EndFraction equals StartFraction i times t Over m times normal upper Delta upper V EndFraction
u
pper
 C
 e
qu als StartFraction i Over m left parenthesis d upper V divided by d t right parenthesis EndFraction equals StartFraction i times t Over m times normal upper Delta upper V EndFraction
up p er 
C equals StartFraction i Over m left parenthesis d upper V divided by d t right parenthesis EndFraction equals StartFraction i times t Over m times normal upper Delta upper V EndFraction
where, m is the mass of the electrode material, t is the discharge time and ΔV is the  
potential window. The discharge time is taken in the notion that it renders the charge 
delivering capability. 
The formula given in Eq. (18) is widely used by the research community to 
calculate the speciﬁc capacitance of pesudocapacitors. However, one should bear in 
mind that, pseudocapacitance does not show perfect linearity. Hence, in GCD proﬁles, 
pseudocapacitors do not have a single slope for the potential vs time plot. Hence, 
using the formula, given in Eq. (18) will not be a precise estimation of capability of 
the pseudocapacitor. A more appropriate or accurate method will be integrating the 
area under the discharge curve in GCD to account for the inﬁnitesimal changes in 
the slope.

Pseudocapacitance: Mechanism and Characteristics
53
up pe
r C  equals StartFraction i integral d t Over m times normal upper Delta upper V EndFraction
up p er 
C equals StartFraction i integral d t Over m times normal upper Delta upper V EndFraction
The unit of speciﬁc capacitance is given in Farads/gram. 
For pseudocapacitive materials, it is possible to calculate speciﬁc capacity and 
charge capacity, as the stored charge is not entirely constant in the maintained poten-
tial window. Capacity can be referred to as the amount of net charge stored at the 
capacitor. The speciﬁc capacity measures the number of ions or electrons that can 
be accepted by a certain mass of the electrode. 
upper C h a r g e c a p a c i t y equals StartFraction i integral d t Over m EndFraction left parenthesis upper C g Superscript negative 1 Baseline right parenthesis
u
p
per C
 h a r g e c a p a c i t y equals StartFraction i integral d t Over m EndFraction left parenthesis upper C g Superscript negative 1 Baseline right parenthesis
upper S p e c i f i c 
c a p a c i t y equals StartFraction i integral d t Over m times 3600 EndFraction left parenthesis upper A h g Superscript negative 1 Baseline right parenthesis
up per S 
p
 e c i
 f i c c a p a c i t y equals StartFraction i integral d t Over m times 3600 EndFraction left parenthesis upper A h g Superscript negative 1 Baseline right parenthesis
or 
upper S p e c i f i c 
c a p a c i t y equals StartFraction i integral d t Over m times 3600 EndFraction left parenthesis upper A h g Superscript negative 1 Baseline right parenthesis
up per S 
p
 e c i
 f i c c a p a c i t y equals StartFraction i integral d t Over m times 3600 EndFraction left parenthesis upper A h g Superscript negative 1 Baseline right parenthesis
It is a recommended practice to calculate both speciﬁc capacitance and speciﬁc 
capacity for pseudocapacitive materials to compare with the storage metrics of 
EDLCs and batteries [23]. 
8 Understanding the Transition Region, Capacitive 
and Diffusive Contribution in Pseudocapacitors 
Modern development in nanomaterials and extrinsic pseudocapacitance has broad-
ened the pseudocapacitive electrochemical energy storage as a better alternative to 
batteries and traditional EDLCs [22]. If there are multiple peaks in the CVs of 
pseudocapacitive material, then the possibility of diffusion limitation should not be 
neglected. In fact, in all EDLCs with carbon materials, there are surface parasitic 
redox reactions due to surface functionalities that lead to 5 to 10% diffusive contri-
bution of charge. Similarly, even in batteries, the double layer capacitance could lead 
to a minimal charge contribution. Hence, for pseudocapacitors, especially extrinsic 
pseudocapacitors, which display combined charge storage mechanisms (capacitive 
as in EDLCs and diffusive as in batteries) with material properties, the assessment of 
charge storage kinetics is necessary to understand the overall charge storage contri-
bution. Particularly with the recent advancements with fast kinetics LIBs and high 
energy intercalation psuedocapacitors, the distinguishing line should be drawn based 
on the contribution of charge storage kinetics for correct reporting of capacitance or 
capacity of the electrochemical energy storage device.

54
G. Srividhya and N. Ponpandian
The capacitive and diffusive contribution can be quantiﬁed using different tech-
niques. The power law given in Eq. (23) relates the peak current to the scan rate and 
is useful to number the capacitive (surface process) contribution and diffusive (bulk 
process) contribution. 
i equals
 a nu Superscript b
where, i is the peak current, ν is the scan rate and a and b are constants. Based on the 
value of b, the type of charge storage kinetics can be determined. For diffusion limited, 
faradic, bulk redox reactions, the peak current varies as a function of square root of 
scan rate. For kinetically controlled surface processes like EDLC, the current varies 
as a linear function of scan rate. Hence, b = 0.5 for diffusive processes (batteries) 
and b = 1.0 for capacitive processes (EDLCs). For pseudocapacitors, particularly 
intercalation pseudocapacitors, there is a combination of both capacitive and diffusive 
processes, and the value of b ranges between 0.5 to 1.0. The computation of the value 
of b, will shed more information about the kinetics of the pseudocapacitive materials. 
The value of b can be obtained from the Dunn’s method, by measuring CV at different 
scan rates [24]. 
The logarithmic interpretation of Eq. (23) can be given as follows: 
log i equals  l og a  plu s
 b log upsilon
Hence, by plotting log of the peak current versus the log of the scan-rate, the value 
of b can be obtained from the slope, which is useful in identifying the dominating 
charge transfer process, as illustrated in Fig. 6a 
The capacitive and diffusive current contribution an also be calculated from 
another interpretation of the power law as given in Eq. (25). 
As we know, total current is the sum of capacitive and diffusion current. 
i equals i Subscr ip t c a p Baselin
e plus i Subscript d i f f Baseline equals k 1 nu plus k 2 nu Superscript 0.5
Fig. 6 a Illustration of the power law dependence of the peak current on scan rate for capacitive, 
diffusive and transitional behaviour. Adapted with permission from [1] © 2020, John Wiley and 
Sons and b, c Determination of current contribution by Dunn’s methods for MXenes at different 
scan rate. Adapted with permission, copyright (2019), John Wiley and Sons 

Pseudocapacitance: Mechanism and Characteristics
55
StartFraction i Over nu Superscript 0.5 Baseline EndFraction equals k 1 nu Superscript 0.5 Baseline plus k 2
Start Fraction i Ov
er nu Superscript 0.5 Baseline EndFraction equals k 1 nu Superscript 0.5 Baseline plus k 2
Equation (26) is in the form of a line between i/ν and ν0.5, where k1 and k2 are 
the slope and intercept, respectively, By measuring CV at different scan rates and 
by plotting i/ν0.5 and the square root of the scan rate, the values of k1 and k2 can 
be obtained from the slope and intercept. By substituting k1 and k2 in Eq. (25) for  
a particular scan rate, the current contribution can be determined for the diverse 
potentials in CV. 
This method can also be used to understand how the kinetics changes at different 
scan rates, where in general, for slower scan rates the diffusion takes control and at 
higher scan rates, the current is kinetically. Figure 6b shows that the charge storage 
in MXene is a surface dominated process in high scan rates, whereas in slower scan 
rates, the bulk process dominates the charge storage as shown in Fig. 6c. 
9 Conclusion 
Pseudocapacitance is a unique electrochemical charge storage mechanism that 
combines the features of both double layer capacitance and battery-type charge 
storage. Pseudocapacitors are fundamentally different from the batteries despite the 
fact that they both entail faradic phenomena by deﬁnition. The deﬁnition of pseudo-
capacitance is often misunderstood, leading to the reporting of battery-type materials 
as pseudocapacitive materials and reporting capacitance to inﬂated values. This is 
due to the extensive research and development of nanoscale materials, which give 
different electrochemical capacitive signatures for varying particle size. To distin-
guish the pseudocapacitive process from other electrochemical processes, a funda-
mental understanding of charge storage mechanisms is required. This chapter seeks 
to offer an in-depth explanation of the electrochemical charge storage mechanisms, 
foundations of pseudocapacitance, different pseudocapacitance types and the elec-
trochemical characteristics of pseudocapacitance for the understanding of the viewer 
to distinguish the type of charge storage and pseudocapacitive mechanism. 
References 
1. N.R. Chodankar, H.D. Pham, A.K. Nanjundan, J.F.S. Fernando, K. Jayaramulu, D. Golberg, 
Y.K. Han, D.B. Dubal, True meaning of pseudocapacitors and their performance metrics: 
asymmetric versus hybrid supercapacitors. Small 16(37), 2002806 (2020) 
2. J.W. Long, D. Bélanger, T. Brousse, W. Sugimoto, M.B. Sassin, O. Crosnier, Asymmetric 
electrochemical capacitors-stretching the limits of aqueous electrolytes. MRS Bull. 36(7), 
513–522 (2011)

56
G. Srividhya and N. Ponpandian
3. S. Trasatti, G. Buzzanca, Ruthenium dioxide: a new interesting electrode material. Solid state 
structure and electrochemical behaviour. J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem. 29(2), 
A1–A5 (1971) 
4. B. E. Conway, Electrochemical Supercapacitors (Springer US, Boston, MA, 1999) 
5. P. Simon, Y. Gogotsi, Materials for electrochemical capacitors. Nat. Mater. 7(11), 845–854 
(2008) 
6. Y. Liu, S.P. Jiang, Z. Shao, Intercalation pseudocapacitance in electrochemical energy storage: 
recent advances in fundamental understanding and materials development. Mater. Today Adv. 
7, 100072 (2020) 
7. U. Schmidt, S. Vinzelberg, G. Staikov, Pb UPD on Ag(100) and Au(100)—2D phase formation 
studied by in situ STM. Surf. Sci. 348(3), 261–279 (1996) 
8. V. Augustyn, J. Come, M.A. Lowe, J.W. Kim, P.L. Taberna, S.H. Torbet, H.D. Abruna, 
P. Simon, B. Dunn, High-rate electrochemical energy storage through Li+ intercalation 
pseudocapacitance. Nat. Mater. 12(6), 518–522 (2013) 
9. P. Simon, Y. Gogotsi, B. Dunn, Where do batteries end and supercapacitors begin? Science 
343(6176), 1210–1211(1979, 2014) 
10. S. Fleischmann, J.B. Mitchell, R. Wang, C. Zhang, D. Jiang, V. Presser, V. Augustyn, Pseudo-
capacitance: from fundamental understanding to high power energy storage materials. Chem. 
Rev. 120(14), 6738–6782 (2020) 
11. A. Rajapriya, S. Keerthana, N. Ponpandian, C.M. Hussain, M.B. Ahamed, Smart Supercapac-
itors—Fundamental Understanding of Charge Storage Mechanism (Elsevier, 2023) 
12. G.Z. Chen, Linear and non-linear pseudocapacitances with or without diffusion control. Prog. 
Nat. Sci.: Mater. Int. 31(6), 792–800 (2021) 
13. A.K. Shukla, S. Sampath, K. Vijayamohanan, Electrochemical supercapacitors: energy storage 
beyond batteries. Curr. Sci. 79(12), 1656–1661 (2000) 
14. B. E. Conway, The electrochemical behavior of ruthenium oxide (RuO2) as a material for 
electrochemical capacitors, in Electrochemical Supercapacitors (Springer, Boston, MA, US, 
1999) 
15. M. Okubo, E. Hosono, J. Kim, M. Enomoto, N. Kojima, T. Kudo, H. Zhou, I. Honma, Nanosize 
effect on high-rate Li-ion intercalation in LiCoO2 electrode. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 129(23), 
7444–7452 (2007) 
16. Y. Jiang, J. Liu, Deﬁnitions of pseudocapacitive materials: a brief review. Energy Environ. 
Mater. 2(1), 30–37 (2019) 
17. J. Come et al., Electrochemical kinetics of nanostructured Nb 2 O 5 electrodes. J. Electrochem. 
Soc. 161(5), A718–A725 (2014) 
18. E.  M.  Gavilán-Arriazu, M.P. Mercer, O.A. Pinto, O.A. Oviedo,  D.E.  Barraco, H.E. Hoster,  
E.P.M. Leiva, Numerical simulations of cyclic voltammetry for lithium-ion intercalation in 
nanosized systems: ﬁniteness of diffusion versus electrode kinetics. J. Solid State Electrochem. 
24(11–12), 3279–3287 (2020) 
19. M. Zhou, F. Lu, X. Shen, W. Xia, H. He, X. Zeng, One-pot construction of three dimen-
sional CoMoO4/Co3O4 hybrid nanostructures and their application in supercapacitors. J. Mater. 
Chem. A Mater. 3(42), 21201–21210 (2015) 
20. Y. Lan et al., Phosphorization boosts the capacitance of mixed metal nanosheet arrays for high 
performance supercapacitor electrodes. Nanoscale 10(25), 11775–11781 (2018) 
21. I. Shaheen, K.S. Ahmad, C. Zequine, R.K. Gupta, A.G. Thomas, M.A. Malik, Facile ZnO-based 
nanomaterial and its fabrication as a supercapacitor electrode: synthesis, characterization and 
electrochemical studies. RSC Adv. 11(38), 23374–23384 (2021) 
22. T.S. Mathis, N. Kurra, X. Wang, D. Pinto, P. Simon, Y. Gogotsi, Energy storage data reporting 
in perspective—guidelines for interpreting the performance of electrochemical energy storage 
systems. Adv. Energy Mater. 9(39), 1902007 (2019) 
23. J. Wang, J. Polleux, J. Lim, B. Dunn, Pseudocapacitive contributions to electrochemical energy 
storage in TiO 2 (Anatase) nanoparticles. J. Phys. Chem. C 111(40), 14925–14931 (2007) 
24. H. Shao, Z. Lin, K. Xu, P.-L. Taberna, P. Simon, Electrochemical study of pseudocapacitive 
behavior of Ti3C2Tx MXene material in aqueous electrolytes. Energy Storage Mater. 18, 
456–461 (2019)

Emerging Pseudocapaciting Materials 
Muhammad Abdullah, Wenrui Jiang, Xin Chen, and Shandiao Xu 
Abstract Current environmental problems are largely the consequence of the recent 
growing trends in global energy demand and its utilization, which ultimately resulted 
in the motivation to develop new routes to explore new energy materials. In response 
to this, supercapacitors have drawn much attention due to their relatively high power 
densities and long life cycles as compared to other energy devices. Supercapaciting 
materials are roughly divided into electric double-layer capaciting materials and 
pseudocapaciting materials. Between them, pseudocapacitor materials are attractive 
due to their high speciﬁc capacitance, which can lead to increased energy densities 
in the supercapacitors. In this chapter, we discuss the different types of pseudo-
capaciting materials, including pseudocapaciting nanoparticles developed based on 
the glycerate template method, composite pseudocapaciting materials consisting of 
nanosheets and/or nanoplates, negative electrode pseudocapaciting materials, and 
other emerging pseudocapaciting materials. In each category, the material selec-
tion, structural variations, and electrochemical performances of the pseudocapaciting 
materials will be addressed, respectively. Not only the state of art progress of the 
ﬁeld is presented, but also the future development trends are discussed accordingly. 
Keywords Pseudocapaciting materials · Glycerate template method · Nanosheets/ 
nanoplates · Electrodes 
1 
Introduction 
Unlike traditional electrical double-layer supercapacitor materials that store energy 
as a result of separating electric charges in a dielectric material, pseudo-capacitors 
use materials that undergo reversible faradaic redox reactions at the interface of 
electrode and electrolyte to store and release electrical energy. Pseudocapaciting
M. Abdullah · W. Jiang · X. Chen envelope symbol · S. Xu 
Key Laboratory for Ultraﬁne Materials of Ministry of Education, and Shanghai Key Laboratory of 
Advanced Polymeric Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, East China 
University of Science and Technology, Shanghai 2002237, P.R. China 
e-mail: xinchen73@ecust.edu.cn 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
R. K. Gupta (ed.), Pseudocapacitors, Engineering Materials, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45430-1_4 
57

58
M. Abdullah et al.
materials are currently the subject of intense research as compared with electrical 
double-layer materials due to their higher capacitance, greater energy storage density, 
and outstanding energy conversion efﬁciency. Therefore, pseudocapacitive materials 
have become the hot spot and forefront of research [1]. The researchers are currently 
investigating innovative methodologies for fabricating pseudocapacitive materials 
with enhanced performance characteristics. 
There are several common types of emerging pseudocapacitor materials. 
Conducting polymers such as polypyrrole (PPy), polythiophene (PTh), and polyani-
line (PANI) have been investigated for their pseudocapacitive behavior due to their 
relatively high conductivity and reversible redox behavior [2]. Metal oxide mate-
rials such as tungsten oxide (WO3), vanadium oxide (V2O5), and manganese oxide 
(MnO2) have shown pseudocapacitive behavior due to the reversible redox reactions 
of their transition metal ions [3]. In addition to oxides, chalcogenides are also a subject 
of interest in the research area. As an example, Muhammad F. Ahmad et al. efﬁ-
ciently synthesized trimetallic Zn-Ni-Co-S/Se/Te through a hydrothermal approach 
followed by a solvothermal technique. The resulting material was utilized as elec-
trodes, exhibiting outstanding supercapacitor performance. The research provides 
the energy storage mechanism of trimetallic chalcogenides through the utilization 
of a three-electrode supercapacitor in an aqueous KOH electrolyte. The electrode 
material comprising Zn, Ni, Co, and Se demonstrates outstanding speciﬁc capaci-
tance of 1239.7 F/g at a current density of 1 A/g, thereby indicating its competitive 
superiority [4]. Two-Dimensional Materials such as graphene are attractive in the 
supercapacitor ﬁeld due to their high surface area and fast electron transport, and 
they have been investigated for their pseudocapacitive behavior. MXenes represent 
another type of two-dimensional material that is composed of transition metals (M) 
and other elements such as carbon, nitrogen, and silicon (X). The most important 
features of these materials are their high electrical and thermal conductivity, excellent 
mechanical strength, and chemical stability. The electrical and thermal conductivi-
ties of MXenes are better than many traditional metals and semiconductor materials, 
with a wide range of application prospects. Metal–Organic Frameworks are a class 
of materials composed of metal ions and organic ligands with high porosity, which 
allows for high surface area and high capacitance. Details of these different types 
of pseudocapacitor materials will be reviewed in the other chapters of the book. In 
this chapter, we will address some fundamentals of the emerging pseudocapaciting 
materials. 
2 
Pseudocapaciting Materials Developed Based 
on the Glycerate Template Method 
The research and development of nanomaterial morphology is one of the critical 
aspects of emerging pseudocapaciting materials. The most signiﬁcant parameters of 
electrode materials are speciﬁc surface area and porosity, which can be controlled

Emerging Pseudocapaciting Materials
59
through the size and morphology of the materials. In recent years, the majority 
of scholars have spent a great deal of time on the morphology of electrode mate-
rials to improve the speciﬁc capacitance, energy density, and stability of superca-
pacitors. Researchers are designing and synthesizing nanostructures with different 
compositions and geometric properties [5]. 
The most frequently employed methods consist of the in situ template method, 
the emulsion template method, the glycerate template method, etc. The glycerate 
template method can be utilized as a representative approach in which simple glyc-
erate or its complex can be used as the template. Subsequently, a series of techniques 
such as the solvothermal method, etching technology, phosphating, and vulcaniza-
tion technology can be employed to obtain various metal compounds that possess 
a counter-shape that is similar to the glycerate template. The nanomaterials synthe-
sized through the glycerol template method usually have unique and complex detailed 
structures, a high speciﬁc surface area, and excellent porosity. Besides dense nanopar-
ticles [6], hollow particles can also be prepared [7]. As a versatile tool, the glycerol 
template method is often used in the ﬁeld of pseudo-capacitor materials to improve 
the electrochemical performance of supercapacitors, such as speciﬁc capacitance, 
cycle stability, capacitance retention, etc., which has great research potential and 
broad development prospects. 
2.1 
Glycerate Template Method 
The key step in the glycerate template method is to build the template, which is ﬁrst 
used to control the material morphology and then sacriﬁced when the actual material 
structure is formed. Liu et al. employed a straightforward approach to synthesize 
MnCo2O4 hollow spheres with exceptional uniformity. This involved the utiliza-
tion of solvothermal synthesis to construct highly uniform MnCo-glycerate spheres, 
followed by thermal annealing in an oxygen-rich environment to yield the desired 
ﬁnal material [8]. One trend in the ﬁeld is to build materials/templates with more 
metal elements. Maryam Amiri et al. reported the synthesize of CuCo2V2O8 hollow 
spheres, in which Cu-Co glycerate template spheres are ﬁrstly formed, and then 
an anion-exchange process is used for the formation of uniform spherical Cu-Co-V 
precursors, followed by a subsequent annealing to form uniform porous CuCo2V2O8 
hollow spheres, as shown in Fig. 1 [9]. In Wei’s work, NiCoMn-glycerate spheres 
are ﬁrst achieved in glycerol/isopropanol via a solvothermal method, and then 
the glycerate templates are chemically etched to form hierarchical Ni–Co–Mn 
hydroxide hollow architectures in 1-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP)/H2O[7]. The glyc-
erol template method is currently undergoing reﬁnement and enrichment through 
innovative efforts, leading to the understanding of numerous novel ideas.

60
M. Abdullah et al.
Fig. 1 Synthesis of hierarchical nanoporous quaternary CuCo2V2O8 hollow spheres. Adapted with 
permission [9], Copyright (2020), Elsevier 
2.2 
Emerging Progress with the Glycerate Template 
Approach 
The present progress in advanced supercapacitor development involves the produc-
tion of composite materials and the enhancement of their material performance. This 
is because composites have the ability to keep the beneﬁcial material properties of 
their individual components while also achieving comprehensive properties that are 
unattainable by a single component, which is called synergistic effect. Combining 
two compounds, one of which has high speciﬁc capacitance and the other has high 
conductivity, can produce a composite with both high speciﬁc capacitance and high 
conductivity. It may also be achieved by combining one component with high speciﬁc 
capacitance with another component with more nanochannels to help ion transporta-
tion, or by making a composite with aboundant active multiphase boundaries, etc. 
[10]. 
It is attractive to develop facile methods for composite material preparation. 
For example, our group used a self-template method to make unique bimetallic 
copper cobalt selenide (CCS) hollow nanosphere composites. The modiﬁed Cu7Se4-
CuxCo1-xSe2 composite is achieved through a hydrothermal process with a compar-
atively short duration (2 h, denoted as CCS-2 h), rather than enhancing the reac-
tion completion. Figure 2 describes the synthetic procedure for the copper selenide 
and copper cobalt selenide composites. First, the CuCo-glycerate nanospheres are 
made in a mixture of organic solvents. Consequently, a selenium supplier (Na2SeO3) 
and reducing agent (N2H4·H2O) are introduced for the hydrothermal treatment, 
which changes active SeO3 2− into Se2−. After that, the exchange of ions takes place 
across the glycerate template and Se2−, resulting in the formation of nanostructured 
composite spheres made up of copper selenide/copper cobalt selenide. The composite 
demonstrates interesting characteristics, including a speciﬁc capacitance of 349.1 F/ 
g at a current density of 1 A/g, excellent rate efﬁciency with 80.1% capacitance reten-
tion as the current density boosts to 20 A/g, and outstanding superior electrochemical 
stability with 106.4% capacitance retention beyond 5000 cycles. Additionally, the

Emerging Pseudocapaciting Materials
61
Fig. 2 A Schematic representation of the synthesis procedure for the double-shell hollow 
nanospheres of copper cobalt selenides. Adapted with permission [11], Copyright (2020), Elsevier 
utilization of CCS-2 h and activated carbon electrodes in the creation of an asym-
metric supercapacitor has led to favorable results with an energy density of 26.84 
Wh/kg at 700 W/kg as well as an admirable cycling efﬁciency of 94.1% capaci-
tance retention following 5000 cycles. The present study indicates the potential use 
of composites comprising transition metal selenides in supercapacitor applications. 
Furthermore, it proposes a novel approach to develope high-performance materials 
for supercapacitors [11]. 
In further research, Cheng et al. successfully synthesized hollow spheres of Ni-
Mn hydroxide with a hierarchical structure through an etching methodology. Initially, 
solid spheres of NiMn-glycerate are obtained in the form of templates. Then, NiMn-
glycerate templates undergo treatment in mixed solvents of 1-methyl-2-pyrrolidone 
and water, resulting in the formation of hierarchical Ni-Mn hydroxide hollow spheres 
through etching. The efﬁciency of electrical energy storage of the Ni-Mn hydroxide 
hollow spheres with a hierarchical structure was studied in a 3 M KOH solution  
through the utilization of a three-electrode system. Figure 3a displays the cyclic 
voltammogram (CV) proﬁles ranging from 5 to 30 mV/s. The presence of a visible 
redox peak is observed, demonstrating the characteristic pseudocapaciting proper-
ties of Ni-Mn hydroxide. The redox peaks observed in the experiment are a result of 
the faradaic reactions that occur between M–O/M–O-OH (where M represents the 
elements Ni and Mn) and hydroxide ions (OH−). The Ni-Mn hydroxide exhibits pseu-
docapacitive characteristics, as evidenced by the curved potential peaks observed in 
galvanostatic charge–discharge (GCD) curves, as illustrated in Fig. 3b. The speciﬁc 
capacity values obtained from the GCD curves are presented in Fig. 3c as a function 
of various current densities. The Ni-Mn hydroxide hollow spheres exhibited a hier-
archical structure and demonstrated excellent electrochemical performance, with a 
speciﬁc capacity of 1680 F/g at a current density of 2 A/g and 1104 F/g at 10 A/g. 
The extraordinary rate capability of Ni-Mn hydroxide is being observed. At a current

62
M. Abdullah et al.
Fig. 3 Electrochemical performances of the hierarchical Ni-Mn hydroxide hollow spheres in three-
electrode measurements: a CV and b GCD proﬁles, c speciﬁc capacity versus current density 
histograms, d cycles performance and coulombic efﬁciency at 10 A/g. Adapted with permission 
[12], Copyright (2021), Elsevier 
density of 15 A/g, the capacitance remains at 1068 F/g, representing approximately 
63.6% of the capacitance observed at a current density of 2 A/g. In addition, the 
results presented in Fig. 3d demonstrate that the Ni-Mn hydroxide electrode displays 
remarkable stability over a long cycle life. Particularly, it retains 96.6% of its initial 
value after undergoing 5500 cycles, with a coulombic efﬁciency exceeding 99%. 
These ﬁndings suggest that the Ni-Mn hydroxide electrode holds great potential as 
a material for outstanding-peformance supercapacitors [12]. 
3 
Composite Pseudocapaciting Materials Consisting 
of Nanosheets and/or Nanoplates 
Nanosheets and/or nanoplates can provide a very high speciﬁc area, which is very 
helpful for achieving a superior speciﬁc capacitance of the material. For example, 
Chai’s team employed a simple single step potentiostatic deposition technique to 
fabricate a NiCo2S4 nanostructured electrode on F-doped SnO2 (FTO) substrates

Emerging Pseudocapaciting Materials
63
without the use of any binder. The optimization of the electrodepositing solu-
tion to control the Ni/Co mole ratio results in the fabrication of a nanosheet-like 
NiCo2S4 free-standing electrode. At a current density of 1 A/g, the electrode yields 
an outstanding speciﬁc capacitance of 1080 F/g. Even after 2000 cycles at 5 A/g, 
there is no decrease in the speciﬁc capacitance [13]. Although a nanosheet sample 
itself can achieve good supercapacitor performance, composing it with other compo-
nents can further improve the materials properties through a synergistic effect. 
Composite pseudocapacitor materials consisting of nanosheets and/or nanoplates 
have achieved signiﬁcant progress in recent years. These materials have the potential 
to revolutionize the ﬁeld of energy storage by enabling the development of high-
performance supercapacitors and batteries with improved energy and power densi-
ties. In these composites, if either the nanosheets/nanoplates or the other component 
is a pseuducapaciting material, then the composite would exhibit a Pseuducapaciting 
property. 
Zhang et al. report regarding the NiCo-layered double hydroxide (LDH) hollow 
spheres synthesized with Co-glycerate as the substitute template and cobalt source. 
The assembly of hollow spheres involves the utilization of chaotic NiCo-LDH 
nanosheets. The hollow conﬁguration of the spheres prevents the accumulation of 
LDH nanosheets, thereby facilitating the exposure of more active sites and reducing 
the diffusion path of electrolyte ions. The NiCo-LDH hollow spheres that were 
prepared exhibit a notable speciﬁc capacitance of 1962 F/g when measured at 1 A/g 
and an excellent capacitance retention rate of 66.4% at a current density of 30 A/g. 
The utilization of NiCo-LDH hollow spheres as positive electrodes in the production 
of asymmetric supercapacitors results in a signiﬁcant energy density of 62.9 Wh/kg 
when subjected to a power density of 0.8 kW/kg. The present study aims to estab-
lish a simple method for synthesizing hollow spheres of layered double hydroxides 
(LDHs) that can be utilized in the production of supercapacitors. The use of trans-
mission electron microscopy (TEM) has served as a tool for the observation of the 
NiCo-LDH hollow sphere’s structural characteristics. The TEM images presented in 
Figs. 4a, b demonstrate the presence of void space within the hollow sphere as well as 
the existence of the outside nanosheet shells with a thickness of approximately 50 nm. 
The presence of void space facilitates the storage of electrolytes, thereby reducing 
the diffusion distance. Additionally, the nanosheet shells provide an extensive range 
of active sites that enhance the redox reaction. The homogeneous distribution of Ni, 
Co, and O elements in the associated elemental mapping, as illustrated in Fig. 4c, 
signiﬁcantly verify the creation of nanosheet-assembled NiCo-LDH hollow spheres, 
demonstrating a clear dark-bright distinction between the shells and interiors [14]. 
Remarkable progress has been made in the research of many composite nanosheet 
materials, further revealing their huge potential.

64
M. Abdullah et al.
Fig. 4 a, b Transmission electron microscopy images of NiCo-LDH. c Scanning TEM picture of 
NiCo-LDH with elemental mapping of Ni, Co, and O. Adapted with permission [14], Copyright 
(2022), Elsevier 
4 
Negative Electrode Pseudocapaciting Materials 
An electrochemical energy storage device comprises a positive electrode, an elec-
trolyte, and a negative electrode. The majority of the research papers on pseudoca-
paciting materials appear to be about the positive electrode material; however, the 
research on the negative electrode surely has a vital role in the ﬁeld. Negative elec-
trode Pseudo-capacitive materials are a kind of material employed in energy-storing 
devices, such as a supercapacitor or hybrid supercapacitor, where the negative elec-
trode undergoes a reversible redox reaction with the electrolyte to store energy. These 
materials offer high speciﬁc capacitances, good cycling stability, and fast charge– 
discharge rates, making them appealing for use in applications requiring considerable 
power [15]. 
Different kinds of materials used for negative electrodes exhibit a broad range of 
operational voltages, which has a signiﬁcant impact on their efﬁciency in complete 
SC devices using an aqueous electrolyte. The working potential ranges of several 
materials used for negative electrodes using an electrolyte are summarized in Fig. 5. 
The literature review indicates that the operational potential range for three different 
activated carbon (AC) negative electrode materials is estimated to be 0 to −1 V  
and 0 to −1.1 V. The voltage window for three different graphene oxide negative

Emerging Pseudocapaciting Materials
65
Fig. 5 The working voltage windows of several negative electrode materials with an aqueous 
electrolyte. Adapted with permission [16], Copyright (2023), Elsevier 
electrode materials, is approximately from 0 to −0.8 V, 0 to −1 V, and 0 to −1.2 V, as 
illustrated. It is observed that among the various materials, the metal oxide (Fe3O4) 
exhibits the broadest potential window as compared to the other materials. This 
can help in the selection of suitable negative electrode materials. The operational 
potential range of electrode materials with aqueous electrolytes might be altered by 
changing their nanostructure, crystal conﬁguration, and particle dimensions. With 
a deep understanding of this phenomenon, considerable study and improvement of 
negative electrodes to generate highly energetic SCs devices are now possible [16]. 
4.1 
Metal Sulﬁdes for Negative Electrode Pseudocapaciting 
Materials 
Metal sulﬁdes, as one type of metal chalcogene, have been extensively researched as 
negative electrodes for pseudo-capacitor applications based on their superior theo-
retical capacitances, high electrical conductivity, and chemical stability. In pseudo-
capacitors made of metal sulﬁde, electrochemical processes take place at the metal 
sulﬁde electrode’s surface, where ions from the electrolyte are reduced or oxidized, 
resulting in charge storage. Metal ions and sulﬁde ions are created when metal sulﬁdes 
go through reversible redox reactions during charging. The electrons from the redox 
process are moved to the electrode and stored there for further use. When an electrode 
is discharged, the electrons that have been stored are freed, and the metal ions and 
sulﬁde ions unite to create a metal sulﬁde electrode. Metal sulﬁdes such as MoS2, 
Bi2S3, and WS2 are currently being investigated as promising possibilities for energy 
storage applications [17, 18].

66
M. Abdullah et al.
Javed, Najam, et al. designed a unique negative electrode material for supercapaci-
tors consisting of a binder-free linked composite nanosheet array of two-dimensional 
bimetallic ZnS/FeS on carbon cloth (2D-ZFS@CC). The 2D-ZFS@CC material 
exhibits superior capacitance of 1367.5 F/g/1641 C/g at a current density of 3 A/ 
g, an operating voltage range of -1.4–0.0 V, 58.5% rate-capability, and 87% capaci-
tance retention in comparison to the bimetallic oxide ZnFe2O4. This superior perfor-
mance is accomplished by meticulously controlling the structure to create multiple 
pores with a wide available surface area and signiﬁcant porosity, resulting in excel-
lent capacitance. Moreover, quick charge transfer is made possible by the active 
material’s lack of a binder. Additionally, the kinetic investigation showed that the 
2D-ZFS@CC electrode stores energy via a hybrid charge storage method, having 
b-values for the anodic and cathodic peaks of 0.70 and 0.72, respectively. These 
results show 2D-ZFS@CC’s tremendous potential as a negative electrode material 
for supercapacitors in the future [19]. 
The utilization of metal sulﬁdes as negative electrode pseudocapacitors exhibit 
great potential owing to their interesting attributes such as high speciﬁc capacitance, 
excellent cycling stability, and economic feasibility. The present investigation focuses 
on enhancing the properties of materials and developing energy storage devices that 
are feasible for use in real life. 
4.2 
Metal Nitrides for Negative Electrode Pseudocapaciting 
Materials 
Metal nitrides have gained signiﬁcant attention as potential negative electrodes for 
pseudo-capacitors. These materials undergo reversible surface redox reactions when 
used as negative electrodes in pseudo-capacitors. During the charging process, metal 
ions present in the nitride oxidize and subsequently release electrons into the elec-
trode, while nitrogen ions present in the electrolyte undergo reduction and acquire 
electrons from the electrode. The reverse occurs during discharging, with metal ions 
decreasing and nitrogen ions oxidizing. The redox processes that happen on the 
surface of metal nitride lead to the formation of an induced double layer at the inter-
face of electrode and electrolyte, resulting in high capacitance and rapid charge/ 
discharge rates. Therefore, metal nitrides are well-suited for applications as negative 
electrodes in pseudo-capacitors that demand high power density and extended cycling 
life [20]. Metal nitrides, namely titanium nitride (TiN), tungsten nitride (WN), and 
niobium nitride (NbN), exhibit favorable characteristics, including high conductivity, 
strong chemical stability, and quick charge transfer kinetics, therefore making them 
promising materials for negative electrode applications. 
Ramadoss et al. employed a physical vapor deposition technique to fabricate 
titanium nitride on a ﬂexible graphite substrate. The incorporation of nitrogen into 
the electrode material resulted in an enhancement of the surface’s wettability and

Emerging Pseudocapaciting Materials
67
improved its conductivity. Remarkably, the as-fabricated negative electrode exhib-
ited pseudocapacitive behavior, demonstrating an impressive speciﬁc capacitance of 
about 86 mF/cm2 under 1 mA/cm2 over a broad operational voltage window of -1.1 
to 0 V. It also displayed outstanding cycling stability, retaining 80% of its capacitance 
over 3000 cycles at a current density of 3 mA/cm2 [21]. 
Metal nitrides exhibit high capacitance, remarkable cycling stability, and tunable 
properties, making them the future class of materials for negative electrode 
pseudocapacitive energy storage devices. 
4.3 
Hydroxide/LDH for Negative Electrode Pseudocapaciting 
Materials 
Transitional metal oxides and hydroxides like MnO2, NiO, Ni(OH)2, CoO, and 
Co3O4 and their binary systems are among the traditional pseudocapacitive mate-
rials. The advancement of novel materials for electrodes with superior speciﬁc energy 
density and power density is essential for enhancing the overall efﬁciency of such 
SCs, since the efﬁciency of these SCs is heavily reliant upon the electrode mate-
rials. The remarkable electrochemical properties, device capabilities, and promising 
energy storage potential of LDHs and the corresponding derivatives make them a 
promising class of 2D nanomaterials [22]. LDHs have an anionic brucite structure 
and are two-dimensional in nature. These compounds are known to contain divalent 
and trivalent cations that are electrochemically active, such as Ni, Co, Al, and Fe. The 
strong pseudo-capacitive performance, high redox activity, and environmental friend-
liness of LDHs have made them particularly interesting materials for energy storage 
applications. In contrast, the majority of LDHs described for electrode materials have 
low electrical conductivity and cycle stability. Assembling LDHs with conductive 
materials will therefore be an effective means of improving the electrodes’ electrical 
conductivity and cycle stability [23]. 
Liang & Zhitomirsky presented the synthesis of a novel material for energy 
storage in the negative electrodes of asymmetric supercapacitors. The material is a 
composite of Zn-Fe double hydroxide (Zn-Fe-DH) and multiwalled carbon nanotube 
(MWCNT), with the incorporation of celestine blue (CB) dye serving as a versatile 
additive. The electrodes demonstrated excellent cyclic stability and a capacitance of 
5.2 F/cm2 in a potential range of -1.0 to -0.2 V compared to a saturated calomel elec-
trode. A novel asymmetric device has been developed, featuring negative electrodes 
composed of Zn-Fe-DH-MWCNT and positive electrodes coated with polypyrrole 
on MWCNT. A partially overlapping potential window allowed for the achievement 
of favorable capacitive behavior in both the cathode and anode materials at a high 
active mass of 40 mg/cm2. A capacitance value of 2.2 F/cm2 was determined at a 
scan rate of 2 mV/s [24]. Overall, research into hydroxide negative electrode pseudo-
capacitors continues to grow, with continued attempts to improve performance and 
broaden their applications.

68
M. Abdullah et al.
4.4 
Conducting Polymers, Metal Oxides, and MXenes 
for Negative Electrode Pseudocapaciting Materials 
Conducting polymers. The optimal electrode material for supercapacitors is conduc-
tive polymers (CPs) because of their cost-effectiveness, excellent conductivity, high 
ﬂexibility, and ease of manufacture. In addition, CPs have signiﬁcant potential as 
both positive and negative electrodes due to their acceptable electrochemical char-
acteristics in aqueous electrolytes with a broad operating voltage range from −1.0 to 
1.0 V. Due to their exceptional stability, superior conductivity in the doped state, and 
quick redox operation capability, conducting polymers display a pseudo-capacitor 
type charge storage mechanism [25]. 
Metal oxides. Metal oxides are being widely investigated as negative electrodes 
in pseudocapacitors, which are electrochemical devices for storing energy that stores 
energy through reversible redox processes at the electrode–electrolyte interface. 
Metal oxides have great potential as negative electrodes in pseudocapacitors because 
of their large theoretical speciﬁc capacitance, which relies upon their redox activity, 
allowing reversible charge storage through faradaic processes. Additionally, metal 
oxides have high cycling stability, indicating that they can go through several charge/ 
discharge cycles without signiﬁcantly degrading or losing performance [26]. 
MXenes. MXenes have exhibited attractive efﬁciency and high speciﬁc capaci-
tance when utilized as negative electrodes in pseudocapacitors. The redox activity 
exhibited by MXenes is responsible for their speciﬁc capacitance, as it facilitates 
the reversible storage of charge via faradaic reactions. Furthermore, MXene’s strong 
electrical conductivity enables the fast mobility of ions and excellent power density. 
MXene has several advantages, including hydrophilicity, elemental structure ﬂex-
ibility, metallic nature, rapid charge transfer mobility, unique in-plane anisotropic 
structures, attractive physical and optical characteristics, and an adjustable band gap. 
In general, MXenes are materials with multiple layers that can be separated into large 
numbers of layers or individual ﬂakes through the use of sonication and intercalation 
techniques [27]. 
More detailed discussions of conducting polymers, metal oxides, and MXenes 
can be found in the other chapters of the book. 
5 
Other Emerging Pseudocapaciting Materials 
In addition to the pseudocapacitive materials discussed earlier, there are several other 
emerging materials that show promising potential for energy storage applications: 
Hydroxide positive electrode materials. Hydroxides represent an exciting class 
of pseudocapacitive materials that exhibit higher speciﬁc capacitance, energy density, 
and superior cycle stability in comparison to traditional pseudocapacitive materials. 
These advantages have made hydroxides a research focus in multiple ﬁelds, including 
energy storage, water electrolysis, and supercapacitors.

Emerging Pseudocapaciting Materials
69
As an example, Dipali et al. present the oriented attachment growth of innova-
tive ZnCo and ZnCo@NiCo LDH on graphene-coated nickel foam (NF) by an all-
hydrothermal route for enhanced supercapacitor studies. The oriented growth allows 
a route through which distinct nano-architectures are produced, which is highly bene-
ﬁcial for enhanced electrochemical performance owing to their high surface area and 
porous nature. High-performance electrodes consisting of ultrathin nanosheets of 
Zn-Co and nano-ﬂakes of Ni-Co LDHs supported on highly porous and conducting 
3D graphene foam were fabricated using a facile, one-pot hydrothermal synthesis 
route grown by an oriented growth mechanism without any additives or oxidants, as 
shown in Fig. 6. The hydrothermal process involves the hydrolysis of urea, resulting 
in the production of OH− ions. These OH− ions then interact with the separated 
Zn2+ and Co2+ ions, leading to the formation of ZnCo-hydroxide [ZnCo2(OH)6]. The 
ZnCo-hydroxide electrode underwent a 16-h reaction to form optimized nanoﬂowers, 
following which the samples were utilized for the subsequent deposition of NiCo 
hydroxide under hydrothermal conditions. The ultrathin nature of the nanosheets and 
the conducting nature of graphene foam, as well as the composite LDH structure, 
lead to superior supercapacitor performance of the studied electrode, which exhibits 
excellent values of areal capacitance of 2453 mF/cm2, energy density of 1202 mWh/ 
cm2, and cycling stability of 108% after 5000 charge–discharge cycles within the 
working potential range of −0.2 to 0.6 V. The ultrathin nature of the nanosheets 
and the conducting nature of graphene foam, as well as the synergistic effect of the 
composite LDH structure, lead to superior supercapacitor performance [28]. 
He et al. prepared C/NiMn-LDH/Ni3S2 on a NF substrate through the integra-
tion of hydrothermal and electrodeposition techniques, resulting in remarkable elec-
trochemical properties. The C/NiMn-LDH/Ni3S2/NF electrode exhibits a speciﬁc 
capacitance of 3490 mF/cm2 when subjected to a current density of 2 mA/cm2.
Fig. 6 Schematic illustration of ZnCo@NiCo hydroxide nanostructure synthesis. Adapted with 
permission [28], Copyright (2019), Elsevier 

70
M. Abdullah et al.
Further, it retains 84.25% of its initial energy even after undergoing 5000 contin-
uous cycles and shows an exceptional speciﬁc energy value of 64.46 Wh/kg at a 
power density of 1279.96 W/kg. The outstanding electrochemical efﬁciency can 
be attributed to the synergistic effect resulting from the combined inﬂuence of the 
components. The physical characteristics and the microstructure of the obtained 
samples were studied using SEM. As illustrated in Figs. 7a–c, following the vulcan-
ization process, a ﬂocculent Ni3S2 ﬁlm forms on the surface of the NF material. This 
ﬁlm contributes to an increase in the roughness of the NF surface, thereby providing 
a larger area for the subsequent deposition of the hydroxide nanosheets. The Ni3S2/ 
NF surface is observed to be fully coated by interlinked nanosheets of NiMn-LDHs, 
as depicted in Figs. 7d–f. The structural characteristics of the C/NiMn-LDH/Ni3S2/ 
NF composite are displayed in Figs. 7g–i. The presence of the carbon coating on the 
surface of the nanosheets does not result in any apparent structural alterations when 
compared to NiMn-LDH/Ni3S2/NF [29]. 
Phosphate positive electrode material. Phosphates are mainly used as elec-
trolytes in pseudo-capacitive materials to separate electrodes and promote ion trans-
port. They can provide stable ion transport channels, allowing electrons to shuttle 
back and forth inside the capacitor. Phosphates are commonly used as solid-state 
electrolyte materials due to their excellent ion conductivity and chemical stability. In 
typical pseudo-capacitors, phosphates are concentrated between the electrodes of the 
capacitor, forming an electric ﬁeld and a capacitance effect. By precisely controlling
Fig. 7 SEM image of (a–c) Ni3S2 precursor arrays, (d–f) NiMn-LDH/Ni3S2 and (g–i) C/NiMn-
LDH/Ni3S2 with various magniﬁcations. Adapted with permission [29], Copyright (2021), Elsevier 

Emerging Pseudocapaciting Materials
71
the composition and structure of phosphates, the concentration of electric ions can be 
increased, and the capacitance performance of the capacitor can be improved [30]. 
For example, Zhang et al. discovered a simple surfactant-assisted self-assembly 
approach for synthesizing amorphous, hierarchically porous frameworks of NiCo 
phosphate at room temperature. The electrochemical capacitance performance of 
the prepared transition metal phosphate (SDBS-Ni2CoPO4) has been observed to be 
signiﬁcantly enhanced, with a maximum value of 191.6 mAh/g at a current density 
of 0.5 A/g. This performance is due to the amorphous and mesopore structure of the 
material, which enables it to maintain a capacitance of 142.5 mAh/g even at a high 
current density of 10 A/g. In addition, the material had higher cyclic stability (77% 
retention after 2000 charge–discharge cycles at 10 A/g). Furthermore, an asymmetric 
supercapacitor consisting of SDBS-Ni2CoPO4//graphene was fabricated using an 
aqueous KOH electrolyte, exhibiting an impressive energy density of 36.5 Wh/kg at a 
power density of 150 W/kg over a working potential range from 0 to 1.5 V. The present 
study offers an easy and environmentally friendly approach for synthesizing cost-
effective transition metal phosphates, which exhibit excellent efﬁciency as electrode 
materials in pseudocapacitive devices [31]. 
Lignin positive electrode material. In recent years, researchers have found that 
lignin-based carbon nanoﬁbers are a new type of pseudocapacitive material with 
excellent capacitance performance. Lignin is a natural polymer compound that has 
high thermal stability and conductivity and can be prepared into carbon nanoﬁbers 
by pyrolysis. Studies have shown that lignin-based carbon nanoﬁbers have a high 
speciﬁc surface area and pore volume, which is conducive to electrolyte adsorp-
tion and ion transmission. In addition, the unique structure of lignin can improve 
the thermal stability and conductivity of carbon nanoﬁbers, thereby enhancing their 
capacitance performance. The redox activity of the quinone structure present in lignin 
enables its direct utilization as a cathode material in rechargeable batteries. Quinones 
are considered electron carriers that exhibit mobility, and their six-membered ring 
structure, which contains a C = O functional group, allows for a facile and reversible 
two-electron redox reaction. The utilization of carbonized lignin as a sustainable 
conductor has been found to be effective in facilitating efﬁcient electron trans-
port. Additionally, the heterogeneous morphology of lignin has been observed to 
contribute to the diffusion of metal ions. The beneﬁts of its potential as a cathode 
material, lignin’s electron transfer capabilities are limited due to its insulating prop-
erties. In order to facilitate electrochemical reactions, it is necessary to enhance the 
electronic conductivity either intrinsically or extrinsically. Implementing system-
atic research into the impact of chemical functionality, conductive additives, and 
elemental doping can facilitate the development of effective cathode materials based 
on lignin [32, 33]. 
Besides the information discussed above, quantum dots and heterogeneous struc-
tures are also interesting. Research has demonstrated that the utilization of quantum 
dots as electrodes in supercapacitors can greatly improve their performance [34]. 
Heterostructural (HS) materials represent a novel category of materials that comprise 
heterogeneous domains characterized by mechanical or physical properties that differ

72
M. Abdullah et al.
signiﬁcantly. The interaction among these heterogeneous areas generates a syner-
gistic effect wherein the synthetic characteristics exceed those estimated by mixing 
standards. Heterogeneous materials exhibit superior mechanical and physical charac-
teristics that are unattainable by conventional homogenous materials. The generation 
of active sites along with defects within the grain boundaries of the heterostructure 
materials yields numerous redox activities, greater ionic conductivity, and reduced 
diffusion pathways, all of which may help improve the supercapacitors performance 
[35]. 
With continued development and optimization, emerging pseudocapacitive mate-
rials hold great potential for a wide range of energy storage and conversion appli-
cations, including portable electronics, electric vehicles, and grid-scale energy 
storage. 
6 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, pseudocapacitors are a promising energy storage technology due 
to their high energy density and large capacitance. This chapter has reviewed the 
emerging pseudocapaciting materials that are being developed to improve the perfor-
mance of these devices. One trend is the control of morphology through the template 
method, which has been used to create pseudocapaciting materials with high surface 
areas and excellent electrochemical performance. Other than nanospheres that can be 
readily prepared by a glycerate template method, composite materials consisting of 
nanosheets and/or nanoplates have also been synthesized and shown great potential 
due to their large surface area and unique properties. Moreover, negative electrode 
pseudocapaciting materials and other emerging positive electrode pseudocapaciting 
materials are discussed. Overall, the progress made so far is promising, and these 
materials have the potential to revolutionize the ﬁeld of energy storage and conver-
sion. On the other hand, the research on emerging pseudocapaciting materials still has 
much to be explored in terms of improving their performances. With further research 
and development, pseudocapacitors may become a viable alternative to traditional 
batteries and capacitors, offering a more efﬁcient and sustainable means of storing 
and utilizing energy. 
Acknowledgements The authors acknowledge the support of the National Natural Science Foun-
dation of China (21875066); the Shanghai Leading Academic Discipline Project (B502), and the 
Shanghai Key Laboratory Project (08DZ2230500). 
References 
1. P. Bhojane, Recent advances and fundamentals of pseudocapacitors: materials, mechanism, 
and its understanding. J. Energy Storage 45, 103654 (2022)

Emerging Pseudocapaciting Materials
73
2. N.N. Loganathan, V. Perumal, B.R. Pandian, R. Atchudan, T.N.J.I. Edison, M. Ovinis, Recent 
studies on polymeric materials for supercapacitor development. J. Energy Storage 49, 104149 
(2022) 
3. R. Zhao, L. Zhang, C. Wang, L. Yin, Tetramethyl ammonium cation intercalated layered birnes-
site manganese dioxide for high-performance intercalation pseudocapacitor. J. Power Sources 
353, 77–84 (2017) 
4. M. Ahmad, I. Hussain, T. Nawaz, Y. Li, X. Chen, S. Ali, M. Imran, X. Ma, K. Zhang, Compar-
ative study of ternary metal chalcogenides (MX; M= Zn–Co–Ni; X= S, Se, Te): formation 
process, charge storage mechanism and hybrid supercapacitor. J. Power Sources 534, 231414 
(2022) 
5. J.Y. Wang, Y. Cui, D. Wang, Design of hollow nanostructures for energy storage, conversion 
and production. Adv. Mater. 31(38), 1801993 (2019) 
6. X. Chen, Y. Li, C. Li, H. Cao, C. Wang, S. Cheng, Q. Zhang, A novel strategy of multi-
element nanocomposite synthesis for high performance ZnO-CoSe2 supercapacitor material 
development. Chin. J. Chem. 39(9), 2441–2450 (2021) 
7. C. Wei, C. Cheng, K. Wang, X. Li, H. Xiao, Q. Yao, Hierarchical Ni–Co–Mn hydroxide 
hollow architectures as high-performance electrodes for electrochemical energy storage. RSC 
Adv. 11(25), 15258–15263 (2021) 
8. Z. Liu, F. Teng, C. Yuan, Z. Ul Abideen, W. Gu, Z. Liu, Highly uniform MnCo2O4 hollow 
spheres-based all-solid-state asymmetric micro-supercapacitor via a simple metal-glycerate 
precursor approach. Energ. Technol. 7(9), 1900314 (2019) 
9. M. Amiri, S.S.H. Davarani, S.K. Kaverlavani, S.E. Moosavifard, M. Shamsipur, Construction 
of hierarchical nanoporous CuCo2V2O8 hollow spheres as a novel electrode material for high-
performance asymmetric supercapacitors. Appl. Surf. Sci. 527, 146855 (2020) 
10. Q. Zhang, Q. Zang, Q. Shi, Z. Xiao, K.-P. Wang, L. Zong, L. Wang, Formation of 
V6O11@Ni(OH)2/NiOOH hollow double-shell nanoﬂowers for the excellent cycle stability 
of supercapacitors. Dalton Trans. 50(10), 3693–3700 (2021) 
11. X. Yang, X. Chen, H. Cao, C. Li, L. Wang, Y. Wu, C. Wang, Y. Li, Rational synthesis of 
Cu7Se4-CuxCo1-xSe2 double-shell hollow nanospheres for high performance supercapacitors. 
J. Power Sources 480, 228741 (2020) 
12. C. Cheng, C. Wei, Y. He, L. Liu, J. Hu, W. Du, Etching strategy synthesis of hierarchical Ni-Mn 
hydroxide hollow spheres for supercapacitors. J. Energy Storage 33, 102105 (2021) 
13. Z. Chai, Z. Wang, J. Wang, X. Li, H. Guo, Potentiostatic deposition of nickel cobalt sulﬁde 
nanosheet arrays as binder-free electrode for high-performance pseudocapacitor. Ceram. Int. 
44(13), 15778–15784 (2018) 
14. X. Zhang, W. Lu, Y. Tian, S. Yang, Q. Zhang, D. Lei, Y. Zhao, Nanosheet-assembled NiCo-
LDH hollow spheres as high-performance electrodes for supercapacitors. J. Colloid Interface 
Sci. 606, 1120–1127 (2022) 
15. S. Islam, M.M. Mia, S.S. Shah, S. Naher, M.N. Shaikh, M.A. Aziz, A.J.S. Ahammad, 
Recent advancements in electrochemical deposition of metal-based electrode materials for 
electrochemical supercapacitors. Chem. Rec. 22(7), e202200013 (2022) 
16. M.S.  Javed,  A.  Mateen, I. Hussain, S. Ali, S. Asim,  A.  Ahmad,  E.  Tag Eldin, M.A. Bajaber, T.  
Najam, W. Han, The quest for negative electrode materials for Supercapacitors: 2D materials 
as a promising family. Chem. Eng. J. 452, 139455 (2023) 
17. R. Barik, P.P. Ingole, Challenges and prospects of metal sulﬁde materials for supercapacitors. 
Curr. Opin. Electrochem. 21, 327–334 (2020) 
18. V. Sharma, S.J. Kim, N.H. Kim, J.H. Lee, All-solid-state asymmetric supercapacitor with 
MWCNT-based hollow NiCo2O4 positive electrode and porous Cu2WS4 negative electrode. 
Chem. Eng. J. 415, 128188 (2021) 
19. M.S. Javed, T. Najam, M. Sajjad, S.S.A. Shah, I. Hussain, M. Idrees, M. Imran, M.A. Assiri, 
S.H. Siyal, Design and fabrication of highly porous 2D bimetallic sulﬁde ZnS/FeS composite 
nanosheets as an advanced negative electrode material for supercapacitors. Energy Fuels 35(18), 
15185–15191 (2021)

74
M. Abdullah et al.
20. Y. Tan, L. Meng, Y. Wang, W. Dong, L. Kong, L. Kang, F. Ran, Negative electrode mate-
rials of molybdenum nitride/N-doped carbon nano-ﬁber via electrospinning method for 
high-performance supercapacitors. Electrochim. Acta 277, 41–49 (2018) 
21. A. Ramadoss, A. Tripathy, A. Mohanty, N. Swain, G.S. Kaliaraj, S.Z. Noby, K. Kirubavathi, 
K. Selvaraju, Binder-free TiN/graphite based thin ﬁlm negative electrode for ﬂexible energy 
storage devices. Vacuum 211, 111848 (2023) 
22. X. Gao, P. Wang, Z. Pan, J.P. Claverie, J. Wang, Recent progress in two-dimensional layered 
double hydroxides and their derivatives for supercapacitors. Chemsuschem 13(6), 1226–1254 
(2020) 
23. L. Li, J. Fu, K.S. Hui, K.N. Hui, Y.-R. Cho, Controllable preparation of 2D nickel aluminum 
layered double hydroxide nanoplates for high-performance supercapacitors. J. Mater. Sci.: 
Mater. Electron. 29(20), 17493–17502 (2018) 
24. W. Liang, I. Zhitomirsky, Zn-Fe double hydroxide-carbon nanotube anodes for asymmetric 
supercapacitors. Front. Mater. 7, 137 (2020) 
25. Q. Liu, J. Qiu, C. Yang, L. Zang, G. Zhang, E. Sakai, H. Wu, S. Guo, Robust quasi-solid-
state integrated asymmetric ﬂexible supercapacitors with interchangeable positive and negative 
electrode based on all-conducting-polymer electrodes. J. Alloy. Compd. 887, 161362 (2021) 
26. C. Rogier, G. Pognon, C. Galindo, G.T.M. Nguyen, C. Vancaeyzeele, P.-H. Aubert, MoO3– 
carbon nanotube negative electrode designed for a fully hybrid asymmetric metal oxide-based 
pseudocapacitor operating in an organic electrolyte. ACS Appl. Energy Mater. 5(8), 9361–9372 
(2022) 
27. M.M. Baig, I.H. Gul, S.M. Baig, F. Shahzad, 2D MXenes: synthesis, properties, and elec-
trochemical energy storage for supercapacitors—a review. J. Electroanal. Chem. 904, 115920 
(2022) 
28. D.S. Patil, S.A. Pawar, J.C. Shin, H.J. Kim, Layered double hydroxide based on ZnCo@NiCo-
nano-architecture on 3D graphene scaffold as an efﬁcient pseudocapacitor. J. Power Sources 
435, 226812 (2019) 
29. Y. He, D. Liu, H. Zhao, J. Wang, Y. Sui, J. Qi, Z. Chen, P. Zhang, C. Chen, D. Zhuang, 
Carbon-coated NiMn layered double hydroxides/Ni3S2 nanocomposite for high performance 
supercapacitors. J. Energy Storage 41, 103003 (2021) 
30. S. Alam, M.I.K. Fizza Fiaz, M.Z. Iqbal, F. Alam, Z. Ahmad, H.H. Hegazy, Advancements in 
asymmetric supercapacitors: Material selection, mechanisms, and breakthroughs with metallic 
oxides, sulﬁdes, and phosphates. J. Energy Storage 72, 108208 (2023) 
31. X. Zhang, N. Shang, S. Gao, C. Wang, Y. Gao, Z. Wang, Surfactant assisted self-assembly 
of NiCo phosphate with superior electrochemical performance for supercapacitor. Appl. Surf. 
Sci. 483, 529–535 (2019) 
32. R. Yadav, O. Zabihi, S. Fakhrhoseini, H.A. Nazarloo, A. Kiziltas, P. Blanchard, M. Naebe, 
Lignin derived carbon ﬁber and nanoﬁber: manufacturing and applications. Compos. B Eng. 
255, 110613 (2023) 
33. H.Y. Jung, J.S. Lee, H.T. Han, J. Jung, K. Eom, J.T. Lee, Lignin-based materials for sustainable 
rechargeable batteries. Polymers 14(4), 673 (2022) 
34. S. Satpathy, N.K. Misra, V. Goyal, S. Das, V. Sharma, S. Ali, An AI-based newly developed 
analytical formulation for discharging behavior of supercapacitors with the integration of a 
review of supercapacitor challenges and advancement using quantum dots. Symmetry-Basel 
15, 844 (2023) 
35. S. Saha, P. Samanta, N. Murmu, T. Kuila, A review on the heterostructure nanomaterials for 
supercapacitor application. J. Energy Storage 17, 181–202 (2018)

Pseudocapacitance: Tuning 
Electrochemical Properties 
Jinfeng Sun, Anning Zhang, Qian Zhang, and Changzhou Yuan 
Abstract Recently, advanced electrochemical energy storage technology has come 
to require both high energy and power densities. Pseudocapacitance originates 
from the charge transfer reaction across the electrochemical interface and depicts 
higher capacitance than capacitors and faster electrochemical kinetics than tradi-
tional batteries, providing the opportunity to fulﬁll this goal. However, due to the 
intrinsic poor electrical conductivity, or inadequate structural stability, the rate perfor-
mance and cycling stability of pseudocapacitive materials are still unsatisfactory. 
Thus, various strategies have been proposed to tune the electrochemical performance 
of pseudocapacitive materials for achieving both high energy and power. In this 
chapter, we highlight some recent works in developing pseudocapacitive materials 
for electrochemical energy storage systems. By introducing the research advances of 
both “intrinsic” and “extrinsic” pseudocapacitive materials, tune strategies such as 
nanostructure design, doping, introducing oxygen vacancies, interlayer engineering, 
heterostructure engineering, etc., have been carefully discussed. We hope this work 
will be of directive signiﬁcance for the design and fabrication of high-performance 
electrode materials. 
Keywords Pseudocapacitance · Fast kinetics · Electrochemical properties ·
Pseudocapacitive materials · Tuning strategies 
1 
Introduction 
Batteries can exhibit high energy density (~200 Wh/kg), however, the diffusion-
limited redox reactions always result in slow charging (tens of minutes-several hours) 
[1, 2]. Supercapacitors show much lower energy density (5–10 Wh/kg) but very fast 
charging (on the order of seconds) because of the surface-controlled ion adsorption 
mechanism [1]. Over the past few decades, plenty of research has been reported 
for the development of energy storage materials that can simultaneously possess
J. Sun · A. Zhang · Q. Zhang · C. Yuan envelope symbol
School of Materials Science & Engineering, University of Jinan, Jinan 250022, P. R. China 
e-mail: mse_yuancz@ujn.edu.cn 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
R. K. Gupta (ed.), Pseudocapacitors, Engineering Materials, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45430-1_5 
75

76
J. Sun et al.
high energy and high power density. Pseudocapacitance originates from the charge 
transfer reaction across the electrochemical interface and depicts electrochemical 
behaviors resembling capacitors, providing the opportunity to fulﬁll this goal. 
Pseudocapacitance was ﬁrst used to describe the absorption of hydrogen on metal 
surfaces by Conway and now was divided into three categories based on the storage 
mechanism: adsorption, surface redox, and intercalation pseudocapacitance [3, 4]. 
RuO2 and MnO2 are the most reported examples of surface redox pseudocapaci-
tive materials. They store charges through fast and reversible redox reactions at/ 
near the surface of the materials. Intercalation pseudocapacitive materials such as 
bronze-phase TiO2 (i.e., TiO2(B)) and orthorhombic Nb2O5 store charges through 
ions intercalating into/out of these materials, and no phase change can be observed 
during this process. These materials although exhibit different mechanisms, they all 
show pseudocapacitive properties inherently, i.e., their pseudocapacitive behavior 
is independent of their morphology or particle size. These materials are “intrinsic” 
pseudocapacitive materials. In recent years, the investigation of intrinsic pseudoca-
pacitive materials has been focused on improving the electrochemical performance 
of the materials including the capacitance, rate capability, and cycling stability. In 
2007, researchers found that some battery materials could depict pseudocapacitive 
properties when they were downsized into nanoscale, which were categorized as 
“extrinsic” pseudocapacitive materials. The most noted example of the extrinsic 
kind is LiCoO2, in which a large fraction of Li+ storage sites are on/near the surface 
when the particle size decreases below 20 nm [5]. After that, engineering materials 
such as V2O5, VO2, Li3VO4, and so on into nanoscales to achieve pseudocapacitive 
Li+ intercalation behavior have also been reported. 
In this chapter, we highlight some recent works in developing pseudocapaci-
tive materials for electrochemical energy storage systems, focusing on different 
kinds of methods to tune the electrochemical performance of pseudocapacitive mate-
rials for achieving both high energy and power densities. Strategies such as nanos-
tructure design, doping, oxygen vacancies, interlayer engineering, heterostructure 
engineering, etc., have been discussed, which may have direct signiﬁcance for the 
investigation of high-performance pseudocapacitive materials. 
2 
Tuning Strategies for Intrinsic Pseudocapacitive 
Materials 
Typical examples of intrinsic pseudocapacitive materials like MnO2, RuO2, and iron 
oxides generally demonstrate faster reaction kinetics than the battery materials and 
larger capacitance than the EDLC materials. Regrettably, due to the intrinsic poor 
electrical conductivity and inadequate structural stability, the rate performance and 
cycling stability of these transition metal oxides are usually far from the level of 
EDLCs. If not optimized, they may suffer from obvious capacitance decay during 
long-term cycling.

Pseudocapacitance: Tuning Electrochemical Properties
77
MnO2 have received considerable attention as pseudocapacitive materials thanks 
to their advantages such as high theoretical capacitance (1370 F/g), natural abun-
dance, and low costs [6]. Till now, a variety of strategies have been reported for 
improving the electrochemical performance of MnO2, including but not limited to 
introducing vacancies, expanding interlayer spacing, constructing nanoarchitectures, 
and compositing with conductive components. Choi and co-workers used a ﬂuid 
dynamic-induced shear process to exfoliate layered birnessite-type MnO2 into ultra-
thin 2D MnO2 sheets and during which dopamine was also added to intercalated into 
the MnO2 layers [6]. After calcination, the randomly stacked and interlayer-expanded 
MnO2/nitrogen-doped carbon (MnO2/C) composite was obtained, which can provide 
fast and efﬁcient ions and electrons transport (Fig. 1a). Even at a high mass loading of 
19.7 mg/cm2, the  MnO2/C electrode exhibited high speciﬁc gravimetric (480.3 F/g) 
and areal capacitances (9.4 F/cm2) at 0.5 mA/cm2, as well as superior rate capability 
(Fig. 1b). Peng et al. reported the synthesis of oxygen defect-modulated sodium-
intercalated manganese oxides (Na0.55Mn2O4-x·1.5H2O) for pseudocapacitors [7]. 
The crystal structure of Na0.55Mn2O4-x·1.5H2O show that the [MnO6] octahedron 
site consists of Mn3+ and Mn4+, with Na+ and H2O residing in the tunnels (Fig. 1c). 
The monolayer thickness of Na0.55Mn2O4-x·1.5H2O was evaluated as 0.732 nm which 
is beneﬁt to ion transport and can withstand the stress related to the crystal defor-
mation during charging/discharging. As a result, the Na0.55Mn2O4-x·1.5H2O elec-
trode depicted a rapid kinetics-dominated capacitive process with high capacitance 
of 475.5 F/g at 1 A/g (Fig. 1d). The faster Na+ diffusion in Na0.55Mn2O4-x·1.5H2O 
than pristine Mn3O4 electrode is also conﬁrmed by the lower Warburg coefﬁcient 
(Fig. 1e). By coupling the interfacial modulation and the Kirkendall effect, Wang 
and co-workers constructed the α-MnO2/δ-MnO2 hollow heterostructure that shows 
high aspect ratio with plenty of exposed active sites [8]. According to the theoretical 
calculation and electrochemical kinetic analysis, the improved the charge-transfer 
and electrolyte ion-adsorption/transport kinetics can be attributed to the existence of 
a potential built-in ﬁeld within the heterostructure that enhanced the intrinsic reac-
tivity of the electrode, consequently. The 30 mg/cm2 electrode showed a high areal 
capacitance of 4762 mF/cm2 (1 mA/cm2), superior rate performance (79% capac-
itance retention when current increased from 1 to 100 mA/cm2), as well as good 
cycling stability.
In 2005, Zukalova and co-workers ﬁrst reported the pseudocapacitive charge 
storage behavior of TiO2(B) ﬁbers [9]. TiO2(B) with parallel inﬁnite channels can 
accommodate Li+ with no signiﬁcant structure distortion. In the following years, TiO2 
has been extensively investigated for Li+ and Na+ storage. A variety of efforts such as 
microstructure design, doping, and constructing composites have been attempted to 
tune the electrochemical properties of TiO2(B) [10–12]. Lan et al. precisely designed 
and constructed mesoscale TiO2 structures for high volumetric capacities [10]. The 
mesoporous TiO2 presents a spherical morphology which was made up of aligned 
cylindrical TiO2 bundles (Fig. 2a). This novel structure provided a high tap density 
of the active materials (1.1–1.7 g/cm3) and a high accessible surface area for elec-
trolyte ions to access, thus affording both high volumetric and gravimetric capac-
ities. The nearly symmetric charge/discharge curves with slight aberration are the

78
J. Sun et al.
Fig. 1 a Schematic illustrations of ions and electrons transport on bulk MnO2 and MnO2/C elec-
trodes. b Rate performance of MnO2/C electrodes with different mass loading. Adapted with permis-
sion [6], Copyright (2021), Wiley–VCH GmbH. c The schematic diagram of the interplanar spacing 
evolution of the Na0.55Mn2O4-x·1.5H2O. d Capacitive contribution of the Na0.55Mn2O4-x·1.5H2O 
electrode at 50 mV/s. e Z' against ω−1/2 plots of the electrodes. Adapted with permission [7], 
Copyright (2022), Wiley–VCH GmbH
typical characteristic of pseudocapacitance (Fig. 2b). In addition, the rate capability 
of the ordered mesoporous TiO2 samples are much superior to the hollow TiO2 
spheres and nanoparticles (Fig. 2c). Wang and co-workers constructed Nb-doped 
TiO2 nanosheets that perpendicularly onto the substrate, endowing the TiO2 nanos-
tructure with an ion-conducting surface as well as expanded ions diffusion channels 
(Fig. 2d) [11]. The TEM images of Nb-TiO2 show an expanded atomic spacing 
(d(200) = d(020) = 0.21 nm) compared with the pristine TiO2 (Fig. 2e, f). The two 
crystal planes interlaced with each other with 90°, indicating that {001} lattice is 
the main exposed surface. As a result, the Nb-TiO2 electrode delivered a high initial 
Coulombic efﬁciency of ~90% at 1 C and superior cycling stability even at a high rate 
of 60 C, indicating the fast insertion/extraction of Li+ (Fig. 2g). The doping strategy 
is a generic approach to modulate the electric structure and kinetic behaviors of most 
host metal oxides for electrochemical energy storage. Although TiO2 have received 
considerable interest for Li+ and Na+ batteries, the properties are still limited by their 
intrinsic low electric conductivity. Le and co-workers reported a microwave-assisted 
construction of mesoporous single-crystal-like TiO2-graphene nanocomposite for 
pseudocapacitive sodium storage [12]. TiO2 with spheroid shape and 100–350 nm 
diameters are uniformly anchored on the graphene sheets (Fig. 2h, i). The strong 
interaction of the TiO2 and graphene ensures fast electron transfer within the hybrid 
nanostructure, resulting in pseudocapacitive charge storage behavior. The optimized 
nanocomposite depicted a high capacity of 268 mAh/g at 0.2 C with excellent rate

Pseudocapacitance: Tuning Electrochemical Properties
79
capabilities (Fig. 2j) and maintained 126 mAh/g even at a high current of 10 C for 
over 18,000 cycles. 
Nb2O5 has been ﬁrst researched for Li+ storage in the 1980s by Reichman and 
Bard [13]. They found that Nb2O5 exhibited Li+ and proton insertion and was also 
electrochromic. Kumagai et al. discovered that the insertion of Li+ into Nb2O5 occurs 
under 2 V (vs. Li/Li+), generating LixNb2O5 with x ≤ 2 (theoretical capacity of 202 
mAh/g) [14]. In 2010, mesoporous T-Nb2O5 ﬁlms were reported to exhibit high 
levels of pseudocapacitive charge storage [15]. As shown in Fig. 3a, the CV curves 
delivered broad peaks, which are the typical features of pseudocapacitance. Due to 
the nanoscale porosity that provided a very short diffusion path length and the iso-
oriented nature that could accommodate the volume change during charge/discharge, 
T-Nb2O5 depicted fast electrochemical kinetics comparable to the traditional redox
Fig. 2 a Schematic illustration of the 3D mesoscopic TiO2. b Charge/discharge proﬁles and c Rate 
performance of the meso-TiO2 anodes. Adapted with permission [10], Copyright (2021), American 
Chemical Society. d Structural design schematic of Nb-doped TiO2 nanostructures. e TEM and 
f HRTEM images of Nb-TiO2. g Comparison of rate performance for Nb-doped TiO2 and pristine 
TiO2 nanosheets. Adapted with permission [11], Copyright (2016), American Chemical Society. 
h SEM and i TEM images of TiO2-graphene nanocomposite (inset of i is the SAED pattern). 
j Rate performance of TiO2-graphene samples. Adapted with permission [12], Copyright (2017), 
American Chemical Society 

80
J. Sun et al.
pseudocapacitance of high surface area Nb2O5. These works have stimulated the 
investigations of Nb2O5 as electrochemical energy storage materials, and the crystal 
structure, nanostructure, particle size, and porosity have been ﬁnely tuned to realize 
the intercalation pseudocapacitance with fast kinetics. A series of Nb2O5 samples 
with constant pore size and precision-tailored wall thickness were synthesized and 
investigated for Li+ storage [16]. With the wall thickness increased from 48.5 to 
67.0 nm, the CV curves exhibited increased peak separation which is suggestive of 
the increased diffusion limitation process (Fig. 3b), indicating that the electrochem-
ical properties were sensitively dependent upon the nanoarchitecture of Nb2O5. The  
calculated rate-dependent b value further described the transitions from surface-
limited to diffusion-limited with the increasing wall thickness (Fig. 3c). Fu and co-
workers developed yolk-shell Nb2O5 microspheres through a scalable spray drying 
method [17]. The obtained porous structure enabled Nb2O5 with a high intercalation 
capacity of 211 mAh/g and good rate performance. By a simple thermal treatment 
process, Liao et al. fabricated a series of nano-structured Nb2O5 with different phases 
and morphologies [18]. Electrochemical tests indicated that T-Nb2O5-700 nanoparti-
cles with high surface area delivered the highest capacity and good rate performance. 
Except for nanostructuring, highly conductive materials such as carbon nanotubes 
(CNTs), graphene, etc. have been introduced to construct Nb2O5-based nanocompos-
ites for improving the electron transport of the electrode. 3D porous carbon nanowebs 
incorporated with T-Nb2O5 nanoparticles have been synthesized and investigated for 
Li+ storage [19]. Thanks to the improved conductivity of the composite, the elec-
trode showed a high capacity of 125 mAh/g, fast Li+ storage kinetics, and exceptional 
cycling stability over 70,000 cycles. Meng and co-workers developed an preinterca-
lation strategy to improve the electronic conductivity of T-Nb2O5 and promote charge 
transfer [20]. After preintercalation of Li+ into the T-Nb2O5 tunnels, the guest Li+ 
leads to shallow donor levels that make the electrons easily donate from the donor 
level to the conduction band, thus considerably increasing the electronic conductivity. 
Moreover, the preintercalated Li+ in the crystal structure can help electrolyte Li+ ions 
to  insert  into  the 4 g layer more easily during charging, leading to improved electro-
chemical properties (Fig. 3d). The pseudocapacitance contribution of the LixNb2O5/ 
Graphene composite electrode can reach up to 80%, much superior to that of pristine 
T-Nb2O5 (Fig. 3e). Thereby, the composite delivered a high capacitance of 890 F/g at 
1 mA/cm2, good rate performance, and excellent cycling stability with 90% capaci-
tance retention after 130,000 cycles. Moreover, the fabricated LixNb2O5/Graphene/ 
/MnO2 asymmetric capacitor depicted a high energy density of 115 Wh/kg at 5500 
W/kg.

Pseudocapacitance: Tuning Electrochemical Properties
81
Fig. 3 a Potential-dependent capacitance calculated from CV responses at 2 and 50 mV/s, respec-
tively. Adapted with permission [15], Copyright (2010), American Chemical Society. b CVs for the 
sample series at 2 mV/s and c b-value versus log plot of sweep rate. Adapted with permission [16], 
Copyright (2021), Wiley–VCH GmbH. d The schematic charge/discharge processes for T-Nb2O5 
and LixNb2O5. e The pseudocapacitive contribution of LixNb2O5/Graphene electrode at 0.4 mV/ 
s. Adapted with permission [20], Copyright (2022), Elsevier 
3 
Tuning Strategies for Extrinsic Pseudocapacitive 
Materials 
In 2007, Okubo et al. reported the studies of nanosize effect on Li+ intercalation 
behaviors in LiCoO2 electrode [5]. The ﬂuctuation in site energy caused by the 
lattice expansion near the surface layers resulted in the expected capacitive discharge 
curves. With the decrease in the crystallite size, the number of exposed surface 
layers increased, thus capacitive behavior became appreciable. These battery mate-
rials that could present pseudocapacitive properties when downsized into nanoscale 
were classiﬁed as “extrinsic” pseudocapacitive materials. Till now, plenty of works 
have been reported to arouse the pseudocapacitive response and optimize the kinetics 
of the battery materials. In this section, we will introduce the design strategies in 
detail including nanostructure design, doping, introducing vacancies, interlayer engi-
neering, heterostructure engineering, etc., for the development of high-performance 
“extrinsic” pseudocapacitive materials.

82
J. Sun et al.
3.1 
Nanostructuring 
Informed from the above, the contribution of near-surface Li+ storage sites were 
increased through nanostructuring, hence presenting pseudocapacitive Li+ interca-
lation behavior. Subsequently, downsizing battery materials such as V2O5, MoO2, 
MoS2, Li3VO4, etc. into nanoscale to achieve pseudocapacitive behavior have been 
reported. Kim et al. reported the development of pseudocapacitance properties in 
nanosized-MoO2 [21]. They compared the Li+ storage behavior of micro- and nano-
sized MoO2 and found that nanostructuring could suppress the phase transformation 
caused by lithium insertion/deinsertion. The nanoscale MoO2 delivered pseudoca-
pacitive properties and much better electrochemical kinetics than the corresponding 
bulk material. Ex-situ XRD patterns veriﬁed that the lithium insertion/deinsertion 
induced phase transformation in the microsized MoO2 has been obviously suppressed 
in the nanosized MoO2 (Fig. 4a, b). In 2016, the same group reported the synthesis 
of MoS2 nanocrystals which show high levels of pesudocapacitive contribution [22]. 
The MoS2 nanocrystals were fabricated into carbon ﬁber-based composite electrodes 
which delivered fast electrochemical kinetics and excellent cycling performance. 
The b-values calculated for nanocrystalline MoS2 were in the range of 0.94–0.98 
(Fig. 4c), which are much higher than the bulk MoS2 electrode (between 0.65 and 
0.83). Quantitative kinetic analysis suggested that the capacitive charge storage in 
nanocrystal MoS2 reached up to 83% (Fig. 4d). Asymmetric devices fabricated using 
the nanocrystal MoS2-based electrode as anode exhibited a high energy density of 37 
Wh/kg at 74 W/kg. Atomically thin 2D VO2(B) nanoribbons have been constructed 
with dominant pseudocapacitive charge storage compared with the bulk counterparts 
[23]. HRTEM images showed that VO2(B) with an interlayer spacing of ~0.62 nm 
was in a thickness of few layers (Fig. 4e). The ultrathin structure was beneﬁcial to 
expose interlayers with fast migration channels and shorten the diffusion path of ions. 
Operando XRD measurement suggested that no noticeable evolution of crystal phase 
was observed during charge/discharge (Fig. 4f), revealing the successful conversion 
from battery type to pseudocapacitive charge storage mechanism. Consequently, the 
pseudocapacitance contribution of 2D VO2(B) electrode reached up to 92% of the 
capacity at 0.3 mV/s. Even at a charge/discharge rate of 100 C, the 2D VO2(B) still 
offered a high capacity of 140 mAh/g. SnS2 has large interlayer spacing and alloying 
charge storage process with high capacity, thus receiving considerable interest as 
anode materials. Gao et al. fabricated 2D SnS2 nanosheets on Zn-, N-, and S-doped 
carbon skeletons (SnS2@ZnNS) and investigated the effect of calcination temper-
ature on crystallinity and nanostructure [24]. The electrochemical test showed that 
the sample calcined at 350 °C exhibited the highest capacity and best rate capability 
(Fig. 4g), as well as good cycling performance. At 0.8 mV/s, the capacitive contri-
bution of SnS2@ZnNS-350 was calculated to 55.05% (Fig. 4h). The kinetic analysis 
further demonstrated the stronger pseudocapacitive response of SnS2@ZnNS-350 
than the other two samples, which can be ascribed to the good balance between 
the crystallinity and nanostructure. Dong and co-works synthesized FeVO4·nH2O 
nanowires through a facile hydrothermal process [25]. Operando XRD and ex-situ

Pseudocapacitance: Tuning Electrochemical Properties
83
Fig. 4 Ex-situ XRD patterns of a microsized-MoO2 and b nanosized-MoO2 associated with the 
GCD curves. Adapted with permission [21], Copyright (2015), IOPscience. c CV curves and associ-
ated b-values for nanocrystal MoS2. d Quantiﬁcation of the capacitive contribution for nanocrystal 
MoS2-based electrode. Adapted with permission [22], Copyright (2017), Wiley–VCH GmbH. 
e HRTEM images of 2D VO2 (B) nanoribbons. f Operando XRD measurement for an atomically 
thin 2D electrode. Adapted with permission [23], Copyright (2018), Wiley–VCH GmbH. g Rate 
performance, and h Pseudocapacitive contributions at various sweep rates of the SnS2@ZnNS 
samples. Adapted with permission [24], Copyright (2022), American Chemical Society 
TEM characterizations veriﬁed that the FeVO4·nH2O presented typical pseudocapac-
itive Na+ intercalation behaviors with a 93% capacitive contribution of the capacity. In 
addition, the FeVO4·nH2O anode depicted high capacity, excellent rate performance, 
and cycling stability. 
Nanostructuring has been proven to be an effective strategy to tune the 
diffusion-controlled to surface-controlled pseudocapacitive behavior. The nanostruc-
ture shortens ion’s diffusion path and exposes more interlayers with diffusion chan-
nels, minimizing the kinetic limitation and suppressing phase transition. The concern 
with extrinsic pseudocapacitive materials may be the scalable, low-cost synthesis 
method and how to maintain the electrochemical performance when constructed as 
thick electrodes for commercialization. 
3.2 
Defect Engineering 
Besides nanostructuring, researchers have developed various strategies to tune the 
atomic structure or composition for improving the kinetics of the electron and ion 
transport of pseudocapacitive materials during the past few years. Introducing oxygen 
vacancies is a viable route to enhance the electrical conductivity of many transition 
metal oxides. Oxygen vacancies serving as shallow donors could increase the carrier 
concentration thereby promoting electrochemical kinetics [2].

84
J. Sun et al.
Kim et al. investigated the effects of oxygen vacancies on the electrochemical 
properties of nanostructured MoO3-x [26]. DFT calculation was carried out to deﬁ-
nite stable oxygen vacancy sites and polaron conﬁguration (Fig. 5a). The introduc-
tion of oxygen vacancies leads to an increase in electrical conductivity and a larger 
interlayer spacing that can provide faster kinetics and suppress the structure aber-
ration during the insertion and deinsertion of Li+. As a result, the MoO3-x depicted 
improved capacity (Fig. 5b), pseudocapacitance contribution, rate capability, and 
cycling stability, as well as no solid-state diffusion limited kinetics (Fig. 5c). A 
similar approach has been reported to enhance pseudocapacitive charge storage in 
ultrathin CeO2-x ﬁlms [27]. CeO2-x ﬁlms (9–70 nm) were synthesized by electrode-
position with a high oxygen vacancy concentration of ~4–15 at%. The vacancies led 
to a decrease in the bandgap from 3.2 to 1.9 eV, enhancing the electron conduction 
and thus resulting in a high volumetric capacitance of 1873 F/cm3. DFT calculation 
further illustrated the increased charge density around Ce ions in defective CeO2-x 
compared to CeO2. In addition, the intercrystallite water could promote proton 
conduction, leading to proton insertion/disinsertion pseudocapacitive behavior. VO2 
nanobelts with oxygen vacancies deposited on nitrogen-doped carbon nanosheets 
(VO2-x/NC) were synthesized for pseudocapacitive Na+ storage [28]. Experimental 
and DFT results illustrated that the oxygen vacancies were in favor of enhancing 
electronic conductivity and regulating the adsorption of Na+, thereby resulted in a 
high reversible capacity of 270 mAh/g at 0.2 A/g and fast electrochemical kinetics. 
Moreover, the fabricated sodium-ion hybrid capacitors using VO2-x/NC as anode 
displayed a high energy density of 122 Wh/kg. Du and co-workers developed a 
series of oxygen-rich vacancy MFe2O4/C (M = Ni, Mn, Co) materials (OV-MFO) 
for Li+ storage via a simple solvothermal and subsequent calcination process [29]. 
The oxygen vacancies contributed to higher conductivity, additional active sites, and 
accelerated Li+ diffusion, making for superior pseudocapacitive Li+ storage than their 
counterpart electrodes. A hydrated VO2 nanoribbon (HVO) with oxygen vacancies 
has been prepared for high-rate Zn2+ storage [30]. The defective crystalline structure 
provided suitable ambient spacing for rapidly accommodating and transporting of 
cations, exhibiting a fast Zn2+ diffusion coefﬁcient, and a high reversible capacity of 
396 mAh/g at 0.05 A/g [30].
This oxygen vacancy engineering strategy has been proven effective for tuning the 
electronic structure and reaction kinetics of transition metal-based electrode mate-
rials. On this basis, Zhu et al. reported the quantiﬁcation of vanadium-defective 
clusters (i.e., up to 5.7%) in the V2O3 lattice and investigated its performance for 
Zn2+ storage [31]. The insertion of Zn2+ into the perfect V2O3 (P-V2O3) was blocked 
according to the positive Gibbs free energy (Fig. 5d). On the contrary, the vanadium-
defective V2O3 (Vd-V2O3) accepted the insertion of Zn2+ and provided much higher 
capacity (Fig. 5e). In detail, part of the vanadium vacancies provided permanent 
sites for the preoccupation of a small amount of Zn2+. Thus, the structure can main-
tain stability during the continuous insertion and extraction of Zn2+. In addition, the 
other vanadium vacancies could weaken the strong interaction between Zn2+ and 
the host material, allowing free insertion/extraction of Zn2+ [31]. The capacitance

Pseudocapacitance: Tuning Electrochemical Properties
85
Fig. 5 a The most stable oxygen vacancy conﬁguration and polaron formation in reduced MoO3-x. 
b CVs of MoO3-x and fully oxidized MoO3 at 10 mV/s. c The calculated b-value for MoO3-x. 
Adapted with permission [26], Copyright (2017), Nature. The Gibbs free energy of d P-V2O3 and 
e Vd-V2O3 for Zn2+ insertion. f Pseudocapacitance contribution of Vd-V2O3 at different scan rates. 
Adapted with permission [31], Copyright (2021), Nature. g Rate performances of NVO and pristine 
V2O5. The schematic diagrams of Zn2+ diffusion pathway in h V2O5 and i NVO. Adapted with 
permission [32], Copyright (2023), Elsevier
contribution was shown in Fig. 5f, indicating the capacitive dominant charge storage 
mechanism which can be attributed to the improved electrochemical kinetics of Zn2+. 
Atomic doping is also a widely used strategy to tune the electrochemical proper-
ties of pseudocapacitive materials. N-doped V2O5 (NVO) was synthesized to tune 
its Zn2+ storage properties [32]. N-doping decreased the bandgap energy of V2O5, 
thus increasing the electrical conductivity and weakening the strong electrostatic 
interaction between Zn2+ and V2O5. Besides, the existing form of N in NVO is
-NH2 connected to O-V. Different from the pristine V2O5 in which Zn2+ prefers 
to the vertical interlayer diffusion, Zn2+ ion diffusion pathway in NVO turns to the 
planner interlayer diffusion (Fig. 5h, i). As a result, the NVO exhibited much superior 
electrochemical properties than the pristine V2O5. The capacities at various current 
densities were higher than the undoped-V2O5 (Fig. 5g). Moreover, even after 3000 
cycles at 10 A/g, NVO still maintained a high capacity of 111.1 mAh/g with only

86
J. Sun et al.
slight capacity decay. Wang et al. reported the development of sulfur-doped yolk-shell 
Na2Ti3O7 (s-NTO) spheres as anode materials for Na+ storage [33]. By controlling 
the calcination condition (thiourea as a sulfur source), s-NTO can be successfully 
synthesized. Thanks to the synergistic effects of sulfur doping that improve the slug-
gish Na+ insertion/deinsertion by narrowing the bandgap of NTO and the unique 
double-shell structures that provide enlarged surface area and ions diffusion chan-
nels, s-NTO exhibited improved electrochemical properties than the pristine NTO. 
Through a simple solvothermal method, a Mo-doped sodium titanate (MoNTO) was 
successfully synthesized as an anode for Na+ storage [34]. The authors hold that Mo6+ 
with a comparable ionic radius to Ti4+ can partially replace Ti4+ in the lattice struc-
ture without structure damage. The highly charged Mo6+ in NTO crystal lattice not 
only improves the conductivity but also resulted in oxygen vacancies. The combined 
effect of these two features provided faster Na+ storage kinetics, higher capacity, 
and prolonged cycling life. Wang and co-workers proposed an alternative strategy to 
tune the typical battery-type Co(OH)2 to extrinsic pseudocapacitive materials by S2− 
doping [35]. The electrostatic repulsion from S2− ions increased the energy barrier 
for the insertion of OH−, suppressing the bulk phase transformation. Besides, the 
surface absorbed H2O molecules by S2− decreased interaction between OH− and 
Co(OH)2. Consequently, after S2− doped, the Co(OH)2 delivered electrochemical 
characteristics, and surface-controlled kinetics of pseudocapacitance. 
3.3 
Interlayer Engineering 
2D layered structure materials such as MoS2, and V-based oxides have received 
considerable interest for electrochemical energy storage because of their merits 
of reversibly intercalating ions without structural destruction [36, 37]. However, 
they still suffer from sluggish ions diffusion and large internal strain during charge/ 
discharge [36]. Modifying the interlayer structure of these materials has been veriﬁed 
as an effective way to improve the interfacial charge transfer and ions diffusion. 
Zhao et al. fabricated MoS2 nanoﬂowers with expanded interlayer spacing (more 
than 1.34 nm) deposited on carbon ﬁbers (E-MoS2/CF) for pseudocapacitive Na+ 
storage (Fig. 6a) [36]. The enlarged interlayer spacing of MoS2 nanoﬂowers not only 
decreased the ions diffusion pathways but also increased the available and accessible 
active surface area, enabling the fast Na+ storage kinetics (Fig. 6b). Besides, the large 
interlayer spacing could accommodate the internal strain induced by ions insertion 
which is conducive to maintain the structure stability. E-MoS2/CF electrode delivered 
a high capacity of 104 mAh/g at an ultrahigh rate of 20 A/g, as well as excellent 
cycling performance. The b-values were kept in the range of 0.9–1 at a large voltage 
range over 0.6 V, further illustrating its capacitive dominant charge storage process 
(Fig. 6c).
The interlayer distance of MoS2 can also be modulated by inserting a guest species 
to form an intercalation compound [38, 39]. Li et al. fabricated poly(ethylene oxide)-
intercalated MoS2 composites (PEO-MoS2) using PEO as an intercalating agent

Pseudocapacitance: Tuning Electrochemical Properties
87
Fig. 6 a HRTEM image of the E-MoS2/CF. b E-MoS2/CF with enlarged interlayer spacing is in 
favor of rapid ions diffusion. c b-values versus voltage of the E-MoS2/CF anode, insert: current 
versus scan rate plots. Adapted with permission [36], Copyright (2017), Elsevier. d XRD patterns of 
CTAB-Cu2Se and pristine Cu2Se, inset: the unit cell of α-phase Cu2Se. e Rate performance. f Pseu-
docapacitance contribution of CTAB-Cu2Se at 1 mV/s. Adapted with permission [41], Copyright 
(2020), Wiley–VCH GmbH. g The crystal structures of pristine V2O5·nH2O. h Rate capability of 
VOG and VOG-350. Adapted with permission [42], Copyright (2017), Wiley–VCH GmbH
through a facile exfoliation-restacking process [38]. By optimizing the amount of 
PEO, the interlayer spacing of MoS2 could increase up to 1.45 nm. The optimized 
PEO-MoS2 sample exhibited a high capacity of 210 mAh/g at 50 mA/g which is 
twice the commercial MoS2 and showed improved rate performance. Similarly, an 
in-situ polyaniline (PANI) intercalation strategy to improve the Zn2+ storage prop-
erties of V2O5 has been reported [40]. The intercalated PANI not only expanded the 
interlayer spacing of V2O5 (1.39 nm) that favors the Zn2+ diffusion but also acted as 
interlayer pillars that maintains the structural stability during continuous charging/ 
discharging. Additionally, the strong electrostatic interactions between the Zn2+ and 
the host O2− can be effectively blocked by the unique π-conjugated structure of 
PANI. Beneﬁtting from these advantages, the PANI-intercalated V2O5 exhibited an 
improved capacity of 197.1 mAh/g at 20 A/g, superior rate performance, and excellent 
cycling stability with a capacity retention of 97.6% over 2000 cycles. A nanosheet

88
J. Sun et al.
array of Cu2Se intercalated by cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) has been 
developed (CCNAs) for Na+ storage [41]. The CCNAs depicted expanded interlayer 
spacing of the (004) plane (Fig. 6d) which can increase the buffer space for volume 
expansion during charge/discharge and restrict the shutting of polyselenide interme-
diate [41]. Electrochemical tests suggested that the CCNAs exhibited a high capacity 
of 426.0 mAh/g at 0.1 A/g and can maintained at 238.1 mAh/g even at a high current 
of 30 A/g (Fig. 6e). Besides, the CCNAs exhibited typical pseudocapacitive behavior 
with a capacitive contribution of up to 77.8% at 1.0 mV/s (Fig. 6f). 
Transition metal cations and crystal water can also be used as “pillars” to tune 
the interlayer structure of 2D materials. Xu et al. have investigated the role of crystal 
water on Zn2+ interaction into V2O5·nH2O (Fig. 6g) [42]. The H2O-solvated Zn2+ 
showed considerably decreased effective charge, reducing the electrostatic interac-
tions with V2O5 framework. Thus, the Zn2+ diffusion kinetics has been effectively 
promoted. As a result, the fabricated V2O5·nH2O/graphene (VOG) based aqueous Zn 
ion battery delivered superior electrochemical properties. When the current density 
increases from 0.3 to 30 A/g, the speciﬁc capacity decreased from 372 to 248 mAh/ 
g, indicating the outstanding rate performance (Fig. 6h). Mn2+ was preintercalated 
into the interlayer of V2O5 nanoribbons to enlarge the interlayer spacing, providing 
sufﬁcient space and active sites for Zn2+ diffusion and accommodation [43]. Fe3+ 
preintercalated V2O5 xerogel was developed to inhibit interlayer changes during Na+ 
insertion and deinsertion [44]. Note that, the electrochemical kinetics increased even 
though the Fe3+-pillared V2O5 had a decreased interlayer spacing than the pristine 
material which can be attributed to the lower activation barriers of Fe-V2O5 for 
charge transfer. 
Interlayer engineering has been proven a practical approach for tuning the inter-
layer structure and surface chemistries of the materials to achieve pseudocapacitive 
properties. However, during continuous electrochemical cycling, the structural water 
and preintercalated cations usually have problems with instability in the presence 
of chemical or electric potential gradients [2]. Controllable tuning of the interlayer 
structure of 2D materials with stable intercalant remains the focus of current research. 
3.4 
Heterostructure Engineering 
Most of the extrinsic pseudocapacitive materials demonstrated unsatisfactory electro-
chemical properties due to the low electrical conductivity and large volume expansion 
during charging. Combining carbon materials like graphene, CNTs, carbon ﬁbers, etc. 
can effectively enhance the conductivity, hence achieving optimized performance. 
Sandwich-like SnS2/Reduced graphene oxide/SnS2 
(SnS2/rGO/SnS2) was  
prepared through a simple hydrothermal process for high-rate Li+/Na+ storage [45]. 
SnS2 nanosheets are covalently decorated on both sides of RGO sheets via C-S bonds. 
SnS2 in the composite presented an expanded interlayer spacing of ~8.03 Å, which 
was beneﬁt for the ion’s insertion/extraction. High capacities of 844 and 765 mAh/

Pseudocapacitance: Tuning Electrochemical Properties
89
g for  Li+ and Na+ ion batteries at a high rate of 10 A/g have been obtained, respec-
tively, indicating excellent high-rate performance. Also, ultrathin SnS2 nanosheets 
uniformly deposited on graphene enabled the pseudocapacitance dominant property 
of the composite, especially at large current density. To improve the gravimetric and 
areal capacities of transition metal dichalcogenides, Yousaf and co-workers devel-
oped a 3D trilayered CNT/MoSe2/C heterostructure, in which MoSe2 was sand-
wiched between an inner CNT core and an outer carbon layer (Fig. 7a,b) [46]. The 
CNT core with superior conductivity interconnected with each other to provide path-
ways for the electrons/Na+ conduction. The outer carbon layer could protect MoSe2 
from direct exposure to the electrolyte. Moreover, the interlayer spaces of (002) 
plane of MoSe2 were expanded during the annealing process, which facilitated the 
fast Na+ diffusion. The obtained CNT/MoSe2/C heterostructure was used as a free-
standing electrode and exhibited a high capacity of 484 mAh/g at 100 mA/g. Due to 
the good conductivity of the heterostructure, CNT/MoSe2/C provided a high areal 
capacity of 4.0 mAh/cm2 (gravimetric capacity of 347 mAh/g) at 500 mA/g after 500 
cycles even at a high mass loading of 13.9 mg/cm2 (Fig. 7c). Yuan et al. constructed 
a freestanding anode for Na+ storage with quantum-grade vanadium nitride (VN) 
nanodots anchored in 1D N/F co-doped carbon nanoﬁber cages (VNQDs@PCNFs-N/ 
F) (Fig. 7d) [47]. The strong coupling between VNQDs and N/F co-doped 1D carbon 
cages effectively promoted ion/electron transport and facilitated the intercalation-
conversion-deintercalation reaction of Na+, ensuring fast electrochemical kinetics. 
After the ﬁrst discharge/charge process, the curves almost overlapped, indicating the 
good reversibility of VNQDs@PCNFs-N/F (Fig. 7e). The cycling stability depicted 
in Fig. 7f shown that VNQDs@PCNFs-N/F electrode exhibited a higher reversible 
speciﬁc capacity (392.3 mAh/g) with good cycling stability than that of PCNFs 
(245.9 mAh/g) and VN@CNFs (234.3 mAh/g). Consequently, the hybrid capacitor 
assembled using VNQDs@PCNFs-N/F anode delivered a high energy density of 
157.1 Wh/kg at 198.8 W/kg.
4 
Conclusion and Perspectives 
Pseudocapacitance bridges the ﬁelds of electrochemical capacitors and recharge-
able batteries. During the past few decades, the studies in the ﬁeld of pseudocapaci-
tance included conceptual dispute, the emerging new pseudocapacitive materials, and 
tuning strategies for improving performance. In this chapter, we highlighted some 
recent works in developing pseudocapacitive materials for electrochemical energy 
storage systems. For intrinsic pseudocapacitive materials, we introduced the tuning 
strategies on MnO2, TiO2(B), and T-Nb2O5 for promoting the inherent pseudoca-
pacitive responses. For extrinsic pseudocapacitive materials, design strategies such 
as nanostructuring, doping, oxygen vacancies, interlayer engineering, heterostruc-
ture engineering, etc., have been carefully discussed. Looking ahead, there are still 
substantial spaces for the development of new strategies aiming to further improve 
pseudocapacitance.

90
J. Sun et al.
Fig. 7 a TEM and b HRTEM images of CNT/MoSe2/C. c Areal capacity of CNT@MoSe2/ 
C with different mass loadings. Adapted with permission [46], Copyright (2019), Wiley–VCH 
GmbH. d Schematic illustration of VNQDs@PCNFs-N/F. e CV curves of VNQDs@PCNFs-N/F. 
f Cycling performance of the VNQDs@PCNFs-N/F, VN@CNFs, and PCNFs electrodes. Adapted 
with permission [47], Copyright (2022), American Chemical Society
1) Further investigation for energy storage mechanisms and new materials with 
structural moieties and compositions that enable intrinsic pseudocapacitance is still 
needed. Although extrinsic pseudocapacitance can be achieved through various 
modiﬁcations and nanosizing, this ﬁeld is likely to continue to expand as researchers 
develop new methods for synthesizing nanomaterials. In addition, scalable, low-
cost synthesis methods for nanosized extrinsic pseudocapacitive materials should be 
considered. For interlayer engineering to improve electrochemical performance, it 
is important to consider the stability of intercalants during continuous electrochem-
ical cycling. Adjusting the interlayer structure should include stable intercalants that 
can withstand thousands of charging/discharging cycles at a high rate related to 
pseudocapacitive materials. 
2) A deep understanding of charge storage principles of both intrinsic and extrinsic 
pseudocapacitance is still required which is of great signiﬁcance for the exploita-
tion of new electrode materials. The coupling of experimental and computational 
studies provides opportunities to qualitatively and quantitatively determine how the 
doping, vacancies, etc. affect the chemical, mechanical, and electronic properties of 
electrode materials. 
3) The fundamental research of pseudocapacitive materials is generally performed 
on electrodes with relatively low mass loading to eliminate the mass transfer limi-
tations. Integration of the lab-scale experience into commercial use still faces many 
challenges. Commercial use generally requires high mass loading of >10 mg/cm2 
to accommodate high-energy storage. With the increase in mass loading, electro-
chemical performances can rapidly decline, especially at a high rate. It is essential to

Pseudocapacitance: Tuning Electrochemical Properties
91
have a continuous electrical and ionic network across the entire electrode thickness. 
Construction of 3D conductive networks or scaffolds may be effective to address 
the low rate and cycling stability of the thick electrode materials, nevertheless, the 
accompanied issues arising from the decrease of packing density should be paid 
attention to. 
References 
1. C. Choi, D.S. Ashby, D.M. Butts, R.H. DeBlock, Q. Wei, J. Lau, B. Dunn, Achieving high 
energy density and high power density with pseudocapacitive materials. Nat. Rev. Mater. 5, 
5–19 (2020) 
2. S. Fleischmann, J.B. Mitchell, R. Wang, C. Zhan, D. Jiang, V. Presser, V. Augustyn, Pseudo-
capacitance: From fundamental understanding to high power energy storage materials. Chem. 
Rev. 120, 6738–6782 (2020) 
3. B.E. Conway, E. Gileadi, Kinetic theory of pseudocapacitance and electrode reactions at 
appreciable surface coverage. Trans. Faraday Soc. 58, 2493 (1962) 
4. Z. Gan, J. Yin, X. Xu, Y. Cheng, T. Yu, Nanostructure and advanced energy storage: elaborate 
material designs lead to high-rate pseudocapacitive ion storage. ACS Nano 16, 5131–5152 
(2022) 
5. M. Okubo, E. Hosono, J. Kim, M. Enomoto, N. Kojima, T. Kudo, H. Zhou, I. Honma, Nanosize 
effect on high-rate Li-ion intercalation in LiCoO2 electrode. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 129(23), 
7444–7452 (2007) 
6. J.-M. Jeong, S.H. Park, H.J. Park, S.B. Jin, S.G. Son, J.-M. Moon, H. Suh, B.G. Choi, 
Alternative-ultrathin assembling of exfoliated manganese dioxide and nitrogen-doped carbon 
layers for high-mass loading supercapacitors with outstanding capacitance and impressive rate 
capability. Adv. Funct. Mater. 31, 2009632 (2021) 
7. Z. Peng, S. Li, Y. Huang, J. Guo, L. Tan, Y. Chen, Sodium-intercalated manganese oxides for 
achieving ultra-stable and fast charge storage kinetics in wide-voltage aqueous supercapacitors. 
Adv. Funct. Mater. 32, 2206539 (2022) 
8. J. Wang, W. Guo, Z. Liu, Q. Zhang, Engineering of self-aggregation-resistant MnO2 
heterostructure with a built-in ﬁeld for enhanced high-mass-loading energy storage. Adv. 
Energy Mater. 13, 2300224 (2023) 
9. M. Zukalova, M. Kalbac, L. Kavan, I. Exnar, M. Graetzel, Pseudocapacitive lithium storage in 
TiO2(B). Chem. Mater. 17, 1248–1255 (2005) 
10. K. Lan, L. Liu, J.-Y. Zhang, R. Wang, L. Zu, Z. Lv, Q. Wei, D. Zhao, Precisely designed 
mesoscopic titania for high-volumetric-density pseudocapacitance. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 143, 
14097–14105 (2021) 
11. H.-Y. Wang, H.-Y. Chen, Y.-Y. Hsu, U. Stimming, H.M. Chen, B. Liu, Modulation of crystal 
surface and lattice by doping: Achieving ultrafast metal-ion insertion in anatase TiO2. ACS  
Appl. Mater. Interfaces 8, 29186–29193 (2016) 
12. Z.  Le, F. Liu, P. Nie, X. Li,  X.  Liu,  Z.  Bian, G. Chen,  H.B.  Wu, Y. Lu,  Pseudocapacitive  
sodium storage in mesoporous single-crystal-like TiO2-graphene nanocomposite enables high-
performance sodium-ion capacitors. ACS Nano 11, 2952–2960 (2017) 
13. B. Reichman, A.J. Bard, The application of Nb2O5 as a cathode in nonaqueous lithium cells. 
J. Electrochem. Soc. 128, 344–346 (1981) 
14. R. Kodama, Y. Terada, I. Nakai, S. Komaba, N. Kumagai, Electrochemical and in situ XAFS-
XRD investigation of Nb2O5 for rechargeable lithium batteries. J. Electrochem. Soc. 153, 
A583–A588 (2006) 
15. K. Brezesinski, J. Wang, J. Haetge, C. Reitz, S.O. Steinmueller, S.H. Tolbert, B.M. Smarsly, 
B. Dunn, T. Brezesinski, Pseudocapacitive contributions to charge storage in highly ordered

92
J. Sun et al.
mesoporous group V transition metal oxides with iso-oriented layered nanocrystalline domains. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 132, 6982–6990 (2010) 
16. W. Bergh, H.N. Lokupitiya, N.A. Vest, B. Reid, S. Guldin, M. Stefk, Nanostructure dependence 
of T-Nb2O5 intercalation pseudocapacitance probed using tunable isomorphic architectures. 
Adv. Funct. Mater. 31, 2007826 (2021) 
17. S. Fu, Q. Yu, Z. Liu, P. Hu, Q. Chen, S. Feng, L. Mai, L. Zhou, Yolk-shell Nb2O5 microspheres 
as intercalation pseudocapacitive anode materials for high-energy Li-ion capacitors. J. Mater. 
Chem. A 7, 11234–11240 (2019) 
18. J. Liao, R. Tan, Z. Kuang, C. Cui, Z. Wei, X. Deng, Z. Yan, Y. Feng, F. Li, C. Wang, J. 
Ma, Controlling the morphology, size and phase of Nb2O5 crystals for high electrochemical 
performance. Chin. Chem. Lett. 29, 1785–1790 (2018) 
19. M.Y. Song, N.R. Kim, H.J. Yoon, S.Y. Cho, H.-J. Jin, Y.S. Yun, Long-lasting Nb2O5-based 
nanocomposite materials for Li-ion storage. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 9, 2267–2274 (2017) 
20. X. Meng, Z. Guan, J. Zhao, Z. Cai, S. Li, L. Bian, Y. Song, D. Guo, X. Liu, Lithium-
pre-intercalated T-Nb2O5/graphene composite promoting pseudocapacitive performance for 
ultralong lifespan capacitors. Chem. Eng. J. 438, 135492 (2022) 
21. H.-S. Kim, J.B. Cook, S.H. Tolbert, B. Dunn, The development of pseudocapacitive properties 
in nanosized-MoO2. J. Electrochem. Soc. 162, A5083–A5090 (2015) 
22. J.B. Cook, H.-S. Kim, T.C. Lin, C.-H. Lai, B. Dunn, S.H. Tolbert, Pseudocapacitive charge 
storage in thick composite MoS2 nanocrystal-based electrodes. Adv. Energy Mater. 7, 1601283 
(2017) 
23. C. Xia, Z. Lin, Y. Zhou, C. Zhao, H. Liang, P. Rozier, Z. Wang, H.N. Alshareef, Large interca-
lation pseudocapacitance in 2D VO2(B): Breaking through the kinetic barrier. Adv. Mater. 30, 
1803594 (2018) 
24. Y. Gao, P. Hai, L. Liu, J. Yin, Z. Gan, W. Ai, C. Wu, Y. Cheng, X. Xu, Balanced crystallinity and 
nanostructure for SnS2 nanosheets through optimized calcination temperature toward enhanced 
pseudocapacitive Na+ storage. ACS Nano 16, 14745–14753 (2022) 
25. J. Dong, Y. He, Y. Jiang, S. Tan, Q. Wei, F. Xiong, Z. Chu, Q. An, L. Mai, Intercalation 
pseudocapacitance of FeVO4·nH2O nanowires anode for high-energy and high-power sodium-
ion capacitor. Nano Energy 73, 104838 (2020) 
26. H.-S. Kim, J.B. Cook, H. Lin, J.S. Ko, S.H. Tolbert, V. Ozolins, B. Dunn, Oxygen vacancies 
enhance pseudocapacitive charge storage properties of MoO3-x. Nat. Mater. 16, 454–460 (2017) 
27. S.S. Mofarah, E. Adabiﬁroozjaei, Y. Yao, P. Koshy, S. Lim, R. Webster, X. Liu, R.K. Nekouei, C. 
Cazorla, Z. Liu, Y. Wang, N. Lambropoulos, C.C. Sorrell, Proton-assisted creation of control-
lable volumetric oxygen vacancies in ultrathin CeO2-x for pseudocapacitive energy storage 
applications. Nat. Commun. 10, 2594 (2019) 
28. B. Liu, H. Zhang, C. Yuan, Q. Geng, Y. Li, J. Hu, Z. Lu, J. Xie, A. Hao, Y. Cao, Construc-
tion of oxygen vacancies and heterostructure in VO2-x/NC with enhanced reversible capacity, 
accelerated redox kinetics, and stable cycling life for sodium ion storage. J. Colloid. Interf. 
Sci. 646, 34–43 (2023) 
29. W. Du, Y. Zheng, X. Liu, J. Cheng, R.C.K. Reddy, A. Zeb, X. Lin, Y. Luo, Oxygen-enriched 
vacancy spinel MFe2O4/carbon (M = Ni, Mn, Co) derived from metal-organic frameworks 
toward boosting lithium storage. Chem. Eng. J. 451, 138626 (2023) 
30. N. Liu, X. Wu, L. Fan, S. Gong, Z. Guo, A. Chen, C. Zhao, Y. Mao, N. Zhang, K. Sun, 
Intercalation pseudocapacitive Zn2+ storage with hydrated vanadium dioxide toward ultrahigh 
rate performance. Adv. Mater. 32, 1908420 (2020) 
31. K. Zhu, S. Wei, H. Shou, F. Shen, S. Chen, P. Zhang, C. Wang, Y. Cao, X. Guo, M. Luo, H. 
Zhang, B. Ye, X. Wu, L. He, L. Song, Defect engineering on V2O3 cathode for long-cycling 
aqueous zinc metal batteries. Nat. Commun. 12, 6878 (2021) 
32. X. Xu, Y. Qian, C. Wang, Z. Bai, C. Wang, M. Song, Y. Du, X. Xu, N. Wang, J. Yang, Y. Qian, 
S. Dou, Enhanced charge transfer and reaction kinetics of vanadium pentoxide for zinc storage 
via nitrogen interstitial doping. Chem. Eng. J. 451, 138770 (2023) 
33. N. Wang, X. Xu, T. Liao, Y. Du, Z. Bai, S. Dou, Boosting sodium storage of double-shell sodium 
titanate microspheres constructed from 2D ultrathin nanosheets via sulfur doping. Adv. Mater. 
30, 1804157 (2018)

Pseudocapacitance: Tuning Electrochemical Properties
93
34. S. Chandel, C. Wang, S.P. Singh, N. Wang, A.K. Rai, Signiﬁcant enhancement in the electro-
chemical performances of a nanostructured sodium titanate anode by molybdenum doping for 
applications as sodium-ion batteries. ACS Appl. Nano Mater. 5, 18591–18602 (2022) 
35. X. Wang, K. Liu, J. Li, Y. Liu, M. Wang, H. Cui, Creation of an extrinsic pseudocapacitive 
material presenting extraordinary cycling-life with the battery-type material Co(OH)2 by S2− 
doping for application in supercapacitors. Chem. Eng. J. 451, 138969 (2023) 
36. C. Zhao, C. Yu, M. Zhang, Q. Sun, S. Li, M.N. Banis, X. Han, Q. Dong, J. Yang, G. Wang, 
X. Sun, J. Qiu, Enhanced sodium storage capability enabled by super wide-interlayer-spacing 
MoS2 integrated on carbon ﬁbers. Nano Energy 41, 66–74 (2017) 
37. J. Lai, H. Zhu, X. Zhu, H. Koritala, Y. Wang, Interlayer-expanded V6O13·nH2O architecture 
constructed for an advanced rechargeable aqueous zinc-ion battery. ACS Appl. Energy Mater. 
2, 1988–1996 (2019) 
38. Y. Li, Y. Liang, F.C.R. Hernandez, H.D. Yoo, Q. An, Y. Yao, Enhancing sodium-ion battery 
performance with interlayer-expanded MoS2-PEO nanocomposites. Nano Energy 15, 453–461 
(2015) 
39. J. Chao, L. Yang, H. Zhang, J. Liu, R. Hu, M. Zhu, Engineering layer structure of MoS2/ 
polyaniline/graphene nanocomposites to achieve fast and reversible lithium storage for high 
energy density aqueous lithium-ion capacitors. J. Power. Sources 450, 227680 (2020) 
40. S. Liu, H. Zhu, B. Zhang, G. Li, H. Zhu, Y. Ren, H. Geng, Y. Yang, Q. Liu, C.C. Li, Tuning the 
kinetics of zinc-ion insertion/extraction in V2O5 by in situ polyaniline intercalation enables 
improved aqueous zinc-ion storage performance. Adv. Mater. 32, 2001113 (2020) 
41. Y. Xiao, X. Zhao, X. Wang, D. Su, S. Bai, W. Chen, S. Fang, L. Zhou, H.-M. Cheng, F. Li, A 
nanosheet array of Cu2Se intercalation compound with expanded interlayer space for sodium 
ion storage. Adv. Energy Mater. 10, 2000666 (2020) 
42. M. Yan, P. He, Y. Chen, S. Wang, Q. Wei, K. Zhao, X. Xu, Q. An, Y. Shuang, Y. Shao, K.T. 
Mueller, L. Mai, J. Liu, J. Yan, Water-lubricated intercalation in V2O5·nH2O for high-capacity 
and high-rate aqueous rechargeable zinc batteries. Adv. Mater. 29, 1703725 (2017) 
43. Y. Jiang, H. Xu, L. Ren, M. Ji, X. Shen, S. Li, Mn0.26V2O5·nH2O nanoribbons with fast ion 
diffusion channels and high electrical conductivity for intercalation pseudocapacitive Zn2+ 
storage, Energy Fuels 35, 17948–17955 (2021) 
44. Q. Wei, Z. Jiang, S. Tan, Q. Li, L. Huang, M. Yan, L. Zhou, Q. An, L. Mai, Lattice breathing 
inhibited layered vanadium oxide ultrathin nanobelts for enhanced sodium storage. ACS Appl. 
Mater. Interfaces 7, 18211–18217 (2015) 
45. Y. Jiang, D. Song, J. Wu, Z. Wang, S. Huang, Y. Xu, Z. Chen, B. Zhao, J. Zhang, Sandwich-
like SnS2/Graphene/SnS2 with expanded interlayer distance as high-rate lithium/sodium-ion 
battery anode materials. ACS Nano 13, 9100–9111 (2019) 
46. M. Yousaf, Y. Wang, Y. Chen, Z. Wang, A. Firdous, Z. Ali, N. Mahmood, R. Zou, S. Guo, 
R.P. Han, A 3D trilayered CNT/MoSe2/C heterostructure with an Eexpanded MoSe2 interlayer 
spacing for an efﬁcient sodium storage. Adv. Energy Mater. 9, 1900567 (2019) 
47. J. Yuan, M. Qiu, X. Hu, Y. Liu, G. Zhong, H. Zhan, Z. Wen, Pseudocapacitive vanadium 
nitride quantum dots modifed one-dimensional carbon cages enable highly kinetics-compatible 
sodium ion capacitors. ACS Nano 16, 14807–14818 (2022)

Pseudocapacitive Materials 
for Electrolytes 
Lucia Díaz-Patiño, Lorena Álvarez Contreras, Minerva Guerra-Balcázar, 
and Noé Arjona 
Abstract The electrolyte plays a vital role in the performance and durability of 
electrochemical energy devices like supercapacitors, fuel cells, and batteries. The 
electrolyte is usually employed as an aqueous solution but is also found in non-
aqueous forms like organic solvents, including protic and aprotic ionic liquids. It is 
used as a gel or solid polymer electrolyte (GPE/SPE) for ﬂexible applications. The 
use of pseudocapacitive materials in electrolytes serves different purposes, including 
mechanical stability and ionic conductivity, to improve the electrode/electrolyte inter-
face and water retention, among others. This chapter discusses the most outstanding 
achievements in this ﬁeld, given the prospective improvement of electrochemical 
energy systems. 
Keywords Pseudocapacitive materials · Electrolyte · Metal oxides · Gel polymer 
electrolyte · Graphene · Carbon nanotubes 
1 
Introduction to Pseudocapacitive Materials 
for Electrolytes 
Solid-state electrochemical energy storage devices, such as supercapacitors and 
lithium-ion batteries, have acquired signiﬁcant attention as the next-generation tech-
nology for addressing the limitations of conventional liquid-based devices, specif-
ically low energy density, and safety concerns. However, despite their potential,
L. Díaz-Patiño · N. Arjona envelope symbol
Centro de Investigación y Desarrollo Tecnológico en Electroquímica S.C., Pedro Escobedo, 
Querétaro C.P. 76703, México 
e-mail: wvelazquez@cideteq.mx 
L. Á. Contreras 
Centro de Investigación en Materiales Avanzados S.C., Complejo Industrial Chihuahua, 
Chihuahua C.P. 31136, México 
M. Guerra-Balcázar 
División de Investigación y Posgrado, Facultad de Ingeniería, Universidad Autónoma de 
Querétaro, Santiago de Querétaro, Querétaro C.P. 76010, México 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
R. K. Gupta (ed.), Pseudocapacitors, Engineering Materials, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45430-1_6 
95

96
L. Díaz-Patiño et al.
electrochemical energy systems face limitations primarily associated with their elec-
trode materials and electrolytes [1]. Over the past decade, remarkable advance-
ments have been made in the understanding and design of advanced nanostruc-
tured materials, leading to notable improvements in electrochemical energy storage/ 
conversion performance. The electrolyte is a crucial component in electrochemical 
energy systems, comprising solvents, electrolytes, and additives. The electrolyte 
serves as the essential ionic conductor connecting the two electrodes in electrochem-
ical energy systems, enabling the ﬂow of ionic current and inﬂuencing the elec-
trochemical characteristics determining the voltage window, rate capability, cycling 
stability, determining performance, particularly in terms of capacitance (Cs) and 
energy density (E). The electrolyte facilitates the conduction of ions, acts as an ion 
source to supplement ions, and binds electrode particles together. To ensure proper 
charging and prevent depletion issues, it is key to maintain a high concentration 
of electrolytes, particularly organic electrolytes, to avoid the “electrolyte starvation 
effect” [2], ensuring proper charging and mitigating depletion problems. 
The ionic conductivity, electrochemical window, working temperature range, 
stability, and safety are the fundamental properties that deﬁne the performance of 
the electrolyte. Additionally, for ﬂexible energy systems, mechanical stability plays 
an important role. Thus, the rational modiﬁcation of the electrolyte is fundamental 
to achieving higher performance and durability in electrochemical energy systems. 
Pseudocapacitive materials include carbon-based materials, conductive polymers, 
and metal-based materials like metal oxides, hydroxides, sulﬁdes, and nitrides. In this 
regard, pseudocapacitive materials have been widely used as electrodes for applica-
tions like supercapacitors and batteries. However, they can also be used as dopants or 
modiﬁers in electrolytes to improve the before mentioned properties. In this chapter, 
the most outstanding electrolyte modiﬁcations for electrochemical energy systems 
are revised and discussed as a function of the pseudocapacitive material. 
2 
Types of Electrolytes for Energy Applications 
It is worth noticing that different electrolytes are employed in electrochemical energy 
systems. They present exceptional characteristics for speciﬁc applications. However, 
these electrolytes must display high ionic conductivity for electrochemical energy 
applications to minimize internal resistance and enhance overall performance. More-
over, the electrolyte must demonstrate exceptional chemical and electrochemical 
stability to ensure long-term reliability. Furthermore, environmental friendliness is 
a signiﬁcant consideration, prompting efforts to develop sustainable and non-toxic 
electrolyte options. Thus, various working electrolytes have been used, including 
water-based electrolytes, organic electrolytes, solid electrolytes, and ceramic elec-
trolytes [3, 4]. Each class offers distinct advantages and features summarized in 
Fig. 1.
Nevertheless, electrolyte classiﬁcation extends beyond a single category. In some 
instances, it is delineated based on the primary matrix of the electrolyte, resulting in

Pseudocapacitive Materials for Electrolytes
97
Organic electrolytes 
•
Moderate high ionic 
conductivity (IC)
•
Inorganic or organic 
salts in organic 
solvents
•
Flammable 
(commonly) and 
may leak 
Ionic Liquids (ILs)
•
Moderated IC
•
Salts into ILs or pure 
ILs: ILs are composed 
by organic / inorganic 
cations and anions
•
Flammable at high 
temperatures
•
They may leak 
Aqueous electrolytes
•
High IC
•
Are composed by 
inorganic salts or 
alkali (like KOH) or 
inorganic acids (like 
H2SO4) in water
•
Nonﬂammable but 
may leak 
Solid polymer electrolytes
• The lowest IC
•
Salts (like LiPF6or Li 
imides) dissolved in 
polymer matrix (PEO, PAN, 
PVDF, etc.), ILs or organic 
solvents
•
Combustible at elevated 
temperatures 
Ceramic electrolytes
•
Low to moderate IC
•
Oxides (single MOs, 
perovskites, etc.) 
sulﬁdes, anti-
perovskites, hydrides, 
etc.
•
Nonﬂammable, but 
some may be toxic 
Fig. 1 Classiﬁcation of electrolyte families, advantages, and limitations
the following types: (a) polymer-based solid-state electrolytes (including polymeric 
composite electrolytes and polymer gel electrolytes), (b) ceramic-based solid-state 
electrolytes (comprising oxide-based electrolytes and sulﬁde-based electrolytes), 
and (c) hybrid and composite electrolytes. In the following sub-sections, certain 
advantages and applications of electrolytes are provided for electrochemical energy 
systems. 
2.1 
Aqueous Electrolytes 
In recent years, there has been signiﬁcant interest in aqueous gel electrolytes owing to 
their notable features, including high ionic conductivity, low toxicity, easy process-
ability, and cost-effectiveness. These electrolytes utilize water as the plasticizer. 
Within aqueous gel electrolytes, the electrolytic salts consist of strong acids such 
as H2SO4, HCl, H3PO4, strong bases like KOH, or neutral salts like Na2SO4 and 
LiCl. These salt compositions contribute to the conductivity and overall perfor-
mance of the aqueous gel electrolytes. Utilizing aqueous gel electrolytes provides a 
promising avenue for developing safe, environmentally friendly, and economically 
viable energy storage systems [5]. However, aqueous electrolytes have a limited

98
L. Díaz-Patiño et al.
working potential window, typically up to 1.23 V, due to the decomposition of water 
and the associated hydrogen and oxygen evolution reactions. 
Consequently, they have yet to be widely used in conventional supercapacitors. 
However, aqueous electrolytes offer advantages such as high conductivity, low cost, 
easy preparation, and non-ﬂammability. Neutral aqueous electrolytes have the added 
beneﬁts of being environmentally friendly and easier to handle than acidic or basic 
electrolytes. The high conductivity of the electrolyte is crucial for improving the 
performance of supercapacitors, as it promotes better interaction between the elec-
trolyte ions and the electrode materials, leading to enhanced power density and 
capacitance. 
2.2 
Non-aqueous Electrolytes (Organic, Ceramic, and Ionic 
Liquid-Based) 
The conducting electrolytic salts and plasticizers also play crucial roles in solid-state 
electrolyte performance. These electrolytic salts and plasticizers can be categorized 
into three types: aqueous, organic, and ionic liquid electrolytes [4]. Despite the decent 
performance of supercapacitors (SCs) with aqueous electrolytes, they are limited by 
a small voltage window. Organic electrolytes have emerged as promising candi-
dates to overcome this limitation and achieve high energy density in ﬂexible SCs. 
Organic gel electrolytes typically consist of high molecular weight polymer matrices 
and organic conducting salts dissolved in aprotic solvents. In organic electrolytes, 
organic ammonium salts such as tetraethylammonium tetraﬂuoroborate (TEABF4) 
[6], tetrabutylammonium hexaﬂuorophosphate (TBAPF6), and bis(triﬂuoromethyl 
sulfonyl) amine (TFSI-) played common roles as conducting salts [7]. To further 
enhance device performance, decamethylferrocenium (DmFc) was added to tetra-
butylammonium perchlorate (TBAP)-tetrahydrofuran (THF) electrolytes. The redox 
reaction of DmFc provided additional pseudocapacitance, resulting in increased 
voltage windows, energy densities, and speciﬁc capacitances compared to SCs 
without DmFc. Mixed solvents have also been utilized to expand voltage windows. 
For example, a sodium bis(triﬂuoromethane sulfonyl)imide (NaTFSI):propylene 
carbonate (PC):ethylene carbonate (EC):dimethyl carbonate (DMC) system showed 
higher ionic conductivity compared to single-solvent gel electrolytes. Organic gel 
electrolytes enhance voltage windows and energy densities and offer broader working 
temperature ranges. Additionally, mixed solvent systems improve impedance perfor-
mance and mitigate the ﬂammability and toxicity of particular solvents. These 
advancements in organic electrolytes contribute to developing high-performance and 
versatile supercapacitor technologies [4]. 
Solvent-free ionic liquids (ILs) are considered promising solid-state innovative 
green electrolytes for high-performance supercapacitors (SCs) due to their ability 
to achieve large potential windows (up to 6.0 V). ILs are organic salts composed

Pseudocapacitive Materials for Electrolytes
99
of large cations and delocalized anions with low melting points, low vapor pres-
sure, and negigible inﬂammability. The electrochemical performance of IL-based 
electrolytes depends on the chemical structures of the counter ions. Three funda-
mental parameters should be considered when selecting IL molecules for SCs: ionic 
conductivity, working voltage window, and melting point. Various cationic ILs have 
been developed, such as quaternary ammonium, sulfonium, imidazolium, pyrroli-
dinium, and piperidinium [8]. Common anionic ILs include tetraﬂuoroborate (BF S
ubscript 4 Superscript minus ), 
hexaﬂuorophosphate (PF S
ubscript 6 Superscript minus ), bis(triﬂuoromethane sulfonyl)imide (TFSI−), bis(ﬂuoro 
sulfonyl)imide (FSI−), and dicyanamide (DCA−) as is shown in Fig. 2. 
Compared to organic electrolytes, IL-based electrolytes can extend the voltage 
windows of SCs to 3.5–6 V, typically around 4 V, while maintaining high ionic 
conductivity in the range of 10–3 to 10 S/cm. This enables the development of SCs 
with improved performance and energy storage capabilities [4]. 
The ceramic-based solid-state electrolytes comprise the oxide-based and sulﬁde-
based electrolytes widely used due to their high ionic conductivity and stability at high 
temperatures; some examples are oxides (garnets, NASICON/LISICON, perovskites, 
etc.), sulﬁdes, LiPON, anti- perovskites, hydrides, etc. NASICON (Sodium Super Ion 
Conductor) is a family of ceramic materials with the general formula Na3Zr2Si2PO12. 
It exhibits high sodium ion conductivity, and potential applications in solid-state 
supercapacitors have been reported [9]. The hybrid and composite electrolytes 
combine organic and inorganic components, such as polyethylene oxide (PEO), with 
ceramic ﬁllers like Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3, showing improved ionic conductivity and
Fig. 2 The structures of typical ionic liquids. Adapted with permission [8], Copyright (2015) 
Springer 

100
L. Díaz-Patiño et al.
stability. These electrolytes are being extensively researched for their compatibility 
with different electrode materials [4]. Furthermore, hybrid and composite electrolytes 
that combine other materials are being explored, aiming to achieve a balance of 
desirable properties in solid-state electrolyte systems. 
Overall, choosing electrolyte type in supercapacitors is crucial for optimizing 
performance parameters. Polymer-based solid-state electrolytes, such as polymeric 
composite and gel electrolytes, along with ceramic-based electrolytes like oxide-
based and sulﬁde-based electrolytes, offer promising avenues for enhancing the 
efﬁciency and stability of supercapacitors. 
2.3 
Gel Polymer Electrolytes (GPEs) 
In addition to single-component polymer-based electrolytes, there has been a growing 
focus on developing multicomponent polymer gel-based solid-state electrolytes to 
enhance electrochemical and mechanical performance. An example of such advance-
ment is the creation of a multicomponent PVA-KOH gel electrolyte by grafting 
graphene oxide and amino groups onto the PVA backbone [10]. The grafted PVA-
KOH gel electrolyte exhibits a signiﬁcantly higher ionic conductivity of 108.7 mS/ 
cm compared to the pure PVA-KOH gel electrolytes with 30.5 mS/cm conduc-
tivity. Notable improvements in mechanical properties accompany this enhance-
ment in electrochemical performance. Furthermore, researchers have explored the 
synthesis of a multifunctional hydrogel polyelectrolyte through copolymerization of 
2-acrylamido-2-methylpropane sulfonic acid (AMPS) and N,N-dimethylacrylamide 
(DMAAm). The resulting poly(AMPS-co-DMAAm)/laponite/GO hydrogel elec-
trolytes demonstrate remarkable mechanical stretchability, stretching up to 1000% 
[4]. 
Additionally, these electrolytes exhibit excellent self-healing behavior under 
various conditions. Developing these multicomponent polymer gel-based solid-state 
electrolytes opens new possibilities for advanced energy storage systems. These elec-
trolytes offer potential applications in ﬂexible and durable energy storage devices by 
combining enhanced electrochemical performance and impressive mechanical prop-
erties. The polymeric composite electrolytes consist of a polymer matrix blended 
with inorganic ﬁllers or salts. The presence of inorganic components enhances the 
ionic conductivity of the polymer matrix. One commonly used polymeric composite 
electrolyte is PEO combined with lithium salts, such as lithium perchlorate (LiClO4) 
or lithium bis(triﬂuoromethane sulfonyl)imide (LiTFSI). Incorporating lithium salts 
enhances the ionic conductivity of the PEO matrix, making it suitable for various 
energy storage applications. The polymer gel electrolytes as polyacrylamide (PAA) 
gel electrolytes with liquid electrolytes like lithium salts dissolved in propylene 
carbonate (PC) are extensively studied. The gel structure provides mechanical 
stability, while the liquid electrolyte component enables high ionic conductivity, 
making them promising for ﬂexible and solid-state energy storage devices.

Pseudocapacitive Materials for Electrolytes
101
2.4 
Solid Polymer Electrolytes (SPEs) 
Polymer-based solid-state electrolytes are composed of three primary constituents: 
polymer matrices, electrolytic salts, and plasticizers. These constituents synergis-
tically prevent the leakage of liquid electrolytes. Commonly employed polymer 
matrices include polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), polyethylene oxide (PEO), polyacry-
lamide (PAM), poly-methyl methacrylate (PMMA), polyamine ester (PAE), and 
polyvinylidene ﬂuoride (PVDF) [4]. Additionally, naturally occurring polymeric 
materials such as cellulose [11], chitin, and chitosan [12] have garnered signiﬁcant 
attention as promising components in gel electrolytes due to their cost-effectiveness 
and wide availability. These materials hold immense potential for gel electrolyte 
applications, offering an affordable and easily accessible alternative. Their extensive 
use is observed in ﬂexible devices. The incorporation of multicomponent polymeric 
hosts enhances the ﬂexibility and stretchability of solid-state electrolytes, rendering 
them suitable for wearable and portable device applications. 
3 
Metal-Free Pseudocapacitive Materials for Electrolytes 
3.1 
Carbon-Derived Pseudocapacitive Materials 
Carbonaceous materials are most used as electrode materials for energy storage and 
conversion devices, such as supercapacitors and batteries, due to their large surface 
area, high electrical conductivity, and excellent chemical stability. These materials 
are mainly characterized by the signiﬁcant impact on their capacitance since this 
can be modulated through the pore size, pores’ shape, and electrical conductivity 
[13]. On the other hand, electrolytes (aqueous, non-aqueous, SPEs, GPEs) are essen-
tial to developing electrochemical energy storage devices based on carbonaceous 
materials [14]. It should be noted that the interaction of the electrolytes with the 
electrodes directly affects the electrode–electrolyte interface and the structure of the 
active materials used to carry out the electrochemical processes; hence, the choice 
of electrolytes is a fundamental factor. To obtain safe and high-performance energy 
devices. To achieve this, it is necessary to investigate and understand the reaction 
mechanisms that take place at the carbonaceous materials-electrolyte interface, as 
well as the ionic conductivity, ionic solvation, and dielectric constant of the medium 
that can be used to know the capacity of the device, that is. That is, the amount of 
charge stored, as well as the operating voltage range, charge, and storage time. Like-
wise, it is necessary to consider different parameters when proposing an electrolyte 
to be used in the presence of carbon-based materials, such as the conductivity of 
the medium, the effects of the selected salt, the solvent, electrochemical and thermal 
stability, capacitance, speciﬁc capacitance, energy density, and power density [15]. 
For 2D materials, the advantages of porosity have been established before [16] and 
are summarized in Fig. 3.

102
L. Díaz-Patiño et al.
Fig. 3 Advantages of using porous carbonaceous materials in energy storage and conversion 
devices. Adapted with permission [16], Copyright (2017), Wiley 
3.1.1
Carbon Nanotubes 
Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are a resistant material with high thermal conductivity 
and a large surface area, low resistance, low density, and good chemical stability. 
These intrinsic properties make this material a promising option for its application 
in energy storage and conversion devices. 
Aqueous 
The structure of carbon nanotubes can be assimilated to a porous structure; however, 
this carbon-based material especially possesses one-dimensional nano-spaces. When 
this material encounters an aqueous solution, the electrolyte is conﬁned in these 
nano-spaces, and they tend to behave differently from other variants of carbonaceous 
materials. That is, the water acts as a mediator to drive the ions into the hydrophobic 
carbon nanotube, so the energy barrier for the penetration of the ions is eliminated. 
Likewise, this barrier is directly related to the solvation energies of the ions, as well 
as their hydration shell size within the carbon nanotubes by conﬁnement, and they 
may become dehydrated [17]. 
Non-aqueous 
For applications other than room temperature, aqueous electrolytes are no longer a 
possibility; this is since the solvated ions that are trapped in the nanoporous surface of 
the CNTs and can be affected by the cooling and heating behavior, which is of interest 
for the development of energy devices that operate at low temperatures. One of the 
most widely used non-aqueous electrolytes are ionic liquids and organic additives

Pseudocapacitive Materials for Electrolytes
103
with low melting point; these have shown excellent electrochemical results when 
operating at temperatures below −70 °C. However, it should not be forgotten that 
the material’s porous structure is paramount in determining the device’s performance 
[18]. 
3.1.2
Graphene 
Graphene is composed of carbon atoms counted by sp2 hybridization, where it is 
tightly packed in the form of a single-layer, two-dimensional honeycomb struc-
ture. This material is one of the most used for its application in energy storage and 
conversion devices due to its large speciﬁc surface area and its high conductivity 
[13]. 
Aqueous 
The electronic properties of graphene, such as the concentration of charge carriers, 
mobility, resistance, and work function, are susceptible to adsorbed molecules and 
environmental variations. Water-graphene interactions are highly dependent on their 
hydrophilicity. As the number of graphene layers increases, this material becomes 
more hydrophobic. 
This, together with the concentration of charge carriers and the work function, 
inﬂuences its wetting properties and, in turn, water adsorption. Therefore, graphene 
is considered an excellent candidate for energy applications where it is required to 
have capillaries with nanometric dimensions for ionic transport [19]. 
Non-aqueous 
Organic solvents usually have a larger solvated ion size compared to the use of 
aqueous electrolytes, so it is sought that the electrodes are porous materials such 
as graphene; likewise, the capacitance is directly affected by the porosity of the 
electrode, these solvents usually have good electrical performance, but they are not 
safe, and they are expensive [20]. 
SPE and GPE 
It is common for energy storage and conversion devices to use liquid electrolytes, 
where they are encapsulated, which leads to obtaining a large volume and signiﬁcant 
weight. Likewise, it is difﬁcult to achieve the ﬂexibility of the devices, for which 
there is already a lot of research for the replacement of liquid electrolytes by solid 
polymer electrolytes. It is necessary to involve ﬂexible electrode materials, which 
must have excellent mechanical resistance due to stretching and bending conditions.

104
L. Díaz-Patiño et al.
In addition, they must possess the characteristics offered by carbonaceous materials, 
such as large surface area and high electrical conductivity. On the other hand, devices 
that use CNTs and GPEs have excellent speciﬁc capacitance compared to devices 
that use aqueous H2SO4, and it is considered that the implementation of a GPE with 
a CNTs is more suitable for ionic transport of species by the size of the electrodes 
and their highly porous structure. Likewise, CNT can serve as an excellent template 
for other composite materials, such as PANI/N-CNT@CNT ﬁber [21]. In the case 
of graphene, which is a single or multilayer material, although it has beneﬁcial 
characteristics for use in conjunction with SPEs and GPEs, it is not as suitable for 
ﬂexible devices because electrolyte ions cannot access the stacked regions of the 
material, i.e., the electroactive sites of the material are not fully utilized. Its high cost 
and low performance compared to other electrolytes also represent a problem for its 
large-scale manufacturing [22]. 
3.2 
Conductive Polymers Pseudocapacitive Materials 
Conducting polymers are macromolecules with a conjugated structure, alternating the 
arrangement of C–C and C=C chains; In addition, these macromolecules are joined 
by Van der Waals forces, electrostatics, dipolar interactions, etc. [23] Electronic 
transport in this type of materials is usually affected by the transition between the 
same polymeric chains, this is because its high activation barriers. Likewise, it can 
be modulated by changing the doping level and the material’s crystallinity. 
Some of the most used polymeric materials are polyaniline (PANI) and polypyr-
role (PPy); these are very interesting conducting polymers since they have a large 
capacitance for their application in various energy storage and conversion devices; 
however, they have low cyclic stability; this is caused by swelling of the material 
during operation. Despite this, it is possible to combine these conductive polymers 
and carbonaceous materials through different synthesis methods, as can be seen in 
Fig. 4, which are applied to overcome the limitations during stability. PANI has 
speciﬁc characteristics, such as its electrical and electrochemical activity, simple 
synthesis, and low cost, which makes it a good candidate for use as electrode mate-
rial for energy storage and conversion devices. The capacitance of this material 
depends on the oxidation states of PANI, where it has been previously reported that 
the emeraldine semi-oxidized state of PANI has the highest conductivity and stability. 
Another important conductive polymeric material to consider is PPy, which is easy 
to synthesize, has large capacitance and high cyclic stability, etc., [24].
It has also been reported that PPy has balanced electrochemical properties for 
energy storage and conversion systems [25]. A disadvantage to consider of this 
material is its rigidity and, therefore, its poor mechanical ductility; another draw-
back is reduced to its low properties electrical in its amorphous phase, for which 
its structure, particle size, and morphology must be modulated continuously, so it is 
common to synthesize PPy composites that play a synergistic role, for example with 
carbonaceous materials [26].

Pseudocapacitive Materials for Electrolytes
105
Fig. 4 Different methods of synthesis of composites based on polymer and carbon materials. 
Adapted with permission [24], Copyright (2022), Elsevier
4 
Metal-Derived Pseudocapacitive Materials 
for Electrolytes 
4.1 
Metal Oxides (MOs) and Mixtures of Transition Metal 
Oxides (MTMOs) 
Nanoparticulated single metal oxides have been used as nano-ﬁllers for gel and 
solid polymer electrolytes. Al2O3 is one of the most used metal oxides for lithium 
batteries. This pseudocapacitive material has been used as a solid plasticizer during 
the polymer preparation, and it promotes the increase of the ionic conductivity 
of a series of polymers like poly(ethylene glycol), poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride-co-
hexaﬂuoropropylene)[PVDF-HFP], polyvinyl alcohol, polyethylene oxide, among 
others [27–29]. It is worth noticing that the properties of the SPE have been modu-
lated, changing the polymer and the ﬁller mass loading, but also structural properties 
like size and shape are important to shift because these have a direct impact on 
the resulting SPE properties. Other metal oxides utilized as nano-ﬁllers are TiO2, 
MgO, and ZnO. Among them, ZnO has greatly inﬂuenced the ionic conductivity of 
PVDF-HFP polymers [30]. 
Mixtures of metal oxides/hydroxides can be divided mainly into those with a 
spinel crystalline structure, a perovskite crystalline structure, and layered double 
hydroxides (LDHs). The spinel structure (AB2O4) is composed of a 3d metal with 
a 2+ valence (A), a second 3d metal with a 3+ valence (B2), and oxygen (O4). 
The perovskite structure has the formula ABX3; A and B are cations, where often

106
L. Díaz-Patiño et al.
A is a larger cation than B, being usually from group IIA, while B is typically 
a transition metal cation like Ti, while X is an anion (usually O). The LDHs are 
often the precursor to obtain spinel structures; the LDH is composed of two metallic 
cations like in the spinel structure, one with a 2+ valence and the other with a 
3+ state. The anion and water molecules are found as interlayers, as observed in 
Fig. 5. The advantage of these structures are that multiple metallic cations can be 
found in the same crystalline structure, achieving a synergetic effect and, as a result, 
improving their functionality in applications like energy storage. For electrolytes, the 
BaTiO3 perovskite as a nanocomposite in polymer electrolyte has been proposed for 
lithium batteries, achieving higher ionic conductivity in contrast with an unmodiﬁed 
membrane [31]. This perovskite was also used with PVDF and cellulose nanocrystals, 
enhancing the mechanical characteristics of stress (at 5% strain) and Young’s module. 
The mechanical tensile and the viscoelastic response of SPEs with this perovskite, 
together with the experimental setup, is illustrated in Fig. 6 [32]. 
In the case of spinels, apart from the natural monometallic spinels (Co3O4, 
Fe3O4, Mn3O4), bimetallic spinels like ZnAl2O4 and MgAl2O4. This latter spinel 
has beneﬁtted Mg-ion batteries, presenting higher ionic conductivity to those PVDF 
membranes modiﬁed with Al2O3. The electrochemical response by electrochemical 
impedance spectroscopy is shown in Fig. 6d, where the real impedance (z') at high
Perovskite 
structure 
(ABX3) 
Layered-double 
hydroxides 
Spinel structure 
(AB2O4) 
Single metal 
oxides 
Fig. 5 Classiﬁcation of single and mixtures of metal oxides/hydroxides as pseudocapacitive 
electrolyte materials 

Pseudocapacitive Materials for Electrolytes
107
Fig. 6 a Setup for b the mechanical tensile and c viscoelastic response of PVDF electrolytes 
containing BaTiO3 perovskites. Adapted with permission [32], Copyright (2020), Elsevier. d Photo-
graph of a PVDF electrolyte modiﬁed with the MgAl2O4 spinel and the Electrochemical Impedance 
Spectroscopy response in contrast to Al2O3 as a function of mass loading. Adapted with permission 
[33], Copyright (2018), Wiley 
frequencies is lower than those obtained with Al2O3, indicating higher conductivity 
[33]. Finally, LDHs play an essential role in electrolyte energy conversion/storage. 
For Li batteries, it has been well-established that LDHs like Mg–Al, and Co–Ni, 
can form hydrogen bonds with the polymer (PEO or PVA), restricting the move-
ment of polymer’s chains, inhibiting the migration of anions disfavoring the forma-
tion of Li dendrites [34, 35]. Vijayakumar et al. [36] recently reported an excellent 
review on 2D materials in electrolytes for Li batteries, where the exact mechanism to 
disfavor dendrite formation is discussed, as well as the interaction between the pseu-
docapacitive material as nano-ﬁller, the polymer and the salt composing the GPE/ 
SPE. 
4.2 
Chalcogenides and MXenes Pseudocapacitive Materials 
LDHs, chalcogenides, and MXenes are another kind of 2D material, which are also 
crucial for polymer composite electrolytes [36]. Chalcogenides have been involved in 
the preparation of gel and solid polymer electrolytes (including ceramics) for energy 
purposes like Li batteries [37], PVDF-based Li batteries [38], solid-state Mg batteries 
[39], and rechargeable Mg-ion batteries [40]. It has been observed that chalcogenides 
provide high ionic conductivity to the electrolyte and high electronic conductivity in

108
L. Díaz-Patiño et al.
solid-state Mg batteries (Fig. 7). The effect of different ﬁllers on SPEs for solid-state 
Mg batteries is highlighted in Fig. 7, where it is possible to observe the impact of other 
non-pseudocapacitive materials on the intrinsic properties of these batteries, like Mg-
ion conductivity, transference number, and mechanical stability. On the other hand, 
MXenes is a new class of 2D materials. Like LDHs, MXenes are 2D layered metal 
structures composed of transition metals in the form of carbides, nitrides, and carboni-
trides. Because of their outstanding electrical conductivity, chemical properties like 
high hydrophilicity, and rich surface chemistry, MXenes are highly interesting mate-
rials for energy storage [41]. For instance, the Ti3C2Tx MXene was incorporated into 
a PVDF-based SPE allowing efﬁcient interfacial transport kinetics, while it partici-
pated in promoting the uniform deposition of Zn, enabling a higher performance of a 
Zn/VO2 battery [42]. The deposition of uniform Zn metal has been shown essential 
to decrease the formation of Zn dendrites, while the proper combination with other 
polymers (some characteristics are presented in Fig. 7) can also allow for a decrease 
in the hydrogen evolution reaction and passivation [43], which are the typical anodic 
issues in rechargeable Zn batteries. Notably, the hydrophilic behavior of MXenes 
was used for developing PVA-based GPEs for rechargeable Zn-air batteries, where 
the MXene improved water retention as well as ionic conductivity, enhancing both 
performance and durability [44]. 
Fig. 7 The effect of the ﬁller (phosphates, borohydrides, chalcogenides, MOFs, and polymers) on 
the resulting property of solid-state Mg batteries. Adapted with permission [39], Copyright (2023), 
Elsevier

Pseudocapacitive Materials for Electrolytes
109
4.3 
Metal–Organic Frameworks Pseudocapacitive Materials 
Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) are an interesting group of materials; they are 
formed by metallic ions surrounded by organic ligands, resulting in a large amount 
of MOFs, and for electrochemical energy applications [45], MOFs can be used as 
obtained in composites and even, as MOF-derivate materials like heteroatom-doped 
carbon nanomaterials. In this way, the high surface area of MOFs, the high porosity 
and crystallinity, and tunable polarity make them ideal for improving the ion mobility 
in the electrolyte to boost the activity in applications like solid-state lithium batteries 
[46]. Notably, the open-metal sites provide to GPEs not only high ionic conductivity 
but also a high Li+ transference number [47, 48]. There are at least 20,000 structures 
today reported, and because of the tunability of these materials [49] and their use 
as obtained in composites, derivatives, and defective forms. There is a world of 
possibilities in the ﬁeld of energy conversion and storage systems where MOFs can 
be used in the electrodes or as ﬁllers in electrolytes. 
5 
Conclusions 
In conclusion, electrolyte signiﬁcantly inﬂuences the performance and durability 
of electrochemical energy devices. The selection of the appropriate electrolyte type 
depends on the speciﬁc requirements of the application, including ionic conductivity, 
electrochemical window, working temperature range, stability, and safety. Exten-
sive research has been conducted on pseudocapacitive materials, which encompass 
carbon-based materials, conductive polymers, and metal-based materials, as elec-
trode materials for batteries and supercapacitors. However, these materials can also 
be electrolyte dopants or modiﬁers to enhance their properties. Aqueous electrolytes, 
such as aqueous gel electrolytes, possess several advantages, such as high ionic 
conductivity, low toxicity, ease of processing, and cost-effectiveness. Nonetheless, 
their utilization in conventional supercapacitors is limited due to their narrow working 
potential window. Non-aqueous electrolytes, comprising organic, ceramic, and ionic 
liquid-based electrolytes, have emerged as promising alternatives. Organic elec-
trolytes, in particular, offer higher voltage windows, energy densities, and working 
temperature ranges compared to aqueous electrolytes. Ionic liquids provide inno-
vative and environmentally friendly options for solid-state electrolytes due to their 
wide potential windows and high ionic conductivity. Gel polymer and solid polymer 
electrolytes have gained signiﬁcant attention as multicomponent electrolyte systems. 
These electrolytes combine enhanced electrochemical performance with improved 
mechanical properties, making them suitable for ﬂexible and durable energy storage 
devices. Polymer-based solid-state electrolytes, consisting of polymer matrices, elec-
trolytic salts, and plasticizers, have demonstrated promising results in preventing the 
leakage of liquid electrolytes. In addition to electrolyte selection, incorporating pseu-
docapacitive materials into electrolytes has shown remarkable potential in enhancing

110
L. Díaz-Patiño et al.
the performance of electrochemical energy systems. Carbon-derived pseudocapac-
itive materials, in particular, have been extensively investigated due to their large 
surface area, high electrical conductivity, and excellent chemical stability. Their 
performance can be further improved by modulating their capacitance through pore 
size and shape. The strategic modiﬁcation of electrolytes using pseudocapacitive 
materials presents opportunities for achieving superior performance and durability in 
electrochemical energy systems. Ongoing research and development in this ﬁeld will 
contribute to advancing electrochemical energy storage and conversion technologies, 
ultimately leading to more efﬁcient and sustainable energy systems. 
6 
Challenges and Future Directions in Pseudocapacitive 
Materials for Energy Applications 
The use of pseudocapacitive materials has been primarily as nano-ﬁllers, enhancing 
the ionic conductivity, ion transference number, mechanical stability, and oxidation/ 
reduction stability. Moreover, electrolyte selection greatly depends on the applica-
tion. The use of aqueous solutions has the advantage of superior ionic conductivity, 
and thus, its substitution by gel, solid or ceramic electrolytes has presented different 
advantages and disadvantages like mechanical strength for ﬂexible application or all-
solid-state batteries/capacitors and restricted ion mobility. The composites formed 
by using pseudocapacitive materials into these non-aqueous electrolytes still present 
challenges to increasing the ionic conductivity at magnitudes like those in aqueous 
solutions. The ﬁne integration should also allow for a decrease in certain issues. For 
instance, in rechargeable batteries, the anodic issues like passivation, shape changes, 
formation of dendrites during the charging process, and the hydrogen evolution 
reaction taking place as an undesired reaction decrease the durability and recharge-
ability of the battery. In this way, MOFs in all of their presentations (as prepared, 
as a precursor for doped carbon materials, etc.) have been visualized as efﬁcient 
nano-ﬁllers in GPEs and SPEs, and thus, its rational modiﬁcation together with 
MXenes represent the most viable route to prepare efﬁcient electrolytes. However, 
there is a long way to obtain efﬁcient energy devices once these electrolytes become 
viable at industrial scales. Thus, the preparation method, interfacial phenomena, 
and decrease of anodic /cathodic issues assisted by the electrolyte formulation need 
further investigation for the success of this technology. 
References 
1. X. He, X. Zhang, A comprehensive review of supercapacitors: properties, electrodes, elec-
trolytes and thermal management systems based on phase change materials. J. Energy Storage. 
56, 106023 (2022)

Pseudocapacitive Materials for Electrolytes
111
2. I. Voicu, H. Louahlia, H. Gualous, R. Gallay, Thermal management and forced air-cooling of 
supercapacitors stack. Appl. Therm. Eng. 85, 89–99 (2015) 
3. W. Fu, K. Turcheniuk, O. Naumov, R. Mysyk, F. Wang, M. Liu, D. Kim, X. Ren, A. Magasinski, 
M. Yu, X. Feng, Z.L. Wang, G. Yushin, Materials and technologies for multifunctional, ﬂexible 
or integrated supercapacitors and batteries. Mater. Today 48, 176–197 (2021) 
4. Y. Yang, T. Zhu, L. Shen, Y. Liu, D. Zhang, B. Zheng, K. Gong, J. Zheng, X. Gong, Recent 
progress in the all-solid-state ﬂexible supercapacitors. SmartMat 3, 349–383 (2022) 
5. A. Yu, V. Chabot, J. Zhang, Electrochemical supercapacitors for energy storage and delivery: 
fundamentals and applications, pp. 1–355 (2017) 
6. G. Bahuguna, P. Ram, R.K. Sharma, R. Gupta, An organo-ﬂuorine compound mixed electrolyte 
for ultrafast electric double layer supercapacitors. ChemElectroChem 5, 2767–2773 (2018) 
7. T. Lé, P. Gentile, G. Bidan, D. Aradilla, New electrolyte mixture of propylene carbonate 
and butyltrimethylammonium bis(triﬂuoromethylsulfonyl)imide (N1114 TFSI) for high perfor-
mance silicon nanowire (SiNW)-based supercapacitor applications. Electrochim. Acta 254, 
368–374 (2017) 
8. R. Holze, F. Béguin, E. Fr˛ackowiak (eds), Supercapacitors—materials, systems, and applica-
tions. J. Solid State Electrochem. 19, 1253 (2015) 
9. G. Kaur, S.C. Sivasubramanian, A. Dalvi, Solid-state supercapacitors using ionic liquid 
dispersed Li+-NASICONs as electrolytes. Electrochim. Acta 434, 141311 (2022) 
10. Z. Chen, Y. Yang, Z. Ma, T. Zhu, L. Liu, J. Zheng, X. Gong, Z. Chen, Y. Yang, Z. Ma, T. Zhu, 
L. Liu, X. Gong, J. Zheng, All-solid-state asymmetric supercapacitors with metal selenides 
electrodes and ionic conductive composites electrolytes. Adv. Funct. Mater. 29, 1904182 (2019) 
11. Y. Ji, N. Liang, J. Xu, D. Zuo, D. Chen, H. Zhang, Cellulose and poly(vinyl alcohol) composite 
gels as separators for quasi-solid-state electric double layer capacitors. Cellulose 26, 1055–1065 
(2019) 
12. N.A. Choudhury, P.W.C. Northrop, A.C. Crothers, S. Jain, V.R. Subramanian, Chitosan 
hydrogel-based electrode binder and electrolyte membrane for EDLCs: experimental studies 
and model validation. J. Appl. Electrochem. 42, 935–943 (2012) 
13. Z. Zhai, L. Zhang, T. Du, B. Ren, Y. Xu, S. Wang, J. Miao, Z. Liu, A review of carbon materials 
for supercapacitors. Mater. Des. 221, 111017 (2022) 
14. K. Gajewska, A. Moyseowicz, D. Minta, G. Gryglewicz, Effect of electrolyte and carbon mate-
rial on the electrochemical performance of high-voltage aqueous symmetric supercapacitors. 
J. Mater. Sci. 58, 1721–1738 (2023) 
15. M. Pershaanaa, S. Bashir, S. Ramesh, K. Ramesh, Every bite of Supercap: a brief review on 
construction and enhancement of supercapacitor. J. Energy Storage. 50, 104599 (2022) 
16. L. Peng, Z. Fang, Y. Zhu, C. Yan, G. Yu, Holey 2D nanomaterials for electrochemical energy 
storage. Adv. Energy Mater. 8, 1702179 (2018) 
17. T. Ohba, T. Ohba, Anomalously enhanced hydration of aqueous electrolyte solution in 
hydrophobic carbon nanotubes to maintain stability. ChemPhysChem 15, 415–419 (2014) 
18. Z. Supiyeva, X. Pan, Q. Abbas, The critical role of nanostructured carbon pores in supercapac-
itors. Curr. Opin. Electrochem. 39, 101249 (2023) 
19. C. Melios, C.E. Giusca, V. Panchal, O. Kazakova, Water on graphene: review of recent progress. 
2D Mater. 5, 22001 (2018) 
20. A. Jangid, K.D. Verma, P. Sinha, K.K. Kar (ed.), Handbook of Nanocomposite Supercapacitor 
Materials III, vol. 6, 245 (Springer, Cham, 2021) 
21. J. Tian, N. Cui, P. Chen, K. Guo, X. Chen, High-performance wearable supercapacitors based on 
PANI/N-CNT@CNT ﬁber with a designed hierarchical core-sheath structure. J. Mater. Chem. 
A. 9, 20635–20644 (2021) 
22. T. Lv, M. Liu, D. Zhu, L. Gan, T. Chen, T. Lv, M. Liu, D. Zhu, L. Gan, T. Chen, Shanghai 
key, nanocarbon-based materials for ﬂexible all-solid-state supercapacitors. Adv. Mater. 30, 
1705489 (2018) 
23. H. Zhang, X. Wang, H. Ma, M. Xue, Recent progresses on applications of conducting polymers 
for modifying electrode of rechargeable batteries. Adv. Energy Sustain. Res. 2, 2100088 (2021)

112
L. Díaz-Patiño et al.
24. E. Dhandapani, S. Thangarasu, S. Ramesh, K. Ramesh, R. Vasudevan, N. Duraisamy, 
Recent development and prospective of carbonaceous material, conducting polymer and their 
composite electrode materials for supercapacitor—a review. J. Energy Storage. 52, 104937 
(2022) 
25. J. Wang, X. Li, X. Du, J. Wang, H. Ma, X. Jing, Polypyrrole composites with carbon materials 
for supercapacitors. Chem. Pap. 712(71), 293–316 (2016) 
26. L. Hao, D. Yu, Progress of conductive polypyrrole nanocomposites. Synth. Met. 290, 117138 
(2022) 
27. S. Liu, W. Liu, D. Ba, Y. Zhao, Y. Ye, Y. Li, J. Liu, S. Liu, W. Liu, Y. Zhao, Y. Ye, J. Liu, 
D. Ba, Y. Li, Filler-integrated composite polymer electrolyte for solid-state lithium batteries. 
Adv. Mater. 35, 2110423 (2023) 
28. Nidhi, S. Patel, R. Kumar, Effect of Al2O3 on electrical properties of polymer electrolyte for 
electrochemical device application Mater. Today Proc. 46, 2175–2178 (2021) 
29. J. Wang, L. Fan, Q. Du, K. Jiao, Lithium ion transport in solid polymer electrolyte ﬁlled with 
alumina nanoparticles. Energy Adv. 1, 269–276 (2022) 
30. Nidhi, S. Patel, R. Kumar, PVDF-HFP based nanocomposite polymer electrolytes for energy 
storage devices dispersed with various nano-ﬁllers. AIP Conf. Proc. 2220 (2020) 
31. T. Sathyanathan, C.P. Sugumaran, Modeling and analysis of nano composite BaTiO3 lithium 
polymer battery. IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol. 17, 161–168 (2018) 
32. F. Ram, P. Kaviraj, R. Pramanik, A. Krishnan, K. Shanmuganathan, A. Arockiarajan, PVDF/ 
BaTiO3 ﬁlms with nanocellulose impregnation: Investigation of structural, morphological and 
mechanical properties. J. Alloys Compd. 823, 153701 (2020) 
33. J. Sharma, S. Hashmi, Magnesium ion-conducting gel polymer electrolyte nanocomposites: 
effect of active and passive nanoﬁllers. Polym. Compos. 40, 1295–1306 (2019) 
34. X. Hui, P. Zhang, J. Li, D. Zhao, Z. Li, Z. Zhang, C. Wang, R. Wang, L. Yin, In situ integrating 
highly ionic conductive LDH-Array@PVA gel electrolyte and MXene/Zn anode for dendrite-
free high-performance ﬂexible Zn–Air batteries. Adv. Energy Mater. 12, 2201393 (2022) 
35. Q. Wang, J.F. Wu, Z.Y. Yu, X. Guo, Composite polymer electrolytes reinforced by two-
dimensional layer-double-hydroxide nanosheets for dendrite-free lithium batteries. Solid State 
Ionics 347, 115275 (2020) 
36. V. Vijayakumar, M. Ghosh, K. Asokan, S. Babu Sukumaran, S. Kurungot, J. Mindemark, D. 
Brandell, M. Winter, J. Ravi Nair, V. Vijayakumar, J. Mindemark, D. Brandell, M. Ghosh, K. 
Asokan, S.B. Sukumaran, S. Kurungot, M. Winter, J.R. Nair, 2D Layered Nanomaterials as 
ﬁllers in polymer composite electrolytes for lithium batteries. Adv. Energy Mater. 13, 2203326 
(2023) 
37. X. Yu, A. Manthiram, A review of composite polymer-ceramic electrolytes for lithium batteries. 
Energy Storage Mater. 34, 282–300 (2021) 
38. Y. Zhang, C. Zhu, S. Bai, J. Mao, F. Cheng, Recent advances and future perspectives of PVDF-
based composite polymer electrolytes for lithium metal batteries: a review. Energy Fuels (2023) 
39. Y. Pang, Y. Zhu, F. Fang, D. Sun, S. Zheng, Advances in solid Mg-ion electrolytes for solid-state 
Mg batteries. J. Mater. Sci. Technol. 161, 136–149 (2023) 
40. M. Guo, C. Yuan, T. Zhang, X. Yu, M. Guo, C. Yuan, X. Yu, T. Zhang, Solid-state electrolytes 
for rechargeable magnesium-ion batteries: from structure to mechanism. Small 18, 2106981 
(2022) 
41. M. Hu, H. Zhang, T. Hu, B. Fan, X. Wang, Z. Li, Emerging 2D MXenes for supercapacitors: 
status, challenges and prospects. Chem. Soc. Rev. 49, 6666–6693 (2020) 
42. J. Feng, D. Ma, K. Ouyang, M. Yang, Y. Wang, J. Qiu, T. Chen, J. Zhao, B. Yong, Y. Xie, H. Mi, 
L. Sun, C. He, P. Zhang, J. Feng, D. Ma, K. Ouyang, M. Yang, Y. Wang, T. Chen, B. Yong, Y. 
Xie, H. Mi, L. Sun, C. He, P. Zhang, J. Qiu, Multifunctional MXene-bonded transport network 
embedded in polymer electrolyte enables high-rate and stable solid-state zinc metal batteries. 
Adv. Funct. Mater. 32, 2207909 (2022) 
43. Z. Chen, X. Li, D. Wang, Q. Yang, L. Ma, Z. Huang, G. Liang, A. Chen, Y. Guo, B. Dong, X. 
Huang, C. Yang, C. Zhi, Grafted MXene/polymer electrolyte for high performance solid zinc 
batteries with enhanced shelf life at low/high temperatures. Energy Environ. Sci. 14, 3492–3501 
(2021)

Pseudocapacitive Materials for Electrolytes
113
44. Z. Chen, W. Li, X. Yang, C. Ke, H. Chen, Q. Li, J. Guo, Y. He, Z. Guo, X. Liang, Gel polymer 
electrolyte with MXene to extend cycle lifespan of ﬂexible and rechargeable Zinc-Air batteries. 
J. Power. Sources 523, 231020 (2022) 
45. X. Li, X. Yang, H. Xue, H. Pang, Q. Xu, Metal–organic frameworks as a platform for clean 
energy applications. EnergyChem. 2, 100027 (2020) 
46. Z. Zhang, Y. Huang, H. Gao, C. Li, J. Hang, P. Liu, MOF-derived multifunctional ﬁller rein-
forced polymer electrolyte for solid-state lithium batteries. J. Energy Chem. 60, 259–271 
(2021) 
47. X. Lu, H. Wu, D. Kong, X. Li, L. Shen, Y. Lu, Facilitating lithium-ion conduction in gel 
polymer electrolyte by metal-organic frameworks. ACS Mater. Lett. 2, 1435–1441 (2020) 
48. Y. Xu, R. Zhao, J. Fang, Z. Liang, L. Gao, J. Bian, J. Zhu, Y. Zhao, Metal-organic framework 
(MOF)-incorporated polymeric electrolyte realizing fast lithium-ion transportation with high 
Li+ transference number for solid-state batteries. Front. Chem. 10, 1013965 (2022) 
49. L. Jiao, J.Y.R. Seow, W.S. Skinner, Z.U. Wang, H.L. Jiang, Metal–organic frameworks: 
structures and functional applications. Mater. Today 27, 43–68 (2019)

Electrochemical Properties of Metal 
Hydroxides 
Hamideh Mohammadian Sarcheshmeh and Mohammad Mazloum Ardakani 
Abstract The electrochemical capacitor has received remarkable attention due to its 
bridging performance for the power/energy interval between conventional capacitors 
and batteries/fuel cells. The electrochemical behavior of capacitors is mainly inﬂu-
enced by using electrode materials. One of the promising pseudocapacitive materials 
is metal hydroxide, whose electrochemical performances originated from reversible 
Faradaic reactions between the electrode and electrolyte interface. It is necessary 
to use advanced pseudocapacitive materials to manufacture supercapacitors to solve 
their problem of lower energy density (E) compared to lithium batteries. Different 
strategies, such as doping, various synthesis methods, fabrication of composites, 
and utilization of conductive substrates, have been introduced. This chapter repre-
sents investigations on pseudocapacitive electrode materials, essentially transition 
metal hydroxides. Some published reports about applications of metal hydroxides 
as pseudocapacitive electrode materials with their different structures and compos-
ites are summarized in this chapter. Some strategies to improve the electrochemical 
performance of transition metal hydroxides are mentioned. 
Keywords Composite · Doping · Metal hydroxides · Pseudocapacitive electrode 
materials 
1 
Introduction 
The most famous metal hydroxides as pseudocapacitive electrode materials are 
hydroxides based on transition metals including Ni, Co, and Mn with abundant redox 
states. They remarkably boost the E value in comparison with similar carbon-based 
materials. Nevertheless, their long-term stability and rate capability are generally 
low due to their approximately poor electrical conductivity. In order to practical 
utilizations, good stability, and high rate capability are essential to acquire accept-
able power density (P) and E values [1]. Pseudocapacitive materials store electrical
H. Mohammadian Sarcheshmeh · M. Mazloum Ardakani envelope symbol
Faculty of Science, Department of Chemistry, Yazd University, 89195-741 Yazd, Iran 
e-mail: mazloum@yazd.ac.ir 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
R. K. Gupta (ed.), Pseudocapacitors, Engineering Materials, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45430-1_7 
115

116
H. Mohammadian Sarcheshmeh and M. Mazloum Ardakani
energy via reversible Faradaic reactions, which produce electrochemically active 
materials on the electrode surface and provide charge transfers between the elec-
trode and electrolyte. It is necessary to mention that the speciﬁc capacitance (SC) 
values of pseudocapacitive electrodes are typically not signiﬁcant owing to the poor 
charge transfer in bulk materials [2]. To acquire excellent capacitance, the size of 
electrode materials should be decreased to nano. Thus, most of the pseudocapacitive 
materials can operate to the charge storage. Among transition metals, Ni, Co and Mn 
have been extensively investigated as pseudocapacitive electrode materials due to 
their good capacitance values, and simple fabrication methods [3]. We will explain 
their applications in the following. 
2 
Nickel Hydroxides 
They have been known as a noticeable pseudocapacitive electrode material owing to 
their signiﬁcant electrochemical properties. Different techniques have been applied to 
prepare nickel (II) hydroxide (Ni(OH)2) with higher capacitive performances. Some 
methods have been reported, e.g., chemical precipitation, sol–gel processes, and 
electrochemical deposition [4]. The range of SC values for nickel-based structures 
was 50–350 F/g. Nevertheless, the obtained SC values were much lower than their 
theoretical value (SC = 2082 F/g for Ni(OH)2). This low obtained SC values reveals 
a limitation in the electrochemical practical of Ni(OH)2 and, thus, a challenge to 
improve its speciﬁc capacitance. It is worth knowing that the performance of electrode 
materials can be improved by managing some of their characterizations such as 
morphologies and speciﬁc surface area. The materials involving a large surface area 
and a uniform porous structure in the nanometer sizes provide excellent performance. 
Among different synthetic methods, electrochemical techniques indicated signiﬁcant 
ability in controlling nonporous materials morphologies [4]. The porous nickel ﬁlm 
was prepared via the electrodeposition of an alloy of Ni–Cu [5]. The porous Ni(OH)2 
material electrode was produced using the electrodeposition of Ni (OH)2 ﬁlm on the 
mentioned prepared nonporous nickel substrate. This electrode indicated the SC 
value of 1434 F/g with E = 52.1 Wh/kg at a current density of 10 A/g. Shaikh 
et al. [6] introduced a procedure to synthesize β-Ni(OH)2 using plating waste and 
change it into a valuable product. The hydroxide precipitation is a typical strategy 
for the treatment of waste electroless nickel plating baths, which produces a lot of 
Ni(OH)2 waste with expensive handling and storage processes. Nickel plating is 
known as a plating technology that improves the strength, hardness, conductivity, 
corrosion resistance, and heat resistance of metallic substrates. The produced β-
Ni(OH)2 powder had a SC value of 332 F/g. Lokhande et al. [7] fabricated Ni(OH)2 
nanosheets on nickel foam via nickel foam oxidization in a solution, which led to a 
morphology conversion in the oxidative solution. Also, the thin Ni(OH)2 nanosheet 
on nickel foam was synthesized with the SC = 2384.3 F/g, and 75% capability 
retention after 3000 contentious cycles [8].

Electrochemical Properties of Metal Hydroxides
117
3 
Manganese Hydroxides 
They have an acceptable theoretical SC = 1370 F/g, and high practical potential 
[9]. Some limitations, such as low cycle stability, and decreased electrical and ionic 
conductivities, restrict the utilization of manganese compounds in commercial appli-
cations. The utilization of 3D nickel foams in fabricating of Manganese (II) hydroxide 
(Mn(OH)2) nanostructure electrodes indicated their capability in commercial appli-
cations [10]. Nickel foams, as 3D porous metallic templates, include large speciﬁc 
surface areas that can help to increase the metal hydroxide conductivity, boost their 
reaction kinetics, and absorb the stress induced by the swelling and contraction of 
the electrode materials. 
4 
Cobalt Hydroxides 
Among transition metal hydroxides, cobalt compounds were extensively investigated 
as suitable materials with outstanding capacitive performance. Cobalt(II)hydroxide 
(Co(OH)2) nanowires grown on nitrogen-modiﬁed microwave exfoliated graphite 
oxide (NMEG) indicated SC= 610 F/g with an E=24.9 Wh/kg [3]. The Co(OH)2 has 
received much consideration to examine the operation of crystalline nanomaterials 
with 3D structures as developed pseudocapacitive materials. However, amorphous 
phase materials were generally considered unacceptable for preparing capacitors 
due to their poor performance. It should be known that amorphous nanomaterials 
indicate relatively unique electrochemical performances. In this regard, the amor-
phous Co(OH)2 nanostructures were prepared via an electrochemistry technique 
[11]. Amorphous Co(OH)2 nanostructures (SEM and TEM images and XRD patterns 
for amorphous Co(OH)2 can be seen in Fig. 1. These results verify the formation of 
amorphous structure) showed interestingly signiﬁcant electrochemical behavior with 
a good SC value of 1094 F/g and remarkable cyclic stability during 8000 continuous 
cycles. Obtained results veriﬁed that the utilization of amorphous nanomaterials as 
developed pseudocapacitive electrode materials. The disordered Co(OH)2 structures 
signiﬁcantly enhanced the electrochemical performance. The proposed amorphous 
nanostructure indicated appropriate electrochemical properties due to these reasons: 
1-The pure surface of the proposed electrodes can cause the effective interaction 
of Co(OH)2 with electrolyte, 2-the 3D surfaces of prepared nanostructures have a 
larger speciﬁc surface to adsorb electrolytic ions on the electrode, 3-the amorphous 
structures. Also, a material involving low crystallinity or an amorphous phase can 
lead to more transportation channels than an extensively crystalline material [12].

118
H. Mohammadian Sarcheshmeh and M. Mazloum Ardakani
Fig. 1 a, b SEM images of the as-synthesized amorphous Co(OH)2 nanostructures on graphite 
electrodes, c TEM images of the sample, and d XRD patterns of the products. Adapted with 
permission [11], Copyright (2014), American Chemical Society 
5 
Doped Metal Hydroxides 
Ni(OH)2 has been known as an acceptable electrode material. However, it is typi-
cally p-type with poor electrical conductivity and low stability, which restricts its 
acceptable electrochemical application. To solve these issues, different efforts have 
been made to enhance rate capability and electrical conductivity. A strategy was 
doping it with some elements. The similar ion radii sizes of Co and Ni allow Ni 
hydroxide to be doped with cobalt without causing severe lattice strain. Another 
strategy was increasing the speciﬁc surface area via the fabrication of mesoporous 
structures. It leads to enlarging the interface contacts effectively between active 
sites and electrolyte ions, creates spaces for volume increment in the duration of 
the cycling process, and enhances ion and electron transportation. A green method 
to produce novel nanostructured materials without employing surfactants or stabi-
lizers is laser ablation in liquid (LAL) [13]. A nanosheet of Co-doped Ni(OH)2 
was prepared by a laser-induced cobalt colloid. This colloid operated as a doping

Electrochemical Properties of Metal Hydroxides
119
Fig. 2 Proposed formation process of Co-doped Ni(OH)2 and oxide nanosheet network structures. 
Adapted with permission [14], Copyright (2016), Royal Society of Chemistry 
solution [14]. Figure 2 shows all steps for fabrication process. The fabrication mate-
rial involved two advantages: Co-doping and mesoporous structure preparation. The 
pseudocapacitive electrode based on Co-doped Ni(OH)2 indicated a SC value equal 
to 1421 F/g at 6 A/g with a good stability (76% after 1000 consecutive cycles). The 
partial replacement of Co2+ instead of Ni2+ in the structure led to an increment in the 
number of holes in the valence bands, and, thus, provided high p-type conductivity 
[15]. Consequently, the increment of p-type conductivity for Ni(OH)2 and meso-
porous structure promotes contact area between electrode and electrolyte. Also it 
reduces the length of the channels for ion transportation. 
6 
The Competition Between Morphology and Chemical 
Doping 
A wide range of research has been performed to boost the conductivity of active 
materials through their morphology controls and doping. Conductivity will increase 
using chemical doping. For example, nickel in the structure of Ni(OH)2 was partially 
replaced by various cations such as (Al), (Zn), and (Co). Doping of Ni(OH)2 elec-
trode using Co increased its electrochemical performance via improvement of elec-
trical conductivity. A Co0.5Ni0.5(OH)2 composition, indicated SC = 1560 F/g [16]. 
Moreover, decreasing material size into nano-size increases the resistance because 
of reduced transportation distance for electronic and ionic species. Various Ni(OH)2 
nanostructures, e.g., nanoplates, nanoﬂowers, and hierarchical nanostructures, have 
been fabricated [17]. According to some investigations, Ni(OH)2 material size can

120
H. Mohammadian Sarcheshmeh and M. Mazloum Ardakani
be effectively changed by controlling the pH amount with some agents, for example, 
alkali metal hydroxides or hexamethylenetetramine. The size decreased-Ni(OH)2 
materials indicated higher electrochemical performances due to the increased mass 
transport. Therefore, it is obvious that morphology and doping inﬂuence the electro-
chemical behavior of Ni(OH)2 when utilized independently [18]. Gyeonghee et al. 
[19] showed that the structural characterizations competed with chemical doping to 
affect the electrochemical behaviors of metal hydroxide electrodes. They changed 
the morphology and crystallinity characterization of Ni(OH)2 using glucose in a 
solvothermal method. It signiﬁcantly decreased metal hydroxide particle size. Modi-
ﬁed metal hydroxides by glucose provided better ion transport because of more inter-
layer water. Ethyl glucosides were produced when glucose was used. They prevented 
the precursors diffusion in the time synthesis and, consequently limited the forma-
tion of larger crystals of Ni(OH)2 particles. Signiﬁcantly, the increment of SC value 
induced using glucose was less efﬁcient at high Co amounts and more efﬁcient at low 
Co amounts (high Ni) in the Co doped-Ni(OH)2 materials, verifying a competitive 
effect between the morphology and doping. This competitive effect was attributed to 
the amount of continuity between particles and charge hopping. Amorphous mate-
rials have more metal vacancies on the surface which intensify inter-particle discon-
tinuity. Therefore, charge hopping enhancement provided by chemical doping in 
greatly defective materials, may be less effective. 
7 
Metal Hydroxide Composites 
Most pseudocapacitive materials are p-type semiconductors, which are kinetically 
unsuitable to provide fast electron transport and thus obtain a high (P) value. Thus, 
it is necessary to increase the ion and electron transport kinetics in the electrode and 
electrode–electrolyte surfaces. A suitable idea is the fabrication of composites with 
conductive matrixes. Pseudocapacitive materials can be incorporated into nonporous 
highly conductive substrates, for instance, carbon nanotube (CNT), carbon aerogel, 
mesoporous carbon, graphene, conducting polymers, and current collectors. These 
porous conductive substrates provide proper accessibility of ions and electrons to the 
active surfaces resulting in good performance [20]. It should be noted that improving 
electronic conductivities using conductive carbon substrates indicated some prob-
lems. The direct growth of metal hydroxides on substrates is complicated because 
their surfaces are incompatible. Thus, the oxidative treatment of carbon materials 
is necessary to enhance surface compatibility, which creates some structural defects 
and oxygen functional groups to facilitate the formation of metal hydroxides on 
these substrates. Metal hydroxides can simply grow on current collectors such as 
nickel foam and ﬂuorine-doped tin oxide glass (FTO). Nevertheless, the number 
of active materials is extensively restricted owing to the cofﬁned speciﬁc surface 
area and the low thickness of active material coating in the nickel foam or FTO.

Electrochemical Properties of Metal Hydroxides
121
Consequently, the obtained electrode capacitance is undesirable. Xiaowei [21] fabri-
cated a conductive substrate via nickel-coated CNTs (Ni-CNTs) to vertically grow 
β-Ni(OH)2 nanoplates on it. This Ni-CNTs@β-Ni(OH)2 composite indicated SC = 
1807 F/g. 
7.1 
Bimetallic Hydroxide Composites 
The bimetallic hydroxides mainly reveal better electrochemical performances than 
unitary hydroxides. Improvement in performance is attributed to the complicated 
combination and synergistic effects of multiple metals. Newly, hydroxides based on 
nickel–cobalt (Ni–Co) have been investigated as signiﬁcant electrode materials. In 
comparison with the unitary Ni or Co hydroxides, the bimetallic Ni–Co hydrox-
ides exhibit more redox reactions and ﬁnally show an electrochemical performance 
related to the combination of the performance of Ni and Co ions. In addition, the 
Co ions can convert into the remarkably conductive CoOOH, which is proper to 
enhance the conductivity and, therefore, the fast electron transfer for electroactive 
materials [22]. A (Ni–Co) oxy-hydroxides with a mesoporous structure was acquired 
using the microwave-assisted hydrothermal annealing. Microwave irradiation can 
uniformly transfer heat to the substance resulting in higher homogeneous nucleation 
and lower crystallization time compared to usual heating processes, thus, improving 
the particle size distribution. The porosity of the Ni–Co oxy-hydroxide nanostructure 
was controlled by adding a surfactant agent. Ni–Co oxy-hydroxides showed SC = 
636 F/g with the E, and P values equal to 17 Wh/kg and 1.6 kW/kg, respectively 
[23]. 
The nano-Ni/Co(OH)2 nanoﬂake composite ﬁlm exhibited a good SC value of 
1920 F/g. This nano-Ni ﬁlm was fabricated by a hydrogen bubble template and then 
Co(OH)2 nanoﬂakes (~20 nm) were electrodeposited on it. Recently, the preparation 
of 3D porous nanometal ﬁlms using the hydrogen bubble template has received 
much attraction because of their noticeable structural characterizations and attractive 
features. They exhibited greatly porous dendritic walls with a large surface area 
and open porous structures, which introduced them as appropriate materials for 
the fabrication of capacitors [21]. A chemical bath deposition (CBD) procedure 
was also reported to directly form nickel–cobalt hydroxide nanorod arrays onto 
a stainless-steel template. This proposed structure could decrease the electrolyte 
diffusion resistance in the electrode materials and increase their electrochemical 
charge–discharge. Signiﬁcantly, this nanorod indicated SC = 456 F/g and a proper 
rate capability (90% retention after 1000 cycles) [24]. 
According to the crystal structures, the Ni and Co hydroxides generally include 
two phases: α-phase and β-phase. The α-phase hydroxides indicate superior electro-
chemical performance than their β-phase because they have disordered and weakly 
crystallized structures. Nevertheless, the α-phase can rapidly convert to β-form 
during the fabrication process, leading to a small fabrication yield. Some methods, 
for example, co-precipitation, hydrothermal, and microwave-assisted hydrothermal

122
H. Mohammadian Sarcheshmeh and M. Mazloum Ardakani
methods, were utilized to fabricate the α-phase structures of Ni–Co hydroxides. The 
mentioned procedures signiﬁcantly utilizes many surfactants and alkaline reagents 
[22]. Chen et al. [25] introduced a simple hydrothermal procedure to fabricate Ni–Co 
hydroxides with α-phase without using the alkali, and surfactant agents. They used 
1-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) in the mixed solvent showing the principal func-
tion in the metal ions precipitation and α-phase hydroxides formation. The Ni–Co 
hydroxides as the electroactive materials indicated SC = 1337.4 F/g for Ni0.67Co0.33 
hydroxide and a remarkably increased SC = 2286.7 F/g and 2248.9 for Ni0.67Co0.33 
and Ni0.5Co0.5 hydroxides, respectively after growth on Ni foam. Xia and coworkers 
[22] reported a simple precursor conversion procedure to grow the α-phase Ni–Co 
hydroxides structure. This procedure is extensively used as a synthesis method. Using 
the precursors, it is possible to fabricate different speciﬁc morphologies and struc-
tures by precursors. These precursors will be converted into the corresponding form 
while keeping the morphology and structure. The SC value of bimetallic Ni–Co 
hydroxides (1600 F/g) was more signiﬁcant than some α-phase hydroxides and their 
combinations, e.g., α-Co(OH)2, α-Ni(OH)2 and α-Ni (OH)2/rGO, and also much 
better than different bimetallic Ni–Co materials e.g., Ni–Co hydroxides. The cyclic 
stability of the Ni–Co hydroxides was more signiﬁcant than monometallic Ni hydrox-
ides. The Ni–Co hydroxides exhibited much better stability and better rate capability 
due to adding Co ions. These ions helped to the stable presence of ethylene glycol 
molecules in the interlayer space of the α-phase Ni–Co hydroxides, leading to higher 
cycling stability. Metal hydroxides are not stable in the aqueous medium. When they 
are exposed to H2O, they can quickly hydrolysis and decompose. Adding Co ion in 
the Ni–Co hydroxide could help keep ethylene glycol in the interlayer. The interlayer 
species are important for the α-phase hydroxide stability. They can efﬁciently inhibit 
the transformation of phases in hydroxides (α into β), and lead to good stability for 
bimetallic Ni–Co hydroxides compared to monometallic Ni hydroxides [22]. 
Hybridizing pseudocapacitive electrode materials using conductive materials to 
fabricate composites can be utilized for the improvement of electrical conductivity 
and electrochemical performance. A Ni–Co hydroxide growth on graphene petal 
foam was reported as a pseudocapacitive material, which indicated outstanding elec-
trochemical performance. Composites are used to increase the resistance of complete 
electrodes and improve the utilization rate of active materials. A high conductive 
structure, NiCo2O4 nanowires array @ NiCo(OH)2 nanosheets, was reported as 
an electrode material. The metallic NiCo2O4 increased composite conductivity and 
enhanced the electron transport in the prepared electrode. This electrode indicated the 
ultrahigh SC = 2890.6 F/g with 94.66% capacitive retention after 5000 continuous 
cycles [26].

Electrochemical Properties of Metal Hydroxides
123
7.2 
Ternary Metal Hydroxide Composites 
For improvement of charge storage and thus E value, numerous works have been 
reported to develop electrodes based on metal hydroxide composites to enhance 
redox activity or the electroactive sites density. However, there are various chal-
lenges with physically distributed components in heterogeneous composites: (i) the 
complex and expensive multi-step preparation process of the composites; (ii) reduced 
electron transfer efﬁciency due to the interface between heterogeneous components; 
(iii) The difﬁculty of using all electroactive sites of the composite. Therefore, multi-
component metal hydroxides (metal component number ≥3) with a homogeneous 
element distribution can overcome the mentioned problems. A triple hydroxide 
nanoneedles (Ni–Co–Mn) growth on plasma-grown graphitic petals (GPs) using 
a simple method was fabricated [27]. As explained earlier, to improve the charge 
transfer efﬁciency and decrease internal resistance, different templates have been 
used for metal hydroxides, e.g., Ni foam, stainless steel, and carbon-based nanoma-
terials. However, for fabricating active electrodes using these substrates with limited 
surface area, a binder is essential. Consequently, electrical conductivity, long-term 
stability, rate capability, and the E value of electrodes will be reduced. The GPs 
involving a low number of graphene layers are proper substrates for the pseudoca-
pacitive electrodes because of their large surface area, good electrical conductivity, 
and binder-free utilization [28]. 
The porous Ni–Co–Mn triple hydroxide nanoneedles with a homogenous metal 
elements distribution, enhanced the redox state numbers and, therefore, electroac-
tive sites. As a result, increased energy and power densities. 3D greatly conduc-
tive substrate involving a lot of sharp graphene edges, and the sharp nanoneedles 
could signiﬁcantly improve electrolyte ions diffusion and therefore enhance the rate 
capability for the electrode. The electrode showed high charge storage efﬁciencies 
with SC = 1400 F/g and 117% performance retention after 3000 successive cycles. 
This signiﬁcant long-term cyclic stability was attributed to the strong mechanical 
connection between the nanoneedles and GPs, continuous ﬁber-petal transition with 
crystalline continuity, and synergistic effect of three metals in the structure [27]. 
To fabricate ﬂexible electrodes, carbon nanotube yarns (CNTY) can be used. 
They have good ﬂexibility and high electrical and mechanical features. However, 
they typically exhibit poor SC and E values owing to the conﬁned energy storage in 
the fabricated electric double-layer capacitive systems. Transition metal hydroxides 
as pseudocapacitive materials can be utilized to modify CNTYs to promote electro-
chemical performance [29]. Nevertheless, the cyclic stability and charge transport 
for functionalized CNTYs with transition metal hydroxides is unsuitable because of 
their poor structural stability and low electrical conductivity. The structural collapse 
of metal hydroxides is attributed to the swelling and shrinkage during consecu-
tive cycling, thus reducing the cyclic long-term stability. Also, the poor interac-
tion between metal hydroxides and CNTYs causes metal hydroxides easily sepa-
rate from CNTY during continuous cycles, particularly at a large current density 
[30]. Recently, conducting 2D metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) have been known

124
H. Mohammadian Sarcheshmeh and M. Mazloum Ardakani
as a good suggestion for active electrode materials owing to excellent porosity, 
good speciﬁc surface area, proper electrical conductivity, and adaptable function-
alities. Nevertheless, they degrade due to the adsorption/desorption process of elec-
trolyte ions during continuous cycling, and in the presence of acidic and alkaline 
environments [31]. Zhang et al. [32] introduced a simple but strong ship-in-a-
bottle structure providing proper electrochemical behavior with improved kinetics 
and life cycling via growing (Ni(OH)2 or Co(OH)2 into MOF (Ni3(2,3,6,7,10,11-
hexaiminotriphenylene)2, Ni3(HITP)2) nonporous and anchored them onto CNTY 
through π-π interactions. The physical nanoconﬁnement and hydrogen bonding 
between metal hydroxide and Ni3(HITP)2 interlock them to prevent structure collapse 
of the composite during charging/discharging. The Ni(OH)2@Ni3(HITP)2@CNTY 
electrode exhibited a SC value of 496.0 mF/cm2 at 0.4 mA/cm2 with noticeable 
stability (92.3% capacitive retention after 10,000 successive cycles). 
The Ni–Fe–Co hydroxides/N-doped carbon nanoplate (Ni Co Fe–NC) was fabri-
cated by a simple method. N-doped carbon hydrogel with numerous hydrophilic 
groups such as COOH, OH, and C=O can react with H2O molecules by hydrogen 
bonding and thus improve the material wettability and enhance the electrolyte acces-
sibility. In addition, doping the carbon matrix by nitrogen will alter the charge density 
of carbon and therefore increase its pseudocapacitance property. The Ni Co Fe-NC 
showed SC = 1849 F/g and an E = 31.5 Wh/kg [33]. Table 1, shows a summary of 
the mentioned studies.
8 
Layered Double Hydroxides (LDHs) 
Newly, 2D nanosheet morphologies such as inorganic layered hydroxides have 
received remarkable attraction on electrochemical properties and energy applica-
tions. Much research has studied fabricating layered hydroxide electrodes that involve 
higher Faradaic reactions and larger capacities owing to an enhancement in pseudo-
capacitive performance. Bimetallic LDHs with the formula of [M2+ 1-xM3+ x(OH)2]x+ 
[An−x/n · mH2O]x− (M2+ and M3+, the bivalent and trivalent metal cations, respec-
tively; An−, the charge-balancing anion of valence n; x = M3+/(M2+ + M3+)) is a large 
category of the 2D inorganic materials. So far, most reported LDHs are Brucite or 
hydrotalcite structured compounds. By suitable controlling anionic species, lamellar 
LDHs can provide acceptable operations on energy storage resulting from the ﬁnal 
2D anisotropy, available large surface area, and a particular positively charged prop-
erty [34]. Hwang et al. studied the pseudocapacitive performance of the Zn–Co LDH 
ﬁlm prepared by the restacked Zn–Co LDHs nanosheets after exfoliation [35]. This 
ﬁlm showed SC = 170 F/g. A simple formation of Ni–Co and Ni–Fe LDHs nanosheet 
arrays on the conductive substrate by a homogeneous precipitation method exhibited 
a proper E = 77.3 Wh/kg for Ni–Co LDH and E = 82.3Wh/kg for Ni–Fe LDHs [36, 
37]. Pan et al. [38] introduced the growth of ZnCo1.5(OH)4.5Cl0.5.0.45H2O (30 nm) 
on Ni foam and obtained a noticeable SC value of 3946.5 F/g. Nasir et al. reported a 
hybrid of Ni and Ni–Co LDH nanostructures wrapped in nitrogen-doped graphene

Electrochemical Properties of Metal Hydroxides
125
Table 1 Some pseudocapacitive electrode materials based on metal hydroxides 
Electrode/(Substrate)
SC (F/g)
E (Wh/kg)
P (Kw/kg)
Cycle 
stability 
References 
Ni (OH)2 ﬁlm/(Porous Ni ﬁlm)
1634 at 2 
A g−1 
52.1
2500
59.3% 
after 
500 
cycles 
[5] 
β-Ni (OH)2
330
11.5
207.5
–
[6] 
Ni (OH)2/(Ni foam)
2384.3 at 
1 A g−1 
–
–
75% 
after 
3000 
cycles 
[8] 
Co(OH)2 NW/(Nitrogen 
modiﬁed microwave exfoliated 
graphite oxide) 
610
24.9
224
65% 
after 
6000 
cycles 
[3] 
Amorphous Co(OH)2/(Graphite)
1094 at 1 
mV · s−1 
–
–
95% 
after 
8000 
cycles 
[11] 
Co-doped Ni (OH)2
1421 at 6 
A g−1 
–
–
76% 
after 
1000 
cycles 
[14] 
β-Ni (OH)2/(Ni-CNT)
1807 at 2 
A g−1 
–
–
98% 
after 
2000 
cycles 
[20] 
Mesoporous Ni–Co 
oxy-hydroxide 
636
17
1.6
–
[23] 
3D porous nano-Ni/Co(OH)2 
nanoﬂake 
1920 at 
40 A g−1 
80
11
Good 
stability 
after 
2000 
cycles 
[21] 
Ni–Co hydroxide nanorod array
456
12.8
–
91% 
after 
1000 
cycles 
[24] 
α-phase Ni–Co hydroxides/(Ni 
foam) 
2286.7 at 
1 A g−1 
–
–
83.7% 
after 
2000 
cycles 
[25] 
α-phase Ni–Co hydroxides
1600 at 1 
A g−1 
–
–
94% 
after 
1000 
cycles 
[22]
(continued)

126
H. Mohammadian Sarcheshmeh and M. Mazloum Ardakani
Table 1 (continued)
Electrode/(Substrate)
SC (F/g)
E (Wh/kg)
P (Kw/kg)
Cycle
stability
References
NiCo2O4 NWA @NiCo(OH)2/ 
(Ni foam) 
2890 at 
0.625 A 
g−1 
45.83
2.5
94.66% 
after 
5000 
cycles 
[26] 
Ni–Co–Mn Hydroxide 
nanoneedles (Plasma-grown 
graphitic petals) 
1400
30
39
95% 
after 
3000 
cycles 
[27] 
Ni(OH)2 @Ni3(HITP)2@CNTY
496
49.8
340.0
90.9% 
after 
10,000 
cycles 
[32] 
Ni–Fe–Co hydroxides/N-doped 
carbon nanoplate/(Ni foam) 
1849
31.5
–
92.2% 
after 
5000 
cycles 
[33]
(Ni–Co LDH@NG) sheets. This hybrid had a particular composition involving 
considerably active positive, host ions, and charge-balancing counter anions (Cl− 
and CO3 2−) to stabilize the structure and solvation molecules that can boost the deep 
diffusion of electrolyte ions and provide the use of more redox sites. This hybrid had 
a single crystalline nature, and hence greatly orientated structure, improved the effec-
tive electron transport from the redox site to the current collector. Also, the excellent 
restriction of Ni–Co LDH nanostructures in NG sheets enhanced their ﬁnal conduc-
tivity and structural stability. NG sheets effectively increased electronic and mass 
transport by creating a more excellent conductive template. Consequently, using Ni– 
Co LDH@NG promoted performance compared to some previously reported Ni–Co 
LDH. It indicated SC = 2925 F/g and a remarkable rate capability (90% capacitive 
retention during 10,000 successive cycles) [39]. 
8.1 
Aluminum Based LDHs 
Some LDHs, such as cobalt aluminum LDHs (Co–Al LDHs), nickel aluminum 
LDHs (Ni–Al LDHs), Ni–Co–Al LDHs, and their composites with greatly conduc-
tive matrixes such as graphene, CNT, and polymers were reported to indicate high 
capacitive performances. The morphology and phase transformation of Co–Al LDHs 
nanoplates were examined in the alkali solutions with high concentrations. The 
process depended on time, during which Co–Al LDHs were slowly transformed to β-
Co(OH)2 and CoOOH, and the structure changed to greatly porous. This phenomenon

Electrochemical Properties of Metal Hydroxides
127
could happen via the dissolution of the Al atoms of Co–Al LDHs, Co atom recrys-
tallization, and further Co oxidation. It was revealed that the pseudocapacitive prop-
erties of the prepared materials changed with the soaking time (1–72 h), and a low 
soaking time resulted in a proper SC = 1123 F/g and good rate capability. Neverthe-
less, the formation of CoOOH (at a high immersion time) remarkably decreased the 
electrochemical performance [40]. 
8.2 
Modiﬁcation of LDHs 
Previous research has exhibited that LDH materials with larger surface area and active 
sites indicate good theoretical capacitance. Nevertheless, their low conductivity and 
the random dopants dispersions, particularly with some conductive materials, inten-
sively prevent their contractions with the active sites of electrolyte ions. Recently, 
nitrogen, oxygen, phosphorus, or cobalt vacancies were conﬁrmed to signiﬁcantly 
promote electrode redox activity via the enhanced electron distribution density, 
and electronic structure charge. Combination with heteroatom results in excellent 
redox activity and adjustment of electronic distribution conﬁguration and thus indi-
cate acceptable pseudocapacitive behaviors. Cobalt phosphide (CoP), known as an 
efﬁcient dopant, is a kind of p-type semiconductor. The contact of the CoP with 
the transition metal LDH (as an n-type semiconductor) creates a p–n junction and 
shifts the energy levels to a thermal equilibrium state. In addition, transition metal 
LDH with positive charges is conducive to adsorbing charged electrolyte ions which 
enhances the subsequent redox reaction processes. According to mentioned expla-
nation, an electrode based on a 3D structure hybrid containing CoP and Ni–Al LDH 
was synthesized on the carbon cloth (Ni–Al LDH/CoP/CC). It noticeably improved 
conductivity and included proper adsorption energy, which was effective in pseu-
docapacitive performances. Thus, the prepared electrode exhibited a proper SC = 
1822.6 F/g, and excellent stability after 8000 cycles (95.3% capacitance retention). 
Also, it showed E  = 182 Wh/kg, and P = 300 W/kg [41]. 
2D nanosheets of Co(OH)2 and LDH have been known as proper pseudocapaci-
tive electrode materials with a great E value in the aqueous medium. Cobalt-based 
LDHs compounds can be simply prepared. They provide fast guest ion insertion/ 
desertion reactions due to high interlayer space. Nevertheless, these kinds of elec-
trode materials can be simply dissolved and degraded in the high pH solutions during 
the cycling process, resulting in reducing cycle stability. Numerous researchers have 
reported synthesis and surface modiﬁcation of the Co–Al LDH arrays on different 
conductive matrixes to develop the SC value and rate capability. However, the oper-
ation of Co–Al LDH was limited by the poor kinetics for charge distribution, leading 
to low stability at great current density. The most essential factor known for its high-
rate capability is the chemical structure stability of electrode materials. According to 
this view, Cha et al. [42] introduced a composite of the core–shell nanostructure of 
metal sulﬁde and hydroxide using a wet-chemical surface modiﬁcation procedure. 
Surface chemical reactions are used for complex nanostructures while preserving the

128
H. Mohammadian Sarcheshmeh and M. Mazloum Ardakani
structure and nanometer size of the starting materials. The surface of the Co–Al LDH 
nanostructure was modiﬁed by cobalt sulﬁde (CoS) layers having a proper capacitive 
performance in alkaline electrolytes. The composition of Al2+ and Co3+ in the LDH 
hydroxide sheets inhibited phase conversion from α to β phase for Co(OH)2 at the 
time of the charging/discharging process. In addition, a robust CoS shell prevented the 
collapse and decomposition of the Co–Al LDH in the alkali electrolyte. The prepared 
core–shell structured LDH electrode enhanced the cycle stability with SC = 2700 F/ 
g for 4000 corneous cycles [42]. Some other researchers have investigated the surface 
modiﬁcation of Co–Al LDHs nanostructure using inorganic materials, e.g., MnO2, 
Ni(OH)2, and platinum nanoparticles [42]. A composite of Co–Al LDH@MnO2 
nanowire was reported with the SC = 1837.8 F/g and proper stability (91.8% capaci-
tive retention after 5000 continuous cycles) [43]. Table 2 summarizes the mentioned 
studies and some other examples [43–51]. 
Table 2 Some pseudocapacitive electrode materials based on LDHs 
Electrode/ 
(Substrate) 
SC (F · g−1)
E (Wh  kg−1)
P (Kw kg −1)
Cycle stability Ref. 
Zn–Co LDH 
nanosheets/(Ni 
foam) 
3946.5 at 3 A 
g−1 
114.8
643.8
81% after 
5000 cycles 
[38] 
Ni–Co LDH/ 
(N-doped 
graphene) 
2925 at 1 A g−1
52
3191
90% after 
10,000 cycles 
[39] 
Ni–Al LDH/CoP/ 
(carbon cloth) 
1822 at 0.5 A 
g−1 
182
300
95.3% after 
8000 cycles 
[41] 
Core–shell CoS/ 
Co–Al LDH/(Ni 
foam) 
1503 at 2 A g−1
–
–
–
[42] 
Ni–Al LDH 
@MnO2 NW 
1837.8 at 1 A 
g−1 
–
–
91.8% after 
5000 cycles 
[43] 
Hierarchical 
Ni–Al LDH/ 
MWCNT/ 
(Nickel foam) 
1293 F cm−2 at 
5 mA cm−2 
–
–
83% after 
1000 cycles 
[44] 
Ni–Ti LDH 
ﬁlms/(Nickel 
foam) 
10.37 F cm−2 at 
5 mA cm−2 
–
–
86% after 
1000 cycles 
[45] 
Ni–Al LDH
2128 at 1 A g−1
-
-
-
[46]
(continued)

Electrochemical Properties of Metal Hydroxides
129
Table 2 (continued)
Electrode/
(Substrate)
SC (F · g−1)
E (Wh kg−1)
P (Kw kg −1)
Cycle stability Ref.
3D Mn-Ni LDH/ 
(graphene) 
2219 at 0.73 A g 
− 1 
47.29
7473
90% after 
1400 cycles 
[47] 
Co–Fe LDH
456 at 2 A g − 1 
–
–
–
[48] 
Sandwich-like 
nanocomposite 
Co–Ni–Al LDH 
growth one both 
sides of RGO 
(RGO(X)@ 
Co–Ni–Al LDH, 
1866 at 1 A/g
–
–
100% after 
5000 cycles 
[49] 
PEDOT@ Ni–Co 
LDH/(Carbon 
cloth) 
1508 at 1 A g−1
77.1
750
90.1% after 
10,000 cycles 
[50] 
Zn–Co@ Ni–Co 
LDH/(3D 
graphene foam) 
7485 mF · cm2 at 
5 mV s−1, 
1202 mWhcm−2
–
108% after 
5000 cycles 
[51] 
References 
1. G. Xiong, K. Hembram, R.G. Reifenberger, T.S. Fisher, MnO2-coated graphitic petals for 
supercapacitor electrodes. J. Power Sourc. 227, 254–259 (2013) 
2. H.Y. Lee, S.W. Kim, H.Y. Lee, Expansion of active site area and improvement of kinetic 
reversibility in electrochemical pseudocapacitor electrode. Electrochem. Solid-State Lett. 4, 
A19 (2001) 
3. X. Cai, S.H. Lim, C.K. Poh, L. Lai, J. Lin, Z. Shen, High-performance asymmetric pseudoca-
pacitor cell based on cobalt hydroxide/graphene and polypyrrole/graphene electrodes. J. Power 
Sourc. 275, 298–304 (2015) 
4. D.-D. Zhao, S.-J. Bao, W.-J. Zhou, H.-L. Li, Preparation of hexagonal nanoporous nickel 
hydroxide ﬁlm and its application for electrochemical capacitor. Electrochem. Commun. 9, 
869–874 (2007) 
5. D.-S. Kong, J.-M. Wang, H.-B. Shao, J.-Q. Zhang, C. Cao, Electrochemical fabrication 
of a porous nanostructured nickel hydroxide ﬁlm electrode with superior pseudocapacitive 
performance. J. Alloy. Compd. 509, 5611–5616 (2011) 
6. A. Shaikh, B.K. Singh, K. Purnendu, P. Kumari, P.R. Sankar, G. Mundra, S. Bohm, Utilization 
of the nickel hydroxide derived from a spent electroless nickel plating bath for energy storage 
applications. RSC Sustain. (2023) 
7. P.E. Lokhande, K. Pawar, U.S. Chavan, Chemically deposited ultrathin α-Ni(OH)2 nanosheet 
using surfactant on Ni foam for high performance supercapacitor application. Mater. Sci. 
Energy Technol. 1, 166–170 (2018) 
8. X. Xiong, D. Ding, D. Chen, G. Waller, Y. Bu, Z. Wang, M. Liu, Three-dimensional ultrathin 
Ni(OH)2 nanosheets grown on nickel foam for high-performance supercapacitors. Nano Energy 
11, 154–161 (2015) 
9. A.V. Radhamani, M.K. Surendra, M.S.R. Rao, Tailoring the supercapacitance of Mn2O3 
nanoﬁbers by nanocompositing with spinel-ZnMn2O4. Mater. Des. 139, 162–171 (2018) 
10. R.M. Obodo, N.M. Shinde, U.K. Chime, S. Ezugwu, A.C. Nwanya, I. Ahmad, M. Maaza, P.M. 
Ejikeme, F.I. Ezema, Recent advances in metal oxide/hydroxide on three-dimensional nickel

130
H. Mohammadian Sarcheshmeh and M. Mazloum Ardakani
foam substrate for high performance pseudocapacitive electrodes. Curr. Opin. Electrochem. 
21, 242–249 (2020) 
11. H.B. Li, M.H. Yu, X.H. Lu, P. Liu, Y. Liang, J. Xiao, Y.X. Tong, G.W. Yang, Amorphous 
cobalt hydroxide with superior pseudocapacitive performance. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 6, 
745–749 (2014) 
12. M.C. Bernard, R. Cortes, M. Keddam, H. Takenouti, P. Bernard, S. Senyarich, Structural defects 
and electrochemical reactivity of β-Ni(OH)2. J. Power Sourc. 63, 247–254 (1996) 
13. Z. Tian, C. Liang, J. Liu, H. Zhang, L. Zhang, Reactive and photocatalytic degradation of 
various water contaminants by laser ablation-derived SnOx nanoparticles in liquid. J. Mater. 
Chem. 21, 18242–18247 (2011) 
14. D. Liang, S. Wu, J. Liu, Z. Tian, C. Liang, Co-doped Ni hydroxide and oxide nanosheet 
networks: laser-assisted synthesis, effective doping, and ultrahigh pseudocapacitor perfor-
mance. J. Mater. Chem. A 4, 10609–10617 (2016) 
15. Y.J. Mai, J.P. Tu, X.H. Xia, C.D. Gu, X.L. Wang, Co-doped NiO nanoﬂake arrays toward 
superior anode materials for lithium ion batteries. J. Power Sourc. 196, 6388–6393 (2011) 
16. X. Liu, R. Ma, Y. Bando, T. Sasaki, A general strategy to layered transition-metal hydroxide 
nanocones: tuning the composition for high electrochemical performance. Adv. Mater. 24, 
2148–2153 (2012) 
17. X. Ma, J. Liu, C. Liang, X. Gong, R. Che, A facile phase transformation method for the 
preparation of 3D ﬂower-like β-Ni(OH)2/GO/CNTs composite with excellent supercapacitor 
performance. J. Mater. Chem. A 2, 12692–12696 (2014) 
18. Z. Lu, Z. Chang, W. Zhu, X. Sun, Beta-phased Ni(OH)2 nanowall ﬁlm with reversible 
capacitance higher than theoretical Faradic capacitance. Chem. Commun. 47, 9651–9653 
(2011) 
19. G. Lee, C.V. Varanasi, J. Liu, Effects of morphology and chemical doping on electrochemical 
properties of metal hydroxides in pseudocapacitors. Nanoscale 7, 3181–3188 (2015) 
20. X. Ma, Y. Li, Z. Wen, F. Gao, C. Liang, R. Che, Ultrathin β-Ni(OH)2 nanoplates vertically grown 
on nickel-coated carbon nanotubes as high-performance pseudocapacitor electrode materials. 
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces. 7, 974–979 (2015) 
21. X.H. Xia, J.P. Tu, Y.Q. Zhang, Y.J. Mai, X.L. Wang, C.D. Gu, X.B. Zhao, Three-dimentional 
porous nano-Ni/Co(OH)2 nanoﬂake composite ﬁlm: a pseudocapacitive material with superior 
performance. J. Phys. Chem. C 115, 22662–22668 (2011) 
22. D. Xia, H. Chen, J. Jiang, L. Zhang, Y. Zhao, D. Guo, J. Yu, Facilely synthesized α phase nickel– 
cobalt bimetallic hydroxides: Tuning the composition for high pseudocapacitance. Electrochim. 
Acta 156, 108–114 (2015) 
23. H.-Y. Hsu, K.-H. Chang, R.R. Salunkhe, C.-T. Hsu, C.-C. Hu, Synthesis and characterization 
of mesoporous Ni–Co oxy-hydroxides for pseudocapacitor application. Electrochim. Acta 94, 
104–112 (2013) 
24. R.R. Salunkhe, K. Jang, S. Lee, H. Ahn, Aligned nickel-cobalt hydroxide nanorod arrays for 
electrochemical pseudocapacitor applications. RSC Adv. 2, 3190–3193 (2012) 
25. H. Chen, J. Jiang, L. Zhang, Y. Zhao, D. Guo, Y. Ruan, D. Xia, One-pot fabrication of 
layered α-phase nickel-cobalt hydroxides as advanced electrode materials for pseudocapacitors. 
ChemPlusChem. 80, 181–187 (2015) 
26. Y. Zhang, Z. Shi, L. Liu, Y. Gao, J. Liu, High conductive architecture: bimetal oxide with 
metallic properties@ bimetal hydroxide for high-performance pseudocapacitor. Electrochim. 
Acta 231, 487–494 (2017) 
27. G. Xiong, P. He, L. Liu, T. Chen, T.S. Fisher, Plasma-grown graphene petals templating Ni– 
Co–Mn hydroxide nanoneedles for high-rate and long-cycle-life pseudocapacitive electrodes. 
J. Mater. Chem. A 3, 22940–22948 (2015) 
28. G. Xiong, K. Hembram, D.N. Zakharov, R.G. Reifenberger, T.S. Fisher, Controlled thin 
graphitic petal growth on oxidized silicon. Diam. Relat. Mater. 27, 1–9 (2012) 
29. C. Choi, H.J. Sim, G.M. Spinks, X. Lepró, R.H. Baughman, S.J. Kim, Elastomeric and dynamic 
MnO2/CNT core–shell structure coiled yarn supercapacitor. Adv. Energy Mater. 6, 1502119 
(2016)

Electrochemical Properties of Metal Hydroxides
131
30. M. Zhi, C. Xiang, J. Li, M. Li, N. Wu, Nanostructured carbon–metal oxide composite electrodes 
for supercapacitors: a review. Nanoscale 5, 72–88 (2013) 
31. D.Y. Lee, S.J. Yoon, N.K. Shrestha, S.-H. Lee, H. Ahn, S.-H. Han, Unusual energy storage 
and charge retention in Co-based metal–organic-frameworks. Microporous Mesoporous Mater. 
153, 163–165 (2012) 
32. K. Zhang, Q. Xu, X. Liu, J. Zhang, Y. Xu, M. Zhou, J. Li, M. Du, X. Qian, B. Xu, A ship-in-
a-bottle architecture transmission metal hydroxides@ conducting MOF on carbon nanotube 
yarn for ultra-stable quasi-solid-state supercapacitors. J. Mater. Chem. A (2023) 
33. W. Liu, X. Hu, H. Li, H. Yu, Pseudocapacitive Ni–Co–Fe Hydroxides/N-doped carbon 
nanoplates-based electrocatalyst for efﬁcient oxygen evolution. Small 14, 1801878 (2018) 
34. P. Sun, R. Ma, X. Bai, K. Wang, H. Zhu, T. Sasaki, Single-layer nanosheets with exceptionally 
high and anisotropic hydroxyl ion conductivity. Sci. Adv. 3, e1602629 (2017) 
35. M.A. Woo, M.-S. Song, T.W. Kim, I.Y. Kim, J.-Y. Ju, Y.S. Lee, S.J. Kim, J.-H. Choy, S.-J. 
Hwang, Mixed valence Zn–Co-layered double hydroxides and their exfoliated nanosheets with 
electrode functionality. J. Mater. Chem. 21, 4286–4292 (2011) 
36. J. Yingchang, S. Yun, L. Yanmei, T. Wenchao, P. Zhichang, Y. Peiyu, L. Yuesheng, G. Qinfen, 
H. Linfeng, Charge transfer in ultraﬁne LDH nanosheets/graphene interface with superior 
capacitive energy storage performance (2017) 
37. H. Chen, L. Hu, M. Chen, Y. Yan, L. Wu, Nickel–cobalt layered double hydroxide nanosheets 
for high-performance supercapacitor electrode materials. Adv. Func. Mater. 24, 934–942 (2014) 
38. Z. Pan, Y. Jiang, P. Yang, Z. Wu, W. Tian, L. Liu, Y. Song, Q. Gu, D. Sun, L. Hu, In situ 
growth of layered bimetallic ZnCo hydroxide nanosheets for high-performance all-solid-state 
pseudocapacitor. ACS Nano 12, 2968–2979 (2018) 
39. N. Mahmood, M. Tahir, A. Mahmood, W. Yang, X. Gu, C. Cao, Y. Zhang, Y. Hou, Role of 
anions on structure and pseudocapacitive performance of metal double hydroxides decorated 
with nitrogen-doped graphene. Sci. China Mater. 58, 114–125 (2015) 
40. T. Xu, X. Wu, Y. Li, W. Xu, Z. Lu, Y. Li, X. Lei, X. Sun, Morphology and phase evolution of 
CoAl layered double hydroxides in an alkaline environment with enhanced pseudocapacitive 
performance. ChemElectroChem. 2, 679–683 (2015) 
41. X. Wu, Z. Zhao, B. Huang, 0CoP-Doped nickel aluminum double hydroxide as superior 
electrode for boosting pseudocapacitive storage. Electrochim. Acta 361, 137092 (2020) 
42. J. Cha, E.B. Park, S.W. Han, Y.D. Kim, D. Jung, Core-shell structured cobalt sulﬁde/cobalt 
aluminum hydroxide nanosheet arrays for pseudocapacitor application. Chem.—Asian J. 14 
(2019) 446–453. 
43. X. Hao, Y. Zhang, Z. Diao, H. Chen, A. Zhang, Z. Wang, Engineering one-dimensional and 
two-dimensional birnessite manganese dioxides on nickel foam-supported cobalt–aluminum 
layered double hydroxides for advanced binder-free supercapacitors. RSC Adv. 4, 63901–63908 
(2014) 
44. B. Wang, G.R. Williams, Z. Chang, M. Jiang, J. Liu, X. Lei, X. Sun, Hierarchical NiAl 
layered double hydroxide/multiwalled carbon nanotube/nickel foam electrodes with excellent 
pseudocapacitive properties. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces. 6, 16304–16311 (2014) 
45. Y. Gu, Z. Lu, Z. Chang, J. Liu, X. Lei, Y. Li, X. Sun, NiTi layered double hydroxide thin ﬁlms 
for advanced pseudocapacitor electrodes. J. Mater. Chem. A 1, 10655–10661 (2013) 
46. G. Li, X. Zhang, D. Qiu, Z. Liu, C. Yang, C.B. Cockreham, B. Wang, L. Fu, J. Zhang, B. Sudduth, 
Tuning Ni/Al ratio to enhance pseudocapacitive charge storage properties of nickel–aluminum 
layered double hydroxide. Adv. Electron. Mater. 5, 1900215 (2019) 
47. I. Lee, G.H. Jeong, S. An, S.-W. Kim, S. Yoon, Facile synthesis of 3D MnNi-layered double 
hydroxides (LDH)/graphene composites from directly graphites for pseudocapacitor and their 
electrochemical analysis. Appl. Surf. Sci. 429, 196–202 (2018) 
48. X. Ge, C.D. Gu, X.L. Wang, J.P. Tu, Ionothermal synthesis of cobalt iron layered double 
hydroxides (LDHs) with expanded interlayer spacing as advanced electrochemical materials. 
J. Mater. Chem. A 2, 17066–17076 (2014) 
49. P. Huang, C. Cao, Y. Sun, S. Yang, F. Wei, W. Song, One-pot synthesis of sandwich-like 
reduced graphene oxide@ CoNiAl layered double hydroxide with excellent pseudocapacitive 
properties. J. Mater. Chem. A 3, 10858–10863 (2015)

132
H. Mohammadian Sarcheshmeh and M. Mazloum Ardakani
50. J. Zou, J. Zou, W. Zhong, Q. Liu, X. Huang, Y. Gao, L. Lu, S. Liu, PEDOT coating boosted NiCo-
LDH nanocage on CC enable high-rate and durable pseudocapacitance reaction. J. Electroanal. 
Chem. 928, 117069 (2023) 
51. D.S. Patil, S.A. Pawar, J.C. Shin, H.J. Kim, Layered double hydroxide based on ZnCo@ NiCo-
nano-architecture on 3D graphene scaffold as an efﬁcient pseudocapacitor. J. Power Sourc. 
435, 226812 (2019)

Pseudocapacitance in Double Perovskite 
Material 
Mostafa M. Omran, Ahmed I. Abdel-Salam, Delvin Aman, 
and Saad G. Mohamed 
Abstract Double perovskite materials (DPMs) with the formula of A2BB'O6 have 
gained much attention as supercapacitor materials due to their compositional char-
acteristics that improve the properties of conventional perovskite structure ABO3 
to gain higher electroactivity, conductivity, and faradic redox activity, in addition 
to their conventional structural stability. These advanced properties recently made 
DPMs promising materials for supercapacitor application, and they could show rela-
tively high speciﬁc capacitance and speciﬁc energy density (Ed) at high speciﬁc 
power density (Pd). At the beginning of this chapter, the DPMs will be introduced in 
detail from a chemical perspective to address their chemical composition, common 
morphology, electrochemical characteristics, and the effect of oxygen intercalation 
on their electrochemical properties. Then, the electrochemical energy storage mech-
anism in DPMs will be discussed from the electrochemical interactions point of 
view, and the pseudocapacitive behavior will be explained through simple kinetics 
and thermodynamics concepts. After that, the recent developments in DPMs design 
and the correlation between the structural improvements and the change in the pseu-
docapacitance performance will be addressed. Finally, the pros and cons of using 
double perovskite as pseudocapacitive material will be discussed alongside future 
developments and directions in this type of pseudocapacitive material. 
Keywords Double perovskite · Pseudocapacitance · Charge-storage mechanism ·
Cation leaching · Supercapacitor
M. M. Omran 
Chemistry Department, Faculty of Science, Cairo University, Giza 12613, Egypt 
A. I. Abdel-Salam 
Nanotechnology Research Centre (NTRC), The British University in Egypt (BUE), El-Shorouk 
City, Suez Desert Road, Cairo 11837, Egypt 
D. Aman 
Catalysis Laboratory, Reﬁning Department, Egyptian Petroleum Research Institute (EPRI), Nasr 
City, Cairo 11727, Egypt 
S. G. Mohamed envelope symbol
Mining and Metallurgy Engineering Department, Tabbin Institute for Metallurgical Studies 
(TIMS), Tabbin, Helwan 11421, Egypt 
e-mail: saadmohamed@tims.gov.eg 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
R. K. Gupta (ed.), Pseudocapacitors, Engineering Materials, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45430-1_8 
133

134
M. M. Omran et al.
1 
Introduction 
After tens of years of research and investigating new materials for supercapacitors 
to ﬁll the gap of the low speciﬁc power of batteries without losing their advan-
tage as a high energy density (Ed) charge storage system, it is still unclear if this 
gap is fulﬁlled successfully [1]. Naturally, the supercapacitor is the most promising 
candidate to achieve such a goal; however, more efforts and new material investiga-
tions are still required, despite the huge efforts that have been paid to improve the 
speciﬁc energy of supercapacitors at the high speciﬁc power values [2]. Pseudocapac-
itive material moved the supercapacitor an extra mile toward increasing the speciﬁc 
energy of supercapacitors at moderated speciﬁc power values by combining both 
characteristics of regular electrical double-layer capacity (EDLC) supercapacitor as 
a high-power materials and redox batteries as an energy-dense material; however, a 
further improvement is needed to further increase the Ed of supercapacitors at the 
high-power density (Pd) [3]. 
Among the wide variety of newly designed materials for supercapacitor applica-
tions (especially pseudocapacitive materials) to acquire higher energy-density super-
capacitors, perovskite oxides showed themselves as an exceptionally promising mate-
rial as an open research area that can open horizons to new strategies and directions 
which can bring our needs of high energy-dense supercapacitors with the required 
high power-density. Perovskite oxides with the structure of ABO3 are a great family 
of chemical structures, where A and B are different cations with relative atomic 
radios that allow for highly ordered crystal structure formations. These perovskite 
oxides are well known for their high conductivity, chemical stability, and relatively 
thermal stability. Perovskite oxides were intensively investigated as pseudocapacitive 
electrode material for several years and recorded exceptional capacitive properties; 
however, the relatively limited stability was a challenge due to cation leaching in the 
aqueous electrolytes, which prevented perovskite oxides from being further used as 
the future electrode material for supercapacitors [2, 4]. Several improvements have 
been made to perovskite oxides to improve their stability by composite formation with 
carbon-based materials, structural defects or oxygen vacancies creation, or oxygen 
substitution with halides, which successfully improved perovskite stability; however, 
another improvement opportunity of perovskite oxides has been explored by discov-
ering new crystal structures of perovskite oxide like layered and columnar double 
perovskite, triple perovskite, quadruple perovskite, which seemed to be promising 
investigation area for improving the stability properties of single perovskite oxides 
[5, 6]. 
DPMs can be considered as an updated branch of the single perovskite materials 
with a different chemical structure of ABB'O6, where A, B, and B's are different 
cations, where A and both B and B' have a relative atomic radius, while B and B'
should have a close atomic radius. This variation in B-site atoms initiates a variation 
in the internal interactions that leads to different properties [2]. A study has been made 
to found that in mixed cation perovskite Pb(ZnNb)O3, the highly ordered B-site tends 
to be a slightly covalent structure, which is expected to enhance the cationic leaching

Pseudocapacitance in Double Perovskite Material
135
assessment and increase the electrochemical stability [7]. DPMs showed themselves 
as high Ed materials due to the variety of available charge storage pathways; a slight 
improvement in DPMs stability has been achieved through a controlled synthetic 
approach that keeps the high ordering of the mixed A-site and B-site cations; however, 
a further improvement could be made in this area due to the limitation of the intensive 
investigation of this kind of materials. 
To understand exactly the right way to further discover more promising pseudoca-
pacitive DPMs, these materials’ chemical, and physical nature should be addressed 
alongside the state-of-the-art. In this chapter, the chemistry of DPMs, including the 
synthetic methodologies and their structural and electrochemical properties, will 
be clearly stated with useful refers to the previous work that has been made in 
this research area, the latest improvement methodologies and their outputs will 
be covered, and ﬁnally, the current challenges and future recommendations are 
addressed to ensure that this chapter is covering this research area from all aspects 
the of importance to researchers who are interested in pseudocapacitive materials in 
general. 
1.1 
Advances in Double Perovskite Materials 
1.1.1
DPMs Characteristics and Properties 
Single perovskites have been widely recognized as cost-effective pseudocapacitive 
materials. Their chemical composition is characterized by a nominal formula of 
ABO3, where B site cations and O anions form share-corner BO6 octahedral struc-
tures, while A cations occupy the 12-fold coordinated sites within the cavity formed 
by eight BO6 octahedrons. The chemical composition of single perovskites can be 
easily adjusted using a wide variety of elements, which makes them highly customiz-
able and easily doped perovskite structures [8]. In 1951, Steward and Rooksby discov-
ered DPMs, which can be represented by the general formula AA'BB'O6. These 
oxides are derived from the doped ABO3 perovskite structure (upper 
A Subsc
ript 1 minus x Baseline upper A prime Subscript x Baseline upper B Subscript 1 minus y Baseline upper B prime Subscript y Baseline upper O Subscript 3) 
and exhibit an extended super-lattice framework [9]. 
Over the years, extensive research has been conducted on DPMs due to their favor-
able characteristics, including high oxygen surface exchange kinetics, fast oxygen ion 
diffusion rates, and excellent mixed ionic and electronic conductivity at high temper-
atures. For illustration, if x (or y) in single doped perovskite is approximately 0.5 
and A' and A (or B' and B) are differing signiﬁcantly in size and/or charge, ordering 
of A-site (or B-site) cations can occur in different conﬁgurations (Fig. 1). This leads 
to the formation of a double perovskite, which is more accurately represented by the 
formula AA'B2O6 (or A2BB'O6) [4].
Comparing single-doped disordered perovskite oxide structures, represented by 
upper 
A Subscript 1 minus x Baseline upper A prime Subscript x Baseline BO Subscript 3 (or AB Subs
cript 1 minus y Baseline upper B prime Subscript y Baseline upper O Subscript 3), with the highly ordered double perovskite oxides 
structures of the form AA'BB'O6, it was observed that the double perovskite structure 
minimizes lattice distortion and improves cycling stability. Additionally, the A/A'

136
M. M. Omran et al.
Fig. 1 A diagram illustrating the process of double perovskite formation. Adapted with permission 
[8], Copyright (2019), Elsevier
ions are bonded to oxygen atoms in a 12-fold coordination, while the B and B'
ions are bonded to oxygen atoms in a sixfold coordination in the layered ordering 
[10]. In general, the A-site metal plays a crucial role in enhancing thermodynamic 
stability, while the B-site metal controls the electrochemical reactions. In the context 
of electrode materials used in supercapacitors (SCs), alkaline-earth metals (such as 
Sr and Ba) and rare-earth metals (such as La and Sm) are commonly utilized as the 
primary A-site cations, whereas the B-site cation is typically a transition metal (such 
as Mn, Co, and Ni) [1]. 
Four main types of order observed in A-site and B-site ordered DPMs are layered, 
columnar, and rock-salt (Fig. 2). The resulting ordering pattern has alternating B and 
B' patterns that interleave in 3D through the structure. The formula for this perovskite 
is A2BB'X6. The valence difference (ΔV) between B and B' governs the driving force 
to generate the rock salt pattern, where a random pattern develops when ΔV ≤ 3 
and the rock salt pattern results when 3 < ΔV ≤ 6; the layered pattern occurs when
ΔV = 2. It has been proposed that the layered pattern is favored by Jahn–Teller 
distortion of either the BO6 or B'O6 octahedron. Because of the signiﬁcant strain

Pseudocapacitance in Double Perovskite Material
137
Fig. 2 The potential ordering patterns of BO6 and B'O6 octahedra in A2BB'O6 DPMs. The four 
possible ordering types depicted are a random, b rock-salt, c layered, and d columnar Adapted with 
permission [11], Copyright (2021), the Royal Scocity of Chemistry 
between surrounding A cations in the very typical rock salt pattern, ordered B site 
replacement is more likely than A site ordering [11]. 
1.1.2
Crystal Structure Stability and Electronic Properties of DPMs 
To evaluate the structural stability of A2BB'O6 double perovskite oxide, similar to a 
simple perovskite oxide ABO3, Birch–Murnaghan’s equation of state and calculating 
tolerance factor (τ ) by using effective ionic radii, which is based on Goldschmidt’s 
tolerance factor which is deﬁned as 
tau
 eq uals StartStartFraction r Subscript upper A Baseline plus r Subscript upper O Baseline OverOver StartRoot 2 EndRoot left bracket StartFraction left parenthesis r Subscript upper B Baseline plus left parenthesis r Subscript upper B Sub Superscript Sub Super Superscript prime Sub Superscript Subscript Baseline right parenthesis Over 2 EndFraction plus r Subscript upper O Baseline right bracket EndEndFraction
√
t
a u equals  StartStartFraction r Subscript upper A Baseline plus r Subscript upper O Baseline OverOver StartRoot 2 EndRoot left bracket StartFraction left parenthesis r Subscript upper B Baseline plus left parenthesis r Subscript upper B Sub Superscript Sub Super Superscript prime Sub Superscript Subscript Baseline right parenthesis Over 2 EndFraction plus r Subscript upper O Baseline right bracket EndEndFraction
t
au e
q
uals StartStartFraction r Subscript upper A Baseline plus r Subscript upper O Baseline OverOver StartRoot 2 EndRoot left bracket StartFraction left parenthesis r Subscript upper B Baseline plus left parenthesis r Subscript upper B Sub Superscript Sub Super Superscript prime Sub Superscript Subscript Baseline right parenthesis Over 2 EndFraction plus r Subscript upper O Baseline right bracket EndEndFraction
where a tautolerance factor, rA, rB, and rB' are the average ionic radii of A, B, and B'
ions, respectively, and rO is the ionic radius of the oxygen anion [12]. The structural 
changes occurring in the entire A2BB'O6 family, depending on the value of tau, can 
be described as follows [6]: 
– When t is less than 1.05, a hexagonal structure is preferred. 
– In the range of 1.00 < tau< 1.05, it is likely that a cubic crystal structure with the 
Fm3m space group is formed. 
– For values between 0.97 < tau< 1.00, the most probable crystal structure transforms 
a tetragonal structure with the space group I4/m. 
– Finally, for tauless than 0.97, the compound tends to adopt either an orthorhombic 
structure (Pbnm) or a monoclinic structure (P21/n). 
In the case of an ordered A2BB'O6 oxide with a rock salt-type arrangement of B/ 
B' cations and a tauvalue of 1.0, the crystal superstructure can be visualized as two 
separate perovskite layers, namely ABO3 and AB'O3, alternating along the [111] 
direction. Consequently, the lattice constant (aDP) of the super unit cell is twice the 
size of a single perovskite (ap), which is why it is referred to as a double perovskite 
[13]. Also, high stability (τ = 1) depends on the bond nature in perovskite which

138
M. M. Omran et al.
is not completely ionic but is partially covalent due to the resistance of π (B–O) 
bond with σ (A–O) bond and σ (B–O) with σ (B'–O) bond. Increasing the covalent 
bonding nature can serve as a protective mechanism against the leaching of metals 
[14]. The variety and unique crystal structure of DPMs can signiﬁcantly enhance the 
electrochemical performance of electrodes. The electrical properties of electrodes 
are crucial for achieving fast kinetics in supercapacitors. DPMs exhibit a wide range 
of electronic structures, ranging from insulating to half-metallic and, in some cases, 
fully metallic. This versatility in electronic structures is made possible by the ﬂexible 
composition framework of perovskite oxides. 
For instance, the layered double perovskite structure with A-site ordering facili-
tates the diffusion of oxygen ions under electrochemical conditions. The stable crys-
talline structure of perovskite in alkaline electrolyte solutions is advantageous for 
long-term cycling stability. Therefore, to develop highly capacitive perovskite-based 
electrodes for oxygen anion intercalation-type supercapacitors, effective strategies 
encompassing detailed structural and electrochemical characterizations, calculation 
methods, and fabrication techniques of practical supercapacitors need to be real-
ized. These strategies aim to increase speciﬁc capacitance, ensure long-term oper-
ational stability, and enhance energy and power densities. Furthermore, expanding 
the potential windows and speciﬁc capacitance will enhance the supercapacitors’ Ed 
[15]. 
A study by Liu et al. investigated a DPM called PrBaMn2O6−7, which exhibited 
a cubic phase with a layered structure. This unique structure facilitated the diffusion 
of oxygen ions and increased the concentration of oxygen vacancies. As a result, the 
electrode made from this oxide showed exceptional capacitance in supercapacitors 
[5]. Similarly, in another study by Wang et al., they examined an A site cation-ordered 
double perovskite oxide called PrBaCo2O6−7. This oxide was utilized as an electrode 
material for anion intercalation supercapacitors. The perovskite structure of this oxide 
contained oxygen atoms situated in the Pr3+ planes. By removing some or even 
all of these oxygen atoms, numerous oxygen vacancies were created, signiﬁcantly 
enhancing the diffusivity of ions during the electrochemical reaction [16]. 
1.2 
Synthesis Approaches of DPMs 
The ﬂexibility of the double perovskite crystal structure gives it exceptional phys-
ical and chemical properties. However, there is no consensus on how the synthesis 
method, ion type and size, and resulting crystalline phases are interrelated. Regarding 
energy storage applications, the choice of synthesis method depends on the composi-
tion of the perovskite, as it affects the dielectric and conductive properties of DPMs 
[17]. The dielectric properties of materials, such as the orthorhombic Sr2CeSbO6 
(SCS), are determined by the interplay between cations with varying oxidation 
states and the oxygen content within the structure [18]. Ba2LaSbO6 is a notable 
example of a perovskite compound that exhibits both chemical stability and a high

Pseudocapacitance in Double Perovskite Material
139
dielectric constant, making it suitable for applications as a superconductor in High-
Temperature Superconducting (HTS) devices [19]. The discovery of superconduc-
tivity in copper-layered perovskites, which were annealed at high temperatures, was 
ﬁrst reported by Bednorz and Muller in 1986 [20]. The synthesis methods employed 
can impact the crystal’s superconductivity, as various factors such as structural 
defects, doping processes, dielectric properties, and ferroelectric characteristics may 
undergo changes that can inﬂuence the overall superconducting behavior [21]. 
1.2.1
Solid-State Reaction (SSR) Method 
The SSR method is commonly used to synthesize DPMs. It involves mixing and high-
temperature calcination of oxides or carbonate precursors to form polycrystalline 
bulk samples. For example, re-based DPM ceramics such as Sr2FeReO6 were synthe-
sized by the solid-state method [22]. Rietveld analysis of the XRD data conﬁrms a 
tetragonal I4/m crystal structure for the SFRO ceramic sample, with an average crys-
tallite size of approximately 50 nm. Superstructural reﬂections, including the (011) 
diffraction peak, indicate the presence of long-range Fe/Reordering at the B-site of 
the SFRO crystal. 
Although the solid-state reaction method can produce ﬁnal products with particles 
at the nanometer scale, controlling the morphology and crystallite size of the ﬁnal 
products becomes challenging, especially using high calcination temperatures [23]. 
In general, higher temperatures during the synthesis of perovskites result in the 
formation of a pure phase. However, this also leads to a decrease in surface area [24]. 
The ionic conductivity of perovskite oxides is affected by the calcination temperature, 
which in turn inﬂuences the densiﬁcation of atomic packaging and the presence of 
different crystal coordination phases (such as rhombohedral, tetragonal, and cubic) 
[21]. Polycrystalline La2CuMnO6 double perovskite was synthesized through SSR 
at 1523 K. X-ray diffraction analysis conﬁrmed orthorhombic symmetry using the 
P21/n space group. The La-O1 bond length was larger than La-O2, and Cu-O2 had 
a larger bond length than Cu-O1. Additionally, particle sizes have a known impact 
on the catalytic behavior in electrochemical reactions. Achieving a balance between 
speciﬁc surface areas, phase structure purity, and low-temperature calcination poses 
a signiﬁcant challenge, as these three factors are closely interconnected [25]. 
1.2.2
Combustion Method 
The combustion method is a highly attractive approach for synthesizing nanoma-
terials due to its self-propagating high-temperature synthesis process. It is favored 
for its ﬂexibility and cost-effectiveness [26]. La2CoMnO6 double perovskite was 
successfully synthesized using a modiﬁed combustion route. X-ray diffraction (XRD) 
analysis with Rietveld reﬁnement conﬁrms the formation of a monoclinic crystal

140
M. M. Omran et al.
structure with the space group P21/n. The Raman active modes of the MnO6 octa-
hedra correspond to the Jahn–Teller stretching mode (antisymmetric stretching vibra-
tions) and symmetric stretching vibrations, while the breathing mode represents the 
symmetric stretching vibrations. The electrochemical performance of La2CoMnO6 
as an electrode material for supercapacitors shows excellent cyclic stability, with 
84% capacitance retention after 500 cycles [27]. 
1.2.3
Hydrothermal Method 
The hydrothermal method is a prominent and well-established approach for synthe-
sizing DPMs on the nanoscale. It offers advantages like lower working temperatures 
compared to the melting point of the reactants, a variety of autoclave options, and 
adjustable reaction parameters. An innovative Y2MnCoO6 double perovskite was 
synthesized through the hydrothermal process for the ﬁrst time. In this study, we 
report on the structural, morphological, and energy-storage properties of Y2MnCoO6 
double perovskite synthesized through the hydrothermal process. An innovative 
aspect of our work is the electrochemical investigation of Y2MnCoO6, as this compo-
sition is being synthesized for the ﬁrst time using the hydrothermal technique. Powder 
X-ray diffraction analysis reveals the formation of a cubic crystal phase with Ia (206) 
symmetry, and the lattice parameters are determined to be a = b = c = 10.60 Å in 
the form of microspheres. The microsphere shape enhances charge movement at the 
nanoscale, providing a larger surface area for electrochemical reactions to occur. The 
speciﬁc capacitance value was calculated to be approximately 148.0 F/g at a current 
density of 0.5 A/g, with an impressive retention rate of approximately 85% after 
10,000 cycles [28]. Y2NiMnO6 nanowires double perovskite, as an active material 
for the positive electrode in electrochemical supercapacitors prepared by a simple 
and low-temperature hydrothermal, which offers the advantages of a large active 
surface area at the nanoscale, thereby enhancing the electrochemical properties of 
the material. Y2NiMnO6 nanowire-based electrodes exhibited higher speciﬁc capac-
itance and cyclability (>1800 cycles), along with a good retention rate of 70.17% 
[29]. 
1.2.4
Sol–Gel Method 
The sol–gel method ﬁnds extensive application in material science for producing solid 
materials from precursor molecules. This versatile approach enables the straightfor-
ward synthesis of various metal oxides, serving as active materials in diverse energy 
storage devices [30]. A sol–gel method was employed to prepare double perovskite 
Sr2CoMoO6 δ (DP-SCM), which exhibits a desirable rock salt structure with a 0-D 
arrangement. The presence of both Co and Mo elements in DP-SCM enhances its 
redox capability, leading to enhanced oxygen mobility. It has a high oxygen vacancy

Pseudocapacitance in Double Perovskite Material
141
content which enhances the oxygen anion diffusion rate (2.03 × 10−11 cm2/s). DP-
SCM demonstrates a remarkable capacitance of 747 F/g at 1 A/g accompanied by a 
notable rate capability of 56% up to 10 A/g [31]. 
La2B(II)MnO6 (where B = Cu, Co, Ni) was prepared as an electrode material 
using the sol–gel method and calcined at a moderate temperature [26]. The bonding 
force of the units B2+–O–Mn4+ was found to weaken in the order of Cu > Ni > Co, 
as evidenced by the displacement of the stretching vibration Mn–O towards lower 
frequencies. In the case of LaCuMn, it exhibited a larger particle size and speciﬁc 
surface area, which suggests a favorable inﬂuence on the capacitive properties of 
LaCuMn oxide, which reached 781.25 F/g. 
A novel electrode material for supercapacitor applications was developed based 
on a single-phase double perovskite oxide, Pr2CrMnO6. Structural analysis revealed 
a monoclinic structure with space group P21/n. The sample exhibited bond angle 
distortion in the form of octahedral tilt. At a current density of 2 A/g, the speciﬁc 
capacitance of the developed single-phase double perovskite oxide (Pr2CrMnO6) 
reached a noteworthy value of 177.4 F/g. This speciﬁc capacitance was found to be 
superior to that of Ni-Mn-based double perovskite oxides [32]. 
1.2.5
Other Methods 
A supercapacitor electrode material consisting of La2CoNiO6 inorganic nanoﬁbers 
was successfully synthesized using a polyvinylpyrrolidone/lanthanum nitrate-cobalt 
acetate-nickel acetate (PVP/LCN) precursor via electrostatic spinning. They found 
that the ﬁbers were connected through rhombohedral La2CoNiO6 nanoparticles 
resulting in a linear spatial network structure. The three-electrode and two-electrode 
systems demonstrated a respectable speciﬁc capacitance of 335 and 129.1 F/g, respec-
tively [33]. Enhancing the electrochemical performance of supercapacitor electrodes 
using the unique structures of double perovskite oxides remains a challenge. In this 
study, we developed hollow spherical porous La2CoMnO6 (HS-LCMO) materials 
prepared by impregnating carbon spheres as templates, followed by annealing to 
remove the template, as illustrated in Fig. 3. This method offers advantages such 
as low cost, simplicity, scalability, and improved electrochemical performance of 
La2CoMnO6. The electrochemical testing of HS-LCMO was compared to a reference 
sample (SG-LCMO) prepared through the sol–gel method. To broaden the application 
potential of supercapacitors, HS-LCMO and activated carbon (AC) were assembled 
into asymmetric supercapacitors, which showed a wide potential window of 2 V and 
achieved a high Ed. Furthermore, the supercapacitor devices maintained approxi-
mately 89.2% of the initial capacitance after 3000 cycles, indicating good cycling 
stability. This method offers the potential to simplify the synthesis of perovskite 
oxides and enhance the electrochemical performance of perovskite hollow spheres 
[34].

142
M. M. Omran et al.
Fig. 3 Preparation ﬂowchart of hollow spherical porous La2CoMnO6. Adapted with permission 
[34], Copyright (2020), Elsevier 
2 
Electrochemistry of DPMs 
DPMs are considered one of the cheapest electrochemically active materials thanks to 
their highly ordered crystal structure, high conductivity, and electrochemical stability, 
like most perovskite materials. This electrochemical activity made DPM good 
candidates for various electrochemical applications like supercapacitors, lithium-
ion batteries, and solar water splitting. In this section, the electrochemical activity of 
DPMs will be discussed and clariﬁed from the pseudocapacitance point of view; this 
section aims to understand the mechanism of charge storage based on thermodynamic 
and kinetic aspects. 
2.1 
Charge Storage Mechanism 
The highly ordered hierarchically structured DPM allows for the EDLC to occur, and 
the electrolytic anions (i.e., OH−) can easily diffuse into the internal crystal structure 
to be accumulated electrostatically on the internal crystal surface of DPM. However, 
the speciﬁc surface area of DPMs is not high enough. It is rare to ﬁnd DPM with

Pseudocapacitance in Double Perovskite Material
143
Fig. 4 a Demonstrates the probable charge storage mechanism in DPMs and b illustrates the 
different kinetics of different electrode material types 
a speciﬁc surface area exceeding a few tens or hundreds of m2/g, which leads to a 
low gravimetric EDLC in comparison to carbonaceous materials. Faradic current is 
the other form in which the charge can be stored in DPMs, which can be a result 
of several electrode/electrolyte chemical interactions. Transition metals in the DPM 
chemical structure are well known for their redox ability. 
Pseudocapacitance is the common behavior of DPMs, especially in redox-active 
electrolytes (i.e., Potassium Hydroxide) due to a large number of vacancies for 
oxygen intercalation and transition metals redox interactions alongside the EDLC 
behavior (Fig. 4). The presence of oxygen vacancies is well known with the dramatic 
enhancement of charge storage capacity; however, the high degree of lattice distor-
tion can lead to the cationic leaching effect, especially in aqueous electrolytes. 
Again, thanks to the mixed ionic structure of DPM, that enhances their electrochem-
ical stability and subsequently provide a wider stable potential widow. In general, 
perovskite materials suffer from low speciﬁc surface area and low EDLC contribu-
tion in the charge storage cycle; however, the cationic leaching effect in aqueous 
electrolytes enhances the capacity of perovskite material during the early cycling, 
which is known to most researchers as an activation process, in which the surface 
cations are leached in electrolyte and increase the surface distortion leading for a 
higher exposed surface to the electrolyte. In DPMs, the cationic leaching is quite 
controlled by the mixed ionic lattice structure, allowing for the activation process to 
be carried out without further destruction of the crystal structure. 
2.2 
Electrochemical Stability and Reversibility 
The electrochemical stability of DPMs can be the main reason for considering them 
as an upgrade of single perovskite materials that suffer from electrochemical insta-
bility due to cationic leaching. However, the electrochemical stability of DPMs will 
be discussed in this section from the thermodynamics point of view. The electrode

144
M. M. Omran et al.
material can be described as thermodynamically stable and reversible when the reac-
tions (faradic) that occur on the electrode surface or inside the electrode bulk are 
deﬁned as reversible redox reactions, which in this case, the redox reaction is running 
smoothly in the two reversed direction with the same kinetics and quantities. Ther-
modynamic stability could be achieved in simple reversible redox reaction couple, 
but it is rarely found as 100% reversible in complicated systems such as perovskite 
materials that involve several reactions with different dynamics at the same time. 
However, the more enhanced thermodynamic stability of the electrode material in an 
electrochemical system is highly desired, which practically means longer life cycle 
stability for the electrochemical system. 
Anuj Kumar Tomar et al. prepared Sr2CoMoO6−δ double perovskite electrode 
material which exhibited about 70 mV redox peak separation in KOH electrolyte 
at 10 mV/s scan rate, which can be considered a high degree of thermodynamic 
stability, which led to higher cycling stability for the fabricated device. The capaci-
tance retention started to increase from 100% to about 150% as a result of activation 
through the cationic surface distortion (mentioned in the previous section) during 
the ﬁrst 4,000 cycles and then exhibited a relatively high degree of electrochemical 
stability at about 150% of capacitance retention during the following 6,000 cycles 
[2]. 
The degree of thermodynamic reversibility of any redox reaction couple can 
be determined through the coulombic efﬁciency of the current combined in both 
oxidation and reduction reaction phases. However, in pseudocapacitive material, 
coulombic efﬁciency cannot express the thermodynamic stability and reversibility 
of the electrochemical system due to the EDLC current existence. The coulombic 
efﬁciency of the EDLC current is affected by the IR drop and the cumulative resis-
tance in the electrochemical system, which means the redox reaction couple may 
exhibit a high degree of thermodynamic reversibility, but the overall coulombic efﬁ-
ciency is affected by the EDLC cumulative resistance. So, high coulombic efﬁciency 
means a high degree of thermodynamic reversibility, but low coulombic efﬁciency 
does not necessarily mean low electrochemical stability of the redox reaction couple 
in pseudocapacitive material like DPMs. The degree of thermodynamic reversibility 
of the redox couple in pseudocapacitive material can be determined either by the 
redox couple peak separation value, which should not exceed 100 mV at a low scan 
rate for an acceptable degree of reversibility or by narrowing the potential window 
so the redox reaction couple is completed with the minimum of EDLC current. 
2.3 
Electrochemical Kinetics 
In any electrochemical charge storage system that involves a redox reaction, the 
reaction kinetics is a critical factor that affects the operation characteristics of that 
system. For instance, one of the major reasons why supercapacitors got intensively 
investigated during the past few decades is to enhance the low speciﬁc power of 
batteries, which leads the researchers to combine the characteristics of both battery

Pseudocapacitance in Double Perovskite Material
145
(high Ed) and conventional capacitors (high Pd). In a conventional capacitor, there 
are no chemical reactions, and the only factor that inhibits the ﬂow of current is 
the material charge transfer resistance, and as the used material in conventional 
capacitors is metals, the internal resistance is very limited, and the current can ﬂow 
through the connections freely resulting a high power. Batteries are usually based 
on reversible electrochemical systems; a redox reaction couple is involved, and the 
current ﬂow is limited by the electrochemical reaction rate, which is controlled by 
the chemical reaction kinetics. The faster the kinetic reaction is achieved, the higher 
Pd can be afforded. EDLC supercapacitors involve no redox reaction, it is only the 
charge accumulation on the electrode surface, so the speciﬁc power of the EDLC-
based charge storage system is controlled only by the ionic mobility of the electrolyte 
and the electrical resistance of the electrode material. Single perovskite and DPMs as 
pseudocapacitive materials have their power ability limited by both redox reactions’ 
kinetics and EDLC cumulative resistance, which ﬁnally determine whether the DPMs 
have high Pd or not. 
For pseudocapacitive materials, it is very complicated to study their reaction 
kinetics, especially when several types of interactions are involved; however, an 
easy way to have an idea about the kinetics of the electrode material is to study 
its capacitive performance at different scan rates of cyclic voltammetry (CV) and 
current density of galvanic charge and discharge (GCD) between the extremely high 
and extremely low values. For instance, in Fig. 4b, the CV technique distinguishes the 
capacitive performance of the kinetics-controlled material and resistance-controlled 
material. It is quite obvious that in kinetic-controlled materials such as battery-like 
materials, the quantity of stored charge via redox reactions is increased as much as 
the reaction time has been prolonged in slow scan rates and vice versa. 
In resistance-controlled materials such as EDLC materials, the capacitive perfor-
mance is affected only by the system resistance, which is constant for the single 
system, so that the drop in the capacitive performance is almost linear with the scan 
rate increasing (i.e., faster charge storage and higher currents). In pseudocapaci-
tive materials like DPMs which combine both the kinetic-controlled and resistance-
controlled processes, the capacitive performance in CV became in a case between 
kinetic-controlled and resistance-controlled behaviors and the faster reaction kinetics 
is achieved for the faradic current in pseudocapacitive material, the more the capaci-
tive performance to be resistance-controlled like, which means a higher Pd could be 
afforded without a dramatic Ed drop. 
2.4 
Cation Leaching Assessing 
Cationic leaching is a common effect in perovskite materials with the structure of 
ABO3 due to its ionic chemical bonding nature. Thus the cations in perovskite mate-
rials tend to be leached especially in aqueous alkaline electrolytes, causing surface 
distortion in the early stage and crystalline dissociation in the late stage. The positive 
side of the cation leaching of perovskite materials is to increase the reactive surface

146
M. M. Omran et al.
area, especially because perovskite materials have a very limited speciﬁc surface area, 
and by increasing the reactive surface area, the capacitive activity gets increased 
as some kind of activation. However, with the continued cation leaching during 
charging and discharging cycling, the perovskite material starts to get deactivated 
due to destroying the perovskite internal crystal structure. 
DPMs are considered to be ionic-covalent mixed chemical bonding structures or 
partially covalent materials due to σ (B-O) bond resistance with σ (B'-O) bond, which 
prevents the continued leaching of the DPM crystal structure. Another mechanism 
of cation leaching assessment in DPMs was illustrated by Yagi et al. when they 
introduced the late transition metal (Cu) as a high valance metal to the earth alkali 
metal (Ca) to increase the covalency of the crystal structure and assessed the cation 
leaching effectively [35]. Cation leaching at a very fast rate can be detected using 
techniques like XRD and XPS, but it is quite difﬁcult to detect cation leaching at 
slow leaching rates relying on the above-mentioned techniques, especially for DPMs 
that afford the cation leaching assessment. However, electrochemical techniques 
could indicate the leaching rate (the total irreversible electrochemical reaction, to be 
more speciﬁc) by comparing the anodic and cathodic currents at a speciﬁed narrow 
potential window. This technique could be effective for stable potential window 
determination to allow for longer lifetime stability. 
3 
DPMs as Pseudocapacitive Electrodes 
3.1 
Double Perovskite Material as Electrode Materials 
Several research studies have investigated perovskite oxides as a class of metal oxides 
because of their high conductivities and rich oxygen vacancies [16]. Due to their 
unique structures, in which ions are arranged at either the A-site or B-site, DPMs have 
also piqued the attention of numerous researchers. Generally, Inside the perovskite 
lattice, cations are typically disorganized and uniformly scattered. However, in other 
instances, the cations could be arranged in the perovskite lattice as AA'B2O6 or A2 
BB'O6, which could improve the material’s physical and chemical properties [1]. For 
instance, when a simple cubic perovskite with randomly occupied A-sites transfers 
into a layered crystal structure, the oxygen ion diffusivity increases by orders of 
magnitude [16]. This section provides a thorough discussion of the numerous DPMs 
that have been identiﬁed as excellent high-rate pseudocapacitive electrode materials. 
3.1.1
A-Site Substitution in Double Perovskite 
Generally, the B-site transition metal element strongly inﬂuences the SC performance 
of perovskite oxides. The redox process does not directly affect the A-site element,

Pseudocapacitance in Double Perovskite Material
147
such as lanthanide and alkaline earth. However, the electronic structure and coordi-
nation may be impacted by the A-site cation. When a low-valence cation, such as Sr2+ 
or Ca2+, partially replaces the A-site, additional oxygen vacancies are created, and 
a signiﬁcant portion of the transition-metal ions in the B-site is shifted into unstable 
oxidation states (Bm+/B(m+1) + redox pair). As a result, electronic conductivity is 
increased, and electrochemical performance is enhanced [1, 36]. 
Liu et al. prepared layered double perovskite structure-based manganite with an 
equimolar ratio of Pr and Ba elements in the A-site of the structure of PrBaMn2O6–δ 
(r-PBM) using the sol–gel method [5]. The electrochemical performance of the r-
PBM structure was investigated in a 3-electrode system using Pt and Hg/HgO as 
counter and reference electrodes in the presence of 6 M KOH. It revealed a speciﬁc 
capacitance (Cs) value of about 1034.8 F/g at 1 A/g and 791 F/g at 10 A/g with a 
capacitance retention of about 76.5%, conﬁrming the high-rate capability. Further-
more, it reveals cyclic stability with capacitance retention of about 92.8% after 5000 
charge/discharge cycles. Wang et al. replaced the double perovskite manganite struc-
ture with a double perovskite cobaltite structure using the same ratio of the Pr and 
Ba elements in the A-site. 
Using the sol–gel approach, they prepared PrBaCo2O5+δ (PBCO) double 
perovskite structure [16]. The electrochemical behavior of the PBCO was inves-
tigated in a 3-electrode system through CV, GCD, and cyclic stability. The electrode 
revealed a high speciﬁc capacity (C) value of about 301.6 C/g at 1 A/g, as well 
as high cyclic stability with capacity retention of about 93.3% after 2000 charge/ 
discharge cycles. They mentioned that the PBCO has outstanding electrochemical 
behavior due to the excess oxygen vacancies that result from the partial or total 
removal of oxygen atoms from the Pr3+, which improves the diffusion of oxygen 
ions and enables the formation of ion channels [37]. Zhong et al. tried to improve 
the electrochemical behavior of the PrBaCo2O5+δ through partial substitution of the 
Co ion in the B site with the Ni ion by using the sol–gel method [38]. The fabricated 
electrode from the Ni-doped PrBaCo2O5+δ with a doping ratio of 0.4 (PBCN04) 
revealed outstanding electrochemical characteristics with a C value of about 513.1 
C/g at 1 A/g. The assembled device of structure PBCN04//AC includes the positive 
electrode of PBCN04 and negative electrode of AC, showed an Ed of about 48.3 Wh/ 
kg at a Pd of 20,011.8 W/kg; the CV, GCD, and Ragone plots of the device are shown 
in Fig. 5 [38].
3.1.2
B-Site Substitution in Double Perovskite 
Incorporating oxygen ions into the vacancies necessitates a corresponding change 
in the oxidation state of the B cation since the charge storage mechanism involves 
electrochemical processes. Another helpful technique to improve electrochemical 
performance is B-site doping, which can create oxygen vacancies and increase the 
stability of the crystal structure [1, 39]. 
The barium-based DPMs are the best category of double perovskite materials 
that show high pseudocapacitive performance. Xu et al. synthesized a barium-based

148
M. M. Omran et al.
Fig. 5 a CV curves of PBCN04//AC, b GCD curves of PBCN04//AC at different current densities, 
c Ragone plots of PBCN04//AC. Adapted with permission [38], Copyright (2021), Elsevier
double perovskite structure using Bi, Sc, and Co elements in the B-site with ratios 
of 0.1:0.2:1.7 to obtain a B-site cation-ordered structure with a composition of 
Ba2Bi0.1Sc0.2Co1.7O6−δ by the sol–gel method [40]. The electrochemical characteris-
tics of the fabricated electrode from the material were evaluated by measuring the CV 
and GCD; see Fig. 6. It exhibited an outstanding value of Cs of about 1050 F/g at 1 A/ 
g with high cyclic stability and capacity retention of about 74.2% after 3000 charge 
and discharge cycles. The fabricated device of structure Ba2Bi0.1Sc0.2Co1.7O6−δ//AC 
that includes a positive electrode of Ba2Bi0.1Sc0.2Co1.7O6−δ and negative electrode 
of AC showed an Ed of about 70 Wh/kg at a Pd of 787 W/kg, as well as cycling 
stability of about 70% retention after 2000 charge/discharge cycles. Kumar A. and 
A. Kumar also synthesized a barium-based double perovskite structure by replacing 
the Bi and Sc elements in the B-site with Fe elements to obtain a perovskite structure 
with a composition of Ba2FeCoO6−δ [41]. While the fabricated electrode from the 
Ba2FeCoO6−δ revealed a Cs value of about 820 F/g at 3 A/g which is lower than that 
of the Ba2Bi0.1Sc0.2Co1.7O6−δ in the previous study [40].
Multiple research studies have been carried out on the strontium-based double 
perovskite. Tomar et al. prepared strontium-based double perovskite with a compo-
sition of Sr2CoMoO6−δ using the sol–gel method [31]. This structure reveals amazing 
electrochemical behavior with a Cs of 474 F/g at 1 A/g indicating high capacitive 
performance. Furthermore, the electrode revealed fast kinetics (ΔEP ≈ 0.013 V@ 
1 mV/s) of charge storage, conﬁrming that there is no phase transition. Figure 7 exhib-
ited the CV and GCD of the fabricated electrode. Moreover, a symmetric device was

Pseudocapacitance in Double Perovskite Material
149
Fig. 6 a CV curves of Ba2Bi0.1Sc0.2Co1.7O6−δ at different scan rates. b GCD curves at various 
current densities. c Cycling performance at 1 A g–1. d CV curves of Ba2Bi0.1Sc0.2Co1.7O6−δ// 
AC. e GCD curves at different current densities of Ba2Bi0.1Sc0.2Co1.7O6−δ, and  f Cycling stability 
of Ba2Bi0.1Sc0.2Co1.7O6−δ//AC at a current of 1 A/g. Adapted with permission [40], Copyright 
(2018), American Chemical Society
fabricated of Sr2CoMoO6−δ and showed a high Ed value of 64 Wh/kg at Pd of 855 
W/kg. Figure 7 shows the Ragone plot and cyclic stability of the device.
Liu et al. also synthesized strontium-based double perovskite with partial substi-
tution of molybdenum (Mo) with nickel in the B-site to obtain a perovskite structure 
with a composition of Sr2CoMo1−xNixO6−δ to improve the electrochemical behavior 
of the Sr2CoMoO6−δ double perovskite through oxygen anion-intercalation and 
faradaic surface redox pseudocapacitance [42]. The Sr2CoMo1−xNixO6−δ electrode 
material has been examined in a 3-electrode system to evaluate their electrochemical 
behavior; it reveals a high Cs of 930 F/g which is greater than that of the Sr2CoMoO6−δ 
in the previous study. While replacing the Mo metal in the Sr2CoMoO6−δ by Fe metal 
to obtain Sr2FeCoO6−δ double perovskite led to decreasing the Cs value to about 263 
F/g at 1 A/g, this study was performed by Vats et al. [43]. This means that the partial 
substitution of Mo and Ni elements with Co element in the B-site gives outstanding 
electrochemical performance compared to the partial substitution with Fe element 
alone. 
Several research studies have been performed on the lanthanum-based DPMs by 
varying the B-site element by using different transition metals to improve its elec-
trochemical performance. Bavio et al. prepared La2B(II)MnO6 double perovskite 
using the B-site elements as Cu, Ni, and Co elements by the sol–gel method [26]. 
All prepared compositions were investigated in 3-electrode systems to evaluate their 
electrochemical performance; it was found that the La2CuMnO6 showed the highest 
Cs value, which was 781.25 F/g compared to the La2NiMnO6 and La2CoMnO6 
which have Cs values of about 394.45 and 347.22 F/g, respectively. While the 
electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) conﬁrms that all compositions have

150
M. M. Omran et al.
Fig. 7 a CV curves of Sr2CoMoO6−δ, b GCD curves at different current densities, c Ragone plots 
of symmetric device, d cyclic stability of the device. Adapted with permission [31], Copyright 
(2020), American Chemical Society
good electrical conductivity and ion diffusion, which promotes perovskites as elec-
trode materials for supercapacitors. Another lanthanum-based DPM of composition 
La2ZnMnO6 has been synthesized hydrothermally by Singh et al. [44], The electro-
chemical performance of the fabricated electrode was better than the La2NiMnO6 
and La2CoMnO6 perovskite structures, but it was lower than the La2CuMnO6 since 
it has a Cs value of 515.5 F/g at 1 A/g, in addition to good cycling stability of about 
86% retention after 1000 charge/discharge cycles. 
Singh et al. also replaced the Zn element with the Ni element in the La2ZnMnO6 
to obtain the DPM of the La2NiMnO6 composition. The La2NiMnO6 electrode 
revealed a Cs value of 478.2 5 F/g at 2 mV/s. Using the sol–gel method, Meng et al. 
prepared porous hollow spheres of lanthanum-based double perovskite structures of 
La2CoMnO6 composition [34]. The fabricated electrode showed a Cs value of 376 
F/g at 1 A/g. Furthermore, a supercapacitor device of the structure La2CoMnO6/ 
/Ac was assembled using the positive electrode of La2CoMnO6 and the negative 
electrode of AC. The device exhibited an Ed of 65.8 Wh/kg at 1000 W/kg and good 
cycling stability of about 89.2% retention after 3000 charge/discharge cycles. 
A research study has been performed on gadolinium-based DPMs to obtain 
promising materials for supercapacitor applications. Amit Kumar et al. prepared

Pseudocapacitance in Double Perovskite Material
151
Gd2NiMnO6 DPM using the wet chemical method. The pseudocapacitance perfor-
mance of the as-prepared materials has been evaluated using a 3-electrode system; 
it revealed a Cs value of about 400.46 F/g at 1 A/g which is better than the Cs values 
of La2NiMnO6 [44] and La2CoMnO6 [34], conﬁrming the role of the Gd element in 
enhancing the electrochemical performance of the DPMs for energy storage systems. 
Another category of DPMs based on praseodymium has been studied as an active 
electrode material for supercapacitors. Rudra et al. prepared the Pr2ZnMnO6 double 
perovskite using a solid-state reaction approach [45]. It revealed the intercalated 
pseudocapacitive behavior with a Cs value of 69.14 F/g at 2 A/g when investigated 
in a 3-electrode system to evaluate their electrochemical performance. Muddelwar 
et al. replaced the Zn element with the Cr element in the Pr2ZnMnO6 structure by 
preparing the Pr2CrMnO6 DPM using the sol–gel method [32]. It revealed a Cs 
value of 177.4 F/g at 2 A/g, which is better than the Cs value of the Pr2ZnMnO6 
structure, conﬁrming the role of the Cr element in improving the pseudocapacitance 
performance of the praseodymium-based double perovskite. 
Also, some research studies have been performed on the yttrium-based DPMs 
to improve the pseudocapacitance performance of the double perovskite materials. 
Mansoorie et al. synthesized the Y2CuMnO6 double perovskite using the wet chem-
ical method [46]. The fabricated electrode revealed a Cs value of 15.6 F/g at 0.2 A/g 
when investigated in a 3-electrode system to evaluate their electrochemical perfor-
mance. While the nanowires Y2NiMnO6 DPM that have been prepared hydrother-
mally by Alam et al. exhibited a Cs value of 77.76 F/g at 30 mA/g which is greater 
than that of the Y2CuMnO6 [29]. Devi et al. recently prepared the microsphere-like 
structure of Y2MnCoO6 double perovskite using hydrothermal [28]. By investigating 
the electrochemical performance of the as-prepared double perovskite structure in a 
3-electrode system, it revealed a Cs value of about 148 F/g at 0.5 A/g, in addition 
to the high cycling stability of about 856% retention after 10,000 charge/discharge 
cycles. This result means that the electrochemical performance of the Y2MnCoO6 
double perovskite is better than that of Y2CuMnO6 and Y2NiMnO6. 
3.2 
Challenges and Future Perspectives 
The scientiﬁc community has been focusing on designing novel materials to help with 
the construction of cutting-edge electrode systems for effective energy harvesting 
and storage. Investigating these new materials is crucial for improving performance 
metrics, including power conversion efﬁciency, speciﬁc capacity, cycle life, and 
energy/power densities. The multidimensional (0D, 1D, 2D, and 3D) perovskites are 
a subset of these materials that have demonstrated signiﬁcant potential for energy 
storage and harvesting devices [3]. The perovskites have a wide range of uses, as seen 
by the quick rise in articles published between 1980 and 2002. Even with doping A, 
B, or A and B sites, the rhombohedral, orthorhombic, and cubic phases of perovskites 
have been the most widely reported structures [21]. However, the currently available 
reports are insufﬁcient for commercial applications and cannot be compared to other

152
M. M. Omran et al.
supercapacitors that use well-known electrode materials. These materials’ stability 
and toxicity are additional barriers to their usage in a variety of applications [47]. 
Perovskite materials have been used in energy devices since 2003; there hasn’t 
been much research on their utilization in this ﬁeld due to their use as electrocatalysts 
mostly focused on the ORR, OER, and HER reactions [21]. Additionally, the inap-
propriate performance of these materials is also caused by improper optimization 
of their properties. Therefore, the improvement and optimization of the perovskite 
materials’ properties could be achieved by engineering their morphology and crystal 
structure as well as by doping new elements in the A and B sites, which results in 
enhancing their electrochemical behavior. Perovskites can exhibit a wide range of 
electrical, electronic, optical, and chemical properties because of the variety of their 
structure. Since 90% of the elements in the periodic table can ﬁt into their crystal 
lattices, their chemical and physical properties can also be modiﬁed by doping or 
replacing their anions or cations with foreign metal ions of the same valence. Further-
more, their morphology could be tuned by changing the size of the doped ions, for 
instance, to create a 3D perovskite material, a small-size cation on the A-site can 
simply enter inside the BX6 octahedra. In contrast, when a large-size cation is used 
on the A-site, 2D, 1D, or 0D structures frequently develop [2, 3]. 
In comparison to single perovskites, double perovskite structures are superior 
because they exhibit more oxygen vacancies; however, the doping in these mate-
rials may alter the perovskite structure, which occasionally results in subpar perfor-
mance. Another obstacle to understanding the charge storage mechanisms is the 
shortage of theoretical studies about the structure and storage characteristics of 
various perovskite materials. To improve the electrochemical performance of the 
perovskite materials for the forthcoming applications, there is still much work to 
be done. The discovery of novel perovskite materials is the ﬁrst and most crucial 
one [47, 48]. According to research studies, the supercapacitor behavior could be 
inﬂuenced by tuning the morphology and the particle size of the electrode materials; 
they could reveal rich active sites, which improve the charging kinetics and enhance 
supercapacitor performances. However, aggregation is the main problem that would 
decrease the active surface area. 
There are numerous available synthesis techniques for the development of 
perovskite materials, but they are all currently poorly investigated and difﬁcult to 
replicate. Therefore, it’s critical to customize the synthesis techniques and ensure that 
the selected approach is scalable, repeatable, and economical for use at the commer-
cial level as well as to achieve the proper design that preserves stability, structural 
coordination, and material neutrality. Despite these challenges, perovskite materials 
have several beneﬁts, including good conductivity, low cost, and simple preparation. 
If the aforementioned problems can be solved, perovskite will be a promising and 
cutting-edge material for storage applications [21, 48].

Pseudocapacitance in Double Perovskite Material
153
4 
Conclusions 
DPMs are promising candidates for high energy density supercapacitor applica-
tions due to their pseudocapacitive behavior. The discussed variety of charge storage 
mechanisms allows for high charge/anion accumulation over the DPM, which offers 
longer discharge time at high current densities with suppressing the fast potential 
drop. The mixed B-site cations of highly ordered DPMs could enhance the cation-
leaching assessment, which is increased the stability of DPMs. Several synthesis 
methodologies have been employed to obtain DPMs, which allowed for a more 
controlled material designing process. Several research investigations have demon-
strated promising results regarding the improved stability and reaction kinetics of 
DPMs. Finally, the research area of employing DPMs as pseudocapacitive materials 
has to be more deeply investigated as it observes very promising results for future 
ultra-energy supercapacitors. 
References 
1. Y. Cao, J. Liang, X. Li, L. Yue, Q. Liu, S. Lu, A.M. Asiri, J. Hu, Y. Luo, X. Sun, Recent 
advances in perovskite oxides as electrode materials for supercapacitors. Chem. Commun. 57, 
2343–2355 (2021) 
2. A.K. Tomar, A. Joshi, G. Singh, R.K. Sharma, Perovskite oxides as supercapacitive electrode: 
properties, design and recent advances. Coord. Chem. Rev. 431, 213680 (2021) 
3. P. Goel, S. Sundriyal, V. Shrivastav, S. Mishra, D.P. Dubal, K.H. Kim, A. Deep, Perovskite 
materials as superior and powerful platforms for energy conversion and storage applications. 
Nano Energy 80, 105552 (2021) 
4. C. Sun, J.A. Alonso, J. Bian, C.W. Sun, J.J. Bian, J.A. Alonso, Recent advances in perovskite-
type oxides for energy conversion and storage applications. Adv. Energy Mater. 11 (2021) 
5. Y. Liu, Z. Wang, J.P.M. Veder, Z. Xu, Y. Zhong, W. Zhou, M.O. Tade, S. Wang, Z. Shao, 
Highly defective layered double perovskite oxide for efﬁcient energy storage via reversible 
pseudocapacitive oxygen-anion intercalation. Adv. Energy Mater. 8, 1702604 (2018) 
6. C.J. Bartel, C. Sutton, B.R. Goldsmith, R. Ouyang, C.B. Musgrave, L.M. Ghiringhelli, M. 
Schefﬂer, New tolerance factor to predict the stability of perovskite oxides and halides. Sci. 
Adv. 5 (2019) 
7. N. Setter, L.E. Cross, The contribution of structural disorder to diffuse phase transitions in 
ferroelectrics. J. Mater. Sci. 15, 2478–2482 (1980) 
8. X. Xu, Y. Zhong, Z. Shao, Double perovskites in catalysis, electrocatalysis, and 
photo(electro)catalysis. Trends Chem. 1, 410–424 (2019) 
9. E.G. Steward, H.P. Rooksby, IUCr Pseudo-cubic alkaline-earth tungstates and molybdates of 
the R3MX6 type. urn:issn:0365-110X 4, 503–507 (1951) 
10. Q. Tang, X. Zhu, Half-metallic double perovskite oxides: recent developments and future 
perspectives. J. Mater. Chem. C 10, 15301–15338 (2022) 
11. H. Arandiyan, S.S. Mofarah, C.C. Sorrell, E. Doustkhah, B. Sajjadi, D. Hao, Y. Wang, H. 
Sun, B.J. Ni, M. Rezaei et al., Defect engineering of oxide perovskites for catalysis and energy 
storage: synthesis of chemistry and materials science. Chem. Soc. Rev. 50, 10116–10211 (2021) 
12. T. Sato, S. Takagi, S. Deledda, B.C. Hauback, S.I. Orimo, Extending the applicability of the 
Goldschmidt tolerance factor to arbitrary ionic compounds. Sci. Rep. 6, 1–10 (2016) 
13. S. Vasala, M. Karppinen, A2B'B''O6 perovskites: a review. Prog. Solid State Chem. 43, 1–36 
(2015)

154
M. M. Omran et al.
14. A. Muñoz, J.A. Alonso, M.T. Casais, M.J. Martínez-Lope, M.T. Fernández-Díaz, Crystal 
and magnetic structure of the complex oxides Sr2MnMoO6, Sr2MnWO6and Ca2MnWO6: 
a neutron diffraction study. J. Phys. Condens. Matter 14, 8817 (2002) 
15. Y. Liu, S.P. Jiang, Z. Shao, Intercalation pseudocapacitance in electrochemical energy storage: 
recent advances in fundamental understanding and materials development. Mater. Today Adv. 
7, 100072 (2020) 
16. Z. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Chen, L. Yang, Y. Wang, M. Wei, A-site cation-ordered double perovskite 
PrBaCo2O5+δ oxide as an anion-inserted pseudocapacitor electrode with outstanding stability. 
J. Alloys Compd. 810, 151830 (2019) 
17. L. Zeng, L. Cui, C. Wang, W. Guo, C. Gong, In-situ modiﬁed the surface of Pt-doped perovskite 
catalyst for soot oxidation. J. Hazard. Mater. 383, 121210 (2020) 
18. C. Bharti, T.P. Sinha, Dielectric properties of rare earth double perovskite oxide Sr2CeSbO 6. 
Solid State Sci. 12, 498–502 (2010) 
19. R. Jose, J. Konopka, X. Yang, A. Konopka, M. Ishikawa, J. Koshy, Crystal structure and 
dielectric properties of a new complex perovskite oxide Ba2LaSbO6. Appl. Phys. A Mater. 
Sci. Process. 79, 2041–2047 (2004) 
20. J.G. Bednor, K.A. Muller, Possible high T superconductivity in the Ba-La-Cu-O system. Z. 
Phys. B Condens. Matter 64, 189–193 (1986) 
21. L.C.C.B. Oliveira, R. Venâncio, P.V.F. de Azevedo, C.G. Anchieta, T.C.M. Nepel, C.B. Rodella, 
H. Zanin, G. Doubek, Reviewing perovskite oxide sites inﬂuence on electrocatalytic reactions 
for high energy density devices. J. Energy Chem. 81, 1–19 (2023) 
22. H. Kato, T. Okuda, Y. Okimoto, Y. Tomioka, K. Oikawa, T. Kamiyama, Y. Tokura, Structural 
and electronic properties of the ordered double perovskites A2MReO6 (A = Sr, Ca; M = Mg, 
Sc, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Zn). Phys. Rev. B Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 69 (2004) 
23. Q. Tang, X. Zhu, Half-metallic double perovskite oxides: recent developments and future 
perspectives. J. Mater. Chem. C (2022) 
24. C. Li, Z. Yu, H. Liu, K. Chen, High surface area LaMnO3 nanoparticles enhancing electro-
chemical catalytic activity for rechargeable lithium-air batteries. J. Phys. Chem. Solids 113, 
151–156 (2018) 
25. D. Liu, M. Chen, X. Du, H. Ai, K. Ho Lo, S. Wang, S. Chen, G. Xing, X. Wang, H. Pan 
et al., Development of electrocatalysts for efﬁcient nitrogen reduction reaction under ambient 
conditions. Adv. Funct. Mater. 31, 2008983 (2021) 
26. M.A. Bavio, J.E. Tasca, G.G. Acosta, M.F. Ponce, R.O. Fuentes, A. Visintin, Study of double 
perovskite La2B(II)MnO6 (B: Ni Co, Cu) as electrode materials for energy storage. J. Solid 
State Electrochem. 24, 699–710 (2020) 
27. A. Shereef, P.A. Aleena, J. Kunjumon, A.K. Jose, S.A. Thomas, M. Tomy, T.S. Xavier, S. 
Hussain, D. Sajan, Third-order nonlinear optical properties and electrochemical performance 
of La2CoMnO6 double perovskite. Mater. Sci. Eng. B 289, 116262 (2023) 
28. M. Devi, D. Nagpal, A. Vasishth, A. Kumar, A. Kumar, Structural and energy storage prop-
erties of hydrothermally synthesized Y2MnCoO6 double perovskite. Phys. Status Solidi 220, 
2200444 (2023) 
29. M. Alam, K. Karmakar, M. Pal, K. Mandal, Electrochemical supercapacitor based on double 
perovskite Y2NiMnO6 nanowires. RSC Adv. 6, 114722–114726 (2016) 
30. M.B. Hanif, S. Rauf, M. Motola, Z.U.D. Babar, C.J. Li, C.X. Li, Recent progress of perovskite-
based electrolyte materials for solid oxide fuel cells and performance optimizing strategies for 
energy storage applications. Mater. Res. Bull. 146, 111612 (2022) 
31. A.K. Tomar, A. Joshi, S. Atri, G. Singh, R.K. Sharma, Zero-dimensional ordered Sr2CoMoO6-
δ double perovskite as high-rate anion intercalation pseudocapacitance. ACS Appl. Mater. 
Interfaces 12, 15128–15137 (2020) 
32. R.K. Muddelwar, J. Pani, A.B. Lad, K.U. Kumar, V.M. Gaikwad, H. Borkar, Pr2CrMnO6 
double perovskite as new electrode material for electrochemical energy storage. Mater. Chem. 
Phys. 302, 127726 (2023) 
33. Y.-B. Wu, B. Jun, W. Bin-Bin, Preparation and supercapacitor properties of double-perovskite 
La2CoNiO6 inorganic nanoﬁbers. Acta Phys. Chim. Sin. 31, 315–321 (2015)

Pseudocapacitance in Double Perovskite Material
155
34. Z. Meng, J. Xu, P. Yu, X. Hu, Y. Wu, Q. Zhang, Y. Li, L. Qiao, Y. Zeng, H. Tian, 
Double perovskite La2CoMnO6 hollow spheres prepared by template impregnation for 
high-performance supercapacitors. Chem. Eng. J. 400, 125966 (2020) 
35. S. Yagi, I. Yamada, H. Tsukasaki, A. Seno, M. Murakami, H. Fujii, H. Chen, N. Umezawa, 
H. Abe, N. Nishiyama et al., Covalency-reinforced oxygen evolution reaction catalyst. Nat. 
Commun. 6 (2015) 
36. J.T. Mefford, X. Rong, A.M. Abakumov, W.G. Hardin, S. Dai, A.M. Kolpak, K.P. John-
ston, K.J. Stevenson, Water electrolysis on La1−xSrxCoO3−δ perovskite electrocatalysts. 
Nat. Commun. 7, 1–11 (2016) 
37. G. Kim, S. Wang, A.J. Jacobson, L. Reimus, P. Brodersen, C.A. Mims, Rapid oxygen ion 
diffusion and surface exchange kinetics in PrBaCo2O5+x with a perovskite related structure 
and ordered A cations. J. Mater. Chem. 17, 2500–2505 (2007) 
38. S. Zhong, Y. Chen, L. Yang, Y. Liu, X. Chen, C. Wang, Ni-doped perovskite PrBaCo2O5+δ as 
supercapacitor electrode with enhanced electrochemical performance. Mater. Lett. 297, 130013 
(2021) 
39. A. Aguadero, D. Pérez-Coll, J.A. Alonso, S.J. Skinner, J. Kilner, A new family of mo-doped 
school 3-delta; Perovskites for application in reversible solid-state electrochemical cells. Chem. 
Mater. 24, 2655–2663 (2012) 
40. Z. Xu, Y. Liu, W. Zhou, M.O. Tade, Z. Shao, B-site cation-ordered double-perovskite oxide 
as an outstanding electrode material for supercapacitive energy storage based on the anion 
intercalation mechanism. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 10, 9415–9423 (2018) 
41. A. Kumar, A. Kumar, Electrochemical behavior of oxygen-deﬁcient double perovskite, 
Ba2FeCoO6-δ, synthesized by facile wet chemical process. Ceram. Int. 45, 14105–14110 
(2019) 
42. Y. Liu, Z. Wang, Y. Zhong, X. Xu, J.P.M. Veder, M.R. Rowles, M. Saunders, R. Ran, Z. 
Shao, Activation-free supercapacitor electrode based on surface-modiﬁed Sr2CoMo1-xNixO6-
δ perovskite. Chem. Eng. J. 390, 124645 (2020) 
43. A.K. Vats, N. Sangwan, J. Singh, A. Kumar, A. Kumar, Anion intercalation pseudocapacitance 
performance of oxygen-deﬁcient double perovskite prepared via facile wet chemical route. 
Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process. 138, 106300 (2022) 
44. J. Singh, A. Kumar, U.K. Gautam, A. Kumar, Microstructure and electrochemical performance 
of La2ZnMnO6 nanoﬂakes synthesized by facile hydrothermal route. Appl. Phys. A Mater. Sci. 
Process. 126, 1–9 (2020) 
45. M. Rudra, H.S. Tripathi, A. Dutta, T.P. Sinha, Existence of nearest-neighbor and variable range 
hopping in Pr2ZnMnO6 oxygen-intercalated pseudocapacitor electrode. Mater. Chem. Phys. 
258, 123907 (2021) 
46. F.N. Mansoorie, J. Singh, A. Kumar, Wet chemical synthesis and electrochemical performance 
of novel double perovskite Y2CuMnO6 nanocrystallites. Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process. 107, 
104826 (2020) 
47. M. Mohan, N.P. Shetti, T.M. Aminabhavi, Perovskites: a new generation electrode materials 
for storage applications. J. Power. Sources 574, 233166 (2023) 
48. G.R. Monama, K.E. Ramohlola, E.I. Iwuoha, K.D. Modibane, Progress on perovskite materials 
for energy application. Results Chem. 4, 100321 (2022)

Conducting Polymers 
for Pseudocapacitors 
Quoc Bao Le, Rudolf Kiefer, Phuong Nguyen Xuan Vo, 
Natalia E. Kazantseva, and Petr Saha 
Abstract The energy crisis has increased the need for energy storage materials 
with high power and energy density. To solve the problem, scientists have inves-
tigated the possibilities of pseudocapacitive materials, which may overcome the 
capacitive constraints of electrical double-layer capacitors and the mass transfer 
limitations of batteries, making them better energy storage applications. Conducting 
polymers, which offer unique qualities such as low cost, good electrochemical prop-
erties, and high conductivity, have garnered substantial interest in energy storage 
devices. Because of their high potential to increase working performance, conducting 
polymers have been studied in numerous energy storage devices such as superca-
pacitors, batteries, and fuel cells, making them intriguing alternative materials. This 
chapter comprehensively overviews conducting polymers’ contributions to energy 
storage. We address the theoretical foundation of conductivity in conjugated poly-
mers, multiple methods of producing conducting polymers, their uses in superca-
pacitors, and the distinctions between electrochemical supercapacitor technologies. 
Furthermore, we highlight recent breakthroughs in conducting polymers for energy 
storage, providing an overview of the ﬁeld’s current condition and future direction. 
Keywords Electrochemical supercapacitors · Conducting polymers · Energy 
materials · Charge storage mechanisms
Q. B. Le envelope symbol · N. E. Kazantseva · P. Saha 
University Institute, Tomas Bata University in Zlín, Nad Ovˇcírnou 3685, 760 01 Zlín, Czech 
Republic 
e-mail: le@utb.cz 
R. Kiefer 
Conducting Polymers in Composites and Applications Research Group, Faculty of Applied 
Sciences, Ton Duc Thang University, Ho Chi Minh City 700000, Vietnam 
P. N. X. Vo 
Faculty of Applied Sciences, Ton Duc Thang University, Ho Chi Minh City 700000, Vietnam 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
R. K. Gupta (ed.), Pseudocapacitors, Engineering Materials, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45430-1_9 
157

158
Q. B. Le et al.
1 
Introduction 
The Earth has recently faced a rising energy crisis and environmental pollution. Due 
to population growth leading to economic development, the energy demand rapidly 
increased, causing terriﬁc environmental matters for our generations and children in 
the future. Especially since the great conﬂict in Europe in 2022, the energy crisis 
has become more momentous [1]. Scientists worldwide have concentrated on envi-
ronmentally friendly alternative energy technologies, including supercapacitors and 
batteries built of sustainable materials and renewable energy resources. One area 
of interest is conducting polymer (CP) research. CP can exhibit electrical conduc-
tivity and quickly be processed into various shapes and sizes, making them ideal for 
electrodes in energy storage devices [2]. 
Supercapacitors (SC), or electrochemical double-layer capacitors (EDLCs), store 
energy by separating charge at the electrode/electrolyte interface. They have high 
energy density and fast charge/discharge times, which make them deserve hybrid 
electric vehicles, grid-scale energy storage, and portable electronics. However, the 
capacitance of supercapacitors needs improvement to meet the developing require-
ments of human activities. Notably, the materials used in their construction can be 
expensive and environmentally harmful [3]. 
Pseudocapacitors (PSCs) are a type of supercapacitor that stores energy via redox 
reactions of ions at the electrode/electrolyte interface [4]. This type of energy storage 
offers a much higher capacity than traditional capacitors, which store energy by accu-
mulating electrical charge on two metal plates separated by an insulating material. 
The high energy storage capacity and fast charge/discharge times make PSCs ideal 
for hybrid electric vehicles, grid-scale energy storage, and portable electronics [4]. 
Compared to EDLCs, PSCs have high power densities, fast charge/discharge times, 
and a higher energy storage capacity [4]. 
Due to their electrical conductivity and versatility in processing, conducting poly-
mers have become a viable material for supercapacitors. Including conductive poly-
mers in the design may improve SCs’ energy density, stability, and overall perfor-
mance. These polymers may also be created from eco-friendly and sustainable ingre-
dients, giving them a more environmentally sound option than conventional energy 
storage systems [5]. 
This chapter overviews recent developments in CPs for pseudocapacitors, 
including their synthesis, characterization, and performance of their composites. The 
fundamental principles of pseudocapacitance, different types of conducting polymers 
and their properties, and the directions for developing these polymers for PSCs are 
also covered.

Conducting Polymers for Pseudocapacitors
159
2 
Types of Pseudocapacitance 
In the 1990s, Conway et al. proposed the concept of pseudocapacitance to describe 
the reversible capacitance associated with the electrochemical adsorption of species 
on the electrode surface (Fig. 1). Generally, pseudocapacitance can be classiﬁed into 
three types: (i) monolayer adsorption pseudocapacitance, (ii) surface redox pseudo-
capacitance (Faradaic pseudocapacitance), and (iii) intercalation pseudocapacitance 
[6]. 
2.1 
Adsorption Pseudocapacitance 
Adsorption pseudocapacitance results from the adsorption of ions or molecules onto 
the surface of an electrode (Fig. 1a). Unlike EDLC, which involves the accumu-
lation of ions in the diffuse layer, adsorption pseudocapacitance occurs when ions 
or molecules are adsorbed onto the surface of the electrode. Electrodes made from 
porous materials, such as carbon-based or metal oxides, have large surface areas,
Fig. 1 Illustration of three types of reversible redox mechanisms that give rise to pseudocapaci-
tance deﬁned by Conway: a monolayer adsorption pseudocapacitance (underpotential deposition), 
b surface redox pseudocapacitance, c intercalation pseudocapacitance [7]; the d schematic of a 
pseudocapacitance, and e its corresponding equivalent circuit diagram modeling the cell electrical 
behavior [8] 

160
Q. B. Le et al.
which allow for increased ion adsorption. Hence, they are often used to observe this 
capacitance type [7]. 
While adsorption pseudocapacitance can improve the capacitance of electrochem-
ical systems, it is not as reversible or stable as redox pseudocapacitance, which means 
the number of charge/discharge cycles before losing its capacitance is limited. Thus, 
it is essential to consider these limitations in designing electrochemical systems 
for energy storage applications. Overall, adsorption pseudocapacitance is a valuable 
mechanism for energy storage [7]. 
2.2 
Redox Pseudocapacitance 
The redox reactions occurring on the surface of an electrode cause redox pseudoca-
pacitance (Fig. 1b). This type of Faradaic pseudocapacitance is formed as electrons 
transport between the electrode and the electrolyte. The redox processes on the elec-
trode surface provide additional sites for charge storage, increasing the system’s 
total capacitance. Because of their capacity to perform redox reactions, metal oxides 
or conducting polymers are commonly used as electrodes to drive this capacitance 
mechanism [7]. 
Because of enormous amounts of capacitance, this capacitance is particu-
larly useful for energy storage devices. Furthermore, redox pseudocapacitance is 
frequently more reversible and stable than adsorption pseudocapacitance, allowing 
it to go through more charge/discharge cycles with no loss of capacitance [7]. 
2.3 
Intercalation Pseudocapactiance 
Intercalation pseudocapacitance, like redox pseudocapacitance, refers to the capac-
itance caused by the intercalation of ions or molecules into the lattice structure of 
electrode material (Fig. 1c). The transfer of electrons between the electrode and the 
electrolyte causes both forms of pseudocapacitance. However, the ions/molecules 
are injected into the electrode material’s lattice structure in this mechanism [7]. 
Intercalation pseudocapacitance employs layered electrodes such as transition 
metal oxides or graphite. The layered structure of these materials provides a wide 
surface area for the ion intercalation, increasing overall capacitance. Furthermore, 
intercalation pseudocapacitance is frequently more reversible and persistent than 
the adsorption pseudocapacitance. As a result, the pseudocapacitors may endure 
longer charge/discharge cycles without losing capacitance. It is a valuable energy 
storage mechanism intensively explored and used in developing supercapacitors and 
other electrochemical energy storage devices [7].

Conducting Polymers for Pseudocapacitors
161
2.4 
Electrochemical Capacitors 
Electrochemical SCs are commonly constructed with two electrodes separated by an 
electrical insulator, also known as a separator, in an electrolyte. These SCs, modeled 
as parallel plate capacitors, store energy as a polarized electric ﬁeld between the elec-
trodes, separated by a dielectric material. Electrochemical SCs are known for their 
high cycling times and efﬁciency, although they have a lower energy density than 
batteries. They have a higher power density than conventional capacitors, which 
allows them to be useful for applications that require rapidly distributing a large 
amount of charge. Figure 1d and e show the device conﬁguration of an electrochem-
ical SC made of nanostructured conducting polymer electrodes and its equivalent 
circuit diagram [8]. 
PSCs are a promising solution for ﬁlling the electrochemical energy storage tech-
nology gap. They offer a combination of battery-level energy density and EDLCs’ 
cycling stability and power density [9]. It is worth noting that there is no mate-
rial or device perform solely either a pseudocapacitive or EDLC mechanism [8]. 
A Helmholtz layer may form in pseudocapacitive electrodes with a large surface 
area, contributing to double-layer capacitance to some extent [9]. On the other hand, 
depending on synthesis process, the functional groups in EDLC electrodes can affect 
their capacitance by participating in faradaic charge storage [10]. 
PSCs have high capacitance, but their faradaic processes slow ion transport 
compared to electrostatic adsorption in EDLCs, resulting in low power [7]. A pseu-
docapacitive material should have high conductivity to improve charge transfer 
kinetics at the electrode. A conducting polymer must possess charge carriers, good 
charge mobility, efﬁcient kinetics, and readily available solvated counterions to 
achieve high conductivity and electrochemical capacitance [11]. The concentration 
of charge carriers can be increased by n-doping (reducing) to insert electrons into 
the conduction band or p-doping (oxidizing) to remove electrons from the valence 
band. Equations 1 and 2 represent the general reactions of n-doping and p-doping 
using an undoped conducting polymer (CP) chain, oxidant (Ox), reductant (Red), 
counteranion (A–), and a countercation (C + ), respectively [8]. 
CP pl us nR e
d
 ri
ght arro w lef
t parenthesis upper C Superscript plus Baseline right parenthesis nCP Superscript n minus Baseline plus nRed Superscript plus
CP pl us n Ox righ
t a
r ow  CP 
Superscript n plus Baseline left parenthesis upper A Superscript minus Baseline right parenthesis n plus nOx Superscript minus
The equilibrium geometry of a polymer refers to its spatial arrangement of atoms 
or molecular units in the minimum energy state. This arrangement characterizes the 
balanced pull-and-push forces within the three-dimensional oriented networks of the 
polymer chains, and thus signiﬁcantly impacts its physical and chemical properties, 
such as solubility, reactivity, and conductivity. The ionization of a polymer involves 
introducing positive or negative charges into the polymer chain, which changes the 
equilibrium geometry [12]. It leads to a shift in the highest occupied molecular 
orbital (HOMO) energy to increase and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital

162
Q. B. Le et al.
(LUMO) energy to decrease, creating new delocalized energy bands within the band 
gap of the polymer chain and forming charge “islands.” The extent of ionization, 
or “doping,” determines the degree of overlap and delocalization of these islands, 
thereby increasing the polymer’s conductivity. Generally, higher ionization results 
in higher conductivity [12]. 
3 
Polymeric Materials 
Polymers are a common material with wide applications based on their advantages. 
Recently, the application of both biopolymers and synthetic polymers acquired signif-
icant attention from scientists. Biopolymers are derived from natural sources such 
as biological materials or living organisms and are considered renewable resources, 
while synthetic polymers are artiﬁcially fabricated compounds and are typically 
non-renewable. Among various types of polymers, conducting polymers (CPs) have 
gained signiﬁcant attention, leading to their wide range of applications in material 
science and electronics. The presence of conjugated π-electrons in CPs is responsible 
for their extensive electronic properties, including low energy optical transitions, 
electrical conductivity, high electron afﬁnity, and low ionization potential. 
In 2022, Moon et al. conducted a study to explore the potential use of methyl 1H-
pyrrole-3-carboxylate (MPC) polymer as a conducting electrode for SCs in various 
applications, including transient electronics, biomedical devices and biodegradable 
energy storage (Fig. 2a) [13]. The MPC polymer was synthesized using electro-
chemical and chemical polymerization methods and compared with polyprole (PPy) 
regarding capacitance, charge–discharge characteristics, impedance, and cycle life 
performance. They also combined MPC polymer with a biodegradable high-surface-
area substrate made of poly (l-lactic acid) (PLLA), which showed similar capacitance 
values to PPy-PLLA composites and higher current per gram measurements than pure 
PLLA. The discharging current of MPC polymer followed a faradaic-current model, 
suggesting that the polymer reduction–oxidation mechanism plays a signiﬁcant role 
in the charge storage mechanism. During the charging process, the current devi-
ated from the faradaic model, likely due to side reactions or irreversibilities, which 
increased with each successive cycle. The MPC polymer and PPy electrodes showed 
appropriate retention when tested after 2000 cycles. Their results showed that PPy 
exhibited better stability than MPC during the longer working times. Despite the 
expectation of MPC polymer having higher capacitance loss due to its solubility in 
an aqueous environment, the results are promising for its use as an SC electrode 
material, and the team suggests depositing MPC polymer on a ﬂexible nanomaterial 
substrate, such as carbon nanotubes, to extend its cycle life [13].
Energy storage devices rely on different material structures, each with unique 
advantages and disadvantages [9]. The selection of a material structure for a particular 
application depends on the desired properties and speciﬁc requirements. Researchers

Conducting Polymers for Pseudocapacitors
163
Fig. 2 a Structure and pseudocapacitive charge storage mechanism of MPC polymer via reversible 
oxidation–reduction reactions, the Planar electrodes of 1H-pyrrole-3-carboxylate (MPC) polymer 
(solid line) and Polypyrrole (PPy) (dashed line), schematic of planar MPC polymer electrodes 
tested and MPC polymer electrodeposited on an Au-coated Si wafer for planar electrode char-
acterization. Adapted with permission [13], Copyright 2023, Elsevier; b schematic illustration of 
the fabrication route to polypyrrole hydrogel (PPH). Adapted with permission [14], Copyright 
2023, American Chemical Society; c schematic preparation of PANI-derivatives from carbazole 
and 1,4-aryldiamines (Cbz-PANI), poly(9-(2-ethylhexyl)-carbazole-3,6-diyl-alt-2,5-dimethyl-p-
phenylenediamine) (Cbz-PANI-1), and poly(9-(2-hexyldecyl)-carbazole-3,6-diyl-alt-p-phenylene-
diamine) (Cbz-PANI-2) for SC devices. Adapted with permission [15], Copyright 2023, American 
Chemical Society

164
Q. B. Le et al.
are seeking alternative materials and fabrication techniques to enhance the sustain-
ability and performance of these devices. Hydrogel is also an interesting mate-
rial for energy conversion and storage applications, such as water electrolysis, 
fuel cells, rechargeable batteries, and SCs. Conducting polymer hydrogels (CPHs), 
including polyaniline, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT), and polypyrrole 
(PPy), have gained attention for electrochemical applications. They have excellent 
features, such as ease of synthesis, low cost, lightness, environmental stability, and 
good electrochemical performance [7]. CPHs possess remarkable potential as elec-
trode materials for future energy storage devices. However, conventional methods of 
synthesizing CPHs using cross-linkers, adhesives, or supporting frameworks lead to 
low porosity, unsatisfactory electrical conductivity, and harsh synthesis conditions. 
Researchers are currently exploring straightforward strategies to fabricate CPHs with 
desired porous nanostructures that can help address these challenges. 
Gao and his colleagues introduced a new one-step ice-templating method to fabri-
cate porous polypyrrole hydrogel (PPH) with interconnected PPy nanoparticles [14]. 
They conducted the polymerization of pyrrole using FeCl3.6H2O as the oxidizing 
agent. The ice crystals formed in ethanol and water were used as the template to 
guide the formation of a three-dimensional (3D) porous structure at low tempera-
tures (Fig. 2b). The PPy nanoparticles were designed to disperse on the surface of 
the ice crystals and form a 3D conductive structure. PPy is a widely studied and 
promising CPH electrode material due to its high conductivity, excellent pseudoca-
pacitive performance, and nontoxicity. However, its low porosity has limited its prac-
tical application in the past. Efforts to improve the porosity of PPy-based electrode 
materials have involved integrating PPy into porous substrates or using other porous 
materials as sacriﬁce templates. By comparing the rate capability of ice-templated and 
conventional electrodes, they demonstrated that the ice-templated nanostructure of 
the PPH electrode signiﬁcantly improved its rate capability by enabling the diffusion 
of electrolytes. This led to a high speciﬁc capacitance (226 F/g at a current density 
of 67.6 A/g), excellent rate performance (85% capacitance retention when current 
density increases from 1.35 to 67.6 A/g), and long cycling life (80% capacitance 
retention after 5000 cycles) [14]. 
Polyaniline (PANI), along with PPy, is one of the most extensively studied 
CPs. PANI has various beneﬁcial characteristics, including ease of synthesis and 
low cost, non-redox doping, environmental stability in the doped state, reversible 
oxidative states, and high electrical conductivity [16]. As a result, PANI has a 
wide range of applications, such as sensors, energy storage devices, corrosion 
inhibitors, photovoltaic cells, microwave safeguards, and electromagnetic shielding 
materials. However, PANI faces two signiﬁcant challenges: electrochemical aging, 
which results in electrochemical instability [17], and insolubility in common organic 
solvents [18]. Several approaches have been reported to address PANI’s insolu-
bility, such as incorporating solubilizing counterions and blending with solubilizing 
polymers. However, fewer reports address its electrochemical instability. The most 
common approach to address the latter is to dope the polymer with large counterions 
or prepare nanostructures [18].

Conducting Polymers for Pseudocapacitors
165
Scott and colleagues [15] reported a PANI-derivative containing carbazole (Cbz-
PANI) (Fig. 2c) with low cost, easy side-chain alteration at the nitrogen-containing 
9H-position for improved dissolution, and ease of functionalization at the 3- and 
6-positions for additional reactivity. Because carbazoles create relatively stable 
cations with high charge carrier mobility, they are also employed as charge trans-
port materials. They explored different kinds of homopolymers prepared from 
carbazoles for their electrochromic and photoreactive properties named poly(9-(2-
ethylhexyl)-carbazole-3,6-diyl-alt-2,5-dimethyl-p-phenylenediamine) (Cbz-PANI-
1), and poly(9-(2-hexyldecyl)-carbazole-3,6-diyl-alt-p-phenylene-diamine) (Cbz-
PANI-2). Both polymers were soluble in common organic solvents, making them 
easy to characterize and process. Cbz-PANI-1 was more conductive (2.8 S/cm) than 
Cbz-PANI-2 (0.70 S/cm) and had better ﬁlm formation and a higher Mn. Addi-
tionally, it exhibited electrochromic properties, good electrochemical stability, and 
processability, making it a promising material for use in all-polymer symmetric 
supercapacitors [15]. 
PEDOT has received signiﬁcant interest in various applications due to its rela-
tively high chemical and thermal stability and high conductivity. In particular, 
PEDOT has shown promise in improving the performance of metallic neural micro-
electrodes by lowering impedance and increasing charge-injection capacity [19]. 
However, one major challenge in using PEDOT coatings on inorganic substrates is 
the relatively low adhesion, which can result in coating detachment under chronic 
neural recording or stimulation conditions, leading to a loss of device perfor-
mance. Efforts have improved PEDOT adhesion and other conjugated polymers 
on metallic substrates. For instance, thiol-modiﬁed phenyl monolayers were found 
to enhance the adhesion of polythiophene to platinum [20], while surface-initiated 
Kumada catalyst-transfer polycondensation was used to increase the stability of 
poly(3-methyl-thiophene) ﬁlms on indium-tin-oxide surfaces [21]. However, only 
a few studies have investigated PEDOT coatings’ adhesion and mechanical stability. 
Researchers have explored various methods to improve the mechanical stability of 
PEDOT coatings, including polymerizing PEDOT with carbon nanotubes (CNTs) 
or using an EDOT-substituted silane (APTES-EDOT) as an adhesion promoter [22]. 
While these methods have provided valuable insights for optimizing PEDOT adhe-
sion and mechanical stability, a better protocol is still under investigation. Strong 
bonding between the organic polymer and the inorganic glass substrate is necessary 
for improved performance in transparent energy storage devices. The phenyl func-
tional groups on the silane monolayer can inﬂuence the molecular conﬁguration of 
polymer chains, resulting in better performance of PEDOT-coated silanized glass 
electrodes [20]. Strong adhesion between the polymer coating and glass also leads to 
high cycle stability of the planar PEDOT SC. Improving PEDOT coatings’ adhesion 
and mechanical stability on inorganic substrates remains an ongoing topic of interest 
in transparent devices. While several approaches have been developed, more research 
is still needed to create a perfect protocol to optimize PEDOT coatings’ adhesion 
and mechanical stability [19–23].

166
Q. B. Le et al.
4 
Polymeric Carbon-Based Materials 
One of the common materials applied for supercapacitors is carbon-based ones such 
as carbon black (CB) and activated carbon (AC). There are various ways to receive 
the AC, such as biomass pyrolyzes, which create a porous material with a large 
speciﬁc surface area, resulting in a high double-layer capacitance when operated in 
electrolytes [3, 24]. However, due to its poor electrical conductivity, CB particles are 
usually added to increase electron transportation. Conversely, CB has low speciﬁc 
capacitance, so adding this conductive ﬁller lowers the overall speciﬁc capacitance in 
resulting devices. The materials need additional components to improve the speciﬁc 
capacitance and associate them with electrode ﬁlms [3, 24]. 
Organic compounds provide an exciting alternative to inorganic alternatives for 
the active components in energy storage systems due to their excellent availability, 
safety, and sustainability when used as binders. However, binders like PTFE, PVDF, 
or Naﬁon have drawbacks such as limited hydrophilicity, high cost, and environ-
mental issues because they are not biodegradable and release poisonous gases 
[25]. Conducting polymers can be used as binders for supercapacitors that have 
lately received increased attention. For example, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) 
polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) is known for its excellent mixed ionic and elec-
tronic charge transport, with the electronic transport in the PEDOT phase and the ionic 
transport through the PSS phase. PEDOT:PSS can easily interface and composite with 
other organic and inorganic materials [26]. Composites of cellulose and PEDOT:PSS 
combines the mechanical strength and large speciﬁc surface area of cellulose with the 
electronic and electrochemical properties of PEDOT:PSS and carbon-based mate-
rials. Belaineh et al. reported PEDOT:PSS-cellulose electrode composites resulted 
in exceptional capacitance values and discharge performances. They successfully 
incorporated the materials into printing process protocols [27]. 
Du et al. have established a simple and cost-effective method for producing 
durable and conductive PEDOT:PSS bulk ﬁlms using cellulose nanoﬁbrils (CNF) 
as the building blocks (Fig. 3a) [28]. They used an in situ polymerization tech-
nique to create a PEDOT:PSS/CNF suspension, which was vacuum-ﬁltered and 
treated with Dimethyl sulfoxide to create ﬂexible and conductive PEDOT:PSS/CNF 
nano paper. The optimized PEDOT:PSS/CNP demonstrated outstanding ﬂexibility, 
high tensile strength (72 MPa), and high electrical conductivity (66.67 S/cm). The 
assembled symmetrical supercapacitor using PEDOT:PSS/CNP electrodes showed 
an areal speciﬁc capacitance of 854.4 mF/cm2 (equivalent to 122.1 F/cm3) at 5 mV/ 
s and the highest energy density at 30.86 μWh/cm2 (equivalent to 4.41 mWhcm3), 
excellent cycling stability retention of 95.8% after 10,000 charge/discharge cycles. 
PEDOT:PSS/CNP has the potential to be a viable electrode material for ﬂexible 
supercapacitors due to its remarkable mechanical qualities and excellent electro-
chemical performance [28]. However, PEDOT:PSS is still one of the most expensive 
components in any such composite, so using small quantities of PEDOT:PSS as 
an electronic and mechanical adhesive within other active low-cost materials is an 
exciting strategy to achieve superior electrode properties while keeping the ﬁnal cost

Conducting Polymers for Pseudocapacitors
167
low. Hence, developing methods to utilize the common conducting polymers for PSC 
applications is always in focus. 
One interesting material applied in energy storage devices is nitrogen doping 
carbon-based materials. Nitrogen doping can improve carbon materials’ wettability 
and conductivity while providing additional pseudocapacitance for supercapacitors. 
There are two common ways of creating nitrogen-doped carbon materials. The 
ﬁrst approach is the pyrolysis of nitrogen-containing precursors such as biomass, 
synthetic polymers, small molecules, and ionic liquids. The second method is the 
alteration (via chemical or thermal processes) of carbon materials with reagents or 
gases containing nitrogen atoms [29]. Selecting precursors is critical to both pore 
structure modulation and surface chemical modiﬁcation. Precursor design is crucial 
to nitrogen-doped porous carbon compounds’ physical and chemical characteris-
tics. Precursors have been reported to manufacture nitrogen-doped porous carbon 
materials, including renewable biomass, polymers, and MOFs. Polymers containing 
N atoms can form different morphologies and pore structures designed in carbon-
based materials. For the electrochemical applications, the N-containing polymers can 
be modiﬁed in their structures and compositions to enhance the chemical properties 
at the molecular level [31]. 
Organic cross-linked polymers are formed primarily of carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, 
and hydrogen components and have a network structure. Porous carbon materials 
with such polymers have a high heteroatom content, speciﬁc surface area, and excel-
lent electrochemical characteristics. In particular, their design can be easily modi-
ﬁed by varying the raw material ratio during synthesis [29]. Zou et al. produced 
a novel heteroatom-doped porous carbon material with a high speciﬁc surface 
area by carbonizing and activating polyphosphazene [32]. To make N/O-doped 
porous COCLPs, the researchers employed a network-structured organic cross-linked 
polymer as a carbon source. Their novel materials were obtained by optimizing the 
raw materials ratios exhibiting an excellent electrochemical performance of a speciﬁc 
capacitance of 438 F/g at a current density of 0.5 A/g tested in the three-electrode 
system. 
In 2022, Lao et al. developed nitrogen/oxygen(N/O)-doped carbon-based porous 
materials via carbonization and activating an organic cross-linked polymer with a 
network structure (Fig. 3b) [29]. They used polyethylene glycol (PEG 6000), hydrox-
ypropyl methylcellulose (HPMC), and 4,4-diphenylmethane diisocyanate (MDI) to 
make the organic cross-linked polymer. After fabrication, they acquired a large 
speciﬁc surface area (1589 m2/g) and a high speciﬁc capacitance of 522 F/g at a 
current density of 0.5 A/g. Furthermore, the symmetric capacitor achieved an energy 
density of 18.04 Wh/kg at a power density of 200.0 W/kg. The material beneﬁtted 
from the network structure of organic cross-linked polymers to form hierarchical 
porous carbon and the pseudocapacitance introduced by heteroatoms. Therefore, 
the proposed method for fabricating carbon materials provides a new strategy for 
developing electrode materials with high electrochemical performance [29]. 
SCs’ energy and power density are inﬂuenced by the choice of electrolyte, with 
various options available, including organic and ionic liquids and aqueous elec-
trolytes. Aqueous electrolytes are considered more environmentally friendly and

168
Q. B. Le et al.

Conducting Polymers for Pseudocapacitors
169
◄Fig. 3 a Schematic illustration of the preparation of PEDOT:PSS/CNF and the fabrication of 
PEDOT:PSS/CNP. Adapted with permission [28], Copyright 2023, Elsevier. b Organic cross-linked 
polymer-derived porous carbon production technique in one pot. Adapted with permission [29], 
Copyright 2023, MDPI; c Scrupulously designed porous carbon nanostructures with high pore 
volumes and surface area with prepared polymer-derived honeycomb-like carbon nanostructures 
(HCNs), taking nano-spherical silica as a template, PVDF as a carbon source, and PMMA as a pore-
forming agent. The cells used the electrolytes of 6 M KOH and 0.1 M K3(Fe(CN)6)3− solutions. A 
PVDF/PVP composite membrane has been developed as a separator to fabricate a coin-cell device. 
Adapted with permission [30], Copyright 2023, Elsevier 
safer, with excellent ionic conductivity allowing greater charge storage in a shorter 
time [4]. Hence, SCs based on aqueous electrolytes are promising for grid-scale 
power storage. However, the ions in aqueous electrolytes do not contribute to the 
capacitance value as they form an electric double layer on the electrode surfaces. 
Redox-active species can be added to the electrolyte to enhance the ionic conductivity 
and increase the capacitance [33].
Porous carbon nanostructures, such as those with macro-, meso-, and micropores, 
have a high speciﬁc surface area and can store a signiﬁcant amount of charge via 
the electrochemical double-layer capacitance mechanism. The macro pores serve 
as an electrolyte reservoir, while the mesopores mitigate ion diffusion paths, and 
the micropores store the charge by their appropriate pore dimensions [34]. Since 
EDLC materials retain charge on their surfaces, these structures enable higher power 
density. Furthermore, when the surface area increases, energy density also increases. 
Nevertheless, gaps between porous carbon structures can cause electrolyte ﬂooding 
and increase total electrode weight, which does not give additional capacitance value 
and reduces electrical conductivity. Hence, building porous carbon structures with 
no cavities is difﬁcult [34]. 
The porous structures offer two advantages. Firstly, the solid matrix linking 
the porous structures works as a single substrate, limiting electrolyte ﬂooding and 
enhancing electrical conductivity due to the continuous phase. Secondly, the micro-
pores in the solid matrix give additional surface area and a speciﬁed capacitance 
value. Heteroatom doping can improve electronic conductivity and wettability, but 
it can also increase chemical consumption or need extra post-synthesis operations, 
increasing material prices. High-temperature annealing can improve crystallinity and 
conductivity but uses more energy than lower-temperature calcination [34]. 
Zou et al. introduced a non-solvent induced phase separation (NIPS) method to 
synthesize honeycomb-like carbon nanostructures (HCNs) to make highly porous 
carbon structure, with nano-spherical silica as a template, PVDF as a carbon source, 
and PMMA as a pore-forming agent (Fig. 3c) [30]. In this method, a slurry of PVDF/ 
PMMA/DMF was prepared, and cotton/SiO2 nanosphere templates were added to it, 
followed by the addition of non-solvent water. It separated polymer-rich and polymer-
lean phases, which generated gaps and pores, and a uniform coating of PVDF/PMMA 
mixture on the SiO2 nanosphere. After annealing and washing away the template, 
a honeycomb structure with numerous micro and mesopores was obtained. The 
resulting material exhibited a high speciﬁc capacitance of 578.80 F/g in a 6 M KOH

170
Q. B. Le et al.
solution. To construct a supercapacitor device, PVDF/PVP composite membrane was 
used as a separator, and the addition of redox-active species [0.1 M K3(Fe(CN)6)3−] 
with the electrolyte substantially enhanced the super capacitance properties. The 
improved performance was attributed to the concerted effect of HCNs, HCNox, 
redox-active added electrolytes, and the PVDF/PVP composite separator [30]. 
5 
Polymeric Composite Materials 
PANI exhibits excellent properties in electrochemical working devices using different 
structures, such as nanowire arrays [35], spheres [17], or ﬁlms [36]. According to 
electrochemical impedance studies, PANI ﬁlms produced by the potentiodynamic 
technique of electrodeposition display high speciﬁc conductance and resistance [37]. 
However, PANI is prone to ﬂaking off the deposited surface during the charge– 
discharge cycle. PANI-prepared composites were fabricated to address this issue and 
demonstrated greater capacitance and stability than their equivalents [38]. Those 
composites comprise a physical combination of conducting polymer, metal nanopar-
ticles, carbon powder, graphite ﬁbers, metal-embedded glass ﬁbers, and other poly-
mers [39]. The percolation hypothesis explains the electrical conductivity in these 
composites, which assigns electrons ﬂowing between metallic phases. Via using 
composites containing metal nanoparticles such as PANI/Pd-Sn [40], PANI/Au [41], 
and PANI/Pt [36], scientists can design novel physicomechanical characteristics of 
the composites aiming at a higher working performance of PSCs. 
However, the studies on supercapacitors using the synchronized concept of PANI/ 
Pt are limited. Pt thin ﬁlms are widely used in high-performance circuits due to their 
long-term stability, although alternative materials are being developed in micro-
electronics. Sumana et al. reported a new mechanism where Pt nanoparticles were 
potentiostatically electrodeposited onto a porous PANI layer on stainless steel (SS) 
(Fig. 4a) [36]. Ionic conductivity and supercapacitor performance were improved 
in PANI/Pt nanoﬂowers compared to the PANI/SS electrode in charge–discharge 
experiments. The layer of electrodeposited Pt nanoﬂowers increased the hardness of 
PANI on the electrode. The supercapacitor made from Pt-PANI hybrid electrodes 
has a quasi-rectangular form and a speciﬁc capacitance of 926 F/g. Pt nanoﬂowers 
increased ion transport across the bulk of the supercapacitor, reducing the abrupt 
reduction in speciﬁc capacitance during charge–discharge. The layer of electrode-
posited Pt nanoﬂowers increased the hardness of PANI on the electrode. The super-
capacitor has a large potential window, charge–discharge stability, and coulombic 
efﬁciency of 98% [36].
Due to its advantages, polypyrrole (PPy) is another commonly used polymer 
material for SC electrodes. However, its poor cycling stability, resulting from volu-
metric swelling and shrinking during charge/discharge cycles, leads to structural 
breakdown and the rapid decay of conductive polymer properties [42]. One of the 
effective methods to overcome the drawback is making the composite of PPy with

Conducting Polymers for Pseudocapacitors
171
Fig. 4 a The probable mechanism for ion mobility at the electrode–electrolyte interface on PANI 
and PANI-Pt deposited electrodes during charge/discharge. Adapted with permission [36], Copy-
right 2023, Elsevier; b Schematic representation of: ZnFe2O4 NP formation on carbon cloth 
substrate, PPy creation on carbon cloth enrobed ZnFe2O4, CC-ZnFe2O4@PPy electrode, and 
electrochemical performance of CC-ZnFe2O4@PPy electrode. Adapted with permission [42], 
Copyright 2023, Elsevier
the ternary transition metal oxide (AB2O4), such as iron-based MFe2O4 ternary tran-
sition metal oxide. For example, ZnFe2O4 has shown great potential for SC applica-
tions due to its excellent electrochemical efﬁciency, spinal arrangement producing 
various active sites and ion diffusion pathways, and increasing electrochemical 
behavior and conductivity relative to binary metal oxides. However, it has poor 
electrical conductivity, and tends to agglomerate during charge/discharge cycles 
limit its SC implementations. Besides it, Carbon cloth (CC) is suitable for energy 
storage systems due to its 3D texture architectures, good electrical conductivity (1– 
10 S/cm), and outstanding mechanical stability. CC is a ﬂexible biomaterial that 
provides extensive surface area for loading active materials. Devi et al. proposed a

172
Q. B. Le et al.
general method for fabricating mesoporous ZnFe2O4@PPy nanocomposites on CC 
(Fig. 4b) [42]. In their study, ZnFe2O4@PPy nanocomposite was synthesized via 
simple hydrothermal and organic oxidative polymerization methods. Due to their 
respective design features, ZnFe2O4 nanoparticles that grow on CC have numerous 
chemical reaction active sites. Meanwhile, the PPy that forms on the ZnFe2O4 
nanoparticle acts as a transverse conduit for electron transmission, lowering internal 
resistance. The perfect synthesis of these two materials offers good chemical and 
physical conditions for ion diffusion and rapid electron transmission, resulting in 
composites consisting of conducting polymer and ternary transition metal oxides 
with high working performance [42]. 
6 
Conclusion and Future Perspective 
Among various kinds of electrochemical energy materials, CPs exhibited excellent 
pseudocapacitance and ﬂexibility in application. They can combine with different 
materials to increase the overall capacitance of PSC. Additionally, CP’s ﬂexibility 
allows them to transform into other materials structures, such as aerogel, via a simple 
reaction method. CPs, with their advantages, have much potential in the application 
of SCs. However, CPs also have hindrances, and the most signiﬁcant one is their 
weak retention during long-time working performance. As mentioned, during the 
working process of SC, the organic molecules of CPs have to react with the ions 
from the electrolyte leading to their degradation. The strategy to overcome these 
problems is the combination of different materials to form the new composite mate-
rials, which can utilize the capacitance of each component to increase the overall 
working performance of SC. 
Besides the mentioned advantages of CPs, choosing an electrolyte for the opera-
tion of SC also plays a vital role in their performance. Due to their organic structure, 
CPs are not dissolved but interact well with various organic solvents and aqueous 
electrolytes. Even though the common electrolyte used in SC studies now is aqueous 
electrolyte due to its safety and environmental friendliness, organic electrolytes also 
acquire signiﬁcant interest from scientists. The research reports published in 2022 
and 2023 related to CP materials applied for SC are described in Table 1. Opti-
mizing electrolytes involved in SCs based on CPs materials can improve working 
performance. Consequently, CPs are potential materials for energy storage device 
studies and deserve further study to develop electrodes and devices with high speciﬁc 
capacitance and aim for industrial mass production.

Conducting Polymers for Pseudocapacitors
173
Table 1 SC’s working performance reports based on CP materials in 2022 and 2023 
Materials
Speciﬁc capacitance 
(Scan rate) 
Electrolyte
Retention rate (Cycles)
Ref. 
PANI-Co3O4
593 F/g 
(0.5 A/g) 
6 M KOH
89% 
(5000 cycles) 
[43] 
AC-PVA/rGO/PVP
223 F/g 
(1 A/g) 
2.5 M KNO3
99.3% 
(5000 cycles) 
[44] 
GO/PANI/CoFe2O4
781.27 F/g 
(1 mV/s) 
1 M KOH
79.03% 
(5000 cycles) 
[45] 
Py-OXD-CMP/CNT
504 F/g 
(0.7 A/g) 
1 M KOH
91.1% 
(2000 cycles) 
[46] 
TPU/CNT/PPyNF
712 mF/cm2 
5 mV/s  
1 M H2SO4
85% 
(10,000 cycles) 
[47] 
Py: Pyrene 
OXD-CMP: 1,3,4-oxadiazole-linked conjugated microporous polymers 
TPU: thermoplastic polyurethane 
Acknowledgements This work was supported by the Horizon Europe project TwinVECTOR of 
the European Union (Grant Agreement No. 101078935). 
References 
1. B. Luo, D. Ye, L. Wang, Recent progress on integrated energy conversion and storage systems. 
Adv. Sci. 4, 1–15 (2017) 
2. M.E. Yibowei, J.G. Adekoya, A.A. Adediran, O. Adekomaya, Carbon-based nano-ﬁller in 
polymeric composites for supercapacitor electrode materials: a review. Environ. Sci. Pollut. 
Res. 28, 26269–26279 (2021) 
3. A. González, E. Goikolea, J.A. Barrena, R. Mysyk, Review on supercapacitors: technologies 
and materials. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 58, 1189–1206 (2016) 
4. P. Bhojane, Recent advances and fundamentals of Pseudocapacitors: materials, mechanism, 
and its understanding. J. Energy Storage. 45, 103654 (2022) 
5. G.P. Hao, F. Hippauf, M. Oschatz, F.M. Wisser, A. Leifert, W. Nickel, N. Mohamed-Noriega, 
Z. Zheng, S. Kaskel, Stretchable and semitransparent conductive hybrid hydrogels for ﬂexible 
supercapacitors. ACS Nano 8, 7138–7146 (2014) 
6. H. Huang, M. Niederberger, Towards fast-charging technologies in Li+/Na+ storage: From the 
perspectives of pseudocapacitive materials and non-aqueous hybrid capacitors. Nanoscale 11, 
19225–19240 (2019) 
7. S. Fleischmann, J.B. Mitchell, R. Wang, C. Zhan, D.E. Jiang, V. Presser, V. Augustyn, Pseudo-
capacitance: from fundamental understanding to high power energy storage materials. Chem. 
Rev. 120, 6738–6782 (2020) 
8. A.M. Bryan, L.M. Santino, Y. Lu, S. Acharya, J.M. D’Arcy, Conducting polymers for 
pseudocapacitive energy storage. Chem. Mater. 28, 5989–5998 (2016) 
9. Q. B. Le, R. Kiefer, T. T. Dao, N. E. Kazantseva, P. Saha, Recent and future research related to 
the use of conducting polymers for supercapacitors, in: R. K. Gupta (Ed.), Springer International 
Publishing, Cham, pp. 289–309 (2022)

174
Q. B. Le et al.
10. W. Gu, G. Yushin, Review of nanostructured carbon materials for electrochemical capacitor 
applications: advantages and limitations of activated carbon, carbide-derived carbon, zeolite-
templated carbon, carbon aerogels, carbon nanotubes, onion-like carbon, and graphene, Wiley 
Interdiscip. Rev. Energy Environ. 3, 424–473 (2014) 
11. M.E. Abdelhamid, A.P. O’Mullane, G.A. Snook, Storing energy in plastics: a review on 
conducting polymers & their role in electrochemical energy storage. RSC Adv. 5, 11611–11626 
(2015) 
12. M. C. Scharber, N. S. Sariciftci, Low band gap conjugated semiconducting polymers. Adv. 
Mater. Technol. 6 (2021) 
13. J. Moon, V. Diaz, D. Patel, R. Underwood, R. Warren, Dissolvable conducting polymer 
supercapacitor for transient electronics. Org. Electron. 101, 106412 (2022) 
14. M. Huang, L. Li, Z. Ai, X. Gao, J. Qian, H. Xu, X. Su, J. Wu, Y. Gao, One-step fabrication 
of ice-templated pure Polypyrrole nanoparticle hydrogels for high-rate supercapacitors. ACS 
Appl. Nano Mater. 5, 11940–11947 (2022) 
15. M. Almtiri, T.J. Dowell, H. Giri, D.O. Wipf, C.N. Scott, Electrochemically stable carbazole-
derived polyaniline for Pseudocapacitors. ACS Appl. Polym. Mater. 4, 3088–3097 (2022) 
16. Q.B. Le, T.-H. Nguyen, H. Fei, C. Bubulinca, L. Munster, N. Bugarova, M. Micusik, R. Kiefer, 
T.T. Dao, M. Omastova, N.E. Kazantseva, P. Saha, Electrochemical performance of composite 
electrodes based on rGO, Mn/Cu metal–organic frameworks, and PANI. Sci. Rep. 12, 1–13 
(2022) 
17. L. Quoc Bao, T. -H. Nguyen, H. Fei, I. Sapurina, F. A. Ngwabebhoh, C. Bubulinca, L. Munster, 
E. D. Bergerová, A. Lengalova, H. Jiang, T. Trong Dao, N. Bugarova, M. Omastova, N. E. 
Kazantseva, P. Saha, Electrochemical performance of composites made of rGO with Zn-MOF 
and PANI as electrodes for supercapacitors. Electrochim. Acta. 367, 137563 (2021) 
18. V. Babel, B.L. Hiran, A review on polyaniline composites: synthesis, characterization, and 
applications. Polym. Compos. 42, 3142–3157 (2021) 
19. B. Wei, J. Liu, L. Ouyang, C.-C. Kuo, D.C. Martin, Signiﬁcant enhancement of PEDOT thin 
ﬁlm adhesion to inorganic solid substrates with EDOT-Acid. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 7, 
15388–15394 (2015) 
20. Z. Mekhalif, P. Lang, F. Garnier, Chemical pretreatment of platinum by aromatic and aliphatic 
thiols. Effect on polybithiophene electrodeposition and properties. J. Electroanal. Chem. 399, 
61–70 (1995) 
21. L. Yang, S.K. Sontag, T.W. LaJoie, W. Li, N.E. Huddleston, J. Locklin, W. You, Surface-
initiated Poly(3-methylthiophene) as a hole-transport layer for polymer solar cells with high 
performance. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 4, 5069–5073 (2012) 
22. X. Luo, C.L. Weaver, D.D. Zhou, R. Greenberg, X.T. Cui, Highly stable carbon nanotube doped 
poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) for chronic neural stimulation. Biomaterials 32, 5551–5557 
(2011) 
23. Q. Huang, J. Chen, S. Yan, X. Shao, Y. Dong, J. Liu, W. Li, C. Zhang, New donor–acceptor– 
donor conjugated polymer with twisted donor-acceptor conﬁguration for high-capacitance 
electrochromic supercapacitor application. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 9, 13807–13817 (2021) 
24. R. Jain, D. K. Sharma, S. Mishra, High-performance supercapacitor electrode of HNO 3 doped 
polyaniline/reduced graphene oxide nanocomposites. J. Electron. Mater. (2019) 
25. Z. Zhu, Effects of various binders on supercapacitor performances. Int. J. Electrochem. Sci. 
11, 8270–8279 (2016). https://doi.org/10.20964/2016.10.04 
26. H. Zhou, Z. Yan, X. Yang, J. Lv, L. Kang, Z.H. Liu, RGO/MnO2/polypyrrole ternary ﬁlm 
electrode for supercapacitor. Mater. Chem. Phys. 177, 40–47 (2016) 
27. D. Belaineh, R. Brooke, N. Sani, M.G. Say, K.M.O. Håkansson, I. Engquist, M. Berggren, 
J. Edberg, Printable carbon-based supercapacitors reinforced with cellulose and conductive 
polymers. J. Energy Storage. 50, 104224 (2022) 
28. H. Du, M. Zhang, K. Liu, M. Parit, Z. Jiang, X. Zhang, B. Li, C. Si, Conductive PEDOT: PSS/ 
cellulose nanoﬁbril paper electrodes for ﬂexible supercapacitors with superior areal capacitance 
and cycling stability. Chem. Eng. J. 428, 131994 (2022)

Conducting Polymers for Pseudocapacitors
175
29. J. Lao, Y. Lu, S. Fang, F. Xu, L. Sun, Y. Wang, T. Zhou, L. Liao, Y. Guan, X. Wei, C. Zhang, Y. 
Yang, Y. Xia, Y. Luo, Y. Zou, H. Chu, H. Zhang, Y. Luo, Y. Zhu, Organic cross-linked polymer-
derived N/O-doped porous carbons for high-performance supercapacitor. Nanomaterials 12, 
2186 (2022) 
30. S.K. Das, L. Pradhan, B.K. Jena, S. Basu, Polymer derived honeycomb-like carbon nanostruc-
tures for high capacitive supercapacitor application. Carbon N. Y. 201, 49–59 (2023) 
31. J. Kou, L.B. Sun, Nitrogen-doped porous carbons derived from carbonization of a nitrogen-
containing polymer: efﬁcient adsorbents for selective CO2 capture. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 55, 
10916–10925 (2016) 
32. W. Zou, S. Zhang, Y. Abbas, W. Liu, Y. Zhang, Z. Wu, B. Xu, Structurally designed heterochain 
polymer derived porous carbons with high surface area for high-performance supercapacitors. 
Appl. Surf. Sci. 530, 147296 (2020) 
33. I.E. Rauda, V. Augustyn, B. Dunn, S.H. Tolbert, Enhancing pseudocapacitive charge storage 
in polymer templated mesoporous materials. Acc. Chem. Res. 46, 1113–1124 (2013) 
34. R. Mendoza, J. Oliva, V. Rodriguez-Gonzalez, Effect of the micro-, meso- and macropores on 
the electrochemical performance of supercapacitors: a review. Int. J. Energy Res. 46, 6989–7020 
(2022) 
35. T. Zhang, H. Yue, X. Gao, F. Yao, H. Chen, X. Lu, Y. Wang, X. Guo, High-performance 
supercapacitors based on polyaniline nanowire arrays grown on three-dimensional graphene 
with small pore sizes. Dalt. Trans. 49, 3304–3311 (2020) 
36. V.S. Sumana, Y.N. Sudhakar, A. Varghese, G.K. Nagaraja, Pt nanoﬂower-poly(aniline) elec-
trode material with the synchronized concept of energy storage in supercapacitor. Appl. Surf. 
Sci. 589, 152994 (2022) 
37. S.K. Mondal, K.R. Prasad, N. Munichandraiah, Analysis of electrochemical impedance of 
polyaniline ﬁlms prepared by galvanostatic, potentiostatic and potentiodynamic methods. 
Synth. Met. 148, 275–286 (2005) 
38. N.Q. Khuyen, R. Kiefer, Q.B. Le, RGO/Ni-MOF composite modiﬁed with PANI applied as 
electrode materials for supercapacitor. Chem. Lett. 52, 17–21 (2023) 
39. Q. Meng, K. Cai, Y. Chen, L. Chen, Research progress on conducting polymer based 
supercapacitor electrode materials. Nano Energy 36, 268–285 (2017) 
40. H. Kebiche, F. Poncin-Epaillard, N. Haddaoui, D. Debarnot, A route for the synthesis of 
polyaniline-based hybrid nanocomposites. J. Mater. Sci. 55, 5782–5794 (2020) 
41. Z. Peng, L. Guo, Z. Zhang, B. Tesche, T. Wilke, D. Ogermann, S. Hu, K. Kleinermanns, Micelle-
assisted one-pot synthesis of water-soluble polyaniline - gold composite particles. Langmuir 
22, 10915–10918 (2006) 
42. R. Devi, J. Patra, K. Tapadia, J.-K. Chang, T. Maharana, Arrangement of ZnFe2O4@PPy 
nanoparticles on carbon cloth for highly efﬁcient symmetric supercapacitor. J. Taiwan Inst. 
Chem. Eng. 138, 104474 (2022) 
43. I. I. Misnon, K. Manickavasakam, N. Nordin, R. Jose, Fabrication and electrochemical evalua-
tion of polyhedral PANI-coated Co 3 O 4 electrode for supercapacitor application. Int. J. Appl. 
Ceram. Technol., 1–13 (2023) 
44. D.T. Bakhoum, K.O. Oyedotun, S. Sarr, N.F. Sylla, V.M. Maphiri, N.M. Ndiaye, B.D. Ngom, 
N. Manyala, A study of porous carbon structures derived from composite of cross-linked 
polymers and reduced graphene oxide for supercapacitor applications. J. Energy Storage. 51, 
104476 (2022) 
45. S. Verma, T. Das, V.K. Pandey, B. Verma, Nanoarchitectonics of GO/PANI/CoFe2O4 
(Graphene Oxide/polyaniline/Cobalt Ferrite) based hybrid composite and its use in fabricating 
symmetric supercapacitor devices. J. Mol. Struct. 1266, 133515 (2022) 
46. M.G. Mohamed, M.M. Samy, T.H. Mansoure, S.U. Sharma, M.-S. Tsai, J.-H. Chen, J.-T. Lee, 
S.-W. Kuo, Dispersions of 1,3,4-oxadiazole-linked conjugated microporous polymers with 
carbon nanotubes as a high-performance electrode for supercapacitors. ACS Appl. Energy 
Mater. 5, 3677–3688 (2022) 
47. S.H. Hong, H.H. Shi, H.E. Naguib, Polypyrrole nanofoam/carbon nanotube multilayered 
electrode for ﬂexible electrochemical capacitors. ACS Appl. Energy Mater. 5, 4059–4069 
(2022)

MXenes for Pseudocapacitors 
Harishchandra S. Nishad, Rajesh R. Jaiswar, Sachin D. Tejam, 
and Pravin S. Walke 
Abstract The emergence of transition metal carbides/nitrides (MXene) in 2011 has 
sparked signiﬁcant interest in the development of 2D materials for energy storage 
applications. MXene’s layered structure offers several advantages, such as increased 
active sites, rapid ionic diffusion, hydrophilicity, and a larger surface area. Moreover, 
the surface chemistry of MXene exhibits high-rate pseudocapacitance characteris-
tics. This chapter aims to discuss various methods to alter the interlayer distance of 
MXenes and also discuss how these interlayers affect the electrochemical properties 
of the materials. Furthermore, the chapter explores various composites and hybrid 
structures involving MXene for pseudocapacitors. The storage capacity and kinetics 
of MXene are described in the context of pseudocapacitors. Finally, the challenges 
and prospects of MXene for supercapacitor applications are discussed. 
Keywords MXene · Interlayer distance · Layered property · Composites MXene 
1 
Introduction 
Clean and sustainable electric grid development is a global requirement to combat 
climate change. Electrochemical energy storage (EES) can play a key role in grid 
applications and enable seamless integration of green and carbon free energy. 
However, EES should meet the essential desires of high energy and power density 
[1–3]. For example, EES with high energy density provide long time power to the 
electric vehicles (EV), and high-power density provides intermittent power to the EV. 
EES devices for instance lithium ion batteries can store charge in the form of Li+ ion 
intercalation/deintercalation, due to low ionic diffusion, it possesses lower power 
density [4]. Whereas, supercapacitor follow electric double layer charge storage, 
which is limited by surface mechanism, hence it cannot store large amount of energy
H. S. Nishad · R. R. Jaiswar · S. D. Tejam · P. S. Walke envelope symbol 
National Centre for Nanosciences and Nanotechnology, University of Mumbai, Vidyanagari, 
Kalina, Mumbai, Santacruz (E) 400098, India 
e-mail: shivshripsw@gmail.com 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
R. K. Gupta (ed.), Pseudocapacitors, Engineering Materials, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45430-1_10 
177

178
H. S. Nishad et al.
at a time and possess low energy density [5]. Therefore, research on the advance-
ment of EES needs to enhance energy as well as power density. The alternative 
to the current technological advancement is the development of pseudocapacitive 
materials with enhanced surface redox reaction to store large amount of charge in 
the EES. Nanomaterials with large surface area would favor the irreversible surface 
redox reaction, but the electrolyte decomposition may led to low volumetric energy 
density. 
In past two decades, after the discovery of 2D material like graphene, many 
materials have been developed through different exfoliation of various materials like 
black phosphorous (BP), boron nitride (BN), graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4), Tran-
sition metal dichalcogenides (TMD’s), Transition metal oxides (TMO’s) and layered 
double hydroxides (LDH’s) but graphene got more attention due to its applications 
in energy storage [6–9]. The weak van der Waals bonding between the layers of 
graphene made limitation for uses in future research. Other Nobel metals like Ru, 
Pt, and Ir and other elements were also good candidates for grid scale but the natural 
abundance of these elements made it very costly for the practical application. 
Generally, electrochemical charge storage devices such as batteries and superca-
pacitors follow various charge storage mechanisms. These mechanisms namely elec-
tric double layer capacitor, (EDLC), battery type and pseudocapacitor are governed 
by non-faradic, faradic process and combination of both process respectively [10]. 
Especially pseudocapacitors are dominated either by redox activities or by interca-
lation [11]. The materials following pseudocapacitive charge storage mechanism are 
known as pseudocapacitive materials. MXene is an emerging novel material that was 
developed by Yuri Gogotsi in the year 2011 [12]. These are basically transition metal 
carbides and nitrides with surface termination groups. MXenes are pseudocapacitive 
material electrode that possess high electronic conductivity and fast ionic diffusion 
this favors more suitable candidate for energy storage and grid scale [13]. MXenes are 
layered stacked structure of nanosheets and their composites have fascinated signif-
icant amount of interest in the development of pseudocapacitive property attributed 
to layered structure. The chemical formula of MXene is Mn+1XnTx (n = 1–4) where 
M = Ti, V, Mo, Cr, Zr, Nb etc.; X represents C, N and the surface termination groups 
T = F, OH, Cl, O, etc.). The improved electrochemical properties and mechanical 
properties of 2D MXenes have gained prominent attention. Removal of Aluminum 
layer by suitable etching agent to form layered MXene Mn+1XnTx. [14]. 
MXene is derived from the layered hexagonal structure of MAX phase with space 
group P63/mmc. The ﬁrst MAX phase was discovered by prof. Michel W. Barsoum, 
it has a laminated structure with anisotropic properties. Ti3SiC2 was the ﬁrst MAX 
phase, which was a popular candidate for pseudocapacitive property. Further Prof 
Gogotsi et. al. derived MXene from MAX by etching with suitable etching agent (HF) 
[15]. The common layered structure of MXene is Ti3C2TX. Hydrophobic nature of 
the MXenes is imparted due to the presence of surface termination groups (-OH,
-F, O). This kind of material possesses more electrochemical active sites with high 
electrical conductivity for high energy, power density and fast charge storage. These 
fascinating properties made MXene promising candidate for EES like batteries and

MXenes for Pseudocapacitors
179
Fig. 1 Schematic illustration of Aluminum etching and aniline functionalization. Adapted with 
permission [14], Copyright (2018), American Chemical Society 
supercapacitors [16]. Titanium and vanadium based MXenes and their composites 
ae mostly studied for the supercapacitors (Fig. 1). 
2 
Charge Storage and Kinematics in MXene 
The EES devices possess charge storage mechanisms such as formation of elec-
trical double layer in supercapacitors and ionic intercalation and deintercalation in 
batteries (e.g., Li+ ion battery, Zn2+ ion battery). For grid scale application of EES, 
this mechanism provides insufﬁcient performance as well as efﬁciency. The pseu-
docapacitive mechanism offers fast diffusion with redox reaction is alternative of 
this charge storage mechanism chemistry and emerged as potential application in 
grid scale. The sheet like structure of MXene (e.g., Ti2CTx, Ti3C2TX, Mo2CTX and 
V2CTX) makes it promising material of class that uses intercalation pseudocapac-
itor mechanism [17–19]. The interlayer distance and stacked structure of MXene 
helps to enhance the electrochemical performance. After the complete etching of 
‘A’ layer from MAX phase only, the stacks of MXene with 2D slits remain in the 
structure. Electrolytes with water molecules can easily conﬁne into these slits that 
further boosts the capacitance. The reason for the enhancement is the negative dielec-
tric constant, the dipolar nature of the water molecule can screen electric ﬁeld and 
increases the capacitance for EDLC. The lateral layered structure improves the ionic 
diffusion and capacitance. Ti3C2Tx fabricated using ﬂash oxidation process resulted 
reversible capacity of 220 mAh g−1 at a C/18 after 30 cycles [20, 21]. 2D layered 
structure of MXene allows fast ion transport within 2D channels causes formation 
of redox active sites that add a pseudocapacitive part to the EDL mode of charge 
storage. It balances the ﬂexibility of the layered nanosheets to accommodate large

180
H. S. Nishad et al.
ions for metal ion batteries and other EES. So, one of the effective ways to obtain 
the desired capacity is tuning of oxidation process. Incorporating water molecules 
to the 2D MXene lateral dimension can enhance the speciﬁc capacitance with better 
EDLC owing to dipolar polarization of water molecules. Stacked nanosheets of 
MXene minimize the exposures to electrolytes on the surfaces and fasten the ion 
intercalation leads to improved charge storage. Several researchers have examined 
the use of MXenes nanocomposite-based electrode material for EES. The electrode 
materials based on MXene show favorable properties such as large speciﬁc capacity 
and high rate of charge/ discharge. The partially delaminated layered structure of 
MXene allows ionic intercalation as well as electrical double layer formation for 
the charge storage contribution. Ultra -sonication method is more frequently used 
for the delamination of MXene nanosheets. Electrochemical properties of MXene 
electrode by delamination and without delamination process in aqueous as well as 
non-aqueous electrolytes are presented in this chapter [22]. 
3 
Pseudocapacitive Asymmetric Devices 
For better understanding of pseudocapacitive charge storage mechanism in super-
capacitor, comparison of Cyclic Voltamogram (CV) curves of 2, 5-dihydroxy-1,4-
benzoquinone (DBQ) and composite shown in Fig. 2a attributed to pseudocapacitive 
nature indicating semi-rectangular curve broaden by redox peaks [23].
The CV curves of an asymmetric device shown in Fig. 2b assembled, as 
DBQ@RGO//TI3C2TX in 3 M H2SO4 electrolyte at different scan rates (2– 
100 mV s−1) [17]. CV curves show a combined double layer (ﬂat ends) and Faradic 
(redox peaks) charge storage nature. No sign of electrolytic decomposition observed 
from the asymmetric devices even after reaching water-splitting potential. This pseu-
docapacitive phenomenon of asymmetric devices conﬁrms the possibility to extend 
the potential window of the devices in protic electrolytes. At the higher scan rate 
of 100 mV s−1, asymmetric devices exhibited good stability, better pseudocapaci-
tive character, high rate performance and fast redox reaction kinetics. The charge 
storage mechanism in asymmetric capacitor was determined by CV curves with the 
following current (I) and scan rate (v) relation [17, 24, 25]. 
up pe r I 
equals a v Superscript b
where a and b are two adjustable parameters. Plot of log (v) vs log (I) provides 
quantitative information regarding charge storage. The diffusion-controlled process 
consists of capacitance from battery type Faradaic intercalation and the response 
of current is directly proportional to the square root of the scan rate (i.e. b = 0.5). 
Capacitance for non-diffusion-controlled processes includes EDLC and due to the 
fast Faradaic charge transfer process with active atoms surface pseudocapacitance 
take place where the current response is directly proportional to scan rate (i.e. b = 
1). In Fig. 2c, the b value obtained from anodic and cathodic peak currents are in

MXenes for Pseudocapacitors
181
Fig. 2 a CV curves of an asymmetric cell at 5 mV s−1, b CV curves at different scan rates of 
DBQ@rGO//Ti3C2Tx c Corresponding b-value obtained using log (san rates) vs log (peak current) 
d Capacitive and diffusive contributions CV curve at 2 mV s−1. Adapted with permission [17], 
Copyright (2019), Elsevier
0.86–0.87 range at 2–100 mV s−1. From the b values, it is conﬁrmed that the charge 
storage mechanism in all-pseudocapacitive asymmetric devices is battery type with 
no diffusion. Thus, the surface process limited redox and double-layer contributions 
of the DBQ@rGO and MXene qualify it as pseudocapacitive storage. Furthermore 
the asymmetric device enumerated the capacitive and diffusive contribution to the 
total current using following relationship. 
up per I left par enthesis 
upper V right parenthesis equals k Subscript 1 Baseline left parenthesis v right parenthesis plus k Subscript 2 Baseline left parenthesis v right parenthesis Superscript 0 period 5
This relationship between current (I) at ﬁxed potential is sum of the two processes, 
capacitive (k1 v) and diffusion-controlled process (k2 v0.5). From the values of k1 and 
k2, it is possible to quantify the fraction of the current initiating from the capaci-
tive and diffusion-controlled processes. The selected lower scan rate of 2 mV s−1 
would permit precise estimation of the largest contribution to the diffusion-controlled 
process, which is 89% of the total current as shown in Fig. 2d. However, the 
high b-Value with high capacitive contribution at lowest scan rate conﬁrmed the 
pseudocapacitive nature of DBQ@rGO electrodes [17, 25].

182
H. S. Nishad et al.
4 
Intercalated Pseudocapacitor 
MXene based electrodes exhibits intercalation of ions in the interlayer spacing from 
aqueous electrolyte to form EDL to narrow potential window of aqueous electrolyte 
promote pseudocapacitive performance [26]. While non aqueous electrolytes, the 
solvated ions intercalate into the interlayer spacing of the MXene in initial stage 
of charging process, narrowed solvation shell slowly collapse due to large potential 
difference in the interlayer spacing. Further charging initiate intercalation of desol-
vated ions and the atomic orbital of the MXene overlaps with the atomic orbital of 
desolvated ions for the formation of donor band. This gives rise to the intercalated 
pseudocapacitance through charge transfer between MXene nanosheets [27]. The 
differences in the charge storage mechanism between aqueous and non-aqueous elec-
trolyte highlights dissimilarity of the electrochemical responses of MXenes. MXene 
possess better charge storage kinetics compared to the traditional 2D materials for 
EES devices, asymmetric capacitors using MXene electrode in aqueous and non-
aqueous systems are capable of effectual operation at high charge and discharge 
rates. 
4.1 
Aqueous System 
In aqueous electrolyte, ionic intercalation of hydrated cations (Li+, Zn2+, Na+, K+ 
etc.) without dehydration originated due to atomic orbitals of cation in hydration 
shell cannot hybridize with the atomic orbitals of MXene. Therefore, the separation 
of charge generates an inner potential difference (Δϕ = ϕ_eE- ϕ_iE), where inter-
layer spacing is denoted by E; results in the formation of EDL. As a result of the small 
number of stored ions, electrochemical potential of the electron and ion should be 
always constant during the charge and discharge process. Hence, the potential differ-
ence governs the electrode potential during charging/discharging process. MXene 
has an insigniﬁcant pseudocapacitance nature to EDLC within the small potential 
window of aqueous electrolytes [28]. In acidic medium of electrolytes (e.g., H2SO4) 
distorted rectangular CV curves contributed to faradic reaction (Mn+ −O + H+ + e− 
→ M (n  − 1) + −OH). The in-situ X-ray absorption spectroscopy conﬁrmed the 
reduction of M. Seemingly because of Faradaic reaction; acidic electrolytes provide 
the highest capacitance in aqueous electrolytes. 
4.2 
Non-Aqueous System 
In the case of non-aqueous electrolytes, the salivation energy is very weaker than 
hydration energy. On the MXene electrode–electrolyte interface partial desolvation 
occurs, and hybridization of orbitals of surface termination group with atomic orbital

MXenes for Pseudocapacitors
183
of cations occurs. The charge transfer between MXene and intercalated cations occurs 
with the hybridization of orbital. Organic electrolytes allow the large amount of 
electrons and cations for the storage results in large potential window, leading to 
signiﬁcant changes in μ_eE and μ_iE due to the band-ﬁlling effect. Therefore, the 
enhancement in capacitance of MXene electrode from pseudocapacitive nature domi-
nated by chemical potential, which is larger in organic (non-aqueous) than that of 
aqueous electrolytes. Modiﬁcation of surface termination group and selection of 
proper intercalant can maximize the capacitance value. For example, Zn2+, Na+, K+, 
Li+ is intercalated into the matrix of MXene, 2 s orbital of ions interact with surface 
termination group to persuade large amount of charge transfer δ (Mm+ − Tn− + Na+ 
+ e− → M(m−1 + η) + − T(n + δ + η) −− X(1 − δ) + ) where X = Zn2+, 
Na+, K+, Li+ [29, 30]. However, it should be accentuated that the change in chemical 
potentials, i.e., the redox reaction of 2D MXene electrode, plays a leading role in 
determining the pseudocapacitance. 
5 
Strategies to Tune the Interlayer Spacing 
The controlling or tuning the interlayer spacing is a unique feature of Mxenes to 
enhance the electrochemical performance. 
The modiﬁcation of interlayer spacing in MXene through ion intercalation is a 
widely studied phenomenon. It involves the spontaneous insertion of cations, such as 
Na+, Li+, NH4 +, K+, and Mg2+, from aqueous solutions into the interlayer regions of 
MXene [31]. Consider the example of ion intercalation in MXene interlayer spacing, 
the K+ ion intercalation takes place via potassium hydroxide (KOH) treatment to 
interchange of -F with hydroxyl groups (OH−) instantaneously. When Ti3C2Tx was 
treated by KOH, the lattice parameter in the c-direction was enhanced from 25.0 Å to 
19.2 Å, that suggesting the tuning interlayer distance via KOH treatment. Moreover, 
the introduction of organic molecule such as EDA (ethylene diamine), dicarboxylic 
acid Fig. 3a between the interlayer spacing of MXene enhances the performance of 
supercapacitor [16, 32, 33]. Because intercalating organic molecules into the MXene 
layers, EDA were able to increase the interlayer spacing. This enlargement facilitates 
better accessibility of electrolyte ions, which improves the energy storage capacity. 
Further, the introduction of polypyrrole (PPy), 0%, 24.2%, 39%, and 51.6% in the 
Ti3C2Tx, the ‘d’ spacing increases to 13 nm, 14.31 nm, 15.43 nm, and 17.76 nm 
respectively (Fig. 3b) [34]. However, the increase in interlayer spacing of MXene 
is not solely limited to ions or molecules. Other factors, such as heteroatom doping 
and structural geometry adjustments in MXene, also play signiﬁcant roles in altering 
the interlayer properties. Doping candidates such as Nitrogen (N) and Sulphur (S) 
heteroatoms doped or Cobalt (Co)-doped MXenes have appeared as capable materials 
for supercapacitor application owing to their unique properties. These heteroatoms 
provide the signiﬁcant advantage of enlarging the interlayer spacing between the 
MXene layers. Heteroatoms doped MXenes not only increase the interlayer spacing

184
H. S. Nishad et al.
to provide more space for ion intercalation, but also introduce numerous electrochem-
ical active sites that promotes efﬁcient ion adsorption and eventually enhance the 
electrochemical performance of the material [35]. The enlarged interlayer spacing of 
Mxene has various advantages; primarily the lower resistance to transport faster ionic 
and electronic movement. Moreover, it relieves strain within the material and facili-
tates volume expansion during the insertion/deinsertion mechanism. These combined 
effects contribute to improved performance and durability of the electrode material. 
More interestingly, the wrinkling and crumpling structures of MXene also tune the 
interlayer spacing. So, while designing electrode materials for the supercapacitor 
application, this parameter should be considered. The wrinkling or crumpling the 
MXene structures provides the lower resistance across the area that allows the fast 
ion transport (Fig. 4a, b) [36]. The restacking-free wrinkled MXene (TiC2Tx) single 
layer along with sulfonic group with nitrogen decorated were achieved the speciﬁc 
capacitance of 260 F g−1 at 0.8 A g−1 along with 90% cycle stability even after 5000 
cycles [37]. More interestingly due the wrinkling of MXene, the speciﬁc capaci-
tance was three times higher than pristine MXene. Moreover, the crumbled MXene 
nanosheets in to the 3D architecture along with the porous structure demonstrated 
excellent pesudocapacitve property and exhibits the speciﬁc capacitance of 333 F 
g−1 at 1 A g−1 [38]. However, these crumbled MXenes are also stable at very higher 
current density, it showing speciﬁc capacitance of 132 F g−1 at 1000 A g−1. So  
overall, the alteration of interlayer spacing of MXene materials can be done by 
various methods such as spontaneous intercalation of ions, insertion of molecules, 
hetero-atom doping, and crumbling or wrinkling of MXenes. These strategies play a 
very essential role in their design and optimization of interlayer spacing of MXene. 
Through this manipulation of the interlayer spacing, researchers can enhance the 
properties and performance of MXene materials, opening up new possibilities for 
their use in energy storage, electronics, and beyond.
6 
Interlayer Spacing of MXene in Pesudocapacitor 
For the preparation of MXenes, initial elimination of ‘A’ layers from MAX phase 
compounds, create the interlayer space between each MXene. The interlayer space 
offers the large active sites, fast ion transport, lower diffusion barrier and able 
to accommodate large umber ion between the layer. During the electrochemical 
reaction, intercalation involves the reversible insertion and extraction of cations 
(positively charged ions) into and out of the material’s layered structure (Fig. 4c). 
During intercalation, the host material undergoes structural changes to incorporate 
the cations between its layers. The cations are typically smaller in size compared to 
the spacing between the atomic layers, enabling them to ﬁt into the interlayer spaces 
without disrupting the overall crystal structure. Especially, intercalated pseudoca-
pacitor offers quick current response and larger surface functional groups during the 
electrochemical reaction. Moreover, in aqueous electrolyte, metal ions can interact 
with water molecules, forming an electric double-layer structure on the surface of

MXenes for Pseudocapacitors
185
Fig. 3 Schematic illustration of intercalation of dicarboxylic acid between interlayer spaces of 
MXene along with structural representation. Adapted with permission [33], Copyright (2021), 
Elsevier. (b–i) FESEM image of MXene ﬁlm, (ii, iii, and  iv) FESEM image various composites of 
MXene respectively. Adapted with permission [34], Copyright (2021), Wiley
MXenes. Simultaneously, redox reactions take place between the surface functional 
groups of MXenes and the electrolyte. While in organic electrolyte at higher potential 
window can breakdown the electrical double layer structure. 
7 
Composites and Hybrid Structures of MXene 
As graphene, TMOs, TMDs, and MOFs have shown a good conductivity and elec-
trochemical properties but many efforts of their composites and hybrid materials 
proved enhance performance via synergetic effect. Hence systematic development 
of composites and/or hybrid. 
MXene materials with complementary physical and electrochemical properties is 
excellent way to achieve giant pseudocapacitive storage [39]. Furthermore, pseudo-
capacitive materials have potential electrochemical properties, stability, long working 
life, high power, and energy density. In this context, two-dimensional layered struc-
ture is highly beneﬁcial attributed to electrolytes more likely exposed to the electrode 
surface due to the greater surface-to-volume ratio. While these materials had good 
conductivity, they exhibited poor van der Waals bonding and hydrophobic nature. 
MXene is a class of two-dimensional material with a large surface-to-volume ratio, 
abundant electrochemical activity, and a high surface-to-volume ratio. In recent years, 
MXene-based composites have been gaining a lot of attention because of their 2D

186
H. S. Nishad et al.
Fig. 4 a, b FESEM image of Ti3C3 vacuum drying, and natural drying, Adapted with permission 
[36], Copyright (2021), Springer. c–i schematic representation of different ions for MXene insertion, 
(ii) schematic illustration of ion inserted polypyrole between the interlayer space of MXene. Adapted 
with permission [34], Copyright (2021), Wiley
morphology, layered structures, and good ﬂexibility. The combination of MXene with 
polymers, metal oxides, and carbon nanotubes has so far led to the development of 
several novel composite sites. MXene can improve polymer mechanical and thermal 
properties during composite formation because they have excellent mechanical prop-
erties, hydrophilic surfaces, and metallic conductivity. The surface hydrophilicity of 
single-layer MXene is higher than that of multi-layered MXene, and it is better 
compatible with polymers than that of multi-layered MXene [40]. Polymers are 
usually combined with MXene after they have been delaminated. The electrochem-
ical actuator developed using a 3D structure of MXene/polystyrene-MXene demon-
strated a signiﬁcant bending strain (1.18%), a wide frequency bandwidth, excellent 
durability (90 percent of its performance is retained after 10,000 cycles), and an 
extremely high Young’s modulus (about 246 MPa). 
The MXene’s outstanding actuation performance is because of its 3D structure 
along with high electrical conductivity and mechanical strength, MXene enables 
strong interaction between electrodes and rapid electron transfer [41]. Superca-
pacitors could beneﬁt from MXene–oxide composite electrode materials as they 
are high in electrical conductivity and possess good electrochemical stability. By

MXenes for Pseudocapacitors
187
combining metal oxides and sulphides, the theoretical capacity for a deposit can 
greatly increase MXene-based materials’ energy storage capacity. Additionally, 
MXene can prevent metallic oxides and sulphides from collapsing. Additionally, 
the insertion can prevent MXene layers from re-stacking. For this reason, MXene-
based composites are composed predominantly of metal oxides and sulphides. In 
addition to providing a large surface area for electrochemical reactions, MXene 
serves as a conductive framework that helps metal oxides to enhance its capaci-
tance, stability, and overall performance. It is noteworthy that MXene composites are 
quite stable than other nanomaterials. Electrochemical performance of a composite 
is greatly inﬂuenced by its morphology, since pore size distribution, intercalation, 
and ion diffusion [42]. As one of the most promising transition metal oxides, MnO2 
features ultrahigh theoretical speciﬁc capacitance, excellent cycle stability, and ideal 
charge storage properties [43]. Guo et al. employed a wet spinning and electrochem-
ical deposition method to grow MnO2@MXene/CNT nanoﬁbers, whose capacitance 
was 371.1 F cm−3. This speciﬁc capacitance is much higher than MnO2 electrodes 
and 1800% greater than CNT ﬁber electrodes. Overall 86.3% of the capacitance is 
retained after 10,000 cycles [44]. Zheng et al. prepared TiC2Tx and MoO3/Ti3C2Tx 
composites (Fig. 5a–f) and between pristine Ti3C2Tx and MoO3 exhibit low electro-
chemical performance as comparison with MoO3/Ti3C2Tx (Fig. 5g, h). Further, the 
GCD curves of MoO3/Ti3C2Tx composites showed higher discharge time than other 
two materials (Fig. 4i). Thus MoO3/Ti3C2Tx anode containing Ti3C2Tx bridging the 
molecular belts of MoO3 generated 31.2 W h kg−1 gravimetric energy density and 
39.2 Wh L−1 volumetric energy density [45]. As transition metal oxide contributes 
most of the weight to MXene, it has a high energy density. Cyclic stability was 94.2% 
after 10,000 cycles. The CoFe2O4 nanorods were prepared using MOFs attached to 
MXene nanosheets by Xie et al. In this case, Co-Fe oxide acts as a spacer between 
MXene layers, which increases the interlayer spacing and prevents restacking.
In addition to improving ﬂexibility, Co-Fe enhances charge transfer with MXene. 
In LiCl electrolyte, the composite demonstrates a volumetric capacitance of 2467.6 
F cm−3. In addition to its electrochemical storage stability, this device has 88.2% 
capacitance retention after 10,000 charges and discharges, making it a better candi-
date for ﬂexible and portable energy storage devices in the future [46]. Freestanding 
composite ﬁlms comprising of Ti3C2Tx nanosheets decorated with gold nanoparti-
cles (AuNPs) were successfully synthesized via a self-reduction reaction between 
Ti3C2Tx and an aqueous solution of HAuCl4. The mixture solution was subjected to 
vacuum ﬁltration to obtain the composite ﬁlms. Subsequently, the MXene/AuNPs 
composite was employed as an electrode material for supercapacitors, marking the 
ﬁrst utilization of MXene/AuNPs in this context (Fig. 6a–c). Remarkably, the elec-
trochemical properties of the MXene/AuNPs electrodes were signiﬁcantly enhanced 
in comparison to the pure Ti3C2Tx electrodes [39]. Another composite material of 
MXene with NiFe-LDH materials were prepared via hydrothermal method. MXene

188
H. S. Nishad et al.
Fig. 5 a SEM images of MoO3 in plan-view, b and cross-section view c MoO3/Ti3C2Tz composite 
in plan-view, d, e and cross-section view, f Ti3C2Tz ﬁlm in plan-view, g CV curves of MoO3, MoO3/ 
TiC2T2, TiC2Tx at 5 mV s−1, h CV curves of MoO3/TiC2T2 at different scan rates, i GCD curves 
of MoO3, MoO3/TiC2T2, TiC2Tx at 5 A g−1. Adapted with permission [45], Copyright (2021), 
Wiley
shows the nanoplate like morphology (Fig. 6d) while the composite of MXene/NiFe-
LDH showing the Nanoﬂake like morphology (Fig. 6e). The electrochemical perfor-
mance NiFe/MXene have higher speciﬁc capacitance value of 720.2 F g−1 than NiFe-
LDH having 465 F g−1 [47]. Better performance and excellent electrical conduc-
tivity, high porosity, and mechanical stability of carbon nanotubes make them ideal 
conductive spacers for two-dimensional nanomaterials. MXene/CNT aerogels were 
fabricated by using easy directional freezing and freeze-drying methods to layer one-
dimensional CNTs with MXene nanosheets. MXene nanosheets showed improved 
interactions because of the strong π-π interactions, whereas CNTs enhanced the 
network’s interconnection. The resultant MXene/CNT composite aerogel shows high 
conductivity of 1600 S m−1 and an ultralow density of 7.0 mg cm−3. Over 1000 cycles 
of compression and release, the MXene/carbon nanotube aerogel can retain approxi-
mately 85% of its initial strain. MXene/carbon nanotube aerogel possesses a speciﬁc 
capacitance of 142.5 F g−1 at 0.3 A g−1. It concludes that MXene/carbon nanotubes 
are the most suitable material for ﬂexible supercapacitors [48].

MXenes for Pseudocapacitors
189
Fig. 6 a, b SEM images of MXene/AuNPs composite ﬁlm at various magniﬁcation, c Cross-
sectional view of MXene/AuNPs. Adapted with permission [40], Copyright (2021), Springer Nature. 
d SEM image of m-MXene, e, f SEM images of NiFe-LDH/MXene. Adapted with permission [47], 
Copyright (2020), Elsevier 
8 
Summery and Future Prospective 
In summary, MXene materials exhibit exceptional charge storage capabilities and 
unique kinematics, making them promising candidates for pseudocapacitor elec-
trodes. Further, different strategies can be utilized to tune the interlayer spacing of 
MXene such as spontaneous interaction of ions, molecules, crumping etc. whereas, 
the electrochemical property of MXene were investigated in both in aqueous and 
non-aqueous systems. Additionally, the integration of MXene into composites and 
hybrid structures further improved the overall performance of MXene-based pseudo-
capacitors. Currently, an emerging printing technology like continuous centrifugal 
coating are used for the fabrication of MXene based composites for microelectrode 
preparation. This printing method would be used to fabricate highly compact micro-
electrode. Pore engineering is one of the physical methods to emphasize the surface 
area of the MXene but due to the brittle nature of the MXene nanosheets, it is difﬁ-
cult to achieve by physical method. Chemical method used to modify the surface 
termination groups results in crumpling of MXene nanosheets. To achieve better 
electrochemical performance, modiﬁcation of electrolyte to salvage charge storage 
ability for pseudocapacitor is necessary. EES devices like Li air batteries and current 
trending devices like Zn ion, Zn air batteries have experienced a resurrection due 
to progress in the technology for preparation of stable 2D materials. 2D MXene is 
an attractive material used as cathode preparation in Zn ion battery with improves 
speciﬁc capacity and stability and electrode material in supercapacitor with enhanced

190
H. S. Nishad et al.
cyclic stability, lifetime. A large number of theoretical study on ion batteries revealed 
electrochemical performance is not good as predicated, this is due to less funda-
mental understanding of mechanisms. Gap between fundamental understandings can 
be ﬁlled by operando characterization techniques to identify the errors and pursued 
suitable solution. Operando X-ray study for stabilizing effect on aqueous Zn capac-
itor with MXene based nanocomposite electrode advancing the path of research. 
MXenes worth as a consistent 2D electrode for EES devices, has been recognized 
by attempting various obstacles and this trend is expected to remain continue in the 
future for other materials. Therefore, MXene will grasp its true potential by fetching 
2D materials to the large industrial-scale application. 
References 
1. M. Li, J. Lu, Z. Chen, K. Amine, 30 Years of Lithium-Ion Batteries. Adv. Mater. 30, 1800561 
(2018). https://doi.org/10.1002/ADMA.201800561 
2. M. Fichtner, K. Edström, E. Ayerbe, M. Berecibar, A. Bhowmik, I.E. Castelli, S. Clark, R. 
Dominko, M. Erakca, A.A. Franco, A. Grimaud, B. Horstmann, A. Latz, H. Lorrmann, M. 
Meeus, R. Narayan, F. Pammer, J. Ruhland, H. Stein, T. Vegge, M. Weil, Rechargeable Batteries 
of the Future—The State of the Art from a BATTERY 2030+ Perspective. Adv. Energy Mater. 
12, 2102904 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1002/AENM.202102904 
3. P. S. Walke, S. P. Gupta, H. Nishad, B. R. Sathe, D. J. Late, Engineering two-dimensional 
materials for high-performance supercapacitor devices. Fundam. Supercapacitor Appl. 2D 
Mater. 359–387. (2021). https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-821993-5.00001-7 
4. J. Xie, Lu YC (2020) A retrospective on lithium-ion batteries. Nat. Commun. 111(11), 1–4 
(2020). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-16259-9 
5. S.P. Gupta, P.S. Walke, Scalable multifunctional ultralight mesoporous micro yarn carbon for 
excellent durable supercapacitor and tremendous oils sorbent. Chem. Eng. J. 456, 141011 
(2023). https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CEJ.2022.141011 
6. H.S. Nishad, S.P. Gupta, N.S. Khan, A.V. Biradar, J. Lee, S.M. Mane, P.S. Walke, Structural 
Transformation of Hydrated WO3 into SnWO4 via Sn incorporation enables a superior pseu-
docapacitor and aqueous Zinc-Ion Battery. Energy Fuels (2023). https://doi.org/10.1021/ACS. 
ENERGYFUELS.3C00556/SUPPL_FILE/EF3C00556_SI_001.PDF 
7. E.P. Asiwal, H.H. Nishad, C.S. Gujja, P.S. Walke, S.D. Pawar, Fabrication of anhydride core-
based conductive layered Ni-MOF nanoﬂakes for high performance supercapacitors. New J. 
Chem. (2023). https://doi.org/10.1039/D2NJ06120A 
8. H.S. Nishad, S.P. Gupta, V. Kotha, B.M. Patil, S.D. Chakane, M.G. Bute, S.W. Gosavi, D.J. Late, 
P.S. Walke, Enhanced van-der Waals separation in hydrated tungsten oxide nanoplates enables 
superior pseudocapacitive charge storage. J. Alloys Compd. 914, 165227 (2022). https://doi. 
org/10.1016/J.JALLCOM.2022.165227 
9. S.P. Gupta, H.H. Nishad, V.B. Patil, S.D. Chakane, M.A. More, D.J. Late, P.S. Walke, 
Morphology and crystal structure dependent pseudocapacitor performance of hydrated WO3 
nanostructures. Mater. Adv. 1, 2492–2500 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1039/d0ma00518e 
10. Y. Wang, L. Zhang, H. Hou, W. Xu, G. Duan, S. He, K. Liu, Jiang S (2020) Recent progress in 
carbon-based materials for supercapacitor electrodes: a review. J. Mater. Sci. 561(56), 173–200 
(2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/S10853-020-05157-6 
11. H.T.H. Shi, S. Jang, A. Reza-Ugalde, H.E. Naguib, Hierarchically structured nitrogen-doped 
multilayer reduced graphene oxide for ﬂexible intercalated supercapacitor electrodes. ACS 
Appl. Energy. Mater. 3, 987–997 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1021/ACSAEM.9B02038/ASSET/ 
IMAGES/MEDIUM/AE9B02038_0010.GIF

MXenes for Pseudocapacitors
191
12. M. Naguib, M. Kurtoglu, V. Presser, J. Lu, J. Niu, M. Heon, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi, M.W. 
Barsoum, Two-Dimensional nanocrystals: Two-Dimensional nanocrystals produced by exfo-
liation of Ti3AlC2 (Adv. Mater. 37/2011). Adv. Mater. 23, 4207–4207 (2011). https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/ADMA.201190147 
13. N.K. Chaudhari, H. Jin, B. Kim, D. San Baek, S.H. Joo, K. Lee, MXene: an emerging two-
dimensional material for future energy conversion and storage applications. J Mater Chem A 
5, 24564–24579 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1039/C7TA09094C 
14. J. Fu, J. Yun, S. Wu, L. Li, L. Yu, K.H. Kim, Architecturally robust Graphene-Encapsulated 
MXene Ti2CTx@Polyaniline composite for High-Performance Pouch-Type asymmetric super-
capacitor. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 10, 34212–34221 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1021/ACS 
AMI.8B10195/SUPPL_FILE/AM8B10195_SI_001.PDF 
15. K.R.G. Lim, M. Shekhirev, B.C. Wyatt, B. Anasori, Y. Gogotsi, Seh ZW (2022) fundamentals 
of MXene synthesis. Nat Synth 18(1), 601–614 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s44160-022-
00104-6 
16. M. Hu, H. Zhang, T. Hu, B. Fan, X. Wang, Z. Li, Emerging 2D MXenes for supercapacitors: 
Status, challenges and prospects. Chem. Soc. Rev. 49, 6666–6693 (2020). https://doi.org/10. 
1039/d0cs00175a 
17. M. Boota, C. Chen, K.L. Van Aken, J. Jiang, Y. Gogotsi, Organic-inorganic all-pseudocapacitive 
asymmetric energy storage devices. Nano Energy 65, 104022 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
J.NANOEN.2019.104022 
18. H. Tang, Q. Hu, M. Zheng, Y. Chi, X. Qin, H. Pang, Q. Xu, MXene–2D layered electrode 
materials for energy storage. Prog Nat Sci Mater Int 28, 133–147 (2018). https://doi.org/10. 
1016/J.PNSC.2018.03.003 
19. Q. Tang, Z. Zhou, P. Shen, Are MXenes promising anode materials for Li ion batteries? Compu-
tational studies on electronic properties and Li storage capability of Ti 3C 2 and Ti 3C 2X 2 (X 
= F, OH) monolayer. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 134, 16909–16916 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
JA308463R/SUPPL_FILE/JA308463R_SI_001.PDF 
20. S.A. Thomas, A. Patra, B.M. Al-Shehri, M. Selvaraj, A. Aravind, C.S. Rout, MXene based 
hybrid materials for supercapacitors: Recent developments and future perspectives. J Energy 
Storage 55, 105765 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1016/J.EST.2022.105765 
21. S. Yadav, A. Sharma, Importance and challenges of hydrothermal technique for synthesis of 
transition metal oxides and composites as supercapacitor electrode materials. J Energy Storage 
44, 103295 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1016/J.EST.2021.103295 
22. M.R. Lukatskaya, S.M. Bak, X. Yu, X.Q. Yang, M.W. Barsoum, Y. Gogotsi, Probing the mecha-
nism of high capacitance in 2D Titanium Carbide Using in Situ X-Ray absorption spectroscopy. 
Adv. Energy Mater. 5, 2–5 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1002/aenm.201500589 
23. Z. Wang, Z. Xu, H. Huang, X. Chu, Y. Xie, D. Xiong, C. Yan, H. Zhao, H. Zhang, W. Yang, 
Unraveling and regulating self-discharge behavior of Ti3C2Tx MXene-based supercapaci-
tors. ACS Nano 14, 4916–4924 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1021/ACSNANO.0C01056/SUPPL_ 
FILE/NN0C01056_SI_001.PDF 
24. M. Boota, Y. Gogotsi, MXene—Conducting polymer asymmetric pseudocapacitors. Adv. 
Energy Mater. 9, 1802917 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1002/AENM.201802917 
25. J. Wu, Q. Li, C.E. Shuck, K. Maleski, H.N. Alshareef, J. Zhou, Y. Gogotsi, L. Huang, An 
aqueous 2.1 V pseudocapacitor with MXene and V-MnO2 electrodes. Nano Res. 15, 535–541 
(2022). https://doi.org/10.1007/S12274-021-3513-X/METRICS 
26. P. Zhang, J. Li, D. Yang, A. Soomro, B. Xu, P. Zhang, J. Li, D. Yang, R.A. Soomro, B. 
Xu, Flexible Carbon Dots-Intercalated MXene ﬁlm electrode with outstanding volumetric 
performance for supercapacitors. Adv. Funct. Mater. 33, 2209918 (2023). https://doi.org/10. 
1002/ADFM.202209918 
27. J. Xu, T. Peng, Q. Zhang, H. Zheng, H. Yu, S. Shi, Intercalation effects on the electrochemical 
properties of Ti3C2TxMXene nanosheets for High-Performance supercapacitors. ACS Appl 
Nano Mater 5, 8794–8803 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1021/ACSANM.2C00632/SUPPL_FILE/ 
AN2C00632_SI_001.PDF

192
H. S. Nishad et al.
28. S. Zheng, C. Zhang, F. Zhou, Y. Dong, X. Shi, V. Nicolosi, Z.S. Wu, X. Bao, Ionic liquid 
pre-intercalated MXene ﬁlms for ionogel-based ﬂexible micro-supercapacitors with high volu-
metric energy density. J. Mater. Chem. A. 7, 9478–9485 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1039/C9T 
A02190F 
29. M. Okubo, A. Sugahara, S. Kajiyama, A. Yamada, MXene as a Charge Storage Host. 
Acc. Chem. Res. 51, 591–599 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1021/ACS.ACCOUNTS.7B00481/ 
SUPPL_FILE/AR7B00481_SI_001.PDF 
30. J. Pang, R.G. Mendes, A. Bachmatiuk, L. Zhao, H.Q. Ta, T. Gemming, H. Liu, Z. Liu, M.H. 
Rummeli, Applications of 2D MXenes in energy conversion and storage systems. Chem. Soc. 
Rev. 48, 72–133 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1039/C8CS00324F 
31. R. Fang, C. Lu, A. Chen, K. Wang, H. Huang, Y. Gan, C. Liang, J. Zhang, X. Tao, Y. 
Xia, W. Zhang, 2 D MXene-based energy storage materials: interfacial structure design and 
functionalization. Chemsuschem 13, 1409–1419 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1002/CSSC.201 
902537 
32. K. Nasrin, V. Sudharshan, K. Subramani, M. Sathish, Insights into 2D/2D MXene Heterostruc-
tures for Improved Synergy in Structure toward Next-Generation Supercapacitors: A Review. 
Adv. Funct. Mater. 32, 1–42 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.202110267 
33. M.C. Liu, B.M. Zhang, Y.S. Zhang, B.N. Gu, C.Y. Tian, D.T. Zhang, Y.Q. Wang, B. Zhao, Y.Y. 
Wang, M.J. Liu, Y.J. Yu, K. Zhao, K.L. Bin, Y.L. Chueh, Regulating interlayer spacing with 
pillar and strain structures in Ti3C2 MXene layers by molecular welding for superior alkali 
metal ion storage. Mater Today Energy 22, 100832 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mtener. 
2021.100832 
34. W. Cheng, J. Fu, H. Hu, D. Ho, Interlayer structure engineering of MXene-Based Capacitor-
Type electrode for Hybrid Micro-Supercapacitor toward Battery-Level energy density. Adv. 
Sci. 8, 1–13 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1002/advs.202100775 
35. Y. Tang, J. Zhu, W. Wu, C. Yang, W. Lv, F. Wang, Synthesis of Nitrogen-Doped Two-
Dimensional Ti 3 C 2 with enhanced electrochemical performance. J. Electrochem. Soc. 164, 
A923–A929 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0041706jes 
36. N. Sun, Z. Guan, Q. Zhu, B. Anasori, Y. Gogotsi, B. Xu, Enhanced ionic accessibility of ﬂex-
ible MXene electrodes produced by natural sedimentation. Nano-Micro Lett 12, 1–11 (2020). 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40820-020-00426-0 
37. Y. Li, Y. Deng, J. Zhang, Y. Shen, X. Yang, W. Zhang, Synthesis of restacking-free wrin-
kled Ti3C2Tx monolayers by sulfonic acid group grafting and N-doped carbon decoration for 
enhanced supercapacitor performance. J. Alloys Compd. 842, 155985 (2020). https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jallcom.2020.155985 
38. X. Zhang, J. Miao, P. Zhang, Q. Zhu, M. Jiang, B. Xu, 3D crumbled MXene for high-
performance supercapacitors. Chinese Chem Lett 31, 2305–2308 (2020). https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.cclet.2020.03.040 
39. Z.M. Qiu, Y. Bai, Y.D. Gao, C.L. Liu, Y. Ru, Y.C. Pi, Y.Z. Zhang, Y.S. Luo, Pang H (2021) 
MXenes nanocomposites for energy storage and conversion. Rare Met. 414(41), 1101–1128 
(2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/S12598-021-01876-0 
40. X. Zhan, C. Si, J. Zhou, Z. Sun, MXene and MXene-based composites: synthesis, properties 
and environment-related applications. Nanoscale Horizons 5, 235–258 (2020). https://doi.org/ 
10.1039/C9NH00571D 
41. T. Wang, T. Wang, C. Weng, L. Liu, J. Zhao, Z. Zhang, Engineering electrochemical actuators 
with large bending strain based on 3D-structure titanium carbide MXene composites. Nano 
Res. 14, 2277–2284 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/S12274-020-3222-X/METRICS 
42. C. Peng, Z. Kuai, T. Zeng, Y. Yu, Z. Li, J. Zuo, S. Chen, S. Pan, L. Li, WO3 Nanorods/MXene 
composite as high performance electrode for supercapacitors. J. Alloys Compd. 810, 151928 
(2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JALLCOM.2019.151928 
43. Y. Wei, W. Luo, Z. Zhuang, B. Dai, J. Ding, T. Li, M. Ma, X. Yin, Fabrication of ternary MXene 
/ MnO 2 / polyaniline nanostructure with good electrochemical performances. Adv. Compos. 
Hybrid. Mater. 1082–1091 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/s42114-021-00323-z

MXenes for Pseudocapacitors
193
44. Z. Guo, Y. Li, Z. Lu, Materials High-performance MnO2 @ MXene/carbon nanotube ﬁber 
electrodes with internal and external construction for supercapacitors. J. Mater. Sci. 57, 3613– 
3628 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10853-021-06840-y 
45. Z. Zheng, W. Wu, T. Yang, E. Wang, Z. Du, W. Zheng, J. Halim, A. El Ghazaly, A.S. Etman, 
E.N. Tseng, P.O.Å. Persson, J. Rosen, M.W. Barsoum, Flexible Free-Standing MoO3/Ti3C2Tz 
MXene composite ﬁlms with high gravimetric and volumetric capacities. Adv. Sci. 8, 1–9 
(2021). https://doi.org/10.1002/advs.202003656 
46. W. Xie, Y. Wang, J. Zhou, M. Zhang, J. Yu, C. Zhu, J. Xu, MOF-derived CoFe2O4 nanorods 
anchored in MXene nanosheets for all pseudocapacitive ﬂexible supercapacitors with superior 
energy storage. Appl. Surf. Sci. 534, 147584 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/J.APSUSC.2020. 
147584 
47. H. Zhou, F. Wu, L. Fang, J. Hu, H. Luo, T. Guan, B.S. Hu, M. Zhou, Layered NiFe-LDH/MXene 
nanocomposite electrode for high-performance supercapacitor. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 45, 
13080–13089 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2020.03.001 
48. T. Xu, Y. Wang, K. Liu, Q. Zhao, Q. Liang, M. Zhang, C. Si, Ultralight MXene/carbon 
nanotube composite aerogel for high—performance ﬂexible supercapacitor. Adv. Compos. 
Hybrid. Mater. 8, 1–9 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1007/s42114-023-00675-8

MXenes-Based Composites 
for Pseudocapacitors 
Li Sun and Chunxu Pan 
Abstract MXenes, a family of two-dimensional (2D) transition metal carbides/ 
nitrides with a general formula of Mn+1XnTx (n = 1–3), are demonstrated to act 
as a suitable electrode for high-performance energy storage devices owing to 2D 
lamellar structure, impressive density, metallic-like conductivity, availability of abun-
dant active edge sites and tunable electrochemical properties, especially in super-
capacitors. Nevertheless, MXenes have some demerits due to the aggregation and 
restacking of nanosheets, which hinder their further exploration. MXenes with the 
unique 2D layered surface and rich surface functional groups are easy to combine 
with other functional materials (transition metal oxides, transition metal disulﬁde 
compounds, conductive polymers, etc.) to construct composites, which can prevent 
MXenes aggregation, thereby promoting the formation of stable dispersions. Further-
more, owing to synergistic effects, the electrochemical performance of MXenes-
based composites is superior to that of two precursors. In this chapter, the latest 
research progress of MXenes-based composites is elaborated and discussed. This 
chapter reviews various methods for preparing MXenes-based composites, intro-
duces their applications in supercapacitors, and analyzes their excellent electrochem-
ical properties. Similarly, we mainly focus on the current development, challenges, 
and prospects of MXenes-based composites for pseudocapacitors application. 
Keywords 2D materials · MXenes-based composites · Electrochemical 
performance · Pseudocapacitors · Metal carbides/nitrides
L. Sun 
Northwest Institute for Non-ferrous Metal Research, Xi’an 710016, People’s Republic of China 
C. Pan envelope symbol 
School of Physics and Technology, MOE Key Laboratory of Artiﬁcial Micro- and 
Nano-Structures, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China 
e-mail: cxpan@whu.edu.cn 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
R. K. Gupta (ed.), Pseudocapacitors, Engineering Materials, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45430-1_11 
195

196
L. Sun and C. Pan
1 
Introduction 
Among various energy storage devices in modern electronic devices, supercapacitors 
as a new, green, safe, and efﬁcient energy storage device have received widespread 
attention [1, 2]. How to achieve the advantages of fast charging/discharging, high 
power density, ultra-long cycle life, and excellent mechanical properties of superca-
pacitors under the premise of improving energy density has always been the focus 
of researchers in the ﬁeld of new energy storage technology [3]. As an important 
component of supercapacitors, electrode materials are essential for their performance 
improvement [3]. At present, traditional electric double-layer capacitor materials 
(low energy density) and pseudocapacitor materials (poor stability or conductivity) 
have their own limitations [4]. Therefore, to realize the development and appli-
cation of high-performance supercapacitors, there is an urgent need to build new 
high-efﬁciency electrode materials with reasonable morphology and structure, high 
electrochemical performance, high energy, and power density, and long cycle life. 
The ways to improve the performance of supercapacitors mainly include active 
material selection and structure control. In 2011, Professor Michel W. Barsoum and 
Professor Yury Gogotsi ﬁrst reported the successful synthesis of Ti3C2Tx (MXenes) 
by selectively etching the original Ti3AlC2 (MAX phase), which sparked research 
on MXenes [5]. The MXenes can be expressed as Mn+1XnTx or Mn+1Xn (M and 
X are as in the MAX phase and T is O, OH, H, or F) [6]. MXenes can be semi-
conductive or metal-conductive with conductivity up to 6500 S/cm [4]. The conduc-
tivity depends on the atomic species of M and X, as well as the -T group. In addition, 
MXenes exhibit much higher pseudocapacitance than other capacitive materials. 
The MXenes solution has clay-like properties and therefore has a speciﬁc ability to 
form binder-free electrodes that reach high capacities (up to 900 F/m3) at 2 mV/s 
[4]. Moreover, due to unique atomic layer thickness and lateral size, MXenes can 
withstand various deformations and has broad application prospects in the ﬁelds of 
new energy vehicles, portable electronic devices, ﬂexible and wearable devices [7]. 
High capacitance (especially volumetric capacitance) and similar metallic conduc-
tivity make MXenes a promising active material for designing supercapacitors with 
high-energy and high-power density. However, pure MXenes typically exhibit unsat-
isfactory supercapacitors performance (low speciﬁc capacitance of 245 F/g in H2SO4 
electrolyte), hindering its application as a commercial electrode material [4]. There-
fore, various attempts have been made to overcome the problem of MXenes as 
electrodes, resulting in the idea of hybridization with pseudocapacitive materials to 
achieve effective performance improvement. In addition, the introduction of pseudo-
capacitive materials into the two-dimensional (2D) MXenes structure will effectively 
suppress the restacking and aggregation of nanosheets. So far, MXenes have success-
fully combined metals, metal sulﬁdes, metal oxides, polypyrrole, etc., and applied in 
various ﬁelds, such as batteries, supercapacitors, electromagnetic wave absorption, 
water puriﬁcation, etc. [7–10]. 
To understand the research progress of MXenes composites quickly and conve-
niently in pseudocapacitors, this chapter elaborates and discusses the latest research

MXenes-Based Composites for Pseudocapacitors
197
progress of Mxenes-based composites, reviews various methods for preparing 
Mxenes-based composites, introduces their applications in supercapacitors, and 
analyzes their excellent electrochemical properties. Similarly, we mainly focus on the 
current development, challenges, and future prospects of Mxenes-based composites 
for pseudocapacitors application. 
2 
MXenes Based Composites for Pseudocapacitors 
With the unique 2D layered structure, rich surface functional groups, and high 
electronic conductivity, MXenes are considered a promising material for preparing 
composites in energy storage applications [11]. At present, various active materials 
(metal oxides, metal sulﬁdes, conductive polymers, etc.) have been combined with 
MXenes to achieve synergistic effects [11–13]. In composites, MXenes will provide 
high electron conductivity to promote rapid electron transfer, increase the achievable 
surface area, and stabilize the structure of the active material [8]. On the other hand, 
the active component serves as a spacer to increase interlayer spacing and reduce the 
reaccumulation of MXenes, thereby achieving rapid ion transport and improving ion 
accessibility [7]. In addition, active materials such as metal oxides, metal sulﬁdes, 
and conductive polymers undergo reversible redox reactions to provide high pseudo-
capacitance for high energy storage [11]. Therefore, MXenes-based composites typi-
cally exhibit enhanced electrochemical performance, which represents an important 
and promising direction for MXenes in supercapacitor applications. 
2.1 
MXenes/Metal Compound Composites 
Metal compounds have received widespread attention due to their low cost, natural 
abundance, environmental friendliness, and high theoretical capacitance, making 
them ideal materials for high-performance electrode materials in supercapacitors [7]. 
However, low conductivity signiﬁcantly hinders their electrochemical performance. 
The strategy to further improve the performance of metal compound-based super-
capacitors is to combine them with other high-conductivity materials to construct 
nanocomposites for assisting in rapid electron transfer [14]. Compared with metal 
compounds, MXenes have excellent conductivity but relatively low capacitance. 
Integrating MXenes with transition metal compounds into supercapacitor electrodes 
can combine their respective advantages while compensating for their respective 
shortcomings.

198
L. Sun and C. Pan
2.1.1
MXenes/Metal Oxide Composites 
Metal oxides such as MnO2, RuO2, Co3O4, NiO, TiO2, WO3, Fe2O3, ZnO, etc. have  
been widely used to combine with MXenes to construct composites to achieve excel-
lent capacitive performance [7, 11, 14]. MnO2 is considered one of the most attractive 
electrode materials for supercapacitors in the metal oxides family due to extraordi-
nary characteristics, such as pseudocapacitance behavior and high theoretical speciﬁc 
capacitance (1370 F/g) [7]. Recently, researchers have studied the application of 
different structures MnO2 combined with MXenes to construct nanocomposites for 
optimizing the electrochemical performance of electrodes in supercapacitors. Yu 
et al. prepared a conductive, highly deformable, independent, fully pseudopacca-
pacitive electrode (Ti3C2Tx/MnO2 NWs) using solution treatment in Fig. 1a [15]. 
MnO2 NWs with a diameter of 10–30 nm and a length of 50 μm have excellent 
ﬂexibility, which serve as intermediate layers and additional electrochemical active 
materials between Ti3C2Tx nanosheets in Fig. 1b. This structure prevents MXene 
from restacking, improves pseudocapacitance, and maintains the excellent ﬂexibility 
of the composite paper. The volume capacitance of the nanocomposites as an elec-
trode for supercapacitors can reach up to 1025 F/cm3 at 0.2 mA/cm2 in Fig. 1c. 
In addition, the MnO2/Ti3C2Tx electrode exhibits excellent cycling stability (with 
a capacitance retention of 98.38% after 10,000 cycles). Yang et al. prepared a ﬂex-
ible MnO2/Ti3C2Tx hybrid ﬁlm composed of porous Ti3C2Tx nanosheets and MnO2 
nanoshells, which can be directly used as electrodes for pseudocapacitors [16]. The 
unique porous structure of the ﬁlm promotes the vertical and planar transport of ions 
through the nanopores within and between Ti3C2Tx nanosheets. Compared with 
MnO2 nanoshells and porous Ti3C2Tx nanosheets, the speciﬁc surface area, speciﬁc 
capacitance, and cycling stability of the hybrid ﬁlm were signiﬁcantly improved. The 
nanocomposites, as an electrode for supercapacitors, have a mass-speciﬁc capaci-
tance of 452 F/g and a volume capacitance of 1273 F/cm3 at a current density of 
1 A/g, respectively. In addition, the MnO2/Ti3C2Tx electrode has high capacitance 
retention (90% after 5000 cycles).
In addition to MnO2, researchers have explored many other active materials, 
such as Fe2O3, NiO, Co3O4 and Fe3O4, which can improve electrochemical perfor-
mance by combining with highly conductive MXenes. Due to the high theoretical 
capacitance (3625 F/g) and large volume scalability in the process of charge and 
discharge, Fe2O3 combined with MXenes to construct nanocomposites can effec-
tively improve the performance of electrodes [9]. Lan et al. reported a ﬂexible hybrid 
paper composed of Fe2O3 nanoparticles ﬁxed on Ti3C2Tx (Fe2O3 NPs@MX) through 
electrostatic self-assembly and annealing treatment method in Fig. 1d [17]. 
Fe2O3 nanoparticles effectively expanded the layer spacing of Ti3C2Tx 
nanosheets, allowing more electrochemical active sites to store charges. At the 
same time, Ti3C2Tx nanosheets form a continuous metal skeleton (Fig. 1e), which 
suppresses the volume expansion of Fe2O3 nanoparticles during charging and 
discharging process, and enhances cycling stability. The nanocomposites have an 
ultra-high volume capacitance of 2607 F/cm3 (584 F/g) in Fig. 1f and highly cycling 
stability (121% capacitance retention after 13,000 cycles). In addition, the assembled

MXenes-Based Composites for Pseudocapacitors
199
Fig. 1 Ti3C2Tx/MnO2 NWs: a Preparation process; b SEM images and c Capacitance value. 
Adapted with permission [15], Copyright (2018), Wiley Online Library. Fe2O3 NPs@MX: d Prepa-
ration process; e SEM images and f Capacitance value. Adapted with permission [17], Copy-
right (2020), American Chemical Society. Co-MXene: g Preparation process; h SEM images and 
i Capacitance value. Adapted with permission [19], Copyright (2022), Elsevier
symmetrical solid-state supercapacitors show an energy density of 29.7 Wh/L and 
excellent mechanical ﬂexibility. Ghule et al. synthesized NiO@MXene nanocompos-
ites (NO@MX) in a controlled manner [18]. Firstly, 2D multi-layer MXene endows 
nanocomposite with excellent conductivity. The introduction of NiO inhibits the 
restacking of nanosheets, achieving a large surface area and providing more active

200
L. Sun and C. Pan
sites. Secondly, MXene enhances the electrical conductivity of NO@MX electrodes 
to improve electrochemical performance. The nanocomposite, as an electrode for 
supercapacitors, has an ultra-high speciﬁc capacitance of 1542 F/g. In addition, the 
all-solid-state asymmetric supercapacitors have an energy density of 10.7 Wh/kg 
and excellent stability (90.6% capacitance retention after 5000 cycles). Lou et al. 
successfully prepared Co-MXene composites by growing Co3O4 on the surface of 
Nb2C-MXene using a hydrothermal method in Fig. 1g [19]. The composites have a 
high conductivity, 2D layered morphology, and an open structure. The self-assembly 
of Co3O4 between Nb2C MXene layers (Fig. 1h) can effectively prevent the self-
stacking of nanosheets. The high electrical conductivity and abundant active groups 
on the surface of MXene provide a large number of active sites for the uniform 
distribution of Co3O4. Nb2C-MXene with a large speciﬁc surface area can be used 
as a substrate for growing Co3O4 nanoparticles to establish three-dimensional (3D) 
cross-linked structures, which provide an efﬁcient electron transfer channel between 
Co3O4 nanoparticles and Nb2C-MXene. In addition, the synergistic effect of MXene 
and Co3O4 makes the Co-MXene electrode has excellent electrochemical stability. 
The nanocomposites, as electrodes for supercapacitors, have a high speciﬁc capaci-
tance of 1061 F/g at a current density of 2 A/g in Fig. 1i. In addition, the assembled 
asymmetric supercapacitors show an energy density of 60.3 Wh/kg and 93% capacity 
retention after 1000 cycles. 
In addition to the above-mentioned metal oxides, other metal oxides (V2O5, 
MoO3, WO3, etc.) with high electrochemical properties have also been used to 
combine with MXenes to construct high-performance supercapacitors electrode 
materials. V2O5 shows the advantages of high voltage windows, good theoretical 
capacitance, low toxicity, and low cost, and has been widely used in energy storage 
devices, such as lithium-ion batteries and supercapacitors [5]. Ma et al. prepared 
Ti3C2Tx MXene/V2O5 (MV) ﬁlms by vacuum-assisted ﬁltration of a mixture of 
MXene nanosheets and V2O5 nanoﬁbers [20]. The introduction of V2O5 nanoﬁbers 
effectively inhibits the self-stacking of MXene nanosheets, and the thickness of MV 
ﬁlm can be adjusted by controlling the dosage of V2O5 nanoparticles. The MV ﬁlms 
show excellent capacitive properties (319.1 F/g, 0.5 A/g) and cyclic stability (70.4%, 
5000 cycles, 3 A g-1), thanks to the efﬁcient intercalation of V2O5 nanoﬁbers. In 
addition, the asymmetric supercapacitors have a capacitance retention rate of 83.9% 
after 8,000 cycles and an energy density of 20.83 Wh/kg, indicating good energy 
storage capacity. Yuan et al. prepared MXene/MoO3 hybrid membranes by vacuum-
assisted ﬁltration of MXene nanosheet suspension and MoO3 nanoribbon dispersion 
in Fig. 2a [21]. In composites, the ultra-thin MoO3 nanoribbons (~16 nm) are easily 
in full contact with the conductive MXene substrate to reduce the inherent resistance 
and expose more electrochemically active sites for high capacitance behavior. At 
the same time, MoO3 nanoribbons act as an effective intermediate layer between 
MXene nanosheets in Fig. 2b, preventing MXene from restacking, and enabling full 
expression of MXene capacitance. The composites as electrodes show ultra-high 
volume capacitance of 1817 F/cm3 (545 F/g) at a scanning rate of 3 mV/s in Fig. 2c, 
exceedingly most previously reported MXene electrode materials. The composites

MXenes-Based Composites for Pseudocapacitors
201
also maintain a good rate performance (773 F/cm3 at 200 mV/s) and excellent elec-
trochemical stability (100% capacitance retention after 5000 cycles). In addition, the 
symmetric supercapacitors can produce a volume energy density of 44.6 Wh/L (13.4 
Wh/kg). Han et al. synthesized WO3-Ti3C2-MXene composites by hydrothermal 
electrostatic adsorption and achieved in-situ synergy without additives or catalysts 
in Fig. 2d [22]. In the Hexa-WO3-Ti3C2 hybrid, WO3 nanoparticles are uniformly 
distributed on MXene nanosheets in Fig. 2e. This synergistic growth in WO3-Ti3C2 
hybridization eventually leads to a tight interaction between WO3 and Ti3C2. In  
addition, the large speciﬁc surface area provides a larger channel for ion movement. 
The Hexa-WO3-Ti3C2 hybrid anode exhibits excellent speciﬁc capacitance (566 F/ 
g) in Fig. 2f and excellent stability (92.33% capacitance retention after 5000 cycles) 
at 2 mV/s due to rigid tunnel, high surface area, enhanced conductivity, and greater 
electrostatic interaction. The energy density of the supercapacitor assembled by the 
composites reaches 35.9 Wh/kg.
Currently, nanocomposites made by combining metal oxides with high-
conductivity MXenes have been widely discussed due to their excellent performance. 
However, the electrochemical performance of MXenes can also be further improved 
by binding with bimetallic oxides, as their coupling enhances the REDOX reaction 
[7]. Yang et al. successfully prepared Ti3C2Tx MXene composites loaded with Co–Ni 
bimetallic oxides by atomic layer deposition technology [23]. The uniform distribu-
tion of metal oxide nanoparticles on MXene nanosheets provides more active sites 
for pseudocapacitance generation, and the synergistic effect between CoOx and NiO 
greatly improves the electrochemical performance. Compared with pure Ti3C2Tx 
MXene, the electrochemical performance of xCoOx–NiO/Ti3C2Tx nanocomposites 
has been greatly improved. CoOx–NiO/Ti3C2Tx shows a high speciﬁc capacitance 
of 1960 F/g at 1 A/g, a rate performance of 87.3% at 1–18 A/g, and a capacitor reten-
tion of 90.2% after 8,000 cycles. Esfandiar et al. electrodeposited Ti3C2Tx MXene on 
the surface of nickel foam and then constructed RuCo2O4/Ti3C2Tx-MXene hybrid 
materials by growing RuCo2O4 nanostructures in Fig. 2g–h [24]. RuCo2O4/Ti3C2Tx 
MXene@NF has a high speciﬁc capacitance of 450 F/g at a current density of 3 A/g 
in Fig. 2i and 94% capacitor retention after 4000 cycles. In addition, the assembled 
symmetric supercapacitors have an energy density of 20.4 Wh/kg. 
2.1.2
MXenes/metal Sulﬁde Composites 
Metal sulﬁdes are also very promising electrode materials for supercapacitors due to 
their high theoretical capacitance [13]. Metal sulﬁdes generally have higher electron 
conductivity than metal oxides. In order to further improve the electrical conductivity 
of MXenes and buffer the volume changes during REDOX, the composite electrode 
materials for pseudocapacitors by combining various metal sulﬁdes with MXenes 
have been reported recently [14]. Zhao et al. constructed multidimensional CoS2 
on the surface of MXene using cobalt chloride hexahydrate as the cobalt source 
by one-step solvothermal method in Fig. 3a [25]. The structure of MXene/CoS2 
composites not only inhibits the aggregation and stacking of MXene nanosheets, but

202
L. Sun and C. Pan
Fig. 2 MXene/MoO3 hybrid membranes: a Preparation process; b SEM images and c Capaci-
tance value. Adapted with permission [21], Copyright (2020), Springer. Hexa-WO3-Ti3C2 hybrid: 
d Preparation process; e SEM images and f Capacitance value. Adapted with permission [22], 
Copyright (2018), Wiley Online Library. RuCo2O4/Ti3C2Tx MXene@NF: g Preparation process; 
h SEM images and i Capacitance value. Adapted with permission [24], Copyright (2022), Royal 
Society of Chemistry
also increases the speciﬁc surface area of composites in Fig. 3b. Simultaneously, 
with the addition of cobalt ions, the active site of metal ions on the MXene surface 
increases, which also promotes the transfer efﬁciency between metal ions, improving 
electrochemical performance. The speciﬁc capacitance of the composites can reach 
1320 F/g at a current density of 1 A/g in Fig. 3c. In addition, the asymmetric super-
capacitors based on the composites show a wide potential window of 1.6 V and a 
high energy density of 28.8 Wh/kg, maintaining an initial speciﬁc capacitance of 
98% after 5000 cycles. Qi et al. cultured ﬂower-like 3D NiS on MXene (Ti3C2Tx)

MXenes-Based Composites for Pseudocapacitors
203
by one-step hydrothermal method in Fig. 3d [26]. The nanosheets in the composite 
are interconnected to form a macroporous network structure, which facilitates the 
transfer of ions and charges. The 3D ﬂower-like NiS prevents the aggregation of 
MXene and increases the metal ion sites in Fig. 3e. Compared with pure MXene, 
MXene/NiS composites achieve a speciﬁc capacity of 857.8 F/g at 1 A/g, about four 
times that of MXene in Fig. 3f. After 3,000 cycles, the composites still maintain 
99.49% capacitance value. The asymmetric supercapacitors have an energy density 
of 17.688 Wh/kg. A small light bulb (12 V, 2W) can light up by the supercapacitor’s 
device for more than 100 s. Zhong et al. synthesized the heterogeneous structure of 
MoS2 deposited in multilayer Ti3C2Tx nanosheets by a simple hydrothermal method 
[27]. MoS2 is vertically arranged on the surface of Ti3C2Tx nanosheets, forming an 
interconnected network structure, which increases the speciﬁc surface area of the 
electrode materials and improves the accessibility of the electrolyte. Meanwhile, the 
Ti3C2Tx nanosheets provide a highly conductive and stable substrate for the growth 
of MoS2. This structure greatly accelerates electron transfer, reduces the aggregation 
of 2H-MoS2, and thus improves electrochemical performance. The MoS2–Ti3C2Tx 
heterostructure greatly improves the performance of supercapacitors. The speciﬁc 
capacitance reaches 303.8 F/g at a current density of 1 A/g, which is ﬁve times 
that of 2H phase MoS2 (62.8 F/g) and three times that of Ti3C2Tx (105.8 F/g). 
Meanwhile, the MoS2–Ti3C2Tx electrode exhibits excellent cycling stability (with 
capacitance retention of 82% after 10,000 cycles). The symmetrical supercapaci-
tors based on MoS2–Ti3C2Tx show a speciﬁc capacitance of 115.2 F/g at 0.5 A/g, a 
good coulombic efﬁciency (over 90%), and cycling stability (capacitance retention 
of 72.3% after 10,000 cycles).
In addition to single metal sulﬁdes, multiple metal sulﬁdes (NiCo2S4, CuCo2S4, 
ZnCo2S4, etc.)/MXenes composites have also been reported. Javed et al. prepared 
a heterogeneous nickel cobalt sulﬁde nanoﬂower, which is embedded in the exfoli-
ated Ti3C2Tx-MXene layer (HS-NCS@MXene) [28]. NCS nanoﬂowers are evenly 
dispersed in the MXene layer, forming a sandwich structure. HS-NCS@MXene 
exhibits excellent pseudocapacitive performance in a three-electrode system. The 
capacitance can reach 2637 F/g at 2.5 A/g, and a stable cycle life of 96% capacitance 
retention after 10,000 cycles. The asymmetric solid-state supercapacitors based on 
the composites can operate in a potential range of 1.6 V, providing a high capacitance 
of 226 F/g, a stable cycle life (92%) of 20,000 cycles, and a high energy density of 
80 Wh/kg. Chen et al. reported a simple two-step strategy for designing layered 3D 
porous CuCo2S4/MXene composite electrodes to enhance storage performance [29]. 
This structure in CuCo2S4/MXene composites not only provides an abundant active 
site for the Faraday reaction, but also supplies a more effective way for rapid electron/ 
ion transfer, and limits the volume expansion during the charging and discharging 
process. The CuCo2S4/MXene-3 electrode shows a speciﬁc capacity of 1351.6 C/g 
at 1 A/g and maintains excellent cycling stability (capacity retention of 95.2% after 
1000 cycles). In addition, the energy density of the solid-state asymmetric super-
capacitor device based on the composites reaches 78.1 Wh/kg. Qi et al. fabricated 
MXene/ZnCo2S4 composites by ﬁxing ZnCo2S4 on MXene nanosheets surface using 
an electrostatic self-assembly method in Fig. 3g [30]. Due to the synergistic effect

204
L. Sun and C. Pan
Fig. 3 MXene/CoS2 composites: a Preparation process; b SEM images and c Capacitance value. 
Adapted with permission [25], Copyright (2020), Wiley Online Library. MXene/NiS composites: 
d Preparation process; e SEM images and f Capacitance value. Adapted with permission [26], 
Copyright (2020), Elsevier. MXene/ZnCo2S4 composites: g Preparation process; h SEM images 
and i Capacitance value. Adapted with permission [30], Copyright (2022), Springer
between MXene nanosheets and ZnCo2S4 core–shell nanospheres in Fig. 3h, the 
prepared composites exhibit a fast ion transfer rate and charge–discharge process. The 
capacity of MXene/ZnCo2S4 composites can reach 1072 F/g, which is much larger 
than that of ZnCo2S4 (407 F/g) in Fig. 3i. The asymmetric supercapacitors device 
based on the composites provides a 1.7 V potential window, superior cyclic stability 
(95.41% capacitor retention), and a high energy density of 30.46 Wh/kg. Fan et al. 
prepared a composite composed of 2D layered Ti3C2 and NiCoMn-S nanoparticles 
by a simple one-step hydrothermal method [31]. Many NiCoMn-S nanoparticles are 
distributed on the surface of Ti3C2, and even inserted into the Ti3C2 layer, providing

MXenes-Based Composites for Pseudocapacitors
205
rich electrochemical active site for redox reaction, and enhancing the mechanical 
stability of the composites. In addition, the charge transfer resistance of NiCoMn–S/ 
Ti3C2 composites is lower than that of pure NiCoMn-S, indicating that the 2D layered 
structure of Ti3C2 improves conductivity and enhances additional electron channels 
for ion transport. The speciﬁc capacity of NiCoMn-S/Ti3C2-3.4% reaches 347.1 C/g 
at a current density of 1 A/g, which is higher than that of pure NiCoMn-S (270.2 C/g). 
The asymmetric supercapacitors device based on this composite material achieves 
an energy density of 16.2 Wh/kg. 
2.1.3
MXenes/metal Hydroxide Composites 
Metal hydroxides are also considered a promising electrode material for energy 
storage devices due to their large surface area, abundant exposed sites, high theoret-
ical capacitance, and inﬁnite ion diffusion channels between layers [32]. However, 
the low conductivity and aggregation in electrochemical ion storage processes lead to 
a sharp decrease in capacity, resulting in poor stability and rate performance during 
long cycles, which hinders their commercial application [33]. Therefore, the combi-
nation of metal hydroxides and highly conductive MXenes can exert the synergistic 
effect between them to overcome the agglomeration problem in energy storage appli-
cations, and effectively improve the electrochemical performance. α-Ni(OH)2 has 
unique physical and chemical properties, such as multivalent, precise electrochem-
ical redox behavior, high theoretical capacitance value (2358 F/g, 0–0.44 voltage 
window), cost-effectiveness, and environmental friendliness. Ghosh et al. prepared 
a composite (MXene-Ni(OH)2) in Fig.  4a, that α-Ni(OH)2 slides within the MXene 
layer in Fig. 4b, thereby preventing their reaccumulation [32]. In nanocomposites, 
MXene has larger layer spacing, accessible active site, and rapid ion/electron transfer, 
and α-Ni(OH)2 exhibits faster redox reactions. Due to the synergistic effect between 
MXene and α-Ni(OH)2, MXene-Ni(OH)2 nanocomposites exhibit excellent speciﬁc 
capacitance of 1046.4 F/g at 5 A/g in Fig. 4c. The ﬂexible all-solid-state asym-
metric supercapacitors device based on the nanocomposites provides a high energy 
density of 29.3 Wh/kg and maintains 90% capacitance even after ~5000 cycles. Yu 
et al. prepared the cobalt hydroxide coupled Ti3C2Tx MXene layers on nickel foam 
(Co(OH)2–Ti3C2Tx@NF) by hydrothermal method [33]. The porous structure of 
nickel foam can ensure the rapid diffusion of electrolytes, and the heterogeneous 
structure prevents the agglomeration of layered materials. The 2D/2D heterostruc-
ture formed by the coupling of layered hydroxides and MXene can expose a larger 
speciﬁc surface area, increase the REDOX active site, and improve electrochemical 
performance. Co(OH)2–Ti3C2Tx@NF has a high speciﬁc capacitance of 1400 F/g 
and a cycle stability of 98.2% after 10,000 cycles.
In addition to single metal hydroxides, double metal hydroxides are also consid-
ered an attractive alternative electrode for supercapacitors. Yang et al. prepared 
NiCo hydroxides/Ti3C2Tx nanosheet composites with strong contact using Ti3C2Tx 
MXene as the substrate [34]. It is found that NiCo hydroxides can replicate the 
MXene structure, generate enough contacts, accelerate electron transfer, and expose

206
L. Sun and C. Pan
Fig. 4 MXene-Ni(OH)2 nanocomposites: a Preparation process; b SEM images and c Ragone plot. 
Adapted with permission [32], Copyright (2022), American Chemical Society. CNMV composites: 
d Preparation process; e SEM images and f Capacitance value. Adapted with permission [35], 
Copyright (2022), Elsevier. NiMnZn hydroxide/Mo2CTx: g Preparation process; h SEM images 
and i Capacitance value. Adapted with permission [36], Copyright (2022), American Chemical 
Society
abundant electric active sites, thus improving the electrochemical kinetics. Ti3C2Tx 
MXene can enhance the redox reaction kinetics of NiCo hydroxides nanosheets. The 
complete contact between Ti3C2Tx MXene and NiCo hydroxides can signiﬁcantly 
enhance conductivity, provide abundant reaction sites, increase the contact area of 
electrolyte ions, and improve charge storage capacity. The prepared NiCo hydrox-
ides/Ti3C2Tx electrode has a speciﬁc capacitance of 1030 F/g at 1 A/g, and the 
maximum energy density of the asymmetric supercapacitors based on the materials

MXenes-Based Composites for Pseudocapacitors
207
can reach 59 Wh/kg. Han et al. successfully synthesized 2D/2D co-doped NiMn-
layered hydroxide/V2CTx MXene (CNMV) electrode materials through a co-doping 
and electrostatic co-assembly method in Fig. 4d [35]. 2D V2CTx MXene as substrate 
has high conductivity, while NiMn-layered hydroxide has abundant electrochemical 
activity. The two components are closely combined to form 2D/2D nanoﬂower-like 
CNMV electrodes in Fig. 4e. The nano-ﬂower-like composites not only overcome the 
poor speciﬁc capacitance of the original V2CTx MXene, but also the low conduc-
tivity and cycling performance of metal hydroxides. The CNMV electrode has a 
high speciﬁc capacitance of 1005 F/g at 1 A/g in Fig. 4f, and the asymmetric super-
capacitors assembled based on CNMV have a high energy density of 30.16 Wh/ 
kg. Dai et al. prepared 2D-on-2D nanohybrids of NiMnZn hydroxide/Mo2CTx with 
oxygen-rich vacancy by electrostatic assembly in Fig. 4g–h [36]. Mo2CTx MXene 
can provide conductive channels during rapid Faraday reactions, inhibit the reac-
cumulation of NiMnZn hydroxide nanosheets, and facilitate maximum exposure of 
their surface or edge active sites. The strategy of etching Zn atoms can effectively 
regulate the valence states of active Ni/Mn atoms and generate abundant oxygen 
defects in NiMnZn hydroxide, which is beneﬁcial for electrochemical applications. 
The strong coupling between NiMnZn hydroxide and Mo2CTx can further regulate 
the surface electronic structure and oxygen vacancy content of NiMnZn hydroxide. 
Compared with pure NiMnZn hydroxide, Mo2CTx, and initial NiMnZn hydroxide, 
the speciﬁc capacity (1577 C/g at 2 A/g) in Fig. 4i, cyclic stability and good abun-
dance of NiMnZn hydroxide/Mo2CTx nanohybrids obtained were greatly improved. 
In addition, the maximum energy density of the asymmetric all-solid supercapacitors 
based on the materials reached 92.6 Wh/kg. 
2.2 
MXenes/polymer Composites 
Compared with other pseudocapacitive materials, conductive polymers exhibit addi-
tional advantages in supercapacitors due to simple synthesis, good conductivity, 
good ﬂexibility, and high redox activity [12]. Many conductive polymers can achieve 
high capacitance in acidic electrolytes, as can MXenes/conductive polymer compos-
ites. At present, many conductive polymers, such as polyaniline (PANI), poly (3,4-
ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT), polypyridine (PPy), and polydopamine (PDA), 
combine with MXenes to prepare composites with excellent electrochemical perfor-
mance [12]. Gogotsi et al. prepared a high-performance 3D PANI@M-Ti3C2Tx 
composites by casting homogeneous polyaniline layer on 3D porous Ti3C2Tx MXene 
in Fig. 5a–b [37]. The compact and highly integrated PANI@MXene heterostructure 
possesses a larger work function, so they have high anodic oxidation electrochemical 
stability and can be used as stable positive terminals. This electrode synergistically 
utilizes the high capacitance of PANI at a positive potential and the high-speed 
capability of MXene, which allows the PANI@M-Ti3C2Tx electrode to have a high 
speciﬁc capacitance of 1632 F/cm3, and a high-capacity retention of 827 F/cm3 at 
a scanning rate of up to 5000 mV/s in Fig. 5c. The asymmetric supercapacitors

208
L. Sun and C. Pan
device assembled based on this material achieves a volumetric energy density of 
50.6Wh/L. Yuan et al. proposed high conductivity PANI nanoparticles (PANI-NPs, 
~10 nm) as intercalation agents, and adjusted MXene nanoﬂake interlayer by self-
assembly method [38]. PANI-NPs not only inhibit the self-stacking of MXene, but 
also provides more ion transfer pathways. In addition, conductive PANI-NPs ﬁlled 
between MXene layers can construct interconnected conductive channels in the form 
of nanoparticles. Meanwhile, PANI-NPs will slightly change the thickness of the MX/ 
PANI-NPs mixed ﬁlm, resulting in higher volumetric capacitance. The capacitance 
of the MX/PANI NPs-10% electrode is 1885 mF/cm2 (377 F/g), which can main-
tain a high capacitance of 873 F/cm3 even when the MXene load reaches 5 mg/ 
cm2. In addition, the symmetrical supercapacitors assembled based on MX/PANI 
NPs hybrid ﬁlms have a bulk energy density (20.9 Wh/L). Zhang et al. established a 
simple and effective method for preparing Ti3C2Tx/PEDOT: PSS hybrid membranes, 
which involves ﬁltering Ti3C2Tx/Levios PH1000 composite ink, and then treating by 
H2SO4 in Fig. 5d–e [39]. The process of H2SO4 treatment can remove some insulating 
PSS on the Ti3C2Tx/PEDOT: PSS hybrid ﬁlm, thereby signiﬁcantly improving the 
conductivity of the composites. In addition, conductive PEDOT can not only serve as 
a pillar between Ti3C2Tx sheets, exposing more electroactive surfaces and reducing 
ion diffusion pathways but also serve as a conductive bridge to form multidimensional 
electron transfer channels for accelerating the electrochemical reaction process. The 
speciﬁc surface area of Ti3C2Tx/PEDOT: PSS (Ti3C2Tx/P-100-H) hybrid ﬁlm treated 
with H2SO4 increased by 4.5 times, and the capacity reached 1065 F/cm3 at 2 mV/ 
s, demonstrating excellent rate performance in 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte in Fig. 5f. 
The asymmetric supercapacitors based on the materials show an energy density of 
23mWh/cm3 and a power density of 7659 mW/cm3. Ma et al. prepared MXene/PPy 
(M-PPy) composite ﬁlms using MXene nanosheets and PPy nanoﬁbers as raw mate-
rials by vacuum-assisted ﬁltration in Fig. 5g [40]. By introducing PPy nanoﬁbers, 
the layer spacing of MXene nanosheets is expanded in Fig. 5h, providing more 
transport channels and ion reachability sites. The introduction of PPy nanoﬁbers 
effectively prevents the self-accumulation of MXene nanosheets, while the inter-
layer gap of MXene nanosheets effectively overcomes the expansion of PPy during 
the charging and discharging process. M-PPy3 shows high capacitance (563.8 F/g) 
in Fig. 5i and excellent cycling performance (79.5%, 6000 cycles). The asymmetric 
supercapacitors assembled based on the materials have a capacitance retention rate 
of 86.8% after 6000 charging/discharging tests at 2 A/g, and an energy density of 
35.3 Wh/kg, demonstrating excellent energy storage capacity. Zhang et al. success-
fully synthesized Ti3C2Tx/PDA composite membrane electrodes by one-step in-situ 
polymerization of dopamine on the surface of Ti3C2Tx nanosheets [41]. The intro-
duction of PDA effectively prevents the restacking of Ti3C2Tx nanosheets, which is 
conducive to exposing more active sites, increasing interlayer spacing, and promoting 
electron transfer and ion diffusion. Compared with pure Ti3C2Tx, this structure is 
advantageous for fast Faraday reactions. In addition, the strong bonds are formed 
between the O–H groups and/or N–H groups of the PDA ring and the –O and/or 
–F terminal groups on the surface of the Ti3C2Tx nanosheets. Titanium ion in the 
Ti3C2Tx nanosheets and the –O group originated from catechol structure can form a

MXenes-Based Composites for Pseudocapacitors
209
strong chelation, leading to a stable electrode structure. The Ti3C2Tx/PDA composite 
electrode shows a capacitance of 715 mF/cm2 at a scanning rate of 2 mV/s and main-
tains an initial capacitance of 95.5% after 10,000 cycles, demonstrating long cycle 
stability. When the mass load increases to 13.6 mg/cm2, the capacitance can increase 
to 3440 mF/cm2.
2.3 
MXenes Based Other Composites 
In addition to metal oxides, metal sulﬁdes, metal hydroxides and polymers, many 
other materials have been combined with MXenes for pseudocapacitors, such as 
metal organic frameworks, metal phosphides, black phosphorus, selenide, antimony 
alkenes, MXene, etc. [7, 11]. Li et al. utilized 2D aminated Ti3C2Tx to in-situ stabilize 
a bimetallic Ni/Co metal organic framework (Ni/Co MOF) with high redox activity, 
and constructed a layered heterostructure composites with excellent wettability in 
Fig. 6a [42]. Due to the high conductivity and good wettability of aminated MXene, 
bimetallic Ni/Co MOF can be uniformly in-situ stabilized on the surface of aminated 
MXene in Fig. 6b, ensuring excellent electron and ion transport from redox active 
centers, good interface compatibility, and large contact area. The modiﬁed MXene is 
beneﬁcial for slowing down van der Waals interactions between functional groups, 
and leading to separation of sheet-like structures. The synergistic effect of high redox 
activity Ni/Co in bimetallic Ni/Co MOF provides a rapid redox effect for Faraday 
capacitors. Therefore, Ni/Co-MOF@TCT-NH2 has an ultra-high speciﬁc capaci-
tance of 1924 F/g at 0.5 A/g, and an ultra-long cycle stability of 10,000 times at 
10A/g. In addition, the asymmetric supercapacitors device assembled based on the 
materials exhibits a maximum speciﬁc energy density of 98.1 Wh/kg at 600 W/kg 
and excellent rate stability. Sun et al. demonstrated the in-situ coupling of NiCoP 
bimetallic phosphides and Ti3C2 MXene to establish a heavy-duty NiCoP/MXene 
(NCPM) electrode in Fig. 6c–d [43]. The 3D printed NCPM electrode with layered 
pores and adjustable mass load shows easy charge transfer and electrolyte perme-
ation, enhancing rate ability and cycling stability. Therefore, the printed electrode 
has a sturdy and open frame, while combines the good capacitance of NiCoP and the 
excellent conductivity of MXene. The electrode respectively achieves a high area 
and volume capacitance of 20 F/cm2 and 137 F/cm3 even under a high-quality load 
of approximately 46.3 mg/cm2. The asymmetric supercapacitors assembled based 
on the materials can easily achieve ultra-high area and volume energy densities of 
0.89 mWh/cm2 and 2.2 mWh/cm3, respectively.
Yang et al. reported a black phosphorus (BP)@MXene compact ﬁlm in Fig. 6e 
[44]. 3D porous network structure is successfully made by in-situ growth of BP 
nanoparticles on crumbled MXene ﬂakes. The strong interfacial interaction (Ti– 
O-P bonds) formed at the BP-MXene interfaces not only enhances the atomic 
charge polarization in the BP-MXene heterostructures, leading to efﬁcient interfacial 
electron transport, but also stabilizes the 3D porous dense architecture with much 
improved mechanical robustness. The introduction of BP nanoparticles effectively

210
L. Sun and C. Pan
Fig. 5 3D PANI@M-Ti3C2Tx composites: a Preparation process; b SEM images and c Capacitance 
value. Adapted with permission [37], Copyright (2020), Wiley Online Library. Ti3C2Tx/P-100-H: 
d Preparation process; e SEM images and f Capacitance value. Adapted with permission [39], 
Copyright (2019), Royal Society of Chemistry. M-PPy composite ﬁlms: g Preparation process; 
h SEM images and i Capacitance value. Adapted with permission [40], Copyright (2023), Elsevier

MXenes-Based Composites for Pseudocapacitors
211
Fig. 6 Ni/Co-MOF@TCT-NH2: a Preparation process; b SEM image. Adapted with permission 
[42], Copyright (2023), Elsevier. NCPM: c Preparation process; d SEM image. Adapted with 
permission [43], Copyright (2020), Springer. BP-MXene composites: e Preparation process; f and 
g SEM image. Adapted with permission [44], Copyright (2021), American Chemical Society
prevents the self-stacking of MXene nanosheets in Fig. 6f–g. BP@MXene ﬁlm elec-
trode provides an impressive volume capacitance of 781.6 F/cm3 (at 2.0 mV/s) in a 
neutral Na2SO4 electrolyte and exhibits high-rate capacity (91.2% capacitance reten-
tion, 718.4 F/cm3 at 1000 mV/s). BP@MXene based supercapacitors with commer-
cial grade mass load (~15 mg/cm2) exhibit a high stacking volume energy density 
of 72.6 Wh/L, which is close to the performance of lead-acid batteries (50–90 Wh/ 
L), and has long-term stability (a capacitance retention rate of 90.58% after 50,000 
cycles).

212
L. Sun and C. Pan
Wang et al. prepared ZIF-67 nanoboxes on the surface of MXene nanosheets 
using in-situ growth methods, and successfully constructed a unique honeycomb-
like 2D layered nanocomposite (MXene@CoSe2/Ni3Se4) in Fig.  7a [45]. The vertical 
anchoring of CoSe2/Ni3Se4 nanosheets derived from ZIF-67 on MXene nanosheets 
can effectively inhibit the self-polymerization of MOF derivatives in Fig. 7b and 
improve the conductivity of the composites. In addition, the strong chemical interac-
tion between CoSe2/Ni3Se4 nanosheets and MXene nanosheets promotes the charge 
transfer kinetics of the structure, thereby improving the cyclic stability of the compos-
ites. When the current density is 1 A/g, the speciﬁc capacitance of MXene@CoSe2/ 
Ni3Se4 can reach 1019 C/g. The asymmetric supercapacitors assembled based on the 
materials can achieve an energy density of 41.2 Wh/kg at a power density of 3.1 kW/ 
kg. 
Zhu et al. introduced antimonene into MXene ﬁlms, and achieved the preparation 
of high electrochemical performance composite ﬁlms with excellent deformability 
and editing properties in Fig. 7c [46]. Antimonene nanosheets have excellent electro-
chemical activity, ultra-thin/foldable performance, and a large aspect ratio, making 
them an ideal choice for hybridization with MXene to form uniform and dense thin 
ﬁlms in Fig. 7d. The presence of antimonene effectively improves the stability and
Fig. 7 MXene@CoSe2/Ni3Se4: a Preparation process; b SEM image. Adapted with permission 
[45], Copyright (2022), Elsevier. Antimonene/MXene: c Preparation process; d SEM image. 
Adapted with permission [46], Copyright (2019), Wiley Online Library. Mo1.33CTz–Ti3C2Tz. 
composite ﬁlms: e Preparation process; f SEM image. Adapted with permission [47], Copyright 
(2021), Elsevier 

MXenes-Based Composites for Pseudocapacitors
213
energy storage capacity of antimonene/MXene electrodes in acidic and neutral elec-
trolytes. The ﬁlms have a signiﬁcant area capacitance of 3403 mF/cm2 in 1 M H2SO4, 
corresponding to an ultra-high speciﬁc volume capacitance of 4255 F/cm3. The ﬂex-
ible electrode can also achieve excellent values of 2192 F/cm3 (1754 mF/cm2) and a 
wider potential window in LiCl. 
Etman et al. introduced a one-step method for preparing MXene composite ﬁlms 
using Mo1.33CTz and Ti3C2Tz in Fig. 7e [47]. The composite ﬁlms exhibit extremely 
high ﬂexibility and good electronic conductivity (140 S/cm). The composite ﬁlms 
show stronger porosity and more curved layered morphology in Fig. 7f, which can 
enhance the transport of ions in the plane, and increase the number of active sites 
that can be reached by the electrochemical reaction. The composite ﬁlms exhibit a 
high capacitance of 1380 F/cm3 (460 F/g) in 1 M H2SO4, and a capacitance retention 
rate of 96% after 17,000 cycles. 
3 
Summary 
The development of new materials for electrochemical energy conversion and storage 
plays an important role in the development of a sustainable society. New 2D carbides, 
carbonitrides, and nitride MXenes with unique intrinsic properties have been success-
fully prepared through selective etching of the MAX phase in various materials [1]. 
MXenes material has the characteristics of 2D layered structure, metal-like conduc-
tivity, high density, variable surface termination, and embedded pseudocapacitance, 
being an ideal material for designing advanced supercapacitors with high energy and 
power density [48]. However, there are still some issues that need to be addressed 
with pure MXenes, such as poor mechanical properties, easy stacking, relatively 
small lateral dimensions, and poor stability in oxidizing atmospheres. Due to the 
stable layered structure, high conductivity, and abundant surface functional groups, 
MXenes allow for various modiﬁcations to form composites for electrodes in super-
capacitors [10]. Therefore, various modiﬁcation strategies have been developed to 
improve the performance of MXenes. This chapter summarizes the latest methods 
and progress that MXenes combine with various functional materials (such as metal 
oxides, metal sulﬁdes, metal hydroxides, conductive polymers, etc.) to build compos-
ites for the application of supercapacitors. MXenes composites are considered an 
important way to improve the performance of Mxenes-based electrodes for superca-
pacitors. The addition of functional materials also expands the interlayer spacing to 
reduce the stacking of 2D MXenes nanosheets, enhances the accessible surface area 
of ions, and enables rapid electron transfer in the material. Synergies are also intro-
duced, effectively improving capacitance performance. Despite signiﬁcant progress 
in the past few years, MXenes composites still face signiﬁcant challenges that need to 
be addressed in order to promote their practical applications: (1) Preparation strate-
gies, reasonable structural design, and functionalization methods for Mxenes-based 
electrode materials. (2) In terms of electrode structure, the optimal porous and layered 
structure design can reduce the waste of gap space and improve packaging density.

214
L. Sun and C. Pan
(3) The inﬂuence of functional groups on conductivity and electrochemical perfor-
mance requires in-depth understanding. (4) By improving the oxidation stability of 
MXenes, the cycling stability of the electrode is improved. Always, in the near future, 
MXenes may develop into an excellent sturdy electrode material for energy storage 
devices, and many ﬁelds still need to be studied. 
References 
1. R. Ma, Z. Chen, D. Zhao, X. Zhang, J. Zhuo, Y. Yin, X. Wang, G. Yang, F. Yi, Ti3C2Tx MXene 
for electrode materials of supercapacitors. J. Mater. Chem. A 9, 11501–11529 (2021) 
2. Y. Wang, Y. Wang, Recent progress in MXene layers materials for supercapacitors: high-
performance electrodes. SmartMat. 4, e1130 (2022) 
3. S. Sahoo, R. Kumar, E. Joanni, R.K. Singh, J.-J. Shim, Advances in pseudocapacitive and 
battery-like electrode materials for high performance supercapacitors. J. Mater. Chem. A 10, 
13190–13240 (2022) 
4. Q. Zhu, J. Li, P. Simon, B. Xu, Two-dimensional MXenes for electrochemical capacitor 
applications: progress, challenges and perspectives. Energy Storage Mater. 35, 630–660 (2021) 
5. V.M. Hong Ng, H. Huang, K. Zhou, P.S. Lee, W. Que, J.Z. Xu, L.B. Kong, Recent progress 
in layered transition metal carbides and/or nitrides (MXenes) and their composites: synthesis 
and applications. J. Mater. Chem. A 5, 3039–3068 (2017) 
6. Y. Cui, J. Zhu, H. Tong, R. Zou, Advanced perspectives on MXene composite nanomaterials: 
Types synthetic methods, thermal energy utilization and 3D-printed techniques. iScience 26, 
105824 (2023) 
7. S.A. Thomas, A. Patra, B.M. Al-Shehri, M. Selvaraj, A. Aravind, C.S. Rout, MXene based 
hybrid materials for supercapacitors: Recent developments and future perspectives. J. Energy 
Storage 55 (2022) 
8. J. Yang, W. Bao, P. Jaumaux, S. Zhang, C. Wang, G. Wang, MXene-based composites: 
synthesis and applications in rechargeable batteries and supercapacitors. Adv. Mater. Interfaces 
6, 1802004 (2019) 
9. M.S. Javed, A. Mateen, I. Hussain, A. Ahmad, M. Mubashir, S. Khan, M.A. Assiri, S.M. Eldin, 
S.S.A. Shah, W. Han, Recent progress in the design of advanced MXene/metal oxides-hybrid 
materials for energy storage devices. Energy Storage Mater. 53, 827–872 (2022) 
10. M. Ramezani Farani, B. Nourmohammadi Khiarak, R. Tao, Z. Wang, S. Ahmadi, M. 
Hassanpour, M. Rabiee, M.R. Saeb, E.C. Lima, N. Rabiee, 2D MXene nanocomposites: 
Electrochemical and biomedical applications. Environ. Sci.-Nano 9, 4038–4068 (2022) 
11. L. Li, D. Zhang, J. Deng, Y. Gou, J. Fang, H. Cui, C. Zhang, M. Cao, Application of MXene-
based materials in hybrid capacitors. Sustain Energ. Fuels 5, 3278–3291 (2021) 
12. W. Luo, Y. Ma, T. Li, H.K. Thabet, C. Hou, M.M. Ibrahim, S.M. El-Bahy, B.B. Xu, Z. Guo, 
Overview of MXene/conducting polymer composites for supercapacitors. J. Energy Storage 
52, 105008 (2022) 
13. N.R. Hemanth, T. Kim, B. Kim, A.H. Jadhav, K. Lee, N.K. Chaudhari, Transition metal 
dichalcogenide-decorated MXenes: promising hybrid electrodes for energy storage and 
conversion applications. Mater. Chem. Front. 5, 3298–3321 (2021) 
14. Y. Luo, W. Que, X. Bin, C. Xia, B. Kong, B. Gao, L.B. Kong, Flexible MXene-based composite 
ﬁlms: Synthesis, modiﬁcation, and applications as electrodes of supercapacitors. Small 18, 
e2201290 (2022) 
15. J. Zhou, J. Yu, L. Shi, Z. Wang, H. Liu, B. Yang, C. Li, C. Zhu, J. Xu, A conductive and highly 
deformable all-pseudocapacitive composite paper as supercapacitor electrode with improved 
areal and volumetric capacitance. Small 14, e1803786 (2018)

MXenes-Based Composites for Pseudocapacitors
215
16. X. Zhang, B. Shao, A. Guo, Z. Sun, J. Zhao, F. Cui, X. Yang, MnO2 nanoshells/Ti3C2Tx 
MXene hybrid ﬁlm as supercapacitor electrode. Appl. Surf. Sci. 560, 150040 (2021) 
17. Y. Ma, H. Sheng, W. Dou, Q. Su, J. Zhou, E. Xie, W. Lan, Fe2O3 nanoparticles anchored on 
the Ti3C2Tx MXene paper for ﬂexible supercapacitors with ultrahigh volumetric capacitance. 
ACS Appl. Mater. Interf. 12, 41410–41418 (2020) 
18. R.A. Chavan, G.P. Kamble, S.B. Dhavale, A.S. Rasal, S.S. Kolekar, J.-Y. Chang, A.V. Ghule, 
NiO@MXene nanocomposite as an anode with enhanced energy density for asymmetric 
supercapacitors. Energy Fuels 37, 4658–4670 (2023) 
19. B. Shen, X. Liao, X. Zhang, H.-T. Ren, J.-H. Lin, C.-W. Lou, T.-T. Li, Synthesis of Nb2C 
MXene-based 2D layered structure electrode material for high-performance battery-type 
supercapacitors. Electrochim. Acta 413, 140144 (2022) 
20. W. Luo, Y. Sun, Z. Lin, X. Li, Y. Han, J. Ding, T. Li, C. Hou, Y. Ma, Flexible Ti3C2Tx MXene/ 
V2O5 composite ﬁlms for high-performance all-solid supercapacitors. J. Energy Storage 62, 
106807 (2023) 
21. Y. Wang, X. Wang, X. Li, R. Liu, Y. Bai, H. Xiao, Y. Liu, G. Yuan, Intercalating ultrathin MoO3 
nanobelts into MXene ﬁlm with ultrahigh volumetric capacitance and excellent deformation 
for high-energy-density devices. Nanomicro Lett. 12, 115 (2020) 
22. S.B. Ambade, R.B. Ambade, W. Eom, S.H. Noh, S.H. Kim, T.H. Han, 2D Ti3C2 MXene/WO3 
hybrid architectures for high-rate supercapacitors. Adv. Mater. Interfaces 5, 1801361 (2018) 
23. X. Zhang, B. Shao, A. Guo, Z. Gao, Y. Qin, C. Zhang, F. Cui, X. Yang, Improved electrochem-
ical performance of CoOx–NiO/Ti3C2Tx MXene nanocomposites by atomic layer deposition 
towards high capacitance supercapacitors. J. Alloy. Compd. 862, 158546 (2021) 
24. P. Asen, A. Esfandiar, H. Mehdipour, Urchin-like hierarchical ruthenium cobalt oxide 
nanosheets on Ti3C2Tx MXene as a binder-free bifunctional electrode for overall water splitting 
and supercapacitors. Nanoscale 14, 1347–1362 (2022) 
25. H. Liu, R. Hu, J. Qi, Y. Sui, Y. He, Q. Meng, F. Wei, Y. Ren, Y. Zhao, W. Wei, One-step synthesis 
of nanostructured CoS2 grown on titanium carbide MXene for high-performance asymmetrical 
supercapacitors. Adv. Mater. Interfaces 7, 1901659 (2020) 
26. H. Liu, R. Hu, J. Qi, Y. Sui, Y. He, Q. Meng, F. Wei, Y. Ren, Y. Zhao, A facile method for synthe-
sizing NiS nanoﬂower grown on MXene (Ti3C2Tx) as positive electrodes for “supercapattery.” 
Electrochim. Acta 353, 136526 (2020) 
27. W. Hou, Y. Sun, Y. Zhang, T. Wang, L. Wu, Y. Du, W. Zhong, Mixed-dimensional heterostruc-
ture of few-layer MXene based vertical aligned MoS2 nanosheets for enhanced supercapacitor 
performance. J. Alloy. Compd. 859, 157797 (2021) 
28. M.S. Javed, X. Zhang, S. Ali, A. Mateen, M. Idrees, M. Sajjad, S. Batool, A. Ahmad, M. Imran, 
T. Najam, W. Han, Heterostructured bimetallic-sulﬁde@layered Ti3C2T-MXene as a syner-
gistic electrode to realize high-energy-density aqueous hybrid-supercapacitor. Nano Energy 
101, 107624 (2022) 
29. X. Chen, H. Ge, W. Yang, P. Yang, Construction of Ti3C2Tx MXene wrapped urchin-like 
CuCo2S4 microspheres for high-performance asymmetric supercapacitors. Dalton Trans. 52, 
3746–3754 (2023) 
30. J.-Q. Qi, C.-C. Zhang, H. Liu, L. Zhu, Y.-W. Sui, X.-J. Feng, W.-Q. Wei, H. Zhang, P. Cao, 
MXene-wrapped ZnCo2S4 core-shell nanospheres via electrostatic self-assembly as positive 
electrode materials for asymmetric supercapacitors. Rare Met. 41, 2633–2644 (2022) 
31. J. Zhang, Z. Yao, W. Zou, Q. Shen, M. Fan, T. Ma, Trimetal NiCoMn sulﬁdes cooperated with 
two-dimensional Ti3C2 for high performance hybrid supercapacitor. J. Solid State Chem. 308, 
122909 (2022) 
32. R.S. Karmur, D. Gogoi, M.R. Das, N.N. Ghosh, High-performance ﬂexible supercapacitor 
device composed of a hierarchical 2D MXene-Ni(OH)2 nanocomposite and biomass-derived 
porous carbon electrodes. Energy Fuels 36, 8488–8499 (2022) 
33. C. Zhu, C. Pei, H.S. Park, X. Yu, Design of 2D/2D heterostructure by coupling cobalt hydroxides 
with MXene on nickel foam for high energy density supercapacitors. J. Alloy. Compd. 948, 
169809 (2023)

216
L. Sun and C. Pan
34. X. Zhang, S. Yang, S. Liu, X. Che, W. Lu, Y. Tian, Z. Liu, Y. Zhao, J. Yang, Ti3C2Tx MXene-
coupled NiCo-layered double hydroxide nanosheets with entire contact for high-performance 
supercapacitors. ACS Appl. Energy Mater. 6, 636–643 (2022) 
35. Y. Zhang, J. Cao, J. Li, Z. Yuan, D. Li, L. Wang, W. Han, Self-assembled Cobalt-doped NiMn-
layered double hydroxide (LDH)/V2CT MXene hybrids for advanced aqueous electrochemical 
energy storage properties. Chem. Eng. J. 430, 132992 (2022) 
36. F. Liu, C. Wang, L. Wang, F. Huang, J. Fan, N. Shi, M. Han, Z. Dai, Oxygen-vacancy-
rich NiMnZn-layered double hydroxide nanosheets married with Mo2CTx MXene for high-
efﬁciency all-solid-state hybrid supercapacitors. ACS Appl. Energy Mater. 5, 3346–3358 
(2022) 
37. K. Li, X. Wang, S. Li, P. Urbankowski, J. Li, Y. Xu, Y. Gogotsi, An ultrafast conducting 
polymer@MXene positive electrode with high volumetric capacitance for advanced asym-
metric supercapacitors. Small 16, e1906851 (2020) 
38. X. Wang, Y. Wang, D. Liu, X. Li, H. Xiao, Y. Ma, M. Xu, G. Yuan, G. Chen, Opening MXene 
ion transport channels by intercalating PANI nanoparticles from the self-assembly approach 
for high volumetric and areal energy density supercapacitors. ACS Appl. Mater. Interf. 13, 
30633–30642 (2021) 
39. L. Li, N. Zhang, M. Zhang, X. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Flexible Ti3C2Tx/PEDOT:PSS ﬁlms with 
outstanding volumetric capacitance for asymmetric supercapacitors. Dalton Trans. 48, 1747– 
1756 (2019) 
40. W. Luo, Y. Sun, Y. Han, J. Ding, T. Li, C. Hou, Y. Ma, Flexible Ti3C2Tx MXene/polypyrrole 
composite ﬁlms for high-performance all-solid asymmetric supercapacitors. Electrochim. Acta 
441, 141818 (2023) 
41. H. Wang, L. Li, C. Zhu, S. Lin, J. Wen, Q. Jin, X. Zhang, In situ polymerized Ti3C2Tx/PDA 
electrode with superior areal capacitance for supercapacitors. J. Alloy. Compd. 778, 858–865 
(2019) 
42. L. Yue, L. Chen, X. Wang, D. Lu, W. Zhou, D. Shen, Q. Yang, S. Xiao, Y. Li, Ni/Co-
MOF@aminated MXene hierarchical electrodes for high-stability supercapacitors. Chem. Eng. 
J. 451, 138687 (2023) 
43. L. Yu, W. Li, C. Wei, Q. Yang, Y. Shao, J. Sun, 3D printing of NiCoP/Ti3C2 MXene architectures 
for energy storage devices with high areal and volumetric energy density. Nanomicro Lett. 12, 
143 (2020) 
44. Z. Pan, L. Kang, T. Li, M. Waqar, J. Yang, Q. Gu, X. Liu, Z. Kou, Z. Wang, L. Zheng, J. 
Wang, Black phosphorus@Ti3C2Tx MXene composites with engineered chemical bonds for 
commercial-level capacitive energy storage. ACS Nano 15, 12975–12987 (2021) 
45. Y. Yang, X. Huang, C. Sheng, Y. Pan, Y. Huang, X. Wang, In-situ formation of MOFs derivatives 
CoSe2/Ni3Se4 nanosheets on MXene nanosheets for hybrid supercapacitor with enhanced 
electrochemical performance. J. Alloy. Compd. 920, 165908 (2022) 
46. J. Yu, J. Zhou, P. Yao, H. Xie, M. Zhang, M. Ji, H. Liu, Q. Liu, C. Zhu, J. Xu, Antimonene 
engineered highly deformable freestanding electrode with extraordinarily improved energy 
storage performance. Adv. Energy Mater. 9, 1902462 (2019) 
47. A.S. Etman, J. Halim, J. Rosen, Mixed MXenes: Mo1.33CTz and Ti3C2Tz freestanding 
composite ﬁlms for energy storage. Nano Energy 88, 106271 (2021) 
48. M.Q. Long, K.K. Tang, J. Xiao, J.Y. Li, J. Chen, H. Gao, W.H. Chen, C.T. Liu, H. Liu, Recent 
advances on MXene based materials for energy storage applications. Mater. Today Sustain. 19, 
100163 (2022)

Hydrogel and Its Composites 
for Pseudocapacitors 
Jeffery Horinek, Allen Davis, and Ram K. Gupta 
Abstract As the need for energy rises congruently with the global population, 
renewable alternatives are becoming a necessity. Traditional fossil-burning energy 
sources create large volumes of emissions. Meanwhile, common options for energy 
storage are non-recyclable and pollutive. In response to these failings, certain avenues 
of research are being performed. Material such as metal oxides, metal sulﬁdes, and 
conductive polymers are promising candidates for electrocatalytic applications. This 
is due to the pseudocapacitive nature of these compounds, which allows for unique 
energy storage opportunities. Without a substrate, however, many of these materials 
would fail to operate as intended. Hydrogels, when used as either the precursor or the 
substrate, provide ample properties that improve electrocatalytic activities. The high 
porosity native to hydrogels and their analogs allow ions to interact with the electro-
catalyst properly and more easily. Furthermore, the mechanical properties unique to 
hydrogels allow for ﬂexible energy storage devices to be made. 
Keywords Hydrogels · Composites · Pseudocapacitors · Energy storage ·
Electrochemistry 
1 
Introduction 
In the year 2022, CO2 projections reached a new high of more than 36.8 billion tons. 
Further projections for the year 2050 reveal emission numbers that could surpass 40 
million tons [1, 2]. The energy industry is responsible for the largest single share of 
these emissions at about 35% [2]. With emissions from the energy sector being so 
high it is more important than ever to ﬁnd clean sustainable forms of energy storage. 
In the realm of energy storage, there are two main types: utility-scale and grid-scale.
J. Horinek · A. Davis · R. K. Gupta envelope symbol
National Institute for Materials Advancement, Pittsburg State University, 1204 Research Road, 
Pittsburg, KS 66762, USA 
e-mail: ramguptamsu@gmail.com 
Department of Chemistry, Pittsburg State University, 1701 South Broadway Street, Pittsburg, 
KS 66762, USA 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
R. K. Gupta (ed.), Pseudocapacitors, Engineering Materials, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45430-1_12 
217

218
J. Horinek et al.
Utility-scale is the type of energy storage most people are familiar with. This form 
of energy storage can take on the form of devices like batteries and supercapacitors. 
However, with improvement, these materials could potentially be used for grid-scale 
energy storage. These types of energy storage are used in smaller applications such 
as the automotive industry and portable electronics [1]. Grid-scale energy storage, 
this type of storage involves the collection and conversion of electrical energy into a 
stored form. This most commonly takes on the form of pumped stored hydropower, 
ﬂywheels, or thermal energy. When looking at the current materials used in these 
forms of energy storage the most common material used is lithium. This is mainly 
due to its use in lithium-ion batteries which are the most common energy storage 
device for electronics and automotive applications. The main reason lithium is so 
often used for these batteries is because of the excellent results it produces. These 
results include high energy density, cyclic stability, and rechargeability. However, 
due to several glaring issues such as high cost, detrimental environmental impact, 
and waning supply, many are trying to replace lithium with sustainable alternatives 
[2, 3]. 
As the push for sustainability gains increasing support, the renewability of the 
material has become a major factor for consideration. One such material that 
combines promising qualities and extreme sustainability is metal oxides [4–6]. Aside 
from applications in energy storage metal oxides can be found in applications such 
as catalysis, radar wave absorption, and hydrogen production [7]. This is due to 
several desirable properties including various valence states, low cost, and poten-
tial for redox reaction [7]. In the application of energy storage, these metal oxides 
are typically used as a component in the electrodes for various types of capacitors. 
However, metal oxides cannot meet the high demands for energy storage as they suffer 
from low initial coulombic efﬁciencies and relatively poor cycling performances. To 
combat these issues researchers are currently trying to enhance the lacking properties 
by combining the oxides with other materials to make hybrid structures [8]. Contin-
uing with the trend of sustainable materials, metal organic frameworks (MOFs) have 
become quintessential in the quest for sustainability. MOFs are a 3D framework that 
consists of functional organic ligands that link to inorganic material clusters. These 
ligands then act as a form of scaffolding to create a porous 3D structure unique 
to the MOF [9]. As a material, MOFs have several unique properties such as high 
speciﬁc surface areas, substantial pore volumes, high concentrations of active sites, 
and tunable pore diameters [10]. A more in depth look at MOFs physical structure 
can be seen in Fig. 1 [11, 12]. Despite MOFs having several properties that give 
them an advantage as a material for energy storage, they have many glaring disad-
vantages. These include low electrical conductivity, poor cycle stability, and low 
speciﬁc capacitance. However, there has been great progress in attempting to ﬁx 
these issues with a promising option being the introduction of metal oxides to the 
structure of the MOF [13].
While the above materials are typically used for electrodes, these are but one facet 
of an energy storage device. Hydrogels are a popular material for energy storage 
devices due to their ability to act as an electrolyte and/or separator. Hydrogels are 
popular for these applications due to their incredible ﬂexibility and high porosity.

Hydrogel and Its Composites for Pseudocapacitors
219
Fig. 1 Different MOF 
structures and their 
applications. Reproduced 
with permission [12], 
Copyright (2020), The Royal 
Society of Chemistry
Aside from these abilities, hydrogels also have several other desirable properties 
including excellent mechanical properties, high conductivity, biocompatibility, and 
generally low cost. Due to these unique properties, it comes of little surprise that 
hydrogels are used in many other applications outside of energy storage. Many of the 
popular applications for hydrogels can be seen in Fig. 2 [14]. When it comes to why 
hydrogels should be used in energy storage there is one reason that stands out from 
the rest and that is the sustainability of hydrogels. As material bio-based hydrogels 
are extremely sustainable. This is due to hydrogels being able to be synthesized from 
many different natural sources. These sources include, but are not limited to pectin, 
cellulose, chitosan, and carboxymethyl cellulose [15, 16].
Looking at the importance of composites for energy storage, composites have 
one key characteristic that other materials do not and that is adaptability. A material 
composite can be created for speciﬁc applications giving them a greater adaptability 
than other materials. This allows composites to have a role in energy storage not only 
now, but in the future as well. 
2 
Fundamentals of Pseudocapacitors 
When selecting a device for energy storage, at least three aspects must be considered. 
These aspects are energy density, power density, and overall lifespan. To deﬁne 
these terms, energy density pertains to the total amount of energy maintained in the 
storage device. Power density relates to the rate at which said energy is delivered 
from the device, with different applications requiring varying power output. Finally,

220
J. Horinek et al.
Fig. 2 Various applications of hydrogels. Reproduced with permission [14], Copyright (2020), 
American Chemical Society
while storage lifespan sounds straight forward, it is a complicated characteristic that 
relies on many aspects of the device in question. While these traits are common 
amongst different energy storage devices, they are not distributed equally. Fuel cells 
often demonstrate a high energy density and low power density [17], while batteries 
are generally moderate in both regards. Capacitors, meanwhile, often boast a high 
power density alongside a low energy density [18]. The high-power density seen in 
capacitors is attributed to the charge storage mechanism of the capacitor itself. The 
most basic form of a capacitor is the parallel plate capacitor. This device consists 
of two separate conducting plates separated by a dielectric material. The nature 
of these plates can vary, with tubular and circular capacitors also being common. 
Meanwhile, the dielectric is responsible for reducing the voltage needed per unit of 
charge stored. Electrolytic capacitors involve an electrolyte that acts as the cathodic 
end of the device, with a thin metal oxide layer acting as a dielectric. Both standard 
capacitor designs suffer from a lack of high-capacity energy storage, which is where 
supercapacitors come into play.

Hydrogel and Its Composites for Pseudocapacitors
221
Supercapacitors maintain a much higher capacitance value as compared to tradi-
tional capacitors. The increase in capacitance is attributable to the different mech-
anisms employed by the different supercapacitor types. Electrostatic double-layer 
capacitors (EDLCs) were the ﬁrst type of supercapacitor developed, taking advan-
tage of the double layer effect to drastically increase capacitance. As opposed to the 
more traditional capacitors, EDLCs have highly porous carbon material for an elec-
trode. The high surface area of this material allows for the formation of a Helmholtz 
layer on the electrode, which massively increases overall capacitance. On the oppo-
site end of the spectrum exist pseudocapacitors, which use a vastly different mecha-
nism of charge storage. Pseudocapacitors use faradaic electrochemical reactions to 
store charge chemically within the electrode in addition to surface charge storage. 
This process is very similar to the storage mechanisms seen in batteries, as such, 
pseudocapacitors trend towards higher energy densities [19]. Similarly, the overall 
sluggishness native to faradaic reactions means that power density tends to decline in 
these devices. Pseudocapacitive behavior in a device is generally deﬁned over three 
separate mechanisms [20]. The most basic of these mechanisms is pseudocapacitive 
adsorption. Adsorption entails the formation of an ionic monolayer on the surface 
of the electrode. This property is relevant to all electrochemical capacitors and is 
even seen in hybrid EDLCs. Redox electrochemistry is the most widely researched 
subject for pseudocapacitance. A wide range of materials are available for redox 
pseudocapacitor design. These selections vary from simple transition metal oxides, 
sulﬁdes, and phosphides to more complex metal organic frameworks and perovskites. 
The last mechanism for pseudocapacitance is intercalation, which involves the inser-
tion of ions between planes of the host material. This process is commonly seen in 
lithium-ion batteries and is partially responsible for their widespread implementa-
tion. Schematics of these different types of pseudocapacitors can be seen in Fig. 3 
[21]. 
While the above reactions host different mechanisms, each operate with 
reversibility in mind. The term redox stands for oxidation–reduction, a reaction
Fig. 3 This ﬁgure depicts the three different types of pseudocapacitance on the surface of the 
electrode. Reproduced with permission [21], Copyright (2020), Elsevier 

222
J. Horinek et al.
wherein one chemical species donates an electron to another [22]. In the reaction, 
the oxidative species acts as an electron donator while the reductive agent acts as a 
receiver. A common example of this reaction is observed in transition metals, such 
as the rusting of iron, tarnishing of silver, and the formation of patina on copper. In 
terms of electrocatalytic application, the electron storage that occurs during oxidation 
allows for the sequestering of charge within the sample in addition to electrostatic 
storage. As such, the primary goal when creating a redox active pseudocapacitor 
is to beneﬁt from the improved energy density without sacriﬁcing power density. 
As mentioned, faradaic reactions struggle with slow rates, and redox reactions are 
no exception. This sluggishness is due to a variety of factors; however, active site 
availability is of note. Knowledge of the principles and electrochemical processes of 
pseudocapacitors is for naught if they cannot be characterized. Cyclic voltammetry 
(CV) is a form of analysis that ramps and reduces an electrode’s potential versus time. 
Electrical current is then potted against this to reveal the electrochemical properties 
of the electrode in question [23]. To supplement this, galvanostatic charge discharge 
(GCD) can be performed to observe the storage capability of the device. In GCD, 
electric potential is plotted over time at a set current density (commonly at 1 A/g) 
[24]. From these two tests, other electrochemical capabilities can be derived. Speciﬁc 
capacitance is often derived from CV, while columbic efﬁciency can be gathered from 
GCD. GCD can also be used to observe energy density and power density, making 
it a power tool of analysis. Meanwhile, electrode stability and capacitance retention 
can be gathered from long-term charge–discharge over many cycles. Electrochemical 
impedance spectroscopy (EIS) allows for the observation of reaction at the interface 
of the electrode and can be useful for observing different electrochemical phenomena 
[25]. An example of some of these tests can be observed in Fig. 4 [26].
3 
Hydrogel and Composites 
Hydrogels are hydrophilic three-dimensional cross-linked and branched polymeric 
networks. The high degree of cross-linking native to hydrogels allows them to 
absorb and retain water (about 70–99% of their structure) without the threat of being 
dissolved [27]. Hydrogels have been used by humans for thousands of years with a 
common example being that of gelatin. The ﬁrst instance of man-made hydrogel was 
discovered by Otto Wichterle in 1960 for use as soft contact lenses [28]. Since then, 
researchers have developed new methods to synthesize wholly synthetic, bio-based, 
or hybrid hydrogels. Each of these gels features their own unique properties and 
characteristics. While these unique properties are useful for a variety of applications, 
these properties can be enhanced by making a composite. Composites are a mate-
rial class that consists of a matrix and a reinforcement. The matrix is typically the 
main material of the composite, while the reinforcement is a different material that 
is enveloped in the matrix. An example of the would be the addition of carbon ﬁber 
to epoxy resin. In this scenario, your carbon ﬁber acts as the matrix of the composite 
while the epoxy acts as the reinforcement. The combination of these two materials

Hydrogel and Its Composites for Pseudocapacitors
223
Fig. 4 a Example of CV curves over varying scan rates. b Example of GCD over different current 
densities. c Graph of areal capacitance over current density. d Graph of volumetric capacitance 
over current density. e Comparison of capacitance retention and coulombic efﬁciency over high 
cycle numbers. f Graph of energy density over power density. Reproduced with permission [26], 
Copyright (2022), American Chemical Society
then serves to enhance the properties of the overall material. Even though hydrogels 
are an extremely capable material they are still often used as the matrix for compos-
ites since some hydrogel applications require the characteristics to be adapted to ﬁt 
the application. 
When looking at the characteristics of hydrogels the degree of cross-linking is 
one of the most integral properties a hydrogel can have. This is because the degree 
of cross-linking inﬂuences almost all the other characteristics of a hydrogel. The 
characteristic that is most affected by the degree of cross-linking is the porosity of 
the gel. Typical hydrogels feature a volume that is >5% pores, and with hydrogels 
featuring a high percentage of pores the pore sizes are often used to help classify the 
gel. The classiﬁcations are shown in Table 1 [29]. 
For a gel to be synthesized to a certain pore size, the degree of cross-linking can be 
adjusted. A higher degree can be being used to produce gels with smaller pore sizes 
and vice versa [29]. The pore size of the hydrogel also inﬂuences the swelling and 
mechanical properties of the gel. Essentially, swelling is the ability of a hydrogel to 
absorb large amounts of liquid without dissolving. Gels that feature larger pore sizes
Table 1 Classiﬁcations of 
hydrogels based on their pore 
size 
Hydrogel classiﬁcation
Pore size 
Nonporous hydrogels
1–10 nm 
Microporous hydrogels
10–100 nm 
Macroporous hydrogels
100 nm–1 µm 
Superporous hydrogels
100 µm 

224
J. Horinek et al.
absorb more liquid leading to increased swelling [18]. When it comes to mechanical 
properties, gels that are synthesized with a high degree of cross-linking are stiffer 
and more brittle. Whereas gels synthesized with a lower degree of cross-linking are 
more ﬂexible and have more elastic properties [30]. 
When synthesizing hydrogels there are many routes that can be taken. The method 
chosen for synthesis can determine the properties of the gel. Meanwhile, there are 
many different methods to synthesize a gel, with the method chosen depending on 
the materials needed. One of the most common synthesis methods for these gels 
is the sol–gel method. The IUPAC Gold Book deﬁnes this process as, “Process 
through which a network is formed from solution by a progressive change of liquid 
precursor(s) into a sol, to a gel [31]”. The process of sol–gel synthesis relies on 
two initial reactions; the ﬁrst part is hydrolysis followed by polycondensation. In 
hydrolysis the initial compounds are reacted with water, forming a multifunctional 
monomer. Once the monomers are formed, polycondensation begins. In polyconden-
sation, the cross-linking of the polymer begins, creating clustered sites of polymer. 
These particles constitute the “sol” of the sol–gel method. Once the formation of sol 
is complete the gelation process can begin. This is the reaction where sol solution 
transitions from a liquid to a solid material. Once the gelation process reaches its end 
the aging process of the gel can commence. Throughout this stage there are a handful 
of processes that happen, and these processes include: the formation of additional 
crosslinks, a transformation in the size of the gel’s pores, and an overall decrease in 
the size of the gel. The end of the aging process constitutes the end of the sol–gel 
method. An illustration of this process can be seen in Fig. 5 [32]. 
When trying to synthesize hydrogels from graphene oxide often the best route for 
synthesis is the hydrothermal method. Hydrothermal synthesis involves the heteroge-
nous reactions of materials with three crucial factors. These factors being an aqueous 
environment, higher than standard temperature, and pressure. An illustration of a 
study using this synthesis method can be seen in Fig. 6 [33]. In a study by Hu et al., 
graphene oxide hydrogels were synthesized via the hydrothermal method [33]. This 
was accomplished by taking a single layer graphene oxide dispersed in a liquid media
Fig. 5 Image showing the different phases of the sol–gel method of synthesis. Reproduced with 
permission [32], Copyright (2018) by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article 
is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons 
Attribution (CC BY) license 

Hydrogel and Its Composites for Pseudocapacitors
225
Fig. 6 Graphic showing the process of synthesizing a graphene oxide hydrogel. Reproduced with 
permission [33], Copyright (2016), American Chemical Society 
and placing it into a Teﬂon lined autoclave. The completion of this synthesis yielded 
a graphene oxide-based hydrogel with a water content of >98%. 
A more recent method of hydrogel synthesis is rapidly rising in popularity due to 
the increasing prevalence of additive manufacturing (3D printing) technology. Much 
study has been done to allow for the ability to 3D print hydrogels. There are several 
ways to complete this process, but the most common is direct ink writing. This type 
of printing involves taking ink (Ink is a liquid phase polymer that is extruded during 
the direct ink writing) and depositing it layer by layer to form. This is illustrated by 
Fig. 7 [34]. In a study by Zhang et al. chitosan based ink was used to 3D print a 
bio based hydrogel [34]. This process occurred by immersing chitosan microspheres 
with an into a pre-polymerization solution which contained the monomer and the 
cross-linker (N, N'-methylenediacrylamide). Then to catalyze the printing ink, acetic 
acid was introduced into the solution, inducing the swelling of the microspheres, and 
allowing them to absorb the pre-polymerization solution. These microspheres were 
then run through vacuum ﬁltration and centrifugation to remove the aqueous medium 
from the microspheres allowing for a printable ink. This ink was then transferred to 
an extrusion nozzle. The nozzle threatens layer by layer to successfully create a 
hydrogel monolith.
One of the biggest advantages of a hydrogel material is that they can have their 
rheological properties tuned. This means that depending on their application they 
can have speciﬁc properties tuned to better ﬁt that speciﬁc application [35]. Another 
advantage of hydrogels is that they can be self-healing. This means that when synthe-
sized for self-healing it gives the gel the ability to autonomously repair damage. Thus, 
allowing them to maintain their integrity during long term applications [36]. Another

226
J. Horinek et al.
Fig. 7 Image detailing the process of 3D printing a hydrogel. Reproduced with permission [34], 
Copyright (2023), American Chemical Society
incredible advantage of hydrogels is their ability to act as a precursor for aerogels, 
xerogels, and other derivatives. To create aerogels, supercritical drying, or lyophiliza-
tion can be used, while ambient pressure drying forms xerogels [37, 38]. Hydrogels 
do face some issues, however, with one major issue being the potential for a rapid 
decrease in the properties of the gel. This typically happens when the gel suffers 
some form of damage to its structure. Once the structure of a gel is damaged a rapid 
decrease in the properties of the gel can be noted since the structure of a gel is so 
integral to the gel’s characteristics [39]. 
Another challenge that inhibits hydrogels is the randomness of the pore size. 
Certain studies have produced models that can help to predict pore size [30], but 
these studies only provide an average of the pore size. As of now there has been one 
way to reliably control the size of hydrogel pores [40]. In terms of electrochemistry, 
hydrogels have been found to suffer from rather low energy densities. These lower 
energy densities are caused by altering the structure of the gel to enhance the mechan-
ical properties [41]. As stated, earlier gels that are stiffer feature smaller pore sizes. 
In terms of electrochemistry, when the pore size of a gel is decreased a decrease in 
the electrochemical properties can be seen. More speciﬁcally speaking a decrease in 
the energy density of the gel [41].

Hydrogel and Its Composites for Pseudocapacitors
227
4 
Hydrogel and Composites for Pseudocapacitors 
When considering hydrogels for pseudocapacitor applications, there are multiple 
roles that must be considered. Generally, hydrogels can ﬁnd use in three different parts 
of a pseudocapacitor. The ﬁrst and most substantive option is as an electrocatalyst. 
Due to their porous framework, hydrogel precursors make for an excellent substrate 
for electrocatalyst synthesis. Hydrogel based ﬁlms meanwhile, serve as a popular 
option as an electrolyte separator. Finally, hydrogels, either in their native state or 
modiﬁed, are a popular option as an electrolyte for electrolytic pseudocapacitors. 
Hydrogels are also a popular selection when designing a ﬂexible pseudocapacitor, 
due to their inherent strength and ﬂexibility. By themselves, hydrogels are generally 
non pseudocapacitive, which is where the inclusion of composite materials is needed. 
Carbon is an extremely pervasive element that is responsible for our very lives. 
Additionally, materials like carbon black, polyaniline, and graphite are but a few 
examples of carbon’s conductivity. Due to these factors, many hydrogels used for 
energy storage are organic in nature. One exception to this standard is reduced 
graphene oxide (rGO) hydrogel. These hydrogels are synthesized hydrothermally 
from graphene oxide, after which they can be used for further synthesis into an 
electrocatalyst. In one experiment, Gong et al. synthesized a resveratrol (Res)/rGO 
composite that demonstrated excellent energy storage capability. Res is a highly 
substituted phenolic compound that is produced by many species of plants. In this 
context, Res was used to help separate the different layers of rGO to improve the 
fantastic qualities of graphene. Graphene by itself is prone to agglomerations, when 
oxidized, these agglomerations become exfoliated, massively increasing surface area. 
Regrettably, graphene oxide is an insulator, requiring reduction to regain conduc-
tivity. Thus begets the need for a molecular separator with conductive properties 
such as Res. To create the electrodes, the Res/rGO hydrogels were ﬁrst sliced and 
lyophilized, then pressed onto nickel foam and epoxy coated at the nonactive portions. 
The synthesis of the hydrogel, alongside a diagram of Res function in the composite, 
can be seen in Fig. 8 [42].
For testing, the Res/rGO composites electrodes were differentiated based on their 
mass ratios. The 3:1 (mGO/mRes) ratio sample resulted in the most promising data out 
of all the samples tested. CV scans of the Res/rGO samples demonstrated traditional 
redox behavior at 10 mV/s. Meanwhile, Res/rGO3 demonstrated a GCD time around 
1400 s at 1A/g and 1800s at 0.5 A/g in the negative range. Furthermore, the Res/ 
rGO3 electrodes presented a high speciﬁc capacitance of 588 F/g at 1 A/g. In terms 
of stability, the Res/rGO3 electrodes had a low charge-transfer resistance alongside 
a capacitance retention of 88.8% after 10,000 cycles at 2 A/g. 
Metal oxides are commonly seen as the ﬁnal chemical state for a variety of metals. 
From the metal oxides formed during battery operation to the corrosion of iron and 
steel, these compounds are everywhere. While they might be the natural end state for 
metals, their reversibility makes them a perfect candidate for pseudocapacitor appli-
cation. In the energy ﬁeld, metal oxides are commonly divided between noble metal 
oxides and transition metal oxides. Noble metals such as ruthenium oxide and iridium

228
J. Horinek et al.
Fig. 8 Images of Res/rGO composite at different stages of synthesis alongside a graphic depicting 
the stacking of Res on rGO sheets. Reproduced with permission [42], Copyright (2023), American 
Chemical Society
oxide act as powerful electrocatalysts, but their scarcity makes them prohibitively 
expensive for widespread application. Conversely, transition metal oxides can vary 
in electrocatalytic effect, but are widespread and low cost. Iron oxide is perhaps 
the most widespread metal oxide, making it especially interesting for development. 
Gupta et al. explored a polyaniline/graphene/iron oxide hydrogel composite for pseu-
docapacitor development [43]. Synthesis of the composite material occurred in three 
distinct steps. The graphene was synthesized from ﬂaked graphite via a modiﬁed 
Hummer’s method. To create the intermediate binary composite, graphene oxide was 
placed into an ethylene glycol solution and sonicated. After this, varying amounts of 
ferric chloride was added to the solutions alongside hydrazine hydrate and stirred. 
The solutions were then microwave treated to form the composite. To incorporate 
polyaniline into the mix, aniline, phytic acid, carbon cloth, and the graphene inter-
mediate were added to deionized water, sonicated, and cooled. This solution was 
then added to a pre-cooled ammonium persulfate and stirred, creating the hydrogel. 
To make the electrodes, the hydrogel coated carbon cloths were dried, lyophilized, 
and placed into a Swagelok assembly for testing, as seen in Fig. 9 [43]. Of all the 
composites created for testing, the sample denoted PGF5@cc performed the best for 
testing. The CV plot demonstrated good pseudocapacitive behavior at scan rates up 
to 100 mV/s, alongside a good GCD time just above 1800 at 0.5 A/g. The speciﬁc 
capacitance calculated from GCD was 1115 F/g. The stability of PGF5@cc was 
maintained at 82% at 1 A/g after 10,000 cycles.
Like metal oxides, metal sulﬁdes are immensely common in nature. Materials 
like iron pyrite and lead galena are ores of their respective metals that are mined 
worldwide. Also like metal oxides, metal sulﬁdes are commonly researched for their 
electrocatalytic capabilities [44]. One advantage of metal sulﬁdes is that they are often 
more conductive than metal oxides. Solid state metal oxides are generally considered

Hydrogel and Its Composites for Pseudocapacitors
229
Fig. 9 Graphic depicting the synthesis of PGF@cc and the resulting device made for characteri-
zation. Reproduced with permission [43], Copyright (2020), American Chemical Society
to be nonconductors, meanwhile many metal sulﬁdes fall well within the range of 
semi-conduction. Taking advantage of metal sulﬁde conductivity, Niu et al. devised 
a Ni3S2 carbon composite sourced from alginate hydrogels [45]. Alginate is unique 
when compared to other hydrogels thus far as it is easily sourced as a renewable 
biomaterial. Sodium alginate (SA) is a naturally derived hydrogel precursor that can 
be extracted and reﬁned from brown algae. In terms of synthesizing the composite, 
SA and thiourea were stirred into an aqueous solution and added dropwise into a 
rapidly stirring nickel chloride solution. This process created hydrogel beads which 
were lyophilized into aerogels, carbonized, washed, and made into Ni/Ni3S2@CNS 
pseudocapacitor electrodes. Preliminary electrochemical testing observed that an 
electrode made from gels consisting of a 2:1 SA-thiourea ratio calcined at 800 °C 
(Ni/Ni3S2@CNS-2-800) performed the best for supercapacitor application. GCD 
demonstrated a charge–discharge time of 1200 s at 0.5 A/g, with CV demonstrating 
pseudocapacitive behavior even at 100 mV/s scan rate. Speciﬁc capacitance at 0.5 A/ 
g was observed at 720 F/g, with speciﬁc capacitance maintained at 500 F/g at 10 A/ 
g. This material also demonstrated a capacitance retention of 85% after 5000 cycles 
at 10 A/g, indicating potential for higher amperage applications. 
Conducting polymers are a class of material that has proved useful in energy 
storage. First explored in the early to mid-1900s, conducting polymers have expanded 
to ﬁll a variety of niches in supercapacitor applications. Polyvinylidene ﬂuoride 
(PVDF) is often used as a binder, improving the adhesion of electrocatalysts to

230
J. Horinek et al.
an electrode [46]. Polyaniline, meanwhile, has seen use in electronics applications, 
speciﬁcally circuitry. Another advantage of conducting polymers is their ﬂexibility. 
Flexible energy storage is a hot topic in the scientiﬁc community, especially in the 
ﬁeld of wearable electronics. Wearable electronics are often hampered by bulkiness 
and weight. The bulkiness of a worn electronic device can reduce maneuverability and 
ergonomics, potentially causing damage to the user or device. Weight, meanwhile, 
can cause strain to the user, leading to discomfort. To combat this, many designs 
have been made that incorporate ﬂexible hydrogel supercapacitors, often with the 
inclusion of equally ﬂexible conductive polymers. 
When designing ﬂexible supercapacitors, there are a few factors that need to be 
kept in mind. Flexibility is the most obvious factor, as devices that can twist and bend 
are valuable for application. Stretchability is important for devices that need to fold, 
extend, or retract. To this effect, Wang et al. designed a highly stretchable polypyrrole 
(PPy) hydrogel ﬁlm for supercapacitor construction [47].  The high degree of ﬂexi-
bility was obtained through a unique hydrogel composite synthesis procedure. The 
ﬁrst hydrogel used in this composite was made from polyacrylic acid (PAA). PAA 
is a unique polymer due to its ability to link via ionic bonds. Ionomers such as PAA 
tend to demonstrate self-healing ability, alongside a higher degree of ﬂexibility due 
to the transient nature of its bonds. PPy, meanwhile, is a conducting polymer with the 
ability to interact with the ionic groups of PAA. In this synthesis, PAA-Fe substrates 
were developed and placed into PTFE molds. The resulting gels were then stretched 
to certain degrees and immersed in liquid nitrogen until entirely frozen. After the 
gels were frozen, they were immersed in a 1:1 ethanol–water solution alongside an 
equimolar amount of APS and pyrrole. Polymerization on the surface of the frozen 
gels were allowed to occur over set times, after which they were allowed to thaw 
in water. The composite gels were ﬁnally washed multiple times and made into a 
supercapacitor. A schematic of the composite hydrogel synthesis is visible in Fig. 10 
[47]. 
Fig. 10 Image depicting the synthesis of SSHF hydrogels, as well as the accordion like structure of 
the ﬁnal product. Reproduced with permission [47], Copyright (2022), American Chemical Society

Hydrogel and Its Composites for Pseudocapacitors
231
The hydrogel composite’s electrochemical measurements were tested under 
multiple conditions. The most optimal sample, SSHF-2, was measured in its native 
state, during stretching at up to 500%, and after repeated cut heal processes. In each 
of the states, good pseudocapacitive behavior was observed at a 10 mV/s scan rate in 
CV testing. At baseline, GCD trials demonstrated a charge–discharge time just under 
200 s at 1 A/g. When comparing the original with 500% stretch, charge discharge time 
dropped to just above 120 s. Finally, the 500% sample was cut and rejoined, where it 
was observed that minimal time was lost, even after 7 cut and rejoin cycles. Speciﬁc 
capacitance was observed to be 79.5 F/g at 0.5 A/g, while GCD held relatively stable 
out to 5000 cycles. It was noted that while this device was near the lower end of 
the supercapacitor spectrum, its enhanced physical properties, all in one design, and 
ability to stack both in series and parallel made it an excellent candidate for ﬂexible 
device fabrication. 
Low capacitance values are not uncommon when designing ﬂexible supercapac-
itors. The material properties required for ﬂexural ability often prove antithetical 
to capacitor materials. Metals like to maintain their shape once bent, while other 
materials are liable to snap when signiﬁcant force is applied. One method to improve 
the energy storage of ﬂexible supercapacitors was explored by Wu et al. [48]. In this 
study, the team created a quasi-solid-state zinc-ion hybrid supercapacitor. Hybrid 
supercapacitors are a subset of supercapacitors that implement battery-like opera-
tion in their design. This is achieved by creating separate electrodes, one that operates 
via EDLC behavior, and one the operates like ion batteries. Additionally, the device 
created takes advantage of an eutectogel electrolyte for ion transport. Eutectogels are 
a cousin of hydrogels that use ionic liquids as their solvent. The eutectic solvents used 
in this experiment not only improve the electrochemistry of the device but endow 
antifreeze properties to the gel. Synthesis of this material occurred over 3 steps. First, 
graphene oxide hydrogel was synthesized and puriﬁed for later use. Meanwhile, the 
eutectogel was made from a 1:5 molar ratio solution of acrylamide and zinc perchlo-
rate hexahydrate. This solution was stirred until transparent then cured in a 60 °C oil 
bath. With the gels obtained, they were made into a protodevice where the graphene 
gel was pressed into a titanium mesh, pressed to the eutectogel, with zinc foil layered 
onto the other side. The protodevice was then further cross-linked in a 50 °C oil bath, 
after which it was made into the hybrid supercapacitor device. Pseudocapacitance 
was conﬁrmed via CV at 10 mV/s over all trials. GCD was tested in its ambient state, 
at cryogenic temperatures, and at varying degrees of ﬂexing. In its ambient state, 
charge–discharge times reached around 1100 s at 0.8 A/g, with times between −20 
and 70 °C ranging from 550 to 800 s at 1 A/g, respectively. Flexural charge discharge 
was observed to barely change between bends from 0 to 180°. The hybrid capacitor 
also demonstrated a high energy density of 117.5 Wh/kg alongside a power density 
of 833.8 W/kg. The device operating at different angles can be observed in Fig. 11 
[48].

232
J. Horinek et al.
Fig. 11 a Photographs of an assembled ﬂexible ZHSC at various bending angles. b CV curves at 
different bending angles. c GCD curves at different bending angles. d Optical images of a green 
LED lit up by assembled ZHSC. Reproduced with permission [48], Copyright (2022), American 
Chemical Society 
5 
Conclusion 
Given the ever-growing need for clean renewable energy, new solutions have arisen to 
match. Hydrogel composites are an up-and-coming solution to the mounting energy 
concerns faced globally. Electrochemically involved hydrogels that bend, stretch, 
and twist can be used for the development of ﬂexible electronics. Such applications 
are important for medical devices or ergonomically compatible consumer products. 
These medical devices can include blood monitors, portable sensors, and other neces-
sary apparatuses. In the realm of consumer electronics, ﬂexible power sources can be 
used in watches, clothing, and cybernetics. Meanwhile, pseudocapacitive compos-
ites help to improve the energy density of super capacitors. By improving the energy 
density, their application falls in line with more traditional storage methods. The addi-
tional power density afforded by supercapacitors, in conjunction with their recharge-
ability, make for a potential alternative to batteries. Redox active materials have been 
demonstrated to increase many of the properties conducive to energy storage. This is 
due to the chemical reactions that allow further energy storage within the chemical 
structure of the electrocatalyst. When considering these devices for practical appli-
cations, it is well to consider the drawbacks. While often improved when compared 
to batteries, pseudocapactivie supercapacitors suffer from a lower net power density 
compared to EDL capacitors. This again is due to the time required to facilitate a 
chemical reaction, as opposed to the near instantaneous energy transfer of capaci-
tance. However, this limitation is only a drawback in high power applications and is 
less of an issue for more general use products. The more glaring issue is the generally 
weak electrical properties seen in ﬂexible devices. This limitation is the regrettable

Hydrogel and Its Composites for Pseudocapacitors
233
tradeoff for the enhanced ﬂexural properties. For practical application, this compro-
mise needs to be amended, either through expanding the amount of devices used, or by 
engineering a better material. Nevertheless, pseudocapacitive hydrogel composites 
represent an emerging class of material that holds promise for energy applications. 
References 
1. D. Zheng, C. Sun, W. Pan, G. Guo, Y. Zheng, C. Liu, J. Zhu, Nanostructured Fe2O3@C negative 
electrodes for stable asymmetric supercapacitors with high-performance. Energy Fuels 35, 
16915–16924 (2021) 
2. Z. Yuan, L. Wang, D. Li, J. Cao, W. Han, Carbon-reinforced Nb2CTx MXene/MoS2 nanosheets 
as a superior rate and high-capacity anode for sodium-ion batteries. ACS Nano 15, 7439–7450 
(2021) 
3. S. Nishimura, Y. Suzuki, J. Lu, S. Torii, T. Kamiyama, A. Yamada, High-temperature neutron 
and X-ray diffraction study of fast sodium transport in alluaudite-type sodium iron sulfate. 
Chem. Mater. 28, 2393–2399 (2016) 
4. J. Choi, A. Nkhama, A. Kumar, S.R. Mishra, F. Perez, R.K. Gupta, A facile preparation of 
sulfur doped nickel–iron nanostructures with improved HER and supercapacitor performance. 
Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 47, 7511–7521 (2022) 
5. I. Shaheen, K.S. Ahmad, C. Zequine, R.K. Gupta, A.G. Thomas, M.A. Malik, Modiﬁed sol-gel 
synthesis of Co3O4 nanoparticles using organic template for electrochemical energy storage. 
Energy 218, 119502 (2021) 
6. S. Aloqayli, C.K. Ranaweera, Z. Wang, K. Siam, P.K. Kahol, P. Tripathi, O.N. Srivastava, B.K. 
Gupta, S.R. Mishra, F. Perez, Nanostructured cobalt oxide and cobalt sulﬁde for ﬂexible, high 
performance and durable supercapacitors. Energy Storage Mater. 8, 68–76 (2017) 
7. M. Fu, W. Chen, H. Yu, M. Gao, Q. Liu, General synthesis of two-dimensional porous metal 
oxides/hydroxides for microwave absorbing applications. Inorg. Chem. 61, 678–687 (2022) 
8. R. Packiaraj, K. Mahendraprabhu, P. Devendran, N. Nallamuthu, B. Palanivel, K.S. Venkatesh, 
R. Karuppannan, Electrochemical performances of ZnO–NiO–CuO mixed metal oxides as 
smart electrode material for solid-state asymmetric device fabrication. Energy Fuels 36, 603– 
617 (2022) 
9. D.L. Singh, T.K. Ghosh, V. Mishra, S. Ramasamy, M.K. Sahoo, R.R. Gangavarapu, Three-
dimensional lanthanide-based nanoporous metal-organic frameworks for high-performance 
supercapacitors. ACS Appl. Nano Mater. 5, 15237–15249 (2022) 
10. A. Gupta, C.A. Allison, M.E. Ellis, J. Choi, A. Davis, R. Srivastava, F.M. de Souza, D. Neupane, 
S.R. Mishra, F. Perez, A. Kumar, R.K. Gupta, T. Dawsey, Cobalt metal–organic framework 
derived cobalt–nitrogen–carbon material for overall water splitting and supercapacitor. Int. J. 
Hydrogen Energy 48, 9551–9564 (2023) 
11. X.F. Lu, Y. Fang, D. Luan, X.W.D. Lou, Metal-organic frameworks derived functional materials 
for electrochemical energy storage and conversion: a mini review. Nano Lett. 21, 1555–1565 
(2021) 
12. J. Meng, X. Liu, C. Niu, Q. Pang, J. Li, F. Liu, Z. Liu, L. Mai, Advances in metal–organic 
framework coatings: versatile synthesis and broad applications. Chem. Soc. Rev. 49, 3142–3186 
(2020) 
13. K. Jayaramulu, S. Mukherjee, D.M. Morales, D.P. Dubal, A.K. Nanjundan, A. Schneemann, 
J. Masa, S. Kment, W. Schuhmann, M. Otyepka, R. Zboˇril, R.A. Fischer, Graphene-based 
metal-organic framework hybrids for applications in catalysis, environmental, and energy 
technologies. Chem. Rev. 122, 17241–17338 (2022) 
14. Y. Guo, J. Bae, Z. Fang, P. Li, F. Zhao, G. Yu, Hydrogels and hydrogel-derived materials for 
energy and water sustainability. Chem. Rev. 120, 7642–7707 (2020)

234
J. Horinek et al.
15. N. Chelfouh, G. Coquil, S. Rousselot, G. Foran, E. Briqueleur, F. Shoghi, L. Caradant, M. 
Dollé, Apple pectin-based hydrogel electrolyte for energy storage applications. ACS Sustain. 
Chem. Eng. 10, 15802–15812 (2022) 
16. E. Cevik, S.T. Gunday, A. Bozkurt, A. Iqbal, S.M. Asiri, A.N. Alqarni, A. Almoﬂeh, Scal-
able, quasi-solid-state bio-polymer hydrogel electrolytes for high-performance supercapacitor 
applications. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 10, 10839–10848 (2022) 
17. S. Tominaka, S. Ohta, H. Obata, T. Momma, T. Osaka, On-chip fuel cell: micro direct methanol 
fuel cell of an air-breathing, membraneless, and monolithic design. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 130, 
10456–10457 (2008) 
18. Z. Liang, M. Liu, L. Shen, L. Lu, C. Ma, X. Lu, X. Lou, C.-L. Jia, All-inorganic ﬂexible 
embedded thin-ﬁlm capacitors for dielectric energy storage with high performance. ACS Appl. 
Mater. Interfaces 11, 5247–5255 (2019) 
19. W. Raza, F. Ali, N. Raza, Y. Luo, K.H. Kim, J. Yang, S. Kumar, A. Mehmood, E.E. Kwon, 
Recent advancements in supercapacitor technology. Nano Energy 52, 441–473 (2018) 
20. S. Fleischmann, J.B. Mitchell, R. Wang, C. Zhan, D. Jiang, V. Presser, V. Augustyn, Pseudo-
capacitance: from fundamental understanding to high power energy storage materials. Chem. 
Rev. 120, 6738–6782 (2020) 
21. M. Sarno, Chapter 22—Nanotechnology in energy storage: the supercapacitors, in Catal-
ysis, Green Chemistry and Sustainable Energy, ed. by A. Basile, G. Centi, M. De Falco, G. 
Iaquaniello (Elsevier, 2020), pp. 431–458 
22. J. Li, Z. Wang, L. Yang, Y. Liu, Y. Xing, S. Zhang, H. Xu, A ﬂexible Li–air battery workable 
under harsh conditions based on an integrated structure: a composite lithium anode encased in 
a gel electrolyte. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 13, 18627–18637 (2021) 
23. N. Elgrishi, K.J. Rountree, B.D. McCarthy, E.S. Rountree, T.T. Eisenhart, J.L. Dempsey, A 
practical beginner’s guide to cyclic voltammetry. J. Chem. Educ. 95, 197–206 (2018) 
24. L. Zeng, T. Wu, T. Ye, T. Mo, R. Qiao, G. Feng, Modeling galvanostatic charge–discharge of 
nanoporous supercapacitors. Nat. Comput. Sci. 1, 725–731 (2021) 
25. A.C. Lazanas, M.I. Prodromidis, Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy a tutorial. ACS 
Meas. Sci. Au. 3, 162–193 (2023) 
26. S. Yamada, A transient supercapacitor with a water-dissolvable ionic gel for sustainable 
electronics. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 14, 26595–26603 (2022) 
27. E. Axpe, D. Chan, G.S. Offeddu, Y. Chang, D. Merida, H.L. Hernandez, E.A. Appel, A 
multiscale model for solute diffusion in hydrogels. Macromolecules 52, 6889–6897 (2019) 
28. O. Wichterle, D. Lím, Hydrophilic gels for biological use. Nature 185, 117–118 (1960) 
29. R. Foudazi, R. Zowada, I. Manas-Zloczower, D.L. Feke, Porous hydrogels: present challenges 
and future opportunities. Langmuir 39, 2092–2111 (2023) 
30. T. Kopaˇc, A. Ruˇcigaj, M. Krajnc, The mutual effect of the crosslinker and biopolymer 
concentration on the desired hydrogel properties. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 159, 557–569 (2020) 
31. J.V Alemán, A.V Chadwick, J. He, M. Hess, K. Horie, R.G. Jones, P. Kratochvíl, I. Meisel, 
I. Mita, G. Moad, S. Penczek, R.F.T. Stepto, Deﬁnitions of terms relating to the struc-
ture and processing of sols, gels, networks, and inorganic-organic hybrid materials (IUPAC 
Recommendations 2007), vol. 79 (2007), pp. 1801–1829 
32. Y. Tao, P.P. Pescarmona, Nanostructured oxides synthesised via scCO2-assisted sol-gel methods 
and their application in catalysis. Catalysts 8, 212 (2018) 
33. K. Hu, X. Xie, T. Szkopek, M. Cerruti, Understanding hydrothermally reduced graphene oxide 
hydrogels: from reaction products to hydrogel properties. Chem. Mater. 28, 1756–1768 (2016) 
34. R. Zhang, J. Guo, X. Yang, X. Jiang, L. Zhang, J. Zhou, X. Cao, B. Duan, Ink based on the 
tunable swollen microsphere for a 3d printing hydrogel with broad-range mechanical properties. 
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 15, 15917–15927 (2023) 
35. D. Skoulas, G. Mangiapia, D. Parisi, M. Kasimatis, E. Glynos, E. Stratikos, D. Vlassopoulos, H. 
Frielinghaus, H. Iatrou, Tunable hydrogels with improved viscoelastic properties from hybrid 
polypeptides. Macromolecules 54, 10786–10800 (2021) 
36. J. Lei, X. Li, S. Wang, L. Yuan, L. Ge, D. Li, C. Mu, Facile fabrication of biocompatible 
gelatin-based self-healing hydrogels. ACS Appl. Polym. Mater. 1, 1350–1358 (2019)

Hydrogel and Its Composites for Pseudocapacitors
235
37. X. Gao, R.J. Esteves, T.T.H. Luong, R. Jaini, I.U. Arachchige, Oxidation-induced self-assembly 
of Ag nanoshells into transparent and opaque Ag hydrogels and aerogels. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
136, 7993–8002 (2014) 
38. X. Li, S. Liu, Recovery and reutilization of the solvents and catalyst used in the sol-gel synthesis 
of silica xerogel. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 7, 7094–7101 (2019) 
39. W. Wang, S. Liu, L. Liu, S. Alfarhan, K. Jin, X. Chen, High-speed and high-resolution 3d 
printing of self-healing and ion-conductive hydrogels via µCLIP. ACS Mater. Lett. 5, 1727– 
1737 (2023) 
40. C. Xue, Y. Huang, X. Zheng, G. Hu, Hopping behavior mediates the anomalous conﬁned 
diffusion of nanoparticles in porous hydrogels. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 13, 10612–10620 (2022) 
41. C. Gao, Z. Gao, Y. Wei, N. Luo, Y. Liu, P. Huo, Flexible wood enhanced poly(acrylic acid-co-
acrylamide)/quaternized gelatin hydrogel electrolytes for high-energy-density supercapacitors. 
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 15, 2951–2960 (2023) 
42. X. Gong, Y. Wang, K. Yao, J. Yang, Y. Li, X. Ge, H. Xie, G. Pan, R. Xing, Supercapacitors 
based on resveratrol/reduced graphene oxide composites. ACS Appl. Nano Mater. 6, 4162–4169 
(2023) 
43. A. Gupta, S. Sardana, J. Dalal, S. Lather, A.S. Maan, R. Tripathi, R. Punia, K. Singh, A. Ohlan, 
Nanostructured polyaniline/graphene/Fe2O3 composites hydrogel as a high-performance 
ﬂexible supercapacitor electrode material. ACS Appl. Energy Mater. 3, 6434–6446 (2020) 
44. Y.-S. Cheng, Y.-T. Wu, S. Aulia, C.-C. Chang, M. Rinawati, T.-Y. Lee, J.-Y. Chang, N.L.W. 
Septiani, B. Yuliarto, M.-H. Yeh, Robust cobalt manganese sulﬁde thin ﬁlm as an electrocat-
alytic layer for quantum dot-sensitized solar cells with the polysulﬁde electrolyte. ACS Sustain. 
Chem. Eng. 11, 6903–6913 (2023) 
45. W. Niu, Z. Xiao, Z. Zhao, S. Zhai, N. Liu, C. Qin, High-performance asymmetric supercapacitor 
based on Ni3S2 nanoparticles immobilized on carbon nanosheets from sodium alginate. J. 
Alloys Compd. 885, 161194 (2021) 
46. M. Wang, Q. Tan, L. Liu, J. Li, A. Facile, Environmentally friendly, and low-temperature 
approach for decomposition of polyvinylidene ﬂuoride from the cathode electrode of spent 
lithium-ion batteries. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 7, 12799–12806 (2019) 
47. Y. Wang, Y. Liu, Z. Wang, D.H. Nguyen, C. Zhang, T. Liu, Polymerization-driven self-wrinkling 
on a frozen hydrogel surface toward ultra-stretchable polypyrrole-based supercapacitors. ACS 
Appl. Mater. Interfaces 14, 45910–45920 (2022) 
48. Y. Wu, Y. Deng, K. Zhang, J. Qiu, J. Wu, L. Yan, Ultrahigh conductive and stretchable eutectogel 
electrolyte for high-voltage ﬂexible antifreeze quasi-solid-state zinc-ion hybrid supercapacitor. 
ACS Appl. Energy Mater. 5, 3013–3021 (2022)

Pseudocapacitive Materials for 3D 
Printed Supercapacitors 
Arthi Gopalakrishnan, Vishnu Surendran, Venkataraman Thangadurai, 
and Benjamin Tutolo 
Abstract Recent advancements in wearable, ﬂexible, and portable electronics have 
stimulated a swift increase in demand for compatible energy storage devices with 
promising performance. Supercapacitors offer the potential to satisfy the demands 
for complicated design and integrated functionality due to their highly adaptable 
manufacturing process. This chapter provides a review of recent advancements in 
3D-printed supercapacitors using pseudocapacitive materials. A brief introduction 
on the subject is addressed with the main concepts of ink formulations and their 
constraints, optimization steps, and printing technologies. Moreover, we review 
various pseudocapacitive electrode materials, e.g., metal oxides, conducting poly-
mers, chalcogenides, metal–organic frameworks, and MXenes, and their conversion 
into printable inks used for 3D printing supercapacitors. We conclude by discussing 
major limitations and the future perspectives in 3D printable supercapacitors. 
Keywords Pseudocapacitors · 3D printing electrodes · Supercapacitors ·
Solid-state · Ink writing 
1 
Introduction 
Pseudocapacitive materials have drawn signiﬁcant attention in the effort to create 
advanced energy storage systems due to their high speciﬁc capacitance and 
outstanding rate capability. In addition, pseudocapacitive materials, which undergo 
fast and reversible redox reactions, have shown great promise in improving the energy
A. Gopalakrishnan envelope symbol · B. Tutolo 
Department of Geoscience, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB T2N 1N4, Canada 
e-mail: arthi.gopalakrishnan@ucalgary.ca 
V. Surendran · V. Thangadurai 
Department of Chemistry, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB T2N 1N4, Canada 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
R. K. Gupta (ed.), Pseudocapacitors, Engineering Materials, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45430-1_13 
237

238
A. Gopalakrishnan et al.
density and power delivery of supercapacitors. A new method for creating superca-
pacitors with improved performance and design ﬂexibility has just surfaced: addi-
tive manufacturing, more commonly known as 3D printing. Incorporating pseudo-
capacitive materials into 3D-printed supercapacitors offers the potential for higher 
energy storage and improved device performance [1]. The advent of 3D printing has 
revolutionized the manufacturing landscape, enabling the production of complex 
and customized structures with precise control over their geometry. By leveraging 
computer-aided design (CAD) models, 3D printing facilitates the layer-by-layer 
deposition of materials, eliminating the need for traditional fabrication methods 
such as casting or lithography. This additive manufacturing approach offers numerous 
advantages, including reduced material waste, enhanced integration capabilities, and 
the ability to tailor electrode architectures for optimal electrochemical performance 
[2]. 
In this chapter, we explore recent advancements in the ﬁeld of pseudocapaci-
tive materials for 3D-printed supercapacitors. We examine the different classes of 
pseudocapacitive materials, such as transition metal oxides, conducting polymers, 
and metal–organic frameworks, and highlight their unique properties and electro-
chemical performance. We build on this foundation by delving into the fabrication 
techniques and strategies employed for integrating these materials into 3D-printed 
electrode architectures, ensuring enhanced mass loading, efﬁcient charge transfer, 
and improved overall device performance. Furthermore, this chapter discusses the 
challenges and opportunities associated with the use of pseudocapacitive materials 
in 3D-printed supercapacitors. It addresses issues such as material selection, elec-
trode design optimization, and post-processing treatments, aiming to provide insights 
into the development of high-performance energy storage devices. We conclude 
by exploring potential applications and future research directions for 3D-printed 
supercapacitors utilizing pseudocapacitive materials, ranging from wearable elec-
tronics and portable energy systems to large-scale energy storage. By combining 
the unique capabilities of pseudocapacitive materials and 3D printing technology, 
novel energy storage solutions can be developed, paving the way for the next gener-
ation of high-performance supercapacitors with tailored architectures and improved 
electrochemical performance. 
2 
3D Printing Technologies 
The emerging 3D printing technologies offer different types of printing techniques, 
which control the electrode architecture and geometry, thus enhancing the energy/ 
power density of the supercapacitor devices. Overall, 3D printing follows a series of 
operations from model design to printing and to the post-treatment process, following 
the basic operational procedure given in Fig. 1a [3]. First, the ink composition is 
prepared according to the printable conditions. Then, using computer-aided design, 
a 3D model is prepared and converted to layer data to be printed. Finally, the printed 
material is post-treated by various processes to acquire desired 3D objects. Different

Pseudocapacitive Materials for 3D Printed Supercapacitors
239
Fig. 1 a Overview of basic additive manufacturing procedure in preparation of 3D objects; b fused 
deposition modeling (FDM); c stereolithography (SLA); d direct ink writing (DIW); and e binder 
jetting. Adapted with permission [3], Copyrights (2021), Distributed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution Non-commercial License 4.0 (CC BY-NC). f digital light signal (DLP) 3D printer 
based on digital mirror device (DMD) arrays; g inkjet printing process. Adapted and reproduced 
with permission [1], Copyright (2022), John Wiley and Sons 
types of 3D printing methods (Fig. 1b–g) have been used to fabricate 3D electrodes 
and devices [1–4]. 
2.1 
Fused Deposition Modeling 
Fused deposition modeling (FDM) is a widely used 3D printing technique that 
involves layer-by-layer extrusion of a thermoplastic ﬁlament through a heated nozzle 
to construct objects. This method offers advantages such as low cost, ease of use, and a 
wide range of compatible materials, including acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS), 
polylactic acid (PLA), and nylon. However, it should be noted that FDM exhibits 
some limitations, including limited resolution and the visibility of layer lines on the 
ﬁnal prints. Despite these limitations, FDM is widely used among researchers to 
manufacture complex objects with ease. The electrochemically active materials mix 
with the thermoplastic materials and form the ﬁlament for the deposition.

240
A. Gopalakrishnan et al.
2.2 
Stereolithography 
Stereolithography (SLA) is an additive manufacturing technique known for its high 
precision and ability to produce intricate designs. In SLA, a liquid photopolymer 
resin is selectively cured using an ultraviolet (UV) light source, solidifying each layer. 
SLA is commonly used in applications such as jewelry, dental models, and prototypes 
requiring ﬁne details. While SLA delivers excellent resolution and smooth surface 
ﬁnishes, it requires expensive equipment and provides limited choices in terms of 
available materials. 
2.3 
Selective Laser Sintering 
Selective laser sintering (SLS) is a 3D printing method that employs a high-powered 
laser to selectively fuse powdered materials, layer by layer. This technique enables the 
use of various materials, including nylon, polyamide, metals, and ceramics, making 
it suitable for applications such as functional prototypes, end-use parts, and objects 
with complex geometries. It offers advantages such as versatility and good strength 
and durability. The drawbacks of SLS include the need for costly equipment and the 
possibility of yielding a rough surface ﬁnish. 
2.4 
Digital Light Processing 
Digital light processing (DLP) is a 3D printing process that employs a digital projector 
to expose an entire layer of liquid resin to UV light, solidifying it in one pass. 
DLP is known for its fast-printing speeds and high accuracy, making it valuable for 
applications such as dental models, jewelry, and small functional parts. DLP utilizes 
a spatial light modulating element to project a speciﬁcally patterned light, allowing 
for the printing of planar ﬁgures in a single step, signiﬁcantly reducing printing time 
while achieving high-resolution patterns and smooth surfaces. Nonetheless, it should 
be noted that DLP has limitations in terms of material choices compared to other 
techniques and may offer a rough surface compared to SLA. 
2.5 
Binder Jetting 
Binder jetting is a 3D printing technique that selectively deposits a liquid binding 
agent onto thin layers of powdered material, which are then fused together [5]. 
This method ﬁnds applications in the production of large-scale objects, architectural

Pseudocapacitive Materials for 3D Printed Supercapacitors
241
models, and sand-casting molds due to its high-speed printing capabilities and cost-
effectiveness for larger objects. However, it is important to consider that binder jetting 
does have limitations in terms of material properties and may result in low-resolution 
prints. 
2.6 
Direct Ink Writing 
Direct ink writing (DIW) is one of the most popular additive manufacturing tech-
niques employed for fabricating energy storage devices, utilizing an extrusion-based 
approach. The successful implementation of this technique relies on ink rheological 
properties that ensure optimal ink ﬂuidity and ﬁlament shape retention throughout the 
three essential processes: internal ﬂow within the syringe and nozzle, extrusion from 
the nozzle, and deposition onto substrates. The fabrication of energy storage devices 
using the direct ink writing technique has certain limitations, including the need for 
ink with speciﬁc properties, compromised mechanical strength, and the necessity 
for additional post-treatment procedures. For the successful construction of desired 
patterns, the ink or slurry must possess high viscosity and shear-thinning characteris-
tics, ensuring that the extruded ﬁlament or line maintains its shape without distortion. 
DIW has been successfully employed to print various materials such as carbon-based 
substances, conductive polymers, and metal oxide-based active components [6]. 
2.7 
Inkjet Printing 
While primarily a 2D method, layer-by-layer printing can also be utilized to enhance 
pattern thickness, offering several beneﬁts such as precise control over material 
deposition, efﬁcient pattern design, and waste reduction. The inkjet printing (IJP) 
technique is particularly noteworthy for its cost-effectiveness and adaptability to the 
mass production of personalized items. Notably, various metal oxides and graphene-
based inks have demonstrated success in printing pseudocapacitive energy storage 
devices [7]. 
3 
Electrode Design and Architectures 
Designing the architecture of electrodes is a viable approach to enhancing the energy 
density and power density of energy storage devices like batteries and supercapaci-
tors. While traditional fabrication methods have limitations in controlling the geom-
etry and architecture of electrodes and electrolytes, 3D printing offers promising 
possibilities to precisely manipulate material architecture (e.g., dimension, porosity, 
morphology) and improve energy storage device performance. By utilizing speciﬁc

242
A. Gopalakrishnan et al.
Fig. 2 Overview of 3D printing techniques and their electrode architectures. Adapted with 
permission [1], Copyright (2022), John Wiley and Sons 
3D printing techniques like DIW, FDM, and SLA, complex capacitor structures can 
be produced with high precision (Fig. 2), enabling the efﬁcient storage and discharge 
of electrical energy [3]. These techniques offer the ﬂexibility to create intricate elec-
trode designs and optimize the capacitor’s performance, leading to enhanced energy 
storage capabilities. The ﬂexibility of the 3D printing techniques allows for designing 
complex structures. 
3.1 
Interdigitated Structures 
The interdigitated electrode structure refers to a conﬁguration where the cathode 
and anode “ﬁngers” of energy storage devices are closely interconnected in an inter-
leaved manner. This interdigitated approach increases the contact area between the 
electrodes and electrolyte, reducing ion transfer distances between the electrodes. 
Unlike planar electrodes, the interdigitated structure requires 3D printing techniques 
for fabrication, such as DIW, FDM, and SLA [8]. Among these methods, DIW 
is frequently employed due to its simplicity and the ability to use different active 
materials for ink printing.

Pseudocapacitive Materials for 3D Printed Supercapacitors
243
3.2 
Vertically Aligned Structures 
High energy density and high-power density in batteries and supercapacitors are made 
possible through the design of vertically aligned structures. The vertically aligned 
array with low tortuosity facilitates ion transport, withstands volume changes, and 
enhances cycling stability. Various 3D printing methods such as FDM and SLA can 
be utilized to create vertically aligned structures by precisely extruding or curing 
electrode materials along a single axis, enabling the fabrication of thick electrodes 
with aligned structures [9, 10]. 
3.3 
Complex 3D Structures 
Sophisticated hierarchical porous structures, characterized by a signiﬁcant surface-
to-volume ratio, can be readily manufactured using 3D printing methods like DIW 
and FDM [11]. Wearable energy storage devices with ﬂexibility and breathability can 
be achieved through ﬁber or fabric electrode design, overcoming the limitations of 
conventional electrodes. 3D printing enables the fabrication of ﬂexible ﬁbers woven 
into fabric structure electrodes, offering porosity, stretchability, and high electro-
chemical performance [12]. This integration of 3D-printed ﬁber structure electrodes 
into textile fabrics holds promise for future wearable electronic applications, ensuring 
functionality and breathability [7]. 
4 
Pseudocapacitive Materials-Based 3D Printed 
Supercapacitors 
The focus on supercapacitor research is signiﬁcantly towards the development of 
high-performance electrode materials. The supercapacitor electrode materials ideally 
should hold a high speciﬁc surface area, large electroactive sites, tunable porosity, 
high electronic conductivity, and stability [13]. Pseudocapacitive materials offer 
higher speciﬁc capacitance but lower rate performance in comparison to carbon-based 
electrode materials [1]. 
4.1 
Transition Metal Oxides 
Transition metal oxides (TMOs) offer large pseudocapacitance that leads to a higher 
energy density for 3D-printed capacitors. However, their low electrical conductivity 
reduces the energy density of the device and affects the electrochemical stability. 
These limitations can be overcome by using combinations of conductive materials

244
A. Gopalakrishnan et al.
for printable inks. The most widely used pseudocapacitive metal oxide material is 
manganese oxide (MnO2), due to its low cost, facile synthesis, and high theoretical 
capacitance. Wang et al. developed highly concentrated 2D δ-MnO2 nanosheet-based 
ink formulations that could be inkjet printed onto oxygen plasma-treated glass and 
polyimide substrates without the formation of a coffee-ring effect [12]. The fabri-
cated all-solid-state ﬂexible micro-supercapacitors (MSCs) using polyvinyl alcohol/ 
lithium chloride (PVA/LiCl) electrolyte, attained a volumetric energy density of 1.8 
× 10–4 Wh cm−3 at 0.018 W cm−3 with 88% retention over 3600 cycles. Zhao 
et al. prepared α-MnO2 nanorods with reduced graphene oxide (rGO) and ethylene-
propylene oxide symmetrical triblock copolymer (pluronic F127) as composite ink 
material for electrodes (Fig. 3a) [14]. The addition of rGO to the MnO2 nanorods 
increases the overall conductivity of the electrodes and F127 with amphiphilic func-
tional groups and rheological properties, helps in forming a stable dispersion ink. The 
extrusion-based 3D printed one-layer electrode delivered a high speciﬁc capacitance 
of 422 F g−1 at the current density of 0.1 A g−1 and reached a high energy density of 
19.35 Wh kg−1 at a power density of 50 W kg−1. These 3D-printed supercapacitor 
electrodes demonstrated their practical applications like charging a mobile phone 
and powering LEDs. Yao et al. developed a high-level loading of MnO2 material 
(182.2 mg cm−2) to the 3D-printed graphene aerogel, which exhibited a high areal 
capacitance of 44.13 F cm−2 [15]. The fabricated symmetric supercapacitor device 
with 3D printed Graphene/MnO2 electrodes (4 mm thickness), delivered an energy 
density of 1.56 mWh cm−2. To avoid manufacturing difﬁculties, Seol et al. reported 
end-to-end printing of all units of supercapacitors including electrodes, electrolytes, 
substrates, and current collectors [16]. Here, the graphene-Mn3O4 nanocomposite ink 
was used as electrodes with gel polymer electrolyte and Ag-based current collector. 
All printed pseudocapacitors exhibited a high energy and power density of 14.74 
Wh kg−1 and 400.8 W kg−1, respectively. Khomami group developed a unique laser 
ablation synthesis in solution (LASiS) method to prepare hybrid nanocomposites 
of MnOx/Mn3O4 and rGO [17]. The LASiS-printed interdigitated hybrid electrodes 
showed an outstanding speciﬁc capacitance of 325 F g−1 compared to the commercial 
MnO2-graphene composite of 189 F g−1.
Another, promising printable pseudo-material is ruthenium dioxide (RuO2) with 
a high theoretical capacitance of 1450 F g−1 was used along with a single-walled 
carbon nanotube (SWCNT) by Chen et al. [18]. The SWCNT/RuO2 nanowire hybrid 
thin ﬁlm electrode prepared via ink-jet printing improved speciﬁc energy density 
to 18.8 Wh kg−1 at a speciﬁc power of 96 kW kg−1 using PVA/phosphoric acid 
(H3PO4) solid electrolyte. Another typical TMO is Fe2O3 with high theoretical capac-
itance, but low electronic conductivity during the electrochemical process. Tang et al. 
developed a novel Fe2O3/graphene/silver ink for 3D printing solid-state MSCs via 
extrusion printing [19]. The 3D-printed pseudocapacitor device exhibited a high 
areal energy density of 65.4 μWh cm−2 and remarkable capacitance retention of 
90.2% over 500 bending cycles. Nickel oxide (NiO) possesses a high theoretical 
capacity of 1292 C g−1. Giannakou et al. demonstrated inkjet printing of NiO-based 
interdigitated co-planar symmetrical MSCs [20]. This device achieved a maximum 
areal capacitance of 155 mF cm−2 and operates until 1.5 V delivering state-of-art

Pseudocapacitive Materials for 3D Printed Supercapacitors
245
Fig. 3 a Schematic illustration of α-MnO2/rGO ink preparation and 3D printing of electrode. 
Adapted with permission [14], Copyright (2018), Springer Nature; b, c Schematic of the fabrica-
tion of FASC device using 3D-printed electrodes, FASC device/FTS-integrated conﬁguration; d, 
e Optical images of the printed wet ﬁber during the process. Adapted with permission [21], Copyright 
(2018), John Wiley and Sons; f Schematic of 3D printed asymmetric MSCs on the current collectors 
with layer-by-layer interdigitated electrodes consisting of G–VNQDs/GO ink as an anode (1st step) 
and V2O5/GO ink as a cathode (2nd step). Adapted with permission [22], Copyright (2018), John 
Wiley and Sons; g Fabrication Mo-MoOx MSC devices with different patterns using EDDW onto 
Mo metal sheet. Adapted with permission [23], Copyright (2023), Elsevier
high energy-power density. Vanadium oxides (V2O5) and nitrides (VN) emerged 
as pseudocapacitive materials due to the multiple valence states of vanadium, wide 
potential window, active redox reversibility, high theoretical capacitance, and robust 
stability during the charge–discharge process. Zhao et al. fabricated ﬁber-shaped 
3D printed electrodes for wearable integrated electronics applications along with 
printed temperature sensors. The ﬁber-shaped printed asymmetric pseudocapacitor 
device was assembled using SWCNT/V2O5 as cathode and SWCNT/VN as anode 
with PVA/potassium hydroxide (KOH) as printed gel electrolyte (Fig. 3b–e) [21]. 
The twisted ﬁber-shaped device exhibited outstanding mechanical ﬂexibility, high 
areal capacitance (116 mF cm−2), high areal energy/power density of 41.28 μWh 
cm−2 /480 μW cm−2, and temperature sensitivity of the integrated device is 1.95% 
°C−1. Shen et al. developed quasi-solid-state 3D printed asymmetric MSCs using 
V2O5 ink as cathode and graphene-vanadium nitride quantum dots (G-VNQDs) ink 
as an anode in highly concentrated graphene-oxide (GO) dispersions (Fig. 3f) [22]. 
The 3D printed MSCs via layer-by-layer interdigitated electrodes with PVA/LiCl 
gel electrolyte achieved ultrahigh areal speciﬁc capacitance of 207.9 mF cm−2 and 
superior areal energy density of 73.9 μWh cm−2. Tung et al. prepared graphene-
cobalt ferrite (G-CoFe) ink for the 3D printing of electrodes on graphite paper using

246
A. Gopalakrishnan et al.
the DIW technique [6]. The assembled supercapacitor device with 5 × 5 cm2 elec-
trodes exhibited a speciﬁc capacitance of 304 F g−1 with 94.7% retention over 16,000 
cycles. Moreover, the device was used to demonstrate powering of a 5 V LED lamp 
for 15 min with a booster circuit. In addition to TMOs, metal hydroxides were also 
studied for their feasibility towards printed supercapacitors. Xu et al. developed 3D 
ceramic interdigitated pseudocapacitive MSCs (pMSCs) using the one-step electric 
discharge direct writing (EDDW) method with computer-aided design patterns as 
shown in Fig.  3g [23]. The fabricated binder and additive-free 3D pMSCs using a 
3D patterned Mo-MoOx device delivered a high areal capacitance of 49.1 mF cm−2 
with capacitance retention of 96% over 5000 cycles using 1 M KOH as electrolyte. 
4.2 
Conducting Polymers 
The conducting polymers with high electrical conductivity, ﬂexibility, active redox 
states, and lightweight are amongst the most ideal and economic pseudocapacitive 
electrode materials. One among them is polyaniline (PANI). Dou et al. used 3D 
printing to pattern rapidly formed PANI hydrogel as electrodes for supercapacitors 
[24]. The PANI hydrogel electrodes in three-electrode cells exhibited a capacitance 
of 422 F g−1 at 0.2 A g−1 and high-rate performance. The drawbacks of polymers as 
electrodes are their poor cyclic stability and moderate conductivity. Thus, these poly-
mers are always combined with carbon to increase their stability and conductivity. 
Xu et al. formulated nano-graphene platelets (NGP)/PANI composite inks for the 
fabrication of electrodes using inkjet printing [25]. The demonstrated two-electrode 
NGP/PANI ﬁlms on carbon fabric substrates with 1 M H2SO4 as an electrolyte, 
exhibited a maximum capacitance of 70 F g−1 and energy density of 2.4 Wh kg−1 at 
a high-power density of 124 kW kg−1 with good cycling stability. Wang et al. used 
PANI/GO gel as composite ink for 3D printing via the direct ink writing method 
(Fig. 4a, b) [8]. The 3D-printed interdigitated PANI/rGO electrodes after reduction 
were constructed to form a planar solid-state pseudocapacitor device. The device 
exhibited an impressive areal capacitance of 1329 mF cm−2 with PVA-H2SO4 gel 
electrolyte. Liu et al., developed highly concentrated water-dispersible GO/PANI 
composite inks for all-solid-state supercapacitors using extrusion printing [26]. The 
fabricated interdigitated ﬂexible asymmetric MSCs with a wide operating voltage of 
up to 1.2 V delivered speciﬁc energy of 4.83 mWh cm−3 at 25.3 W cm−3 and cyclic 
stability of ~100% retention over 5000 cycles.
Zhang et al. prepared a new-type polypyrrole (PPy)/PANI co-axis nanotube ink 
which is adaptable and 3D printed directly onto various substrates [27]. The all-
printed MSCs device with PVA gel as electrolyte delivered a high capacitance of 
151.2 mF cm−3 with volumetric energy of 19.6 mWh cm−3 and ﬂexibility for wear-
able electronics. Lu et al. prepared a porous iron-nickel/PANI nanocages ink for 
3D printing multiscale supercapacitor device using powder bed technologies, which 
delivered a high speciﬁc capacitance of 540.68 F g−1 [28]. Other than PANI and 
PPy polymers, researchers have used aqueous poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene)

Pseudocapacitive Materials for 3D Printed Supercapacitors
247
Fig. 4 a Preparation of PANI/GO inks and 3D printing process of PANI/RGO workpiece & planar 
structure, b Capacitance retention rate for the planar device over 1000 cycles at 50 mA cm–2. 
Adapted with permission [8], Copyrights (2018), Elsevier; c Fabrication of highly deformable 3D-
printed electrodes with NPR structures and under different deformation conditions, d re-entrant 
structure electrodes with the maximum stretch state, e construction of symmetric full SC device, 
f GCD curves of the stretchable symmetric SC under different conditions, g Photograph of the 
wearable PEDOT:PSS/CNT SSC. Scale bars: 6 mm. Adapted with permission [29], Copyrights 
(2013), Royal Society of Chemistry
(PEDOT) and poly(4-styrene sulfonic acid) (PSS) in combination with metal oxides 
and carbon as composite ink for printing electrodes. Yang et al. fabricated highly 
stretchable self-standing 3D printed additive-free electrodes using PEDOT: PSS/ 
CNT hybrid ink, as shown in Fig. 4c–g [29]. The fabricated quasi-solid-state printed 
supercapacitor using PVA-H2SO4 electrolyte achieved an areal capacitance of 990 
mF cm−2 and areal energy density of 0.065 mWh cm−2 at a power of 0.4 mW cm−2 
with ultra-long cycling stability of 74.7% retention over 14,000 cycles. 
4.3 
Metal Dichalcogenides 
Another important class of pseudocapacitive material is the metal dichalcogenides 
(TMDs), which possess various oxidation states, large active sites for adequate elec-
trochemical performance, and large surface areas with both faradaic and non-faradaic 
surface behaviors [30]. Moreover, the 2D TMDs have a unique structure of a single 
sheet has a metal atomic layer sandwiched between the chalcogenide layers through 
covalent bonding. Among the TMDs, the most used electrode material is the molyb-
denum disulﬁde (MoS2) nanosheets. Shao et al. reported electro-hydro-dynamic-
assisted preparation of the 3D 1 T-phase crumpled MoS2 stable ink formulation 
for inkjet printing [31]. The inkjet printed asymmetric MSCs, with rGO as cathode

248
A. Gopalakrishnan et al.
onto ﬂexible photo paper with a wide voltage of 1.75 V in 1 M magnesium sulfate 
(MgSO4) as an electrolyte, delivered a maximum areal energy of 3.85 μWh cm−2 
at 12.6 μW cm−2 and an outstanding stability of 96% retention over 20,000 cycles. 
Yang et al. demonstrated 3D core-sheath extrusion-based printing of CNT-MoS2-
CNT/graphene ink with high mass loading of 55% (Fig. 5a–c) [10]. The assembled 
symmetric supercapacitor device with polyvinylidene ﬂuoride (PVDF) nanoﬁbers 
as separator and PVA-based gel polymer as an electrolyte, delivered an areal energy 
density of 49 μWh cm−2 with an areal capacitance of 558 mF cm−2. Ghosh et al.  
electrodeposited the MoSx layer onto a 3D-printed nanocarbon electrode surface 
to form a MoSx-coated free-standing 3D electrode [32]. The fabricated symmetric 
solid-state-supercapacitor device with PVA-H2SO4 electrolyte delivered a maximum 
areal energy density of 0.2 μWh cm−2 at 16.26 μW cm−2 without any use of the 
current collector. Odnevall group used the SLM technique to fabricate pseudocapac-
itor devices using MoS2/Mo2S3 nanocomposite ink [9]. The electrode performance 
of the SLM printed electrode in a three-electrode cell offered a speciﬁc capacitance of 
83.1 mF cm−2 and areal energy of 1.66 mWh cm−2. Zhao et al. used copper sulfate 
KCu7S4/rGO composite ink for MSCs using the direct ink writing method [33]. 
The assembled symmetric capacitor with 3D printed electrodes with 8 layers with 
PVA-KOH gel electrolyte delivered remarkable areal and gravimetric capacitance 
of 7.33 F cm−2 and 815.8 F g−1, respectively, and high areal energy of 286 μWh 
cm−2 at 2.16 μW cm−2. Later, the KCu7S4/rGO composite ink was incorporated 
with MWCNT to form a 3D-printed rGO/MWCNT/ KCu7S4 electrode with 8 layers 
[34]. The assembled device exhibited enhanced areal and gravimetric capacitance 
of 27.8 F cm−2 and 1674.3 F g−1, respectively compared to the electrode without 
MWCNT.
4.4 
Transition Metal Carbides/carbonitrides (MXenes) 
In addition to the above-mentioned materials, a novel printable material that includes 
MXene has attracted signiﬁcant attention in recent years for printable energy storage 
devices. These MXenes possess negatively charged surfaces for better hydrophilicity, 
high metallic conductivity due to alternate layers of metal and carbon atoms, and 
excellent redox activity. Zhang et al. developed MXene- based additive-free inks for 
3D printing MSCs by extrusion and inkjet printing methods [35]. The all-printed 
ﬂexible MSCs with PVA-H2SO4 as gel electrolyte delivered volumetric capacitance 
of 562 F cm−3 and areal energy of 0.32 μWh cm−2 with 97% capacitance reten-
tion after 14,000 cycles. Yu et al. reported N-doped MXene (Ti3C2) ink used for 
screen and extrusion-printed supercapacitors [36]. The 3-layered electrode SC exhib-
ited high areal and volumetric energy densities of 0.42 mWh cm−2 and 0.83 mWh 
cm−3, respectively. Yang et al. formulated aqueous Ti3C2Tx inks for extrusion-based 
free-standing 3D printed interdigitated supercapacitors free-of current collector by 
freeze-drying as shown in Fig. 5d–f [37]. The 3D printed MSCs in PVA-H2SO4 solid

Pseudocapacitive Materials for 3D Printed Supercapacitors
249
Fig. 5 a Schematic artwork of the 3D-printed CM-CNT/graphene electrode process, b photographs 
of 3D-printed CM-CNT/graphene electrode from a top view and in different 2D geometric patterns, 
c Fabrication process of symmetric CM-CNT/graphene//PVDF nanoﬁber//CM-CNT/graphene 
pseudocapacitor. Adapted with permission [10], Copyrights (2021), Elsevier. d Illustration of the 
manufacturing of 3D printing of freestanding MXene architectures strategy that includes synthesis, 
ink preparation, 3D printing of inks, freeze-drying to retain the shapes, and probing of the ﬁnal 
device, e 3D printed architectures- MXene (4 layers), University of Manchester (UoM) (5 layers), 
interdigitated (4 layers) and bee (3 layers) designs all printed through a 330 μm nozzle with a 
printing speed of 6–10 mm s−1. All scale bars in 3 mm, f CV curves of interdigitated MSCs at a 
scan rate of 5 mV s−1. Adapted with permission [37], Copyrights (2019), John Wiley and Sons
electrolyte delivered 0.0244 mWh cm−2 at 0.64 mW cm−2 with unique rheolog-
ical properties. Interestingly, Huang et al. developed multi-scale MXene (Ti3C2Tx) 
hydrogel electrodes by unidirectional freeze-drying for fabricating all-MXene 3D 
printed MSCs devices [11]. The 3D printed interdigitated all-MXene electrode with 
PVA-H2SO4 gel polymer delivered a high areal capacitance of 2004 mF cm−2 with 
high rate capability and outstanding areal energy of 100 mWh cm−2 at a power 
density of 0.38 mW cm−2. Orangi et al. reported water-based additive-free MXene 
(Ti3C2Tx) ink for all-solid-state MSCs [38]. The fabricated interdigitated 3D printed 
electrodes on polymer substrates with PVA-H2SO4 gel polymer electrolyte exhibited 
impressive areal capacitance of 1035 mF cm−2 for 10 layers of electrode and areal 
energy of 51.7 μWh cm−2 at 5.7 mW cm−2. Gogotsi group introduced 4D printing 
technology for fabricating a family of MXene hydrogels (Ti3C2Tx, Nb2CTx, and 
Mo2Ti2C3Tx) with low-temperature tolerance for MSCs using polymer composition 
and additives [39]. The 4D printed MSCs using Ti3C2Tx as hydrogel electrode and 
PVA-ethylene glycol-H2SO4 as gel electrolyte, delivered high areal energy of 92.88 
μWh cm−2 at 6.96 mW cm−2 with ultrahigh capacitances of 2.31 F cm−2.

250
A. Gopalakrishnan et al.
4.5 
Metal–organic Frameworks 
Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) are a new class of coordination polymers used as 
supercapacitor electrodes due to their highly porous nature, tunable porosity, various 
structures, and tunable chemical properties [40]. The preparation of MOFs-based 
inks mostly depends on additives that lead to low rheological properties. Zhang 
et al. reported MOF-derived carbon via laser scribing to fabricate 12-interdigitated 
MSCs using MOF-199 with copper and zeolitic imidazolate framework (ZIF-67) 
with cobalt [40]. The laser-scribed asymmetric MSCs in 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte 
delivered maximum areal energy of 0.7 mWh cm−2 at 1 mW cm−2 and areal capac-
itance of 8.1 F cm−2 with good cyclic stability of 94% over 10,000 cycles. Wu 
et al. developed a heterostructure using MOF (ZIF-67) with covalent 2D black 
phosphorus (BP) – BP/ZIF-67 ink with CNT and polymer binder for fabricating 
wearable and ﬂexible supercapacitor (FSCs), as shown in Fig. 6a, b [41]. The 
3D printed FSCs by extrusion process with PVDF-hexaﬂuoropropylene (HFP)/ 
1-eutyl-3-methylimidazoliumtetraﬂuoroborate (EMIBF4) electrolyte ink exhibited 
volumetric capacitance of 506 F cm−3, areal energy/power densities of 109.8 mWh 
cm−2 at 0.675 mW cm−2 and maintains 89.3% capacitance retention after 12,000 
cycles.
4.6 
Hybrid Electrode Combination 
To mitigate the limitations of individual pseudocapacitive materials and to over-
come the challenges faced during ink formulations, hybrid composite-based ink was 
proposed by the combination of two or three different materials. Li et al. prepared 
hybrid ink using the pseudoplastic nanocomposites comprised of Ti3C2Tx MXene, 
manganese dioxide (MnO2) nanowires, Ag NWs, and fullerene (C60) for extrusion-
based 3D printing of electrodes (Fig. 6c–g) [42]. The 3D-printed interdigitated MSCs 
with unidirectional freezing of electrodes infused with PVA-KOH gel polymer elec-
trolyte exhibited areal capacitance of 216.2 mF cm−2 and energy density of 19.2 
μWh cm−2 with long-term cyclic stability. Yu et al. demonstrated a hybrid elec-
trode consisting of bimetallic phosphide (NiCoP) and Ti3C2 MXene ink (NCPM) 
using layer-by-layer 3D printing [43]. The assembled asymmetric supercapacitor 
cell with 3D-printed NCPM as positive and activated carbon as negative electrode 
in 2 M KOH as electrolyte, delivered a volumetric energy density of 2.2 mWh cm−3 
with improved rate capability. Similarly, a solid-state asymmetric supercapacitor (SS-
ASC) was fabricated by the Pumera group using a 3D-printed nanocarbon framework 
coated with MoS3-x (MoS3-x@3DnCF) as positive and exfoliated Ti3C2Tx MXene 
as a negative electrode using PVA-H2SO4 gel electrolyte [44]. The 3D-printed inter-
digitated SS-ASC exhibited a high volumetric capacitance of 556.09 mF cm−3 that 
can work in a potential of up to 1.6 V and robust cyclic life over 25,000 cycles.

Pseudocapacitive Materials for 3D Printed Supercapacitors
251
Fig. 6 a Representation of the all-integrated solid-state FSC by 3D printing and its cross-sectional 
morphology of assembled supercapacitor with photographs of a health care device powered by 
FSC woven into cloth on the right side, b CV curves of E-BP/ZIF-67 FSC under at a scan rate of 
50 mV s−1 under consecutive motions. Adapted with permissions [41], Copyrights (2021), John 
Wiley and Sons; c Schematic of the fabrication process of stretchable interdigitated MSCs through 
3D printing and unidirectional freezing, d Optical images under 0% to 50% stretch, e under 0° to 
180° bending, f capacitance retention as a function of stretching over 1000 cycles, g capacitance 
retention at different bending degrees (inset: CV curves at 100 mV s−1 under bending condition). 
Adapted with permission [42], Copyrights (2020), John Wiley and Sons
Furthermore, the SS-ASC in series combination was demonstrated to power a 1.8 V 
green LED for 2 min. 
Recently, integrating energy storage devices with multifunctional wearable and 
portable electronics or devices is of utmost demand. Ma et al. prepared an aqueous 
printable MXene/PEDOT: PSS (MP) hybrid ink to print MSCs using inkjet printing 
[7]. The printed interdigitated planar MSCs delivered a maximum volumetric capac-
itance of 754 F cm−3 and comparative speciﬁc energy of 9.4 mWh cm−3. More-
over, MP-MSC when integrated with the printed temperature sensor and solar cell, 
delivered a remarkable response of 2% and high ﬂexibility under various bending 
stages. Lin et al. integrated a printed supercapacitor device into a self-powered sensor 
system onto a single ﬂexible substrate including a solar cell demonstrated in a wrist-
band model as shown in Fig. 7a [45]. The inkjet-printed interdigitated planar super-
capacitor electrodes consist of MnO2/rGO/PEDOT:PSS hybrid ink onto a ﬂexible 
Ni-coated polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrate delivering areal capacitance of

252
A. Gopalakrishnan et al.
12.9 mF cm−2 and speciﬁc energy of 4.5 mWh cm−2. The fully printed device consists 
of supercapacitors to store photovoltaic energy, power functional LED devices, and 
simultaneously function without charging modules, which was demonstrated for 
wearable practical wristband electronics shown in Fig. 6b. Zhao et al. reported coaxial 
ﬁber-shaped asymmetric supercapacitors (FASC) using the direct coherent multi-ink 
writing (DCMW) technique as shown in Fig. 7c–f [46]. The ﬁber-shaped printed 
V2O5 nanowires (NWs) with MWCNT were used as positive and VN nanowires 
with MWCNT were used as negative electrodes for fabricating FASC using PVA-
KOH as electrolyte ink. The FASC device delivered a high areal capacitance of 152.7 
mF cm−2 with a wide operating voltage of 1.6 V and gravimetric energy density of 
21.2 Wh kg−1 at high material loading of 16.4 mg cm−2. This FASC device was 
then integrated into solar cells and an electric motor to demonstrate a self-powered 
system converting solar to electrical energy and into mechanical energy (Fig. 7g).
5 
Implications and Future Perspectives 
Advancements in 3D printing technology offer unique advantages for pseudocapaci-
tors and other electrochemical energy storage devices that can enable the creation of 
high-energy density devices with complex structures and design freedom. To advance 
the future of 3D-printed electrochemical energy storage systems, it is vital to enhance 
the intrinsic conductivity of 3D-printed electrodes. This can be accomplished through 
techniques like active material composites or separate current collectors coated with 
energy storage materials. Furthermore, addressing the obstacles associated with high-
performance feedstock materials and optimizing ink formulations plays a critical 
role in improving the printing process and achieving high-performance 3D-printed 
supercapacitors. Enhancing the mechanical properties of printed electrodes through 
innovative approaches and simulation methods is essential for durability and stability. 
While commercialization is still in progress, the potential market for 3D-printed pseu-
docapacitors, batteries, and integrated systems is promising. However, overcoming 
limitations and optimizing manufacturing processes will be necessary for successful 
large-scale production and cost competitiveness. With continued research and devel-
opment, it is expected that 3D-printed energy storage devices will ﬁnd widespread 
applications, contributing to the advancement of energy storage technologies.

Pseudocapacitive Materials for 3D Printed Supercapacitors
253
Fig. 7 a Schematic representation of printable supercapacitors integrated wearable monolithically 
self-powered smart sensor system, b Voltage drop on LED (b1) without and (b2) with detection 
of ethanol in ambient. Inset: multimeter readings and photos of a wearable wristband. Adapted 
with permission [45], Copyrights (2018), John Wiley and Sons. c 3D printing extrusion process 
of the printable coaxial FASC device and its subsequent solidiﬁcation process, d assembled FASC 
device, e capacitance retention under several bending cycles, f Photo of a fully charged 3D printed 
coaxial FASC device powering a red 1.5-V LED, g Schematic of the self-powered system where 
the solar energy is converted into electrical energy and then into mechanical energy. Adapted 
with permission [46], Copyrights (2021), Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution Non-
commercial License 4.0 (CC BY-NC)
Acknowledgements Authors thank in part to funding from the University of Calgary- Eyes High 
Postdoc fund and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) 
Collaborative Research and Development (CRD) grants.

254
A. Gopalakrishnan et al.
References 
1. M. Li, S. Zhou, L. Cheng, F. Mo, L. Chen, S. Yu, J. Wei, 3D printed supercapacitor: techniques, 
materials, designs, and applications. Adv. Funct. Mater 33(1) (2023) 
2. D.M. Soares, Z. Ren, S.B. Mujib, S. Mukherjee, C.G. Martins Real, M. Anstine, H. Zanin, 
G. Singh, Additive manufacturing of electrochemical energy storage systems electrodes. Adv. 
Energy Sustain. Res. 2(5), 2000111 (2021) 
3. T. Chu, S. Park, K. Fu, 3D printing-enabled advanced electrode architecture design. Carbon 
Energy 3(3), 424–439 (2021) 
4. W. Zong, Y. Ouyang, Y.E. Miao, T. Liu, F. Lai, Recent advances and perspectives of 3D printed 
micro-supercapacitors: from design to smart integrated devices. Chem. Commun. 58(13), 
2075–2095 (2022) 
5. B. Rezaei, T.W. Hansen, S.S. Keller, Stereolithography-derived three-dimensional pyrolytic 
carbon/mn3o4nanostructures for free-standing hybrid supercapacitor electrodes. ACS Appl. 
Nano Mater. 5(2), 1808–1819 (2022) 
6. D.T. Tung, L.T.T. Tam, H.T. Dung, N.T. Dung, H.T. Ha, N.T. Dung, T. Hoang, T.D. Lam, 
T.V. Thu, D.T. Chien, P.N. Hong, P.N. Minh, N.V. Quynh, L.T. Lu, Direct ink writing of 
graphene-cobalt ferrite hybrid nanomaterial for supercapacitor electrodes. J. Electron. Mater. 
49(8), 4671–4679 (2020) 
7. J. Ma, S. Zheng, Y. Cao, Y. Zhu, P. Das, H. Wang, Y. Liu, J. Wang, L. Chi, S. Liu, Z. S. Wu, 
Aqueous MXene/PH1000 hybrid inks for inkjet-printing micro-supercapacitors with unprece-
dented volumetric capacitance and modular self-powered microelectronics. Adv. Energy Mater. 
11(23) (2021) 
8. Z. Wang, Q. Zhang, S. Long, Y. Luo, P. Yu, Z. Tan, J. Bai, B. Qu, Y. Yang, J. Shi, H. Zhou, 
Z.Y. Xiao, W. Hong, H. Bai, Three-dimensional printing of polyaniline/reduced graphene 
oxide composite for high-performance planar supercapacitor. ACS Appl. Mater. Interf. 10(12), 
10437–10444 (2018) 
9. N. Alinejadian, S. H. Kazemi, I. Odnevall, SLM-processed MoS2/Mo2S3 nanocomposite for 
energy conversion/storage applications. Sci. Rep. 12(1) (2022) 
10. Z. Yang, X. Lv, C. Zhang, Y. Zhang, S. Jia, Y. Niu, Y. Zhang, B. Wang, T. Zhao, H. 
Fu, Q. Li, Core-sheath 3D printing of highly conductive and MoS2-loaded electrode with 
pseudocapacitive behavior. Chem. Eng. J. 423 (2021) 
11. X. Huang, J. Huang, D. Yang, P. Wu, A multi-scale structural engineering strategy for high-
performance MXene hydrogel supercapacitor electrode. Adv. Sci. 8(18) (2021) 
12. Y. Wang, Y.Z. Zhang, D. Dubbink, J.E. ten Elshof, Inkjet printing of δ-MnO2 nanosheets for 
ﬂexible solid-state micro-supercapacitor. Nano Energy 49, 481–488 (2018) 
13. A. Gopalakrishnan, S. Badhulika, Hierarchical architectured Dahlia ﬂower-like NiCo<inf>2</ 
inf>O<inf>4</inf>/NiCoSe<inf>2</inf>as a bifunctional electrode for high-energy superca-
pacitor and methanol fuel cell application. Ener. Fuels 35(11) (2021) 
14. X.  Zhao, B. Liu, P. Pan, Z. Yang,  J.  He, H. Li,  J.  Wei,  Z.  Cao,  H.  Zhang,  J.  Chang,  Q.  Bao,  X.  
Yang, Fabrication of reduced graphene oxide/manganese oxide ink for 3D-printing technology 
on the application of high-performance supercapacitors. J. Mater. Sci. 56(13), 8102–8114 
(2021) 
15. B. Yao, S. Chandrasekaran, J. Zhang, W. Xiao, F. Qian, C. Zhu, E.B. Duoss, C.M. Spadaccini, 
M.A. Worsley, Y. Li, Efﬁcient 3D printed pseudocapacitive electrodes with ultrahigh MnO 2 
loading. Joule 3(2), 459–470 (2019) 
16. M.L. Seol, I. Nam, E.L. Ribeiro, B. Segel, D. Lee, T. Palma, H. Wu, D. Mukherjee, B. Khomami, 
C. Hill, J.W. Han, M. Meyyappan, All-printed in-plane supercapacitors by sequential additive 
manufacturing process. ACS Appl. Energy Mater 3(5), 4965–4973 (2020) 
17. M. Mokhtarnejad, E.L. Ribeiro, D. Mukherjee, B. Khomami, 3D printed interdigitated super-
capacitor using reduced graphene oxide-MnOx/Mn3O4 based electrodes. RSC Adv. 12(27), 
17321–17329 (2022)

Pseudocapacitive Materials for 3D Printed Supercapacitors
255
18. P. Chen, H. Chen, J. Qiu, C. Zhou, Inkjet printing of single-walled carbon nanotube/RuO2 
nanowire supercapacitors on cloth fabrics and ﬂexible substrates. Nano Res. 3(8), 594–603 
(2010) 
19. K. Tang, H. Ma, Y. Tian, Z. Liu, H. Jin, S. Hou, K. Zhou, X. Tian, 3D printed hybrid-dimensional 
electrodes for ﬂexible micro-supercapacitors with superior electrochemical behaviours. Virtual 
Phys. Prototyp. 15(S1), 511–519 (2020) 
20. P. Giannakou, M.G. Masteghin, R.C.T. Slade, S.J. Hinder, M. Shkunov, Energy storage on 
demand: Ultra-high-rate and high-energy-density inkjet-printed NiO micro-supercapacitors. J. 
Mater. Chem. A Mater. 7(37), 21496–21506 (2019) 
21. J. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Y. Huang, J. Xie, X. Zhao, C. Li, J. Qu, Q. Zhang, J. Sun, B. He, Q. Li, C. Lu, 
X. Xu, W. Lu, L. Li, Y. Yao, 3D printing ﬁber electrodes for an all-ﬁber integrated electronic 
device via hybridization of an asymmetric supercapacitor and a temperature sensor. Adv. Sci. 
5(11) (2018) 
22. K. Shen, J. Ding, S. Yang, 3D printing quasi-solid-state asymmetric micro-supercapacitors 
with ultrahigh areal energy density. Adv. Energy Mater 8(20) (2018) 
23. Y. Xu, P. Deng, R. Chen, W. Xie, Z. Xu, Y. Yang, D. Liu, F. Huang, Z. Zhuang, I. Zhitomirsky, K. 
Shi, Electric discharge direct writing of 3D Mo-MoOx pseudocapacitive micro-supercapacitors 
with designable patterns. Ceram Int. (2023) 
24. P. Dou, Z. Liu, Z. Cao, J. Zheng, C. Wang, X. Xu, Rapid synthesis of hierarchical nanostructured 
Polyaniline hydrogel for high power density energy storage application and three-dimensional 
multilayers printing. J. Mater. Sci. 51(9), 4274–4282 (2016) 
25. Y. Xu, I. Hennig, D. Freyberg, A. James Strudwick, M. Georg Schwab, T. Weitz, K. Chih-Pei 
Cha, Inkjet-printed energy storage device using graphene/polyaniline inks. J. Power. Sources 
248, 483–488 (2014) 
26. Y. Liu, B. Zhang, Q. Xu, Y. Hou, S. Seyedin, S. Qin, G. G. Wallace, S. Beirne, J. M. 
Razal, J. Chen, Development of graphene oxide/polyaniline inks for high performance ﬂexible 
microsupercapacitors via extrusion printing. Adv. Funct. Mater 28(21) (2018) 
27. Y. Zhang, T. Ji, S. Hou, L. Zhang, Y. Shi, J. Zhao, X. Xu, All-printed solid-state substrate-
versatile and high-performance micro-supercapacitors for in situ fabricated transferable and 
wearable energy storage via multi-material 3D printing. J. Power. Sources 403, 109–117 (2018) 
28. X. Lu, T. Zhao, X. Ji, J. Hu, T. Li, X. Lin, W. Huang, 3D printing well organized porous 
iron-nickel/polyaniline nanocages multiscale supercapacitor. J. Alloys Compd. 760, 78–83 
(2018) 
29. J. Yang, Q. Cao, X. Tang, J. Du, T. Yu, X. Xu, D. Cai, C. Guan, W. Huang, 3D-Printed highly 
stretchable conducting polymer electrodes for ﬂexible supercapacitors. J. Mater. Chem. A. 
Mater. 9(35), 19649–19658 (2021) 
30. N. Alinejadian, L. Kollo, I. Odnevall, Progress in additive manufacturing of MoS2-based 
structures for energy storage applications – a review. Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process 139 (2022) 
31. Y. Shao, J.H. Fu, Z. Cao, K. Song, R. Sun, Y. Wan, A. Shamim, L. Cavallo, Y. Han, R.B. 
Kaner, V.C. Tung, 3D crumpled ultrathin 1T MoS2for Inkjet printing of Mg-Ion asymmetric 
micro-supercapacitors. ACS Nano 14(6), 7308–7318 (2020) 
32. K. Ghosh, M. Pumera, Free-standing electrochemically coated MoSx based 3D-printed 
nanocarbon electrode_Nanoscale. Nanoscale 13, 5744–5756 (2021) 
33. Y.  Zhao, F. Liu, Z. Zhao,  P.  Bai,  Y.  Ma, A. Alhadhrami,  G.A.M.  Mersal, Z. Lin, M.M.  
Ibrahim, Z.M. El-Bahy, Direct ink printing reduced graphene oxide/KCu7S4 electrodes for 
high-performance supercapacitors. Adv. Compos. Hybrid Mater 5(2), 1516–1526 (2022) 
34. Y. Zhao, F. Liu, K. Zhu, S. Maganti, Z. Zhao, P. Bai, Three-dimensional printing of the copper 
sulfate hybrid composites for supercapacitor electrodes with ultra-high areal and volumetric 
capacitances. Adv. Compos. Hybrid Mater 5(2), 1537–1547 (2022) 
35. C. Zhang, (John), L. McKeon, M. P. Kremer, S. H. Park, O. Ronan, A. Seral-Ascaso, S. Barwich, 
C. Coileáin, N. McEvoy, H. C. Nerl, B. Anasori, J. N. Coleman, Y. Gogotsi, V. Nicolosi, 
Additive-free MXene inks and direct printing of micro-supercapacitors. Nat. Commun. 10(1) 
(2019)

256
A. Gopalakrishnan et al.
36. L. Yu, Z. Fan, Y. Shao, Z. Tian, J. Sun, Z. Liu, Versatile N-Doped MXene ink for printed 
electrochemical energy storage application. Adv. Energy Mater, 9(34) (2019) 
37. W. Yang, J. Yang, J. J. Byun, F. P. Moissinac, J. Xu, S. J. Haigh, M. Domingos, M. A. Bissett, R. 
A. W. Dryfe, S. Barg, 3D printing of freestanding MXene architectures for current-collector-free 
supercapacitors. Adv. Mater. 31(37) (2019) 
38. J. Orangi, F. Hamade, V.A. Davis, M. Beidaghi, 3D printing of additive-free 2D Ti3C2Tx 
(MXene) Ink for fabrication of micro-supercapacitors with ultra-high energy densities. ACS 
Nano 14(1), 640–650 (2020) 
39. K. Li, J. Zhao, A. Zhussupbekova, C. E. Shuck, L. Hughes, Y. Dong, S. Barwich, S. Vaesen, I. 
V. Shvets, M. Möbius, W. Schmitt, Y. Gogotsi, V. Nicolosi, 4D printing of MXene hydrogels 
for high-efﬁciency pseudocapacitive energy storage. Nat. Commun. 13(1) (2022) 
40. W. Zhang, R. Li, H. Zheng, J. Bao, Y. Tang, K. Zhou, Laser-assisted printing of electrodes 
using metal–organic frameworks for micro-supercapacitors. Adv. Funct. Mater 31(14) (2021) 
41. T.  Wu, Z. Ma,  Y.  He, X. Wu,  B.  Tang,  Z.  Yu, G. Wu,  S.  Chen, N. Bao, A covalent  black  
phosphorus/metal–organic framework hetero-nanostructure for high-performance ﬂexible 
supercapacitors. Angewandte Chemie Intern. Edition 60(18), 10366–10374 (2021) 
42. X. Li, H. Li, X. Fan, X. Shi, J. Liang, 3D-printed stretchable micro-supercapacitor with 
remarkable areal performance. Adv. Energy Mater 10(14) (2020) 
43. L. Yu, W. Li, C. Wei, Q. Yang, Y. Shao, J. Sun, 3D printing of NiCoP/Ti3C2 MXene architectures 
for energy storage devices with high areal and volumetric energy density. Nanomicro. Lett. 
12(1) (2020) 
44. K. Ghosh, M. Pumera, MXene and MoS3−x Coated 3D-printed hybrid electrode for solid-state 
asymmetric supercapacitor. Small Methods 5(8) (2021) 
45. Y. Lin, J. Chen, M. M. Tavakoli, Y. Gao, Y. Zhu, D. Zhang, M. Kam, Z. He, Z. Fan, Printable 
fabrication of a fully integrated and self-powered sensor system on plastic substrates. Adv. 
Mater. 31(5) (2019) 
46. J. Zhao, H. Lu, Y. Zhang, S. Yu, O. I. Malyi, X. Zhao, L. Wang, H. Wang, J. Peng, X. Li, Y. 
Zhang, S. Chen, H. Pan, G. Xing, C. Lu, Y. Tang, X. Chen, Direct coherent multi-ink printing 
of fabric supercapacitors. Sci. Adv. 7(3) (2021)

Pseudocapacitive Materials for Flexible 
Supercapacitors 
Fang Cheng, Xiaoping Yang, and Wen Lu 
Abstract Along with the rapid development of ﬂexible and wearable electronics, 
there has been a strong need for ﬂexible energy storage devices to power these devices. 
Flexible supercapacitors (FSCs), having the unique characteristics of high-power 
density, long lifetime, wide operating temperature range, and remarkable safety in 
a ﬂexible fashion, have been extensively studied for this emerging technology. An 
ideal FSC would have both superior electrochemical performances and excellent 
mechanical deformabilities, which require thorough research on the electrode mate-
rials and device conﬁgurations of FSCs. This chapter reviews the recent progress on 
these aspects of FSCs. Electrode materials, speciﬁcally pseudocapacitive materials 
(including metal oxides, conducting polymers, and Mxenes) and their composites, 
of FSCs are ﬁrstly elucidated. This is followed by the discussion about the device 
conﬁgurations of pseudocapacitive material-incorporated FSCs, ranging from one-
dimensional ﬁber-shaped to two-dimensional ﬁlm-shaped and three-dimensional 
structural. Finally, the practical applications of pseudocapacitive material incor-
porated FSCs are summarized. In conclusion, the current challenges and future 
prospects for pseudocapacitive material-incorporated FSCs are discussed. 
Keywords Flexible supercapacitors · Electrochemical performances · Mechanical 
deformabilities · Electrode materials · Pseudocapacitive materials · Device 
conﬁgurations
F. Cheng · W. Lu envelope symbol 
College of Chemical Science and Engineering, Yunnan University, Kunming 650091, China 
e-mail: wenlu@ynu.edu.cn 
Institute of Energy Storage Technologies, Yunnan University, Kunming 650091, China 
X. Yang 
School of Metallurgy and Energy, Kunming University of Science and Technology, 
Kunming 650091, China 
W. Lu 
School of Materials and Energy, Yunnan University, Kunming 650091, China 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
R. K. Gupta (ed.), Pseudocapacitors, Engineering Materials, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45430-1_14 
257

258
F. Cheng et al.
1 
Introduction 
In recent years, the rapid applications of ﬂexible and wearable electronic devices, 
such as ﬂexible touch screens, artiﬁcial electronic skins, wearable electronic suits 
and smart sensors, miniature biomedical devices, and health monitoring and manage-
ment, have dramatically inﬂuenced our daily lives [1, 2]. This has triggered the 
extensive research and development of ﬂexible power sources [3], mainly including 
ﬂexible batteries (FBs) and ﬂexible supercapacitors (FSCs) [4–6]. Compared to FBs, 
FSCs possess the advantages of higher power density, wider operating temperature 
range, longer cycle life, and better safety but a distinct disadvantage of lower energy 
density. In this regard, owing to their higher capacitances than those of traditional 
electric-double-layer-capacitor (EDLC) materials, pseudocapacitive materials have 
been studied to enhance the energy density for FSCs, resulting in a family of pseu-
docapacitive material-incorporated FSCs [7–9] in the community of ﬂexible power 
sources. 
An ideal FSC would have not only superior electrochemical performances 
(including high energy/power densities, long lifetime, and high safety) but also the 
excellent mechanical deformabilities (such as ﬂexibility, stretchability, bendability, 
foldability, and twistability) [5, 6], with the former largely determined by the prop-
erties of the electrode materials [10] and the latter by the conﬁguration designs of 
the devices [3]. Herein, this chapter systematically discusses the recent progress in 
the research of pseudocapacitive electrode materials (including metal oxides (MOs), 
conducting polymers (CPs), and Mxenes (MXs) as well as their composites) for 
FSCs and the device conﬁgurations (from one-dimensional (1D) ﬁber-shaped to two-
dimensional (2D) ﬁlm-shaped and three-dimensional (3D) structural) of the resultant 
FSCs. This is followed by a discussion about the practical applications of pseudoca-
pacitive material incorporated FSCs. Towards the conclusion, the current challenges 
and future prospects of pseudocapacitive material incorporated FSCs are spotlighted. 
2 
Pseudocapacitive Materials for FSCs 
Different from the energy storage mechanism of a so-called electric double layer for 
an EDLC material, that of a pseudocapacitive material is characterized by its fast 
and reversible redox reactions at or near the electrode surface [11, 12]. This results 
in higher capacitances for pseudocapacitive materials and thus higher energy densi-
ties for pseudocapacitors over those of their EDLC counterparts [7, 8]. In the past 
decades, considerable efforts have been made to utilize a large variety of pseudoca-
pacitive materials including, for example, MOs [3, 8], CPs [7, 13, 14], and MXs [9, 
11], for developing FSCs. It is straightforward to directly fabricate pseudocapacitive 
materials into electrodes for FSCs. By doing so, however, some shortcomings exist 
in, for example, capacitance, rate capability, mechanical deformability, and cycling

Pseudocapacitive Materials for Flexible Supercapacitors
259
stability (especially under repeated deformation conditions), for the resultant elec-
trodes [3, 9, 11]. In this regard, processing pseudocapacitive materials into composite 
electrodes has been demonstrated to be efﬁcient to address these limitations towards 
high-performance FSCs [14]. 
On the one hand, multiple pseudocapacitive materials can be incorporated to 
fabricate composite electrodes. By integrating the superiorities from different types of 
pseudocapacitive materials (such as high theoretical capacitances of MOs, excellent 
intrinsic ﬂexibility of CPs, and high density and metallic-like conductivity of MXs), 
the resultant multi-component-pseudocapacitive-material composite electrodes can 
achieve enhanced properties over their original individual ingredients [3, 7–9, 14]. 
On the other hand, compositing pseudocapacitive materials with carbon nano-
materials has attracted considerable research efforts to develop ﬂexible composite 
electrodes for FSCs. It is known that carbon nanomaterials (e.g., graphene, carbon 
nanotube (CNT), and carbon nanoﬁber (CNF)) possess the excellent properties 
of large speciﬁc surface area (SSA), high electrical and thermal conductivities, 
outstanding ﬂexibility, light weight, high Young’s modulus, and high tensile strength 
[1, 5, 15]. By combing these unique advantages of carbon nanomaterials with the high 
capacitance of pseudocapacitive materials, the resultant composite electrodes exhibit 
signiﬁcantly enhanced properties over their original pseudocapacitive-material 
counterparts [3, 7–9, 14]. 
2.1 
Metal Oxides and Their Composites for FSCs 
Owing to their high theoretical capacitances [5], MOs are an attractive group of 
pseudocapacitive materials for FSCs [3, 8]. However, the inherent brittleness and 
stiffness, low electrical conductivity, and poor stability and durability of MOs [10] 
inevitably limit their practical FSC applications. To address these issues, MOs have 
been composited with carbon nanomaterials and/or other pseudocapacitive materials. 
The integration of MOs with carbon nanomaterials can not only reinforce the 
mechanical properties but also enhance the conductivity and capacitance for the 
resultant composites. Among various MOs, MnO2 has been investigated the most 
intensively mainly because of its high theoretical capacitance (~1370 F g−1), envi-
ronmental friendliness, low cost, and abundant resources [8]. For example, Lv et al. 
[16] developed a stirring hydrothermal method to synthesize a ultralong MnO2 
nanowire/CNT (MNWs/CNT) composite, followed by sandwiching the resultant 
composite between two thin layers of nanocellulose ﬁbers (NCFs) to achieve a 
mechanically strengthened MNW-NCF electrode (Fig. 1a). With a polyvinyl alcohol 
(PVA) gel electrolyte, this composite electrode was assembled into a honeycomb-like 
symmetric FSC, showing a high capacitance of 227.2 mF cm−2. Mechanically, the 
FSC thus constructed presented excellent stretchability (Fig. 1b) and superior cycling 
stability upon varied deformations (Fig. 1c). Moreover, this FSC retained nearly 98% 
of its initial capacitance even subjected to stretch-release cycling under a 400% tensile

260
F. Cheng et al.
Fig. 1 a Schematic illustration of the construction of a MNWs/CNT-NCF based FSC (side view). 
b Normalized speciﬁc capacitances of different FSCs tested at 1.6 mA cm−2 under different strains. 
c Electrochemical performance comparison between different FSCs upon cycling at 1.6 mA cm−2 
under various mechanical deformations. Insets are the photographs of FSCs under various mechan-
ical deformations. d Capacitance retention ratio of the FSC at 1.6 mA cm−2 under a recycling tensile 
strain of 400%. Adapted with permission [16], Copyright (2018), Wiley–VCH. e Schematic illustra-
tion of the synthesis of a SnO2@PPy/CC composite. f (a) photograph of a stainless steel autoclave 
hanged by the SnO2@PPy/CC composite; (b–f) photographs of a SnO2@PPy/CC based symmetric 
FSC under different bending angles and twisting state; g. cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves of the 
FSC at 50 mV s−1 under various bending and twisting conditions (inset is CV curves of the FSC 
before and after 200 bending cycles). Adapted with permission [17], Copyright (2022), Elsevier 
strain for 10,000 cycles (Fig. 1d). Compared with a MnO2 nanoﬂowers (MNFs)/CNT-
NCF electrode (Figs. 1b, c), these achievements can be understood by the intercon-
nected fabric-like microstructure of the MNWs/CNT enabled by the intact contact 
between the ultralong MnO2 nanowire and CNT. Therefore, the enhanced electro-
chemical and mechanical performances of such carbon-MO composites indicate a 
good strategy for introducing carbon nanomaterials to process MOs into realistically 
useful electrodes for FSCs. 
Alternatively, another strategy to overcome the shortcomings of MOs is to 
composite them with inherently conductive and ﬂexible pseudocapacitive materials, 
i.e., CPs. This way, the simultaneous utilization of the high capacitance of MOs 
and the intrinsic conductivity and ﬂexibility of CPs makes the resultant composites 
superior over not only their MO but also the CP components. With this concept, 
for example, Zhuang et al. [17] developed a carbon cloth (CC) ﬂexible scaffold 
supported SnO2@polypyrrole (PPy) composite electrode (SnO2@PPy/CC). The 
SnO2 nanosheets were in-situ grown on CC ﬁbers by a simple solvothermal method, 
followed by polymerizing PPy on the SnO2 nanosheets thus prepared (Fig. 1e). 
Beneﬁting from the combination of SnO2 and PPy, the as-obtained SnO2@PPy/ 
CC composite electrode showed signiﬁcant improvements in both electrochemical 
and mechanical performances compared to its single-component counterpart without 
PPy. In particular, the conductivity and ﬂexibility of PPy made the SnO2-incorporated 
composite electrode conductive and ﬂexible (inset (a) in Fig. 1f), while its electroac-
tivity provided SnO2 with additional pseudocapacitance. Consequently, a symmetric

Pseudocapacitive Materials for Flexible Supercapacitors
261
FSC constructed from this composite electrode with a PVA-KOH gel electrolyte 
realized a high capacitance of 265.9 mF cm−2, a maximum energy and power densi-
ties of 0.7 mWh cm−3 and 94.7 mW cm−3, respectively, and a superior cycling 
stability. Moreover, this FSC exhibited excellent mechanical deformabilities without 
an apparent capacity decay under various bending and twisting conditions (Fig. 1f, 
g). The above results reveal the effectiveness of incorporating other pseudocapacitive 
materials to make MOs more suitable for practically useful FSCs. 
2.2 
Conducting Polymers and Their Composites for FSCs 
CPs, mainly represented by polyaniline (PANi), PPy, polythiophene (PTh), and 
their derivatives, are another type of pseudocapacitive materials for FSCs, thanks 
to their high theoretical capacitance (e.g., 750 F g−1 for PANi and 620 F g−1 for 
PPy). Compared to MOs, CPs possess the distinctive advantages of ease of produc-
tion, environmental friendliness, and especially inherently high ﬂexibility. However, 
CPs usually encounter with an inferior rate capability determined by their relatively 
low conductivity [10] and poor cycling stability by their volume change during the 
doping-dedoping process [7, 14]. Compositing CPs with carbon nanomaterials and/ 
or other pseudocapacitive materials has been demonstrated to be simple yet effective 
to address such shortcomings. 
The integration of the high capacitance from CPs and the excellent conductivity 
and stability from carbon nanomaterials endows the resultant carbon-CP composite 
electrodes with enhanced capacitance, rate capability, and cycling stability over their 
original CP and carbon counterparts. Among various CPs, PPy is a frequently studied 
candidate [7, 13]. For example, Li et al. [18] ﬁrstly painted reduced graphene oxides 
(rGO) layers on the surface of SnCl2 modiﬁed polyester ﬁbers (M-PEF) via a repeated 
“dyeing and drying” strategy, followed by in-situ polymerization of PPy onto the 
resultant rGO/M-PEF substrate to fabricate a PPy/rGO/M-PEF composite electrode 
(Fig. 2a). While the highly ﬂexible and conductive rGO/M-PEF scaffolds served 
as a continuous conductive skeleton, the hierarchical PPy/rGO/M-PEF textile struc-
tures permitted a large loading of PPy, synergistically enabling excellent mechan-
ical deformabilities with a high capacitance and rate capability for the resultant 
composite. When combined with a PVA/H2SO4 gel electrolyte, the PPy/rGO/M-
PEF based symmetric FSC thus assembled showed an excellent rate capability with 
a high capacitance of 350 mF cm−2 at 50 mA cm−2 versus that of 474 mF cm−2 at 1 
mA cm−2, corresponding to a high energy and power densities of 0.0658 mWh cm−2 
and 0.5 mW cm−2, respectively. This FSC exhibited a remarkable cycling stability 
with its 100% capacitance retention after being charged/discharged for 10,000 cycles. 
Furthermore, it showed an outstanding bendability, maintaining its initial capacitance 
at 97.6% and 99.2% after being bend-cycled for 1000 cycles (Fig. 2b) and bent to an 
angle up to 180° (Fig. 2c), respectively.
As an important derivative of PTh, poly (3,4-ethylenedioxythiphoenes) (PEDOT) 
is attractive for FSCs, due to its easier processability, higher conductivity, and

262
F. Cheng et al.
Fig. 2 a Schematic illustration of the synthesis route toward (a) a textile electrode (PPy/RGO/M-
PEFT) and (b) a yarn electrode (PPy/RGO/M-PEFY). b. Capacitance retention and CV curves of 
the device after repeated bending. c Capacitance retention and CV curves of the device at different 
bending states. Adapted with permission [18], Copyright (2018), Wiley–VCH. d (i–ii) schematic 
illustration of the preparation of a PEDOT:PSS/CNP; (iii) digital photos of the PEDOT:PSS/CNP 
lifting an 2 kg autoclave; (iv) illustration of a PEDOT:PSS/CNP based FSC device; (v) digital photo 
of a green-light LED powered by three FSC devices in series. Adapted with permission [19], Copy-
right (2022), Elsevier. e Schematic illustration of the fabrication of an ACPM composite. f–g Capac-
itance retention, digital photographs, and CV curves of a solid-state ACPM//ACFC asymmetric SC 
under different bending angles and after bending for various cycles. Adapted with permission [20], 
Copyright (2018), American Chemical Society
better stability than other CPs such as PANi and PPy [19]. For example, Du et al. 
[19] developed a facile strategy to fabricate mechanically strong and conductive 
PEDOT: poly(styrenesulfonate) (PSS) bulk ﬁlms (Fig. 2d). By using CNFs as 
building blocks to reinforce the mechanical strength, PEDOT:PSS/CNF suspension 
was ﬁrstly prepared via a simple in-situ polymerization process. Afterwards, a ﬂex-
ible and conductive PEDOT:PSS/CNF nanopaper (PEDOT:PSS/CNP) was obtained 
through vacuum ﬁltration and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) post-treatment (inset i-
ii in Fig. 2d). The as-prepared PEDOT:PSS/CNP exhibited outstanding ﬂexibility, 
electrical conductivity, and tensile strength and can lift up a heavy autoclave (inset iii 
in Fig. 2d). With a 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte, the PEDOT:PSS/CNP-based symmetric 
FSC (inset iv in Fig. 2d) delivered a capacitance of as high as 854.4 mF cm−2 (~122.1 
F cm−3) and realized a high energy density of 30.86 μWh cm−2 and power density 
of 28.27 mW cm−2. It presented a high capacitance retention of 95.8% after being 
charged/discharged for 10,000 cycles and maintained its original capacitance even 
under severe deformations. 
Moreover, another pseudocapacitive material can be introduced into the carbon-
CP binary system as elaborated above, resulting in multi-component pseudocapaci-
tive material-carbon nanomaterial composites with further enhanced properties [17,

Pseudocapacitive Materials for Flexible Supercapacitors
263
20, 21]. For instance, Wang et al. [20] reported a layer-by-layer method to develop 3D 
activated carbon ﬁber cloth/CNT/PANi/MnO2 (ACFC/CNT/PANi/MnO2) (denoted 
as ACPM) composite textile electrodes. Speciﬁcally, PANi was ﬁrstly deposited on 
ACFC via an electropolymerization process, followed by the deposition of CNT and 
MnO2 through a dipping-drying procedure and an in-situ chemical reaction, respec-
tively (Fig. 2e). In the resultant multi-component composite electrode, the ACFC/ 
CNT hybrid framework served as a porous and conductive 3D network to facili-
tate the transport of electrons and electrolyte ions, while PANi and MnO2 syner-
gistically ensured a high capacitance. As a consequence, the ACPM electrode thus 
prepared realized an ultra-high capacitance up to 4615 mF cm−2. Coupling the ACPM 
electrode (as anode) with an ACFC cathode and a PVA/H2SO4 gel electrolyte, the 
as-assembled ACPM//ACFC asymmetric FSC presented excellent electrochemical 
and mechanical performances, delivering an energy and power densities of 413 μWh 
cm−2 and 16,120 μWcm−2, respectively, and retaining its capacitance under different 
bending conditions (Fig. 2f, g). This work demonstrates the signiﬁcance of incor-
porating multiple pseudocapacitive materials with carbon nanomaterials to fabricate 
composite electrodes with further enhanced properties for FSCs. 
2.3 
Mxenes and Their Composites for FSCs 
With respect to MOs and CPs, MXs, i.e., the 2D transition metal carbides and nitrides, 
are a relatively new member in the pseudocapacitive materials community. MXs have 
been intensively investigated for electrochemical energy storage due to their remark-
able physical and chemical characteristics, including unique 2D layered structure, 
good processability, metallic conductivity, large SSA, excellent mechanical strength, 
hydrophilic nature, and ability to accommodate intercalants [9, 22]. These superior 
properties of MXs, along with their high theoretical capacity of 615 C g−1 [23], make 
them especially suitable for FSCs. 
However, MXs may suffer from a undesirable capacitance because of their 
restacking of 2D nanosheets caused by the strong interplanar van der Waals inter-
actions (leading to reduced ion-accessible SSA and blocked electrolyte ion diffu-
sion) and an inferior rate capability because of their anisotropic behavior (leading 
to poor interlayer and interparticle conductivity) [24–26]. In order to address these 
shortcomings, MXs have been composited with carbon nanomaterials and/or other 
pseudocapacitive materials (e.g., MOs or CPs), resulting in various composites, 
such as carbon-MX [24, 25, 27–29], MX/CP [30], and carbon-MX/MO [26]. In 
the resultant composites, carbon nanomaterials, MOs, and CPs can not only serve as 
special spacers to mitigate the restacking of MX nanosheets but also further boost 
the overall electrochemical and mechanical properties of the composites (owing to 
the synergistic effects from all constituents of these composites) [26, 31]. 
In the carbon-MX system, for example, Chen et al. [29] utilized vacuum ﬁltration 
to incorporate CNF, porous carbon (PC), and Ti3C2TX to fabricate a free-standing 
Ti3C2TX/CNF/PC composite electrode, in which CNF and PC formed a ﬂexible

264
F. Cheng et al.
scaffold (Fig. 3a). In addition to constructing the ﬂexible scaffold, CNF and PC 
can also serve as spacers to suppress the self-restacking of the Ti3C2TX nanosheets, 
thereby increasing the interlayer distance and creating open gaps for facilitating ion 
transport. Synergistically, owing to the porous structure of PC, abundant porosity and 
good mechanical properties of CNF, excellent conductivity of Ti3C2TX, and the well-
established 3D interconnected hierarchical structure of the composite, the Ti3C2TX/ 
CNF/PC electrode possessed a high SSA of 574.5 m2 g−1 and a high conductivity up 
to 83.1 S cm−1. Coupling this composite electrode with a PVA/KOH gel electrolyte, 
the resultant symmetrical FSC displayed a high capacitance of 143 mF cm−2, an  
excellent rate capability (a capacitance retention of 50.9% at 10 mA cm−2), a high 
energy and power densities of 2.4 uWh cm−2 and 2000 uW cm−2, respectively, 
and especially superior mechanical deformabilities under various bending angles. 
These results highlight the signiﬁcance of compositing MXs with multiple carbons 
(including carbon nanomaterials) in constructing a 3D conductive scaffold to enhance 
both the electrochemical and mechanical properties for the resultant carbon-MX 
composite electrodes. 
Into the carbon-MX system as discussed above, moreover, the introduction of 
another pseudocapacitive material has been demonstrated to be efﬁcient to further 
enhance the properties of the resultant multi-component composite electrodes. For 
example, Huang et al. [26] developed a vacuum-ﬁltration assisted layer-by-layer 
strategy to synthesize a carbon-MX/MO-based multi-component composite for 
FSCs. Speciﬁcally, a CNT@MnO2 composite was ﬁrstly prepared via a hydrothermal 
process, followed by embedding the as-synthesized CNT@MnO2 into the MX
Fig. 3 a Schematic illustration of the preparation of a Ti3C2TX/CNF/PC hybrid ﬁlm and a quasi-
solid-state SC: (a) mixing of a dispersion containing Ti3C2TX, CNF, and PC; (b) vacuum assisted 
ﬁltration of the dispersion into a Ti3C2TX/CNF/PC hybrid ﬁlm; (c) fabrication of a SC using two 
hybrid ﬁlms as free-standing electrodes with a PVA/KOH gel electrolyte. Adapted with permis-
sion [29], Copyright (2020), Elsevier. b Schematic illustration of the preparation of a MXene/ 
CNT@MnO2 ﬁlm and its corresponding all-in-one FSC device. c Digital photographs of the FSC 
under different bending conditions and its corresponding galvanostatic charge/discharge (GCD) 
curves at 0.5 A g−1. Adapted with permission [26], Copyright (2021), The Royal Society of 
Chemistry 

Pseudocapacitive Materials for Flexible Supercapacitors
265
nanosheet interlayers to obtain the MX/CNT@MnO2 composite ﬁlm electrode 
(Fig. 3b). In this electrode, while the CNT@MnO2 composites can suppress the 
restacking of MX nanosheets, the MX nanosheets and CNTs can form a 3D conduc-
tive network for MnO2 loading, jointly facilitating the electron transport and elec-
trolyte ion diffusion for the entire system. As a result of these unique features, the MX/ 
CNT@MnO2 composite electrode showed a high capacitance of 221 F g−1. Incor-
porating this composite electrode with a PVA/Na2SO4 gel electrolyte, the resultant 
all-in-one FSC exhibited a high energy and power densities of 24.5 mWh cm−3 and 
2.5 W cm−3, respectively, as well as a good cycling stability (no apparent capacitance 
decay after 1800 cycles) and bendability (negligible change in capacitive behavior 
upon mechanical bending) (Fig. 3c). These promising results spotlight the excel-
lence of combining multiple pseudocapacitive materials with carbon nanomaterials 
to fabricate superior multi-component composites for high-performance FSCs. 
As discussed above, due to the shortcomings of their direct use, pseudocapaci-
tive materials are usually processed into composites to fulﬁll their FSC applications. 
Speciﬁcally, pseudocapacitive materials can be incorporated each other or combined 
with carbon nanomaterials to fabricate composites with superior electrochemical and 
mechanical properties for FSCs. Therefore, with appropriate electrode and device 
design, these composites can be fabricated into FSCs in varied conﬁgurations to 
satisfy the application requirements for various wearable and ﬂexible electronic 
devices, to be discussed as follows. 
3 
Device Conﬁgurations of Pseudocapacitive 
Material-Incorporated FSCs 
Apart from the electrode properties, the device design is also essential in determining 
the performances of FSCs [32]. Pseudocapacitive material-incorporated FSCs have 
been fabricated in 1D ﬁber-shaped, 2D ﬁlm-shaped, and 3D structural conﬁgura-
tions to meet the application demands for varied mechanical deformation conditions 
[32, 33]. 
3.1 
One-Dimensional Fiber-Shaped FSCs 
1D FSCs are characterized by a ﬁber-shaped (or wire-like, cable-type) conﬁguration 
possessing the advantages of lightweight and good stretchability and knittability [32, 
33]. 1D ﬁber-shaped FSCs have been fabricated in three conﬁgurations, i.e., parallel, 
twisted, and coaxial (or core–shell) [4, 32], with various pseudocapacitive materials 
[25, 34–41].

266
F. Cheng et al.
A parallel 1D ﬁber-shaped FSC consists of two ﬁber electrodes in parallel that are 
separated by an electrolyte. For instance, Li et al. [35] designed a prestraining-
then-buckling method to develop a stretchable ﬁber-shaped FSC composed of 
two MnO2/oxidized CNT ﬁber electrodes and a LiCl-PVA gel electrolyte on a 
poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) ﬁlm in a continuously buckled pattern (Fig. 4a). The 
FSC thus fabricated displayed a remarkable capacitance of 409.4 F cm−3, a superior 
energy and power densities of 14.2 mWh cm−3 and 6250 mW cm−3, respectively, 
and an excellent cycling stability (98% of capacitance retention after 5000 cycles). 
Moreover, it showed negligible change in electrochemical properties under various 
stretching and folding conditions (Fig. 4b). 
In a parallel 1D ﬁber-shaped FSC, the electric ﬁeld formed in the radial direction 
(across the diameters) of its two parallel electrodes is not uniform, limiting its elec-
trochemical performances [4]. This drawback can be addressed by arranging the two 
ﬁber electrodes in a more efﬁcient conﬁguration, such as with a twisted or coaxial 
structure.
Fig. 4 a Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of a stretchable FSC. b CV curves of 
the FSC obtained at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 under stretching and folding, respectively. Adapted 
with permission [35], Copyright (2017), Wiley–VCH. c Schematic illustration of the fabrication 
processes of an all-solid-state AFSC with an ionic liquid incorporated gel-polymer electrolyte. 
d GCD curves of the AFSC measured at 0.5 A cm−3 under different bending angles. e Normalized 
capacitance of the AFSC after bending at 90° for 1000 cycles. Adapted with permission [41], 
Copyright (2019), Wiley–VCH. f Schematic demonstration of a FSS with a core-sheath structure. 
g–h CV and GCD curves of the FSS under different bending angles. Adapted with permission [39], 
Copyright (2021), American Chemical Society 

Pseudocapacitive Materials for Flexible Supercapacitors
267
Constructed by twisting two ﬁber electrodes together along with an electrolyte in 
between, a twisted 1D ﬁber-shaped FSC can form a uniform electric ﬁeld between its 
two electrodes. With this design, Pan et al. [41] twisted a MnOx@Titanium Nitride 
nanowires/CNT (MnOx@TiN NWs@CNT) ﬁber cathode and a carbon@TiN NWs/ 
CNT (C@TiN NWs@CNT) ﬁber anode with an ionic liquid (IL) gel polymer elec-
trolyte to assemble an asymmetric ﬁber-shaped SC (AFSC) (Fig. 4c). The resultant 
AFSC achieved a high working voltage up to 3.5 V and thus an ultrahigh energy 
density of 61.2 mWh cm−3, comparable to those of commercially available planar 
lead-acid batteries (50 ~ 90 mWh cm−3), and a high-power density of 10.1 W cm−3. 
Furthermore, the well-maintained shape of the GCD curves under different bending 
angles (Fig. 4d) and the high capacitance retention of 92.7% after 1000 bending 
cycles (Fig. 4e) of this AFSC strongly indicate its exceptional ﬂexibility. 
The two ﬁber electrodes of a coaxial (or core–shell) 1D ﬁber-shaped FSC are 
well-arranged in a coaxial conﬁguration, i.e., an external electrode wrapping around 
an internal electrode with an electrolyte in between, making the electric ﬁeld between 
the two electrodes uniform in both the axial and radial directions, maximizing the 
effective area for the electrodes, and lowering the internal resistance for the device 
[32]. This conﬁguration is especially useful for fabricating stretchable FSCs. For 
example, Xu et al. [39] fabricated a ﬁber-shaped SC (FSS) by wrapping a MnO2 
deposited CNT ﬁlm (MnO2@CNT) electrode (as cathode) on a PPy deposited carbon 
ﬁber (PPy@CF) electrode (as anode) (Fig. 4f). The as-assembled FSS delivered a 
high capacitance of 66.27 mF cm−2 at 5 mV s−1 with a good rate performance 
retaining 67% of initial capacitance at 100 mV s−1. Meanwhile, it displayed a high 
energy and power densities of 23.56 uWh cm−2 and 3.3 mW cm−2, respectively, 
and exhibited a remarkable ﬂexibility with a negligible change in capacitance under 
different bending angles (Fig. 4g, h) and a high capacitance retention of 90% after 
200 bending cycles. 
The active material loading of a 1D ﬁber-shaped FSC is relatively low (because 
of its use of small-sized ﬁber electrodes) and its internal resistance would increase 
upon the increase in length of its ﬁber electrodes [5]. Use of ﬁlm electrodes would be 
capable of addressing these issues, resulting in two-dimensional ﬁlm-shaped FSCs, 
to be discussed below. 
3.2 
Two-Dimensional Film-Shaped FSCs 
2D FSCs have a ﬁlm-shaped (or paper-like) appearance, in which two thin-ﬁlm ﬂex-
ible electrodes sandwich an electrolyte [32]. In recent years, the substantial achieve-
ments in the research of pseudocapacitive materials have accelerated the develop-
ment of 2D ﬁlm-shaped FSCs with either a symmetric or asymmetric conﬁguration 
[28, 42, 43]. 
In the symmetric conﬁguration, for example, Li et al. [43] reported a bendable 
FSC by sandwiching two identical MX (Ti3AlC2)/α-Fe2O3-C-MoS2-PEDOT:PSS/ 
MX (Ti3AlC2) (M/FMP/M) ﬁlm electrodes with a PVA/H2SO4 gel electrolyte in a

268
F. Cheng et al.
CC framework (Fig. 5a, b). In the electrode design, while PEDOT:PSS can provide 
active sites and lower resistance for α-Fe2O3 and C-MoS2 to efﬁciently utilize their 
capacitances, the resultant FMP composite can suppress the restacking of the Ti3AlC2 
sheets. At the device level, the CC framework can provide ﬂexibility for the FSC. As a 
result, the as-assembled symmetric FSC delivered a high energy and power densities 
of 371 uWh cm−2 and 50 mW cm−2, respectively, and showed a superior bendability 
retaining its capacitance up to 98.6% under a bending angle of 180° (Fig. 5c). 
Constructed from two different electrodes, an asymmetric (hybrid) FSC has an 
enlarged operating voltage and hence an enhanced energy output. In an example by 
Patil et al. [44], a CC supported porous Co3(PO4)2 transparent stacked micropetals 
(TSMs) decorated with Co2Mo3O8 nanosheets (Co3(PO4)2@Co2Mo3O8) composite 
and a CC supported 2D CNT/MX (CNT-Ti3C2TX) composite were employed as the 
positive electrode and negative electrode, respectively, to sandwich a PVA/KOH gel 
electrolyte (Fig. 5d). The resultant ﬂexible hybrid solid-state SC (FHSC) realized 
an enlarged working voltage up to 1.5 V and thus delivered an exceptional energy 
and power as high as 2.47 mWh cm−3 and 225 mW cm−3, respectively, along with
Fig. 5 a Illustration of the preparation of a M/FMP/M ﬁlm on a carbon cloth. b Structure of a device 
assembled from two M/FMP/M-20% ﬁlm electrodes. c Capacitance retention of the device tested at 
20 mV s−1 in different bending states. Adapted with permission [43], Copyright (2022), American 
Chemical Society. d Schematic representation of the designing of a FHSC device by employing 
CoPO-CMO238 as the positive electrode and CNT–Ti3C2TX/CC as the negative electrode with a 
PVA–KOH gel electrolyte. e Photos of the device in its initial position and at various bending angles 
of 90°, 120°, and 180°, and the corresponding CV curves at 100 mV s −1. Adapted with permission 
[44], Copyright (2021), The Royal Society of Chemistry. f Schematic of an internal asymmetric 
tandem all-in-one FSC. g GCD curves of the FSC measured at 4 mA cm−2 under different bending 
angles. h Normalized capacitance of the FSC upon cycling with a bending angle of 90° for 6000 
cycles. i Two blue-light LEDs powered by the FSC (bending angle from 0 to 135°). Adapted with 
permission [45], Copyright (2020), Elsevier 

Pseudocapacitive Materials for Flexible Supercapacitors
269
an outstanding cycling stability retaining its capacitance at 93.2% after charging/ 
discharging for 5000 cycles. Under various bending angles (Fig. 5e), this FHSC was 
able to maintain its initial capacitance with negligible decay. 
Moreover, by integrating multiple asymmetric cells into a tandem structure, the 
working voltage and hence energy density of the resultant FSCs can be further 
boosted. In this regard, Zhou et al. [45] built an asymmetric FSC by incorpo-
rating a CNT ﬁlm supported MnO2@N-doped carbon skeleton (CNTF/MnO2@N– 
C) cathode, a CNTF/N–C@vanadium nitrogen (CTF/N–C@VN) anode, and a LiCl/ 
PVA gel electrolyte in a tandem conﬁguration (Fig. 5f). This tandem design enabled 
the as-assembled FSC to have a maximum working voltage up to 6.6 V (versus that 
of 2.2 V for a single cell), thereby a high energy and power of 118.2 mWh cm−3 
and 3821.9 mW cm−3, respectively. Furthermore, it retained 95.1% of its initial 
capacitance after charging/discharging for 15,000 cycles. More importantly, this 
FSC exhibited impressive mechanical deformabilities, maintaining its GCD curves 
almost unchanged upon the increase of bending angle from 0° to 180° (Fig. 5g), 
presenting a high capacitance retention of 97.2% after 6000 bending cycles (Fig. 5h), 
and holding a stable energy output under various bending angles (Fig. 5i). The above 
results clearly demonstrate the effectiveness of the asymmetric conﬁguration and the 
tandem structure design in boosting the energy output for 2D ﬁlm-shaped FSCs. 
As can be seen, fruitful progress has been achieved for pseudocapacitive material-
incorporated 1D ﬁber- and 2D ﬁlm-shaped FSCs. For practical applications, more-
over, the active material loading of these devices needs to be efﬁciently increased 
(without a decay in speciﬁc capacitance [46]) and their deformabilities need to be 
signiﬁcantly improved. These have, in fact, triggered the efforts on the research of 
higher-dimensional, i.e., 3D structural, FSCs [33]. 
3.3 
Three-Dimensional Structural FSCs 
A 3D structural FSC is constructed in a 3D conﬁguration by integrating low-
dimensional (1D or 2D) FSCs as the building units. Compared to their low-
dimensional counterparts, 3D structural FSCs incorporate more active materials into 
the device and can omni-directionally accommodate mechanical deformations [32], 
more suitable for practical applications. 
In this context, for example, Lv et al. [47] utilized a 2D ﬁlm-shaped SC as 
the building unit to develop a 3D stretchable FSC in a conﬁguration mimicking a 
honeycomb lantern. With a honeycomb lantern structure (Fig. 6a), the proposed 3D 
stretchable FSC was constructed by incorporating a symmetric capacitor composed 
of a PPy/black-phosphorous oxide electrodeposited on CNT ﬁlm (PPy/BPO/CNT) 
composite electrode and a PVA/H2SO4 gel electrolyte as the building unit. Conse-
quently, the unique expandable architecture of the honeycomb lantern enabled the 
FSC with device-thickness-independent ion-transport path and stretchability that 
allowed the fabrication of FSCs into customizable device thickness for enhancing 
the energy output and adjusting the integrability for ﬁtting with various wearable

270
F. Cheng et al.
Fig. 6 a Schematic representation showing the fabrication procedure of a 3D rectangular-shaped 
stretchable FSC. b Digital images of the FSC under varied strains. Inset is a scheme presenting the 
expandable honeycomb structure and hexagonal unit cells of the FSC before and after stretching. 
c Effect of device thickness on the rupture strain of the FSC. d Normalized capacitances of FSCs 
from different PPy-based electrodes tested at 7.8 mA cm−2 with varied strains. e Capacitance 
retention of the FSC from PPy/BPO/CNT electrodes tested at 7.8 mA cm−2 under stretch cycling 
with a tensile strain of 2000%. Adapted with permission [47], Copyright (2018), Wiley–VCH 
devices. Remarkably, a 1.0 cm-thick FSC thus fabricated displayed a boosted capac-
itance of 7.34 F cm−2, 60 times that of its original 2D SC unit (120 mF cm−2). 
Mechanically, this 3D FSC could be stretched up to 2400% (Fig. 6b) and exhibited 
a device-thickness/shape-independent stretchability (Fig. 6c). It maintained its elec-
trochemical performance unchanged under 2400% stretching (Fig. 6d) and retained 
its capacitance at 95% even upon stretch-release cycling under 2000% strain for 
10,000 cycles (Fig. 6e). These results clearly demonstrate the practical application 
superiorities of 3D structural FSCs over their low-dimensional counterparts. 
To this end, remarkable progress has been achieved in the research of pseudo-
capacitive materials and the development of their FSCs. This has facilitated the 
practical application exploration of FSCs for ﬂexible and wearable electronics as 
brieﬂy elaborated as follows.

Pseudocapacitive Materials for Flexible Supercapacitors
271
4 
Practical Applications of Pseudocapacitive Material 
Incorporated FSCs 
Pseudocapacitive material incorporated FSCs have shown great potentials for prac-
tical applications because of their excellent safety, electrochemical performances, 
and mechanical deformabilities [1, 48]. While 1D FSCs are promising for wearable 
applications, 2D and 3D FSCs have better suitability for large-scale ﬂexible elec-
tronics, and 3D FSCs are especially useful for multi-direction-deformation appli-
cations. Pseudocapacitive material-incorporated FSCs have been incorporated into 
many application concepts and even prototypes, such as ﬂexible and transparent 
electronics [49], healthcare monitoring systems [16, 42, 50], skin-attachable wear-
ables and sensors [51], wearable digital electronics [38], and self-powered wearable 
devices [52]. In some speciﬁc scenarios, furthermore, the special functionalities, such 
as transparency or self-power, are needed, resulting in multifunctional FSCs. 
For the emerging electronics of ﬂexible and transparent devices [53], for instance, 
many attempts have been made to fabricate FSCs that are ﬂexible and also trans-
parent. In this regard, a multifunctional wearable electrochromic patch device 
powered by an all-transparent stretchable electrochromic SC (all-TSES) was devel-
oped (Fig. 7a) [54]. Attributed to the pseudocapacitive/coloration dual character-
istics of the PEDOT:PSS/WO3 electrodes, this patch device delivered a maximum 
energy and power densities of 52.6 Wh kg−1 and 19.1 kW kg−1, respectively, and 
showed reversible coloration at –1.5 V and bleaching at –0.1 V (Fig. 7b, c). It 
demonstrated stable electrochromic and electrochemical properties by holding 95.0% 
and 97.6% of its normalized transmittance change and normalized speciﬁc capaci-
tance, respectively, even after being exposed to the ambient conditions for 2 weeks 
(Fig. 7d). Mechanically, it was stable upon stretch-bend cycling and exhibited a 
high capacitance retention of 98.6% even under a tensile strain up to 20% (Fig. 7e, 
f). These results highlight the importance of fabricating FSCs with unique features 
such as transparency in providing power for emerging ﬂexible electronics such as 
skin-attachable wearables and bioelectronics.
For self-powered wearable devices, on the other hand, a FSC is used to store 
the energy harvested from sunlight, body motion or even human bioﬂuids rather 
than provided by conventional external power supplies. For example, Lv et al. [52] 
developed a screen-printed textile-based hybrid SC-biofuel cell (SC-BFC) system 
for on-body testing (Fig. 7g–m). In this self-powered system, an epidermal BFC 
(Fig. 7j) was used to harvest the biochemical energy generated from the wearer’s 
sweat and a CNT/MnO2/PEDOT:PSS composite based FSC (Fig. 7g, i) to store the 
energy thus harvested. Owing to the remarkable electrochemical stability and high 
energy density (17.5 mWh cm−2) of the FSC, this self-powered hybrid system can 
deliver a stable energy output over long charging periods, boost the voltage output of 
the BFC, and exhibit excellent stability under a variety of mechanical deformations 
(Fig. 7k–m). These results clearly reveal the great potential of such unique FSC-based 
hybrid power systems as next-generation self-powered ﬂexible power supplies for 
wearable electronics and smart textiles.

272
F. Cheng et al.
Fig. 7 a Schematic illustration of an all-TSES wearable patch device. b Real images of the bleached 
and colored states of the patch device. c Demonstration of the patch device. d Normalized trans-
mittance change and capacitance change of the patch device after exposure in ambient conditions 
for 14 days. e CV results of the patch device under different stretching conditions. f Normalized 
capacitance change of the patch device under a tensile strain to 20%. Adapted with permission [54], 
Copyright (2019), American Chemical Society. g Illustration of the composition of a MnO2–CNT/ 
CNT/PEDOT:PSS composite. h–j Schematic illustration of a self-powered textile composed of a 
BFC and a FSC. The energy generated by the BFC from the lactate in sweat charges the FSC. k– 
m Photographs of the textile under different deformations of bending, twisting, and 20% stretching, 
respectively. Adapted with permission [52], Copyright (2018), The Royal Society of Chemistry
5 
Summary and Outlooks 
The research and development of FSCs as a group of ﬂexible power sources for 
ﬂexible and wearable electronic devices have gained signiﬁcant progresses. In order 
for FSCs to be practically useful, they should have both superior electrochemical 
performances and excellent mechanical deformabilities. This has triggered substan-
tial research on the electrode materials of FSCs and the development of their device 
conﬁgurations. 
Largely owing to their high capacitances, pseudocapacitive materials (including 
MOs, CPs, and MXs) are promising electrode materials for FSCs. While the direct 
processing of pseudocapacitive materials into electrodes possesses shortcomings, 
the incorporation of varied pseudocapacitive materials together and the compositing 
of pseudocapacitive materials with carbon nanomaterials are efﬁcient to fabricate 
ﬂexible composite electrodes with both well-deﬁned electrochemical and mechanical 
properties for FSCs. This also indicates a future direction to continue the research 
on synthesis method, composition optimization, and morphology design of such 
pseudocapacitive material-based composite electrodes for practically useful FSCs. 
Pseudocapacitive material-incorporated FSCs have been realized in a range 
of conﬁgurations from 1D ﬁber-shaped to 2D ﬁlm-shaped and 3D structural, 
providing them with tremendous opportunities for varied mechanical deformation

Pseudocapacitive Materials for Flexible Supercapacitors
273
scenarios. Speciﬁcally, they have been integrated into prototype products with 1D 
FSCs promising for wearable, 2D and 3D FSCs for large-scale ﬂexible, and 3D 
FSCs for multi-direction-deformation applications. Furthermore, with the incorpo-
ration of special features (such as transparency or self-power), the FSCs become 
multifunctional, signiﬁcantly enhancing their practical application capabilities. 
Therefore, with the remarkable progresses accomplished in the past and the exten-
sive research in the future on pseudocapacitive materials and their FSCs, practically 
useful ﬂexible power sources with both superior electrochemical performances and 
excellent mechanical deformabilities would be anticipated into the market for ﬂexible 
and wearable electronic devices. 
Acknowledgements This work was supported by The Special Signiﬁcant Science and Technology 
Program of Yunnan Province (grant number: 2016HE001-2016HE002). 
References 
1. C. Wang, K. Xia, H. Wang, X. Liang, Z. Yin, Y. Zhang, Advanced carbon for ﬂexible and 
wearable electronics. Adv. Mater. 31, e1801072 (2019) 
2. Y. Liu, M. Pharr, G.A. Salvatore, Lab-on-skin: a review of ﬂexible and stretchable electronics 
for wearable health monitoring. ACS Nano 11, 9614–9635 (2017) 
3. L. Lyu, W. Hooch Antink, Y. S. Kim, C. W. Kim, T. Hyeon, Y. Piao, Recent development of ﬂex-
ible and stretchable supercapacitors using transition metal compounds as electrode materials. 
Small 17, e2101974 (2021) 
4. Y. Zhou, C.H. Wang, W. Lu, L. Dai, Recent advances in ﬁber-shaped supercapacitors and 
lithium-ion batteries. Adv. Mater. 32, e1902779 (2020) 
5. P. Xie, W. Yuan, X. Liu, Y. Peng, Y. Yin, Y. Li, Z. Wu, Advanced carbon nanomaterials for 
state-of-the-art ﬂexible supercapacitors. Ene. Stor. Mater 36, 56–76 (2021) 
6. G. Shao, R. Yu, N. Chen, M. Ye, X.Y. Liu, Stretchable supercapacitors: From materials and 
structures to devices. Small Methods 5, 2000853 (2021) 
7. Y. Han, L. Dai, Conducting polymers for ﬂexible supercapacitors. Macromol. Chem. Phys. 
220, 1800355 (2019) 
8. S. A. Delbari, L. S. Ghadimi, R. Hadi, S. Farhoudian, M. Nedaei, A. Babapoor, A. Sabahi 
Namini, Q. V. Le, M. Shokouhimehr, M. Shahedi Asl, M. Mohammadi, Transition metal oxide-
based electrode materials for ﬂexible supercapacitors: a review. J. Alloys Compd. 857, 158281 
(2021) 
9. S. Nam, J.-N. Kim, S. Oh, J. Kim, C.W. Ahn, I.-K. Oh, Ti3C2Tx MXene for wearable energy 
devices: supercapacitors and triboelectric nanogenerators. APL Mater. 8, 110701 (2020) 
10. T. An, W. Cheng, Recent progress in stretchable supercapacitors. J. Mater. Chem. A 6, 15478– 
15494 (2018) 
11. S. Sahoo, R. Kumar, E. Joanni, R.K. Singh, J.-J. Shim, Advances in pseudocapacitive and 
battery-like electrode materials for high performance supercapacitors. J. Mater. Chem. A 10, 
13190–13240 (2022) 
12. Y. Shao, M.F. El-Kady, J. Sun, Y. Li, Q. Zhang, M. Zhu, H. Wang, B. Dunn, R.B. Kaner, Design 
and mechanisms of asymmetric supercapacitors. Chem. Rev. 118, 9233–9280 (2018) 
13. Y. Wang, Y. Ding, X. Guo, G. Yu, Conductive polymers for stretchable supercapacitors. Nano 
Res. 12, 1978–1987 (2019) 
14. C. Zhao, X. Jia, K. Shu, C. Yu, G.G. Wallace, C. Wang, Conducting polymer composites for 
unconventional solid-state supercapacitors. J Mater Chem A 8, 4677–4699 (2020)

274
F. Cheng et al.
15. L. Huang, D. Santiago, P. Loyselle, L. Dai, Graphene-based nanomaterials for ﬂexible and 
wearable supercapacitors. Small 14, e1800879 (2018) 
16. Z. Lv, Y. Luo, Y. Tang, J. Wei, Z. Zhu, X. Zhou, W. Li, Y. Zeng, W. Zhang, Y. Zhang, D. 
Qi, S. Pan, X.J. Loh, X. Chen, Editable supercapacitors with customizable stretchability based 
on mechanically strengthened ultralong MnO2 nanowire composite. Adv. Mater. 30, 1704531 
(2018) 
17. Q. Zhuang, W. Li, Z. Zhu, H. Yu, W. Chen, J. Yang, M. Fu, Facile growth of hierarchical 
SnO2@PPy composites on carbon cloth as all-solid-state ﬂexible supercapacitors. J. Alloy. 
Compd. 906, 164275 (2022) 
18. X. Li, R. Liu, C. Xu, Y. Bai, X. Zhou, Y. Wang, G. Yuan, High-performance Polypyrrole/ 
Graphene/SnCl2 modiﬁed polyester textile electrodes and yarn electrodes for wearable energy 
storage. Adv. Funct. Mater. 28, 1800064 (2018) 
19. H. Du, M. Zhang, K. Liu, M. Parit, Z. Jiang, X. Zhang, B. Li, C. Si, Conductive PEDOT:PSS/ 
cellulose nanoﬁbril paper electrodes for ﬂexible supercapacitors with superior areal capacitance 
and cycling stability. Chem. Eng. J. 428, 131994 (2022) 
20. J. Wang, L. Dong, C. Xu, D. Ren, X. Ma, F. Kang, Polymorphous supercapacitors constructed 
from ﬂexible three-dimensional carbon network/polyaniline/MnO2 composite textiles. ACS 
Appl. Mater. Inter. 10, 10851–10859 (2018) 
21. H.U. Lee, C. Park, J.-H. Jin, S.W. Kim, A stretchable vertically stacked microsupercapac-
itor with kirigami-bridged island structure: MnO2/graphene/Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) 
nanocomposite electrode through pen lithography. J. Power. Sources 453, 227898 (2020) 
22. C. Zhang, Y. Ma, X. Zhang, S. Abdolhosseinzadeh, H. Sheng, W. Lan, A. Pakdel, J. Heier, F. 
Nüesch, Two dimensional transition metal carbides and nitrides (MXenes): synthesis properties, 
and electrochemical energy storage applications. Energ. Environ. Mater 3, 29–55 (2020) 
23. M.R. Lukatskaya, S. Kota, Z. Lin, M.-Q. Zhao, N. Shpigel, M.D. Levi, J. Halim, P.-L. Taberna, 
M.W. Barsoum, P. Simon, Y. Gogotsi, Ultra-high-rate pseudocapacitive energy storage in two-
dimensional transition metal carbides. Nat. Energy 2, 17105 (2017) 
24. H. Li, R. Chen, M. Ali, H. Lee, M.J. Ko, In Situ grown MWCNTs/MXenes nanocomposites on 
carbon cloth for high-performance ﬂexible supercapacitors. Adv. Funct. Mater. 30, 2002739 
(2020) 
25. C. Yu, Y. Gong, R. Chen, M. Zhang, J. Zhou, J. An, F. Lv, S. Guo, G. Sun, A solid-state ﬁbriform 
supercapacitor boosted by host-guest hybridization between the carbon nanotube scaffold and 
MXene nanosheets. Small, e1801203 (2018) 
26. Y.-L. Huang, S.-W. Bian, Vacuum-ﬁltration assisted layer-by-layer strategy to design MXene/ 
carbon nanotube@MnO2 all-in-one supercapacitors. J. Mater. Chem. A. 9, 21347–21356 
(2021) 
27. A. Salman, S. Padmajan Sasikala, I. H. Kim, J. T. Kim, G. S. Lee, J. G. Kim, S. O. Kim, Tungsten 
nitride-coated graphene ﬁbers for high-performance wearable supercapacitors. Nanoscale, 12, 
20239–20249 (2020) 
28. Y. Zhou, K. Maleski, B. Anasori, J.O. Thostenson, Y. Pang, Y. Feng, K. Zeng, C.B. Parker, S. 
Zauscher, Y. Gogotsi, J.T. Glass, C. Cao, Ti3C2Tx MXene-reduced graphene oxide composite 
electrodes for stretchable supercapacitors. ACS Nano 14, 3576–3586 (2020) 
29. W. Chen, D. Zhang, K. Yang, M. Luo, P. Yang, X. Zhou, Mxene (Ti3C2Tx)/cellulose nanoﬁber/ 
porous carbon ﬁlm as free-standing electrode for ultrathin and ﬂexible supercapacitors. Chem. 
Eng. J. 413, 127524 (2020) 
30. M. Zhu, Y. Huang, Q. Deng, J. Zhou, Z. Pei, Q. Xue, Y. Huang, Z. Wang, H. Li, Q. Huang, C. 
Zhi, Highly ﬂexible freestanding supercapacitor electrode with enhanced performance obtained 
by hybridizing Polypyrrole chains with MXene. Adv. Energy Mater. 6, 1600969 (2016) 
31. Q. Zhu, J. Li, P. Simon, B. Xu, Two-dimensional MXenes for electrochemical capacitor 
applications: progress, challenges and perspectives. Energy Stor. Mater 35, 630–660 (2021) 
32. X. Chen, N.S. Villa, Y. Zhuang, L. Chen, T. Wang, Z. Li, T. Kong, Stretchable supercapacitors 
as emergent energy storage units for health monitoring bioelectronics. Adv. Energy Mater. 10, 
1902769 (2019)

Pseudocapacitive Materials for Flexible Supercapacitors
275
33. J. Liang, C. Jiang, W. Wu, Toward ﬁber-, paper-, and foam-based ﬂexible solid-state 
supercapacitors: electrode materials and device designs. Nanoscale 11, 7041–7061 (2019) 
34. Q. Zhou, X. Chen, F. Su, X. Lyu, M. Miao, Sandwich-structured transition metal oxide/ 
graphene/carbon nanotube composite Yarn electrodes for ﬂexible two-ply yarn supercapacitors. 
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 59, 5752–5759 (2020) 
35. M. Li, M. Zu, J. Yu, H. Cheng, Q. Li, Stretchable ﬁber supercapacitors with high volumetric 
performance based on buckled MnO2/oxidized carbon nanotube ﬁber electrodes. Small 13, 
1602994 (2017) 
36. S. Wang, N. Liu, J. Su, L. Li, F. Long, Z. Zou, X. Jiang, Y. Gao, Highly stretchable and 
self-healable supercapacitor with reduced graphene oxide based ﬁber springs. ACS Nano 11, 
2066–2074 (2017) 
37. J. Sun, Y. Huang, C. Fu, Z. Wang, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, C. Zhi, H. Hu, High-performance 
stretchable yarn supercapacitor based on PPy@CNTs@urethane elastic ﬁber core spun yarn. 
Nano Energy 27, 230–237 (2016) 
38. Z. Wang, S. Qin, S. Seyedin, J. Zhang, J. Wang, A. Levitt, N. Li, C. Haines, R. Ovalle-Robles, 
W. Lei, Y. Gogotsi, R.H. Baughman, J.M. Razal, High-performance Biscrolled MXene/carbon 
nanotube Yarn supercapacitors. Small 14, e1802225 (2018) 
39. Y. Xu, Y. Yan, W. Lu, S. Yarlagadda, G. Xu, High-performance ﬂexible asymmetric ﬁber-
shaped supercapacitor based on CF/PPy and CNT/MnO2 composite electrodes. ACS Appl. 
Energy Mater 4, 10639–10645 (2021) 
40. Z. Pan, J. Yang, L. Li, X. Gao, L. Kang, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhang, Z. Kou, T. Zhang, L. Wei, Y. 
Yao, J. Wang, All-in-one stretchable coaxial-ﬁber strain sensor integrated with high-performing 
supercapacitor. Ene. Stor. Mater 25, 124–130 (2020) 
41. Z. Pan, J. Yang, Q. Zhang, M. Liu, Y. Hu, Z. Kou, N. Liu, X. Yang, X. Ding, H. Chen, J. Li, K. 
Zhang, Y. Qiu, Q. Li, J. Wang, Y. Zhang, All-solid-state ﬁber supercapacitors with ultrahigh 
volumetric energy density and outstanding ﬂexibility. Adv. Energy Mater. 9, 1802753 (2019) 
42. G. Lee, J.W. Kim, H. Park, J.Y. Lee, H. Lee, C. Song, S.W. Jin, K. Keum, C.H. Lee, J.S. 
Ha, Skin-Like, dynamically stretchable, planar supercapacitors with buckled carbon nanotube/ 
Mn-Mo mixed oxide electrodes and air-stable organic electrolyte. ACS Nano 13, 855–866 
(2019) 
43. C. Li, S. Wang, Y. Cui, X. Wang, Z. Yong, D. Liang, Y. Chi, Z. Wang, Sandwich-like MXene/ 
alpha-Fe2O3-C-MoS2-PEDOT:PSS/MXene Film electrodes with ultrahigh area capacitance 
for ﬂexible supercapacitors. ACS Appl Mater Inter 14, 9172–9182 (2022) 
44. A.M. Patil, N.R. Chodankar, E. Jung, S. Roy, D.P. Dubal, G. Guan, Y.-K. Han, S.C. Jun, 2D-
on-2D core-shell Co3(PO4)2 stacked micropetals@Co2Mo3O8 nanosheets and binder-free 2D 
CNT-Ti3C2TX-MXene electrodes for high-energy solid-state ﬂexible supercapacitors. J Mater 
Chem A 9, 26135–26148 (2021) 
45. Z. Zhou, Q. Li, L. Yuan, L. Tang, X. Wang, B. He, P. Man, C. Li, L. Xie, W. Lu, L. Wei, Q. 
Zhang, Y. Yao, Achieving ultrahigh-energy-density in ﬂexible and lightweight all-solid-state 
internal asymmetric tandem 6.6 V all-in-one supercapacitors. Ener. Stor. Mater, 25, 893–902 
(2020) 
46. N. Swain, A. Tripathy, A. Thirumurugan, B. Saravanakumar, L. Schmidt-Mende, A. Ramadoss, 
A brief review on stretchable, compressible, and deformable supercapacitor for smart devices. 
Chem. Eng. J. 446, 136876 (2022) 
47. Z. Lv, Y. Tang, Z. Zhu, J. Wei, W. Li, H. Xia, Y. Jiang, Z. Liu, Y. Luo, X. Ge, Y. Zhang, R. Wang, 
W. Zhang, X.J. Loh, X. Chen, Honeycomb-lantern-inspired 3D stretchable supercapacitors with 
enhanced speciﬁc areal capacitance. Adv. Mater. 30, 1805468 (2018) 
48. J. Wen, B. Xu, Y. Gao, M. Li, H. Fu, Wearable technologies enable high-performance textile 
supercapacitors with ﬂexible, breathable and wearable characteristics for future energy storage. 
Energy Stor. Mater 37, 94–122 (2021) 
49. J. Yun, H. Lee, C. Song, Y.R. Jeong, J.W. Park, J.H. Lee, D.S. Kim, K. Keum, M.S. Kim, 
S.W. Jin, Y.H. Lee, J.W. Kim, G. Zi, J.S. Ha, A Fractal-designed stretchable and transparent 
microsupercapacitor as a Skin-attachable energy storage device. Chem. Eng. J. 387, 124076 
(2020)

276
F. Cheng et al.
50. H. Park, J.W. Kim, S.Y. Hong, G. Lee, H. Lee, C. Song, K. Keum, Y.R. Jeong, S.W. Jin, D.S. 
Kim, J.S. Ha, Dynamically stretchable supercapacitor for powering an integrated biosensor in 
an all-in-one textile system. ACS Nano 13, 10469–10480 (2019) 
51. H. Park, J. W. Kim, S. Y. Hong, G. Lee, D. S. Kim, J. H. Oh, S. W. Jin, Y. R. Jeong, S. Y. 
Oh, J. Y. Yun, J. S. Ha, Microporous polypyrrole-coated graphene foam for high-performance 
multifunctional sensors and ﬂexible supercapacitors. Adv. Funct. Mater, 28 1707013 (2018) 
52. J. Lv, I. Jeerapan, F. Tehrani, L. Yin, C.A. Silva-Lopez, J.-H. Jang, D. Joshuia, R. Shah, Y. 
Liang, L. Xie, F. Soto, C. Chen, E. Karshalev, C. Kong, Z. Yang, J. Wang, Sweat-based wearable 
energy harvesting-storage hybrid textile devices. Energ. Environ. Sci. 11, 3431–3442 (2018) 
53. C. Zhang, V. Nicolosi, Graphene and MXene-based transparent conductive electrodes and 
supercapacitors. Energy Stor. Mater 16, 102–125 (2019) 
54. T.G. Yun, M. Park, D.H. Kim, D. Kim, J.Y. Cheong, J.G. Bae, S.M. Han, I.D. Kim, All-
transparent stretchable electrochromic supercapacitor wearable patch device. ACS Nano 13, 
3141–3150 (2019)

Redox-Active Polymers for Batteries 
Aswathy Vijayakumar Kumar, Treesa Karangattuserriyil James, 
and Suresh Mathew 
Abstract Electrochemical energy storage is critical in accelerating the transition to 
a low-carbon future for grid storage and transportation. While most research on elec-
trochemical energy storage devices has focused on improving performance (energy 
density and power density), little attention has been paid to designing devices that 
can be recycled at a low cost with minimal environmental impact. Renewable organic 
batteries are an excellent option for storing sustainably generated energy and can help 
to phase out current carbon-based energy production. Over the past 80 years, several 
strategies have been developed that use organic redox materials as active elements 
in batteries. Polymers have piqued the interest of numerous research groups due to 
their (1) fast redox chemistry in comparison to conventional active materials, (2) 
simple syntheses, and (3) tuneable solubility, all of which are desirable properties 
for a variety of electronic devices. Notably, the beginning of redox-active poly-
mers is linked to the discovery of conductive polymers by Heeger, Mac Diarmid, and 
Shirakawa in 1977. RAPs have progressed from an intriguing phenomenon to a family 
of promising, tailor-made battery materials that have also reached commercializa-
tion. Redox-active Polymers (RAPs) are macromolecules with chemical groups that 
can reversibly modify their electrochemical state by losing (oxidation) or gaining 
(reduction). The conventional polymerization stages of initiation, propagation, and 
termination are used in the creation of redox polymers. This chapter focuses on 
redox-active polymers, their classiﬁcation, the concept of electron transfer in RAPs, 
and redox-active polymer-based electrochemical energy storage devices and their 
application in energy storage devices i.e., batteries. 
Keywords Redox-active polymers · Redox-ﬂow battery · Electrochemistry ·
Electron transfer · Energy storage
A. Vijayakumar Kumar · T. K. James · S. Mathew envelope symbol
School of Chemical Sciences, Mahatma Gandhi University, Kottayam, Kerala 686560, India 
e-mail: sureshmathewmgu@gmail.com 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
R. K. Gupta (ed.), Pseudocapacitors, Engineering Materials, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45430-1_15 
277

278
A. Vijayakumar Kumar et al.
1 
Introduction 
The global battery market has expanded dramatically over the last decade [1]. Elec-
tric vehicles, wearable devices, the Internet of Things (IoT), and smart grids all 
necessitate more precisely tailored energy storage systems. Nowadays, the dominant 
technique is based on lithium-ion batteries (LIB) and conveniences with low costs, 
high voltages, and increasing power densities. The LIBs have become widely estab-
lished, resulting in the displacement of many other systems, and their discovery was 
recently honoured with the Nobel Prize in 2019. However, inorganic lithium tech-
nology has limitations. Because the batteries are stiff, bending would result in leaks 
and serious hazards [2]. Furthermore, the frequently required cobalt raw materials 
are toxic and extracted under unsustainable mining conditions, including the use of 
child laborers; as a result, global cobalt market prices have risen over the last decade 
[3]. Larger battery packs also necessitate temperature control systems to keep them 
in safe conditions; otherwise, serious dangers, such as explosions, can occur. As a 
result of these drawbacks, inorganic lithium electrodes are unsuitable for small and 
ﬂexible devices in smart clothing, smart packing, or other IoT devices, as well as 
resource-intensive applications like battery systems for grid stabilization and on-site 
storage. Based on organic raw materials, redox polymers represent a promising alter-
native approach for battery-active materials in these applications. They enable the 
production of ﬂexible devices that are largely independent of rare metal commodity 
prices and employ a variety of scaffolding options, making additional tailoring much 
easier. 
The concept of redox-active chains originates from early studies using ion 
exchange polymers. Lauth applied the concept of reversibly exchanging charged ions 
to exchanging electrons in 1944 when he synthesized his poly (resorcinol-trihydroxy 
benzene-formaldehyde) redox polymers for water deoxygenation. Nonetheless, he 
was not the ﬁrst to synthesize electroactive polymers; poly(aniline) can be traced 
back to 1862 [4]. The second era of redox polymers (Fig. 1) began in 1977 when 
Heeger, MacDiarmid, and Shirakawa demonstrated the high electric conductivity of 
oxidized polyacetylene. Overall, the second era was deﬁned by the fact that conju-
gated polymers, due to their novel redox properties, opened a new dynamic ﬁeld 
of research called organic electronics. The concept of an organic radical battery 
(ORB) was developed in the early twenty-ﬁrst century by Nakahara and Nishide, 
bringing the third era of redox polymers (Fig. 1), shows the timeline with the most 
net worthy inventions and scientiﬁc milestones in the ﬁeld of redox-active polymers 
[5]. The most promising organic battery materials are polymers with stable radical 
side groups. Metal ion batteries with Li [6–8], Na [9, 10], K [11], Mg [12], Ca [13], 
Zn [13], or Al [13] as well as metal-free all-organic batteries and even redox ﬂow 
batteries (RFBs) use redox-polymers [14, 15].
To achieve simple and effective cathode and anode material extraction, the redox-
active materials should ideally function as single-phase electrode materials, avoiding 
additional separation steps of additives and binders during the recycling process [16]. 
Furthermore, the materials must be highly soluble in solvents used for recycling,

Redox-Active Polymers for Batteries
279
Fig. 1 Timeline with the most net-worthy inventions and scientiﬁc milestones in the ﬁeld of redox-
active polymers. Adapted with permission [5], Copyright (2021), Elsevier
while remaining insoluble in the operating electrolyte. Redox-active conjugated poly-
mers are one type of material that is compatible with the proposed method. Recent 
advancements in their design have allowed for the creation of solution-processable 
redox-active polymers with balanced electronic/ionic transport properties. The func-
tionalization of conjugated polymers with ion-transporting side chains has led to 
novel applications as cathode and anode materials in energy storage devices that 
operate in organic or aqueous electrolytes [17]. Furthermore, the design of polymer 
side chains allows for solubility in organic solvents, facilitating solution processing 
during device fabrication. 
The current chapter primarily focuses on the redox-active polymers and their 
classiﬁcation or the concept of charge transfer in redox-active polymers in batteries 
and what function redox polymeric materials can serve within these batteries. 
2 
Redox-Active Polymers 
RAPs are macromolecules that contain chemical groups that can change their elec-
trochemical state reversibly by losing (oxidation) or gaining (reduction). They enable 
the co-immobilization of enzymes and redox mediators on the electrode surface. To 
that end, redox-active polymers oversee managing the transfer of ions and electrons 
generated when their redox-active units interact with substrates. They are softer than 
inorganic electrode materials and do not require ions to intercalate into the solid-state 
structure [18].

280
A. Vijayakumar Kumar et al.
2.1 
Classiﬁcation of Redox-Active Polymers 
RAPs are classiﬁed into two types based on their chemical structures: (1) redox-active 
group-embedded polymers, which include conjugated polymers (i.e., conductive 
polymers), and (2) redox-active pendant-bearing polymers. Polymers with redox-
active groups embedded in them have an electrochemically active backbone made 
up of redox-active monomers. Redox-active pendant-bearing polymers, on the other 
hand, have redox-active groups on their non-conductive polymer backbones, like 
a grafted polymer structure. They have different chemical and physical properties, 
redox reactions, and performances due to their different chemical structures. 
2.1.1
Redox-Active Group-Embedded Polymers 
Except for sulfur polymers, conjugated polymers are typical of redox-active 
group-embedded polymers. Dopant ions on the conjugated polymer backbone 
can provide good electrical conductivity in conjugated polymers with an alter-
native bonding structure of single and double bonds [19]. Particularly well-
known redox-active conductive polymers with high electrical conductivity are 
polyaniline (PANI), poly (3,4-methylenedioxy thiophene) (PEDOT), polythiophene 
(PT), poly (3,4-propylenedioxy thiophene) (PProDOT), PEDOT: poly (4-styrene 
sulfonate) (PEDOT: PSS), and polypyrrole (PPy). Furthermore, polyacetylene (PA), 
poly(indole) (PI), and poly(p-phenylene) (P-p-P) are conjugated redox-active poly-
mers. Doping and undoping cause redox reactions and the dopant ion depends on 
the polymer species. In contrast to other heterocyclic conductive polymers that are 
redox-active due to anionic dopants, PANI can be doped and undoped by cationic 
dopants [20]. The voltage of the resulting ESSs is not constant because the degree of 
doping varies during charging/discharging, which is a major issue for ESS applica-
tions. Sulfur polymer ESS applications have recently received a lot of attention due 
to their simple synthesis, low cost, suitability for large-scale production, and high 
capacitance. Sulfur polymers have sulfur-sulfur bonds (-S-Sn-S-) embedded on a 
non-conjugated polymer backbone, such as poly (sulfur-random-(1,3-di isopropenyl 
benzene)) (poly(S-r-DIB)), and they are highly redox-active and can be used for 
lithium- and sodium-sulfur batteries with high energy storage capability [21]. 
2.1.2
Redox-Active Pendant-Bearing Polymers 
The majority of redox-active group-embedded polymers have good electrical conduc-
tivity, and many of their derivatives can be used for ESSs. Their doping level can 
be changed during redox reactions (i.e., by doping or dedoping); however, some 
well-known conjugated polymers are insoluble, limiting processing options. As a 
result, the redox-active group-embedded polymers have drawbacks in some appli-
cations. More information on redox-active pendant-bearing polymer derivatives and

Redox-Active Polymers for Batteries
281
their energy storage capabilities can be found in the literature [22–24]. Like grafted 
structures, these polymers have redox-active functional groups on non-conjugated 
polymer backbones. To make the redox-active pendant-bearing polymers, ﬁrst, intro-
duce polymerizable functional groups into the redox-active pendant groups. The 
prepared monomers are then polymerized using a variety of polymerization methods, 
including polycondensation, oxidative polymerization, free-radical polymerization, 
and so on. Because these polymerization methods limit ﬁne control of molec-
ular weight with narrow dispersity of the redox-active pendant-bearing polymers, 
detailed studies on the effects of molecular weight and their precise electrochemical 
characterization have been rarely reported [25]. 
3 
Effects of Polymer Architecture on Cell Properties 
The term “back-bone RAP” will be used to further justify polymers that contain 
the redox-active moiety in the backbone. Like this, the term “side chain RAP” will 
be used to describe polymers that contain a redox-active moiety as a side chain. 
Aside from the incorporation of active material into the polymer, the architecture 
of the polymer itself is critical. The architecture, on the other hand, is primarily 
determined by how and how frequently branching points are integrated into the 
polymer. Another important factor inﬂuencing polymer properties is their composi-
tion and whether they are made up of one or more monomers. This can but does not 
have to have an impact on the structural architecture. Overall, the trend is towards 
simple structures that can be easily synthesized using well-established techniques. 
The improved performance of complex structures frequently outperforms their costs, 
which could stymie future potential commercialization. Conjugated polymers have 
been heralded as the active material for the next environmentally friendly battery 
generation since the groundbreaking work of Heeger, MacDiamid, and Shirakawa 
[26]. Their most notable feature is the conjugated nature of their polymeric backbone, 
which is made up of -conjugated repeating units. Although the intrinsic conductivity 
is low, charging increases it by several orders of magnitude due to the introduction 
of delocalized charges along the main chain (i.e., doping) [20]. This is possible due 
to the polymer backbone’s widely expanded system; however, the introduction of 
de-localized charges is also a signiﬁcant disadvantage. The redox moieties are elec-
trostatically inﬂuenced by each other due to the conjugated linkage. This produces 
a redox potential that is strongly dependent on the doping level, which varies with 
the state-of-charge (SOC) of the battery, resulting in a slope-like cell voltage (Fig. 2) 
[5].
Furthermore, the practically achievable doping levels (per monomeric unit) 
deviate signiﬁcantly from unity, with real values ranging from 0.3 to 0.5, resulting in 
signiﬁcantly lower capacities than would be theoretically possible for 100% doped 
materials [27]. Even though the doping is incomplete, the respective polymers repre-
sent highly charged species, resulting in a destabilized polymeric matrix that could 
cause unfavorable chain interactions or even chain destruction reactions, which is

282
A. Vijayakumar Kumar et al.
Fig. 2 The discharging behavior of batteries is compared schematically using conductive polymers 
(dashed line) and polymers with separated and isolated redox moieties (red solid line). Adapted 
with permission [5], Copyright (2021), Elsevier [5]
one disadvantage they share with most redox polymers that contain the active moiety 
in the backbone [28]. Higher charging levels are possible, and the typically desired 
plateau-like cell voltage is obtained over a wide SOC range (Fig. 2) if no interactions 
between the side chain moieties exist. Although sidechain polymers are preferred 
due to their superior electrochemical performance, the synthetic routes are frequently 
more difﬁcult or economically unfavorable. Furthermore, due to the lack of intrinsic 
conductivity, conductive additives are required in the battery to form a composite 
electrode. 
4 
Concepts of Electron Transfer in RAPs 
The dynamics of polymer solutions were ﬁrst presented in pioneering publications by 
Flory and Huggins, among others, in the 1940s [29]. These theories would serve as 
the foundation for a whole class of macromolecular chemistries. The voltammetry of 
low molecular weight (<16 u pper K upper D Subscript a) poly (vinyl ferrocene) in solution was presented 
for the ﬁrst time by Bard and Anson, who discovered that this system behaved 
similarly to its constituent monomer. This RAP exhibited a single oxidation wave 
with intensity proportional to an n-ferrocene center system. Because the ferrocene 
units were linked by an electronically insulating backbone, a single redox process 
was observed. Each pendant functioned as a separate ferrocene. Conjugated systems, 
on the other hand, exhibit electronic interactions that alter their redox potentials [26]. 
These pioneering studies opened the way for RAPs, but until 2012, there was little 
understanding of the role of polymer molecular weight and electrolyte dependencies 
on the electrochemical responses of soluble RAPs. Charge transport within RAPs

Redox-Active Polymers for Batteries
283
Fig. 3 Possible contributions of polymer dynamics to RAP electrochemical response. During all 
electrochemical measurements, there is an adsorbed polymer layer (1) that will mediate charge 
transfer to solution phase RAPs. Polyelectrolyte solution dynamics (2) of RAPs can change the 
conformation and orientation of the coil depending on the state of charge. Self-exchange of charges 
(3) and ionic interactions (4) modulate electrolysis rates of the particles. Adapted with permission 
[27], Copyright (2016), American Chemical Society 
and at the electrode/electrolyte interface is inﬂuenced by polymer dynamics that 
do not exist in monomer solutions or are less important in small polymers. Some 
of the most common high polymer characteristics of RAPs are depicted in (Fig. 3) 
[27]. Small redox shuttles, such as ferrocene, undergo simple outer sphere electron 
transfer reactions via electron tunneling at an electrode. With larger RAPs, however, 
electron transfer at the polymer/electrode interface is replaced by intraparticle charge 
transport. When an insulating backbone is used, the charge propagates pendant-to-
pendant via a charge diffusion process mediated by self-exchange reactions, i.e., 
charge hopping between neighboring redox species [27]. 
As illustrated in Fig. 3, charge transport via self-exchange becomes increasingly 
important for larger RAP structures. The DahmsRuff formalism is a widely used 
model for describing charge diffusion, upper D Subscript upper E, in a system of mixed redox centers 
shown in Eq. 1. In this case, the diffusion of charges within a RAP is related to the 
rate constant for self-exchange, up p er K Subscript upper E upper X, and a distance parameter, delta, which describes the 
separation of redox centers. This equation has been particularly useful for describing 
electron hopping rates in small molecule dimer systems and redox-active polymer 
ﬁlms. 
up er  D  Subscript upper E Baseline equals StartFraction upper K Subscript upper E upper X Baseline delta squared Over 6 EndFraction
up
per D Subscript upper E Baseline equals StartFraction upper K Subscript upper E upper X Baseline delta squared Over 6 EndFraction
However, when more degrees of structural freedom are introduced, as in the case of 
large RAPs, it is unclear whether this simple mathematical relationship is adequate 
to accurately describe charge hopping. The radius of gyration is well known to 
describe polymer size, but the distance between any two redox centers varies greatly 
depending on which chain segments are chosen. As a result, assigning the pendant 
separation distance parameter deltais ambiguous [30].

284
A. Vijayakumar Kumar et al.
Synthetic control and systematic RAP studies are assisting in closing the knowl-
edge gap in the cut-off boundary that distinguishes small and large redox systems. 
This is signiﬁcant because the redox properties of monomers do not always 
scale linearly in polymer form. The redox mediator N, N, N', N'-tetramethyl-p-
phenylenediamine (TMPD), for example, is highly inaccessible to charge transfer in 
polymer form [31]. 
5 
Redox- Active Polymers for Batteries 
One of the most promising systems for large-scale electrochemical energy storage 
applications is the RFB. The creation of redox-active materials is a critical compo-
nent of RFB research. Commercial RFBs use redox-active inorganic ions, which 
have various drawbacks, including expensive and hazardous active materials, redox 
species crossover, and the high expense of the ion exchange membrane. Incorpo-
rating redox-active polymeric materials is an intriguing solution because low-cost 
polymeric redox-active materials and size-exclusion porous membranes formed by 
commodity polymers could be used to replace expensive inorganic redox-active mate-
rials and ion exchange membranes. Polymer-based redox-active materials in RFB 
applications (PRFB) have improved considerably in recent years [32]. 
5.1 
Development of Polymer-Based Aqueous RFB 
During the investigation of electrically conducting polymers, the ﬁrst concept of a 
water-soluble redox-active polymer was published. Heeger synthesized and studied 
a thiophene-based polymer with a sulfonate functional group in 1987. This polymer 
is soluble in concentrated sulfuric acid and has a bulky conductivity of 10–7 to 10–2 
S/cm [33]. 
Using classical radical polymerization, the Schubert group developed and 
synthesized a 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidiny-1-oxyl (TEMPO)-based copolymer 
for catholyte and a viologen-based copolymer for anolyte (Fig. 4) Because 
TEMPO is insoluble in water, the polymer was created by copolymerizing 
2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidin-4-yl-methacrylate with the water-soluble monomer [2-
(methacryloyloxy)- ethyl] trimethylammonium chloride. To convert the 2,2,6,6-
tetramethylpiperidin group to TEMPO, the polymer (poly- (TEMPO-co-METAC)s) 
was treated with an oxidant. Because of the nonconjugated structure, the resultant 
polymer (Mw = 33,700 g/mol, polydispersity (PDI) = 1.7) is water soluble and has 
a similar redox potential as TEMPO monomer (0.64 vs Ag/AgCl) [34]. The viologen 
copolymer was created by copolymerizing styrene-based monomers and then quater-
nizing them with N-methyl-4,4-bipyridinium chloride (Fig. 4). The pendant group of 
the viologen copolymer (Mw = 73,400 g/mol, PDI = 2.4) is similar to that of methyl 
viologen (MV), which is very water-soluble. It is worth noting that the electrolytes

Redox-Active Polymers for Batteries
285
Fig. 4 Synthesis of poly (TEMPO-co-METAC) (P1) and poly (viologen) (P2) copolymers. Adapted 
with permission [34], Copyright (2015), Springer Nature 
generated by both polymers exhibit Newtonian behavior, with viscosities of around 
17 and 5 mPa.s, respectively (at the speciﬁc capacity of 10 Ah/L). In those elec-
trolytes, no shear thickening behavior was seen, which would increase the expense 
of ﬂow cell maintenance. 
To test the battery cyclability and membrane permeability, a PRFB cell made of 
poly (TEMPO-co-METAC) and poly(viologen) was developed. The cell was manu-
factured in the same way as all organic-RFBs, except that the ion exchange membrane 
was replaced by a size-exclusion membrane with an MWCO of 6000 g/mol (Fig. 5a 
and b). This ﬁrst aqueous PRFB system was run in neutral (pH ~ 7) settings with 
sodium chloride solution as the supporting electrolyte. The PRFB’s capacity may be 
8.2 Ah/L with 82% material utilization at a current density of 40 mA/cm2, equivalent 
to an energy density of 8 Wh/l. After 100 cycles, the long-term cycling test demon-
strated a 75% capacity retention, which is equivalent to the results of small molecule 
cells with ion exchange membranes. By using an anion exchange membrane, poly 
(TEMPO-co-METAC) was coupled with small molecule MV to construct a semi-
PRFB system (Fig. 5c and d) The battery was stable for the ﬁrst 100 cycles but 
declined dramatically after that. The conclusion is that the capacity loss was caused 
by osmotic pressure between the catholyte and anolyte.
Water molecules were found to migrate from polymer-based catholyte to MV-
based anolyte, resulting in polymer material precipitation after approximately 100 
cycles [35]. 
Another semi-PRFB study used poly (TEMPO-co-METAC) as the catholyte and 
zinc salt as the anolyte. The anode was zinc foil, and the electrolyte was a mixed 
electrolyte of 0.71 M NaCl, 0.08 M ZnCl2, and 0.08 M NH4Cl which served as

286
A. Vijayakumar Kumar et al.
Fig. 5 a Schematic representation of all-polymer redox ﬂow battery based on poly (TEMPO-
co-METAC) and poly(viologen). b Cycle test of an all-polymer redox ﬂow battery. c Schematic 
representation of poly (TEMPO-co-METAC)/MV redox ﬂow battery. d Cycle test of poly (TEMPO-
co-METAC)/MV redox ﬂow battery. Figure a, b; Adapted with permission [34], Copyright (2015) 
Springer Nature. Figure c, d; Adapted with permission [38], Copyright (2017), Elsevier. Distributed 
under a Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 (CC BY 4.0)
both an anolyte and supporting electrolyte. The cell voltage might reach 1.69 V 
due to the high potential of zinc chloride. Long-term cycling (1000 cycles) in a 
static cell was demonstrated, with relatively constant capacity retention (78.6%). 
The current densities in those trials, however, were quite low (between 220 mA/cm2) 
[36]. The low current density was caused by the electrolyte’s poor ionic conductivity 
(60 mS/cm), which is approximately one order of magnitude lower than that of 
1 M H2SO4 (390 mS/cm). The scientists also created a new TEMPO copolymer 
(poly (TEMPO-co-PEGMA)s) by substituting an amphiphilic polyethylene glycol 
comonomer for the cationic comonomer. The poly (TEMPO-co-PEGMA)s/Zn ﬂow 
cell (electrolyte and anolyte: 1.0 M ZnCl2 and 1.0 M NH4Cl) performed similarly to 
the poly(TEMPO-co-METAC)s/Zn cell but with a slightly higher energy density of 
4.1 Wh/L. 
A recent study described a novel method for increasing the solubility and ionic 
conductivity of polymeric redox-active compounds [37]. Because the zwitterionic 
group has both positive and negative charge centers on one unit, it has an extremely 
high solubility in an aqueous solution. The zwitterionic poly (TEMPO) copolymer 
has a solubility of more than 20 Ah/L, which is the highest value reported for all-
polymeric redox-active materials in an aqueous medium. The materials’ oxidation

Redox-Active Polymers for Batteries
287
degree is >98%, which is among the highest values reported in aqueous polymeric 
redox-active materials. Furthermore, the zwitterionic poly (TEMPO) copolymer had 
a viscosity of 4.59 mPas. and a speciﬁc capacity of 10 Ah/L at 20 °C, which was much 
lower than the cationic poly (TEMPO-co-METAC) copolymer. The cell comprising 
zwitterionic poly- (TEMPO) and MV was tested and found to be stable in the ﬁrst 
100 cycles [38]. 
5.2 
Development of Polymer-Based Nonaqueous RFB 
The non-aqueous method has been researched to improve the energy density of ﬂow 
batteries with organic active species because it provides for a large electrochemical 
window. Since the initial publication of a nonaqueous RFB system with ruthenium 
bipyridine in 1988, various metal complexes have been shown to be redox-active 
species in nonaqueous electrolytes. However, due to the low ionic conductivity of 
IEMs in nonaqueous RFB systems, the power density of nonaqueous RFBs is often 
lower than that of aquatic RFBs [39]. The majority of reported nonaqueous RFBs 
utilized anion exchange membranes with ionic conductivities in the supporting elec-
trolyte ranging between 0.2 and 0.5 mS/cm, which is nearly an order of magnitude 
lower than the ionic conductivity of Naﬁon in an aqueous system. 
In nonaqueous RFBs, where a porous membrane paired with a liquid-supporting 
electrolyte could give increased ionic conductivity, macromolecule-based redox-
active materials take advantage of their huge molecular size [40]. Computer simula-
tion reveals that polymer/oligomer-based redox-active materials and size-exclusion 
porous membranes can minimize the crossover to less than 3 µmol/cm2/day, which 
meets the battery industry’s crossover standards. Many polymers were explored 
in nonaqueous RFB, including TEMPO-based polymer, viologen-based polymer, 
ferrocene-based polymer, and poly (ionic liquid). 
5.2.1
TEMPO-Based Polymers 
Organic radical polymers have been extensively studied in polymer batteries 
throughout the last few decades. TEMPO was also examined for nonaqueous 
PRFB as a stable radical. Poly(norbornene)-g-poly(4-methacryloyloxy-2,2,6,6-
tetramethylpiperidin-1-oxyl) (PNB-g-PTMA) was initially synthesized and tested 
in a nonaqueous ﬂow battery in 2014. Figure 6a and b depict the synthesis of PNB-g-
PTMA: ﬁrst, the branch chains containing TEMPO units were polymerized via live 
anionic polymerization, and then the main chain was polymerized by ring-opening 
metathesis polymerization (ROMP). PNB-g-PTMA produced a high yield (over 94% 
for anionic polymerization and over 98% for ROMP), and the polymer had a high 
molecular weight (Mn = 2.2 105 g/mol) and narrow PDI (1.2) [42]. Furthermore, 
the polymer can have a high radical concentration (95% for each unit) using this 
“grafting through” process. At 0.80 V (versus Ag/AgCl), a steady redox reaction

288
A. Vijayakumar Kumar et al.
Fig. 6 a, b Synthesis scheme of PNB-g-PTMA. c Half-cell ﬂow cell architecture for testing PNB-
g-PTMA. d Charge/discharge proﬁles of PNB-g-PTMA half-cell. Adapted with permission [42], 
Copyright (2014), American Chemical Society
of TEMPO/TEMPO+ was observed in 0.1 M (n-C4H9)4NClO4/CH3CN supporting 
electrolyte. The authors demonstrated a half-cell ﬂow cell with 0.1 M PNB-g-PTMA 
in 0.1 M (n-C4H9)4NClO4 in ethylene carbonate/diethyl carbonate (1/1 in v/v) that 
supplied 95% of theoretical capacity (Fig. 6c and d) [41]. 

Redox-Active Polymers for Batteries
289
5.2.2
Viologen and Ferrocene-Based Polymers 
The groups of Moore and Rodriguez-Lopez explored the viologen-based redox-
active polymer in nonaqueous RFB. Poly-(vinylbenzylethyl viologen) with regulated 
molecular weights ranging from 21 to 318 u pper K upper D Subscript a was synthesized to investigate the 
effect of molecular weight on electrochemical characteristics and transport behavior 
over porous membranes. The viologen-based polymers were created by synthesizing 
the precursor polymer poly (vinylbenzyl chloride) with a certain molecular weight. 
To achieve ammonium hexaﬂuorophosphate salt form, post-polymerization quater-
nization, and ion exchange processes were utilized. The polymer has good solubility 
in aprotic solvents such as acetonitrile and propylene carbonate, as well as a quick 
redox reaction at 0.7 V (versus Ag/Ag+) [43]. 
Furthermore,
in
controlled
potential
bulk
electrolysis
studies,
poly-
(vinylbenzylethyl viologen) with varied molecular weights all showed high 
charge accessibility (9499%). To assess the separation effectiveness of polymers 
with varying molecular weights, commercially available porous separators (Celgard 
2400 and Celgard 2325) were utilized. The results showed a signiﬁcant relationship 
between molecular weight and rejection rate across the membrane. The crossover 
rate of polymers with high molecular weight was 70 times lower than that of 
charge-balancing ions (Li+BF4−). It is concluded that porous membranes may 
effectively block the viologen-based polymer with a high molecular weight [44]. 
In subsequent work, the same group created polymers with two viologen groups 
on each styrene unit in ortho or meta orientations. Although the new polymers 
increased the density of redox-active centers in the polymer, only the polymer with 
two viologen groups on the meta position demonstrated faster redox kinetics than 
poly (vinylbenzylethyl viologen). Other research groups have reported viologen-
based nonaqueous polymers; however, no ﬂow cell studies were included in the 
publication. 
The
ﬁrst
ferrocene-based
soluble
polymer
was
synthesized
in
the 
1950s.Poly(vinylferrocene) is commercially available but has a low solubility. 
Polymer-based RFB research recently disclosed a new ferrocene-based polymer 
poly (vinylbenzyl aminomethyl) ferrocene (PAF). By quaternization and ion 
exchange processes, PAF was synthesized from commercial poly- (vinylbenzyl 
chloride). The polymer was soluble in organic electrolytes such as 0.1 M LiBF4 
in acetonitrile and had a molecular weight of 271 kDa (Mn). To conﬁrm the 
size-exclusion efﬁcacy of nonaqueous RFBs, the viologen-based polymer was 
combined with a ferrocene-based polymer The separators in the testing were an 
ion-exchange membrane (Fumasep) and two distinct porous membranes (Celgard 
2325 and Daramic 175) [45]. To produce reference cells with IEM or porous 
membranes, monomers of benzyl-ethyl viologen and benzyl(ferrocenylmethyl)-
dimethylammonium were utilized. The battery with the porous membrane demon-
strated greater conductivity and energy efﬁciency for polymer-based RFBs, with 
Coulombic efﬁciency exceeding 98% and capacity utilization over 80%. When the 
size-exclusion membrane was applied on viologen and ferrocene monomer-based 
cells, the crossover of redox-active components was severe [36]. Furthermore,

290
A. Vijayakumar Kumar et al.
self-discharge studies demonstrated that polymer-based RFBs were stable, whereas 
monomer-based cells showed a large voltage loss, indicating a quick self-discharge. 
The study found that combining a size-exclusion barrier with polymeric redox-active 
materials could give a low-cost solution for nonaqueous RFBs. 
5.2.3
Other Polymeric Materials for Nonaqueous RFB 
Other RAPs have been reported as redox-active materials in nonaqueous 
RFB,
including
dicyanoanthraquinone
diamine-containing
polymer 
(poly(DCAQI)),phthalimide-containing
polymer,
cyclopropenium-containing 
polymer, poly(para-nitrostyrene), and boron-dipyrromethene (BODIPY)-based 
polymers, BODIPY derivatives in those polymers demonstrated a unique character-
istic with two reversible redox reactions on one molecule.108 Poly(BODIPY-co-
TEGSt) and poly(BODIPY-co-TASt) revealed two reversible redox peaks at 1.5 and 
0.7 V versus Ag/Ag+, respectively. (TEMPO-co-PEGMA) with a size-exclusion 
membrane (MWCO = 1000 g/mol) [46]. The cell demonstrated a high discharge 
voltage of 1.82 V as well as a high Coulombic efﬁciency of 99%. After 100 cycles, 
the capacity fading was 70%. BODIPY derivatives can be utilized as both a catholyte 
and an anolyte due to the presence of two redox peaks. The all-BODIPY static cell 
was built and tested with a size-exclusion membrane and a supporting electrolyte of 
0.5 M Bu4NClO4 in propylene carbonate. The cell had a charging plateau at 2.06 V 
but no discernible discharging plateau. The ﬁrst 10 cycles showed a signiﬁcant drop 
in capacity, while the following 90 cycles were very steady [47]. 
5.2.4
Oligomer-Based Nonaqueous RFB 
The size exclusion technique is applicable to both macromolecules and oligomers 
with signiﬁcant molecular sizes. Recently, oligomer-based RFBs with porous 
membranes were reported (Fig. 7a). In research published in 2018, a series 
of tris(dialkylamino)cyclopropenium-based (CP-based) oligomeric catholyte with 
acetonitrile solubility of 0.1- 0.3 M was synthesized. The investigation concentrated 
on the effect of chain length between two CP groups on electrochemical stability and 
redox potential [48]. It was determined that a four-carbon linker length was required 
to sustain the reversible and steady redox behavior at 0.87 V (versus Fc/Fc+). After 
6 days of cycling, no crossover of CP tetramers was identiﬁed during the charging and 
discharging test for a proof-of-concept battery utilizing the tetramer and PIM (poly-
mers of intrinsic microporosity) membrane. The cell with tetramers performed better 
than the cell with monomers (Fig. 7b). These tests demonstrated that the oligomers 
could be used in RFBs with size-exclusion membranes. The creation of oligomer-
based materials has the potential to improve redox-active materials’ solubility and 
electrochemical stability [49].

Redox-Active Polymers for Batteries
291
Fig. 7 a Oligomer structures reported for nonaqueous organic RFB. Adapted with permission 
[48], Copyright (2018), American Chemical Society. b RFB cycle results with cyclopropenium-
based tetramer and monomer. Adapted with permission [49], Copyright (2018), American Chemical 
Society 
5.3 
Polymer Suspension-Based RFB 
Polymer-based electrolytes enable the use of porous membranes in RFBs, which has 
the potential for cost savings and increased ionic conductivity. However, because 
polymeric molecules are often less soluble than their equivalent monomers, the PRFB 
has a low speciﬁc capacity and energy density. While highly soluble polymeric redox-
active materials manufacture remains difﬁcult, polymer-based RFBs based on redox-
active colloids or suspensions have appeared in recent years [50]. A ﬂow cell was 
constructed using polythiophene microparticles as both anolyte and catholyte. The 
supporting electrolyte was 1 M TEABF4 (tetraethylammonium tetraﬂuoroborate) 
in propylene carbonate, and carbon black was suspended in the electrolyte as a 
conductivity-enhancing powder. The separator in the cell was an anion-exchange 
membrane. At a current density of 0.5 mA/cm2, the cell used 34.5% of its potential 
capacity, according to testing data. The poor conductivity of neutral polythiophene, 
which is around 10–10 and 10–5 S/cm, which is substantially lower than that of 
doped polythiophene (1 to 104 S/cm), could be one cause for the low utilization of 
redox-active materials. 
In a nonaqueous RFB system, Schubert’s group examined polymer colloidal-
based redox-active materials. In organic solvent, the block copolymer generated core-
corona micelle structures. DLS measurements revealed that the polymer particles’ 
hydrodynamic radius was roughly 40 nm. The polymer particles were utilized as

292
A. Vijayakumar Kumar et al.
a catholyte with 0.5 M Zn (ClO4)2.6H2O as an anolyte and supporting electrolyte 
in EC/DMC/DEC (v:v:v = 1:1:1) [39]. The catholyte solubility was 13 mg/mL, 
which corresponded to 1.2 Ah/L. The RFB cell with a size-exclusion membrane 
demonstrated good nonﬂow stability (capacity retention of 95% after 1000 cycles). 
Under low current (0.2 mA/cm2), materials utilization was 93%, but capacity declined 
quickly with higher current. 
6 
Conclusions 
The current state of research, particularly in the ﬁeld of secondary batteries, places 
the commercialization of new environmentally friendly and potentially metal-free 
batteries within reach. RAPs play an important role in these concepts because they 
represent a smart way of addressing many consumers’ environmental concerns (e.g., 
material sources or recycling) while still combining cheap and easy synthetic path-
ways for industrial-scale production. However, some critical issues, such as the 
intrinsic stability of active materials or the ability to retain the applied charge over 
time, frequently go unaddressed. The use of solid additives in electrolytes promises 
signiﬁcantly increased energy densities in the near future, exceeding the known 
benchmarks for these systems and boosting their competitiveness among known 
battery technologies. When it comes to the use of polymeric materials in energy 
storage, they are currently almost exclusively the pure carrier of redox moieties. 
Polymers have gained particular interest in the context of stimuli-responsive mate-
rials / smart materials in recent years, enabling a wide range of potential applications, 
such as soft robotics or sensors. As a result, we anticipate that other polymer proper-
ties/functionalities and stimuli-responsive behavior will ﬁnd their way into the ﬁeld 
of polymers for electrical energy storage. 
References 
1. J. Figgener, P. Stenzel, K. P. Kairies, J. Linßen, D. Haberschusz, O. Wessels, ... D. U. Sauer, 
The development of stationary battery storage systems in Germany–A market review. J. Ener. 
Stor. 29, 101153 (2020) 
2. K. Liu, Y. Liu, D. Lin, A. Pei, Y. Cui, Materials for lithium-ion battery safety. Sci. Adv. 4(6), 
eaas9820 (2018) 
3. C. Banza Lubaba Nkulu, L. Casas, V. Haufroid, T. De Putter, N. D. Saenen, T. Kayembe-
Kitenge, ... B. Nemery, Sustainability of artisanal mining of cobalt in DR Congo. Nat. Sustain. 
1(9), 495-504 (2018) 
4. H. Letheby, XXIX.—On the production of a blue substance by the electrolysis of sulphate of 
aniline. J. Chem. Soc. 15, 161–163 (1862) 
5. P. Rohland, E. Schröter, O. Nolte, G.R. Newkome, M.D. Hager, U.S. Schubert, Redox-active 
polymers: the magic key towards energy storage–a polymer design guideline progress in 
polymer science. Prog. Polym. Sci. 125, 101474 (2022)

Redox-Active Polymers for Batteries
293
6. S. Muench, A. Wild, C. Friebe, B. Haupler, T. Janoschka, U.S. Schubert, Polymer-based organic 
batteries. Chem. Rev. 116(16), 9438–9484 (2016) 
7. R. Chen, D. Bresser, M. Saraf, P. Gerlach, A. Balducci, S. Kunz, ... J. Chen, A compara-
tive review of electrolytes for organic-material-based energy-storage devices employing solid 
electrodes and redox ﬂuids. Chem. Sus. Chem. 13(9), 2205-2219 (2020) 
8. Y. Liang, Z. Tao, J. Chen, Organic electrode materials for rechargeable lithium batteries. Adv. 
Energy Mater. 2(7), 742–769 (2012) 
9. Q. Zhao, Lu., Yong, J. Chen, Advanced organic electrode materials for rechargeable sodium-ion 
batteries. Adv. Energy Mater. 7(8), 1601792 (2017) 
10. Y. Lu, Q. Zhang, L. Li, Z. Niu, J. Chen, Design strategies toward enhancing the performance 
of organic electrode materials in metal-ion batteries. Chem 4(12), 2786–2813 (2018) 
11. J.C. Pramudita, D. Sehrawat, D. Goonetilleke, N. Sharma, An initial review of the status of 
electrode materials for potassium-ion batteries. Adv. Energy Mater. 7(24), 1602911 (2017) 
12. L. Chen, J.L. Bao, X. Dong, D.G. Truhlar, Y. Wang, C. Wang, Y. Xia, Aqueous Mg-ion battery 
based on polyimide anode and prussian blue cathode. ACS Energy Lett. 2(5), 1115–1121 (2017) 
13. J. Xie, Q. Zhang, Recent progress in multivalent metal (Mg, Zn, Ca, and Al) and metal-ion 
rechargeable batteries with organic materials as promising electrodes. Small 15(15), 1805061 
(2019) 
14. K. Koshika, N. Chikushi, N. Sano, K. Oyaizu, H. Nishide, A TEMPO-substituted polyacry-
lamide as a new cathode material: an organic rechargeable device composed of polymer 
electrodes and aqueous electrolyte. Green Chem. 12(9), 1573–1575 (2010) 
15. S. Behzadi, M. Gallei, J. Elbert, M. Appold, G. Glasser, K. Landfester, D. Crespy, A triblock 
terpolymer vs. blends of diblock copolymers for nanocapsules addressed by three independent 
stimuli. Poly. Chem. 7(20), 3434–3443 (2016) 
16. D.H.S. Tan, Xu., Panpan, Z. Chen, Enabling sustainable critical materials for battery storage 
through efﬁcient recycling and improved design: a perspective. MRS Ener. Sustain. 7, E27  
(2020) 
17. D. Moia, A. Giovannitti, A. A. Szumska, I. P. Maria, E. Rezasoltani, .M. Sachs, ... & J. Nelson, 
Design and evaluation of conjugated polymers with polar side chains as electrode materials for 
electrochemical energy storage in aqueous electrolytes. Ener. Environm. Sci. 12(4), 1349-1357 
(2019) 
18. A. Ruff, Redox polymers in bioelectrochemistry: Common playgrounds and novel concepts. 
Curr. Opin. Electrochem. 5(1), 66–73 (2017) 
19. J. Kim, J. You, E. Kim, Flexible conductive polymer patterns from vapor polymerizable and 
photo-cross-linkable EDOT. Macromolecules 43(5), 2322–2327 (2010) 
20. S. Bhadra, D. Khastgir, N.K. Singha, J.H. Lee, Progress in preparation, processing and 
applications of polyaniline. Prog. Polym. Sci. 34(8), 783–810 (2009) 
21. J.J. Griebel, R.S. Glass, K. Char, J. Pyun, Polymerizations with elemental sulfur: a novel route 
to high sulfur content polymers for sustainability, energy and defense. Prog. Polym. Sci. 58, 
90–125 (2016) 
22. T.B. Schon, B.T. McAllister, P.F. Li, D.S. Seferos, The rise of organic electrode materials for 
energy storage. Chem. Soc. Rev. 45(22), 6345–6404 (2016) 
23. M. Miroshnikov, K.P. Divya, G. Babu, A. Meiyazhagan, L.M.R. Arava, P.M. Ajayan, G. John, 
Power from nature: designing green battery materials from electroactive quinone derivatives 
and organic polymers. J. Mater. Chem. A 4(32), 12370–12386 (2016) 
24. R. Gracia, D. Mecerreyes, Polymers with redox properties: materials for batteries, biosensors 
and more. Polym. Chem. 4(7), 2206–2214 (2013) 
25. Di Lena, Fabio, Krzysztof Matyjaszewski, Transition metal catalysts for controlled radical 
polymerization. Progr. Polym. Sci. 35.8, 959-1021 (2010) 
26. H. Shirakawa, E.J. Louis, A.G. MacDiarmid, C.K. Chiang, A.J. Heeger, Synthesis of electrically 
conducting organic polymers: halogen derivatives of polyacetylene, (CH) x. J. Chem. Soc. 
Chem. Commun. 16, 578–580 (1977) 
27. M. Burgess, J.S. Moore, J. Rodríguez-López, Redox active polymers as soluble nanomaterials 
for energy storage. Acc. Chem. Res. 49(11), 2649–2657 (2016)

294
A. Vijayakumar Kumar et al.
28. J. Flory, Paul, Thermodynamics of high polymer solutions. J. Chem. Phys. 9.8, 660–660 (1941) 
29. C. LeVanda, K. Bechgaard, D.O. Cowan, M.D. Rausch, Intervalence transfer in substituted 
biferrocene cations. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 99(9), 2964–2968 (1977) 
30. A.J. Bard, A life in electrochemistry. Annu. Rev. Anal. Chem. 7, 1–21 (2014) 
31. S. Conte, G.G. Rodríguez-Calero, S.E. Burkhardt, M.A. Lowe, H.D. Abruña, Designing 
conducting polymer ﬁlms for electrochemical energy storage technologies. RSC Adv. 3(6), 
1957–1964 (2013) 
32. Y.Y. Lai, X. Li, Y. Zhu, Polymeric active materials for redox ﬂow battery application. ACS 
Appl. Poly. Mater. 2(2), 113–128 (2020) 
33. Z.J. Liu, L.B. Kong, Y.H. Zhou, C.M. Zhan, Polyanthra [1, 9, 8-b, c, d, e] [4, 10, 5-b, c, d, e] 
bis- [1, 6, 6a (6a-S) trithia] pentalene-active material for cathode of lithium secondary battery 
with unusually high speciﬁc capacity. J. Power. Sources 161(2), 1302–1306 (2006) 
34. T. Janoschka, N. Martin, M.D. Hager, U.S. Schubert, An aqueous redox-ﬂow battery with high 
capacity and power: the TEMPTMA/MV system. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 55(46), 14427–14430 
(2016) 
35. T. Liu, X. Wei, Z. Nie, V. Sprenkle, W. Wang, A total organic aqueous redox ﬂow battery 
employing a low cost and sustainable methyl viologen anolyte and 4-HO-TEMPO catholyte. 
Adv. Energy Mater. 6(3), 1501449 (2016) 
36. Y. Ding, C. Zhang, L. Zhang, Y. Zhou, G. Yu, Molecular engineering of organic electroactive 
materials for redox ﬂow batteries. Chem. Soc. Rev. 47(1), 69–103 (2018) 
37. J. Winsberg, T. Janoschka, S. Morgenstern, T. Hagemann, S. Muench, G. Hauffman, J.-F. Gohy, 
M.D. Hager, U.S. Schubert, Poly (TEMPO)/zinc hybrid-ﬂow battery: a novel, “green”, high 
voltage, and safe energy storage system. Adv. Mater. 28(11), 2238–2243 (2016) 
38. T. Hagemann, J. Winsberg, M. Grube, I. Nischang, T. Janoschka, N. Martin, M.D. 
Hager, U.S. Schubert, An aqueous all-organic redox-ﬂow battery employing a (2, 2, 6, 
6-tetramethylpiperidin-1-yl) oxyl-containing polymer as catholyte and dimethyl viologen 
dichloride as anolyte. J. Power. Sources 378, 546–554 (2018) 
39. P.J. Cappillino, H.D. Pratt III., N.S. Hudak, N.C. Tomson, T.M. Anderson, M.R. Anstey, Appli-
cation of redox non-innocent ligands to non-aqueous ﬂow battery electrolytes. Adv. Energy 
Mater. 4(1), 1300566 (2014) 
40. S.E. Doris, A.L. Ward,  A.  Baskin, P.D. Frischmann,  N.  Gavvalapalli, E. Chénard, C.S.  Sevov,  D.  
Prendergast, J.S. Moore, B.A. Helms, Macromolecular design strategies for preventing active-
material crossover in non-aqueous all-organic redox-ﬂow batteries. Angew. Chem. 129(6), 
1617–1621 (2017) 
41. E.C. Montoto, G. Nagarjuna, J.S. Moore, J. Rodríguez-López, Redox active polymers for non-
aqueous redox ﬂow batteries: validation of the size-exclusion approach. J. Electrochem. Soc. 
164(7), A1688 (2017) 
42. T. Sukegawa, I. Masuko, K. Oyaizu, H. Nishide, Expanding the dimensionality of polymers 
populated with organic robust radicals toward ﬂow cell application: synthesis of TEMPO-
crowded bottlebrush polymers using anionic polymerization and ROMP. Macromolecules 
47(24), 8611–8617 (2014) 
43. G. Nagarjuna, J. Hui, K.J. Cheng, T. Lichtenstein, M. Shen, J.S. Moore, J. Rodríguez-
López, Impact of redox-active polymer molecular weight on the electrochemical properties 
and transport across porous separators in nonaqueous solvents. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 136(46), 
16309–16316 (2014) 
44. M. Burgess, E. Chénard, K. Hernández-Burgos, G. Nagarjuna, R.S. Assary, J. Hui, J.S. Moore, 
J. Rodríguez-López, Impact of backbone tether length and structure on the electrochemical 
performance of viologen redox active polymers. Chem. Mater. 28(20), 7362–7374 (2016) 
45. Y. H., Chen, M. Fernandez-Refojo, H. G. Cassidy, Electron exchange polymers. XII. Poten-
tiometric titration of dicyclopentadienyliron (“ferrocene”) and some derivatives. J. Poly. Sci. 
40(137), 433–441 (1959) 
46. J. Winsberg, S. Benndorf, A. Wild, M.D. Hager, U.S. Schubert, Synthesis and characterization 
of a phthalimide-containing redox-active polymer for high-voltage polymer-based redox-ﬂow 
batteries. Macromol. Chem. Phys. 219(4), 1700267 (2018)

Redox-Active Polymers for Batteries
295
47. J. Winsberg, T. Hagemann, S. Muench, C. Friebe, B. Häupler, T. Janoschka, S. Morgenstern, 
M.D. Hager, U.S. Schubert, Poly (boron-dipyrromethene) A redox-active polymer class for 
polymer redox-ﬂow batteries. Chem. Mater. 28(10), 3401–3405 (2016) 
48. K.H. Hendriks, S.G. Robinson, M.N. Braten, C.S. Sevov, B.A. Helms, M.S. Sigman, S.D. 
Minteer, M.S. Sanford, High-performance oligomeric catholytes for effective macromolecular 
separation in nonaqueous redox ﬂow batteries. ACS Cent. Sci. 4(2), 189–196 (2018) 
49. M.J. Baran, M.N. Braten, E.C. Montoto, Z.T. Gossage, L. Ma, E. Chénard, J.S. Moore, 
J. Rodríguez-López, B.A. Helms, Designing redox-active oligomers for crossover-free, 
nonaqueous redox-ﬂow batteries with high volumetric energy density. Chem. Mater. 30(11), 
3861–3866 (2018) 
50. C. Montoto, Elena, Gavvalapalli Nagarjuna, Jingshu Hui, Mark Burgess, M. Nina Sekerak, 
Kenneth Hernández-Burgos, Teng-Sing Wei, Redox active colloids as discrete energy storage 
carriers. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 138(40), 13230–13237 (2016)

Carbon-Based Pseudocapacitive 
Materials for Next Generation Batteries 
B. Jeevanantham and M. K. Shobana 
Abstract Sodium and potassium-ion batteries have been hampered by their low rates 
and capacities, making them less desirable as electrical energy storage devices at low 
prices. Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) are the preferred electrochemical energy storage 
technology for portable devices, electric vehicles, and grid storage. Despite this, LIBs 
are not being developed further due to their lack of fast charging technology, low 
energy density, and safety concerns. Utilizing carbon substrates as composite elec-
trodes is one of the most widely used strategies for improving their electrochemical 
performance. Metal oxides and metal sulﬁde materials also possess a low working 
potential and the highest practical reversible capacity compared with commercialized 
graphite. Thus, combining a carbon-based material with a metal oxide/sulﬁde-based 
material will result in excellent electrical conductivity and reactivity, high theoretical 
capacity, ﬂexibility, and remarkable tensile strength. In this chapter, carbon materials 
with metal oxides/sulﬁdes are discussed in detail based on their structure–property 
interactions and the different electrochemical mechanisms driving their behavior to 
discuss the possibilities and challenges of post-battery technologies. 
Keywords Lithium-ion batteries · Carbon-based materials · Metal oxides/ 
sulﬁdes · Carbon–metal oxide/sulﬁde composites 
1 
Introduction 
Our global energy consumption has been dramatically increased by the rapidly 
growing economy and population. The sustainability of energy supplies has been 
gaining attention worldwide due to the rapid depletion of fossil fuels. Modern society 
also requires mature energy storage systems because of hybrid electric vehicles and 
portable electronics. Batteries, supercapacitors, and fuel cells are gradually being 
investigated as initial energy storage devices [1, 2]. Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs)
B. Jeevanantham · M. K. Shobana envelope symbol 
Department of Physics, School of Advanced Sciences, Vellore Institute of Technology, 
Vellore 632014, Tamil Nadu, India 
e-mail: shobana.mk@vit.ac.in 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
R. K. Gupta (ed.), Pseudocapacitors, Engineering Materials, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45430-1_16 
297

298
B. Jeevanantham and M. K. Shobana
have received rapid development in renewable energy sources and electric vehi-
cles. Despite this progress, electric vehicles face several technical obstacles, such as 
mileage anxiety, low charging efﬁciency, time-consuming charging, safety concerns, 
and low energy density. To address these challenges, several efforts have been made, 
including the development of high-power cathodes and anodes, advanced separa-
tors, and safe electrolytes. Moreover, many efforts have been made to develop cath-
odes that are thermally stable and have long cycle lives, such as polyanion-based 
compounds and layered transition metal oxides [3]. But the anode materials are still 
challenging. Therefore, ﬁnding a feasible anode material could enable a signiﬁcant 
breakthrough for rechargeable batteries. 
Graphite and non-graphite carbon are carbon-based materials that have the advan-
tages of widespread raw materials, chemical stability, low cost, and thermal stability. 
They can act not only as anodes for LIBs but also as additives for other anodes. Carbon 
materials play a crucial role in electrode material fabrication owing to their large 
surface area, high electrical conductivity, and natural ability to self-expand. Nanos-
tructures with diverse morphologies and numerous pores have been designed for 
LIBs to enhance their electrochemical properties using carbon-based electrodes [4]. 
In most current commercial LIBs, they are the most traditional electrode materials. 
Similarly, metal oxides/sulﬁde-based materials also possess low working potential, 
the highest practical reversible capacity, and relatively efﬁcient power capabilities. 
In general, graphite has a much lower capacity than metal oxides/sulﬁdes. The most 
promising approach appears to be combining carbon with metal oxides/sulﬁdes. A 
carbon-based material is excellent in electrical conductivity, ﬂexible, and remarkable 
in tensile strength, while metal oxides/sulﬁdes are excellent in reactivity and theo-
retical capacity. Also, customer convenience can be improved highly by reducing 
charging time without sacriﬁcing mileage [5]. A composite design may consist of a 
core–shell, tube-in-tube or void-spaces, egg yolk to allow for expansion in volume. 
This review examines the underlying materials of composites, including carbon-
based materials (carbon nanotubes, carbon nanoﬁbers, graphite, and graphene), metal 
oxides, and metal sulﬁdes. Finally, the electrochemical mechanisms and properties 
of carbon-based materials with metal oxides/sulﬁdes are discussed. 
2 
Carbon-Based Materials 
In this chapter, carbon nanoﬁbers, carbon nanotubes, graphene, and graphite are 
discussed extensively. It inhibits dendrite growth with carbon-based electrolyte addi-
tives with unique physical and chemical properties. Carbon-based materials also 
accommodate volume changes due to their various structures, ﬂexibility, and high 
surface area.

Carbon-Based Pseudocapacitive Materials for Next Generation Batteries
299
2.1 
Carbon Nanotubes (CNTs) 
CNTs are widely used as attractive candidates for energy storage technologies. These 
materials are ideal reinforcements for a wide range of materials, including polymers, 
metals, alloys, and ceramics, due to their high electrical and mechanical proper-
ties. Benzene molecules combine to form a crystalline CNT structure, and their 
large porosity and high electrolyte accessibility make them an ideal candidate for 
high-power electrode materials, ﬂexible and stretchable electronic applications, and 
implantable microchips [6]. CNTs are categorized into single-walled CNT (graphene 
sheets rolled into a cylindrical tube with a nanometer diameter) and multi-walled 
CNTs (MWCNTs) (multiple nanotubes with high levels of impurities and defects), 
respectively. According to the microstructure of agglomerates, the agglomerates in 
CNTs are divided into entangled CNTs and CNT arrays. Entangled CNTs have 
twisted CNTs, while CNT arrays have parallel CNTs, as shown in Fig. 1a and b. 
These CNT arrays have a regular pore structure that inﬂuences their electrochemical 
properties and energy storage applications. Also, the CNT array is fabricated in two 
dominant ways: direct growing of CNT arrays and transfer techniques. CNT arrays 
are ﬁrst grown directly over silicon or silica substrates by chemical vapor deposition 
(CVD). Second, the transfer techniques, in which the CNT array is detached from 
the original substrates by cutting and then placing it over the metal (Ni, Cu, and Al) 
foil and other current collectors with binders and solders to fabricate the CNT array 
electrode. Compared with these techniques, the growing array of current collectors 
is more attractive and powerful. This technique is a one-step procedure with robust 
CNT growth on metal contacts and low electrical resistance between the array and 
substrate [7].
2.2 
Carbon Nanoﬁbers (CNFs) 
CNFs consist of curls of graphite sheets arranged in one-dimensional ﬁbrous struc-
tures with diameters ranging from 100 to 500 nm and a length of about 1 nm. 
CNF has many advantages, including a large surface area, high mechanical stability, 
good electrical conductivity, and low density. These properties enable the CNFs to 
deliver excellent electrochemical properties, enhanced capacity, good cycle perfor-
mance, and outstanding low-temperature performance. Since CNFs possess unique 
thermal, mechanical, and electrical properties, they possess great potential as large-
scale energy storage, sensors, and nanocomposites. Figure 1c–e illustrates the shapes 
of carbon nanoﬁbers based on the angles between graphene layers. Electrospin-
ning, melt-blowing, bicomponent ﬁber spinning, chemical vapor deposition, and 
wet chemical synthesis are methods used to produce these nanoﬁbers [8]. Although 
the CNFs are electrochemically good, some modiﬁcation is needed to improve their 
performance. Because of CNF, the production cost is high, which inhibits widespread 
applications.

300
B. Jeevanantham and M. K. Shobana
Fig. 1 Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of a aligned CNTs and b entangled or waved 
CNTs. Adapted with permission [14], Copyright (2021), Springer Nature. c–e Represents the 
platelet-type, tubular-type, and ﬁshbone-type CNFs. Adapted with permission [15], Copyright 
(2012), Elsevier. f, g Schematic illustrations of graphene and graphite. Adapted with permission 
[5], Copyright (2021), Elsevier
2.3 
Graphene 
Energy storage devices can greatly beneﬁt from graphene’s superior electronic, 
thermal, and mechanical characteristics, as well as its strong van der Waals force 
between sheets. Like charcoal, fullerenes, graphite, and carbon nanotubes, it consists 
of a single layer of carbon atoms. Some of the key features, like a large surface 
area, microporosity, and good electrical conductivity, make them an ideal candi-
date for energy storage applications [9]. A graphene molecule is composed of two-
dimensional (2D) honeycombs of carbon atoms with a sp2 hybrid, as shown in Fig. 1f 
[10]. It can increase the storage capacity of LIBs by adsorbing lithium (Li) ions on 
both sides of the anode. Also, they act as additives to construct the three-dimensional 
conducting framework and enhance the interfacial interaction, which is beneﬁcial for 
full electrolyte inﬁltration. Graphene with perfect crystallinity can be produced by 
CVD and some mechanical methods. Here, the reduced graphene oxide (rGO) aids 
in feasible mass production and has layered graphene properties. It also exhibits 
enhanced performance due to its large speciﬁc surface area [11]. Graphene ﬂakes 
buffer the volume impact when metals or metal oxides are used as anodes. Despite 
this, ionic-steric effects and low stability make graphene unsuitable to use in LIBs 
directly as an anode active material. Moreover, the development of graphene-based 
composites will show signiﬁcant paths to LIBs [12].

Carbon-Based Pseudocapacitive Materials for Next Generation Batteries
301
2.4 
Graphite 
LIBs have been commercially designed with graphite because of its superior cycle 
life and low cost, with a theoretical capacity of 372 mAh g−1. As graphite consists 
of crystalline carbon, it has a perfect c-axis crystal structure, as shown in Fig. 1g. 
In the plane, carbon atoms are delocalized, which results in exceptional electronic 
conductivity [5]. Graphite’s layers are connected by van der Waals forces, allowing 
ions to diffuse between the layers, resulting in intercalation compounds [9]. Changes 
in the intrinsic properties of graphite, such as enlarging the gap between graphite 
layers, do not increase the capacity based on the insertion mechanism. Thus, lithium-
graphite intercalation compounds are to be fabricated that show higher lithiation 
than LiC6. It obtains nearly 1000 mAh g−1 with an enhanced microporous structure 
[13]. Anodes made from graphite experience superior cycling stability and high tap 
density, but their progress is slowed by low capacitances and sluggish kinetics. If 
graphite’s lithium storage capabilities are further enhanced, it will make a promising 
component for electric vehicle power storage and grid-scale energy storage systems 
[4]. 
3 
Metal-Based Materials 
3.1 
Metal Oxides 
The excellent electrochemical performance of inorganic battery materials has enticed 
researchers for decades. As anode materials, metal oxides are widely used due to 
their simple preparation, low cost, and high speciﬁc capacity. It shows superior 
performance compared to commercialized graphite. Materials are generally classiﬁed 
into three types: intercalation, conversion, and alloying (Al, Sn, Mg, etc.) [16]. Some 
metal oxides like TiO2, SiO2, and V3O5 are intercalated with Li and de-intercalate to 
form LixMOy. Metals like Co, Mn, Mo, etc. can react with Li but do not form alloys 
because of their poor metallic activity. In the interlayer reaction, Li+ is only embedded 
in the material’s interlayer structure during charging and discharging. The conversion 
is a redox reaction where, in the ﬁrst charge–discharge process, metal oxides and 
Li+ undergo oxidation–reduction reactions, generating metal and Li2O. During the 
alloying process, metal oxides are converted into metallic elements by reacting with 
Li and forming LizM. Further, these oxides have a better effect than graphite anodes 
because they demonstrate high capacity, good stability, widespread availability, and 
are environmentally friendly. For example, SnO2 has a theoretical storage capacity 
of 790 mAh g−1, twice that of a graphite anode, while TiO2 has low capacity but 
achieves low volume expansion and good stability [17]. 
Yang et al. synthesized titanium dioxide ﬂakes via a simple spreading method. 
Flakes with a larger surface area provide a larger electrode/electrolyte contact area, 
which results in shorter solid-state paths and higher rates for Li-ions and electrons

302
B. Jeevanantham and M. K. Shobana
Fig. 2 SEM images of an (a) annealed Fe2O3 sample; (b) at 1C, the Fe2O3/Li half cells undergo 
charge/discharge cycles between 0.005 and 3.0 V using a 1000 mAh g−1 current density. Adapted 
with permission [20], Copyright (2014), Elsevier. (c) V3S4 synthesis process; (d) rate performance 
of V3S4 at 10 Ag−1 current density. Adapted with permission [25], Copyright (2022), Elsevier 
[18]. Courtel et al. fabricated an AMn2O4 (A = Zn, Co, and Ni) anode using a 
co-precipitation technique. A ZnMn2O4 anode sintered at 800 °C provides a good 
performance of about 690 mAh g−1 at a C/10 rate and retains 88.5% [19]. Likewise, 
Jiang et al. prepared an amorphous Fe2O3 anode, and their SEM image is shown in 
Fig. 2a. As shown in Fig. 2b, the anode delivers 1600 mAh g−1 of reversible charge– 
discharge capacity over 500 cycles at 1000 mA g−1. In this case, the anode yields 
good electrochemical behavior and unique capacitive storage [20]. However, the Li+ 
penetration in the anode material causes volume expansion, which leads to poor cyclic 
performance. Some electrochemical mechanisms contribute to these performance 
issues. Since oxygen has a low atomic weight, lithium can react with a small amount 
of oxygen to form lithium oxide, which deposits on the surface of metals and alloy 
materials. Anodes made of alloys exhibit low Li+ diffusion rates, thus trapping and 
preventing lithiation/de-lithiation from being reversible. During cycling, the current 
collector and the active material become electrically insulated due to their dramatic 
volume changes. This case more often occurs in the electrode material when Li+ ions 
are de-lithiated [21]. Studying composites of metal oxides, such as those doped with 
carbon, improves electrical conductivity and reduces volume expansion [22]. 
3.2 
Metal Sulﬁdes 
Recent research has focused on metal sulﬁdes as anodes for LIBs with high speciﬁc 
capacities, a long life, and low redox potential. During charge/discharge reactions,

Carbon-Based Pseudocapacitive Materials for Next Generation Batteries
303
sulﬁde compounds have higher electrochemical reversibility than oxide materials. 
Its dazzling superiority in high theoretical speciﬁc capacity and easily controlled 
morphology have attracted great attention. Compared to metal oxides, metal sulﬁdes 
have better conductivity; the bond between M and S in sulﬁdes is weaker than the 
bond between M and O in oxides, which may favor conversion [23]. Like metal 
oxides, metal sulﬁdes are also classiﬁed into three types: (a) intercalation, (b) conver-
sion, and (c) alloying [16]. A combination of intercalation and conversion is gener-
ally attributed to metal sulﬁde lithiation/de-lithiation. Anodes made from transition 
metal sulﬁdes usually accommodate lithium ions by conversion reactions lower than 
1.5 V versus Li/Li+, in contrast to intercalation electrodes in graphite. Compared 
to an intercalation mechanism-based compound, conversion reactions may deliver a 
greater energy density. Metal sulﬁdes are also safer than graphite anodes because their 
voltage platform is usually well above 1 V, which prevents lithium dendrite forma-
tion. In addition to accommodating volumetric expansion upon lithium storage, the 
layered metal sulﬁdes will also mitigate strain experienced during conversion or alloy 
reactions, improving cycling stability. 
Nguyen et al. enhanced the performance of LIBs by decorating MoS2 with B2O3 
nanoparticles via a sintering technique, and the decorated material exhibits a stable 
capacity of 500 mAh g−1 after the ﬁrst cycle [24]. Similarly, Zhang et al. synthe-
sized self-assembled V3S4 nanosheets, as shown in Fig. 2c. Here, the nanosheets 
accelerate ion and electron migration while alleviating the volume changes. Further, 
at 0.1 A g−1, it exhibits the remarkable performance of 1099.3 mAh g−1 and at 5 
A g−1, it attains the superior rate capability of 588.8 mAh g−1, as shown in Fig. 2d 
[25]. Anodes containing Fe1−xS were synthesized by Xiao et al. and have high theoret-
ical capacity, low cost, and excellent electrochemical conversion mechanisms. Here, 
the carbon-free anode shows long cycle life and high tap density. Building blocks 
and nanosheets are assembled in intertexture, which results in excellent performance, 
according to scientists. During the ﬁrst cycle of discharge/charge, electrode materials 
expand signiﬁcantly. Moreover, side reactions with electrolytes and the loss of active 
materials can result in poor performance. Further, these lead to cracking, disconnec-
tion from the current collectors, and fracture, which pave the way for capacity fading 
[26]. In this context, a combination of three strategies is often used to overcome these 
disadvantages: compositing, mitigating crystallite size, and nano-structuring. 
4 
Metal–Carbon Composites 
4.1 
Metal Oxide/Sulﬁde with CNT Composites 
Metal oxides or sulﬁdes were anchored on CNT surfaces to make 1D CNT-metal 
oxide/sulﬁde composites. High-rate capability is achieved by transferring ions or 
electrons between the metals and CNTs. Additionally, the spacing between the 
networks may prevent aggregation by buffering volume variations of metal oxides/

304
B. Jeevanantham and M. K. Shobana
sulﬁdes. Synthesis methods like coprecipitation, sol–gel, thermal decomposition, 
hydrothermal methods, etc. aid in the fabrication of CNTs. Consequently, metal 
oxides like SnO2 [27], Fe2O3 [28], TiO2 [29], NiO [30], and some ferrite materials, 
and metal sulﬁdes like CoS2 [31], SnS2 [32], and MoS3 [33] have been successfully 
anchored on CNT surfaces. 
Among the metal oxides reported, SnO2 is among the most popular for combining 
with CNTs. SnO2, with a theoretical capacity of 781 mAh g−1 is being developed 
as a potential replacement for graphite. But high-volume changes due to continuous 
charge–discharge cause electrical contact loss and mechanical failure. Thus, many 
researchers have been focusing on overcoming this stress from volume change by 
using carbon support in SnO2. Using ethylene glycol as a solvent, Ren et al. developed 
a SnO2-CNT electrode. Here, the glycol, with a boiling point of 197.3 °C, acts as a 
stabilizer, an agglomeration prohibitor, and a limiter of particle growth. As shown in 
Fig. 3a, b, the SnO2 was deposited over the MWCNTs. With a capacity of 500 mAh 
g−1 , it provides superior cycling stability for 300 cycles. It was attributed to the strong 
adhesion of SnO2 nanocrystals on CNT, which has high electronic conductivity and 
ﬂexibility [27]. Furthermore, Ban et al. fabricated a ﬂexible meso-Fe2O3 layer on 
a conductive CNT-supporting skeleton using PI (meso-Fe2O3/PI/CNT). The ternary 
nanocomposite materials were designed by sequentially assembling the materials 
and dehydrating them at high temperatures. At 0.1 C, it attains a speciﬁc capacity 
of 708.9 mAh g−1, and at 1 Ag−1, it retains 95.6 mAh g−1 over 3000 cycles [28]. 
Likewise, Yuan et al. in 2022 investigated Cu–ZrO2–TiO2/CNTs as anode materials. 
Here, the presence of Zn4+, Ti3+, metal copper, and oxygen vacancies enhances the 
electrical conductivity and improves the porous structure of the material, which has 
a discharge capacity of 351 mAh g−1 at 100 mAg−1 and retains 92% after 200 cycles 
[29]. Similarly, Zhang et al. synthesized biochar-CNT-NiO electrodes via a simple 
air oxidation method for LIBs. Compared with biochar-NiO, the biochar-CNT-NiO 
composite attains 674.6 mAh g−1 and remains stable even after 100 cycles, as shown 
in Fig. 3c, d. Biochar-NiO-CNT, with its unique structure and CNT presence, make 
an electrode that attains this high capacity. This composite enhances the conductivity, 
promotes secondary electrolyte interface (SEI) formation, and mitigates the volume 
expansion [30].
Metal sulﬁdes have attracted more attention due to their excellent speciﬁc capac-
ities, but their poor cyclability due to Li+ insertion and extraction has hindered 
their advancement and application in Li rechargeable batteries. Thus, combining 
metal sulﬁdes with CNT will rectify these problems. Xu et al. assembled an inter-
woven CoS2/CNT/graphene composite via a facile hydrothermal reaction. The well-
designed architecture of 2D graphene creates a highly porous, ﬂexible, and highly 
conductive network that prevents CoS2 nanoparticles from aggregation and enhances 
the contact area between the electrolyte and composite anode. Additionally, for elec-
tron transfer and ionic diffusion, CoS2 in the composite undergoes volume expansion 
during charge/discharge, which is accommodated by sufﬁcient channels. Further-
more, at 100 mA g−1, it delivers a discharge capacity of 993 mAh g−1 and a rate 
performance of 212 mAh g−1 under 2000 mA g−1 [31]. Likewise, a SnS2/CNT 
composite with SnS2 nanosheets growing along the CNTs via in-situ sulfuration in

Carbon-Based Pseudocapacitive Materials for Next Generation Batteries
305
Fig. 3 SEM images of a MWCNTs and b SnO2-CNT composite. Adapted with permission [27], 
Copyright (2011), Elsevier. Galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of c biochar-CNT-NiO and 
d biochar-NiO electrodes. Adapted with permission [30], Copyright (2021), Elsevier. e Advantage 
comparison of SnS2/CNTs with SnO2/CNTs in lithium storage. Adapted with permission [32], 
Copyright (2021), Elsevier. f Schematic representation of electron and lithium-ion diffusion with 
less resistance. Adapted with permission [33], Copyright (2013), Springer Nature
a liquid environment with excellent cycling and rate performances was fabricated 
by Cheng et al. According to density functional theory (DFT), hexagonal SnS2 has 
a lower  Li+ migration barrier and adsorption energies when compared with tetrag-
onal SnO2, thus suggesting Li+ transfer and storage in the SnS2/CNT electrodes are 
much easier, as shown in Fig. 3e [32]. At 200 °C, Shi et al. synthesized a MoSx/ 
CNT (2 < x > 3) via a high-throughput solvent thermal method. In this case, MoS2 
layers have weak van der Waals interactions, so Li+ ions diffuse (Fig. 3f) without 
much volume expansion, preventing the pulverization of active materials due to 
repeated lithiation and de-lithiation. Moreover, the designed hierarchical structure 
with increased layer distance and maximum surface has resulted in less strain and 
a low intercalation barrier of Li ions, ensuring high lithium storage capacities in 
reversible conﬁgurations, stable cycling lifetimes, and excellent rates [33]. 
4.2 
Metal Oxide/Sulﬁde with CNF Composites 
Composite anodes based on CNF have been extensively used in recent decades. Even 
though CNTs and CNFs provide continuous conducting paths for electrons and Li+. 
A CNF matrix differs from a CNT matrix in that CNFs are typically encapsulated 
with active materials, which buffer their volume changes during cycling. Active 
materials like SnO2, CoO, MoO2, Fe2O3, WOx, MnOx, WS2, and MoS2 have been 
encapsulated into CNFs. The composites (metal oxide or sulﬁde/CNF) are generally 
synthesized by electrospinning with subsequent carbonization. Shen et al. developed

306
B. Jeevanantham and M. K. Shobana
a Sn–SnO2-CNF@C electrode via carbonization and low-temperature hydrothermal 
treatment. Composites have been used directly as anodes without polymer binders 
or electrical conductors being added. The carbon coating prevents the electrode 
from side reactions with the electrolyte, improves the electrical conductivity, and 
reduces volume changes. This material shows improved rate capability and enhanced 
cycling stability in the composite electrodes. Due to the protective carbon coating 
and the 3D CNF membrane, the Sn-SnO2 particles exhibit improved electrochem-
ical properties [34]. Chen et al. designed 2D CoO/Co/C nanosheets by adopting 
CNF precursors. At 10 Ag−1, it delivers a good performance of 500 mAh g−1 and 
an outstanding cyclic performance of 800 cycles at 2 Ag−1 [35]. Also, the tran-
sition molybdate metals have been studied as LIB anodes. Wang et al. reported a 
low-cost lithium molybdate composited with CNFs via a sol–gel technique. Here, 
the lithium molybdate (LiMoO4) is a shot-rod nanoparticle that gets tightly wound 
in the CNFs. At 100 mA g−1, it attains a discharge capacity of 830 mAh g−1 and 
maintains 760 mAh g−1 over 100 cycles. Lithiation of LiMoO4@CNF transforms it 
into Li2+xMoO4, followed by a phase transition into Li0.98MoO2 at low potentials. At 
last, the Li0.98MoO2 is further transformed into Li2O and MO. Here, the CNFs bind 
the broken LiMoO4 microcrystals during cycling, which enhances the composite’s 
electrochemical performance [36]. Similarly, Guo et al. conﬁned MXene nanoﬁbers/ 
CNF with MnOx via electrospinning and subsequent carbonization. During charging 
and discharging, the MnOx nanoparticles with ﬁber conﬁnement effects embedded 
internally ensure structural stability and enables cyclic ﬂuctuation through dual stabi-
lization strategies. An electrospinning method prevents the MXene ﬂakes from self-
restacking by bonding the surface-anchored MnOx nanoparticles with the nanoﬁbers, 
which leads to a large surface area and anode-accessible sites [37]. 
Likewise, Yang et al. synthesized a WO3@N-doped CNFs electrode by 
hydrothermal combined with electrospinning, as shown in Fig. 4a, and their SEM 
images are in Fig. 4b, c. A double 1D structure formed by the embedded WO3 
nanowires and N-CNFs improves the structural stability of the composite signiﬁ-
cantly. Further, by using this method, nanoﬁbers can provide many active sites for the 
penetration of lithium ions due to their large surface-to-volume ratio. Here, the poorly 
conductive WO3 combined with CNFs improves cyclic performance. At 0.2 Ag−1, it  
exhibits a discharge capacity of 960 mAh g−1 over 300 cycles, and after 1300 cycles, 
it attains 550 mAh g−1 at 2 Ag−1, as shown in Fig. 4d. Because of the synergistic 
effects of WO3 nanorods and nitrogen doping in 1D carbon nanoﬁbers, the elec-
trochemical properties are excellent compared to those of most WO3-based carbon 
composite materials [38]. Additionally, Chen et al. synthesized MoS2 nanoﬂowers 
that got encapsulated into CNFs containing amorphous SnO2. Here, the encapsu-
lation is done by facile solvothermal and electrospinning methods, as shown in 
Fig. 4e and their transmission electron microscope (TEM) images in Fig. 4f, g. 
After 100 cycles and at 200 mAh g−1, it yields a speciﬁc capacity of 983 mAh g−1, 
and at 2000 mA g−1, it obtains 710 mAh g−1 over 800 cycles, as shown in Fig. 4h. 
SnO2 and MoS2 nanoﬂowers that are present over the conductive CNFs not only 
enhance electron transfer but also show direct current pathways. Further, the p-n

Carbon-Based Pseudocapacitive Materials for Next Generation Batteries
307
Fig. 4 a Synthesis of a double one-dimensional WO3@CNFs composite; b, c SEM images of 
WO3@CNFs; d rate performance of WOx, N-CNF, and  WO3@N-CNFs electrodes at a different 
current density. Adapted with permission [38], Copyright (2022), John Wiley and Sons. e preparation 
of MoS2–SnO2@CNF composites; f, g TEM images of MoS2–SnO2@CNF composite; h cyclic 
performance of MoS2–SnO2@CNF composite at 2000 mA g−1 current density. Adapted with 
permission [39], Copyright (2009), Royal Society of Chemistry 
heterogeneous interfaces with 3D interconnected conductive networks could facil-
itate ion diffusion, enhance mass transfer, and reduce diffusion distances [39]. Wu 
et al. developed a ﬂexible WS2@CNFs via a hydrothermal method with an electro-
spinning process. During extended cycling, WS2 nanosheets transform into WS2/W 
nanoparticles due to kinetic analysis. The capacitive mechanism dominates the Li-ion 
storage process. In addition to the three-dimensional porous architecture of CNFs and 
the good conductivity of CNFs, WS2 nanosheets equiaxed structure during cycling 
induced an extrinsic capacitive effect, which could explain the superior cycling and 
rate properties. These nanoparticles also enhance electrochemical conductivity and 
reversibility, resulting in increased capacity and better cycles [40]. 
4.3 
Metal Oxide/Sulﬁde with Graphene/Graphite Composites 
LIBs with graphene anodes achieve relatively high speciﬁc capacities with some 
drawbacks, including voltage hysteresis, low initial coulomb efﬁciency, and a lack 
of plateau potential. The combination of metal oxides/sulﬁdes with graphene offers 
several advantages, including excellent electrical conductivity, large surface areas, 
and the prevention of agglomeration of active materials. Lian et al. designed a 
nano-sized porous SnO2@C/graphene composite where the carbon reduces nanopar-
ticle aggregation and undesirable reactions. Further, the porous structure facilitates 
excellent electrolyte diffusion. At 100 mA g−1, the nano-sized electrode exhibits 
a reversible capacity of 1115 mAh g−1 and stabilizes 1015 mAh g−1 over 100

308
B. Jeevanantham and M. K. Shobana
cycles. These excellent performances are due to: (a) composites are highly reac-
tive and have a short path for electronic and ionic transport; (b) nanoparticle aggre-
gation is suppressed by carbon shells; and (c) graphene sheets and carbon shells 
guarantee good electrical conductivity [41]. In Fig. 5a, Liu et al. presented a novel 
carbon microspheres@SnO2/reduced graphene electrode composite produced by a 
facile hydrothermal method and their SEM images in Fig. 5b and c. Here, the SnO2 
surrounds carbon microspheres, while the reduced graphene is shuttled through the 
outer layers. Due to its high ﬂexibility and abundance of free space at the nanoscale, 
this composite was less affected by volume variation. In this case, graphene improves 
the poor electronic conductivity and acts as SnO2’s double protective layer. Here, 
the low-cost preparation methods also facilitate the practical preparation of SnO2-
based anodes and exhibit a reversibility of 789.5 mAh g−1; over 350 cycles, it retains 
68.6% at 200 mA g−1, as shown in Fig. 5d [42]. Xu et al. prepared Fe2O3 nanopar-
ticles anchored with multilayer graphene (obtained by ultrasonic exfoliation, which 
reduces the application cost due to the facile synthesis). Also, the chemical deposi-
tion method aids in anchoring Fe2O3 nanoparticles on multilayer graphene. On the 
multilayer graphene surface, dense Fe2O3 nanoparticle ﬁlms are coated uniformly, 
which can entirely resist the stacking of multilayer graphene grains. As shown in 
Fig. 5e, this group also worked with anchoring Fe2O3 over the graphene oxide and 
reduced graphene oxide. At 0.1C, the Fe2O3/multilayer graphene electrode results 
in a discharge capacity of 1050 mAh g−1 over 100 cycles [43]. 
Wei et al. synthesized SnO2@TiO2 by a facile micro-arc oxidation technique to 
enhance electrochemical performance. SnO2 and TiO2 have a symbiotic structure
Fig. 5 a Preparation method of CMS@SnO2/GR and H-SnO2, b, c SEM images of CMS@SnO2/ 
GR, and d cyclic performance of CMS@SnO2/GR, H-SnO2, and commercial bulk SnO2 at 
200 mA g−1. Adapted with permission [42], Copyright (2022), Elsevier. e Growth process of 
multilayer graphene (MLG), graphene oxide (GO), and reduced graphene oxide (rGO) over Fe2O3 
nanoparticles; f Cyclic performance of MLG, Go, and rGO over the Fe2O3 composite. Adapted 
with permission [43], Copyright (2022), Elsevier. g Rate capability of ZnS@C/EG and ZnS-SnS/C 
composite. Adapted with permission [50], Copyright (2021), Elsevier 

Carbon-Based Pseudocapacitive Materials for Next Generation Batteries
309
that allows them to function as active substances and current collectors. During lithi-
ation and de-lithiation, TiO2 rectiﬁes the volume variation of SnO2, resulting in a 
high speciﬁc capacity. This composite not only helps to alleviate the vertical direc-
tional volume variation but also enhances electron transportation. Also, the composite 
preparation method demonstrates an economic and facial strategy to synthesize 
the anode materials [44]. Yang et al. developed a biomass-derived porous carbon/ 
MoO2@TiO2 anode for LIBs via the hydrothermal method. Because biomass-derived 
carbon materials are renewable, abundant, cheap, and environmentally friendly, they 
have attracted signiﬁcant attention as LIB anode materials. Further, they display 
a large surface area, excellent conductivity, and a uniform pore structure. In addi-
tion to buffering volume changes during lithiation and de-lithiation, porous carbon 
anchored MoO2 and TiO2 nanoparticles provide a greater active surface area and a 
more convenient and effective means of transporting and storing lithium ions. Due 
to the MoO2 and TiO2 nanoparticles synergistic effect, the signiﬁcant volume expan-
sion can be reduced, which provides more active surface area, and lithium-ion storage 
and transport channels are more convenient and efﬁcient [45]. Rao et al. fabricated 
a WS2/MoS2@carbon microsphere and anchored it to the graphene composite via 
solvothermal and hydrothermal methods. A conductive carbon structure based on 
graphene and carbon layers can mitigate electrode pulverization and volume vari-
ation. Additionally, the graphene introduction leads to abundant active sites and 
excellent mechanical stability, with an increase in capacity and cyclic performance. 
Similarly, these composites in sodium-ion batteries improve cyclic durability [46]. 
In the same way, graphite has proven to be an outstanding intercalation elec-
trode material in commercial LIBs with a sloping voltage proﬁle and large polariza-
tion during intercalation and de-intercalation. Thus, compositing with metal oxides/ 
sulﬁdes delivers a beneﬁcial effect compared with pristine. Xu et al. obtained a MoO2/ 
graphite oxide anode using a simple solvothermal technique. As the graphite oxide 
precursor content increases, MoO3 rods turn into MoO2 nanorods. These nanorods 
are gradually distributed on graphite oxide sheets. This group studied the composite 
with different weight percents of graphite oxide, in which the 10 wt% graphite oxide 
exhibits good electrochemical properties. At 100 mA g−1, it offers a speciﬁc capacity 
of 726 mAh g−1 after 30 cycles. Further, the composite demonstrates high perfor-
mance, outstanding capacity retention, excellent capacity, and high-rate capability 
when compared to MoO2. 2D graphite oxide sheets and MoO2 nanoparticles in the 
composite interact strongly, preventing volume expansion and contraction as well 
as aggregation during charge/discharge [47]. Wang et al. synthesized a Fe2O3 and 
graphite composite via a facile and effective ball milling method. Here, Fe2O3 is 
poor (high volume variation) and leads to an insufﬁciency in redox reactions. Thus, 
nanostructured Fe2O3 with a large surface-to-volume ratio and carbon material (i.e., 
graphite) with good electrical conductivity exhibit enhanced performance. Further, 
due to the close contact between nanocrystalline Fe2O3 and graphite, the Fe2O3-
graphite composites have improved electronic conductivity and minimized volume 
variation during cycling [48]. Furthermore, Liu et al. prepared a monodisperse MoS2/ 
graphitic anode with varying compositions. This anode is prepared by mechanical 
ball-milling and low-temperature annealing. Here, MoS2 has many advantages, like

310
B. Jeevanantham and M. K. Shobana
low cost, high theoretical capacity, and a unique layered structure. Graphite sheets in 
this composite reduce particle agglomeration and improve electrical conductivity. In 
this case, the MoS2:graphite ratio of 80%:20% shows a discharge capacity of 832.70 
mAh g−1 [49]. Liang et al. developed hetero-structured SnS-ZnS@C nanoparticles 
that act as an LIB anode and were embedded over the graphite via a facile and scalable 
method. In this case, the ZnS-SnS structure not only restricts the nanoparticle agglom-
eration but also mitigates the charge transfer resistance. In addition to increasing the 
conductivity of electrodes, expanded graphite buffers ZnS–SnS volume expansion 
and maintains electrode integrity during cycling. Thus, at 1 A g−1, the nanoparticle 
composite exhibits a discharge capacity of 517 mAh g−1 after 600 cycles and attains 
a rate capability of 319 mAh g−1 at 5 A g−1 , as shown in Fig. 5g [50]. 
5 
Conclusion and Perspective 
In this featured chapter, we summarize the progress made in research on different 
anode materials used in LIBs. Each anode and its composition deliver high speciﬁc 
capacity and excellent cyclability. Speciﬁcally, combining nanostructured metal 
oxides/sulﬁdes with carbonaceous matrices can help complement with each other’s 
positive attributes. In general, carbon-based materials that are composited with metal 
oxides/sulﬁdes have the advantages of charge storage, shorter diffusion paths for 
ion transport, alleviating volume changes, good electronic and ionic conduction, 
and mitigating nanoparticle agglomeration. Embedded active materials (e.g., carbon 
nanotubes, carbon nanoﬁbers, and porous carbon) exhibit various advantages and 
disadvantages. In this case, graphene composites with metal oxides/sulﬁdes enhance 
structural stability by preventing the active materials exfoliation and aggregation. As 
well as three-dimensional CNTs exhibit good mechanical integrity, electrical conduc-
tivity, and porosity to accommodate volume changes. Some of the challenges with 
carbon-composite metal oxides/sulﬁdes include: (a) For LIB applications, under-
standing the working mechanism of metal oxides/sulﬁdes is crucial; (b) during the 
ﬁrst discharge, a SEI forms, resulting in a large irreversible capacity; (c) carbon-
based materials focus on speciﬁc capacity, capability, and cyclability but do not 
focus on coulombic efﬁciency and volumetric energy density. Thus, more atten-
tion should be paid to the consideration of fast kinetics. As production scales up, 
complex, and time-consuming design strategies may also face escalating challenges. 
Simpliﬁed synthesis routes that are customized for industrial needs are necessary for 
their commercialization. Long-term use of expensive metals is not recommended. 
Also, it is essential to balance electrochemical performance with structural design 
when designing a rational carbon-based composite. Research should focus more on 
structural design and the electrochemical performance of composite structures. As a 
result, next-generation electrode designs will be optimized, and nanocomposites of 
carbon and metal oxides/sulﬁdes for energy storage will be vigorously developed. It 
is essential to develop experimental and theoretical research so that advanced LIBs

Carbon-Based Pseudocapacitive Materials for Next Generation Batteries
311
with long cycling stability and high rate-capable electrode materials can be made 
commercially available. 
References 
1. B. Jeevanantham, Y. Song, H. Choe, M.K. Shobana, Structural and optical characteristics of 
cobalt ferrite nanoparticles. Mater. Lett.: X 12, 100105 (2021) 
2. B. Jeevanantham, M.K. Shobana, T. Pazhanivel, H. Choe, Pseudocapacitive behaviors of 
strontium-doped cobalt ferrite nanoparticles for supercapacitor applications. J. Alloy. Compd. 
960, 170651 (2023) 
3. B. 
Jeevanantham, 
P. 
Sarathkumar, 
S. 
Kavita, 
M.K. 
Shobana, 
Magnesium 
doped 
LiNixMnyCozO2 cathode-structural properties. Appl. Surf. Sci. Adv. 12, 100350 (2022) 
4. Y. Yuan, Z. Chen, H. Yu, X. Zhang, T. Liu, M. Xia, R. Zheng, M. Shui, J. Shu, Heteroatom-
doped carbon-based materials for lithium and sodium ion batteries. Energy Storage Mater. 32, 
65–90 (2020) 
5. L. Li, D. Zhang, J. Deng, Y. Gou, J. Fang, H. Cui, Y. Zhao, M. Cao, Carbon-based materials 
for fast charging lithium-ion batteries. Carbon 183, 721–734 (2021) 
6. R.N.A.R. Seman, M.A. Azam, A.A. Mohamad, Systematic gap analysis of carbon nanotube-
based lithium-ion batteries and electrochemical capacitors. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 75, 
644–659 (2017) 
7. H. Zhang, G. Cao, Y. Yang, Carbon nanotube arrays and their composites for electrochemical 
capacitors and lithium-ion batteries. Energy Environ. Sci. 2(9), 932–943 (2009) 
8. V.A. Agubra, L. Zuniga, D. Flores, J. Villareal, M. Alcoutlabi, Composite nanoﬁbers as 
advanced materials for Li-ion, Li-O2 and Li-S batteries. Electrochim. Acta 192, 529–550 
(2016) 
9. S. Iqbal, H. Khatoon, A.H. Pandit, S. Ahmad, Recent development of carbon based materials 
for energy storage devices. Mater. Sci. Energy Technol. 2(3), 417–428 (2019) 
10. W. Gao, L.B. Alemany, L. Ci, P.M. Ajayan, New insights into the structure and reduction of 
graphite oxide. Nat. Chem. 1(5), 403–408 (2009) 
11. X. Lu, X. Jin, J. Sun, Advances of graphene application in electrode materials for lithium ion 
batteries. Sci. China Technol. Sci. 58, 1829–1840 (2015) 
12. H. Zhang, Y. Yang, D. Ren, L. Wang, X. He, Graphite as anode materials: fundamental 
mechanism, recent progress and advances. Energy Storage Mater. 36, 147–170 (2021) 
13. B.M. Khan, W.C. Oh, P. Nuengmatch, K. Ullah, Role of graphene-based nanocomposites as 
anode material for Lithium-ion batteries. Mater. Sci. Eng., B 287, 116141 (2023) 
14. T. Hajilounezhad, R. Bao, K. Palaniappan, F. Bunyak, P. Calyam, & M.R. Maschmann, 
Predicting carbon nanotube forest attributes and mechanical properties using simulated images 
and deep learning. npj Comput. Mater. 7(1), 134 (2021) 
15. H.Y. Cheng, Y.A. Zhu, Z.J. Sui, X.G. Zhou, D. Chen, Modeling of ﬁshbone-type carbon 
nanoﬁbers with cone-helix structures. Carbon 50(12), 4359–4372 (2012) 
16. L. Zhang, H. Wang, X. Zhang, Y. Tang, A review of emerging dual-ion batteries: fundamentals 
and recent advances. Adv. Func. Mater. 31(20), 2010958 (2021) 
17. H.B. Wu, J.S. Chen, H.H. Hng, X.W.D. Lou, Nanostructured metal oxide-based materials as 
advanced anodes for lithium-ion batteries. Nanoscale 4(8), 2526–2542 (2012) 
18. M.C. Yang, Y.Y. Lee, B. Xu, K. Powers, Y.S. Meng, TiO2 ﬂakes as anode materials for Li-ion-
batteries. J. Power Sources 207, 166–172 (2012) 
19. F.M. Courtel, H. Duncan, Y. Abu-Lebdeh, I.J. Davidson, High capacity anode materials for 
Li-ion batteries based on spinel metal oxides AMn2O4 (A= Co, Ni, and Zn). J. Mater. Chem. 
21(27), 10206–10218 (2011) 
20. Y. Jiang, D. Zhang, Y. Li, T. Yuan, N. Bahlawane, C. Liang, W. Sun, Y. Lu, M. Yan, Amorphous 
Fe2O3 as a high-capacity, high-rate and long-life anode material for lithium ion batteries. Nano 
Energy 4, 23–30 (2014)

312
B. Jeevanantham and M. K. Shobana
21. P.U. Nzereogu, A.D. Omah, F.I. Ezema, E.I. Iwuoha, A.C. Nwanya, Anode materials for 
lithium-ion batteries: a review. Appl. Surf. Sci. Adv. 9, 100233 (2022) 
22. B. Jeevanantham, M.K. Shobana, Enhanced cathode materials for advanced lithium-ion 
batteries using nickel-rich and lithium/manganese-rich LiNixMnyCozO2. J. Energy Storage 
54, 105353 (2022) 
23. Y. Xiao, S.H. Lee, Y.K. Sun, The application of metal sulﬁdes in sodium ion batteries. Adv. 
Energy Mater. 7(3), 1601329 (2017) 
24. T.P. Nguyen, I.T. Kim, Boron oxide enhancing stability of MoS2 anode materials for lithium-ion 
batteries. Materials 15(6), 2034 (2022) 
25. Y. Zhang, J. Li, H. Li, H. Shi, Z. Gong, T. Lu, L. Pan, Facile self-assembly of carbon-free 
vanadium sulﬁde nanosheet for stable and high-rate lithium-ion storage. J. Coll. Interface Sci. 
607, 145–152 (2022) 
26. X. Xu, W. Liu, Y. Kim, J. Cho, Nanostructured transition metal sulﬁdes for lithium ion batteries: 
progress and challenges. Nano Today 9(5), 604–630 (2014) 
27. J. Ren, J. Yang, A. Abouimrane, D. Wang, K. Amine, SnO2 nanocrystals deposited on multi-
walled carbon nanotubes with superior stability as anode material for Li-ion batteries. J. Power 
Sourc. 196(20), 8701–8705 (2011) 
28. Q. Ban, Y. Liu, P. Liu, Y. Li, Y. Qin, Y. Zheng, Hierarchically nanostructured carbon nanotube/ 
polyimide/mesoporous Fe2O3 nanocomposite for organic-inorganic lithium-ion battery anode. 
Microporous Mesoporous Mater. 335, 111803 (2022) 
29. Y. Yuan, Y. Shao, X. Zhou, An investigation of Cu–ZrO2–TiO2/CNTs anode material for 
lithium-ion batteries. Int. J. Energy Res. 46(8), 11092–11108 (2022) 
30. J. Zhang, A. Tahmasebi, J.E. Omoriyekomwan, J. Yu, Microwave-assisted synthesis of 
biochar-carbon-nanotube-NiO composite as high-performance anode materials for lithium-ion 
batteries. Fuel Process. Technol. 213, 106714 (2021) 
31. C. Xu, Y. Jing, J. He, K. Zhou, Y. Chen, Q. Li, J. Lin, W. Zhang, Self-assembled inter-
woven CoS2/CNTs/graphene architecture as anode for high-performance lithium ion batteries. 
J. Alloy. Compd. 708, 1178–1183 (2017) 
32. Y. Cheng, H. Xie, L. Zhou, B. Shi, L. Guo, J. Huang, In-situ liquid-phase transformation 
of SnS2/CNTs composite from SnO2/CNTs for high performance lithium-ion battery anode. 
Appl. Surf. Sci. 566, 150645 (2021) 
33. Y. Shi, Y. Wang, J.I. Wong, A.Y.S. Tan, C.L. Hsu, L.J. Li, Y.C. Lu, H.Y. Yang, Self-assembly of 
hierarchical MoSx/CNT nanocomposites (2< x< 3): towards high performance anode materials 
for lithium ion batteries. Sci. Rep. 3(1), 1–8 (2013) 
34. Z. Shen, Y. Hu, Y. Chen, R. Chen, X. He, X. Zhang, H. Shao, Y. Zhang, Controllable synthesis 
of carbon-coated Sn SnO2 carbon-nanoﬁber membrane as advanced binder-free anode for 
lithium-ion batteries. Electrochim. Acta 188, 661–670 (2016) 
35. H. Chen, S. Zhang, S. Wu, K. Wang, C. Chen, Y. Chen, W. Chu, Z. Chen, H. Li, H. Liu, Design 
and synthesis of cellulose nanoﬁber-derived CoO/Co/C two-dimensional nanosheet toward 
enhanced and stable lithium storage. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 625, 915–924 (2022) 
36. J. Wang, J. Yao, W. Li, W. Zhu, J. Yang, J. Zhao, L. Gao, Lithium molybdate composited with 
carbon nanoﬁbers as a high-capacity and stable anode material for lithium-ion batteries. Energy 
Mater 2, 200026 (2022) 
37. Y. Guo, D. Zhang, Z. Bai, Y. Yang, Y. Wang, J. Cheng, P.K. Chu, Y. Luo, MXene nanoﬁbers 
conﬁning MnOx nanoparticles: a ﬂexible anode for high-speed lithium ion storage networks. 
Dalton Trans. 51(4), 1423–1433 (2022) 
38. J. Yang, S. Du, L. Ao, J. Zhang, C. Jin, M. Han, K. Jiang, L. Shang, Y. Li, J. Zhang, L. 
Zhu, Embedded double one-dimensional composites of WO3@ N-doped carbon nanoﬁbers 
for superior and stabilized lithium storage. ChemElectroChem. 9(2), e202101477 (2022) 
39. H. Chen, J. He, G. Ke, L. Sun, J. Chen, Y. Li, X. Ren, L. Deng, P. Zhang, MoS2 nanoﬂowers 
encapsulated into carbon nanoﬁbers containing amorphous SnO2 as an anode for lithium-ion 
batteries. Nanoscale 11(35), 16253–16261 (2019) 
40. L. Zhang, W. Fan, T. Liu, Flexible hierarchical membranes of WS2 nanosheets grown on 
graphene-wrapped electrospun carbon nanoﬁbers as advanced anodes for highly reversible 
lithium storage. Nanoscale 8(36), 16387–16394 (2016)

Carbon-Based Pseudocapacitive Materials for Next Generation Batteries
313
41. P. Lian, J. Wang, D. Cai, L. Ding, Q. Jia, H. Wang, Porous SnO2@ C/graphene nanocomposite 
with 3D carbon conductive network as a superior anode material for lithium-ion batteries. 
Electrochim. Acta 116, 103–110 (2014) 
42. Y. Liu, X. Liu, X. Zhang, X. Miao, Y. Wang, P. Wang, A novel carbon microspheres@ SnO2/ 
reduced graphene composite as anode for lithium-ion batteries with superior cycle stability. 
Ceram. Int. 48(13), 18625–18634 (2022) 
43. J. Xu, D. Xu, J. Wu, J. Wu, J. Zhou, T. Zhou, X. Wang, J.P. Cheng, Ultra-small Fe2O3 nanopar-
ticles anchored on ultrasonically exfoliated multilayer graphene for LIB anode application. 
Ceram. Int. 48(21), 32524–32531 (2022) 
44. B. Wei, S. Yan, D. Jia, C. Feng, J. Yin, Z. Wang, Preparation of SnO2@ TiO2/Graphene by 
micro-arc oxidation as an anode material for lithium ion batteries. Inorg. Chem. Commun. 145, 
110048 (2022) 
45. L. Yang, Z. Niu, C. Wang, Z. Liu, X. Feng, Preparation and electrochemical performance of 
biomass-derived porous carbon/MoO2@ TiO2 composite as anode materials for lithium-ion 
batteries. Solid State Ionics 389, 116110 (2023) 
46. Y. Rao, J. Wang, P. Liang, H. Zheng, M. Wu, J. Chen, F. Shi, K. Yan, J. Liu, K. Bian, C. 
Zhang, Heterostructured WS2/MoS2@ carbon hollow microspheres anchored on graphene for 
high-performance Li/Na storage. Chem. Eng. J. 443, 136080 (2022) 
47. Y. Xu, R. Yi, B. Yuan, X. Wu, M. Dunwell, L. Fei, S. Deng, P. Andersen, D. Wang, H. Luo, 
High capacity MoO2/graphite oxide composite anode for lithium-ion batteries. J. Phys. Chem. 
Lett. 3(3), 309–314 (2012) 
48. Y. Wang, L. Yang, R. Hu, L. Ouyang, M. Zhu, Facile synthesis of Fe2O3-graphite composite 
with stable electrochemical performance as anode material for lithium ion batteries. Elec-
trochim. Acta 125, 421–426 (2014) 
49. B. Liu, F. Li, H. Li, S. Zhang, J. Liu, X. He, Z. Sun, Z. Yu, Y. Zhang, X. Huang, F. Guo, 
Monodisperse MoS2/graphite composite anode materials for advanced lithium ion batteries. 
Molecules 28(6), 2775 (2023) 
50. Q. Liang, L. Zhang, M. Zhang, Q. Pan, L. Wang, G. Yang, F. Zheng, Y. Huang, H. Wang, Q. 
Li, Heterostructured SnS-ZnS@ C nanoparticles embedded in expanded graphite as advanced 
anode materials for lithium ion batteries. Chem. Phys. Lett. 775, 138662 (2021)

Surfactant-Assisted Pseudocapacitive 
Materials for Li-Ion Batteries 
Wan Mohd Abd Kalam, Hong Ngee Lim, Izwaharyanie Ibrahim, 
and Chuan Yi Foo 
Abstract Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) are broadly accustomed in many electrical 
devices, such as electric vehicles (EVs) and hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs). The 
selection of Li-based pseudocapacitive materials in LIBs has become the main focus 
of numerous research efforts to commercialize LIBs with great features, including 
good environmental compatibility, low-cost consumption, and most importantly, 
great electrochemical properties (capacity, open-circuit voltage, rate capability, life 
cycle, energy density, and power density). Unfortunately, the pseudocapacitive mate-
rials are not capable of standing alone without any external supportive materials due 
to their downsides, which are low electronic conductivity, low Li ion diffusivity, and 
poor cycling stability. Therefore, surfactants, also known as surface-active agents, 
are introduced in the active materials of LIBs to develop excellent electrochemical 
performance, as successfully presented in many reported articles. The properties of 
surfactants can promote a strong interaction between the particles with the advan-
tages of physical captivity and chemical encapsulation, which enable adjusting the 
performance stability of Li-based pseudocapacitive materials. Herein, we disclose in 
detail the synthesis methods and structural morphology involved in achieving the high 
electrochemical performance of LIBs based on surfactant-assisted pseudocapacitive 
materials perspectives. 
Keywords Lithium-ion battery · Surfactant · Pseudocapacitive materials ·
Li-based · Cathode
W. M. A. Kalam · H. N. Lim envelope symbol · I. Ibrahim 
Functional Nanotechnology Devices Laboratory, Institute of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, 
Universiti Putra Malaysia (UPM), 43400 Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia 
e-mail: hongngee@upm.edu.my 
H. N. Lim 
Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Universiti Putra Malaysia (UPM), 43400 Serdang, 
Selangor, Malaysia 
C. Y. Foo 
School of Energy and Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University Malaysia, 43900 Sepang, 
Selangor Darul Ehsan, Malaysia 
College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
R. K. Gupta (ed.), Pseudocapacitors, Engineering Materials, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45430-1_17 
315

316
W. M. A. Kalam et al.
1 
Introduction 
Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) are now the most sought-after power source for energy 
storage systems due to their exceptional qualities, including their high energy density, 
high power density, longevity, and environmental friendliness. In comparison to 
lead-acid (Pb-acid), nickel–cadmium (Ni–Cd) and nickel-metal hydride (Ni-MH) 
batteries, LIBs are another form of secondary battery that has been modiﬁed with 
qualiﬁed properties. The extensive use of LIBs in a variety of electrical equipment, 
including electric vehicles (EVs) and hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs), is entirely 
due to the conductivity of electrode materials. Typically, LIBs are built with positive 
electrodes (cathode) and negative electrodes (anode), which are separated by the 
electrolyte solution through a selective membrane. The ions are moved from the 
anode to the cathode during the charging process, whereas the ions are moved from 
the cathode to the anode during the discharging process. In a rechargeable energy 
storage system, these processes are actively repeated. 
Pseudocapacitive materials like transition metal oxides, metal hydroxide, metal 
nitride metal sulﬁdes and conducting polymer are among the active materials that 
have received the most attention in recent research because of their ability to conduct 
faster ion diffusion and good rate capability, providing higher energy density and 
higher power density to the battery [1]. Li-based pseudocapacitive materials and LIBs 
have worked together to establish a notable strategy to enhance battery performance 
by employing the active materials as cathodes. To mention a few, layered lithiated 
transition metal oxide, manganese spinel and olivine materials are the most domi-
nant materials in the development of current LIBs. The layered lithiated transition 
metal oxide materials such as LiCoO2 have been used on a large scale of manufacture 
despite of their potential high toxicity due to the cobalt (Co) element residues [2]. The 
manganese spinel materials are produced for commercial purposes with more afford-
able production, but the low durability and inadequate storage system have shown 
to be the unfavorable characteristics for long-term usage. The Olivine-structured 
materials such as LiFePO4 are reliable materials, owing to their great theoretical 
capacity, high open-circuit voltage, excellent chemical and thermal stability, great 
environmental compatibility, and low cost of production [3]. However, these mate-
rials have signiﬁcant drawbacks, including low electronic conductivity and slow 
Li ion diffusivity, which prevent efﬁcient charging/discharging processes [3]. As a 
result, Li-based pseudocapacitive materials cannot totally solve the degradation of 
battery capacity, which has become a critical problem for LIBs. 
The researchers have made numerous remarkable contributions to the improve-
ment of electrochemical performance, promoting better pseudocapacitive materials 
of LIBs. One of the noteworthy works is combining the Li-based pseudocapacitive 
materials with surfactants, which introduces a strong physical and chemical interac-
tion between the particles to control the stability of electrochemical performance [4]. 
Surfactants are also referred to as surface-active agents that are formed by the chem-
ically self-arranging molecules to create aggregates, which are able to minimize the

Surfactant-Assisted Pseudocapacitive Materials for Li-Ion Batteries
317
Fig. 1 Illustration of surfactant-assisted pseudocapacitive materials in LIBs 
interfacial tension between two immiscible phases, such as oil and water. Accord-
ingly, the formation of particles yields a different type of structures that has affected 
the electrochemical performance of batteries, depending on the methods used for 
material preparation. This chapter will present the studies of Li-based pseudoca-
pacitive materials with the assistance of surfactants for performance enhancement 
of LIBs, as illustrated in Fig. 1. The advantages of surfactants in energy storage 
devices are further discussed to comprehend the importance of surfactant-assisted 
pseudocapacitive materials in LIBs. Besides, the synthesis methods for surfactant-
assisted materials are demonstrated, including solvothermal, hydrothermal, sol–gel 
and solid-state methods, to reveal the outcomes obtained based on an overview of 
many type of structures, such as rod-like, plate-like and spherical-like structures. 
2 
Properties and Advantages of Surfactants in Active 
Materials of LIBs 
Surfactants are formulated in many daily supplies such as cleaning products and 
detergents, as well as cosmetics and pharmaceutical products. The presence of surfac-
tants in the formulation mobilised and integrated the molecular properties of materials 
with diverse phases (water, oil, solvents, and fats) in order to break down the chem-
ical barriers, molecular weight and surface tension [5]. The positive characteristics 
of surfactants have opened up a huge possibility to collaborate on the development 
of pseudocapacitive materials for battery application. Due to the ability to combine 
the molecular characteristics, the aggregation between the surfactants and materials 
would result in better protected structures of the active components.

318
W. M. A. Kalam et al.
Surfactants are composed by molecules with a lower surface tension, possessing 
a hydrophobic tail (non-polar group) and a hydrophilic head (polar group). The 
properties of common non-polar group hydrophobicity are decreasing based on the 
following order of hydrocarbon groups [6]: 
alkyl gr eater tha n alkyl ene grea ter t han ar yl rad ic al wi th alkyl  c hain greater than aryl radical greater than minus CH Subscript 2 Baseline minus CH Subscript 2 Baseline minus CH Subscript 2 Baseline upper O minus
Interestingly, surfactants are able to alter the particle–surface interaction forces 
that involved van der Waals force, electrostatic force and hydrophobic force, 
depending on the type of molecules. Besides, surfactants are the self-assembled 
molecular clusters that adsorbed to the interface between a solution, which enabled to 
insist and direct the formation of structural molecules with other particles, including 
pseudocapacitive materials. The electrochemical performance of LIBs is signiﬁcantly 
impacted by morphological structures of battery materials. 
There are four classiﬁcation of surfactants: cationic, anionic, non-ionic and 
amphoteric surfactant, as shown in Fig. 2a. The charges of hydrophilic head are 
corresponded to the functional group of molecules, where the cationic surfactant has 
a positive charge, the anionic surfactant has a negative charge, the non-ionic surfac-
tant has no charge, and the amphoteric surfactant has both positive and negative 
charges. Cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) are the most popular example 
of cationic surfactants that consist a quaternary ammonium compound and a different 
alkyl group, as their polar and non-polar groups, respectively. To attract the nega-
tively charged group, these surfactants are widely used in industrial production, 
including fabric softeners, hair conditioners, corrosion inhibitors, and emulsiﬁers. 
Instead, anionic surfactants, which are mostly suitable for high cleansing applica-
tions like detergent and shampoo, are linked to the positively charged particles in the 
presence of water. The examples of anionic surfactants are sodium dodecylsulfonate 
(SDS), and sodium dodecylbenzenesulfonate (SDBS), which are typically applied 
for industrial dispersion. In addition, non-ionic surfactants are long chain polymers 
that are distinctly not coupled with any charged functional groups, even if there is 
water present. The non-ionic surfactants are commercially available with low toxi-
city and biodegradable features, such as poly (alkylene-oxide) block copolymers, 
sorbitan esters and oleic acid. Amphoteric surfactants are also known as zwitteri-
onic surfactants because they have a positive charge and a negative charge, which 
uniquely can change according to the pH of the surrounding solution, transforming 
the surfactants into anionic in an alkaline solution and cationic in an acidic solu-
tion. Betaine surfactants are the most famous amphoteric surfactants, but they are 
rarely applied in energy storage application. Generally, different types of surfactants 
are used for different objectives, such as emulsiﬁcation, dispersion, foaming and 
defoaming, corrosion inhibition and many more.
In battery applications, surfactants are introduced with cathode active materials 
to increase the rate of ions diffusivity by encouraging the formation of surfactant 
micelles, which ampliﬁes the electrochemical activity [7]. A surfactant micelle is 
produced from colloidal particles by the self-assembled aggregation of hydrophilic 
head segments and hydrophobic tail segments, as displayed in Fig. 2b. At a critical

Surfactant-Assisted Pseudocapacitive Materials for Li-Ion Batteries
319
Fig. 2 a Classiﬁcation of surfactants. b Formation of a surfactant micelle

320
W. M. A. Kalam et al.
micelle concentration (CMC), surfactant micelles form and maintain physical and 
chemical stability, depending on the factors involved, such as synthesis methods, 
solvent types, analytical methodologies, and more [8]. The utilisation of surfactant 
enables to facilitate the interfacial interaction between the particles, assisting the 
surface modiﬁcation to increase the surface area of molecules, which in turn enhances 
the rate of ion diffusion of materials [9]. Surfactants can also be associated with 
silicon-based composites to develop a selective assembly method for LIBs. The 
cationic surfactants, such as CTAB, are able to selectively assemble the molecules 
due to their hydrophobic properties, which resulted in a homogeneous dispersion 
of silicon (Si) through electrostatic interaction [10]. Besides, the use of non-ionic 
surfactant, such as Triton-X100, with Si-based composites has demonstrated that 
Si particles are evenly distributed and encapsulated, improving the surface area of 
active materials and maintaining their structural stability [11]. These approaches 
have successfully increased the molecule sizes based on surface modiﬁcation that 
has facilitated the Li ion transportation in LIBs [11]. Furthermore, surfactants can 
be acted as additive agents, for an instance, to stop the active materials of LIBs 
from combining with citric acid [12]. As a result, by linking citric acid and CTAB 
surfactant, an appropriate space has been created for lithiation/delithiation process to 
take place between the electrodes [12]. The surfactants as additive agents are capable 
to adjust the phase composition, morphological uniformity and particles crystallinity, 
depending on the quantity of surfactants employed in the system [12]. Therefore, 
the presence of surfactants helps to explain the interactive behaviour among the 
particles in the active materials of LIBs, which exhibited excellent electrochemical 
performance. 
3 
Synthesis Methods of Surfactant-Assisted 
Pseudocapacitive Materials 
Li-based pseudocapacitive materials can be produced using a variety of surfactant-
assisted synthesis techniques, such as solvothermal, hydrothermal, sol–gel, and solid-
state methods, but these processes must be carried out under the right conditions 
because they may lead to different types of particle structures. The preparation 
methods enable the components to respond appropriately in response to variables 
like temperature, time, pressure and so on. Surfactants must also be introduced in 
the proper circumstances and directed to the necessary structures for batteries to 
perform more effectively based on the structures engineering. Some of the notable 
studies of surfactant assisted Li-based pseudocapacitive materials of LIBs based on 
the synthesis methods are summarised in Table 1.

Surfactant-Assisted Pseudocapacitive Materials for Li-Ion Batteries
321
Table 1 Surfactant assisted Li-based pseudocapacitive materials of LIBs based on the synthesis methods 
Li-based pseudocapacitive 
materials 
Type of surfactants
Synthesis methods
Solvents
Speciﬁc 
capacity (mAh 
g−1) 
Capacity 
retention 
References 
LiFePO4/C
CTAB (cationic)
Solvothermal 180 °C 
6 h  
Ethylene glycol
163 at 0.1C
99.2% after 
200 cycles 
[13] 
LiMnPO4/C
CTAB (cationic)
Solvothermal 
190 °C 24 h 
Water-DEG
148.6 at 0.1C
92.7% after 
500 cycles 
[14] 
Li3V2(PO4)3/C
CTAB (cationic)/ 
Pluronic® P123 
(non-ionic)/Tween® 
20 (non-ionic) 
Solvothermal 120 °C 
24 h and 180 °C 24 h 
Water–ethanol
112 at 2C
97.1% after 
1000 cycles 
[15] 
LiFePO4
SDS (anionic)
Hydrothermal 200 °C 
6 h  
Water
165 at 0.1C
–
[16] 
LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2-V2O5
SDBS (anionic)
Hydrothermal 170 °C 
12 h 
Water
101.7 at 10C
89.12% after 
100 cycles at 
0.5C 
[17] 
Li[Li0.2Ni0.2Mn0.6]O2
CTAB (cationic)/PVP 
(non-ionic)/SDBS 
(anionic) 
Hydrothermal 160 °C 
12 h 
Water
270 at 0.1C
89.5% after 
200 cycles at 
1C 
[18] 
C-Li1.05FePO4
Oleic acid (non-ionic) Sol–gel 160 °C 5 h
Ethanol
155 at C/3
–
[19] 
LFP/C
Block copolymer 
(non-ionic) 
Sol gel 70 °C 24 h
Tetrahydrofuran (THF)
160 at 0.1C
92% after 
1000 cycles at 
1C 
[20] 
Li4Ti5O12-LTO
CTAB (cationic)
Sol–gel 70 °C 24 h
Ethanol-acetic acid
176 at C/15
92% after 30 
cycles 
[21]
(continued)

322
W. M. A. Kalam et al.
Table 1 (continued)
Li-based pseudocapacitive
materials
Type of surfactants
Synthesis methods
Solvents
Speciﬁc
capacity (mAh
g−1)
Capacity
retention
References
LiFe0.5Mn0.5PO4/C
Oleic acid (non-ionic) Solid-state 400 RPM 
4 h  
Ethanol
155 at 0.1C
94.8% after 
500 cycles at 
1C 
[22] 
LiMnPO4/C
Oleic acid (non-ionic) Solid-state
Parafﬁn
117 at 1C
–
[23] 
PVP Polyvinylpyrrolidone

Surfactant-Assisted Pseudocapacitive Materials for Li-Ion Batteries
323
3.1 
Solvothermal Methods 
The adaptive process of solvothermal synthesis is frequently used to precisely 
regulate the well-deﬁned morphological structures based on their size distribu-
tion, shape, and crystalline phases [24]. This kind of synthesis is carried out in 
sealed containers, like Teﬂon-lined stainless steel autoclaves, where the chemical 
reactions are conducted in a solvent at temperatures above the boiling point and 
pressures above 1 bar, which are able to promote the solubility and reactivity of 
the reagents [24]. Numerous non-water based solvents, such as ethanol, methanol, 
ammonia, hydrochloric acid, hydroﬂuoric acid are commonly employed in the 
process. Solvothermal process is one of the most efﬁcient ways to prepare pseudoca-
pacitive materials, which involves ﬁne-tuning the structures with surfactant adsoption 
by using the selected solvents and inducing the high crystallinity diffraction patterns 
[25]. 
The methods can also be used for synthesis of pseudocapacitive materials and 
surfactants to stimulate the crystallisation process through the self-assembly mech-
anism. The addition of surfactants to a LiFePO4 precursor solution with ethylene 
glycol solvent has shown high crystallinity of LiFePO4 composites, accelerating the 
rate of capability and stabilising the cycling performance [13]. The aid of surfactant 
like CTAB has served to control the particles growth and inhibit an agglomeration of 
molecules, enlarging the speciﬁc surface area of Li-based pseudocapacitive materials, 
such as LiMnPO4 composites [13, 14]. Besides, the solvothermal routes has played 
the roles to regulate the crystal orientation, control the particle sizes, and promote the 
carbon-coating, thus beneﬁting the electrochemical performance of LIBs [14]. Some 
of the studies has compared the signiﬁcant effects of surfactants in electrochemical 
performance of LIBs based on pseudocapacitive composites by using solvothemal 
methods. The presence of cationic surfactants in the composites has generated a 
superior charge/discharge capacity with an improved cycling stability to the battery 
performance [14]. Moreover, the tailoring technique of surfactants has demonstrated 
well-deﬁned cluster of microstructures through the formation of micelles, presenting 
better electrons pathway for ions migration for higher rate capability of LIBs [15, 
26]. Surfactants also can be applied as structure-directing agents to create the core 
and shell regions, contributing larger particle sizes for ions conductivity [27]. In 
addition, the reaction of anionic surfactant and solvent under a high temperature of 
heating has developed the growth of Li-based materials that avoids the agglomeration 
of particles, which has exhibited high crystallinity of nanocomposite [28]. 
3.2 
Hydrothermal Methods 
Hydrothermal synthesis is analogous to solvothermal synthesis that must be carried 
out in a sealed container at high temperatures (100–250 °C) and high vapour pres-
sures. The term of ‘hydrothermal’ clariﬁes water or aqueous solution is employed

324
W. M. A. Kalam et al.
as the solvent, which distinguishes it from a solvothermal process. This simple tech-
nique is another way to generate composites with controlled and maintained size, 
shape, porosity and composition. It also offers advantages, such as environmental 
friendliness, cost effectiveness, and improved the performance due to better solution 
dispersion [29]. 
Additionally, hydrothermal methods are commonly used to synthesize olivine 
composites, which also enable to produce well-crystallized compounds with high 
surface areas, similar as solvothermal methods. The large surface areas are impor-
tant properties of psuedocapacitive materials to give high probability of electrons 
transportation and ions diffusion through the inﬁltration area of Li-based composites, 
making the hydrothermal is essential way for the synthesis [30]. The synthesis process 
also has achieved the desired morphologies that adjusted in the system. The assistance 
of SDS surfactant in a two-step hydrothermal process has developed high surface 
area of rhombohedral olivine structures with crystalline appearance that presented 
high discharged capacity of battery [16]. Other than that, the hydrothermal route has 
created a homogenous precipitation with a surfactant as the additive agent, which 
allowed the formation of crystalline particles by modifying the structural patterns 
[31]. The uniformity of structures can also be controlled through the stable forma-
tion of surfactant micelles. In other research, the surfactant-assisted hydrothermal 
reaction has been utilized for in-situ coating with the purpose of ions doping and 
surface modiﬁcation of Li-based pseudocapacitive materials, such as the vanadium 
pentoxide (V2O5) coating in LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2 cathode materials [17]. The tech-
nique has provided good dispersibility and uniform structures that accelerated rate of 
Li ion diffusion, where the coating effect had successfully reduce the electrolyte side 
reaction in the LIBs system [17]. Hydrothermal methods has also resulted different 
morphological structures, depending on the types of surfactant added in the solution, 
cationic, anionic, or non-ionic surfactants. The cationic surfactants have contributed 
small particle sizes with the most deﬁned distribution that had shorten the pathway of 
Li ion transportation to generate the largest Li+ diffusion coefﬁcient and the smallest 
charge transfer resistance, producing excellent electrochemical performance of LIBs 
[18]. 
3.3 
Sol–gel Methods 
Sol–gel methods are another approach that managed effective routes to synthesize 
nanoparticles with high stability and high surface areas through the formation of a 
colloidal particle suspension in a solvent. The word ‘sol’ is referred to the dispersion 
of colloidal solid particles at maximum stability, whereas the word ‘gel’ is referred 
to three-dimensional (3D) network of solid particles in hydrolysis and condensation 
processes that has interlinked between solid phase and liquid phase. Sol–gel methods 
are common methods that used in a large scale manufacture due to the competency 
of controlling the materials composition at low temperatures with high purity level, 
making them suitable for surfactant-assisted synthesis [32].

Surfactant-Assisted Pseudocapacitive Materials for Li-Ion Batteries
325
Sol–gel routes are speciﬁed in many studies for carbon-coating process, which 
are collaborated to intensify electric and ionic conductivity of nanocomposites by 
controlling the uniform distribution of particles and modifying the nanoparticles 
proportion [33]. The non-ionic surfactants, like long chain polymers (i.e. oleic acid 
and PVP) are mostly applied in sol–gel methods to act as a carbon source, covering the 
active materials and minimizing the average particle sizes to reduce the Li ions path 
for a rapid ions diffusion [19]. Besides, the non-ionic surfactants has prevented the 
aggregation between the colloid particles and carbon by forming hydrogen bonds 
to obtain uniform small grains porous structure that had enhanced the electronic 
conductivity of pseudocapacitive nanomaterials [34]. The formation of non-ionic 
surfactant micelles has polymeric components with high molecular weight, oper-
ating as the surface-directing agents to yield a self-assembled aggregation to produce 
carbon-coated nanocomposites [20]. The other type of surfactants, such as anionic 
and cationic surfactants are also applied for the pseudocapacitive materials prepa-
ration with different purposes. The anionic surfactant, like lauric acid has served 
as blocking agents in sol–gel methods to inhibit the colloid agglomeration because 
the gel formation has produced a large amount of free hydroxyls that expanded the 
particle size distribution, resulting inhomogeneity of solution [35]. The surfactants 
has also managed the high dispersibility of solution, promoting better element doping 
process to Li-based materials without structure alteration, giving a good protection 
of active materials to maintain the cycling stability of LIBs [35]. A subsequent eval-
uation is also studied on cationic surfactant, like CTAB based on sol–gel synthesis, 
which provides well-dispersed particles orientation through the formation of phase 
pure, boosting high Li storage capacity for LIBs [21]. 
3.4 
Solid-State Methods 
Solid-state methods are utilized occasionally in preparation of Li-based cathode 
active materials, involving the chemical decomposition reactions of solid reactants 
through annealing and milling steps at high temperatures that depend on reactants 
properties, reaction conditions, and thermodynamic free energy. These methods are 
relatively inexpensive and facile approaches for nanomaterials preparation, including 
Li-based pseudocapacitive materials. The chain size of surfactants has inﬂuenced the 
surfactant-assisted synthesis in solid-state reaction. The alkyl C–C chain length in 
surfactants able to initiate the space steric effect, reducing the particle sizes of active 
materials as the chain length increases [36]. The smaller particles of composites has 
established a uniform distribution with stronger space steric effects that had ensured 
the high surface energy and kinetic reaction, contributing well-maintained Li-based 
molecules with shorter pathway of Li ion diffusion [36]. The surfactants in solid-state 
reaction are also supported the element substitution by decreasing the particle sizes 
as well, in which the synthesized Li-based materials have efﬁciently taken place the 
Li insertion and extraction that exhibited high speciﬁc capacity and high conductivity 
with excellent rate performance [22]. Besides, the alkyl chain length of surfactants

326
W. M. A. Kalam et al.
has generated a better surface capping to form a dictated nanocrystal pattern, which 
has also performed a surface-coating to avoid excessive agglomeration of particles, 
upgrading the electrochemical behaviour of the particles [23]. 
4 
Structural Morphologies of Surfactant-Assisted 
Psedocapacitive Materials 
The structures of pseudocapacitive materials are extensively explored due to their 
excellent characteristic and properties for use in electronics. The above-mentioned 
approaches have led to a number of different morphologies and structures of Li-
based pseudocapacitive composites, which have potentially enhanced the electro-
chemical performance of LIBs. The most well-known structural morphologies will 
be discussed, including rod-like, plate-like and spherical-like structures, to study the 
importance of surfactants in fabrication of the achieved structures of LIBs cathode 
materials. The reported works of surfactant-aided pseudocapacitive composites 
synthesis are presented in Table 2, based on their structures.
4.1 
Rod-Like Structures 
Rod-like structures are one-dimensional (1D) structures that are applicable for many 
uses, including functional carriers, polymer composites, colloidal agents, and adsor-
bents due to their physical characteristics. Rod-like structures have a large surface 
area to facilitate the ions transportation and exhibit high stability of rate capability 
of LIBs [37]. The presence of surfactants has regulated the development rod-like 
structures and controlled the particles orientation of active materials. 
The addition of surfactants in carbon-coated Li-based nanorods has promoted a 
better cycle performance of LIBs. The nanorods are developed by self-assembling 
properties of surfactants that displayed a better monodipersibility and good particle 
sizes distribution [42]. The surfactants have also stimulated the crystallization process 
of nanorods to favour the Li ion diffusion for high rate performance [42]. More-
over, the structures are able to withstand the electrolytes corrosion during charging/ 
discharging process has become another alternative to overcome one of the down-
sides of Li-based pseudocapacitive materials, assisting the fast Li ions transportation 
of LIBs [37]. The external parameters of surfactant, like concentrations, tempera-
tures and time have also inﬂuenced the thickness of rod-shaped Li-based materials. 
Increasing the surfactant concentrations has slightly stretched the particle shapes and 
lowering the concentrations has produced thinner rod-shaped structure, in which the 
thinner rod structures generated excellent yields of active materials that has improved 
the electrochemical performance [43]. Higher temperature (about 240–270 °C) and 
longer reaction time have developed the most compatible and the best condition of

Surfactant-Assisted Pseudocapacitive Materials for Li-Ion Batteries
327
Table 2 Surfactant assisted Li-based pseudocapacitive materials of LIBs based on their structural morphologies 
Li-based pseudocapacitive materials
Type of 
surfactants 
Type of structures
Type of synthesis 
methods 
Speciﬁc capacity 
(mAh g−1) 
Capacity 
retention 
References 
LiV3O8
Pluronic-F127 
(non-ionic) 
Rod-shaped 
0.5–1.0 µm (ø)  
4–6 µm (length) 
Sol–gel
292.0 at 1C
80.5% after 500 
cycles 
[37, 24] 
LiFePO4
SDBS (anionic)
Nanorods 
~200 nm (ø) 
1–2 µm (length) 
Solvothermal
150 at 1C
88% after 50 
cycles 
[38] 
LiMnPO4·Li3V2(PO4)3/C
Oleic acid 
(non-ionic) 
Nanorods 40–100 nm 
(ø) 
300–500 nm (length) 
Solid-state
101.3 at 16C
79.39% after 
4000 cycles at 
4C 
[39] 
LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2
Span 85 
(non-ionic) 
Nanoplates ~50 nm 
(length) 
~3 nm (thickness) 
Sol–gel
165 at 2C
98.2% after 200 
cycles 
[40] 
LiMnPO4/C
Oleic acid 
(non-ionic) 
Plate-like 1–2 µm 
(length) 
~50 nm (thickness) 
Solid-state
117 at 1C
–
[23] 
LiMnPO4/C
CTAB (cationic) 
Nanoplates 
13 nm (thickness) 
Solvothermal
148.6 at 0.1C
92.7% after 500 
cycles 
[14] 
LiFePO4/C
CTAB (cationic) 
Hollow micro-spheres 
1.2 µm (ø)  
Solvothermal
163 at 0.1C
99.2% after 200 
cycles 
[13] 
Li(Li0.167Mn0.5-Co0.167Ni0.167)O2
PEG-600 
(non-ionic) 
Spheres 
200–250 nm (ø) 
Hydrothermal
142 at 10C
–
[41] 
PEG-600 Polyethylene glycol-600

328
W. M. A. Kalam et al.
nanorod structures, which have generated higher surface areas of active materials 
to manage higher discharged capacity and higher rate capability of LIBs [43]. The 
excellent yields of rod-shaped structures are also created with spaces between the 
neighbouring particles, supplying more open areas to penetrate the electrolyte for 
electron transportation of great LIBs performance [39]. Thus, longer rod-shaped 
morphologies of Li-based pseudocapacitive materials provide higher surface areas 
for better electrical performance of LIBs. 
4.2 
Plate-Like Structures 
Plate-like structures are classiﬁed as notable structures that can be produced using a 
variety of synthesis techniques and environmental factors, modifying the structural 
morphologies in accordance. These structures are widely used in a wide range of 
application, including energy generators, sensors, solar cells, and detectors. The self-
assembling structures using surfactant-assisted synthesis are suitable techniques to 
yield Li-based plate structures for improvement of high electrochemical performance 
in LIBs. 
During the formation of plate-like structures, the surfactant micelles has 
surrounded the active material ions based on their charges to inhibit the growth 
of molecules and prevent the agglomeration that produced conductive particle sheets 
[18]. Then, the particle sheet planes are broaden and widen by strong electrostatic 
repulsion under heat treatment to form plate-like structures, making the designed 
surfactants and temperatures have played the important roles in generating plate-
like structures [18]. Surfactant-aided pseudocapacitive materials, such as LiMnPO4 
composites require high heating and sintering temperatures (about 300–400 °C) to 
form a very stable and maintained plate structures during ions transportation [23]. 
The surfactant-capped active materials have oriented into plate-shaped structures by 
self-assembling process without particles agglomeration under very high tempera-
tures [23]. The morphology modiﬁcation of plate-like structures has expanded the 
contact areas of pseudocapacitive composites, accommodating the Li ion transporta-
tion between the electrodes to enhance the speciﬁc capacity of LIBs [40]. Besides, 
the thickness of plate structures has impacted the distance of Li ion pathways, in 
which lowering the thickness of plate structures has shorten the distance that bene-
ﬁtted the electrochemical performance [14]. The thickness of these structures are 
also effected by the temperatures or heating rates, where the higher temperature has 
created lower thickness of plates structure as it has widen the surface areas and struc-
tures are sustained in the presence of surfactants [44]. Hence, the plate-like structures 
with broader surface area and lower thickness are favourable structures for Li-based 
pseudocapacitive materials, which are capable to decrease Li ion transportation paths 
and facilitate the ions diffusion that led to high speciﬁc capacity and rate capability 
of LIBs.

Surfactant-Assisted Pseudocapacitive Materials for Li-Ion Batteries
329
4.3 
Spherical-Like Structures 
Spherical-like structures are fabricated with typical sizes between 10 and 200 nm in 
diameter, however they can be occasionally developed depending on the properties 
and conditions applied to the particles, such as stability, homogeneity of solution, 
and compatible active materials. The sphericals are capable to efﬁciently sustain the 
interaction between active materials and electrolyte by reducing the Li ion pathway 
due to the formation of porosity that are inﬂuenced by particle sizes and synthesis 
process [45]. The properties of sphericals are consequently has induced the conduc-
tivity of active composites. The surfactant-assisted approaches are also effectively 
established the spherical-like structures in preparation of Li-based pseudocapacitive 
materials. 
The surfactants have acted as structure-directing agents to prepare hollow and 
porous interior of Li-based composites, producing a uniform distribution of spher-
ical particles that are controlled by the surfactants [13]. The spherical structures 
are normally hollowed sphere structures with a vacant space inside, which created 
the porosity properties of sphericals that increased the speciﬁc area of active 
materials and led to faster ions diffusion [24]. The porous structure of sphericals 
have contributed well-dispersed of high crystallized particles with reduced particle 
sizes that improved the distribution consistency of Li-based spherical structures, 
comparing to the particles with non-presence of surfactant [13]. The good dispersion 
effect provides stability of molecules that has successfully prevented the irregular 
accumulation and agglomeration during growth of crystalline spherical structures 
[46]. The spherical morphologies are mostly formed by electrostatic interaction of 
surfactant micellar shells to protect the active materials from agglomeration [46]. 
Other than that, the surfactant-assisted synthesis, such as hydrothermal methods 
has positively affected the development of spherical structures that are proﬁcient to 
narrow the particle sizes distribution [41]. The association of surfactant in precursor 
solution has increased the solution viscosity to give a homogeneous solution with 
better dispersion of particles. The surfactant-associated solution has underwent a 
high temperature (about 180 °C) for self-assembling of Li-based spheres by main-
taining the structures and providing the best composition of spherical structure [41]. 
The bigger particle size distributions (200 nm–1 µm) are oppositely obtained without 
hydrothermal process, depleting the electrochemical performance of LIBs [13, 41]. 
Hence, the smaller particle size distributions of spherical-like structures are highly 
proposed to employ as Li-based pseudocapacitive cathode materials, resulting higher 
speciﬁc areas for Li ions diffusion, shorter distance for ions transportation, and faster 
Li ions diffusion that led to excellent electrochemical performance of LIBs.

330
W. M. A. Kalam et al.
5 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, the studied based on surfactant-assistant Li-based pseudocapacitive 
materials have a wide range of applications in diverse synthesis methods and struc-
tural morphologies to achieve excellent electrochemical performance of LIBs. The 
surfactants are mostly adaptable to Li-based cathode active materials because of their 
physical and chemical properties. The compatibility of surfactants and pseudocapac-
itive materials has signiﬁcantly intensiﬁed the reversible cycling stability of LIBs, 
depending on the required parameters, including surfactant concentrations, designed 
temperatures, and operation time. 
Acknowledgements The authors acknowledge the ﬁnancial support from the Fundamental 
Research Grant Scheme (FRGS) FRGS/1/2021/STG05/UPM/01/1 awarded by the Ministry of 
Higher Education of Malaysia (MOHE). 
References 
1. M. Goswami, S. Kumar, H. Siddiqui, V. Chauhan, N. Singh, N. Sathish, M. Ashiq, S. Kumar, 
Hybrid energy storage devices: Li-ion and Na-ion capacitors, in Emerging Trends in Energy 
Storage Systems and Industrial Applications (Elsevier, 2023), pp. 223–258 
2. Y. Nancharaiah, S.V. Mohan, P. Lens, Biological and bioelectrochemical recovery of critical 
and scarce metals. Trends Biotechnol. 34, 137–155 (2016) 
3. M. Mastali, M. Farkhondeh, S. Farhad, R.A. Fraser, M. Fowler, Electrochemical modeling 
of commercial LiFePO4 and graphite electrodes: kinetic and transport properties and their 
temperature dependence. J. Electrochem. Soc. 163, A2803 (2016) 
4. F. Sun, Y. Zhang, J. Zhang, X. Yan, X. Liu, L. Wang, Preparation of ultraﬁne iron phosphate 
micro-powder from phosphate slag, in MATEC Web of Conferences, EDP Sciences (2018), 
p. 02002 
5. M. Chen, S. Jiang, S. Cai, X. Wang, K. Xiang, Z. Ma, P. Song, A.C. Fisher, Hierarchical 
porous carbon modiﬁed with ionic surfactants as efﬁcient sulfur hosts for the high-performance 
lithium-sulfur batteries. Chem. Eng. J. 313, 404–414 (2017) 
6. M. Miyake, Y. Yamashita, Molecular structure and phase behavior of surfactants. Cosmet. Sci. 
Technol. 389–414 (2017) 
7. K. Naoi, Y. Oura, M. Maeda, S. Nakamura, Electrochemistry of surfactant-doped polypyrrole 
ﬁlm (I): formation of columnar structure by electropolymerization. J. Electrochem. Soc. 142, 
417 (1995) 
8. M. Joseph, H.M. Trinh, A.K. Mitra, Peptide and protein-based therapeutic agents, in Emerging 
Nanotechnologies for Diagnostics, Drug Delivery and Medical Devices (Elsevier, 2017), 
pp. 145–167 
9. X. Liu, J. Lu, J. Jiang, Y. Jiang, Y. Gao, W. Li, B. Zhao, J. Zhang, Enhancing lithium 
storage performance by strongly binding silicon nanoparticles sandwiching between spherical 
graphene. Appl. Surf. Sci. 539, 148191 (2021) 
10. J. Jang, H. Kim, H. Lim, K. jae Kim, H.-G. Jung, S.O. Kim, W. Choi, Surfactant-based selective 
assembly approach for Si-embedded silicon oxycarbide composite materials in lithium-ion 
batteries. Chem. Eng. J. 401, 126091 (2020) 
11. T.K. Pham, J.H. Shin, N.C. Karima, Y.S. Jun, S.K. Jeong, N. Cho, Y.W. Lee, Y. Cho, S.N. Lim, 
W. Ahn, Application of recycled Si from industrial waste towards Si/rGO composite material 
for long lifetime lithium-ion battery. J. Power. Sources 506, 230244 (2021)

Surfactant-Assisted Pseudocapacitive Materials for Li-Ion Batteries
331
12. H. Torkashvand, M. Bagheri-Mohagheghi, Synthesis of Si/rGO nano-composites as anode 
electrode for lithium-ion battery by CTAB and citrate: physical properties and voltage–capacity 
cyclic characterizations. J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Electron. 32, 16456–16466 (2021) 
13. Y. Liu, J. Zhang, Y. Li, Y. Hu, W. Li, M. Zhu, P. Hu, S. Chou, G. Wang, Solvothermal synthesis 
of a hollow micro-sphere LiFePO4/C composite with a porous interior structure as a cathode 
material for lithium ion batteries. Nanomaterials 7, 368 (2017) 
14. W. Zhang, Z. Shan, K. Zhu, S. Liu, X. Liu, J. Tian, LiMnPO4 nanoplates grown via a facile 
surfactant-mediated solvothermal reaction for high-performance Li-ion batteries. Electrochim. 
Acta 153, 385–392 (2015) 
15. S. Yu, A. Mertens, H. Kungl, R. Schierholz, H. Tempel, R.A. Eichel, Morphology dependency 
of Li3V2(PO4)3/C cathode material regarding to rate capability and cycle life in lithium-ion 
batteries. Electrochim. Acta 232, 310–322 (2017) 
16. S. Bolloju, R. Rohan, S.-T. Wu, H.X. Yen, G.D. Dwivedi, Y.A. Lin, J.T. Lee, A green and facile 
approach for hydrothermal synthesis of LiFePO4 using iron metal directly. Electrochim. Acta 
220, 164–168 (2016) 
17. M. Yuan, Y. Li, Q. Chen, C. Chen, X. Liu, W. Zeng, R. Wang, S. Xiao, Surfactant-assisted 
hydrothermal synthesis of V2O5 coated LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2 with ideal electrochemical 
performance. Electrochim. Acta 323, 134822 (2019) 
18. H. Zhou, Z. Yang, C. Yin, S. Yang, J. Li, Fabrication of nanoplate Li-rich cathode material via 
surfactant-assisted hydrothermal method for lithium-ion batteries. Ceram. Int. 44, 20514–20523 
(2018) 
19. K. Bazzi, M. Nazri, V. Naik, V. Garg, A. Oliveira, P. Vaishnava, G. Nazri, R. Naik, Enhancement 
of electrochemical behavior of nanostructured LiFePO4/Carbon cathode material with excess 
Li. J. Power. Sources 306, 17–23 (2016) 
20. M.G. Fischer, X. Hua, B.D. Wilts, E. Castillo-Martínez, U. Steiner, Polymer-templated 
LiFePO4/C nanonetworks as high-performance cathode materials for lithium-ion batteries. 
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 10, 1646–1653 (2018) 
21. C. Sandhya, B. John, C. Gouri, Surfactant-assisted sol–gel route to lithium titanate and its 
electrochemical properties. J. Alloys Compd. 655, 238–243 (2016) 
22. X. Zhou, Y. Xie, Y. Deng, X. Qin, G. Chen, The enhanced rate performance of LiFe0.5Mn0.5PO4/ 
C cathode material via synergistic strategies of surfactant-assisted solid state method and carbon 
coating. J. Mater. Chem. A 3, 996–1004 (2015) 
23. D. Choi, D. Wang, I.-T. Bae, J. Xiao, Z. Nie, W. Wang, V.V. Viswanathan, Y.J. Lee, J.-G. 
Zhang, G.L. Graff, LiMnPO4 nanoplate grown via solid-state reaction in molten hydrocarbon 
for Li-ion battery cathode. Nano Lett. 10, 2799–2805 (2010) 
24. R.S. Mane, V. Jadhav, Spinel Ferrite Nanostructures for Energy Storage Devices (Elsevier, 
2020) 
25. H. Yang, X.-L. Wu, M.-H. Cao, Y.G. Guo, Solvothermal synthesis of LiFePO4 hierarchically 
dumbbell-like microstructures by nanoplate self-assembly and their application as a cathode 
material in lithium-ion batteries. J. Phys. Chem. C 113, 3345–3351 (2009) 
26. Y. Yao, X. Huang, D. Zhou, B. Yang, W. Ma, F. Liang, Surfactant assisted synthesis of rod-like 
LiFePO4/C composite with cluster texture as cathode material for lithium ion batteries. Int. J. 
Electrochem. Sci. 14, 2442–2451 (2019) 
27. M.-Y. Cho, Y.S. Lim, S.-M. Park, K.-B. Kim, K.C. Roh, Size-tunable tavorite LiFe(PO4)(OH) 
microspheres with a core–shell structure. CrystEngComm 17, 6149–6154 (2015) 
28. J. Wang, Y. Niu, Y. Fu, Y. Yang, M. Hojamberdiev, Urea and ethylene glycol-assisted 
solvothermal synthesis of spheroidal LiFePO4/C nanoparticles as a cathode material for 
lithium-ion batteries. ChemistrySelect 3, 5471–5479 (2018) 
29. A.K. da Silva, T.G. Ricci, A.L. de Toffoli, E.V.S. Maciel, C.E.D. Nazario, F.M. Lanças, The 
role of magnetic nanomaterials in miniaturized sample preparation techniques, in Handbook 
on Miniaturization in Analytical Chemistry (Elsevier, 2020), pp. 77–98 
30. G. Du, Y. Xi, X. Tian, Y. Zhu, Y. Zhou, C. Deng, H. Zhu, A. Natarajan, One-step hydrothermal 
synthesis of 3D porous microspherical LiFePO4/graphene aerogel composite for lithium-ion 
batteries. Ceram. Int. 45, 18247–18254 (2019)

332
W. M. A. Kalam et al.
31. J. Wang, S. Zheng, H. Yan, H. Zhang, M. Hojamberdiev, B. Ren, Y. Xu, Na2EDTA-assisted 
hydrothermal synthesis and electrochemical performance of LiFePO4 powders with rod-like 
and block-like morphologies. Mater. Chem. Phys. 160, 398–405 (2015) 
32. S. Prasad, V. Kumar, S. Kirubanandam, A. Barhoum, Engineered nanomaterials: nanofabri-
cation and surface functionalization, emerging applications of nanoparticles and architecture 
nanostructures (Elsevier, 2018), pp.305–340 
33. Y. Zhang, P. Xin, Q. Yao, Electrochemical performance of LiFePO4/C synthesized by sol-gel 
method as cathode for aqueous lithium ion batteries. J. Alloys Compd. 741, 404–408 (2018) 
34. C. Fan, Q. Li, S. Chen, J. Fan, Z. Wen, T. Zeng, X. Zhang, S. Han, Poly (vinylpylrrolidone) as 
surfactant in the sol-gel preparation of lithium iron phospate/carbon cathodes for lithium-ion 
batteries. Energ. Technol. 4, 973–979 (2016) 
35. Y. Gao, L. Li, H. Peng, Z. Wei, Surfactant-assisted sol–gel synthesis of nanostructured 
ruthenium-doped lithium iron phosphate as a cathode for lithium-ion batteries. ChemElec-
troChem 1, 2146–2152 (2014) 
36. Q. Li, F. Zheng, Y. Huang, X. Zhang, Q. Wu, D. Fu, J. Zhang, J. Yin, H. Wang, Surfactants 
assisted synthesis of nano-LiFePO4/C composite as cathode materials for lithium-ion batteries. 
J. Mater. Chem. A 3, 2025–2035 (2015) 
37. Z. Chen, F. Xu, S. Cao, Z. Li, H. Yang, X. Ai, Y. Cao, High rate, long lifespan LiV3O8 nanorods 
as a cathode material for lithium-ion batteries. Small 13, 1603148 (2017) 
38. F. Teng, M. Chen, G. Li, Y. Teng, T. Xu, S.-I. Mho, X. Hua, Synergism of ionic liquid and 
surfactant molecules in the growth of LiFePO4 nanorods and the electrochemical performances. 
J. Power. Sources 202, 384–388 (2012) 
39. X. Cao, A. Pan, Y. Zhang, J. Li, Z. Luo, X. Yang, S. Liang, G. Cao, Nanorod-nanoﬂake 
interconnected LiMnPO4·Li3V2(PO4)3/C composite for high-rate and long-life lithium-ion 
batteries. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 8, 27632–27641 (2016) 
40. W. Pi, T. Mei, Z. Zhang, X. Li, J. Wang, J. Li, X. Wang, Synthesis of disk-like 
LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2 nanoplates with exposed (001) planes and their enhanced rate perfor-
mance in a lithium ion battery. CrystEngComm 19, 442–446 (2017) 
41. J. Fan, G. Li, D. Luo, C. Fu, Q. Li, J. Zheng, L. Li, Hydrothermal-assisted synthesis of Li-rich 
layered oxide microspheres with high capacity and superior rate-capability as a cathode for 
lithium-ion batteries. Electrochim. Acta 173, 7–16 (2015) 
42. L. Bao, G. Xu, X. Sun, H. Zeng, R. Zhao, X. Yang, G. Shen, G. Han, S. Zhou, Mono-dispersed 
LiFePO4@C core-shell [001] nanorods for a high power Li-ion battery cathode. J. Alloys 
Compd. 708, 685–693 (2017) 
43. N.H. Kwon, K.M. Fromm, Enhanced electrochemical performance of <30 nm thin LiMnPO4 
nanorods with a reduced amount of carbon as a cathode for lithium ion batteries. Electrochim. 
Acta 69, 38–44 (2012) 
44. C. Min, X. Ou, Z. Shi, G. Liang, L. Wang, Effects of heating rate on morphology and perfor-
mance of lithium iron phosphate synthesized by hydrothermal route in organic-free solution. 
Ionics 24, 1285–1292 (2018) 
45. Y. He, A. Li, C. Dong, C. Li, L. Xu, Mesoporous tin-based oxide nanospheres/reduced graphene 
composites as advanced anodes for lithium-ion half/full cells and sodium-ion batteries. Chem. 
A Eur. J.  23, 13724–13733 (2017) 
46. J. Guo, M. Yu, F. Wu, Preparation of high purity iron phosphate based on the advanced liquid-
phase precipitation method and its enhanced properties. J. Solid State Chem. 287, 121346 
(2020)

Pseudocapacitive Materials 
for Metal-Sulfur Batteries 
Yogita Dahiya, Shivani Agarwal, Manoj Kumar, Debasish Sarkar, 
and Ankur Jain 
Abstract Alkali metal-sulfur batteries have developed profound interest among 
researchers due to their high theoretical energy density (>2500 Wh kg−1). However, 
their commercial exploitation potential is hindered due to the lower electronic 
conductivity of sulfur and other discharging products, deteriorating polysulﬁde shut-
tling, and substantial volume variations during discharging. Pseudocapacitive mate-
rials can address these issues. Their superior intrinsic properties, such as higher elec-
tronic conductivity, better ionic conduction, and abundant functional groups that, 
trap polysulﬁdes and make them suitable candidates for batteries. Pseudocapaci-
tive materials such as layered transition metal oxides (TMOs), phosphides (TMPs), 
chalcogenides (TMCs), MXenes, etc. have the metal center acting as Lewis’s entity to 
attract polysulﬁde anions. In contrast, the anionic species, such as oxides/phosphides 
and chalcogens, react with metal ions (Li, Na, and K) to provide the synergetic effect. 
This chapter discusses the beneﬁts of using these materials for metal-sulfur batteries 
and associated challenges in a detailed manner. 
Keywords Pseudocapacitive materials · Metal-sulfur batteries · Shuttling effect ·
Hierarchical composites · MXenes
Y. Dahiya · M. Kumar · D. Sarkar 
Department of Physics, Malaviya National Institute of Technology Jaipur, Jaipur, 
Rajasthan 302017, India 
S. Agarwal 
Department of Physics, JECRC University, Jaipur, India 
A. Jain envelope symbol 
Centre for Renewable Energy and Storage, Suresh Gyan Vihar University, Jaipur, 
Rajasthan 302017, India 
e-mail: ankur.j.ankur@gmail.com 
Natural Science Centre for Basic Research and Development, Hiroshima University, 
Higashi-Hiroshima, Japan 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
R. K. Gupta (ed.), Pseudocapacitors, Engineering Materials, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45430-1_18 
333

334
Y. Dahiya et al.
1 
Introduction 
In modern society, electrochemical energy storage (EES) systems such as batteries, 
fuel cells, and supercapacitors have been vastly employed in now-ubiquitous portable 
electrical devices and electriﬁed transport. Pursuing sustainable energy storage tech-
nologies and renewable alternatives is a global research target to cater to growing 
energy demands. Among the batteries, group IA alkali metal-sulfur batteries (M-S 
batteries, M = Li, Na, K) hold enormous potential towards electriﬁed transport 
to succeed conventional lithium-ion batteries because of their ability to provide 
appealing energy density and power density at a comparatively lower cost [1, 2]. In 
metal-sulfur batteries (Li–S and Na–S), the cathode comprises sulfur incorporated in 
the host matrix/framework coupled with the metal anode. Sulfur is an encouraging 
candidate as cathode material for next-generation metal-batteries owing to its envi-
ronmental friendliness, abundance, high theoretical capacity (1673 mAh g−1), and 
remarkable speciﬁc energy density (2500 Wh kg−1, 2.15 V) [3]. In these batteries, 
sulfur follows a two-electron redox reaction and possesses much higher theoretical 
capacity than conventional intercalation cathodes in lithium-ion batteries due to the 
involvement of sulfur [4, 5]. While opportunities for metal-sulfur batteries abound, 
their performance is limited due to low sulfur utilization, lower rate performance, 
and inferior cyclic performance because of slow redox kinetics associated with metal 
polysulﬁdes and the shuttling of these entities through the electrolyte. To resolve 
these problems, efﬁcient sulfur hosts are required that may capture polysulﬁdes 
and facilitate faster reaction kinetics. Traditionally, carbon-based sulfur composite 
electrodes include carbon nanotubes (CNTs) [6], graphene [7], fullerene [8] and 
porous carbon [9]. However, due to the non-polar nature of the carbon matrix, its 
binding energy with lithium polysulﬁdes (LIPSs) is low, which eases the desorp-
tion of LiPSs. In addition, the conversion of polysulﬁdes over carbon is sluggish. 
In such circumstances, pseudocapacitive materials have turned out to be the best 
performers to boost the performance of metal sulfur batteries and tap the energy 
density potential. Various categories of pseudocapacitive materials include layered 
transition metal oxides (TMOs) [9], phosphides (TMPs) [10], chalcogenides (TMCs) 
[11], conducting polymers [12], MXenes [13] and compounds derived from various 
metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) [14]. These materials inherently possess sufﬁ-
cient internal spaces that help in capturing polysulﬁdes. The metal centers in such 
compounds act as Lewis’s entities to attract polysulﬁde anions. In contrast, the anionic 
species, such as oxides/phosphides and chalcogens, act with metal ions (Li, Na, and 
K) to provide the synergetic effect [15]. Their properties, such as good electronic 
conductivity, favorable porous/layered structure, high speciﬁc area, and richer redox 
active sites, boost the reduction of long-chain polysulﬁdes. Further, the porous frame-
work of compounds such as TMCs and MOF-based materials can accommodate 
strains, produced during cycling [16].

Pseudocapacitive Materials for Metal-Sulfur Batteries
335
In this chapter, we have comprehensively covered the fundamentals of the 
charge–discharge mechanism in alkali metal-sulfur batteries, their inherent limi-
tations, followed by a discussion on critical progress in designing robust cath-
odes using pseudocapacitive materials. The mechanism underlying the preferen-
tial absorption of polysulﬁdes due to polar interactions is systematically discussed. 
We have summarised strategies to tune the physiochemical properties of pseu-
docapacitive materials using defect engineering, heteroatom doping, composites/ 
heterostructure designing, and phase engineering in respective sections. The further 
mechanisms underlying the anchoring of sulﬁdes and catalyzing due to Lewis’s acid– 
base pairs depend upon speciﬁc coordination environments concerning a probable 
structure–property relationship is highlighted. 
2 
Metal-Sulfur Batteries 
Metal-sulfur batteries use elemental sulfur as a cathode coupled with metallic anodes 
(Li, Na, and K), as shown in Fig. 1a. Generally, sulfur is combined with diverse host 
materials such as carbon, TMOs, TMCs, conducting polymers (CPs), MOFs, their 
derivatives, etc., due to its insulating nature and absence of crystal or cage-like struc-
ture of sulfur that can accommodate ions. This section mainly focus on mechanisms 
related to Li–S batteries. Various other categories of existing M-S batteries using 
alkalis or other high-valent metals follow similar chemistry as Li–S batteries. Elec-
trochemically, the reactions of S cathodes involve multi-step conversion reactions 
accompanying complex phase transfer of LIPSs during discharging [17]. In general, 
Sulfur (S8) dissociates to bind with lithium ions from electrolytes and catches elec-
trons from external circuits, and subsequently reduces into intermediate poly sulﬁdes 
(Li2Sn, 3 < n < 8). Further, these intermediate polysulﬁdes ultimately transform into 
Li2S (Overall reaction: 16 Li+ + S8 + 16 e− → 8 Li2S), providing a high theoretical 
capacity of 1672 mAh g−1, energy density of 2600 Wh kg−1 and volumetric energy 
density of 3600 Wh L−1. Figure 1b shows the general charge–discharge proﬁle of 
a standard metal-sulfur battery. During discharging, at the ﬁrst discharge plateau 
(potential range 2.15–2.4 V), intermediate lithium polysulﬁde (LiPSs) chains are 
formed, including Li2S8 to Li2S6. Then the intermediate polysulﬁdes transform to 
Li2S4 involving 0.5 electron transfer per sulfur atom in the potential range 2.15– 
2.4 V with theoretical capacity 418 mAh g−1 [18, 19]. At lower potential (2.1 V), 
Li2S4 transforms into Li2S2/Li2S featuring 1.5 electron transfer and providing a 
theoretical capacity of 1255 mAh g−1. High-order polysulﬁdes (Li2Sn, 3 < n < 8)  
which are highly soluble in nature, diffuse towards the anode to get reduced at the 
Li-metal surface, where they get reduced into low-order sulﬁdes (Li2S2 and Li2S). 
During charging, short-order sulﬁdes, predominantly insoluble in nature, return to the 
cathode to oxidize in long-chain sulﬁdes [20]. This process degrades the active mate-
rial, leading to serious repercussions such as capacity fading, excessive consumption 
of electrolytes, and decay in coulombic efﬁciency. Thus, boosting the conversion 
reactions kinetics of long-chain polysulﬁdes into short-chain during discharging

336
Y. Dahiya et al.
Fig. 1 a Schematics showing the conﬁguration of Li–S battery composed of a sulfur-based cathode, 
lithium anode; b Typical charge–discharge proﬁle for Li–S batteries 
would inhibit the dissolution and improve the battery’s performance. Unlike intrin-
sically intercalation-based cathode hosts, sulfur being a conversion-based cathode, 
needs an additional host to store and immobilize the mobile redox polysulﬁdes. 
Despite having high surface area and good conductivity, conversion reactions with 
non-polar carbon nanomaterials are slow and partial due to the physical conﬁnement 
of LiPSs, poor catalytic performance, and sluggish diffusion. Therefore, introducing 
catalysts in electrode material is suggested to boost the conversion kinetic of long-
chain LiPSs into Li2S2/Li2S. Catalytic conversion on conducting and polar entities 
are faster and complete due to faster diffusion and high catalytic performance [18]. 
Na–S and K–S batteries are also in trend with Li–S batteries as they are cost-
effective, and a high abundance of sodium and potassium makes them suitable for 
large-scale practical applications. However, theoretical capacities for Na and K are 
1166 and 664 mAh g−1, respectively, much less than Lithium (3860 mAh g−1) Na–S 
and K–S batteries have similar chemistry as Li–S; challenges exist, such as poor 
ionic transport and sluggish reaction kinetics due to the larger ions and less reducing 
behavior than Li+ ions [21, 22]. 
All the drawbacks associated with Li–S batteries are listed as follows: 
1. M-S batteries undergo a conversion reaction of Sulfur (S) to form Li2S as a  
discharge product. The redox intermediates, metal polysulﬁdes (Li2Sx), migrate 
through the electrolyte, causing a notorious shuttling effect between the cathode 
and anode. This phenomenon leads to capacity fading and hinders the actual 
potential of metal-sulfur batteries [23, 24]. 
2. Both elemental S and polysulﬁdes with electrical insulation behavior have intrin-
sically sluggish kinetics leading to enormous polarisation during cycling and 
deteriorating electrode rechargeability. Therefore, they require the incorporation 
of conducting materials, leading to low utilization of active materials [25, 26]. 
3. The conversion reaction between S and Li2S is accompanied by extensive volume 
alterations as high as 80% during cycling, predominantly arising from different 
densities of S and the reduced metal sulﬁdes [27].

Pseudocapacitive Materials for Metal-Sulfur Batteries
337
The solution to the ﬁrst problem is primarily rooted in the rationale of designing 
innovative cathode materials to tailor physiochemical interactions between sulfur 
and polysulﬁdes [7, 28]. Nevertheless, the central problem of bettered storage and 
suppression of mobilization of metal polysulﬁdes to safeguard coulombic efﬁciency 
and avoid self-discharging to design M-S batteries with long cyclability is still a 
challenge. In this regard, pseudocapacitive materials provide a promising solution. 
3 
Pseudocapacitive Materials 
3.1 
Transition Metal Oxides/Hydroxides 
TMOs have been vastly employed in energy generation and storage applications 
owing to their favourable features such as eco-friendliness, economic viability, and 
excellent catalytic behavior. They exhibit more substantial adsorption capability due 
to ionic bonds associated with higher chemical polarisation. Various 2D metal oxides 
such as Iron oxide [7], Cobalt oxide [7], Silicon Oxide [29], Vanadium Oxide [30], 
manganese oxide [31], titanium oxide [32], etc., are explored by researchers in metal-
sulfur batteries [33]. However, due to low electronic conductivity, TMOs can’t be 
employed in pristine form and thus require conjunction with carbon-based entities 
to ensure smooth electronic and ionic transfer. The lithiated products Li2S2/Li2S 
etc., should be in the conductive environment rather than on oxide to promise sufﬁ-
cient conversion efﬁciency [34]. Sun et al. reported the performance of hierarchical 
spinal sulfur-doped ZnCo2O4 particles anchored on graphene nanosheets synthe-
sized via the hydrothermal method. Subsequently, they are doped with sulfur via a 
melt-diffusion process. The ﬁnal composite could perform as a quirky cathode scaf-
fold to suppress the shuttling effect efﬁciently by conﬁning polysulﬁdes chemically. 
On the other hand, graphene sheets provided for high surface area. They reported the 
electrochemical performance of three distinct conﬁgurations as depicted in Fig. 2. 
As revealed in Fig. 2b–d, cycling capability ZnCo2O4@N-RGO(I)/S71 (S loading— 
71%) was found to best among three samples due to lesser oxide content which have 
led to relatively inferior conductivity in other samples [35].
Xiaobo et al. reported NiO-carbon nanotubes/sulfur (NiO-CNT@S) composite. 
The composite revealed hierarchical features involving high conductivity of CNTs 
and synergetic physiochemical adsorption by both NiO and CNTs, boosting the 
electrochemical performance of Li–S batteries. NiO-CNT@S composite provided a 
high initial discharge capacity of 1072 mAh g−1 and could retain 609 mAh g−1 after 
completing 160 cycles at the current rate of 0.1 C [36]. 
Despite being most discussed and exploited profoundly, transition metal oxides 
could not be commercialized because of low electronic conductivity. Transition metal 
chalcogenides are great performers due to their better cyclic performance, enhanced 
redox activity, added catalytic activity, ﬁner electronic conductivity, and worthier 
structural aspects such as high surface area, ﬂexibility, and denser active sites.

338
Y. Dahiya et al.
Fig. 2 a Scheme illustrating synthesis procedure for ZnCo2O4@N-RGo composites; b GCD curves 
for ZnCo2O4@N-RGo (I)-S62; c long-term cycling performance of various cathodes at 0.8 A g−1; 
d GCD proﬁles for ZnCo2O4@N-RGo (I)-S71; (e) cyclic performance at current density 1.6 A g−1. 
Adapted with permission [35], Copyright (2018), John Wiley & Sons
3.2 
Transition Metal Chalcogenides (TMCs) 
TMCs are anisotropic crystalline compounds with stoichiometry MaXb (M— 
elements from group 3 to group 12, X—chalcogens i.e., group 16 elements mainly S, 
Se, Te) [14]. Transition metal sulﬁdes [37], selenides [38], and tellurides exhibit vari-
able band gaps, tuneable structures, and distinct materials, making them attractive for 
various energy storage/conversion-based applications. TMCs are highly investigated 
materials for Li–S batteries because of their ability to trap LiPSs effectively chem-
ically and boosting the kinetics of conversion of sulﬁdes due to electro catalytic 
behavior [39, 40]. Qin et al. rationally designed multi-shelled hollows spheres of 
Mn3O4–MnS by controlled sulfurization of manganese oxide spheres and employed 
these as sulfur host to fabricate cathode for Li–S batteries. This structure provided 
ample active sites and strong adsorption and fast conversion are facilitated by Mn3O4 
and MnS, respectively, which lead to a synergetic effect. As assembled battery deliv-
ered decent rate performance and prominent cyclic stability (00.016% decay per 
cycle at rate 2 C) up to 100 cycles [41]. Liu et al. reported various chalcogenides of 
manganese (including MnO, MnS, MnSe) implanted in carbon nanoﬁbers synthe-
sized by electrospinning method and by thermal treatment. It was observed that

Pseudocapacitive Materials for Metal-Sulfur Batteries
339
MnO@CNF being polar in nature show best adsorption behavior while MnSe@CNF 
showed best catalytic performance leading to better rate performance and cycla-
bility. Figure 3 shows electrochemical performance of all three cathodes in lithium-
sulfur batteries. Figure 3a reveals highest capacity of 1056 mAh g−1 at 0.2 C for 
MnSe@CNF and exhibited superior rate performance in current range of 0.2 to 4 C. 
Long term cyclic measurements also reveals superiority of MnSe@CNF over other 
two electrodes [42]. 
Single step in-situ sulﬁdation strategy was employed to create a CoS2-N-doped 
MXene heterostructure (N-MX-CoS2) as a perspective sulfur host by X. Fan and 
co-workers to cultivate the desirable properties of MXene and CoS2. Synergistic 
N-dopant sites and polar CoS2 nanoparticles ensured efﬁcient adsorption of LiPSs. 
In addition, the layered structure and high conductivity of MXene paved the way for 
faster redox reactions. This structure effectively immobilized LiPSs and enhanced 
their conversion reaction. An initial capacity of 1031 mAh g−1 at 1 C was observed, 
along with excellent rate performance and outstanding cyclability with a decay rate 
of 0.052% per cycle at 1 C [43].
Fig. 3 Electrochemical performance of Li–S coin cells, a GCD proﬁles for various cathodes at 0.2 
C; enlarged proﬁles corresponding to b discharge proﬁle; c charge proﬁle; d rate performance of 
various cathodes; e long-term cycling performance of coin cells; f Nyquist plots of cell post-cycling 
(0.2 C). Adapted with permission [42], Copyright (2022), Elsevier 

340
Y. Dahiya et al.
To exploit the advantages of TMCs, various TMC heterostructures have been 
created with carbon-based materials [42], TMOs [41], Mxenes [43], and conducting 
polymers (CPs) [44] for their applications in metal-sulfur batteries. In these 
heterostructures, TMCs provided noticeable electrocatalytic capabilities for the 
conversion of LIPS; while TMOs, MXenes, or metal oxides exhibited superior trap-
ping behavior towards polysulﬁdes. Thus, hybrid structures synergistically boosted 
the trapping and conversion of LiPSs, suppressing the shuttle effect. For instance, 
a heterostructure composed of WS2 nanosheets-WO3 nanoparticles synthesized via 
vapor sulfurization of tungsten oxide provided abundant active sites at the interface, 
which leads to performance enhancement [45]. 
3.3 
Transition Metal Phosphides/Borides 
Transition metal Phosphides (TMPs) and Borides (TMBs) consist of metal-metalloid 
bonds (M-P or M-B) and metalloid-metalloid (P–P or B–B) bonds, respectively. 
Due to this peculiar bonding, they are endowed with abundant compositions, 
diverse crystal structures, exposed electronic states, strong electronegativity, and 
electronic conductivity [46, 47]. They are superior to TMOs and TMCs as sulfur 
hosts concerning their electrocatalytic behavior and LiPSs adsorption abilities. Thus, 
sulfur-based composites of TMPs/TMBs with carbon nanomaterials as conductive 
backbone possessing high catalytic response offer ultimate possibilities as a cathode 
in Li–S batteries [48]. However, these compounds must be dispersed on porous 
conductive surfaces to avoid their accumulation. 
Cheng et al. prepared novel yolk-shell hollow nanospheres of Ni2P to encapsulate 
sulfur in the interiors of spheres to capture the synergy from excellent adsorption 
and abundant electroactive sites. As-prepared S@Ni2P cathode delivered an ultra-
high capacity of 1409 mAh g−1 at 0.2 C rate and superior rate capability up to 
10 C [49]. Chen’s team reported Fe–Co–P Nanocubes with porous architecture, high 
conductivity, abundant adsorptive sites, and strong polarity. S@Co–Fe–P showed the 
reversible capacity of 1245 mAh g−1 at 0.1 C rate and better cyclic performance at 
1 C for 500 cycles, as shown in Fig. 4. The areal capacity observed for this cathode 
was 4.6 mAh cm−2 with a sulfur content of 5.5 mg cm−2 [50].
Pang et al. reported superconductor MgB2 that can fulﬁll the need for electron 
conduction and polysulﬁdes immobilization and enhancing redox kinetics of LiPSs. 
They used a sandwiched structure of MgB2 and graphene to provide a large surface 
area and prevent aggregation [51]. The graphene-MgB2 electrode showed superior 
cyclic capacity retaining 92% capacity over 200 cycles at 0.5 C with a minimal fade 
rate of 0.04% per cycle. With the development of advanced futuristic materials, new 
strategies can be further incorporated into metal phosphides/borides as catalytic hosts 
for Li–S batteries. For instance, using high-entropy oxides and alloys in composite 
form with phosphides, etc., as catalytic hosts for sulfur cathodes in Li–S batteries.

Pseudocapacitive Materials for Metal-Sulfur Batteries
341
Fig. 4 a CV proﬁles for 2nd cycles for S@Co–Fe and S@Co–Fe–P; b GCD proﬁles for S@Co– 
Fe–Pat various scan rates from 0.1 to 2 C; c Rate performance; d Long-term cycling performance 
at 0.2 C for S@Co–Fe and S@Co–Fe–P; e cycling for S@Co–Fe–P cathode at 1 C. Adapted with 
permission [50], Copyright (2019), American Chemical Society
3.4 
Conducting Polymers 
Conducting polymers are organic materials whose structure consist of π-conjugated 
double bonds with high electrical conductivity and mechanical ﬂexibility. Further, 
their favorable features including easy fabrication, cost-friendliness, lighter weight, 
tuneable physical properties, structural diversity, and redox reversible nature, make 
them attractive materials for M-S batteries. Conducting polymers can be incorpo-
rated with polar compounds (TMOs and MOFs) or carbon to make composite struc-
tures. Sometimes they contain functionalities such as S, N, and O that could interact

342
Y. Dahiya et al.
with LiPSs. Polyaniline (PANI) [44], polythiophene (PTh) [44], Polypyrrole (PPy) 
[52] and their derivatives are mainly employed in Li–S battery and energy storage 
research nowadays. They can be used as sulfur hosting materials, interlayers, redox 
mediators, or in coating layers of cathodes, separators or binders to eliminate volu-
metric changes during cycling. It plays a key role as an adsorbing material, active 
material, and a conductive agent [53]. 
Polyaniline has a theoretical capacity of 294 mAh g−1, and it tends to capture 
migrating LiPSs via interaction between quinonoid imine linkages (–N=) with 
sulfur-containing entities to immobilize them. Dai et al. fabricated an S-rich 
copolymer containing PANI and S-composite, i.e., S-g-PANI/S (SPAS). As synthe-
sized, copolymer S-based composite with a high S copolymerization degree of 
52 at.% provided capacity rates of 1227 mAh g−1 at 0.1 C, 950 mAh g−1 at 1 C, and 
a retention of up to 54.2% of initial capacity was observed after 800 cycles, where a 
decay rate of only 0.06% per cycle is reported [53]. 
Polypyrrole (PPy) has a conjugated structure with alternate single and double 
bonds between carbon atoms. Zhao’s group reported a core–shell composite of S/PPy 
by direct polymerization of monomeric pyrrole on nanospheres of sulfur. Polypyr-
role could avoid aggregation of sulfur particles, LiPSs dissolution, and their shuttling 
while simultaneously providing efﬁcient pathways for electronic and ionic conduc-
tion. As-fabricated cathode with sulfur loading of 80% could achieve the initial 
capacity of 1142 mAh g−1 and retained capacity of 65% after 100 cycles at 0.5 C 
[54]. In similar instances, a 3D porous cathode of sulfur and carbon nanotubes (CNT) 
composite (S/PSKC) encapsulated by a Polypyrrole layer (formed by vapor-phase 
polymerization) was reported. Figure 5 represents the schematic illustration of the 
synthesis process of the hybrid structure. The S/PSKC@PPy electrode with 72.8% 
sulfur loading provided the reversible capacity of 1109.2 mAh g−1, and after 100 
cycles, remarkable retention of the capacity of 93.1% was observed, as shown in 
Fig. 5b–d. As synthesized cathodes provided for superior cyclic performance and 
improved coulombic efﬁciency [55].
Chen’s group used polythiophene in Li–S batteries in core–shell structure prepared 
by in-situ chemical oxidation polymerization method. The hybrid structure provided 
stable cyclability because of conductive PTh surrounding sulfur particles that 
prevented agglomeration of S particles, and the porous structure adsorbed LiPSs efﬁ-
ciently, boosting the battery’s performance. The initial discharge capacity observed 
was 1119.3 mAh g−1, and the capacity retained after 80 cycles was 830.2 mAh g−1 
[56]. A facile strategy was employed to synthesize porous tin oxide nanoparticles-
decorated tubular PPy (S/PPy@SnO2) as a host for sulfur to integrate advantageous 
properties while tackling shortcomings. As synthesized material exhibit high speciﬁc 
surface area, highly conducting pathways, and large spaces to accommodate LiPSs 
and Li ions. Consequently, the cathode with sulfur loading of 65% exhibited excel-
lent cycling stability with a minimal capacity decay rate of 0.05% per cycle till 500 
cycles at 1 C is observed along with remarkable rate capability at 5 C (coulombic 
efﬁciency > 90%) [57].

Pseudocapacitive Materials for Metal-Sulfur Batteries
343
Fig. 5 a Schematics depicting the synthesis approach for S/PSKC@PPy composite; Charge– 
discharge proﬁles showing cycling performance for cathodes at 0.15 C up to 100 cycles for cell 
with; b S/PSKC cathode and c S/PSKC@PPy cathode; long term cycling performance of cathodes 
at d 0.15 C; e 0.5 C. Adapted with permission [55], Copyright (2019), American Chemical Society
Given the advantages and challenges mentioned above, it is suggested to look 
for the solution of existing problems of this system such as poor cyclic perfor-
mance and low heat resistance which limits their potential of being used directly in 
commercial applications. Further, their conductivity is still unsatisfactory, which may 
be signiﬁcantly improved by doping (chemical, electrochemical, or light excitation 
doping). In addition, functional groups may be attached via physical or chemical 
approaches to enhance the adsorption phenomenon. Further, to get deeper insight

344
Y. Dahiya et al.
regarding the mechanism of adsorption of polysulﬁde by CPs, operando IR, XPS or 
XAS techniques may be used to study the evolution of changes happening during 
the process. 
3.5 
MXenes (Nitrides and Carbides) 
MXenes are a newly emerged class of 2D materials (nitrides and carbonitrides); ﬁrst 
introduced in 2011. They have been extensively employed in energy storage applica-
tions because of their very high conductivity, low diffusion barrier, and hydrophilic 
surface [58]. Two-dimensional MXenes can realize efﬁcient trapping-diffusion-
conversion of LiPSs because of their inherent structural properties, such as rich active 
sites, better conductivity, surface functional groups, and structural maneuverability. 
Due to their unique porous 2D structure, they can act as suitable sulfur hosts in Li–S 
batteries [15, 59]. Zhang et al. reported a sulfur cathode based on a 3D composite of 
N-doped porous carbon and MXene (Ti3C2) synthesized via a sacriﬁcial-template-
assisted approach with 80% sulfur loading (Fig. 6). The composite could provide 
high speciﬁc area, conductive pathways, and ensured stronger physical and chemical 
interactions with LiPSs [60]. 
Fig. 6 Electrochemical behavior of S@N-PC/MXene-based cathode: a CV proﬁles for 1st, 2nd, 
and 3rd cycles; b Rate performance; c Initial GCD proﬁles at various scan rates; d cyclic performance 
at 1 C for pure S@MXene and S@N-PC/MXene. Adapted with permission [60], Copyright (2019), 
Royal Society of Chemistry

Pseudocapacitive Materials for Metal-Sulfur Batteries
345
In the same way, the performance of an interlinked composite of MXenes and 
carbon nanotubes (CNTs) is unveiled by Liang et al., whereby they reported excellent 
cycling performance of composite along with negligible capacity fading of 0.043% 
per cycle till 1200 cycles [61]. The superior performance of the composite is ascribed 
to the interaction between metallic MXene and LiPSs by cleavage of Ti–OH bonds 
by the formation of thiosulfates (stronger Ti–S bonds). Meanwhile, interlinked CNT 
provided for a porous framework with conductive network pathways and enhanced 
LiPSs adsorption. 
3.6 
MOF-Derived Materials 
MOFs serve as perspective sulfur hosts with a high speciﬁc surface area and large pore 
volume, leading to a long life span and enhanced capacity. Metal-organic frameworks 
(MOFs) are materials with well-deﬁned crystallinity and high permanent porosity 
consisting of metal entities inter-connected by organic linkers. They can be rationally 
designed to get desirable structure and tuneable porosity [62]. 
The pioneering work based upon using a MOF-based template incorporating 
sulfur was demonstrated by Zhou et al. in which smaller MOFs are better for higher 
sulfur utilization. They suggested that functional groups attached in MOFs’ apertures 
interact with polysulﬁde anions in Lewis’s acid–base manner to provide stable and 
long cyclic performance by mitigating their movement through electrolytes. ZIF-
8 particles with 30 wt% sulfur loading with size <20 nm could provide a higher 
speciﬁc capacity of ~950 mAh g−1 at 0.5 C, while the larger one with size ~200 
nm could provide better capacity retention (75% after 250 cycles at 0.5 C) in metal-
sulfur storage systems. They also revealed the electrochemical performance of other 
Al-based MOFs, MIL-53, NH2-MIL-53, and HKUST-1, in a comparative manner. 
Rationally designed small sizes and smaller apertures are favorable for achieving 
high capacity and superior life span [63]. Chen et al. revealed the electrochem-
ical performance of the micropores-rich structure of MIL-101(Cr) as a host for 
sulfur impregnation. They synthesized MIL-101(Cr)/S nanocomposite enfolded by 
graphene nanosheets to generate a conducting backbone that dramatically enhanced 
the cathode’s cyclic stability and rate performance [64]. 
Besides, pristine MOFs as host matrix, MOF-derived carbon, and other 
compounds have also been investigated by researchers. Cheetham et al. revealed 
the performance of four different sulfur-loaded carbon materials derived from the 
ZIF-8, RT-MOF-5, Solvo-MOF-5, and Zinc furmate synthesized by pyrolysis in 
inert ambient. It was observed that specimens containing higher micropores content 
than mesopores provided enhanced initial capacity [65]. Wei et al. synthesized 
polyhedron-shaped porous Zn–Co oxide (ZnCo2O4) derived from their MOFs (ZIF-
8@ZIF-67) anchored by MXene (Ti3C2) as an efﬁcient sulfur immobilizer. As-
synthesized ZnCo2O4@Ti3C2/S composite could provide a discharge capacity of 
1283.9 mAh g−1 in its ﬁrst cycle, along with coulombic efﬁciency of 98.7% at a 
current rate of 0.1 C. It exhibited outstanding cycling stability at 0.5 C up to 400

346
Y. Dahiya et al.
cycles and remarkable rate performance in diverse current density range varying 
from 0.1 to 2 C, as depicted in Fig. 7 [66]. The performance may be credited to a 
well-designed composite with an internal hollow structure that provides more space 
for sulfur storage sites, thus enhancing sulfur utilization. It also alleviates volume 
changes occurring during cycling. Meanwhile, ZnCo2O4 inhibited the dissolution 
and diffusion of polysulﬁdes by providing enough polar sites which could strongly 
interact with LiPSs. Ti3C2 added to synergy by enhancing the composite’s elec-
tronic conductivity, and the overall composite accounted for high reversible speciﬁc 
capacity and rate capability.
MOFs and MOF-derived carbon-based materials and their composites are 
perspective candidates for mitigating polysulﬁde shuttling between electrodes. All 
the advantages are listed as follows: 
1. Abundant pores that can accommodate large amounts of sulfur to achieve high 
utilization of active material. 
2. Tuneable pore size with desirable window apertures to absorb and capture 
polysulﬁde anions efﬁciently to prevent their electrolyte solubility. 
3. Functionalities on inner surfaces of MOF structures endow them with a polarity 
that interacts with polysulﬁdes and strengthens the immobilization ability. 
4. Hierarchical carbonized structures and rigid scaffolds can effectively accom-
modate volume strains produced during cycling while simultaneously providing 
conducting pathways for electrons. 
4 
Conclusion and Future Perspective 
Pseudocapacitive materials are opportune for metal-sulfur battery applications 
because of their distinctive structural, electrochemical, and electrical features. 
Advanced sulfur host matrices can be realized via precise size regulation from 
angstrom to the micron level. This chapter discussed metal-sulfur batteries, brieﬂy 
introducing existing challenges with these systems. Minimizing polysulﬁdes by 
reducing the shuttling and boosting reaction kinetics is a long-term research target 
towards realizing state-of-art metal-sulfur batteries. A perspective sulfur cathode 
should guarantee: (a) bettered electrical and ionic conductivity to compensate for the 
insulation behavior of the sulfur/sulﬁdes family; (b) Smooth interfacial contacts and 
improved absorption and catalytic properties to mitigate shutting and poor kinetics; 
(c) enough spaces and suitable mechanical stability to accommodate volumetric 
strains produced during cycling. 
In this regard, pseudocapacitive materials with a layered structure, adjustable 
morphology, and tuneable physical and chemical properties are promising. Lewis’s 
acid centers in these metallic compounds provide high adsorption capabilities toward 
polysulﬁdes, suggesting these conﬁgurations’ importance. Furthermore, transition 
metal-based compounds’ heterostructures/composites show rewarding catalytic abil-
ities toward sulfur redox reactions by reducing the energy barrier. Enhanced reac-
tion kinetics ensures the reversibility of metal-sulfur batteries. Predominantly in

Pseudocapacitive Materials for Metal-Sulfur Batteries
347
Fig. 7 a Schematic illustration for the synthesis of ZnCo2O4@Ti3C2/S composite; b Rate perfor-
mance of ZnCo2O4@Ti3C2/S and ZnCo2O4/S cathodes from current densities 0.1–2 C; c Initial 
charge–discharge proﬁles at various scan rates ranging from 0.1–2 C; Cyclic performance of cath-
odes; d At 0.2 C up to 100 cycles; e At 0.5 C up to 400 cycles. Adapted with permission [66], 
Copyright (2022), Elsevier
crucial steps, the inadequate transformation of high-order sulﬁdes into low-order 
insoluble sulﬁdes creates a concentration gradient, exacerbating the shuttling effect 
and capacity fading. 
Although signiﬁcant progress has been made in fabricating state-of-art metal-
sulfur batteries, several existing challenges still need to be addressed. The approaches 
to circumvent these challenges would deﬁne outlook as discussed below:

348
Y. Dahiya et al.
(A) Despite extensive research to develop state-of-art sulfur cathodes and towards 
the inner structure–property relationship, proper rational foundations for sulfur 
cathodes are yet to be laid due to its highly complex conversion process. 
(B) In the near future, signiﬁcant breakthroughs towards establishing redox 
chemistry behind the conversion mechanism in Li–S batteries are highly 
anticipated. 
References 
1. X. Wang, H.M. Kim, Y. Xiao, Y.K. Sun, Nanostructured metal phosphide-based materials for 
electrochemical energy storage. J. Mater. Chem. A 4, 14915–14931 (2016). https://doi.org/10. 
1039/c6ta06705k 
2. K. Kisu, S. Kim, R. Yoshida, H. Oguchi, N. Toyama, S. Orimo, Microstructural analyses of all-
solid-state Li–S batteries using LiBH4-based solid electrolyte for prolonged cycle performance. 
J. Energy Chem. 50, 424–429 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jechem.2020.03.069 
3. H. Fan, W. Luo, S. Dou, Z. Zheng, Advanced two-dimensional materials toward polysulﬁdes 
regulation of metal–sulfur batteries. SmartMat 1–30 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1002/smm2. 
1186 
4. M. Salama, A.R. Rosy, R. Yemini, Y. Gofer, D. Aurbach, M. Noked, Metal-sulfur batteries: 
overview and research methods. ACS Energy Lett. 4, 436–446 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acsenergylett.8b02212 
5. K. Fu, Y. Gong, G.T. Hitz, D.W. McOwen, Y. Li, S. Xu, Y. Wen, L. Zhang, C. Wang, G. Pastel, 
J. Dai, B. Liu, H. Xie, Y. Yao, E.D. Wachsman, L. Hu, Three-dimensional bilayer garnet solid 
electrolyte based high energy density lithium metal-sulfur batteries. Energy Environ. Sci. 10, 
1568–1575 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1039/c7ee01004d 
6. D. Sui, L. Si, C. Li, Y. Yang, Y. Zhang, W. Yan, A comprehensive review of graphene-based 
anode materials for lithium-ion capacitors. Chemistry (Easton) 3, 1215–1246 (2021). https:// 
doi.org/10.3390/chemistry3040089 
7. Q. Liu, X. Han, Q. Dou, P. Xiong, Y. Kang, S.-W. Kang, B.-K. Kim, H.S. Park, Multiphase and 
multicomponent nickel-iron oxide heterostructure as an efﬁcient separator modiﬁcation layer 
for advanced lithium sulfur batteries. Batter. Supercaps 4, 1843–1849 (2021). https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/batt.202100156 
8. R. Vishnoi, K. Sharma, Y.S. Yogita, R. Singhal, Investigation of sequential thermal annealing 
effect on Cu-C70 nanocomposite thin ﬁlm. Thin Solid Films 680, 75–80 (2019). https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.tsf.2019.04.004 
9. V. Marangon, E. Scaduti, V.F. Vinci, J. Hassoun, Scalable composites beneﬁting from transition-
metal oxides as cathode materials for efﬁcient lithium-sulfur batteries. ChemElectroChem 9, 
e202200374 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1002/celc.202200374 
10. J. Xie, X. Luo, L. Chen, X. Gong, L. Zhang, J. Tian, ZIF-8 derived boron, nitrogen co-doped 
porous carbon as metal-free peroxymonosulfate activator for tetracycline hydrochloride degra-
dation: performance, mechanism and biotoxicity. Chem. Eng. J. 440, 135760 (2022). https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2022.135760 
11. X. Kang, Z. Jin, H. Peng, Z. Cheng, L. Liu, X. Li, L. Xie, J. Zhang, Y. Dong, The role of 
selenium vacancies functionalized mediator of bimetal (Co, Fe) selenide for high-energy– 
density lithium-sulfur batteries. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 637, 161–172 (2023). https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jcis.2023.01.090 
12. P. Han, S.H. Chung, A. Manthiram, Designing a high-loading sulfur cathode with a mixed ionic-
electronic conducting polymer for electrochemically stable lithium-sulfur batteries. Energy 
Storage Mater. 17, 317–324 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ensm.2018.11.002

Pseudocapacitive Materials for Metal-Sulfur Batteries
349
13. J. Wen, L. Huang, Y. Huang, W. Luo, H. Huo, Z. Wang, X. Zheng, Z. Wen, Y. Huang, A 
lithium-MXene composite anode with high speciﬁc capacity and low interfacial resistance 
for solid-state batteries. Energy Storage Mater. 45, 934–940 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ensm.2021.12.033 
14. Y. Dahiya, M. Hariram, M. Kumar, A. Jain, D. Sarkar, Modiﬁed transition metal chalcogenides 
for high performance supercapacitors: current trends and emerging opportunities. Coord. Chem. 
Rev. 451, 214265 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2021.214265 
15. Y.H. Liu, C.Y. Wang, S.L. Yang, F.F. Cao, H. Ye, 3D MXene architectures as sulfur hosts for 
high-performance lithium-sulfur batteries. J. Energy Chem. 66, 429–439 (2022). https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jechem.2021.08.040 
16. Y. Xu, L. Wang, Q. Xu, L. Liu, X. Fang, C. Shi, B. Ye, L. Chen, W. Peng, Z. Liu, W. Chen, 3D 
hybrids based on WS2/N, S co-doped reduced graphene oxide: facile fabrication and superior 
performance in supercapacitors. Appl. Surf. Sci. 480, 1126–1135 (2019). https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.apsusc.2019.02.217 
17. C. Ye, J. Shan, H. Li, C.-C. Kao, Q. Gu, S.-Z. Qiao, Reducing overpotential of solid-state sulﬁde 
conversion in potassium-sulfur batteries. Angew Chem. Int. Ed. 62, e202301681 (2023). https:// 
doi.org/10.1002/anie.202301681 
18. R. Gao, Z. Wang, S. Liu, G. Shao, X. Gao, Metal phosphides and borides as the catalytic host of 
sulfur cathode for lithium–sulfur batteries. Int. J. Miner. Metall. Mater. 29, 990–1002 (2022). 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12613-022-2451-2 
19. Z. Yang, C. Xu, M. Xia, X. Zhang, H. Yan, H. Yu, T. Sun, L. Zhang, F. Hu, J. Shu, Thermody-
namic analysis and perspective of aqueous metal-sulfur batteries. Mater. Today 49, 184–200 
(2021). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mattod.2021.01.012 
20. G. Liu, Q. Sun, Q. Li, J. Zhang, J. Ming, Electrolyte issues in lithium-sulfur batteries: devel-
opment, prospect, and challenges. Energy Fuels 35, 10405–10427 (2021). https://doi.org/10. 
1021/acs.energyfuels.1c00990 
21. M.K. Aslam, I.D. Seymour, N. Katyal, S. Li, T. Yang, S. Bao, G. Henkelman, M. Xu, Metal 
chalcogenide hollow polar bipyramid prisms as efﬁcient sulfur hosts for Na-S batteries. Nat. 
Commun. 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-19078-0 
22. H. Yang, B. Zhang, Y.X. Wang, K. Konstantinov, H.K. Liu, S.X. Dou, Alkali-metal sulﬁde as 
cathodes toward safe and high-capacity metal (M = Li, Na, K) sulfur batteries. Adv. Energy 
Mater. 10, 1–24 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1002/aenm.202001764 
23. S. Risse, S. Angioletti-Uberti, J. Dzubiella, M. Ballauff, Capacity fading in lithium/sulfur 
batteries: a linear four-state model. J. Power. Sources 267, 648–654 (2014). https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.jpowsour.2014.05.076 
24. S. Bai, X. Liu, K. Zhu, S. Wu, H. Zhou, Metal–organic framework-based separator for lithium– 
sulfur batteries. Nat. Energy 1, 16094 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1038/nenergy.2016.94 
25. M.J. Klein, A. Dolocan, C. Zu, A. Manthiram, An effective lithium sulﬁde encapsulation 
strategy for stable lithium-sulfur batteries. Adv. Energy Mater. 7, 1–9 (2017). https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/aenm.201701122 
26. H. Chu, H. Noh, Y.J. Kim, S. Yuk, J.H. Lee, J. Lee, H. Kwack, Y.K. Kim, D.K. Yang, H.T. 
Kim, Achieving three-dimensional lithium sulﬁde growth in lithium-sulfur batteries using 
high-donor-number anions. Nat. Commun. 10, 1–12 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-
018-07975-4 
27. M. Zhu, S. Li, J. Liu, B. Li, Applied Surface Science Promoting polysulﬁde conversion by 
V2O3 hollow sphere for enhanced lithium-sulfur battery. Appl. Surf. Sci. 473, 1002–1008 
(2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2018.12.189 
28. Z. Xu, M. Wu, Z. Chen, C. Chen, J. Yang, T. Feng, E. Paek, D. Mitlin, Direct structure-
performance comparison of all-carbon potassium and sodium ion capacitors. Adv. Sci. 6, 
1802272 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1002/advs.201802272 
29. P. Rajkumar, K. Diwakar, G. Radhika, K. Krishnaveni, R. Subadevi, M. Sivakumar, Effect 
of silicon dioxide in sulfur/carbon black composite as a cathode material for lithium sulfur 
batteries. Vacuum 161, 37–48 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vacuum.2018.12.016

350
Y. Dahiya et al.
30. Y. Zhang, X. Ge, Q. Kang, Z. Kong, Y. Wang, L. Zhan, Vanadium oxide nanorods embed in 
porous graphene aerogel as high-efﬁciency polysulﬁde-trapping-conversion mediator for high 
performance lithium-sulfur batteries. Chem. Eng. J. 393, 124570 (2020). https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.cej.2020.124570 
31. Y. Li, B. Su, Manganese dioxide nanosheet functionalized sulfur@ PEDOT core–shell 
nanospheres for advanced lithium–sulfur batteries. J. Mater. Chem. A 4, 9403–9412 (2016). 
https://doi.org/10.1039/c6ta03211g 
32. Y. Wang, R. Zhang, J. Chen, H. Wu, S. Lu, K. Wang, H. Li, C.J. Harris, K. Xi, R.V. Kumar, 
S. Ding, Enhancing catalytic activity of titanium oxide in lithium–sulfur batteries by band 
engineering. Adv. Energy Mater. 9, 1900953 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1002/aenm.201900953 
33. X. Song, T. Gao, S. Wang, Y. Bao, G. Chen, L.-X. Ding, H. Wang, Free-standing sulfur host 
based on titanium-dioxide-modiﬁed porous-carbon nanoﬁbers for lithium-sulfur batteries. J. 
Power Sources 356, 172–180 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2017.04.093 
34. X. Lang, X. Wang, Y. Liu, K. Cai, L. Li, Q. Zhang, Cobalt-based metal organic framework (Co-
MOFs)/graphene oxide composites as high-performance anode active materials for lithium-ion 
batteries. Int. J. Energy Res. 45, 4811–4820 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1002/er.6080 
35. Q. Sun, B. Xi, J.Y. Li, H. Mao, X. Ma, J. Liang, J. Feng, S. Xiong, Nitrogen-doped graphene-
supported mixed transition-metal oxide porous particles to conﬁne polysulﬁdes for lithium-
sulfur batteries. Adv. Energy Mater. 8, 1–10 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1002/aenm.201800595 
36. X. Jia, B. Liu, J. Liu, S. Zhang, Z. Sun, X. He, H. Li, G. Wang, H. Chang, Fabrication of 
NiO-carbon nanotube/sulfur composites for lithium-sulfur battery application. RSC Adv. 11, 
10753–10759 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1039/d1ra00216c 
37. X.Y. Yu, X.W. (David) Lou, Mixed metal sulﬁdes for electrochemical energy storage and 
conversion. Adv. Energy Mater. 8, 1–37 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1002/aenm.201701592 
38. Z. Ali, T. Zhang, M. Asif, L. Zhao, Y. Yu, Y. Hou, Transition metal chalcogenide anodes 
for sodium storage. Mater. Today 35, 131–167 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mattod.2019. 
11.008 
39. C. Wang, L. Sun, K. Li, Z. Wu, F. Zhang, L. Wang, Unravel the catalytic effect of two-
dimensional metal sulﬁdes on polysulﬁde conversions for lithium-sulfur batteries. ACS Appl. 
Mater. Interfaces 12, 43560–43567 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.0c09567 
40. P. Wang, B. Xi, M. Huang, W. Chen, J. Feng, S. Xiong, Emerging catalysts to promote kinetics 
of lithium–sulfur batteries. Adv. Energy Mater. 11, 2002893 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
aenm.202002893 
41. B. Qin, Q. Wang, W. Yao, Y. Cai, Y. Chen, P. Wang, Y. Zou, X. Zheng, J. Cao, J. Qi, W. 
Cai, Heterostructured Mn3O4-MnS multi-shelled hollow spheres for enhanced polysulﬁde 
regulation in lithium-sulfur batteries. Energy Environ. Mater. 1–9 (2022). https://doi.org/10. 
1002/eem2.12475 
42. G. Liu, Q. Zeng, X. Sui, S. Tian, X. Li, Q. Wu, X. Wang, K. Tao, E. Xie, Z. Zhang, Modulating 
the d-p orbital coupling of manganese chalcogenides for efﬁcient polysulﬁdes conversion in 
lithium–sulfur batteries. J. Power. Sources 552, 232244 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpo 
wsour.2022.232244 
43. C. Yang, Y. Li, W. Peng, F. Zhang, X. Fan, In situ N-doped CoS2 anchored on MXene toward an 
efﬁcient bifunctional catalyst for enhanced lithium-sulfur batteries. Chem. Eng. J. 427, 131792 
(2022). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2021.131792 
44. H. Xiang, N. Deng, H. Zhao, X. Wang, L. Wei, M. Wang, B. Cheng, W. Kang, A review 
on electronically conducting polymers for lithium-sulfur battery and lithium-selenium battery: 
progress and prospects. J. Energy Chem. 58, 523–556 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jechem. 
2020.10.029 
45. B. He, W.C. Li, Z.Y. Chen, L. Shi, Y. Zhang, J.L. Xia, A.H. Lu, Multilevel structured carbon 
ﬁlm as cathode host for Li-S batteries with superhigh-areal-capacity. Nano Res. 14, 1273–1279 
(2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/s12274-020-3102-4 
46. Y.  Liu,  X.  Que,  X.  Wu, Q. Yuan,  H.  Wang,  J.  Wu, Y. Gui, W. Gan, ZIF-67 derived  carbon  
wrapped discontinuous CoxP nanotube as anode material in high-performance Li-ion battery. 
Mater. Today Chem. 17, 100284 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mtchem.2020.100284

Pseudocapacitive Materials for Metal-Sulfur Batteries
351
47. R. Reinhold, U. Stoeck, H.J. Grafe, D. Mikhailova, T. Jaumann, S. Oswald, S. Kaskel, L. 
Giebeler, Surface and electrochemical studies on silicon diphosphide as easy-to-handle anode 
material for lithium-based batteries—the phosphorus path. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 10, 
7096–7106 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.7b18697 
48. Z. Li, P. Li, X. Meng, Z. Lin, R. Wang, The interfacial electronic engineering in binary sulﬁphilic 
cobalt boride heterostructure nanosheets for upgrading energy density and longevity of lithium-
sulfur batteries. Adv. Mater. 33, 2102338 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202102338 
49. J. Cheng, D. Zhao, L. Fan, X. Wu, M. Wang, N. Zhang, K. Sun, Ultra-high rate Li-S batteries 
based on a novel conductive Ni2P yolk-shell material as the host for the S cathode. J. Mater. 
Chem. A 5, 14519–14524 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1039/c7ta03236f 
50. Y. Chen, W. Zhang, D. Zhou, H. Tian, D. Su, C. Wang, D. Stockdale, F. Kang, B. Li, G. Wang, 
Co-Fe mixed metal phosphide nanocubes with highly interconnected-pore architecture as an 
efﬁcient polysulﬁde mediator for lithium-sulfur batteries. ACS Nano 13, 4731–4741 (2019). 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.9b01079 
51. Q. Pang, C.Y. Kwok, D. Kundu, X. Liang, L.F. Nazar, Lightweight metallic MgB2 mediates 
polysulﬁde redox and promises high-energy-density lithium-sulfur batteries. Joule 3, 136–148 
(2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joule.2018.09.024 
52. Y. Gu, L.Q. Fan, J.L. Huang, C.L. Geng, J.M. Lin, M.L. Huang, Y.F. Huang, J.H. Wu, N-
doped reduced graphene oxide decorated NiSe2 nanoparticles for high-performance asym-
metric supercapacitors. J. Power. Sources 425, 60–68 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpo 
wsour.2019.03.123 
53. J. Shen, Y. Feng, P. Wang, G. Qiu, L. Zhang, L. Lu, H. Wang, R. Wang, V. Linkov, S. Ji, 
Conductive sulfur-rich copolymer composites as lithium-sulfur battery electrodes with fast 
kinetics and a high cycle stability. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 8, 10389–10401 (2020). https:// 
doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.0c01791 
54. Y. Xie, H. Zhao, H. Cheng, C. Hu, W. Fang, J. Fang, J. Xu, Z. Chen, Facile large-scale synthesis 
of core–shell structured sulfur@polypyrrole composite and its application in lithium–sulfur 
batteries with high energy density. Appl. Energy 175, 522–528 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.apenergy.2016.03.085 
55. X. Wang, S. Zhang, H. Zhang, S. Gao, S. Han, Q. Xu, J. Xu, W. Lu, X. Wu, L. Chen, 3D porous 
spherical sulfur/carbon cathode materials with in situ vapor-phase polymerized polypyrrole 
coating layer for high-performance lithium-sulfur batteries. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 7, 17491– 
17499 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.9b04805 
56. F. Wu, J. Chen, R. Chen, S. Wu, L. Li, S. Chen, T. Zhao, Sulfur/polythiophene with a core/ 
shell structure: synthesis and electrochemical properties of the cathode for rechargeable lithium 
batteries. J. Phys. Chem. C 115, 6057–6063 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1021/jp1114724 
57. W. Wei, J. Li, Q. Wang, D. Liu, J. Niu, P. Liu, Hierarchically porous SnO2 nanoparticle-anchored 
polypyrrole nanotubes as a high-efﬁcient sulfur/polysulﬁde trap for high-performance lithium-
sulfur batteries. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 12, 6362–6370 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acsami.9b18426 
58. T. Wang, D. Luo, Y. Zhang, Z. Zhang, J. Wang, G. Cui, X. Wang, A. Yu, Z. Chen, Hierarchically 
porous Ti3C2 MXene with tunable active edges and unsaturated coordination bonds for superior 
lithium-sulfur batteries. ACS Nano 15, 19457–19467 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano. 
1c06213 
59. N. Li, Z. Xu, P. Wang, Z. Zhang, B. Hong, J. Li, Y. Lai, High-rate lithium-sulfur batteries enabled 
via vanadium nitride nanoparticle/3D porous graphene through regulating the polysulﬁdes 
transformation. 398, 1–8 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2020.125432 
60. Y. Zhang, W. Tang, R. Zhan, H. Liu, H. Chen, J. Yang, M. Xu, An N-doped porous carbon/ 
MXene composite as a sulfur host for lithium-sulfur batteries. Inorg. Chem. Front. 6, 2894–2899 
(2019). https://doi.org/10.1039/c9qi00723g 
61. X. Liang, Y. Rangom, C.Y. Kwok, Q. Pang, L.F. Nazar, Interwoven MXene nanosheet/carbon-
nanotube composites as Li–S cathode hosts. Adv. Mater. 29, 1–7 (2017). https://doi.org/10. 
1002/adma.201603040

352
Y. Dahiya et al.
62. H. Liu, H. Guo, N. Wu, W. Yao, R. Xue, M. Wang, W. Yang, Rational design of nickel-cobalt 
selenides derived from multivariate bimetal metal-organic frameworks for high-performance 
asymmetric supercapacitor. J. Alloys Compd. 156535 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jallcom. 
2020.156535 
63. J. Zhou, R. Li, X. Fan, Y. Chen, R. Han, W. Li, J. Zheng, B. Wang, X. Li, Environmental Science 
for sulfur storage in fast, long-cycle Li–S batteries. Energy Environ. Sci. 7, 2715–2724 (2014). 
https://doi.org/10.1039/c4ee01382d 
64. S. Li, Z. Zhao, S. Wang, R. Liang, Z. Li, G. Chen, Graphene-wrapped chromium-MOF (MIL-
101)/sulfur composite for performance improvement of high-rate rechargeable Li–S batteries. 
J. Mater. Chem. A 2, 13509–13512 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1039/c4ta01241k 
65. K. Xi, S. Cao, X. Peng, C. Ducati, R.V. Kumar, A.K. Cheetham, Metal–organic frameworks 
for lithium sulphur batteries. 49, 2192–94 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1039/c3cc38009b 
66. A. Wei, L. Wang, Z. Li, Metal-organic framework derived binary-metal oxide/MXene 
composite as sulfur host for high-performance lithium-sulfur batteries. J. Alloys Compd. 899, 
163369 (2022)

Pseudocapacitive Materials for Metal-Air 
Batteries 
Allen Davis and Ram K. Gupta 
Abstract Clean energy storage is a problem faced by many nations around the 
world. These issues range from storing ﬂuctuating energy from green energy storage 
to improving the battery life of smart devices. Additionally, the need for ﬂexible 
electronics is rapidly rising in the medical and private ﬁelds of use. All these devices 
require storage sources with high energy density, long life, and reusability. Metal air 
batteries (MABs) exist as an up-and-coming device that can ﬁt each of these needs 
handily. MABs boast an incredibly high potential energy density, environmental 
compatibility, and potential for reuse or recharge. Additionally, speciﬁc engineering 
methods allow for these devices to be engineered for high ﬂexibility. To further 
improve the efﬁcacy of these devices, pseudocapacitive integration has been explored. 
By imbuing a redox nature further energy storage is possible. Given these facts, the 
functionality of MABs is explored in brief, alongside the integration of different 
materials to improve their performance and ﬂexibility. 
Keywords Energy storage · Metal-air battery · Pseudocapacitance · Transition 
metal oxides · Flexible materials 
1 
Introduction 
Efﬁcient energy usage has been a hallmark of an advancing society since the dawn 
of the written word. In early history, the wheel and axle were developed to efﬁciently 
leverage mechanical energy. At ﬁrst, wheels were used to transport heavy loads 
quicker than they could be on foot. As society developed, earthen wheels known 
as millstones became more common, converting the force of wind and water into 
a grinding force for food production. The simple design of both wind and water
A. Davis · R. K. Gupta envelope symbol
Department of Chemistry, Pittsburg State University, Pittsburg, KS 66762, USA 
e-mail: ramguptamsu@gmail.com 
National Institute for Materials Advancement, Pittsburg State University, Pittsburg, KS 66762, 
USA 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
R. K. Gupta (ed.), Pseudocapacitors, Engineering Materials, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45430-1_19 
353

354
A. Davis and R. K. Gupta
Fig. 1 The evolution of different grid-scale storage devices from 1860 to 2010. Adapted with 
permission [1]. Copyright © 2022, American Chemical Society 
mills is replicated today in the construction of wind turbines and hydroelectric dams. 
Innovation, however, has brought humanity beyond its reliance on these two methods, 
with solar, nuclear, and a litany of other sources becoming ever more popular for 
clean and efﬁcient energy generation. The excess of available energy has led to a new 
problem, however, the growing need for energy storage. When considering the scope 
of energy storage in society, grid storage, commercial storage, and personal storage 
are of top priority. Grid energy storage is the large-scale storage of energy for use in 
the electrical grid. Grid storage is done either to stabilize intermittent energy sources 
like wind and solar or to store the excess power of high-output energy emitters like 
oil and nuclear. Due to the scale involved, grid energy storage methods can be seen 
as atypical when compared to common sources, as seen in Fig. 1 [1]. 
Gravitational, compressed air, and water pump storage use potential energy as a 
physical form of energy storage, while ﬂywheels store energy kinetically. Chemical 
energy storage is popular at this level as well, with a larger variety of batteries seeing 
use for this application. Commercial energy storage is signiﬁcantly smaller in scale, 
existing at the building scale in lieu of the grid scale. At this level, chemical and 
thermal storage become more popular due to the scale limitations. Air conditioning 
units, for example, often make use of thermal energy storage to lower overall energy 
costs. Personal scale energy storage involves the capacitors and batteries used in 
everyday life. Capacitors physically store electrical charge on their surface and excel 
in applications where short bursts of energy are required. Meanwhile, batteries store 
their energy chemically, requiring a reaction of different reagents to create electricity. 
Batteries of all kinds are ubiquitous due to their portability and variety. While batteries 
have gotten more efﬁcient, the overall designs have hardly changed. The ﬁrst battery 
design was known as the voltaic pile, as seen in Fig. 2 [2].
This device consisted of a repeating pattern of zinc and copper electrodes separated 
by an electrolyte-soaked piece of cardboard. Each Zn–Cu set acted as an individual 
battery, combining additively to increase the overall voltage. Later, the ﬁrst recharge-
able batteries were created in the form of lead acid batteries. These batteries were

Pseudocapacitive Materials for Metal-Air Batteries
355
Fig. 2 Graphical example of a simple home-made metal air battery. Adapted with permission [2]. 
Copyright © 2021, American Chemical Society
much more efﬁcient than the old voltaic piles, however, they were also large and 
unwieldy. Ni–Cd batteries were later developed, to ﬁll the role of portable storage 
batteries. While these batteries were initially large, further technology reduced their 
size greatly. One of the greatest advancements in battery creation was the advent 
of alkaline batteries. These batteries could be made compact, with moderate energy 
density and low cost. These batteries often lack rechargeability and as such, must be 
disposed of after their power is drained. Lithium-ion (Li-ion) batteries were devel-
oped to counter this issue and are used globally for most portable consumer elec-
tronics. An additional beneﬁt of Li-ion batteries is their high-power density, allowing 
them to be used for energy intensive devices. One important type of battery not 
discussed thus far is the metal air battery (MAB). MABs were discovered sometime 
after the voltaic pile but were not used commercially until the 1930s. Unlike the 
other batteries discussed here, MABs are designed to be partially open to air. This is 
because ambient oxygen is required to drive the electrochemical reaction. While this

356
A. Davis and R. K. Gupta
process will be discussed in depth later, the general principle is that O2 is reduced 
into hydroxide ions at the cathode. These hydroxide ions then go on to oxidize the 
metal anode, creating an electrical current in the process. This style of reaction has 
two major advantages for battery applications. The ﬁrst advantage is that the reac-
tion is reversible, meaning that the anode component of MABs can be recycled for 
further use. The second advantage is the material availability of certain metals versus 
other battery options. While lithium air batteries suffer the same scarcity issues that 
lithium-ion batteries have, other options are much more common. Aluminum, nickel, 
iron, and zinc are all exceedingly common metals that are accessible for battery use. 
Due to these facts, MABs are a hot topic in energy research, with many options being 
reviewed to enhance their performance. Pseudocapacitive materials are one of the 
larger areas of interest due to the supplemental storage they can offer. Pseudoca-
pacitive materials store electrical energy both chemically and physically, improving 
overall energy storage in a material. Examples of such materials include metal oxides, 
metal sulﬁdes, metal phosphides, conducting polymers, and composites. One other 
method to improve MABs is in the realm of ﬂexibility. As the market for portable 
and wearable technology expands, ﬂexible energy storage needs expand concurrently. 
Such devices require a ﬂexible form of battery to operate ergonomically, a niche that 
is also explored with MABs. 
2 
Metal-Air Batteries: Fundamentals and Working 
MABs, like all batteries, rely on electrochemical reactions to produce electrical 
energy. The unique requirement of free oxygen, however, makes MABs unique in 
design. MABs are composed of three distinct parts that contribute to energy genera-
tion. These parts are the anode, electrolyte, and cathode. The anode of a MAB is often 
made from a solid metal, of which its composition dictated the name and function of 
the battery. The electrolyte serves as a medium for ion transport and can be aqueous 
or nonaqueous depending on the reagents within the battery. Finally, the cathode of 
a MAB is designed to be extremely porous, allowing for the diffusion of oxygen 
through its structure. Each of these three components is vital for the electrochemical 
reaction to proceed and generate energy. For aqueous MABs, the reaction begins after 
oxygen diffuses into the system. At the anode, the metal species oxidizes into metal 
cations and electrons. Meanwhile, atmospheric oxygen reduces into hydroxide ions 
via the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). Like other batteries, the ﬂow of electrons 
generated from this process goes on to power the device of choice. However, this 
process results in the formation of metal oxide, with the content increasing as the 
battery depletes. For nonaqueous MABs, the process is slightly different, with the 
anode kicking off metal cations, followed by the formation of multioxidative metal 
oxide species. These reactions are demonstrated in Fig. 3 [3].
With the overall reaction in mind, research is performed to improve at least one 
of the core portions of the battery. In terms of the anode, different metals exhibit 
different electrochemical properties. These different properties inﬂuence the overall

Pseudocapacitive Materials for Metal-Air Batteries
357
Fig. 3 Comparison of the 
electrochemical chemical 
half reactions that take place 
at the electrodes of both a 
aqueous and nonaqueous 
MAB
construction, and name, of the battery. Alkali and alkali-earth metals are known 
for their explosive reactivity with water, as such, they often require nonaqueous 
electrolytes. Meanwhile, transition metals such as zinc, cobalt, and iron oxidize 
readily in an aqueous solution. While the inﬂuence on the electrolyte is important, 
a more pressing concern is the metals theoretical energy density. The theoretical 
energy density of the battery is dependent on the metal selected for reaction, while 
the actual energy density is limited by kinetics, corrosion, and entropy. As seen in 
Fig. 4, lithium, aluminum, and magnesium have the highest theoretical energy density 
[3]. Even so, zinc-based batteries are one of the most popular items of MAB research 
around the world. This is due to two major limitations, material cost and electrode 
corrosion. While lithium air batteries may boast a high energy density, lithium itself 
is costly and competitive in other battery designs. Meanwhile, while corrosion is 
a consistent problem, it affects certain metals to different degrees. Aluminum for 
example, is heavily afﬂicted by corrosion when used as a battery limiting its use. 
As far as reducing an anode’s corrosion, some work has been done to implement 
alloyed materials [4], apply surface modiﬁcations [5], or completely change the 
microstructure [6]. As with many problems, the design and function of the anode is 
but a portion of a complex system.
For a MAB to function correctly, efﬁcient ion exchange must be observed. Thus, 
the selection of a proper electrolyte is an equally important consideration to the anode. 
As an example, lithium’s volatility somewhat prohibits the selection of an aqueous 
electrolyte. While some examples of an aqueous Li-air battery do exist, they require 
extra components to prevent failure [7]. Due to this fact, aprotic, gel polymer, and 
solid-state electrolytes are preferred for battery construction [8–10]. Meanwhile, 
many of the less volatile transition metals are compatible with aqueous electrolytes. 
The advantage of aqueous based MABs is the higher availability and lower cost 
when compared to other costly solvents. Another concern in electrolyte selection is 
MAB’s real life applications. Volatility, ﬂexibility, and internal dynamic requirements 
can rapidly vary between applications. While these properties can be affected by 
the electrode material, electrolyte failure is liable to happen ﬁrst. Nevertheless, the 
single most important property of the electrolyte is its capability for ion exchange. 
If hydroxide ions are unable to diffuse to the anode, the oxidation will fail to occur, 
and no energy will be generated.

358
A. Davis and R. K. Gupta
Fig. 4 Comparison of the theoretical energy density of different MABs. Adapted with permission 
[3]. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society
The third critical portion of a MAB is the oxygen reducing cathode. MAB cath-
odes are the limiting step of the overall reaction due to the sluggish kinetics involved 
in oxygen reduction. As such, they are also the most highly researched segment of 
MAB battery construction. Improving the kinetics of the ORR is an obvious point of 
investment, however, other improvements are also under review. Battery lifespan, for 
example, is important when considering the long-term use of MABs. One consider-
ation for life extension is improving the electrode’s electrocatalytic stability. This is 
often achieved by tuning the electrode’s properties to reduce competitive reactions 
and electrochemical breakdown. One ﬁnal zone of research is investigating bifunc-
tional integration into the cathode end of the device to endow rechargeability. While 
generally non-rechargeable, engineering the cathode to participate in the oxygen 
evolution reaction (OER) when charged. This process allows for the batteries to be 
recharged and reused, further improving the functional lifespan of the battery. 
With the different battery components, alongside their differing attributions to 
battery function, considered, the next step is observing their efﬁcacy. There are a 
variety of different tests and measurements that can be performed to observe the 
real-world implementation of a MAB. The battery’s lifespan, energy density, power 
density, and operating voltage are all important metrics of battery operation. Battery 
lifespan is a complex system reliant on many factors in battery construction. However, 
the generally accepted stability testing process for rechargeable batteries involves 
repeated charge/discharge of the battery, while measuring its change in the voltage 
polarization curve over time. Energy density and power density are similar terms that 
have vastly different meanings. Energy density refers to the total amount of energy 
stored in the battery per unit volume (J/m3). Meanwhile, power density is the rate at 
which the battery delivers power per unit volume (W/m3). While these methods are 
volumetric, areal measurements are also popular for battery speciﬁcation. Operating 
voltage is related to the output of the battery when applied to the system. For example,

Pseudocapacitive Materials for Metal-Air Batteries
359
a 9 V battery can have an operating voltage ranging from ±0.5 V depending on its 
make. As the battery degrades the operating voltage shrinks until it fails to power the 
system. As such, operating voltage is an important characteristic to measure when 
considering battery function. 
3 
MAB Using Pseudocapacitive Materials 
3.1 
Transition Metal Oxides/Sulﬁdes/Phosphide 
The ﬁrst category of pseudocapacitive materials under review are transition metal 
oxides (TMOs), sulﬁdes (TMSs), and phosphides (TMPs). These three materials 
share many distinct similarities and differences that make them invaluable for elec-
trochemical research. For starters, these compounds are of relatively low cost when 
compared to other battery materials [11]. Not only are they economically friendly, 
but environmentally friendly as well, with many options found directly in nature [12]. 
TMOs are renowned for their redox activity, ﬁnding extensive use as a pseudocapac-
itive supplement to more standard capacitor setups [13]. TMSs demonstrate further 
redox potential through their S–S bonds, allowing for rapid electron transfer [14, 
15]. Finally, TMPs demonstrate improved electrochemical properties due to the high 
electronegativity of phosphorus [16]. While each of these materials are different, 
they confer similar electrochemical beneﬁts. For example, improved conductivity, 
electron transport, and redox capability can be observed in each of these cases. With 
these prospects in mind there are plenty of examples where transition metal-based 
materials improve battery viability. 
Zinc air batteries are a popular choice for development, this is in part due to the 
rechargeable nature achieved with some battery designs. To exhibit rechargeability, 
the battery must efﬁciently perform both the usual ORR observed in discharge, as 
well as an oxygen evolution reaction (OER) for recharging. Li et al. investigated the 
use of spinel structured metal oxide composites as a ORR/OER bifunctional elec-
trocatalyst [17]. For this study, the team constructed different aluminum precursor 
alloys with a small amount of metal varying from iron, cobalt, manganese, or X (Ni, 
Cr, Nb, V). These alloys were prepared via pure melting under an argon atmosphere, 
followed by melt spinning to for the desired ribbon structure. The metallic ribbons 
were then chemically dealloyed and annealed to produce metal oxide nanocompos-
ites. Finally, the nanocomposites were made into electrocatalytic ink via sonication 
alongside carbon nanotubes and Naﬁon in an isopropanol solution. The inks were 
then dropped onto a glassy carbon electrode and dried for electrochemical testing. 
To ensure elemental dispersion, scanning transmission electron microscopy and 
energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometry (STEM-EDS) microscopy was used. Herein, 
the expected distribution of the different elements was observed, barring the FeCoNi, 
FeCoV, and FeCo-based oxides, which had regions lacking manganese due to phase 
separation in the alloy, as seen in Fig. 5 [17].

360
A. Davis and R. K. Gupta
Fig. 5 STEM-EDS mapping of a dealloyed AlFeCoNiMn, b AlFeCoVMn, c AlFeCoMn, and d 
AlCoMnf. Adapted with permission [17]. Copyright © 2020, American Chemical Society 
Furthermore, selective area electron diffraction (SAED) demonstrated the spinel 
type crystal structure. To measure the electrochemical ability of the materials, ORR, 
OER, and battery testing was performed. Overall testing demonstrated that Mn3O4 
demonstrated improved ORR performance, with cobalt doping improving the effect 
and iron doping diminishing it. The best sample for OER proved to be the (CoFe)3O4-
based oxides, with iron and manganese improving the ability. Additionally, it was 
observed that the addition of nickel, vanadium, or chromium further enhanced OER 
activity. The resulting (FeCoNi)3O4/Mn3O4-based Zn-air battery demonstrated a 
voltage gap of ~0.7 V, with good stability observed after 400 h of cycling at 2 mA/cm2. 
Furthermore, a power density of ∼136 mW/cm2 was observed, indicating fantastic 
battery capability. 
Meanwhile, metal sulﬁdes have also been tested for zinc air battery construction. 
Shang et al. explored the construction of zinc air batteries containing core–shell-
structured NiO@Co3S4 electrodes [18]. TMS materials often demonstrated better 
reversibility when compared to metal oxide materials. This is attributed to the lower 
electronegativity of sulfur as compared to oxygen. For this study Co3S4 was selected 
due to its desirable structure and electrochemical performance. To synthesize the 
NiO@Co3S4 electrodes, Co3O4 was grown on nickel foam and added to an autoclave. 
Next, an aqueous solution containing sodium sulﬁde nonahydrate was added to the 
autoclave which was then treated to hydrothermal synthesis. The resulting material 
was ﬁnally heat treated to create the NiO@Co3S4 electrodes. The nanostructure of the

Pseudocapacitive Materials for Metal-Air Batteries
361
electrode resembles nanowires of Co3S4 coated with a NiO2 shell, hence the desig-
nation NiO@Co3S4. The conﬁrmation of the material’s structure and composition 
was observed using SEM, TEM, XRD, and XPS. Herein, wiry, hair like, prongs were 
observed with the SEM, while the encapsulated structure was observed with TEM. 
Furthermore, elemental mapping conﬁrmed the expected elemental composition of 
the material as seen in Fig. 6. Battery testing revealed that the electrode can produce 
maximum power density of 26.2 mW/cm2 at 49.4 mA/cm2. Subsequently, the elec-
trode demonstrates two operating voltage plateaus of 1.75 and 1.28 V at 1 mA/cm2. 
These factors, alongside high stability, demonstrate the potential for metal sulﬁdes 
for battery construction.
TMPs are an attractive option for electrocatalyst construction due to their complex 
crystalline nature and electronic interactions [19]. Wang et al. explored the construc-
tion of CoP nanoparticles embedded on (N,P) co-doped carbon for Zn-air batteries 
[20]. The nanoparticles themselves were synthesized through a metal organic 
framework (MOF) templating method. In this method, an equal mix zinc nitrate 
hexahydrate and cobalt nitrate hexahydrate were dissolved in water, after which 2-
methylimidazole was added. The mixture was stirred at room temperature for 5 h to 
form the MOF. The resulting material was then separated, washed, and lyophilized to 
obtain the powdered product. To create the ﬁnal product, the ZnCo-MOF precursor 
was phosphorized in a tube furnace using disodium hydrogen phosphate. This process 
simultaneously created the TMP, decomposed the MOF into a porous nitrogen doped 
carbon substrate, and further doped said substrate with phosphorus. As far as battery 
applications are concerned, the material demonstrated a heightened power density 
of 186 mW cm−2 alongside a minuscule charge–discharge potential gap of ~1 V. 
3.2 
Conducting Polymers 
Intrinsically conducting polymers (ICPs) are a unique class of polymeric mate-
rials that are conducive to electron ﬂow [21]. Examples of ICPs include polyani-
line (PANi), polyvinylidene ﬂuoride (PVDF), polypyrrole (PPy), and polyacety-
lene (PA) [22]. Traditional organic polymers are insulative in nature due to the sp3 
hybridization along the length of their chain. This is because the electrons respon-
sible for binding are locked in place and are unable to ﬂow. ICPs, however, are sp2 
hybridized, meaning that conjugated π bonds are present along the length of the 
chain. Conjugated bonds lend to a property known as resonance, in which the spare 
electrons are nonlocalized on the chain, allowing for electron ﬂow. While main-
taining a high conductivity is helpful for electrode construction, this is only half of 
the picture. For ICPs to demonstrate a pseudocapacitive nature, redox activity must 
be observed. Such redox activity is imbued to ICPs via doping. Doping is the process 
of purposely adding impurities to a material to enhance its electrochemical effects. 
This can occur either through the inclusion of electron doners (N-doping), or electron 
acceptors (P-doping). While both methods have opposing implementations, the result 
is a conductive polymer matrix capable of ionization. Despite these facts, research

362
A. Davis and R. K. Gupta
Fig. 6 a Synthesis diagram of NiO@Co3S4, b, c SEM images of NiO@Co3S4, d TEM image of 
NiO@Co3S4 of a single nanowire, e HRTEM image of NiO@Co3S4, and  f–j TEM mapping of 
NiO@Co3S4. Adapted with permission [18]. Copyright © 2022, American Chemical Society
on pseudocapacitive conducting polymers for MABs is almost nonexistent beyond 
one speciﬁc application. Conducting polymers make for an excellent electrolyte/ion 
exchange material. This is due to the ﬂexibility, conductivity, and compatibility of 
conducting polymers when implemented in this fashion. Due to the limitations on 
applicable data, stability and battery lifespan will be of greater focus as compared to 
voltage measurements.

Pseudocapacitive Materials for Metal-Air Batteries
363
The beneﬁts of a compatible electrolyte when designing a MAB cannot be under-
stated. At best an incompatible electrolyte will be inefﬁcient or ineffective. At worst, 
the wrong electrolyte could lead to explosive results. One common issue faced by 
MABs is the process of dendritic growth. In this process, tree-like dendrites grow 
out from the electrodes, eventually these dendrites reach the opposing electrode 
and short circuit the battery or rupture the electrolyte [23]. Carbonate growth is 
another unintended side reaction that can prove harmful to MAB operation. While 
dendrite growth primarily affects the anode, carbonate accumulation occurs at the 
cathode. This process occurs when CO2 enters the MAB. When CO2 comes across 
the cathode, a competitive side reaction produces carbonate ions that interfere with 
battery processes [24]. To reduce the formation of these side products, Chen et al. 
designed a bipolar conducting polymer membrane to improve the stability of zinc-
air batteries [25]. The membrane itself was designed to have a cationic layer and an 
anionic layer, with a catalytic layer in between. This setup allows for a pH difference 
across the membrane, which further enhances the unique electrocatalytic processes 
of the respective electrodes. To create the bipolar membranes, a Fumasep anion 
exchange membrane was prepared for a drop casting process. Next, a graphene 
oxide solution was drop cast onto the membrane, followed by a Naﬁon solution that 
was sprayed on the surface. For electrochemical testing, the bipolar membrane was 
compared to a standard nylon separator over different current densities. In testing, 
the nylon separated samples failed over so many cycles, meanwhile, the bipolar 
membrane demonstrated exceptional stability up to 300 h of cycling at 5 mA/cm2. 
The stability comparison of the nylon separated battery and the bipolar separated 
battery is visible in Fig. 7 [25]. 
Ionic liquids are a powerful family of compounds that are under investigation for 
energy storage applications. Unlike salts which are solid at room temperature and 
must be dissolved, ionic liquids are capable of dissociating at lower temperatures, 
with some being liquid at room temperature. While ionic liquids can be used directly 
as an electrolyte, certain properties can be improved by including it in a conduc-
tive polymer gel. Unlike rigid solids and incompressible liquids, gel materials can
Fig. 7 Comparison of cycle life between the bipolar membrane batteries (left) and the nylon sepa-
rated batteries (right). The black, red, and blue lines are 1, 5, 10 mA/cm2, respectively. Adapted 
with permission [25]. Copyright © 2022, American Chemical Society 

364
A. Davis and R. K. Gupta
exhibit ﬂexibility, compressibility, and mechanical stability. These properties are 
due to the unique interactions between the gel polymer network and the solvent 
within. While traditional materials dissolve in a compatible solvent, gels will swell. 
This fact alongside engineered chain ﬂexibility allows a gel to be extremely ﬂexible 
while still maintaining the electrolytic solvent. In one study, Shui et al. engineered 
two different ionic liquid-based gel polymer electrolyte membranes [26]. The two 
PVDF based membranes were labeled PVDF-[C4mpyr]Cl, and PVDF-[BMIM]Cl. 
These gels were separated based on the ionic liquids they contained. PVDF-
[C4mpyr]Cl contained 1-butyl-1-methylpyrrolidinium chloride ([C4mpyr]Cl), while 
PVDF-[BMIM]Cl contained 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride ([BMIM]Cl). 
These materials were created using the solution-casting method, wherein 30 wt% 
of PVDF-HFP, 60 wt% of the respective ionic liquid, and 10 wt% of AgCl3 salt 
combined and stirred until viscous. Afterwards, the electrolyte was dried and stored 
for later device implementation. The ﬁnalized battery consisted of an aluminum 
anode, the designed gel electrolyte, and a commercially available air cathode. Initial 
testing demonstrated that PVDF-[C4mpyr]Cl sample performed slightly better than 
the PVDF-[BMIM]Cl sample across the differing battery tests. This is especially 
visible in the open-circuit voltage spectra, where the samples exhibit a voltage of 
1.16 and 1.09 V respectively. Further measurements showed a power density of 
3.57 mW/cm2, and a speciﬁc capacity of 532.7 mAh/g. To test the device’s function 
under ﬂex, the device was bent at 30°, 90°, and completely folded. During these ﬂex-
ural tests, galvanostatic discharge was measured over time, where it was observed 
that the PVDF-[C4mpyr]Cl battery would lose some voltage when bent, as seen in 
Fig. 8 [26]. 
Fig. 8 Galvanostatic discharge of ﬂexible aluminum-air battery with PVDF-[C4mpyr]Cl in various 
conﬁgurations over time. Adapted with permission [26]. Copyright © 2022, American Chemical 
Society

Pseudocapacitive Materials for Metal-Air Batteries
365
3.3 
Composites 
The IUPAC gold book deﬁnes a composite as a “Multicomponent material 
comprising multiple, different (non-gaseous) phase domains in which at least one 
type of phase domain is a continuous phase” [27]. In simpler terms, a composite 
is the result of combining two or more separate materials to create something with 
properties unique to the sum of its parts. Examples of common composites include 
ﬁber reinforced plastics, particle board, and concrete. Taking ﬁber reinforced plastics 
as an example, ﬁbrous materials have a high tensile strength, but completely lack 
rigidity. Meanwhile, plastics can demonstrate rigidity, but also suffer from when 
stretched. The resulting composite meanwhile exhibits a high degree of toughness 
because the weakness of one fraction is improved by the strengths of the other. As far 
as MABs are concerned, composite materials are the most common. In fact, almost 
every material discussed thus far can be considered a composite to a certain degree. 
For electrochemical devices, compositing is often performed to imbue pseudocapac-
itance into a purely conductive material, or vice versa. Further modiﬁcations could 
be sought to improve overall stability [28], reduce oxygen bubble accumulation [29], 
or introduce new physical properties into the material. 
Graphene is a powerful material that is under scientiﬁc investigation for its variety 
of useful properties. Graphene has been explored for use as a conductor [30], mechan-
ical enhancer [31], and ﬁlter [32]. These applications were selected due to graphene’s 
high surface area and electronic structure. With a focus on improving graphene for 
energy storage, Ryu et al. explored the creation of a ﬂuorinated graphene composite 
containing both silver nanoparticles and α phase NiO/Ni(OH)2 [33]. Ni(OH)2 was 
selected due to its low cost and environmental compatibility. Additionally, Ni(OH)2 
has two material phases, α-phase is randomly stacked along the c-axis of the crys-
talline plane, while β-phase Ni(OH)2 is stacked in an ordered manner. For this study, 
α-phase Ni(OH)2 was selected due to its improved electrochemical performance. To 
synthesize the α-NiO/Ni(OH)2 material, nickel nitrate hexahydrate was dissolved 
alongside sodium dodecyl sulfate in a 50/50 ethanol-aqueous solution. Next, urea 
was added, and the solution was stirred until a green solution was obtained. The mate-
rial was then separated, dried, and calcined to create Ni(OH)2. Meanwhile, AgNP/ 
F-graphene was synthesized from the photoirradiation of silver nitrate alongside 
F-graphene in an isopropanol solution. The ﬁnal composite was synthesized from 
further photoirradiation of both the α-NiO/Ni(OH)2 and AgNP/F-graphene mate-
rials, creating the α-NiO/Ni(OH)2/AgNP/F-graphene composite. The microscopic 
structure of the material was gypsum rose-like in appearance under SEM due to 
the c-axis aligned crystals [33]. Electrochemical testing revealed that the material 
demonstrated a high afﬁnity in terms of ORR-OER properties. As a Zn–Ni/Ag/air 
battery, a speciﬁc capacity of 1200 mAh/g was observed alongside a speciﬁc energy 
of 660 Wh/kg. 
In a similar vein to graphene, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are a novel material 
for conductive composites. Overall, CNTs can be considered the tubular cousin 
of the traditionally sheetlike graphene. One major beneﬁt of this tubular structure

366
A. Davis and R. K. Gupta
is the ability for CNTs to nestle other materials within. This fact, combined with 
their tunability, make CNTs an exceptional option for composite construction. For 
example, Kundu et al. experimented with MOF derived CNT encapsulated CoNi 
alloys for Zn-air battery electrocatalysts [34]. Like CNTs, some MOFs exhibit a 
high aspect ratio alongside their porosity. Furthermore, some of these MOFs can be 
reduced into carbon encapsulated metal composites, as seen in this report. To synthe-
size the sacriﬁcial precursor MOF, trimesic acid, polyvinyl pyrrolidone, and a 3:1 mol 
ratio of nickel nitrate hexahydrate and cobalt nitrate hexahydrate was dissolved in 
a 1:1:1 ratio solution of dimethylformamide, ethanol, and water. The solution was 
then hydrothermally treated to produce the MOF, which was then separated, washed, 
and dried. To create the Co0.25Ni0.7 @NCNT composites, the MOF material was 
ground and mixed alongside dicyandiamide, then annealed ﬁrst at 550 °C, and again 
at 750 °C. The purpose of the dicyandiamide was to dope the material with nitrogen, 
further improving the desired electrical properties. The battery itself demonstrated 
solid stability and a peak power density of 167 mW/cm2. 
One ﬁnal class of materials that are popular for composite construction is the 
MXene family of materials. While generally similar in structure to graphene, MXenes 
have regular metallic inclusions that separate them as an entirely different material. 
One of the most unique traits that MXenes possess is their accordion-like structure 
[35]. This alternating atomic morphology changes the intermolecular stacking of the 
material, allowing for a greater variety of polymorphs. Another electrochemically 
active material that is of interest is the perovskite family of crystalline materials. 
Perovskites are in themselves a common crystal polymorph with desirable electro-
chemical properties. Taking advantage of this fac, Hui et al. developed a strontium 
titanate perovskite-Ti3C2 MXene composite (Ti3C2@SrTiO3) for use as a zinc air 
battery electrocatalyst [36]. To create the perovskite composite, titanium carbide 
nanosheets were hydrothermally reacted with strontium hydroxide in extremely 
basic conditions. After 24 h of reaction, the material was washed and lyophilized 
to create the desired product. As seen in Fig. 9, the resulting material demonstrated 
perovskite crystal structures on the MXene sheets, with elemental analysis demon-
strating elemental distribution. The Ti3C2@SrTiO3 zinc air battery demonstrated 
powerful energy storage properties. A high open circuit potential of 1.44 V was 
observed alongside a power density of 122 mW/cm2. The material also demonstrated 
excellent stability even after 1000 cycles.
4 
Flexible Metal-Air Batteries 
While improving the energetics of energy storage devices has always been a goal in 
research, recent technological developments have shed light on a new issue, ﬂex-
ibility. Wearable electronics are beginning to become a part of daily life, from 
medical devices to consumer electronics. One goal when designing such devices 
is the concept of ergonomics. The goal of ergonomics is to make a device or process 
more compatible with human interactions. In the case of wearable electronics, the

Pseudocapacitive Materials for Metal-Air Batteries
367
Fig. 9 Synthesis and morphological characterization of Ti3C2@SrTiO3. a Schematic illustration 
for the preparation of the Ti3C2@SrTiO3 composite; b SEM, c TEM, and d HRTEM images and e 
SAED pattern of Ti3C2@SrTiO3; and  f–j) TEM image and elements mappings of Ti3C2@SrTiO3. 
Adapted with permission [35]. Copyright © 2022, American Chemical Society
electronic components themselves become the limiting factor. Solutions to some of 
these issues have been thoroughly explored, such as the creation of ﬂexible logic 
devices [37], sensors [38], and displays [39]. Energy storage poses a unique problem 
however, in that traditional storage devices are bulky and inﬂexible. Thus, the goal 
is clear, to make effective, ﬂexible, and ergonomic devices, a ﬂexible energy storage 
system will be necessary. Such a solution has a major caveat, as the device will need 
to demonstrate the needed ﬂexibility without sacriﬁcing structural stability, energy 
storage efﬁciency, and safety. When constructing a ﬂexible metal air battery, the 
electrolyte and the electrodes are the major bottleneck in design. Many solid and 
liquid state electrolytes risk rupture when ﬂexed. Meanwhile, repeated ﬂexing can 
physically wear down or snap the electrode depending on composition. As such, 
further characterization will take ﬂexibility into account in addition to the standard 
measurements. 
One attempt at creating a ﬂexible MAB was pursued by Qu et al., who designed 
metal-coated polyurethane sponges as an electrode for a zinc-air battery [40]. 
Polyurethane foams can either be ﬂexible or rigid depending on their design, however 
most polyurethanes are considered nonconductive. The opposite is true with metal 
electrodes, which are extremely conductive, but unable to naturally return to their

368
A. Davis and R. K. Gupta
original state when bent. To get around this, Qu’s team used both an electric and 
nonelectric plating method to coat a commercial polyurethane material. To achieve 
this, a clean polyurethane sample was soaked in a tin chloride solution for 30 min, 
then soaked in a palladium chloride solution. Afterwards, the material was added to a 
copper sulfate solution to copper plate the foam. Electroplating was then used to zinc 
plate the anode, and nickel plate the cathode. The resulting electrodes demonstrate 
extreme ﬂexibility due to their polymeric nature. Furthermore, the strongest variant 
of the battery demonstrated an energy density of 23.6 W h L−1, albeit with a slight 
reduction in ﬂexibility. As with other samples, ﬂexing leads to a slight reduction in 
electrochemical properties. 
A similar study by Shui et al. designed a honeycomb shaped folding N/S codoped 
MnO2 graphene composite material for ﬂexible aluminum air batteries [41]. Metama-
terial properties are an important aspect to consider when designing ﬂexible materials. 
By designing material in a certain way, such as in the honeycomb pattern reported 
here, ﬂexibility can be suffused to non-ﬂexible materials. Such designs are often seen 
in the shipping industry, where cardboard spacers in a grid pattern gain anisotropic 
ﬂexibility. To create the MnO2-N/S graphene material, thiourea was slowly added 
to a graphene oxide solution. The N/S codoped graphene oxide was then mixed 
with manganese chloride tetrahydrate and potassium permanganate until a homoge-
nous solution was formed. The solution was then reacted at an elevated temperature, 
cleaned, then lyophilized. To create the stretchy honeycomb metamaterial, layers of 
the battery were taped together in alternating spots. Battery testing demonstrated a 
variety of interesting properties, including an inbuilt battery activation feature, as 
seen in Fig. 10 [41]. Overall, the device demonstrated a speciﬁc capacity of 1203.2 
mAh/g and an energy density of 1630.1 mWh/g. Additionally, the device maintained 
nominal output at up to 2500% elongation, and solid stability after 1000 stretch 
cycles. 
Fig. 10 a Demonstration of aluminum-air batteries’ ﬂexibility. b Galvanostatic discharge (1 mA/ 
cm−2) of the stretchable aluminum-air batteries at differing % elongations. c Demonstration of the 
batteries powering an LED. Adapted with permission [41]. Copyright © 2020, American Chemical 
Society

Pseudocapacitive Materials for Metal-Air Batteries
369
Extreme temperatures are a common concern when considering a device’s opera-
tional conditions [42]. For a machine to be able to operate in arctic conditions, or at 
high altitudes, it must be resistant to cold temperatures. When considering batteries 
for low temperature applications, electrolyte swelling is a major concern. In aqueous 
electrolytes the ﬂuid medium is likely to freeze, damaging the battery. Meanwhile, in 
gel electrolytes, trace bits of water can crystalize and damage the network. To counter 
these issues, Zhang et al. devised a ﬂexible double-network electrolyte with extreme 
low temperature conditions [43]. To create the hydrogel electrolyte, a polyacrylamide 
hydrogel was made alongside a cellulose nanoﬁber hydrogel within the same vessel. 
The resulting PAM-CNF hydrogel was then soaked in an aqueous mixture of KOH 
and KI and allowed to swell. The ﬁnal product demonstrated antifreezing properties 
alongside a fair bit of ﬂexibility. The batteries made in this experiment demonstrated 
a narrow voltage gap of 0.43 V alongside a discharge voltage of 1.26 V and a charge 
voltage of 1.69 V at standard temperature. Meanwhile, the battery demonstrated a 
higher voltage gap of 0.74 V with a charge voltage of 1.75 V and discharge voltage 
of 1.03 V at −40 °C. While less efﬁcient and ﬂexible at these lower temperatures, 
most batteries fail well before −20 °C. 
In addition to freezing temperatures, high humidity and rough conditions can 
cause extreme wear on a MAB. For many MABs, clipping, twisting, and full water 
immersion would cause rapid failure. However, Li et al. developed lithium air battery 
capable of activity in all of these scenarios [44]. The stalwart nature of this battery 
is attributed to its heavily integrated composite nature. The anode of the battery 
was made from lithium sheets rolled onto a copper mesh. The anode was then 
placed into a mold and suspended within a gel electrolyte precursor solution that 
was promptly cured. Finally, a cobalt oxide–carbon cloth cathode was used to sand-
wich the electrode. The assembled battery was then sealed and enclosed in a punched 
aluminum plastic ﬁlm casing. Fortitude and ﬂexibility were the main factors tested 
when observing battery operation. A high degree of cycling stability was observed 
at up to 180° of bending and lateral twisting. Furthermore, the battery was able to 
power an LED array under harsh bending, water submersion, partial cutting, and 
enclosure removal. The battery was also capable of extended operation at a relative 
humidity of ~50%, a trait which is uncommon amongst lithium air batteries. 
While the prior battery was able to function when damaged, were it to be split 
it would cease to function. Such an issue is less so when considering regenera-
tive materials. While not necessarily designed for MABs, Chen et al. developed 
a self-healing gel polymer electrolyte for lithium ion batteries [45]. Self-healing 
can be endowed to a material through ionic bonding, dynamic covalent interac-
tions, and noncovalent interactions. In this materials case, self-healing is produced 
from noncovalent hydrogen bonding. The gel itself was formed from a complex 
polyvinylidene ﬂuoride hexaﬂuoropropylene copolymer with PEG-UPy side chains. 
To synthesize the gel electrolyte, UPyMA monomers were reacted with ethylene 
glycol using reversible addition-fragmentation chain transfer (RAFT) polymeriza-
tion. The PEGMA-UPyMA copolymer was dispersed in dimethylformamide along-
side PVDF-HFP and PEO. The solution was then spread across a glass plate to 
make the electrolyte ﬁlm. A rough sketch of the synthesis, alongside the material’s

370
A. Davis and R. K. Gupta
Fig. 11 a Schematic of the synthesis of brush-like copolymer PEG-UPy. b Graphic illustration of 
the formation of the PP-PU and the self-healing mechanism. c Images of the self-healing process 
of the gel electrolyte under standard conditions. Adapted with permission [45]. Copyright © 2022, 
American Chemical Society 
self-healing properties, can be seen in Fig. 11. As shown in this ﬁgure, the material 
can heal so well that the original cut is invisible after 15 h of ambient self-repair. 
However, the initial repair can happen as quickly as 30 min after separation. The 
gel electrolyte also demonstrated excellent ﬂexibility, with the material ﬂexing up to 
720° without structural failure. 
5 
Conclusion and Future Remark 
With reliable energy storage becoming a major concern, renewable and reusable 
materials have grown in market value. This growth is particularly visible in the realm 
of consumer electronics, which generates great demand and even greater waste. The 
most popular source of power for these devices are lithium-ion batteries, which 
exhibit a long lifespan and a rechargeable nature. Lithium, however, is a volatile 
material that is prone to explosive failure if the batteries housing is breached and

Pseudocapacitive Materials for Metal-Air Batteries
371
exposed to water. Additionally, lithium is becoming increasingly expensive due to 
its intensive harvesting process and relative scarcity. To circumvent these issues, 
alternative sources are under investigation. MABs preside as one of the most popular 
alternatives that have been researched thus far. These batteries are popular due to 
their renewability, generally low cost, and environmental compatibility. Transition 
metals are abundant in nature and widely used in many ﬁelds. Subsequently, the metal 
oxides and hydroxides are low in cost and environmentally friendly when disposed 
of properly. Of even greater importance is the fact that the metal-based residue can be 
recycled back into their base metal, allowing them to be used for battery construction 
all over again. The greatest limitation of these batteries is their high rate of corrosion 
and overall lack of traditional rechargeability. One solution to these issues is the 
inclusion of pseudocapacitive materials into the device. Metal oxides, conducting 
polymers, and composites have all demonstrated their potential for improving the 
capabilities of MABs. This is due to the additional energy storage granted by their 
redox active behavior. Further electronic integration has been explored in the ﬁeld 
of ﬂexible batteries. Forward thinking designs all but ensure that metal air batteries 
will be a popular form of energy storage soon, barring any major discoveries in 
other ﬁelds. Prospects for the wider implementation of metal air batteries would be 
to unlock their maximum energy density. MABs have some of the highest potential 
energy densities reported, however, most implementations only scratch the surface 
of their potential. Regardless, due to their low cost, ease of swapping, and recyclable 
nature, MABs are at minimum a fantastic contender as the disposable battery of the 
future. With further tuning of these devices, MABs are likely to ﬁnd purchase in 
other ﬁelds as well, such as in the medical ﬁeld for use in integrated electronics, or in 
larger scale applications such as grid scale energy storage and as a power source for 
heavy machinery. While one might see a bleak future regarding humanities’ rampant 
misuse of technology and the environment. Sustainable materials and devices like 
those seen in MABs echo calls of a bright future ahead. 
References 
1. Z. Zhu, T. Jiang, M. Ali, Y. Meng, Y. Jin, Y. Cui, W. Chen, Rechargeable batteries for grid 
scale energy storage. Chem. Rev. 122, 16610–16751 (2022) 
2. T.B. Clarke, M.W. Glasscott, J.E. Dick, The role of oxygen in the voltaic pile. J. Chem. Educ. 
98, 2927–2936 (2021) 
3. Y. Li, J. Lu, Metal-air batteries: will they be the future electrochemical energy storage device 
of choice? ACS Energy Lett. 2, 1370–1377 (2017) 
4. P. Zhang, X. Liu, J. Xue, K. Jiang, The role of microstructural evolution in improving energy 
conversion of Al-based anodes for metal-air batteries. J. Power Sources 451, 227806 (2020) 
5. S.-M. Lee, Y.-J. Kim, S.-W. Eom, N.-S. Choi, K.-W. Kim, S.-B. Cho, Improvement in self-
discharge of Zn anode by applying surface modiﬁcation for Zn–air batteries with high energy 
density. J. Power Sources 227, 177–184 (2013) 
6. D. Huang, F. Cao, T. Ying, D. Zheng, G.-L. Song, High-energy-capacity metal-air battery based 
on a magnetron-sputtered Mg–Al anode. J. Power Sources 520, 230874 (2022) 
7. A. Manthiram, L. Li, Hybrid and aqueous lithium-air batteries. Adv. Energy Mater. 5, 1401302 
(2015)

372
A. Davis and R. K. Gupta
8. Z. Jiang, A.M. Rappe, Mechanistic study of the Li–air battery with a Co3O4 cathode and 
dimethyl sulfoxide electrolyte. J. Phys. Chem. C 125, 21873–21881 (2021) 
9. J. Yi, X. Liu, S. Guo, K. Zhu, H. Xue, H. Zhou, Novel stable gel polymer electrolyte: toward a 
high safety and long life Li–air battery. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 7, 23798–23804 (2015) 
10. Y. Liu, B. Li, H. Kitaura, X. Zhang, M. Han, P. He, H. Zhou, Fabrication and performance 
of all-solid-state Li–air battery with SWCNTs/LAGP cathode. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 7, 
17307–17310 (2015) 
11. P. Lang, N. Yuan, Q. Jiang, Y. Zhang, J. Tang, Recent advances and prospects of metal-based 
catalysts for oxygen reduction reaction. Energy Technol. 8, 1900984 (2020) 
12. A.A. Keller, H. Wang, D. Zhou, H.S. Lenihan, G. Cherr, B.J. Cardinale, R. Miller, Z. Ji, 
Stability and aggregation of metal oxide nanoparticles in natural aqueous matrices. Environ. 
Sci. Technol. 44, 1962–1967 (2010) 
13. W. Deng, X. Ji, Q. Chen, C.E. Banks, Electrochemical capacitors utilising transition metal 
oxides: an update of recent developments. RSC Adv. 1, 1171–1178 (2011) 
14. R. He, X. Huang, L. Feng, Recent progress in transition-metal sulﬁde catalyst regulation for 
improved oxygen evolution reaction. Energy Fuels 36, 6675–6694 (2022) 
15. J. Wu, T. Ye, Y. Wang, P. Yang, Q. Wang, W. Kuang, X. Chen, G. Duan, L. Yu, Z. Jin, J. Qin, 
Y. Lei, Understanding the catalytic kinetics of polysulﬁde redox reactions on transition metal 
compounds in Li–S batteries. ACS Nano 16, 15734–15759 (2022) 
16. J. Yang, Z. Wang, Z. Wang, J. Zhang, Q. Zhang, P.P. Shum, L. Wei, All-metal phosphide 
electrodes for high-performance quasi-solid-state ﬁber-shaped aqueous rechargeable Ni–Fe 
batteries. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 12, 12801–12808 (2020) 
17. S. Li, X. Zhou, G. Fang, G. Xie, X. Liu, X. Lin, H.-J. Qiu, Multicomponent spinel metal oxide 
nanocomposites as high-performance bifunctional catalysts in Zn–Air batteries. ACS Appl. 
Energy Mater. 3, 7710–7718 (2020) 
18. W. Shang, W. Yu, X. Xiao, Y. Ma, Y. He, P. Tan, Free-standing electrode of core–shell-structured 
NiO@Co3S4 for high-performance hybrid Zn–Co/Air batteries. Energy Fuels 36, 1121–1128 
(2022) 
19. C.A. Downes, K.M. Van Allsburg, S.A. Tacey, K.A. Unocic, F.G. Baddour, D.A. Ruddy, N.J. 
LiBretto, M.M. O’Connor, C.A. Farberow, J.A. Schaidle, S.E. Habas, Controlled synthesis 
of transition metal phosphide nanoparticles to establish composition-dependent trends in 
electrocatalytic activity. Chem. Mater. 34, 6255–6267 (2022) 
20. Y. Wang, M. Wu, J. Li, H. Huang, J. Qiao, In situ growth of CoP nanoparticles anchored on 
(N, P) co-doped porous carbon engineered by MOFs as advanced bifunctional oxygen catalyst 
for rechargeable Zn–air battery. J. Mater. Chem. A 8, 19043–19049 (2020) 
21. A.M. Bryan, L.M. Santino, Y. Lu, S. Acharya, J.M. D’Arcy, Conducting polymers for 
pseudocapacitive energy storage. Chem. Mater. 28, 5989–5998 (2016) 
22. C.I. Awuzie, Conducting polymers. Mater. Today Proc. 4, 5721–5726 (2017) 
23. M.K. Aslam, Y. Niu, T. Hussain, H. Tabassum, W. Tang, M. Xu, R. Ahuja, How to avoid dendrite 
formation in metal batteries: innovative strategies for dendrite suppression. Nano Energy 86, 
106142 (2021) 
24. T. Wang, M. Kunimoto, T. Mori, M. Yanagisawa, J. Niikura, I. Takahashi, M. Morita, T. Abe, 
T. Homma, Carbonate formation on carbon electrode in rechargeable zinc-air battery revealed 
by in-situ Raman measurements. J. Power Sources 533, 231237 (2022) 
25. Y. Chen, W. Li, Y. Yao, P. Gogoi, X. Deng, Y. Xie, Z. Yang, Y. Wang, Y.C. Li, Enabling acidic 
oxygen reduction reaction in a zinc-air battery with bipolar membrane. ACS Appl. Mater. 
Interfaces 14, 12257–12263 (2022) 
26. Z. Shui, Y. Chen, W. Zhao, X. Chen, Flexible aluminum-air battery based on ionic liquid-gel 
polymer electrolyte. Langmuir 38, 10791–10798 (2022) 
27. J.V. Alemán, A.V. Chadwick, J. He, M. Hess, K. Horie, R.G. Jones, P. Kratochvíl, I. Meisel, 
I. Mita, G. Moad, S. Penczek, R.F.T. Stepto, Deﬁnitions of terms relating to the struc-
ture and processing of sols, gels, networks, and inorganic-organic hybrid materials (IUPAC 
Recommendations 2007). 79, 1801–1829 (2007)

Pseudocapacitive Materials for Metal-Air Batteries
373
28. F. Daneshvar, S. Tagliaferri, H. Chen, T. Zhang, C. Liu, H.-J. Sue, Ultralong electrospun copper-
carbon nanotube composite ﬁbers for transparent conductive electrodes with high operational 
stability. ACS Appl. Electron. Mater. 2, 2692–2698 (2020) 
29. Y. Chen, J. Chen, K. Bai, Z. Xiao, S. Fan, A ﬂow-through electrode for hydrogen production 
from water splitting by mitigating bubble induced overpotential. J. Power Sources 561, 232733 
(2023) 
30. A.J. Samuels, J.D. Carey, Engineering graphene conductivity for ﬂexible and high-frequency 
applications. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 7, 22246–22255 (2015) 
31. F. Sarker, N. Karim, S. Afroj, V. Koncherry, K.S. Novoselov, P. Potluri, High-performance 
graphene-based natural ﬁber composites. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 10, 34502–34512 (2018) 
32. U. Misra, N. Dixit, S.P. Singh, Effect of Laser parameters on Laser-induced graphene ﬁlter 
fabrication and its performance for desalination and water puriﬁcation. ACS Appl. Mater. 
Interfaces 15, 7899–7910 (2023) 
33. S.Y. Ryu, M.R. Hoffmann, α-NiO/Ni(OH)2/AgNP/F-graphene composite for energy storage 
application. ACS Omega 8, 10906–10918 (2023) 
34. A. Kundu, A. Samanta, C.R. Raj, Hierarchical hollow MOF-derived bamboo-like N-doped 
carbon nanotube-encapsulated Co0.25Ni0.75 alloy: an efﬁcient bifunctional oxygen electro-
catalyst for zinc–air battery. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces. 13, 30486–30496 (2021) 
35. K.R.G. Lim, A.D. Handoko, S.K. Nemani, B. Wyatt, H.-Y. Jiang, J. Tang, B. Anasori, Z.W. 
Seh, Rational design of two-dimensional transition metal carbide/nitride (MXene) hybrids and 
nanocomposites for catalytic energy storage and conversion. ACS Nano 14, 10834–10864 
(2020) 
36. X. Hui, P. Zhang, Z. Wang, D. Zhao, Z. Li, Z. Zhang, C. Wang, L. Yin, Vacancy defect-rich 
perovskite SrTiO3/Ti3C2 heterostructures in situ derived from Ti3C2 MXenes with exceptional 
oxygen catalytic activity for advanced Zn–air batteries. ACS Appl. Energy Mater. 5, 6100–6109 
(2022) 
37. M. Li, C. Li, X. Xu, M. Wang, Z. Zhu, K. Meng, B. He, G. Yu, Y. Hu, L.-M. Peng, Y. Jiang, 
An ultrathin ﬂexible programmable spin logic device based on spin–orbit torque. Nano Lett. 
(2023) 
38. C. Li, H. Chen, S. Zhang, W. Yang, M. Gao, P. Huang, M. Wu, Z. Sun, J. Wang, X. Wei, 
Wearable and biocompatible blood oxygen sensor based on heterogeneously integrated lasers 
on a laser-induced graphene electrode. ACS Appl. Electron. Mater. 4, 1583–1591 (2022) 
39. B. Lim, J. Kim, M.S. Desai, W. Wu, I. Chae, S.-W. Lee, Elastic ﬂuorescent protein-based 
down-converting optical ﬁlms for ﬂexible display. Biomacromolecules 24, 118–131 (2023) 
40. S. Qu, B. Liu, J. Wu, Z. Zhao, J. Liu, J. Ding, X. Han, Y. Deng, C. Zhong, W. Hu, Kirigami-
inspired ﬂexible and stretchable zinc-air battery based on metal-coated sponge electrodes. ACS 
Appl. Mater. Interfaces 12, 54833–54841 (2020) 
41. Z. Shui, X. Liao, Y. Lei, J. Ni, Y. Liu, Y. Dan, W. Zhao, X. Chen, MnO2 Synergized with N/ 
S codoped graphene as a ﬂexible cathode efﬁcient electrocatalyst for advanced honeycomb-
shaped stretchable aluminum-air batteries. Langmuir 36, 12954–12962 (2020) 
42. C. Aswin Karthik, P. Kalita, X. Cui, X. Peng, Thermal management for prevention of failures 
of lithium ion battery packs in electric vehicles: a review and critical future aspects. Energy 
Storage 2, e137 (2020) 
43. Y. Zhang, H. Qin, M. Alfred, H. Ke, Y. Cai, Q. Wang, F. Huang, B. Liu, P. Lv, Q. Wei, Reaction 
modiﬁer system enable double-network hydrogel electrolyte for ﬂexible zinc-air batteries with 
tolerance to extreme cold conditions. Energy Storage Mater. 42, 88–96 (2021) 
44. J. Li, Z. Wang, L. Yang, Y. Liu, Y. Xing, S. Zhang, H. Xu, A ﬂexible Li–air battery workable 
under harsh conditions based on an integrated structure: a composite lithium anode encased in 
a gel electrolyte. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 13, 18627–18637 (2021) 
45. X. Chen, L. Yi, C. Zou, J. Liu, J. Yu, Z. Zang, X. Tao, Z. Luo, X. Guo, G. Chen, B. Chang, 
Y. Shen, X. Wang, High-performance gel polymer electrolyte with self-healing capability for 
lithium-ion batteries. ACS Appl. Energy Mater. 5, 5267–5276 (2022)

Pseudocapacitive Materials-Based 
Metal-Air Batteries 
Sanjeev Verma, Vikas Kumar Pandey, Ram K. Gupta, Shivani Verma, 
and Bhawna Verma 
Abstract Researchers’ attraction has been sparked by the fabrication of green and 
renewable energy-storage innovations in view of the increasing hurdle around the 
needs of energy and environmental concerns. MABs (Metal-air batteries), mainly 
rechargeable MABs, are seen as a viable energy storage/conversion solution because 
of their high energy density and speciﬁc power, lower price, as well as its safety. 
Moreover, the fabrication of MABs is signiﬁcantly hindered by their lower rate ability, 
corrosion, and dendrite formation between the electrochemical actions, less active 
material synthesis strategies expansion, slower oxygen reaction kinetics at cathode 
surface, electrolyte and electrode reﬁnement, and a proper separator selection. This 
chapter goes into great detail to help readers understand many types of MABs, 
the fundamentals of electrode reactions and battery conﬁgurations, the function of 
electrode active materials, separators, and electrolytes, as well as future scenarios. 
Keywords Pseudocapacitance · Metal-air batteries · Energy storage ·
Electrochemical · Energy density 
1 
Introduction 
Through the processes of metal oxidation and oxygen reduction, MABs are an elec-
trochemical cell type that can achieve high energy densities that are 3–30 times 
greater than those of commercially available Li–ion batteries. The three basic parts
S. Verma · V. K. Pandey · B. Verma envelope symbol 
Department of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Indian Institute of Technology, Banaras 
Hindu University, Varanasi 221005, India 
e-mail: bverma.che@itbhu.ac.in 
R. K. Gupta 
Department of Chemistry, National Institute for Materials Advancement, Pittsburg State 
University, Pittsburg, KS 66762, USA 
S. Verma 
Department of Chemistry, CBSH, G.B. Pant University of Agriculture and Technology, Pantnagar 
U.S. Nagar-263 145, Rudrapur, India 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
R. K. Gupta (ed.), Pseudocapacitors, Engineering Materials, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45430-1_20 
375

376
S. Verma et al.
of this system; (i) a metal anode, (ii) an electrolyte separating the two electrodes, and 
(iii) a porous air cathode. Na, Li, Zn, Fe, K, Al, and more elements with strong elec-
trochemical equivalency are used as anodes in MABs. Available electrolytes include 
solid-state, nonaqueous (aprotic), and aqueous (protic) electrolytes. With growing 
concern over the energy issue and environmental protection, considerable interest 
has been made in environmentally friendly, recyclable, and green energy storage 
technologies. Li-ion batteries are widely used in energy storage systems and electric 
cars due to their suitable ecological properties and huge energy density value. Li-ion 
batteries currently have an energy density in the range of 100 and 200 Wh/kg, that 
have inadequate to meet the endless design of EVs [1–5]. 
In MABs, the oxygen changes into OH− at the cathode while the metal plate 
loses electrons and turns into metal ions that are dissolved into electrolytes at the 
anode during the discharge process. During the charging phase, all of these reactions 
are inverted. Additionally, this kind of operation is simply the opposite of the redox 
process that takes place in a traditional ionic battery, which is when metal ions 
go from the anode to the cathode. The gas diffusion layer in the MAB is where 
oxygen diffuses into the battery. According to Fig. 1, oxygen behaves differently in 
non-aqueous electrolytes than it does in aqueous media [6]. The following equation 
illustrates how the reactions at the electrodes in both of these media; 
In aqueous electrolyte. 
M ↔ Mn+ + ne− (At anode). 
O2 + 4e− + 2H2O ↔ 4OH− (At cathode). 
In non-aqueous electrolyte. 
M ↔ M+ + e− (At anode). 
xM+ + O2 + xe− ↔ MxO2 (x = 1, 2) (At cathode). 
The absence of effective catalyst for the O2 evolution reaction/O2 reduction reac-
tions (OER/ORR) at normal temperature, side reactions, and metal dendrite formation 
among other issues, remain major problems for metal-air batteries [7]. In addition, 
the volatility of the liquid electrolytes can be another challenging issue that metal-
air batteries encounter in real-world settings. A lot of people have been worried 
recently about different MABs (Li, Na, Zn, etc.) [8–11]. In general terms, MABs 
are superior to traditional liquid metal-air batteries in the ways listed below: (1)
Fig. 1 Schematic diagram 
of MABs 

Pseudocapacitive Materials-Based Metal-Air Batteries
377
increased safety. Liquid electrolytes are prone to a number of dangers, including as 
leakage concerns, thermal breakdown at huge thermal climate, and volatilization with 
its huge conductivity and robust electrodes wetting. Solid type electrolytes, having 
good ionic conductivity and better thermal stability at elevated temperatures, can 
successfully avoid the aforementioned problems. (2) cyclic life and higher energy 
density. A high-voltage platform can be used by the solid-state metal-air battery due 
to its greater chemical and mechanical stability [12, 13]. A longer cycle life can be 
achieved by successfully eliminating the undesired reactions in between H2O/CO2 
and metal plate anodes. But solid-MABs are nevertheless in its roots and encounter 
several difﬁculties in practical use. First, the battery life may be greatly reduced by 
dendrite formation and side reactions brought on by very reactive metal plate anodes 
and intrinsic electrodeposition characteristic. Additionally, the metal anode’s enor-
mous volume variation lead to an unbalanced surface, which reduced the battery’s 
cycle life [14–16]. Second, substantial interface resistance is typically caused by 
solid electrolytes’ inadequate contact with the electrode. Finally, there are still a lot 
of unanswered questions regarding the multiple step catalytic type reactions, and 
additional study is still required to ﬁgure out how to create a high ability materials 
[17, 18]. 
In this chapter, we’ll highlight the main developments and problems with several 
metal-air batteries, in particular Zn, Na, and Li batteries. In this study, we will 
concentrate on speciﬁc issues and difﬁculties associated with employing inorganic 
ceramic electrolytes (ICEs) for Li/Na-based MABs due to the abundance of materials 
on OPEs (organic polymer electrolytes). We will mostly rapidly cover the progression 
of OPEs based Zn-air batteries since fully developed ICEs are not yet available. The 
knowledge presented in this chapter will aid in the creation of MABs and point out 
the parts that require more study. 
2 
Metal Air Battery Working Mechanism 
The reaction mechanism of metal-air batteries is affected differently by the metal 
anode and the electrolyte. In general, nonaqueous electrolytes are used in most alkali 
metal–air batteries. Because alkali metal anodes (such as Na, K and Li) usually react 
aggressively in aqueous electrolyte solutions, the majority of these type alkali MABs 
contain a nonaqueous type electrolyte solution and their corresponding reaction 
method is as below [19]: 
M ↔ e− + M+ (At anode). 
aM+ + O2 + ae− ↔ MaO2 (a = 1, 2) (At cathode). 
where x is the metal ion’s oxidation number and M represents the alkali metal. 
The ORR is now widely acknowledged to entail a ﬁrst one-electron reduction, 
resulting in the formation of superoxide anion O2−, which subsequently combines 
with a metal alkali cation to produce MxO2 peroxide (Fig. 2a). Later Li+, a hard 
Lewis acid with a short ionic radius, is unable to pair with the soft Lewis base 
O2−, which is very reactive, Li+ prefers to generate Li2O2 as primary outlet product

378
S. Verma et al.
Fig. 2 Pictorial representation of metal air batteries mechanism a Nonaqueous metal air batteries, 
b Aqueous metal air batteries 
for Li-based MABs [20]. In contrast, the principal outlet desired product of Na-
based MABs is NaO2, which is favored by the Na+ with huge ionic radius. The 
thermodynamically and kinetically desired outlet product for K-air batteries at room 
temperature (>10 S/cm2) is KO2, which has good conductivity [21, 22]. Without a 
catalyst, a single electron transfer will cause the K-air battery to respond quickly. 
As a result, K-air batteries display great round-trip energy efﬁciency (over 90%) and 
minimal overpotential when compared to Na-air batteries and Li-air batteries [23]. 
A gradual blockage of the accessible cathode surface brought on by the buildup of 
peroxides and superoxides onto the air cathode always results in the battery shutting 
down. As a result, the behavior of the nonaqueous type MAB is always greatly 
inﬂuenced by the air cathode. For these batteries, it’s also crucial to ensure that the 
cathode or catalyst has high activity and long-term stability in the air. 
M ↔ Mn+ + ne− (At anode). 
O2 + 4e− + 2H2O ↔ 4OH− (At cathode). 
The electrode used in a battery is primarily dictated by the type of electrolyte used, 
which is mainly the thermodynamically stable ﬁeld of the electrode/electrolyte. In 
contrast to nonaqueous systems, aqueous electrolytes are typically used in metal-
air batteries for multivalent metal anodes (such as Zn, Fe, Al, and Mg). Although 
multivalent metals in aqueous environments have the same thermodynamic insta-
bility, their surfaces can be passivated by matching oxides or hydroxides to make 
them compatible with aqueous electrolytes. Typically, OH− ions serve as the carriers 
in the electrolyte, whereas hydrates/salts (like Zn(OH)4 –2) serve as the discharge 
products (Fig. 2b). These batteries operate differently than nonaqueous type MABs, 
which can see anions (OH−) move from the air cathode towards metal plate anode 
[19].

Pseudocapacitive Materials-Based Metal-Air Batteries
379
3 
Li-Air Batteries 
As Li-O2 batteries have one of the highest potential energy densities of any type of 
battery (3500 Wh/kg), they are considered highly promising for large-scale energy 
storage since Abraham and Jiang ﬁrst reported on them in 1996 [24]. MABs in 
particular have drawn a lot of attention because they successfully prevent solvent 
volatilization and the side reactions between impurity gases (CO2, H2O etc.) and 
reactive metal anodes. Still, there are still many difﬁculties with Li-air, including 
high interfacial resistance, Li dendrite and a dearth of effective catalyst. Research 
continues to be conducted on the physical/chemical compatibility of the contact 
between solid electrolyte and Li metal anode. Historically, liquid electrolyte in a small 
amount has been added to lower the interfacial resistance between the electrolyte/ 
Li-metal plate anode [25, 26]. Although, the continual use of liquid electrolytes 
during cycling is not completely sustainable. It is thought that even at greater current 
densities, the lithiophilic material’s surface coating can effectively detain the Li metal 
inﬁltration. Higher Li-ion diffusion channel for ion transfer and the prevention of 
undesired reactions will arise from the creation of an uniform interface between metal 
anode and the coating substances (like metal oxides, metals, or sulﬁde) [27, 28]. 
Another popular method for preventing the growth of Li dendrites is the use of 
polymer interlayers. Due to the massive charges diffusion at interface with the huge 
volume variations in Li metal anode, the SEI (solid electrolyte interface) layer was 
instinctive unstable. Due to their favorable mechanical and chemical characteristics, 
polymer electrolytes can help. Gao et al. created an artiﬁcial SEI which was stable by 
an in-situ reaction using reactive polymer composites [29]. In order to safeguard the 
Li metal anode through prolonged cycling, Luo and coworkers suggested a gel–solid-
state hybrid polymer based electrolyte [30]. The results shown that cycle stability 
greater than 140 times at 0.4 mA/cm2 of current density. 
Additionally, It has been demonstrated that a well-formed Li anode can prevent 
the inevitable volume shift of a Li anode during plating/stripping [31, 32]. By using 
carbon paper that has been co-doped with nitrogen and Sulphur and reacting with 
molten lithium, Li et al. created a novel hybrid anode [32]. With a host that has 
a layered structure, nitrogen and Sulphur co-doping can signiﬁcantly improve the 
surface’s lithophilicity capabilities to show strong wettability with liquid nitrogen. 
The distinctive hybrid anode’s large number of holes could hold suﬁcient Li in order 
to prevent change in electrode volume and reduce the local current density, which 
would otherwise encourage Li dendrite growth. The results showed that compared to 
the identical Li metal based batteries in atmospheric condition, the battery employing 
these anodes might have a greater cycling stability with less voltage polarisation. 
In 1996, Abraham and Jiang presented a general reaction for a system of Li-air 
employing organic polymer electrolytes (OPEs), stating that during discharge, 2Li + 
O2 → Li2O2 [24]. OPEs have a low ionic conductivity at normal temperatures, which 
affects the battery’s performance. Since then, scientists have put in a lot of effort to 
improve OPEs’ overall effectiveness, and one popular method has been to include 
inorganic particles in them [33]. It has been demonstrated that strong interactions

380
S. Verma et al.
between organic molecules and inorganic particles could improve OPE durability, 
decrease electrolyte evaporation and increase ionic conductivity. However, because 
of their inferior air stability at room temperature and electrochemical stability at high 
potential, OPEs’ utility is still constrained. Inorganic ceramic electrolytes (ICEs) 
are gaining popularity because of their increased ionic conductivity and chemical 
stability. garnet-type materials, LISICON (Li superionic conductors), perovskites and 
sulﬁdes are among the ICEs for Li-based MABs that have received the most attention. 
The sulﬁde based electrolytes at ambient temperature, demonstrate a higher ionic 
conductivity of around 10–3 S/cm. Sulﬁde electrolytes are shown unstable nature 
in air, which signiﬁcantly limits its use in Li-based MABs [34]. The perovskite 
type electrolyte’s ability to mainly protect the Li anode and prevent O2 crossing is 
made possible by its high density and ionic conductivity, but vastly hampered by the 
undesired reaction that arises when perovskites-Li metal contact happened. 
Ultimately, it is critical to keep considering strategies to raise the electrolyte’s 
relative density, ion conductivity, and air stability for Li-based MABs. Given this, 
electrolytes of LISICON or garnet could offer good future possibilities for Li-
based MABs, but their electrolyte design must simultaneously accomplish high 
environmental adaptability and good electrochemical performance. Inorganic solid 
electrolytes are likewise severely limited in their applicability due to their rigid 
structure. It is challenging to produce a solid based electrolyte for solid Li-based 
MABs that satisﬁes the demands of exceptional electrochemical performance, high 
environmental adaptability, and excellent mechanical qualities. 
In order for the air cathode to act as the domain for the dissolution/deposition of 
outlet, it must have high ORR and OER catalytic activity, good electron conductivity 
and a high degree of porosity. The discharge product (Li2O2) undergoes slow reaction 
kinetics during both its generation and decomposition in two-electron processes. In 
most cases, all-solid-state Li-air batteries have poor coulombic efﬁciency due to 
the limited electrochemical reversibility of Li2O2, which also causes high discharge 
over potentials. Additionally, the solid electrolyte’s substantial interfacial resistance 
to the catalysts signiﬁcantly limited the kinetics of the process. As a result, designing 
a high-efﬁciency catalyst for Li-based MABs is “a big challenge”. 
4 
Na-Air Batteries 
Due to its affordability, Na-based MABs have gained attention as a possible substitute 
for Li-based MABs. However, their safety method is much more complicated than 
that of the Li-based MABs due to the strong chemical reactivity of the anode’s Na 
metal [35]. Because of the inadequate interaction between highly active Na and the 
solid electrolyte, it was shown that when ICE was utilized, the formation of Na 
dendrites was more severe. To extend the life of batteries, it is essential to protect the 
sodium anode. A frequent technique for improvement is the creation of extremely 
sodiophilic surfaces [36, 37].

Pseudocapacitive Materials-Based Metal-Air Batteries
381
Lu and coworkers selected 1 M ﬂuoroethylene carbonate/ NaClO4 to serve the 
sodium anode based on theoretical predictions, and resulting NaF 8 nm rich interlayer 
successfully promoted Na+ transit and decreased interface resistance [36]. Addition-
ally, it is important to employ a thick electrolyte to stop oxygen crossing since it 
can cause irreparable damage to the Na-air batteries if oxygen crosses from air 
to anode. Recent works [38, 39] demonstrated all solid-state NaO2 battery with a 
proper-wettable intermediary phase (NaxPb) between Na and electrolyte with high 
environmental compatibility and long cycle life. NaO2 battery research by Peled 
et al. has rapidly increased since 2011 [40]. Since sodium and lithium share many 
traits, a number of NaO2 battery management techniques can also be used with 
lithium-ion batteries. Because of their strong interface contact and machinability, 
solid-state polymer electrolytes (SPE) make up the majority of today’s solid-state 
Na-air batteries. By including SiO2 ﬁller in the PVDF-HFP matrix, Wang et al. 
created a composited SPE. The SPE’s ionic conductivity increased to about 1.0 mS/ 
cm due to the presence of several ﬂuorocarbon chains [11]. After 80 cycles and 1000 
mAh/g discharge capacity, the created quasi-solid-state NaO2 battery can reach an 
average coulombic efﬁciency of 97%. 
In hybrid NaO2 batteries, the NASICON electrolyte has been used as a separa-
tion barrier due to its excellent chemical stability [41, 42]. It has been shown that 
when cycling Na-air hybrid batteries at room temperature, they functioned consis-
tently. Kang and coworkers showed that in severely acidic circumstances, where 
Na and H went through ion exchange and oxide dissolution, the NASICON elec-
trolyte stability was impaired [43]. Additionally, an interfacial layer could develop 
between the NASICON and organic electrolytes, raising the hybrid NaO2 batteries’ 
overall internal resistance. Solid-state NaO2 batteries with a liquid electrolyte or 
gel electrolyte addition have also been reported to alleviate interface concerns. By 
minimizing bad contact and sluggish mass transfer kinetics across the electrode 
interface/NASICON and successfully avoiding O2 crossing, this technique increased 
the battery’s reversibility. The NASICON electrolyte, according to the most recent 
study, performs better than others in real-world applications because of its high ionic 
conductivity and good air stability [44, 45]. 
As previously mentioned, increasing the battery’s speciﬁc energy density, it is 
essential to create a high activity based air cathode. Assuring the rapid transfer of 
cathode charge, desired product in all solid states is a further difﬁculty for Na-based 
MABs. Meanwhile, among all the MABs that have been described so far, it is very 
tough to be fully solid-state form. According to Chang et al. [45], a gel type cathode 
made of ionic liquid and SW-CNT could produce a quasi-solid Na-based MAB with 
a long cycling life of 125 cycles (528 h) at a current density of 0.1 mA/cm2. It was  
demonstrated that during the working process, water from the surrounding ambient 
was moderately accumulated on the gel cathode’s surface, and creation of soluble 
charge products of NaOH exhibited good reversibility. A recently developed all-solid-
state NaO2 battery by Sun et al. exhibited a high ionic conductivity of 2.39*10–3 S/cm 
with a NASICON type electrolyte [39]. It was demonstrated that the battery cycles 
steadily at 100 mA/g of current density and that humidity signiﬁcantly affects the 
battery’s performance.

382
S. Verma et al.
5 
Zn-Air Batteries 
Due to the lack of appropriate inorganic zinc ion conductor electrolytes, OPEs now 
power the bulk of Zn-air batteries. Even though the primary Zn-air battery was avail-
able for a while, the secondary Zn-air battery remains in its infancy of development. 
The Zn dendrite of metal zinc during the deposition/dissolution process and volume 
deformation serve as the foundation for the creation of secondary zinc batteries. 
Solvent volatilization severely decreased the operational range of water-based Zn-air 
batteries’ semi-open design. 
One of the most extensively researched anodes has a high theoretical capacity of 
820 mAh/g and a low potential (-0.762 V vs. SHE). This anode is zinc metal. However, 
the Zn metal anode frequently experiences dendrite formation due to hydrogen 
precipitation reactions and the difﬁculty of decomposing compound ZnO. Surface 
coating and structured design are typical strategies to increase the reversibility of 
the Zn metal anode [46–48]. A structured Zn metal anode’s ability to efﬁciently 
suppress Zn dendrite growth and increase battery cycle life has been demonstrated. 
For instance, Chamoun and coworkers created a porous foam anode based on Zinc 
using in-situ electrochemistry, which may utilize up to 88% of the depth of discharge 
[49]. Even though zinc metal anodes are an ancient concept, achieving their reversible 
application is still a very difﬁcult task. With more research being done on Zn-air or 
Zn-ion batteries in the future, we think that this aspect will gradually improve. 
Nowadays, Zn-air batteries employ mostly aqueous OPEs-based electrolytes. It 
has been demonstrated that the converted zincate ions (Zn(OH)4 2−) in the extremely 
alkaline solution can increase the Zn metal anode’s reversibility [50]. The poly(vinyl 
alcohol)/poly(acrylic acid)/KOH solid polymer electrolyte had an ionic conductivity 
of 0.301 S/cm at room temperature [51]. Huang et al. absorbed and held 0.2 M 
Zn(CH3COO)2 + 6 M KOH solution to form a novel PANa hydrogel electrolyte [13]. 
The Zn dendrite growth was prevented by the quasi-SEI that was created on the PANa 
network, which also considerably facilitated ionic transport. Initiated polymerization 
was used by Zhao et al. to create the PAA-Na hydrogel electrolyte [52]. This material 
has excellent mechanical properties and interconnected mesh-type morphology that 
can hold and absorb signiﬁcant volumes of electrolyte. The electrolyte will be quickly 
blocked by the newly produced ZnO, particularly at high current densities. As a result 
of the concentration gradient, Zn(OH)4 2− ions are forced to pass across the electrolyte 
membrane and directed towards cathode, where they might precipitate ZnO asym-
metrically and shorten battery life. In order to solve the problem of generated ZnO 
block electrolytes accessing the cathode, it is imperative to manage the selective 
migration of ions in the solid electrolytes of these batteries. To address this issue, 
various academics have suggested separators that prevent zincate crossing. A novel 
design of electrospun nanoﬁber mat-reinforced elective composite membrane was 
created by Lee et al. [53]. It proved that the Zn (OH)4 2− crossovers may be success-
fully inhibited by electrospun nanoﬁber mat-reinforced perm-selective composite 
(ERC) membranes without compromising conductivity. The ERC ﬁlm may signif-
icantly reduce the formation of ZnO after its seventh cycle, demonstrating better

Pseudocapacitive Materials-Based Metal-Air Batteries
383
discharge stability. Later, Kim et al. deﬁned the separator of Zn-air batteries as a 
polymeric blend electrolyte (PBE) membrane composed of ion-conducting PAA/ 
PVA and ion-repelling Naﬁon. By limiting zincate ion diffusion through the Donnan 
exclusion phenomenon, the Naﬁon phase can reduce the amount of ZnO that forms 
on the air electrode. 
6 
Alternative Metal Air Batteries 
There are various types other metal-air battery being gradually investigated. Al-
air batteries exhibited 8100 Wh/kg of theoretical speciﬁc energy, but their subpar 
rate capability made them very unreliable [54]. For ﬁeldwork power supplies and 
portable power supplies, magnesium metal’s small weight made it a great choice. 
Additionally, the magnesium hydroxide from the Mg-air battery’s discharge process 
may be reutilized and transformed back into ingots [55]. These batteries, however, 
also had a number of glaring ﬂaws, including catastrophic self-corrosion caused 
by the development of copious volumes of hydrogen gas. The Fe-air battery’s low 
Coulombic efﬁciency raised numerous application-related issues, despite the fact that 
Fe metal was cheaper than most of other metal anode components used in conven-
tional batteries [56, 57]. A revolutionary three-cell stack of carbon-air batteries with 
a speciﬁc energy of 3600 Wh/kg was reported by Yan et al., which was much higher 
than that of metal-air batteries that were at the cutting edge of technology [58]. 
Due to the large activation energy (190 kJ/mol) required for electrochemical carbon 
oxidation in this kind of battery, it is highly challenging to accomplish. The slow 
kinetics and consequently the electrochemical process need to be accelerated by 
high temperature, which severely constrained their development. Researchers were 
encouraged to continue their exploration of different kinds of metal-air batteries as 
they had potential in a variety of industries. 
7 
Summary and Vision 
In the end, this research outlined several signiﬁcant advancements and signiﬁ-
cant problems with solid-state metal-air batteries. Due to its great energy density 
and exceptional safety, solid-state metal-air batteries have numerous potential uses. 
However, there are still some issues with metal-air batteries like reasonable elec-
trolyte development and interface side reactions because of metal dendrites. Future 
research should concentrate on the following aspects of solid-state metal-air batteries. 
First, interface instability, side reactions and dendrite development are the three main 
problems in the case of metal-air batteries of Li/Na type. Additionally, compared to 
liquid systems, the dendrite growth model for solid-state batteries is more complex 
due to the presence of a space charge layer with the weakened interface contact. There 
is currently no widely recognized model, hence a thorough investigation is required

384
S. Verma et al.
going forward. Interfacial wettability can be increased and the interfacial speciﬁc 
resistance decreased using techniques like interfacial coatings and polymer inter-
layers. In order to achieve long-term stability of the interface, structured anodes have 
been shown to be successful in relieving volume variations and lowering deposition 
current density. Recent research has shown that lowering the electrical conductivity 
of electrolytes can also prevent dendritic development. Second, metal-air batteries 
function in an airy environment. It should be noted that metal anodes can sustain 
permanent harm if there is water or carbon dioxide in the air. The H2O and CO2 in 
the air have a tendency for interacting with discharge products, making the batteries 
more complex. Further, the voltage cutoff for charging for most metal-air batteries 
is typically set at around 4.5 V, the performance of the battery can be signiﬁcantly 
impacted by the ease with which side reactions can be produced. The difference in 
the kinetics of the reaction between the original discharge products and impurity 
components from ambient air should be considered the cause of this occurrence. The 
battery’s cycle life always rapidly decreases as a result of carbonate buildup. The 
effects of impurity gases on battery performance should be understood, as well as 
how to eliminate them. Also, from the past experience pertaining to fuel cells, we 
may learn how to efﬁciently minimize the cathode water content under the inﬂu-
ence of air impurity molecules, for example, by designing the air diffusion layer. 
Additionally, novel materials like MOF or COF can be used to separate gas in an air 
cathode. MOF or COF materials have a lot of potential for use in gas separation since 
they can be experimentally tailored to modify their crystallinity, void regularity, and 
surface activity. 
Additionally, solid electrolyte-based cathode catalysts still lack an adequate 
design and mechanism. The catalytic reaction on cathode for metal-air batteries 
differs from the conventional liquid system, and is comparable to the former, such as 
OER and ORR reaction, with apparent distinctions. A few liquid media can also work 
as induced catalysts, and the favourable wetting of the liquid solvent in the liquid 
system can facilitate intimate contact between the catalyst and metal ions. Although 
gas molecules can move through solid-state systems more efﬁciently, there are still 
a number of challenges, such as ensuring that air molecules, catalysts, and metal 
ions are able to interact. The widely used technique frequently involves intermediary 
media, like polymer electrolytes or ionic liquids. There are still many unknowns 
regarding these intermediates’ long-term stability. Additionally, the limiting three-
phase boundary can be successfully extended and the electrolyte/cathode interface 
resistance can be decreased by constructing an integrated structure of solid elec-
trolyte and air cathode. High-performance metal-air batteries are predicted to be 
achieved with this innovative design. Finally, there is still much work to be done 
on the solid cathode’s catalytic mechanism. In-situ online detection methods have 
advanced quickly in recent years. Examples include surface-enhanced Raman spec-
troscopy and in-situ differential electrochemical mass spectrometry. An important 
area of research for metal-air batteries is the investigation of more sophisticated in-
situ characterization techniques. Additionally, theoretical simulation is a powerful 
tool, such as molecular dynamics simulation or ﬁrst-principles calculations.

Pseudocapacitive Materials-Based Metal-Air Batteries
385
References 
1. P.G. Bruce, S.A. Freunberger, L.J. Hardwick, J.-M. Tarascon, Li–O2 and Li–S batteries with 
high energy storage. Nat. Mater. 11, 19–29 (2012) 
2. J.B. Goodenough, K.-S. Park, The Li-Ion Rechargeable Battery: A Perspective. J. Am. Chem. 
Soc. 135, 1167–1176 (2013) 
3. M. Li, J. Lu, Z. Chen, K. Amine, 30 Years of Lithium-Ion Batteries. Adv. Mater. 30, 1800561 
(2018) 
4. A. Cresce, K. Xu, Aqueous lithium-ion batteries, Carbon. Energy 3, 721–751 (2021) 
5. S. Verma, B. Verma, Graphene-Based Nanomaterial for Supercapacitor Application, in: 2022. 
pp. 221–244 
6. A.G. Olabi, E.T. Sayed, T. Wilberforce, A. Jamal, A.H. Alami, K. Elsaid, S.M.A. Rahman, 
S.K. Shah, M.A. Abdelkareem, Metal-Air Batteries—A Review. Energies 14, 7373 (2021) 
7. C. Wang, Y. Yu, J. Niu, Y. Liu, D. Bridges, X. Liu, J. Pooran, Y. Zhang, A. Hu, Recent progress 
of Metal-Air Batteries—A mini review. Appl. Sci. 9, 2787 (2019) 
8. X. Zhao, N. Xu, X. Li, Y. Gong, K. Huang, Energy storage characteristics of a new rechargeable 
solid oxide iron–air battery. RSC Adv. 2, 10163 (2012) 
9. J. Park, M. Park, G. Nam, J. Lee, J. Cho, All-Solid-State Cable-Type Flexible Zinc-Air Battery. 
Adv. Mater. 27, 1396–1401 (2015) 
10. K. Liu, H. Sun, S. Dong, C. Lu, Y. Li, J. Cheng, J. Zhang, X. Wang, X. Chen, G. Cui, A rational 
design of High-Performance Sandwich-Structured quasisolid State Li-O 2 battery with redox 
mediator. Adv. Mater. Interfaces 4, 1700693 (2017) 
11. J. Wang, Y. Ni, J. Liu, Y. Lu, K. Zhang, Z. Niu, J. Chen, Room-Temperature ﬂexible Quasi-
Solid-State rechargeable Na–O 2 batteries. ACS Cent. Sci. 6, 1955–1963 (2020) 
12. J. Sun, N. Zhao, Y. Li, X. Guo, X. Feng, X. Liu, Z. Liu, G. Cui, H. Zheng, L. Gu, H. Li, 
A rechargeable Li-Air fuel cell battery based on garnet solid electrolytes. Sci. Rep. 7, 41217 
(2017) 
13. Y. Huang, Z. Li, Z. Pei, Z. Liu, H. Li, M. Zhu, J. Fan, Q. Dai, M. Zhang, L. Dai, C. Zhi, Solid-
State rechargeable Zn//NiCo and Zn-Air batteries with ultralong lifetime and high capacity: 
the role of a sodium polyacrylate hydrogel electrolyte. Adv. Energy Mater. 8, 1802288 (2018) 
14. X. Liu, X. Lei, Y.-G. Wang, Y. Ding, Prevention of na corrosion and dendrite growth for 
Long-Life Flexible Na–Air Batteries. ACS Cent. Sci. 7, 335–344 (2021) 
15. S. Verma, T. Das, V.K. Pandey, B. Verma, Nanoarchitectonics of GO/PANI/CoFe2O4 
(Graphene Oxide/polyaniline/Cobalt Ferrite) based hybrid composite and its use in fabricating 
symmetric supercapacitor devices, J. Mol. Struct. (2022) 133515. 
16. S. Verma, B. Verma, Synergistic interaction of bacteria with graphene oxide for high 
performance supercapacitor. Bioresour. Technol. Reports. 21, 101354 (2023) 
17. C. Zhao, J. Liang, X. Li, N. Holmes, C. Wang, J. Wang, F. Zhao, S. Li, Q. Sun, X. Yang, J. Liang, 
X. Lin, W. Li, R. Li, S. Zhao, H. Huang, L. Zhang, S. Lu, X. Sun, Halide-based solid-state 
electrolyte as an interfacial modiﬁer for high performance solid-state Li–O2 batteries. Nano 
Energy 75, 105036 (2020) 
18. X. Chi, M. Li, J. Di, P. Bai, L. Song, X. Wang, F. Li, S. Liang, J. Xu, J. Yu, A highly stable and 
ﬂexible zeolite electrolyte solid-state Li–air battery. Nature 592, 551–557 (2021) 
19. H.-F. Wang, Q. Xu, Materials Design for Rechargeable Metal-Air Batteries. Matter. 1, 565–595 
(2019) 
20. J. Lu, L. Li, J.-B. Park, Y.-K. Sun, F. Wu, K. Amine, Aprotic and Aqueous Li–O 2 Batteries. 
Chem. Rev. 114, 5611–5640 (2014) 
21. S.K. Das, S. Lau, L.A. Archer, Sodium–oxygen batteries: a new class of metal–air batteries. J. 
Mater. Chem. A. 2, 12623 (2014) 
22. W. Wang, N.-C. Lai, Z. Liang, Y. Wang, Y.-C. Lu, Superoxide stabilization and a universal KO 
2 growth mechanism in potassium-oxygen batteries, Angew. Chemie. 130, 5136–5140 (2018) 
23. Y. Sun, X. Liu, Y. Jiang, J. Li, J. Ding, W. Hu, C. Zhong, Recent advances and challenges 
in divalent and multivalent metal electrodes for metal–air batteries. J. Mater. Chem. A. 7, 
18183–18208 (2019)

386
S. Verma et al.
24. K.M. Abraham, Z. Jiang, A polymer Electrolyte-Based rechargeable Lithium/Oxygen battery. 
J. Electrochem. Soc.Electrochem. Soc. 143, 1–5 (1996) 
25. B. Kumar, J. Kumar, R. Leese, J.P. Fellner, S.J. Rodrigues, K.M. Abraham, A. Solid-State, 
Rechargeable, long cycle life Lithium-Air Battery. J. Electrochem. Soc.Electrochem. Soc. 157, 
A50 (2010) 
26. Z. Guo, Q. Zhang, C. Wang, Y. Zhang, S. Dong, G. Cui, I-containing Polymer/Alloy Layer-
Based Li Anode Mediating High-Performance Lithium-Air Batteries. Adv. Funct. Mater.Funct. 
Mater. 32, 2108993 (2022) 
27. T. Zhang, H. Zhou, A reversible long-life lithium–air battery in ambient air. Nat. 
Commun.Commun. 4, 1817 (2013) 
28. Y. He, C. Lu, S. Liu, W. Zheng, J. Luo, Interfacial Incompatibility and Internal Stresses in 
All-Solid-State Lithium Ion Batteries. Adv. Energy Mater. 9, 1901810 (2019) 
29. Y. Gao, Z. Yan, J.L. Gray, X. He, D. Wang, T. Chen, Q. Huang, Y.C. Li, H. Wang, S.H. Kim, 
T.E. Mallouk, D. Wang, Polymer–inorganic solid–electrolyte interphase for stable lithium metal 
batteries under lean electrolyte conditions. Nat. Mater. 18, 384–389 (2019) 
30. W.-B. Luo, S.-L. Chou, J.-Z. Wang, Y.-M. Kang, Y.-C. Zhai, H.-K. Liu, A hybrid gel–solid-
state polymer electrolyte for long-life lithium oxygen batteries. Chem. Commun.Commun. 51, 
8269–8272 (2015) 
31. Y. Chen, Y. Huang, H. Fu, Y. Wu, D. Zhang, J. Wen, L. Huang, Y. Dai, Y. Huang, W. Luo, TiO 
2 Nanoﬁber-Modiﬁed lithium metal composite anode for Solid-State lithium batteries. ACS 
Appl. Mater. Interfaces 13, 28398–28404 (2021) 
32. D. Li, S. Zhang, Q. Zhang, P. Kaghazchi, H. Qi, J. Liu, Z. Guo, L. Wang, Y. Wang, Pencil-
drawing on nitrogen and sulfur co-doped carbon paper: An effective and stable host to pre-store 
Li for high-performance lithium–air batteries. Energy Storage Mater. 26, 593–603 (2020) 
33. J. Yi, X. Liu, S. Guo, K. Zhu, H. Xue, H. Zhou, Novel stable gel polymer electrolyte: toward a 
high safety and long life Li–Air battery. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 7, 23798–23804 (2015) 
34. F. Wu, W. Fitzhugh, L. Ye, J. Ning, X. Li, Advanced sulﬁde solid electrolyte by core-shell 
structural design. Nat. Commun.Commun. 9, 4037 (2018) 
35. E. Matios, H. Wang, C. Wang, W. Li, Enabling safe sodium metal batteries by solid electrolyte 
interphase engineering: a review. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 58, 9758–9780 (2019) 
36. Y. Lu, Y. Cai, Q. Zhang, L. Liu, Z. Niu, J. Chen, A compatible anode/succinonitrile-based 
electrolyte interface in all-solid-state Na–CO 2 batteries. Chem. Sci. 10, 4306–4312 (2019) 
37. W. Meng, J. Liu, L. Wang, L. Dai, S. Liu, In situ construction of a liquid ﬁlm interface with 
fast ion transport for solid Sodium-Ion batteries. Nano Lett. 22, 5214–5220 (2022) 
38. S. Cai, H. Tian, J. Liu, S. Liu, L. Dai, J. Xu, L. Kong, L. Wang, Tuning Na 3 Hf 2 Si 2 PO 12 
electrolyte surfaces by metal coating for high-rate and long cycle life solid-state sodium ion 
batteries. J. Mater. Chem. A. 10, 1284–1289 (2022) 
39. Q. Sun, L. Dai, Y. Tang, J. Sun, W. Meng, T. Luo, L. Wang, S. Liu, Designing a Novel Electrolyte 
Na 3.2 Hf 2 Si 2.2 P 0.8 O 11.85 F 0.3 for All-Solid-State Na-O 2 Batteries, Small Methods. 
6 (2022) 2200345. 
40. E. Peled, D. Golodnitsky, H. Mazor, M. Goor, S. Avshalomov, Parameter analysis of a practical 
lithium- and sodium-air electric vehicle battery. J. Power. Sources 196, 6835–6840 (2011) 
41. C. Xu, K. Zhang, D. Zhang, S. Chang, F. Liang, P. Yan, Y. Yao, T. Qu, J. Zhan, W. Ma, B. 
Yang, Y. Dai, X. Sun, Reversible hybrid sodium-CO2 batteries with low charging voltage and 
long-life. Nano Energy 68, 104318 (2020) 
42. J. Zhu, T. Qu, F. Su, Y. Wu, Y. Kang, K. Chen, Y. Yao, W. Ma, B. Yang, Y. Dai, F. Liang, D. Xue, 
Highly dispersed Co nanoparticles decorated on a N-doped defective carbon nano-framework 
for a hybrid Na–air battery. Dalt. Trans. 49, 1811–1821 (2020) 
43. Y. Kang, F. Su, Q. Zhang, F. Liang, K.R. Adair, K. Chen, D. Xue, K. Hayashi, S.C. Cao, 
H. Yadegari, X. Sun, Novel High-Energy-Density rechargeable hybrid Sodium-Air cell with 
acidic electrolyte. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 10, 23748–23756 (2018) 
44. X. Lin, F. Sun, Q. Sun, S. Wang, J. Luo, C. Zhao, X. Yang, Y. Zhao, C. Wang, R. Li, X. Sun, 
O 2 /O 2 – Crossover- and Dendrite-Free Hybrid Solid-State Na–O 2 Batteries. Chem. Mater. 
31, 9024–9031 (2019)

Pseudocapacitive Materials-Based Metal-Air Batteries
387
45. S. Chang, M. Hou, B. Xu, F. Liang, X. Qiu, Y. Yao, T. Qu, W. Ma, B. Yang, Y. Dai, K. Chen, 
D. Xue, H. Zhao, X. Lin, F. Poon, Y. Lei, X. Sun, High-Performance Quasi-Solid-State Na-Air 
Battery via gel cathode by conﬁning moisture. Adv. Funct. Mater.Funct. Mater. 31, 2011151 
(2021) 
46. L. Kang, M. Cui, F. Jiang, Y. Gao, H. Luo, J. Liu, W. Liang, C. Zhi, Nanoporous CaCO 3 coatings 
enabled uniform Zn Stripping/Plating for Long-Life Zinc rechargeable aqueous batteries. Adv. 
Energy Mater. 8, 1801090 (2018) 
47. W. Yuan, G. Ma, X. Nie, Y. Wang, S. Di, L. Wang, J. Wang, S. Shen, N. Zhang, In-situ 
construction of a hydroxide-based solid electrolyte interphase for robust zinc anodes. Chem. 
Eng. J. 431, 134076 (2022) 
48. J.F. Parker, C.N. Chervin, I.R. Pala, M. Machler, M.F. Burz, J.W. Long, D.R. Rolison, Recharge-
able nickel–3D zinc batteries: An energy-dense, safer alternative to lithium-ion, Science (80-. 
). 356 (2017) 415–418. 
49. M. Chamoun, B.J. Hertzberg, T. Gupta, D. Davies, S. Bhadra, B. Van Tassell, C. Erdonmez, 
D.A. Steingart, Hyper-dendritic nanoporous zinc foam anodes. NPG Asia Mater. 7, e178–e178 
(2015) 
50. T.N.T. Tran, D. Aasen, D. Zhalmuratova, M. Labbe, H. Chung, D.G. Ivey, Compositional 
effects of gel polymer electrolyte and battery design for Zinc-Air Batteries. Batter. Supercaps. 
3, 917–927 (2020) 
51. G.M. Wu, S.J. Lin, C.C. Yang, Preparation and characterization of PVA/PAA membranes for 
solid polymer electrolytes. J. Memb. Sci. 275, 127–133 (2006) 
52. S. Zhao, K. Wang, S. Tang, X. Liu, K. Peng, Y. Xiao, Y. Chen, A New Solid-State Zinc-Air 
battery for fast charge. Energy Technol. 8, 1901229 (2020) 
53. H.-J. Lee, J.-M. Lim, H.-W. Kim, S.-H. Jeong, S.-W. Eom, Y.T. Hong, S.-Y. Lee, Electrospun 
polyetherimide nanoﬁber mat-reinforced, permselective polyvinyl alcohol composite separator 
membranes: A membrane-driven step closer toward rechargeable zinc–air batteries. J. Memb. 
Sci. 499, 526–537 (2016) 
54. Y. Wei, Y. Shi, Y. Chen, C. Xiao, S. Ding, Development of solid electrolytes in Zn–air and Al– 
air batteries: from material selection to performance improvement strategies. J. Mater. Chem. 
A. 9, 4415–4453 (2021) 
55. P. nam, B. J K, S. R C, A Review of Magnesium Air Battery Systems: From Design Aspects 
To Performance Characteristics, Int. J. Mater. Sci. Eng. 7 (2021) 18–28. 
56. R.D. McKerracher, C. Ponce de Leon, R.G.A. Wills, A.A. Shah, F.C. Walsh, A Review of the 
Iron-Air secondary battery for energy storage. ChemPlusChem 80, 323–335 (2015) 
57. C. Zhang, K. Huang, A comprehensive review on the development of Solid-State Metal-Air 
batteries operated on Oxide-Ion chemistry. Adv. Energy Mater. 11, 2000630 (2021) 
58. X. Yan, M. Zhou, Y. Zhang, Q. Qiu, Q. Chen, W. Cai, Y. Tang, J. Liu, An all-solid-state carbon-
air battery reaching an output power over 10 W and a speciﬁc energy of 3600 Wh kg−1. Chem. 
Eng. J. 404, 127057 (2021)

Pseudocapacitive Materials for 3D 
Printed Batteries 
Sagar Jariwala, Yash Desai, and Ram K. Gupta 
Abstract Batteries are becoming more and more reliable energy storage devices 
and are promising information exchange platforms for real-time responses. They are 
getting more efﬁcient in terms of performance and stability because of the use of 
advanced materials and their conﬁgurations. The ongoing demand for energy storage 
devices is being fulﬁlled by pseudocapacitive materials which lowers our dependence 
on single types of Li-ion batteries and other types that are being used in the market 
that are less abundant. For instance, the depletion of lithium reserves is a concerning 
issue. Pseudocapacitive materials are being explored for manufacturing batteries and 
supercapacitors with enhanced in terms of electrochemical and mechanical properties 
as alternatives to scarce materials. Furthermore, pseudocapacitive materials are being 
used with several other nanomaterials to improve the performance of the fabricated 
devices. Once the materials are found their manufacturing technique plays a vital role, 
where comes in the additive manufacturing technology. This technology provides 
fast and precise production of some complex miniature structures helping as a plus 
point in the electrochemical performance of the devices. 3D printing also enables 
the manufacturing of ﬂexible and wearable energy storage devices which have been 
a hot area of research lately. 
Keywords Pseudocapacitance · 3D printing · Flexible batteries · Polymeric 
composites · Transition metal oxide
S. Jariwala · Y. Desai · R. K. Gupta envelope symbol 
Department of Chemistry, Pittsburg State University, Pittsburg, KS 66762, USA 
e-mail: ramguptamsu@gmail.com 
National Institute for Materials Advancement, Pittsburg State University, Pittsburg, KS 66762, 
USA 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
R. K. Gupta (ed.), Pseudocapacitors, Engineering Materials, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45430-1_21 
389

390
S. Jariwala et al.
1 
Introduction 
Energy in the world is directly linked with the well-being and prosperity of mankind. 
It comes in from various sources and forms. Subsequently, energy is required to run 
most of the things in the world and outer space. Therefore, the surge in energy makes it 
a very important aspect; without energy, life seems impossible. Sun is the largest and 
eternal source of energy for the earth. However, in the present day, we are more reliant 
on fossil fuels for generating and supplying energy, which are non-renewable sources 
of energy. Due to the over-exploitation of these resources, severe adverse effects have 
been observed. Solar and tidal energy are good sources, but they aren’t continuously 
supplying power, forcing the development of new and better energy storage systems. 
However, with the growing population and increasing consumption of energy, the 
development of new technologies becomes vital to support the functioning of the 
planet. Additionally, the development of new technologies to generate energy will 
need efﬁcient storage methods. The world’s progress toward decarbonization will 
escalate the growth of the energy storage industry. Decarbonization is the term used 
to denote the process of reducing the dependence on the energy sources such as 
fossil fuels which give out carbon dioxide gas while supplying energy and have 
adverse effects on the atmosphere such as global warming. So, this issue enables 
new opportunities and approaches for building different types of storage energy 
devices such as mechanical, thermal, electrochemical, and chemical. 
Among many techniques, electrical and electrochemical storage devices have been 
widespread due to their easy operation and user-friendly operation. From the above 
categories, electrochemical and electrical comprise several devices such as batteries, 
ﬂow batteries, supercapacitors, and superconducting magnetic energy storage which 
have gained popularity due to their performance [1–5]. Electrical energy storage 
devices also include a hybrid system of storage devices such as fuel cells which run on 
electricity as well as fuel to provide energy. These devices display good performance 
due to high energy density and long life span. Batteries and supercapacitors depend 
on electrochemical processes that determine the relative energy and power density. 
Many recent studies have prevailed that several materials demonstrate the high power 
density of the batteries as well as the long cycle life and short charging times of 
the supercapacitors which will be a breakthrough for manufacturing energy storage 
devices (ESD) [6, 7]. 
Furthermore, materials used to manufacture energy storage devices play a very 
important role as they make up the largest proportion of the system cost; materials 
also decide the performance and properties of the energy storage devices. Polymeric 
materials such as polyvinylidene ﬂuoride (PVDF) have been a point of research for 
producing dielectric-based energy storage devices due to their good electrical resis-
tance, mechanical strength, and high-volume resistivity. PVDF and PVDF copoly-
mers are also being used as a host for gel polymer electrolytes, these electrolytes 
are a mixture of solid polymeric materials and liquid electrolytes [8]. Polymers have 
been in use for a few years to manufacture electrolytes moreover, other conventional 
materials were also used for energy storage devices but for two centuries the batteries

Pseudocapacitive Materials for 3D Printed Batteries
391
had been mainly dependent on liquid electrolytes due to their high ionic conductivity 
and excellent wetting properties of the electrodes, but they were vulnerable to corro-
sion and leakage. These issues were even more concerning due to the increasing 
demand for energy storage devices, so replacing liquid electrolytes with inorganic 
material-based solid-state electrolytes (SSE) is necessary and this SSE when incor-
porated with batteries made of lithium metal batteries, lithium-sulfur systems, and 
lithium-air batteries display exceptionally high power density and long durability 
and they are even better in terms of safety [9]. 
Apart from conductive polymers and inorganic metals, nanocomposites and nano-
materials are materials that have been great research electrochemical energy storage 
devices [10]. Nanomaterials have enabled electrically pseudocapacitive materials 
like transition metals oxides, to be used more efﬁciently in batteries and capaci-
tors [11]. Nanomaterials in the form of natural biopolymers such as nano-cellulose, 
the most abundant biomaterials extracted from plants and other organisms obtained 
for use in several ESDs and on an industrial scale due to the unique and attractive 
mechanical and electrochemical properties that make nano cellulose highly suitable 
for manufacturing of several energy storage components such as electrolytes, sepa-
rators, binder, and substrate materials [2, 12]. Apart from nanocellulose, researchers 
have also focused on building ESDs through several eco-friendly bionanomaterials 
such as lignin, cotton, and protein(silk) by incorporating electroactive nanomaterials 
for example carbon nanotubes (CNT), graphene, and metallic nanomaterials to make 
them electronically conductive [13]. 
Once we select the appropriate materials for manufacturing energy storage devices 
there arrive challenges for the process selection, here 3D printing comes into role. 
3D printing has been a popular method in manufacturing quick prototypes of the 
product and parts which can be further tested to know if they comprise the desired 
properties or if they need improvement to enhance the overall performance [14]. 
Upon producing the prototypes 3D printing also enables us to produce innovative 
state-of-the-art products which are a leap ahead of the energy storage technologies 
[15]. 
2 
Batteries: Fundamentals and Working 
A battery is an electrochemical device that generates electrical energy by undergoing 
a chemical reaction. They are composed of two or more cells joined in series or 
parallel and transform chemical energy into electrical energy via electrochemical 
reactions that occur at the electrodes. Batteries comprise three active parts, including 
two conductive electrodes and an electrolyte and if the electrochemical reaction is 
irreversible, the battery is known as a primary battery. However, if the reaction is 
reversible, the battery can be charged again and classiﬁed as a secondary battery 
which is displayed through a schematic illustration in Fig. 1 where charge transfer 
is occurring through a semi-permeable membrane. A lot of research has been done 
over the past years and several aspects have been tackled such as low power density,

392
S. Jariwala et al.
Fig. 1 Schematic illustration of a discharging and b charging of Li-ion battery. Adapted with 
permission [16]. Copyright © 2016, American Chemical Society 
self-discharge, and cyclability. For this purpose, new materials have been explored 
for the manufacturing of the electrodes as well as the mechanism of the batteries 
has been manipulated which forces the battery to act in pseudocapacitive behavior, 
where it consists of higher power density with enhanced cyclic stability throughout 
time as compared to the conventional batteries. 
Batteries are classiﬁed based on the materials used such as metal, Li-ion, organic 
batteries, and presently ample amount of research is being conducted on metal– 
organic batteries incorporating nanomaterials such as CNT, graphene, and nanoﬁbers. 
Nanoﬁbers are extensively researched as they provide a new dimension of ﬂexibility 
to the batteries increasing the area of application batteries. Wherefore, metal-based 
secondary cells are made of metals such as copper, silver, etc. The materials are 
manufactured as electrodes and dipped into an electrolyte, which contains respective 
metal ions. Basically, the electrodes are separated into a semipermeable membrane 
which allows the transfer of ions through the electrolyte. The respective ion transfer 
plays a vital role in cell efﬁciency, which suggests that electrolyte with high ionic 
conductivity is required. Once the battery is discharged the cell is connected to 
power source where the anode is reduced and oxidizing the cathode and restoring its 
original state. Other than metal-based cells, Li-ion batteries have been in great use 
due to their high energy density and cyclic stability. However, the battery follows the 
same mechanism as described above for metal-based batteries. The anode in such 
batteries is composed of carbon-containing Li atom and Li-metal oxide materials 
such as lithium cobalt oxide as cathode materials. The anode gets oxidized and 
generates Li-ions moving towards the cathode through the cathode which eventually 
converts into LiCoC2 as shown in Fig. 1. 
Contradictory to Li-ion batteries, organic batteries offer better redox reactions 
and enhanced reaction rate. Like other batteries they have anode and cathode-based 
electrodes dipped into electrolytes and connected to an external circuit. However, 
organic materials are classiﬁed into three main categories based on their reaction 
pathway, such as p-type, n-type, and b-type. The n-type materials are reduced to

Pseudocapacitive Materials for 3D Printed Batteries
393
generate anions and are consumed at cathode; p-type materials oxidize at cathode and 
are applied to anode. Both oxidation and reduction reaction can be carried out with 
b-type materials. The reaction mechanism remains like metal batteries but due to the 
amorphous morphology of the electrodes they offer fast ionic movement during the 
reaction cycle providing good cyclic stability. The third type of battery conﬁguration 
is obtained when metal electrode is used as the anode and an organic cathode such as 
p-type. The electrolyte in these batteries should contain cations of the corresponding 
metal electrodes. Firstly, Li possesses a bit of redox potential, which allows the 
organic cathode to utilize most of the potential. Secondly, in the case of n-type 
material, a small Li+ radius helps in the fast migration of ions to the cathode. During 
the charging of p-type material, the cations are reduced and deposited at the metal 
anode. At the same time, the p-type material is oxidized. The discharge is the reverse 
of the process described above. When the n-type organic material is employed, the 
basic process remains the same. However, in this case, the battery stays charged after 
the fabrication, and the discharge takes place by reducing the cathode and oxidizing 
the anode. 
Batteries are also classiﬁed based on the housing techniques used in the fabrica-
tion of the cell comprising of coin cell, Swagelok cell, pouch cell, and cylindrical 
cell are discussed below. A coin cell is a frequent form of test cell housing. It only 
necessitates a little amount of electrode materials. As indicated in Fig. 2a, a porous 
membrane is utilized between the electrodes, and the electrodes are pushed against 
each other by springs. This straightforward procedure allows for quick cell manu-
facture and testing. Next type of conﬁguration is Swagelok cells, unlike coin cells, 
may be reused and are simple to disassemble. This capability enables scientists to 
conduct morphological research prior to and after charge/discharge cycles. Further-
more, reusability has both environmental and economic advantages. Swagelok cells, 
such as Swagelok T-cell, can be modiﬁed to provide additional testing beneﬁts. 
Swagelok T-cells are three-electrode cells that are employed in more complicated 
experiments (Fig. 2b). In 1995, the basic pouch cell was created, offering 90% effec-
tive packing. In pouch cells, multiple layers of cathode and anode are sandwiched 
together with foils in between (Fig. 2c). To avoid direct electrode contact, foils are 
utilized. Each electrode’s current is collected by attaching metal collectors, typically 
copper and aluminum for the anode and cathode, respectively. An aluminized plastic 
box contains heaps of electrodes. Because of its mechanical resilience, cylindrical 
cells are commonly employed in commercial applications. As shown in Fig. 2d, the 
electrodes are separated by a porous membrane, rounded, and packed in a cylinder.
3 
3D Printed Batteries Using Pseudocapacitive Materials 
Many pseudocapacitive materials are used for the fabrication of 3D printed batteries. 
Some of the most popular pseudocapacitive materials used for battery applications 
are discussed in the following sections.

394
S. Jariwala et al.
Fig. 2 Schematic illustration of a coin cell, b Swagelok cell, c pouch cell, and d cylindrical cell. 
Figure a–d are adapted from [17]. Copyright © 2019 The Authors. InfoMat published by John 
Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of UESTC. This is an open access article under the terms of 
the Creative Commons Attribution License. Figure b is adapted with permission [16]. Copyright © 
2016, American Chemical Society
3.1 
Transition Metal Oxides 
Pseudocapacitive material-based energy devices are of great importance due to their 
balancing nature of high energy density and fast charging/discharging. Among many 
pseudocapacitive materials, transition metal oxides such as MnO2, CuO, Fe3O4 have 
proven for their high theoretical speciﬁc capacitance, wide availability, and envi-
ronmental friendliness [18]. Yoa et al. developed MnO2 based current collector that 
simultaneously enabled efﬁcient electron transport and ion diffusion by being a prac-
tical pseudocapacitive material for batteries. They addressed their research by direct 
ink method 3D printing graphene aerogels with rationally designed scaffolds for 
supporting pseudocapacitive MnO2 as shown in Fig. 3. The scaffolds have lower 
surface area than the previously printed graphene aerogels, however, the large pores 
enabled uniform deposition of MnO2 throughout the entire aerogel which possessed 
efﬁcient ion diffusion during the charging and discharging even at high mass loading 
of the pseudocapacitive material. The material with mass loading of 45.2 mg/cm2 
of MnO2 delivered excellent areal and volumetric capacitances of 11.55 and 115.5 
F/cm3, respectively and retained a high capability of 73.2% on increasing current 
density from 0.5 to 10 mA/cm2. These results attest that charge transfer and ion 
diffusion in these 3D-printed electrodes are highly efﬁcient.
Miniaturized and portable electronic devices have very compact designs and for 
such applications metal oxide-based 3D printed materials are being extensively used.

Pseudocapacitive Materials for 3D Printed Batteries
395
Fig. 3 Schematic illustration of fabrication of a 3D printed graphene aerogel/MnO2 electrode. 
Reproduced with permission [19]. Copyright © 2019, Elsevier
One such research was carried out by Wang et al. [20]. Wherefore, they 3D printed 
cellular microelectrodes for micro-pseudocapacitive applications. The conventional 
microelectrodes struggled by offering unsatisfactory speciﬁc energy density due 
to surface or near-surface mechanisms. Towards this end, micro-supercapacitors 
constructed with additive manufacturing technology offered superior electrochemical 
performances supporting the urgent energy need for future applications. In this study 
two types of metal oxide-based pseudocapacitive materials Ni–Co–O nanosheets and 
MnO2 were grown on 3D graphene oxide scaffolds where the scaffolds were pneu-
matically printed using a 3D extrusion system with the designed programmer (Fig. 4). 
The mass-loaded scaffolds exhibited superior electrochemical performance with a 
high speciﬁc capacity of up to 500 mC/cm2 and high device capacitance, the energy 
density of 384.9 mF/cm2 and 90 µWh/cm2, respectively with a moderate voltage 
window of 1.3 V. The electrodes also provided device cycling stability during 10,000 
charge–discharge cycles which opens a novel avenue to design and manufacture 
performance-oriented miniaturized electrochemical energy storage devices.
3.2 
Transition Metal Sulﬁdes 
There is an inclining demand for electrochemical energy storage (EES) devices 
with high energy and power densities to meet the requirements for a sustainable 
future. For this reason, researchers have been working on transition metal sulﬁdes 
due to their high theoretical capacity based on multi-electron reaction mechanisms 
and have been widely promising as pseudocapacitive anode materials for energy 
storage [21]. In addition to a handful of efforts on the innovation of electrode

396
S. Jariwala et al.
Fig. 4 Schematic representation of loading Ni–Co–O and MnO2 nanosheet on the 3D printed 
reduced graphene oxide electrode scaffolds. Reproduced with permission [20]. Copyright © 2020, 
Royal Society of Chemistry
materials, lots of research has been focused on manufacturing 3D printed elec-
trodes comprising state-of-the-art architectures and high performance. Therefore, 
Yu et al. designed and synthesized bimetallic sulﬁdes/carbon composite [22]. The 
Cu2S nanoplates were coated with MOFs-derived ZnS and an N-doped carbon layer 
composite (Cu2S@ZnS/C) had been synthesized with a heterogeneous architecture 
having rich defects and homogeneous carbon coating layer offering multiple advan-
tages for sodium ion storage with an ability to deliver high reversible capacity, excel-
lent rate performance and high long term cyclic stability. At ﬁrst, the 3D Cu2S@ZnS/ 
C inks were tested for printability, to guarantee that rheological properties were tested 
where the ink displayed a shear thinning behavior which was meant to be appropriate 
for 3D printing inks. While testing the ink as electrode materials for sodium storage 
with a high reversible capacity of 434 mAh/g, the durable cyclability of 94.7% 
after 1000 cycles. The electrodes were then assembled as active anode materials 
concerning Na+ charge transfer constructing a sodium-ion battery (SIB) with a good 
power density of 203 W/k and stable cycle performance. The construction of the 
electrode material ink and SIB is displayed in Fig. 5.
Other than CuxS-based energy storage systems molybdenum sulﬁde (MoSx) 
is a promising material for electrochemical storage devices. Therefore, Ghosh 
et al. researched free-standing electrochemically coated MoSx-based 3D printed 
nanocarbon electrodes for solid-state supercapacitors [23]. The electrodes in this 
respective study were synthesized in three distinct shapes by depositing graphene/

Pseudocapacitive Materials for 3D Printed Batteries
397
Fig. 5 Schematics displaying synthesis of 3D electrode ink and Na+ charge transfer mechanism of 
SIB through the transition metal sulﬁde-based composite. Adapted with permission [22]. Copyright 
© 2022, Elsevier
PLA ﬁlament on the 3D printer and solvent treated by DMF taking out the PLA from 
the electrodes as shown in Fig. 6. The 3D printed ﬁlaments were then coated with 
MoSx through an electrodeposition technique and free-standing 3D printed working 
electrode, Pt wire as a counter electrode, and Ag/AgCl as a reference electrode in 
ammonium tetra thiomolybdate electrolyte. The MoSx coating displayed an inter-
calating and pseudocapacitive charge storage behavior giving out a capacitance of 
27 mF/cm2 at a scan rate of 10 mV/s, the current density of 0.13 mA/cm2 and 90% 
of cyclic stability even after 10,000 cycles. Based on the above studies attests that 
the integration of 3D-printing and room temperature electrodeposition techniques 
allows high-performance transition metal sulﬁde-based pseudocapacitive materials, 
which leads to a better perspective for synthesizing novel materials for energy storage 
applications with better efﬁciency.
3.3 
Transition Metal Phosphide 
It has been a challenging task of designing high-performance electrodes via 3D 
printing for advanced energy storage. Generally, lightweight carbonaceous materials 
outperform excellent electrical conductivity, but they struggle with undermined areal 
and volumetric energy density, particularly for supercapacitors devices. Wherefore, 
researchers have been working on synthesizing better materials that show pseudo-
capacitive behavior and synthesized in-situ coupling of NiCoP bimetallic phosphide 
and Ti3C2 MXene to build up heavy NiCoP/MXene (NCPM) electrodes with tunable 
mass loading throughout 3D printing technology. In this study, Ti3C2Tx nanosheets

398
S. Jariwala et al.
Fig. 6 Schematic representation of the synthesis of free-standing MoSx electrodes and assembling 
them as pseudocapacitive energy storage devices. Reproduced with permission [23]. Copyright © 
2021, Royal Society of Chemistry
were etched and obtained as an aqueous dispersion [24]. The bimetallic phosphide 
was electrodeposited on the MXene and mixed with CNT to obtain the 3D printing 
ink. Herein, it was observed that an 18 wt.% concentration of CNT in the suspension 
had the correct viscosity to manufacture self-standing electrodes. The same process 
from the material synthesis, ink formulation, and 3D printing of the electrodes is 
explained in Fig. 7. The 3D printed design of the NiCoP/MXene asymmetrical super-
capacitor yields high volumetric energy density due to hierarchical pores and tunable 
mass loadings. These properties also enabled better charge transport and electrolyte 
penetration giving out outstanding rate capability and cyclic stability. Above all, the 
device delivered high areal and volumetric energy densities of 0.89 and 2.2 mWh/ 
cm3, respectively [24].
Other than bimetallic phosphides, mono phosphide-based materials for pseudo-
capacitive batteries have been a point of interest due to their advantages such as 
low cost, environmental friendliness, and excellent volumetric capacity with optimal 
power density. For this purpose, Xu et al. calcinated Cu3P/N-CN composites through 
freeze drying as demonstrated in Fig. 8 [25]. The morphology suggested that the 
honeycomb-like structure of Cu3P nanoparticles encapsulated in an N-CN composite 
had high crystallinity and were evenly distributed in the carbon network. Due to the 
above surface morphology, the composite displayed an excellent rate capability of 
461.8 mAh/g at 2 A/g, and outstanding stability of 752.3 mAh/g at 0.1 A/g for 
over 100 cycles. The unique porous structure and noteworthy performance of the

Pseudocapacitive Materials for 3D Printed Batteries
399
Fig. 7 Schematic representation for 3D printed transition metal phosphide-based pseudocapacitive 
electrodes. Adapted with permission [24]. Copyright © 2020 The authors, This article is licensed 
under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
Fig. 8 Schematical synthesis route of 3D Cu3P nanoparticle composite for pseudocapacitive 
lithium storage batteries. Reproduced with permission [25]. Copyright © 2020, Elsevier 
material make the transition metal phosphides promising materials in providing 
high-performance 3D-printed electrodes for pseudocapacitive batteries. 
3.4 
Conducting Polymers 
The development of hierarchically organized nanomaterial with modular structure 
has been a point of interest in diverse applications such as 3D printing and manu-
facturing of novel EES. Different combinations of pseudocapacitive materials, such 
as RuO2, MnOx, NiO, V2O5, polythiophenes, polypyrrole, and polyaniline have 
been explored for the development of hybrid SC materials. From the above-noted 
materials, MnOx has been giving out the best outcome through high theoretical 
speciﬁc capacitance, natural abundance, and low cost [26]. To further improve the 
real-life properties of the materials several synthesis methods have been applied

400
S. Jariwala et al.
such as solvothermal, hydrothermal, sonochemical, and sol–gel to the surface of the 
electrodes, these are generally combined with a conductive binder such as PVDF, 
PTFE, or Naﬁon in a paste [26]. Following the above steps, Rezaei et al. derived 
novel 3D pyrolytic carbon/Mn3O4 nanostructures for free-standing hybrid superca-
pacitor electrodes. Commercial photopolymers composed of acrylate monomers and 
methacrylate oligomers were incorporated to print complex 3D structures and iden-
tiﬁed as pyrolyzable materials. These 3D-printed photopolymers were directly used 
as substrates for the deposition of MnOx nanoﬂakes and nanoﬂowers through the 
chemical reduction of manganese. The obtained material was then passed through 
a pyrolysis chamber to increase the uniformity of the thermal degradation and gas 
evolution [27]. The same process of synthesizing the 3D printed support-free printed 
scaffolds to pyrolysis of the electrode materials. 
The electrochemical performance of the novel hybrid supercapacitor electrodes 
had good capacitance gravimetric and areal capacitance of 186 F/g and 968 mF/ 
cm2, respectively, rate capability, and excellent cyclic recovery loss of less than 8% 
up to 5000 cycles. The values in this research are comparable with the conven-
tional material-based supercapacitor devices. Conducting polymer has also enabled 
the production of stretchable and ﬂexible supercapacitors which give a huge leap 
in increasing the range of application of energy storage devices. One such study 
was conducted by Yang et al., which combined theoretical structural design and 
3D printing giving out free-standing stretchable electrodes using poly(3,4-ethylene 
dioxythiophene): polystyrene sulfonate ink. First, they made polymer-based nanoﬁb-
rils and integrated them with carbon nanotubes. The research showed that the incor-
poration of CNT improved the areal capacitance up to 99 mF/cm2. The supercapacitor 
further exhibited a high energy density of 0.065 mWh/cm2 and performed with excel-
lent stability even after 14,000 cycles [28]. According to the research conducted above 
it is attested that 3D printed conducting polymers come out as potential materials 
for the manufacturing of pseudocapacitive electrochemical energy storage devices. 
It has also been observed that the electrode materials exhibited comparable electro-
chemical performance and were mechanically ﬂexible to provide a better platform 
for application as ﬂexible electrochemical storage devices. 
3.5 
Composites Based on Pseudocapacitive Materials 
Supercapacitors are energy storage devices comprising higher energy density and 
lifetime than batteries on a wider span of temperature. There are several electrode 
materials but carbon-based organic materials such as CNT, CNFs, rGO, and carbon 
spheres have been a wide point of research [29]. These materials are incorporated 
with several metal oxides or conducting polymer forming composites which provide 
good mechanical properties such as ﬂexibility up to 180° making them suitable for 
wearable devices. Such composite for pseudocapacitors was composed by Chen et al. 
using polyacrylonitrile (PAN) as a precursor polymer for the fabrication of CNFs

Pseudocapacitive Materials for 3D Printed Batteries
401
via electrospinning and carbonization [30]. Once the ﬁbrils were synthesized parti-
cles of MnO were applied to the ﬁbril structure through electrospinning, however, 
this reduced the electrical conductivity, in further study, they deposited copper onto 
the nanoﬁbers to enhance the conductivity. Such kind of modiﬁcation increased 
deeper electrolyte penetration which increased conductivity from 10 to 46 S/m from 
the MnO deposition to copper deposition respectively [30]. A similar study was 
conducted by Ren et al., constructing ﬂexible zinc-ion batteries (ZIBs) [31]. Compos-
ites were constructed using carbon nanotubes and coated with MnO2 to form ﬂexible 
CNT@MnO2 ink as cathode for ﬂexible aqueous micro-ZIBs and zinc powder ink 
was used as an anode which gives out high ﬂexibility and bendability. To fabri-
cate the materials as the coin cell composition MnO2 was mixed with PVDF as a 
binder and N-methyl-2-pyrrolidine (NMP) as a solvent to adjust the viscosity and 
the ink was coated on the carbon paper with an active material loading of 1.6 mg/ 
cm2 and glass ﬁber as a separator. Furthermore, they fabricated ﬂexible batteries 
like coin cells and processed them as 3D-printed batteries including a substrate, 
current collector, electrodes, and an electrolyte. While discussing the electrochem-
ical performance of the 3D printed ﬂexible battery which showed a stable capacity 
of 63 µAh/cm2 at 0.4 mA/cm2. When the battery is bent in different states, the 
maximum capacity loss compared with the initial value is only 2.72%, indicating 
its stability [31]. Apart from transition metal-based composites for pseudocapaci-
tive energy storage batteries, conducting polymer in association with carbon-based 
materials such as graphene oxide gives out high conductivity and pseudocapac-
itive behavior. Hong et al., conducted research with a combination of graphene 
with PANI composite for supercapacitor application [32]. The study was catego-
rized into three sections, comprising ﬂexible graphene/PANI composites, graphene 
framework-based composites, and printable graphene/PANI composites. The 3D 
printed composite was manufactured by ﬁrst graphene templates were synthesized 
using the chemical vapor deposition method, which was then freeze-dried, and the 
electrochemical oxidative method was used to coat PANI on the templates which gave 
provided a fast fabrication of complicated shape electrodes, enhancing the material 
compatibility for the application of portable and wearable electronics. The electrodes 
performed outstandingly through the electrochemical performance test attesting to 
a speciﬁc capacitance of more than 800 F/g and capacitance retention over 10,000 
cycles. Wherefore, the above-supplied data is sufﬁcient to prove that printable inks 
synthesized from conductive polymers or transition metal-based composites and 
compatible printing techniques will promote the rapid growth of efﬁcient energy 
storage microdevices and ﬂexible wearable pseudocapacitor applications [32].

402
S. Jariwala et al.
4 
Flexible 3D Printed Batteries Using Pseudocapacitive 
Materials 
Flexible batteries have been in growing demand due to their usage in wearable elec-
tronics, which proﬁciently cope with the power consumption of such wearable elec-
tronics [14, 33–35]. Concerning such devices pseudocapacitive materials have been 
extensively used due to their high energy density, large capacity, and outstanding 
mechanical ﬂexibility [36]. To further enhance the electrochemical performance of 
the pseudocapacitive materials several strategies have been employed such as coating 
carbon-based substances upon the electrode materials which eventually improves 
the cyclic stability of the materials on which it has been lacking. Therefore, making 
electrode materials with the best performance in each aspect. Upon that advanced 
techniques in terms of additive manufacturing are used which provides ultra-high 
manufacturing capabilities with some miniature structures which further make the 
batteries minute in size but provide high electrochemical performance. As described 
above, Lu et al., developed ﬁbrous electrodes using pseudocapacitive materials with 
a 3D printing technique [37]. The usage of ﬁbrous materials improved the ﬂexibility 
and electrochemical properties of the electrodes. Firstly, MnO2 and MoS2 nanosheets 
were synthesized and N-doped with porous carbon and graphene respectively. Once 
the base materials were synthesized, 3D printing ink was prepared with a prede-
ﬁned ratio of 1:0.2 for graphene and pseudocapacitive materials respectively. The 
mixture was dispersed into NMP and processed through ball milling and ultrasonica-
tion. Electrolyte inks were also synthesized through a mixture of PVA/LiCl. The ink 
was then 3D printed as a coaxial single ﬁber electrode and assembled as a ﬂexible 
ﬁbrous pseudocapacitive device. On successful printing of the device, it was tested 
to characterize its electrochemical properties wherefore, the device had excellent 
cyclic stability of which it had 98.63% of capacity retention rate after 12,000 cycles. 
The device displayed a speciﬁc capacitance of 318.82 mF/cm2 and excellent bending 
capabilities showing no difference in performance with a bending angle of 90o [37]. 
Other than carbon-based materials such as graphene oxide or carbon nanotubes, ﬂex-
ible pseudocapacitive batteries have also been manufactured using biomaterials such 
as gelatin and others. In the subsequent study, highly elastomeric, shear-thinning, 
3D-printed hydrogels were constructed by incorporating defect-rich MoS2 nano-
scaffolds with thiolated gelatin. Further moving into the study, the defect density of 
the metal oxide materials was increased through engineering defects. These defects 
acted as crosslinking epicenters forming a mechanically robust, ﬂexible polymeric 
network without the use of the crosslinker or UV exposure to join the thiolated gelatin 
as  shown in Fig.  9 [38]. The hydrogel ink displayed compatible rheological charac-
teristics which enabled 3D printing of complex patterns. The concentration of MoS2 
played a vital role in exhibiting hybrid conductivity and pseudocapacitive response 
due to the faradic and capacitive currents.
It was observed that nano assemblies were in vitro and in vivo biocompatible 
which suggested that such devices can be used in ingestible electronics, electro-
ceuticals, and energy storage devices because of their hybrid conductivity, charge

Pseudocapacitive Materials for 3D Printed Batteries
403
Fig. 9 Schematic representation of synthesis and fabrication of nanoengineered 3D hydrogel bio 
inks through defect-driven gelation between defect-rich MoS2 nano-scaffolds and thiolated gelatin. 
Reproduced with permission [38]. Copyright © 2022, American Chemical Society
storage, and mechanical properties that correspond to human tissue [38]. Apart from 
conventional pseudocapacitive materials are compounded with biomaterials, and 
carbon-based materials to synthesize electrode materials. These materials are also 
used for manufacturing Lithium-ion batteries which are in popularity due to the 
electrochemical performance they offer. Researchers are also using 3D printing 
technology to fabricate Li-ion batteries with enhanced performance in compar-
ison with conventional Li-ion batteries. Mwizerwa et al. synthesized 3D printed 
grid patterned LiFePO4@MgO composite electrodes with a variable thickness [39]. 
Firstly, LiFePO4@MgO composite was prepared through the freeze-drying method 
and used as cathode material. On the other side, Li4Ti5O12 was employed as active 
anode electrode material. To make the active electrode materials they were mixed 
with carbon black and PVDF-co-HFP which were meant to be conductive agents and 
binders respectively once the appropriate rheological properties were obtained the 
material was 3D printed through conventional casting method. The ink preparation 
and electrode fabrication processes are displayed in Fig. 10.
Once the 3D printed electrodes were assembled as full battery it had an areal 
capacity of 3.01 mAh/cm2 after 20 cycles at 0.1 C which was identical to previ-
ously reported Li-ion based electrode batteries. The electrodes displayed a high 
discharge capacity of 147.1 mAh/g at 0.1 C and maintained discharge capacity of 
139.0 mAh/g after 400 cycles. Such enhanced electrochemical performance attests 
well-constructed 3D printed structures with porous structures with promising high 
capacity, stable cycling life and good ﬂexibility. Such research paves way for the 
future development and widen the application of Li-ion batteries with high-energy 
density [39].

404
S. Jariwala et al.
Fig. 10 Schematic of the synthesis of MgO-doped LiFePO4 composite via solution phase method 
and 3D-printed electrodes with the structure of the full cell. Reproduced with permission [39]. 
Copyright © 2022, Elsevier
5 
Conclusion and Future Remark 
Pseudocapacitive materials, such as transition metal oxides, sulﬁdes and phosphides 
have gained considerable attention recently to provide new alternatives of currently 
found electrochemical devices such as Li-ion batteries. This book chapter provided 
some recent research being conducted on pseudocapacitive materials for batteries. 
These materials were processed on the state of art technology of 3D printing providing 
a new dimension in terms of device performance and its physical properties. Battery 
fundamentals and different categories of batteries were also discussed which unwinds 
the basic working of the batteries. It was observed that these pseudocapacitive mate-
rials combined with the 3D printing technology gave out better electrochemical 
performance of the devices as compared to the conventionally available devices. The 
devices provided high power densities accompanied with long lasting cyclic stability 
being promising materials for commercial usage. We also discussed that polymers

Pseudocapacitive Materials for 3D Printed Batteries
405
and nanomaterials combined also enhanced the properties of the device. As a part 
of future remark, other materials and battery conﬁgurations can be explored such as 
sodium-ion batteries and metal air batteries respectively. Usage of polymeric mate-
rials should be maximized, and 3D printed electronic devices using biopolymers 
should be examined to provide cleaner and more sustainable energy storage devices. 
References 
1. R.K. Gupta, Solid State Batteries: Emerging Materials and Applications (American Chemical 
Society, Washington, DC, 2022) 
2. R.K. Gupta, T.A. Nguyen, Energy from Waste: Production and Storage, 1st edn. (CRC Press, 
Boca Raton, FL, 2022) 
3. R.K. Gupta, Metal-Air Batteries: Principles, Progress, and Perspectives (CRC Press, Boca 
Raton, FL, 2023) 
4. R. Gupta, T.A. Nguyen, H. Song, G. Yasin, Lithium-Sulfur Batteries: Materials, Challenges 
and Applications (Elsevier, Cambridge, United States, 2022) 
5. R.K. Gupta, Solid State Batteries: Materials and Advanced Devices (American Chemical 
Society, Washington, DC, 2022) 
6. S. Thomas, A.B. Gueye, R.K. Gupta, Nanostructured Materials for Supercapacitors (Springer, 
Switzerland, 2022) 
7. P. Simon, Y. Gogotsi, B. Dunn, Where do batteries end and supercapacitors begin? Science 
343(80-), 1210–1211 (2014) 
8. S. Chen, A. Skordos, V.K. Thakur, Functional nanocomposites for energy storage: chemistry 
and new horizons. Mater. Today Chem. 17, 100304 (2020) 
9. W. Xia, Y. Zhao, F. Zhao, K. Adair, R. Zhao, S. Li, R. Zou, Y. Zhao, X. Sun, Antiperovskite 
electrolytes for solid-state batteries. Chem. Rev. 122, 3763–3819 (2022) 
10. R.K. Gupta, Conducting Polymers for Advanced Energy Applications, 1st edn. (CRC Press, 
Boca Raton, FL, 2021) 
11. Y. Gogotsi, R.M. Penner, Energy storage in nanomaterials—capacitive, pseudocapacitive, or 
battery-like? ACS Nano 12, 2081–2083 (2018) 
12. C. Chen, L. Hu, Nanocellulose toward advanced energy storage devices: structure and 
electrochemistry. Acc. Chem. Res. 51, 3154–3165 (2018) 
13. O. Faruk, D. Hosen, A. Ahmed, M.M. Rahman, Functional bionanomaterials—embedded 
devices for sustainable energy storage, in Biorenewable Nanocomposite Mater Vol 1 Electro-
catal Energy Storage, Part 1—Funct Bionanomaterials—Embedded Devices Sustain Energy 
Storage 1 
14. J. Choi, T. Ingsel, R.K. Gupta, Printable and ﬂexible solid-state batteries, in Solid State Batteries 
Volume 2: Materials and Advanced Devices (American Chemical Society, 2022), pp. 14–311 
15. U. Gulzar, C. Glynn, C. O’Dwyer, Additive manufacturing for energy storage: Methods, designs 
and material selection for customizable 3D printed batteries and supercapacitors. Curr. Opin. 
Electrochem. 20, 46–53 (2020) 
16. S. Muench, A. Wild, C. Friebe, B. Häupler, T. Janoschka, U.S. Schubert, Polymer-based organic 
batteries. Chem. Rev. 116, 9438–9484 (2016) 
17. Y. Liang, C.-Z. Zhao, H. Yuan, Y. Chen, W. Zhang, J.-Q. Huang, D. Yu, Y. Liu, M.-M. Titirici, 
Y.-L. Chueh, H. Yu, Q. Zhang, A review of rechargeable batteries for portable electronic 
devices. InfoMat 1, 6–32 (2019) 
18. V. Augustyn, P. Simon, B. Dunn, Pseudocapacitive oxide materials for high-rate electrochem-
ical energy storage. Energy Environ. Sci. 7, 1597–1614 (2014) 
19. B. Yao, S. Chandrasekaran, J. Zhang, W. Xiao, F. Qian, C. Zhu, E.B. Duoss, C.M. Spadaccini, 
M.A. Worsley, Y. Li, Efﬁcient 3d printed pseudocapacitive electrodes with ultrahigh MnO2 
loading. Joule 3, 459–470 (2019)

406
S. Jariwala et al.
20. T. Wang, X. Tian, L. Li, L. Lu, S. Hou, G. Cao, H. Jin, 3D printing-based cellular microelec-
trodes for high-performance asymmetric quasi-solid-state micro-pseudocapacitors. J Mater 
Chem A 8, 1749–1756 (2020) 
21. J. Xu, E. Gu, Z. Zhang, Z. Xu, Y. Xu, Y. Du, X. Zhu, X. Zhou, Fabrication of porous 
Na3V2(PO4)3/reduced graphene oxide hollow spheres with enhanced sodium storage perfor-
mance. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 567, 84–91 (2020) 
22. B. Yu, Y. Ji, X. Hu, Y. Liu, J. Yuan, S. Lei, G. Zhong, Z. Weng, H. Zhan, Z. Wen, Heterostruc-
tured Cu2S@ZnS/C composite with fast interfacial reaction kinetics for high-performance 
3D-printed Sodium-Ion batteries. Chem. Eng. J. 430, 132993 (2022) 
23. K. Ghosh, M. Pumera, Free-standing electrochemically coated MoS: Xbased 3D-printed 
nanocarbon electrode for solid-state supercapacitor application. Nanoscale 13, 5744–5756 
(2021) 
24. L. Yu, W. Li, C. Wei, Q. Yang, Y. Shao, J. Sun, 3D Printing of NiCoP/Ti3C2 MXene architectures 
for energy storage devices with high areal and volumetric energy density. Nano-Micro Lett. 
12, 1–13 (2020) 
25. P. Xu, K. Dai, C. Yang, X. Wang, R. Zou, J. Shao, G. Zeng, M. Zhang, Q. Huang, Z. Su, 
Efﬁcient synthesis of Cu3P nanoparticles conﬁned in 3D nitrogen-doped carbon networks as 
high performance anode for lithium/sodium-ion batteries. J. Alloys Compd. 849, 156436 (2020) 
26. Y.C. Tsai, W.D. Yang, K.C. Lee, C.M. Huang, An effective electrodeposition mode for porous 
MnO2/Ni foam composite for asymmetric supercapacitors. Materials (Basel) 9, 246 (2016) 
27. B. Rezaei, T.W. Hansen, S.S. Keller, Stereolithography-derived three-dimensional pyrolytic 
carbon/Mn3O4nanostructures for free-standing hybrid supercapacitor electrodes. ACS Appl. 
Nano Mater. 5, 1808–1819 (2022) 
28. J. Yang, Q. Cao, X. Tang, J. Du, T. Yu, X. Xu, D. Cai, C. Guan, W. Huang, 3D-Printed highly 
stretchable conducting polymer electrodes for ﬂexible supercapacitors. J. Mater. Chem. A 9, 
19649–19658 (2021) 
29. T.Y. Bin, J.M. Lee, Graphene for supercapacitor applications. J. Mater. Chem. A 1, 14814– 
14843 (2013) 
30. X. Chen, X. Liu, M. Ouyang, P. Childs, N. Brandon, B. Wu, Electrospun composite nanoﬁbre 
supercapacitors enhanced with electrochemically 3D printed current collectors. J Energy 
Storage 26, 100993 (2019) 
31. Y. Ren, F. Meng, S. Zhang, B. Ping, H. Li, B. Yin, T. Ma, CNT@MnO2 composite ink toward 
a ﬂexible 3D printed micro-zinc-ion battery. Carbon Energy 4, 446–457 (2022) 
32. X. Hong, J. Fu, Y. Liu, S. Li, X. Wang, W. Dong, S. Yang, Recent progress on graphene/ 
polyaniline composites for high-performance supercapacitors. Materials (Basel) 12, 1451 
(2019) 
33. R. Arukula, P.K. Kahol, R.K. Gupta, Electrodes for ﬂexible-stretchable supercapacitors, in Flex-
ible Supercapacitor Nanoarchitectonics, ed. by M.I. Ahamed, R. Boddula, T. Altalhi (Scrivener 
Publishing, Beverly, MA, 2021), pp. 485–531 
34. T. Ingsel, R.K. Gupta, Smart and ﬂexible energy devices: principles, advances, and opportuni-
ties, in Smart and Flexible Energy Devices. ed. by R.K. Gupta, T.A. Nguyen (CRC Press, Boca 
Raton, 2022), pp. 1–21 
35. Q. Gui, L. Wu, Y. Li, J. Liu, Scalable wire-type asymmetric pseudocapacitor achieving high 
volumetric energy/power densities and ultralong cycling stability of 100 000 times. Adv. Sci. 
6, 1802067 (2019) 
36. Y. Guo, X. Hong, Y. Wang, Q. Li, J. Meng, R. Dai, X. Liu, L. He, L. Mai, Multicomponent hierar-
chical Cu-Doped NiCo-LDH/CuO double arrays for ultralong-life hybrid ﬁber supercapacitor. 
Adv. Funct. Mater. 29, 1–11 (2019) 
37. H. Lu, Q. Peng, Z. Wang, J. Zhao, X. Zhang, L. Meng, J. Wu, Z. Lu, J. Peng, X. Li, 3D 
printing coaxial ﬁber electrodes towards boosting ultralong cycle life of ﬁbrous supercapacitors. 
Electrochim. Acta 380, 19–21 (2021) 
38. K.A. Deo, M.K. Jaiswal, S. Abasi, G. Lokhande, S. Bhunia, T.U. Nguyen, M. Namkoong, K. 
Darvesh, A. Guiseppi-Elie, L. Tian, A.K. Gaharwar, Nanoengineered Ink for designing 3D 
printable ﬂexible bioelectronics. ACS Nano 16, 8798–8811 (2022)

Pseudocapacitive Materials for 3D Printed Batteries
407
39. J. Pierre Mwizerwa, C. Liu, K. Xu, N. Zhao, Y. Li, Z. Chen, J. Shen, Three-dimensional printed 
lithium iron phosphate coated with magnesium oxide cathode with improved areal capacity 
and ultralong cycling stability for high performance lithium-ion batteries. J. Colloid Interface 
Sci. 623, 168–181 (2022)

